MIRANDA; 



A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 



CHAPTER I. 

HER GRANDFATHER. AND GRANDMOTHER. 

.* Most learned scion of unlearned race, 

Revered far more than parson or than squire ; 
He lived a century in his native plaoe, 

A strange old village in a strange old shire." 

Whoso makes pilgrimage to the quaint vil- 
lage of Rothescamp-in-the- Valley, will find 
much to reward him. There is the church . 
an abbey church originally . ^with a massive 
square tower, inhabited by jackdaws innumer- 
able, and the most daring of flying buttresses, 
and one of the finest peals of bells in the king- 
dom. The story is, that when those bells 
were being cast, Guy de Rothescamp, just 
returned from the Crusades, threw into the 

VOL. I. A 



2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

molten mass all his gold and silver plate. As 
evidence hereof is engraven on the tenor 
bell. 

(B Sol'Qmu huxnm + nnnt %mia mxnm* 

Then there is the beautiful rivulet Rothe, 
always full and free and clear, always con- 
taining trout innumerable. Then there is the 
famous old inn and posting-house, the Tach- 
brook Arms; . for the Rothescamps have 
long perished from the land, and their estates 
and lordships have passed to the Tachbrooks, 
whose house, at Rothescamp-on-the-Hill, is a 
famous show-place. Rothescamp-on-the-Hill 
is five miles away, up over the downs, by a 
white chalky road, which bears the inappro- 
priate name of Long River. The great house 
stands almost alone, only a few cottages clus- 
tering around its lofty outer walls ; and it is 
a long time now since any Tachbrook has 
dwelt tliere. The last baronet was killed in 
a duel ; tlie present baronet is commonly 
reported to be in a lunatic asylum. The* old 
house is kept in order by a few staid old ser- 
vants^ The estate is sagaciously administered 
by a trusty old steward ; but no Tachbrook, 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 3 

save one, has been seen in either Rothescamp 
for many a year. 

Save one. Walk up the village street, and 
you will see a long red brick house, two stories 
high, with a row of pollarded limes in front 
of it. If the hall-door is open you may admire 
the old stairway of black oak, and the pleasant 
garden, which may be seen through an arched 
doorway. Look at the brass-plate on that 
entrance-door, and you will see engraven . 
** Septimus Tachbrook, M.D." Enter a quaint 
study on the left, and you will see Doctor 
Septimus Tachbrook . a spare man, six feet 
four inches high, with stooping shoulders, an 
eagle s beak, and eyes so . keen that you at 
once conclude he wears those gold-rimmed 
spectacles to moderate their power. 

Doctor Tachbrook is the youngest son 
of the brother of the last baronet. He 
is seventh son of a seventh son . sl doctor 
heaven-born. He made himself what he is. 
His father, considering himself hardly used, 
because he was the youngest son when he 
ought to have been the eldest, consoled him- 
self with wine and the dice, and died an out- 
law. Septimus Tachbrook's eldest brothers 



4 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

took very much after their father : they were 
obliged to work for their living ; they did the 
genteelest work they could find. One married * 
a rich widow ; another started a bank on a 
new principle ; a third got an appointment 
under Government, and so on. Not so Sep- 
timus. An old maiden lady, his mother's 
cousin, seeing that he meant to work, helped 
him to obtain a medical education. Medicine 
was his natural faculty. A thorough disciple 
of Asklepios, he loved the healing art. He 
practised with success in London for some 
time ; but when the old lady died, she left 
him her little property, a few hundreds a year, 
and he, drawn towards his native air, bought 
the old house in Rothescamp village, and 
settled down for life. Soon he had a capital 
practice, for all the county families for miles 
round were delighted to have as doctor a real 
Tachbrook. He ruined two or three rivals, 
who had previously been trying to ruin each 
other. He had more than he could do ; his 
curricle and pair seemed ubiquitous. Nobody 
of any standing, for miles around Rothes- 
camp, could be born or die without Doctor 
Tachbrook's aid. 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 5 

When the Doctor was nearly forty, an ad- 
venture befell him. Among his clients was 
a widow lady of about his own age . Lady 
Endsleigh . who had several daughters, and 
who kept a governess to look after them. 
This governess was a Polish girl, with 
the wondrous name of Sobieska Chlopicki ; 
amazingly accomplished, mistress of many 
languages, a musician most perfect and ori- 
ginal. Her hair was long, and black as 
midnight; her face pallid, but looking as if 
a fire burnt beneath the skin ; her tall form 
strangely pliant and willowy ; her hands 
tremulous, nervous, looking like living crea- 
tures on the strings of a harp, or the keys of 
a piano. Lady Endsleigh and her daughters 
were subjugated by her. She became their 
mistress. They worshipped and obeyed her. 
All the country round used to remark how 
infatuated Lady Endsleigh was with that 
foreign governess of hers. 

One night, about twelve, as the Doctor was 
just going to bed, there came a tremendous 
ring at the night-bell. Opening the door, 
Doctor Tachbrook saw a carriage with four 
steaming horses, the lamps throwing vivid 



6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

light upon the dark village street. The man 
who had rung delivered a note from Lady 
Endsleigh. It was brief and incoherent ; it 
simply stated that Miss Chlopicki was sud- 
denly taken very ill . seemed to be in a sort 
of trance . would he come at once ? 

** Confound the girl ! " said to himself 
Septimus Tachbrook, who was rather sleepy. 
" Never mind ; it 's a good eight miles to the 
Lodge ; I shall get half-an-hour's doze in the 
carriage." 

So he put together such things as he 
deemed necessary, got into the carriage, and 
slept till the postilions pulled up at Lady 
Endsleigh's gate. 

Her Ladyship was a cheerful fussy per- 
sonage, who took her meals regularly, and 
delighted in gossip. She was a kind of 
grown-up child, and as she had married 
young, her elder daughters treated her very 
much as if she were merely their sister. The 
establishment was in a chaotic state until 
Miss Chlopicki came as governess ; before 
that time no governess had been known to 
stay above three months. This Polish girl 
was a born administratrix. At once she saw 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 7 

the Situation. She took Mary Endsleigh, the 
eldest daughter, a girl of twenty-three, in 
hand, and told her that her conduct to her 
mother was improper. Miss Endsleigh 
laughed at her superciliously : she was no 
match for the Pole. 

" You may sneer," she said ; " you think 
yourself better than I ; but my father was a 
prince, and I am a princess in my own right. 
I am poor, you think . I am ; but I am not 
so poor in spirit as to treat my own mother 
with disrespect. Take my advice, Miss 
Endsleigh, behave to Lady Endsleigh like 
a daughter; then, as a reward, I will teach 
you to play the piano like an artist, instead 
of, thumping it as if all your fingers were 
hammers." 

It took a little time to carry out the 
reform, but Sobieska did it. She advised 
her Ladyship on all points. She induced 
her to act as mistress in the house ; whereas, 
previously, orders had been given by all the 
elder daughters, and when Lady Endsleigh 
wanted to drive, she would perhaps find all 
the carriages engaged.- Lady Endsleigh was 
fond of giving dinner-parties, and the three 



8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

elder daughters (there were six in all, the 
youngest fourteen) always joined them. Miss 
Chlopicki also joined them, and by her quaint 
beauty, her brilliant talk, and her occasional 
sly sarcasms, completely effaced these girls. 
They were beaten at last. They capitulated 
. ^and took to adoring Sobieska instead of 
hating her. 

The one who held out longest was the 
third . Violet . about nineteen. She was a 
romp and a hoyden . liked to climb trees 
after birds' nests, and to wade rivers after 
water-lilies. She had just eirierged from the 
schoolroom, having learned nothing ; for all 
previous governesses had been afraid of her, 
as well they might. One that offended her 
she tied to a tree in the park, and left her 
there. She fancied her elder sisters fools for 
being managed by Sobieska. She rejoiced 
in her physical strength, and longed to show 
Miss Chlopicki her superiority therein. One 
afternoon she entered the schoolroom (a very 
comfortable room, for Lady Endsleigh liked 
to make every one comfortable), just as her 
three younger sisters left it. Sobieska had 
thrown herself on a sofa to rest.- Her eyes 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 9 

were closed. Violet came forward, took her 
wrists in her , hands, grasping them tightly, 
and said. 

" Now, Miss Chlopicki, you are in my 
power." 

Sobieska looked at her languidly, and 
smiled. 

'^ Dear me," she said, " what are you going 
to do to me ?" 

"You see I am stronger than you," said 
Violet. 

" I see you are more foolish," said Sobieska. 
" Do you really think you can hold my hands ? 
You are a mere baby." 

Violet, indignant, squeezed her wrists. 

"O yes I you hurt me dreadfully. Now, 
hold fast; I am going to take my hands 
away. 

Sobieska, whose father had taught her to 
fence, gave a sudden turn of the wrist, ahd 
was free. So sharp was that turn that Violet 
almost fainted with pain, and there was a 
dark line across the palm of her left hand, 
caused by the rapid movement of Sobieska's 
right. 

From that time Violet was as docile as her 



lO MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sisters. Wnother circumstance rendered them 
more docile still. One winter evening Lady 
Endsleigh had a dinner-party, and the conver- 
sation turned on a man who had been lec- 
turing on mesmerism in the county town. 
Difference of opinion existed as to whether 
he did anything inexplicable. Miss Chlopicki 
said nothing. 

When the guests had left, the ladies sat 
awhile around the smouldering fire, and re- 
ferred back to the conversation. 

" You did not give any opinion, I re- 
marked/* said Lady Endsleigh to her 
governess. 

" No," said Sobieska ; " my opinions are so 
decided that your guests might have been 
shocked." 

** O, do tell us what they are," said her 
Ladyship and Mary and Annabel and Violet, 
all in a breath. 

" The man they heard lecture is an im- 
postor," said Sobieska. "So was Frederic 
Antony Mesmer, the inventor of mesmerism. 
But there is such a thing as spiritual magnet- 
ism, and it is a force of immense value. I 
know it, too, for I can magnetise*" 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 1 1 

" O, do magnetise me !" cried the impetu- 
ous Violet. 

" It is not a thing to be done for mere 
amusement. Come to me the next time you 
feel inclined to be mischievous, and I may 
try the experiment.'' 

The time came, and Violet was success- 
fully magnetised. So in their turn were her 
sisters. Now, whatever be the true theory 
of spiritual magnetism . ^whether it is a matter 
of imagination, or of will, or a physical 
change . assuredly it gives the person who has 
the power immense ascendancy over those 
who submit to it. These girls, who had pre- 
viously rebelled against all authority, became 
Sobieska's humble servants. She used her 
despotism wisely. Never hitherto had they 
learned anything, having always treated their 
teachers with scorn. Sobieska brought them 
back to the schoolroom, and did her best to 
amend their neglected education. The con- 
sequence of this was that she became lady 
paramount of Endsleigh Lodge, and that 
nothing was done by mother or daughters 
without her. The girls came to her to know 
if they might accept an invitation. Their 



I 2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

mother asked her advice on all matters con- 
nected with the estate. Both Lady Endsleigh 
and her daughters regarded Sobieska as their 
best counsellor ; so no wonder that four horses 
came at a fast gallop to Doctor Tachbrooks 
when she was suddenly taken ill. 

When the Doctor reached Miss Chlopicki's 
room, which was one of the most luxurious 
in the house, he found her lying supine, per- 
fectly still, her changeable eyes wide open : 
there was no sensible pulse. His first step 
was to turn out fussy Lady Endsleigh and 
her daughters, who were in a state of chronic 
lamentation. Then he took a lancet, and 
slightly punctured a vein in her beautiful brown 
arm : the blood moved not. He applied to 
the delicate nostrils strong liquor ammoniae : 
there was no sign of consciousness. 

" It is a cataleptic trance," he said to Lady 
Endsleigh, whose anxiety was almost amus-" 
ing : surely never was governess so valued 
before. " One person should always be in 
the room with her, and not more than one ; 
the moment she shows signs of awaking, give 
her wine . a tumbler of champagne with a 
desert-spoonful of brandy in it." 



. -^ . > M.^^ . 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. 1 3 

" How long will this dreadful trance last ?" 
inquired her Ladyship. 

" Impossible to say. She may recover in 
a week ; she may be cataleptic for a year. 
The great point is, that she should never for 
a moment be left alone." 

" You will come often, Doctor Tachbrook," 
said her Ladyship. 

" Daily." 

He kept his promise. The trance lasted 
only five days. It terminated, by a fortunate 
accident, during one of the Doctor's visits. 
He was alone with his patient, watching with 
the curiosity of a physicist the unchanged, 
unlighted colour of her wide open eyes. 
Suddenly, as he was gazing upon them, he 
fancied that a scintilla of violet light came 
from their pupils. 

"She is coming back," he thought, and 
prepared for her the magic draught. 

He was right. He continued looking into 
her eyes, and it seemed to him as if they 
exerted upon his a strange magnetic power. 
He was aware that she claimed to possess 
this power, at that time new and startling, 
though old, at least, as the Pyramids ; and, 



14 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

though by nature and profession incredulous, 
he could not help feeling that there was some 
strange attraction in this young woman's 
eyes. 

The violet scintilla grew to a definite flame 
of light. The eye began to live. A look of 
recognition gradually grew there. Sobieska 
shuddered and moved. The Doctor brought 
the glass to her lips, and she drank a little. . 

"Yes, I knew you would be here," she 
began to say, speaking slowly and painfully ; 
"I saw you from the window of papa's palace." 

" You must not talk now," said the Doctor, 
" or you will tire yourself. Drink a little and 
rest." 

She obeyed. After a while, however, she 
grew restless, and said to the Doctor . 

"How long have I been away ?" 

" Five days," he said. 

" Yes ; that is what I reckoned. I have 
been to see papa, who is in some other world. 
He has a lovely palace there, and a great park 
with deer, where he hunts, and a gallery of 
pictures of all the famous things he did in this 
world. There is one by Rembrandt of his 
cutting down an officer who insulted a lady 



HER GRANDFATHER AND GRANDMOTHER. I 5 

that was taken prisoner. It is such a deh'ght- 
ful place ! From its windows you can see 
the earth . for they are made of telescopic 
glass, so that the most distant things seem 
close by. I saw you quite clearly sitting in 
this room, and looking at what you thought 
was me, though it was merely my body. 
Papa pointed you out to me, and I knew you 
at once." 

Doctor Tachbrook listened, with a kind of 
belief that the young lady could not yet have 
gathered up her scattered senses. Her next 
remark made him feel certain thereon. 

" Fancy what papa said ! He said,^ ' You 
will marry that learned physician.' How 
would you like such a fate, Doctor Tach- 
brook ?" 



CHAPTER IL 

A STRANGE STORY. 
" She is a womaD/therefore'may be won." 

It will be evident to persons of discernment 
that our singular Polish maiden was not quite 
restored to her normal condition, and wholly 
awakened from her trance, at the time when 
she informed her sage medical adviser that it 
was her fate to marry him, and consequently 
his to marry her. 

Although she possessed the mystic consti- 
tution of the Delphic sybil, she did not lack 
the modesty of the ordinary maid. 

When she was thoroughly awakened to the 
material everyday world, she dfd not remem- 
ber that she had made love in an unusual 
manner to Doctor Tachbrook whilst on the 
way to earth and in the portal of the Chamber 
of Dreams. 



A STRANGE STORY. I ^ 

There is a curious fact which we ought to 
note with reference to abnormal states of 
being. A man when drunk has been proved 
to remember circumstances which occurred 
in a previous state of inebriation, while in his 
sober condition he had been utterly unable to 
recall them. His drunken memory is tenacious 
only of his drunken actions ; when sober he 
u remembers clearly only what he did while 
sober. 

Sobieska Chlopicki, though her eyes never 
wholly lost the mysterious magnetism which 
was their birthrigh^ yet returned absolutely 
from her dreamlarld to her old life. 

Doctor Tachjorook did not become quite 
restored to the^^erene plane of existence upon 
which he had lormerly stood. 

He was a man with a considerable taste for 
mystery, though he possessed a keen clear 
brain which allowed it to be obfuscated by no 
hallucinatory cobwebs. The medical profes- 
sion, in however materialistic and incredulous 
armour it may fence itself, nevertheless, is not 
quite blind to the occult influences of which 
sometimes a glimmering is vouchsafed to the 
student. However much in outward art the 

VOL. I. B 



1 8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

medical physiological leaders of opinion may 
ridicule Th^ophile Gautier's idea, ^'Sur les 
sciences occultes les sciences officielles riont pas 
dit leur dernier motl^ yet many of them only 
do so because such a course is official and 
orthodox. Many of them, like Gautier, have 
known men like Balzac, and have had their 
inmost and secret faith shaken as to the omni- 
science of the authorised text-books. Some 
are known to meet together to discuss with 
closed doors those occult elements of hupian 
nature, these psychologic puzzles and mag- 
netic marvels, which it would disturb the 
placidity of society and the nerves of their 
wealthiest patients to hear of. 

Doctor Tachbrook, in addition to having 
a private taste for the so-called abnormal, was 
also a man not wholly insensible to the normal 
feminine magic. Although not far from forty, 
he was one of those men who grow mellower 
every year up to seventy ; he was by no means 
crabbed by study, and never dreamed that a 
male human being is otherwise than amorous 
and young at forty. 

As he was returning home he considered 
his position. Here was a most interesting 



A STRANGE STORY. 1 9 

psychologic Study ready to hand. Here also 
was a most interesting and weird maiden 
evidently only waiting to be wooed, evidently 
bound to him, even though unconsciously, by 
a magnetic spell that he had but to awaken to 
call into action. He was not a superstitious 
man, but whether or no he had absolute belief 
in the spiritual palaces with telescopic glass 
windows of his patient's papa, he nevertheless 
considered it probable that her dream-message 
to him was founded upon some fact of their 
mutual suitability. 

" She 's a sweet allurement," he said to him- 
self, " and if she tries to manage me as she has 
managed poor infatuated Lady Endsleigh and 
her daughters, why, TU mesmerise her." 

That night Doctor Tachbrook dreamed of 
Prince Chlopicki's palace. There was the lordly 
deer park ; there was the Rembrandtesque pic- 
ture gallery ; there'were the telescopic windows, 
through which he could see his lengthy form 
wrapped in cosy bachelor bed-clothes in the 
fire-lit room of the red-brick house in the well- 
known street of the village of Rothescamp in 
the valley ; there, too, in his dream was So- 
bieska, more lovely and magnetic than ever. 



20 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Septimus Tachbrook, when he awoke the 
next morning and found that the princess of 
his dream was not by his side, stretched out 
his lengthy limbs, yawned, and felt rather 
forlorn. 

After breakfast, of which he partook with 
more than usual appetite, for dream-wander- 
ings during night produce a sensation of 
emptiness and chill in the stomach the next 
morning ; after breakfast, his meditations were 
so far advanced that he had decided to un- 
dergo further the enchantments of the fairy 
princess. 

As she had only revived from her trance 
the evening before, of course his visit could be 
made professional and t^te-a-t^te. . Otherwise 
he would only have been able to see his 
charmer in the presence of Lady Endsleigh, 
and such a selection from her half-a-dozen 
daughters as happened to be at the time in the 
drawing-room. 

H e went to the house. J ust as his brougham 

was turning down the avenue he was stopped 

by a footman who bore a letter in his hand 

from Lady Endsleigh, which he was on the 

vay to deliver at the surgery. 



A STRANGE STORY. 2 I 

The Doctor told his coachman to drive on, 
and sat down calmly to read her Ladyship's 
letter. It was as follows : . 

" Dear Doctor Tachbrook, . Come at once ! 
We are all extremely uneasy about dear Miss 
Chlopicki. What do you think .'^ She positively 
declares that she must return to Poland at 
once. We can get no reason from her for such 
a strange proceeding, and greatly fear that her 
indisposition cannot be yet entirely removed ! 
Do come as soon as you can ! She says she 
must leave us at noon ! It is all very extraor- 
dinary ; and we all feel so terrified, as if some- 
thing dreadful were going to happen. . Yours 
faithfully, Selina Endsleigh." 

" This is a pretty business ! " thought the 
Doctor ; " so sensitive an organisation is so 
soon put out of gear. Still the constitution 
is manifestly a rare and splendid one, and a 
little care will soon set the disturbance to 
rights." 

As he entered the house, he met Lady 
Endsleigh and four of her daughters in the 
hall. The two youngest were in hysterics in 
their bedrooms, and commotion had evidently 



22 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

been acting upon all. Ceremony was aban- 
doned. " O Doctor ! " said her ladyship, 
" I 'm so glad you Ve come ; you '11 find Miss 
Chlopicki in her boudoir. Please see her at 
once, and relieve us of our dreadful fears ! " 

" She 's having her boxes packed," said one 
of the girls. 

"She's had nothing to eat this morning," 
said another ; while a third chimed in, " She 
even refused some oysters and sal volatile I 
took up to her half an hour ago." 

Doctor Tachbrook went up-stairs. Sobieska 
was in her boudoir, as had been stated. It 
was true, too, that she was packing her boxes. 
Several articles of wearing apparel, as well as 
her collection of jewellery, several handsome 
pieces of which had been the gift of the 
Endsleigh women, lay scattered on the floor. 

She started as the Doctor entered, and then 
looked flurriedly round the room, while an in- 
tense blush shot visibly through her olive skin 
over face and neck. He marked the violet 
scintilla returning to her eye. 

She had not been expecting the Doctor so 
soon, although well aware that Lady Endsleigh 
had sent for him. She had not meant to see 



A STRANGE STORY. 23 

him, and even imagined that she had locked 
her door. 

This precaution she had inadvertently 
omitted ; and now it was too late to bar out the 
foe. She stood fronting the Doctor with eyes 
fixed on the ground, and a subtle observer 
might have observed the difficultly restrained ^ 
and concealed hard-drawn panting of her 
heart. She wore no longer the assured, almost 
commanding, manner of old. The pallor of 
her skin remained ; but even when the first 
sudden blush had faded from her cheeks, there 
was still beneath the surface that appearance 
of a hidden fire, burning more luminously than 
ever. Altogether her appearance, if more 
unearthly on account of the weird and un- 
usual hue of her complexion, was yet more 
human and feminine than usual, inasmuch as 
the change of her manner from cold and subju- 
gating to timid and unassertive, added much 
to the charm of her uncommon and ordinarily 
too statuesque beauty. 

Doctor Tachbrook happily had studied some- 
thing of human nature in addition to his 
drier professional researches in physics. He 
had seen a singular flash produced from her 



24 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

eyes, in addition to the flurry which filled 
them, and the look of vexation even with 
which she had greeted him. 

Whether the Doctor^s guess as to the cause 
was absolutely and fully correct, it would be 
impossible with certainty to determine; but 
this is what he whispered to himself. 

** No longer superhuman : the woman has 
arrived. Could she have any remeiribrance 
of her concluding remark to me last night ? 
Perhaps some flash of feeling of it has touched 
her without its being definite enough in mean- 
ing to put into words." 

Being a man of the world, in addition to a 
man of science, a gentleman, and a possible 
lover, he did nothing foolish. 

*' Miss Chlopicki," he said, in a decided and 
professional tone, " will you be kind enough 
to inform me what important work you are 
about here ? You ought not to have quitted 
the sofa for a minute. I must request an 
immediate return to it : your conduct is most 
imprudent" 

A curious change of expression came over 
Sobieska's face. A physiognomist would 
have said that a feeling of relief had passed 



\ 
\ 



A STRANGE STORY. 25 

over it : that a sense of painful suspense and 
some agitation of shame had been apparently 
oppressing her, but were now partially or 
temporarily removed. 

She looked up timidly but with a curious 
fleet glance that passed over his carefully 
guarded face, as if to read his inmost secrets. 

** I find it is necessary for me to return 
to Poland at once," she said, with a forced 
sang-froid. 

"Nonsense I" replied the Doctor, promptly ; 
" it would be fatal for you to travel in your 
present state ; oblige me by following out my 
instructions, and be good enough to lie down 
at once." 

Sobieska, with a feeble remonstrance and 
repetition of her plea about leaving for 
Poland, obeyed his instructions. 

Doctor Tachbrook rang the bell . a servant 
appeared . and the face of one of the least 
hysterical of Lady Endsleigh's six daughters 
was seen behind. 

Her the Doctor did not appear to notice, 
and as Sobieska had not caught her eye, she 
retired. He said to the servant, "A red 
mullet and a glass of sherry, with a chop and 



26 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

a glass of stout to follow, as rapidly as 
possible." 

Then he turned to his patient : " You have 
not eaten this morning, Miss Chlopicki, I 
believe ?" 

" No," she stammered . she who was never 
known to stammer before. 

" Most injudicious, most foolish ! " replied 
the Doctor. At every strong word of this 
kind which he made use of, a very close 
student of Miss Chlopicki's face would have 
said that a weight seemed to be lifted off her. 
The Doctor observed it, and formed his own 
conclusions. " Loving her self-consciousness," 
he thought, " she thinks now that her making 
any unvirginal remarks to me must have been 
a delusion of her imagination." 

He rang the bell again. " Ask Lady End- 
sleigh if she will be kind enough to step up 
here for one moment ! " he said to the 
servant. 

Lady Endsleigh had been afraid to enter 
the room before. Her governess's prolonged 
trance had much shaken her nerves, and now 
that there appeared a beginning of new and 
unintelligible vagaries on Miss Chlopicki's 



A STRANGE STORY. 2/ 

part, she had been employing her time chiefly 
in wringing her hands and taking miniature 
doses of cura9oa in her own room, in order 
to fortify her in case her remarkable governess 
should prove to be going mad. But now as 
the interview was to be in the all-powerful 
Doctor s presence she felt reassured, and pro- 
ceeded up-stairs. 

" Miss Chlopicki," said that gentleman, as 
her Ladyship entered the room, " is suffering 
from a slight febrile malady consequent upon 
exhaustion, arising from her not having taken 
sufficient food after recovery from her nervous 
attack. I have taken the liberty of ordering 
lunch for her." 

"Then she is not going to start for 
Poland to-day ? " said Lady Endsleigh, rather 
inconsequently. 

"Certainly not, my dear lady; quite im- 
possible for her to travel for a fortnight. 
Indeed, highly doubtful whether such a 
journey could safely be performed within a 
month, or even whether it ought to be 
attempted at all." 

Lady Endsleigh looked reassured, and 
after saying, " Then we will not let her go," 



28 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

came by degrees to ^ chat pleasantly, the 
Doctor carefully leading the conversation. 
With Lady Endsleigh in the room, some- 
thing of Sobieska's usual bearing gradually 
returned, as if the presence of a person 
over whom she was conscious. of intellectual 
superiority, and over whom she had been 
wont to exert much half-unconscious influ- 
ence, restored her her strength. 

Soon the lunch which had been ordered 
arrived, and under the Doctor's scientific 
explanations and warnings the invalid man- 
aged to eat it. 

In a short time one of the daughters joined 
the party, and the conversation became more 
general and ordinary in its character. The 
oppression which had been weighing on 
more than one of the household gradually 
lifted off; and the weirdness of such abnor- 
mal matters as trance, and the unpleasant 
feelings caused by unaccountable eccentricities, 
began to wear away. 

Septimus Tachbrook stayed more than 
an hour, excusing himself professionally on 
the ground that Miss Chlopicki's digestion 
required careful attention. 



A STRANGE STORY. 29 

It was to him a most curious time. 

Sobieska sat on the sofa, looking ex- 
quisitely charming in the glow of returning 
health, and in the newly-gained freedom 
from an indefinable consciousness of some 
strange relation to the Doctor. She did 
not quite lose the sense of a singular rapport 
with regard to him, but the dread of un- 
maidenly nearness to him faded somewhat 
from her mind, being relegated as it were 
from her nerves as they grew serener to 
the more mysterious depths of her spirit. 

On the Doctor she looked, or appeared to 
look, with the same eyes as of old, whenever 
he had seen her on the occasion of his friendly 
occasional calls upon Lady Endsleigh. 

But ever and anon there seemed to him 
to be a subtle and novel element in her 
look, a kind of wooing, unrealised by her, 
and proceeding from the very depths of 
her unconsciousness. If her outward de- 
meanour was ordinary and merely polite, 
^ this inward demeanour manifested itself by 
flashes of ineffable and extraordinary fasci- 
nation. 

By the time the Doctor departed, the 



30 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

portions of his soul which were divided 
from those devoted to science, and were 
set apart for love, were filled to the utmost. 
His whole being for the hour seemed almost 
to forget science and its incredulities, and to 
live in love and its faiths. 

As he returned home, through the avenue, 
after engaging to call again the morning 
following, his scientific voice said within 
him, "All smooth now, possibly, now that 
we have tranquillised the excessive maidenly 
self-consciousness and reproach." And all 
the while, through day and night, through 
work and dream, his love voice kept repeat- 
ing, " An exquisite girl, a fascinating spirit, 
a magnetic miracle, an adorable woman." 

Septimus Tachbrook called at the Hall 
often and often, at first professionally, and 
afterwards without that excuse. 

Sobieska, being wooed in ordinary fashion, 
and not wooing as she seemed to see 
herself in the horror of a half-remembered 
dream, did not manifest more terror and 
reluctance than are usual with maidens 
who are truly wooed and truly won. The 
glances of ineffable fascination that at first 



A STRANGE STORY. 3 1 

had flashed timidly from . the deepest founts 
of her inner soul, gradually grew in volume, 
and seemed to come fropi less distant regions 
of her eyes, and to be glowing closer and 
closer to her lover. 

And when the day came that, in manly, 
straightforward language, normal and un- 
mystical, he told her that he loved her, she 
was able to make effable those ineffable 
gleams of her spirit, and to say in homely, 
mortal speech the little sweet word. Yes. 

She married that learned physician, and 
the pair proceeded to enter that lovely 
palace of love that had appeared in her 
dreams to be her father's, but is in reality 
universal. Doctor Tachbrook had met with 
his fate. 



CHAPTER III. 

A MAGNETIC LADY. 

** Florio. . . , See her eyes ! 

They look you through, they make you shrink and shudder ; 

Yet, for all that, they hold you close, and bind you 

As loadstone steel. You cannot soon forget 

lliose eyes ; they haunt you o' nights ; they make you 

wonder . . . 
Eyes are they, or strange orient talismans 
Set in a pretty woman's giddy head 
To madden men ? '* ^Old Play, 

Adam, when he married Lilith, must have 
felt rather perplexed as to how to manage 
her. So must the chivalrous gentleman who 
married Undine. So, questionless, do a 
great many persons of both sexes who have 
the ill luck to wed those whom they cannot 
understand. Doctor Septimus Tachbrook, 
however, was a man of unusual perspicacity ; 
he had the gift of insight, which is the best 
gift of any doctor, moral or physical. He 



A MAGNETIC LADY. 33 

saw clearly that his young wife (she was not 
much more than half his age) had a curious 
inexplicable faculty which enabled her to in- 
fluence others as the serpent influences the 
bird, or the snake-charmer the serpent. She 
became of immense use to him, for she pos- 
sessed the clairvoyant faculty ; and when a 
new patient was heard of, had a knack of 
discovering what was the matter without 
diagnosis. 

Not many years before had Mesmer been 
flourishing in Paris, magnetising ladies and 
trees, while sturdy Benjamin Franklin did 
his best to demolish him. Between two such 
men there is no osculating point. Mesmer 
was an imaginative quack ; Franklin was an 
unimaginative philosopher. Mesmer had an 
inkling of a great mystery, and tried to make 
money of it ; Franklin would have scorned 
the thought of making money, but could not 
apprehend a mystery. Hence they were not 
fairly matched, and Franklin's unanswerable 
argruments were' practically answered . since 
Mesmer flourished. 

Doctor Tachbrook made Lady Endsleigh 
and her six daughters very unhappy by 

VOL. I. c 



34 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

taking Sobieska away ; but they gave her 
superb presents, and it was decided they 
should never have another governess. They 
were always coming over to Rothescamp-in- 
the- Valley to see her. She still advised Lady 
Endsleigh, still kept the girls in order. 
Indeed, she very soon became the adviser of 
the whole village ; and as she ' insisted on 
cleanliness and ventilation, the Doctor used 
to say she was spoiling his practice. 

Over Doctor Tachbrook himself Sobieska 
exerted a curious influence. He had rather 
a restless temper, and was apt to think more 
of a scientific experiment than of all his 
patients. Sobieska did .for him all his deli- 
cate manipulations ; she taught him tran- 
quillity ; in the pleasant evenings, after the 
day's work and worry, she calmed him with 
choice ballads sung to harp or guitar . ^ballads 
that were usually improvisations, words and 

music too» Here is one : . 

I. 

She was tall and fair, and strange and strong, 

Helen of Troy. 

To her did the world's worst war belong, 

And for many heroes grievous wrong ; 

But ah ! there was also Homer's song, 

Worth more annoy. 



A MAGNETIC LADY, 35 

II. 

She came, men say, of a strain divine, 

Helen of Troy. 
The dew on her lips outwent all* wine. 
The light in her eyes surpassed starshine. 
The pulse of her fair breasts said, Be mine / 

Lady of joy. 

Ui. 

Thou shalt never die ; thou art here this day, 

Helen of Troy. 
So long as the sweet spring breezes play. 
And the swallow swings in the air of May, 
Why the men wi41 woo and the girls be gay, 

Helen of Troy ! 

The Doctor grew quite a different man 
under his wife's tendence, and the village 
and the vicinage declared that his marriage 
had marvellously improved him. 

Unhappily for him, his married life did 
not last long. Sobieska died three years 
after their marriage, leaving a child for her 
husband to take care of DoctOF Tachbrook 
was miserable ; he had lost one half of his 
soul . he longed to recover it. Gladly would-^ 
he also have passed to the other world ; but 
the Destinies had other designs. He lived 
more than half-a-century after his wife's 
death ; and during all those years had a firm 
belief that she was present with him. Was 
he mad, think you ? 



36 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

The child lived . a boy. He was 
christened Harold, a family name of the 
Tachbrooks. He was the oddest of boys. 
His father let him do just what he pleased. 
His fancies were eccentric. He sometimes 
liked cricket and football with the village 
youngsters, and at such games he showed 
easy mastery. He sometimes liked to shut 
himself up in the Doctor's library and read 
Homer for hours. When his father talked 
to him about his irregular habits, he said that 
some invisible being told him what to do ; 
he could not help it, he was under orders. 
The Doctor, who had reason for believing 
that 

'* There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy," 

did not thwart his son's vagaries. He had a 
kind of superstition that the wife he had lost 
held some communication with her boy. 

The young squire, as everybody in Rothes- 
camp called him, since he was a true Tach- 
brook, often lounged into the Tachbrook 
Arms of a morning. The landlord, Tom 
Ockit, was rather a humourist, and had rather 
a pretty niece. Edith Ockit was a thorough 



A MAGNETIC LADY. 37 

It 

lady, though orphanhood had thrown her on 
the jolly avuncular innkeeper. Her father 
was an artist of no common power, and the 
" O. or of Orlando Ockit commands thou- 
sands to-day where he, poor fellow, would 
have been glad of a ten-pound note. When 
he died, his jolly brother Tom, innkeeper and 
farmer, took in the girl right readily ; but he 
was incapable of seeing that her fine fibre was 
unsuited to doing barmaid's business. Harold 
saw it : Harold fell in love. 

Edith was proud, and slightly inaccessible. 
Harold played a waiting game. He talked 
to her at eventide. He told her the most 
abominable stories. An active imagination 
is very useful in lovemaking. Harold's was 
very active ; and in course of time he con- 
trived to subjugate Edith : which done, he 
thought he would talk to his father. 

I should here observe that when Lady 
Endsleigh died she left Harold a few thou- 
sand pounds, "as a testimony of gratitude to 
Doctor Tachbrook." The Doctor would 
not be persuaded to accept it for his son 
till the executors assured him that if he 
did not there would be a Chancery suit to 



38 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

make him, whicli might perhaps ruin the 
estate. 

Well, Harold came to the Doctor. 

" Father," he said, " I want to marry." 

" You are young," said the Doctor, gravely. 

*' True,*' said Harold.- " But I have been 
dreaming, night after night, of my mother, 
and she tells me to marry Edith Ockit, and 
to go to Australia within a year." 

" I should once have said," his father 
replied, " that such dreams were mere reflec- 
tions of what you thought of during the day. 
But I have seen so many curious experiments 
that I t:annot reach a conclusion. You shall 
have your way. Edith Ockit is not your 
equal in birth, but she seems a remarkably 
good girl. As to Australia, I see no objection. 
I shall miss you, but I must find some study 
to enliven me. You have a little money to 
start with : I can send you some more if you 
should want it." 

Harold Tachbrook married Edith Ockit . 
a calm and thoughtful girl, who quieted her 
husband's restlessness. But he was still 
haunted by a phantom that bade him go to 
the antipodes : so a few months (I forget 



A MAGNETIC LADY. 39 

the number) after marriage he engaged a 
passage for himself and his wife in a well- 
found sailing vessel, and started for Australia . 
Felix. 

The passage was long and troublesome. 
The winds blew wilder than ever around the 
Cape of Good Hope. They were blown 
about to the verge of despair. Driven out 
of their course, they were becalmed off 
Borneo : and there occurred what is in- 
evitable if the human race is to continue to 
exist. Mrs Tachbrook gave birth to a child. 
It was a girl. It cost poor Edith her life, 
and her body was buried in the sea, amid 
the tears of passengers and sailors. Folly, 
of course : but the sadness of death seems 
increased when the corpse must be left in the 
untraceable depths of ocean, where no stone 
can be placed, no flowers planted. 

Mrs Tachbrook, when first she felt what 
was going to happen, had a presentiment 
that she was not fated to survive her trouble. 
Of this to her husband she said nothing, 
knowing well how miserable it would make 
his loving heart. But the feeling haunted 
her, perhaps rendering more certain the 



40 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

doom she dreaded : and she thought very 
sadly, indeed, of Harold left alone in the 
world, of her unborn child without a mother's 
loving care. She should never kiss its pretty 
lips, or lave in fair water its tender form, 
or feel its little fingers on her breast. That 
was her presentiment : it proved true. 

Believing that she should die, she wanted 
to tell Harold concerning an old school 
friend whom she dearly loved, and to ask 
him to find her out if she should return to 
England. Friendships made at school are 
often durable. This girl was named Mary 
Fane ; she was under the common height, 
a delicate creature that you might put under 
a glass shade. Every part of her body had 
curious beauty, both of form and colour ; 
her ears were little shells, her nails pure 
mother-o'-pearl, her mouth a rose-bed. She 
was tremulous all through with fire and fun. 
All her school fellows were in love with lier ; 
but her chosen friend was Edith Ockit. 

Mary Fane was terribly naughty, but so 
irresistibly amusing that her naughtinesses 
were always forgiven. They were the out- 
come of a high and daring spirit in a lively, 



A B1A.GNETIC LADY. 4 1 

lovely form. To her might well have been 
applied what Wordsworth wrote of Hartley 
Coleridge in his childhood : . 

" Thou art so exquisitely wild, ' 
I think of thee with many fears. 
For what may be thy lot in future years." 

She was the plague and the delight of the 
school ; was more punished and more petted 
than all the rest put together. She was 
just the sort of girl whom a wise and loving 
husband might mould into a perfect woman. 
Unluckily she was not so constituted as to 
be likely at first sight to attract a man of 
this class. 

Whea Edith Ockit left school and went 
to live with her uncle, an active corres- 
pondence (active for days of dear postage) 
was kept up between her and Mary Fane. 
It gradually slackened : Edith was very busy 
with Harold Tachbrook, and perhaps Miss 
Mary was very busy with somebody else. 
If so, I warrant he had a fine time of it. 

When Edith became Mrs Tachbrook, she 
had not heard from her friend for a long 
time. Preparation for travel gave her no 
time to discover where she was. On the 



42 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

voyage she had often talked to Harold, in 
a pleasant, simple way, about her school life : 
and Mary Fane was so frequently named 
that Harold laughingly pretended to be 
jealous. 

As poor Edith grew weaker and weaker 
before her baby s birth, with the sad pre- 
sentiment of never regaining strength, she 
was haunted by strange dreams of Mary 
Fane, in all kinds of terrible difficulty, call- 
ing to her across the sea for help. A sensible 
woman enough, Edith recognised these 
dreams as the phantasms of illness and 
weakness, yet she could not help saying to 
her husband . 

" Harold, when we go back to England, I 
want to find out Mary Fane. I cannot help 
thinking she is likely to get into trouble." 

" Very likely, indeed, my pet, from all 
that you have told me of her," said Harold, 
laughing. He did not, nor indeed did the 
Doctor, imagine Edith so weak as she really 
was. Her cheerful resolute spirit deceived 
them. 

But when she died, and he felt his great 
loss, he thought of her anxiety about Mary 



A MAGNETIC LADY. 43 

r 

Fane. He resolved that on his return to 
England he would seek for her. After he * 
had seen his dear love buried in the illimit- 
able sea, he thought more of this last fancy 
of hers than even of his little unconscious 
daughter. 

This little baby girl was the pet of the ship. 
She was called Miranda. She was happy 
enough . for there were cows on board, and 
plentiful milk : there were also ladies on 
board, and plentiful petting. Harold Tach- 
brook was miserable. He could not bear to 
look at his little girl : she was such a dread 
reminder of her mother's death. The only 
thing that consoled him was his firm faith 
that his mother's spirit communicated with 
him and gave him guidance. He had left his 
father ; he had lost his wife ; his child was a 
baby : but he was not alone, for he recognised 
the spirit of his mother. That spirit had 
in a vision of the night mapped Melbourne 
before his eyes, and had pointed to a place in 
that map as if ordering him to go thither. 
Harold resolved to go. 



CHAPTER IV. 

UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 

** Bom far from merry England, English folk 

See her in dreams. For them the summer breeze 
Murmurs through mighty woods of beech and oak : 

They hear her minster bells across the leas ; 
In vision they behold her cities fair, 
And drink her rivulets, and breathe her happy air." 

Melbourne was a small place when Harold 
Tachbrook reached it, bringing his baby-girl, 
much wondering what he could do with her. 
The famous English city was but a few years 
old, and scanty signs appeared of its marvel- 
lous development. When Harold landed, he 
seemed to recognise in its right-angled streets 
the town of his dreams ; and he made his way 
to the particular point which he fancied had 
been indicated to him. What he found was a 
rather dingy lodging-house. It was kept by a 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 45 

middle-aged woman called Brown, who had 
come out with her husband. That gentleman 
had gone into the bush some years before, 
and Mrs Brown had pretty well given him up 
altogether. She was a Wiltshire farmers 
daughter, homely and good-natured. Harold's 
interview with her resulted in his leaving his 
hotel to lodge there, while he decided what he 
would do ; and kind-hearted Mrs Brown, who 
had no children, except a married daughter in 
England, took to little Miranda at once. 

Close to Mrs Brown's establishment, rather 
dingy, but not uncomfortable, there was a large 
piece of waste ground, where rubbish was 
thrown, and dogs and cats congregated. The 
old lady one day remarked that she wished 
she could rent it. At present it was quite a 
nuisance, and she might make a useful garden 
of it in time. Harold Tachbrook, who was 
wandering about the infant city in search of 
adventure, amused himself by making inquiry 
as to the ownership of this waste spot, and 
found its proprietor in the person of an oyster- 
vendor, who was only too glad to sell his 
property for fifty pounds, Mrs Brown was 
delighted, especially when he set to work 



46 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

energetically to make a fence round it, and to 
lay out a kitchen-garden. It took some time, 
some money also, for garden-seeds were at 
that time scarce in Melbourne. But Harold 
worked hard, and made Mrs Brown quite 
a pleasant garden in a month or two. 

One day Harold was down at the docks, 
smoking a short pipe (for tobacco is always 
your Englishman's consoler when other con- 
solation fails), and saw a ship come in . the 
Albatross from Liverpool . with a large num- 
ber of emigrants. Looking curiously at the 
motley groups that landed^ he was specially 
struck by a boy of about fourteen, in jacket 
and trousers of blue serge, who sprang ashore 
with only a small bag in his hand, and walked 
up the beach as if he meant to annex Australia. 

" ril talk to that young gentleman," said 
Harold to himself; " he's a runagate, I guess." 

So he accosted the boy, and asked him 
where he thought of going. 

"O, I don't care," said the youngster, 
laughing; " I've run away from home, and 
mean to see the world. If there 's any place 
you think will suit me, I shall feel thankful for 
knowing it." 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS* 47 

" Well," said Harold Tachbrook, much 
amused, ** I lodge at a pretty comfortable 
place ; will you come and look at it ? But 
where is your luggage ? " 

*' Luggage ! this bag is all I have. I may 
as well tell you that I ran away from school, 
and determined to put myself a good way off. 
The fact is, my governor hates me . I don't 
know why ; and though he has plenty of 
money, he sent me to a wretched little school, 
where nothing was taught, and where the fool 
of a master took delight in flogging. One 
day I thought I wouldn't stand it any longer ; 
so, when this fool wanted to flog me, I gave 
him a jolly good licking, and packed up my 
bag and went off*. I had plenty of money, 
for an aunt of mine had given me a lot of 
jewellery my grandmother left for me, and one 
ring paid my passage out here. Look ! here's 
a satisfactory roll of paper." 

The mad boy took from his pocket a roll 
of bank-notes, and handed them to Harold. 

^' What are you going to do ?" asked the 
latter. 

"O, / don't know. Enjoy myself and 
see Australia." 



48 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADJ^ESS. 

The boy, who gave his name as Tom Jones, 
which probably was not his name, and who 
had a fine patrician daring about him, went 
home with Harold to Mrs Brown. He settled 
down easily in his new quarters. He took 
a tremendous fancy to baby Miranda, and 
would nurse her all day long. He helped 
Harold Tachbrook in the garden. He per- 
vagated the infant city, which seemed to 
grow day by day, so rapid was its movement 
at that time. He attached himself closely to . 
Harold, who, for his part, quite enjoyed the 
youngster's energy and pluck. , 

Tiring at leiigth of Melbourne, they deter- 
mined to go on an exploring tour. Harold 
saw that his little girl was in good hands with 
Mrs Brown ; so leaving her plenty of money 
for the child's comfort, he and his young 
comrade set out to explore the wilds of 
Australia, at that time a land utterly un- 
known. Away they went, gaily enough, into 
the bush, taking with them a waggon and a 
team of light horses, plentiful provisions, and 
two enormous mastiffs. Also, they were not 
without firearms, which are more fatal than 
"he boomerang. 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 49 

What adventures had they ? Faith, many 
bushrangers were out in those days : Harold 
Tachbrook and Tom Jones killed a few. They 
killed emus, too, and kangaroos, and made 
friends with the natives, and lived a half- 
'v(rild life that seemed to sunburn their souls. 
Only two books they had between them : 
Harold had a Bible and Tom Jones had a 
Horace. There were occasions when they 
read them very thoroughly. 

By and by they bought between them a 
great sheep-walk, and went in for oxen as 
well'. They were successful. They had a 
very snug log-hut, where they enjoyed life 
thoroughly. Occasionally one or the other 
went to Melbourne, and Mrs Brown was 
supplied with funds, and Miranda with pre- 
sents, and letters were sent to England, . 
that is to say, Harold Tachbrook wrote to 
the Doctor, but young Tom Jones wrote to 
no one. Nor did he receive any letters. It 
was clear that he had successfully isolated 
himself, and that no one had the remotest 
notion of his whereabouts. 

When Harold wrote to his father, he did 
not forget Mary Fane, whose fate had so 

VOL. I. D 



50 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Strongly impressed his wife on her deathbed. 
The Doctor made many inquiries about her ; 
he could only discover that she had left the 
school at which she and Edith were together ; 
that she had married and gone abroad with 
her husband ; but the name *of her husband 
he failed to find out. 

Eighteen years had passed. Harold Tach- 
brook was a stalwart sunburnt long-bearded 
fellow, hard as nails, brown as a berry, ready 
for anything from pitch-and-toss to man- 
slaughter. He was in the very prime of 
life, and had never known five minutes of 
dyspepsia. Tom Jones, now about thirty-two, 
was young for his years ; he had lived a fine 
wild simple Homeric life, without a worry 
to wrinkle his brow ; the boy that Harold 
remembered when he landed at Melbourne, 
had developed into a man of wonderful power 
and resolve, with brain and muscle both in 
noble order. Only the worst of it is, that 
brain gets few opportunities in a new 
country. 

One day the two comrades were sitting 
side by side in front of their rough dwell- 
ing. It was sunset . ^such a sunset as one 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 5 1 

might see in England. They simultaneously 
thought oi home. 

" Tom/' said Harold Tachbrook, " that 
American fellow's offer for our sheep-run is 
not a bad one. Let 's sell and go home. I 
want to see Old England again. I want to 
see my father." 

" I don't want to see mine," said Tom 
Jones, "but I have no objection to seeing 
England. Let 's start at once." 

They sold their property . excellent well. 
They returned to Melbourne to dwell awhile 
with Mrs Brown. Miss Miranda had be- 
come charming : her hair was light, her eyes 
and eyebrows dark ; she was five feet six 
inches high, and as agile as Artemis. Of 
course Tom Jones fell in love with her at 
once. 

He had not been in Melbourne before for 
three years, and in the interval she had 
grown from a child to a woman. Having 
spent eighteen years in the bush without 
seeing any specimen of female humanity 
except the aboriginal darkie, he was rather 
wonder-stricken by the apparition of his 
friend's daughter. For she was a pretty 



52 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

girl . in fact, a girl of the old Venetian type 
of beauty ; in addition whereto she was a 
girl of amazing cleverness, which cleverness 
had received cultivation. 

Thus did it happen. Among the guests 
at Mrs Brown's lodging-house was a young 
German, engaged as a clerk in one of the 
Melbourne banks. He had the usual German 
superficial omniscience and love of lecture. 
He took to teaching Miranda, and Miranda 

* 

learnt easily, and indeed rather amazed her 
instructor by finding out the meaning of 
things which to him were mere formulae. He 
taught this girl, consciously, all he knew ; 
unconsciously, much more : for she had an 
instinctive power of carrying out to further 
issues any scrap of knowledge that reached 
her. This German was a mere smatterer, 
who loved not knowledge for its own sake, 
but liked the ostentation of knowledge ; still, 
even from him, Miranda Tachbrook learnt 
things which young ladies of her age seldom 
know. 

She was delighted at the thought of going 
to England. Can you not understand how a 
child, born in some colony or dependency 



mmm^mmmmmmmmmm^mmmmmmmtmmmmmm 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 53 

where everything is new and rough, must 
long to realise England? Fancy being an 
English boy or girl born at the antipodes, and 
not able to picture to one's self an English 
mayor or an English oak, a foxhunt or an 
express train, a regiment of the Guards or a 
cathedral, the House of Commons or the 
Derby ! Our little Undine was born at sea ; 
but well hath it been said by Walter Landor . 

" Ubicunque pontus est ibi Britannia est." 

Miranda was sorry to leave dear old Mrs 
Brown. The old lady had taken care of her 
since she was a month old, and had made a 
^reat pet of her. She had taught her to read 
and write when she was a very little girl, and 
had made all her little frocks, and had taken 
pride in so doing. She remembered how, 
when Miranda grew so fast, she was so proud 
of being up to Brownie's waist. She always 
called the old lady Brownie. And then she 
reached up to Brownie's shoulder, and in time 
left Brownie, who was rather short, far behind. 
The old lady was incessantly talking on such 
subjects during these last days before Miranda 
was to leave her. " I did hope, sir," she said 
to Harold, "that you would have settled 



54 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

down here, in the new country, and have built 
a fine house, and made my young lady the 
mistress of it ; though I daresay some good 
gentleman would have been wanting to run 
off with the pretty dear," and she cast a side 
look at Tom. 

"And no doubt, Mr Tom," she said to 
him, " you '11 be marrying one of these fine 
English ladies when you get to England, and 
I hope you'll send me a paper when your 
marriage is announced." 

" O, we won't forget you, Mrs Brown ; but 
so far as marriage is , concerned, I could be 
content to marry in this country." 

" But not if a certain lady went out of it, 
sir." 

" Well, Mrs Brown, when I am married I 
will send for you to come to my wedding if 
you like." 

" I am an old woman now, sir, and travel- 
ling about won't suit me : but I should like to 
hear of you and Mr Harold sometimes, and 
I am sure my young lady won't forget me. 
You won't forget poor old Brownie, will you, 
dear ? " she said to Miranda. 

" No, Brownie, I shall always think of you. 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 55 

/ 

and write to you vety bften, and I will have 
a picture of myself painted in England, and 
will send it to you." 

Poor old Mrs Brown went up to her bed- 
room to have a little cry, and to hug some relics 
of Miranda's childhood that she had by her. 
A little pinafore was always kept, for Mrs 
Brown remembered when Miranda one day 
said as she put on her pinafore, " Brownie, I 
am getting a woman now . women don't wear 
pinafores. Mayn't! wear an apron like you 
do. Lend me one of your aprons, I am 
ashamed of my pinafore." 

"But I musn't waste time," thought Mrs 
Brown, "there is plenty yet to be done to 
make everything comfortable for them on 
board the vessel. Ah, what a mighty fine 
ship it is ! Times are altered since I came 
out here in a sailing vessel. I wonder 
whether England is much altered. I should 
like to see it again, and see my dear child's 
home. And I wonder what my own old 
home in Wiltshire is like! I daresay it is 
altered ; but I should know it again." 

Harold Tachbrook and Tom Jones both 
longed to see the old country again; while 



56 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Miranda, bom somewhere near the equator, 
and therefore a little citizen of ocean, could 
not help longing to see the island of her race. 
Before Harold Tachbrook left Melbourne, 
he took care to make good Mrs Brown com- 
fortable. He was the better able to do this 
because eighteen years before he had fenced 
in a garden for her. The growth of Mel- 
bourne had placed her house in the most 
fashionable of localities, and that bit of garden 
was coveted by an hotel company as the most 
'* eligible " in the city of Melbourne. When 
Harold Tachbrook was known to be its pro- 
prietor, he had these people after him imme- 
diately. He showed no eagerness to deal with 
them ; he allowed them to make offer after offer 
without even answering their letters ; and the 
final result was, that he got thirty thousand 
pounds for what had originally cost him fifty. 
So he felt he could afford to make worthy Mrs 
Brown comfortable for the remainder of her 
life. This done, he arranged with his friend 
Tom Jones to start for England ; and it was 
decided they should go together on board 
the Mighty Metropolis steamer, the most 
famous steamship of the time. 



UNDER THE SOUTHERN CROSS. 57 

After eighteen years of sheep breeding, 
Harold Tachbrook and Tom Jones found 
the world considerably changed. Even as 
Tachbrook's fifty pounds had become thirty 
thousand, so everything had waxed vaster. 
They had come to Australia in a cranky tub ; 
they were to return to England in a floating 
palace, moving so steadily that you could not 
be sea-sick if you tried, and carrying on board, 
all the necessities of civilisation. When they 
went over the ship, they found both the 
library and the wine-cellar well stocked. It 
was scarcely possible to imagine anything 
that was not obtainable. 

" I suppose the world has been moving 
while we have been breeding sheep," said 
Harold Tachbrook. " I wonder what Lon- 
don will look like when we return ?" 

" I don't care much about London," said 
Tom Jones, ** for I have seldom been there ;' 
but I should like to know whether my old 
governor is alive still, and if he is as 
cantankerous as he used to be." 

"What do you think about it all?" said 
Tachbrook to Miranda, who had hardly 
begun to realise the fact that she had a 



58 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

father in the flesh. "What is your notion 
about England, child ?" 

" I hardly know, papa. I must have a 
notion about you, first. You say I was born 
at sea : I feel just like a mermaid that has 
come ashore . a fish out. of water. I 
want to go on board the great steamer : I 
hope it will pass over the very place where I 
was born and poor mamma was buried." 

" No chance thereof, my child. We go 
back round Cape Horn." 

** I think I must begin to study geography," 
said Miranda. '* It would be dreadful not to 
know Cape Horn when you saw it, and I am 
sure I shall not unless somebody gives me a 
likeness of it. Cape Horn is suggestive of 
an old woman in an old-fashioned cape, wear* 
ing horns." 

" Madcap," said her father. 



CHAPTER V. 



THE '* MIGHTY METROPOLIS." 

** Where lies the land to which the ship would go? 
Far, far ahead, is all her seamen know. 
And where the land she travels from ? Away, 
Far, far behind, is all that they can say.' 



ft 



That famous steamship, the Mighty Metro- 
poltSy carried about five hundred passengers, 
of whom nearly a hundred were in the saloon. 
A motley multitude, of course, and quite inde- 
scribable within the limits of three volumes. 
Still there are a few of them that deserve 
description. The passengers, however, must 
give place to the captain, Edward Grainger, 
a man six feet two inches high, whose 
battered figure-head, in its handsome ugli- 
ness, showed that in his time he had fought 
many ships through many storms. That 



60 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

« 

osculation of ugliness and beauty is a curious 
case of my favourite dogma that extremes 
meet. Grainger was perfectly charming when 
he talked to a lady, and perfectly furious when 
he had to fight a hurricane. 

Now for a few of the passengers. There 
were our friends Harold and Miranda Tach- 
brook, and Tom Jones. There was an elderly 
gentleman named Wilson, with a wife and 
some dumpy daughters, and a very diamonded 
son. The father was going home to be 
knighted for something or other he had done 
in the colony. There was a Ca:ptain Stuart, 
dark-eyed and black-bearded, evidently one of 
those adventurous gentlemen who, like Ancient 
Pistol, regard the world as an oyster. Stuart 
was popular, for he could sing comic songs won- 
derfully, and there was not his equal on board 
at whist and 6cart6. There was a poet, Cin- 
cinnatus Meunier, who had the wildest eyes 
and wore the hugest watch-chain ever known. 
He had been wandering all over the world ; 
had used up Western America and Southern 
Australia, and now thought he would try 
London. That city of giant brains may cure 
his poetic influenza. There were two pretty 



THE '* MIGHTY METROPOLIS. 6 1 

girls . twins . orphan daughters of an English 
gentleman named Mansard, who were going 
home to the care of their only relation, their 
maternal grandmother. The poor children, 
in their deep mourning, looked ver)^ unhappy. 
There was a rather frisky gentleman, called 
Leary, who showed from the first a decided 
disposition to be master of the ceremonies, 
and who started a daily newspaper (in manu- 
script, of course) called the Metropolitan. 
His first article was very fine. 

" The sea is the mother of cities ; where the 
water flows, bringing the masts of all nations, 
there will cities be built. Nowhere comes 
the sea without bringing civilisation as well 
as iodine. We are now on the sea. The 
Mighty Metropolis may be considered as a 
city, though rather small in girth . ^a mov- 
ing city, even as the earth is a travelling 
planet. Its king is the captain ; its archbishop 
is the chaplain ; it$ premier is the first officer ; 
its Times \s the Metropolitan^' 

There was a good deal more of this sort 
of thing ; and it was generally agreed among 
the passengers, that unless a deputation from 
the Times met Mr Leary the moment he 



6 2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

landed in England, offering him any sum he 
liked to mention for articles, the leading jour- 
nal of Europe would have decidedly neglected 
its duty. There were several families of plu- 
tocratic position, who had picked up gold 
enough in Australia to make them very bril- 
liant in England. To them, of course, it 
occurred not that birth or rank or culture 
are, even in the England of to-day, thought 
more of than gold. There was Jack Manly, 
whose father had sent him out with eight 
thousand pounds, and who had come back 
with eighty, and a considerable contempt for 
the climate. There was Harry Loraine, who 
had gone out just to see what Australia 
was like, and who went back to his chambers 
in the Albany with a well-founded conviction 
that Piccadilly was preferable to Collins 
Street, where every Melbourne gentleman 
lounges on summer afternoons, when the 
ladies are abroad. Australians know how to 
enjoy their December midsummer. There 
were many more, some of whom there may be 
occasion to name ; but these were the persons 
most prominent in the saloon group. 

When people are shut up together in large 



THE ** MIGHTY METROPOLIS.'* 63 

or small numbers for any length of time, it is 
noticeable that some of them soon take a de- 
cided lead. So much for equality. The gentle- 
man who, on board the Mighty MetropoliSy^xst 
attempted to take the lead, was Mr Edward 
Wilson. He was as pompous as the man 
whom Theodore Hook crossed Pall Mall to 
ask whether he was "any one particular." 
He was going home to be knighted ! The 
sublime idea held him with magnetic power. 
Sir Edward Wilson ! He walked the deck 
with a feeling that the handle of his name 
was ready to be prefixed. His superb style 
especially delighted the hearts of Tom Jones 
and Harry Loraine. 

The Mighty Metropolis left Melbourne on 
May the second ; I forget the year. It was 
the clearest sky in the world, and the serenest 
sea. Everybody looked on the voyage as a 
mere trifle . ^a poetic picnic from Pacific to 
Atlantic . ^a pleasant kind of ocean honey- 
moon. That two or three people managed to 
experience mat du mer before they lost sight 
of land, was merely a proof of nervous tem- 
perament. Nobody need be sea-sick if they 
tmly took sufficient champagne. That liquid 



64 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

was plentiful on board the Mighty Metropolis; 
but Harry Loraine expressed a suspicion that 
it was flavoured with the essence of elder- 
flowers. He had drunk wine in many capi- 
tals, and on board many steamships. He had 
come to the conclusion that your Roederer 
and your Lafitte were a mockery, a delusion, 
a snare, and that nothing in the world was 
worthy of touching the English palate except 
good wholesome ale. 

" When I get back to my place," he said to 
Tom Jones, " I shall get some good strong 
ale that was brewed when I came of age, and 
has been walled up ever since. You mu§t 
come and drink some of it" 

" With delight," said our friend Tom. " My 
governor had some good beer, but I used to 
get frightfully washy stuff* at home ; and I 
don't care for the bottled ale they send us out, 
though it is very good in its way. I Ve the 
recollection of drinking a quart of good ale 
at a draught." 

" You can soon do that in England." 

" Ay ! in England ! England ! . Do you 
know, I am wild to see England again. I ran 
away from school at fourteen. I have been 



THE " MIGHTY METROPOLIS." 65 

breeding sheep ever since. I cannot under- 
stand what England is like. I wish this ship 
would travel faster." 

" A thousand miles in four days is good 
work," said Loraine. "Yet I understand 
your impatience. I am never impatient my- 
self, for I have been all over the world, and 
don't know that there is anything new to be 
seen. You, having lived all the chief part of 
your life in a colony, may well wonder what 
civilisation resembles. You know Melbourne : 
it is a big village. If you were to put a thou- 
sand Melbournes together, you would not 
get London. You cannot imagine London. 
You cannot conceive the exquisite beauty, 
and grace of a London lady, the easy wit and 
careless courtesy of a London gentleman. I 
do not mean Cockneys : I mean the men and 
women who live in the country many months 
of the year, but are in London for the season : 
I mean the real English aristocracy. I like 
them. I like the girls who believe most 
firmly that they were brought into the world 
to look lovely, and dress delightfully, and wear 
costly diamonds and costlier lacel I like the 
men who drawl and lounge through life like 

VOL. I. E 



66 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Alcibiades, but who know how to fight and 
make love if opportunities occur. You will be 
amazed with London, especially if yqu see all 
sides of it. There is the daintiest life in the 
world ; also there is the roughest. There is 
the most exquisite society in the world at the 
West ; there is the roughest mob imaginable 
at the East. London is a nation in a narrow 
space. I should like to see what you think 
of it when you get there." 

" I shall be glad of your guidance," said 
Tom Jones. " I suspect my good friend 
Tachbrook knows very little about London. 
We shall both of us want a guide, philosopher, 
and friend." 

" All right," said Loraine. " You shall do 
what I tell you. I cannot take you in at the 
Albany, for the excellent reason that I have 
only one bed, and it is a devilish narrow one. 
You shall go to Hatchett s Hotel, and I '11 
teach you what London is like." 

When the Mighty Metropolis got well out 
of the Australasian seas, and the passengers 
grew tolerably stout of stomach, it was sug- 
gested by Captain Grainger that there would 
be some fun in concerts, private theatricals. 



THE " MIGHTY METROPOLIS. 67 

and the like. Stuart and Meunier and Lo- 
raine immediately formed themselves into a 
committee to carry out the idea. They 
determined to make everybody work, male 
and female. They made an early attack on 
Harold Tachbrook. 

" Let 's have a comedy," said Harold, " a 
comedy of ocean. We Ve got a poet on 
board, Cincinnatus Meunier. He can write 
a play, I guarantee. What say you, my 
poetic friend ? " 

Meunier found the tables turned upon him 
rather. ^ 

" I have written some verse," he said, 
" but don't think I could write a play." 

" Well, I '11 give you an idea for nothing. 
Shakespeare wrote. As you like it: do you 
write. As you do fit like it. Put in two 
Rosalinds; it will just suit the two Miss 
Mansards, who are so absurdly alike. I '11 
play Jaques if you'll write me some good 
blank verse, and Tom Jones will make a 
capital Orlando. Now, O poet ! go and begin 
at once." 

" Really the idea is not a bad one," said 
Loraine. " Substitute for the Forest of Arden 



68 MIRANDA ; A MIDSIJMMER MADNESS. 

the deck of the Mighty Metropolis. It is a 
grand place for Jaques to soliloquise . 

*^ A fool ! a fool ! I met a fool on deck, 
With many nuggets hanging at his watch chain ; 
And when he saw me, he exclaimed, ' Old fellow ! 
I 'm going home to be a lord in England : 
They make men lords when they are rich, you know.' 
I said I did not know it : and he laughed, 
As who should say, ^ Well, this man is a fool 
Not to know English customs better.* 

Faith, 
He probably is right, and I am wrong. 
And great King Mammon makes his puffy peers." 

" By George, Loraine, you will have to 
help our laureate," said Tachbrook. " Come, 
we '11 talk the matter over with the ladies in 
the saloon to-night. It will be queer if we 
cannot get up a play between us." 

So full council was that night held, and 
much chaff transpired. Ultimately it was 
decided that As you dotCt like it was to be 
the name of the play ; that Mr Cincinnatus 
Meunier was to write it, putting in as much 
poetry as he liked, and as much fun as he 
could ; that there were to be two Rosalinds 
in doublet and hose, who were to fight for 
Orlando ; that various other characters from 
Shakespeare should be introduced, especially 
Hamlet and Othello, and Romeo and Juliet, 



THE " MIGHTY METROPOLIS." 69 

and Jack Falstaff ; and that anybody in the 
saloon who declined to play any part set down 
for him or her should be fined champagne all 
round. The irrepressible Leary constituted 
himself stage -manager, and the thing was 
done. 

It would be impossible to describe the ad- 
mirable fun which arose from this new method 
of treating Shakespeare. Cincinnatus worked 
out the conception charmingly. The two 
Miss Mansards were twin Rosalinds ; Tom 
Jones was Orlando, making love to each in 
turn, and getting scolded by the other; 
Harold Tachbrook was Jaques ; Wilson 
(Sir Edward) was Hamlet ; Jack Manly was 
Falstaff ; Stuart was Othello ; Harry Loraine 
was Romeo, and made Tom Jones quite jeal- 
ous, for Miranda played Juliet. As thus . 

Romeo, " O that I were a glove upon that hand, 

That I might touch that cheek. 
JulieU That cheek objects 

To being touched by anybody's glove* ' 

Cincinnatus Meunier spoke his own epi- 
logue . 

" We are going home, and the strength of steam 
Carries us on like a magical dream ; 
And we have no knowledge of whither we wend. 
Save that England. England, lies at the end ; . 



70 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

'^e land of life and of power and truth. 

Where our dear old ^thers lie under the sod, 

Where we wasted the glory of our joyous youth, 

Where live the men who dare believe in God. 

So as home we go, as the great sails fill, 

We lovingly parody Gentle Will . 

The poet of poets, the man of men. 

Who held all life in his wondrous ken. 

O listen to FalstafTs mighty laugh ; 

Hear the mad Prince*s easy chaff ; 

Mercutio see, in the street moonlit. 

Ready with rapier, ready with wit ; 

Think of love's fierce fever and fiery fret '' 

Where Romeo embraces his Juliet ; 

Think of all the scenes in the galleries grand 

Which Shakespeare built for his own dear land . 

Of his Palace of Poetry, noblest far 

That has ever been touched by the morning star. 

Ah here, mid-ocean, on the waters dim, 

We are at home in England when we talk with him.*' 

" I call that an excellent good epilogue of 
yours," said Loraine that evening to the poet 
Cincinnatus, as they were slaking their thirst. 
"^ But when you do get to England, I recom- 
mend you to get some fellow or other to teach 
you versification. It's very easy. You 
should carefully study Dr Watts." 

Cincinnatus ejaculated. 



CHAPTER VI. 



LOTOS-EATING, 



yaific AcoTopdyuVy olr av&ivof ilda^ idoustr" 

Many ways are there of eating lotos. Pleasant 
is it to lie on emerald turf under heavy foliagq^ 
talking, or dreaming, or reading some such 
" summer book" as Curtis's " Lotos-Eating/' or 
those "Leaves from the Diary of a Dreamer," 
which Pickering published in 1 85 3. Although 
the Americans are so rapid a race, they excel 
us in that tranquil style of poetic prose 
which is represented in such books as these, 
. in Washington Irving s delightful pictures 
of the Alhambra and the Generalife, in Long- 
fellow's " Hyperion," in Hawthorne's lovely 
sketches of both hemispheres, in Thoreau's 



72 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

wonderful researches into nature's mystery. 
They seem to catch the magic of the world 
better than we. The reason is clean As 
yet there are wide stretches of wild country 
in the States. You can get beyond reach of 
the shriek of steam. You can bury yourself 
in serene and uninterruptible solitude. There 
are American villages, too, especially in the 
West, where life is simple and primitive, 
calm and idyllia 

Then there are the Adirondac lakes, of 
which we possess Emerson's magical pic- 
ture. 

^ Ten scholars, wonted to lie warm and soft, 
In well-hung chambers daintily bestowed, 
Lie here on hemlock-boughs, like Sacs and Sioux, 
And greet unanimous the joyful change. 

Up with the dawn, they fancied the light air. 
That circled freshly in their forest dress, 
Made them to boys again. Happier that they 
Slipt off their pack of duties, leagues behind, 
At the first inounting of the giant stairs. 

Look to yourselves, ye polisht gentlemen ! 
No city airs or arts pass current here. 
The sallow knows the basketmaker's thumb, 
The oar, the guide's. Dare you accept the task . 
He shall impose, to find a spring, trap foxes. 
Tell the sun's time, determine the true north ; 
Or, stumbling on through vast self- similar woods. 
To tread by night the nearest way to camp ?" 



LOTOS-EATING. 73 

There is, however, a kind of lotos-eating 
in which I think Englishmen excel all other 
races ; that is, the marine method. Who can 
yacht like an Englander ? Who can enjoy 
the sunlit sea of noon, the phosphorescent 
sea of midnight, so absolutely as an Eng- 
lishman . finding music the while in the song 
of rope and shroud, voiced like the swallow, 
and in the musiccil moan of the water as the 
ship cuts its way therethrough*? Still, we 
can also sympathize with the American poet's 
happy experience of lake and mountain. We 
can find a spring with the diviner's hazel rod, 
and tell the time of day by a dial whose index 
is the middle finger ; and I have found my 
way at midnight through the " self-similar 
woods" of the New Forest to the " Crown" at 
Lyndhurst, hungering and thirsting for bitter 
ale and lavender-scented beds, and a joyous 
morning breakfast of forest bacon, beech-mast 
fed, and eggs new laid, and butter and bread 
home-made. These delicacies, and the 
thought of Leighton's fresco, magnetised 
me through silvan scene self-similar. I am 
neither a wise nor a foolish virgin . but I 
like that fresco. 



74 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

# 

The quarterdeck of the Mighty Metropolis 
was a regular Castle of Indolence. Mr Wilson 
and his distinguished family had established 
themselves on the larboard side ; their ser- 
vants brought up and strewed around the 
most magnificent wrappers, and the future 
knight lay among them, looking, as if ocean 
belonged to him. His wife was florid . 
queenly ; his daughters were vulgar prin- 
cesses; his son was a delicious mixture of 
diamonds and dirt. When a stone of the 
first water calls attention to fingers that 
demand water, the result is curious. The 
starboard side had been appropriated by 
Miranda, who held quite a little court there 
every morning and evening. Of course she 
had her father and Tom Jones in close and 
constant attendance; but she had also the 
passionate Captain Stuart, the poetic Cin- 
cinnatus, the adoring but taciturn Manly, 
the used-up and yet not altogether useless 
Loraine. She associated with herself Amy 
and Alice Mansard, two charming girls, who 
were beginning to forget some portion of 
their sorrows under the influence of Miranda's 
gay and joyous temper. These three formed 



LOTOS-EATING. 75 

a txium-feminate/ and governed despotically 
that comer of the quarterdeck. £ven Captain 
Grainger was submissive in their sacred 
presence. The dear old Captain was a sea- 
Launcelot 

Considerable jealousy existed between the 
two rival leaders of fashion, and this jealousy 
deepened and intensified when it became 
apparent that the son and heir of the Wil- 
sons, the diamonded Neoptolemus, preferred 
the company of Miranda to that of his mother 
and sisters, not to mention his father. One 
would have thought that, with so magnifi- 
cently wise a father, Neoptolemus would 
never have desired to leave home in feearch 
of adventure, even to cross a quarterdeck in 
quest of a pretty girl. Somehow or other 
he found Miranda irresistible : there was no 
withstanding that abundant hair, colour of 
marigold . ^those lambent electric eyes, colour 
of onyx . that little red mischievous mouth, 
colour of damascene rose. Even Neopto- 
lemus Wilson, a dull fellow, recognised the 
piqliancy of this unusual beauty. His mother 
and sisters were always worrying him ; but 
he crossed the deck with perfect regularity, 



76 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

and was found rather a bore by all the other 
fellows who were in love with Miranda, for 
everybody else was in the same category. 
Captain Stuart laid at her pretty feet his 
dark eyes and hair and beard, and all his 
past adventures and projects of the future. 
Stuart was a man of bonnes fortunes and of 
misfortunes. He could not exclaim with the 
Caroline song-writer . 

" If I were only ont of debt. 

As I am out of love !' 

for he was always over head and ears in both. 
Of course he at once had a grand passion for 
Miranda ; but that young lady did not seem 
very enthusiastic in return. Indeed, she 
treated all her adorers coolly enough; but 
Stuart thought himself most favoured, since 
he was usually chosen to arrange her rugs, 
and bring her a book or some feminate 
frivolity nicknamed " work," and generally act 
the part of a *\tame cat." He played that 
part extremely well. 

Not so Cincinnatus the poet. He had 
brought from Arizona to Australia the mad 
intoxication of the wild mountain air. He 
had lived from boyhood in wild and desolate 



LOTOS-EATING. ^ 7 

-places, with a sense of infinite solitude around 
him. What poetry he had in him was re- 
ceptive rather than originative, was the echo 
and reflex of the wild life he had seen and 
known. Many mad deeds had he done, 
many mad loves had he loved ; his history 
could only be told after dinner to people of 
strong nerves. The river of adventure that 
swept through his life was known as it winded 
by a fringe of blossoming oleander. This 
was all his poetry ; the poetry not of tranquil 
art, but of a restless spirit He was a kind 
of colonial Byron- 

« Pitt is to Addington . < 

As London is to Paddington," 

said Canning once; and , these wild Byronic 
versifiers are to their chief and lord very 
much in the same ratio. Byron, great as he 
was, would have been greater without his 
mental malady : these minor minstrels re- 
semble him in the mental malady only. 

Cincinnatus was laughable, but a trifle 
rough . a kind of poetic bean He amused 
Miranda, and she tamed him. She laughed 
merrily at his sentiment and cynicism, and 
criticised the structure of his verse, which was 



78 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

uncommonly rough, and mercilessly chaffed 
him about his false pathos and sham bitter- 
ness. He would have been angry with her 
if he could ; but who could be angry with a 
creature so lovely.'^ I think she did him 
good. He was going home to England with 
the frightfully vindictive design of avenging 
himself on an inappreciative world by pub- 
lishing his poems : it is my belief that most of 
the MSS. was turned into cigar-lights before 
the Mighty Metropolis sighted Kinsale. 

Then there was Leary. Leary certainly 
was smitten, but he was not the man to admit 
it. As self-appointed M.C., and as editor of 
the Metropolitan^ Leary considered himself 
the most important man on board. He 
thought nothing of the captain, whom indeed 
he would as willingly have superseded as 
Lord Russell would take the command of the 
Channel Fleet. He rather wished for a 
hurricane and a shipwreck, that he might 
show his presence of mind and power of 
command. Leary would have got on better 
with the queen of the quarterdeck if he 
had been rather less boisterous, and rather 
apter to wash his hands. 



LOTOS-EATING. 79 

Poor inoffensive and inefficient Jack Manly 
must by no means be forgotten. Miranda 
struck him dumb at first sight, and he barely 
recovered his speech through all the voyage. 
He was going back to a stern father, in the 
guise of a penitent prodigal son ; so he had 
not courage enough to fall in loye. 

As to Harry Loraine, I think he would 
have taken a header into the depths of the 
erotic ocean, had he not seen that Tom 
Jones was thoroughly in love . had he not also 
fancied that Miss Miranda was rather taken 
with Tom Jones. Loraine was emphatically 
an unmarriageable man : he hated *the idea of 
losing his independence ; he liked Bohemian 
bachelorism. Miranda was absolutely the 
first woman who had made him ask himself 
the question whether the game of marriage 
was worth the candle. Her pretty piquant 
unsophisticated style delighted him as much 
as her amazing Venetian beauty ; but then he 
thought of the quiet Albany, the isolated exist- 
ence of a man without claims or responsibili- 
ties, the perfect ease and independence of his 
unfettered life. " One might have children," 
thought Loraine. " Fancy, how dreadful !" 



8o MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

« 

However, he joined Miranda's other ad- 
mirers, and the court she held astern was 
alway3 lively- It was a triifle exclusive : 
most of the other saloon passengers were 
fortunate adventurers, who had made money 
rapidly, and were going to England to spend 
it. Still it was not so exclusive as the Wilson 
society, which was as fashionably select as 
Almack's when they blackballed Duchesses. 

On the 30th of May the Mighty Metro- 
polis came in sight of the rocky island of 
Diego Ramirez, between fifty and sixty miles 
from Cape Horn. It was growing cold, for 
the ship was about fifteen degrees from the 
antarctic circle; and Miranda was wrapt 
up in furs and tiger-skins, which her father 
had providently purchased for her. The 
weather, ^ hitherto exquisitely calm, had 
become boisterous ; severe storms of hail 
had once or twice cleared the decks ; and the 
cold night winds had made the fast young 
gentlemen who liked to prowl the deck in 
the short hours, extremely glad to seek their 
berths at a reasonable time. Many a wide- 
winged albatross followed the great ship on 
its way, as if for company; and as she rounded 



LOTOS-EATING. 8 1 

the Horn, the stormy petrels . Mother Carey s 
chickens . ^were seen lovingly playing with 
the crests of the waves. 

Still our pleasant little parliament of wit 
and flirtation, guided by the trium-feminate, 
held its sittings regularly. The albatross 
gave the poet Cincinnatus an opportunity 
of reciting long screeds from Coleridges 
** Ancient Mariner," much to the delight of 
his audience.' But Loraine worried him with 
parody, exclaiming- 

** I say with scorn, as we rourld the Horn, 
And to the Atlantic cross, 
Bring close to my hand the cruet-stand, 
And we'll devil an albatross. 

" He'll be fishy and tough, I've often heard. 
But still we '11 have our revel : 
Why shouldn't we devil a fishy bird, 
When a fishy bard's the devil?" 

Such was the nonsense that amused our 
party while the Mighty Metropolis made 
magnificent way through the waters, some- 
times under canvas, sometimes under steam, 
but always seeming to subjugate ocean with 
a splendid mastery. Heartily did Miranda 
enjoy her voyage : she was an Undine, and 
the ocean was her birthplace, and the restless 

VOL. I. F 



82 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

waves seemed to be her friends. As she 
watched them fretting into foam against the 
great steamship's side, she seemed as if she 
were at home. Her mother had found her 
tomb in the infinite bosom of ocean. Per- 
haps, thought the imaginative girl, she had 
come to life again there ; had been nurtured 
and tended by the gods of the sea ; was even 
now dwelling in some crystal city where 
mighty groves of seaweed surrounded palaces 
built of coral red as blood. In those im- 
measurable depths dwell strange creatures. 
When the kraken rises to the surface, men 
think it an island, and the coils of the great 
sea-serpent are leagues in length. Surely 
those mighty stretches of submarine land 
may have inhabitants. So speculated our 
Undine as she watched the wandering water 
from the stately ship : of physical difficulties 
her instinctive philosophy made nothing . 
rightly, since to the Creator there are no 
physical difficulties. 

Tom Jones got more and more in love 
with Miranda every day ; but she maddened 
that impetuous hero of ours by treating him 
in a quiet confiding sisterly fashion. She 



LOTOS-EATING. 83 

flirted with the captain ; she laughed merrily 
at Meunier's poetry and Leary*s rhodomon- 
tade ; she patronised Jack Manly ; she co- 
quetted with Loraine in the most outrageous 
manner, and he was always lying at her feet 
on deck, and playing the part of Mercutio in 
love. But to Tom Jones she was always 
frank and sisterly and easy. 

" She '11 never care a bit for me/' soli- 
loquised that young gentleman. '* I 'm too 
old . I'm too stupid. Those fellows, with 
their chaff and their poetry, take all the wind 
out of my sails. Confound it! If I were 
ashore, I might tear myself away from her ; 
but I can't well jump overboard and swim to 
Patagonia. No; I'll marry that child what- 
ever happens. By J ove ! I wonder whether 
we could get married on board ? There 's 
the parson coming up the companion ; I '11 
ask him. No^ I won't ; he '11 think I 'm 
cracked : besides, I 'd better ask Miranda 
first. Faith, I '11 smoke a pipe, and consider 
the question. Miranda! Lovely name, . 
but not half so lovely as she is." 

Tom Jones, having smoked his pipe, went 
below in search of champagne. 



CHAPTER VII. 

CROSSING THE LIi;rE. 

*' Oh I the oak and the ash and the bonny ivy tree, 
They flourish best of all in the North Countrie." 

'' We shall cross the line about four this after- 
noon," said Captain Grainger, on the 20th of 
June, to his passengers; "and please don't 
give any of the seamen anything to drink, for 
they always get as much as is good for them." 
^* I suppose we may have a glass of cham- 
pagne ourselves," said Harold Tachbrook, 
" eh. Captain ? Only it will make your thirsty 
sailors thirstier still if they see us at it When, 
in my boyhood, I studied geography, those 
wonderful lines on the maps always used to 
puzzle me; and the equator especially was 
a mystery. I wondered how ships could get 
over it." 



CROSSING THE LINE. s 85 

'* I think we shall manage that part of the 
business," said the captain. " I have passed 
the line a good many times, and never gaw it 
yet." 

" Well, then, we'll have the champagne,"* 
said Tachbrook, laughing. " We '11 drink to 
such of our old friends in England as are 
likely to remember us. Tom, my bay, go and 
make the steward send me up some of the 
right stuff, and plenty of ice. I know there 's 
some ice left, and one can*t do without it 
under the line." 

" Let me share in the festive entertain- 
ment," said Neoptolemus Wilson, who had 
joined the group. 

'* Thanks," said Harold, " but I am Presi- 
dent of Ecuador on this occasion." 

'^ I can't drink to any old friends in England, 
papa," said Miranda. " My childish acquaint- 
ances are all sharks and whales and sea-ser- 
pents and stormy petrels. * Health and long 
life to the great sea-serpent!' will be my 



toast." 



Afternoon came, and the Captain caused 
the moment of crossing the equator to be noti- 
fied by a discharge of half-a-dozen small brass 



86 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

cannon . dogs that could bark, but that could 
not bite very hard. And then our friends en- 
joyed their champagne . half-a-dozen bottles 
decanted at once in a mighty gold jug, em- 
bossed all over with figures of flying nymphs 
and pursuing deities, which the Captain had 
found in his early days among a heap of other 
antique rarities that had belonged to buc- 
caneers. 

" This is a grand jug," quoth the poet 
Cincinnatus, ^* heavy to lift and hard to drain. 
Tell us all about your finding it, Captain ; 
it will be a capital yarn for the equator." 

" I Ve got the story in verse somewhere," 
said Grainger, ** done years ago by a friend 
of mine, who thought himself a poet, and was 
wrong. If I can find it, will anybody read 
it?" 

Leary, of course, offered at once, and the 
Captain went to find the MS. It was on 
very yellow paper, and in the crabbedest of 
writing ; but Leary dauntlessly undertook his 
task. 

So, as the great gold cup went round, while 
the steamship clove its way through the tur- 
bid current that discoloured the sea from the 



CROSSING THE LINE. 8/ 

mouths of the mighty Amazon, eloquent Leary 
rose and read . 

" It was only a merry corvette that rode the South Pacific sea ; 
But the man who held that craft in hand was brave 

Lieutenant Lee. 
And when he was told of slaves and gold in Arequipa Bay, 
And when there came a spy of fame to show the difficult 

way, 
' 111 hang those rascally buccaneers by their ugly necks/ 

said he. 

" O how soft was the summer air when the little Firefly 
crept 

Under the low green woodland shores where the villanous 
pirates slept, 

Under the heavy fringes of foliage, fruit, and flower, 

Where safe, as they deemed, the scoundrels enjoyed their 
holiday hour ; 

And they drank good wine from stolen cups, and their luck- 
less captives wept. 

" In she paddled . the Firefly. The channel was hard to 

find ; 
As if to the heart of a forest it seemed to wind and wind ; 
But right was the guide ; he knew the tide ; he had been 

there a slave: 
He longed to see the pirates in conquered agony rave . 
Came the delight ^at very night for which he had prayed 

and pined. 

" Quietly lay the Firefly under the great trees, where 
Never the water rippled, nor soft winds stirred the air ; 
Never a whisper we uttered, but watched them, iazy as 

swine, 
Swinging in easy hammocks, while white girls served them 

wine. 
' *Tis your very last day,' said Lee to himself; * drink on, and 

never spare.' 



88 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Ay 1 we could hear their ribald*songs as the sudden evening 

fell, 
And their bestial jests, that well might shame the lowest 

fiends of hell ; 
And sobs we heard, and screams and shouts, and a roar of 

impious song ; 
And we longed with cutlass to strike down the cowardly 

scoundrel throng, 
But Lee lay close, for he knew his game, and meant to play 

it well. 

** Yes, well it was played : we made our raid when the fools 
with wine were gay ; 

They were five to one, but the thing was done in swift 
and sudden way. 
~The cutlass bright did work that night, and a horde of 
rascals killed ; 

But we managed to save the chief, a knave of huge and 
hideous build ; 

He was hung in his gorgeous gems and gold at the yard- 
arm next day. 

" Plenty of plunder was there in that base pirate hold ; 
They had ransacked churches and houses, and taken jewels 

and gold. 
They had- taken beautiful girls, too ; we could but bring 

them back] 
To the homes whence they were stolen in midnights wild 

and black ; 
But ah ! they might never know again the happy days of old. 

"This mighty cup was part, of my share : when from its 

golden brim 
The red wine flows, my eyesight grows with tears of 

memory dim ; 
Since I know with pain that never again I shall sail the 

Southern Seas . [these ; 

Never again shall scour the main for scoundrels such as 
Never again my steel shall cleave a pirate limb from limb." 



CROSSING THE LINE. 89 

" A capital ballad," said Stuart. " Did it 
really happen, Captain ? I 'd like to have 
been with you." 

" Yes, it happened," said Grainger. "It was 
the fastest thing I ever saw. Our men had 
been lying under the shore in grim silence, 
like chained mastiffs, watching these beggarly 
thieves, who were drinking and swearing and 
making the poor unfortunate girls wait upon 
them. Now there 's nothing a sailor hates so 
much as seeing a woman abused ; so when the 
time came at last, and the boats with muffled 
oars landed us on the other side, we were all 
mad to get at them." 

"And you hanged their leader?" said 
Tachbrook. 

"Yes; I shall never forget the fellow. He 
was immensely tall, and so dark that he must 
have had nigger blood in him. There were 
great rings of gold in his ears, which flapped 
down like an elephant's ; and round his great 
dusky throat he wore a big band of precious 
stones of a dozen sorts, worth no end of money. 
He was lying on a kind of rough sofa, half 
asleep. One girl was fanning him ; another 
was standing with a goblet of wine in her 



t 



90 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

hand, ready if he wanted. Lee had heard of 
the fellow from our spy, who had been cap- 
tured by him, and had escaped with great in- 
genuity; and he was resolved to make an 
Example of him. So he and I and another 
made straight to the ruffian, and slipped a cord 
round his arms and another roui^d his throat, 
and tied him down securely. Then we went 
in for a general fight : it was soon over, and 
of about fifty of the villains, we cut down all 
but five. We hardly got a scratch." 

" And Lieutenant Lee hanged them ? " said 
Loraine. 

" He did. He wasn't reprimanded by the 
Admiralty for inhumanity, as, of course, he 
would be in these days. He had the pirate 
captain well flogged first, in the presence of 
his men, and then he made short work with 
them. The delight of the poor girls that 
they had carried off was something to remem- 
ber. They showed ua where the pirates kept 
their treasures, and we soon cleared it out. 
It was the first good fight I ever saw." 

"How old were you, Captain ? " asked 
Miranda. 

" About seventeen. Miss Tachbrook. If I 



CROSSING THE LINE, 9 1 

had met you then, I should have been in love 
with you directly." 

" O, I have no doubt you were precocious," 
she said ; " but have you no more adventures 
to tell ? " 

" It is somebody else's turn now. Come, 
Captain Stuart," he said, " pass the mug this 
way and spin us a yarn." 

'" I've nothing in the way of a trophy like 
your huge vessel of gold," said Stuart, pass- 
ing it to Grainger, " but I 've rather a curiosity 
here, which I got in a curious way." 

He took from his watch chain a small 
article which he handed to Grainger, who 
passed it on to Miranda, as lady president 
of the assembly. It was a perfect icosahedron 
of crystal, marvellously cut, in the centre of 
which was a small sphere, the size of a pea, 
of radiant ruby. It passed round the group. 

" That looks as if it ought to have a his- 
tory," said Loraine. " Let us hear it." 

" I had it from a dervish at Bokhara," said 
Stuart. " I met him on the Lebi Hanz Divan- 
beghi, and, as he looked awfully miserable, 
took him to a tea-booth and gave him some 
tea, which he flavoured with lard and salt." 



92 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" O, was it nice ? " asked Amy Mansard. 

" I didn't try it. It failed to cheer up my 
pious friend, so I gave him some Scotch 
whisky from a pocket-flask, and he rapidly 
improved. We sat down under one of the 
great elms by the reservoir, and he told me 
his troubles. He had inherited this talisman, 
which he showed : the round stone in the 
centre was then perfectly white, like a dia- 
mond. He told me that he had inherited this 
curiosity ; that the natural colour of the centre 
was red ; that if any piece of good fortune 
was coming to the owner, it would turn blue ; 
if of ill fortune, black ; while if he were going 
to die, it would become white. * You see,' he 
said, ' it is white ; I shall die before sunset.' 
I laughed at his superstition, and tried to 
cheer him with more whisky. Whether it 
was too much for him I don't know, but he 
suddenly sprang up, threw the talisman into 
my lap, and rushed frantically through the 
excited crowd that always covers the Hanz. 
I did my best to follow him ; but there is no 
moving fast in Bokhara, and one dervish is so 
like another, that twenty times I thought I 
had found him, but was wrong. So I was 



CROSSING THE LINE. 93 

obliged to keep the stone. It was red, as you 
see it now, when I looked at it next morn- 
ing." 

" H^s it changed since ? " asked Loraine. 

"Not once ; and I have had no particular 
luck, good or ill." 

Many another yarn was spun as the ship 
flew northwards fourteen knots an hour, and 
the Captain*s great gold jug circulated at 
about the same pace. It was, as Tachbrook 
remarked, an apt illustration of the duplex 
motion which one finds in the planetary 
bodies. But the dinner-gong sounded at 
last, and Capfain Grainger took his place at 
the head of the table ; and later in the evening 
there was a dance upon deck in the light of 
the full moon, for there was a capital band 
on board. 

The state-cabins of the Mighty Metro- 
polis were unusually commodious ; and when 
Harold Tachbrook took his passage, he was 
lucky enough to get a group of three with an 
anteroom, which formed a pleasant lounging 
place for the trio the last thing at night. 
This evening they sat half-an-hour, Tach- 
brook and Tom Jones, smoking cigarettes. 



94 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

which Miranda deftly rolled for them. Tom 
was very quiet ; he had been for the last few 
days. There were two things on his mind, 
and every day nearer home made their 
burden feel heavier. So Miranda and her 
father had most of the talk to themselves. 

" Now you 're in north latitude, child," he 
said, " for the first time in your life. Do you 
sniff your natural air ? Do you pine for the 
land of oak, ash, and ivy ? Are you in a 
hurry to see your grandfather ? ** 

" Yes," she replied, " I am impatient ; and 
yet . ^well I don't know, this life is so pleasant 
and amusing. I like the people on board . 
most of them. I like the lazy existence, 
while there is all the time a feeling that you 
are travelling tremendously fast without 
trouble to yourself. I think I should like to 
always make voyages in a big ship with 
pleasant company and pleasant weather." 

" How would it be," said her father, " to 
have a private planet of , your own, and go 
wandering all over the universe ? " 

" O, the idea is too vast Perhaps it 
might suit me in my next state of exist- 



ence." 



CROSSING THE LINE. 95 

Tom Jones smoked silendy, watching the 
play of her mobile features, and thinking that 
he most certainly would like the voyage to 
last for ever. 

" Do you think all those delightful stories 
were true, papa, that we heard to-day ? '* 

" Grainger's was true enough, I don't doubt; 
but I wouldn't answer for any of the others. 
I don't think Loraine ever saw a ghost in the 
Albany ; and I question the probability of 
Cincinnatus's lady whom he saw drowned 
in California and afterwards met alive in 
England." 

"And Captain Stuart's talisman, papa?" 

" Stuart is a humbug I" growled Tom Jones 
. his first contribution to the colloquy. 

"Well, I think he is, rather," rejoined 
Tachbrook. "Still, I may perhaps believe 
in his talisman when I see it work." 

" I '11 be hanged if I would," said Jones. 

" O you are cross, Tom/' said Miranda. 
" You have an fevil demon in you, like poor 
King Saul, who I have always thought was 
abominably treated. Come, shall I exorcise 
the fiend with a song ?" 

Tom's eyes brightened as he said " Yes." 



96 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS, 

But then, again, he thought to himself that 
this frank and easy kindness was nothing but 
sisterly affection. 

Miranda found her guitar, and sang . 

** Summer is here on the sea, 
And the white foam flashes free 

Around our ship all day. 
We live in a pleasant dream, 
While the infinite waters gleam. 

And the swift leagues speed away . 
No storm, no stay. 

" Ah ! could it ever be so! 
Could the magical moments flow 

Under serenest skies ! 
Could life be always youth, 
And love be beauty and truth ! 
Ah ! that is no mortal prize . 
Life flies, love dies." 

*' After that we '11 all go to bed," quoth 
Harold. " Come, Miranda, give Tom a kiss 
to cheer him up." 

She obeyed, and Tom dreamt of it. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



TORRICELLl's TUBE. 



** With lens of glass'did Galileo probe 
The secrets of the spheres ; with tube of glass, *' 
Wherein the liquid metal fluctuates free, 
His famous pupil taught us how to search 
The lair of storms." 

For many days the great steamship passed 
pleasantly on its course, and there were 
agreeable instances among the parties in the 
sternsheets of that scientific flirtation which 
has been described as attention without in- 
tention. For many days the history of the 
voyage was eventless ; and surely of a ship, 
as of a nation, it may be said that it is happy 
to be without a history. The only discon- 
tented voyager seemed to be Tom Jones . 
Jones of the two troubles. One we know; 

VOL. I. G 



98 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the other we shall know in time. That 
known trouble was his love for Miranda, and 
his heavy fear that she regarded him solely 
as a kind of elder brother. She never flirted 
with him, as she did with Stuart and Loraine, 
and the poet, and even Jack Manly. She 
treated him with perfect simplicity and con- 
fidence. Eighteen years in the bush had 
left him a boy of fourteen still in ignorance 
of the ways of young ladies ; for when he 
left England, the question of sex, as Arthur 
Clough' called it, had never disturbed him. 
He could play cricket and football ; he could 
knock down his schoolmaster, and run away 
in search of freedom ; but he looked on a 
young person in petticoats as an entirely in- 
ferior animal, not worth a moment's considera- 
tion. This is very much the way with boys not 
too precocious, and it is much the healthier 
form of development. The boy who begins 
too early in erotics should be treated as Florio 
was treated when Biancafiore fascinated him 
-^whereof Boccaccio hath written in very 
choice Italian. That which is strongest is 
slowest of growth. A gourd may run up 
in a night, to oblige a minor prophet : the 



TORRICELLI S TUBE. 99 

oak wants his qenturies, and waxes strong 
by battle with the storms. 

One evening early in July, Captain Grain- 
ger went below to register his barometrical 
observations and consult his chart. The ship 
was in about 37° N. latitude and 30"* W. lon- 
gitude. The Captain was pleased with his 
passage and his passengers ; there was not a 
cloud in the sky as large as a man s hand. 
" All went merry as a marriage-bell." How- 
ever, as some Frenchman has somewhere said, 
nothing is certain but the unforeseen. When 
Captain Grainger looked at his glass, he, a 
man usually imperturbable, started suddenly 
back. It had fallen since morning from 30.7 
inches to 29.3, and the summit' of the mer- 
curial column was concave. Grainger, after 
meditating half a minute, went rapidly on 
deck, and said a few words to his chief officer, 
the result of which was that the great ship 
took in all sail, and used her screw all the 
night. 

Although it was late, a few passengers were 
strolling on deck to enjoy the moonlight ; one 
of these was Captain Stuart, whose quick 
ear caught sufficient of Grainger's communi- 



lOO MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

cation to his subordinate to make him guess 
there was something up. He rejoiced, for he 
loved adventure. He thought he should like 
to be shipwrecked on a desert island, with 
nobody but Miranda. 

When the Captain had made his arrange- 
ments for the night, which he decided to pass 
on deck, he went down to the antechamber 
of Tachbrook's cabin, where he often looked 
in for a few minutes for a final gossip. Our 
friends were there, enjoying the coolness of 
the evening, for the ship was marvellously 
well built for abundant access of air. Mir- 
anda, who was very keen-sighted, noted at 
once that the Captain seemed absent and 
thoughtful. 

" You don't look well, Captain Grainger," 
she said ; " I will be your doctor, and pre- 
scribe a cooling draught." 

" Thanks," he said ; ** I will take a glass of 
Mr Tachbrook's favourite mixture, hock and 
seltzer. I must be moderate, for I have to 
keep watch to-night." 

*' Why so ? " 

" The mercury is going down. That, in- 
deed, is what brought me here. I am afraid 



TORRICELLl's TUBE. lOI 



of rather a gale, and want you, without 
frightening the ladies, to keep them below 



to-morrow." 



*' We 'U look after them to-night," cried 
Tom Jones, whose excitable temper made 
him almost long for a hurricane. "It would be 
absurd to turn in. Tachbrook, let's go on 
deck ; if anything happens, we can help the 
women folk.^' 

" I agree with you," said Harold. " What 
will ypu do, Miranda ? " 

" Go on deck with you, papa. If I get 
tired, I can lie down in my berth just as I 
am, to be ready for all emergencies. It would 
be so very chilly to be drowned in one's 
night-dress." 

" And might shock the Nereids," said her 
father . " lanassa and Kallianassa, and their 
forty-eight sisters. Well, Captain, with your 
permission, we '11 all three go on deck, and be 
ready to take orders from you at any moment. 
My little Miranda can manage the ladies. 
She is not easily daunted ; she was born at 
sea, you know. Captain." 

" Was she ? " he exclaimed. " Then we 
are all safe. No ship was ever hopelessly 



I02 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

wrecked with a passenger on board that was 
born at sea." 

Tachbrook did not smile at the Captain's 
superstition. Superstition is a necessity of 
lonely life. 

The sea was calm. Nothing moved it 
except the mighty screw, which left a trail of 
foam that sparkled strangely in the moon- 
light. The sky had no cloud. The idea of 
peril could not have entered the most ex- 
perienced seaman's brain, but for that magic 
tube of Torricelli. 

Swift moved the ship, but slowly passed 
the night The Captain at frequent inter- 
vals went to consult his barometer. Slowly 
i^ sank. It was at 28.9 at sunrise when the 
Farworker arose in his glory of purple and 
saffron, and sent long interminable shafts of 
light across the fire-flushed levels of the sea. 

" It will be a long time coming, and will 
last long," said the Captain in a whisper to 
Tachbrook. " Say nothing to any one, but 
keep your eye on the ladies, so as to get them 
below in a minute or two if the gale begins. 
We are just off the Azores . and when it 
blows there, it does blow. Sometimes the 



TORRICELLfs TUBE. IO3 

Storms force islands up from below ; there is 
one there that came up about 1810 or 181 2," 

" I shall give Miranda some breakfast," 
said Harold, "and make her He down for a 
few hours, and do the same myself. Then 
we shall be all right /or what may happen. 
Send if you want us, . Captain. Tom, you 
must do likewise." 

About six o'clock they turned in ; at ten, 
after sound sleep and refreshing baths, they 
were perfectly fresh and ready for the events 
of the day. They found breakfast in pro- 
gress in the saloon, and the magnificent 
Wilson lecturing on colonial politics to the 
small clique that professed to admire him. 
Tackbrook, who was on as good terms with 
the cook as with the Captain, got a capital 
omelet made. After that, and a cup of good 
coffee, slightly dashed with cognac, they felt 
ready for the day 

Captain Grainger paced the deck uneasily. 
At noon the mercury had dropped a quarter 
of an inch. The majority of the passengers 
were wisely kept ignorant of the situation ; 
they enjoyed themselves in the sternsheets 
as usual ; but Captain Stuart ostentatiously 



I04 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

exhibited his crystal icosahedron, the centre 
of which had turned jet black. The ladies 
to whom he exhibited it were all terrified, 
and. thought something dreadful was going to 
happen. Stuart was happy ; he had created 
a sensation. 

Loraine took the trinket from the hands 
of Alice Mansard, who had been examining 
it in a half-frightened way. He touched a 
spring, and then handed it to Stuart . with 
the centre white ! 

"You are doomed to drowning, I fear," 
said Loraine, sympathisingly. 

Stuart looked puzzled, then got up and 
walked forward. Miranda said to Loraine . 

" What does it mean ? " 

" Those toys are all over Asia," he said. 
*' I 've a couple of them somewhere, but I 
think it 's in London. You turn the handle 
till it comes the colour you want. Our friend 
Stuart wanted to hoax you." 

** What a shame ! " exclaimed Miranda. 

" Dreadful ! Send him to Coventry, with- 
out a return -ticket. By the way, I hope he 
won't drown himself to prove the truth of his 
talisman." 



TORRICELLI S TUBE. I05 

" Pooh ! " quoth Tom Jones, ** that 's not his 
destiny." 

The day continued calm, but still the column 
of mercury sank, sank, sank, and with it sank 
Captain Grainger s heart. Everybody on deck 
was gay enough. The only three of the party 
to whom the Captain had spoken were of dar- 
ing temperament, and easily kept up their 
spirits, sanguine of good luck in any peril. 
Dinner went gaily. There was a dance on deck 
afterwards. Amid all the music and gaiety 
Grainger perpetually consulted his barometer. 
At sunset it stood 28.8, yet the sky was clear. 

At ten o'clock most of the ladies had gone 
below. The only one left, indeed, was Mir- 
anda, who, leaning on her father's arm, in a 
state of intense expectation, searched the sky 
with those clear eyes of hers. Suddenly, in 
the dim cobalt eastern sky, she saw a small 
grey cloud, and pointed it out to the Captain. 

"It is coming," he said, hoarsely. "Go 
below, for God's sake." And then he gave 
swift orders to the crew. 

They were hardly under hatches when the 
gale struck the great ship like a thunderbolt, 
and she staggered into the trough of the sea. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. 

** Whence came that marvellous sudden shaft 
Which cut us down on our path, while we, 
With singing shrouds, through a summer sea 
Swept, and the sweet waves softly laughed ? " 

Captain Grainger felt that he could fight 
any common storm, but this strong rush of 
tempest was irresistible. It took the great 
ship as if it had been a feather, and drove it 
between air and sea with swiftness unima- 
ginable. The engines were paralysed ; the 
masts went by the boards ; Grainger, clinging 
to the ungovernable helm, said, " We are in 
God's hands ! " and waited the event with 
courage and patience indomitable. 

Quickly did the unfortunate passengers 
below discover that something terrible was 



THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. IO7 

happening. Tachbrook and Tom Jones tore 
up some blankets, and fastened Miranda to a 
stationary couch, so that she might not be 
shattered to fragments by the furious move- 
ment of the vessel. They could not get from 
their cabins to aid any one else, for it was im- 
possible to stand upright for an instant, so 
fiercely was the ship clutched and whirled by 
the cyclone. They held on to the couch 
where Miranda lay, and resolutely awaited 
certain destruction. Of such moments, how- 
ever brief, there is no description ; and when 
sensations of this sort last, ordinary humanity 
becomes^ torpid with terror. 

It was not so with our friends. How long 
the ship was driven before the gale they did 
not know, but they managed to say a good 
many things to each other before the final 
catastrophe arrived. The roai^ of the wind 
was a strong continuous sound, but did not 
prevent their voices being heard by each other. 

" The ship musi be lost," said Tom Jones. 
*^ I wish I were on deck ; I hate being 
drowned in a hole." 

'* You won't be drowned," said Miranda ; 
" I was born at sea, you know." 



I08 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" We had better Look forward to death, my 
child," said Harold Tachbrook, quietly; "it 
is the inevitable fate of us all ; and where it 
happens, or how, is of slight consequence . 
we are in God's hands." 

He was unconsciously echoing Grainger's 
exclamation when the wild gale broke loose. 
It is what men most callous and impious 
are forced to exclaim when they are power- 
less amid peril. 

"Yes!" cried Tom Jones, "that is true; 
and now that we are doomed to die together, 
let me tell you something, Miranda . let me 
tell you something, Tachbrook : I am " 

At that instant a mighty shock threw both 
Harold and Tom from their position, and 
almost shook Mirandas couch from its 
strongly-fixed foundation ; then there was 
quiet. The wind yelled at the sea, and the 
sea howled like a scourged slave, but the 
ship was still. 

" We have struck," said Tachbrook, "thank 
God I " 

They unswathed Miranda from her blankets, 
and she stood up gay and brave as a daughter 
of Nereus. It was easy to stand now : the 




THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. IO9 

ship did not tremble, tl\ough the storm still 
shrieked like a myriad million of fiends. 

" You see my being born at sea has been 
of some use, papa," said Miranda. 

" Immense, child," said her father ; " I 
shall try and get on deck. Tom will take 
care of you till I return." 

Getting on deck was not easy, for the ship 
was a chaos. Tachbrook struggled to the 
surface in time, and found that although the 
gale still blew, it had driven the ship into so 
sheltered a corner that it was just possible to 
stand on deck without being blown overboard. 
Stem on, the Mighty Metropolis had been 
driven between two lofty ridges of basaltic 
rock, just wide' enough to clench her; there 
she lay, while the wind roared over her, fixed 
as if in a vice. The cliffs, were lofty ; it was 
impossible to see what was beyond ; to 
Tachbrook it seemed that the best thing he 
could do was to search for Grainger. He 
found him holding on to the helm, almost 
faint with what he had endured. He made 
the Captain take a little brandy, after which 
he soon recovered his faculties. Meanwhile 
the gale was blowing itself out ; by the time 



I lO MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Tachbrook had medicated the Captain, there 
was hardly a puff of wind, and the sun shone 
brightly on the maddened waters. The 
passionate wind soon forgets its rage, and 
gives zephyr-kisses to the sea ten minutes 
after, but the sullen sea groans and swells, 
and surges for days after the wind's passion. 

Miranda, during her father's absence, had 
been changing her dress, and came on deck 
quite a gay little figure, uncrumpled by the 
storm. The others, as they came up one by 
one looked each more tattered and disar- 
ranged than the last. So they served as foils 
to Miranda. They were a very different 
party from those whom we have seen enjoy- 
ing champagne from the Captain's .famous 
gold cup. 

When Captain Grainger made his exa- 
mination, it was found that there were few 
casualties during the storm ; which shows 
that when seamen (or any other men) have 
a dangerous thing to do, they do it well. 
There was nobody missing except Captain 
Stuart, and he would be sure to turn up. 

Grainger soon had his crew at work to see 
what could be done. It was evident almost 



THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. 1 1 1 

at once that they must let down boats and 
get ashore. The Captain feared the return 
of the gale, since so long an atmospheric pre-, 
monition clearly indicated a series of storms, 
worse perhaps than this -wild hurricane. 
Then perchance the power that had fixed 
his steamer between the rocks might drag 
her out again, and shatter her to pieces. 
So he set all hands at work, and the 
passengers were landed on a beach of firm 
yellow sand that lay south of the rocks ; and 
some sat upon cushions and rugs, and re- 
freshed themselves, and wrung their hands 
and moaned ; while others, enterprising as 
, Gulliver or Crusoe, determined to explore. 
Loraine, Jack Manly, Leary, the poet Cincin- 
natus joined our party ; and they turned their 
backs to the sea, and went bravely inland. 

" O how delightful ! " was Miranda's excla- 
mation before they had walked a hundred 
yards. They were in a wood of orange and 
lemon trees, with innumerable fruitage upon 
the boughs. The oranges were small and 
sweet, the lemons large and fragrant. Through 
this wood of glossy leaf and exquisite odour 
they walked for about half a mile. Then 



1 1 2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS, 

they came to what seemed a half-wild vine- 
yard, the grapes ripening rapidly, while 
here and there stood a group of banana-trees. 
Through this vineyard sparkled a crystal 
stream. On they went, not despising a few 
grapes where the clusters were ripest, and 
reached an eminent point, whence they could 
see the ocean on the other side, and many 
islands of various sizes sleeping in the sun- 
shine. It was a lovely view, both by sea and 
on shore. The air was laden with the lus- 
cious aroma of lemon and citron, coffee and 
cinnamon, all growing half-wild everywhere. 
Human habitation saw they none. The sea 
shone like an oriental sapphire. The blue 
peaks of the archipelago cut the air like cones 
of steel. Everywhere reigned beauty and 
fertility, but everywhere also reigned soli- 
tude. Stay ! There were goats innumerable 
capering about the ravines ; and there 
hovered in aether multitudinous falcons : the 
aqoreSy which gave their name to the whole 
group of islands. 

" What a lovely spot ! " suddenly exclaimed 
Miranda. They were on the verge of a 
gentle grassy slope, which formed a complete 



THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. 1 1 3 

amphitheatre. Miranda rested on a block of 
lava that seemed moulded for a seat, and her 
bodyguard threw themselves on the virgin 
turf. The bright rivulet from the vineyard 
became a musical torrent here, throwing 
itself over a bed of tufa, and rushing wildly 
into a calm oval lake that lay in the valley 
below. This lake was a perfect ellipse. 
Very pure and tranquil it lay, except where 
the headlong brook disturbed its waters. 
Harry Loraine, the completest of men as 
regards the practical apparatus of travel, had 
not allowed his field-glass to be smashed in 
the shipwreck, and it hung across his 
shoulder in its russia-leather case. He 
was adjusting it to sweep the opposite shore 
of the lake, when Tom Jones, whose Austra- ' 
lian experience from boyhood had made him 
strong of sight, exclaimed . 

" There 's something in the cliffs there 
that looks very like the mouth of a cavern. 
Examine it, Loraine." 

He turned his glass that way ; then, after 
taking a good look, passed it to Tach- 
brook. 

" Certainly a cavern," said the latter, " and 

VOL. L H 



114 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

With marks of human artifice about the 
portal. Perhaps the inhabitants of this islet 
ar^ troglodytes." 

" What is that, papa ?'' asked Miranda. 

" Greek, child. * Troglodyte ' means a 
dweller in a cave, like some of the Not- 
tingham people. They used .to do it in 
iEthiopia, according to Herodotus. . Shall 
we go round the lake and investigate ?" 

" Of course!" exclaimed the poet Meunier. 
" Perhaps we shall find an underground 
kingdom, where everything is reversed . 
where people are born old and go back to 
youth . where ice is hot and fire cold." 

" Where poets are fools," interrupted 
Loraine. 

** What in the world is that ? " exclaimed 
Miranda, pointing to the lake, a few yards 
from the other side. "There is something 
moving in the water." 

" Big fish," said Leary. 

Loraine looked at the moving objects 
through his field-glass. 

" If it were not impossible," he said, " I 
should think they were a couple of children 
swimming. Try your eyesight, Tachbrook." 



THE ISLAND OF HAWKS. 1 1 5 

"By Jove, you're right," he exclaimed; 
" a couple of amphibious young troglodytes. 
Well, there are inhabitants, after all ; I sup- 
pose they '11 talk nothing but Portuguese." 

" There 's a Portuguese sailor on board," 
said Jack Manly. "He'll be able to in- 
terpret." 

The party made their way down the steep 
grassy sward, and were soon on the lake's 
margin. They skirted it on a hard beach of 
lava mixed with strange sea-shells. All the 
Azores are volcanic in origin. Doubtless 
this lake was the crater of a submarine 
volcano, lifted to the surface suddenly. When 
they came near the point at which their 
strange fish had been swimming, it was 
apparent that they had just landed. A couple 
of beautiful children, nine or ten years old, 
were racing up and down on a stretch of 
turf, drying themselves in the sunshine. They 
had no towel, and apparently no raiment. 
When they saw the travellers approach, they 
came running up to them, exclaiming . 

" Hurrah! hurrah!" 

"I wonder what that's Portuguese for," said 
Loraine. " It sounds ridiculously like English." 



1 1 6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

The two children, down whose white skins 
the spherules still trickled, shook their abun- 
dant wet hair, and danced gaily, and played 
all sorts of wild tricks upon the grass. . 

"They are wild creatures," said Tach 
brook ; " but they seem English in look and 
language. Let us question them." 

Tom Jones sprang forward and caught 
hold of the boy. The youngster was not in 
the least alarmed. He clomb up his stalwart 
captor's form, and seated himself on his 
shoulder. 

" Now," he said, in excellent good English, 
" what do you want ?" 

" You 've got caught by the young Man of 
the Sea," said Leary to Tom Jones. 

" Where do you live ?" asked Tachbrook. 

"In the cave there," he said, pointing to 
the arched entrance they had seen from the 
other side of the lake. It was a noble natural 
archway. "Come and see father," the boy 
went on ; while the girl, a wild creature, ran 
forward over the grass. 

When they approached the entrance to the 
cave they heard a mighty roar of water, and 
at the giant doorway they found a deep 



THE ISLAND OF HAWKS, _ 1 1 7 

chasm, ten feet wide perhaps, and of depth 
unguessable, far. down in which the waters of 
the lake were evidently discharged by a sub- 
terranean river. Across this gulf there was 
a cord stretched tight : the girl walked on it 
to the other side with perfect ease, 

" Let me go and find father," cried the boy, 
and sprang from Tom Jones's shoulder, and 
crossed in like manner. 

Our exploring party stood in amazement. 
These inhabitants of an unknown island, wild 
as savages yet speaking English, perplexed 
them greatly. They stood on the brink of 
this wonderful abyss, and waited to see what 
would happen. Presently there appeared in 
the entry a tall figure with hair and beard 
perfectly white. He was apparently about 
six feet high. He had on a tunic of goat's 
skins, and short trews of the same material 
reaching to the knees. Below, his legs and 
feet were bare. 

" Friends ? " he cried interrogatively ; and 
on receiving an affirmative answer, he let 
down a rough plank that just crossed the 
chasm. For some curious reason connected 
with the human imagination, walking a plank 




1 1 8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

a foot wide is easy enough if you put it on 
firm ground, but makes you dizzy if there is 
space below. It is noticeable that monkeys 
do not feel this difficulty . b, fact . hard to re- 
concile with Darwinism. 

However, Tom Jones crossed easily enough, 
and standing midway, offered his hand to Mir- 
anda, and landed her safely. Cincinnatus the 
poet, having ascended Mount Tyndall in the 
Sierra Nevada, had no difficulty. Tachbrook 
disdained the plank and leaped the chasm. 
Leary and Manly and Loraine had some 
slight hesitations. When they were across, 
the scene was superb. The entrance-hall of 
this great cavern, or series of caverns, was 
about three hundred feet from floor to roof, 
and instead of being dark, as they anticipated, 
was suffused with a tender light. For high 
in the mountain peak there was a natural 
skylight, catching the meridian sun . ^and half 
way up the wall of the cavern was a noble 
window, of whose form a Gothic architect 
might be proud, through which poured the 
western sunset. 

" This is a palace for a King of the Sea," 
said Cincinnatus Meunier. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE BIG SHIP. 

" Nequicquam Deus abscidit 
Pnidens Oceano dissociabili 
Terras, si tamen impiae 
Non tangenda rates transiliunt vada.'* 

While our exploring party were cheerily 
seeking adventure, and realising Mr Disraeli's 
favourite apophthegm, that "adventures are 
to the adventurous," Captain Grainger was 
doing his duty, not without considerable 
trouble. He had to provide sustenance for 
crew and passengers, to keep the former in 
order, to console the latter. Can you not 
imagine Mr Edward Wilson, knight infuturo, 
pompously delivering himself ? 

** I am very much annoyed. Captain 
Grainger ; we are all very much annoyed. I 



1 20 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

was to have been presented to Her Most 
Gracious . Majesty early in August, and to 
have received the honour of knighthood ; and 
here we all are on a desert island . most incon- 
venient for Lady . I mean Mrs Wilson and 
the Misses Wilson . ^and it is impossible to 
say when she shall reach England. You 
know, sir, it is not pleasant to disappoint the 
Queen!" 

Grainger, with less troubles on his broad 
shoulders, would probably have laughed. 
As it was, he simply said, with the uttermost 
gravity . 

"You may thank God, Mr Wilson, that 
you have disappointed the sharks." 

The Mighty Metropolis^ jammed by the 
gale between two rocks, moved not percep- 
tibly either with wind or tide. She lay high 
out of the water, and her stern sank a* little at 
first, but now she was stedfast ; and Grainger 
said to himself that it would take a fleet of 
steamers to haul her off". She was safe 
enough . only too safe. Nothing less than as 
strong a gale from the opposite quarter could 
drive her back into the sea. So the captain's 
first business was to land provisions and 



THE BIG SHIP. J 2 1 

articles of comfort . canvas for tents, and 
mattresses for sleeping. All hands worked 
hard at this business, and the afternoon saw 
the beach a complete encampment, and 
cookery going on over many fires, and every- 
body willing to look cheerfully at the situation. 
Except Mr Edward Wilson, who strutted up 
and down like an injured turkey-cock, pining 
for his accolade. 

One of the Captain's most efficient helpers 
was the surgeon, Mr Brett; and one of the sur- 
geon's earliest proceedings was togo to the snug 
little corner known as the surgery, in order to 
collect necessary medicines. A very small den 
was the surgery, opening from the surgeon's 
private cabin, fitted up with cases and chests 
for various kinds of drugs, and with no furni- 
ture except a heavy sofa, designed to serve as 
a basis of operation in case anybody wanted 
a tooth extracted, or anything worse. When 
Brett entered this snuggery, he was aixiazed 
to see a man apparently asleep on the sofa. 
It was Captain Stuart. He lay prone, 
with a phial clutched in his left hand. 
The Doctor looked at the phial, and 
felt the Captain's pulse . and came to a 



122 MIRANDA J A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

rapid conclusion, .which turned out to be 
correct 

When the gale struck the ship with such 
awful suddenness, Stuart was below in the 
saloon. He made a rush toward his own 
cabin, but was unable to reach it. He fell 
through a door, and found himself in the 
surgery. He held on to the sofa, white with 
terror; he heard the mad conflict of wind 
with sea, and felt the great ship trembling in 
every plank a^ she was driven through the 
water. Stuart, a man of no faith, and not much 
reason, was disgusted with his situation. He 
remembered how, when he went out rabbit- 
ing in his boyhood, he pitied the poor devil 
of a rabbit, caught in his hole, the ferret 
behind him, and the terrier waiting at the 
mouth. 

" I 'm in a hole npw, by Jove," said Stuart 
to himself, " and there 's no getting out of it 
No ship can live in this gale. We shall all 
go down ; and where the deuce shall we find 
ourselves ? I wish it was over." 

Stuart was not a coward. In active daring 
he had few equals ; but he had no power of 
passive endurance. Each moment made him 




THE BIG SHIP. 123 

more madly impatient. All at once a sudden 
idea occurred to him ; he managed to stretch 
over to one of the medicine cases, and to find 
a phial of chloroform. He emptied the whole 
of it on his handkerchief, buried his nostrils 
and mouth therein, and in two minutes was 
dreamlessly asleep, and quite unconscious of 
the steamship and the gale. 

Still asleep was Stuart when Brett found 
him. .The surgeon asked the Captain to come 
and look at him ; and Grainger ordered some 
sailors to get him into a boat on a mattress, 
and land him at a quiet spot on the beach, 
away from the rest of the party. So he was 
laid on his mattress in a niche of the rocks, 
whence he could see nothing but sea and sky. 

When he awoke, he was alone, for Brett 
and the sailors had plenty to do. Where was 
he ? He felt weak and headachy, and reasoned 
that such feelings could hardly occur in any 
world except the earth. Yet he was not on 
board ship, at any rate ; and for aught he 
knew, he might be in some easy avenue to the 
nether world, awaiting a summons to the pre- 
sence of that monarch whom no man, save 
Cuvier, has ever foiled. 



I 24 MIRANDA ; A J^IDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Weakened by fatigue and chloroform, he 
lay in a dozy lotophagous state, and watched 
the sky and sea. The calm was perfect. 
Stuart's brain worked mechanically, and he 
imagined a host of things which seemed ab- 
solutely real. He was in that state which 
opium confers when not used in excess . a 
state which the Turk calls kef. 

Brett, having a thousand things to do, left 
Stuart alone for some hours : when he came 
to look after him, he found he was in a 
dreamy half-tonscious state ; he administered 
a little brandy. Stuart gulped it; looked 
round ; recognised Brett ; exclaimed . 

" I thought I was in heaven. It can't be 
true, I know, for Saint Peter would never 
pass such brandy as that'* 

By the time the encampment on the beach 
was organised, and arrangements made for 
tolerable comfort, Captain Grainger began to 
wonder what had become of the exploring 
party. He was not without hope that they 
might have obtained information of some 
value. Having provided as well as he could 
for his passengers, his next duty was to see 
what could be done to save the ship . a 



THE BIG SHIP. 125 

matter which weighed heavily on the Cap- 
tain's mind. This was his first misadventure 
of magnitude; heretofore his fortunes had 
been fabulously good. * And now he felt 
rather in-despair : for he full well knew the 
lethargic state of the Azores, and the impos- 
sibility of obtaining the kind of help he re- 
quired. 

" Not an engineer in the islands," he thought 
to himself, " and not a steamer of fifty horse 
power. I shall have to get to Liverpool any 
way I can, and then they '11 supersede me, and 
send some other fellow to save the ship. 
Well, if one is to be shipwrecked, I should 
like it to be in some civilised country." 

It was close on sunset wheii Captain 
Grainger, who was anxious about his miss- 
ing friends, saw some of them approaching . 
four only out of the seven . Loraine, Leary, 
Jack Manly, and the poet. He hurried to 
meet them. 

"What news?'* he asked. "Where are 
the others ? " 

" It's a long story. Captain," said Loraine. 
" The worst thing about it is that there 's no 
chance of any help on the island. There 



126 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

isn't a house upon it. The only inhabitants are 
a man and two children ; they live in a cavern." 

" I feared that there was no civilisation in 
the wretched little place. Well, I shall start 
a couple of boats to Terceira and St Michael's 
before sunrise to-morrow. But how about 
our other friends ? " 

" O they are going to stay in the cavern 
with these aborigines to-night," said Leary. 
" The man is English ; Tachbrook discovered 
that he knew something about his family . 
I can't say what . so they have taken lodgings 
in his cavern, and I 'm sure I hope they '11 
like it." 

" You must be hungry," said the Captain. 
" We Ve plenty to eat, thank Heaven.'' 

" Well," said Cincinnatus, " I can manage 
a slight refection ; but the old fellow in the 
cave treated us very well. We had stewed 
kid, with oranges ; and some wonderful purple 
fish that I never saw before, which he said 
was never caught except in lakes that had 
been the craters of volcanoes ; and goat's 
milk cheese ; and bananas in cream ; and ex- 
cellent coffee, from berries picked while we 
were there." 



THE BIG SHIP. 127 

" I hope you got something to drink be- 
sides coffee/' said Grainger. 

** Yes," said Loraine, " a wonderful brew- 
age made from grapes, oranges, lemons, 
citrons, bananas, and cinnamon, that had 
been allowed to ferment, and was, he said 
several years old. It was capital stuff, but 
rather too strong and rather too sweet." 



t< 



CHAPTER XL 



THE TROGLODYTE. 



In the world's childhood all were troglodytes." 



As man contains in himself the models of all 
living creatures that dwell on this planet, so 
the earth itself contains antitypes of all 
edifices which men erect, and all instruments 
they use. The oar was borrowed from the 
fish's fin ; an oak has been the pattern of a 
lighthouse; the cones of Alps suggested 
the cathedral spire ; the tors of Devon and 
Derby the cathedral tower; the frowning 
entrances of mighty caverns the cathedral 
gate ; the arches of great forests the cathe- 
dral aisle. God made models for us, rough 



THE TROGLODYTE. 1 2 9 

yet sublime, of all that we could do. As a 
great poet has said . 

" The Bible is the earth ; and we begin 
To learn a little of what lies within." 

Had there been no caverns on the earth's 
surface, it may be doubted whether mankind 
would ever have learnt to build houses. 

The Troglodyte of the Island of Hawks 
was very courteous to his unexpected visitors, 
and gave them aboriginal refreshment, which 
already has been described. The day was 
hot without ; in the core of that cavern it 
was delectably cool. Beneath the natural 
floor the river outlet of the lake made endless 
music ; while through the great window sea- 
birds flashed by, sometimes entering the 
cavern to find their nests in its mighty roof. 
The two young swimmers served their father's 
guests, without even the SuL^coa-fm* The scene 
was curious, and deserves a painter's treat- 
ment. 

When the meal was over, the Troglodyte 
led them up rather a difficult stairway to the 
window looking across the sea, thirty feet at 
least above the floor of the cavern. There a 
natural bench existed, whereon they sat com- 

VOL. I. I 



* 1 30 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

fortably enough, looking out across the ocean 
towards America. The children had run 
away to amuse themselves. 

" This is a curious habitation for an English 
gentleman of pretty old family," said the 
Troglodyte presently. " As you are all 
English, I feel disposed to tell you a part 
of my history ; for imagine ! I have seen no 
human creature but those two children for 
the seven years I have been on this island. 
The island itself is not many years old." 

"What!" said Loraine, "How do you 
make that out?" 

" Well, it isn't of age yet," said the old 
man, laughing. "It was thrown up by an 
earthquake, or rather a seaquake, about 
twenty years ago. I expect it will go down 
just as suddenly." 

" Not to-day, I hope," said Leary. 

" Yours must be a romantic story," said 
Miranda. " I wish these gentlemen would 
not interrupt it by unnecessary remarks. 
Please go on, and I will try to keep order." 

"You shall be lady president," said the 
Troglodyte, courteously. " I will give you 
the second half of my story. I came from 



THE TROGLODYTE. I31 

England for two reasons . I disliked my 
relations, and I longed for adventure. I had 
plenty of money, and can get plenty now. 
I was shipwrecked on Terceira. There was 
a good deal of fun at Angra. I had no reason 
for going away, so I stayed. I fell in love 
with a most charming Portuguese girl, whom 
I will call Juanita. She was of good family; 
was exquisitely pretty . was ineffably lazy. 
We lived a pleasant easy life, and she gave 
birth to those two youngsters . and then she 
died of consumption. Just at that time my 
love of adventure revived, and I happened 
to hear of this wonderful island. I deter- 
mined to explore it ; bought a cutter, which 
I loaded with all I thought requisite for 
Crusoe life, and came over here. I have 
enjoyed it, though I have worn out nearly 
all my clothes." 

" But you are not going to stay here," said 
Tachbrook. ** Come home to England with 
us when we can get away." 

"I will think of it,'' he said. 

When they descended again to the cavern, 
the Troglodyte drew Tachbrook aside, and 
said . 



132 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Do you know Rothescamp ?" 

" Indeed I do," said Harold, surprised. 

" I wish you would stay here to-night, with 
your daughter, and the young man you call 
Jones. I can make you comfortable, really. 
Will you ? Send the other men on to say 
you will come to-morrow." 

" Agreed," said Harold. 

So he told his friends that he had deter- 
mined to stay the night in the cavern ; and 
they four, as we have seen, returned to the 
shore and made their report. When they 
had left, the Troglodyte asked his remaining 
guests to stroll on the margin of the lake 
until he joined them. Hereunto they as- 
sented, crossing the chasm, and finding the 
lake more beautiful than before under the 
sl^^nt evening light. 

" There is something queer about this old 
gentleman," said Tachbrook, as they loitered 
beside the lake. " That he is a gentleman is 
clear enough : but what an odd life for an 
Englishman of his stamp ! And fancy those 
two little imps of his, running absolutely 
wild." 

Miranda laughed, for at that moment the 



THE TROGLODYTE. 1 3 3 

two naked children were turning the wildest 
somersaults on the grass by the Ikke. And 
much more amused was Miranda when there 
presently emerged from his cavern the Trog- 
lodyte himself . but in how different a costume 
from the scanty goat-skins ! He came before 
them like one of the sketches in Sams's 
window . ^a beaver hat, blue coat with brass 
buttons, long kerseymere waistcoat, knee 
breeches, silk stockings, shoes with square 
toes, and diamond buckles. There, in the 
Island of Hawks, the Troglodyte looked 
every inch a member of Brooks's. It was a 
perfect transformation scene. They stood 
amazed . the most amazed being Harold 
Tachbrook, who had some experience of old- 
fashioned dress. 

The Troglodyte joined them, first ordering 
the children off to bed ; a couple of young 
nudities seemed very much out of place 
near those highly respectable habiliments. 
Fancy Aphrodite in her customary costume 
walking down St James's Street under the 
eyes of the decorous old gentlemen who 
haunt the bow-windows of clubs ! The Trog- 
lodyte guided his guests to a group of olive- 



1 34 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

trees which overhung the lake ; there they 
sat down. 

" I asked you if you knew Rothescamp," 
he presently said to Harold. ** Let me tell 
you why. I know it well ; at least, I knew it 
well, years ago. When a boy I was fond of 
pictures, and used to spend hours in the old 
picture-gallery at Rothescamp-on-the-Hill." 

" I was never there that I remember," said 
Harold. " I lived with my father in the vil- 
lage below." 

'* I see . I see ! Now I begin to know who 
you are. Strange that we should meet in 
this island, where I expected to pass the re- 
mainder of my life in solitude. Passing 
strange ! " 

He remained silent for a moment. Then 
he said . 

" Your name is Tachbrook ? '^ 

'' Yes." 

" So is mine." 

All three of his auditors gave a perceptible 
start. 

" I found you out," he proceeded to say, 
** by your own and your daughter's wonder- 
ful likeness to portraits in that famous old 



THE TROGLODYTE. 1 35 

gallery . portraits of your ancestors, some 
centuries old. There is a man painted there 
by Vandyke, who might be your twin bro- 
ther. There are several ladies like your 
daughter ; but one is so like, that you might 
think it was absolutely painted for her.'' 

" Don't say there 's anybody like me," ex- 
claimed Tom Jones. ** I 'm Jones. I de- 
cline to be stuck in among your aristocratic 
people. I should feel quite unhappy in a 
picture-gallery. Fancy being hung up in the 
same place for centuries, with nobody to look 
at but your great-grandmother in a short 
frock as a shepherdess . ten years old." 

The Troglodyte gave Tom Jones a queer 
smile, and then said to Harold . 

" You don't, I suppose, know much of your 
family history. But of course you can tell 
me who is the present baronet ? " 

" Indeed I cannot. When I left England, 
there was nobody living at the old house, and 
the rumour of the village was that Sir Arthur 
Tachbrook was in a lunatic asylum. My 
father used to say that he did not believe 
that, although certainly of opinion that he was 
qualified for admission. His letters have 



136 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

never mentioned Sir Arthur, and I am quite 
uncertain whether he is alive, or dead. I do 
not even know whether he has children." 

" If not," said the Troglodyte, " I am his 
heir, for I am his nephew, son of his only- 
brother Theodore." 

" How extraordinary ! " exclaimed Harold. 
** Then what relation is there between you 
and me ? " 

" We are second cousins, I suppose ; at 
any rate, we had the same great-grandfather. 
It is an odd place for cousins to meet." 

" Very odd, but I am rather a believer in 
curious coincidences, . for my mother pos- 
sessed some strange magnetic power, and I 
have inherited a kind of mystical tendency. I 
think the air of our Australian steppes has 
blown it away : I don't now believe much more 
than I can see." 

** Don t believe half you can see," said 
the Troglodyte. " Since I have lived in this 
insular splitude, I have seen the strangest 
visions. I have seen a great fleet of war- 
ships pass close to the shore, and suddenly 
vanish. I have seen a woman walking on 
the smooth surface of that lake by moonlight. 



THE TROGLODYTE. 1 37 

I have seen an army besieging a city in the 
clouds of sunset. Between what we see and 
what we imagine, how slight is the difference ! 
And is not imagination often stronger than 
sight ? However, I don t think we have yet 
come to the end of our coincidences.*' 

At this moment Miranda exclaimed . . 

" Look at the lake ! How it is bubbling !*' 

They all looked. In the very middle of 
the lake the water was rising in a sort of 
mound, lifted evidently by some force from 
below. 

** That 's no vision,'' said Tom Jones. 
" What does it mean ? " 

" It means that we had better turn int© the 
cavern, for there is another storm on the way. 
That lake is my barometer, as well as my 
fishpond : it is evidently the crater of a 
volcano, for it moves with every impulse of 
weather. This is going to be a big storm : I 
hope your shipmates are well sheltered." 

^* Shall we be well sheltered ? " asked 
Miranda, " if one may put a selfish ques- 
tion." 

** No storm has ever troubled my cavern," 
replied the Troglodyte. " But as you, being 



138 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

a Tachbrook, are of course a brave young 
lady, I may venture to say that I never go to 
bed at night without thinking I may wake 
at the bottom of the sea in the morning. An 
island that so unexpectedly comes to the sur- 
face may disappear just as abruptly." 

*' I am not afraid," said Miranda, laughing; 
" for, don't you know, I am a kind of mer- 
maid . I was born at sea." / 

The Troglodyte guided his guests out of 
the great hall in which they had dined into a 
square chamber of immense height, but not 
more than thirty feet each way. It had two 
windows : one looking seaward, a hundred 
feet from the ground ; the other, not much 
more than an arrow-slit, close to the floor. 
From this they could watch the lake. The 
bore in its centre rose higher and higher. 
The sky grew as dark as if there were an 
eclipse. The Troglodyte lighted a fragrant 
fire of dry cinnamon, which gave them just 
sufficient light to see each other. Presently 
lightning zigzagged so vividly that it grew 
intolerable to the eye. They retreated from 
the window, and reclined on couches of 
fragrant leaves a^d grass, which lay along 



THE TROGLODYTE, 1 39 

the sides of the cavern. They did not talk 
much : the heightening fury of the storm 
absorbed their ideas. The flash of Hghtning 
and the roar of thunder and wind and sea 
grew more terrifying every instant. Tom J ones 
was the only member of the party who seemed 
thoroughly to enjoy the storm. He leaned 
on the ledge of the narrow rock-window, and 
watched the lightning cutting the air, and the 
water of the lake rising higher and higher. 
It rose so high that the lawn on which they 
had walked was now a part of the lake. He 
could see it advancing towards the entrance 
of the cavern. 

" It looks as if we should soon be flooded," 
he said to the Troglodyte. 

"Then we'll go to the first floor," he 
replied, unperturbed. Rising, he lighted a 
long stick of cinnamon, and led his guests 
"^up rather a rough ascent to a perfect suite of 
rooms opening one from the other. Rough- 
hewn they were . unpapered, untiled, un- 
floored ; but far above possible access of 
water, and too firmly built to be blown away 
by wind. There were cosy rugs and wrap- 
pers for any who desired sleep : but who 



1 40 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

could sleep while that storm roared outside ? 
With restless minds in bodies forced to rest, 
they waited for the dying of the storm. 

It died at midnight ; but, looking down 
upon the moonlit lake, they saw that it had 
swelled so high, that to leave the cavern 
would be impossible until its recession. 

" You are my prisoners," said the Trog- 
lodyte, gaily. " How long it will take for 
the water to recede it is impossible to say ; 
but there is plenty to eat and drink in store, 
and I have no doubt we shall manage to 
exist." 

A week passed before the lake reached its 
normal condition. During that time Tach- 
brook and the Troglodyte held many con- 
versations which convinced them both of 
their cousinship. During that time Tom 
Jones and Miranda had many pleasant hours, 
though they were immured in a cavern, with 
scant glimpses of the light of the sun. Yet, 
somehow, they did apt reach a complete 
understanding. Tom was uninstructed in 
the ways of women, or he would have known 
the meaning of that diamond light burning 
in the brown depths of Miranda's eyes, like 



THE TROGLODYTE. I4I 

some jewel in fathoms of ocean. Miranda 
was unskilled in the erotic art, or she would 
have made Tom speak his mind in very 
quick time. She knew well enough what he 
wanted to say, but knew not how to make 
him say it. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 

There came a morning when the lake was 
calm and still ; when across its misty roof 
there was arched a marvellous rainbow, vivid 
in colours, the very bridge for light-foot Iris 
to cross with message of peace to mortals ; 
when Adam and Eve (thus had the Trog- 
lodyte named his children) could rush down 
and take their matutinal bath in safety ; when 
they ate some fresh-caught crater-fish, and 
drank some fresh-plucked coffee on the mar- 
gin of the lake. Harold and Tom Jones 
tried the waters of the lake that tranquil 
morning, and even Miranda had a quiet dip 
in a shallow place which Eve showed her. 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 1 43 

where great basalt masses formed ai natural 
dressing-room. 

** We shall be able to go to the shore this 
morning," said Harold. " Grainger will be 
wondering what has become of us." 

" Let us start at once," replied the Troglo- 
dyte. " Your daughter had better not come ; 
let my youngsters show her some of the 
curiosities of the neighbourhood." 

To this Miranda agreed, and Adam and 
Eve showed her many marvels. These 
young islanders trod the rocks with their 
naked feet more easily than the goats. Mir- 
anda was horror-stricken when she saw them 
run easily along a ledge of cliff not a foot 
wide, with a perpendicular precipice below 
sheer to the sea. It was the outer wall of the 
cavern. Beneath you could see the sub- 
terrene outlet of the lake, through which the 
water fell in a mighty cataract. These agile 
children clung to the giant creepers that 
fringed the rock, and threw themselves into 
the very midst of the waterfall. 

Then, rushing back, unconscious of peril, 
they climbed great trees that overhung the 
cliff, and brought Miranda fruit. They took 



144 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

her to a line of beach on one side the lake, 
where, instead of sand and shingle, you trod 
on nothing but sea-shells and fluorine crystals. 
They showed her a hole a foot wide which 
reached underground water ; drop in a pebble, 
and up there came a furious jet of briny spray. 
They took her by an easy way up to a cliff over- 
hanging the sea, where there were thousands 
of hawks' nests . ^the hawks so tame, from 
utter unacquaintance with the mischievous 
propensities of mankind, that they did not 
rise as you passed. 

Meanwhile the Troglodyte and his com- 
panions were making their way towards the 
encampment through, vineyard and orange- 
wood. When they reached the place, not a 
creature was to be seen, nor a single tent, nor 
any vestige of the camp. The sands were per- 
fectly fre^ from soil ; had evidently been well 
washed by ocean during the second gale. 

" They are all washed away, I fear," ex- 
claimed Harold. " What a frightful things! " 

** Let us go and look for the ship," said 
Tom Jones. 

They ran round the cliff towards the chasm 
into which the Mighty Metropolis had been 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 1 45 

jammed. She was gone ! Harold and Tom 
Jones stared at each other, speechless with 
amazement They also stared across the sea ; 
no sign was there of the mighty bulk of the 
great vessel. What could have happened ? 
Where were dauntless Captain Grainger and 
his splendid ship ? These questions they 
unavailingly put to each other, the Troglodyte 
quietly listening. At last he said . 

*< The steamer was jammed between those 
rocks, you say ? " 

" Yes," said Harold. 

** And the passengers and crew were on the 
beach here ?" 

'' Yes." 

He remained awhile thoughtful; then he 
said . 

" What has happened to the ship I know. 
What has happened to the men I do not 
know." 

" Where is the ship then ? " impetuously 
asked Tom Jones. 

** Where ? I am not conjurer enough to 
tell you that, though I might tell you some- 
thing that would astonish you more. In these 
great storms in the Azores the sea rises very 

VOL. L , K 



146 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

fast and very high. No doubt the steamer 
was floated out of the fissure into which she 
was jammed. At the same time, the "beach 
was probably many fathoms deep in water ; 
so that, if your people remained here, they 
were all washed into the ocean." 

" Surely some traces would be left of 

them." 

" I think not," said the Troglodyte, " the sea 
rises and falls too rapidly* The only chance 
of their escape is, that Captain Grainger 
knew something of the character of these 
seas, and got everybody on board when the 
storm began. If so, they may be safe ; if not, 
you '11 see no soul of them again." 

" Grainger knows these seas well enough," 
said Tom Jones. "Would the storm give 
him time ? " 

** I think It would. If yx)u remember, the 
bore in the lake rose gradually. I am inclined 
to hope that, when he saw the weather change 
and the sea rise, he got all hands on board at 
once. If he did, and the ship was not much 
injured by the crash, he may be landing his 
passengers at Liverpool at this moment.** 
. ''1 heartily hope he may," said Harold. 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 1 47 

" But now, my good cousin, how are we to 
get away ? I am the more anxious about it 
since I found out you were heir-presumptive 
to the Tachbrook baronetcy." 

" Let's make a raft," cried Tom Jones, im- 
petuously, "and drift away to the nearest 
inhabited island." 

" I don't think I should like to put Miranda 
on a raft," replied Tachbrook. " No ; better 
keep watch for a passing sail. We are pretty 
close to the usual track of ships; we can 
easily signal them with a flag or a bonfire." 

" Better not say anything to your daughter 
about the uncertainty we are in ; she would 
be so shocked," said the Troglodyte. " Tell 
her the ship has got off, and left you im- 
prisoned. And now, as we may as well go 
back again, I '11 show you a different way." 

Climbing up a steep bit of cliff, they reached 
an aperture which led to a flight of natural 
stairs, that seemed as if they descended to 
the centre of the earth. After descending 
several yards, the steps ended. Through 
the chasm beneath, the sands were visible a 
hundred feet down ; but right across this 
chasm there was another opening. The 



148 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Troglodyte leapt across with ease ; his com- 
panions successfully followed him, not without 
a slight qualm. They found themselves in a 
kind of natural corridor, with gaps in the 
rock at intervals, framing superb sea-scapes. 
Now and then the floor of the corridor 
ceased, and it became necessary to spring 
across the chasms thus formed . chasms 
through which was perceptible either a group 
of rocks or the sea itself. When they had 
walked about fifteen minutes, they came to 
a staircase leading upward. Ascending this, 
they reached daylight at last . or rather, twi- 
light. 

Through an archway they came upon a 
small platform of rock, with a natural 
parapet. Above, there was the roar of falling 
water, an inveterate iris colouring the spray 
as the sunshafts shot through. Below, the 
mad water flung itself down a sheer abyss, 
boiling fiercely. It was impossible for the 
eye to search that awful depth. 

"Where are we ? " said Harold. 

" You don't recognise the gulf, though you 
have crossed it," said the Troglodyte, with 
a laugh. " This is my moat. Do you see 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 1 49 

that tangle of creepers ? We shall have to 
climb to the surface by that." 

Therewith he caught the natural rope, and 
made his way upwards. Harold and Tom 
Jones were obliged to follow, through the 
blinding mist of the waterfall; but they had 
been through so many strange adventures, 
that they gave up being surprised. The 
strong stems of the creepers formed a con- 
venient ladder, and they soon emerged, a 
little damp and out of breath, on the floor of 
the great cavern. Miranda and her young 
companions had not yet returned, 

They dried themselves by a fire of cinna- 
mon, drank some of the Troglodyte's insular 
liquid, and held a council of three. 

" What's to be done ?" said Harold. " We 
cannot be permanent prisoners in this island, 
pleasant as it is. There would be nobody 
to marry Miranda." 

" Pardon me," quoth Tom Jones ;/* there 
are three of us who might be rivals. Our 
host might marry again, you know ; and 
iJiQn there is myself ; and then there is young 
Adam. What if he should fall suddenly in 
love ? He will soon be old enough." 



150 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" I hope not," said the Troglodyte. " Let 
us be serious. Till I met you, I had made 
up my mind that, if I were obliged to remain 
on this little island, it would be no great hard- 
ship. The soil and climate are such that we 
get all we want with trifling trouble. It is 
mere amusement to catch crater-fish and make 
goats' milk cheese . to pick oranges and 
grapes and bananas. This cavern is a palace, 
and there are no rent and taxes to pay. Seven 
years of this isolation had made me rathefr 
careless as to whether I ever should leave the 
place ; but you came, and I recognised a 
kinsman ; and your talk told me of what was 
going on everywhere, and I longed to visit 
my old home. The longing strengthens. I 
am amazed at myself. After seven tranquil 
years in this beautiful island, I am rendered 
restless by my very first visitors, and pine to 
return to a world wherein I know I shall be 
infinitely bored." 

" I sm. glad you have decided to go," said 
Harold. " Now, the great question is, how 
to manage it? We ought to find a good 
point to signal from, and keep watch there 
in turns." 



THE BOW IN THE CLOUD. 1 5 1 

" There can be no better point than the 
conical hill above the fissure into which your 
ship was driven. It is right in ihe way of all 
vessels going north-eastward." 

" Good," said Tom Jones. ** Then let us 
set up a flagstaif there, and light a bonfire at 
night, and keep watch by turns night and day. 
What say you ? " 

" First-rate notion," quoth Harold, and the 
Troglodyte agreed; and forthwith they set 
out in search of a tall tree that would serve as 
a pole. This was soon found : and that very 
evening the flagstaff was set up, carrying a 
white flag made out of a sheet. Next day 
they started in procession ; and drove the 
staff into the ground, at the lofty point which 
the Troglodyte had suggested. It was a 
lovely conical hill covered with grass . on one 
side you saw illimitable sea . on the other the 
interior of the island, and the great fleet of 
islands beyond, ships too strong to be driven 
from their anchorage by any common gale. 
And from this time regular watch was kept 
up both day and night . the flag always flying, 
and a noble fire built every sunset. This 
duty of signalling was executed in a frolic- 



152 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

some way : and though the Troglodyte and 
Harold and Tom did the work nominally, 
Miranda and Adam and Eve did a good deal 
of the actual work. As to the children, their 
young eyes were telescopes. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



tom's two secrets. 



*' If you have a secret, 
Go tell it in waste places, far away 
From all but elves and goblins ; yet be sure 
Some swift inquisitive elf will pick it up ; 
And what you said at midnight to the stars 
Shall be proclaimed at the High Cross at noon." 

Tom Jones had the first night-watch . in such 
matters, juniores priores. They lighted the 
bonfire at sunset, and then his friends left 
him, Miranda giving him a merry smile as 
she vanished down the pathway. Gradually 
the magical lights . those ghostly echoes of 
sunset . died in the east and west ; grey 
grew the concave sky, and darker grey the 
levels of the sea. 

Night-watches are good for the restless 



1 54 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

spirit of man. You are face to face, nothing ' 
to disturb, with the most marvellous and 
inexplicable works of God. No wonder the 
Chaldean shepherds were astronomers, seeing 
how close seemed the stars during their long 
solitary nights. Also, when you are so close 
to the Creator, you get a new and special 
introduction to yourself; you are not the 
same man among your jolly comrades over 
the wine as when you are absolutely alone 
upon a windy hill, with nothing between your- 
self and God. 

Tom Jones had two secrets, and wished he 
hadn't. He pondered over them through 
this calm and lovely night, while the bonfire 
blazed on the height, and the ocean was phos- 
phorescent, as if to mock the stars. It was a 
marvellous time. Those stars move faster 
than the light of ocean ; yet distance makes 
them seem immovable. They are coming or 
going with measureless speed, yet we call 
them fixed. 

Leaning against the flagstaff, watching his 
bright bonfire, and looking sometimes at the 
tracks of scintillant light upon the sea, Tom 
passed the hours in half-conscious soliloquy 



TOM^S TWO SECRETS. 1 5 5 

and self-examination. He looked back over 
his life with doubtful feelings. Had he been 
right, after all, to sever himself from his family, 
and pass eighteen years in Australian wilds, 
because his father neglected him and his 
schoolmaster flogged him ? When a man 
gets an opportunity of seriously reflecting on 
his past life, he can usually touch one point of 
departure which was the real commencement 
of his career, whether that career were suc- 
cess or failure. At the moment, it possibly 
seemed to him unimportant which course 
he took; but the two paths diverged more 
widely every year, and the time arrives when 
it was easy to see whether you have made a 
mistake or not It is not impossible that a 
mathematical formula might be constructed to 
take in all cases of this kind. The astrologers 
could do it, doubtless. Some such vague 
fancy had Tom Jones, as the clear stars filled 
the air with quiet light He would have 
liked to question the stars. Had they indeed 
any influence on the lives of men ? Could 
their runes be read ? What would he not 
give to know his fate before making an 
attempt to change its course ! But, probably 



156 Miranda; a midsummer madness. 

because he had not faith enough, there 
reached him no intimation of guidance, so he 
had to decide for himself. 

"How I love Miranda ! " he thought, 
smoking his pipe by that solitary fire which 
blazed unanswered. " I have seen no women, 
and after Miranda I have no wish to see any. 
Surely she is perfect, if there is any such 
thing as perfection. She must have some 
small faults, of necessity: perhaps I shall 
find them out if I am lucky enough to make 
her my wife. She can't be quite immaculate. 
Indeed, I should be sorry if she were ; for I 
should like to amuse myself by correcting 
her little peccadilloes. But shall I tell her ? 
If I do, will she laugh at me as an old fogy, 
whom she has always regarded as a kind 
of amateur uncle ? Why have I thrown 
away my youth on those Australian sheep- 
walks? But, then, if I had not, I should 
never have seen Miranda ; and not to have 
seen her would have left my life incomplete. 
Certainly I know very little about women, 
but there can be no other like her, I '11 
swear/' 

In this fashion through the summer night 



TOM S TWO SECRETS. 1 5 ^ 

did Tom Jones meditate on the first of his 
two secrets. At last he decided to pluck up 
courage and tell Miranda his first secret the 
first time there came an opportunity. Alack ! 
how many an opportunity already had he 
lost ! If you cannot tell your sweetheart 
your desire during a month or two at sea, 
better not try to do so ashore. 

The quiet night went on. The bonfire 
blazed. An eastern light came slowly up 
the sky, and slowly grew more strong. .Then 
purple and rose and saffron streaked the 
heaven ; then came the gold rim of the rising 
sun, widening and widening till the perfect 
disc threw level light upon the sea. Tom 
Jones forget his troubles in the glory of the 
sight. To him a sunrise was no such novelty 
as to the jaded citizen who ^ees it seldom, un- 
less he is up a little later than usual. Many a 
sunrise had Tom Jones seen upon the green 
plains of Australia, when there was a long 
day's ride to be done ; but this sunrise on 
the sea appeared to him the loveliest sight he 
had ever known; and he looked eastward as 
eagerly as if he had been Orion in his blind- 
ness. 



158 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

So eager was his gaze, that he was quite 
unaware he had a companion. When, hav- 
ing drunk in the beauty of the scene to the 
uttermost, he looked round again . behold ! 
there was Miranda. With long hair freely 
flowing over rosy shoulders, with cheeks 
flushed and eyes brightened by exercise, with 
dress succinct like that of Milton's stripling 
cherub, she looked the very spirit of the 
scene. Her bright, brown eyes sparkled 
with pleasure ; her lips looked so provokingly 
kissable that Tom scarce knew how to resist 
the temptation. 

"Ah Tom," she said, '*I have been by 
your side thfese ten minutes, and you did not 
know it. You look quite romantic, staring 
at the sunrise. Have you seen any ships, or 
have you been asleep ? " 

" What brings you here so early ? " asked 
Tom. 

" Why, to see the sun rise, of course. Do 
you suppose the sun is entirely your property, 
and nobody else may look at it without your 
august permission ? Quite a mistake, I assure 
you, Mr Joiies.'* 

She looked so bewitching as she talked this 



tom's two secrets. 159 

merry nonsense, that Tom Jones was regularly 
done for. 

" May I tell you a secret ? " he asked. 

^' Two if you like." 

" I do want to tell you iwo. Will you 
listen ? " 

" Oh ! let me guess what they are. I know 
. one is that you want your breakfast ; the 
other is that you would like coffee and a but- 
tered roll.'' 

" You won't be serious," said Tom. " My 
secrets are really important." 

" If so, hadn't you better keep them your- 
self .'^ If you tell nje, I may forget they are 
secrets, and tell them without thinking to 
somebody else. If you can't keep your owja 
secrets, how can you expect me to ? " 

" Now do please be serious," said Tom. 

" O well, I '11 be serious. Don't put on 
such a long face* Come, I 'm ready. Please 
begin. Secret number one." 

" I love you/' cried Tom, hotly, taking her 
plump, warm hand in his. 

" O dear^ dear ! " she cried, laughing 
merrily. " Do you call ^Aa^ a secret ? Why, 
I could have told you that months ago." 



1 60 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

*' Then C2in you love me ?" exclaimed Tom. 

"Asking a question is a different thing 
from telling a secret," she said. " I did not 
offer to submit to be catechised. Come, Tom, 
out with your other secret. It must be a good 
one, to make up for- the other's being no 
secret at all." 

"O you are a wicked witch!" he cried. 
" I don't believe you care an atom about 
me. Now do you ? " 

"Mr Joaes, you are an impostor. You 
promised me two secrets, and I have not yet 
had one; and you positively want me to 
answer your questions just as if you had ful- 
filled your engagement." 

Tom was silent for a few minutes, and 
looked at the sea as if he thought a plunge 
in it would do him good. Then he said . 

" Well, I know my other secret is worth 
knowing ; so, if you '11 answer my question, 
1 11 tell it you." 

" What a shabby idea ! after having offered 
me your secrets for nothirig. I call it mean 
Tom. Well, repeat your question." 

" You know what it is. Do you love me?^' 

"No, not a bit," she replied merrily ; but 



tom's two secrets. i6i 

there was a look in her eye that made Tom, 
dull fellow though he was, read her reply the 
other way. Old Helios, who once informed 
against Ares and Aphrodite, might on this 
occasion have given evidence of a meeting 
of lips. Miranda blushed . for she knew it 
was the kiss of betrothal. 

" Now, sir," she said, " for secret number 
two." 

A seamew was screaming just above their 
heads at this moment. Perhaps Tom feared 
a bird of the air might carry the matter, for 
he softly whispered his second secret in 
Miranda's ear. 

" How delightful ! " she cried. " Dear 
Tom ! is it really true ?" 

'' Quite." 

" But why not tell papa ?" 

*' I think it is better not, till we are in 
England. We will talk it over. See! they 
are coming to relieve me." 

The Troglodyte and Harold were climbing 
the hill. Her father looked rather curiously 
at Miranda, who had the prettiest possible 
flush of excitement and pleasure on her 
countenance. She seemed a nymph of hill 

VOL. I. L 



1 62 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

and sea . a creature moulded of the elements, 
with the glitter of the wave in her eyes and 
the splendour of sunlight in her hair. As to 
Tom Jones, he looked quite worthy of her. 
So at least thought his friend and her father, 
who guessed, from the aspect of each, that 
the critical moment had come and gone. But 
he only said . 

"Glad you've taken to early rising, 
Miranda. Now, Tom, I 'm in charge ; go 
and refresh yoursel£ Mind you sleepP^ 



CHAPTER XIV. 



THE WATCHERS OF THE SEA. 



** Maria vasta visens." 



Watchers . of the vague immeasurable sea 
are apt to grow despondent when, through 
long days and nights, no sail is seen. Our 
party on the Island of Hawks were not of 
this temper. The Troglodyte, having dwelt 
on the mystical island a mystical number of 
years, was in no hurry to leave it. Indeed, * 
when he thought thereon, he grew melan- 
choly, well aware that in no other island 
should he find such rare beauty, such inex- 
haustible fertility, such absolute quietude. 

" If I get back to England," reflected the 
Troglodyte, ** I may become a baronet, with a 



164 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

great estate. What estate could equal this 
island ? What is the good of being a 
baronet? However, I suppose I must do 
it for the sake of Adam and Eve." 

Adam and Eve themselves were quite 
satisfied with their position, and resented 
being put into rough clothing, which their 
father made of goatskins and the like, as he 
rightly thought that, if a ship reached the 
island, it would hardly do to put on board a 
couple of young nudities. They had out- 
grown their clothing long ago, and the Trog- 
lodyte did not think making more worth the 
trouble. To these wild youngsters, how- 
ever, the trammels of dress were an abomina- 
tion ; only by threat of chastisement could 
they be induced to wear their rough habili- 
ments. When they were beyond the paternal 
ken, they threw their new clothes aside, and 
rejoiced in freedom from restraint. These 
young barbarians show us the difference 
between barbarism and civilisation in its 
crucial point. Barbarism is unclothed in 
mind and body; civilisation is clothed as 
to both . mentally by hypocrisy, corporally 
by fashion. 



THE WATCHERS OF THE SEA, 1 65 

Harold Tachbrook was the most restless 
of the islanders. He, though quiet enough 
during his Australian sojourn, the sojourn of 
his own choice, was now eager to escape 
from his enforced imprisonment. He had a 
kind of calenture. He dreamt of the green 
fields and good dinners of his youth . of the 
orchards he had robbed, the trout he had 
caught, the birds' nests he had taken, the 
girls he had kissed. There is no place like 
England for boyhood's harmless sports. To 
be an English boy, wisely treated and in 
perfect health, is an amazingly fortunate 
position. George Canning once said, at an 
Eton dinner in London, "Whatever might 
be the success of after life, whatever gratifica-, 
tion of ambition might be realised, whatever 
triumphs might be realised, no one is ever so 
great a man as when he was a sixth-form boy 
at Eton." Canning was right. The boy 
has no cares. His ambitions are free from 
the dross which clings to most ambitions of 
manhood. He desires to be the best rower 
or cricketer . ^the best writer of classic verse 
or prose . the best mathematician ; but these 
desires are wholly unconnected with the 



1 66 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

after-thought of money. The glory of a great 
public school is, that it is a world without 
worldliness. 

I am bound to say that the other two mem- 
bers of the party were not at all eager to leave 
the island. They had what Americans call 
a "good time." Both were rather ignorant in 
the scholastic sense ; for Miranda had never 
been taught anything save by that German 
enthusiast, and Tom Jones had distinguished 
himself at school simply by reversing the natu- 
ral order of things, and thrashing his ludi- 
magister. However, scholastic guidance was 
in no wise necessary to make them very agree- 
able one to the other. Adam and Eve (I mean 
the primevals| could have had no education 
worth mentioning ; it may be questioned 
whether it ever occurred to them that seventy 
pence were five and tenpence, or that cAemises 
ought not to be spelt shimes. You see they 
had no weekly washing-list. 

Watch was kept on the windy peak day 
after day, week after week ; but never a white 
sail came that way, night after night, day after 
day. The Troglodyte began to fancy there was 
some sort of necromancy, since many a length 



THE WATCHERS bF THE SEA. 1 67 

of days before ships had passed the island 
shore. As to Harold, he looked on ocean 
with a strange magnetical emotion ; as if he 
could see beneath its water the quaint old 
village, the landlord's daughter, and his 
father amid old books shut fast, saying, ** Sons 
run away, but books will last." But Tom 
and fair Miranda cared nought for the future, 
' since they shared a perfectly happy life, and 
knew that each to the other was loyal and 
true. They lived and loved, and watched 
and waited . not at all in haste for the good 
ship fated to carry them off to England. 

Miranda and Tom Jones without a doubt 
passed pleasant hours where that queer white 
flag fluttered. A thousand pleasant things 
they talked about; their lips a thousand curious 
fancies uttered. Tom used to. chaff" . Miranda 
used to pout sometimes, while overhead 
the strong storm muttered. But lovers little 
care for change of weather, being alone upon 
a hill together. 

These two were better off" than all the rest. 
If Tom's watch came by day, Miranda passed 
her day beside him, no unwelcome guest. She 
sat and worked, and looked across the vast 



1 68 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sea-levels, vexed with many a foamy crest. 
Tom used to wish that summer day might 
last always. Time's progress is a perfect 
pest when you are sitting on the turf beside 
the lady who is soon to be your bride. 

And when Tom watched at night she saw 
him off up to the top of the steep sea-cliff, 
carrying some slight refreshment. Let no 
reader scoff at such kind aid. When people 
think of marrying, they should not let mere 
pseudo-philosophic fancies goiide them. Fair 
Miranda, tarrying beside the flagstaff, had nor 
fear nor shame, being Tom's own property, 
except in name. 

Yes ; but I think that the pleasantest hour 
was when, in the morning, merry Miranda 
came and brought her lover his -breakfast : 
goats' milk . a. mighty can . ^and abundant 
grapes and bananas. Tom used to sit on the 
grass and be waited on. Tom used to like 
it. Can you not easily fancy the two, while 
the orient putple flushed a miraculous sky, 
and the sea was golden and sapphire ? There 
they sat like a king and a queen. They were 
king and queen then . royal owners of 
youth and of strength, and of beauty and 



THE WATCHERS OF THE SEA. 1 69 

courage* Tom ate his fruit like a prince of the 
earth, and swallowed his goats' milk far more 
gaily than wine is drunk in pale Piccadilly. 

When Miranda had taken her seat, Tom 
would lie at his lady's feet ; and the two 
would gaze across the sea, and wonder what 
the world would be. 

In this fashion did the two young people 
chatter nonsense from morn to noon, from 
noon to dewy eve. They were in love . 
which means, they saw each other and none 
else. Not unsuitable seemed they. Tom was 
a dauntless daring delicious dunce : Miranda 
was a versatile volatile vivacious vixen. 
Perhaps Miranda's notion of remaining with 
Tom on the Isle of Hawks would have been 
rather a good one, if possibly it could have 
been carried out. It was not possible. Tom 
Jones pined for England more than any 
one of the party beside. His second secret . 
which none save Miranda knew . impelled 
him homewards : beyond which there was 
the natural impulse of a young Englishman 
who had left England a boy, and now desired 
to return thither in the very prime and flower 
of manhood. 



1 70 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Miranda, my love," he said, ** you know 
my secret, and you agree with me that it 
should be kept till we reach England and 
see how matters stand £here. The thought 
of living a poetic life, all indolence and love, 
in this happy island, is tempting ; but I <can- 
not help thinking I was born for stronger 
work. I want to be back in England, and 
learn what England is like, and do my 
duty." 

" You are right, dearest love," said Mir- 
anda ; " and I am a naughty temptress. 
Punish me as you like, only don't cease to 
love me. I have led a lazy life, and the 
laziness of this island is lovely, and I cannot 
quite understand your desire to be doing 
something. But you are my master . do as 
you will." 

'* Ah ! " he said, drawing a long breath, 
"you are a darling . ^you are my own. I 
plague you, I know. But I am longing for 
life . ^longing to be in the old world . ^longing 
to set myself against other men, and to try 
whether they are stronger or weaker than I. 
You know, my beauty, what power I shall 
have to do good, . and God knows I desire to 



THE WATCHERS OF THE SEA. 1 7 1 

do good, . you know, and you only. It would 
be wicked of me to pass an ea^y lazy life, 
when I have such power within my grasp." 

" What you say is true," replied Miranda. 
" I have been misled by the lovely indolence 
of our time on this island. Oh ! I wish a ship 
would come ! I am as tired as you are now." 

That very evening a small steamer bound 
for Terceira passed, and perceived the signal, 
and stood in. There was general excitement, 
and a rapid rush to get together all that was 
necessary to carry away. The steamer sent 
a couple of boats, and the islanders entered 
them with their scanty luggage. The Trog- 
lodyte (whom now, as he is going to Europe, 
we may call Gilbert Tachbrook), his children 
Adam and Eve, Harold Tachbrook, Tom 
Jones, Miranda Tachbrook, were the pas- 
sengers. With regret they left the island ; 
it was a lovely spot, devoted to the Goddess 
of Indolence, if indeed there be any such 
goddess. 

Not far had the boats to go before reaching 
the steamer. Yet that short distance was 
not destined to be passed safely. Suddenly 
the sky darkened ; a black squall smote the 



172 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sea ; the boat in which Miranda and her 
father and Tom Jones were passengers was 
turned keel upwards just as they reached the 
steamer. There was unutterable confusion. 
Other boats were promptly lowered ; Harold 
Tachbrook was picked up quietly floating oh 
his back (a prince of swimmers ! ) holding his 
daughter's head easily above water. They 
were got on board as fast as possible^ When 
Miranda came to herself, her first inquiry was . 

" Where is Tom ? " 

Harold Tachbrook, tired with his exertions, 
had thought that of course Tom was safe 
enough. But the steamer had almost reached 
Terceira when Miranda awoke to ask this 
question, and Tom Jones was not on board. 
Strange ! for he was an unrivalled swimmer. 
Harold quieted his daughter, for her own 
sake, with a mild fiction, and then went 
astern and looked toward the island, and 
wondered whether his good friend had landed 
there. 

'* I '11 go straight back at once," he resolved. 



CHAPTER XV. 

LIVERPOOL. 

"Did Rome build Carthage? 
And were the Hannibals and' Scipios partners 
Ere they grew rivals ? Better than soft friends 
Are enemies keen." 

It has been said that England built New 
York. Nothing this to be proud of, perhaps ; 
for New York is not quite a model city, and 
differs widely from Athens or Rome, or even 
Babylon ; wherefore the builders of cities like 
Westminster and Winchester hiave no need 
to claim this New York as their own. It 
may, however, be admitted in return, that the 
United States built Liverpool. That town 
has never been a favourite of mine, though it 
is a place where you meet pleasant company. 



174 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS, 

It is a monotonous place. The Liverpool 
folk are very proud of themselves ; and there 
is a cosmopolitan air about them, brought in 
by the sea breeze, which comes refreshingly 
up the Mersey ; and they are singularly enter- 
prising in their own special groove. But they 
have one groove only. Some English cities 
have had a literature of their own : Liverpool 
has not yet reached this level, notwithstanding 
what has been done for it by Roscoe and the 
Broughs. 

The time seems to have altogether de- 
parted when towns like York, Bath, Bristol, 
were centres of country influence, of local 
culture, of literary and dramatic success. 
London has magnetised all the clever fellows. 
This is regretable. Country towns of reason- 
able magnitude give a brilliant man or a charm- 
ing woman better chances than they can find in 
what De Quincey aptly called " the Nation of 
London." Immense cities are self-destructive. 
Their west end is frivolous ; their east end is 
squalid ; their north and south are dreary and 
slow. All cities follow the great geographic 
law of movement westward, leaving behind 
them on the north and south the dull dwellings 



LIVERPOOL. 175 

of crass citizens. You can tell the man from 
his abode . the woman also. Wide is the dif- 
ference between Kensington and Stepney, be- 
tween HoUoway and Heme Hill, though all 
four are within four miles of the village where 
Queen Eleanor's Cross stood of old.. As the 
overgrown city pushes its horns westward, 
Greenford, and Hayes, and Hillington will 
be fashionable parts ; indeed, it will not 
surprise me if, in days to come, Stoke Pogis 
should be looked upon as East London, :and 
a house at Knowl Hill, now letting for fifty 
pounds a year, should be thought cheap at a 
thousand. 

What the Troglodyte predicted was very 
much what occurred to the Mighty Metro* 
polls. The sudden rise of the tide floated 
her off. Grainger, an experienced navigator, 
with some knowledge of Azore eccentricities, 
got his people on board the moment he saw 
the sea rising. The ship, all teak and iron, 
did her duty well ; and the voyage to Liver- 
pool was accomplished without difficulty. 
Clipped as she had been by the rocks . driven 
fiercely into a via by the wind-driven hammer 
of the wave . she bore the strain. 



1 76 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

The run from the Azores to England 
was in all respects fortunate and favourable. 
Grainger, loyal to his passengers, and a good 
king to his subjects, could not help regretting 
the inexorable necessity which had caused him 
to leave Harold Tachbrook and his daughter 
and Tom Jones behind. He determined to 
despatch a small steamer in search of them 
the moment he reached Liverpool. His only 
consolation was that both Tachbrook and 
Tom Jones were not easily alarmed, and 
would probably find their way home what- 
ever happened. 

As to the passengers, their opinions as to 
their missing fellow-travellers varied. The 
future Sir Edward Wilson was, on the whole, 
well pleased : those benighted people had 
never treated with enough reverence the 
illustrious gentleman who was going home to 
be knighted. Nor were his wife and daughter 
very sad : Miranda's beauty and grace had 
effaced their aristocratic air of the Antipodes, 
and had even lured from their side the 
elegant hope and heir of the house of Wilson. 
That same hope and heir is believed to have 
torn his dishevelled locks in the privacy of 



LIVERPOOL, ^ 177 

his own cabin. He had just begun to per- 
suade himself that he had made a sort of a 
kind of an impression on Miranda's virgin 
heart. 

Captain Stuart, though rather a humbug, 
showed real feeling on the occasion. Below 
the outer crust of this reckless adventurer 
there was a vein of chivalry ; and though h^ 
took chloroform when he thought of being 
drowned like a rat, he would have fought 
like a Bayard for a lady of Miranda's type. 
Cincinnatus Meunier rushed into verse, of 
course, and recited it with such redoubt- 
able fluency, that the sailors sent a round 
robin to the captain protesting that it was 
unlucky. 

The two little Mansard girls, whom 
Miranda had always treated with a kindness 
born of pity, yet with no pity perceptible in 
it, managed to make themselves miserable' 
all the way home ; but Leary the irrepres- 
sible, and Harry Loraine the immovable, did 
their utmost to console them, each in his 
different way. Leary made fun of the whole 
business. 

"Faith," he said, "it will be Robinson 

VOL. I M 



I 78 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Crusoe over again, just for a week or two. 
There 's plenty to eat on the island. Miss 
Tachbrook can cook like an angel, as any- 
body can see, and her father will catch fish 
and turn turtles, and Mr Jones will shoot all 
the birds of the air. Egad, I 'd like to be 
with them, only I should spoil sport ! I don't 
fliink Mr Tom and Miss Miranda would care 
for the third party when papa goes off 
to smoke his cigar." 

The girls could not help laughing at Leary's 
way of putting it. Loraine was graver. 

" I think they are safe," he said. " Both 
Tachbrook and his friend had knocked about 
the world a good deal, and knew what to do 
in a difficulty. As to Miss Tachbrook, I 
think she would be ready for anything that 
happened.'* 

Both the Miss Mansards enthusiastically 
agreed. 

When the Mighty Metropolis steamed into 
Liverpool, Captain Grainger was the hero of 
the hour, and all the reporters of all the papers 
wanted to " interview" him. But he wouldn't 
stand it ; he used stronger language than he 
had ever before been known to use, except 



LIVERPOOL. 1 79 

in the teeth of a gale ; he went off to charter 
a steamer in search of his missing passengers. 
The reporters, in default, went off to inter- 
view Sir (beg pardon, Mr) Edward Wilson. 
That illustrious personeity was nothing loth. 
He liked to be interviewed. It was a high 
tribute to his dignity. He was clear in his 
own mind . ("Observe, gentlemen, this is onFy 
the opinion of a person who has obtained 
merely colonial celebrity, but who nevertheless 
has been deemed worthy of the honour of 
knighthood by the singularly able advisers of 
Her Most Gracious Majesty") . ^that the 
Mighty Metropolis was not a vessel at all 
equivalent to perform the duties expected of 
it, and that the captain, though a most 
excellent man, was scarcely the right person 
to intrust with the care of passengers whose 
welfare was of importance to the world. 

"By the holy poker!" said an Irish reporter, 
when the magnificent Wilson had dismissed 
his deputation with a lofty courtesy that 
would befit a prime minister, "that man's 
delightful. He wants a big ship built specially 
for him. You '11 see he'll patronise the Queen 
when she knights him." 



1 80 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

A few days, and the^ passengers by the 
Mighty Metropolis had dispersed over the 
country. A few days, and the romantic 
adventure of that great steamship had ex- 
. hausted the , fluent pens of a few hundred 
journalists, and was as completely forgotten 
as the voyage of Jonah round the Cape of 
Good Hope. As to the aforesaid passengers, 
as we shall see little more of the majority, 
we may wish them farewell now. The little 
Mansard twins found their mother's mother 
a charming and loving old lady, with a kind 
of honeyed strictness about her, living in a 
quaint old country house of the Elizabethan 
sort. Their history is no affair of ours ; but 
I believe they are both happily married by 
this time. 

Leary, failing an offer from the Times^ 
stayed at Liverpool, and started a newspaper 
. people are always starting newspapers in 
Liverpool. Captain Stuart went to London ; 
so did the poet Meunier; so did Harry 
Loraine. They went by the same train, and 
smoked and talked all the way to town. 
Loraine was so amused with the aspirations 
of his comrades, that he asked them to 



LIVERPOOL. 1 8 1 

breakfast with him in the Albany next day. 
They accepted. For himself, he had tele- 
graphed to his servant to have dinner ready 
for him, and ready it was. 

When the breakfast-hour came, both Stuart 
and Meunier were punctual. Though Loraine 
had been to the other side of the world, 
everything was in perfect order. His people 
were accustomed to his ways: any morning, 
when he walked quietly out into Piccadilly 
and called a cab, he might be going away for 
an hour, or for a year. Any day he might 
appear without warning, and expect a good 
dinner to be served in an hour. 

This day, his guests enjoyed a pleasant 
breakfast, and there was much easy talk. 
Loraine quite understood these two men, 
neither of whom quite understood him. He 
saw that Stuart was a plausible fellow, with a 
desire to spend money, but with no knowledge 
of the right way of making it. He saw that 
Cincinnatus was an illiterate imitative man, 
who, having been flattered by fools in far 
latitudes and longitudes, was now come to 
London to show himself the greatest poet in 
the world. He smiled inwardly at both of 



1 82 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

them, listened to their talk, and gave them 
an excellent breakfast. 

Mr Wilson and family arrived in due time 
at the Grosvenor Hotel. They took a fur- 
nished house at Something Gate, Hyde Park. 
They were knighted. at least Sir Edward 
was ; but Rumour . wicked witch ! . declares 
that the magnificent Wilson family do not 
find themselves appreciated in London. The 
Colonial Secretary has not yet asked Sir 
Edward to dinner. Not a single duchess has 
left her card on Lady Wilson. The whole 
family are rapidly becoming democratic. 

I must not forget poor Jack Manly. His 
irascible, but generous father forgave him, 
saying . 

" Confound you. Jack ! you Ve good for 
nothing else : you must stay at home and 
live with me." 



CHAPTER XVL 

THE RETURN HOME. 

Raphael. His village is the best to every villager. 

The Roman erudite poet, reckless yachting-man. 
Thought Sirmio fairest of the world's peninsulas. 

AloneUe, This is the dreariest of existing villages. 

Raphael, Read, child I 

Alonette, 1 *d rather flirt. What can I read, papa ? 

Raphael, Here 's Villchius I}e Mysteriis Magicalibus . 
A most entrancing book. 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

When Harold and his party arrived at Ter- 
ceira, instant inquiry was made for a vessel 
that would take them to the Island of Hawks. 
This was easily found. It was agreed that 
the Troglodyte should remain at Terceira till 
Harold returned, as it was necessary to buy 
some clothes for his children and himself, now 
that he had given up his wild life. Harold 
begged Miranda also to stay ; but she was too 



1 84 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

anxious about Tom, so she accompanied her 
father. When they arrived at the island, they 
made their way as quickly as possible to the 
Troglodyte's cavern, hoping to find Tom there. 
They knew that Tom; being such an excel- 
lent swimmer, would be sure to find his way 
to the island, and that he would depend upon 
their sending him means of escape. But they 
could not find him. The cavern was just as 
they left it, with the various rude household or 
cavernhold implements which the Troglodyte 
had used lying about. There was no sign 
that any one had been there since they left. 
They wandered about the island till it was 
dark ; they shouted, but were only answered 
by the echoes of their own voices. They de- 
termined to search once more on the next day; 
so they slept in the vessel, just off the island. 
The next day's search was as fruitless; so 
they left and turned back to Terceira sadly. 
But Miranda was not without hope. " Do 
not despair, papa," she said ; ** I know he is 
safe. Perhaps we shall find him at Terceira 
when we return ;" for Harold had asked the 
Troglodyte to have inquiries made of any 
vessels that came in, whether Tom had been 



THE RETURN HOME. 1 85 

picked up. Every minute Miranda was 
saying to herself, ** I know he is safe. He 
cannot be drowned." Perhaps she was not 
altogether uninfluenced by the strong spirit of 
her ancestress Sobieska, a spirit which had 
while on earth found entrance into higher 
spheres. When they reached Terceira there 
was no news of Tom. Little Adam and Eve 
were looking disconsolate in ordinary costume, 
even more uncomfortable than a labouring 
man looks in his Sunday clothes. The Trog- 
lodyte was already tired of civilised life, and 
was wishing himself back at the Island of 
Hawks. Sorry as he was that no trace had 
been found of Tom, he could not help being 
eager to ask how his island was looking. 

" There is one thing very odd ^about the 
poor fellow," said the Troglodyte, " you say 
he is no relation to us, Harold ?" 

"None whatever. His name is Jones. 
We have been knocking about together for 
eighteen years, and he told me his history . 
what little there was to tell . for he was only 
fourteen when he came to Australia, and he 
had run away from school." 

" Of course, you must know," said the 



1 86 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Troglodyte ; " but if I had not been told his 
name was Jones, I should have said it was 
Tachbrook. He is marvellously like the 
Tachbrooks." 

Miranda was listening eagerly to this, when 
her father said . 

" What do you think about it, Miranda ? " 

Miranda seemed a little confused as she 
said . 

"O, I have not seen any Tachbrooks, 
except you and cousin Gilbert and myself.'* 

It was arranged that they should go to 
England at once. Tom Jones, if picked up 
by any vessel touching at Terceira, would 
have reached there ere this. Their hope was 
that they should find him in England, v It 
was a sad journey for them the next few days. 
Harold had looked forward to seeing his 
father, and Miranda to seeing the grandfather 
of whom she had heard so much. And Tom 
had talked so much of going to Rothescamp. 
He was" always asking questions about the 
place. It had been so often described to him 
by Harold, that he seemed to know every 
inch of it. And now Harold must go there 
without him. 



THE RETURN HOME. 1 87 

Harold had one hope. The Captain of 
the vessel which brought them from the 
Island of Hawks to Terceira said that a 
strange yacht was see^ off the Azores at the 
time that Tom was missed. " She was going 
fast, as if racing," the Captain had said. 

When our travellers reached Liverpool, 
they at once sent notice to Dr Septimus of 
their arrival. This was happy news for the 
Doctor ; for but a few days before, he had had 
a visit from Captain Grainger, who told him 
how he had been obliged to get his ship off, 
and leave Harold and Miranda behind. The 
Doctor knew he should see his children soon, 
but he had not hoped to see them yet. 
When the Captain came down to Rothes- 
camp, he was, as may be supposed, well 
received. Indeed, the Doctor and the Cap- 
tain seemed to become old friends at once, 
so thoroughly did they understand each other. 
The Captain had sailed many treacherous 
seas, and taken ships through many terrible 
perils: the Doctor had saved many human 
creatures from falling too early into the 
grasp of death. They had their common 
measure. To fight a ship thrpugh a storm, 



1 88 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

or a soul through a fever, is of equal 
moment. 

Captain Grainger had told the Doctor that 
Harold had found some relation on the 
island. "What relation can it be ?" thought 
the Doctor ; " surely it is not Gilbert come 
to life again, he has disappeared so many 
years. Perhaps it's that little rascal of 
Priscilla's. I wonder who it is ?** 

So when Harold telegraphed from Liver- 
pool to say that he had arrived, and should 
come home the next day, the Doctor tele- 
graphed back, and said . 

" Bring your new-found relation, if he is 
with you." 

This puzzled Harold, who had intended to 
surprise his father by introducing cousin 
Gilbert to him. 

" Who can have told my father ? " he said 
. " Captain Grainger, perhaps. At any rate, 
it must be some one from the Mighty Metro- 
polis, which shows that at least some of the 
passengers arrived safely in England." 

" I wonder whether I shall find any more 
relations besides my grandfather when I get 
to Rothescamp," said Miranda. 



THE RETURN HOME, 1 89 

"No, I think not," said Harold. "We 
have some distant relations who have never 
visited Rothescamp for years. The present 
Baronet lives abroad, and, I believe, was never 
married." 

The old Doctor's house brightened up 
as it had not done for many a year. The 
lights were twinkling from many of the 
windows when the travellers arrived. The 
Doctor, at his books, was trying to appear as 
if nothing unusual were going to happen. But 
he did not seem quite to know which book 
it was he wanted. He found it necessary to 
go to the book-case often ; and as he passed 
the window, he would stand for a minute 
and listen for the sound of wheels. Then he 
would find that his spectacles seemed misty, 
and wanted removing frequently. Then he 
rang for his housekeeper, to ask if she was 
quite sure the bedrooms were aired . for it 
was long since he had had visitors ; and was 
she sure that everything was provided for 
the young lady which she should require ? 

Now they arrive, and the old man goes 
out to meet them. The housekeeper, who is 
standing back in the hall, waiting while intro- 



190 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

ductions are going on, catches sight of two 
rather wild-looking children. 

" Lawk a mercy !" she thought to herself, 
" what shall we do with them two children in 
the house ? " 

And I think before they left the poor old 
woman was nearly frantic ; for they climbed 
up the staircase, and up any other dangerous 
place, like cats, and they asked such wonderful 
questions of the housekeeper, into whose 
charge they were given. 

" I say, Mrs Dawson," said Adam, " why 
does everybody wear clothes here ? " 

" Clothes, my dear, why, you wouldn't go 
without them, would you ? " 

" We never used to wear any in our home." 

Mrs Dawson thought the sooner "them 
young savages " went away to the outlandish 
parts where they came from the better. 
'^ And only to think of them being real Tach- 
brooks,'' she said ; " I am sure their mother 
must have been one of those nigger savages 
we read of." 

The Doctor was delighted with Miranda. 
Gilbert he had not seen for many years, 
and had supposed he was dead. He, who 



THE RETURN HOME. I9I 

was SO fond of staying at home himself, liked 
to meet men who had seen the world, and 
sought adventure and found it. He and the 
Troglodyte would chatter pleasantly, and for 
hours. 

" And now, we shall be having you at 
Rothescamp when Sir Arthur dies, I sup- 
pose," said the Doctor. 

" Yes, I suppose I am the heir, as I under- 
stand Sir Arthur never married." 

" I think it is generally understood that 
Sir Arthur never married, but there is some 
mystery in the family, and there is just a 
chance that your title may be disputed. But 
it will depend only on one person, who has 
not been heard of for about twenty years, 
and is supposed to have died long ago. 
Besides, he was a boy when he was lost, and 
it might be difficult to identify him, suppose 
any one should lay claim to the title. But it 
is such an unlikely thing that I need not tell 
the story; and indeed I think it better not 
to tell it You will at any rate disappoint 
the man who supposed he was heir, the 
son of a nephew of mine, whom I have not 
seen for years, and who is an extravagant 



< 



192 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

worthless fellow. I think you had better 
look him up, and let him know of your 
existence, or he may dispute your identity 
when the time comes, and waste some of the 
estate in law business." 

The Doctor was disappointed that Tom 
did not arrive with the party. Harold, in his 
letters to his father, was accustomed to men- 
tion himself and Tom always together, so 
that the Doctor had learnt to think of him 
as part of Harold. Miranda persuaded her 
grandfather that he could not be lost, and 
that some day he would surprise them by 
arriving there. 

It may well be imagined that Miranda, 
glad though she was to see Rothescamp and 
her g^randfather for the first time, was melan- 
choly about our friend Tom Jones. It is 
questionable whether she felt his loss so 
much as her father . ^his tried comrade of 
eighteen years. A young girl's love is a 
pretty thing; but it fortunately does not, 
with innocent children, ripen too rapidly into 
passion. Hence, though Miranda and Tom 
Jones had fully understood each other, and 
though Miranda felt for a while that some- 






THE RETURN HOME. 1 93 

thing had passed from her existence, she grew 
in time of serener temper, and could not help 
feeling pleasure in the beauty of Rothescamp 
scenery, and in the happiness which her 
father s return and her own gave to Doctor 
Septimus Tachbrook. The old gentleman, 
while he had borne his solitude well through 
all those years, consoling himself probably by 
the thought that he was doing a weighty 
work in the world, while his son was merely 
producing money and a daughter, could not 
well be otherwise than pleased with the 
daughter, though caring nothing about the 
money. For Miranda was both gentle and 
sprightly, both duteous and vivacious; and 
the old Doctor saw in her character a proof 
that the life of the Tachbrook race was not 
extinct. 



VOL. I. N 



CHAPTER XVII. 

VOYAGERS AT HOME. 

** How many a weary traveller, soiled with dust, 
After long miles beneath a pitiless sun 
On white monotonous roads, catches a glimpse 
Of the remote blue ocean, all alive 
"With yachts and trawlers . a great war-ship spreading 
Canvas like snow on masts like mighty trees, 
And thinks, Ah ! surely on the sea is rest I 
Tail on the mainland^ rest upon the main I " 

A TRILLION is defined by Dr Johnson as "a 
million of millions of millions." A mathe- 
matician might more conveniently describe 
it as the number whose common logarithm 
is 1 8. It .would be a remarkably pleasant 
amount to possess in sovereigns, if only thfere 
were gold enough in the world to coin it. 
The trillionaire might turn patriot, and pay 
the National Debt without feeling it, much 
to the relief of the over-burdened taxpayers. 
Fancy the sensation in the House if the 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. I95 

Right Honourable Robert Lowe could get 
up and announce that Sir Theophilus Tril- 
lion, Baronet, had sent him a cheque on 
Drummond's for what the French call a 
milliard ; so that taxation would. cease to be 
necessary for the present. Nobody would 
begrudge the generous trillionaire a peerage 
and a statue. 

People who have lived much at sea find 
the land unpleasant in certain respects. It 
is noisy; it is infested by tramps, and tax- 
gatherers, and telegraph posts ; it is mono- 
tonous in its fixity. Day after day you see 
the same place and go through the same 
routine. If one had the inexhaustible trillion, 
right pleasant would it be to launch a yacht 
that resembled a floating island. There 
might be gardens on deck, and groves of 
trees ; and why not a Rotten Row for eques- 
trian exercise ? We do not, as yet, utilise 
the sea. Byron has made two false state- 
ments in a breath in one of his weakest, and 
therefore most admired, passages. He tells 
us that . 

'^ Man marks the earth with ruin ; his control 
Stops with the shore." 



196 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

To mark the earth with ruin can hardly be 
deemed a primary function of the race which 
builds cities and plants gardens, while it is 
quite certain that the sea has been controlled 
ever since Noah launched his ark on the 
maddened and tormented waters . ever since 
Jason led forth his band of wanderers. Still 
our control might be carried further. Build 
vaster ships . sail on great circles . calculate 
cyclones . then the sea may become a habit- 
able country. 

Miranda quite pined for the sea. She 
felt imprisoned at Rothescamp-in-the- Valley. 
She longed to wander over the interminable 
waste of ocean in search of Tom J ones, whom 
she felt certain she should meet again, not- 
withstanding his strange disappearance. Fain 
would she have persuaded her father to start 
in search of her lost lover, but it was not to 
be expected that he should desert the Doctor 
in his old age. So Miranda perforce re- 
mained at Rothescamp, and waited, with a 
firm belief, strengthened by her grandfather's 
superstition, that Tom would return in time. 

Doctor Tachbrook had by this time wholly 
relinquished his practice . seldom, indeed. 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. 1 97 

went beyond the limits of the quaint old 
garden behind his house. It was his delight 
to wander there on fine afternoons, and to 
hear his son spin yarns interminable. He 
had lived all his long life at home ; he liked 
to follow in imagination Harold's wild adven- 
tures in the world's remotest seas. 

Harold, on the other hand, was eager to 
hear whether anything further was discover- 
able concerning Mary Fane. Edith's last 
thoughts rested on this girl ; and though so 
many years had passed, Harold was loyal to 
his lost wife, and longed to find the school 
friend whom she loved so well. 

"She is untraceable," said Doctor Septi- 
mus. 

" I shall make another trial, for all that," 
quoth Harold ; " I will find her, ifsh^ lives." 

Meanwhile Gilbert Tachbrook, better known 
as the Troglodyte, made himself known to 
Messrs Sherwood and Sherwood, hereditary 
solicitors to the estate, who were almost the 
only people who knew anything about the pre- 
sent baromet, and their knowledge was limited. 
Though Rothescamp rumour placed him in a 
lunatic asylum, and though he was well quali- 



198 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

fied for such a residence, he was actually at 
Venice. He lived under an assumed name 
in a palace on the Grand Canal, and was 
famed for lying in bed all day, and breakfast- 
ing at sunset. Though sumptuous in his habits, 
Sir Arthur lived within the income of the 
Rothescamp estates. Soon after Gilbert 
Tachbrook had called on Messrs Sherwood, 
he received a note from them with intelligence 
of Sir Arthur's death. He died intestate, 
and there was rather a large accumulation of 
personal property. 

The old legal firm of Lincoln's Inn were 
quite willing to acknowledge Gilbert Tach- 
brook as the heir, but there arose an un- 
expected difficulty. One day an elderly 
lady in deep mourning called on Mr Sher- 
wood, junior . junior by courtesy, for he was 
a man more staid and sagacious than his 
father . sending in a card as Mrs Tachbrook. 
Sherwood, junior, an attorney not easily sur- 
prised, was on this occasion slightly startled, 
for his visitor announced. herself as daughter- 
in-law of the late Sir Arthur Tachbrook, and 
widow of his only son Harold. 

*' Sir Arthur Tachbrook died unmarried," 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. 1 99 

said Sherwood, junior, with dignified so- 
lemnity, quite believing the mysterious lady 
an impostor. 

" Sir Arthur did nothing of the kind," she 
replied, coolly. " He was married in Ireland. 
He had one son, to whom I was married at 
the church of Saint Edgar the King, in the 
city of London. And my only son is the 
present baronet and owner of the estates . 
Sir Harold Tachbrook." 

Sherwood, junior, though startled, was not 
displeased. He saw chances of a lawsuit. 
The magic eighty pence, so easily multi- 
plicable into thousands of pounds, affected 
his imagination. Could there be any truth 
in the story told by this lady in sable 
clothing? An. Irish marriage . invalid, per- 
haps : infinite doubts loomed in the distance, 
suggested by the question of religion. Then 
where was the present claimant? and why 
h^d he sent his mother to represent him ? 
These last questions Sherwood, junior, put in 
a quiet manner, but received from the lady 
this curt reply . 

" Sir Harold Tachbrook, Baronet, of 
Rothescamp, will be here when requisite." 



200 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Sherwood, junior, could only reply . 
** I shall be very glad to see him." 
" You will kindly take from me the notice 
that he claims the title and estates. As 
solicitors to the family, your firm will not, of 
course, act with hostility to the real heir." 
" Ah ! but who is the real heir ?'* 
" My son. Investigate the question. Your 
duty to the estate is to ascertain the truth." 

" I admit this ; but I should wish to consult 
my father and partner before deciding what 

» 

steps to take. After that, I should be glad 
to see either yourself or your son. My father 
is out of town, but will return in a few days." 
" I will call again this day week." 
She passed out of the office in a stately 
fashion, leaving Sherwood, junior, slightly per- 
plexed. He wrote to his father, who was 
staying in Devonshire ; and the old gentle- 
man was rather more puzzled than his son. 
Was it possible Sir Arthur married without 
a word to anybody ? The old lawyer could 
not deny that possibility. He had known 
many mad clients, but none madder than Sir 
Arthur Tachbrook. 

Sherwood, senior, came to town earlier than 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. 201 

he had intended, leaving reluctantly the river 
Dart for the river Thames. The matter 
was important. He and his son having held 
counsel together, sent for the Troglodyte, 
wjio was inhabiting a furnished cavern at 
the Clarendon. Before their client the two 
lawyers placed the case as clearly as they 
could. He listened and laughed. 

" I think the story likely enough. We are 
a mad ra:ce. If this youngster is the right 
heir, in God's name let him have it. I re- 
member that old Dr Tachbrook hinted at 
something of this sort, but he said that the 
young man entirely disappeared twenty years 
ago." 

" The thing must be thoroughly proved," 
said Sherwood, junior. " There was some- 
thing about that woman that struck me as 
not quite straightforward. At any rate, we 
must see her son first, and ascertain what he 
knows of his position.'* 

" It is odd Sir Arthur, if he married, never 
mentioned it to me/' said Sherwood, senior. 
" I was his friend as well as his lawyer, and 
he gave me confidential information of all 
his scrapes. That he should marry and have 



202 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

a son, and take no steps to establish his son's 
legitimacy, seems almost incredible. Though 
a very careless man, he had strong opinions 
in regard to the rights and duties of heredi- 
tary landowners. He was proud of the Tach- 
brook blood and history." 

*^ It is curious," said the Troglodyte. *' How- 
ever, all I desire is to get at the truth ; if the 
old lady's story is true, the sooner it is estab- 
lished the better. I have no desire to occupy 
a position that is not mine." 

The lawyers arranged that Gilbert Tach- 
brook should meet the lady in mourning 
when she next called. She came, to the day 
and hour. She brought with her a macilent 
man between thirty and forty, with lank black 
hair, a sallow complexion, short thin legs, 
feet and hands absurdly large. The hands 
were flat, unwashed, with bitten nails and 
diamond rings. This uninviting personage 
was introduced as Sir Harold Taxrhbrook. 
He looked rather uncomfortable, but put on 
an air of baronetcy, and tried to patronise 
everybody. 

Mrs Tachbrook's story was clear enough. 
Sir Arthur was married at Athlone to a Miss 



VOYAGERS AT ilOME. 203 

Geraldine, of the famous old family so called ; 
date not precisely known, but easily obtain- 
able ; marriage at the famous Protestant 
church which was celebrated in rhyme by 
some wicked wit . 

" High church, 
Low steeple, 
Dirty town, 
Proud people." 

Sir Arthur had one son by this lady, who 
was born abroad, and was named Harold. 
Lady Tachbrbok died young; Sir Arthur 
turned misanthropic, and sent his son to 
England to be out of his way. He was put 
under the care of a Mrs HartnoU, who kept 
a school at Greenwich. There he remained 
until he grew towards manhood, his father 
paying a hundred a year for his maintenance. 
There, at about eighteen, he fell in love, or 
fancied he fell in love, or perhaps was or- 
dered to fall in love, with Priscilla HartnoU, 
several years his senior, daughter of the 
Greenwich schoolmistress. That he married 
her against his will seemed clear to the 
lawyers from Priscilla's way of telling her 
story (for this, of course, was Priscilla, the 



204 MIRANDA ,* A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

dignified female in black) ; the fact being 
that when he was seven or eight, and she 
seventeen or eighteen, she had been a hard 
taskmistress to him, teaching him spelling 
and grammar and geography, not without 
stripes, wherefore at eighteen he submitted 
to marry her without venturing to murmur. 
On his marriage Sir Arthur withdrew the 
hundred a year, and Priscilla began to fear 
she had made a mistake ; but when he came 
of age his father sent him a cheque for fifteen 
thousand pounds, which he said was his 
mothers property, and thereafter took no 
further notice .of him. 

When he got this money he became mutin- 
ous, and rebelled against the lady who had 
married him. He was a weak member of a 
strong family. He was obstinate and spite- 
ful; his wife, who thought she had done a 
clever thing, found only that she had made a 
great mistake. He treated her brutally. 
They had one boy, on whom he visited his 
4islike for his mother. He gradually grew 
worse and worse, and finally died of delirium 
tremens in a London hospital. 

This is a brief summary of the story tojd 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. 205 

by Priscilla Tachbrook to Gilbert Tachbrook 
and Messrs Sherwood & Sherwood. It 
bore the stamp of truth. Many points she 
was enabled to establish by old letters which 
she had carefully preserved. When her story 
was finished, the Troglodyte was first to 
speak. 

" I think, Mrs Tachbrook, that your case 
is too strong for me. All I want is that 
right should be done ; and if your son is the 
head of our house, I shall rejoice to see 
him in his proper place." 

*' You speak like a gentleman," said Sher- 
wood, senior ; ** and it is the right way in 
which family matters should be arranged; 
but we, for our own sakes as well as yours, 
must carefully investigate the records of mar- 
riage and birth. These investigations, Mrs 
Tachbrook, shall be made as quickly as pos- 
sible ; and we shall be glad if you will assist 
us in any points within your cognisance." 

Sherwood, junior, had said nothing all this 
time ; he had been thinking: He was not a 
rapid man, but he was adroit and safe. 
Something about Sir Harold Tachbrook (so 
called) jarred on his instinct. There had 



206 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

been lots of fools among the Tachbrooks, 
. strong ^unilies produce fools ; but this man 
looked vulgar, and old families do not pro- 
duce vulgarity* So Sherwood, junior, with a 
look at his fether, which that wary old gentle- 
man understood, said to the claimant . 

'*Will you look in to-morrow, and have 
some luncheon with me? I should like to 
talk over matters quietly.** 

The invitation was accepted, and Priscilla 
and her son went away. The lady looked 
triumphant. 

" So I may give up my chance of the title 
and estates," said Gilbert Tachbrook, laugh- 
ingly. "Never mind, I'll tronsole myself 
with your sherry and Prague* biscuits. How 
is it lawyers always have such dry sherry ? " 

" They do a dry business,"' said Sherwood, 
senior. " But, Tom, my boy, what 's your idea 
for having that greedy-looking feUow to lunch 
with you to-morrow? Baronet or not, I 
should not care to lunch with him." 

"He makes me ashamed of the Tach- 
brooks," said Gilbert, 

" I don't think he need," remarked Sher- 
ood, junior, quietly. 



VOYAGERS AT HOME. 207 

" Why, he 's a manifest cad." 

"Yes; but not a manifest Tachbrook. 
There is something odd about the affair." 

" The woman's story is straightforward," 
said Sherwood, senior. 

" Yes ; she tells a certain amount of truth, 
but I think it is mixed with lies. That Sir 
Arthur married Miss Geraldine, I believe, 
and that their son married . or, rather, was 
married by . this appalling woman. Poor 
devil ! Fancy being forcibly married by the 
educational female who had walloped you in 
your childhood 1 Dreadful fate I *' 

** But what is your hypothesis ?" asked 
SherwQod, senior. 

" I am not sure that I have reached one. 
I have a kind of attenuated impression that 
this man is not a Tachbrook." 

"He doesn't look like one," said Gilbert. 

" No," replied Sherwood, junior. " So 
I want to find out two things. Did this 
woman have a son ? Does anybody know 
this man ? I will drop a line to Dr Tach- 
brook, and ask if he knows anything of this 
business. The first point we shall establish 
by the registers probably. As to the second 



208 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

. well, I may know more after we have 
lunched together." 

" Come and dine with me afterwards," said 
the Troglodyte. " I shall be glad of your 
news. There 's some good claret in , Bond 
Street." 

" With pleasure." 

Sherwood, junior, when he had attended to 
a little business, put himself into a hansom, 
and found his way to Scotland Yard. There 
he meet Inspector Ubique. 

" Ubique," he said, " I want to find out 
who somebody is. I am going to give him 
some luncheon between one and two to- 
n\orrow at the Pall Mall. You could manage 
to pass through the room and take a look at 
him, couldn't you ?" 

** Easily. I '11 see it 's done, sir." 

" Thanks. I '11 come down for your report 
in the course of the afternoon." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

AN INSPECTION. 
"Homo trium literarum." 

The attorney-at-law cannot always pick his 
company; and Sherwood, junior, having gen- 
tlemanly proclivities, felt that, by inviting the 
quasi Sir Harold to lunch with him, he was 
doing more than ordinary legal service. But 
he did not believe in this man, and he did not 
want to see the great estate of Tachbrook fall 
into wrong hands. Hence he threw himself 
into the matter with energy unusual. He 
treated his guest with as much courtesy as he 
could command; but it was not without a 
shudder he sat at the same table with him, 
disgusted by his dirt and diamonds, and ob- 
VOL. I. o 



210 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

serving that the attentive waiters looked also 
disgusted. Luckily there were few persons 
in the room at this hour; and so it was 
chiefly the waiters* criticism that discomposed 
Mr Sherwood. He, however, consoled him- 
self with a good glass of wine, which he 
administered freely to his companion, desir- 
ing to develop his loqug^city. This had its 
effect. At first very shy, Sir Harold warmed 
into garrulity, and was soon telling Sherwood, 
juriior, most amazing adventures which had 
happened to him in all parts of the world. 
The lawyer listened with avidity. 

So did somebody else. They had only 
just finished an anchovy salad, and were en- 
joying the accompanying Montrachet, when 
a middle-aged clergyman took a seat at the 
nearest table. He had a companion, a re- 
tiring young lady, dressed with elegant 
simplicity, who looked like his daughter. 
The divine ordered a quiet refection, which 
he took leisurely, and without much inter- 
ruption of talk. He was so seated that Sher- 
wood, junior, could scarcely perceive him, 
while Sherwood's guest was almost face to 
face with him. But the said guest saw no- 



AN INSPECTION. 2 1 1 

thing, save "an old fogy of a parson," as 
probably he would have described him ; cer- 
tainly recognised not the keenest detective 
eyes that ever London saw. 

And who was the parson's daughter ? 
Well, Mr Inspector Ubique has an orphan 
niece, whom he, a bachelor, adopted years 
ago, and who has entered into the romance 
and mystery of his profession, and kept his 
diary of discovery. The worthy and astute 
inspector is not so keen of hearing as he was 
once ; his niece s rather nice looking little 
ears often do shrewd service when there is 
anything difficult to find out. Moreover, 
there are delicate enigmas wherein lady ad- 
venturers are concerned . feminine creatures 
who dress fashionably and aim at a distin- 
guished style. Such game has to be tracked 
in exclusive coverts . ^in places where it seems 
as surprising to mark it down as to find a cor- 
morant close to the tree of knowledge. Miss 
Lucy Ubique, though an uncovenanted and 
unrecognised servant of the Government, had 
once or twice done signal service. She wore 
this day a very handsome gold watch, given 
her by a Countess, whom she had saved from 



212 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

being the victim of a clever conspiracy. Her 
uncle is a man of remarkable capacity, yet he 
owes much of his good fortune and high 
repute to the acumen of his niece. 

The apparent parson and his supposititious 
daughter ate their quiet cutlets with a pint of 
claret between them, while the assumed baro- 
net and his legal entertainer went through a 
series of courses, and mixed their wines reck- 
lessly. Sir Harold talked recklessly. He 
described e:^travagant adventures in coun- 
tries seldom traversed. He had shot lions, 
caught condors in figure-of-four traps, climbed 
Andes, been buried in earthquakes. That 
the fellow was romancing was clear to his 
auditors ; but every now and then an acci- 
dental truth crept into his farrago of lies. 
Those scraps of truth betrayed him. It is 
, an adage that liars should have long memo- 
ries ; it may further be said that a liar, to suc- 
ceed in his vocation, should never tell truth. 

The country parson's luncheon was over 
first ; indeed, Sherwood, junior, had much 
difficulty in bringing his entertainment to any 
termination.' The quasi-baronet did not tire 
of eating, drinking, and talking, and it was 



AN INSPECTION. 2 1 3 

With a feeling of great relief that the lawyer, 
late in the afternoon, got him into a cab, and 
saw the last of him. This done, he drove off 
to find his friend the inspector. 

" I hardly knew you at first," said Sher- 
wood ; " you looked frightfully respectable. 
What do you thing of my man ? " 

" I know he 's a scamp," said Ubique. " I 
did not at first recognise him, though there 
was something in his face familiar to me ; but 
my niece gave me the office." 

" Your niece looks a very charming girl," 
said Sherwood. 

" She ^s very good, and she *s wonderfully 
sharp. She 's a regular actress, and can go 
into any sort of company as if she belonged 
to them. She twigged this fellow almost 
directly ; but he used to have carrotty hair, 
and now it's as black as if he had dipt it in 
an inkbottle. But he has a queer twitch of 
the left eyelid if you notice him carefully ; 
he had it fifteen years ago, and ink won't 
cure that." 

" But who is he ? " asked Sherwood, with 
perhaps more impatience than befits a lawyer. 

" At that time he went by the name of 



214 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Moses Hyam. He was a clerk ; robbed his 
master ; got seven years. We lost sight of 
him altogether, and thought he was dead or 
turned honest . dead most likely. But a 
couple of years ago he turned up in London 
again, and made an honest livelihood as a 
writer of begging-letters. He writes a lovely 
hand . two or three lovely hands, I may say. 
Sometimes he is a distressed author ; some- 
times a widow with many small brats ; some- 
times a curate in a consumption ; but his 
favourite part is being a young lady of high 
position, who has been ruined by a scoundrel, 
who induced her to run away with him, 
though he had a wife already living, and who 
dares not now return to her ancestral home. 
This dodge is almost infallible. We found 
him out in it, and stopped about a hundred 
letters with post-office orders in them; but 
he was too quick for us, and got out of the 
way. I have seen nothing of him since till 
to-day." 

" He professes to be Sir Harold Tachbrook, 
Baronet, and heir to an immense property. 
A person who calls herself his mother has 
been at our office with a plausible story of 



AN INSBECTION. 2 1 5 

her having married the son of the late baro- 
net, and maintains that this is her^ son by 
him. I fear her story is true to some extent ; 
but I can t think that fellow can be a Tach- 
brook." 

" I 've seen some rum baronets," said the 
inspector, sagaciously. 

" Yes ; and so have I. But all the Tach- 
brooks I know or have known, though often 
eccentric, have been gentlemen." 

" It *s very odd the lady should call him 
her son if he isn't. Did she have a son at 
all ? '' 

" That is a most important point,'* said 
Sherwood. " There are several questions we 
must look into, and I think you had better 
come and see me some time to-morrow, 
when I may ask you for more help. I must 
be off now to dine with Gilbert Tachbrook, 
whom I believe to be the true baronet." 

" You know he 's a Tachbrook, then ? " 

"No mistaking him. He looks like a 
family portrait stepped out of its frame. Ask 
your niece to accept this trifle to buy her a 
locket or a bracelet. Some day or other I 
should like you to bring her to Richmond or 



2l6 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Hampton Court. I have a great fancy to 
hear some of the stories I am sure she could 
tell." 

Sherwood, junior, drove rapidly back to his 
own rooms for hasty ablution, and was only 
just in time for the Troglodyte's dinner. 

" I have made so copious a lunch with our 
baronet," said the lawyer, ** that I hope you 
are going to give me the very simplest of 
dinners." 

" I am," said the dweller in a cave. 
" Oysters, with chablis ; clear turtle, with old 
Madeira ; a haunch of Exmoor mutton, with 
Heidseck; a grouse, with Lafitte. That's 
all you '11 get." 

" I feel already starved," said the attorney ; 
" you will find in your bill of costs by and 
by- 

To attending you at dinner at the Clarendon, 13 4 

To cab hire, 17 6 

To headache next mommg, . . . 6 8" 

.* All right ! " said the Troglodyte, " I '11 
pay: a humorous lawyer is worth his hire. 
Come, let us try the oysters." 

Gilbert Tachbrook, having lived so long on 
an island in solitude, had acquired two most 



AN INSPECTION. 2 1 ^ 

enviable faculties. He could live without 
gossip ; he could live without anxiety . ^he 
was self-contained. It was an apophthegm of 
his that nothing which can happen to-morrow 
is worth a wise man's consideration to-day. 
As to the Tachbrook title and estates, he 
cared nothing so far as his own interests 
were concerned. When, by and by, Sher- 
wood, junior, told him all he had discovered 
concerning the claimant, the Troglodyte's 
only feeling of disgust was that possibly this 
swindler might by ill-hap be a Tachbrook. 
His chance of the estate gave him no greater 
concern than the price of the wine he was 
drinking. 

When they came to a tranquil cigar, with 
the mocha, Gilbert Tachbrook said. 

" I shall leave this matter entirely to you, 
Mr Sherwood. My sole wish is that the 
rightful heir should obtain the estate ; but I 
certainly shall regret to find the rightful heir 
a swindler and a felon. I hope better things. 
However, I am in your hands, and I give 
you full authority to act for me." 

" I will try to do you full justice," said 
Sherwood. " I cannot believe this man has 



2 1 8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

any connection with your family. I shall 
make inquiries at once into Mrs Tachbrook's 
history." 

" Do what you like. Don't trouble me 
more than is necessary. I am going to the 
Channel Islands to-morrow, and will give 
you an address." 

"The Channel Islands!" 

** Yes ; Sark. You may have heard that, 
though I am an ancient mariner, I have a 
couple of young children to look after. My 
good cousin, Doctor Tachbrook, wanted the 
young heathens to come to his place ; but I 
wouldn't have him bothered in his old age, 
so they have been at a boarding-house on 
Wimbledon Common. But, in answer to an 
advertisement, I have heard of a Miss Delisle, 
at Sark, a wonderfully ingenious person, whose 
mission it is to civilise small pagans." 

" At so much a-year ?" said Sherwood. 

" Of course. The labourer is worthy of 
her hire. Now these two children, who are 
called Adam and Eve, have lived in the water 
from infancy. They know nothing except 
what they have found out for themselves. 
They are amphibious. They have lived un- 



AN INSPECTION. 2 1 9 

clothed till we entered the realms of decorum. 
They are a couple of superb little animals, 
and I quite shudder at the notion of educating 
them. Still, it must be done. Little Adam, 
you know, may be Sir Adam Tachbrook, if 
the other fellow turn out a failure." 

" I shall be greatly interested in the future 
development of these children; but what 
cause have you for sending them to this 
person at Sark ? What do you know about 
her?" 

" I have made full inquiries. She is a lady 
of about forty, of good family and means, 
with a special faculty for educating children 
who have been warped or neglected. There 
is some romance of disappointment about her 
early life which has caused her to find for 
herself an unusual occupation. She seems, 
from all I hear, to have amazing powers of 
insight and of control. There are children 
who. are thought stupid, because the exact 
things they could do well are never given 
them to do. This is one sort of problem she 
solves. There are also children who become 
little rebels for want of sensible treatment : 
they are either coaxed too much or castigated 



220 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

too much. She has discovered the via 
media.'^^ 

" She must be a remarkable woman/* quoth 
Sherwood. 

" So I think. I am going to take these 
youngsters over from Southampton to-morrow 
night, with special intent to see her. And, 
as I know one can get comfortable quarters 
in that picturesque islet, I shall probably stay 
there awhile. So, if you have anything im- 
portant to say, write to Sark ; if not, don't." 

"Good!" said the lawyer, taking his final 
glass of cool claret. " But don't fall in love 
with this eccentric schoolmistress." 



CHAPTER XIX. 

AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 
** Circae pocula nosti.'' 

Allegory doubtless lies beneath all that 
Homer tells us, but it is allegory based on 
actual events. All fiction is based on history, 
as all language on onomatopoiea. There 
will never be any adequate explanation of 
the primeval mythus, yet it is full of sugges- 
tion and of moral, and cannot be studied 
without ample reward. Even to read it 
backwards is useful now and then. Miss 
Delisle had read backwards the story of 
Circe. 

Her own early history was not a happy 
one- Left an orphan when quite young, she 
had been taken under the care of a maiden 



222 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

aunt, who had a fierce temper and a stingy 
temperament It was her mother's sister. 
Both sisters had been in love with Miss 
Delisle s father, and the lady who lost him 
never forgave either of them. Delisle him- 
self was penniless; the sisters were co- 
heiresses to considerable property, but so 
setded that whichever survived, the other 
should take the whole, without any provision 
for children. Hence the orphan girl was 
wholly dependent on her aunt, who revenged 
upon her what she considered the misdeeds 
of her parents. The poor little animal was 
half starved, made to do menial work, 
punished for sheer love of cruelty, taught 
nothing at all. But in time people talked 
about her treatment, and the rector of the 
parish heard of it, and gave her persecutor 
a good lecture. As the aunt was a lady of 
exemplary piety, she did not venture to rebel' 
against her clergyman's authority. So at 
about sixteen the girl was sent to a boarding 
school . of course, a cheap one. When she 
had been there a year or two, and had learnt 
all that the mistress could teach, her aunt 
made an arrangement by which she was to 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 2 23 

become an articled pupil, which in schools of 
a low order means a person obliged to do 
work which servants will not deign to do. 
Even in private families of no culture, tutors 
and governesses are to this day disgracefully 
used. Think of the famous Justice Maule, 
one of the few men who have been both 
Senior Wrangler and First Smith's Prizeman, 
as tutor in a highly respectable family, where 
the smallest child slept in his bed, and had 
to be washed and dressed by him in the 
morning! Now that all the world is on the 
strike, why do not tutors and governesses 
begin ? ^ 

Margaret Delisle got no holidays; saw and 
heard nothing of her only relation ; received 
no letters, except now and then a kind note 
from the old rector. It was a hard life, but it 
did not harden her ; it made her, indeed, an 
intelligently sympathetic woman. The mis- 
tress of the school did a very peculiar 
business. You might see in the morning 
papers, at Christmas and Midsummer, an 
advertisement, not in the best English, to the 
effect that she received, on moderate inclusive 
terms, unmanageable children, or children 



224 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. * 

whom it was desirable to send from home 
No holidays unless wished for. This resulted 
in her getting a large number of neglected 
little creatures, some of whom were ill^ti- 
mate, some; too much in the way of dissipated 
fathers or jealous stepmothers. Mrs Runcorn 
(she was a widow, and had worried her 
husband into another world) asked no ques- 
tions, but always insisted on her money in 
advance. Her system was, a simple one; 
she regarded all her pupils as " unmanage- 
able," and began by what she called " break- 
ing their spirits." This process was accom- 
plished by a small allowance of food and a 
great many sharp blows. A week of such 
treatment usually produced a perfect cure. 

Margaret Delisle had been sent to this 
school by her amiable aunt, with a cheque 
for a year's education, and a note saying that 
she was a very troublesome girl, who might 
have lived comfortably at home, but who 
made mischief, by complaining to the 
clergyman of the parish that she was badly 
treated. As a year's payment in advance 
was four times what she vjentured to ask, 
Mrs Runcom saw at once that Aunt Rebecca 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 22$ 

was a most respectable lady, and her honest 
indignation was aroused at Margaret s wicked- 
ness. It was just a case for her cure. The 
girl had travelled a good many miles outside 
a coach on a frosty day, but no pity on her 
had this harridan. A servant, having re- 
moved her bonnet and shawl, showed her 
into the schoolmistress's private room, where 
that lady was sitting by a comfortable fire, 
with fragrant tea and an oily pile of muffins 
beside her. The sight looked pleasant to the 
shivering starving child. Mrs Runcom sai4 . 

" You are Margaret Delisle ? " 

** Yes, ma'am." 

" Always kertchey when you speak to me. 
I have a letter here from your good aunt. 
You have behaved most wickedly to her. I 
wonder you are not ashamed of yourself." 

Margaret said nothing, feeling almost faint 
with trouble and exhaustion. 

Mrs Runcom went on . 

" You will soon be taught obedience here. 
I know how to break rebellious spirits." 
Then ringing the bell, she said to the gaunt 
servant who entered, ** Take this girl to bed. 
You know where she is to sleep." 

VOL. I. / p 



226 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Margaret unresistingly followed the ser- 
vant to a long dormitory, in which were about 
twenty comfortless beds. It was about six 
on a January evening, and she was almost 
too cold to undress. Of course all the other 
beds were as yet unoccupied. The servant 
hurried her, for her own tea was cooling in 
the kitchen. 

"Come, make haste, you litde slut ; I can^t 
be here all night." 

Wherewith she pulled away at Margaret's 
scanty habiliments with a rough hand. When 
the girl wanted, cold and tired as she was, 
to kneel and say her prayers, the servant 
said . 

" Pooh, pooh ! say 'em in bed." 

She bundled her in, gave her a smart slap 
on the shoulders, and left her in darkness. 
But Margaret had 'strength enough to get 
out of bed again and sob an incoherent prayer 
upon her knees. 

Thus began her career under Mrs Runcorn, 
and it went on in the same way. This ill- 
conditioned woman was. always hardest on 
her last victim. Margaret, however, dis- 
gusted her, and tired her out She liked 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 22 7 

children who resisted, rebelled, screamed : 
she liked to break their spirits. Margaret 
showed no spirit to break. The fact is, that 
the good rector, who, all in the kindness of 
his heart, had transferred her from the frying- 
pan to the fire, was very apt to take his 
texts from the Sermon on the Mount. Its 
wonderful lessons of fortitude and non- 
resistance he inculcated with gentle but per- 
suasive eloquence. Indeed, he practised 
them, which is harder far than preaching 
them. He had a man-servant who robbed 
him for years, and was at last found 
out. 

'* Thomas," said the rector, " I am sorry 
you should have taken the corn from my 
cob ; doubtless necessity pressed you. Here 
is a sovereign for your immediate wants; 
I will increase your wages two shillings a 
week, which is all I can afford." 

Will it be believed that Thomas refused 
both the sovereign and the increased wages, 
and seldom stole again ? Never I must not 
say, for petty theft had become an inveterate 
habit with the poor fellow. At last, being a 
Kentishman, and therefore imaginative, he 



228 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

cured himself . or nearly . ^by this plan. He 
fixed up a money box in the stable, and when 
he had filched com or hay during the week, 
he put the price he got for it into the box. 
At the end of a year he brought it to his 
master, and told him all about it. 

"Thomas/* said the parson, "you have 
done wisely. I shall put this in the Savings' 
Bank for you. Go on in the same way. There 
will be less money next year, I am sure." 

To return to poor Margaret Delisle. Her 
perfect submission, her absolute obedience 
to any order however humiliating, to any 
punishment however painful, caused Mrs 
Runcom to despise her rather, and in time 
to leave her alone. So Margaret, naturally 
quick, learned what there was to learn in 
that sordid seminary, and obtained much 
influence over her schoolmates, and made 
herself very useful to her mistress, who was 
lazy in most things, and only active in cruelty. 
Margaret became quite a pet, and was there- 
by enabled to mitigate the sufferings of others. 
When, at the age of eighteen. Aunt Rebecca 
proposed that a premium should be paid to 
make her an articled pupil for' three years, 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS, 229 

after which she would have no more re- 
sponsibility, the schoolmistress was well 
pleased ; she took care, however, to assure 
poor Margaret that she would taste the cane 
all the same if she were troublesome. 

Now Miss Delisle, who had grown up 
under all these difficulties tall and handsome, 
with dark eyes and hair, might easily have 
defied the schoolmistress. But she still held 
to the Sermon preached upon the hill of grey 
olive-trees, and she began to think she had 
found a mission in life . to tame down Mrs 
Runcom, and to lessen the troubles of her 
victims. She set herself to this heart and 
soul. If she were ordered to punish a poor 
little child, she would, let it off with the 
mildest of pats, and then, perhaps, the 
schoolmistress would strike her, and she al- 
ways submitted without complaint. Many 
a time has she lost her dinner, because she 
had, against orders, supplied some child with 
food. 

Yet had she spirit, as one event will show. 
One day, Mrs Runcom, who more and more 
consulted her, showed her a letter from a 
London tradesman who wished her to receive 



230 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

his daughter, aged about seventeen. The 
poor man's case was bad enough. His wife 
had taken to drinking, and had killed herself 
with it : worse, she had infected her daughter, 
who could not resist it. Somebody had re- 
commended Mrs Runcom, and he offered an 
unusually large sum if she would try the girl. 
He described her as quiet and docile natu- 
rally, but excited by the slightest taste of 
alcohol. 

A difficult caSe ; but Mrs Runcom could 
not resist the money. The girl came, brought 
by her father, a gentlemanly tradesman in a 
large way of business. He manufactured the 
most amazing portmanteaus in the world, or 
something of that sort. The girl was tall, 
with a kind of florid handsomeness, and as 
quiet as a lamb. The father paid his money, 
had a cup of tea, and went away melancholy 
but much impressed by Mrs Runcom's distin- 
guished manner. Miss Delisle was not pre- 
sent. 

Now the worthy schoolmistress had a habit 
of occasionally improving the flavour of her 
tea with a drop of bright cognac ; and now, 
unthoughtful of her new pupil's weakness, she 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 23 1 

went to a corner cupboard with glass front, 
took from it a small decanter, and was just 
making the mixture, when the girl rushed 
wildly at her and snatched it out of her hand. 
There.was a struggle between them, and all 
the brandy was spilt except a small drop that 
Mary Booth had managed to gulp . small, but 
enough to madden her. Mrs Runcom, how- 
ever, was too strong for her ; her sheer weight 
threw the girl on the floor and kept her there, 
and the noise brought in a couple of servants, 
who soon mastered her. Then, with her 
arms pinioned, she was marched off to bed, 
and strong means were taken to break her 
spirit. Her spirit suffered little ; her body, 
however, suffered so much that she could not 
come to the schoolroom for some days. 

When she came she was quiet enough ; but 
Margaret, a close observer, noticed a curiously 
cunning look in her eye. The schoolmistress, 
of course, worried her terribly; found fault 
with her at every turn, persecuted her miser- 
ably for weeks. The girl seemed to grow 
dull and torpid under this treatment, but 
people with a craze, however caused, are 
difficult to understand. One day, as Mrs 



232 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Runcorn entered the schoolroom, she noticed 
that her pupil was missing. 

" Where 's Mary Booth ? " she exclaimed. 
" Margaret, you are very careless ; you shall 
be punished for not looking after that girl." 

At this moment Mary Booth entered the 
door. She had slunk into the mistress's room. 
In one hand she held a decanter of brandy, in 
the other one of those slates with wooden 
frames on which unfortunate children do 
impossible sums. 

"Here's Mary Booth!" she said. "Do 
you want me, you old wretch ? " 

And in an instant she struck Mrs Runcorn 
on the head with the flat of the slate, so 
that it broke in many pieces, and the frame 
was round her neck ; and then both the 
schoolmistress and her assailant fell on the 
floor. 

The former was ill for weeks, being so sud- 
denly stunned. During that time Margaret 
was mistress, and everybody was glad. She 
had spirit enough to curb rebellious children, 
but she would not torture children who were 

. 

not rebellious. When I was young there was 
a schoolmaster who advertised that he kept 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 233 

order by moral suasion, which the boys de- 
cided must be Greek for a birch-rod. 

Amazingly did Margaret manage affairs, 
though only twenty. She had a heavy re- 
sponsibility. Mrs Runcom was dangerously 
ill ; brandy in tea, with many muffins, is not 
the healthiest of diets. Mary Booth was 
troublesome for several days ; but Margaret 
took advantage of her lucid intervals, and 
tried to tame her. She reasoned with her on 
the folly of maddening herself with drink ; 
she showed her that Mrs Runcom would 
probably treat her with terrible severity if 
she did not reform ; she depicted her father s 
trouble ; she tried to describe to her that 
she might be enjoying life as mistress of her 
father's house. These arguments, with Mar- 
garet's natural magnetism, had their weight. 
One day the girl voluntarily promised that she 
would never touch anything intoxicating again 
without Miss Delisle's leave. 

Mrs Runcom took some time to come 
round. When she did, she was languid . too 
languid to carry out the vengeance which she 
had vowed against Mary Booth. Indeed, 
Margaret would have permitted nothing of 



234 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the kind She was now mistress of the situ- 
ation ; she ruled her little realm very easily. 
She received, during Mrs Runcorn's illness, 
one or two new pupils, and treated them very 
differently from the way in which she had 
been treated. Her own experience had taught 
her that children with harsh relations are 
most of all God's creatures to be pitied. She 
pitied and consoled and advised, where her 
unwiser mistress was wont to scold and starve 
and flog. 

On Margaret's twenty-first birthday she 
terminated her engagement. On the morning 
of that day, by a curious coincidence, came a 
letter from the rector, informing her of her 
Aunt Rebecca^s death, and that she had left 
' all her property to the Society for Preventing 
the Drowning of Kittens ; but he added that, 
as it was property in land, the statute of 
mortmain made the bequest void, and she 
inherited the whole. 

This letter she read at breakfast, and was 
unable to munch her thick bread-and-butter 
for the excitement of it. Just then a servant 
came to say Mrs Runcom wished to speak 
to her ; she obeyed the summons. The 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 235 

schoolmistress, half in her old fashion, and 
half in her new, said . 

" This is your last day with me, I think, 
Margaret." 

" Yes, ma'am," says she, with a " kertchey." 

**You are laughing at me," said the old 
lady, fiercely. " Don't be impudent. You 
shall be well whipped, though it is your last 
day, if you dare be saucy to me." 

" I am willing to submit to any punish- 
ment you consider I deserve, madam," said 
Margaret. 

" Yes, that 's- it. You always did submit, 
and so you come to command." And then 
she began to cry. Cruelty and cognac, 
muddle and muffins, had brought her to her 
dotage. 

When she became more intelligent, Mar- 
garet asked her, would she like to retire, and 
said she would take the school herself, and 
give her as much for the rest of her life as 
the present rate of profit ? The old lady, 
when Miss Delisle explained to her how she 
could do this, was delighted beyond measure, 
and the arrangement was very soon made. 
But, thanks to muffins, the annuity soon fell in. 



236 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Margaret had no intention of carrying on 
the school for any length of time. She only 
wished to send the pupils back to their 
parents in a reasonable and reconcileable 
frame of mind. She had ascertained the 
histories of them all, had probed their mental 
bounds, had taught them the unwisdom of 
rebellion. Most of her disciples . all but one 
indeed . ^were, at the end of the half year, 
restored to their homes in a satisfactory way. 

The one exception was Mary Booth 1 

She declared it would kill her to leave her 
dear mistress. She would be her servant . 
her slave. If she had to go away, she should 
go mad again ; she must live with her. Much 
wild language, which resulted in a talk to 
Booth, pater, who was just then thinking of 
a second marriage to a warm widow ; and had 
also on his mind a new patent portmanteau, 
with pockets for your own cigars, and your 
wife's maraschino, and a pistol in the lock 
to shoot any railway porter who should try to 
get at either. He offered Margaret a hundred 
a year to take care of Mary till she was tired 
of her ; and Margaret said . 

" I will take your daughter and your money 



AN INSULAR ENCHANTRESS. 237 

for a time. When she is of age we will 
reconsicler the question." 

Quite proud was Margaret that she was of 
age. Mary was only in her nineteenth year, 
she thought ; a mere chit, a baby. Certes Mar- 
garet was twenty rather than two years wisen 

Miss Delisle got her property with perfect 
ease. She stayed awhile with the dear old 
rector, and induced him to accept a thousand 
pounds, the interest whereof should be paid 
for preaching on the Sermon on the Mount, 
every Whitsunday afternoon. Then, with 
Mary Booth as a companion, she travelled a 
few years, having always been athirst for 
knowledge of other lands, and at no time 
dreaming of such knowledge as possible. 
After being far a-field, for they reached 
the mount where her beloved sermon was 
preached, they returned to travel through 
England, missing no minster town.. Eng- 
land's outlying islands also they saw; and 
when Margaret beheld the mad wave boiling 
in the Creux Terrible, in Sark, she turned 
to Mary and said, 

" I shall come and live here, and set up a 
school ; and you shall help me." 



238 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Mary would have thrown herself into the 
Creux Terrible if Miss Delisle had bidden 
her. 

Now it was to arrange for Adam and Eve 
with Miss Delisle that the Troglodyte had 
come to Sark; and the first thought that 
passed through his mind, as he looked at 
her glossy dark hair and pleasant brown 
eyes was this . 

'' 1 11 be hanged if she's forty/' 



CHAPTER XX. 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 



** To his side the fallow deer 
Came and rested without fear ; 
The eagle, lord of land and sea, 
Stooped down, to pay him fealty ; 
And both the undying fish that swim, 
Through Bowscale Fam did wait on him. 

Gilbert Tachbrook picked up his two wild 
youngsters at Wimbledon, and carried them 
off to Southampton by rail. He found them 
as wild as ever, for they could not understand 
the usages of civilisation. They had lived in 
a way which developed their instincts while 
leaving their reason dormant. This is the 
simplest form of life. In the antique poetry 
of any people are found men of heroic mould 
who scarcely reasoned at all, but who pos- 



240 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sessed in a very high degree the spiritual and 
natural instincts. They saw the Divinity in 
many forms around them; they knew the 
meaning of the sounds uttered by wind and 
wave, of the flight of birds through the air. 
They were superstitious, in the nobler sense. 
This very rational generation laughs at all 
things superstitious, and has adopted a creed 
called Positivism (being uniquely negative), 
which is only explicable on the assumption 
that the world is a vast machine that has no 
motive power and no owner. Many difficul- 
ties arise in connection with this theory, but 
they are quietly ignored. 

Now little Adam and Eve both believed in 
a God ; had an actual personal belief in Him ; 
fancied even that they had heard His voice 
and felt His touch. Had they not seea 
Him afar, when the mighty sun fell westward 
from the Island of Hawks, attended by a 
terribly beautiful train of angelic powers ? 
Again, Adam and Eve were on good friends 
with all living creatures. Birds would perch 
on their pretty sunburnt shoulders, fish 
would come through the water to be stroked 
by their hands. The very butterflies and 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 24 1 

dragonflies recognised them ; they handled 
bees and wasps and hornets without fear. 
Yet had their faculty of reason been most 
imperfectly developed, and they could not 
understand the mighty motive powers which 
actuate the majority of their fellow-creatures. 

It must be admitted they were fit pupils 
for Miss Delisle. 

The Troglodyte started at midnight from 
Southampton Water, and was off Guernsey 
Pier at about five on a lovely quiet morning. 
That troublesome Race of Alderney had not 
delayed them. He stayed for the slightest 
possible refreshment, chartered a, cutter, and 
reached Sark in excellent good time for a 
breakfast of hot lobster at Madame Vaudin's. 
Then he went with his youngsters to find 
Miss Delisle's residence, which he ascertained 
was on the coast above the Chapelle des 
Mauves. 

Fancy how Adam and Eve, imprisoned 
awhile at Wimbledon, rejoiced in the infinite 
space and variety of the never-resting sea ! 
How they longed to throw away their unac- 
customed wearisome wrappages, and dash 
headlong into the green island water . to dive 

VOL. I. Q 



242 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

below and see the upper world through a 
ceiling of emeralds! They danced along 
Sark's green terraces with more gaiety of 
heart than they had felt since they left their 
cavernous island. 

Gilbert Tachbrook found Miss Delisle's 
house to be an old granite farmhouse, not 
unlike that Jersey farmhouse delineated in 
Mr Bertrand Payne's monogram on the 
genealogy of the Millais family. Quaint was 
it, long, low, rambling, irregular, buried in a 
great garden with a double avenue of limes 
and chestnuts on one side, and on the other a 
sunny wall covered with chaumontelle pear- 
trees. Surely the chaumontelle in its per- 
fection is the king of all fruits. Very green 
was the turf on Miss Delisle's lawns, and her 
trees, both fruit and forest, flourished so as 
to show they were carefully tended. 

When the Troglodyte reached the house, 
he was shown by a neat servant girl into a 
wainscoted parlour, with a deep red paper 
above the wainscot. The lozenged windows 
were in bars, with low seats around, where 
you could lounge and see the shadow creep 
around the sun-dial, while the birds ate the 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 243 

cherries. Gilbert Tachbrook had not long 
waited before there entered a good-looking 
young lady, of ruddy complexion and pleasant 
^manner, who informed him that Miss Delisle 
was down on the beach, but would return 
shortly. This was no other than Mary 
Booth, whom Margaret Delisle had tamed, 
and who was now her absolute slave. Miss 
Booth proposed to take the young people 
out to see the grounds. They went with her : 
and in less than two minutes entered Margaret 
Delisle. We have heard already his internal 
ejaculation . "Til be hanged if she's forty." 
That, indeed, was her scholastic age . an 
educational brevet rank. It is doubtful 
whether she was above twenty-eight. The 
Troglodyte, undoubted member of a family 
famous for beauty and amoro.us of beauty, 
recognised in this- lady a rare and superb 
type of womanhood. Sherwood, junior's 
humorous warning suddenly recurred to 
him. 

Previous correspondence with Miss Delisle 
had cleared the way as to negotiation, and 
the conversation between her and Gilbert 
Tachbrook resulted in a brief exchange of 



244 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

histories. Each was amused with the other's 
apparently unique adventures. 

" I should have thought," said the Troglo- 
dyte, " that you had enough of unruly chil- 
dren with that abominable old woman, and 
that now you would prefer some other occu- 
pation." 

"O no," she said, laughing. " I have become 
quite enamoured of managing the unmanage- 
able. My motto is suaviter in modo, fortiter 
in re. Miss Booth, whom you saw just now, 
and who took charge of the children, was the 
fiercest rebel I ever tamed ; now she is as 
obedient to me as if she had eaten haschish, 
and as firm in^ government as the Caliph 
Haroun." 

"You have a magic influence," said the 
Troglodyte, "and belong to a famous fraternity 
who have influenced the world more than 
men deem. In your case there is freedom 
from the quackery which entered into the 
characters of Paracelsus, Swedenborg, Cag- 
liostro, Mesmer." 

" Thaijk you," she said ; " that charming 
compliment deserves a glass of wine, and all 
this time I have been neglecting hospitality." 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 245 

Thus saying, she found in a corner cup- 
board of black oak a decanter and glasses, 
that looked as old as the oak itself, being of 
Bohemian ware, thin as a soap bubble, and 
tinged with a flush of colour like a cleft 
pomegranate. The wine was of much the 
same coloun The Troglodyte approved it. 

" Have you many eccentric pupils just 
now?" he asked. 

" Only four . two girls and two boys . all 
pretty near the age of your children. You 
see, I do the work for sheer love of it. I, 
can choose my subjects. Two of my present 
set are twins, a brother and sister, whose 
peculiarity is that one cannot live a minute 
without the other. They are motherless, 
and their father is in India. They seem 
always absorbed in each other. They care 
for nobody else. Now, as there are obvious 
objections to a brother and sister being linked 
together for life, I am doing my best to 
separate them." 

" Shall you succeed ? " 

" I think. Your two young people will 
wonderfully help me, by introducing a new 
element of interest. When your Adam and 



246 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Eve rush wildly into the sea, perhaps these 
timid twins will have a desire to follow 
them." 

" And what are your other two ? " 

" One is a boy of about seven, who came 
into the world biting and kicking, and has 
bitten and kicked everybody ever since. 
They say he was born with teeth, like 
Richard III." 

" I wonder you tried so troublesome a 
customer," said the Troglodyte. " Your 
amiable old mistress would better have 
suited him." 

"O I don't know. My sixth pupil is a 
young lady now about sixteen, a member of 
a rather large family. She is a curious 
example of the way in which ancestral pecu- 
liarities reappear. Her great-grandfather 
was a Devonshire gentleman of great phy- 
sical and mental power . famous as a 
wrestler, a duellist, a parliamentary speaker. 
Her grandfather was smaller every way, in 
body and mind. Her father was smaller 
still; and though, as is often the way, he 
married a lady of vast proportions, out of a 
family of thirteen there was but one of any 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 247 

Size . my pupil. She Wcts the sixth, I think. 
At ten years old she was mistress of all her 
brothers and sisters : her father was afraid of 
her, and her mother too lazy to interfere . 
indeed, I think she rather sympathised with 
the young giantess. However, in time she 
became intolerable, and so was consigned to 
me* 

" How did they get her here ? " 

" She came quite cheerfully : she longed 
for more worlds to conquer. Having re- 
duced her family to a state of abject submis- 
sion, she thought it would be great fun to 
subjugate a schoolmistress. She had treated 
her elder brothers and sisters as footmen and 
waiting-maids. They dared not refuse her, 
or it would have been a case of haecfrangit 
ferulaSy rubet illeflagellis. Had their mental 
exceeded their corporal vigour, they would 
have combined against her; but she is as 
clever as she is strong, and was altogether 
too much for them." 

" A difficult subject," said Tachbrook. 
" How in the world could you manage her ? " 

" I took her very coolly, being previously 
informed as to her peculiarities. She came 



248 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

into the room laughing, attended by a lady's- 
maid, and said . 

" ' Now here I am. Miss Delisle . ^what do 
you think of me ? ' 

" * I think you have not learnt to behave 
like a lady,' I replied. ' You are old enough 
to be rather wiser. Tell me this : have you 
come here of your own accord ? ' 

"'O quite.' 

'"You know that you are sent here to 
be cured of your tendency to bully other 
people.^' 

" ' I know it well . cure me if you can.* 

" ' I will cure you : no fear.* Then I just 
touched this silver handbell, and a fcouple of 
servants came in who were quite capable of 
mastering the young lady. They took her 
off to bed in a room which happens well to 
suit my refractory patients, since it is lighted 
by a skylight only. Not till the next morn- 
ing did I visit her, and then I tried to make 
her see that she was making an immense 
mistake in life. 

*' * You are strong and clever,' I said ; " but 
there are people stronger and cleverer than 
you. I admire your power; but power 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 249 

ought never to become tjo^nny. Now, will 
you let me guide you ? . or am I to continue 
to use force? If you like to live here 
quietly, and try to get rid of your unwise 
tendency to govern other people, I think you 
will soon be a girl of the best sort. If you 
will not, I shall treat you severely. I can be 
severe, I assure you.' 

" She looked at me as if she would like to 
fly at my throat, like a wild cat. I laughed 
at her. * Come,' I said, ' make up your mind 
to submit, since you must submit. I will 
give you somebody to keep in order.' 

" This notion affected her. ' Whom ?' said 
she. 

" * A little boy. He scratches and kicks 
and bites. He is rather less than half your 
age. Do you think you can manage him ? ' 

" * Manage him ! . I should think so. Let 
me try.' 

"*You shall try on condition that you 
obey me in everything I order. I can en- 
force obedience, as you see. If you are 
rebellious, you will be in trouble ; if you keep 
order, you may be as happy as you please. 
I can see you are a clever girl, and I don't 



250 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

see why you should not be a good one* 
Tame this wild boy, and you will tame your- 
self/ " 

"Excellent!" said the Troglodyte. "What 
has been the result ?" * 

" The result has been exactly what I ex- 
pected. The girl and the boy . ^both fools 
in the same fashion . have acted and re-acted 
on each other. Both, in different ways, were 
under the impulse of physical force. I left 
Susanna and Dick . ^those are their elegant 
names . to fight it out between them. The 
consequence is, that Dick is very tame, and 
that Susanna, having found the difficulty of 
managing anybody else, begins to think she 
will try to manage herself." 

" You A^^ill have a curious menagerie when 
my two youngsters are added to these. How 
are the twins named ?" 

" Frederick and Ellen ; their surname is 
unimportant. They are a queer couple. 
Fred might have been Ellen, or Ellen, Fred. 
You can see that Fred will never be manly, 
or Ellen womanly. The sister is far more 
troublesome than the brother, and I some- 
times am obliged to use stern measures with 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 2 5 I 

her. She is too forward for a girl, and he 
is too backward for a boy." 

"Your menagerie will now be quite in- 
teresting," said the Troglodyte. " Let me 
see : . Susanna, the Despot ; Dick, the Rebel ; 
Fred, the Girl ; Ellen, the Boy ; Adam, the 
Preadamite ; Eve, the Primeval. A charming 
little colony. Do you think this last importa- 
tion will improve it ?" 

" Certainly. Your two children, from your 
description, are true children of nature, whose 
faults are those of absolute simplicity. The 
other four are mere artificial animals. I 
speak freely to you, Mr Tachbrook, for I see 
you will not misinterpret what I say. The 
interchange of sexual intellect between Ellen 
and Fred is evidendy morbid. Boy afid girl are 
both fools ; and I am rather doubtful whether 
they have intellect enough to recover them- 
selves. Your little folk . whom, by the way, 
I have not yet seen . will help to make them 
healthier. Shall we go and look for them ?* 
I suspect Mary has taken them down to the 
sands by the Chapelle de Mauves." 

Miss Delisle took her guest down one of 
those zigzag precipitous paths which are 



252 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS, 

common on the shore of our Norman islets . 
those islets which remain as gage and pledge 
that the Queen of England is Duchess of 
Normandy, and that in days to come Nor- 
mandy will again be English. Those slant 
stairs, from summit of cliff to floor of sand, 
required quick eye and steadfast tread ; but 
they were child's-play to the Troglodyte, who 
had acquired that use of the foot which en- 
abled Waterton to climb a tree at seventy. 
If the Creator had designed the foot to be 
encased in leather, He would have made it 
toeless. It was meant to do equal work with 
the hand. Adam and Eve, children of 
nature, could grasp a branch with the foot, 
and hang on thereby. 

Down through a narrow many-angled 
steepness of descent, buried in famous ferns 
and humid with a trickling streamlet, they 
reached the wide stretch of sand around the 
chapel of the seamews. Is there any man 
who knows the true legend of that mysterious 
chapel ? What the Troglodyte heard from 
Miss Delisle was curious. The Chapelle 
de Mauves is a freak of nature, like the 
. cavern of Wayland Smith. It stands in soli- 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 253 

tary beauty on the sands of Sark. It is a 
granite gem. Always you may see the sea- 
mews circling around it, and perching on 
its pointed ridge of roof, screaming a 
strange bird-litany, which none but Aristo- 
phanes could transmute into the weaker form 
of words. And the story which Margaret 
Delisle, having learnt it from the Norman in- 
dwellers, told unto Gilbert Tachbrook was, 
that the famous Saint Magloire, who brought 
to these islands of La Manche the imperish- 
able religion of Christ, was greatly inter- 
rupted when he brought the good tidings to 
the Sark folk by the scream of innumerable 
seamews ; for neither on Great Sark nor on 
Little Sark (unless you creep into a cavern) 
is there any spot whence you cannot see the 
sea. So the great Magloire was interrupted 
by the congregation of shrieking sea gulls, and 
declared in language to the pagans of Sark 
unintelligible that the island was ^vkcucq irav 

T09 oppeov atcaJdapTov Kai, /lefuarjfjkevov* And thus 

in his ire he perorated . 

" Birds ! the sea » shall to-morrow build 
you a chapel of your own." 

And the next day there was a great storm, 



254 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

and granite cliffs were torn away by the sea's 
anger, and the chapel of the seamews stood 
upon the sands, a myriad of birds hovering 
around it and screaming a strange kyrie 
eleison. 

As they stood beside the chapel, with 
lovely lines of sunset light across the yellow 
sands, they perceived Mary Booth in the 
distance alone. Approaching her, they found 
that she was in the position of tjiat imme- 
morial hen who is always calling to her 
ducklings from the verge of a pond. No 
sooner did Adam and Eve find themselves 
by the sea than they stripped off their cloth- 
ing, always to them a hateful wrappage, and 
threw themselves into the water with irresis- 
tible instinct. Poor Mary Booth screamed 
after them, but it was useless ; all she could 
do was pace up and down like a sentinel, 
doubtless vowing to scarify them on their 
return. 

Much did the Troglodyte laugh when he 
beheld Miss Booth in distress, and the two 
children a mile away in the offing. 

"You see their habits," he said to Miss 
Delisle. " Can you tame them ? " 



ADAM AND EVE AT SARK. 255 

It Strikes me that she just then looked as 
if she would like to tame the Troglodyte 
himself. He, for his part, gave a mighty 
shout . his customary summons home at the 
Island of Hawks . and the children swam 
ashore. 



END OF VOL. I. 
MIRANDA; 



A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE HAPPY FAMILY. 



** A party in a parlour." 

. Wordsworth. 



The Troglodyte surrendered Adam and Eve 
right willingly to the care of Miss Delisle ; 
but he did not leave Sark, for he had heard 
of its wondrous sea-caverns tapestried with 
marine anemone, and with great gateways 
opening to wide stretches of sea and cliff. 
Singularly satisfied with Miss Delisle as an 
instructress bf eccentric youth, he left his 
young folk under her care, and returned to 
the quiet little hotel, where the chief fare 

VOL. IL A 



2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

was lobsters and rabbits and claret. He 
took leave of Miss Delisle and the young- 
sters, at first intending to return at once to 
England; but, as he sat that evening over 
his wine, and saw the full moon sink yellow, 
leaving silver paths along the sea that might 
have been made for angel-princesses, and 
meditated on the caverns he had heard of, 
and the delicious isolation and uncivilisation, 
he thought he would stay a day or two. 
Whether he thought of anything else, who 
can say ? 

Anyway, he settled down awhile. Messrs 
Sherwood had his directions. His sole desire 
as to the estate and baronetcy was to see 
justice done ; he was only too glad to dwell 
quietly in a comer. So he stayed quietly at 
Madame Vaudin's, and wandered everywhere, 
and thoroughly enjoyed himself. 

Meanwhile Miss Delisle's six pupils were 
shaking down into a reasonable state. It is 
probably a pity that the eccentricities of 
nature should be crushed out ; but regular 
people are the majority ; irregular people, 
unless very strong, must suffer. Unrestrained 
Susanna would have made a capital Semira- 



THE HAPPY FAMILY. 3 

mis or Catherine; Dick, a Garibaldi; Fred 
and Ellen, a couple of dubious creatures ; 
Adam and Eve, good hardy simple regenera- 
tors of the race to whom sea was as much a 
home as land. It may easily be imagined 
that these six young people were a queer 
human menagerie ; but the clever keeper of 
these wild creatures left them alone as much 
as was safe, and found that, with slight re- 
straint, they gradually civilised each other. 
Adam and Eve brought into the place a 
thoroughly healthy influence. They were 
sound, and only wanted to be controlled and 
guided. They did much to bring the others 
into a reasonable state. 

As thus : Susanna was taming Dick, and 
Dick exhausting Susanna ; whence it seemed 
likely that in time both would behave like 
sensible people. Still they had occasional 
outbreaks. Moreover, Dick, a fierce little 
villain, was particularly fond of playing tricks 
on the unfortunate Fr^d and Ellen. Though 
several years older than he, these helpless 
twins were afraid of him ; and when the de- 
spot was away, the rebel would plague them 
unmercifully. When Adam and Eve became 



4 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Miss Delisle's pupils, he tried the same ex- 
periment on them ; but the peirastic attempt 
was a failure at the first, for Adam dropt 
him into a deep sea-pool, and did hot haul 
him out till his mouth was filled with salt 
water. The next thing was that Susanna 
endeavoured to make Eve understand that 
she was an inferior person to be under the 
despot's orders. Eve laughed at her . Susanna 
attempted to box her ears ; but the lissom 
little islander sprang on her, threw her on the 
sands, and compelled her humbly to apologise. 
Questionless, it did both these young fools 
good to be mastered. It would do this 
English nation good to be mastered. But 
when again shall we see a master of men ? 

Fred and Ellen were otherwise influenced. 
These timorous and torpid creatures were 
§mitten with enyy and amaze when they saw 
Adam and Eve swim a mile out to sea, or 
climb the perpendicular face of a rock. They 
woke up. They began to get tired of each 
other. Fred had thought Ellen perfect, and 
Ellen, Fred ; now Fred looked lovingly at 
Eve, and Ellen still more lovingly at Adam. 
There was not much reciprocity, for the two 



THE HAPPY FAMILY. 5 

Azorians were quite too healthily young to . 
understand the scrofulous precocity of their 
admirers. So when Fred made love to Eve, 
she took up the first stick she could find, and 
drubbed him ; while, when Ellen made love 
to Adam, and became uncomfortably pertina- 
cious, he tied her to a tree and left her. 

With all their ineradicable wildness. Miss 
Delisle found Adam and Eve much more 
capable of development thaji either of her 
other pupils. They took to thought as bravely 
as they took to the sea. Strong by nature, 
they recognised a greater strength than their 
own . it is your weak people who cannot 
obey, who defy God and the King, and the 
constable and the schoolmaster. Miss Delisle 
tempted these two children to learn things 
which their unique life would cause them to 
like to learn ; very soon they showed curiosity 
insatiable. They had the same thirst for 
knowledge as they had for catching fish and 
birds. They liked the excitement. Any 
new thing, as men said in Astu. When once 
Adam and Eve began to learn, their pace was 
tremendous. They left the torpid Fred and 
Ellen leagues behind. Miss Delisle feared 



6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

they would move too fast for her. For Adam 
took to mathematics magnificently, while Eve 
had a passion for language ; and they followed 
their favourite fancy just as resolutely as they 
were wont to follow wild creatures on the 
Island of Hawks. 

The Troglodyte could not tear himself away 
from the marvellous caverns of Sark. For 
some time Miss Delisle and the children 
thought he had left the island ; but in so 
small a sea-surrounded space, it cannot be 
very long befpre you meet the man you would 
rather not meet. Of course, therefore, the 
time came when Gilbert Tachbrook's presence 
on the island became known to Miss Delisle. 
He met her in one of his strolls, and acknow- 
ledged that he had been trying to tear himself 
away, but found the place too pleasant. 

** Why hurry yourself ?" she asked. ** You 
are too old to be a pupil of mine, but the sea 
and sky will take you as pupils. You have 
nothing to do." 

" Indeed I have/' he replied ; ** and one 
reason why I stay here is to avoid doing it. 
I have a lot of tiresome business, and ought 
to be in London to transact it. I stay here 



THE HAPPY FAMILY. 7 

ta avoid interviews and correspondence. But 
never mind me, Miss Delisle ; I am incor- 
rigible. How are the children ?" 

" They are not at all incorrigible, I am glad 
to say. They are my best and brightest and 
most amusing pupils. They have interested 
me so much that I really fear I have not done 
justice to the others. Indeed, Mary Booth, 
who is rather jealous of them, told me some- 
thing of the kind the other day, for which I 
sent her supperless to bed." 

"Your discipline seems severe. Do you 
mean to keep your husband in as good 
order .>" 

** I don't intend to have such an incum- 
brance." 

While the Troglodyte stayed in Sark he 
often dropped in at Miss Delisle's to see his 
children and her. He was astonished at the 
marvellous improvement of Adam and Eve. 
He was amused by the endless duel between 
Dick and Susanna, neither of whom seemed 
finally capable of conquering the other. They 
were growing gradually more quiet, but at 
intervals there was an outbreak. Dick would 
kick Susanna's legs, and she would retaliate 



8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

with smart slaps. But these explosions be- 
came rarer, since, when they occurred, Miss 
Dclisle impartially punished both parties. . 

Gilbert Tachbrook was also greatly amused 
by the flabbiness of Fred and Ellen. They 
had improved by contact with Adam and 
Eve ; but they were still creatures of dull 
intellect and feeble fibre. Neither kindness 
nor severity had any definite effect on them. 
Scolded or punished, they sulked. Miss 
Delisle confessed that they were the worst 
specimens she had ever had. Indeed, sulky 
people are the most abominable nuisances of 
intimate association. They can be kept in 
order by the pedagogue, who should lash 
them severely with his knottiest whipcord ; 
but in a state of independence, they become 
such an abomination, that an Act of Parlia- 
ment is wanted to put them down. 

Somehow or other the Troglodyte stayed 
at Sark very much longer than he at first 
intended. His notion was to wander awhile ; 
for, being a man of wide experience, he full 
well knew that much time must pass before 
Messrs Sherwood had any information for 
him. He was in no hurry. It was clear that 



THE HAPPY FAMILY. 9 

the claimant of the baronetcy was not Harold 
Tachbrook ; but it was not at all clear how 
that negative could be proved. So he thought 
he might leave Adam and Eve behind him, 
and go round the world : but he did not do it. 
What reason had he for this change of 
procedure ? Caverns, it must be remembered, 
were singularly attractive to him ; besides he 
would naturally be anxious as to the edu- 
cation of his children. Sufficing reasons, 
surely ; yet may it be doubted whether they 
were the true ones. No; the fact is, that 
Gilbert Tachbrook was fascinated by the rare 
style of beauty and the high mental qualities 
possessed by Margaret Delisle ; ah uncon- 
scious fascination at first, which, in course of 
time, grew definite and determinate. He 
laughed at himself for it ; tried indeed to 
laugh himself out of it. Gravely did he 
argue with himself that he surely had per- 
formed his matrimonial duty to the world ; 
that Adam and Eve were children enough 
to possess, and quite as troublesome as need 
be ; still his fancy reverted to this dark-eyed 
lady, so quiet, so pleasant, so resolute, so 
wise. Did she think of him at all ? It 



10 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

seemed unlikely. She appeared completely 
absorbed in her occupations. She was al- 
ways glad to see him, certainly ; and down 
on the sands by the Chapelle de Mauves 
they had many an afternoon stroll when the 
young folk were enjoying themselves under 
the care of Miss Mary Booth. Nominal 
care, so far as Adam and Eve were con- 
cerned ; for their young heads might be seen 
above the water half a mile away. The other 
couples were sometimes troublesome, either 
two by stupidity or mischief. 

" Those children live in the sea," said the 
Troglodyte to Miss Delisle, as they came 
swimming homewards one sunny evening, 
their pretty curly heads touched by soft glints 
of saffron light. 

** Ah ! " she said, " I quite envy them. I 
never saw the sea in my youth, and now I am 
a little afraid of it. I wish I could swim." 

** Shall I teach you ? " asked the Trog- 
lodyte. ** The sea is a faithful friend to 
those who love and trust it. When will you 
have a lesson ? " 

** It is my business to give lessons, not to 
take them," she said, with a laugh. 



CHAPTER II. 

HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 

*' Beatos ille, qui procul negotiis 
Ut prisca gens mortalium, 
Paterna nira bobus exercet suis 
Solutus omni fenore." 

Harold Tachbrook having been a fortunate 
man so far as money is concerned, and in- 
deed in most other matters, could gratify his 
tastes more, and do what he deemed his 
duties. Those duties, in his idea, were 
threefold : to his father, Dr Septimus, to 
Miranda, and to Rothescamp, the village of 
his ancestors. The old Doctor's state of 
mind caused one to recollect the quaint 
couplet . 

" The soul's dark cottage, battered and decayed, 
Lets in new light through chinks that time has made.'' 

There was a curious blend of logic and 
superstition in his character, the latter 



1 2 . MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

doubtless developed by the magnetism of 
Sobieska. His chief pleasure was in the 
company of his son and his son's daughter. 
To sit at noon under the great plane-tree in 
that quaint old garden, with Miranda to 
chatter to him, or to read him fragments of 
his fayourite poets and essayists, was per- 
fect delight. Miranda began to get deeper 
knowledge of literature from the Doctor's 
remarks. As the wind made susurrus in the 
broad-leafed plane . 

" Such tents the patriarchs loved'* . 

it was pleasant to hear Miranda's musical 
voice uttering choice gems of perfect English 
verse, while her grandfather showed her their 
significance. They became great friends, 
these two : and surely nothing can be prettier 
than the friendship between an old man and 
a young girl specially of the same race. 
Read Mr Locker's charming poem, " Grand- 
mamma" . compare it with Leslie's picture, 
which it suggested . ^and then reflect a little 
upon Darwinism and the continuity of the 
human race. 

** Thou deity in paint ! 
What canon says I mayn't 
Marry thee ? " 



HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 1 3 

If you are lucky enough to have ancestors 
and portraits of them, look through the 
gallery ; make acquaintance with people, cen- 
turies old, who might be your twin-brothers 
or twin -sisters . whom Pythagoras haply 
might say were indeed yourselves. How 
would you have acted fighting at Cre^i or 
flirting at the Court of Charles ? When 
somebody asked the inimitable epigram- 
matist of Bilbilis how he would act if he 
were rich. Martial retorted with the ques- 
tion . If you were a lion what sort of a lion 
would you be ? 

Doctor Septimus saw in his pretty ocean- 
born grand-daughter the sort of girl that his 
sisters were, many long years ago. She 
brought him back a fragment of his youth. 
He remembered, the erudite octogenarian, 
the days when he was eight, eighteen, 
twenty-eight. To some men old age is 
melancholy : those are the men who regret 
the past and distrust the future. Not of such 
mould was Dr Septimus Tachbrook. As he 
approached the end of life he felt a renewal 
of youth. He was about to be born into a 
new world. He had reached his second 



14 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

boyhood ; and the boy who had left the 
world behind him discovered his identity 
with the boy who many a year ago had all 
the world before him. He often imagined 
himself a youngster again, with a lovely girl 
of Miranda's type to make him amorous. 

The Doctor s intercourse with his son was 
of another character. It usually took form at 
evenglome, under the plane, with accompani- 
ment of the weed. There was rather a dis- 

. 

agreement between them. Dr Tachbrook's 
strong mind, naturally logical, had been turned 
out of its groove by his wife's influence, and 
he had no end of odd ideas, which could be 
based only on something superautpraeter- 
natural. Now Harold, though he had knocked 
much about the world, meeting many strange 
adventures, strange coincidences, was not so 
imaginative as his father, or so willing to 
admit the possibility of any deflection in the 
current of events. This difference between 
the old and the middle-aged is like unto the 
difference between the young and the middle- 
aged. The child is fresh from God's hand ; 
the old man is going soon into God's 
presence. One smells the fragrance and 



HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 1 5 

hears the music of the land whence he came ; 
the other feels in like fashion the delight and 
beauty of the land whereto he returns. The 
man of middle age, middle ideas, middle 
ambitions, toils wearily along the dusty roads 
of life, and cannot remember the beginning, 
and cannot imagine the end. Hence, though 
Harold Tachbrook was not by any means a 
dull or unimaginative man, it is a fact that he 
could not understand either his father or his 
daughter half so well as they understood each 
other. 

Human griefs happily fade. Miranda in 
due time was not quite so miserable about 
Tom Jones. Her temperament was a mix- 
ture of faith and fear. When a month had 
passed, she went on quietly enough, and was 
well pleased to be her grandfather's com- 
panion at one time, and her father's at 
another. But she had alternate fits, sanguine 
and desperate, in one whereof she would 
imagine Tom Jones coming gaily home to 
her ; in another five fathoms deep, alongside 
of multitudinous drenched relics of earth. 
But gradually the general tone of her life 
grew gay and bright, and she unconsciously 



1 6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

accepted her destiny. Tom Jones was lost, 
she thought ; well, she must await some other 
form of fortune. Another Tom Jones was 
of course unimaginable . only one such man 
could possibly exist So Miranda resolved 
to wear the willow as resolutely as the classic 
poet who sang . 

** Omne circa petasum salicem gero viridem ; 
Per annos circa petasum, et unam diem plus." 

She resolved to forget all amorous ideas ; to 
devote her young life to her father and 
grandfather ; to be an excellent young person, 
devoid- of selfishness, and eager to do good 
in her generation. It may be deemed rather 
a come-down for a child born at sea to take 
up with these worn-out follies of the land. 
Fancy silver-footed Thetis member of a 
school-board ! 

Harold Tachbrook, a restless spirit always, 
had not enough to occupy him with his father 
and his daughter, but must needs think of 
doing his duty to his neighbours. An un- 
expected windfall of money had reached him, 
and he was so foolish as to imagine that his 
old neighbours ought to partake his good 
fortune. What shall I do for Rothescamp ? 



HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 1 7 

was one of his first thoughts. He saw the 
village in a very dull and neglected state. 
The parson was a young gentleman who, ac- 
cording to his bucolic parishioners, preached 
in petticoats all over crosses. He was one 
of those foolish lovers of ceremony who are 
doing tkeir best to disestablish the Church 
of England. Without irreverence to the 
sacerdotal order, it may be suggested that if 
the bishop ivere empowered to authorise 
churchwardens to administer to these young 
clerical babies a dozen stripes with a birch 
rod, it would do a deal of good. The ten- 
. dency to make one's self ridiculous is never 
more dangerous than when it infects eccle- 
siastics. 

Harold Tachbrook, as in duty bound, 
consulted first this parson, the Reverend 
Florence Langridge, but found that he did 
not possess an idea. So he left him to his 
gesticulations and genuflexions, and tried the 
second power in the parish, the landlord 
of the ** Tachbrook Arms." That worthy 
. ^known in the neighbourhood as Gaffer 
Wiggins, though very inferior to his prede- 
cessor, Tom Ockit . ^was a prpsperous fellow ; 

VOL. IL B 



1 8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

indeed, as he had reached the weight of 
twenty-five stone, he wanted to retire as soon 
as anybody was willing to buy the lease of 
his house and the goodwill of his business. 

Harold bought both. He found in London 
a canny Scot named Macliver (the i is long, 
and the name was Lord Clyde's), who in 
his lifetime had edited newspapers, managed 
hotels, promoted companies, taken photo- 
graphs, and a hundred other things. Alex- 
ander Macliver, known for euphony as Sandy 
Mac, was quite willing to become landlord 
of the '* Tachbrook Arms " on Harold Tach- 
brook's conditions. These terms were : to 
receive a good salary, and to implicitly obey 
orders. Sandy Mac justified by his beha- 
viour Harold Tachbrook's judgment of his 
character. Harold at once transmuted the 
** Tachbrook Arms " into a village club. He 
turned out all the vile liquids in the place, 
and it is to be feared a few fish in the river 
Rothe were poisoned. He had good ale, 
home-brewed; good wine and spirits at 
reasonable prices ; and an ordinary every day 
for working-men at sixpence a head. It was 
a famous sixpenny-worth. The Rothescamp 



HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 1 9 

folk, whose best dinner of the week was a 
slice of "pigstye beef" and an onion, were 
amazed at the dinner they could get for 
sixpence. The ale they did not like at first ; 
the taste for strychnine and salt and cocculus 
indicus is not easily eradicable. Malt and 
hops resumed their ancient supremacy in 
time. Thanks to Liberal Governments and 
Free Trade principles, the taste of malt is 
unknown to the majority of the Queen's 
subjects. 

The club at the " Tachbrook Arms " an- 
swered admirably. Of course it took some 
little time to develop; for there is nothing 
more difficult than to move that glorious 
obstinacy which has made the English the 
first race in the world. Mr Matthew Arnold 
plaintively ejaculates that the English aristo- 
cracy are slow to imbibe ideas. He does 
not see two things . that all Englishmen are 
one aristocracy, and that to absorb ideas 
slowly, yet surely, is better than to intoxicate 
yourself with ideal alcohol. 

Harold Tachbrook did not leave the mani- 
pulation of his ideas entirely to Sandy Mac. 
Few days passed that he did not join the 



20 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. ^ 

"company at the " Tachbrook Arms ^ at one 
o'clock, and pay sixpence for his dinner. 
Faith, it was hard work to digest so much meat- 
and cabbage and potato at such an hour ; but 
Harold had brought dura ilia from Australia, 
and was willing to eat two dinners a-day for 
the regeneration of his countrymen. And 
his presence at the inn soon brought custom. 
The dinner became an institution. 

This was not by any means Harold Tach- 
brook's sole act of generosity to Rothescamp. 
He woke up the young people in every way. 
He started a cricket-club, which quickly 
brought into work the young fellows who, 
for want of amusement, had been previously 
drinking abominable beer, and smoking what 
cannot be called tobacco. He set up a read- 
ing-room at the ** Tachbrook Arms," and 
supplied plentiful newspapers, and a few 
sensibly amusing books, and admitted every 
one who liked to come on payment of one 
farthing. Farthings became a coin in de- 
mand at Rothescamp-in-the-Valley. 

Harold Tachbrook's long absence from 
England had made him all the more desirous 
to supply English folk with enjoyment and 



HAROLD TACHBROOK AT ROTHESCAMP. 2 I 

comfort. His great delight was Saturday, 
when, from time immemorial, Rothescamp 
people had taken half the day. This he 
encouraged. At one he left Dr Septimus in 
Miranda's care, and went down to the " Tach- 
brook Arms," and carved and ate and drank. 
" By Jove," he one day said to a friend, " I 
never ate so much vegetable substance in so 
short a time." Then came cricket ; and rather 
to his own surprise, he found he could bowl 
as well as he did in his hot youth. His was 
the fast underhand style, and it did damage. 
Cricket over, our friend went home to 
dine ; but on these Saturdays he returned 
early to the hostelry, leaving his father and 
daughter to amuse each other, while he told 
the villagers some quaint story of travel ; and 
the evening ended with a dance. Once or 
twice Dr Septimus himself deigned to flatter 
his son's fancy, and came down and dis- 
co\irsed with leisurely eloquence to the peas- 
antry, telling them some story of his past life. 
Possibly they did not to the uttermost fathom 
all that he said, or all the words he used, 
but they thoroughly understood the kindness 
of his coming ; they looked reverently on the 



22 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

tall figure and keen face of the ancient aristo- 
cratic physician. He dropt apophthegms in 
monosyllables, and some of these villagers 
contrived to pick them up. Sesquipedalian 
stuff breaks before it touches ground. 

After the lecture came the dance ; and, 
strange to say, my lovely Miranda disdained 
not to join therein ; nor was she coy in choice 
of partners. Thereby she did much good. 
The youthful villagers began to cultivate 
courtesy and cleanliness. Miranda was wor- 
shipped. The villageresses were terribly 
jealous at first ; but when they saw her move 
among them with the perfect dignity that 
knows no pride, and treat their sweethearts 
with an easy courtesy that implies no conde- 
scension, they began to understand. Miranda 
grew to be the Lady of Rothescamp-in-the 
Valley. 

She was happy. She delighted to please 
her grandfather, and her father, and the 
Rothescamp people. But where was Tom 
Jones ? 



CHAPTER III. 

^ THE PALINOURA. 

** 0/ vovrovavrai ruv roLka.i'jrfL^tav ^^oruy, 
Olg ourg Aaifiuv ouTi rtg QsCjv vifim 
UXovTOv TOT otv vsifistsv d^/av )(oioivJ* ^ 

What happened to our friend Tom Jones, 
the adventurous ? Caught in the paddle- 
wheel, he had to dive so low to clear the 
steamer that she started without him. Away 
she splashed, merrily enough. Tom threw 
himself on his back for rest, and wondered 
how soon they would discover his disappear-' 
ance. He fully expected to see the steamer 
come back in search of him, but nothing of 
the kind occurred, and she gradually passed 
out of sight ; and Tom, burdened with cloth- 



24 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

ing, grew tired, and resolved to swim for the 
island. Even this was too much for him. 
The weather was hot, his clothes over- 
weighted him, and he was striking out fiercely 
in despair, when he heard a tremendous shout 
from an obviously English throat . 

" Come on board, my man ! Look sharp ! " 
Tom, almost faint with over-toil, found 
himself alongside a vessel of curious shape. 
He was not in condition to criticise it ; indeed 
he was only too glad to scramble up the side. 
They undressed him, and put him into a 
hammock, and administered brandy. He 
slept a dreamless sleep of exhaustion till next 
morning. When he awoke he was not 
neglected. A boy came with coffee and bis- 
cuits . the coffee dashed with cognac. He re- 
freshed himself, and fell again asleep, worn out 
by his hard work. 

At noon he felt restless ; got out of his ham- 
mock, dressed . for fresh clothes had been pre- 
pared for him . ^went on deck. When he came 
to the surface, he was amazed at the curious 
craft on board which he found himself It was 
rushing through the water at a tremendous 
pace. It was propelled by steam, but there 



THE PALINOURA. 25 

was neither screw nor paddles. These points 
Tom Jones noticed as he came on deck ; but 
he was immediately accosted by the steward 
of the yacht, who took him aft. There he 
found its owner, a tall slight young gentle- 
man, with light hair that fell to his shoulders, 
and a moustache of the softest kind. 

" The gentleman we picked up, my lord," 
said the steward. 

" Very glad to see you all right again," said 
the young gentleman, coming forward with 
the easy frankness of the better sort. " I am 
running a race against time . perhaps you 
have made me lose it." 

" I hope not," said Tom. 

" You are not up to the mark yet, I can 
see," said the yachtsman. " Steward, get this 
gentleman some breakfast. To save trouble, 
how shall I call you ? I am Lord Tixover ; 
my friends irreverently call me Tix." 

" I am Tom Jones," said Tom. 

** Capital name ! got it in three volumes in 
my cabin. Call me Tix, and I '11 call you 
Tom. Have something to eat and drink, 
then we'll smoke and spin a yarn or two. 
By Jove, I 'm devilish glad I picked you up." 



26 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" So am I," said Tom, whom the steward 
just then supplied with an appetising mutton- 
chop, slightly flavoured with Nepaul pepper, 
and a pint bottle of Madeira. Tom was him- 
self again. 

" Now," said Lord Tixover, ** let us have a 
smoke. Stewart, find some pipes. This is 
tobacco the Sultan gave me . rather mild, but 
not altogether bad." 

They sat in the stern and smoked in 
silence for some time. By and by Tixover 
said . 

** How in the world did you come to be 
swimming where we picked you up ? " 

Tom explained. 

** How unlucky ! Your friends will think 
you lost. I am obliged to go ahead, for 
I have made a tremendously heavy bet to 
go round the world in a hundred days. If 
I haven't to pick up many drowning men, I 
shall win." 

" I am very unfortunate," said Tom. 
" Tachbrook, who has been a father to me, 
and his daughter, whom I hoped to marry, 
will both think I am dead. I might as well 
have been drowned." 



THE PALINOURA. 2/ 

" Pooh !" quoth Tixover. " Don't talk non- 
sense. I knew the Tachbrooks." 

" You do ? " 

" Of course I do. I know everybody. 
Don't you know the crest of the family . a cat, 
and the motto, '%)^xn iimt^ iJ^xn.' They 
have all nine lives, like a cat. Tachbrook 
is supposed to be a corruption of Cats' brook 
. so called because the cats of the family 
caught trout there. If your sweetheart's a 
Tachbrook, she'll be waiting for you when 
you reach England with me. I shall expect 
a kiss for bringing you safely home." 

Tom laughed, cheered by the Viscount s 
voluble fun. 

" Let 's forget these temporary annoy- 
ances," said Tixover. ** Look here, Tom ! 
You 've been in Australia since you were a 
boy : have you had any adventures ? " 

'' None." 

*' Never been shot at, or knocked down, or 
skinned alive ?" 

" Never." 

** By Jove," said Tix, ''you're a living 
proof of what I always say . that there 's no 
place like England for adventures. I 've 



28 MIRAXDA ; A SCDSUMXER ItADXESS. 

had thousands. When I left coDege, I made 
up my mind to go in for defending women 
who were in any diflSculty or trouble. I 
started a society ; found the money ; gave a 
secretary five hundred a year, which he spent 
principally on ballet-girls . doubtless think- 
ing that was an object of the society. As for 
me, I traversed England to and fro in search 
of distressed damsels ; and I assure you I 
rescued a lot of them. I got dreadfully 
laughed at. The morning papers were only 
too pleased to make fun of a lord ; but I cared 
nothing, for I knew I was doing good. 
However, one can't always be going over the 
same ground. I happened to be asked to 
stay at Goodwood during the races ; and 
when I left the Duke's I went over to Bognor 
fur some bathing. I hired a boatman called 
Boniface, and we went out lobster-fishing. 
Uoniface was a close observer of nature ; he 
ust\l to show me the lobster swimming for- 
\van.l when at leisufe . backward when m 
haste. The idea occurred to me that we 
^.>u^ht tv> take a lesson from the lobster. I 
rush<.\l up to town : found a deuced clever 
cu^iucvT of my aaiuaintance, a pupil of 



THE PALINOURA. 29 

Brunei's, called Wakefield ; got him away to 
dine with me in the Albany. 

'* * Wakefield/ said I, when dinner was over, 
and he was enjoying the best bottle of claret 
my man could find in the cellar, *do you 
think you could build me a two -hundred-ton 
lobster ? ' 

** He evidently thought me mad ; but when 
I explained my idea, he jumped at it. So I 
gave him carte blanche, and he built this 
yacht . the Palinoura. You have not yet 
seen its action. Let us go for *ard." 

Tom Jones perceived that the yacht was 
propelled by a mighty tail, just like that of 
the lobster, which caught the water and let 
it go again. A slight movement reversed the 
engine, and then the yacht went at an easy 
pace in the opposite direction. She had been 
modelled to precisely resemble a lobster, all 
but the claws. 

Tom Jones was astonished and delighted. 
The idea was evidently a good one, for Lieu- 
tenant Nolan, Tixovers captain, was quite 
certain the wager would be won. Indeed, 
the little craft flew far faster through the 
water than the Mighty Metropolis. 



30 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

The Viscount and Tom Jones cronied ex- 
cellent well. When they put into Melbourne 
for a few hours to get fresh stores and coal, 
Tom looked up Mrs Brown ; that worthy old 
lady became quite hysterical over his misad- 
ventures. As to Tom, it was delicious for 
him to walk through the rooms where his 
Miranda had lived from her babyhood. He 
wondered whether she, at the other side of 
the world, could, by any intuition, know that 
he was in that house so haunted by her 
memory ? Poor Tom ! He was in love. 
He pictured her pretty fingers arranging 
flowers in the vases, as they had done a 
thousand times before. He saw her graceful 
form at the window, with a merry smile at 
the oddities of Melbourne life. He fancied 
he could smell the flower that blushed on 
her bosom. 

Tixover allowed Tom scanty time for senti- 
ment. Off started the Palinoura again, to 
round the Cape of Good Hope. It is not 
necessary to follow the flight of the insect 
ship with, any minuteness. Storms caught 
her at the Cape, and she was driven many 
leagues southward ; but she was staunch, and 



THE PALINOURA. 3 1 

did her work well. Wakefield knew how to 
build, and Nolan how to navigate. She beat 
the sea and the wind, and won her match 
against time. 

Tixover and Tom Jones, living so long on 
board ship together . about long enough for a 
bill at three months to become due . ^got re- 
markably intimate. They had just those points 
of contact and divergence which make men 
friends. You cannot have for friend a man 
too like yourself, or too unlike. An unlike 
likeness is the base of friendliness. Tix and 
Tom were both adventurous ; both ready to 
dare anything for fun ; both capable of enjoy- 
ing life with that royal gaiety which makes 
mere dissipation impossible. But Tom was 
a man with fixed ideas ; whereas the Viscount 
had a new notion every day, and ran after it 
as you may see an entomologist run after a 
butterfly, net in hand, on a summer day in 
the country. There was a new butterfly 
every hour to tempt Tixover. 

Tom, you may be sure, told him his story ; 
told him, indeed, that secret which previously 
had been confided to Miranda only. 

" You are a lucky fellow," says Tix. " Your 



32 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

life 's a romance. Your sweetheart's a queen. 
I envy you. I shall try to cut you out. 
YouVe got a secret, too . I wish I had a 
secret. Hang it ! there ought to be that sort 
of thing in all good old families." 

** You had better leave a mystery to your 
heir," said Tom. 

" Capital notion ! Murder somebody, and 
bury him " 

" Or her !" 

" Ah ! yes . Aer. Bury her in the wine-cellar. 
Fearful groans heard from the farthest binn. 
Pooh ! I am talking nonsense . a, thing ex- 
cusable on a moonlight night at sea. But I 
cant make a secret . and youVe got one, 
you villain. I envy you." 

"All very well, Tix ; but when I tell my 
secret . as I must . there's an end of the 
romance." 

" Ah ! but see what a lot of fellows you '11 
astonish. You '11 have' ten minutes of rap- 
ture, at any rate. That 's what I like. Life 
is slow. Crush me a hundred years into five 
minutes, and I'll take my century at a g^lp." 



CHAPTER IV. 

STILL AT SEA. 

** Old ocean, how thy laughter multitudinous, 
Long, long ago, well sung by mighty ^Esdiylus, 
Gladdens the ear of whoso knows thy mysteries I 
Deep in thy depths invisible what creatures dwell 
In coral halls, amid stupendous forest-growth. 
Guarded by giant fish, to whom the elephant 
Would seem a tiny creature, fit for Lilliput. " 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

Life at sea is a great test and trial of human 
character. Commonly it is found that men 
who go on a long voyage, determined to 
occupy their leisure wisely, become inveter- 
ately indolent, and pass their time in eating, 
drinking, smoking, and, if there is the 
opportunity, flirting. Good resolutions are 
blown away by the breeze that fills the sails, 
and they come very soon to that lotos-eating 
stage which has been described on board the 
Mighty Metropolis. 

VOL. II. c 



34 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Not in this way did Lord Tixover spend 
his time on board his favourite Palinoura . 
this last toy of his fertile imagination which 
was now fulfilling his prophetic instinct. His 
day was a long one. Up at sunrise or soon 
after, he began the morning with a tour of 
inspection round the yacht, receiving a report 
as to the way she had made during the night. 
Tom soon came to join him in this matutinal 
circuit, and was always much amused at the 
Viscount's enthusiasm when he went forward 
and watched his lobster s mighty tail grasping 
the water. After this, they breakfasted and 
smoked a cigar : then Tix, the weather being 
fine (and they had a curiously fine voyage) 
would get astern amid cushions and rugs, and 
have his writing materials brought from 
below, and occupy his restless mind for hours 
together. Tom Jones, who in the bush had 
learnt to handle bridle-rein, lasso, revolver, or 
boomerang, but not that more delicate, yet 
sometimes more dangerous implement, the 
pen, begged to see what Tixover wrote, and 
was amazed by its inexhaustible variety. Ideas 
seem to come to him as readily as foam to 
the Waves. He blew intellectual bubbles all 



STILL AT SEA. 35 

day long. He kept a diary of the voyage, 
every now and then putting in a pen-and-ink 
sketch illustrative. Tom found caricatures 
of himself and of everybody on board among 
these croquis. Again, the Viscount had a 
romance in hand, with a plot so complex and 
characters so abnormal that nothing in the 
world could surpass it. Moreover, he wrote 
verses . . . easy pleasant patrician verses 
that did not pretend to be poetry, yet were far 
better than much that does. He was writing 
essays, too, on questions of English social life ; 
. . . not political questions, which he 
abhorred, being of opinion that government 
by party was most injurious to our intel- 
lectual and material progress. Besides all 
this, he had a fancy for architecture, and was 
perpetually designing all manner of buildings, 
from castle to cottage, from minster to theatre. 
Then there was a touch of chemistry about 
him, and he sometimes had a morning with 
alembics and crucibles and retorts ; and one 
day nearly blew Tom Jones overboard when 
passing a stream of chlorine through am- 
monia. Finally, as regards my list, though 
not finally, by any means, as regards the 



36 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Viscount's fancies, he had a mathematical 
craze, and firmly believed that he had carried 
the interpretation of V. i a step farther than 
Peacock or Gregory or De Morgan. 

Much of this was unintelligible utterly 
to Tom Jones . . . whose scholastic 
knowledge was that of an imperfectly edu- 
cated school-boy, and whose wild life in 
Australia had naturally left him quite 
ignorant of the questions which men of the 
world discuss in the cities of Europe. What 
he did understand both amused and in- 
structed him ; he had a robust, but not a 
subtle or even an acute intellect. Any- 
thing within the sphere of what we call 
common sense was intelligible to Tom Jones, 
and he could decide upon it promptly. Tix- 
over was much delighted with his comments 
on those social essays already mentioned. 
His fresh unwarped way of looking at things, 
born of a brain unclouded by city smoke, 
and of a long intellectual quietude, charmed 
the Viscount. These mornings, where one 
scribbled and the other criticised, passed 
very pleasantly. 

There was luncheon about one . . . 



STILL AT SEA. 37 

served on deck when possible. After- 
wards the weed and chat . . . inter- 
mingled with attempts to catch fish, or shoot 
birds. The Palinoura travelled too fast for 
much success in either way. Tom shot an alba- 
tross. One foggy afternoon some flying-fish 
leapt on deck, and were found uncommonly 
good at dinner. Dinner was usually at eight, 
and Nolan generally joined them ... a 
welcome guest, being a thorough gentleman 
of the maritime type, and a spinner of splen- 
did yarns. After dinner, which was lazily 
prolonged, a stroll on deck . . . where 
they smoked and chatted, and watched the 
great procession of the stars, while a nau- 
tical member of the crew played the key- 
bugle at intervals. 

This bugler, by the way, old Sam Witney, 
was a real oddity, and one day spun the yarn 
of his life, for the amusement of their hon- 
ours. To give his way of telling it would be 
impossible ; a summary must suffice. He was 
brought up for a blacksmith by his father, 
a stern disciplinarian, who generally used a 
hammer as instrument of punishment. 
** That's why my skull have got so main 




38 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

thick," says Sam. Sam always liked music, 
which his father hated ; he played all sorts of 
instruments he could get at, from the Jew's 
harp upwards ; by and by, he was engaged to 
play the bassoon in the village choir, in days 
ere organs had reached country villages. 
His sire, a " methody," was enraged at this; 
enraged still more, when Sam was known to 
" keep company " with the parish school- 
master s daughter. So there was a quarrel 
unappeasable ; off runs Sam and lists for a 
" soger," gets appointed bugler to his com- 
pany . spends a few happy years in a red 
coat' By and by, the old blacksmith dies 
intestate : Sam is advertised for ; a few 
hundred pounds enable him to buy his dis- 
charge; and do what he likes. Back goes 
Sam to his native village to look for the 
schoolmaster's daughter : alas, she has mar- 
ried a scoundrel who keeps a public-house, 
and drinks all the profits, and starves her and 
her children. Her old sweetheart gives her, 
on the sly, a couple of ten pound notes, and 
then makes up his mind to try a seafaring 
life. So he ships on board the Arethusa 
frigate, and soon learns his business, and 



STILL AT SEA. 39 

graduates A.B. "And 'then your honour, 
. my Lord, I mean,*' he continued, "when 
the Capen here wanted a crew, why, Tci just 
been paid off, and I thought Td like to go to 
sea in such a wonderful queer craft." 

Such was Sam Witney the bugler's story, 
one of many yarns that were spun on moonlit 
nights: for Tix lik;ed to make friends of his crew 
. . as indeed, he made friends of everybody. 

It was odd to note the varieties of these 
stories. One man had seen a ghost. An- 
other had been in love. Another had been 
left on a desert island. Another had been 
captured by pirates. Tix made memoranda 
of all these stories in his diary. 

" If they are true," he said to Tom, " they 
are instructive : if untrue, they at least show 
the imaginative faculty at work among minds 
of no culture. The imagination is the great- 
est of human endowments, and so few of us 
know how to use it. When a great orator, 
political or religious, knows how to act on the 
universal imagination, he may change the 
whole current of human affairs. What wonder- 
ful work was done by the men who preached 
the Crusades." 




40 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

. **It's no use talking history to me," said 
Tom, frankly, " for I never learnt any, and it 
is rather too late to begin ; but I quite agree 
with you about the power of the imagina- 
tion, for I have imagined the most wonderful 
things, when I have been alone on those 
Australian plains." 

" Ay," quoth Tix, " solitude is the nurse of 
imagination ; see how superstitious sailors are." 

" I like your thorough English seaman," 
said Tom, "he is always ready to fight or 
make love . . . two fine propensities." 

** You go home to do the latter,'' said Tix. 
" Don't you wish we were in Falmouth Bay, 
and could telegraph your safety to your lady- 
love ? '' 

** Don't I ? Sanguine as I am, old fellow, 
I should have been as melancholy as a gib- 
cat, if your inexhaustible spirits had not kept 
me going. I have thought of Miranda 
making herself wretched because she be- 
lieved me to be drowned . . . and then 
I have thought of her listening to some 
other fellow." ... 

**You infamous heretic!" cried Tix, "you 
rascally unbeliever in the perfection of 



STILL AT SEA. 4 1 

woman ! Why, if I had a Miranda (I wish I 
had), do you think I could doubt her for as 
long a time as it takes the Palinoura to tra- 
vel an inch ? I am ashamed of you, Tom. 
Miranda will not weep too much, I hope ; her 
friends will cheer her into a wise belief that 
you are safe somewhere. Egad, sir, if I were 
going home with such a prospect, wouldn't I 
swear at the Palinoura for being slow ? " 

''You are a capital consoler, Tix," said 
Tom Jones. 

The day came when they sighted Pen- 
dennis Castle, and ran into the lovely bay 
whence all steamers going eastward will start 
in years to come. Two telegrams went 
from Falmouth as soon as Tix and Tom 
could reach the office. 

" TixovER, Falmouth, to Price Roden, 
Princes Gate. 

" Round the world in 96 days, 
7 hours, 15 minutes, 43 seconds." 

" Tom Jones, Falmouth, to Harold Tach- 
BROOK, Rothescamp. 

'* I am safe, and will be with 
you to-morrow." 



42 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Now," said Tixover, " let us dine. I have 
one idea in my head. I have been round the 
world on a lobster, so a lobster will I have for 
dinner. And I '11 make him into a mayon- 
naise with Devonshire cream . we must call 
it Cornish here ; and we '11 drink the cider of 
the country tempered with cognac. What say 
you, Tom ? " 

" Faith, I say yes, and the sooner the 
better." 

" All right. Come al6ng." 

Tixover, a practical man, walked straight 
into the hotel kitchen; made love to Mary 
Tregelles the cook ; sent Boots for some live 
lobsters ; and within an hour had prepared 
the most miraculous lobster-salad ever eaten 
in the far west of England. 



\ 



CHAPTER V. 

WHICH IS THE BARONET? 
** Si Fortima volet, fies de rhetore consuL" 

Miranda lived on very pleasantly at Rothes- 
camp, gossiping with her grandfather, and 
helping her father in his generous enterprises. 
Autumn passed, and the Septembrian hours, 
beloved by Horace, were followed by a superb 
October, glorious in sunsets and foliage, and 
a November which, though a trifle iced, had 
its own special effects of cloud and mist and 
ha^e. November is a month too much ma- 
ligned. It is melancholy to think of leafless 
trees ; but there is a great lesson to be learned 
from the fact that algates they renew their 
leaves. 



V 



44 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

The Troglodyte had made no sign ; he was 
prowling through Sark caverns, and sailing on 
Sark waters, not always unaccompanied by 
Margaret Delisle. His claim to the baronetcy 
was still in abeyance, for Sherwood's people 
were baffled by the determination of Mrs 
Tachbrook to swear to the claimant as her 
son. 

Messrs Sherwood had written to old Doctor 
Tachbrook to ask if he had any information 
on the subject. The Doctor replied that he 
knew of the marriage of the late baronet, and 
also that he was present at the birth of his 
grandson, who, if he were now living, would 
be the baronet ; but that he understood he 
had disappeared from school when quite a boy, 
and nothing more had been heard of him. He 
had never seen him except at his birth, so he 
could not identify him ; but he was bom with 
a certain mark upon him, which was sure to 
be permanent . also that it would be almost 
hnpcesiWe to imitate this mark in any way. 

Messrs Sherwood deemed it wise to keep 
secret the histor)" of this birth mark, for the 
ckiimant to the baronetcy was so clever an 
impostor, that they believed he would manage 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 45 

in some way to imitate the mark, if he heard 
that his identification depended on it. They 
thought it quite possible that Mrs Sherwood 
would forget it. 

A lawsuit was threatened . " Tachbrook 
versus Tachbrook." The Troglodyte was too 
lazy and careless to give his lawyers a fair 
chance ; he liked lazing in Sark, and watching 
Adam and Eve swim, and talking to the 
schoolmistress. So there was talk in London 
clubs of a great cause ceUbre^ with all the force 
of the bar arrayed on one side; and the 
gentleman who styled himself Sir Harold 
Tachbrook got into capital society, and was 
tenderly, yet cautiously, tempted by manoeuvr- 
ing mammas. They were all a little dubious, 
these wise old ladies, as to giving him their 
daughters. Was he the baronet, or was he 
not } This was the great question in London, 
superseding all politics for the season. He 
had a great miny faithful followers ; and in 
process of time he got a wife. 

Lady Flora Rantipole, daughter of that 
famous Irish peer, the Earl of Riffraffley, 
has gone through several escapades. There 
were wicked rumours that, although only 



46 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

forty, and an unmarried lady, she was already 
a grandmother. Of course this was only 
one of those rascally libels which are per- 
petually promulgated against the aristocracy. 
Still it was noticed that Lady Flo was in 
a great hurr)' for a husband ; and when she 
made up her n^ind to have Sir Harold Tach- 
brook, Baronet, nobody was much surprised. 
Nor was surprise exhibited when the quasi- 
baronet was presented with a son and heir 
six months after his marriage. This, how- 
ever, is anticipation. 

Sir Harold determined to go to Rothes- 
camp and survey the place which ought 
to be his, and be cheered by his future 
tenantry. With him went his mother and 
Lady Flo. They travelled in great state . ^four 
horses with outriders ; and come down by 
easy stages from London. Curiously enough, 
Rothescamp had some other unexpected 
visitors that day. On the morning of the 
day before, Miranda was walking down the 
street, and had just reached the " Tachbrook 
Arms," a hostelry which always attracted her, 
by reason of the fact that her unknown 
mother had dwelt there, when she was 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 47 

accosted by a boy from the nearest railway 
station, who had a telegraph for Mr Tach- 
brook. She paid the money, and took the 
document back to her father, who was in the 
garden. He opened it and said . 

" Good news for you and me, Miranda. 
Our old friend Tom Jones is all right, as I 
expected.. He is at Falmouth, and will be 
here to-morrow." 

Miranda said no word. She had spirit 
enough to conceal her terrible delight, even 
from her father. Tears were in those brown 
eyes, but she crushed them under her eye- 
lids. Harold Tachbrook knew his daughter, 
and saw her self-control. 

** To-morrow ! "continued her father; "well, 
I am glad. So are you, I *ll swear,^although 
you don't say so. I wonder what train he 
can arrive by ! " 

It was an afternoon train, of course ; and 
it brought somebody besides Tom. Tix- 
over, you will guess : not him alone, but also 
the Troglodyte. Gilbert Tachbrook had been 
so sharply warned by his lawyers that if he 
did not look after matters his opponent would 
certainly beat him, that he felt obliged to 



48 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

come over to England. By curious coin- 
cidence he took the same train with Tom 
Jones and his friend, and got into the same 
carriage. Recognition was immediate. Easy 
to imagine the " Hallo, old fellow ! " where- 
with the two desert islanders met at Euston. 
**We thought you were lost," quoth the 
Troglodyte. 

"So I should have been," replied Tom, 
" but for my friend Lord Tixover, who 
picked me up in the very nick of time. It 
was a close thing, Tix." 

"It was, old boy. However, you were 
worth saving." 

" Thanks ! Have a cigar after that com- 
pliment." 

" Where are you going now ? " asked Gil- 
bert Tachbrook. 

" Down to Rothescamp," said Tom, " to 
meet my old comrade. I telegraphed to him 
yesterday." 

" Ah ! " said the Troglodyte, " I suppose 
you expect to meet somebody else. Well, 
she is a charming girl, though she is a Tach- 
brook. I wish you joy." 

They had picked up some evening papers 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 49 

at Euston, and one contained a paragraph 
headed . 

" The Tackbrook Claimant T 

What the self-styled Sir Harold had been 
doing is unimportant ; but there he was, an 
unquestionable baronet. The Troglodyte 
laughed, and passed the paper to Tom 
Jones, who, for reasons of his own, was 
even more amused. 

They were destined to greater amusement. 
At Rothescamp Road Station they had to 
take a fly : already the November afternoon 
grew dusky, but as they passed along the 
narrow road they could not help admiring 
the magnificence of a carriage-and-four with 
postilions and outriders that passed them. 

" That looks like the lord of the manor," 
said Tixover. 

" Lord-Lieutenant of the county, I should 
think," said the Troglodyte. 

Now this was Sir Harold's carriage ; and 
we already know whom it contained. They 
pulled up at the " Tachbrook Arms,'' in mag- 
nificent state. It was a chill night. Outside 
the inn many people were sitting in the 

VOL. II. D 



50 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

moonlight, drinking and singing songs. The 
majority of Rothescamp-in-the- Valley (not a 
vast village) swarmed around the " Tach-- 
brook Arms." Our oleaginous aristocrat 
pulled up there, and asked if he could be 
accommodated. Sandy Mac said yes. So, 
just as the fly which carried visitors to Doctor 
Tachbrook's passed the " Tachbrook Arms," 
three visitors reached that comfortable inn. 
A troublesome trio they were : if Sandy 
Mac had not been a Caledonian, they would 
have driven him wild. The elder lady was 
cantankerous and crotchety; the younger 
was full of whims and caprices ; the baronet 
was dignified and pompous, and drank much 
more than was good for him. It quite dis- 
gusted Lady Flo to find there was no fish 
for dinner; while her spouse was equally 
annoyed that the village inn contained no 
billiard-room. It was, however, noticeable that 
Lady Flora was decided mistress. Sir Harold, 
though he was insolent in his demeanour to 
other people, behaved to her in a very submis- 
sive way. She was evidently the leading spirit 
of the party, and held her position as might be 
expected from the daughter of an Irish earl. 




WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 5 1 

Sandy Mac was of course made aware 
what illustrious personages were under his 
roof, and the news soon spread through the 
village. The villagers knew nothing at all 
about the deceased baronet, and had heard 
very little as to his possible successor ; but 
when the landlord announced to his cus- 
tomers what he had heard, there was much 
shouting and hurrahing, and the bell-ringers 
at once proceeded to ring a peal of wel- 
come. 

Welcome of another sort had Tom Jones 
when he reached the Doctors. Under the 
pollarded limes Miranda and her father 
awaited him ; and as he took in his strong 
sunburnt hands her delicate white ones, both 
felt that their troubles were over at last. 
Tom had been round the world, but came 
home unchanged. Our old friend Tixover 
was quite delighted at having brought home 
to so lovely a girl her lost sweetheart. There 
was ample room both for him and the Trog- 
lodyte in the Doctor's hospitable mansion; 
and they had just settled down to an im- 
promptu meal, when they heard a startling 
peal from the church bells, which all Rothes- 



I 



5 2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

camp folk verily believed the most musical 
in England. 

" What is the meaning of that ? " said the 
old Doctor to his butler, who had just entered 
the room with a decanter of Madeira that 
had voyaged as far as Tom Jones himself. 

** They say in the village that the baronet 
has come, sir." 
*' What baronet ? " asked Harold. 
" Sir Harold, sir," said the butler ; " he 's 
at the * Tachbrook Arms:* " 

" This is amusing," said the Troglodyte. " I 
never told you, Tom, that there is a claimant 
to the baronetcy, who says he is Sir Arthur s 
grandson. The lawyers suspect him to be 
an impostor ; but Mrs Tachbrook declares he 
is her son. Is it likely, do you think ?*' 

"She had a son," said Doctor Tachbrook, 
'. who ran away to sea in his boyhood . not 
long after you did, Harold. If this is the 
same, I should know him, for I had the hon- 
our of bringing him into the world, under 
curious circumstances, and he had an inde- 
lible mark upon him." 

Tom and Miranda exchanged glances full 
of meaning, but said nothing. 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 53 

" If he 's the man," said the Troglodyte, 
*' I don't want to give him any trouble, but 
he IS certainly a scamp, and has borne several 
aliases, and does not look in the least like a 
Tachbrook/' 

** We shall have the pleasure of seeing him 
to-morrow," quoth Harold Tachbrook. 

" And of exposing him," said Tom Jones, 
hastily and with an excited manner. " The 
truth is, that I am the youngster you brought 
into the world, Dr Tachbrook." 

'* You ! " he exclaimed. 

" Yes. I ran away from that wretched 
school at Beckington . there was nothing to 
learn, and very little to eat . and got out to 
Australia, where I was lucky enough to find 
a Tachbrook." 

" Why the deuce didn't you tell me ? " 
exclaimed Harold. 

"He told me, papa," said Miranda. 

"Then why didn t jv^^ tell me, you minx ? " 

" To show a lady can keep a secret," said 
the Troglodyte. " But now, Mr Jones, other- 
wise Sir Harold, are you and I and the im- 
postor to fight a triangular duel ? " 

" Let me say a word about it," said Doctor 



54 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Tachbrook. " Sir Arthur kept curious secresy 
about his marriage, and i was the only person 
who knew it. The lady was a Miss Ella 
Geraldine, much too good for my hypochon- 
driac cousin. I 've a miniature of her on ivory 
somewhere; it is worth looking at, for all the 
ladies of the Geraldines are famous for the 
graceful curve of the shoulder. When Sir 
Arthur found that his son had married Miss 
HartnoU, he was very angry, though it was 
of course his own fault for leaving him in 
such hands ; he wrote to me, telling me that 
he should send him the whole of his mother's 
private property on his coming of age ; and 
asked me, if I were in London, to call and tell 
the young couple what to expect. I happened 
to be ill at the time, and it was nearly a year 
before I went to London. Even then, I was 
so full of business, that I could only get down 
to Greenwich late in the evening. It was a 
queer establishment. Mrs HartnoU, a weak- 
eyed lachrymose woman, who smelt of gin, 
kept what was half a school and half a board- 
ing-house. I ndeed, she would take in anybody, 
on any pretext, if money were obtainable. 
She had induced her daughter to marry 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 55 

Harold, and now quarrelled with her perpet- 
ually because she had lost a hundred a year 
by the marriage. This I learnt afterwards, 
for at the time Priscilla was in bed expectant 
of maternity ; and, as the critical moment 
came while I was there, I officiated. Could 
I do less for the future head of my house ? " 

The Doctor refreshed himself with a 
leisurely pinch of snuff, and resumed. 

" The happy father was still a boy . an 
obstinate and morose one. He seemed to 
have been persistently kept down by his 
wife and mother-in-law. There was a mix- 
ture of depression and defiance in his cha- 
racter. He clearly cared very little whether 
his wife got through her difficulties ; and when 
I told him his father's resolution, he mut- 
tered an oath. I believe he took full revenge 
when he came into his property." 

" Indeed he did," said Tom Jones. " They 
were always quarrelling with each other, and 
ill-treating me ; so I was uncommonly glad to 
be at school, though it was a wretched place." 

" Well," continued the Doctor, *' if you are 
the head of the Tachbrooks, born that night, 
you have on your left arm, just above the 



k 



56 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADXESS. 

elbow, a star-shaped mulberry-coloured mole. 
I made a note of it at the time in my diary 
. ^indeed, of the whole transaction, for I have 
alwa}*s kept a record of any remarkable cir- 
cumstances*"* 

*' Faith, r\-e seen that queer-shaped mole 
on Tom's arm hundreds of times when we 
hax-e been hard at work on a hot day,'' said 
Harold. 

Tom was about to bare his armj but the 
Doctor stopped him. 

" Wait a minute," he said, " My diar}- 
contains a rough sketch of its appearance.'' 

He went into his librar\\ found the old 
book, and passed it round. Thereupon Tom 
exhibited his arm, and the idoititv was re- 
cognised. 

*' I must give in, I see,'* said the Troglo- 
d\te. * Allow me to drink vcnir health. Sir 
Harold Tachbrook. This mad^ra is better 
than the wine I brewed for \xm in the Isle of 
Hawks.*' 

All this while the rare old Rothescamp 
beBs were rincinc merrilv. and the air was 
fiDed with the jmous old crusader's golden 
mdody. 



WHICH IS THE BARONET ? 57 

" The other baronet seems to get most 
glory," said Tixover. ** Suppose we stroll 
out in the moonlight and see what is going 
on. Of course he was the magnificent gentle- 
man with four horses." 

" No doubt," said Tom Jones, whom we 
may as well call by his old name so long 
as he is not actually acknowledged by the 
world. " The fellow has evidently lofty ideas, 
and deserves to be the real Simon Pure. 
What I can't understand is, how my mother 
can be deceived." 

" She is not deceived," said the old Doctor. 
" I know her character pretty well. She 
believes you dead, and pretends to recognise 
this man in order to gratify her ambition." 

" Ah, well I wonder what she '11 say 
when she sees me." 

" I don't know," said the Doctor. " Unless 
taken by surprise, it is quite likely she may 
refuse to recognise you." , 



CHAPTER VI. 

A MOONLIGHT STROLL AN'D ITS RESULTS. 
" The devil *s in the moon for mischiet" 

Verona by moonlight ! Who knows it not, 
since Shakespeare's royal hand painted the 
fair town, with its rare beauties and gay 
cavaliers, on his immortal canvas ? Still 
even an English village by moonlight has 
a magical beaut}', specially when, as at 
Rothescamp, there is a sparkling rivulet to 
catch the lunar rays, and a noble abbey 
church among giant elms and yews, making 
mj-sterious profundities of shadow to baffle 
the silver)' sheen. This special evening the 
village was alive. The golden music of the 
bells testified that the ringers expected a 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 59 

golden reward. They had made a bonfire 
on the village green, enacting over again the 
solemnities of the Fifth of November; and 
the youngsters were roasting potatoes in the 
ashes. They were also letting off squibs and 
crackers ; for the village shopkeeper had not 
sold off all that she had ordered in honour of 
Guy Fawkes, and was glad of this oppor- 
tunity to sell them at. a reduced price, 
especially as they were growing damp. Per- 
haps a damp cracker is more efficient than 
a dry one, as an engine of annoyance, to be 
dropt quickly into somebody's pocket. 

The " Tachbrook Arms" was the great 
centre of excitement. Its front windows 
were brilliantly alight, for the three illustrious 
travellers required all the best rooms of the 
house ; and indeed it was hard to find space 
for their servants. Lady Flora had a lady's- 
maid far more difficult to please than even 
her mistress, since her own captious temper 
was naturally exaggerated by her mistress's 
captiousness. The bar, and taproom of 
the inn were crowded with customers, all 
anxious to talk over the wonderful news, 
and, if possible, to catch a glimpse of some 



6o MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

member of the party. Sandy Mac never 
remembered Rothescamp so thirsty. 

Harold Tachbrook, accompanied by his 
two kinsmen and the Viscount, walked 
into the inner parlour reserved for the village 
aristocracy, and found therein a few neigh- 
bouring farmers listening to Sandy Mac's 
story about his guests, told many times that 
night. 

" Well," says Harold ; " so the baronet is 
here, Macliver. Is he as good-looking as the 
Tachbrooks generally ? " 

The farmers grinned and guffawed. 

" He 's not much to look at,'* said the Scot ; 
** but his wife 's a wonderful fine lady, and 
will have her way. She keeps Sir Harold 
in good order, 1 11 maintain." 

** Well," said the Troglodyte, ** bring some- 
thing cool in honour of the auspicious occa- 
sion. If that's Sir Harold Tachbrook, I'm 
his cousin ; so I must rejoice at his return." 

Thanks to Harold Tachbrook's having 
taken the inn under his management, it was 
possible to refresh one's self there without 
being poisoned. Our party of four listened 
to all the gossip of the evening, but said 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 6 1 

little themselves. Presently there was con- 
siderable ringing of bells, and it was an- 
nounced that Mrs Tachbrook and Lady Flora 
were going to bed. Not so Sir Harold ; he 
came heavily down-stairs, and exhibited 
himself at the front door in the moonlight, 
smoking the hugest Partagas ever seen. He 
looked the lord of the manor every inch . so 
far as swagger could do it. The two Harolds 
and Tixover examined him curiously. He 
' strolled down the village street, and looked 
to right and left as if it all belonged to him. 
Now Tixover had a good memory ; flying 
round the world in the Palinoura had not 
washed away his reminiscent faculty ; quite 
certain did he feel that he had seen the ill- 
favoured quasi-baronet before. Soon his 
faint idea took form, and he remembered 
that, a year or two before, as John Jobson 
this person had been brought up at Bow 
Street for ill-treating a woman who lived 
with him. This he mentioned to his com- 
panions, suggesting at the same time that 
such a fellow, baroneted, slightly intoxicated, 
and in a country town, would be likely 
enough to do something of an objectionable 




62 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

kind. He looked as if he were going out for 
a lark. 

"A fellow who has been known as Moses 
Hyam and John Jobson is a nice young man 
to walk into the baronetage/' said the Trog- 
lodyte. 

" Let us watch him, you and I/' said Tix 
to Tom. " Perhaps my instinct is prophetic. 
I often find it so." 

Harold and Gilbert strolled home quietly. 
The Viscount and Tom lounged and smoked 
on the unlighted side of the street. And 
the pre-imagined adventure arrived. 

When the quasi-baronet had walked down 
the village street, and looked at the great 
tower of Rothescamp Church with a pro- 
prietary eye, and observed that everybody 
seemed gone to bed or going, he walked back 
again toward Doctor Tachbrook's. There, 
late as it was growing for country habits, 
lights burnt in many windows. The Doctor 
had retired, but was studying in his own 
room : he knew from long experience that to 
exhaust the mind is the surest way to obtain 
sleep. Miranda had waited for her father 
(not to mention her lover), who was now 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 63 

having a quiet confabulation with Gilbert 
Tachbrook over the events of the evening. 
Miranda's maid, a little person called Jessy 
Hatton, finding that her mistress was sitting 
up late, stealthily slipped out by the side gate, 
in hope of encountering one of the many 
young men she knew. This Jessy had no 
particular harm in her; but she was pretty 
in a rustic way, and had many followers and 
flatterers ; and of moonlight nights she could 
not resist the temptation of waiting for an 
interview. A young person of this kind 
soon obtains clients. Jessy Hatton was 
popular among youthful louts, being wonder- 
fully stylish in her dress, and coquettish in 
her ways. 

Jessy had slipped out. She leaned over a 
wicket gate in the moonlight, waiting to see 
if any of her friends passed. She could hear 
therefrom the tinkle of her mistress's bell, 
and so felt safe. As she thus waited, the 
quasi-baronet came lazily up the street in 
search of adventure : when the full moon 
revealed to him a pretty little female figure 
in a charming attitude, he thought he had 
found what he wanted. The fluttering raiment 



^ 



64 . MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

of the flighty girl charmed him beneath the 
autumnal moon. He went up, and com- 
menced conversation. 

Jessy, the veriest gossip in Rothescamp, 
knew on the instant who he was. She had 
listened slyly while he was described at 
her master s table. She was quite ready for 
a little fun, and probably thought she could 
trust a baronet. 

All this while Tix and Tom had been on 
the trail. Jessy was induced to pass the gate, 
and there was a certain amount of kissing. 
Presently they observed that she was led into 
a dark corner of the lane, where moonlight 
penetrated not. They followed closely ; and 
suddenly there was a scream. Tix was 
ready : he sprang over a hedge upon the 
quasi-baronet, and grasped him too tightly 
to permit his escape; while Tom Jones' 
raised the young woman from the ground 
in a rumpled condition. 

" Where do you live ?'* said Tix to the girl, 
prompt in all his ways. " Who are you ?" 

She told him, whimpering. 

*' Go straight home. Don't go to bed, as 
I shall want to talk to you." 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 65 

She obeyed. The quasi-baronet, mean- 
while, was struggling to escape; but Tix 
held him like a vice, and would have knocked 
him on the head with a life-preserver if he 
had been troublesome. 

" Do you know who I am ?" he exclaimed, 
fiercely. 

" Yes," said the Viscount. " You are Moses 
Hyam, alias John Jobson. I know all about 
you." 

The man turned visibly pale in the moon- 
light, but said defiantly . 

** I am Sir .Harold Tachbrook, Baronet, of 
Rothescamp." 

" Are you ? We shall find that out. Come 
with me quietly. Where 's the police-station, 
I wonder?" 

"Better inquire at the inn," said Tom. 
But just at that moment, as they were round- 
ing the corner of the lane, a county policeman 
appeared, in the usual elegant attire. They 
took their prisoner and the policeman down 
to the front door of the Doctor's house, and 
Harold Tachbrook being summoned to their 
aid, made the constable take the baronet to the 
station. So that night Lady Flora slept alone. 

VOL. XL E 



66 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

When they had got this man quietly locked 
up, they returned to decide what should next 
be done. Miranda had already carpeted 
silly little Jessie, and found that this fellow 
had behaved in a rascally way to her. So 
they determined to treat him as he deserved, 
without any consideration of the position he 
daringly claimed. He was taken before the 
Elmwood bench of magistrates next morning 
. just when he expected to be amazing 
Rothescamp with his magnificence. The 
justices, in petty sessions assembled, would 
probably have been frightened if Doctor 
Tachbrook had not driven over ; but he took 
the chair, and keenly lectured the culprit, and 
caused him to pay a fine of five pounds. 
The fun of it was, that, under Tixover's wise 
advice, he was described as Moses Hyam,, 
alias John Jobson, alias Sir Harold Tach- 
brook, Baronet. 

To return to the " Tachbrook Arms." The 
ladies had gone quietly to bed, not altogether 
unused to the vagaries of Sir Harold. Lady 
Flora slept admirably, and, when breakfast 
was brought up, thought nothing at all about 
her lord and master. She expected him to 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 67 

appear in the course of the morning; and, 
after waiting a short while to see if he arrived, 
she ordered out the carriage, and went for a 
drive to Rothescamp-on-the-Hill. Four horses 
found it hard to tug the equipage up Long 
River. 

The proceedings of the ladies were noted 
by Sandy Mac, under orders from Harold 
Tachbrook, and, as a result thereof, Tom Jones 
found access to his mother at the time when 
Lady Flora was amusing herself, and when 
the quasi-baronet was before the magistrates. 
The old lady, once Priscilla Hartnoll, was a 
curious and not attractive character. She 
had married a boy much younger than herself, 
simply for mercenary considerations, and 
decidedly against his will ; she had plagued 
and worried him, and when he came to man- 
hood he revenged himself by using her 
cruelly. She hated him ; she cared little for 
her son, who was sent to a wretched school. 
When he ran away, disappearing for so many 
years, she quite believed him dead ; so, 
anxious to occupy a better position in the 
world, she found an unscrupulous associate, 
and taught him his lesson as well as she 



68 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

could. It may seem surprising that such a 
woman could be the mother of an honourable 
straightforward fellow like Tom Jones ; but 
life is full of anomalies. 

Sandy Mac showed him up-stairs, opened 
the door where the lady was sitting alone, 
and said . 

" Sir Harold Tachbrook, ma'am." 

Then he closed the door behind him, and 
Tom Jones stood looking at his mother with 
a strong feeling of pity and sorrow. Her 
life had been a failure throughout, and now 
she ended it with a conspiracy. 

As for her, she was completely startled. 
The strong and stalwart and sunburnt man 
before her was widely diflferent from the fair- 
haired boy whom she had sent away to Beck- 
ington school, yet there was something in his 
countenance which she could not help recog- 
nising. 

" Harold f^^ she said. 

"Yes, mother," said he. "I have come 
back to England at last You know me, 
don't you ? Look, here is the last thing you 
ever gave me." 

This was a curious little locket, with a fly 



1 



A MOONLIGHT STROLL AND ITS RESULTS. 69 

in amber, which, in some unusually amiable 
moment, she had given him, and which by- 
strange chance he had kept all these years. 
She remembered it well, but there was no 
need of the token. She knew he was her son 
the moment he spoke to her. She knew his 
voice better even than himself. She burst 
into tears,, exclaiming . 

" Yes, you are Harold. Oh ! how wicked 
I have been ! " 

Mrs Tachbrook and her son had a long con- 
versation, wherein she confessed everything. 
Harold Tachbrook the elder and the Trog- 
lodyte were waiting below all the time ; but 
Lord Tixover had gone to the magistrates' 
meeting to bear witness against the sham 
baronet. He was back at Rothescamp in 
good time, for Harold had lent him a horse ; 
hence it happened that he was one of the 
group at the inn door when the ramshackle 
fly hired by the quasi-baronet crept up, and 
that personage got out, looking rather less 
lofty than usual. Sandy Mac having been 
properly instructed, was on the watch, and 
intercepted him as he was about to enter the 



70 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

room in which Mrs Tachbrook was sitting, 
with . 

" Beg pardon, Mr Job^n, but Sir FTarold 
Tachbrook is with his mother at present." 

" Jobson ! Scoundrel ! What do you 
mean ? " 

" Well, Hyam perhaps. It does not much 
matter. Only, I wouldn't interrupt Sir Harold 
if I was you, for he 's rather hasty, and I do 
think Lady Jobson's coach has just driven 
up." 

This was so. Lady Flora came back in 
great disgust, for she could not obtain admis- 
sion on any pretext to the house at Rothes- 
camp-on-the-Hill. 

" 1 11 discharge all those fusty old servants," 
she said to herself, as she drove back to the 
" Tachbrook Arms." 

She ran up-stairs in wrath, and was almost 
upset by her own husband, who was rushing 
down-stairs in abject fear. He was more 
afraid of his wife than of anybody. He would 
have rushed distractedly away, never to 
return, but Tixover stopped him . 

" Look here, Jobson, alias Hyanr, alias 
Tachbrook, you are not going to run away. 



A MOONLIGHT STROJLL AND ITS RESULTS. 7 1 

Stay and see it out. Perhaps Sir Harold 
may think you worth horsewhipping or pro- 
secuting. Stay here." 

The poor devil stayed, in awful dread, and 
in a few minutes his worst fears were realised. 
Lady Flora had found Sir Harold with his 
mother, and had heard -the truth. First she 
would not believe it ; then she heaped terrible 
reproaches on Mrs Tachbrook, who certainly 
deserved them ; then she rushed down to find 
her rascally husband, exclaiming . 

" Where is the villain ? He shall be 
hanged." 

'* Leave her to me," said Tix. " I used to 
know her. Keep the fellow out of her sight." 

« 

As she came wildly into the inn passage, 
the Viscount met her. 

" Lady Flora," he said, catching her hand 
before she could pass, " how are you ?" 

" O let me go ! let me go ! " she cried. " I 
must kill that man." 

But Tixover managed to quiet her down, 
and she was induced to go to Doctor Tach- 
brook's house, and the old Doctor instantly 
took her in hand as a patient, seeing that her 
delicate condition and excitable character 



72 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

rendered care necessary. Of a truth, she was 
severely punished for marrying, for mercenary 
reasons, a man whom she despised. . 

Jobson, alias Hyam, was permitted to de- 
part, but a telegram was sent to Inspector 
Ubique to keep his eye on him. Mrs Tach- 
brook stayed a few days at the inn, and then 
went back to London. Sir Harold took care 
to make her comfortable, but his filial affec- 
tion was not strong enough to induce him to 
offer her a home at Rothescamp-on-the-Hill. 



CHAPTER VII. 

ROTHESCAMP-ON-THE-HILL. 
" hero gaude." 

Sir Harold Tachbrook, otherwise Tom 
Jones, was soon placed in possession of his 
rights, now that the imposture had collapsed. 
Although a man of few ambitions, he felt 
some satisfaction in becoming the master of 
a great estate. The old place on the hill 
was worth holding and worth investigating ; 
for its libraries and picture-galleries and 
cabinets had been left untouched since Sir 
Arthur went away to live a strange life at 
Venice. Although so high up on the hill, 
and accessible only by the white chalk road 
known as Long River, Rothescanlp House 



74 AHRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER ^LAJ)XESS. 

was a moated residence ; for the perennial 
rivulet Rothe rose higher up in the hills 
from a spring known as Rothe Well, and filled 
the Rothescamp moat before it ran rushing 
down into the valley. 

Old Doctor Tachbrook had not entered his 
grandfather s house for many a year ; it was 
with no slight pleasure that he guided over it 
the rightful heir, renewing the recollections of 
his youth. A quaint old mansion, moated, clear 
water in the moat, no entrance save across 
drawbridge and under portcullis, garden in 
terrace above terrace, a noble view for miles 
across the level country below. Moreover, 
there were secret passages and chambers . 
for the old Tachbrooks had been Catholic 
Caroline cavaliers, risking their heads and 
estates from Henry VIII.'s to Cromwell's 
time. One lost his head, but somehow the 
estate was retained. 

They were a joyous party, from the ancient 
physician to his youthful grand-daughter, when 
they reached the end of that tedious Long 
River, and entered the great hall of Rothes- 
camp. This hall was the most remarkable 
feature of the house. It was, apparently, the 



ROTHESC AMP-ON-THE-HILL. 7 5 

full height of the building, the roof being on 
old oak rafters, and the wall, from floor to 
roof, being about sixty feet in height. Round 
the hall ran tier above tier of gallery, all 
carved black oak. It was impossible to 
enter this noble room without admiration : 
and Miranda was in ecstasy. 

"O grandpapa!" she ejaculated, "what a 
lovely place ! Fancy its being yours, Tom !" 

" Ours, you mean," he said. 

The old Doctor was peering curiously 
around, and trying to remember what he had 
heard and what he had known of the secrets 
of the house. At last he exclaimed . 

" Now, I recollect. We must get some 
candles. I want to show you a secret pas- 
sage. Sir Harold." 

Candles obtained, the servants were dis- 
missed, and the Doctor led the way. The 
passage from the hall to its galleries was 
wide and well-lighted, winding, however, 
rather curiously. On the first-landing hung a 
picture. Doctor Tackbrook touched a spring 
therein, and it swung on a central hinge. 
There was revealed a steep narrow stone 
staircase, which ran between the walls, and 




76 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

here and there received dim light from care- 
fully concealed arrowsHts. After stiff climb- 
ing, they reached a kind of platform laid upon 
the rafters of the hall, from a hole in which 
it was easy to see all that was doing in the 
hall below. 

*' What do you think this means ? " said 
the Doctor, as soon as he had recovered 
breath. 

" It looks like a cave," said the Troglodyte. 

Doctor Tachbrook, candle in hand, groped 
around the wall, and at last exclaimed, ** Ah ! 
I have found what I wanted. You would 
hardly think I have never been here before." 

He touched a button ; a door opened, this 
time by sliding into the wall ; and they were 
in a large square chamber, with three windows 
in three sides of the room, all thoroughly 
covered with the cobwebs of years. On the 
fourth side was a superb bed, undisturbed, 
with tapestry hangings, embroidered coverlet, 
carved posts. On a dressing-table stood tall 
wax candles in silver stands ; every appoint- 
ment of the chamber was magnificent. * 

"Well!" exclaimed Viscount Tixover, 
.*this looks like romance." 



ROTHESCAMP-ON-THE-HILL. 7 7 

" It is romance," said the Doctor. " I have 
never entered this room before ; but my father 
told me how to find the way. This room was a 
place of refuge for fugitives in troublous times 
. days when first the Rothescamps, and then 
the Tachbrooks, loved to fight on the weaker 
side. Somewhere or other in the library there 
is supposed to be a manuscript history of this 
room, and of all who inhabited it. If we 
could find it, the information it contains would 
be valuable." 

" How would it do for a bridal chamber ?" 
whispered Tom Jones to Miranda, whose 
reply was unheard. 

Dr Tachbrook, at Sir Harold*s request, 
was induced to stay a while at Rothescamp. 
He had lived to old age within easy distance 
of the ancestral house, and had seen scarce 
anything of it since his early boyhood. Now 
he could enjoy it thoroughly, and he passed 
long days in looking through the old house, 
and investigating all its secrets. Of course 
Miranda, as a good grand-daughter, stayed 
with him . an arrangement whereto Sir 
Harold seemed not to object. 

Love-making was the primary idea with 




78 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

him and Miranda just then : they had a 
pleasant time of it, and made up their minds 
to be married on May Day, by which time 
the old house would be in good order, and 
all the new baronet's affairs pretty well 
settled. Diabolic dilatoriness is the master- 
genius of attorneys ; and although Sher- 
wood, junior, was prompt for a legal man, 
he did not care to show unbusiness - like 
haste in terminating a profitable transaction. 
Now Tom (I must call him Tom sometimes, 
since Miranda almost always did) wanted 
everything thoroughly ship-shape before he 
married ; so the marriage was fixed for the 
first of May, and Sherwoods' firm were 
warned that they must by that time get 
their business completed. 

" They '11 have to do it," said Sir Harold, 
fiercely, " or I '11 get rid of them altogether." 

Miranda laughed at him. 

** Be patient, you absurd boy," she said. 
" We see each other all day long, don't we ? " 

" You are a nice baby to call me a boy," 
he said. " Don't I remember you a plump 
little rascal in short frocks . ^very short, in- 
deed ? " 



ROTHESCAMP-ON-THE-HILL. 79 

" If I 'm a baby, there 's all the more reason 
I should not be married just yet. Come, 
sir. Well, we shall see. I shall marry you 
just when I like. Don't be disobedient." 

After all, Miranda was only just on the 
verge of nineteen, and Tom was in the 
prime of youth, and there really was no 
hurry. 

Sir Harold, as Tom must be called on 
great occasions, though he will be Tom 
Jones always to Miranda and her father, 
insisted on everybody spending Christmas 
at Rothescamp. Tixover was willing enough, 
only he protested that his friend would get 
tired of him ; whereon Sir Harold strongly 
ejaculated . 

*'You didn't tire of me, Tix, aboard the 
Palinourar 

" Who said I did, old boy ? Well, I '11 
stay with you on one condition." 

'* What ^s that ? " 

** Tell you presently. Try and persuade 
your other guests.^' 

The Doctor was willing enough, desiring 
to carry on his investigations in the amazing 
old house. So was Harold Tachbrook, who 



8o MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

indeed passed between his father's house 
and his cousin's many times a day, and was 
managing matters for his old comrade in a 
masterly manner . uniting frugality with 
generosity. Harold had a hundred plans for 
making the great Rothescamp estates perfect 
for landlord and tenants and labourers, which 
he was resolved to make Sir Harold accept 
and adopt so soon as things were in free 
working order. 

The Troglodyte, however, wanted to get 
away; but his friends would not let him. 
Too obvious was it there Was some attrac- 
tion in Sark beyond Adam and Eve ; but to 
allow Gilbert Tachbrook to slip away from 
these grand Christmas festivities was clearly 
out of the question. So he had to promise 
to remain ; and he did so the more willingly 
when he heard the Viscount's proposal. 

" I '11 spend Christmas with you, Tom, if 
you '11 let me take you to spend your honey- 
moon on board the Paltnoura. She can 
steam " 

"She can," said Sir Harold, enthusiasti- 
cally. 

"There's room for two or three honey- 



ROTHESCAMP-ON-THE-HILL. 8 1 

moon couples in the cabins at the lobster s 
head," he went on. " Perhaps Mr Gilbert 
Tachbrook would come." 

" Where do you think of going ? " asked 
Miranda. 

" To the Island of Hawks, if nobody 
objects. Wouldn't Adam and Eve like to 
go?" 

So it was arranged that Sir Harold should 
giye them a merry Christmas, and that Tix- 
over should be master of the honeymoon 
revels. Events occurred which rendered 
both festivities more amusing than was anti- 
cipated. 



VOL. II. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

. ELLA. 

" The prettiest Irish lass that yet 
Was photographed in chemisette, 
Whence all might mark the shoulder fine' 
That notes the illustrious Geraldine." 

Sir Arthur Tachbrook, grandfather of our 
friend Tom, married Ella Geraldine. When 
Tom came into his kingdom, he naturally 
received family information of various kinds ; 
and he and Miranda were much delighted by 
some pleasant letters that reached them from 
a second or third or something cousin, who 
bore the same name as Lady Tachbrook. 
They were full of a lively wit that sprang 
spontaneous, like the fresh flash of a moun- 
tain stream. This unknown cousin was 
staying at Beechampton Castle . seat of Lord 



ELLA. 83 

Beechampton, known heretofore as the Hon- 
ourable Harold Hastings, but who had 
happily obtained his long-delayed succession. 
Sir Harold asked her to come to Rothes- 
camp, and she accepted the invitation. 

Having to describe loveliness in woman is 
always difficult in prose, though it may some-* 
times be managed in poetry. Ella was a 
complete contrast to Miranda, whose aureate 
hair and tarn-brown eyes had something 
unique about them. Perhaps the reader may 
be left to imagine Ella, premising that she 
had the loveliest and most musical Irish 
brogue, and that her white shoulders had 
that perfect curve which is an immemorial 
inheritance of the Geraldines. 

When she came to Rothescamp, Miranda 
was there to receive her, and a very pretty 
picture they made together. She reached the 
house about half an hour before dinner . which 
is a very convenient time for arriving at a 
country-house. The party assembled were 
seven. in number . the Doctor, the two Har- 
olds, the Troglodyte, Tixover, Miranda, Ella. 
The old house had dining-rooms for several 
purposes ; that in which our party met was 



84 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

specially contrived for a small dinner in 
winter. A famous wood-fire burnt upon 
the dogs, but the vaulted roof prevented the 
room from being close. The dinner w^as 
that sort of dinner which consoles one for an 
English winter . oysters and game and wald 
fowl being obtainable, and mutton capable of 
being hung, and port-wine grateful to the 
palate. Miranda and Ella chatted merrily ; 
they found they suited each other. 

" I hope you 're a Jacobite, Miss Geral- 
dine," says Miranda. " We have . ^there is, I 
mean . such a lovely mysterious chamber 
here." 

"You may say we have, Miranda, if you 
like," interposed Tom. " It 's yours from 
this day." 

" O, I'm a Jacobite," quoth Ella. " And 
I shall like to see your wonderful old 
chamber. It is underground, I suppose.*' 

"No, in the roof," said Miranda. "You 
must climb up and see it to-morrow." 

" Tix," said Tom, " give the ladies some 
champagne. I haven't set up a butler yet" 

" When you do, you '11 be sorry for it," said 
the Viscount. " A butler is a nightmare in 



ELLA. 85 

a white choker. He conceives that he is 
engaged because he knows good wine from 
bad, and you don't ; so in the distribution of 
wine he acts equitably. He likes good wine, 
and knows it when he tastes ; any wine will 
do for^^^. You see the inference.** 

" There used to be good butlers, honourable 
and able men, years ago," said Dr Tachbrook. 
" There are few now, I fear. People are 
growing beyond service, and want to be 
thoroughly independent ; they begin to think 
it a crime to serve God." 

" The whirligig of time will bring in its 
revenges, father," said Harold. " We shall 
have to dispense with servants, and do our 
own work. I am willing. No man is his own 
master unless he can be his own servant." 

" Faith," said Tix, " you learn to be your 
own servant at sea. I 'm very much of 
opinion that if gentlemen were to strike, it 
would have a capital effect. Send away all 
your servants ; shut your doors against all 
your tradesmen. If you've land, grow your 
own eatables. If not, go to the chief markets, 
and buy cheaply." 

" You can't grow your own wine. Lord 



86 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Tixover," said the Doctor, "unless you annex 
France." 

" Not such claret as this," said the Vis- 
count, "certainly. And I am afraid that if 
we annexed France it would be more trouble- 
some than Ireland." ^ 

" How you English will abuse Ireland ! " 
exclaimed Ella. " Let us alone ; give us 
our own parliament ; we '11 soon prove we are 
wiser people than you." '" 

" No politics," said Sir Harold. " They 're 
dangerous with an Irish lady present Do 
you know. Miss Geraldine, your pretty name 
always makes me think of my grandmother ?" 

" It 's only the name, I should think," said 
Tixover. " Miss Ella looks a great deal more 
like your grand-daughter." 

" I »^«^/look rather childish, if that 's true," 
said Ella. 

" Is Beechampton as young as ever ?" asked 
Doctor Tachbrook. " I used to know him at 
Fernley Chase years ago." 

" He is in capital condition," replied Miss 
Geraldine. " Obtaining the earldom at last 
has made him young again. Beechampton 
de is full of brilliant society, and the 




ELLA. 8 7 

estates are rapidly getting into better order. 
You will see that everything will improve 
with his wonderful energy at work." 

" I am glad he has come into the estates," 
said the Doctor. " He 's the very man to 
do good in such a position, without doing 
harm. He might give you some useful hints. 
Sir Harold." 

" I must try to make his acquaintance," 
replied Tom. " I like men of his stamp ; 
they seem made of stronger stuff than is com- 
mon now-a-days." 

" Don't run down your own generation," 
said Tixover. " I won't acknowledge my- 
self weaker than my ancestors. Probably 
Beechampton is quite as fine a fellow as that 
forefather of his who fought with the Black 
Prince at Poictiers, and built a castle out of 
the ransoms of his prisoners." 

" Beechampton would take fighting just as 
coolly as he takes deer-stalking or buffalo- 
hunting," said the Doctor. " That I fancy 
is the temper of his race. They have the 
wild strong blood of the Vikings in their 
veins." 

" He 's a man worth knowing," remarked 




88 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the Troglodyte. "It is a fine thing to have 
a good ancestry, and a finer thing to exceed 
one 's family average." 

" I wonder who is the finest specimen of 
the Tachbrooks ?" said Harold. 

" Your daughter," said the Viscount, 
whereat Miranda blushed. 

Miranda and Ella took thoroughly to each 
other. Our nymph from the sea had scanty 
experience of English life, having remained 
at Rothescamp since her return to England. 
So she was glad to listen to the Geraldihe's 
sprightly pictures of life in great houses, 
where each day had its new device, each 
night its fresh pageant. This she could 
repay by a narrative of her adventures, full 
of the keen breath of the sea. Of course the 
culminating adventure of the May marriage 
with Sir Harold was the most absorbing of 
all : IE 11a was delighted with so romantic a 
climax to a life-long romance. 

" Tom," said Miranda, when he and the 
two young ladies were walking up and down 
the terrace one crisp November afternoon, 
V you must keep up some pleasant festivities all 
Ae year round when you are settled down." 



ELLA. 89 

Tom was smoking . too ancient a mariner 
not to love the enchanting weed. After a 
philosophic puff, he replied. 

" Yes ; anything you like. Christmas 
mummery and Midsummer madness. Ha! 
here comes Tix : he shall advise us. By 
Jove ! what has he got ?" 

For the Viscount was striding along at his 
usual swift pace when he had anything to 
do, carrying in one hand a pretty large 
hamper. When he reached the other three, 
he put the hamper on the walk, sat upon it, 
and wiped his brow. 

"Pooh! I'm hot, though the weather's 
cold, and growing colder. Tom, Long 
River *s a heavy pull with a hamper to 
carry." 

"Why in the world did you do it, and 
what 's in the hamper ? " 

" I did it," said Tix, ^* because that ridicu- 
lous old Scotchman down at the Tachbrook 
Arms hadn't sense enough to send it up here 
when it came in by the coach yesterday. Sol 
gave him a grave lecture on the importance 
of punctuality, especially on the part of 
Caledonians. He wanted to send it up, but 




go MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

I said no ; I 'd take it myself. He looked 
quite appalled at the idea of a fellow with a 
handle to his name carrying a hamper up 
Long Riyer." 

"You don't tell us what it is," said Miranda; 
" I hope it's worth the trouble." 

" Give me a cigar ta cool me, Tom, and 
tell me where to get some claret-cup.'' 

"In November!'* 

" If a man is hot in November, why should 
he not try to cool himself? Come, let me 
have something icy, and I '11 tell you the 
contents of the hamper." 

Sir Harold rang a large handbell that lay 
on a garden seat, and quickly a servant 
appeared. 

" Ask them to make some claret-cup 
as fast as possible, and not to forget the 
cura9oa." 

Awaiting the arrival of this cooling bever- 
age, Tixover walked up and down the terrace, 
smoking serenely. 

" Well," said Miranda, " if we are not to be 
enlightened as to the mystery of the hamper, 
will you give us information as to what Tom 
and I were just now talking about ? We want 



ELLA. 9 1 

by and by to enjoy life on a grand scale 
making our pleasures artistic and useful. Can 
it be done ?" 

"Donel Easily. Revert to old English 
modes of enjoyment. We have not half the 
poetic instinct our ancestors had. Spenser 
wrote marriage-rhymes; Jonson and Milton 
wrote masques. The high life of the present 
day is all ostentation and expense. The deli- 
cate and exquisite methods of enjoyment 
which were familiar to the Elizabethan period 
are lost in the Victorian. We have got duller 
during the last fifty years, as the Malmesbury 
correspondence proves. But London, under 
George IV., was infinitely duller than under 
Elizabeth. In everything, except fast travel, 
high prices, and expensive dinners, we have 
been rapidly going down-hill. That facilis 
descensus Averno is not likely to be reverted. 
Ha ! here comes the cup." 

It came, and was approved, though already 
the sharp November air was producing hoar- 
frost on the grass. 

" Now,*' said Tom, '* let's have your ham- 
per opened, Tix. What 's in it ? " 

" Skates ! " he said emphatically. 



92 MIRAXDA ; A MIDSCHUER MADNESS. 

*' Skates ? " exclaimed everybcxly. 

" Yes ; I sent to Loodon for an assortment, 
for a meteorologist I keep at Tixover Hall 
tells me every day what is likely to happen 
tx>-morTow. There's a skin of ice on the 
moat already, and I believe to-morrow it will 
bear. I thought you would like to have some 
skating, so I sent for a lot that I expect will 
fit everybody." 

" How delightful ! "' exclaimed Ella. " I 
love skating ; it is such charming easy grace- 
ful exercise." 

" I have never seen it even," said Miranda. 

" I used to skate at school," said Tom 
Jones. " It 's a good many years back, but I 
think I could manage to balance myself, and 
even to teach you, Miranda." 

" Not a bit of it," rejoined the Viscount, 
'* I '11 teach Miss Tachbrook, for I 'm the 
champion skater of England, Do you take 
lessons from Miss Geraldine. Shall we try 
the ice to-morrow morning ?" 

i,jce was tried next day at an early 

ants, and was found to be 

tix, leader of the party, 

Fitesting it. Though it was 




ELLA. 93 

November, lovely sunshine made the day 
delightful ; but the thermometer was low, and 
the ice was firm ; and the moat was wide, and 
the scene was pretty when the ladies sat 
down to be fitted with skates. Fitting a lady 
with skates is just one of those things that an 
artist, with a love of ankles, can sketch ex- 
cellently. 

Tixover skated like an angel. Indeed, 
there were few things the Viscount could not 
do. He skated amazingly ; he taught Miranda 
to skate ; while Ella, who was a thorough 
flyer, soon brought Tom back to his ancient 
capacity. What a schoolboy learns he does 
not easily forget. As to the other members 
of the party, it is hardly necessary to say that 
they made several stars upon the ice, and 
were very glad to get home to dinner. 



CHAPTER IX. 

CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. 

" The Duke. . . . Let there be stately pageants, 
And fair soft music wedded to sweet words, 
And quaint old stories very soothly told. 
At Christmas-time. 

** The Troubadour. . . . My lord, it shall be so ; 
Yet also there should be some gay caprices i 
Of frolic sort, to suit the youths and maidens, 
And some grim ghastliness of spectral legend 
To frighten them away to bed. 

"The Duchess. . . . Ay ! mingle 

Poetic thought with thought of fright and frolic. 

And you will suit us all." . 0/d Play, 

Christmas at Rothescamp was a thoroughly 
pleasant time. Tixover took the affair in 
hand, and exhibited inexhaustible resources. 
He developed himself; he developed every- 
body else. Nobody had the least idea before 



p 



CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. 95 

that the Viscount could write verse ; but he shut 
himself up one very drizzly day, and knocked 
off a masque in the style of Ben Jonson, and 
positively induced Doctor Septimus Tach- 
brook to take part in it. Then he worried 
Tom Jones into writing a farce in one act. 
Then he plagued the Troglodyte into pro- 
ducing a short but very ghostly melodrama. 
And he compelled everybody to join in the 
amusements, and he made Harold Tachbrook 
take the actual business in hand ; and he 
altogether surprised everybody . himself in- 
cluded. 

The three dramatic performances took 
place in the noble hall of Rothescamp, and 
were several times repeated to large audi- 
ences ; for Sir Harold invited his tenants to 
pass Christmas with him, and bring their 
wives and children, whence it followed that 
there was a very full house night after night. 
There was ample room, without using that 
secret chamber in the roof. 

As in duty bound, the audience cheered 
the lord of the manor's farce above every- 
thing. It really was not bad ; for he took 
up and caricatured the proceedings of an 



i 



96 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

impostor who professed to be heir to an 
estate ; and he cleverly parodied the circum- 
stances and characters known to his audience. 
In his farce the story was reversed, and the 
impostor got the best of it ; but he was then 
taken into the social arena, 'and made such a 
fool of himself among lords and ladies that 
his true position in life was revealed. It was 
great fun ; and, as it had been agreed that 
everybody should act a part in his own play, 
Tom Jones acted the sham baronet, and was 
amazingly successful. 

The Troglodyte, under orders from the 
Viscount, got up a miraculous melodrama 
of the sea ; it was entitled, The Haunted 
Island, or the Spectral Pirate. This island 
was not altogether unlike the one on which he 
had spent so many years of his life ; and the 
central figure, played, of course, by himself, 
was the grim ghost of a giant buccaneer, who, 
in his lifetime, had buried an immense treasure 
there, and who now made midnight horrible 
by trying to find it there. Tix, who was a 
capital hand at scene-painting, splashed off 
two contrasts . first, the island in days of 
piracy, with caverns and other wild arrange- 



CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. 97 

ments, and the buccaneers smoking in their 
hammocks, with nude negresses to wait on 
them ; then the island built over with modern 
** villas" at forty pounds a year, with gas and 
water laid on, and the mighty ghost of the 
pirate chief, shovel on shoulder, knocking at 
midnight at the door of No. 7 to request per- 
mission to dig a hole in the cellar. A small 
policeman, in a large hat, retreating round 
the corner, rather heightened the effect. In 
the melodrama itself, the ghost managed to 
appear at midnights the most unseasonable. 
At No. 7, an elderly gentleman was dying, 
and disgusted his heir by recovering on the 
ghost's arrival. At No. 8, opposite the sea, Mr 
Romeo and Mrs Juliet Smith («/<? Jones) were 
spending the first night of their honeymoon, 
and exasperated Romeo threw some heavy 
piece of furniture out of window on the head 
of the unlucky ghost. At No. 9, there was a 
meeting of gentlemen and ladies for the pur- 
pose of spirit-rapping and table-turning. when 
a real ghost dropt in, they disappeared with 
alacrity. In this way did the Troglodyte per- 
form his task, and there was general approval. 
Tixover's masque was caviare to the 

VOL. II. G 



98 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

general. It was a new reading of The Tern- 
pesty with Doctor Tachbrook as Prospero, 
Miranda as Miranda, Ella as Ariel, himself as 
Ferdinand. Can it not be conceived how 
thoroughly like the ducal magician of the 
island Dr Septimus looked, with a long ivory 
wand, a costume of black velvet, lighted up 
only by his flame-coloured cap and his keen 
bright eyes. Miranda was all in Kendal 
green, with touches of white lace . appro- 
priately reminding one of the sea's shallow 
emerald, flecked with snowy foam. Ella was 
a very dainty and delicate Ariel, whose songs 
were sweetened by the brogue. Of her dress 
there is not much to be said, for in sooth there 
was not much of it, and what there was 
appeared to be a cloud of silvery gauze. 
There could not be a finer chance of showing 
the Geraldine shoulder. 

Tix's masque was all in blank verse that 
the audience thought wonderful ; but, as verse 
is not so popular as prose now-a-days, its pub- 
lication may be deferred. Still, as the poetry 
of peers has, since Byron's time, been tole- 
rated, it may be worth while to give one of 
Ariel's songs . 



CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. 99 

" Oh ! why was I made a sprite, ohone ! 
In the air to take delight, alone ? 
To fly where swallow 
Dare never follow, 
To dip where no petrel's known. 

" Ah ! yes, 'tis pleasant to fly afar. 
To lose one's self between sky and star. 
To sleep, a vagrant, 
'Mid roses fragrant. 
When the winglets weary are. 

** Yet I 'd rather be a girl on land. 
With warm white waist and a pearl-flushed hand, 

Like that Miranda 

'Neath cool veranda. 
Where she coos to Ferdinand." 

Let it not be thought that Tix irreverently 
burlesqued Shakespeare. Far too deep a 
reverence had he for the greatest of English- 
men. He merely put four of his characters 
into new positions ; and the only criticism of 
an adverse character passed upon them by 
the audience was, that Miranda might have 
preferred another Ferdinand, and that Ariel 
looked just a trifle too real for a sprite. As 
to the Doctor, he is irreverently nicknamed 
Prospero to this day. 

It was two hours past midnight when these 
three entertainments were ended ; but nobody 
in the company seemed sleepy, and the great 



lOO MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

logs sparkled and burnt blue with a brilliancy 
that told of frost outside and comfort within ; 
and everybody had suitable refreshment, for 
Tom Jones had fitted up a buffet in the great 
hall, and put some servitresses behind it, and 
supplied all imaginable comestibles. For 
the ladies there were lobster-salads, oyster- 
patties, cold chicken and game, ices, effer- 
vescent wines; for stronger appetites, great 
rounds of beef, boars' heads, mighty pasties 
of Rothescamp venison, tankards of ale 
brewed in some long-forgotten October. 

" Let us try a charade ! " suddenly ex- 
claimed Sir Harold, when, after the Viscount's 
masque was over, and everybody had taken 
refreshment, there seemed a lull in the 
evening's stir. 

" Wouldn't a proverb be better ?" said the 
elder Harold. ** A contented mind is worth 
two in the bush, for instance." 

*^ By Jove!" said Tom, "you oughtn't to 
have spoken that so loud. You and I were 
* two in the bush ' at one time ; and I think 
we had contented minds." 

Doctor Tachbrook was close to them at this 
moment, and said . 



CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. 101 

" Good-night, boys, I 'm going to bed. 
Don't bum the house down. And don't try 
any charades or proverbs. Dance. It will 
digest your suppers and delight the girls." 

As there was a fine bevy of farmers' wives 
and daughters, the proposal was received 
with acclamation. But how about music ? 
Even Tix had not thought of that. There 
was a piano in the hall ; but neither Miranda 
nor Ella cared to sit down and play dance 
music. As they were discussing this difficult 
question, Farmer Bering, an ox-like man, 
impelled by his pretty daughter Susan, came 
up and made a suggestion. 

" Beg pardon. Sir Harold, but Jack Halkin's 
the best fiddler in this shire." 

"Who's Jack Halkin, Mr Bering?" ^sked 
Tom Jones. 

" Why, he 's your honour's footman," said 
the farmer, with a grin. " I suppose you calls 
him John ; but he 's been Jack ever since he 
and I were flogged at school together, which 
was pretty often." 

" Bring him here," says Tom. ** John, 
where are you ? " 

John, a tallish fellow, with a face of im- 



102 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

mense gravity, under which lurked the merry 
devil of humour, was brought forward to his 
master. 

"John," said Tom Jones, '*turn yourself 
into Jack at once. Fetch your best fiddle 
and play us your merriest tune ; and if you 
use your elbow well, a^d make the girls 
dance, you shall see what I '11 give you." 

It was a merry scene in that great hall 
when Jack struck up and the dance began. 
Here and there the execution was not elegant, 
but this was compensated by energy and 
vigour. Susan Bering, for example, the 
pretty girl who had caused her father to bring 
the fiddling footman to the front, was about 
as light-footed as an elephant, and the strong 
oak floor seemed to tremble under her. Tix, 
a lover of heroic achievement, determined to 
tire her out ; so he got Jier as partner for a 
polka, and told Jack Halkin to play the 
" Firefly " at double quick, and whirled the 
farmer's buxom daughter around at such a 
prodigious pace that she had no breath in 
her body when he took her to a seat, and an 
immediate restorative became necessary. 

** Heavenly ! " she exclaimed, when the 



CHRISTMAS AT ROTHESCAMP. IO3 

restorative had been administered. She may 
have meant the milk-punch, or the polka, or 
her partner. 

"How shamefully you are flirting with that 
young woman!" said Miranda to the Vis- 
count, presently ; " you 11 break her heart, 
and her rustic lover will break your head." 

" Yes," said Ella ; " and then you can both 
be buried in one grave." 

"Jack Halkin is a famous fiddler," said 
Tix ; " he 's one of the few men who can 
make the strings talk, and whose tunes run 
so gaily that you couldn't help dancing if you 
had two wooden legs. What a shame he 
should be a footman ! " 

" Pooh ! " says Tom, " he 's promoted from 
to-night. I '11 take him out of livery and 
make him my musician. There is a lot of 
remarkable old fiddles in this curiosity shop, 
he shall have his pick of them." 

Tom kept his word ; and the fiddler, pro- 
moted from John to Jack, and from footman 
to musician, selected a Stradivarius. 



CHAPTER X. 



tixo\'er's dilemma. 



" Some men change hourly, some men never change : 
The best are changeful and unchangeable." 

Christmas festivities come to an end at last. 
The party dispersed. The farmers and their 
wives and daughters went home delighted 
with their entertainment ; they had enjoyed 
the fun and the fare, and came to the con- 
clusion that the new Sir Harold was one of 
the right sort. Miranda was doubly popular, 
triply indeed . for herself, for her grand- 
father's sake, and for her wondrous adven- 
tures. All the tenantry on the estate were 
delighted with the prospect of a Tachbrook 
marrying a Tachbrook. Doctor Tachbrook 



TIXOVERS DILEMMA. IO5 

was a power in Rothescamp. During the 
long absence of the heads of the house from 
the vicinage, he had been their indirect re- 
presentative, keeping alive in the neighbour- 
hood the knowledge that the Tachbrooks were 
still in existence. He had been for more 
years than any inhabitant of the village could 
remember the connecting link between the 
gentry and commonalty ; wherefore he had 
such influence as no lord of Rothescamp 
had possessed for many a year, and the 
people were all the ^better pleased with their 
young landlord when they knew he was to 
marry his cousin. 

** They '11 just fit each other, and they'll 
just fit us," said stout farmer Bering (when 
he and his wife and daughter were talking 
over the festivities). " I never saw such jolly 
fun, or ate such good beef and ale. May 
Sir Harold live to be as old as the Doctor, 
I say.'' 

** The Doctor's good for twenty years yet,'' 
said Mrs Dering. 

" I hope so," replied the farmer. " And 
what a fine sort Mr Gilbert is ! . and Mr 
Harold too." 



I06 MIRAXDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADXESS. 

" But what do you think erf the young 
lord ? " asked Susan, timidly. 

** I think he dances wonderful fast," said 
the farmer. " Don t let him turn your 
silly little head, Susie, as he turned you 
about in that dance." 

The Troglodj-te found it necessary to 
leave Rothescamp the moment the festival 
of Christmas was well over. His nominal 
attraction was Adam and Eve. The Vis- 
count every morning said he must go away 
and look after the Palinoura ; but a strange 
fatality appeared to render it impossible. He 
stayed on, and talked to the Doctor and the 
ladies, while Tom and Harold (the two 
Harolds) were busy as bees in bringing the 
estate into order. The Doctor delighted in 
his tales of adventure, his gaiety of heart, his 
capacity to turn his hand to everything. 
Dry den, in lines far fuller of power than Pope's 
character, has given us the famous Duke, 
who . 

. . . In the course of one revolving moon, 
Was chymist, statesman, fiddler, and buffoon." 

Our friend Tix, however, with no buffoonery 
m him, had a happy versatility. 



tixover's dilemma. 107 

" He, in the course of one revolving day, 
Could woo a lady and invent a play ; 
And in the brief lapse of a moon would go 
Through Quixote, Suckling, Rupert, Romeo- 
Rescue a damsel, write a lyric, fight 
Fierce as a lion, and make love at night." 

Everybody was glad to retain him at Rothes- 
camp : he was the life and soul of the small 
party left there. By Tom's special request, 
and under the Doctor's guidance, he explored 
the old house from cellar-floor to roof- 
summit: and many odd little discoveries 
were made which need not here be recorded. 
Miranda and Ella were his efficient assist- 
ants: now and then Miranda, with a pretty 
craftiness, would profess important affairs . 
something to do for herself or to say to her 
grandfather. and thus find pretext for leaving 
him and Ella alone. 

One January day after breakfast they all 
went to skate on the moat. Everybody 
could skate by this time ; but no one could 
touch the matchless ease and swiftness and 
capricious motion of the Viscount, who 
seemed scarcely to touch the ice, so easily 
did he travel over it. When they had got 
themselves thoroughly hot . as pleasant a 



I08 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sensation on a winter day as to be thoroughly 
cool on a summer day . they went into lunch. 
Thereafter the two Harolds had business ; 
and the Doctor asked Miranda to write a few 
letters for him, for she wrote a rarely clear 
and well-formed hand for a lady: and so 
Tix and Ella were left to their own devices. 
They went off together for further explora- 
tion of the odd nooks and comers in the 
famous old house. 

At dinner neither the Viscount nor Miss 
Geraldine appeared. They had not been 
noticed since luncheon by any of the ser- 
vants. Their rooms were unoccupied and 
undisturbed. There was a slight panic 

" It 's all right," said Tom Jones, helping 
the clear turtle. " Tix invariably falls on his 
feet If you dropt him into the crater of a 
volcano, it would erupt and throw him just 
into Tixover Hall. Perhaps he has been 
caught in the snow somewhere." 

" But where is Ella ? " asked Miranda. 

" With Tix, I should think," said her 
cousin. " She showed affectionate proclivity 
towards him. Perhaps they are just on the 
verge of a proposal." 



tixover's dilemma. 109 

" Perhaps they have been skating on the 
moat, and got drowned," suggested Harold 
Tachbrook the elder. 

" Perhaps they have gone away and got 
married," said Miranda, 

** Perhaps they have lost their way in this 
old house," said the Doctor. 

. . - . . . 

In " playing perhapses," . a Devonshire 
game, . the Doctor was winner. Tixover and 
Ella, in the course of their investigations, 
had gone up to the secret chamber in the 
roof, where the Viscount thought he per- 
ceived traces of undiscovered mystery. He 
imagined that the history of the chamber 
itself, whereof Doctor Septimus had spoken, 
might be in some recondite depository. 

The windows looking across the great 
irregular roof revealed different views of the 
beautiful country around. Southward lay 
the finest view, for there the rivulet Rothe 
danced merrily down over moorland and 
through woodland, till it was lost in a great 
river that passed in silent stately fashion to 
the sea. Here the Viscount and Ella stood 
for a while, looking out upon the bright 



no MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

landscape, while a slight fall of snow began 
to drive across the valley. 

" I wish it would snow fast,'' said Ella. 
" I have always had an idea that I should 
like to be snowed in somewhere." 

" With a pleasant party and plenty to eat 
and drink," said the Viscount. 

" Exactly," she replied. " Dear me, how 
much faster the snow is falling ! It looks as 
if we might be snowed up, after all." 

" Well, we 'd have some more fun, without 
the farmers." 

" And without the farmers' daughters, my 
lord ? I fear you could hardly amuse your- 
self in that case." 

" Ho, ho!" thinks the Viscount, "the child's 
jealous. That's a good sign." For Tix 
was already beginning to think that the gay 
vivacious Irish girl would make him just the 
wife he wanted . if he wanted a wife. 

Tix, however, was not at all certain he did 
want a wife. He was a professed knight- 
errant. He was pledged to rescue and pro- 
tect all the distressed damsels he could find. 
How could he do this if he devoted himself 
to one especial damsel ? 



tixover's dilemma. 1 1 1 



Moreover, there was the Palinourd. A 
yachtsman is wedded to his yacht, especi- 
ally when it is something new in idea. It is 
his bride. He naturally thinks it the fastest 
and safest thing afloat, and if anybody ven- 
tures to contradict him, he resents the remark 
as a stain upon his honour. The Viscount 
was quite as much enamoured of his own 
yacht as anybody that loves salt water : and 
he wondered to himself that a fancy for a 
pretty Irish girl could keep him so long away 
from the inimitable Palinoura. 

Thoughts like these flashed across his 
mind as, by Ella's side, he looked out from 
the highest window in Rothescamp on a 
snow-storm that rapidly whitened the moor- 
land below. But the poor Palinouray in his 
lordship's affection, had to give way to Ella ; ' 
and he was on the very verge of throwing 
himself on his companion's mercy. That he 
did not do so was due to the fact that a vivid 
flash of lightning suddenly cut through the 
snow, and was followed at once by a hoarse 
and heavy roar of thunder. A winter thunder- 
storm, wherein snow falls instead of rain, is 
one of the most grand of meteoric phenomena : 



112 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the Steel-blue lightning zigzagging across the 
heavy lines of falling snow had a strange and 
fascinating effect. The Viscount and Ella 
forgot the lapse of time in watching it . 
forgot also the object wherewith they had 
reached the mysterious room. They talked 
gaily as they looked at the driving storm : 
there is a curious pleasure in looking at 
anything of the kind from a position of 
comfort and safety. But Ella, though that 
warmest of all living creatures, an Irish girl, 
began presently to feel the material cold, and 
gave a little shiver, just perceptible to Tix. 

"You are getting tired of this," he said. 
" And the time has slipped on while we have 
been watching this wonderful storm. Shall 
we go down?" 

" I think so. I could look on at this for 
ever ; but I should like a fire in the room." 

" This would be a very comfortable room, 
with a good fire, on a winter day," said 
Tixover. " But it would be a long way for 
servants to bring up provisions, and unluckily 
we must eat and drink." 

They left the window reluctantly, cold as 
it was ; for the snow fell faster, and the occa- 



tixover's dilemma. 113 

sional flashes of lightning lighted up the scene 
brilliantly; and from no point could it be 
seen so splendidly. Ella was chilly. Tix 
began to feel hungry. When they looked 
to that part of the room by which they had 
entered, to their amazement the door was 
invisible : the Viscount had closed it without 
thinking about it, and it was contrived so as 
to fall into the panel and be imperceptible. 

" This is pleasant,*' said Tixover. 

"Why, what can have become of the 
door?'' said Ella. 

" There is some secret spring : I must try 
and find it." 

He tried : so did Ella, with fingers more 
delicate : but they did not succeed ; and the 
evening grew darker, and the indomitable 
Ella grew tired and cold. 

"What shall vjt, do. Lord Tixover?" she 
said. 

" Light a fire to begin with," quoth Tix, 
cheerily. He was rather puzzled, but would 
not show it. There were logs on the hearth 
that skeleton hands had placed there. Tix 
lighted a fusee, and soon got a blaze. 

" Now, Miss Geraldine," he said, putting 

VOL. II. H 



114 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

an old-fashioned straight-backed chair by the 
fireside, " sit here and get warm, while I think 
what to do next. May I smoke a cigar?" 

** O do, please," said Ella, warming her 
pretty pliant hands by a fire that was laid for 
some hapless fugitive many a long year ago. 
"It will be quite a treat to smell civilised 
tobacco in this chilly old room. How are we 
to get out ? I want my dinner." 

" I feel just like it," said Tix ; *' but I think 
we can manage some refreshment. Can you 
drink whisky without water ? " 

"If it's Irish," said Ella. 

" Could you imagine me so base as to carry 
Scotch ? " said Tix. " No," he went on, 
taking a gold flask from his pocket, " this is 
the real stuff, and has never paid duty. I 
wish we had some water to qualify it ?" 

" But what am I to eat ? " asked Ella, rue- 
fully. 

" Do you think you could eat lozenges ?" 

" What ! Keating s cough lozenges, I sup- 
pose. Now, Lord Tixover, don't be cruel." 

" Cruel ! Is it likely ? No ; mine are 
Fortnum & Mason's game lozenges. I always 
carry some in case of accidents. You may 



TIXOVER S DILEMMA. I 1 5 

not like their first flavour, but they soon grow 
palatable. Let them melt in your mouth." 

It was a sight to see pretty Ella Geraldine 
sitting by a mighty wood-fire in* this quaint 
old room, while the snow-storm raged more 
furiously every moment ; and being fed by 
self-forgetful Tix with lozenge after lozenge, 
and little drops of true Irish whisky. All the 
while he cheered her with merry talk ; and 
the whimsical situation made her laugh ; and 
she chatted away, and warmed her pretty feet 
by the wood-fire, and looked a lovely picture 
of beauty in distress. By and by she said . 

" I am growing sleepy, Lord Tixover." 

" Then I must put you to bed," quoth Tix. 
He went to the old-fashioned bed and 
examined it carefully. It was dry enough, at 
any rate. "Miss Ella," he said, *'I think 
you can sleep here. You need not undress 
very much you know. I won't look at your 
toilet. Come, I shall take your boots off. 
Now, try and make yourself comfortable on 
that old bed, that was probably waiting for an 
English prince, and only receives an Irish 
princess." 

" But what willjj/^^ do ?" Ella asked. 



1 1 6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

"Keep up the fire and smoke, as I 've done 
many a night in many a latitude. Sleep is 
not much in my line. Make yourself as com- 
fortable as you can, my dear Miss Geraldine, 
and I '11 try to take care of you." 

Ella divested herself of some of her gar- 
ments, and loosened others, and was asleep in 
two minutes. Nothing like snow for sleep. 
Tix sat by the fire, and smoked resolutely, 
and pondered as to his course when daylight 
returned. 

** If I can't find the dodge of that door/' 
he soliloquised, " I must get out of window. 
'* This snow is rather a nuisance ; and when 
I 'm on the roof 'twill be difficult business. 
I '11 do it though ; I hope that little girl will 
sleep well." 

He got up and went to the bed. She lay 
with rosy lips half-open, and one white ami 
stretched, as if seeking for something. She 
was dreaming that she was walking to meet 
Tix through fields of the bright immortal 
shamrock. Tix didn't know that; but he 
stooped and softly kissed the semihiant lips, 
and then went back to his fireside cigar. 



CHAPTER XI. . 



Miranda's bedchamber. 



" Adventures are to the adventurous." . Disraeli. 

Dismay was felt at Rothescamp-on-the-Hill 
that night when Tix and Ella remained per- 
manently absent. What had actually hap- 
pened did not enter the mind of anybody; 
there was no fancy among them that the 
missing couple could have got into any diffi- 
culty within the walls of the house ; so they 
organised a search all over the country, ima- 
gining that they might have been caught in 
the blinding snow, or struck by the keen 
lightning. The two Harolds headed separate 
parties ; the Doctor and Miranda could only 
wait at home and hope for good news. 



1 18 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

None came. They met at daybreak dis 
appointed and weary. At daybreak, Tix, who 
had exhausted his cigars, prepared for action. 
First he went all along the portion of wall 
through which they must have passed, but 
neither eyesight nor pressure betrayed the 
presence of the door. 

" The fellow who built this room knew 
what he was about," thought Tix. 

Then he went to the window and looked 
out. The storm was gone, leaving no cloud. 
The sky was the colour of borage-flowers. 
The whole wide landscape was white with 
snow. It massed upon the great square 
tower and the flying buttresses of Rothes- 
camp Church. 

Tix looked carefully at the roof of the 
house through all three windows. It was not 
a tempting prospect. There was a chaos of 
gables and louvres and chimneys. As the 
daylight strengthened, it seemed to our friend 
that beneath the west window there was 
something which, so far as the snow allowed 
him to perceive, was a rude narrow steep 
stair. . It at once flashed across his mind 
that, in the event of surprise, fugitives who 



Miranda's bedchamber. 119 

harboured in this chamber would have a 
way across the roof prepared for them. He 
resolved to try it. 

Having thus resolved, he looked around 
the room for material assistance. What he 
wanted was a staff of some sort and a piece 
of cord ; he found both readily, for the want 
had been foreseen. Four feet of young oak, 
with an iron hook at the end, occupied one 
corner of the room ; while close by lay a coil 
of strong but slender rope. Armed herewith, 
he determined to attempt to descend, but first 
resolved he would awake Ella. 

That young lady had no desire to be 
awoken, and resisted with the unconscious 
obstinacy of sleep. When she opened her 
eyes she felt very uncertain where she was 
and what had happened ; but she blushed 
rosily when she collected her scattered senses, 
and remembered that she had passed the 
night with a gallant bachelor sola cum solo. 
Non presumitur orare, says the old adage ; 
wherefore non presumitur dormire. Ella 
Geraldine had, however, slept excellent well. 

" I am going to get out of window," said 
Tixover, when his fair ward was awakened. 



1 20 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" That will give you time to make yourself 
comfortable and presentable." 

" O, but you are not going to run such a 
dreadful risk ! " she exclaimed. 

" I have been running risks all my life," 
he said. " This is nothing, except that the 
snow will have made the steps slippery, and 
you see I have provided myself against 
accidents. Good-bye ! You will soon see 
me again." 

Whereupon he dauntlessly slung himself 
through the window, and fastened his rope 
to a hook in the wall clearly designed for 
such purpose, and with care, yet agility, 
made his way down the rough stair. Ella 
watched him with immense anxiety, till he 
passed beyond her sight around the base of 
a great chimney : then, with a laughing blush 
at the way in which her night had been 
passed, she conunenced taking his advice so 
far as was possible. She managed to wash 
her &ir young face with snow, taken in hand- 
fuls from the window-sill. 

Tixover, when he passed bej'ond her ken 
in his dangerous descent^ found himself sud- 
denly slopped by a high wall. He was in a 



Miranda's bedchamber. i 2 1 

corner where two portions of the roof met at 
right angles ; and the snow had drifted there 
to such an extent that he was almost up to 
his knees. Over the side he cautiously 
peered, and perceived that there was a sheer 
descent : whence it seemed unlikely that 
fugitives were intended to escape that way. 
So he looked elsewhere, and saw at once a 
square spot at his feet where the snow was 
melting. He kicked the snow away at that 
point, and found an iron trap-door. 

This it took him a considerable time to 
lift, for it was massive, and rusty with long 
disuse. When he had succeeded, he was in 
no hurry to descend ; but, after waiting a few 
minutes, lighted a match and threw it down, 
and was pleased to find that it burnt freely. 
Then he searched his pockets for something 
that would burn, and found nothing but a 
letter or two to use as torches. Armed with 
this dim light he descended through the 
trap-door, and felt his way down a flight of 
very narrow steps which wound in a fashion 
not at all convenient. He burnt up a good 
deal of his correspondence before coming to 
the end of this stairway. It terminated in a 



122 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

cupboard, with a door that was half ground- 
glass, and that for a long time resolutely 
refused to open. Tix had not travelled so 
far to be baffled by a cupboard door ; so he 
put his shoulder to it, and it gave way, and 
he found himself in a pretty bed-chamber, 
with a young lady sitting up in bed, half 
awake. 

" Hang it ! " thought Tix, " I 'm destined 
to be in difficulties with the ladies. Who is 
this, I wonder ? " 

It was, as he soon saw, Miranda. She 
had been sitting up all night in anxiety, and 
Doctor Septimus had insisted on her going 
to bed for a while. Not half-an-hour had 
she dozed before this invasion of her maiden 
retreat occurred. She was so scared in her 
drowsiness that Tix could hardly make her 
understand anything : when he succeeded, 
she exclaimed . 

" O dear ! how glad I am ! Can't you 
bring Ella down the same way. Fancy that 
dreadful cupboard, that I could never open, 
being the door of a mysterious passage I " 

** Lucky for you that nobody found the 
way before I did," said Tixover, laughing. 



Miranda's bedchamber. 123 

" I will go and see what Miss Geraldine 
thinks of a journey this way." 

So he re-ascended by the same steps, and 
found himself, when he reached the window, 
face to face with Ella Geraldine, who was 
leaning over the sill, and whose pretty coun- 
tenance was freshened with snow-water into 
a redder rose than usual. Tixover thought 
her " a vision of delight." 

" What news ?" she cried. " How soon you 
have returned!" 

" I have seen another charming young 
lady in bed," says Tix, lightly leaping into 
the room. " These steps lead straight to 
Miss Tachbrook's bedroom." 

" What an odd thing ! Did they think we 
were lost ? " 

" Do you suppose I ^topped to ask ques- 
tions when I wanted to get back and tell 
you we could get out ? Besides, she was 
half asleep, and I am not yet quite certain 
she does not think she dreamt I came to her. 
I wonder what Tom will say when he knows 
I have been in his sweetheart's bedroom ? " 

" Well, sir, you have been in my bedroom 
all night." 



124 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" As much mine as yours/' says Tix, with 
a laugh. " We have been partners for one 
night, if we are not to be partners for life. 
But come, do you think you can descend this 
way ? It is quite easy with my help. Only, 
you may get your feet wet unless your boots 
are pretty thick." 

" They 're thick enough," said Ella. " And 
did you ever know an Irish girl or an Irish 
horse that couldn't climb ? Why, our pigs 
are quicker than your greyhounds." 

She stood on the window ledge as she 
spoke, showing a pair of very neat ankles, 
and Tixover helped her down, and soon got 
her into Miranda's chamber. Miranda by 
this time had dressed herself in a somewhat 
loose and lazy way, and had put a light to her 
fire, thinking Ella might be cold. 

" Darling Ella !" she exclaimed, "what an 
adventure ! We have all been so dreadfully 
frightened about you. Did you have any 
sleep ?" 

" Slept like a top, dear. Lord Tixover 
sent me to bed, and sat up and smoked." 

*'You must be tired," said Miranda to 
Tixover. 



Miranda's bedchamber. 125 

"What!" said Tix, mischievously; "tired 
after a night with Miss Ella Geraldine! 
Faith, I think it was the pleasantest I ever 
spent, though she never opened her eyes or 
her lips. Never mind, Miss Miranda ; shall 
we go and put our friends out of their 
despair? Of course they are all thinking 
that Miss Geraldine and I have run away 
together." 

" They must think me clever to circumvent 
you',' said Ella. 

Miranda led the way to the bedroom door, 
and they found themselves on the first gallery 
running around the great hall. The hall fire, 
never let out in winter, was burning more 
brilliantly than usual at seven in the morning. 
Looking over the balustrade, Tix saw Doctor 
Tachbrook asleep in an easy-chair by the fire, 
and his son in the same state opposite him, 
and Tom Jones pacing up and down the hall 
with a cigar in his mouth. 

" My old comrade doesn't forget me," 
whispered' the Viscount; but the whisper 
reached Sir Harold's ears, quickened hy long 
watching on sea and land. He looked up, 
caught sight of the group, and could not 




124 MIRAXDA ; A 1CDSUMME& MADNESS. 

" As much mine as yours,'*' says Tix, with 
a laugh. " We have been partners for one 
night, if we are not to be partners for life. 
But come, do you think you can descend this 
way ? It is quite easy with my help. Only, 
you may get your feet wet unless your boots 
are pretty thick." 

" They 're thick enough," said Ella. " And 
did you ever know an Irish girl or an Irish 
horse that couldn't climb? Why, our pigs 
are quicker than your greyhounds." 

She stood on the window ledge as she 
spoke, showing a pair of very neat ankles^ 
and Tixover helped her down, and soon got 
her into Miranda's chamber. Miranda by 
this time had dressed herself in a somewhat 
loose and lazy way, and had put a light to her 
fire, thinking Ella might be cold. 

" Darling Ella ! " she exclaimed, " what an 
adventure ! We have all been so dreadfully 
frightened about you. Did you have any 
sleep ?" 

" Slept like a top, dear. Lord Tixover 
sent me to bed, and sat up and smoked." 

"You must be tired," said Miranda to 
Tixover. 



Miranda's bedchamber. 125 

"What!" said Tix, mischievously; "tired 
after a night with Miss Ella Geraldine! 
Faith, I think it was the pleasantest I ever 
spent, though she never opened her eyes or 
her lips. Never mind, Miss Miranda ; shall 
we go and put our friends out of their 
despair? Of course they are all thinking 
that Miss Geraldine and I have run away 
together." 

" They must think me clever to circumvent 
youl' said Ella. 

Miranda led the way to the bedroom door, 
and they found themselves on the first gallery 
running around the great hall. The hall fire, 
never let out in winter, was burning more 
brilliantly than usual at seven in the morning. 
Looking over the balustrade, Tix saw Doctor 
Tachbrook asleep in an easy-chair by the fire, 
and his son in the same state opposite him, 
and Tom Jones pacing up and down the hall 
with a cigar in his mouth. 

" My old comrade doesn't forget me," 
whispered the Viscount; but the whisper 
reached Sir Harold's ears, quickened b)^ long 
watching on sea and land. He looked up, 
caught sight of the group, and could not 



126 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

refrain from a ^* Hurrah " that awoke the 
sleepers by the fireside, and would probably 
have caused either Epimenides or Rip van 
Winkle to turn in his sleep. 

The story of the night's adventure took no 
long time in telling. Everybody was delighted 
at its fortunate end ; and Tom Jones, pitying 
Ella for having to sup on lozenges and 
whisky, was soon hard at work making 
coffee for her, and devilling turkeys' legs 
upon the hall-fire. As to the old Doctor, he 
took a teaspoonful of brandy, and said . 

" I shall go to bed now. Nobody need 
wake me, for I mean to have a good long 
sleep. As to you. Miss Ella, you are the 
only one of us that has had a night's rest. 
But what has become of your reputation, 
young lady? . sleeping all night with a gentle- 
man in the room 1 " 

" Any lady may trust her reputation with 
Lord Tixover," said Ella. 

" Yes, I think you are right, child," said 
the old Doctor, stooping to kiss her on tjie 
brow. " There are one or two gentlemen 
left, thank God." 

Tix as well as Ella was glad to enjoy 



MIRANDA'S BEDCHAMBER, 1 2 7 

Tom's hasty cookery. Tom could cook: 
when he and Harold were roughing it in 
Australia, Harold acknowledged his superior 
genius in this direction. Tom devilled thigh 
of turkey angelically. Tom boiled coffee in 
an old-fashioned pot to a perfection that would 
have driven a Parisian wild with envy. Tom 
could broil a steak on a gridiron so that it 
should be tender as marrow, and full .of juice 
as a ripe peach. 

" It 's a pity," quoth Harold Tachbrook, as 
he saw Tix enjoying his turkey, " that you 
weren^t obliged to be a cook, Tom. You 're 
a heaven-born genius in that way. Egad ! 
what a lot of good dinners out of bad mate- 
rials you' have contrived when we were the 
other side of the world !" 

" Shall I make you and Miranda an omelet 
now ?" asked Tom. " I'm just in cooking 
humour. It 's no use going to bed at this time 
in the day, so we may as well pull ourselves to- 
gether by eating and drinking. This is supper." 

" I have no moral objection to an omelet," 
said Harold. " Still, something heavier might 
precede it. You know how capitally you 
broil mutton-ham, Tom." 



I 28 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

'* Ah 1 that's the way ; you flatter my weak- 
ness. Never mind ; the thing shall be 
done/' 

And it was ; and as they ate their supper- 
breakfast by the great fire in the stately old 
hall, Tix pronounced it the jolliest meal he 
had ever known, and Tom the deftest of 
cooks. 

** Well/' said Harold, " you ought to enjoy 
your meal after passing through such adven- 
tures. If the papers get hold of the story, 
you 11 lose your character as a knight-errant, 
Tix* There will be fine paragraphs about 
your nocturnal vagaries. Ella will have to 
send to Ireland for somebody to shoot you." 

** Ireland hasn t a man that could do it," 
said Tix. 



CHAPTER XII. 



SNOW. 

" Arethusa arose . 

From her couch of snows 
In the Acroceraunian mountains.'' 



The Rothe well, whence rises the Rothe 
rivulet, is a cool dark deep head of water, far 
up in the hills above Rothescamp. In ordi- 
nary seasons it stands always at the same 
height, the outflow being usually of equal 
volume at all times of the year. The im- 
memorial well-head has a rude Gothic 
archway over it, and a perished inscription 
that looks runic, and a huge stunted yew 
that has taken centuries to grow into giant 
dwarfishness. Among Rothescamp sweet- 
hearts on long summer days it has always 
been as popular as ^*the Bush aboon Tra- 

VOL. II. I 



quair;*^ its cool w^ter has moistened many 
Kps a trifle over-warm with wooing. 

The famous old well has an eccentricity. 
Once in five years its waters rise beyond 
their ordinary levd, and the tiny rivnlet 
Rothe, a playmate broc^ wiierein young 
children can dip th^ feet and fish for 
silverj- minnows, beccxnes a fierce fast river, 
madly seeking the sea, hoarse in its cry as 
Arethusa when Alpheus chased her. Many 
wise folk and F.F.R.S. attempted to fathom 
the reason hereof ; they might just as easily 
have fathomed the Rothe well itself, which 
became as wild and unmanageable as a 
woman, but with unwomanish punctuality. 
Trial had been made to fathom that strange 
spring, but with absolute absence of success. 
There wasnot line enough in the county to 
reach its bottom. 

Now the quinquennial eruption of the 
Rothe well coincided with the great snow- 
storm, and the result was something tre- 
mendous. The spring rose to an immense 
^ieight and came madly down the hill by 
Long Rxver, but was checked by the intense 
frost, which solidified its spray and turned it 



SNOW. 131 

at intervals into vast icicles. Fire and Frost 
were fighting their ancient fray. Fire threw 
from the earth's inner depth that imperishable 
stream ; Frost from without fought against 
it, and strove to stagnate it. 

Rothe rivulet beat its opponent, and took 
a most ungenerous advantage, getting aid 
from the forces of its foe, thawing the snow, 
and as it passed downwards, swelling its army 
with deserters from the enemy. Thence 
happened it that, on the day after the snow- 
storm, RothesCamp-in-the-Valley was flooded. 
Just as Tom's mutton-ham and omelet had 
vanished, and the partakers thereof began to 
think that a night of adventure followed by 
a supper-breakfast was not altogether un- 
pleasant, there came a thunderous knocking 
at the hall-door. 

" More adventures ! '' exclaimed Sir Ha- 
rold. " What can be wanted at this early 
hour ? " 

A sleepy footman, whom the unwonted 
movement had actually brought down-stairs 
between seven and eight o'clock, unbarred 
the door, and there entered a fellow from the 
" Tachbrook Arms," a gaunt lissom " boy " 



132 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

of sixty that acted as ostler and occasional 
postboy. 

'* What 's the matter, Tom ? " cried Harold, 
when this fellow entered the hall at so early 
an hour. 

" There 's a regular flood down in the 
village," he said, " and we thought perhaps 
you might like to know it. The Doctor's 
house is pretty well washed away, they say. 
The old inn 's a regular mash of water." 

This was the announcement which reached 
our friends as they were getting -rid of 
mutton-ham at a great rate in the hall at 
Rothescamp. They at once decided to 
start and see what could be done. The 
Doctor had retired ; the two Harolds and 
Tix went off immediately, leaving Miranda 
and Ella to take care of the house. When 
the gentlemen were gone, the ladies naturally 
began to chatter. 

" This is a wonderful house, Miranda,'! 
said the pretty Irish lass ; ** and yours is a 
wonderful family. In any other I should 
have lost my reputation for spending a night 
in a bedroom with a gentleman." 

" Why, how were you to help it ? " asked 



SNOW. 133 

Miranda. " That same impudent fellow 
walked into my bedroom before I was awake 
by a way that I never knew. Oughtn't I to 
be angry with him ? " 

" Of course you ought, dear. Why don't 
you ? " 

. " Well, 1 11 tell you why I don't/' she 
answered. " Tix is a man that differs very 
much from other men. He is not weaker ; 
he is stronger than most of them. He is not 
cold or careless or dull. He has all the 
capacities of manhood about him : but he can 
resist temptation." 

" A man ! To resist temptation ! " cried 
Ella. " Are you sure ? Has he been 
tempted ? " 

" Didn't he pass the night in your bed- 
chamber, miss ? " says Miranda. 

While the girls were chattering a pleasant 
chatter which resulted in their deciding that 
Ella might be a viscountess if she liked, 
the three men had descended Long River 
through the snow, and reached Rothescamp- 
in-the- Valley. Their presence was welcome. 
The villagers were panic-stricken. Rothe 
rivulet, swollen by snow at the moment of 



1 34 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

its quinquennial flush, had shown its noble 
independence, and become a perfect Simois. 
The village was half washed away. The 
old Doctor's house had suffered : but chiefly 
in the garden. His books were safe. At 
the inn, which lay lower, there had been 
terrible work: Sandy Mac began to think 
the devil had something to do with it. 

A whole heap of cottagers were flooded 
out, and it was to these that attention was 
first given. The difiiculty was, what to do 
with them } Some of the cottages had been 
actually washed into shapelessness by the 
headlong Rothe, swollen by sudden snow. 

" Bring them up to my place," said Tom 
J ones, abruptly. ** What 's the good of having 
a big house if one can't help one s neigh- 
bours^ Harold, old fellow, make Sandy Mac 
charter some carts, and send these cottagers 
up at once. Then we *11 see what can be 
done for them/* 

;^ All right;^ said Harold. « It ^s the best 

"L.^^^ ^"^^ *^"^ ^ »^o^ many are to 
g^ because of pro^-isions.^ 

fuil^'^'^^^'^^ '^^ ^^'« ^ divide our 



SNOW. 135 

in-chief that likes ; Til be commissary-general. 
How many people shall we have to feed ? " 

" Fifty, at a guess," said Harold. 

** Well, you are fairly provisioned for the 
moment, but you will want more. I propose 
to ride over to the nearest town, which Mr 
Macliver says is Dereham, and to order in 
a further quantity. What say you ?" 

"I say you're a trump, Tix, and always 
think of the right thing at the right minute. 
Sandy has got a cob that will go pretty fast, 
and Dereham's only four miles." 

" Good ! " said the Viscount. " Bring out 
that cob. Before your waggons have got the 
unfortunate people up the hill, I shall be back 
again." 

Dereham, on the other side of the ridge 
of hill, is a little quiet town of about three 
thousand people. It was a parliamentary 
borough under Simon de Montfort. It has 
no political privileges now, and no trade 
worth naming, and nobody worth mention 
except old Sampson Rolfe, the landford of 
the " Red Lion." Sampson is a character. He 
says and does what he likes, having money. 
To have money is to be popular with the 



1 36 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

populace. Sampson abhors the populace. He 
is a Tory ; in fact he is a Jacobite ; but he 
has no reason to give for his political creed 
except his own raison cCetre. A man of his 
size could not be a Radical 

Tix knew nothing of Dereham or of Samp- 
son ; but the instant he rode under the " Red 
Lion" gateway he knew his man. The quaint 
old inn showed it him ; so did the burly land- 
lord, with pretence of independent surliness, 
and a grin of pleasure beneath that outer crust, 
caused by the arrival of a pleasant goiest. 

" Landlord," said Tix, leaping from his cob, 
" give me a glass of ale."' 

His order executed, the Viscount went on 
. " We are in difficulties over at Rothescamp, 
The storm has washed away a part of the 
village. The cottagers are going up to Sir 
Harold's, but he is short of provisions. Can 
you get some for us ? " 

Sampson Rolfe was a slow man ; slow, yet 
strong. He put his hand on Tix's shoulder 
heavily . 

" Excuse m£^ sir ; but I like to see a gen- 
tleman take that trouble about poor people. 
There *s plenty of stuflf to be had in Dereham, 



SNOW. 137 

and ril have a waggon loaded for Sir Harold 
within half-an-hour." 

" Thanks, my friend," said Tix. " I '11 
come over and see you again before I leave 
these parts/' 

The Dereham landlord kept his promise, 
and Rothescamp had ample provision sent 
up for its additional inhabitants, whom Sir 
Harold encamped in the great hall till he could 
find out-of-the-way corners for them. Mean- 
while, Tix had an adventure : in fact, Tix found 
it almost impossible to go anywhere without 
an adventure. Tix, having settled affairs with 
the Dereham landlord, turned the cob home- 
wards ; on his way, he fancied he saw a short 
cut Tix was very proud of what phreno- 
logists call the organ of locality. He had 
made many " short cuts" under the guidance 
of that organ, but they usually proved the 
longest way home. However, he still did it ; 
and on this eventful day he put the cob at a 
gate, and rode, as he thought, straight to- 
ward Rothescamp-in-the-Valley. Presently, 
he found the Rothe had to be crossed ; and 
the Rothe, with its floods, had become about 
as wide, though not so deep, as the Thames 



138 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

at Henley. The cob was shy of water ; Tix 
made him go, having that strong hand upon 
the leather which a horse understands. When 
he got to the other side, he was pushing 
rapidly on, but the cob pulled up, and would 
not budge. Tix looked down. There was 
a child of ten or eleven thrown up by the 
stream, lying close to the horse's feet. dead 
or alive, who could say ? 

" Good old boy !" says Tix to his horse, as 
he sprang back into the saddle with his moist 
burden across his knees. "Go a-head, old 
fellow ! " 

The cob seemed to know what he meant ; 
at any rate, he knew the way to the " Tach- 
brook Arms," for he went there as straight 
as a line, and reached it in a very few minutes. 
Sandy Mac was equal to the occasion. The 
poor little waif was a girl . only half drowned, 
as it turned out. The women-folk of the 
hostelry took to it at once. Tixover waited 
only a few moments to see that all was rights 
and then rode the cob up Long River as fast 
as he could be induced to go. 

When he entered the hall, he thought it 
picturesque. Tom Jones and Harold Tach- 



SNOW. 139 

brook were at the door to meet him : Miranda 
and Ella were making the cottagers comfort- 
able. They had a general encampment on 
the floor, roughly and rapidly arranged. A 
curious mixture. Here an old crone was 

enjoying her refreshment in solitary dignity ; 

. 

close by some young monkeys of ten or 
eleven were eating cold meat with a pleasant 
sense of being in much better quarters than 
they ever expected . and all thanks to the 
river. A village patriarch sagaciously smoked 
his pipe, and meditated wisdom. A village 
beauty tried to arrange her hair, and medi- 
tated conquest. The great hall of Rothes- 
camp had a very unusual appearance when 
Tix entered it. 

Both MirandEi and Ella were there to 
receive him. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



THAW. 



"Diffiigere nives." 



Suddenly veered the wind from north-east 
to south-west. Suddenly! Nature works 
fast. The heavy snows that had fallen on 
the moorlands above Rothescamp were turned 
into liquid in an hour. The Rothe rivulet 
became stronger than ever in its impulse to 
seek the sea. The weather grew mild. The 
savage storm had blown itself away, and there 
was nothing left but blue sky above and wet 
sludge below. And Lord Tixover could not 
enjoy it. 

Why? Simply because when he went 
to Dereham, he caught a frightful attack 



THAW. 141 

of rheumatism. All his joints ached, but 
especially his knees. He could scarcely walk 
across the room. Wise in his generation, 
Tix remained in bed, and lived on beef-tea 
and port-wine negus; and dear old Doctor 
Tachbrook attended him constantly. Not- 
withstanding all the Doctor's endeavours, Tix 
had to suffer much pain for a week. 

Pain is power. Men are measurable by their 
capacity of suffering. N othing more thoroughly 
proves the almightiness of God than His 
capacity for enduring the absurdities of His 
creatures. In the face of Tyndall or Voysey, 
Colenso or Garibaldi, any ordinary deity 
would commit suicide. How would you feel 
if you had created i planet with Louis Na- 
poleon and Prince Bismarck upon it ? Surely 
any divinity would shudder if he were held 
responsible for the existence of one-half the 
nonsense of life. However, it is possible that 
the deities are epicureans, and live joyously on 
Olympus, and look down upon the follies and 
frivolities of earth with a half-amused, half- 
pitying eye. Fancy what Apollon would 
think of the poet-laureate, and how Iris would 
laugh at the electric telegraph ! 



142 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Pain is power. The best novelist of the 
day assures me that I should write a good 
novel if I broke both my legs, and were in 
bed for a year. I would rather not Yet 
have I done some of my best work when 
smitten through from head to foot by pain 
indescribable, unutterable. I like pain. 
What is it ? It is the final link of the chain 
which begins with pleasure ; and extremes 
meet, as I have remarked countless times. 
But I do not think I have heretofore laid 
down my new idea . .j>ain is power. 

Look at the martyr . a vulgar^ yet efficient 
type . Sanguis martyrum semen ecclesiae. The 
man is burnt or flogged to death; his opi- 
nions survive. They are worthless, probably ; 
but there are people w^ho adhere to them, 
because he died for them. 

That pain is power came strongly to Lord 
Tixover as he lay for hours with sharp keen 
darts passing through him. It is within the 
limits of possibility that children who have 
what is called " growing pains,'* will in time 
be taught that they mean rheumatism, and 
that they had better not get their feet wet. 
They taught me nothing of the kind : they 



THAW. 143 

taught me tare and tret instead ; and I need 
not say how useful I have found it. I rather 
think I also learnt alligation and double posi- 
tion. I have alHgated muchly since. Having 
heretofore been accused of desulting and 
digressing, I, perhaps, had bettet- return to 
my muttons . videlicet^ Tix in bed. Is not 
pain power when it brings two pretty girls to 
look after a gentleman in rheumatic con- 
dition ? Tix thought so. When he became 
convalescent, he held a levee in his bedroom, 
and Miranda and Ella came to see him. He 
had thought much of Ellaj even when he was 
in extreme pain ; for, was he not on the verge 
of proposing marriage to her ? 

He knew that Ella quite understood him, 
and he thought it would now be hardly neces- 
sary to ask her the question. So when he was 
better, but still unable to leave his bed, he 
begged that he might see her. She came 
into his room with Miranda, and went up to 
the bedside and gave her hand to him. Tix 
drew her down to him and kissed her ; and 
then she knew that she was betrothed to him. 

The old Doctor soon brought Tix into con- 
dition again, although it seems likely that 



144 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the chitchat of Miranda and Ella did him 
most good. They were always ready to 
amuse him either with reading or talk. " Tris- 
tram Shandy '' was Tix s favourite book. He 
was never tired of Uncle Toby and Corporal 
Trim. He could always listen to the story of 
the King of Bohemia and his seven castles. 
The girls understood not a tithe of dear old 
Sterne s naughtinesses . naughtinesses which 
are never nastiness. Wordsworth once said 
that a man's capacity for understanding poetry 
might be tested by his opinion of Shake- 
speare's Sonnets. Similarly a girl's capacity 
for harmless fun might easily be guaged by 
her idea of Sterne. No good girl ever found 
harm in ** Tristram Shandy." The Viscount 
and Miranda and Ella laughed over it im- 
mensely, and found no harm anywhere. 
Sterne is innocently pathetic; and Uncle 
Toby is the only character in our literature 
that will bear to meet those of Shakespeare. 
Tix quite enjoyed his convalescence, and 
thought it worth while to be ill to have two 
such pretty maidens to look after him ; but 
he began to be restless, and wished to be out 
again, for he had many schemes in his mind 



k 



THAW. 145 

which he wanted to carry out He had 
arranged with Tom that he should be married 
on May Day, so that there would be a double 
wedding. And then preparations must be 
made for receiving Ella and Tom and 
Miranda on the Palinoura. So he begged 
Doctor Tachbrook to dismiss him. The 
Doctor tried to persuade him to remain 
another week in the house, as the weather 
was still damp. But Tix had such a firm 
belief in the goodness of his own constitu- 
tion that he would not listen to the Doctor's 
entreaties. 



VOL. II. K 



CHAPTER XIV. 

MAY. 
.** Virgins, virgins ! to sweet Hymen yield." . Ben JoNSON. 

O RARE Ben Jonson ! Odd that the unpre- 
cedented and unparalleled glory of Shake- 
speare should have almost effaced Ben Jonson 
for the common reader. Ben was a man who 
may roughly be described as Thackeray and 
Browning rolled into one. If he had lived 
in an ordinary age . Dryden's, or Pope's, or 
Wordsworth's . he would have stood far taller 
above his fellows. He was, in fact, a giant ; 
but then he had the luck (ill, yet good) of 
being on the stage with a god. What is 
Achilles when you see Apollo ? 

When Tixover got past his rheumatic 
attack, he went to see the small waif he had 



MAY. 147 

picked out of the floods of Rothe. Sandy 
Mac had caused her to be well taken care of, 
and she was in better condition, perhaps, 
than her preserver. She turned out to be 
an orphan, daughter of some small farming 
folk. Tix, who was fortunate enough to have 
ample means of doing good, sent her to a 
school suitable for her condition in life. It 
was a lucky thing for her when his cob 
declined to tread on her. It is a lucky thing 
for a man when he can do good to others 
without harm to himself. This to do, a man 
must have brain as well as gold. 

The next thing Tix had to do was to look 
after the Palinoura. She was to be ready 
by May for the great mellilunatic trip. So 
he ran off to Southampton to look after her, 
having previously arranged everything to 
his content with Ella Geraldine. The jolly 
litde yacht was in capital condition, having 
been thoroughly put in order after her famous 
voyage round the world. Over one of the 
state cabins wias inscribed . 

Who in the world could Tix have been 



148 KIRAXDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS^ 

thinking about when he gave the <Hider for 
that janual legend ? 

While at Southampton Tix took a run 
across to the Channel Islands, and saw the 
Troglodyte. That eccentric scion of the 
Tachbrooks was enjoying the society of 
Margaret Delisle. Tix hadn't much time 
to spare ; when he reached the educational 
establishment above the Chapelle de Mauves, 
he found nobody at home except Susanna 
and Ellen. The Despot and the Boy 
had become very good friends, and were 
now staying at home to look after household 
matters, while the remainder of the family 
were away. Adam and Eve were teaching 
Dick to swim ; what the schoolmistress was 
teaching the Troglodyte it is hard to say. The 
only thing certain is thaf Tixover found them 
in the Boutiques caverns, looking out upon 
the sea, and apparently very happy in each 
other^s company. They were slightly sur- 
prised to see the Viscount, who came quietly 
down the steep ascent into the nereid hall 
tapestried with sea-anemones, smoking a 
cigar, just as if he were entering the 
smoke-room of the " Travellers'." That 



MAY. 149 

Tix belongs to the Travellers' va sans 
dire. 

The Troglodyte and Miss Delisle were 
unfeignedly glad to see him. Even when 
people are spending a kind of introductory 
honeymoon, there are times when they would 
be thankful for an enemy, and therefore 
trebly thankful for a friend. It became clear 
enough to the Viscount that Gilbert Tach- 
brook meant marriage; but, when they had 
dined, and eventide came, they had a confi- 
dential conference. 

" Tixover," said the Troglodyte, " you 
are a capital adviser. I want your ad- 
vice. 

*' You 'd like it to agree with your own 
opinion of course." 

"Come, be serious. I want to marry 
Margaret Delisle." 

«< Why don't you ? She is quite ready." 

" She doesn't like giving up her school. 
It 's a hobby of hers." 

" People always have hobbies before they 
are married. She can make it over to her 
second in command. But what will you do 
with Adam and Eve ? " 



1 50 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Another point. They are never happy 
except when in the water together." 

" Put them in the water together," quoth 
the Viscount, with a laugh. '* Look here, an 
idea has occurred to me. I 'm going to be 
married on May Day." 

" You ! " 

" Yes, I. Odd, isn't it ? So is Sir Harold 
Tachbrook. Couldn't you join us ? We 're 
off to your own island for a honeymoon pic- 
nic. The Palinoura will hold us all." 

The Troglodyte assented. 

** I shan't come over to England to be 
married in state," he said. "Old Cache- 
maille shall marry us quietly, and you 'U have 
to come and pick us up. But you won't 
have room for Adam and Eve.'* 

" Won t I } If not, they can swim,** said 
the Viscount, laughing. 

But as this was only January, and the 
triple event was to occur in May, Tixover 
resolved to hurry forward a second Palimoura 
which had been ordered from a Cotires yacht- 
builder a year before. She was to be of four 
times the tonnage, but quite as lobster-like, 
though with one or two alterations suggested 



MAY. 151 

by experience. She was ready in good time 
for the I St of May. She was the most 
wonderful of yachts, both for space and 
speed. It is generally expected that one of 
these days she will beat the famous yacht 
owned by the proprietor of that remarkable 
daily paper, the New York Arcade. 
. "Well," said Lord Tixover, "you may 
depend on me on the 2d of May. By that 
time the new yacht will be in capital condi- 
tion, and I '11 spread a sail abaft for Adam 
and Eve to bathe. We '11 all be mellilunatics 
together." 

The Troglodyte agreed. 

From January to May is a long period 
when marriage is at the end of it. But it is 
very short when it occurs in a three-volume 
novel. Wherefore let us pass the chasm and 
reach the May- Day which was famous at 
Rothescamp. The double wedding, though 
not extremely brilliant, was extremely plea- 
sant. There was rather a scarcity of brides- 
maids. It would, however, have been found 
difficult to parallel the men who gave the 
brides away; for Doctor Septimus Tach- 
brook presented Miranda to Tom Jones, 



152 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

alias Sir Harold Tachbrook, and the noble 
old Earl of Beechampton came from the Tar 
West to do the same thing for Ella Geraldine. 

The description of weddings must be left 
to lady-novelists. No one of the inferior 
sex dare meddle with such difficult ques- 
tions. It is only possible here to chronicle 
the fact that Irish Ella became Lady Tixover, 
that sea-born Miranda became Lady Tacji- 
brook, and that both couples were on board 
the Palinoura at Southampton before the 
evening. 

Southampton docks were in a state of 
intense excitement this day. Many ships 
of an unusual kind had been seen on 
Southampton Water. Many a time have the 
Simla and the Himalaya^ in old Crimean 
days, started from those docks; but never 
had the loungers who come down from above- 
bar to amuse themsflves with the coming 
and going of multitudinous voyagers seen 
anything afloat so strange as the two Pali- 
nouras. 

They started at midnight. Miranda was 
born at sea, and of course was delighted to 
pass her first nuptial night at sea. Ella 



MAY. 153 

Geraldine, an Irish lass, who had had the 
advantage of Lord Beechampton's tuition, 
would have been plucky enough to pass her 
first nuptial night up in a balloon or down in 
a diving-bell. However, Tix's cabins were 
very comfortable; and the Palifioura went 
through the Race of Aldemey with perfect 
ease and quietude; and when she crossed 
the bar of Sark harbour, the Troglodyte and 
his scholastic spouse . ^also one day married . 
were waiting to receive them. Both Palm- 
ouras were in Sark Bay. Margaret Delisle, 
now transformed into Margaret Tachbrook, 
had dismissed four of her pupils ; the other 
two were put on board the lesser Palin- 
ouray with strict orders to the steward to 
prevent their swimming too far out at 
sea. 

It may be imagined that this was a merry 
mellilunatic trip. It would be hard to say 
who enjoyed it most. Tix enjoys every- 
thing. Tix lives every iota of his life. Tix 
knows not fear and cares not for pain. The 
Viscountess Tix, whom we have hitherto 
known as Ella, has the full pulse of the 
Kelt blood, and drinks in the fresh breath of 



1 54 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the glorious sea that surrounds her native 
island. Tom Jones is Tom Jones. 

But M iranda 1 she was again at sea. She 
had returned to her native element. The 
supreme sunrises and sunsets unknown to 
the lonely land, and only seen upon the im- 
measurable fields of sea, made Miranda feel 
herself at home. She was a descendant of 
Thetis with the silver feet ; she was cousin 
to that other Miranda who dwelt twelve 
years in the most wonderful of islands. She 
.was returning to her birthplace. 

Back .to the Azores. Back to the Island 
of Hawks. 



CHAPTER XV. 



" TIX." 



" Mutat quadrata rotundis." 

The quadrata of London are great facts, and 
would be Still greater facts if only there were 
some one with rather more common sense 
than Ayrton to keep them in order. Rus- 
sell Square, Brunswick Square, Tavistock 
Square, Eaton Square, Grosvenor Square, 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, are worthy of develop- 
ment : even Leicester Square is not devoid 
of capacity for being transformed into a 
pleasant garden. Why should not all these 
squares be so transformed ? What in the 



156 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. ' 

world have squares to do with the Palinoura ? 
Ask Lord Tixover. Tix says . 

" Here are three couples killing time on 
their way to the Azores. Ella is tired of me, 
Miranda of Tom Jones, Margaret of the Trog- 
lodyte. What shall we do ? Amuse our- 
selves. Play whist, humbug, cribbage, back- 
gammon, quarterdeck-croquet, chess . lunatic 
chess." 

Full of ideas was the Viscount; and he had 
an efficient helper in his steward and boat- 
swain, Jack M arris, who was ready to do any- 
thing under any circumstances. 

'Twixt South'ton and the Azores there 
were some days to be wasted : both Bo'sun 
Jack and Cap' en Tix showed their capacity 
of invention. 

" Shall we have a game of chess, Tix ?" 
says Tom Jones one day. " I used to play 
tremendously in the bush." 

They played. Tix won. Tix had a habit 
of winning. There wasn't his equal at a 
Muzio or AUgaier. 

When Tix had beaten all his opponents 
with an ease that seemed impertinent . for 
he might have given Tom Jones a rook . it 



"TIX." 157 

occurred to him that chess had not been 
exhausted. The inventor of the Palinoura 
had other inventions about him. One day 
he had smashed up the Troglodyte with a 
. Cochrane gambit, and they were talking 
thereon. 

"Why are we kept to a square of sixty- 
four ?" suddenly exclaimed Tix. " Why not 
eighty-one, for a change.'* Where's Jack 
Morris ? Morris, paint me a chessboard with 
nine squares of a side. Look alive ! " 

" You '11 want a new piece," said Mir- 
anda. 

" And pray why not, Lady Tachbrook ? 
Why not a new game of chess as different 
from all other games as you are different from 
all other women } " 

" Have you really got a notion ? " said 
Ella the Viscountess. 

" Yes, you Irish lass, I have really got a 

« 

notion. At present, in chess, we 've king, 
queen, bishops, knights, rooks, pawns. All 
have their moves, and the results are excel- 
lent good. But we will have eighty-one 
squares ; and between king and queen there 
shall be the poet, and his move shall be 



I 

158 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the queen's and knight's move combined. 
Look!" 
Tix diagrammatised. 

Slack. 



Rook 


Knight 


Bishop 


King 


Poet 


Queen 


Bishop 


Knight 


Rook 

< 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 




























































. 
































d 


d 


d 


.d 


.d 


.d 


d 


d 


.d 


3I00H 


Hl3iu^ 


doiisig 


Sm^ 


laoj 


uasn^ 


doqsig 


jqSiux 


3I00H 



"What a lovely idea!" exclaimed Miranda. 
" How it will upset all the Murphys and 
Stauntons ! What will they discover instead 
of a Muzio gambit } " 

" We must try," says Tix. " Where 's the 



"TIX." 159 

Bo' sun ? Now, Jack, is the chessboard 
ready ? I must carve the new pieces." 

Therewith Tix took. a bit of cork, and 
with his knife sculpt it into human forms, 
and dipt one into ink. 

" There ! " says the Viscount, " there are 
our minstrels. They '11 make a slight novelty 
in opening." 

" Won t they ?" says Tom Jones, who had 
longed for novelties when he played endless 
games in Australia with his cousin and name- 
sake. " But why give your new piece so 
much power, Tix ? And why put it between 
the king and queen ? " 

" ' J'ai fait, hdas ! narguant le diad^me, 
' Un gros p6ch6 . car j*ai fait un dauphin,' " 

said the Viscount, quoting one of the few 
Frenchmen who could make that unsingative 
language sing. 

"Well, I suppose the troubadour zs king 
of men," said the Troglodyte. 

" And of women," added Tom, " if Tix is 
to be believed. Certainly poet beats either 
soldier or politician in the end. You re- 
member what Homer said to Agamemnon 
when they met in Hades ?" 



1 60 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

"No; what?" 

" You conquered Troy : I conquered Time." 

" We shall find that game of yours rather 
hard to play," said the Troglodyte. " The 
poet will be a difficult piece to manage. 
Fancy losing him !" 

** What do you mean to call the game ..*" 
asked Miranda. 

" Tix, of course," said Ella. 

** A capital monosyllable, "said the Troglo- 
dyte. ** Start it at once when we get back 
ito London. Who '11 make it ?" 

"Jaques of Hatton Garden," said the 
Viscount, who knew everything and every- 
body. " We '11 advertise it as Tix, and place 
on the box a motto from Shakespeare . 

" Miranda, Sweet lord, you play me false. ; 

Ferdinand, No, my dearest love ; 

I would not for the world," 

"Yes," said Tom Jones; "and there shall 
be likenesses of Miranda and me playing 
chess. Will that do?" 

" Capitally," replied Ella. " Meanwhile 
are you going to teach us the game in its 
new form V 

" Do you remember," said Tix, " the reward 



"TIX." l6l 

given by the Asiatic prince to the inventor of 
chess?" 

" No . ^what was It ?" asked Miranda. 

" A grain of wheat for the first square of 
the chessboard ; two for tlie second, four for 
the third, and so on. It exhausted his ma- 
jesty's granary." 

" Well, what are you going to ask ?" in- 
quired Lady Tixover, archly. 

" What should you think, Ella mine? 
None of your corn and gold. Will you pay 
me in kisses ? Three ladies . ^take it in turns. 
At a rough reckoning you would havfe to give 
me a quadrillion of kisses among you." 

" What in the world is a quadrillion ? " 
asked Mrs Gilbert Tachbrook. 

" A million-million-million-million," said 
Tix. " If you three ladies gave me a million 
kisses a day between you, which would take 
up a good deal of your time, since I should 
want about a dozen a second . hard lines for 
all three of us . my reward would still not be 
exhausted for about a third of a trillion of 
years." 

" That 's extremely unintelligible," says the 
Troglodyte. " Write it down." 

VOL. II. L 



1 62 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 



" Thanks !" said the Viscount. ** I never 
rashly put my name to paper. Calculate 
anno domini for yourself, and I hope you 11 
live to reach it." 

*' How would it be," said Miranda, " to 
lessen the chessboard, instead of increasing 
it ? I think there is something absurd in two 
knights, two bishops, two rooks. Surely one 
of each would do." 

" That 's a better idea than yours, Tix,*' 
said Tom Jones, " Then you would have a 
square of twenty-five." 

Tom diagrammatised for his wife. 

Whiie. 



Rook 


Queen 


King 


Bishop 


Knight 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


P. 


. 










.J 


d 


.J 


d 


.J 


jh3iu^ 


doitsja 


Jui^ 


ussn^ 


100H 



'' The battlefield is a trifle narrow," said 
Lord Tixover, " and the first pawn that 
moved would infallibly be taken." 



"tix." 163 

"Is not a hand-to-hand struggle," said 
Ella, "far better than shooting at one an- 
other miles away ? The Lion Heart, with 
his battleaxe, was a finer bellow than the . 
modern general who wins battles by guns 
that kill half a dozen miles off." 

" Well, one must have elbow-room," said 
the Troglodyte. ** I am inclined to think that 
not chess only, but almost all our games, 
might be reconsidered. Tom, you Ve a mil- 
lionaire. Offer prizes at Oxford and Cam- 
bridge annually for essays on the improve- 
ment of cricket, football, chess, whist, cro- 
quet ; offer prizes for the solution of the 
mysteries of the boomerang and mesmerism. 
It would be a grand extension of science." 

" As to chess," said Tix, ** after Lady Tach- 
brook's suggestion, I'm not prepared to 
say that one number of squares is better than 
another. I ask for eighty-one; she is con- 
tent with twenty-five ; the populace believe in 
sixty-four. Perhaps a mathematician might 
show that there is some square more conve- 
nient and efficient than all other squares. 
Just now we are all at sea, as much as the 
British Parliament itself when it is a question 



1 64 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

whether grocers should sell what they call 
brandy." 

It may be observed that a good deal of 
nonsense was talked on board the Palinoura 
by the three honeymoon couples. If senti- 
mental or erotic, they kept such feelings for 
the privacy of their own cabins. Lounging 
on deck, or eating their dinners, they talked 
as if they had all been married half a centurjr 
or so. The three bridegrooms had seen the 
world : of the brides, Miranda was sea-born, 
and Ella Irish, which meaneth much. Per- 
haps Margaret, the schoolmistress, was the 
most childish of them ail- 
When they fell into deck-debate, it was 
pretty to see how Ella fought for Ireland ; 
but Tixover conquered her by courtesy, 
being a greater believer in the Irish than 
are the Irish themselves. 

" I Ve married an Irish lass, and mean to 
quarter the shamrock," he said . 

** * Chosen leaf 

Of bard and chief, 
Green Erin's native shamrock.' ** 

** Tom Moore's shamrock was very sham/' 
said Tom Jones. 



« ^TV " 



TIX." 165 

" It was. And there 's a good deal of 
nonsense about harps in Tara's halls, and 
Malachi wearing a collar of gold. But there 
is just as much nonsense on the other side. 
The last paper I picked up at Southampton 
contained a letter about Home Rule, as they 
call it, and suggested that Ireland might as 
well have its separate parliament as islets 
like Jersey, Guernsey, Man. With that I 
quite agree. A parliament in Dublin would 
be of immense social and political advantage 
to Ireland. But a leader in the same paper 
informs us that ' Ireland is incapable of home 
rule, which is no great loss to her ; but she is 
also incapable of local administration and 
self-government, in the English sense of the 
term, which is a great loss to hen' And the 
fellow goes on to say . look at it !" said Tix, 
throwing the unfortunate newspaper on the 
deck . "that the Irish poor ought to be 
educated." 

" They had better begin with the English 
poor,'' said Tom Jones. " Accurate ideas of 
education have not yet reached the parochial 
brain. Irish folk are quite capable of self- 
government, but don't want to do it in the 



1 66 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

way preferred by English mayors and alder- 
men, who care for nothing except being 
knighted and getting testimonials." 

** I prefer the Irish way,'* said Ella. 

*' Naturally," quoth Miranda ; " you like a 
good fight." 

" Fighting nations ai-e great nations," said 
the Troglodyte, oracularly. 

**What I wonder at," says Tix the om- 
niscient, ** is whether this fellow, contemptu- 
ously disparaging the Irish in the year 1872, 
knows that in 891 three great scholars from 
Ireland visited the court of King Alfred, and 
that a greater than the three, * Swifney, chief 
doctor in Ireland, the academy of Europe,' 
died about that time ? If people knew what 
was going on a thousand years ago, they 
would not write such nonsense. I believe 
in the Irish." 

'' Your wife has made you a Celt," said 
Tom. 

" Explain the round towers," said Miranda. 
" The subject is too difficult for a lady," 
said the Viscount. 

It must not be supposed that all the con- 
verse between Southampton and the Island 



« r«TV " 



TIX." 167 

of Hawks was either about chess or about 
Ireland. Miranda and Ella were both charm- 
ing. You should have heard Ella sing " The 
Groves of Blarney," and " Barney Brallaghan's 
Courtship," on a moonlight night. Then 
Miranda took to her guitar, feeling probably 
the mermaid impulse, and sang thereto 
verses whose authorship has not been dis- 
covered : . 

*' O happy life, whose love is found ! 

happy love, whose life is free ! 

O happy strings whose soft notes ^ound 

Athwart the sea ! 

" The sea has mistress in the moon, 
The moon has lover in the sea ; 
They meet too late, they part too soon . 

And so do we. 

^ I am adored, yet must obey : 

1 am a queen and yet a slave. 
It seems to me the self-same way 

With moon and wave. 

" O be it so ! O let it be ! 

O may I always rule and serve, 
And live the life whose love is free, 

And never swerve ! " 

Thus Miranda. Tix led a chorus of 
cheers. Then he exclaimed, improvisator . 

" Look, we are coming fast 
To where you were shipwrecked last. 



1 68 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

. Who knows on what shore, wind-vext, 
You may be shipwrecked next ? 
By the look of the blue coast I 
Know the isle where falcons fly, 
And can guess at the famous cavern 
Where the Troglodyte kept a tavern." 

At this point Gilbert Tachbrook threw a 
soda-water bottle at Tix, who caught it as if 
he had been point at cricket. 

And the two Palinouras reached the Island 
of Hawks, and Margaret Delisle was beyond 
measure delighted. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

SEROZA. 

" Intus aquae dulces vivoque sediKa saxo, 
Nympharum domus/' 

Viscount Tixover brought his two Palinouras 
into the harbour of the Island of Hawks in 
serene May weather. It was a very different 
time from that in which Captain Grainger's 
unlucky wreck occurred. Perfect calm 
reigned ; there was nothing, indeed, to break 
it, except the salute which Tix fired from his 
brass cannon. 

" This is my island," said the Troglodyte, 
when the party set foot ashore. " I welcome 
you. Let us make our way to my ancient 
palace." 



I 70 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Ah ! " quoth Tixover, " it will delight me. 
I like these out-of-the-way places, and could 
live in a cavern myself till my wife got tired/' 

Here Ella pinched him as he deserved. 

" Let 's have some provender and bedding 

« 

up from the yacht, Tix, and sleep in the dear 
old cavern," said Tom Jones. " You Ve no 
idea how lovely it is. I could pass my life 
there." 

" So could I," said Miranda. 

" I hope to pass a good deal of mine there," 
said the Troglodyte, " and my wife agrees 
with me." 

" Yes," said Mrs Tachbrook. " I like lonely 
places and odd corners of the world. It will 
be such a lovely schoolroom for Adam and 
Eve. By the way, where are they ? " 

" They ran on just now," said Ella. 

" O they are in the lake by this time,'* 
said Tom Jones ; '' and quite right too." 

" Well," said Tix to the Troglodyte, " if you 
think of making this your residence at inter- 
vals, 1 41 give you the old Palinoura, so that 
you may be able to come and see us in Eng- 
land now and then. Will you hare her ? " 

" I will, if he won't," said Mrs Tachbrdok. 



SEROZA. I 7 1 

*' I don't mean to be shut up in this island 
without power of elopement, and with nothing 
to do but tame my step-children." 

" Perhaps your own children may want 
taming by and by," said the Viscount. 

Material for comfortable sojourn had been 
ordered up from the yacht, and our party 
made their way leisurely toward the famous 
cavern. Margaret Tachbrook was most de- 
lighted at the thought of seeing it. Always 
since her unhappy girlhood she had loved 
strange scenes, strange characters ; now she 
was wife of a man who lived in a cavern in a 
desert island, and whose children could swim 
like fish. It was delicious. She scarcely saw 
the beauty of the scenery through which they 
passed in her desire to reach the marvellous 
cavern. 

The vines were grapeless, but the rivulet 
was cool. Adam and Eve, as Tom had 
guessed, were in the water by the time the 
others reached the lake. 

"Those young monkeys have not been 
taught much civilisation yet, Mrs iTachbrook," 
said the Troglodyte. 

" What nonsense it is about civilisation I " 



1 72 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

said Tix. "Which is better . to vote by 
ballot and starve, or not to vote at all and 
live on the fruits of the earth and fish of the 
sea produced without toil ? Which is better 
. that your ladylove should ride in Rotten 
Row and read the Saturday Review^ or that 
she should swim in a southern, sea and read 
nothing ?" 

** It has often occurred to me," said Miranda, 
" that the world is rather neglected. I was 
born at sea, and always think that living on 
an island is the next best thing to living on 
board ship. And see what multitudinous 
islands there are where nobody lives." 

" Here is one, at any rate," said Ella. " An 
island with Mr Tachbrook for its only inhabi- 
tant was dreadfully uninhabited." 

" We '11 inhabit it now," quoth Tom Jones. 
" Shall we hoist her Majesty's flag ?" 

" There '11 be war with Portugal if you do," 
said Tix ; " and they '11 immediately send 
over a consul and a bishop. We should find 
those gentry a nuisance. The only consul I 
cared about I met in Barcelona, and the only 
bishop I cared about I met in New Zea- 
land." 



SEROZA. 173 

* 

They made their way to the cavern. It 
would be hard to say who was most delighted 
of the three new-comers. Margaret Tach- 
brook immediately began to think it would 
make a charming academy for a^cked chil- 
dren. Ella wanted to be a mermaid at once. 
Tix exclaimed . 

" This is glorious ! Let us start a limited 
liability company, and turn it into the Grand 
Shipwreck Subterrene Hotel. Baths always 
ready.'^ 

" I never passed happier days than I passed 
here," said the Troglodyte, "with no com- 
panions but a couple of young children. 
Now, with another companion, I intend to 
surpass that happiness." 

" And so I am not to hear operas and see 
pictures ? " said Margaret. 

" O there will be the Palinoural^ said Tix. 
** Come to town in her for the season. My 
wife will always be glad to see you at Rutland 
House. There's room in that queer old 
place for lots of ladies." 

While they were talking nonsense of this 
description, some sailors from the yachts 
were bringing things eatable, drinkable, and 



I 74 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

sleepable. They meant to dine and sleep in 
the famous cavern for one night, that was cer- 
tain. Tix always had a good cook on board his 
yacht, and the bill of fare was settled between 
him and the Troglodyte, who insisted on 
crater-fish. Tix, emulous of the knight in 
Boccaccios' charming story, killed a hawk 
with his revolver, and made the cook devil 
him to the uttermost; but the ladies all 
agreed he was too tough. 

It is already known to the reader of this 
romance that three married^ couples could 
have convenient chambers in the Troglodyte's 
mansion ; and in the great hall the attendant 
seamen found ample accommodation. Early 
next morning, Tix felt restless. He gave the 
somnolent Ella an unnoticed kiss, and passed 
through the next room, where Tom Jones was 
half awake. A whispered, " Come along and 
swim," brought the baronet out of dream- 
land. Down quietly they went to the margin 
of the crater-lake. 

" Cold," says Tom, '' for this latitude," as 
they denuded themselves. 

" I like ice," says the Viscount, "just as I 
like heat. It^s your medium I hate; ex- 



SEROZA. 175 

tremes are my delight. Geniuses I like, and 
fools I like ; commonplace people I detest." 

"How you must detest me ! " said Tom 
Jones. 

" O very," says the Viscount. " But, Tom, 
look! What's that on the other shore ? It 
can't be a gorilla." 

" It certainly can't," said Tom. " Let's 
rush round and see. It 's uncommonly like 
a female of the human race." 

" Right," says the Viscount; "we'll rush," 
suiting action ts) word. They postponed 
their bath, and skirted the lake at double 
quick. When they arrived at the point 
where they had seen this apparition, they 
found themselves in presence of a rather 
pretty girl, who seemed about nineteen or 
twenty, a mere child in fact. When they 
addressed her, she merely made signs, 
pointing to her ears and lips ; and Tix 
instantly divined she was deaf, and therefore 
dumb. 

" Where in the world can she have come 
from ? " said Tom Jones. " Hadn't we better 
see if there 's anybody else about ? It 's un- 
commonly queer." 



176 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" You investigate/' said Tix, " while I try 
to console her." 

So Tom rambled about the place, finding 
nothing; while Tix, the kindest and most 
ingenious of men, did his best to find out 
something about this fair maiden. He was 
obliged to talk by touch. He discovered 
that she knew nothing of any ordinary finger- 
alphabet. She only shook her head when he 
used those mysterious dactylics which are 
the approved language of persons without 
hearing. 

The girl appeared to be of some other race 
than English. Her dress was picturesque, 
and without soil of shipwreck. She was evi- 
dently glad to see human faces, and showed 
n6 touch of savage shyness. When Tom 
Jones returned from his useless search for 
any clue to her being there, he and Tix ex- 
changed opinions, but could only arrive at 
the conclusion that the child was a deaf mute 
and might be a good pupil for Mrs Gilbert 
Tachbrook. 

At breakfast in the cavern the arrival of 
this stranger caused immense excitement 
Margaret Tachbrook at r.«^^ ^..,.^j i... 



SEROZA. 177 

down for a pupil. Miranda, sea-born, fancied 
she might be like herself therein. Nobody 
could guess any solution of her solitary ap- 
pearance on the island; but it was agreed 
with unanimity that she must be taken care 
of, and that she looked quite worth the 
trouble. She evidently was delighted to be 
among friends, and enjoyed the breakfast 
brought together by joint work of Tix and 
the Troglodyte . one from the yacht, the 
other from the island. The Viscount's London 
stores mixed pleasantly with the insular deli- 
cacies. It was new to sit in a cavern looking 
out upon a lake, and drink caravan-tea from 
Fortnum's, with goat s-milk to cool it, and 
eat crater-fish with soy and anchovy. 

" I wish the Irish would colonise, this lovely 
island," said Ella. 

'' If they wouldn't fight," said Miranda. 
" Dear me, why wz/l they fight ? " 

" Bom in them," said Tix. " They like 
fighting. They ought to be let fight If I 
had a hundred thousand Irishmen, I 'd con- 
quer half the world." 

" You ought to be Lord-Lieutenant," said 
the Troglodyte. 

VOL. II. M 



178 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

** I wouH not hold the position to be con- 
trolled by your English Ministries. If I 
were at Dublin Castle, with power to do what 
I liked for a year, they might hang me at the 
end of it if I did not pacify and satisfy Ire- 
land." 

'' I 'd help," said Ella. 

" What ! to hang your husband^ my dear ?" 
said Mrs Tachbrook. 

"If he failed. I am not afraid of that. 
He never fails in anything." 

" Lucky man ! " said the Troglodyte. " But 
I think you are right about Ireland, Tixover. 
One man who understood the people would 
set them right They have produced, from 
time immemorial, the greatest soldiers and 
scholars; they could do the same again if 
they were not governed by dolts." 

"Yes, that's the true point," quoth Tom 
Jones. " English people, as I soon saw when 
I came back, manage themselves so well that 
it does not much matter whether the monarch 
or the premier is a fooL Self-controlled and 
individual, we are mechanically loyal, and 
habitually obedient to even bad laws. The 
Irishman is otherwise. He wants a king 



SEROZA. 179 

whom he can worship ; a prime minister who 
is a great orator and wielder of influence; 
a parliament full of fire and life ; laws that 
have some equity in them. It is not sur- 
prising that the English cannot manage 
Ireland when they cannot manage Kew 
Gardens." 

" I sometimes fear^" said Tix, " that we 
grow weaker in our governing faculty, which 
has made us the first nation in the world. 
I can quite clearly see the English deficiency. 
We have pluck and strength, but not enough 
insight and sympathy. We can crush a 
mutiny in India, but we ought to have been 
able to prevent it . ^and might have done so 
if we could only understand the people to be 
governed. But fancy an English officer 
being expected to know or care anything 
about Vishnu ! The people look upon us as 
a plague, like a rainy season or cholera, and 
pray for deliverance. It is nearly the same 
with the Irish, near neighbours as they are. 
They are a feminine nation, that has con- 
tracted a marriage of aversion with a mascu- 
line nation. The masculine nation is a fool, 
and won't let its wife have her way, not 



1 80 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

knowing how soon she would be tired of it 
and long to be obedient." 

" I shall box your ears, Tix," said Ella. 

** Do, child. I like the cooling touch of 
your fairy hands." 

Mrs Gilbert Tachbrook, an expert in un- 
usual developments of humanity, had been, 
during this conversation, trying to get the 
new-comer into, some sort of intelligent com- 
munication. Although it proved impossible, 
she remarked that her face had not the 
vacant look which belongs to most deaf 
mutes when people converse around them, 
and she whispered this to her husband, who 
passed on the observation to Tixover. Tix ' 
formed a theory at once, for he was always 
forming theories, just as a tree forms leaves. 
It was that the girl might possibly be dumb 
by malformation, and not have lost the sense 
of hearing. He led the conversation to a 
topic which he thought might arouse her, if 
she really had any comprehension of lan- 
guage, and that language chanced to be 
English. 

" I am not sure, Mrs Tachbrook," he said, 
" that it might not be an advantage to lose a 



SEROZA. 1 8 1 

sense or two. What a keen eye for the pro- 
found beauty of nature had Wordsworth, who 
possessed no sense of smell. When Milton 
grew corporeally blind, his intellectual vision 
swept Paradise and Heaven and HTell. What 
a luxury to be deaf in a country infested by 
organ-grinders, or dumb in a parliament of 
interminable orators ! " 

" Did you ever speak in the House of 
Lords ? " said Sir Harold. 

" Me ! No ; but I mean to, now that I 
have an Irish grievance in the shape of an 
Irish wife." 

" What an incorrigible boy you are, Tixl" 
said Miranda. 

*' I think," said the Troglodyte, who had 
been meditative, " that your notion of the 
deprivation of a sense has ontologic basis. 
It is just like Miranda's idea of playing chess 
with fewer pieces on fewer squares. To lose 
sight must be terrible, but I can well imagine 
its increasing the mental power of a great 
man like Milton." 

" Ay ; and even his happiness," said Tom 
Jones. 

" Again," quoth the Troglodyte, '* loss of 



( 



1 82 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

power IS gain of power, and loss of pleasure 
is gain of pleasure. There comes a time in 
life, earlier much in some men than in others, 
but latest in the greatest, when what people 
call pleasure is a nuisance. The words 
pleasure and pain become reversed. There 
is no pleasure in eating sweatmeats or drink- 
ing champagne. There is pleasure in- 
describable and unimaginable in the keen 
battle-wound, in suffering trouble for a 
friend, in anything which makes you feel 
higher than the mere common circumstance 
of life. A man, conscious of his manhood, 
ought never to think what will happen to 
him." 

" I am quite with you^*' said the Viscount ; 
** existence is enough for me. Give me life ; 
I '11 live it. We are too much the slaves of 
circumstance. * We look before and after,' 
as Shelley puts it, instead of just taking the 
day as it comes. What can happen to any 
man that he need fear ? I like life, especially 
now that I am married. Lady Tixover ; but 
I think I should like to solve the problem of 
death." 

" I '11 marry again if you do," said Ella. 



SEROZA. 183 

While this irregular conversation had ram- 
bled on, the new-comer had not been un- 
noticed. She seemed in some degree to follow 
it, and the three ladies agreed that they had 
noticed once or twice a pretty moisture in 
her eyes. 

** How could she understand anything ? " 
said Tom Jones ; " she does not look 
English. Besides, how is a dumb person to 
catch the meanings of language ? " 

" O we '11 discuss that by and by,'* said 
Tix. ** I Ve a theory about her, and a 
scheme for her ; meanwhile, as she had better 
have a name, I propose to be her godfather, 
and christen her Seroza." 

** Pretty name ! where did you find it ? " 

*' In the Azores." 



CHAPTER XVII. 



AGAIN AT SEA. 



> « 



Cras ingens iterabimus aequor." 



Pleasant weeks they passed in the Island oi 
Hawks, exploring its marvellous caverns and 
enjoying its lovely climate. Tix and Tom 
Jones, however, began to grow restless, and 
wanted to travel farther. So one day, when 
the sky was blue and the crater-lake calm, 
they held council of war. 

'* I vote for a move," said Tix, just like a 
school-boy. "AH in favour of it, hold up 
their hands." 

Here is the division - list . place aux 
dames : . 

Noes. 



Ayes, 

Ella Lady Tixover. 
Dame Miranda Tachbrook. 
The Viscount Tixover. 
Sir Harold Tachbrook. 



Mrs Gilbert Tachbrook. 
The Lord of the Isle. 



AGAIN AT SEA. 1 85 

V No," said the Troglodyte, " I can't leave 
my island yet, and my wife agrees with me. 
How long we shall stay I don't know ; but 
by your magnificent present, Tix, I shall 
be free to move at any moment. Will 
the men like staying? Mayn't they find it 
slow.>" 

" You '11 only want six, or perhaps seven, 
and there are forty on the two yachts, for I 
had more than necessary. We can try which 
will volunteer. If you keep them employed 
on shore, and occasionally take a cruise 
among the other islands, they'll be con- 
tented enoughs Seamen, as you know, can 
put their hands to anything, and like nothing 
so well as being occupied." 

" I will find them employment," said 
Margaret Tachbrook. " And I shall civilise 
Adam and Eve, and cultivate Seroza." 

"Ah ! wait," said Ella, impetuously. " You 
must not have that child. Tix has a theory 
about her." (Ella always called the Viscount 
Tix, like everybody else, though his Chris- 
tian name, hereditary in the family, was 
Edward.) " He thinks that dear Doctor 
Tachtrook might cure her." 



1 86 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Why might not I ? " asked the inveterate 
schoolmistress. 

" I would rather trust the Doctor, Maggie," 
said the Troglodyte. " Those keen old eyes 
of his seem to see through everything." 

" Perhaps you are right," she answered ; 
" and I shall have quite trouble enough with 
you and your young barbarians." 

** I believe the Doctor might do good," 
said Sir Harold. " I never knew a man 
who gave me so much the idea of one of the 
famous old alchemists. If anybody could 
discover the philosopher's stone or the elixir 
of life, it is Septimus Tachbrook." 

"The philosopher's stone will be found 
one day," said Tix. ** All the best modem 
chemists hold that the multitudinous metals 
which resist analysis are capable of being 
transmuted. I think they will be found to 
be all different forms of hydrogen." 

" But hydrogen is the lightest of gases, 
Tix," said Tom Jones, "and metals are so 
jolly heavy." 

"Some of them. Potassium and sodium 
are lighter than water. We have not arrived 
at the ultimate elements in chemistry yet 



AGAIN AT SEA. 187 

I believe they are a trinity, like everything 
else in nature . that they are oxygen, hydro- 
gen, and nitrogen." 

** How about carbon ?" asked the Troglo- 
dyte. 

" AUotropic hydrogen. What can be more 
like a diamond than a dew-drop or a tear in 
a pretty eye ? " 

**Ella," said Miranda, "why do you let 
your husband talk nonsense and pretend it 
is science ? Keep him in order, as I do 
mine." 

Several trusty seamen were ready volunteers 
for service in the lesser Palinoura^ Captain 
Troglodyte in command : they liked the plea- 
sant island^s lazy life. Mr and Mrs Tachbrook 
found themselves provided with a following 
of fellows ready to do anything, from cooking 
a potato to killing a pirate. 

Tix steamed over to Saint Michael for pro- 
visions and coals, and took the opportunity of 
inquiring as to whether any wreck or accident 
had occurred which might account for Seroza s 
appearance, but could hear of nothing. The 
loveliness of the country and the laziness of 
the people astonished our voyagers, who had 



1 88 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS* 

never before seen such fertility of soil or such 
an unwashed aristocracy. 

" What are we to do next, Tom ? " asked 
the Viscount. " I should like a long cruise, 
but I suppose both of us ought to attend to 
certain plaguey home-duties. What say you ? 
And what say the ladies ? Shall we go right 
down the Atlantic and run up the Amazon to 
the Andes ? " 

" What 's your fancy for that ? " asked his 
lady-love. '' It 's a barbarous place, isn't 
it ? They never taught me any geography, 
I am glad to say." 

" Barbarous ! " cried Tix ; " the loveliest 
river in the world 1 Fifty thousand miles 
of navigable water ! Its mouth is about as 
wide as the Thames is long." 

" Is a wide mouth esteemed a beauty in a 
river ? " asked Miranda. 

" Come, Tix," said Tom, " these girls are 
chaffing you. What is it all about . ^your 
Amazon ? What's the attraction ? " 

" Well," said the Viscount, " Orellana, who 
first investigated it, said he came among 
Amazons high up the stream . a nation of 
them. Taller than men, he reported them. 



AGAIN AT SEA. 1 8^ 

and very beautiful, and keeping men in com- 
plete subjection as hewers of wood and 
drawers of water." 

^* How charming!" exclaimed Miranda. 
** Let us go and find them. I i^hould like 
to see how they manage their husbands, 
and take a lesson home for the ladies of 
England." 

" I don't believe in your Amazons," said 
Tom Jones, " but I should like to go up the 
river for all that. They won't expect us back 
yet : Harold will look after Rothescamp. I 
think we might try the experiment if you 
really fancy it." 

" I fancy it much," said Ella. *' I should 
like to bring home a few Amazons and turn 
them loose in Ireland. They might keep 
some sort of order." 

" Faith ! let 's try it," cried the Viscount. 
" If there 's any bother, we need not go on. I 
love a cruise with an object at the end." 

" I like quietude at sea for its own sake," 
said Miranda, "and could stand it for ever. 
Still, if you catch your Amazons, I shall not 
object. One might be useful as a lady's- 
maid." 



1 90 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

"Ah, you should see them as Orellana 
describes : then I think you 'd rather not." 

As this conversation occurred, the Palin- 
otira lay at anchor in St Michael's Bay, and 
the party were lounging astern on rugs and 
cushions. Seroza was a puzzling girl : she 
attached herself specially to Miranda, and did 
small services for her, and seemed by instinct 
to divine what she wanted. She did not like 
to be out of her sight. She waited on her at 
table, made herself her lady's-maid, and 
understood her signs when she could under- 
stand no others. 

" How do you account for it, Tom } " 
Miranda would say; and his answer would 
be. 

" I never heard of anybody who could 
account for anything, child. But you are 
both waifs of the sea, and I suppose were 
mermaids together ; so she recognises 
you.'' 

All sea-born and sea-dwelling folk are 
superstitious. No wonder; for the eternal 
life of the sea and its glorious loneliness 
ennoble and vivify the imagination. Its 
measured motion reminds the voyager of 



AGAIN AT SEA. 1 9 1 

God's presence. Its illimitable solitude re- 
minds the voyager that he is in God's hand. 
Neither of these thoughts seems to come so 
forcibly in crowded towns, or even in wild 
country. 

Miranda, being superstitious, began to 
think that this deaf and dumb girl was sent 
as a special gift to her. Can such things be ? 
Is the world a mere machine, working by 
accident ? or is it the careful work of an 
Omnipotent Spirit who guides every move- 
ment of it ? Believers in the former theory 
can scarcely take much interest in existence, 
seeing that they are utterly devoid of will. 
Thoughts like these ran vaguely through our 
Miranda's little brain. Many another brain, 
little and great, has beea and will be puzzled 
with thenx The fuss mock-metaphysicians 
make over them is. just like that which mock- 
mathematicians make over the quadrature of 
the circle. The radius and the circumference 
are incommensurable : will and fate are in- 
commensurable. 

Everybody was fond of Seroza, who^ not- 
withstanding her physical deficiency, was 
evidently of quick intellect and most loving 



192 MIRANDA; A ^HDSUMMER MADNESS. 

temperament Everybody liked her, and she 
served everybody ; but to Miranda she was 
a willing slave. Often thought Miranda . 

" I hope grandpapa will make her talk. 
I do want to find out where in the world she 
came from." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

UP THE QUEEN OF RIVERS. 

** Tiber *s a liistory and Nile 's a mystery ' 
Of the past, and Thames a glory and a beauty 
Of this strong time ; but Amazon 's a prophecy 
Of a great future utterly imguessable/' 

. Trinuters of Philopotamos, 

Amazon was ascended to the roots of 
Andes. All voyagers were pleased. Tix 
and Tom had the adventure they loved ; for 
they reached the river-mouth about the time 
of full moon, and the tremendous bore, that 
we have on a small scale in our Severn, met 
them with full force, and they wpuld not have 
escaped utter wreck but for the Viscount's 
admirable management of his clever little 
craft. Miranda taught Ella to enjoy almost 

VOL. 11. n 



194 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

as well as herself the absolute isolation 
of the sea. Seroza became a thoroughly 
accepted member of the party ; enslaved 
by Miranda, she knew by an inexplicable 
instinct what to do for her, when she 
wanted her, when she wanted her away. 
On torrid summer nights, they kept festival 
on deck, cool and joyous, while the Palin- 
ouray aided by the east wind, swiftly 
steamed up the rapid river. Tix used to 
make wild rhymes, which Miranda sang to 
her guitar, while Tom imperturbably smoked, 
and Ella criticised. 

" What shall we do with Seroza V^ said 
Tom. 

"01 mean to have her," replied Miranda. 
" You can see that she is my slave. I mean 
to take her home, make grandpapa cure 
her dumbness, and then find somebody to 
marry her." 

" A grand notion," said Tom. " I don't 
object. She 's a charming little creature, and 
I should be uncommonly glad to solve her 
mystery. But, O dear me! women are so 
much like rivers." 

The Palinoura did her duty well upon the 



UP THE QUEEN OF RIVERS. 1 95 

Amazon, and our honeymoon wanderers en- 
joyed their time. ' Many adventures they had, 
which there is here no space to describe. 
Alas ! they found no Amazons. It was a 
real disappointment. They talked about it 
very seriously one night on deck,* as they 
were steaming down stream at a tremendous 
pace, with that fresh current^ on their way 
homeward. 

For the Viscount wanted to see Tixover 
Hall, and Tom wanted to see Rothescamp- 
on-the-Hill, and Miranda wanted to sdfe her 
father and grandfather. She felt that she 
hardly knew her grandfather yet. 

When an American humourist is ironically 
sentimental over " the tomb of Adam," he is 
showing incapacity to understand a very true 
feeling, happily less rare among Englishmen 
than other Europeans. An Arab is proud of 
his descent from IshmaeL Thackeray laughed 
at the " Peerage," as the ** Bible of the middle 
classes." Yet what does that show ? Simply 
that there is among the English folk a love 
of race. Better surely than the worship of . 

" Mammon, the least-erected spirit that fell 
From heaven ; for even in heaven his looks and thoughts 



196 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Were always downward bent, admiring more 
The riches of heaven's pavement . trodden gold . 
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed 
In vision beatific." 

Now, while I heartily approve of a man's 
reverencing his father and mother, so far as 
the feeling of reverence can be called up now- 
a-days (and it is really almost as difficult as 
burning phosphorus in vacuo), I also think 
that his parents' parents are worth some con- 
sideration. Nor that alone ; the lineage of 
other people is a thing worth noting, if there 
be anything in the ancient saying. Noblesse 
oblige. 

I believe in race. The fountain or origin 
of a great nation or a great family was a great 
man. I desire to trace back to. that great 
man in all cases. Those who laugh at the 
genealogist, the investigator of pedigrees, 
should consider what he is trying to do. 

Miranda. . " I don't believe there are any 
Amazons. I should so like to bring one 
home and show her to the feminine populace." 

Tom. . "You can't prove a negative, I was 
taught at school. I daresay there are plenty 
of them, only you could not succeed in finding 
them." 



UP THE QUEEN OF RIVERS. 1 97 

Ella. . " Faith, if you can't find them they 
must exist. It's the truest things that are 
the most difficult to discover.'* 

Tom. . "Truth itself, for example, which 
lies at the bottom of a well." 

Tix. . " It has often occurred to me that 
there is some mysterious meaning in this old 
saying. For how can truth lie at all . 
whether at the bottom of a well or the 
top of an Alp. Hallo! By Jove! what's 
this?" 

A canoe flashed across the water at this 
moment . its occupants a man and a dog. 
The Viscount caused the Palinoura to stop 
her engine, as it seemed clear the stranger 
wanted to attract attention. He came along- 
side at once, and Tix ordered some of his 
crew to look after his canoe while he came 
on board. 

The Canoeist. . " Good morning, ladies and 
gentlemen. Where is the captain ?" 

Tix. . " I 'm your man. And, by Jove ! I 
know v^\io you are." 

Canoeist. . " You do ?" 

Tix. . "Come, do you remember Guy Lut- 
trel, whom you carried away to the lion- 



198 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

haunted inland of Africa? He's First 
Minister now." 

Canoeist. . " The devil he is ! Has anything 
else happened since I have been exploring 
Central America ? But who are you, re- 
membering me so well.'^ I have a half- 
recollection of you." 

Tix. . "O I was a boy when I saw you at 
the * Chandos/ and admired you reverently at 
a distance. The great traveller was to me 
an object of profound worship, and I was 
horrified when somebody said . * That 's 
O. O.'" 

O. O. . ** I see you know me. I am pretty 
well worked out. That upper region of the 
Amazon, where you get into the Andes, is 
hard travel, and I have been at it for six 
years. Are you going home ?" 

Tix, . "Yes, and will take you if you like. 
Haul up the canoe, Morris. We'll take you 
just where you please." 

O. (9.-^" It was lucky to meet you. I was 
in a regular quandary." 

Ella. . " Tix always is lucky . never luckier 
than when he met you to-day, Mr Olifaunt . 
you and your dog." 



UP THE QUEEN OF RIVERS, 1 99 

O. O. . " Why, how do you happen to know 
anything about either me or my old dog ? 
whom I have named Bony . partly for his 
love of boneSj partly because he gets so un- 
commonly like a canine skeleton when he 
and I have stalked a thousand miles together. 
That reminds me, by the way, that perhaps 
he is hungry." 

71r}r.-^" I hope there 's, dinner for both of 
you just ready. I ordered it when you came 
on board, knowing well you must be hungry. 
How long is it since you tasted a Strasbourg 
pie ? " 



CHAPTER XIX. 



« w 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA. 

** Strasbourg tire vanity 

De ses pites de foies ; 
Cette superbe dt6 
Ne doit sa prosperity 

Qu* aux oies." 

Oliver Olifaunt, with Strasbourg pie and 
Other excellent good things before him, soon 
broke into liveliness. He was much altered 
since Tix saw him last. His face was bronze; 
his unshorn hair was snow. His courage 
was as daring as ever ; his wrist and shoulder 
as strong ; his thirst for adventure as great. 
Still one wants Aome now and then ; wants 
the desired bed of Catullus; wants just a little 
rest. O. O., as all men know who know him, 
desires to explore the whole earth. His last 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA." 201 



attempt had been upon certain points in the 
Andes, and to find forgotten cities which 
he had always believed to exist in strange 
comers of the South American continent. 
All the wonders he found cannot be men- 
tioned here ; they will doubtless be chronicled 
when he publishes his travels. He told his 
new friends in confidence that he found a 
few Amazons. When he had finished his 
meal, and had time for conversation, he 
described an adventure or two. 

" There 's an old city,'' said O. O., " cut in 
solid rock like Petra, but with deep caverns 
in the rock, where you might lose yourself in 
five minutes. The aboriginal people seem 
to have been fond of darkness and coolness ; 
and certainly it is rather bright and hot in 
that neighbourhood. I was alone ; my only 
companion my deerhound Bony, who sticks 
to me with doggish resolve. He 's the most 
wonderful fellow on four legs I ever saw. I 
can live on as little as most men when its 
necessary, though I also like a good meal as 
well as most men ; but ' Bony will live on 
nothing for a length of time that passes my 
experience of either man or dog." 



202 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" Good Bony ! " said Miranda, patting the 
head of /O. O/s friend, who was at that time 
feeding luxuriously. 

" I suppose you found some curious Felics 
in your ancient city," said Tom. 

" There were many that I hope to return 
and claim. The expedition would not be a 
difficult one." 

** Does it not seem a shame," said Ella, 
" to remove the monumentjj of ancient days 
from their place ? Byron thought so." 

*' Byron was right," said Tix ; *' but . 

* Venus half removed Minerva's shame.' 

Byron's objection does not apply here, for 
Elgin robbed a civilised country, while Oli- 
faunt talks only of taking memorials from a 
deserted and forgotten city." 

"The only thing I have brought away," 
said O. O., "I can show you now ; but there 
are multitudinous other things for which the 
British Museum and South Kensington will 
be striving with outstretched necks." 

** Ah ! " said the Viscount, " I can foresee 
your coming triumph. London will be mad 
about you, and all other English cities. You 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA." 20$ 

Will come before the Geographical Society 
like Herodotus in a dress-coat" 

** Not a dress-coat, by all the gods," said 
O. O. 

" Well, black velvet, let us say," continued 
the invulnerable Tix, "the sort of thing 
Disraeli and Lord Lytton wore in their hot 
youth. You will be the most popular man in 
England. You will be adored by ladies ; 
implored to lecture ; bored by newspaper 
people. The Times and Telegraph and 
Standard will try which can make most of 
you. There will be heaps of simultaneous 
leaders beginning, . * Our great traveller has 
returned, having discovered the source of the 
AmazdUy and the Amazons who live near its 
source' Your life will be a perpetual blaze 
of glory!" 

. " Till some greater fool turns up," said O. 
O. " I know the sort of thing perfectly 
well." 

.* O but do show us what you have 
brought," said Ella ; " never mind news- 
papers and societies. What's your dis- 
covery ? Don't baffle our curiosity ; ladies 
cannot [^stand it We shan't believe you 



204 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

unless you give us definite proof of your 
adventures." 

" I cannot resist/' said O. O., " s6 absolute 
a command." 

He took from a pocket-case an article of 
antique jewelry. It was a brooch ; the centre 
a cameo representing one of those immobile 
faces we see in Nineveh sculpture, the outer 
rim alternate sapphires and amethysts, the 
setting platinum. The ladies admired it, 
as only ladies can admire the light and colour 
which were petrified to beautify them. Even 
Seroza's eyes brightened as she held it in 
her hand. 

'* I could not have believed," said Sir 
Harold, "that the lapidary art existed 
to this perfection in a forgotten city of 
an extinct race. Can there be no mis- 
take ? " 

" None," he replied. " There are far more 
wonderful things in those subterrene palaces. 
To explore them alone would be impossible, 
for it is necessary to guard against pitfalls 
and foul air, and the natives dare not follow 
you, believing the caves to be haunted by 
unimaginable horrors. I mean to go back 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA." 20$ 

with a gang of stout Englishmen . fellows 
who fear nothing." 

" I '11 lend you the Palinoura when you are 
inclined to go out again/' said the Viscount. 
'* My crew will go anywhere. I '11 come with 
you, if my wife will let me." 

" Not alone," said Ella. 
^ " Do you mean to be always sailing round 
the world, Tix ? " said Tom Jones. " Consider, 
you are now married and settled ; you 
must think of the coming heir of Tixover . 
Oh-h!" 

That exclamation was produced by simul- 
taneous pinches from the two ladies, who sate 
on each side of him. 

"Well," said Tix, standing middeck and 
out of danger, " my coming heir must take his 
chance. My father treated me coolly enough ; 
gave me Eton and Oxford, and money to 
travel ; used to say boys were a nuisance, and 
ought to keep out of the way. The only 
important interview ever I had with him was 
when he caught me on the stairs kissing a 
servant-maid, whereupon he had me into his 
study, and paternally admonished me." 

" You wicked boy I " exclaimed Ella. 



206 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" I hope the admonition was eloquent," said 
Tom Jones. 

" It took the form of a riding-whip," said 
Tix. " I haven't kissed a servant-girl since/' 
. " Don't begin again," said Ella, '* or I shall 
have to borrow a riding-whip." 

Said Miranda . 

" While you talk all this nonsense, what 
lots of pleasant romantic stories Mr Oliphant 
might be telling us ! Don't waste time." 

" You are right, Lady Tachbrook," said 
Tix. '* Odysseus Olifaunt shall tell us stories. 
Give him tobacco. Teach Seroza, the mys- 
terious, to fill his pipe and bring him cooling 
drinks. Now, Olifaunt, tell us some of the 
stories you mean to tell at the Chandos Club 
late o' nights, when incredulous villains are 
snoring on luxurious couches. How about the 
Amazons ?'' 

" Hussies 1 " said the great traveller, oracu- 
larly. 

" O then you have seen them," said Tom. 

" Seen them ! I had hard matter to get out 
of their clutches. I killed two ; but there are 
plenty more, I am sorry to say. The Em- 
peror of Brazil ought to put them down." 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA," 207 

*^ Are you serious ? " said Tom Jones. 

" Is iAis serious ? " asked O. O., baring his 
arm, and showing an impression of very keen 
teeth. " That was the work of an infuriate 
Amazon who attacked me. They hold an 
almost impregnable position on a spur of the 
Andes, and have for immemorial centuries 
carried out the theory . which some people 
think new . that woman is superior to man. 
They kill most of their male children at their 
birth, so the ladies have always a majority." 

" Unfortunately," said Ella, '* they are in a 
majority in England without infanticide." 

" Let us form a society for the importation 
of Amazons," said Tix. " They would teach 
our learned ladies a lesson. Could we get a 
few, Olifaunt, to bring home in the yacht ? " 

" Easily ! The queen will sell you any 
number for a few coral or glass necklaces. 
They do not care for much clothing, and are 
usually content with a few beads round the 
waist." 

'* You will astonish the R.G.S.," said Tix, 
" I shall be there when you deliver your 
Odyssey. Tell us something else ; it shall be 
quite confidential." 



208 MIRANDA ; A MmSUMMER MADNESS. 

" You talk about the ' Odyssey/ " returned 
O. O. " Do you know, I have formed the con- 
clusion . ^which I really wish to be confidential, 
as I want to embody my views in a well-con- 
sidered paper . that Odysseus or Ulysses must 
have been in America. I think so because 
I find traces of what he found there." 

" This sounds amazing," said Sir Harold. 

" The words Amazon and amaze are con- 
nected," said Tix. " An Amazon in Greek 
meant an amazing woman.'* 

" Dear me ! " said Miranda ; " how long is 
this learned talk to last ? Tell us some 
more of your wonderful stories, Mr Olifaunt, 
else I declare 1 11 make Ella sing in Irish." 

"I '11 obey you, lady of the sea," said the 
Viscountess. "If I 'm mistress of the yacht, 
youVe daughter and mistress of the ocean. 
What shall I sing by way of reproach to the 
story-teller who won't tell stories. Will this 
do?. 

* There once was a traveller known, ohone ! 
Who went pfif and wandered alone, ohone ! 
His tales of Ulysses 
And hussies with kisses 
Had rather a tropical tone, ohone ! ' *' 

" Go on," said O. O. " That 's charm- 



O. O. ON BOARD '^HE " PALINOURA." 209 

ing! I should like to put It in my great 
book, when it appears, if it ever should, with 
a sketch of you on the deck of the Palznoura 
singing it/' 

*' I think I '11 take up the parable," said 
Tom Jones, and went off, to the air of the 
"Widow Malone," or something dimly re- 
sembling it : . 

"He has found an American Troy, my boy, 
And the Amazons weren't at all coy, my boy; 

And his fancy environs 

The voyage with sirens. 
That enamour this broth of a boy, my boy." 

"Tom," said Miranda, "you will never be 
a poet. I could have done better than that 
myself." 

" Try 1 " quoth Tom. 

Miranda bravely answered the challenge : . 

" You have been away many a day, O. O. ! 
You have often been awfully gay, ho ! ho ! 
When, solemn and prolix. 
You tell all your frolics, 
I can hear all the Londoners say * Oh ! Oh /"' 

. " Best skolion of the three,'^ said Tix. 
"If the Geographical get hold of me," said 
O. O., "I shall be worn to a skeleton in a 
month . ^they '11 plague me so. I quite dread 

VOL. IL o 



2IO MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

the notion. Just fancy, after having spoken 
about six words of English a year in six 
years, having to stand up and expound and 
explain to a lot of ladies and gentlemen who 
are dreadfully bored, and who don't know 
Africa from America, or latitude from longi- 
tude ! " 

" Well," said Tix, " why the devil should 
you let these people bore you, or even know 
that you are in England ? Come and stay 
with me or Tachbrook, and don't trouble 
yourself about the public until you feel dis- 
posed to reveal yourself. Think of the sen- 
sation when it is announced that the great 
- traveller Olifaunt is at Lord Tixover's seat 
in Rutland, while an expedition has for some 
years been endeavouring to find him on the 
Isthmus of Darien ! " 

" I '11 think of your offer," said the traveller. 
"It certainly would be amusing to be quietly 
in England, while everybody thought one else- 
where. Of course, I wouldn't let an expedi- 
tion be sent out after me, but I 'd keep quiet 
just for a time, to escape the frightful gusts 
of sudden notoriety. I should like it to be 
announced that I had been in England from 



O. O. ON BOARD THE " PALINOURA." 2 1 1 



a certain date, and was about to leave Eng- 
land for further exploration this day^ 

" A capital notion," said Sir Harold. 
" We have lots of room at Rothescamp, and 
you can stay as long as you like. After 
geographical exploring, a man should not be 
hurried. It will give you time to get your 
maps in order, and your irregular notes about 
people and things. I have lots of geogra- 
phical literature about the place, and you can 
live in the library, and Dr Septimus Tach- 
brook, my dear old relation, will give you 
periplus upon periplus." 

" Tempting ! "- said O. O. 

" I 'm sure you '11 come," said Lady Tach- 
brook, " so I won*| use any arguments. And 
we can keep you quite snug in Rothescamp, 
it is such a lonely place." 

" And for a change there 's Tixover," said 
Tix. '* I 'm not often there, but the last note 
I had from my gardener just before leaving 
England was that my pines would beat the 
world.'' 

" O, I adore pines," said Ella. 

" They are nice/' said Miranda. ** I pine 
for pines." 



2 1 2 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

**Sing me one song to the guitar," said 
Tix, "and you shall never be without a 
pine so long as I can grow one." 

Miranda complied. 

" Down the rapid stream we flash, 
You and I together ; 
Is it not a little rash. 
In such sultry weather ? 

^* Blush of rose on cheek of snow 
Thereto this reply went . 
* I would go where you would go ; 
You woidd go where I went. 

*' I would go where you would go, 
Having tied love's true knot,' 
Says the pretty child, ' although 
All the world say, Do nofl'" 



CHAPTER XX. 

SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK, M.D., F.R.S., F.R.G.S., ETC. 

" Memini me turribus altis . .. . 
Corycium vidisse senera," 

** That old Corsican gentleman I knew." . Blackmore. 

Doctor Tachbrook and his son Hiarold were 
at this time passing a very quiet and pleasant 
life . uneventful, except so far as they made 
events for themselves. Harold had taken 
the responsibility of managing his cousin's 
estates in his absence, much to the benefit of 
landlord, tenantry, peasantry. Both Rothes- 
camps . the higher and the lower . felt the 
good done by his wise administration of 
affairs. Knowing that he could act for his 
old friend precisely as if he were acting for 
himself, he carried out any reforms which 



214 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

his father and he, holding council together, 
deemed desirable. By most of those adtera- 
tions the villagers in the main were well 
satisfied, though slightly astonished at first. 

Doctor Tachbrook, during his son's long 
absence, had lived very quietly, sometimes 
visiting London to read and hear read re- 
condite papers at learned meetings; some- 
times receiving some erudite friend, and 
discussing with him after-dinner problems as 
intangible as the bee's wing in his old port. 
What delight has happy youth in blowing 
bubbles that rise, coruscate, float, dissolve 
into the sunny hyaline ! Just such delight 
have men to whom science has become a 
toy in blowing the bubbles of science . in 
talking over those unsettled questions which 
arise with every lift in the level of human 
knowledge. To see the dear old Doctor 
and some able acquaintance as they talked 
about things of the most abstruse character 
was a delight to Harold. To paint them 
would have been a delight to Rembrandt. 

He would have a great astronomer, and 
argue with him oh what is called the " plurality 
of worlds," and maintain that Jupiter may 



SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK. 215 

be warmer than Mercury, since heat, like 
motion, may obey a law analogous to 
Kepler's third law. " Heat ts motion," he 
would say ; " and the farther the planet, the 
faster it moves. Imagine life in Saturn, 
with its three radiant rings and its eight 
moons ! Summer and winter there are 
divided by fifteen years; but the day is 
only ten hours and a half, which seems to 
prove that where people live fastest they live 
longest. If you take the farthest away of all 
the planets we know, Neptune, the only 
moon whose motion has been observed 
whirls round him in five days, while Uranus 
has a moon that completes its voyage in 
two days. But Saturn is my favourite : one 
of its moons gets round in less than a day, 
two others in very little more, and the slowest 
mover takes between two and three months. 
If I lived in Saturn it would drive me to 
learn astronomy." 

Thus also would Doctor Septimus talk to 
antiquaries, classics, mathematicians, chemists, 
botanists, zoologists. He looked for idea in 
all science. " It is there, I know," he would 
say ; ** and where there is idea, you trace the 



2l6 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. , 

hand of God. I cannot tolerate the dull 
fools who think they solve ever3rthing by 
leaving God out of the system. When He 
drops, the stars will drop. The world is 
His idea. Bacon saw it. * Quod in natura 
naturata lex in natura naturante idea dicitur! " 
As the Doctorwaxed old Jie took to epigrams, 
for the older men get the more condensed 
should become the food of both mind and 
body. It is supposed that some day he will 
allow them, in Greek, Latin, and English, to 
be published for private circulation. To offer 
them to the general reading public would be 
simply absurd ; but there will be good luck 
for the happy publisher who gets hold of 
" Oliver Olifaunt's Odyssey." The only Septi- 
mian epigram I am allowed to copy was 
a hit at Harold : . 

" We fain would know, and yet can only guess ; 
Our wildest ventures are by failure crowned. 
My son goes round the world, and sees far less 
Than I, who wait, and let the world go round/' 

One day there was no common arrival 
at the Doctor's house. The old gentleman, 
leaning on Harold's arm, was loitering in the 
sunshine up and down the pavement beneath 
the pollard limes, when a couple of post- 



SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK. 2 1 7 

chaises came dashing up the street, distract- 
ing unaccustomed villagers. Such procession 
seldom amazed the Rothescamp folk. The 
voyagers had been lucky enough to get 
horses at a large station on a railway, whose 
branch line only approached Rothescamp; 
but the inn at this point was well known to 
the omniscient Tix, being one where many a 
time he had invited his friends to dine after 
a row (the o long) ; and the landlord was so 
glad to see the Viscount at home again, that 
he would gladly have horsed him for nothing. 
It was perhaps unfortunate that four of the 
horses were white, being intended for hyme- 
neal purposes, and four black, their customary 
occupation being funereal ; and it was even 
more unfortunate that they were rather oddly 
arranged . three white and the off leader 
black ; three black and the near leader white. 
Tix was foremost to laugh at the arrangement. 

" My Cockney tenantry in Tixover Lane 
would exclaim, ' That's a Wicount, that is ! ' " 

** Tixover Lane ! " said Ella . it was just 
as they were starting from Kenton Station 
. " where in the world is that ? ^' . 

" O you shall go and see Tixover Lane, 



2 1 8 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

my pet. I bought it by auction. It is E.C. 
. easter than most E.C.'s. It was called 
Narrowsmith Lane, a gentleman with that 
name having built cottages of the most 
wretched description there. I bought it. I 
went and saw the people and the houses. I 
rebuilt it. On so narrow a strip of land it 
was impossible to do niuch ; but there are 
twelve cottages, six on each side, and a frag- 
ment of garden ground fore and aft. It's one 
of the most profitable properties I 've got.'* 

** How so ?" asked Tom. 

" Why they're so devilish glad to see me 
when I go that way, which is not always the 
case when landlord and tenant meet. There 
are two or three things I am determined they 
shall have . plenty of light and air and water, 
and good sound beer brewed from malt and 
hops." 

" You are doing a wise thing,'* said O. O. 
" I wish a few other people would do it, and 
make the pepuliace content. Latimer says in 
one of his sermons, * there were never so many 
gentlemen and so little gentleness.' The 
gentleness of gentlemen is the salt of the 
earth." 



SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK. 2 1 9 

" How in the world are the poor to im- 
prove their position if the rich won't help 
them ?" said Tom Jones. " By Jove, I 'd give 
my whole estate . and they say it 's twenty 
thousand a year . to make the people on , it 
live ' happily. I can live happily anywhere 
on anything. I can fell trees or herd cattle 
with any man, and exist on bacon and beer." 

" There you touch the difficulty," said the 
Viscount. " You, having culture and expe- 
rience of the world, are aware that you could 
be as happy, and might be happier, as Tom 
Jones with your living to get, as in the capa- 
city of Sir Harold Tachbrook, Baronet, with 
no end of people depending on you. I am 
entirely of your opinion. I am disgusted at 
being born a peer with an estate. But, you 
see, the two classes of people look at life 
through opposite ends of the telescope. Take 
a poor man . a labourer on my estate . with 
eighteen shillings a week and his cottage and 
garden and orchard. He sees me drive by 
in a mail-phaeton and pair, and he thinks life 
to me is all beer and skittles. Why shouldn't 
h'e have a mail-phaeton and pair ? " 

" I shall go and lecture those mutinous 



220 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

labourers of yours, Tix," said Ella, "and 
show them they are better off than their 
master." 

" That's a hard saying/' quoth Tix, medi- 
tatively. '^ O now I see. Them you will 
lecture now and then . me every day." 

We have retrogressed : let us return to the 
arrival at Dr Tachbrook's. He and Harold 
knew well what it meant when this unusual 
equipage arrived. Miranda was the first to 
reach the ground and salute her father and 
grandfather. Glad were they to see the 
merry creature . a child although a wife. 
Ella's brogue was more delicious than usual 
when she toldthe oldest of the Tachbrooks 
how delighted she was to see him again. 
Tom Jones had tears in his eyes as he 
wrenched his old comrade's hand. Tix, 
always thoughtful, took charge of Seroza, 
and brought her up to the Doctor, and, when 
other matters were over, said quietly . 

" She is deaf and dumb." 

Doctor Tachbrook w:as at once intensely 
interested. He felt her pulse, looked into 
her eyes, seemed to forget everything about 
the arrival of the head of his house and his 



SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK. 221 

grand-daughter in his sudden absorption. 
Meanwhile, where was Oliver Olifaunt ? 

Two things had struck the explorer . he 
was athirst, and he thought the bells ougljit 
to ring on the baronet's return. He saw 
clearly that there would be too much inter- 
change of sentiment to coexist with the idea 
of refreshment. Study of locality in Eng- 
land was not new to him ; when he saw a 
village, he could guess exactly where to find 
the village church and the village inn ; and 
he knew that the village bellringers would be 
within easy call of the latter. O. O. had not 
travelled in America and Asia and Africa 
for nothing. His instinct drew him to the 
** Tachbrook Arms," where Sandy Mac sup- 
plied all he wanted, and as he returned to 
Dr Tachbrook's the bells burst out with the 
merriest of peals. You might have thought 
they remembered their ancient benefactor. 
You might hear the pious crusader s gold in 
them. 

Voltaire has an epigram against bell-ring- 
ing, wherein he wishes the ringers had round 
their necks what they hold in their hands ; 
and the wish has probably been echoed many 



222 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

a time when the clash and clangour of bells 
have been prolonged beyond the endurance 
of weak nerves. Yet is there no other mode 
of music which so nobly announces to the 
world either sorrow or joy. When it fills 
the air with sounds of welcome, the very 
vibration makes the spirits of men jubilant. 
Those golden throbs from Rothescamp's 
ancient tower were the fittest music to greet 
the wanderers on tljeir return. 

Doctor Tachbrook was still interested in 
Seroza when the bells broke out so suddenly 
upoij the air. The sound made her start ; her 
lips seemed to try to articulate ; the Doctor 
watched her intensely as she stood in a listen- 
ing attitude with lips half open. A moment 
more and she said, with a smile . 

"What beautiful bells!" 

Yes! to every one's amazement, Seroza 
spoke, in a low soft voice like Cordelia's. 

" I think I can guess the meaning of your 
silence, my dear," said the old Doctor, speak- 
ing slowly. "You have been frightened, 
have you not ?" 

" Yes, terribly frightened. I cannot tell 
you now," she said, with a shudder. - 



SEPTIMUS TACHBROOK. 223 

" No : there is plenty of time. You shall 
tell us all about it when you feel more at 
home." 

'* O/' she said, " I feel more at home now 
than I have since papa died." 



CHAPTER XXI, 



seroza's story. 



/ *t 



Seroza became in a few days courageous 
enough to tell her story. Sir Harold and 
Miranda had, of course, taken up their abode 
at Rothescamp-on-the-Hill. Olifauntdid not 
go with them as was proposed, for Doctor 
Tachbrook and he fell in love at first sight, 
and he willingly remained. As Harold the 
elder passed most of his time with Tom 
Jones and his daughter, the companionship of 
O. O. was a resource to the Doctor. Tix 
stayed at Rothescamp but a' day, and then 
rushed off with his Irish Viscountess to Tix- 
over Hall, determined to take his neighbours 
and tenants by surprise. 



seroza's story. 225 

One day at noon the Doctor and the travel- 
ler were having a garden-talk, while Seroza 
flitted up and down . a white -apparelled 
nymph . among the trees 5nd flowers. It 
was the- time when the young robins grow 
red-breasted, and begin to sing and fight ; the 
time when leafage is heavy and dark, and 
noon is empty of music, and the cuckoo a 
vanished voice ; the time when thousands of 
reapers are at work in the yellow wheat-fields 
of merry England, and the glory of harvest 
testifies to the goodness of God. 

" After all," said Olifaunt, who had been 
looking through his diary, " it^ is pleasant to 
be back in England again, when one has been 
in so many strange countries for years." 

" Have you decided to publish your Odys- 
sey ? " asked the Doctor. 

" Yes ; but not yet. It will take me a long 
time to get into proper form such a mass of 
undigested notes as I have . -farrago libellL 
Sometimes I wrote on scraps of paper in a 
kind of self-invented shorthand, to save both 
space and time. The transcription of those 
hasty jottings will occupy weeks. Meanwhile, 
I want to be left alone. The worst of it is, I 

VOL. II. p 



226 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

am daily afraid those fussy people will be 
organising an expedition in search of me, and 
I could not well let them do that. And if 
once I am found out, they won't leave me a 
minute alone." 

" Keep incognito as long as you can. No- 
body here will betray it. Rest, after all your 
marvellous adventures, must be not only plea- 
sant but necessary. » At the same time, the 
habit of wandering lessens the fatigue of wan- 
dering.'' 

" Yes ; and it also lessens the danger. Your 
instincts increase. Your presence of mind 
becomes wonderful ; you seem to know in- 
stantaneously what to do if face to face with 
hostile tribes, or dangerous beasts, or difficult 
passes of mountain or river. People at home, 
who write letters in newspapers, begin to 
think you lost after a year or two, unaware 
that there is twice as much danger in Picca- 
dilly as on the Amazon. And then they 
lionise you. I suppose some fellows like it ; 
but they shall not catch me this time, if there 's 
any way to avoid it. I go out to see the 
world, and don't want to talk about it to 
crowds of people, who only want something 



seroza's story. 227 

fresh to amuse their vacant minds, and would 
as lief rush to look at a gorilla or a mer- 
maid." 

** Talking of mermaids, our maid of the sea 
there ought to be ready now to tell her story. 
Shall we try her ? '* 

The trial was made. Seroza was quite 
ready. She sat on a low garden-chair, and 
began her narrative methodically. While 
wandering alone about the garden for these 
few days, she had been telling it over and 
over to herself, and had arranged the incidents 
in their proper order. 

** I remember," she said, '' a pretty little 
house called Millbrook. It was in Devon- 
shire. There I was a little child with papa 
and mamma. Papa had been in the army,* 
but retired because some property was left 
him: he was called Colonel Wallis. Mamma 
was younger than he, I know, and was very 
small and pretty. She seemed to me more 
like my sister than my mother when I was 
old enough to think about it. Papa treated 
us both like children : he spoilt her, and they 
both spoilt me. I don't think I ever learnt a 
lesson in my life, because I didn't like lessons. 



\ 



2.28 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS, 

** I think I was about fifteen when a man 
of about thirty used to come and stay at Mill- 
brook. He was the son of a friend of papa's 
who had been unfortunate, and was now in 
the merchant service. I don't think papa 
liked him, but he. was kind to him for the 
sake of his old friend. He was a short stout 
black-bearded man, and his name was Ragget. 

" I hated him. I was only a child, but he 
used to pretend to make love to me. Once 
when he kissed me I pulled his beard till 
some of it came off in my hands. Then all 
the time, when papa was away, I could see 
that he was making love to mamma as well, 
and that she rather liked it. How she could, 
I can't think. Papa was tall and as straight 
as a dart, and to see him on horseback was 
like a picture : but this Ragget . Captain 
Ragget he called himself . was an ugly 
mean-looking man, who always seemed 
ashamed of himself. Yet mamma used to 
like him. 

" Papa had some suspicion at last, and 
would not have him at the house. Then 
mamma got ill. I don't know what might 
have happened, but the worst thing did hap- 



seroza's story. 229 

pen that possibly could for me : poor papa 
had a fall out hunting, and broke his collar- 
bone, and died in about a fortnight. Mamma 
was in terrible distress ; but I think she was 
pleased when she found that papa had left 
her all his money, only just saying that he 
was sure she would take care of me. 

" He had not been buried a month before 
Captain Ragget was about the place, and 
wonderfully civil to me as well as her ; and 
she grew quite lively, and used to go out with 
him a great deal. I began to see what it meant. 
I grew quite angry about it. To think of 
mamma's liking that dreadful man after my 
dear papa ! It made me mad. I told her so 
one day, not thinking she had gone so far as 
she had ; and she burst into tears, and said 
I was a cruel wicked ungrateful girl, and that 
papa was much too old for her. And then 
she told Captain Ragget, who gave me an 
insolent look, but only said . 

" ' She is a child yet, Mary, my dear. She 
will be wiser in time.' 

'* They married, and left me at Milbrook 
under charge of a governess, whom he of 
course had chosen . ^an awful gaunt woman, 



230 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

who wore blue spectacles, and made me learn 
all sorts of dry stuff, and go to bed at eight 
o'clock. I resisted at first, but she used to 
shake me; and I assure you, to be shaken 
by her was terrible. I couldn't tell what had 
become of my brains. 

"When they came back, I could see at 
once mamma was changed* She looked 
perfectly miserable. When he and the 
governess happened to be out of the way, 
she managed to make me understand that 
Captain Ragget was a brute; and indeed 
I soon found it so. 

"He treated us boith cruelly. He gave 
us scarcely enough to eat, and that of the 
coarsest sort. The servants would not stay ; 
even his own governess went away; and 
then he got a couple of seafaring men into 
the house . not English, but half black . 
who did all the work of the place. Mam- 
ma and I were never allowed to pass the 
gates ; he was afraid we should never come 
back. He used to strike both mamma 
and me whenever we offended him. I 
could see she was gradually giving way 
under it ; that perhaps was what he wanted. 



seroza's story. 231 

for he ill-used her cruelly- At last she 
died. 

" I don't know how to describe my feelings 
when I lost her. To console her had con- 
soled me. Now I was in the power of this 
dreadful wretch, and there was no one I 
could ask to help me. I was half mad for 
days ; but I prayed, and my prayer seemed 
to give me faith. As to Captain Ragget, 
he was dnjjik for weeks, and left me alone. 
By and by he sent for me, and I found him 
in what had been papa's favourite room. 
The pretty furniture was all broken, and 
defaced with the stains of what they drank ; 
and he had with him three or four more 
sailors, all smoking dreadfully strong tobacco, 
that made me feel quite faint. 

" * Now, you proud minx,' he said, * I Ve 
time to attend to you. I 'm going on a 
cruise. Would you like to go with me, or 
to stay in England and be^ent to school ?' 

" I told him I should like to go, for I saw 
by the threatening look in his eye that he 
meant me to say that, and that I should have 
to go at any rate. He simply told me to be 
ready for to-morrow, and I was dismissed. 



232 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

"We went on board ship . I don't know 
where . and had a beautiful voyage ; and he 
left me pretty well alone. I enjoyed it as 
well as I could enjoy anything. The sea 
was calm and the weather warm; and I 
could sit and look at the water, and think of 
poor dear papa and mamma. 

" One day the ship lay to, and a boat was 
lowered, and he told me to get into it. He 
was so unusually civil, that I feared he meant 
some mischief. He told me he wanted to 
land on the island . it was the island where 
you found me . and that it would do me 
good to go ashore. The idea of his wishing 
to do me good was enough to prove that he 
wanted to do me harm. 

" He rowed me ashore by himself. I 
looked back on the ship, as it lay with its 
sails ^ idly furled, with a melancholy feeling 
that I should not see it again . and it seemed 
a little like a home. When we came on the 
island we walked about a little. He smoked 
. I picked fruit. Suddenly he said . 

" * Now, Miss Peevish, I am going to give 
you a lesson.' 

*' He caught hold of me and threw me on 



seroza's story. 233 

the ground. I was a child in his arms. I 
thought myself utterly lost. There I was on 
the ground, no creature within hearing, his 
strong grasp holding me down. At the 
moment I feared the worst a pistol dropped 
from his pocket. I snatched at it, and pulled 
the trigger without thinking which way the 
shot would go ; but it wounded Ragget, and 
he fell back on the grass. Then I suppose 
I fainted. 

" I must have been faint a long time. When 
I came to myself, the brig was not in the 
offing, and Ragget was nowhere to be seen. 
The pistol lay by my side, and there was 
blood on the grass, which, when I re- 
covered, I traced at intervals down to the 
shore. After that I was on the island I don't 
know how long, but I found fruit to eat and 
water to drink, and was happy enough. I 
did not know I could not speak till I was 
found there by your friends, and I feared I 
should never speak again. But those lovely 
bells reminded me of some that dear papa 
was fond of in a great cathedral, and 
somehow I managed to speak. That is 
all." 



234 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

She was flushed and tired with her long 
story. 

" I have known similar cases," said the 
Doctor to O. O. ** That Ragget ought to 
be exterminated. I shall set Tixover at 
him." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

TIXOVER HALL. 

" Malbrouck s*en va-t-en guerre, 

Mi ron ton, ton ton, mi ron taine/* 

TixovER Hall is an Elizabethan house, with 
three courts or quadrangles, called respec- 
tively the Garden Court, the Cloisters, and 
the Stable Court. They are arranged so 
that the three squares, which are equal, 
produce on the outside an equilateral triangle. 
It may thus be roughly described: . 




236 MIR^VNDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

A IS the gfreat entrance, leading to By the 
mews, where carriages are received. C Is 
the summer court, with pleasant rooms all 
round it, and a croquet-ground at E . a 
croquet-ground dedicated to flirtation. D 
is the bachelor's cloister, snug for winter, 
with bowling-green and billiard-rooms and 
other eccentricities at F. G and H are 
devoted to bath-rooms and tennis-courts. / 
is the place where the servants talk scandal. 

Tixover's father had built this wonderful 
mansion. It was very enjoyable. On the 
first floor he had placed a great hall, forty 
feet high, and of superb dimension, and at 
one comer of the building was a tower, three 
hundred feet high, from whose summit might 
be seen all the boundaries of England's 
smallest county. 

Ella was perfectly delighted when she first 
came to Tixover . ^as delighted as everybody 
was to see her. The merry Irish lass won 
all hearts at once. The Viscount's depen- 
dents were all in love with her. She was 
quite courteous without loss of dignity. She 
liked to know everybody, and to talk to them 
easily. It was enchantment for her to live 



TIXOVER HALL. 237 

such a life ; to be lady of a great manor, 
and mistress of a great household, and able 
to do good at any moment to any one. It 
gave her infinite pleasure to think that these 
things were in her power. Tixover let her 
do just as she liked, and if she made any 
mistakes, it is as well to remember that Eve 
began the world by making a mistake. 

What is the most maddening thing in the 
world ? It depends . to a statesman, talk ; to 
a tradesman, debt ; to an author, paper. If 
I could only get paper fit for a human being 
to write upon, it would increase my income 
by several hundreds a year. The makers 
will glaze, varnish, nastify paper to such an 
extent that writing on it is a perfect nuisance. 
Pens are as bad : since the villanous steel-pen 
was invented, a good sound goose-quill is 
undiscoverable. 

On a certain morning Tix and Ella were 
sitting at breakfast in a favourite bay window 
of the great hall, which suited August weather. 
Happy were they ; but the Viscount . restless 
rascal ! . seemed to think it was time he made 
a move. Ella was lazy, and declined to be 
suggestive. 



^ 



238 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" If I live to a hundred," said Tix, " I sup- 
pose I shall like lobster for breakfast. At 
present I just tolerate it Have some tail, 
Ella." 

^' Claw, please." 

" Well, I do like that style, young 'un," says 
Tix. " Two monpsyllables in return for all 
my attention." 

" Hot," says Ella. " Tix talks for two." 

As she sat in a light morning-gown, all 
cool and prettily flowered, she looked the very 
goddess of laziness, if such goddess there be. 
Tix gave her the cock lobster's bigger claw, 
and helped himself to tail, and said . 

" Ella, my pet, you have given me a new 
view of Irish character. I had no idea any- 
body of your race could say so much in so 
few words." 

" Idea is Irish," she said ; ** eloquence is 
English." 

' ' I must think over that great question. Ah ! 
there 's the postman coming up the avenue. 
Any news, I wonder ? " 

Shortly the letters were brought up . a 
heap . which the Viscount did not open. Two 
of perhaps twenty were all looked at on that 



TIXOVER HALL. 239 

day . one from Doctor Tachbropk to Tix, 
the other from Miranda to Ella. Both, in far 
different ways, told Seroza's story. 

Can " you imagine Tix ? Nothing was 
to him so abominable as the ill treatment 
of a woman. It made him absolutely 
shudder. 

" I'll trace that fellow/' he said. 

" What's the use ?" said Ella ; '' the child 
is happy enough now. What good can you 
do?" 

" Punish Azm/* said Tix ; ^' and I will." 

And as he said it, his face looked so much 
like that of an avenging angel, that Ella knew 
he was in earnest, and said nothing more. 
She wanted to tell him not to trouble himself 
about such a matter, but to think of her. One 
glance at his eye and lip sufficed to show the 
uselessness of remonstrance. She felt a little 
jealous that the rest of her sex should have 
some claifn on her husband ; yet, also, she 
felt proud that there was one man who could 
not hear of a woman's being wronged without 
resolving to avenge her. 

'' How shall we catch that villain Ragget?" 
he said to Ella. " I must find that fellow, 



240 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

my pet Think how he treated that poor 
dear little Seroza I " 

" Wretch ! " said Ella. 

*' Ought not he to be punished for his ras- 
calities ? I wish I 'd been on the island when 
he attacked that poor child." 

" Dear Tix, don't be so fierce," said Ella. 
" I am glad to see you fighting for women, as 
they can't fight for themselves. I should some- 
times be a little jealous, if I did not know 
you love me." 

"My own Ella," said Tix, " I love you 
more than any other woman was ever loved. 
But I love all women with that love which a 
true gentleman may have for a lady. And 
no woman, of whatever rank, shall come to 
harm in my presence, nor shall harm done 
be unrevenged if I can revenge it" 

**You are a very good boy," said Ella; 
" but I don't want you to be running about 
quixotically rescuing distressed damsels for 
a long period of time. I want some fun." 

" And you shall have heaps of fun, my 
beauty. Now come, I '11 make an agreement 
with you. If you '11 promise to let me work 
out this question about Ragget, I '11 promise 



TIXOVER HALL. 24 1 

to obey you for the next year. You shall be 
absolute mistress." 

" O what a lark ! " said Ella. " O what 
a year of liberty and tyranny. In return for 
that generous promise I will give you a sug- 
gestion. Advertise in the Times that Cap- 
tain Ragget may hear of something to his 
advantage by applying to Mr Rokes of 
Lincoln's Inn." 

" Capital idea ! " said the Viscount. " The 
thing shall be done at once, and I daresay 
the fellow will be caught." 

" You remember your agreement with me 
as to obedience," said Ella. " Are you afraid ? 
I 'U let you off your bargain if you are." 

" Most distinctly I am not afraid, Ella 
mine. You shall have your own way for a 
year, if you let me have mine now. After 
that year, we go back to the old legal arrange- 
ment whereby the wife is bound to obey the 
husband." 

Lord Tixover took his wife's advice, and 
advertised in that wonderful second column, 
where are sown the seeds of many romances 
. where also one sometimes sees their catas- 
trophes. 

VOL. II. Q 




242 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Captain Ragget, lounging into the coffee- 
room of the " White Hart " at Bristol to drink 
iced sherry and hear the news, had this 
advertisement shown to him at once. The 
Captain had not been very fortunate since 
his attempt on his stepdaughter. She on 
that occasion had wounded him so severely 
in the right arm that he could only get back 
to the ship by sculling astern with his left. 
He had no care for her. 

" The little she-devil !*' he said to himself, 
" let her stay there and starve. I '11 go 
back to England and look out for another 
fool with money." 

On his return voyage the weather changed. 
The ship was caught in a cyclone. The 
Captain was on the sick-list, and could give 
no orders ; the first mate lost his head, the 
vessel was thrown on the rocks by Cape 
Finisterre, and all hands lost except Ragget 
and one sailor, a splendid swimmer, who got 
his rascally master ashore. 

' Ragget had pretty well spent his wife's 
money at the time we find him in Bristol ; 
and the sailor who had saved his life was 
now the terror of it, for he knew all his 



TIXOVER HALL.. 243 

secrets, and stuck to him like a leech. So, 
when he saw this advertisement, he pondered 
over it. He could not think of any source 
whence good fortune might come to him ; he 
was half afraid it was a "plant." Yet he 
felt that he could not afford to neglect any 
cliance. At the time, faute de mieux, he was 
making love to an elderly young lady who 
kept a large dressmaking establishment on 
the steep slope of Park Street, and who was 
supposed to have made money ; at any rate, 
she gave Captain Ragget snug little suppers 
spiced by modest endearments. She was 
pious, and went to a neighbouring chapel 
called Bethesda ; the Captain went also, and 
sang amazing hymns in a more amazing bass. 
Poor Priscilla Waddams began to think she 
should convert him. 

When he saw this advertisement, his 
spirits rose, and he began to despise his 
dressmaker. He wrote off at once to Rokes 
of Lincoln's Inn ; but he went and took supper 
and talked a mixture of love and devotion to 
Miss Waddams that night The roast-duck 
had plenty of stuffing, and the schiedam was 
such as the lady had found her mariner ap- 



"t 



244 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

proved. Yet, when he , got out in the moon- 
light, and swaggered down Park Street, he 
soliloquised . 

*' Damn that dressmaker ! She parts her 
hair on one side, so I guess she 's bald in the 
jniddle. If this lawyer means business, I 
won't trouble her again." 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

BRISTOL. 

" Such a wretch 
Can have but one fit punishment, and that 
Law, being feeble, disallows.*' 

Hearing from Rokes that Ragget had risen to 
his fly, Tixover telegraphed to Rothescamp, 
asking that some one might bring Seroza 
and meet him in Bristol. Both the younger 
' Tachbrooks were so busily occupied, one 
with his wife and estate, and the other with 
his father and daughter, that O. O. volun- 
teered. 

" If you go, I 'U go with you," said Doctor 
Septimus. " I have not seen the old city 
of Bristol since they began to restore St 
Mary's, Radcliffe ; since Brunei tried to 
bridge the Avon, and so spoil Nightingale 
Valley, famed for its bee and butterfly 



i 



246 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

orchises. I want to know if the tower of the 
Temple Church is likely to fall, and so decide 
a bet made between the Mayor and the land- 
lord of the * Bush ' at least a century ago. 
My old crony, John Taylor, tallest and most 
genial of journalists, is gone, I know . ^gone 
to some editorial fields of asphodel, where, 
probably, he will meet Felix Farley, who 
went long before him. Still I should like to 
follow his path through the market, where he 
always bought the meat and vegetables which 
went so well with his famous old wine. Yes ; 
I certainly wz//go to Bristol and see how it 
has changed." 

The Doctor had his way, travelling by rail 
the first time for years, with O. O. and Seroza 
as companions. Lord Tixover had arranged 
to meet whoever came at the " White Lion 
Hotel," which being next door to the " White 
Hart," where Ragget had given an address, 
would be convenient 'for them. Tix got to 
Bristol with Ella first, secured rooms, made 
his wife take refreshment and rest, and went 
out to explore the city whose chief streets are 
named of wine and com. Bristol was one of 
the few English cities of which the Viscount 



BRISTOL. 247 

knew very little, though once he had had a 
famous adventure there. When he got to an 
unknown town, it was his wont to sinuously 
scamander through it, asking no question of 
any one as to the way he was to go, but 
occasionally entering inns and shops to pick 
up character and information. He never 
entered a new place without a feeling that 
something would happen. He used to say, . 

'* The passion for adventure is just like 
yeast. I go into a quiet town or village, 
where nothing has happened for a century, 
and something happens instantly. I always 
have an instinctive presentiment of it. I 
know, as I walk along the thronged streets, 
and look at the churches and halls, that there 
is some event awaiting me. I have the 
destiny on me, and cannot avoid it." 

He fancied something was going to occur 
in Bristol beyond even the Ragget exposure. 
He walked down Wine Street, Corn Street, 
Clare Street, admiring the lovdy tower of 
St Stephen's as he passed it ; crossed the 
drawbridge, and entering College Green, ad- 
mired the Cathedral of Harding the Viking, 
and the oolite arch which divides the two 




248 MIRANDA ; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

Greens, and the exquisite beauty of the 
Mayor's Chapel. 

Then he ascended Park Street and went 
up on the Downs, and saw the bridge given 
by Thames to Avon, and, crossing it, cooled 
his eyes on the luxuriant verdure of the 
woods of Leigh. Avon was full to the brim, 
which adds immeasurably to the beauty of 
that unique scenery. Tixover, slowly return- 
ing, lighted a cigar, and leaned over the 
Hungerford balustrade, looking at the slug- 
gish water beneath. It is a fine view. The 
two shires of Somerset and Gloucester are 
parted here by a chasm six hundred feet 
wide ; and the bridge hangs more than two 
hundred feet above the river at high tide. 

Here Tix leaned, smoked his cigar, and 
marvelled whether he was to have an adven- 
ture. It was pretty and pleasant to see the 
wandering folk on Clifton Downs enjoying 
their summer afternoon. Tix liked to see 
people enjoy themselves. There were the 
youngsters, ascending and descending the 
Zigzag, seen and unseen at intervals. The 
Viscount fell into a reverie, and might have 
kept his wife waiting too long, if he had not 



BRISTOL. 249 

been suddenly aroused from it by somebody 
running against him. 

He looked around calmly. It was a 
woman . 3, young woman dressed like a ser- 
vant in her best. The collision with Lord 
Tixover caused her to fall on the ground, 
and when he raised her from it she seemed 
powerless. She was a little woman, with 
those dark eyes and eyelashes painted by 
scrofula, which are sometimes admired. 
Tix picked her up, and administered some 
brandy from an inseparable pocket-flask, and 
brought her to herselC 

" O," she cried, " why did you stop me ? 
I want to die." 

" What a lot of people there are," thought 
Tix, "who fancy they want to die! If they 
considered the question, they would most 
likely alter their minds. Now, I must find 
out something about this little fool." 

Tixover found the child more amenable to 
control after the medicine, he had adminis- 
tered. He got her story from her. She was 
going to drown herself ; she was tired of life. 
Her mistress was going to marry a gentleman 
who had promised to marry Aer; and . ^but per- 



^ 



250 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

haps his misdeeds may be left to imagination. 
She, poor little wretch ! wanted to get out of 
the world before bringing another poor little 
wretch into it. No wonder, surely, that un- 
taught creatures deem this the best way of 
escape from troubles unutterable. 

Tix soon, by dint of his rare analytic faculty, 
discovered that this girl's name was Jane (h^r 
surname she would not tell) ; that she was 
half-servant, half-workwoman at Miss Wad- 
dams's, in Park Street, and that she had been 
brought into difficulty by Captain Ragget. 
Though pained, he was amused, for he was 
resolved, if she desired it, to make the Cap- 
tain marry her. He got a fly on the Downs 
(cabs are always called flies in Bristol), and 
brought her to the " White Lion," and gave 
her in charge of a chambermaid. 

By this time the Doctor and O. O. and 
Seroza had arrived. Tix, champion of the 
ladies, was, of course, recognised leader of the 
expedition. He decided that Captain Ragget 
should be left alone till the following day, and 
that they should enjoy their dinner in peace. 
Niblett used to give a good dinner ; he, or his 
successor, whoever he may be, doubtless does 



BRISTOL. 251 

the same now. Only, inns are spoilt by end- 
less influx of travellers who do not know a 
good dinner from a bad one. 

Dinner over, Seroza and Ella were left 
alone, for the old Doctor wanted to see the 
city lighted up. So they strolled round it in 
all directions, getting as far out of the beaten 
track as Old Market and Red Cross Streets, 
the former of which might be the finest street 
in England, said O. O. 

'* I do like an unknown city, even if only 
in England. There are lots of things to dis- 
cover in Bristol, depend on it. When I have 
quite finished with South America, I have a 
great mind to explore England." 

'' The idea is admirable," said Dr Tach- 
brook. ** There are some holes down by 
Penpole Point that have never been fathomed. 
Couldn't you descend into some of them ?'' 

" There are no end of unexplored places in 
England," said O. O. '' I think I shall try 
them for a change, and leave people to imagine 
I am still up the Amazon. Even the Avon 
might have its adventures." 

"Yes; and you might pick up something 
fresh in the Pithay," said the old Doctor. 



252 MIRANDA; A MIDSUMMER MADNESS. 

" This is a city of legends. England has been 
inhabited so long, that there is not a village 
without a forgotten history. What is the story 
of ' Little London,' or ' Talk-o'-the-Hill .?'" 

" What, again,'* said Tixover, " of many 
old ecclesiastical villages in Cornwall and 
Wales ? There is scarcely a hamlet in Eng- 
land where there is not something unex- 
plained. When it comes to a city like this 
ancient Bristol . a, famous town when the 
Confessor Edward was King of England . 
the accumulation of historic record must be 
simply incalculable. You can scarcely put 
spade in ground in any new direction without 
upturning some ancient coin, or the fragment 
of some forgotten ruin." 

They were standing on Bristol Bridge as 
this conversation occurred. O. O. arose and 
spake . 

" I will explore England." ' 

Whereupon they went home to supper ; but 
the Viscount said nothing of what he had that 
day discovered on another bridge across the 
same stream. 
