FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER I. 


2 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the passer-by who idly paused to inhale its fragrance ; 
a lane whtre twined in picturesque disorder wild 
bryony and traveller's joy, dog-roses and honey- 
suckles, the woo y nightshade and the greater 
bindweed (old man's nightcap as the children 
irreverently call it) ; where the eye was refreshed 
by looking on soft cushions of moss and ferns, 
graceful, and drooping, and cool ; where blossomed 
in their due season primroses and violets, the wild 
hyacinth, the blue speedwell, delicious clumps of 
birds-foot trefoil, the pink cranesbill, the wood 
strawberry and anemone, ground ivy, the " hinder- 
ing" knot grass, "everywhere bumble and eveiy- 
w ere green ;" St. John's Wort, that balm of the 
warrior wound ; tufted vetch, the creeping cinque- 
foil, with many another wild flower, which in the 
early days little hands love to gather ; which boy- 
hood, and munhood, and middle age pass by un- 
noticed, but which come back fresh and bright as 
ever to the memory of the old man too feeble to 
totter away to the shady lane, to the warm sunny 
bank where the buds are springing, and the flowers 
blooming, and the lights and shadows flitting back- 
wards and forwards, coming and going, coming and 



QUITE IN THE <X)UNTRY. o 

going just as they did half a century preriously, 
when he was young and strong, and actiye Uke the 
best 

We all know sudi a lane: it may be in one 
oounty or it may be in another ; in the far-away 
shire where the happiest years of our lires were 
spent, or within a walk of tiie great Babylon. 

To the north of London there is still a perfect 
tangle of narrow country lanes, in some of which 
Lamb assured Barton he ^' made most of his tragi- 
comedy." 

There are several not far from the churchyard 
where he sleeps so well Qose to his old home 
they wander away from Cfaace Side, up hill and 
down dale ; they strike out of the Southgate Road ; 
they wind in and out from Angel Lane to Bury 
Street, and thence by devious routes to Winchmore 
Hill and Enfield. 

Some of the loveliest lanes on earth, perhaps, are 
those on the opposite side of the Lea, leading fr*om 
Higham Hill to Chingford and Woodford. 

Utterly still ! utterly quiet I There the bee hums 
and the wild roses bloom, and there is heard no din 
or sound of that great city which lies so near at hand. 

B 2 



4 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

But Berrle Down Lane, as the road leading to 
Berrie Down Hollow was styled, wound on its plea- 
sant way many and many a mile distant from Lon- 
don ; so completely in the country, so entirely out of 
the way of strangers, or even ordinary traffic, that 
Tery few persons, excepting thfe family resident at the 
Hollow, and their visitors (who, save of their own 
kin), were far and few between, knew anything of the 
beauty of that quiet walk, of that lonely approach, to 
a still more lonely house. 

Do you mind sauntering along it with me . 
sauntering slowly and lingeringly ? It is in the bright 
summer noon-tide we follow its windings for the first 
time ; but you can fancy how it looks in the spring 
and the autumn likewise ; and the beauty of the 
lane grows upon you like the face of a woman who is 
more lovely than handsome, till you come to under- 
stand that even in mid-winter it will not look deso- 
late ; that even when the buds of spring, and the 
flowers of summer, and the last leaves of autumn 
have departed, there will still be something left for 
the snows and frosts of winter to deck and crown 
right royally with diadems and jewels that sparkle 
and glitter in the cold gleams of the December sun. 



QUITE IN THE CJOUNTRY. 5 

There are the banks where the earliest primrose 
is to be found ; over which the full luxuriance of the 
summer greenery spreads and twines in lavish profu- 
sion of tendril, and branch, and drooping bough, and 
slender spray ; against which the brown leaves pile 
themselves when the storm king rides abroad, and 
the October winds be^n to strip the foliage off the 
trees. 

You can imagine now how the place looks in 
every season ; when the holly berries shine red and 
warm and glossy in the hedgerow ; when their 
branches, clad with polished green leaves, are torn 
down to welcome Christmas in hall, and church, and 
cottage; when the birds begin to build; when 
children part the boughs of the privet and the haw- 
thorn in order to look for the thrush and the linnet's 
nest ; when the hyacinths come with the sweet mid- 
spring ; when the dog-roses, perishable as beautiful, 
open to the sun ; when the May bursts into flower, 
and the honeysuckle perfumes the air; when you 
can pass over the brook dry-shod ; when the August 
sun is pouring his beams on fields where the reapers 
are at work; when the leaves first change their 
colour, and then commence to fall ; when autumn's 



6 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

blasts whistle amongst the topmost branches of the 
elms, and winter's hail and snow descend upon the 
earth. You can fancy how Berrie Down Lane 
must look under all these aspects ; you know here- 
after you could sketch the place from memory, when 
you come to recall its sweet tranquillity amidst the 
din and bustle of that great Babylon where your lot 
is cast 

The nearest railway-station, Palinsbridge, is eight 
miles distant ; the nearest town, South Kemms, four ; 
the nearest .village, Fifield, more than two ; so that, 
although, as the crow flies, Berrie Down Hollow is 
not actually above thirty miles from London, it 
might be a hundred or two in point of acces- 
sibility. 

" Quite in the country, Mr. Dudley," enchanted 
towns-people were wont to remark ; whereupon, if 
the speaker chanced to be a man or one of his own 
kin, Mr. Dudley would answer, " Confoundedly in 
the country ;" from which speech it will rightly be 
inferred that the owner of Berrie Down Hollow did 
not appreciate the advantages of his rural residence 
quite so highly as strangers had a way of doing. 

And it was a pity, for a more picturesque spot could 



QUITE IN THE OOUNTBT. 7 

not bave been found bad you searched the home 
counties througL It was a place which took every 
one's fancy. The great men, who came down from 
London to stay with Lord Kemms when the season 
was over and the Row deserted, were wont to draw 
rein and turn a little round in their saddles as they 
passed The Hollow ; after which they would ride 
slowly on, looking back often at the dear old house 
planted on the &dde of a sloping hill. 

But you shall not jump to the house in a minute 
after this &shion. You shall walk with me under 
the el -trees ; you shall go gently down the dedivity 
whence you catch the first view of Arthur Dudley's 
home ; you shall look over the fields lying on the 
south side of Berrie Down Lane, where the com his 
com, is ripening for the harvest ; you shall pause and 
see in the distance, meadows where the haymakers, his 
haymakers, are at work ; you shall watch the men, and 
the women, and the children mowing and tossing that 
which in due time will be converted into money, to buy 
bread for him and his ; you shall descend the hill and 
cross the ford by means of a narrow foot*bridge, and, 
as you do so, you shall see his cows lying in the pasture 
lands chewing the cud, reflectively ; you shall ascend 



8 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

more leisurely, if possible, the steeper hill b^ond 
the brook ; and, still pursuing your way onward, 
become conscious of hedges less picturesque, only 
because kept trim and closely cropped ; of banks 
where the grass is smooth and even, by reason of 
constant cutting ; where no brambles are allowed to 
trail their length along the ground ; where even the 
honeysuckle has to submit to pruning and clipping ; 
where the road is free from ruts ; and now you know 
that to right as well as left lies Squire Dudley's land, 
and ihat you are drawing dose to his house, which 
is to be reached through those gates not more than 
half-a-dozen paces distant from where we stand. 

One moment, however, ere entering. Do you 
notice how ihe grey pillars on which the gates are 
hinged scarcely show through the branches of the two 
trees of pyracantha that have grown around them ? 

Those shrubs are considered one of the great 
beauties of Berne Down House. They are all white 
in the early spring. They are covered with green 
berries during the summer, which change into great 
masses of bright scarlet during the pleasant autumn 
weather, retaining their rich colour when the frost 
pinches the leaves of the evergreens, and the ice is 



QUITE IN THE COUNTRY. 9 

thick on the mill-pond, and the snow lying on the 
ground. 

They have taken years and years to grow, and 
the Dudleys are as proud of them as they are of 
their quaint home, of their broad acres, of their 
rich pasture lands, of the Hollow (whence their 
place takes its name), w ere the blackberries still 
grow, as they once grew over all the fields around ; 
where there is quite a tangled thicket of underwood 
and broom and brambles, in which die children hide 
themselves, and tear their frocks^ and pass the long 
summer days ; whence they emerge, when the black- 
berrying season comes, with faces and hands dyed 
purple with the rich, luscious juice. 

As the great men from London are wont to 

admire Berrie Down Hollow, so with all the strength 

. 

of their souls the younger Dudleys love its every 
tree, and shrub, and stick, and stone. 

The domestic chronicles contain no record as to 
whether Arthur Dudley, owner of the Hollow, had 
ever similarly cherished any such attachment Of 
one thing, however, the reader may be certain, 
which is, that in his manhood he did not entertain 
the slightest affection for the place. 



10 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

What was the old house, with its many gables . 
what were the fields, the trees, the tangle of brambles, 
the bloom of the broom, the scent of the hawthorn, 
the ripple of the brook to him ? 

Let us pass through the gates, and approach by 
means of a drive, hedged almost with laurestina 
and laurel, Arthur Dudley's home. 

The house is built of brick with curious dark 
stone facings, and over the doorway, carved in the 
same material, is the Dudley coat of arms; for 
before Lord Kemms, or Kemms' Park, was so much 
as thought of, the Dudleys were great people in the 
county. 

Their day had gone by, however, and their 
fortunes, when we make their acquaintance, are like 
their coat of arms . a good deal the worse for wear ; 
for which reason, although the Hollow is a pretty 
place, it is not a grand one. It is a sweet home, 
but not a great mansion; and the front, which 
shows towards the road, is unpretentious in the 
extrema 

But there is another side . that which catches the 
last rays of the setting sun . ^that which reveals 
itself to Lord Kemms' visitors when they have 



QUITE m THE COUNTRY. 11 

pagsed the gates flanked by pyracantha, and taken 
the turn leading away towards Kemms' Park. 

The 'north front of the house is nothing : it is red 
brick and grey stone, with two windows on each side 
the hall door, and five on the first floor, and three 
dormant windows looking out from the roof like 
heads thrust forth from among the slates to survey 
the world. It is masked a good deal from the road 
by evergreens and great trees of arbor-vitae ; and 
the dwellingrooma in that part of the house are 
dark, and somewhat dull in consequence. 

To the west all is difierent; there the ground 
sweeps down from the house to the Hollow, and the 
drawing-room windows look out on the rich cham- 
paign country lying beyond, which is steeped and 
bathed every evening in the golden beams of the 
setting sun. Over this west front climb roses, and 
clematis, and honeysuckle. Here is a westeria, 
which puts forth its purple blossoms long before the 
laburnums think of blooming. Pleasanter bed- 
chambers there are noneln England than those on 
the first floor, into the windows of which the earliest 
TQ^fiS peep blushingly. 

The lawn is shaded by many a grand old tree ; 



12 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

beyond the Hollow trickles a stream, which runs 
through Mr. Dudley's property, after supplying a 
mill on the road leading to South Kemms. There 
are sheep browsing in the fields beyond. There is 
a great peace in the quiet landscape ; there is a 
stillness which strikes Londoners as almost oppres- 
sive. No hermitage could be more retired, no 
spot more perfect in its utterly homelike repose. 

In such a place as this Time glides by, leaving 
few marks upon the road to show that his chariot 

. 

has passed over it. Here the philosopher thinks he 
could meditate in peace, and eliminate truths which 
the world would not willingly let die. Here the 
clergyman deludes himself with the belief that he 
could compose sermons which might stir the hearts 
of thousands. Here, where the pace of life is slow, 
and the mental pulse languid, the author fancies 
that alone with himself and nature he could dis- 
course eloquently about man. Here the musician 
imagines he might discover that roc's egg . a melody 
resembling no other melody ; but no ! here indeed 
might the statesman rest, and the weary physician 
recruit his own exhausted energies ; here the great 
engineer might forget his thousand schemes, and the 



QUITE IN THE COUNTRY. 13 

speculator almost withdraw his mind from the price 
of shares and the rise and fall of debentures ;. here 
is Nature's temple, if you will, where men may come 
and hold communion with her; here is her in- 
firmary likewise, where she visits with sleep the 
heavy eyelids, and recruits with wine and oil the 
body which has been worsted in the world's fight ; 
here she lays her cool hand on burning foreheads, 
and compels the overtaxed mind to lie fallow ; here 
is the place for rest, if you will ; but it is not the 
place for work. 

Out in the battle-field, where the city streets are 
full of eager soldiers ; out where the fray is fiercest, 
the fire strongest ; out where life is not a tranquil 
dream, but a mad struggle ; where men go to their 
long rest not rusted, but worn ; where the night's 
slumber is short, and the day's labour long; out 
where as iron sharpeneth iron, so doth the face of a 
man his friend ; . there is the only place for energies 
to be aroused and genius developed, for profitable 
work to be accomplished, for life's best lessons to be 
learned. 

Thus, at least a dozen times a day, Arthur Dudley, 
owner of '^ The Hollow," is in the habit of express- 



IIIIIIIHII 

60007241 8S 



(^ 



1 



FAE ABOVE RUBIES. 



9 ^bel. 



BT 



Mb8. J. H. BIDDELL, 



AUTHOR OF *'GBOBOB OKITH," "CITT AND SUBUKB." "TOO IIVCR ALONB," 
..THB BACB rOB WXALTH," XTO., BTCL 



IN THREE VOLUMES, 
VOL.1. 



%ttatih (Sbttion. 




LONDON: 

TINSLEY BEOTHEBS, CATHEETNE STREET, STRAND. 

1867. 

I The Rxgkt f^ TroMUttion ar,d FQfrodvciUn: raerved,] 



2^0. ?i. 26"^. 



18 FAB ABOVB RUBIES. 



CHAPTER IL 



SQUIBE DUDLEY. 



Abthub Dudley, Esquibs, of Berne Down Hollow, 
in the parish of Fifield, Hertfordshire^ was in the 
habH of informing all those whom the intelligence 
might, and a great number whom it might not con- 
cem, that he had, to borrow his own expression, 
^ missed his Ufe." And, as is usual with men who 
employ such a phrase, he imagined the miss had 
been in fortune, not in himself. 

He had lost, he felt satisfied, not for want of skill 
in playing his game, but because the game of life 
was an unfair one, in which the cards were packed, 
and all the trumps dealt to one man, while all the 
low, poor, insignificant, valueless bits of pasteboard 
were left for another, in which from birth all the 
odds were against one player, while the stakes were 
thrust, nolens volens, into his opponent's hand. 



SQUIRE DUDLEY. 19 

It is a nice, contented, comforting, reassuring 
creed this for any human being to hold. It makes 

4 

a man utterly dissatisfied with his lot, while it leaves 
him only too well satisfied with himself. He is, so 
he thinks, as competent to take his leaps as the best 
in the land ; and when in succession he misses every 
one, he still believes it was only the fault of the 
steed he rode, of the groom who did not girth his 
horse tight enough, of the saddler who sent him in 
reins which broke in his fingers, of the nature of 
the ground, of the labourer who staked the hedge, 
of the proprietor who wire-fenced the field. 

Other men go flying over every obstacle, and 
gallop past him to the goal all are striving to reach, 
while he labours wearily after, or lies maimed and 
shattered beside the first gate. Yet, mark you, 
this is never his fault ; it is bis ^ cursed luck," to 
quote Arthur Dudley over again. 

Providence, in his inmost heart the Squire con- 
sidered, had a spite against him from his mother's 
womb, and consequently, and by reason only of 
this injustice on the part of Providence, he failed 
where others succeeded. 
In the world's great worksh<q[) he was a very bad 

2 



20 FAR ABOVE BUBIES. 

workman, and, accordingly, he was eternally com- 
plaining of his tools. His fellows moved up in the 
social scale, but he never rose a step higher. With 
a rusty nail one picked the lock of Fortune's trea- 
sure casket ; but then, as Arthur Dudley truly ob- 
served, thai rusty nail never came into his hands. 
With sledge and hammer, and file and chisel, 
common drudges, as they seemed to him, bought 
their estates and took rank in the country. 

His schoolfellows . mere idiots he had thought 
some of them then . mere idiots, indeed, he thought 
them still, had climbed great parts of the steep hill 
of worldly success, and were talked of as rising 
men in the pulpit, at the bar, in the hospitals, in 
literature, science, and art. 

There was Holland, for instance, who went with 
him to Oxford. Well, Holland had no brains^ any 
more than most of the people Squire Dudley knew, 
and yet he had somehow obtained a capital post 
under Government, lived at the West End, and had 
married a beautiful young widow with, rumour said, 
many thousands a year. 

There was Morris, also, a man without a sixpence, 
without appearance, connection, manner, friends, or 



SQUIRB DUDLEY. 21 

&ther or mother to speak of, and yet he, even he 
. Bat it is useless to continue the catalogue. 

Fate had helped every one, except Squire Dudley, 
on in the world, and Squire Dudley did not in the 
least believe that every man's Neme^ is himself. 

Berrie Down Hollow, however, bore no traces 
of belonging to a person who held this peculiar 
doctrine regarding his own life. There was no 
disorder, no neglect Wh^ot once the gates swung 
back, friend and stranger alike beheld a place which 
was kept as well as Kemms' Park: . where no weeds 
grew on the walks; where the grass was like a bowl- 
ing-green; where crocuses and snowdrops filled 
the flower-beds in the early part of the year ; where 
there was a blaze of scarlet geraniums, and a 
Inilliant decking of white, and red^ and purple 
verbena, of petunias and gladioli, lobelias, and all 
othor plants that make our beautiful English summer 
more beautiful stilL 

Never a litter of dead leaves was there about 
those walks ; never a gate hung loose for want of 
hinge or screw; never a thing was left undone 
that willing hands could speedily put to rights ; and 
yet there was an indescribable lode of shortness of 



22 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

money, both within and without the dwelling, which 
those who were in the secrets of the family knew 
was attributable to absolute pecuniary poverty ; for, 
although Arthur Dudley owned house and lands, 
stock and well-filled barns, he was poor as a gentle- 
man with such possessions could be. 

And that was where the shoe pinched Squire 
Dudley. He had money's worth, but not money. 
He paid no rent ; he killed his fatted calves and 
his prime Southdowns ; he brewed his own ale ; 
his fowls were duly trussed for his table; he ate 
of the prodace of his own lands, and drank of the 
only vintages English fields will yield ; he had his 
goodly orchard, and his fair flower-gardens; he 
had his horses in the stable, and his colts running 
loose in the paddock ; he had his broad meadows, 
and his rich pastures; he had still a young wife, 
and two children ; he had sinned no grievous sin ; 
he had no secret he feared being brought to light, 
yet he had '< missed his life.'' So he said, so his 
friends said, and the reason for this unusual unani- 
mity of opinion chanced to be that he had no money. 

^' Arthur was bom to be a rich man," said the 
elders amo g his kith and kin ; but, if Nature had 



SQUIRE DUDLEY. 23 

intended any such beneficial arrangement in his 
behalf, she frustrated her own dengn by permitting 
him to be bom in the wrong house, and amongst 
the wrong people, and with the wrong temperament 
for much good fortune to befall him. 

After all, Nature does make these little mistakes 
occasionally, and each man and woman amongst the 
unsuccessful thinks he or she could have managed 
matters infinitely better for himself or herself^ if only 
the dispoffltion of affidrs had been left in the hands 
of the person interested. 

Squire Dudley thought so, at any rate. He bore a 
grudge against Nature for having spoiled his worldly 
chances, which grudge he paid with interest to Na- 
ture's representatives on earth . his fellow-creatures. 
Had he been bom at Kemms' Park, with the 
typical silver spoon in his mouth, he would, doubt- 
less, have proved a very charming member of society. 
As it was, he had fallen into the habit of quarrelling 
with the bread and butter fate had provided for him, 
to such a degree that there was not a labourer on 
his farm, a servant in his house, a friend he possessed 
in the world, who would have borne with Arthur 
Dudley's dissatisfied temper, his discontent, and his 



24 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

complainings, had it not been for the sake of his 
wife, who was the only person on earth who 
thoroughly and devotedly/ and believingly and 
disinterestedly, loved the young Squire. 

Matrimonially, luck had not been against him. 
If the chances of marriage be but as one eel to a 
bagfuU of snakes, many a man, who thrust his 
hands into that lottery after Arthur Dudley, must 
have had cause to lament his evil fortune. 

Matrimonially the Squire, who had otherwise 
'^ missed his life," had done well, so the world 
thought at least ; but then this was one of the many 
questions of which Arthur Dudley secretly joined 
issue with the world. 

In the experiences of his earlier manhood there 
had been certain love pasisages between himself and 
a handsome young heiress, whom it wa s he wish of 
his aunt, Miss Alethea Hope, that he should marry. 

Then visions of a life worth living, of a position 
worth having, beatified the dreariness of the Squire's 
prosaic existence. Like all men who are utterly 
dissatisfied with their position, he permitted hope to 
tell him many a flattering tale, which had not the 
slightest shadow of a foundation in truth. Indeed, 



SQUIRE DUDLEY. 29 

in the maDagement of his farm, Arthur Dudley was 
but as a reed shaken by the wind of whatever fancy 
whispered to him over night; and it was natural 
enough that, when wandering about the grounds of 
Copt Hall, with his first real love . worth five thou- 
sand a-year, and expectations . ^he should dream of 
a social position unenjoyed by the Dudleys for 
many a year; of a town house; of Berrie Down 
Hollow filled with grand company ; of taking rank 
in the county; of, perhaps, tacking M.P. to the 
end of his name. 

The future, then, seemed as full of promise to 
him as the old gardens at Copt Hall of roses. Can 
you wonder ? Youth was at the helm and Pleasure 
at the prow, and an heiress about to become a pas- 
senger for the voyage of life ; a handsome heiress 
too . graceful and accomplished, and much sought 
after, by reason not merely of her wealth, but of 
her beauty. 

Among the roses at Copt Hall she promised to 
marry Squire Dudley, and yet before the roses were 
in bloom again she had consented to make another 
" happy." 

That was the first serious accident which befell 



26 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the young man's life-boat ; and he retired to Berrie 
Down Hollow, feeling he had been jilted, not merely 
by his lady-love, but by the jade Fortune. 

It is true, I suppose, that, if the cause of the 
mental death or paralysis of any man's life be 
closely inquired into, a woman will prove to have 
been at the bottom of the apparent mystery. 

Directly or indirectly, white soft hands fill the 
cup, either with strengthening wine, or pure water, 
or the drugged liquor, that steals the strength 
away, and impairs the finest genius. 

Those from whom we expected the greatest 
results go to their long sleep, and leave no mark 
behind by which their fellows shall remember them ; 
and why ? because, although they had the power to 
achieve much, some woman prevented their doing 
anything. 

The obstacle, which at one point or other threw 
them ofi^ the rails, wore petticoats, be certain. Either' 
they did not get the right women, or they married 
the wrong ones. Somewhere there was a story in 
their lives ; ay, and it may be a tragedy too. Adam, 
one might have thought, considering the circum- 
stances of his marriage, had a fair chance of happi- 



SQUIRE DUDLEY. 27 

neas ; and yet, see what a mess Eve made of his 
prospects. Since which time to the present it may 
fairly be questioned whether any man has ever 
chosen the proper help-meet ; whether in effect even 
the Adams of the nineteenth century are not origi- 
nally placed in a paradise, out of which, in due 
time, some woman contrives to lead them. Whether 
or not his matrimonial disappointment really was 
the cause of Squire Dudley's ill success, one thing is 
undeniable, viz., that he, in his heart, attributed much 
of his subsequent bad fortune to it Such natures 
are not, perhaps, capable of any great degree of 
passionate attachment ; and, however unromantic 
the statement may sound, I am bound to confess it 
was never the woman he regretted so much as the 
heiress. 

Arabella's raven tresses never appeared before 
his mental vision with one-half the same frequency 
as did her gold. When he failed to dig nuggets 
out of Berne Down Hollow, he reflected sorrow- 
fully on the faithless fair's five thousand a-year. 

Had he married another woman with money, 
there can be little doubt but that then he would 
have thought disconsolately about Miss Laxton's 



28 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

face, Miss Laxton's perfections ; as it was, want of 
money being the one most pressing evil in his life, 
Cupid folded his wings and perched on one of the 
elm-trees, laughing to himself, no doubt, while 
Mammon walked with Squire Dudley up and down 
the meadows and across the lea. 

Passionately, perhaps, as he ever loved any 
woman, Arthur loved the stately fair whom he 
had wooed in the old-fashioned gardens at Copt 
Hall. She was his style of beauty; his ideal of 
feminine perfection ; haughty and queenlike ; capri^ 
cious and fanciful ; strong-willed and domineering ; 
a woman to rule slaves . to govern so feeble and 
purposeless a nature as his, despotically. Had all 
things gone well, she would, as Miss Hope declared, 
have " ruled the roast " at Berrie Down ; she would 
have been mistress and master too ; she would have 
led him a pleasant life of it in the old Hertfordshire 
nome ; she would have taught him meekness and 
submission, and it may be contentment also, for 
some men are like children, better satisfied when a 
strong hand guides their course. As it was^ the 
years had gone by, leaving Squire Dudley intensely 
dissatisfied with all mundane arrangements, parti- 



SQUIRE DUDLEY. 2J) 

cularly with those arrangements which affected 
himself. 

And yet any other person might have made a good 
thing out of his life. There was the rub I The owner 
of Berrie Down Hollow wanted not to make good 
things, but to have good things made for him ; and it 
was for this the world quarrelled with Arthur Dudley. 

'' Hang the man," said Compton Baidsford, 
who was worth half a million of money, and had 
worked for every sixpence of it. ^^ A dissatisfied 
idiot. Has not he got Berrie Down, the sweetest 
place in the county, and, confound him, has he not 
. got the sweetest wife, too ?" 

Which statements might be perfectly true, and 
yet hold no comfort for the possessor of place or 
wife. What was the use of Berrie Down without 
money to keep the estate properly ; and what to such 
a man was the good of having a wife with whom 
even he could -find no fault, unless, indeed, it might 
be, that she was a trifle too sweet . ^too perfect ? 

Aflter all, it is scarcely pleasant to discover, when 
you have thought to make a woman supremely 
happy, that the world will persist in thmking it is 
the woman who is making you happy. 



30 FAB ABOVE BUBIBS. 

This was an idea hurtful to Arthur Dudley in 
the extreme, and those who loved his wife best 
discovered in due time that the greatest kindness 
any friend could do her was to refrain from speak- 
ing to her husband of the blessing he possessed. 

And yet Arthur Dudley was by no means either 
unamiable or ungenerous. He was not a bad man ; 
he was only that which oftentimes produces infi- 
nitely worse results, a weak one ; he was not cruel, 
nor wicked, nor wanton, nor wasteful. He had no 
sins, but he had many grievous faults. He was a 
man going to the dogs, as fast as bad management 
could take him, when he married his wife ; and 
when we enter the gates of Berne Down Hollow he 
is a man going to the dogs more slowly, but not 
less surely still. 

Every one knew that his wife was the drag on 
the wheels of his descent. Every person was fully 
aware that whatever of comfort and happiness, and 
real respectability, his life had held, was due to 
her beneficent influence ; and under this knowledge 
Squire Dudley himself chafed secretly. Had she 
been an ill-tempered shrew ; had she been an idle, 
flaunting, extravagant, wasteful woman ; had she 



SQUIRE DUDLEY, 31 

drank ; had she heen a confirmed inyalid ; had she 
been a loud-talking, boastful, hard, managing semi* 
man ; had she been anything, indeed, but what she 
was, her husband would have had a grievance and 
rested satisfied. As it was, he himself could not 
have told what his feeling was towards her. He 
did not love her much, and yet she loved him ex- 
ceedingly. He did not consider her at all, and 
yet, from sunrise to sunset, her first thought was 
how to benefit and pleasure him. 

She had set up an idol for herself, and fell down 
and worshipped it ; and, as is not unusual in such 
cases, the idol half despised her for her pains. 

At the bottom of his heart, his idea about h^ 
was the same as his idea about Berrie Down 
Hollow. 

No doubt the thing was very good ; but let a 
thing be ever so good, if it be not the thing you 
want . what then ? Why, then you are apt to look 
with a little disfavour and petulance upon it, even 
though it be perfect of its kind . ^a diamond without 
speck or flaw. 

And besides, his marriage had not quite answered 
his expectations; that match, indeed, had needed to 



32 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

be made in a dozen heavens which would have' 
satisfied the expectations of Squire Dudley. 

A good wife, a clever manager, a home-loving 
woman, she was to put all crooked things straight, 
and to put all straight things straighter! The 
Dudley millennium, a reign of utter order and of 
utter peace, was to come to Berrie Down with the 
young wife. He told her all his difficulties, and 
she promised hopefully to help him through them. 
He announced to all his friends that, '' once he was 
married," he should get on ; and his friends, to 
a certain extent, believed him, for they knew a 
mistress to be sorely needed at Berrie Down House, 
" where everything is going to wreck and ruin," 
he stated to his fiancee, who, in due time, veri- 
fied the truth of his assertion, and bravely put her 
shoulder to the wheel, to prevent such a consum- 
mation. 

^'I have to clothe, educate, and maintain five 
brothers and sisters," he declared with that frankness 
concerning his grievances which was a distinguishing 
feature of his character, and, although his friture wife 
looked a little horror-stricken at this revelation, yet 
she adventured amongst those brothers and sisters 



SQUIRE DUDLETr 33 

cheerfully, and, without a murmur^ cast in her lot 
with their& 

How much of her happiness, during the early 
years of her married experience, she owed to that 
young life, Mrs. Dudley never stopped to analyze ; 
but there were those who knew that Berrie Down 
would have been a terrible home for Arthur's 
wife, had bright faces not grown brighter at her 
approach, had strong willing hands not been 
stretched out to smooth her way, to make her diffi- 
cult path easy. 

She would have found out all her husband's faults 
in six months, had she been thrown solely on his 
society during that period ; as it was, she had always 
something else to think about . something to step 
between her and knowledge. She was sorry for 
him, and she was sorry for the ^* children," as she 
called them. It was hard for him, and it was hard 
for them; and the dear hands were always laid 
entreatingly on some half-turned pettish shoulder, 
and the dear voice was ever engaged in soothing 
the effect of sharp and hasty words; for Heather 
Dudley was essentially a peace-maker, a woman 
whose mission it seemed to turn away wrath, to 

VOL. I. D 



34 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

bind up bleeding wounds, to assuage with ointment 
the irritation of long-standing sores. 

With Heather no man quarrelled, and no woman 
either. She was not a good hater ; she had never 
sounded the depths of a great sorrow, nor of a great 
passion. Like many women who marry very young, 
even love had come to her mildly. The disease 
taken in youth, is never so fierce as that which 
attacks the patient in maturity ; as is the strength, 
so is the day ; as are the years, so is the joy and the 
agony. She was wooed and married I smoother 
never ran the course of true love. On neither side 
was there one to interpose an obstacle, or to prevent 
either following the road inclination pointed out 
She was a woman " without a story," without any 
previous attachment . without a wrong, a grief, a 
remorse, a regret. Crime was to her an awful and 
abstract mystery, which existed only in the polices- 
reports, and as a secret, low-whispered in some un- 
happy families. Of the world, she knew nothing : 
of its wickedness, of its temptations, of its pleasures, 
of its sorrows, she was innocent as her own children. 
She had plumbed the depth of no human joy or grief* 
Through the meadows the rivulet of her life had 



SQUIKE DUDLEY. 35 

flowed peacefully and monotonously. Vaguely she 
understood that, there were different existences , 
that there were other lands, through which swept 
riyerSy broad and deep and dark, in the depths 
whereof lay wrecked hopes and terrible memories ; 
she had heard of existences lost on those great 
streams, of corpses which the currents carried down 
to the vast ocean ; she vaguely comprehended that 
there were rapids and pools, contrary currents, cruel 
storms to be encountered by some human ships, but it 
w:a8 all vague to her . ^vague as the story in a book 
She had experienced trouble, but only such trouble 
as comes with the morning, the clouds and misti^ 
whereof vanish under the beams of the mid-day sun. 
Of that different sorrow which falls on humanity 
when the darkness of evening is closing upon man's 
onward course, when there is nonoon-day to follow, 
and only the night left in which to travel darkly, 
her life held no knowledge. She warlike Berrie 
Down Hollow, sweet, natural, unaffected ; and Berrie 
Down would have seemed strange without her, while 
she might, at a first introduction, scarcely have 
seemed so entirely in keeping with any place away 
from Berrie Down. 

D 2 



36 FAB ABOTX 



Aesonof tbift kone^ al any nie i 

die went nsitiiii; ; and, l tihe .mmmiiI Ik joato 
look oat OB tbe view fron Ae drmwiiqpHroaniviDdoivs 
of Berne Dowb HoDov, yon bii^ see the Sqdre 
seated under the diade of a che8tniit-tree leaifing 
the TimeB, and inwardly diafing over his wife's 
ahKnoe, and wondering whedier, ibr certain, die 
win retnm from London tiiat etemng, and bring 
3fn. Ormson with her. 

Mr. Dudley likes Misl Onnson, and he does not 
nmdi like her daughter Beseiey an exoeedin^y 
pretty girl, who rits on the tmf at his feet, spelling 
the other ade of the sheet, resting her round cheek 
on her hand the while. 

All the young Dudleys, his brothers and asters, 
his own son uid his own daughter, were harmless in 
oomparisoQ to Bessie Ormson, who had a will of her 
own which she asserted, and opinions of her own 
which she stuck to, and who was staying at Berrie 
Down for a couple of months, as though. Squire 
Dudley remarked to his wife, ^* the house had not 
enough people in it without her/' 



37 



CHAPTER III. 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 



If Berrie Down ^^ had enough people in it without 
Miss Ormson," Squire Dudley could scarcely in 
common justice lay the blame at any other door 
than his own, considering that of his own free will 
he had at a comparatively early period Jot his and 
their lives encumbered himself with the maintenance 
of five half-brothers and sisters, which fact it was 
impossible either for him or them to forget, seeing 
never a day passed that he did not rehearse to some 
one how this charge had crippled and kept him back 
in life. 

" Other men," he declared^ " found it hard enough 
to maintain wife and family of their own ; but here 
was he, provided by his own father with a family 
large enough to drag down any man." 



38 TAR AfiOTE BUBIIS. 

^ It is 3, comfart your step-modwr married, t all 
erentSy Artbnr," obeerfed Miss Ormson, "^or joo 
would hafe been in tfaeworkhooae loi^ ago. The 
last straw, is it not so ? joa dear gmmblin^ old 



And that was all the sympathy Atf got. Can it be 
wondered at, therefOTe, if Squire Dudley thought 
erery man's hand was raised against him ? 

To explain ^/Gaa Ormsoii's speech, it is, however, 
neoessary to enter into a slight history of the Dudley 
fannly, who had reaUy owned Benie Down for more 
years than any person believed, and were stated by 
tradition to have been great people at an indefinitely 
remote period, when the &ther of the first Lord 
Kemms was a goldsmith in the CSty, lending 
money to grateful princes, who, contrary to all 
Solomon's experience, preyed themselves worthy of 
the trust. 

From that time until the day when this story com- 
mences, the Dudleys had been Dudleys of Berrie 
Down ; but, unhappily, while the trading Baldwins 
were making, the aristocratic Dudleys were spending, 
and thus it came to pass that each successive owner 
of Berrie Down left not merely that place, but also 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 39 

less money, to the man who came after hun than hi^ 
predecessor had done. 

Accordingly, in the course of many deceases and 
successions, the money dwindled down to nothing. 

When there was not a shilling left heyond what- 
ever amount the land might produce to keep up the 
family dignity, Berrie Down descended to Major 
Dudley, Arthur's father, who, on the strength of his 
landed property, half-pay, handsome face, and good 
address, married first, Janet, third daughter of 
Arthur Hope, Esquire, of Copt Hall, Essex, who was 
possessed of a moderate fortune, and a still more 
moderate show of good looks, and who brought one 
son, the Arthur of my story, into the world ; and 
secondly, when Arthur had attained the age of 
seventeen, Laura, daughter of Maddox Cuthbert, 
silk merchant, Manchester warehouseman and alder- 
man in the city of London. 

Miss Cuthbert, it was supposed, would have money 
on her father's death ; but that supposition proved so 

utterly incorrect^ that the only dowry the second 
Mrs. Dudley brought her husband resolved itself into 
a pretty face and five children. 

How many more arrows, male and female, might 



40 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

have been thrust into the Dudley quiver, had Major 
Dudley not opportunely retired into the fiumily vault, 
situate in Fifield churchyard, was a question Arthur 
Dudley declared only the Lord above could answer. 
As things fell out, however, no more sons or daughters 
came to the Hollow, while to Arthur descended the 
family estate and his mother's small fortune, which 
latter barely sufficed to pay the debts Major Dudley 
left behind him. On the other hand, Mrs. Dudley 
No. 2 found, when her husband died, that she had 
nothing to begin the world again upon excepting 
the dowry, afore honourably mentioned, of good 
looks . somewhat the worsQ for wear . and five 
children, whose ages ranged from nine years old 
downwards. 

At this period Arthur Dudley was seven-and- 
twenty, and master of the position. 

He could have turned his^ step-mother and her 
family adrift on the world ; but, instead of doing so, 
he adopted his brothers and sisters and his father's 
widow, who, three years after old Squire Dudley's 
death, made a second very poor investment of her 
good looks, and married, greatly to Arthur's chagrin, 
a Doctor Marsden, possessed of a very small practice 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 41 

in one of the London suburbs. This gentleman 
fancied Mrs. Dudley would make him a good 
managing wife, and was also under the delusion that 
her family . people known and respected within 
sound of Bow bells . might prove useful to him and 
advance his prospects. 

Those were the days in which the young Squire 
was spending much time at Copt Hall, wooing his 
heiress. Those were the days in which he thought 
"The Hollow" might be converted into a great 
place ; in which he looked at life through rose-tinted 
glass; in which he believed he could afford to be 
both proud and generous . for all of which reasons, 
and also because he did not choose that his father's 
children should be beholden for anything to a 
" trumpery apothecary/' he took upon himself the 
burden of feeding, boarding, and educating five 
sturdy and rebellious juvenile Dudleys. 

For this act of liberality, society generally patted 
him on the back, and said he was a fine fellow. Had 
he turned the children of his father's second mar- 
riage out of the gates of Berrie Down Hollow, 
society, on the other hand, would have remembered 
that he had got the property, while the youn^r 



42 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

children were left penniless, and rated him for his 
inhumanity accordingly ; but, as matters stood, every- 
one in the first blush of the affair forgot this fact, 
and pronounced Arthur to be the most generous 
fellow in the ubiverse. 

And so, theoretically, perhaps he was ; just one of 
those men who will give an old horse the run of his 
paddock, but refuse to pay five shillings a week for 
his run in the paddock of any other person. 

Nevertheless, he shared with his brothers and 
sisters the produce of his fields, the fat of his 
pastures, and for two years more they roamed 
wild about Berrie Down . a troop of hardy young 
colts, unbroken, untrained, uneducated, uncared-for. 

The most enthusiastic American could have de- 
sired no more complete democracy than the house- 
hold at '^ The Hollow," where, as is usual in all 
democracies, the classes governed in other communi- 
ties, were rulers of the place. 

At their own sweet wills, the servants went and 

came ; by fits and starts the labourers hedged and 

, ditched, and ploughed and sowed. When it pleased 

them to do so, the younger Dudleys assembled 

at the presumed meal hours ; when the fancy took 



THE FAHILY HISnOBY. 43 

them to do otherwise, they carried their luncheon 
and dinner away to remote parts of the farm, or 
feasted in kitchen and dairy on their return. 

In vain, friends and even acquaintances entered 
remonstrances concerning the manners, habits, and 
appearance, of the unkempt, untaught, uncared-for, 
romping, impudent, mischievous young gipsies at 
" The Hollow." Even the two smallest of the band, 
a boy and girl, twins, only seven years of age, were, 
so the Bector of Fifield assured Arthur, going head- 
long to destruction. Robbing birds'-nests, pelting 
ducks, stealing fruit, trampling down the ripe grain, 
climbing trees, wading in the brook, setting terriers 
on cats, chasing sheep, jeering at the passers-by, 
these children, the good man declared, in all such 
occupations were not alone. Wherever they went, 
Satan accompanied them ; and having arrived at this 
pleasant conclusion, it was only natural he should, 
even with tears in his eyes, entreat Arthur to stretch 
forth his hand and save the little ones from being 
lost, foody and soul. 

The opinion of the Bector, modified to a cer- 
tain extent, was the opinion of the neighbourhood 
generally. 



44 . FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Since time began, such a lot of bright-eyed, fearless, 
active, unmanageable young ^^ limbs " had never, so 
the country-people declared, been seen in Hertford- 
shire. They were at once the terror and admiration 
of all who frequented the roads and lanes round 
Berrie Down. Keen of tongue, swift of foot, careless 
of danger, the children roamed o'er common and 
lea and field. They were to be met with in the 
woods that lay westward of the Hollow, watching the 
squirrels, and almost emulating their agility. As 
for the miller, he declared his heart was always in 
his moudi, thinking some of them would be drowned. 
When the mowers were at work, at the risk of 
their legs the children followed close, hoping to 
rifle the corncrake's nest; when the wheat-stacks 
were moved, the five were always at hand to hiss 
on the terriers, to prevent either rat or mouse 
efiecting its escape. They stayed with the threshers 
in the barn; they were here, there, everywhere; 
they chased the calves, they milked the cows, they 
rode the horses ; they were a herd of sunburnt, 
freckled, bold, romping, cruel and yet tender- 
hearted boys and girls, who made bitter lamentation 
over the death of a favourite rabbit, although they 



THE FAMILY HISTOBY, 45 

robbed neats, and carried off young birds, and tor- 
mented cats, and utterly detested vermin and all 
creeping reptiles; and scandalized at the hct of 
five such natures "running to waste," . so society 
phrased it, . ^people urged upon their brother the 
desirability of some alteration being effected in his 
establishment. 

All in vain. Squire Dudley, the heiress' hope 
having vanished, cursed his luck audibly, but refused 
to attempt to mend it 

** Send them to school, indeed," he said to Mrs. 
Onnson, the second Mrs. Dudley's eldest sister . 
^send them to school I I have trouble enough now 
to make both ends meet, without increasing my 
expenses." 

" Why do you not marry, then ?" she asked ; in 
reply to which inquiry Arthur Dudley only shook 
his head. He had been disappointed in his matri- 
monial schemes, and the world just then looked very 
black to him. 

^^ Unless a wife brought something in her hand 
towards keeping herself," he observed at length, " I 
am afraid that remedy would prove worse than the 
disease." 



46 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Nonsense !" retorted Mrs. Ormson, decidedly. 
" A wife would very soon set things to rights, pre- 
vent waste, see that the people you employ did their 
duty, and keep the children in order. You want a 
managing woman at the head of your establishment 
If my hands were not so tied, I would remain and 
look after matters for you myself." 

^^ I wish you would/' sighed Arthur ; and he was 
in earnest ; for there were two people on earth in 
whom he believed . one, Mrs. Ormson, "a most 
superior woman/* and the other an old housekeeper 
who had lived at Berrie Down Hollow in the better 
days, when Mrs. Dudley No. 1 was alive, who had 
packed up and departed when the advent of Mrs. 
Dudley No 2 was announced, but who still came 
occasionally to see him, and lament over ^^ Master 
Arthur's evil fortune in having all those owdacious 
boys and girls cast like mites into the family 
treasury." 

" You are quite right, Piggott," said Mrs. Ormson, 
to whom, in a moment of forgetfulness, the woman 
once confided this opinion ; *' for the children are 
indeed a widow's mites. Your remark does credit 
alike to your wit and to your scriptural knowledge." 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 47 

" I reads my Bible, mum," observed Piggott, who 
had a secret distrust of Mrs. Ormson. 

*' A very proper thing for a person in your station," 
returned the lady. "I always like servants who 
read their Bible. It teaches them honesty, and 
prevents their striving to be equal with their masters 
and mistresses. Reading the Scriptures has made 
you the invaluable woman you are, Piggott. I only 
wish poor Mr. Arthur had some one like you to 
manage his house for him. Do you think he could 
not make it worth your while to ?" 

"Thank you, mum," interrupted Mrs. Piggott, 
hastily ; " but I would rather be excused. Master 
Arthur, mum, was good enough to wish me to come 
and take the management, after his step-mammk's 
marriage ; but a parcel of young children is a thing 
as I never was accustomed to." And although Mrs. 
Piggott was too polite to add anything in disparage- 
ment of Mrs. Ormson's nephews and nieces, still 
there was a look in her face which that lady rightly 
interpreted to mean, " More especially such a set of 
romping, mischievous, riotous, ill-conditioned young 
imps as there are in this house." 

After that, Mrs. Ormson abandoned all idea of a 
housekeeper for Arthur. 



48 FAB ABO\rE RUBISa. 

*^ Your case is a hard one, Arthur, I fear," she 
said, ^^ when even Piggott will not help you out of 
your scrape. Clearly you must marry . let me look 
out a wife for you. I know so many nice girls, 
suitable in every respect, and several with money 
too. You know you ought to marry a rich woman, 
that is, if you can get one to marry you.'* 

" There's the difficulty," remarked Arthur, think- 
ing of the faithless heiress. 

" Well, let me see what I can do," implored Mrs. 
Ormson, who devoutly believed the Almighty had 
sent her into the world to set right the things He 
had unintentionally left wrong at the creation. 
.* When are you coming to London ?" 

^ Next month ; to stay a day or two with Dick 
Travers." 

'^Then give me a few days at the same time, 
and, before the summer is over, there will be a 
mistress at Berrie Down. Mark my words." 

Whether Squire Dudley marked Jiir words may 
be doubted ; but he verified them, in a manner Mrs. 
Ormson little anticipated, by going to Dick Travers', 
by being persuaded to accompany that gentleman to 
visit his aunt Mrs. Travers, ^' who has three pretty 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 49 

daughters, and a niece staying with her ; the finest 
girl I ever saw," finished Mr. Richard Travers. 
" No nonsense about her ; up to everything . ready 
for anything. Can make a dress, and dance in it after- 
wards ; sit up all night with the old lady, and come 
down to breakfast next morning fresh as a daisy. 
Just the girl I'd marry, if I could scrape together 
money enough to buy the license; but she is too 
poor for me, Dudley, or for you either, for that 
matter. A wife with only a few hundreds is a 
luxury only to be indulged in by a very rich man." 

" She comes of good people," he went on, . " the 
Bells of Layford. They have money among them, 
though, I am sorry to say, but little of it has fallen 
to her share. More's the pity ! Daughter of the late 
Rector of Layford . mother dead also . two sisters 
in heaven with father and mother - not a incum- 
brance of any kind. Well, it is of no use ; you can- 
not aflbrd it, I suppose, any more than I can." 

" I cannot," agreed Arthur Dudley, as gravely as 
though Mr. Travers had made some serious proposi- 
,fion to him ; and then straight away he went and 
did the very thing he had said in all earnestness he 
could not afibrd. 

VOL. I. E 



50 FAR ABOVE BUSIES. 

She struck his fancy . that pretty girl with the 
quaint name ; sweet Heather Bell, as Mr. Travers 
always called her. 

^^The name was a emcy of her godfather, an 
eccentric bachelor/' the lady explained. '^ She was 
the youngest of three daughters, and the other two 
were christened, respectively, * Lily' and ' Rose.' 
*Call this one "Heather," said Mr. Stewart, who 
loved Scotland and her purple mountains ; ^ she 
will grow up like the heather, perhaps . strong, 
hardy, a wild flower, worth a hundred of your 
garden rarities. Call her Heather, and I will 
remember her name to her advantage.' So she 
was christened Heather," went on Mrs. Travers, 
^* and she lived and grew up as you see, while the 
two other daughters drooped and died. Unhappily, 
soon after her birth, Mr. Bell quarrelled with her 
godfather, who has since utterly ignored Heather's 
existence. It is a pretty name for a girl ; don't you 
think so, Mr. Dudley ?" 

Mr. Dudley did, and thought, moreover, that 
Heather was considerably prettier than her name, 
influenced by which opinion he went again and again 
to London, and betook himself day after day to Mrs. 



THE FAMILY HISTOHY. 51 

Travers' pleasant house, where he found order and 
competence, bright faces, and always a cordial 
welcome. 

After the riot and confusion at the Hollow, that 
well-arranged house seemed to Arthur a sort of 
earthly heaven. 

In comparison with the Travers', Mrs. Ormson's 
nice young ladies seemed a little affected and self- 
conscious; and, therefore, during the course of his 
frequent visits to London, he proved rather negligent 
of his relative. 

The Misses Travers were all engaged : one to a 
north country baronet, another to a barrister, the 
third to a reverend gentleman, who was subse- 
quently appointed bishop somewhere at the world's 
end. Miss Bell, however, was heart-whole, and 
Mrs. Travers, who laboured in common with many 
other people under a delusion with regard to Arthur 
Dudley's worldly means, never wearied of singing 
her niece's praises in the ears of the young Squire. 
What a daughter she had been . what a wife 
she would make . what a treasure she had proved 
during the whole of her (Mrs. Travers') illness I 

**When the dear girls were married," Mrs. 

e2 



52 * FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Tracers went on to hope, ^ahe trusted Heather 
would he thrown into society where she would meet 
with a husband worthy of her." 

All of which made the man to whom she spoke 
eager to win the girl for himself; and accordingly, 
to cut a long story short, before the summer was 
over Mrs. Ormson's prediction was Tcrified by Miss 
Bell and her poor little fortune of six hundred 
pounds becoming the property of Arthur Dudley, 
Esquire, of Berrie Down Hollow, to have and to 
hold for ever. 

By degrees that gentleman had worked himself up 
into the belief that the day of his wedding would 
prove the turning-point in his luck. What benefits 
he expected fate would present him with on the 
occasion of his marriage, it would be difficult to say ; 
but certainly he thought there were long arrears of 
forgotten gifts owing to him that might be gracefully 
paid by Providence on so auspicious an occasion. 

For some inscrutable reason, however, Providence 
decided on still remaining Arthur Dudley's debtor. 
His lands yielded no double crops; he found it 
unnecessary to build larger bams for the produce of 
his fields ; his oxen were not stronger to labour, and 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 63 

his sheep did not bring forth thousands and tens of 
thousands on the green slopes of Berrie Down. 

His life continued to be still a " miss/' money 
grew no more plentiful, his stock failed to increase ; 
indoors, indeed, there was comfort and regularity ; 
but what signified indoor comfort to a man who had 
hoped to represent the county, and to stand on an 
equal footing with Lord Kemms ? 

No longer, certainly, were the younger Dudleys a 
terror to the neighbourhood, a vision of very horror 
to cat, and bird, and beast ; but while they had to be 
clothed and maintained, where was there cause for 
gratulation? Worst of all, no one, except Mrs. 
Ormson, sympathized with him saye Heather ; and 
even Heather laboured under the delusion that she 
was bound to sympathize with other people besides 
her husband. 

After seven years of marriage, Squire Dudley 
gratefully decided, in his inmost heart, that he ought 
to have remained single, and, leaving Berrie Down, 
gone forth into the world to push his fortune. 

What, perhaps, established him in this opinion 
was the contemplation of Compton Raidsford's great 
house on the road to South Kemms. 



54 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

From the drawing-room windows of Berrie Down 
Hollow he could see that bran-new mansion staring 
him in the face. It stood on a slight hill, beyond 
the mill, over the fields, across the road, and then 
over more fields ; but still he could see it, and, when 
the wind was from the west, hear the sound of the 
gong which announced to all whom the intelligence 
might interest that the Eaidsfords were about to sit 
down to luncheon or dinner, as the case might be. 

If a man like Compton Raidsford, who had risen 
from the ranks, could make money enough in London 
to build such a palace, and to keep it up when built, 
what might not Arthur Dudley have achieved ? 

With all the veins of his heart the Squire hated 
the merchant who drove off to Palinsbridge in his 
carriage and pair, and rode out with his daughters, 
who sat their horses, so Arthur affirmed, with as 
much grace and elegance as sacks of sand. 

It was well known that Mr. Raidsford had started 
in life as boy in the workshop of Messrs. Fairland 
and Wright, engineers, Stangate, at the moderate 
salary of five shillings per week ; and perhaps the 
only speech Bessie Ormson ever made, which tho- 
roughly met with Squire Dudley's approval, was the 



THE FAMILY HISTORY. 55 

rather ill-natured one, that "most probably Mr. 
Raidsford preferred a gong to a bell, on account of 
early associations connected with the latter." 

" It would have been a fine thing for me, Bessie, 
if J had sprung from the gutter, with no absurd sodal 
conventionalities keeping me back," he sighed ; in 
answer to which remark, Bessie Ormson only shrugged 
her shoulders and pulled a little grimace. 

The man who could not achieve success at Berrie 
Down Hollow was not likely, in Miss Ormson's 
opinion, to have ever reared Mr. Raidsford's palace 
out of five shillings a week ; and, as a rule, she was 
in no way backward about expressing this conviction. 
For which reason . although she was extremely 
pretty, and had higher spirits and more life about 
her than any other guest who ever came to stay at 
Berrie Down . Mn Dudley could very well have 
dispensed with her presence. 

More especially at the juncture when you, reader, 
are invited to walk across the lawn, sloping away 
from the drawing-room windows to the Hollow . for 
Heather had then been absent from home for nearly 
a fortnight, staying with Mrs. Marsden, whose health 
was anything but satisfactory . ^and during the whole 



56 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of that time the house had been, in Arthur's opinion, 
at sixes and sevens, and Mr. Dudley's personal 
comforts somewhat neglected. 

All of which formed a text from which Bessie 
preached a sermon . always beginning, never end- 
ing . on the difference of Berrie Down with and 
without a mistress. 

"I rever believed the woman lived who could 
make me agree with Solomon, till I met your wife, 
Arthur," she said. 

^^ What do you mean 7* he asked. 

''That I am certain now of the truth of that 
which he never could have known from his own ex- 
perience, that a woman may be to her husband, 
' Far Above Rubies.' " 

'' Humph !" ejaculated Squire Dudley ; and he 
went out, disgusted with Bessie, the wisest of men, 
and the world in general. 



CHAPTER IV. 



BEATHER. 



Let me place the picture of Berne Down before 
you once again, before proceeding with my story. 

In the stillness of the summer evening, look upon 
Arthur Dudley's home, as the few passers-by pause 
occasionally to gaze, so that you may stamp the 
stage and its accessories on your memory ere the 
characters I would group together come rominently 
forward, and commence acting the unexciting story 
it is proposed to tell. 

There is the house, with its many windows fes- 
tooned by westeria and clematis, roses and mag- 
nolia; the house, with its red-tiled roof, with its 
grotesque chimneys, with its cheerful drawing-room, 
with its sunny bedchambers. There is the lawn, 
smooth shaven and green, on which the sunlight 



68 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

falls in broad, golden patches, sloping down sharply 
to the Hollow, where the blackberry-bushes, and the 
broom, and the low underwood, form a mass of 
tangled wildness. Beyond there is the stream, and 
a little to the left Mr. Scrotter's modest flour-mill ; 
then come fields, where cows are lying and sheep 
browsing, and away in the distance stands Mr. 
Raidsford's mansion, with trees about it . trees that 
are merged in, and seem to form a part of, the 
woods and plantations surrounding Kemms' Park. 

The lawn at Berrie Down is studded with fine 
old timber. Through the air pigeons are wheeling, 
on the ridge-tiles they are cooing; two or three 
dogs are lying basking in the sun ; at one of the 
open windows of the drawing-room a cat is seated, 
gravely surreying the landscape, and perhaps at the 
same time prospectively viewing supper, or retro- 
spectively thinking of her latest depredations in the 
dairy. There is a great peace in the scene . a 
peace which it requires a person to have been out 
in the hurry and turmoil of the world fully to com- 
prehend. There is a repose in the landscape: in 
the way the sunbeams fall and rest upon the grass ; 
in the monotonous cooing of the pigeons ; in the 



HEATHER. 59 

attitudes of the cattle ; in the murmur of the stream ; 
in the stillness of the mill ; in the faint nistling of 
the leaves ; in the very perfume of the flowers ; in 
the soft fanning of the breeze ; in the grouping of 
the human figures in the landscape. 

It would be a scene that for you, friend, and 
you, worn and weary with the noise and rush and 
excitement of tins great Babylon . where we are all 
speeding so fast through life . to look upon with 
longing gaze, to remember afterwards with aching 
hearts ; but people in the country view these things 
otherwise, and, accordingly, it was with far dif- 
ferent feelings to any you would experience at sight 
of such a sunset, that Squire Dudley occasionally 
lifted his eyes to look towards the glowing west, ere 
dropping them again on the Times, the news in 
which Miss Ormson, seated on the ground at his 
feet, was kind enough to share with him. 

Over the grass were scattered five other Dudleys, 
ranging in age from fifteen years upwards ; one of 
whom, Alick, came up to his brother, and interrupted 
nis study of the price of shares with . 

" I wonder what time mother will get home ; have 
you really no idea by which train she is coming ?" 



60 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'' Not the slightest," said Arthur^ laying down his 
paper, somewhat to the discomfiture of the young 
lady, who had been interesting herself with an " Ex- 
traordinary Elopement " paragraph ; "and how often, 
Alick, am I to tell you not to call Heather ^ mother.' 
It is not enough that I have to support you all, but 
you must persist in calling my wife, who is almost 
as young as Agnes, ' mother.' Mother, indeed ! I 
detest such childishness I" 

^'If I had a mother like Heather, I should call 
her mother, and nothing else," interposed Bessie, 
from her lowly position on the grass. " Don't be 
silly, Arthur ; let your brothers and sisters speak of 
your wife as they have found her." 

" But it irritates me," persisted the Squire ; 
" while they were young, it did not so much matter; 
now, however, when they are all growing up into 
men and women, the name sounds absurd. Heather 
does not look a day older than Agnes." 

"That is the beauty of the thing" returned his 
opponent. ** If Heather looked fifty, or even as old 
as you do, the charm would be dispelled." 

"Thank you for the implied compliment," he re- 
turned, reddening. It was a sore point with him 



HEATHER. 61 

that his youth was gone, that his life had borne no 
fruit ; and, even had the world prospered with him, it 
is not a pleasant thing for a man to be told he looks 
old by a pretty girl ! 

" Well, you know, Arthur," said the same girl, 
frank as she was pretty, "you never will look so young 
as your wife. In the first place, she is ten years 
younger than you ; and in the second, you ought to 
take a leaf out of her book, and learn contentment. 
You ought to cease grumbling and making yourself 
and other people wretched. You ought to think 
yourself lucky you have got Berrie Down Hollow, 
instead of always wishing you were Lord Chancellor, 
or Archbishop of Canterbury, or King of England, 
or something of that kind." 

" What has all this got to do with my brothers 
and sisters calling my wife their mother ?" he asked 
"They have got a mother of their own, and one 
mother ought to be quite enough for any person." 

" Mine is one too many for me," remarked Bessie, 
with a shrug and a pout ; evading at the same 
time the newspaper wherewith Arthur made believe 
to deal her a rebuking blow. " It is the truth, and 
I tell her so a dozen times a week. As for Mrs. 



62 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Marsden, if you wanted Allck and the rest of them 
to feel that devotion towards her which you seem to 
think I ought to feel for my respected mother, why 
did you not let them go with her when she left 
Berrie Down? That was your grand mistake, 
Arthur ; if you had given them so much a year and 
your blessing " 

^^ Bessie, I allow no one to interfere in my family 
concerns," interrupted Arthur with dignity. 

" Yes, you do," persisted the young lady, " you 
allow mamma to do so ; and as I know I shall not 
have a chance of speaking out my mind when once 
she comes, I have been trying latterly to make the 
best of my opportunities. Let me tell you all the 
benefits you would have derived from such an 
arrangement." 

" I wish to goodness, Bessie, you would keep your 
opinions to yourself; you are enough to drive a man 
mad." 

'' And you are enough to drive a woman mad," 
she returned, still looking up at him with a provoking 
smile on her face. '^ Ah, well, you have got your 
troubles, and I suppose I shall have mine, if I live long 
enough. Now, Alick, what are you waiting to say ?" 



HEATHER. 63 

" That if Arthur wants me to give up calling 
Heather mother, I will do so," spoke the lad. *' I 
know he has fed and clothed us, and " 

" Hang the boy," interrupted Squire Dudley, pet- 
tishly, " call her what you like, only let me hear no 
more about it;" and Arthur and his companion 
resumed their study of the Times, while Alick, 
with his head bent a little, walked slowly down the 
lawn in the direction of the Hollow. 

Suddenly there rang a glad cry after him of, 
*' Alick, Alick, she's come," in answer to which the 
lad only waved his hand and ran on to the tangle of 
broom and bramble bushes, from out of which he 
brought a little girl, whom he bore in triumph on 
his shoulder up the hill. 

It was a pretty scene, looking at it from the 
Hollow, on which the evening sunbeams fell. 

The house formed the background of the picture, 
and for foreground there was the grassy slope, where 
were gathered around Mrs. Dudley and Mrs. Ormson 
all those who had been awaiting their coming. 

A bustle and stir succeeded the previous still- 
ness ; there was a rustle of women's dresses, a hum 
of women's voices. There was much kissing and 



64 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

rejoicing, much fondling over and welcoming of 
Heather, who, at length, disengaging herself from 
the detaining group of loving hands, went towards 
her husband, standing a little outside the circle, 
and said . 

" They won't let me speak a word to you, Arthur. 
How have you been all this time ? Have you missed 
me very much ?" And as the others had greeted 
her, so she now addressed him with a little tremor 
in her voice, with tears of gladness at being home 
again standing in her eyes. 

From a short d'stance, Bessie Ormson, who had 
duly presented her cheek to Heather's travelling 
companion, and received in return a maternal kiss, 
contemplated this performance, and as she did so, 
stamped her foot impatiently on the ground. 

" Have you forgotten me, Heather ?" she asked, 
coming forward and putting her hand almost shyly 
in Mrs. Dudley's. *' There comes Lally," she added, 
pointing dowji the hill towards Alick, who advanced 
at a run, while the child from her triumphant posl- 
tion clapped her little palms exultingly, calling 
out . 

'' Faster ! faster ! mamma, mamma !" 



HEATHER. 65 

Panting for breath, Alick Dudley put Lally into 
her mother's arms. " Me first, me first," she cried, 
clinging to Heather, and debarring with true femi- 
nine ingratitude the gallant knight, who had brought 
her safely up the hill, from all benefits demable 
from the meeting. 

"You dreadful child . ^you bold, exacting little 
child," exclaimed Bessie, taking her away by force. 
"Do you think no one has any right to your 
mamma but yourself ? don't you see I leave my 
mamma ; why can't you be as good as I am ? Oh ! 
you naughty little puss. I would not have red hair, 
Lally ; J would not have shilling curls all over my 
head. I would sell them if I had them, and wear 
a wig." 

Whereupon Lally in great glee declared her hair 
was not red, but " dolden ;" and that Bessie had 
ugly hair. 

" I have what, chatterbox ?" demanded Bessie. 
** Say that again . only say it, and I will carry you 
down the hill and bury you among the blackberries. 
I will shake you to pieces; I will kill you with 
kisses. Now, is not my hair beautiful ?" 

" No, it is ugly," persisted Lally ; and then there 

VOL. I. F 



6 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

ensued a fierce contradiction between the two, which 
ended in Bessie first making believe to smother 
the child, and then kissing her, as it may be 
questioned whether Bessie Ormson had ever kissed 
any other creature in her life. 

'^ I love 'oo," said Miss Lally, as a sequence to 
this performance, putting two of her fingers in her 
mouth, and surveying society generally with the 
profoundest composure. 

" And don't you love me, pet ?" inquired Mrs. 
Ormson, venturing upon the hazardous experiment 
of testing the strength of a child's afiections in the 
presence of strangers, . " don't you love me ?" 

" No, Lally don't," was the reply. 

" Not if I have brought you something very nice 
from London ?" persisted Mrs. Ormson. 

Lally stretched out her little hand for the bon- 
bons, but declined to compromise herself by express- 
ing any attachment for the donor. 

*' Now, do you not love me ?' asked Mrs. Ormson, 
persuasively. 

Lally thought the matter over, and decided in the 
negative. 

*' If you do not love my mamma, you must give 



HEATHER, 67 

her the bonbons back, Lally," suggested Bessie ; 
and she made a feint of taking the sweets away, 
which drew forth such a wail from the child as 
attracted public attention to the trio. 

" Hush, hush, hush !" exclaimed Bessie. " I 
would not have believed you could have been so 
naughty. There, kiss mamma, and make friends 
with her. You are to give me half those bonbons, 
you know !" 

To which arrangement Lally demurred; but, 
eventually, being greatly under the dominion of 
Miss Ormson's superior will, with much trouble of 
mind she consented to this division ; and under the 
cedar-tree she and Bessie parted the spoiL 

Such high matters are not, however, to be lightly 
settled ; and they were still engaged in deciding who 
was to have the odd sweetmeat, when, looking up 
from her lap where the treasures were laid in two 
heaps, Bessie saw Mrs. Dudley standing beside her. 

"Come in, dear," said Heather, "the dew is 
beginning to fall, you will catch cold ;" and as she 
spoke she laid her hand gently on Bessie's shoulder. 

Bessie turned and pressed her lips to the white 
soft fingers ; then she tossed the two heaps into one, 

K 2 



68 FAR ABOTE RUBIES. 

and Baying to Lall j, ^ Yoa shall baye them all," 
rose and faced Mrs. Dudley. 

** I saw GObert yeiterday," obserred the latter. 

"Yes?" 

The monosyllable Mrs. Dudley understood to be 
interrogatiTe. 

** And I asked him to come down here." 

^ Thank you yery mudi ; he will be glad to do so." 

" I like him greatly." 

** He is greatly to be liked ?" and Bessie, as she 
said this, slipped her band, which was cold as ice, 
into Mrs. Dudley's. 

** And deyoted to you," went on Heather. 

** I wish I were more worthy his devotion," an- 
swered Besae. 

**I wish I could understand you," was Mrs. 
Dudley's answer, after a pause. 

*^ I do not think there is much to understand," 
said Bessie ; but her heart gave a great leap as she 
spoke, for she knew she was telling a truthful woman 
a falsehood. 

" I only meant that you strike me as being a 
little odd at times," remarked Heather, gently. 

** Not more odd than you strike me as being," 



. - -- 



HEATHER. 69 

was the reply. Then, noticing that her companion 
seemed surprised, she went on, *' Cannot you com- 
prehend? won't you comprehend that to a girl 
brought up as I have been, a woman such as you 
are is an enigma, a wonder, a ne?er-ending, always- 
beginning puzzle r 

''What do you mean?" Heather paused in 
ueir walk back towards the house as she asked this 
question ; and I should like you to take your first 
look at her as she stands thus intent and uncon- 
scious. 

Hair of the mellowest, darkest auburn, out of which 
the original red still gleamed in the sunlight ; eyes 
brown, and deep and tender ; the fairest, softest, 
womanliest complexion ; teeth white and regular ; a 
full and somewhat large mouth, parted as she waited 
for Bessie's reply. 

Altogether a firm &ce, and yet gentle . the face 
of a woman who had not known much sorrow, and 
yet whom you instinctively felt could endure patiently 
almost any amount of trouble which she might be 
called upon to bear ; the face of a woman who had 
from her earliest years thought of others first, of her* 
self last ; the face of a woman whom, once married, a 



70 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

man would know it was hopeless for him to love with 
a sinful passion, but who would be a man's good 
friend, his very right hand, in time of need ; a face in 
which there was " help ; " a face, which no person who 
had once seen it ever quite forgot, which you could 
not fancy changing and altering like the countenances 
of much more beautiful women. 

It was the inner loveliness of her nature, its 
purity, its steadfastness, its pitiful tenderness which 
made her seem so exceeding fair. It was the 
gentleness and the charity, the patience and the 
unselfishness abiding in her, which shone in her 
eyes and drew people towards her. 

It was a calm, good, happy face at the first glance, 
and yet, when any one with a right understanding of 
human faces came to look into it closely, there \^'as 
a sadness underlying the happiness . an expression 
of which I should find it difiicult to convey an idea, 
were it not that the same half-sad, half-worn look is 
to be observed on the countenances of those whose 
constitutions are being undermined by undeveloped 
disease, i.6., by disease which unconsciously to them- 
selves exists in their bodies, and is insidiously sapping 
their health. 



HEATHER. 71 

A man says he is well, and he feels well ; and yet 
a doctor, looking in bis face, can tell that some part 
of the mortal machinery is out of gear, and that ere 
long there will come a crash which shall reveal the 
secret of where the mischief has been brewing ; and 
in like manner, if anything be wrong about a humau 
being's life, if utterly unknown to him or herself, there 
is a want in it . a vacuum; a stream of affection 
runnij^g to waste; twining tendrils involuntarily 
searching about for something to cling to ; if there 
be a mental hunger, which has not even sufficient self- 
knowledge to cry aloud for food ; if there be a thirst- 
ing for love, which the poor draught presented fails 
to satisfy ; if there exist aspirations higher and holier, 
loftier and grander, than can be fulfilled by the '* daily 
round, the common task ; " if there be an undefined 
feeling that the best part of the nature, bestowed by 
the Almighty, has never been comprehended, never 
called out . ^then, when the face of that man or that 
woman is in repose, there will lie brooding upon it a 
look of sadness, which sets the mind of an observer 
at work, marvelling where the inner life is out of 
joint. what the mental disease may be . which, unsus- 
pected even by the patient, is eating the heart out of 
the fruit, the wheat out of the ripe ear of grain. 



72 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

And it was perhaps this second look in Heather 
Dudley's face-*-the unconscious pathos of her expres- 
sion when her features were in repose, which rendered 
her countenance so interesting. 

After all, it is not when the sunlight is streaming 
over the landscape that the scene appeals most to 
our hearts ; it is the shadow lying across the hill- 
side, the cloud darkling on the water, the shades of 
evening creeping stealthily down upon the ba} 
which gives that mournful, melancholy pathetic lool 
to the face of Nature, that touches us like a minor 
chord in music, like the sound of a plaintive melody, 
and awakens in our souls a powerful though often 
almost unconscious response. 

In the twilight, when all harsh outlines are 
smoothed down, our dreams and our realities can 
walk forth hand in hand together, and there is but 
small discrepancy to be observed between them ; 
and in like manner, when the shadow of sorrow 
rests upon the face of a friend, our hearts travel out 
to meet his. Before the wind comes and the rain 
descends, we can behold the approaching presence 
of the storm walking upon the waters, and in- 
voluntarily we stretch forth our hands towards the 



I1KATUR. 73 

bark which is sailing on, dreaming of no peril, 
unthinking of danger. 

The sunshine in Heather Dudley's face was 
always pleasant to look upon ; and yet Bessie felt 
it was the inevitable shadow which attracted her, 
which made her cherish a lore for this woman she 
had never felt for any other woman on earth. 

Well enough Miss Ormson knew Heather's life 
was, according to the teaching of this world's lore, 
a wasted one. Well enough ; for the gu*l, though 
young, had lived in society, and had seen sufficient 
to teach her that, in all respects . socially, domestic- 
ally, conjugally, pecuniarily . Heather might have 
done better ; might have married a man who could 
)iave set her up as an idol in his heart, and thanked 
God for every misfortune, for every apparent mis- 
chance which had led him, by strange and devious 
paths, to the point where he met, and wooed, and 
wed Heather Bell. 

And Heather herself had never discovered this 
&ct. Though there would come that terribly plain- 
tive look over her sweet face, that anxious, sorrow- 
ful, forecasting expression into her eyes, still she was 
a happy woman. 



74. FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

All this swept vaguely through Bessie Ormson's 
mind, even while she replied, nervously . 

*'I cannot answer your question if you stand 
looking at me. Let us walk on, and I will try to 
tell you. Between us there is a gulf placed, and 
I stretch out my hands vainly trying to cross it 
You are all candour and truth ; I am all reserve 
and deceit " 

" Do not say that," interrupted Mrs. Dudley. 

" But I will say it," she persisted, passionately. 
** You shall not think better of me than I deserve. 
You shall not imagine I am a girl like your girls . 
that I am a woman such as you are. Sometimes, 
sitting on the grass quietly by myself, I think about 
myself Of course it is folly; but I do it, and 
wonder what I should have been like had my lot 
been cast at Berrie Down. I have seen nothing in 
my life but planning and scheming and shamming . 
nothing till I came here. Amongst you all, I dream 
of a different life to any I have ever known. I feel 
like a fallen angel on a short visit to Paradise. How 
you look at me ! How stupid it is to talk about 
oneself I Shall we go in ?" 

'^ One moment," Heather said. She had a ccar, 



^a^mmmmmsm^mmmmm 



HEATHER. 75 

sweet voice, in which there was a great virtue of 
leisure. It was the voice of a woman whose life had 
not been hurried by anxiety, by passion, by excite- 
ment, or by over-work. It was one the melody of 
which never seemed out of time, never taken too 
fast. " One moment Are you really unhappy, 
Bessie ? Is there anything I could do, to." 

"To help me, you mean," broke in the other, 
rapidly. " No one can do that Am I unhappy ? 
What cause have I for unhappiness? Am I not 
engaged . almost settled?" 

" But do you love Gilbert ?" asked Mrs. Dudley. 

'^ Love him ! Yes, I do, as well as married people 
usually love . perhaps better," answered Bessie, 
and she laughed and dropped the bonbons; and 
then Lally and she picked them up out of the grass, 
and while she kept her face bent down, Bessie was 
thinking she could tell Mrs. Dudley one or two 
things which it might not have been pleasant for 
that lady to hear. 

** Lally and I are great friends," she said, irrele- 
vantly. " I have put her to bed every night since 
you went away, and sang her to sleep afterwards. 
She is the only person who ever encored my 



70 FAR ABOVE BUSIES. 

musia Don't you love * Ritornella,' Lally ? Don't 
you delight in * Her dark hair hung loothe ?' " 

'* Iss," said Lally, readily. 

''Agnes adopted Leonard in your absence, and 
lias been really quite affecting in her maternal 
solicitude about that young gentleman ; but Lally 
and I agreed nobody could comb out her hair so well 
as I . ^nobody tell her one-half so many fairy tales. 
I fear we have not kept such good hours as we ought ; 
but she looks none the worse for it, does she ?" 

And Bessie, taking up the child, turned the little 
freckled face towards the light, and putting her hand 
under Lally's chin, waited for the mother's opinion 
on the appearance of her first-bom. 

Heather, however, never spoke ; there was some- 
thing the matter with her she could not have put 
into words; there shot a pang through her heart 
such as had never disturbed it before, and in- 
voluntarily almost she stretched out her arms to- 
wards her little girl, who struggled into her mother's 
embrace in spite of Bessie's teasing efforts to detain 
hen 

"Well, Miss Lally, you'll see whether I will 
shake down cherries for you to-morrow I If any 



HEATHER. 77 

one had told me, I would not have beliered you 
could have deserted poor Bessie. You promised to 
be true to me for life. You are a deceitful little 
monkey, and I won't love you a bit." 

In answer to which Lally rejoicingly first slapped 
Bessie's cheeks, and then pulled her hair, and 
finally ofiered her mouth, so full of sweetmeats that 
she experienced a difficulty in closing it, to the end 
that they might kiss and be friends. 

"No, I won't kiss you, indeed," said Bessie. 
" I won't kiss an uncertain little puss who is every- 
body's Joe." Whereupon Lally declared in a voice 
choked with sentiment and sugar-plums, " Se isn't 
bodies Joes." 

All this time Heather kept silence, holding the 
cbild tight as.she could to her heart. 

The sun had set, and as their faces were turned 
from the west, it seemed to her that they were 
walking out of the light into darkness. 

She never said to the child, ** Don't you love me, 
are you not mamma's pet ?" for she could not, at the 
moment, have borne to draw a comparison between 
Lally's attachment for Bessie and Lally's attachment 
for herself. 



80 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

from a tour round the premises, seated in a barrow 
wheeled by Ned, the odd man previously mentioned, 
to a gallop undertaken on the shoulders of that 
willing steed Alick, Lally was equally agreeable to, 
and gratiBed with all. She was so utterly cosmo- 
politan in her ideas, that Squire Dudley's pride was 
daily oflFended by her utter want of conservatism. 
She was so easily pleased, and she found so many 
people willing to please her, that he came seriously 
to the conclusion there must be something wrong 
in the child's mental constitution . some want in her 
brains, as he expressed it. ** I saw her absolutely 
one day last winter," he told Mrs. Ormson, ^ with 
about two pounds of salt in her lap, being wheeled 
round the walks by Ned, in search of birds ; * be- 
cause you know, papa,' she said, Mf I can once 
put salt on their tails, we shall be able to catch 
them.' " 

Whereupon Mrs. Ormson lifted her hands and 
eyes to heaven, and declared, " Heather will never 
stop till she has made that child a perfect idiot." 

*' I sent Ned to his work and Lally into the house," 
proceeded Arthur, " but it is of no use my speaking. 
Five minutes afterwards she was on Alick's shoulder, 



HEATHKK. 81 

apd he wajB carrying th^ salt for ber in a bag tied 
round his neck." 

^'Poor Heather, she will find out her mistake 
some day," sighed Mrs. Ormson. 

^ But it is not Heather alone," went on Mr. Dudley. 
" Everybody is the same ; everybody makes a per- 
fect idol of Lally, while Leonard mopes about 
alone. Where could you find a better child than he 
is ? He will walk with me from here to the mill 
and never say a word, while Lally's tongue never 
ceases from morning tiU night Sometimes I think 
she is in fifty places at once, for wherever I go I 
hear her." 

" It is very sad," observed Mrs. Orm8on '* the 
child will be perfectly ruined." 

And there can be no doubt but that the lady 
believed she was speaking the literal truth. She 
did, indeed, consider Lally an utter mistakerr-her 
very existence an oversight on the part of Provi- 
dence. 

" A nice, quiet, pretty little girl, who would sit 
still in the nursery, with her doll and her picture- 
book," was Mrs. Qrmson's idea of the correct style 
of thing in the scheme of creation ; but a child with 

VOL. L tt 



82 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

red hair, with a face covered with freckles, exactly 
like a turkey's egg, with reddish-brown eyes, with 
legs that, in the course of the longest summer^lay, 
never grew weary of carrying her from parlour to 
kitchen, from garden to Hollow, from Hollow to 
meadow ; a child who had no *^ pretty ways," accord- 
ing to Mrs. Ormson's reading of juvenile attractive- 
ness ; who would not learn anything, nor keep her 
frocks clean ; clearly the Almighty had not consulted 
Mrs. Ormson before He sent Lally Dudley into the 
world, or such a mistake never would have been 
committed, not even to please Heather, to whom the 
little girl was sun, moon, stars, and planets. 

And because her heart was bound up in the child. 
Heather could not bear that another should come in 
her place, and attract Lally towards her as Bessie 
had done. With the "other children," as Mrs. 
Dudley still continued to call her husband's brothers 
and sisters, it did not matter; with the servants also 
it was of no consequence, for they were all of the 
one household, all after a fashion members of one 
family ; but here was a stranger. daughter to a 
woman whom Heather did not much like . a girl 
whom in her inmost heart Heather distrusted . 



HEATHER. 83 

making friendly overtures to Lally, which Lally 
accepted with even more than her ordinary rea- 
diness, with an increase of her wonted gracious 
afiability. 

Was what Bessie said tnie . was Lally every- 
body's Joe ? Did she not care for her mother so 
very, very much, after all ? For the first time in 
her married life there came swelling up in Heather's 
heart a spirit of antagonism . a desire to quarrel; but^ 
before she reached the house, she conquered herself 
and said . 

^^ Your mamma declares I spoil Lally. I wonder 
what she will think about you." 

^^ She can think what she likes, as she usually 
does," answered Bessie, making a movement as if 
to take Lally from her mother. She had been in 
the habit of carrying the child ofi^ to bed every 
night, and it came natural to her now to do so, 
though Heather was at home once more. 

She forgot she had been but at best a self-con- 
stituted viceroy, and that the rightful queen had 
returned to take possession of her own again ; but 
the involuntary backward step with ^ich Heather 
repulsed her intention was like a revelation to 

G 2 



84 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



T. e woman Ae had regarded as perfect, 
was but flesh and blood, afta: all. She could feel 
jealous, and she did, and she meant to keep Lally 
all to herself for the future, and never to permit a 
Stranger's hand to be laid, if she could help it, on 
the child. 

But Bessie was not one to bear such a proceeding 
patiently. ^^ Don't depose me," she said, in a tone 
which was one half of entreaty, half of banter. ^' It 
won't be for long. Am not I going to a home of 
my own, where I shall have something else to do 
than sing lullabies to other people's children ? Be- 
sides^ it will do you good ; you are a little inclined 
to be jealous. Never fear, I won't take Lally's 
love from you ; I could not do it if I would, and I 
would not if I could. Let me sing her to sleep still, 
please do. She won't need much rocking to-night;" 
and she held out her arms to Lally, who tumbled 
headlong into them, only sufficiently awake to clutch 
at her mother's sleeve and entreat her to ^^come 



too." 



u 



I will come up when you are in bed, pet," said 
Mrs. Dudley, turning aside into the dining-room, 
while the girl slowly ascended the broad staircase. 



HEATHER. 85 

humming *^Isabelle" while she carried her light 
burden step by step up to that pleasant chamber 
with the snowy draperies, with the wide prospect, 
with its windows half-covered with roses and 
greenery, which came back to Bessie Ormson's 
memory in dreams when she was far away both 
irom Hertfordshire and Heather. 

After a little time Mrs. Dudley followed her, 
and kissed the children, and then stood looking at 
them lingeringly till she said she must go down to 
supper. 

" Lally will be fast asleep in two minutes/* re- 
marked Bessie, " then I will follow you." But the 
minutes passed, and still no Bessie put in her 
appearance at the ^^old-fashioned meal," as Mrs. 
Ormson styled supper. 

" Shall I tell Bessie ?* asked Agnes Dudley ; and 
she was about leaving the room when Heather 
stopped her. 

^^ I will go, love," she said, just touching the girl's 
cheek with her hand in passing. 

She had tender, caressing ways, this woman, whose 
life was still all before her. No one felt neglect^ 
when she entered. Her nature was to oonsid<^ the 



86 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

very dumb animalsy . to leave nothing outside the 
circle within which she stood ; and feeling that she 
might have been a litde inconsiderate towards 
Bessie, she went to seek her, meaning to make 
amends, to thank her for all her kindness to 
Lally. 

Very softly she opened the door . softly as a 
mother does who fears to wake her children ; for a 
moment she looked in and hetated; then, even 
more softly than die had come, she closed the 
door and stole along the corridor perplexed and 
sorrowfuL 

In the twilight she had seen Bessie kneeling on 
the floor beside Lally's bed. She held one of the 
litUe girl's hands tight in hers, and her face was 
buried in the counterpane. There was no need for 
singing then. Lally was fast asleep : the busy feet 
were still, the tireless tongue silent, the curly head 
quiet enough on the pillow, and Bessie, whom no- 
body ever beheld depressed in spirits, who was 
always either laughing or jesting, scolding or 
teasing, talking or devising some mischief, was 
sobbing in the gathering darkness as though her 
very heart were breaking. 



HEATHER. 87 

If Heather had ever thought any hard thoughts 
about her visitor, they were swept out of her mind 
then ; if she had ever felt doubts of the ^rl, those 
doubts gave place to sympathy and pity; if she had 
ever felt there was something in Bessie Ormson which 
she did not comprehend, which she would rather not 
comprehend, that sensation of repulsion was changed 
into an earnest desire to understand her thoroughly, 
into a conviction that in places the stream was dark 
only because it ran deep. 

Vaguely and instinctively all this came into 
Heather Dudley's heart. As she retraced her steps 
alonof the corridor, she could not have told any one 
the reason of the great change which had come over 
her; but a great change, nevertheless, had been 
effected during the moment she stood looking at 
the kneeling figure, prostrated in a very abandon- 
ment of grief. 

From that hour, through good report and through 
evil, when appearances were in her favour, and 
when appearances were all against her, uncon- 
sciously almost to herself, Heather Dudley loved 
Bessie Ormson. 

In her grief, in her agony of sorrow, in he 



88 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

clin^g attachment to Lally, in her passion of 
despair, of hopelessness, of loneliness^ of regret, of 
indecision, Heather's heart clave to that of her 
guest, and her soul was from thenceforth knit to 
Bessie, as was the soul of Jonathan with the 
soul of David. 



85> 



CHAPTER V. 



AT SUPPER. 



Although Mrs. Onnson, being in her own esti- 
mation a great lady, followed the fashions and 
affected London hours, still, to do her justice, supper 
was one of those ancient customs it delighted her 
to see kept up in her nephew's house. 

"I only wish, my dear," she said to Heather, 
"we could do as we liked in town, and I would 
have supper every night of my life instead of that 
late dinner, which is neither, as Mr. Onnson says, 
fish, flesh, nor fowl. Now, what can be more cosy and 
comfortable than this ?" and the lady complacently 
surveyed the supper-table, whereon was spread a 
meal that ight indeed have caused one of Mr. 
Ormson's late dinners to hide its diminished head 
with a sense of grievous humiliation. 



90 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Thanks to the girls, the arrangement of the table 
was tasteful also; there were freshly-gathered flowers 
peeping out from baskets filled with moss; there 
were cool lettuces and crisp radishes, and little 
banks of mustard and cress, all placed and grouped 
with a certain artistic effect ; there was home-made 
bread, not brown and sodden as home-made bread 
usually is, but white and light as Mrs. Piggott's 
hands could make it ; there were delicious pats of 
yellow butter, brought straight from the dairy; 
there were late cherries and strawberries, and early 
raspberries, gooseberries, and currants on the table ; 
all daintily set out with green leaves ; all looking, to 
quote Bessie, " as though somebody cared for them." 
There was cream so rich that Mrs. Ormson declared 
it made her feel inclined to forswear London for ever ; 
while, for those who desired substantial refreshment, 
Mrs. Piggott had sent up her usual piece de reaistance 
. a round of spiced beef, together with fowls, a ham, 
and a couple of veal pies, which latter were, she knew, 
considered her speciality. Tarts al&o were there, 
and various '^ shapes;" for the good lady declared 
Mrs. Ormson should not go back to town and say 
^* she never saw a meal fit for a Christian to sit down 



AT SUPPER. 91 

to in the house, leastways she sha'n't say it with 
truth," finished Mrs. Piggott^ as she arranged a 
paper frill like a shroud round the knuckle end of 
the ham, and garnished her beef with parsley. V 

Through the open windows the scent of many 
flowers came floating on the night air into the room, 
and the light of the lamp fell on the quiet faces of 
the young people gathered round the table. 

*' Where is Bessie ?" inquired Mrs. Ormson, as 
Mrs. Dudley re-entered the apartment. 

" She will be here presently," Heather answered, 
taking her seat ; but many minutes passed before 
Bessie made her appearance, and, shrinking away 
from the light, drew a chair towards one of the win- 
dows, declaring she did not want any supper, that 
she was tired and lazy, and thought eating destruc- 
tive to the romance of life. 

" Don't be absurd, Bessie," said Mrs. Ormson, 

" Nothing can be further from my intention," was 
the reply. 

" How did you come from the station. Heather ?" 
asked Laura, the youngest of the second generation 
of Dudleys. " I never heard the fly drive up to the 
door." 



92 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" We came back with Mr. Raidsford/' said 
Heather. 

"You came with whom?" demanded Arthur 
Dudley, from the other end of the table. 

"With Mr. Baidsford. He travelled down in 
the same compartment, and kindly offered to drive 
us home ; but our luggage, at least a box of Mrs. 
Ormson's, we left at Palinsbridge. I suppose the 
pony-cart can go over for it to-morrow ?* 

" Good heavens ! mamma is going to take up her 
residence here," whispered Bessie to Alick, who 
was seated within ear-shot. 

" Well, Heather, I really wonder at you," said 
Squire Dudley, laying down his knife and fork; 
^ I did think you had more sense of what was due 
to yourself and to me than to accept a favour at 
the hands of such an arrant snob as Compton Raids- 
ford, a man who looks down upon us all, who thinks 
more of his hundreds of thousands than of having 
come of an ancient family, of having good blood in 
one's vei s." 

" That's right, Arthur ; that's what brings down 
the galleries," remarked Bessie. " Go on. In this 
money-loving a^e " 



AT SUPPER. 93 

" Oh 1 of course you stand up for trade," retorted 
Arthur. 

"Of course, I think so I ought, when every 
morsel I put in my lips, every article of clothing I 
put on my back, is paid for by trade.*' 

" Bessie," interposed Mrs. Ormson, " how often am 
I to tell yuu it is not polite to speak of personal 
matters in general society ?*' 

" If thfa be general society, I sit rebuked," said 
Bessie, while Heather pleaded . 

** Without downright rudeness I could not have 
refused Mr. Raidsford's offer, Arthur. I could not, 
indeed. He was so very kind and pressing, so 
cordial, in fact, that I felt it would be ungracious to 
decline. Would it have been possible to refuse? 
Mrs. Ormson, do you think it would 7* 

" On the contrary, I consider it would have been 
the height, as you say, of rudeness," replied that 
lady, for once deciding against the Squire. '^ And, 
for my part, I think Mr. Raidsford a most gentle- 
manly person, quite above his origin. I can assure 
you, I never enjoyed a journey more in my life, and 
the drive from Palinsbridge was delightful. And to 
see how every one touched their hats to him," finished 



94 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Mrs. Onnson, forgetting in her enthusiasm that such 
a person as Lindley Murray had ever existed. 

''Touch their hats, indeed T repeated Arthur, 
with a muttered oath. 

^ Don't be profane, sir," said Bessie, tapping him 
on the arm. " A Conservative ought never to object 
to see a great man respected by the masses. When 
all is said and done, it is riches make the man, you 
know. It is not birth, or virtue, or learning, but 
money, for money is power ; and what is the meaning 
of the word aristocracy, but the powerful classes, I 
should like to know ? Consider how many blankets, 
how many soup tickets, how many donations to 
hospitals, how much employment Mr. Gompton 
Raidsford's income represents, and be dumb. We 
are all worshippers of some golden calf, so let 
his worshippers kneel down before him, and rest 
content" 

" I wish to Heaven, Bessie, you were not so in- 
fernally clever," remarked the Squire. 

" And I wish to gracious, Arthur, that in some 
respects you were not so intolerably stupid," re- 
turned the young lady, which observation elicited a 
statement from Mrs. Ormson, that '' she should be 



. AT SUPPER. 95 

glad indeed when Bessie was married, and had a 
husband to take care of her." 

" Ah ! mamma, it is very well for you to talk," 
replied Bessie ; ''but you will be sorry when I am 
married." 

''I only wish you would give me the chance of 
being sorry," observed Mrs. Ormson, pretending not 
to notice that Arthur was helping her to a second 
supply of spiced beef. Suddenly, however, becoming 
aware of the fact, she exclaimed, ** My dear boy, 
when do you think I ate last ? You have given me 
enough to dine a whole family." 

''Never mind, mamma, eat it for me," said 
Bessie, from the open window ; whereupon Mrs. 
Ormson bridled, and wondered *^ what had come to 
Bessie," thought '^she had been made too much 
of," and remarked ^'she did not envy Gilbert 
Harcourt." 

" Neither do I, mamma, so for once we are of the 
same opinion," said Bessie shortly, at which point 
Heather deemed it wise to turn the conversation, not 
sorry on the whole, perhaps, that it had glided off 
Mr. Raidsford, and Mr. Raidsford's carriage, and Mr. 
Raidsford's considerate attentions to herself. 



J 



96 FAB ABOVE RUBIES 

After a time, also, other tongues began to 'be 
heard : Alick had to tell of the offer Lord Kemma 
had made for " Nellie," their two-year-old colt 

"I was breaking her yesterday," he said, " on that 
piece of ground beyond the Hollow, when his 
Lordship, riding past, pulled up his horse, and asked 
me if she was for sale. I told him I did not know, 
but could ask my brother ; and seeing he had taken 
a fancy to her, I added I did not think he would part 
with her excepting for a long price." 

"And what do you call a long price, young 
gentleman?" he inquired, laughing; "sol thought I 
might as well value her high enough. A hundred 
^ineas, my lord," I answered. 

" Make it pounds, and you shall have a cheque 
whenever you like to send her over," he said. 

" Oh ! what good fortune," exclaimed Heather, " of 
course you sent her, Alick ;" but the lad's coun- 
tenance fell. "Arthur " he began, at which 

point Arthur took up his parable for himself. 

"The filly will be worth three hundred next 
year," he said ; " Lord Kemms shall sot coin moiy&y 
out of me." 

For a minute there ensued a dead silence, then 



AT SUPPER. 97 

Heather, turning to Agnes, said, ^' And how are the 
chickens going on, dear?" 

" Oh ! we have got five sets more out ance yon 
left," was the reply ; " there are fifty of the sweetest 
little chucks you ever saw, just pecking- '* 

" And two fresh calves, mother," broke in Lucy 
Dudley. 

"And pigeons without end," added Cuthbert ; " and 
I found in the pea-hen's nest four young ones ; and, 
mother, the long meadow is all mowed, and we shall 
have the grandest crop, Ridley says, ever came ofi^ it ; 
and we have painted the gates in honour of your 
coming back, and the garden is as neat as neat, not 
a weed ; and Alick and I rolled the grass and the drive 
this morning, and nailed up the clematis that the 
wind tore down the other night, and Aggy and 
Alick have covered your sofa, and Lucy has " 

" Hush, Cuthbert, don't tell tales," interposed 
Lucy, laughing ; whereupon Heather, with a smile to 
both, stretched her hand over towards the boy, who 
took it in both of his. 

" May I add my mite to the family news ?" inter- 
posed Bessie at this juncture. '*I have trained 
Beauty to beg, and taught Mufi^ to stand in a comer ; 

VOL. I. H 



98 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

I have nearly broken my neck trying to leam to ride ; 
I was tumbled completely over attempting to milk 
Cowslip, an ill-conditioned beast, who did not in 
the least appreciate my delicate attentions." 

^'Oh, mother I it was such fun," said Laura; 
'' you should have seen Bessie sprawling on the grass, 
and Cowslip looking at her ; Alick held her horns, 
and Cuthbert her tail, and Agnes showed Bessie 
how to milk, but it was all of no use." 

^^ The quadruped was wiser than the biped," re- 
marked Bessie, ^^and declined experiments. For 
the future, I intend to leam wisdom from a cow." 

^' I wish you could leam wisdom from anything," 
observed Mrs. Ormson. 

^^ My beloved mother, that, I fear, is impossible, 
since I have failed to acquire it from you," said Bessie. 

^' You remember those letters you forwarded t^ 
me, Arthur," broke in Heather at this point ; '^ one 
was from Miss Hope, to say she had returned from 
Munich, and would like to come to us; and the 
other from Mrs. Black, who had not heard I was in 
London, and wanted to know whether it would 
be convenient for her and Mr. Black to pay us 
a visit now, instead of later on in the year. 



AT SUPPER. 99 

Mr. Black has been ill, and it is his most leisure 
time at present ; so I called in Stanley Crescent and 
arranged that they should bring Harry Marsden 
down with them next week. It really is pitiable to 
see poor Mrs. Marsden with all those yonng children 
about her, ill as she is." 

" Was there no one else, Heather, you could have 
asked while you were about it?" he inquired. "We 
have a tolerably large bam, and plenty of hay and 
straw, so that a score or two more would make little 
difference." 

Heather bit her lip, but otherwise took no notice 
of her husband's remark. Heaven knew she had 
not gone out of her way to ask any of these people, 
who were neither kith nor kin of hers, and whom, 
truth to say, it would scarcely have grieved her had 
she never beheld in the flesh again. 

If the house were full of visitors during the 
summer season, as it usually was, those visitors were 
none of her seeking, although on her fell the burden 
of amusing and catering for them. 

With one and another Arthur walked through the 
fields, or down the lane, or across the meadows, 
towards the Hollow. To Mrs. Ormson he would 

H 2 



100 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

discourse concerning his grievances ; he would quarrel 
with Mrs. Black about the relatiye merits of town 
and country ; while from Mr. Black he culled such 
information anent the ^Vway in which a man with 
push and a few hundreds might get on in London/' 
that for months subsequently Squire Dudley thought 
of nothing excepting how he might best contrive to 
emigrate to this wonderful 1 Dorado, to those ' 
metropolitan gold-fields, where nuggets were dis- 
covered, not in pits and creeks, but in dingy city 
offices, or in great board-rooms, all shining with 
polished mahogany and bright morocco leather. 

As for Mids Hope, she was to Heather, saving 
by correspondence, an utter stranger. Never in her 
life had the present mistress of Berrie Down Hollow 
set eyes on the sister of the lady who had once 
reigned there supreme. For more than seven years 
Miss Hope had wandered to and fro on the earth. 
She had wintered here ; she had summered there. 
She had been returning every season to London; 
and every season she heard of some fresh plan, or 
met with some fresh person, that induced her to 
defer her intention of coming back to England. 

Bohemianism is not confined to one sex or class. 



AT SUPPER. 101 

in the community, and there are numbers of forlorn 
spinsters and lonely widows, running loose about 
the Continent, frequenting British watering-places 
and foreign spas, picking up acquaintances in rail- 
way carriages and at table d'hotes," who would be 
greatly disgusted if they were assured that the lives 
of the men they call Bohemians in London are 
infinitely more useful, and quite as respectable, as 
theirs ; . wandering women, who have no care for 
the Lares and Penates of the ordinary English 
home, whose talk is of art and of far-away cathe- 
drals, of foreign cookery and Rhine wineSj who have 
got up to see the sun rise in every country except 
their own, who go in for passports instead of Sunday- 
schools, who sit next **our own correspondent" 
at dinner-parties on their return to London, and 
.converse with him concerning Rome and Vienna, 
when they mutually agree that the Continent is the 
place to live, that the man, woman, or child, who is 
content to reside in England, should be sent to the 
Asylum for Idiots at once. 

These are the people who ask young girls whether 
they have been abroad, and, on receiving an answer 
in the negative, remark that they envy them. If 



102 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

any one have the temerity to inquire why, they 
reply, ^ Because she has never seen Paris, and the 
first sight of Paris is something worth living for." 
Beyond climate and cheapness, and being able to do 
as one likes, these Bohemians never can give a 
reason for the faith that is in them ; but that they 
hold such faith sincerely is certain. 

"Everything is so different," they declare, if 
pressed on the subject; ''the cooking, for instance." 

*'It is, and I detest messes," says some plain- 
spoken John Bull ; whereupon the elderly Bohemian 
inquires, "whether the speaker has ever dined at 
Zapoli's ?" implying thereby that he is utterly igno- 
rant of the subject about which he has been talking. 

Such a woman was Miss Hope . a woman who 
went poking about foreign galleries, and visiting 
artists' studios ; who had, if her own account were to 
be believed, seen every modern statue in process of 
chiselling, who had been to every opera which ever 
was performed, who conscientiously believed she 
had exhausted Europe, who wrote home reams of 
letters about the Carnival and the Pope, about 
festivals and bull-fights, about Mont Blanc and 
German gaming-tables, and who, in common with 



AT SUPPER. 103 

most English travellers, believing the Lord had 
made mountains and lakes, kings, queens, popes, 
cardinals, musicians, actors, actresses, and painters, on 
purpose to amuse and improve the people of Great 
Britain, considered it only an act of common cour- 
tesy towards the Almighty on the part of that nation 
to see as much of the great Continental entertain- 
ment He had provided for the pleasure and edifica- 
tion of his chosen race as possible. 

All this and much more had Bessie Ormson heard 
concerning Miss Hope. Many and various were the 
comments that had fallen upon her ear concerning 
'Hhat funny old woman," as she mentally called 
Arthur Dudley's respected a nt From Mrs. Piggott, 
who declared she hated Miss Hope as she hated 
^^ pison," to other persons higher in the social scale . 
the name of one of whom, at all events, Bessie would 
not have cared to mention, even to herself, in her 
bedchamber, lest a bird of the air might carry it 
away . from Mrs. Piggott up, I repeat, the girl had 
heard stories of Miss Hope, and her heart burned 
within her at the sound of her name. 

'^ I do trust I shall be at Berrie Down when your 
aunt arrives, Arthur," she said ; and the speech was 



104 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

an opportune diversion at the moment ^'Tt has 
been a dream of my life to meet Miss Hope." 

^' I do not imagine you would agree particularly 
well, if you did meet," answered Arthur, sulkily. 

*'We might for a little time," said Bessie, 

, laughing. ^^ Heather, do be polite, and ask me to 

remain until after Miss Hope's arrival. I have 

heard so much of her, she seems quite like an old 

acquaintance." 

"From whom have you heard much of her, 
Bessie ?" inquired Mr. Ormson ; .' not from me, I 
am confident." 

" My dearest mamma, dther human beings besides 
yourself have been endowed by Providence with the 
gift of speech," replied Bessie ; but she bent as she 
spoke to stroke Muff . bent in order to conceal her 
face, though she was sitting in the shade with the 
cool night air blowing right in upon her. 

" Don't be pert, miss," retorted Mrs. Ormson ; 
" from whom have you heard so much of Miss Hope T 

** From one and another," answered Bessie, care- 
lessly ; '^ I am the rolling stone which gathers moss, 
contrary to the words of the proverb ; and, wherever 
I go, I hear something to the advantage or disad- 



AT SUPPER. 105 

vantage of somebody. Concerning Miss Hope, the 
moBs I have gathered is to the effect that she 
dresses peculiarly badly abroad, and peculiarly well 
in England; that foreigners regard her with awe 
and wonder, as an average specimen of the British 
female; that she praises everything nglish in 
foreign countries, and everything English when 
abroad ; that she is to be met with on the stairs lead- 
ing to attic studios, and dines in the most wonderful 
manner for threepence per diem ; that she is con- 
sidered mad by the Parisians, and a great and good 
lady by the Germans ; that she was requested to 
leave Vienna ; and that at Rome she is regarded 
with distrust, because of the audible comments she is 
in the habit of making during mass, concerning the 
mummery of the Catholic religion. For the rest, I 
am told tbat, since her nephew has come of age and 
married, she has vowed a vow never to set foot in 
Copt Hall, but will, when she returns to England, 
take up her abode in a London boarding-house, 
where she can discourse to her fellow-sufferers con- 
cerning French cookery and George Sand, the 
gondolas of Venice, and the terrible designs and 
wonderful genius of Napoleon the Third." 



106 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"Who told* you all this, Bessie?" demanded 
Squire Dudley, turning round in his chair as he 
asked the question. 

" What can it matter who told me ?" she replied. 
" Is the record not true ?" 

"True or false, I should like to know the name of 
your informant," he said ; " for I never knew but 
one person who talked in that way of my aunt Was 
it a man or a woman ?" he persisted. 

** You might be more polite, Arthur," she replied ; 
" a lady." 

" Was it Mrs. Aymescourt ?" he asked. 

^' I did not know there was such a person upon 
earth," she replied. 

.'Don't tell stories, Bessie," interposed Mrs. 
Ormson ; " you must have heard of her over and 
over again." 

" If I ever did, I have forgotten all about her," 
answered Bessie ; '^ at any rate, it was not from any 
one of the name of Aymes^urt I ever heard a sen- 
tence concerning Miss Hope's peculiarities." 

" And who is Mrs. Aymescourt ?" inquired 
Heather. 

'^ Oh ! a friend of Miss Hope's ; at least, she used 



AT SUPPER, 107 

to be," answered Mrs. Ormson, vaguely ; and then 
she looked at Arthur, who, pulling cherries out of a 
basket lined with green leaves, refused either to 
meet her glance, or to vouchsafe any further infor- 
mation on the subject. 

"Did you know Mrs. Aymescourt, Arthur?" 
asked Heather, whose curiosity was a little piqued. 

'* I . yes, to be sure ; she used to be staying with 
my aunt at Copt Hall, but I have not seen her 
these ten years." 

" Was not there something about Mr. Aymescourt 
having come into another fine property ?" inquired 
Mrs. Ormson. 

** Marsden said he had," returned the Squire ; 
^' likely enough, for we know who takes care of his 
own; and certainly Aymescourt had luck beyond 
what falls to the share of any honest man. He had 
a large income to begin with, or else madam never 
would have married him ; but I dare say they were 
quite able to spend it all, so probably this other 
property fell in none too soon." 

" Where do they live ?" asked Heather. 

" I have not the slightest idea," Arthur answered ; 
*' my aunt keeps up some kind of acquaintanceship. 



110 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

long mental journey, while the youth waited patiently 
for her to speak. 

** Will you be so kind ?" he asked at last. 

" So kind as what ?" she repeated. " Oh ! to tell 
you a secret. From the bottom of my heart, Alick, 
I never loved but one woman on earth, and that 
woman is your brother's wife. If I had a mother 
like her now, or a sister, or anything . " she went 
on, hurriedly, only to stop short and leave her 
sentence unfinished. 

^* Heather would be a mother to you," said the 
lad, softly. 

" No, she wouldn't," was the reply ; " she couldn't, 
and it is not fit she should. There is nobody like 
Heather could be mother, or sister, or Mend, or 
anything to me now. Heather does not like me, 
I know she does not, and I cannot blame her for it, 
for I am cross and hateful." 

^' Oh, Bessie I you are delightful, and so pretty I" 

" I wish I were not pretty, flatterer," she said. " I 
should like to be as ugly as Joan Harcourt, and as 
good. It must be nice to honour one's parents, let 
them be as disagreeable as they will, and to love 
one's neighbour, even though she keep a parrot, 



AT SUPPER. Ill 

and lets her girls hammer at a piano placed against 
the party-wall, and is altogether as great a nuisance 
as Mrs. Riccarde, who lives next door to us. Oh, 
Alick, how lovely and peaceful the country looks in the 
moonlight ! Is not that the house at Kemms Park I 
see, shining white among the trees ? What a delicious 
place ! Do you know lyord Eemms' family name ?" 

" Baldwin," he replied. 

** Baldwin !" repeated Miss Bessie, and there was 
just a shade of disappointment in her voice. *' Is 
he a good-looking man, Alick ? I wish I had been 
with you yesterday in the Croft when he passed. 
That is the only taste which I have inherited from 
my mother ; I do dearly love a lord." 

'* Bessie !" exclaimed Alick. 

" It is a fact," she persisted ; " I do not in the 
least believe they are made of the same flesh and 
blood as the commonalty. I delight in men who 
have had ancestors ; that is one reason why I like 
all of you, because on one side of the house, at least, 
you come of good people." 

^'I am not ashamed of my mother's family," 
answered the lad, a little hastily. 

"No, but you are not proud of it; Maddox 



112 VAJR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Cuthbert, alderman, no doubt, wa^ a most charming 
old institution, and highly respected in the City ; 
but still, that is not like being in the peerage, is it, 
Alick, or amongst the country gentry ?" 

'^I do not think it matters much what one is, 
if one have no money," he replied. ** Did you not 
yourself say at supper, riches make the man 7* 

'^If there is one thing I object to more than 
another," interrupted Bessie, ^' it is to have my own 
conversational sins brought up as witnesses against 
me. I was only jesting about lords, Alick. Don't 
I know the ancestors of Lord Kemms were some- 
thing or other in the city, not nearly so respectable 
as our grandfather? But, seriously, I should like to 
see his lordship. I have a curiosity about him ; 
was he alone, or had he a groom ?" 

'^ He was quite alone," said Alick Dudley, laugh- 
ing, almost in spite of himself, at her persistency, 
'^ and he spoke to me very much as anybody else 
might have done. Do you not think it would be a 
good thing if there were a kind of ' Court Circular' 
published at Kemms Park, telling us all about the 
great folks there . what visitors they had, what time 
they ate and drank ?" 



AT SUPPER. 113 

** Yes, and we might be the editors, and walk 
over every day to learn particulars of their doings. 
I wish Lord Kemms would ask me to go and stay 
there." 

^^ Perhaps he may, when Mr. Harcourt has made 
his fortune, and is created an earl." 

"Then I shall be grey-haired," she said, "and 
have rheumatism so bad, that even Kemms Park will 
seem disagreeable. How beautiful those trees do 
look, Alick ! Is there not a village somewhere near 
Mr. Raidsford's place ?" 

"North Kemms you mean, I suppose," replied 
her companion; "it is two miles, I should say, 
beyond Mr. Raidsford's, that is, two miles by the 
road, but there is a path across the fields, which cuts 
off a great comer. It is a pretty walk to North 
Kemms, and there is such an old, old church there." . 

" Where ?" asked Heather, joining them at the 
moment. 

"At North Kemms," answered Bessie, promptly. 
" Alick is going to take me to see it next Sunday 
afternoon, are you not, Alick ?" 

" If you do not think the walk too much," he 
said ; and then the rest of the party came out to ' 

VOL. I. I 



114 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'^ see the moonlight/' and there was no more talk, 
either about Lord Kemms or Kemms Park. 

That same night, Besffle having shaken down 
her hair. Heather came into her room, hoping 
Bessie would not be vexed if she asked her one 
little favour. 

" A hundred, if you like," answered the girl. 

''I should be glad if you would speak to your 
mamma with more, more " 

'^ Politeness," suggested Bessie, finding Mrs. 
Dudley pause for want of a suitable word. 

" Not exactly politeness, but respect," said 
Heather ; " you know, dear, she ia your mother, and 
you ought to " 

" Please, stop," entreated Bessie. " I will strive to 
do what you ask for your sake ; if I cannot be good 
for that, nothing can make me good. You were 
very fond of your mother, I suppose . very tender 
towards her . very dutiful, no doubt ?" 

" I hope I was," Heather answered, in that low 
tone in which women talk of the dead whom they 
have loved. 

" And she was very fond of you ?" 

" My dear child, what a question ! of course she 
was." 



AT SUPPER. 115 

** Well, sappofiing she had not been fond of you, 
nor you of her, perhaps even you might not have 
found it in the least degiee easier to be dutiful and 
tender than I do?" 

*' But you must be fond of her," Heather asserted. 

^^I do not see any musl in the matter; I never 
asked her to bring me into the world. If she had 
consulted me, I should decidedly have preferred being 
left out of it Well, then, since to please herself she 
did bring me into the world, what has she done for 
me ? My brothers have had all her care and atten- 
tion ; she married youug, as you know, and to some 
women it does not seem a very agreeable thing to 
have a great girl treading on their heels, and calling 
them mother. She dressed me as a child long after 
I was a girl ; . ^when she could not help herself, lund 
had to acknowledge that I was growing up, she 
sent me firom the nursery to school, and kept me 
there till the state of the domestic finances com- 
peQed my return ; dnce which time, the one object, 
aim, and end of her life has been to drive me to 
marry somebody . to get rid of a child she never 
liked." 

** Bessie !" remonstrated Heather. 

I 2 



116 FAR ABOVK RUBIES. 

"It is true," the girl persisted, passionately; 
*'she never liked me . she never wanted to have a 
daughter . ^she has told me so over and over agaia 
Suppose you acted towards Lally as she has acted 
towards me. Suppose you kept the child shut up 
in a London nursery, and never spoke to her, unless 
it was to find fault with or punish her. Suppose 
you were out from morning till night, following 
your own pleasure (my father was rich in those 
days, and she could visit, and dress, and spend as 
much as she chose), and left Lally to the mercy of 
strangers, to the kindness and attention of a cheap 
nurse. Suppose you grudged yourchild the money 
necessary to give her a good education, and sent 
her to a school where there was not enough to eat, 
nor sufficient clothing to keep her warm at night 
Suppose Arthur gave you money to pay for an ex- 
pensive school, and that you pocketed the differ- 
ence " 

"Ah! stop . stop, Bessie I I won't believe it . 
I cannot believe any woman, any mother, capable 
of such wickedness !" entreated Heather; but Bessie 
relentlessly continued : 

'' Then when Lally grew to woman's estate, should 



AT SUPPER. 117 

you expect her to honour a mother who had acted 
such a part by her ? and what I have told you is not 
the worsts Heather, is not the worst 1" 

" And what is worst. dear ?" 

" That I must keep to myself," replied the girl, 
rising as she spoke, and flinging her hair back from 
her face. ^'I have often thought, since I came 
down here this time, that such people as we are 
have neither right nor title to mix among such as 
you ; and yet I do not know . whatever of good I 
have learned, whatever faith in virtue and honesty 
I possess, I have learned and I have acquired from 

you. Oh, Heather! . oh, Heather! " and she 

clasped her hands high above her head. Then, in 
a moment, the fit was over, and the speaker fell into 
her usual tone. " I will try to do what you ask," 
she said, '^ and treat my respected parent with the 
deference you desire. Kiss me for that . kiss me 
once, kiss me twice . ^kiss me as though you meant 
it If I had been a man, I should have married 
you. Heather ; if I had been a duke, I should have 
laid my rank and wealth at your feet, and prayed 
you take them . take everything, if you would only 
take me as well. If you tell me to do it this 



118 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

minute^ I will stay with you all my life, and never 
marry any one/' 

^ What a strange girl you are !*' said Heather, 
tossing over the soft hair, twining and curling it 
round her hand. 

^^ Ay ! all puzzles seem strange till you hold the 
key," answered Bessie. '^ Let me light you along 
the passage, and do not lie awake thinking of me." 



119 



CHAPTER VI. 



Bessie's letter. 



The summer days ran on. They flowed by smooth 
and pleasant . so Bessie Orrason said in one of her 
sentimental moods . ^like a swift river among lovely 
green fields. 

''Look at that stream," she remarked to Alick, 
as they stood, on the Sunday following Heather's 
return, side by side, leaning over the parapet of a 
little bridge which spanned the Kemm ; " do you 
know what it puts me in mind of?" 

" No," answered the boy, to whom sometimes the 
talk of his companion was as the talk of a ereatm'e 
from another world ; *^ I cannot know what anything 
puts you in mind of, for you are like no other person 
I ever met in all my life before." 



120 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

" So much the better for you," she replied. " Do 
I not often infonn you I am one of the daughters 
of Cain, come on a short visit to Adam and Eve 
in the garden of Eden ? and that brings me back to 
the river : it runs by . ^like existence at Berrie Down 
. ^with scarcely a ripple on its surace. I should 
like to be the Kemm/' she added in a lower tone, 
'' murmuring on over the pebbles, never singing a 
more passionate strain than that . never fretting or 
fuming . never forcing my way through rocks and 
stones . never brawling . never uncertain as to my 
future course . but stealing quietly and peacefully 
to the great sea ;" and as she spoke, Bessie dropped 
her arms over the parapet of the little bridge, and 
looked into the stream sadly and dreamily. 

Let me sketch her for you . Herbert Ormson's 
only daughter, Gilbert Harcourt's affianced wife . ; 
or rather let me make the attempt, for it is not easy 
to give in pen and ink an idea of the personal ap- 
pearance of a girl like Bessie Ormson, whose mood 
was shifting as the sunbeams, whose beauty was 
changeful as the shadows flitting over the grass in 
the golden summer-time : 

Scarcely of the middle height, figure slight and 



BESSIE'S LETTER. 121 

delicately rounded, she was not destitute of dignity, 
though lithe and lissom as a child : she had a small 
head, which she could rear, on occasions, almost 
defiantly; a mass of dark hrown hair, smoothly 
braided on her cheeks, and then rolled up at the 
back of her neck in coil after coil ; eyes of the 
darkest, deepest, divinest blue, shaded by long black 
lashes, that gave to her face, when in repose, an 
almost pathetic expression; a complexion which 
neither sun nor wind seemed able to spoil ; she had 
lips like coral, and teeth like pearls ; and a short, 
provoking, piquant, saucy upper lip. Was it any 
wonder, think you, that Alick Dudley should con- 
sider her the perfection of beauty ? . that almost un- 
consciously the fancies and loves of his future life 
were shaped and moulded by this his earliest ideal 
of feminine loveliness ? 

And yet it was no mere beauty of feature that 
caused Bessie Ormson to seem so irresistibly 
charming: it was that ever-varying expression of 
which I have spoken . that shifting look, now sad, 
now gay, now earnest, now provoking, now co- 
quettish, now soft and womanly, and again almost 
sarcastic in its keen perception of human folly 



122 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

and human weakness . which gave variety to her 
face. 

Always changing . never for two minutes the 
same . always filling the beholder with a vague 
wonder as to what strangely-varied mental book 
such a face could be the index. 

It was wistful, it was saucy, it was soiTowful, it 
was joyous. There was a shadow lying across 
her eyes one moment; they were sparkling with 
mirth the next. She would look at Heather as 
though she were gazing into the depths of a clear 
stream, with a strange dreamy glance, and before 
you could fix that expression on your mind it was 
gone. 

See her with Lally, and her face was the face of a 
child ; leave her to herself for an instant, and there 
came an anxious, troubled look on her countenance. 
She was all things . mischievous, tender, high- 
spirited, quiet, loving, cross, full of bitter repartee, of 
premature worldly knowledge. 

She had eaten of the tree too soon ; and, if that 
fruit set her mental teeth on edge, who may say the 
fault lay with Bessie ? 

She was clever, as Arthur Dudley had truly 



Bessie's letter. 123 

observed ; that is, she was not clever in accomplish- 
ments, nor as regarded solid learning, but rather 
socially and conversationally. 

She was no linguist, not much of a musician, 
nothing of an artist ; she had not read much, but 
she could guess what people were thinking of ; she 
could piece this and that together, and tell what 
motives influenced them, what were their purposes, 
by what considerations they were swayed. For this 
reason, many persons had an objection to very intimate 
association with the girl ; she never rested content 
with words . she went straight back to the thoughts 
words concealed. 

The young folks at Berrie Down Hollow, however, 
who had no secrets and no plans, found her capital 
company. Even Lally was not more tireless than she. 
Ever ready to go out to walk, to inspect the poultry- 
yard, to try her hand at butter-making, to gather 
flowers and group them into bouquete, to shake the 
cherry-trees, to carry Lally into the Hollow and 
hide her among the blackberry bushes, to smother the 
child in armfuls of freshly-mown grass, to lead the 
way, fleet of foot, to the meadows, where the hay- 
makers were at work, to don with demurest air a 



124 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

snowy apron, and help Mrs. Piggott whisk eggs, or 
prepare her fruit for preserving ! 

Even Mrs. Piggott, who entertained a most cordial 
dislike for Bessie's maternal parent, brightened up 
when she saw that pretty roguish face peeping in 
at the door of kitchen, larder, and dairy. 

Of severe, not to say despotic, principles, inclined 
to resent intrusions into her domains as acts of revolt 
against a legally-constituted authority, Mrs. Piggott, 
nevertheless, not merely tolerated Bessie's visits, but 
rejoiced in them, and few things delighted the 
beauty more than a forenoon with " that delightfully 
respectable old wonder," as she called the house- 
keeper. 

It was a sight to see Mrs. Piggott and Bessie 
employed in making red-currant jelly . Mrs. Piggott 
arrayed in a clean cotton gown^ and a cap with 
many borders, looking sharply after her assistant to 
scQ that she religiously removed every stem, while 
Lally, perched on the table, superintended the work, 
and ate whole handsful of the fruit, in gleeful de- 
fiance of Bessie's threats of executing condign 
punishment upon her. 

** Dear, dear Miss," observed Mrs. Piggott on one 



Bessie's letter. 125 

occasion, surveying Bessie over her spectacles, 
"who would ever think you were your mamma's 
daughter?" 

" No one, Mrs. Piggott," was the young lady's 
prompt reply. " Don't you think it a pity mothers 
so seldom take after their children ?" which inver- 
sion of the usual proposition so utterly astonished 
Mrs. Piggott's understanding, that she was glad to 
direct Bessie's attention to ^^ that blessed child who 
has eaten a quart of picked fruit, Miss, if she has 
eaten a currant;" whereupon Bessie placed Lally 
on the dresser, where, in the midst of plates and 
dishes, the little girl sat as if on a throne, exchang- 
ing saucy speeches with Miss Ormson, till it pleased 
that young lady to lift her down from her perch and 
take her away to the hay-field, or out into the croft, 
to see Alick breaking-in Nellie. 

It was wonderful to observe the way in which 
Bessie and the child agreed ; more wonderful still, 
perhaps, to notice the manner in which the former 
wound all the household round her finger. 

It was Bessie this, and BesdSe that. She re- 
trimmed the girls' bonnets; she taught them the 
latest mode of dressing hair ; she could change old 



126 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

garments into new by some dexterous sleightro^ 
hand. Ribbons and laces, deemed useless before 
her arrival, and cast aside, as tossed and torn, re- 
appeared after her advent in forms that delighted 
the hearts of Arthur Dudley's sisters. 

She was "good for everything," the boys de- 
clared. Pretty and coquettish herself, she liked 
to see other girls pretty and coquettish too; and 
during her visit the Misses Dudley went about with 
wild flowers in their hair, with dainty bouquets in 
their belts, with dresses guiltless of a crease, " making 
much of themselves," as Bessie phrased it 

How she revelled in that house ! How she, so 
constantly a prisoner among bricks and mortar, 
loved the freedom and the liberty of that country 
life ! How she stood drinking in the pure, unde- 
filed air, that came floating over the fields and the 
hedgerows to her! Much as the young Dudleys 
loved their home, they had not that appreciation of 
every flower and leaf, of every effect of light and 
shade, which astonished them in their guest. 

Her love of the country was keen and sharp, like 
the relish of a half-starved man for food. 

Here, at last, was a life to be desired . a life idly 



Bessie's letter. 127 

busy, sinless^y sensuous ; . here was a lotus land of 
indolent industry, bright with sunshine, where the 
air was full of all delicious perfumes . where the 
days were happy and the nights calm . where the 
morning dawned upon a peaceful household . where 
the moon looked down, not upon a turbulent sea 
of human woes, sorrows, sins, passions, disappoint- 
ments, but on the pleasant fields where the grass 
was springing, and the sheep lay dotted about on 
the soft green slopes. 

The birds in the hedges, the ferns in the dells, the 
soft cushions of moss, which she would caress with 
her little hand and touch with her lips, as though 
such delicious greenery must be conscious of her 
caresses; the branches waving in the breeze, the 
whirling of the pigeons in the air, the hundred 
sounds of the country, . all these things had charms 
for Bessie which made the Dudleys find her a most 
appreciative and delightful companion. 

Never was there such a girl for a walk, Alick 
Dudley thought, as Bessie Ormson. If she went 
out in the early morning, before the sun had risen 
high enough to have much power, Bessie would stop 
to look at the cobwebs glittering with dew-drops, at 



128 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the drooping blades of wet grass, at the tears on the 
leaves of the dog-roses. Were it later in the day, she 
revelled in the luxurious warmth ; in the far-away 
tiled roofs peeping red from amongst sheltering 
trees ; in the quiet cattle ; in the hush of the noon- 
tide; and when the afternoon stole on, and the 
evening shadows began to sl11, she delighted in the 
solemn darkness of the distant woods, in the flow of 
beck and stream, in the figures of the labourers 
hieing them home across the field-paths, in the 
children grouped about the cottage doors. 

"It is peacei" she was wont to say . ^** perfect 
peace. I wonder if heaven will be like this !" 

There are poets who cannot write a line of verse ; 
there are artists who yet lack the power to repro- 
duce that which fills their souls with pleasure almost 
amounting to pain. The understanding mind and 
the skilfiil hand are not necessarily sent into the 
world together. The power of appreciating things 
lovely and beautiful is often divorced from the capa- 
city to create or portray the lovely and the beantifril, 
or, rather, is not always mated with such capacity ; 
and, although Bessie Qrmson possessed no creative 
or imitative genius, she was yet endowed with 



BESSIE'S LETTER. 129 

that diviner genius . the ability to luxuriate in the 
thousand works of the great Creator. 

And it was this faculty of perception and appre- 
ciativeness which, added to her quickness and viva- 
city, made Bessie such good company that no one 
in the length of a summer's day could weary of her. 
Nothing escaped her . ^not a flower growing by the 
wayside, not a cloud fleeting across the sky, not a 
change of expression on a man's face, not an unusual 
cadence in a familiar voice. 

With all her sarcasm and frivolity, the girl's 
human sympathy was intense ; and, perhaps, when 
the secret of most popularity is exhausted, it will be 
found only to exist in the fact that the man or the 
woman popular can enter into and understand th^ 
moods and feelings of other men and women. 

It was so with Bessie, at all events. She loved 
Berrie Down Hollow with a love almost amounting 
to pasaon. To her, that place was the realization 
of peace, happiness, home, beauty, contentment ; and 
yet she could comprehend the natural desire of the 
lad who stood beside her to leave Hertfordshire and 
go forth to push his way in the world. 

It was of that desire they had been talking as 
VOL. I. k: 



130 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

they sauntered across the fields towards North 
Kemms. 

The hush of the first day in the week was around 
them and above ; but still their discourse had been 
of the world, its prizes, its blanks, its successes, its 
disappointments, and the boy's cheek flushed as he 
spoke of how he should like to win a name and a 
position for himself in the great city, where the 
greatest part of Bessie Ormson's life had been 
spent. 

" Of course I shall be sorry to go away from the 
old place,'* he went on, *^ to leave it and Heather ; 
but I should feel proud to make a fortune, and 
bring it back to her. I should not stay away from 
Berrie Down for ever." 

''Yes, you would," Bessie answered. Then, 
seeing him look surprised, she went on : '^ You, 
that is, the Alick Dudley who is talking to me now, 
would go away, and never return. I know it is 
well for you to go ; but still, do not think you could 
ever return. You will leave here a boy with a face 
as smooth as my own, and you will come back a 
man, never to hear the son^ of the birds with quite 
the same ears . never to look out over the fields and 



Bessie's letteb. 181 

the woods with quite the same eyes . ^never to listen 
to the trees and the winds whispering quite the same 
words. You will go out " . from the height of her 
twenty-three years she looked down and told him 
this . "and you may come back, but the noise of 
the world will mingle with the old familiar sounds, 
and never let those sounds fall in perfect harmony 
on your soul more." 

And it was then they came to the Kemm, where 
Bessie paused to look into the stream. 

"I wonder, Bessie, where you have learned all 
you know," said Alick, after a pause. 

** Not out of books," she replied, laughing ; " the 
truth is I know very little, except that I am very 
happy at Berrie Down, and shall be very sorry to 
leave it." 

" Do you not expect to be happy when you leave 
Berrie Down ?" he asked. 

'* That is not a question to be rashly answered," 
she said. ** I may be . ^I may not be. Don't you 
remember that game Lally plays at . blowing dan- 
delion-down away to tell the hour? Whatever 
number she has arrived at, when the last feather 
floats off, is the tune. My future depends on much 

k2 



132 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

sach a chance; but whether it torn out happy or 
unhappy, be certsdn I shall not at down and bemoan 
myself." 

*'But surely you hope to be happy in your 
marriage 7' the lad suggested, hesitatingly, and yet 
with a degree of restrained eagerness which made 
Bessie smfle. 

'^I hope to be sOy Alick," she answered, however, 
gravely; ''but hopes are poor houses to live in. 
Fact is," she added, in a gayer tone, "I know as 
little about my future life as you know about yours. 
When we are old man and old woman, we will sit 
down by the fireade together, and compare notes ; 
we will tell one another about the roads we have 
travelled, and the countries they led to." 

And Bessie lifted her eyes as she spoke, and 
looked away to the woods surrounding Mr. Raids- 
ford's house, which mingled with those of Kemms 
Park. 

In the after-days, the pair stood in the same spot 
again on just such another afternoon, and thought of 
that talk on their way to Kemms church. 

" We shall be very late," Besae sidd at length ; 
and then they turned and pursued their way in the 



Bessie's letter. 133 

delicious stillness across the fields to North Eemms. 
It had been a freak of Bessie's, this Sunday ramble 
alone with Alick to a far-away church ; but then 
Bessie was given to freaks, and no one paid any 
particular attention to them. 

Mrs. Ormson declared such a walk in the heat of 
the day ^was absurd;" even Heather looked sur- 
prised when she and Alick announced their intention 
of starting directly after dinner. Lally had im- 
plored ^* me too/' for once vainly, and an offer of 
companionship from the remainder of the Dudleys 
had met with no better success. 

" I want to go alone with you, Alick," she de- 
clared. *' I want to talk to you quietly ;" and of 
course Alick was delighted. 

Like most girls, Bessie conceived all the wisdom 
of Solomon had come down to her. In the ways of 
this world the young lady believed she was a 
thorough adept ; but she had not that reticence in 
talking about the ways of the world and the wicked- 
ness of the people in it, which is, perhaps, the first 
ngn of thorough knowledge. 

The wise man is modest The man who thinks 
himself wise lacks sense to hold hb tongue ; the 



134 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

saint is eloquent about sin ; the sinner is not given 
to speak of the flavour of that strange meat whereof 
he has partaken; for aU of which reasons Bessie, 
who was but a very novice in that lore wherein she 
aspired to instruct others, was assiduous in her 
endeavours to teach Alick that the world where he 
had been placed was a mistake, the hope of happi- 
ness in it a delusion and a snare. 

This young woman, who delighted in every 
country sight and sound,' who loved Lally and 
adored Heather Dudley, who luxuriated in pleasant 
sights and in all sweet sounds, who had her life all 
before her, who could take fiin out of most things, 
and was not above confessing to a weakness for 
strawberries and cream, would nevertheless talk on 
a fine summer afternoon as I have taken the liberty 
of transcribing her conversation. 

She thought she was original, perhaps, in her 
remarks ; she thought also possibly . and this 
thought chanced to be perfectly true . that Alick 
Dudley delighted in her observations ; and yet her 
talk was but as the talk of other girls of her own 
age and temperament throughout the length and 
breadth of England. 



Bessie's letter. 135 



It was the nought is everything and everything is 
nought creed of bur own girls at the present hour ; 
of those who, whether they take refuge from their 
own luxuriously sad thoughts in earnestness or 
frivolity, in balls or soup-kitchens, in fashionable 
follies or house-to-house visitings, are yet agreed on 
one point, viz., their conviction that the round 
world and all that therein is cannot be considered 
otherwise than hollow and unsatisfactory. 

They believe Ailly, not only that it is all a 
fleeting show, but that it was '^ for man's illusion 
given," and they smile compassionately on the poor 
souls who are deluded with such a transparent 
mockery, and go about raving in a fine melancholy 
about the sins and sorrows, the snares and the pit- 
falls, of our very imperfect earth. 

Did the girls who read Evelina and Cecilia 
share this doctrine, or were they, less sceptical, 
gulled, sweet simpletons, into believing the Almighty 
intended them for happiness instead of misery ? 

It would have been a clever person who could 
have persuaded Bessie Ormson into such a faith, at 
all events ; and as, for most young people, talk of the 
kind to which I have referred . ^melancholy, dreamy. 



136 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

romantic^ unsatisfying talk . ^has a ringular charm, 
she might, with her conversation, have done Alick 
Dudley a considerable amount of mischief, had it 
not been for a little circumstance that occurred on 
the very same Sunday afternoon of which I am 
speaking, and set the lad thinking about a much 
more possible calamity than had been contained in 
any of Bessie's imaginative sentences. 

On, over the fields they walked ; they left the 
Kemm and Mr. Raidsford's property far behind; 
they strolled leisurely through the pleasant Hert- 
fordshire meadows, and stood here and there to 
watch the sheep scuttling away from them, or to 
notice the placid contentment of the cattle lying 
on the smooth grass whence the hay had just been 

carried. 

On, past cottage and homestead; on, to where 
more woods met their sight; on, through the little 
hamlet of North Kemms, and then by a short lane to 
the church surrounded by a graveyard, where the 
mounds were many, and the headstones few. 

The service was half over by the time they stood 
within the porch, but the sexton experienced no 
difficulty in providing the new comers with seats. 



BESSIE'S LETTER. 137 

There were more empty than full in that churchy so 
he ushered the pair into a great family pew near the 
pulpit, and shut the door carefully after them. 

Only to open it, however, again next instant, and 
give admittance to a tall handsome man, who might 
have belonged to the same party, so quickly did he 
follow on their heels. 

A very handsome man . when the stranger took 
his face out of his hat, where he held it for the 
orthodox period ; Alick Dudley was quite satisfied on 
this point, and glanced curiously round to ascertain 
whether Bessie chanced to be of the same opinion ; 
but Bessie's eyes were fastened on her prayer-book, 
and so Alick turned again to the new comer to dis- 
cover what effect Bessie had produced on him. 

Apparently, none whatever ; he looked at the girl 
carelessly, looked her over from head to foot ; then 
examined Alick in the same supercilious and critical 
style, after which he surveyed the congregation at 
large, the clergyman, and the derk. Then, havmg 
apparently exhausted North Kemms as Bessie had 
exhausted the world, be caressed his moustache, and 
retired into his own contemplations. 

All of which proceedings piqued, not to say 



188 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

angered, Alick Dudley; and this anger was the 
more unreasonable, because, if the stranger had 
seemed struck by Bessie's beauty, the lad would 
have been out of temper still. 

But that any one should remain indifferent to 
Miss Ormson's perfections appeared to Alick little 
less than a miracle. Even the rector, an old, white* 
haired man, was to be detected stealing furtiye 
looks at the demure young lady who had come so 
late to church ; and what right had this " great 
swell," so Alick mentally styled the stranger, to give 
himself idrs, and never bestow a second glance on a 
girl who was undeniably beautiful ? 

<< He may meet hundreds of fine ladies before he 
sees anything like her," decided Master Alick ; but 
the offending gentleman evidently did not share 
in this opinion. Wherever his thoughts might be^ 
clearly they were not wandering in the direction of 
Bessie Ormson, who, on her side, .never lifted her 
eyes to look at. him, but kept them fixed resolutely 
on her little prayer-book, the rector, or the east 
window ; a piece of propriety which, considering the 
girl's proclivities for lords and grandees of all kinds, 
was somewhat astonishing. 



Bessie's letter. 139 

But then, if Bessie were a trifle coquettish, she was 
aot bold ; a maiden less likely to take the initiative 
in a love afiair could not have been found in the 
length and breadth of Hertfordshire. 

Which fact made it, perhaps, all the more extra- 
ordinary that the stranger took no heed of so strange 
a mixture of modesty and vivacity and beauty. 

A handsome man, and yet not altogether of pre- 
possessing appearance. Sitting opposite to, and 
staring at him with all his eyes, Alick felt he did 
not much like him. What had he come to .church 
for? He sat there absorbed in his own thoughts, 
whatever they might be, hearing the sermon possibly, 
but unheeding it certainly. Vaguely, as in a dreamy 
kind of way, Alick conjectured the world, of which 
Bessie had been talking as they crossed the fields, 
might have some share in their companion's reverie. 

The lad was gifted with sufficient sense to under- 
stand that a man like this was much more likely to 
know all the ins and outs of a wicked world than 
Miss Bessie Ormson ; and, while the rector droned 
through his sermon, an impression, undefined and 
intangible, it is true, came into Alick's mind, that, 
all through her wise conversation with him, Bessie 



140 FAB ABOVE BUSIES. 

had been arguing out some mental question with 
herself; forecasting what the years might bring to 
her, wondering with what ears she should listen to 
the sweet home sounds again, with what eyes she 
should look over the green Hertfordshire fields in 
the future which was uncertainly stretching forth 
before them botL 

The thoughts of youth are generally as unformed 
as the features of childhood ; and thus, though Alick 
was conscious of some curious enigma perplexing 
him, he yet would have been surprised had any one 
placed the puzzle he was considering before his 
mental vision, perfect in form and clothed with words. 

At length it was all over . ^the sermon, the service, 
the reverie . and, with a sense of relief, the lad opened 
the pew door, and stood in the aisle while his com- 
panion passed out. In order to allow her to take 
precedence of him, the stranger had stepped a little 
back into the pew, and this slight courtesy Bessie 
acknowledged by the merest inclination of her pretty 
head. Then Alick saw the gentleman look at her, 
for an instant only . next moment his dark eyes were 
roaming over the church, scanning the monuments, 
glandng up at the organ-loft. 



Bessie's letter. 141 

When they were half way down the aisle, Alick 
turned to see what the stranger was doing, and found 
him, not following Bessie with his eyes, but still scru- 
tinising the church as though he were a member of 
the Archaeological Society. There he stood in the 
pew just as they had left him, indolently surveying 
roof and walls, tombs and windows. As they passed 
through the porch, Alick looked back once more, but 
the object of his curiosity had not moved. 

"Waiting for the rector, perhaps," thought the 
lad ; and he hurried after Bessie, who by this time 
was half way across the graveyard. 

" What a dear old church !" she said, as they 
reached the gate. *^I like it much better than 
Fifield." 

" Excuse me, but I believe this is your prayer- 
book," said a voice dose beside her at this juncture, 
and ihe interruption was so sudden that both Alick 
and his companion started to find the stranger close 
beiude them. 

" Thank you, I am sorry to have given you so 
much trouble ; yes, it is mine," Bessie stammered, her 
face covered with blushes as she received the book, 
which she put in her pocket ; while the stranger raised 



142 FAS AfiOVn SUBZBSL 

his hat and turned back acraaa the duirchyazd in 
^ direetion of the Bectory. 

** Now, waa not that stupid of me 7* asked Beane. 
In hia heart, perhaps Alick thought it wa%faat hedid 
not express this opinion, he only ofoed to carry the 
hook for her, 

** No^ thank you, it is ao small, I always keep it ia. 
my pocket," sbe answered. ^ If there be one thing 
more than another I dislike, it is to see people parad-> 
ing dmreh- a cr vices and Bibles about on a Sunday as 
though they want to let all the world know they 
have been praying ;" and thus Bessie rattled on while 
they retraced their way across the fields, and o^er ^ 
Kemm, and past the woods, and so to Berrie Down^ 
which {^ace they reached about the time when Mrs* 
OrmsoD, awaking from her aftemooo aiesia like a 
giant refreshed, proposed that society generaCy 
AouM take a torn on the lawn. 

To this proposal society, nothing loth, agreed ; and 
thus it dianced that Bessie and Alick were descried 
entering the croft and rounding the Hollow, and 
ascending the bill leading to the booae. 

Once amongst the &mily groups it was needful to 
pause and gire full particulars of their walk, of North 



Bessie's letter. 143 

Kemms church, of the congregation^ of the music, of 
the sermon, and of various other matters which the 
younger Dudleys were pleased to regard in the 
light of news. 

By a singular coincidence, however, neither Alick 
nor Bessie made any mention of the strange gentle- 
man who had turned aside towards the Rectory. The 
young lady, indeed, talked so much and so BLSt that 
it would have been difficult for her companion to 
have edged in much information on the subject, even 
had he felt inclined to do so. 

But he did not feel inclined ; he could do little 
except watch Bessie, and wonder what had come to 
put her in such astonishing spirits, and to make her 
so much gayer than when they started . so utterly 
absorbed in giving a full and detailed account of the 
appearance of the rector, the prosiness of his sermon, 
the beauty of the walk, and .the horrible discord of 
the choir, that she had not a moment's attention to 
spare for Lally, who revenged herself by coolly thrust- 
ing her little hand into the depths of Bessie's pocket, 
in search of those sweetmeats which her friend 
usually kept there for the child's special delectation 
and benefit 



144 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'^ Not a sing/' exclaimed Lally at length, prayer- 
book in hand, and sorrow written on every feature 
in her face. 

Then Bessie, breaking off in the middle of a 
sentence, tuned and snatched the book from Lally, 
with a look of such blank terror, that for a second it 
seemed to Alick Dudley almost as though the sun 
had gone behind a cloud. 

" Nossing for me," remarked Lally reproachfully, 
and in a tone of mild expostulation against a state 
of society in which such things as pockets destitute 
of sweetmeats could be . " nossing for me ?" 

*' You naughty child," began Miss Ormson, sharply ; 
but next moment she relented, and, catching Lally 
up in her arms, told her she would see whether 
^' Bessie had anything in her drawers for her bold 
little girl." 

After which, exit Bessie with Lally, the latter 
contemplating the family group, as she departed, 
over Bessie's shoulder, and staying her appetite by 
thrusting three of her fingers as far down her throat 
as was compatible with personal safety. 

Once in her own room, Bessie, after finding the 
sweetmeats, turned them and Lally out of the apart- 



BESSIE'S LETTER. 145 

ment, locked her door, and then eagerly opened her 
prayer-book. 

Had Heather Dudley been on the threshold, she 
might well have marvelled what calamity had 
happened to the girl. She shook the book, she 
fluttered over the leaves; she turned her pocket 
inside out, she lifted her handkerchief, she inspected 
the carpet, she examined the prayer-book again, 
then she walked to the door, unlocked and opened 
it, to meet Alick Dudley on the threshold. 

" Is this yours ?" he asked, giving her a sealed 
note. "It dropped from the prayer-book when 
Lally pulled it out of your pocket. I picked it up, 
but I did not like to give it to you on the lawn." 

" You dear, good boy," she said ; but Alick never 
smiled at this praise. His face was as pale as 
Bessie's was red, his tone as quiet as hers was 
hurried. 

For a moment the pair looked at each other, 
then she said : 

"Alick, may I trust that you will not tell 
Heather ?" 

"I will tell nothing," he answered. She put 
her hand into his, but he never clasped the little 

VOL. L L 



146 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

soft fingers. Involuntarily almost she put her lips 
to his and kissed him, but still the lad made no 
sign. 

Then she broke out passionately, ^' Don't judge 
me hardly, Alick; don't judge me till you know 
all." 

** I do not judge you, Bessie," he replied, " but 
I am very sorry ;" and there came a mist before his 
eyes, through which he could not see her distinctly, 
and he turned and walked away along the corridor, 
feeling he had that day got his first real lesson in 
deceit and hypocrisy. 

He had believed in Bessie ; he had listened to 
her talk ; with delight and wonder she had seemed to 
him walking in the golden sunlight like something 
too good for the every-day, common^ work-a-day 
world, and, behold ! she was but a hypocrite playing 
in Heather's house a double game. 

Yes, he knew now the world she had come firom 
must be a wicked place, when such things as this 
were possible in it He had been deceived, and 
straight away he thought of Delilah and Sampson, 
putting up his hand to his mouth the while to feel if 
those were really the lips Bessie had kissed. 



BESSIE'S LETTER 147 

In her fear and humiUation she had offered him 
this bribe ; when he thought of that, his anger melted 
away into a great flood of shame and pity, and then 
the lad whom this girl, his senior by nearly five years, 
was teaching so rapidly to be a man, turned into his 
own room, where, covering his face with his hands, 
he cried like a child. 

After all, he was very young and very inexperi- 
enced, and he found it hard to see the dream-castle 
he had built on so frail a foundation as a woman's 
truth and purity levelled to the ground. 

There comes a time when such knowledge, as 
had been vouchsafed to Alick Dudley that day, pro- 
vokes smiles rather than tears. 

When a man has arrived at the conclusion that 
all women are weak, that all women are frail, it is 
rather gratifying to his penetration than otherwise 
when beauty confirms this view of the question ; but 
Alick Dudley had not commenced travelling 
along the road which leads to this pleasant opinion, 
and it was very grievous to him to find his idol had 
feet of clay, that she had been making a cat's-paw 
of him, that the stranger and she knew more of each 
other than was well for either, that she had fallen in 

L 2 



148 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

a moment so low as not to be above bribing him 
with a kiss. 

And at that point the lad grew dizzy and con- 
fused. There was a great mystery being developed 
in his heart at the moment. He could not have 
put that mystery into words ; but I may for him. 
The ideal he had idolized lay at his feet, broken 
and shattered, marred, ruined, and de&ced ; but the 
reality which occupied its place . a weak, deceitful, 
unhappy girl . ^he loved. 



149 



CHAPTER VII. 



MORE VISITORS. 



And still the summer days ran on. They rippled 
by, scarcely murmuring as they passed ; and life at 
Benie Down flowed smoothly along, leaving no 
mark or trace behind. 

The flowers faded, and fresh flowers bloomed ; 
the cherries were all shaken down ; the haymaking 
was over; the blackberries in the Hollow were 
forming so rapidly that Lally's little fingers had to 
be forbidden plucking the unripe fruit ; the noon- 
tides were hot and sultry ; every blossom was gone 
from the chestnuts ; the shade in Berrie Down Lane 
was sweet and pleasant, and both pedestrians and 
equestrians loved to linger there under the trees, on 
the soft grass by the roadside. There was the 
purple haze on the distant woods, and in the nearer 



130 FAR ABOTB lUIBUSL 

vaDejs; the legfes had loel Acir freA gn'n ii M'jts and 
looked in want of nun ; die Kennn was ledneed 
toameretineadoraatream; and Ae molet which 
meandered Aroi^ the fidds hejood the HoDow 
was ntterlj dried np. 

Arthnr Dudley was beginning to complain kmdfy 
of the droo^it. He spoke of impending kes of 
cattle ; of die probability of the after-graas being 
all scorched np; of &ilnre in the tmmips ; but no one 
paid modi attention to Us ixebodings eaooepting 
Heather and Mi& Qnnaon. 

There was this difenice, howeier, b e t w e e n the 
two women, that, while the latter condoled widi him, 
the former endeaTOored tomakehimbdieTe matts 
woold not tnm out so badly as he feared. 

Comforters are not generdDy so mndi liked as 
sympathizers, and it was t h er efore with Mrs. Ormaon 
Arthur walked aroimd the fidds, bemoaning his 
nsoal ]I14ack as they paced along. 

^ It was like my fortone to baye so many cattle 
in snch a season," he gmmUed. '^ Any other year 
it would not haye mattered; bot this** . and so the 
Sqoire wandered on, while Mrs. Qnnson said it was 
'^ dreadfbl,'' and eeo^Lj hinted that the arranse- 



MORE VISITORS, 151 

ment of the weather, like the arrangement of many 
other things, was not so perfect as it might be. 

" Now, what do we want with rain in London ?" 
she inquired ; ^' and yet you know it is always pour- 
ing there. How much better it would be if you 
could have the rain instead! I dare say, if the 
truth were known, it is coming down there in 
torrents at this very moment" 

But in this supposition Mrs. Ormson chanced to 
be wrong, as successive visitors from London arrived 
in due time to testify. 

" How delightful to get into the country out of 
those suffocating streets !" remarked Mrs. Black, a 
woman of the utterly feeble, limp, languid, and 
mildly pretty school, "Oh, Arthur, how I ewvy 
you this sweet spot I" 

In answer to which speech Arthur declared that, 
if she knew all, perhaps she would find less cause 
for envy than she imagined. Whereupon Mr. 
Black, a stout, middle-aged, light-haired, florid, 
good-looking, self-satisfied individual, observed : 

" Yes, that is what I always say, Dudley . my 
very words, almost Nobody knows where the shoe 
pinches but the man who has to walk through life in 



152 FAB ABOVE BUBIE& 

it. And, after all, though the country is Terjr nice, 
and Berrie Down a refreshing change from the iity 
in such melting weather, still we all know it is not 
London. No," repeated Mr. Blad^, striking the 
sod with the heel of his boot, and looking over the 
landscape as though daring the fields and the trees 
to contradict him, '^ it is not London." 

** And a very good thing too it is not," added 
Bessie ; in answer to wbidi addendum Mr. Black 
stated his belief that she was just the same as ever, 
and inquired how, if she disliked town so much, she 
expected to be able to spend her life in it. 

** As I have done hitherto," she replied, " under 
protest" 

^ Persuade Gilbert when he comes down to turn 
&rmer," suggested Mrs. Black, sentimentally. *^ I 
only wish my lot had been cast among these peace- 
ful scenes." 

The only comment this remark elicited being a 
muttered sentence from Mr. Black, in which Bessie 
thought she heard something about '^peaceful 
devils," the conversation might have been cou- 
mdered ended, but for a voluntary statement from 
Master Marsden, a young gentleman in knickers 



MORE VISITORS. 153 

bockersy to the effect that he hated London, but that 
the country was jolly. He had been down in Surrey 
in the spring, he went on to inform the assembled 
company in a shrill alto, where he robbed fifty . oh I 
a hundred . ^birds' nests, and wasn't it prime I 

*' Then you were wicked boy," said Miss Lally, 
with that charming promptitude of judgment which 
is a peculiarity of her sex. 

**Why? don't you rob nests?" asked the new 
arrival, in answer to which question Lally shook her 
comical little head gravely. 

** Well, you must be a muff; but then, to be sure, 
you are a girl," said Master Marsden, in a tone 
which was at once contemptuous and explanatory. 

^^ She is not a great ill-mannered boy like you, 
Harry, at any rate," observed Bessie, whose fault 
certainly was not reticence in expressing her senti- 
ments. 

^' I don't want you to talk to me, I don't," said 
the boy, turning upon her in a manner which spoke 
of former passages of arms between them. 

*^ Well, it is not every one who gets more than he 
wants," she replied ; at which juncture Mr. Black 
called the young lady to order, declaring the way she 



164 FAK ABOVE SDBIES. 

talked to the boy too bad . "juat like breaking a 
thingumden7 upon a wliateTer's ita name." 

" If you mean a butterfly upon a wheel, I beg to 
remark that Harry is as unlike a butterfly as any* 
thing I can imagine," answered Miss Bee^e 

" We don't expect little boys to be butterffies," 
aud that general pe ce-maker, Mre. Black. 

" No, it is great girls who are that," struck in 
Mr. Black ; and be laughed at hb own wit bo long 
and loudly, that Lally stood looking at him in asto- 
nishment 

" Well, little one, and what are you staring at P" 
inquired Mr. Black, at length noticing that Lally 
had opened not merely her eyes but also her month 
as wide as possible. 

" Oo," was the immediate reply. 
" Ob ! indeed ; and what do you think of me now 
you have stared?" lie aslii'ii. 

" 1 think 'oo like Doe Ode," replied Lally, 
nothing abashed at public attention being directed 
to her. 

"And who may Joe Cole be?" perwsted Mr. 
Black ; but no one aecrned dispoaed to afford ium 
the information he desired. 



MORE VISITORS. 155 

"Who is this Joe Cole that I resemble?' re- 
peated Mr. Black, looking round the circle, and 
especially at Bessie, who had her face buried in her 
pocket-handkerchief. 

Round the circle, too, looked Lally. ^' He's a 
fool," she explained, evidently desirous of enlight- 
ening Mr. Black's ignorance. Alick had raised a 
warning finger too late ; out came the sentence in 
the middle of a dead silence ; and then Bessie burst 
into a perfect scream of laughter ; while Arthur, in 
angry tones, exclaimed, "Take that child away, 
somebody. She's not fit to be among civilised 
people." 

" Ought to be whipped, and sent to bed," volun- 
teered Mrs. Ormson. 

"Poor little thing traced some fancied resem- 
blance," urged Mrs. Black, as an extenuating cir- 
cumstance. 

" She is completely ruined," said her father ; and 
as the child passed him, led off the field by Bessie, 
he struck her, for the first time in his life, a smart 
blow, which caused Lally to break forth into a per- 
fect paroxysm of grief 

In one moment Bessie had her in her armcf, and 



/ 



156 FAB ABOVE BUSIES. 

fiiced roand on the Squire. " I nerer had a greater 

m 

mind to do anything than box your ears, Arthur," 
she remarked. ^ I shall say you are like Toe Cole 
next ;" and with that Miss Ormson swept away firom 
the group, followed by some of the younger Dudleys, 
who were unanimously of opinion the matter was to 
be kept firom Heather. 

^* I am so sorry, Besae . oh I I am so sorry," said 
Agnes Dudley. 

^And so am I that all these people are here," 
Bessie answered. ''They will spoil Arthur among 
them, not that, goodness knows, there is much to 
spoil about him." 

''It is always the same whenever Mr. Black 
comes," continued Agnes. " I can remember how 
we used to dread the very ught of him or your 
mother entering the gates. I suppose I ought not 
to say it, Bessie, as she is your mother ; but she 
always made things worse for us here, at least we 
thought she did." 

" Don't let the fact of her being my mother pre- 
vent your expressing your opinions," said Bessie, 
who, seated on the floor in the nursery, was en- 
gaged in striving to comfort Lally. Most sincerely 



MORE VISITORS. 157 

she hoped and believed Heather was^ at that mo- 
ment, closeted with Mrs. Piggott; but Heather 
happened to be in an adjoining room, and, hearing 
the sound of Lally's exceeding bitter grief, came in 
to see what could be the cause of it. 

"Why, what is the matter with my pet?" she 
asked. 

Agnes looked at Bessie, who promptly answered, 
" Lally has been very naughty." 

"No, Lally not been naughty," broke in the 
child, stretching out her arms towards her mother. 
*' Lally only said that fat man was like Doe Cole. 
and pa hit her . pa did ;" and Lally buried her head 
in her mother's breast, and wept abundantly. 

^'Arthur did not mean to hurt her,'* Agnes 
explained. 

^' And Lally was very naughty, for she said Joe 
Cole was a fool," added Bessie ; but, unheeding 
both the girls' statements. Heather passed from the 
room, carrying Lally with her, and appeared no 
more until supper-time, when Bessie noticed that 
she had been crying. 

" I wish you would keep that child of yours out of 
the way of strangers till she has learnt how to behave 



158 FAB ABOVE RnBIE& 

herself," Arthur remarked from the foot of the 
table, with his customary tact and consideration. 

''She shall not annoy any one again/' said 
Heather, who had intended to take a private oppor- 
tunity of apologising to Mr. Black for Lally's seem- 
ing rudeness. 

'' Oh I she did not annoy me, ma'am," returned 
that gentleman. "Considered it rather a compli- 
ment than otherwise, I assure you. You know the 
saying, I dare say, that it takes a wise man to act 
the fool ; and I rather think any one who tried to 
get the better of me would find he had no fool to 
deal with, Mrs. Dudley." 

** When I was at school, uncle, we had a copy 
text to the effect that ' Self-praise was no reconunen- 
dation,' " remarked Bessie ; at which speech some of 
the younger Dudleys tittered audibly . a proceeding 
that caused Arthur to declare he did not know what 
the house was coming to. 

" It is a very charming house," interposed Mrs. 
Black, who really. Heather felt, was a perfect 
blessing to society. '' I do not know a house like it 
anywhere. Every one amongst my friends has 
heard of Berrie Down Hollow. I always say it 



MORE VISITORS. 159 

seems to me the very abode of peace, . the true 
cottage of contentment" 

" I would very gladly exchange it for your house 
in town," answered Arthur. 

"Or for the same acreage in town," added Mr. 
BlacL " By Jove, if a man had only one of your 
fields anywhere about Threadneedle Street or Corn- 
hill, he might snap his fingers at the world." 

" Yes ; because in that case he would be so rich 
he could afford to live anywhere," ventured Heather, 
to whom such remarks were by no means new ; " but, 
as the land is not in London, why need we think 
about impossibilities ? It is a choice with us between 
a small income in town and a small income in 
the country ; and you know, Mr. Black, how much 
farther a small income goes in the country than in 
town." 

" Now that is just the point on which you are so 
much deceived," replied Mr. Black. ** There is no 
place on earth where a small income can be made 
go so far as in London. Do you want meat ? You 
can have what you want, cut as you like, sent home 
on the instant. Now here, I suppose, your butcher 
lives five miles off; everything is at least five 



160 FAK ABOB KUBIBB. 

.dies off in Ifae oaantry. For lidi and poor alike, 
London is die place. What is there a man can't 
gettbeier 

"^Green fields," answered Mrs. Bbck. 

^Green fields ! nonaensey" retomed her husband. 
''Hare not yon the paries? What can a human 
being deare better than St James's Park, or 
Regent's Park, or eyen Victoria? Is not there 
grass enough in them to content you? Is Hamp- 
stead Heath not big enough for you to walk oyer ? 
Hare not you the squares? Hare not you trees? 
Eyen in the City Ihere is not a street but you may 
see a tree in it Do you want amusement? there is 
not a night but you may go to a dozen places of 
amusement, if you like. Do you want society ? you 
can haye as much as you please. Do you want 
books ? they lie ready to your hand. Eyery thing 
is next door in London. We haye not to send a 
dozen miles for a lemon there, ma'am, as Mr. What- 
ever-you-may-call-him, that parson fellow, said he had 
to do. From grapes at thirty shillings a pound to 
a farthing's worth of tea-dust, you can be accommo- 
dated in London. There is no place like it on 
earth, Mrs. Dudley, take my word." 



MORE VISITORS. 161 

ft 

Poor Mrs. Dudley sighed, and answered " that, for 
her part, she liked the pure country air." 

^' There never was a more mistaken idea than 
that," said Mr. Black. " Country air is not pure. 
How should it be, with its decomposing yegetation, 
with its damp fields, with its ditches filled with grass 
and dead leaves, with its arable land covered with 
natural and artificial manures, with its imperfect 
drainage, with its impure water ? Read the Registrar- 
General's returns, and you will soon change your 
opinion about the healthfulness of the country." 

"That is what I often say," remarked Mrs. 
Ormson. 

^' But still there are some most unpleasant smells 
in London," observed Mrs. Black, feebly. 

" In Bermondsey, for instance," added Bessie. 

" All healthy," persisted Mr. Black. " Now, in 
the country, people breathe poison without knowing 
what they are swallowing. What is called pure air 
is very like sparkling water ; it seems so because it 
is fiill of the seeds of disease, because it is literally 
laden with decomposition and " 

''The eight o'clock express stops at Palinsbridge, 
uncle," suggested Bessie at this point. "You 

VOL. I. M 



162 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

might catch it if you were to sit up all night, and 
start away from here, say, at five o'clock in the 
morning. I should not stay another day in the 
country, if I were you." 

"Well put in, Bessie; but I won't take your 
advice for all that," said Mr. Black, good-humouredly. 
" I have come down here meaning to enjoy myself, 
and to make a complete holiday of it." 

"I should have thought you might have com- 
passed both ends, by spending a day at the British 
Museum," remarked Miss Ormson. 

*'How sharp you have got, Bessie, my dear," 
ventured Mrs. Black. " Is it anything in the air, I 
wonder?" 

"If it be, it is to be hoped you will take it," 
observed her husband. At which speech Mr. Black 
laughed and Mrs. Ormson laughed, while Heather 
looked at her guests, blankly wondering how she was 
to preserve peace amongst them. 

" Gilbert will soon be down to keep Bessie in 
order," remarked Mrs. Ormson. 

" I am glad to hear it . he is a very nice young- 
fellow," aflSrmed Mr. Black. 

" I have never seen him," said Arthur Dudley. 



MORE VISITORS. 163 

" Then you will be pleased when you do see him," 
answered the oracle; "a very intelligent, modest, 
well-mannered, pushing young man as any I know." 

" And handsome too," added Mrs. Black, glad 
to find some smooth water where she could safely 
launch her little conversational boat again without 
fear of breakers. "And handsome too; and oh! 
so good to his mother and sisters." 

" I liked him greatly," said Heather, from her 
end of the table ; and, as she spoke, almost involun- 
tarily she glanced at Bessie, who, with her head 
turned aside, was looking out into the serai-dark- 
ness of the summer's night. 

Alick had his eyes fixed on Bessie also. Per- 
haps he was trying to reconcile the fact of Gilbert 
Harcourt with the existence of the stranger they had 
met in North Kemms church. Anyhow, he felt 
curious, and, though Heather knew nothing about the 
North Kemms stranger, she had grown curious also. 

In due time Mr. Harcourt arrived, as did also 
Miss Hope, and then, indeed, the house was full . 
so full that Bessie privately likened it to a Noah's 
Ark, and wondered how the patriarch managed to 
keep his animals in order. 

M 2 



164 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

^' It is more than poor Heather can do/' aghed Alick. 

^ What makes her have them?" asked Bessie. 

^ Do you think Arthur would be satisfied if she 

had not?" inquired the lad. ^It is just the same 

every year, only, unhappily, this year they have all 

elected to come together." 

'^I am one of the 'all' Alick, remember," she 
said, laughing. 

There had been a time when Alick would indig- 
nantly have denied this assertion ; but he remem- 
bered North Kemms church, and held his peace. 

" You are angry with me," she went on, noticing 
his hesitation. "Perhaps, if you knew everything, 
you would be sorry." And, with that, Bessie turned 
and walked into the house, leaving Alick, who 
certainly did not know everything, in a state of 
wonderment 

Why should he be sorry for Bessie? For himself 
he might feel sorry that two men stood between him 
and the prize he had vaguely began to covet ; but 
where was the need of pitying her? If she did 
not like Gilbert, why had she accepted him ? If she 
did like him, why had she gone to North Kemms 
to meet another lover ? 



MORE VISITORS. 165 

But was he a lover ? Alick had read a sufficient 
number of old romances obtained from Miss Carfort, 
who kept a very small circulating library in South 
Kemms, to be well aware that the walk across the 
fields, the evidently pre-arranged meeting, the note 
secreted between the leaves of Bessie's prayer- 
book, did not of themselves justify him in the con- 
clusion that Miss Ormson was carrying on a clandes- 
tine love afiair. The man might have some hold on 
her. He might have known her before her engage- 
ment to Gilbert ; he might have some power over 
her father ; he might be in possession of some secret 
of the family : so the lad argued ; but still the con- 
viction remained strong within him that Bessie was 
playing a double game ; though how she contrived 
to do so puzzled him beyond measure. 

No more walks across the fields ; no lonely excur- 
sions to Fifield post-office ; no solitary rambles, even 
within the limits of the farm. 

It might not perhaps be generous on his part to do 
so, but he watched the young lady as a cat might 
watch a mouse, and the more he watched the more 
mystified he grew. 

If she were carrying on a secret correspondence 



166 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

with any one, it was impossible she could treat 
Gilbert Harcoui:t as she did From morning till 
night the pair were together " like a pair of dear 
turtle-doves," as Mrs. Black sentimentally declared 
Never a cross word did Bessie bestow on her 
betrothed ; never a saucy speech did she address to 
him. Let who else would, feel the sharpness of her 
tongue . and it was sharp at times, as a serpent*s 
tooth, according to Mrs. Ormson ; and a wasp's sting, 
to quote Mr. Black. Mr. Harcourt always escaped 
scot-free. 

Not even to Heather was Bessie so uniformly 
agreeable as to Mr. Harcourt ; and another strange 
thing Alick noticed came to pass about the same 
time . Bessie ceased in her conversation to be either 
sententious or melancholy. 

In Mr. Harcourt's presence she never spoke about 
desiring to ripple by, like the Eemm ; she never 
talked concerning the world's barrenness ; about the 
dreariness of human life. 

The lover had come, and Mariana no longer cried, 
" I am a-weary." The lover had come, and she 
discoursed before him much after the fashion of other 
people. If the later fashion seemed to Alick less 



MORE VISITORS. 167 

attractive than that formerly adopted by her, who 
can say the fashion was not a better one . ^more 
fitted for every-day wear ? 

But Alick was young, and liked sentiment. As 
our mothers, when girls, used to luxuriate in Mrs. 
Hemans' poetry, so Alick had reyelled in Bessie's 
talk, concerning the world and life, and the arid 
dreariness of both. 

To Mr. Harcourt, however, who hoped for some 
small share of happiness in existence, whose career 
had not been a smooth one, who loved rather to hear 
of the bright sunshine than of winter's clouds, 
Bessie's poetical reveries would have been utterly 
distasteful ; and as the young lady anxiously laid 
herselfikout to please him in other matters, so she 
anxiously selected her talk to suit his tastes. No 
one on earth could have proved a more submissive 
mistress than Bessie Ormson ; to those who were 
learned in the ways of women she might have seemed 
a trifle too submissive for everything in the engage- 
ment to be right 

As for Heather, she delighted in seeing matters 
progress so smoothly. With a half-jealous feeling 
gnawing at hef heart, she watched, during her rare 



168 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

momente of Insure, Gilberts devotion to tbelady of 
his dioioe. What a lover he appeared m Heather^s 
eyes! with what an ever-increaang pain she saw 
him follow BesBie about ; fearfiil lest the yery winds 
of heayen should touch her too roughly. How 
tender he was ; how thoughtful ; how mindful of 
her lightest wish; how his face brightened when 
she entered llie room ; with what looks of pride and 
affection he followed her about I 

It was all a wonderful revelation to the woman 
who had never experienced such devotion ; who was 
becoming conscious that in the book of her own 
existence some of the sweetest pages of most lives 
had never been penned ; who had never known, till 
she beheld love showered upon another, that sudi 
love had never been proffered to her. It was so 
wonderfiil a revelation, in &ct, that she could not 
help remarking one day to Miss Hope : . 

'^ How very fond Mr. Harcourt must be of Bessie !*' 
'< Yes," answered that lady, who was surveying tiie 
pmr tiurough her eye-glass, . '*he seems to like her 
well enough ; more than she is worth, in my opinion. 
He is fonder of her than she is of him. She is 
only marrying hun for a home, my dear." 



MORE VISITORS. 169 

" For a home !" repeated Heather, in amazement. 

" Yes . or to get away from home, if you prefer 
that way of putting it. The match will not turn out 
well. Remember, I said so ;" and Miss Hope took 
another look at the engaged couple, while Heather's 
thoughts flew back to the words Bessie had spoken 
as they stood together side by side on the grassy 
slope with their backs turned towards the west : 
" I wish I were more worthy his devotion ;" and of 
that other more vehement sentence spoken later on 
during the course of the same evening, when the 
girl said : ^* If you tell me to do it this minute, I 
will stay with you all my life and never marry 
any one." 

At this juncture Miss Hope dropped her eye- 
glass once again, and, turning to Heather, said: 
^^Yes, my dear, it is dear as noonday (noonday 
anywhere out of England), that on the young lady's 
part it is a marriage of convenience. How shocked 
you look ! Where have your eyes been not to find 
out the real state of matters for yourself ? I suspected 
it at the first glance ; but then, you and I are two 
very difierent people ; you are the stupidest, sim- 
plest goose I ever had the happiness of meeting." 



170 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

And the old lady laid her hand on her niece's 
shoulder with a not unkindly gesture. 

Wise old ladies occaaonally take fancies to such 
stupid, ample young geese as Heather Dudley ; and 
Miss Hope, who knew Arthur better, perhaps, than 
anybody in the world, felt sorry for the wife, whose 
lot, it was impossible for her to avoid seeing, had 
not been cast in pleasant places. 

But what, you may ask, did that matter, if 
Heather herself were unconscious of the fact? 

My reader, do you think the blind man, bom 
blind, can yet remsun ignorant for ever that others 
are able to look on the blue heavens and the green 
earth ? Do you think the mute comes in due time 
to haye no comprehension that his fellows enjoy a 
gift withheld from him ? Do you imagine the deaf 
have no understanding of all which has been denied 
to them ? Do you suppose the childless never 
listen for the sound of little feet that God has 
decreed shall patter across no floor towards their 
arms outstretdied to greet them ? Do you believe 
the spinster never considers what her lot might 
have been, when she looks around and sees other 
women happily married, and sitting by no lonely 



MORE VISITORS. 171 

fires, as she is dooihed to do, through the years, the 
long, solitary, uneventful years? Do you not 
understand that in due time the eye must behold, 
and the heart long . that the fruit eaten so many 
thousand years ago by our common mother, mvsi 
be tasted sooner or later in its bitterness by all who 
are born of woman, and who would attain to the 
full stature of man ? 

On the branches of the tree still hangs that which 
gives knowledge of good and evil ; and till the hand 
have grasped, and the mind received, no life can be 
called perfect, no human being become as a god, 
comprehending, not merely the mystery of good and 
evil, but also all the joy and all the sorrow which 
that mystery involves. 



172 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER Vni. 

m heather's dressing-room. 

Taken as a whole, the incongruous ingredients 
brought together at Berrie Down Hollow did not 
form a peculiarly agreeable social dish. In one 
respect it might have been called a kind of haggis, 
but the result proved that what may be made 
palatable in cookery, cannot always be tried do- 
mestically. 

The oatmeal and the vegetables^ the mincemeat 
and the savoury stuffing, refused to amalgamate at 
the daily dinner-table, and, as is usual in such cases, 
each guest thought the absence of his neighbours 
the only thing needed to ensure perfect comfort and 
happiness at the board. 

It is a way people have . this of thinking all 
God's creatures bores excepting themselves . of 



IN heather's dressing-room. 173 

imagining certain pleasant places on earth were 
made for their especial delectation, and that every 
other man, woman, or child, who sets foot within 
the enclosure, should be ousted out, and prosecuted 
for trespass. 

There are common lands on which the majority 
of mankind may browse if they will, but they must 
leave the sunny green slopes, the sweet clover-fields, 
the well-fenced paddock, for the gratification and 
comfort of the elect ; and perhaps the most curious 
social problem of the day is to notice how, amongst 
saints and sinners alike, one common idea prevails, . 
the former believing they have a right to heaven, 
the latter that they have a right to earth. 

Each saint thinks that other saints have no right 
or title to be pushing themselves forward into the 
heavenly kingdom ; each sinner thinks his fellow- 
sinner should remain at home, and not strive to 
gain an entrance where he is most decidedly de 
trop. 

Any one who has noticed the disgust of this 
world's elect at the sight of any one whom they do not 
chance to like, seated opposite to them at dinner, will 
have no difficulty in understanding how hard it 



174 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

would be to get into heaven, if man had any power 
in the matter of rejection or selection. Easier a 
thousand times for a camel to pass through the 
needle's eye, than for him who was judged by his 
fellow to obtain ingress there. 

It is not profane to argue from analogy, even on 
sacred subjects, and when we see how man would 
deal with man in life, it is not difficult to guess how 
man would deal, if he could, with man after death. 

^^ Me . me . place for me ! make room for me ! 
you surely care for me ! you will certainly be glad 
to see me !" is the cry here ; and is it too much to 
assume that in the secret souls of men it is the cry 
for hereafter ? 

I am certain it was so at all events with Heather's 
guests : if they could have kept each other, not 
merely out of Berrie Down, but out of heaven, they 
would have done it. 

To say that Miss Hope hated the entire of the 
Cuthbert connection would be to use too mild a 
word. To say that Mr. and Mrs. Black, Mrs. 
Ormson, and Miss Ormson, stank in her nostrils, 
and that the younger Dudleys stank likewise, though 
with a lesser offensiveness, would fail to convey an 



IN heather's dressing-room. 175 

idea of the state of the lady's real feelings on the 
subject of her brother-in-law's second marriage; 
whilst by Mrs. Black, Mrs. Ormson, Bessie, and the 
younger Dudleys, Miss Hope's dislike was returned 
with ample interest . honestly paid in kind. 

But not here did the dislikes end. With all her 
heart Mrs. Black wished her sister, Mrs. Ormson, at 
the antipodes ; while with all Mrs. Ormson's heart 
she wished, not merely Mrs. Black, but also her own 
husband, Mr. Ormson, at New Zealand. If the 
go^ had known much about human nature . which, 
judging from results, we may conclude they do not. 
they would have mated Mr. Black with Mrs. Orm- 
son, Mr. Ormson with Mrs. Black. 

'* There would have been the wife for me," Mr. 
Black stated one day, in strict confidence, to Heather, 
" but she was secured, ma'am . snapped up." 

How badly off Heather thought mankind must 
have been for wives, when two of the sex considered 
Mrs. Ormson a desirable helpmeet, she did not deem 
it needful to state. One virtue of Arthur Dudley's 
wife was, that she knew when to hold her tongue, . 
an incalculable advantage in a woman, when such 
silence does not arise from indifference or stupidity : 



176 FAB ABOVE BUBOES. 

Heather was neither indifferent nor stapid, but Ae 
powesBed that one great g^ft of discretion, without 
which, as Solomon says (and we may safely consider 
him an authority), ^ beauty is to a woman but as 
a jewel in a swine's snout" 

And Heaven knows there was need both for 
discretion and patience, in those days, at Berrie 
Down! 

There are some people with whom everybody can 
agree, and Heaths, unhappily for herself chanced 
to be of that exceptional number. 

If Mrs. Ormson did not like her . ^and she did not, 
for the simple and explidt reason, as she informed 
all whom it might concern^ that Mrs. Dudley *^ was 
not one of her sort'' . still she was quite unable to 
resist taking her into her confidence, and telling 
her all Mr. Ormson's shortcomings, all Bessie's 
delinquendes, all her maternal anxieties, all Mrs. 
Black's follies^ all the young Marsden's sins, all the 
indignities which Miss Hope had heaped upon the 
devoted head of the late Squire Dudley's second 
wife. 

^^ Just as she would treat you, if you had not a 
spirit of your own," finished Mrs. Ormson, which 



IN heather's dressing-room. 177 

speech was the more amusing, as Heather, mih^ 
pily, had not a spirit of her own, but let the whole 
party trample over her at their own sweet wills. 

Then Mrs. Black would, in her weak, limp way, 
intrude on Heather's only really quiet hour, by 
knocking at her dressing-rooni door, and asking if 
she might come in for a comfortable chat, ^^for 
really everything seems so peaceful when I am here 
with you alone, that I could stay upstairs for ever ;" 
an arrangement, the very mention of which filled 
Heather's heart with a terrible despair. 

After a time Bessie would^ much to Mrs. Black's 
chagrin, appear on the stage, and offer to dress 
Mrs. Dudley's hair, . an offer Heather always gladly 
accepted, since Bessie's chatter seemed infinitely 
preferable to Mrs. Black's inane repinings. 

" Lord bless me, aunt," Miss Ormson was wont 
to say, with a vehemence of expression which afforded 
a strong contrast to the sentimental discourses con- 
cerning her own life and lives in general that had 
delighted Alick Dudley, ^^ what do you want that 

you have not got ? If I had your money," with a 
strong emphasis on the personal pronouns, '^ and no 

children" (this fact was very fennel in the cup of 

VOL. I. N 



178 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

Mrs. Black's existence), "I would enjoy myself, see 
if I would not/' 

"Ah, Bessie I'' Mrs. Blax;k was wont to reply, 
" money is all very well while it lasts, and it does 
not last long, you know, but sympathy is better." 

*' Oh, bother sympathy !" Bessie replied . ^if she 
had been a man she would have said something a 
great deal stronger . ^^ what good is it, and what do 
you want people to sympathize about?" 

" When you are married, child, perhaps you will 
know," answered Mrs. Black, vaguely ; whereupon 
Bessie asseiied : 

^^ If any husband bullied me, aunt, as uncle bullies 
you, I would soon let him know the diflference. He 
would not care to try the experiment with me 
twice." 

"It is easy for you to talk," said Mrs. Black, 
feebly. 

*^ Not in the least easier than it would be for me 
to act," answered Bessie, strong in her youth and 
health, giving various pulls to Heather's hair during 
the course of the conversation, which might be con- 
sidered as special marks of admiration, put in to 
attract Mr& Dudley's notice. '^I'd like to see my 



IN heather's dressing-room. 179 

mother submit to the one-half you bear. Believe 
me, aunt, Griseldas are not thought much of by 
modern husbands. If any Griselda of the present 
day went home * smockless,' that is, . if such a thing 
would be tolerated by our * intelligent' police, . she 
might stay smockless all the days of her life after* 
wards, whilst her liege lord committed bigamy, or 
flaunted about with some other woman clothed in 
velvets and satins." 

^^I do not know what you, are talking about, 
Bessie," Mrs. Black would make answer. 

"About a certain Griselda, who was, as Lally 
says, *a fool,' and lived in verse . how many cen- 
turies ago, Heather ?" 

 How should I tell ?" asked Mrs. Dudley. 

" Say eight or ten, that is near enough," went on 
Bessie. "She was a woman, and her husband a 
man. Like many women, she was, as I have said, a 
fool, and he, like many men, was a brute. There 
you have the whole story, aunt; it reads a trifle 
like your own." 

" But, my dear Bessie, your uncle is not a brute," 
ventured Mrs. Black. 

" I am delighted to hear it," Bessie answered. 

N 2 



180 FAB ABOVE BUBIBB. 

^^ He 18 a little rough, to be sore/' Mrs. Black 
went on, *^ and has no appredation, no sympathy, 
as I said before ; but, while he has money, if he 
could clothe me in doth of gold, he would do it" 

" You may be very glad he cannot," answered 
Bessie, ^ for cloth of gold would be not merely very 
expensiye, but also very unbecoming." 

 How you talk, child 1" 

^^Good gradous, aunt! what do you think my 
tongue was given to me for, except to talk?" 
asked the young lady. And so on, and so on, 
till Heather, sometimes amused, but far oftener 
wearied, would entreat Mrs. Black to take Bessie 
away with her, to which little ruse Bessie lent her- 
self, not unwillingly, throwing back a look at Mrs. 
Dudley, which said, as plainly as a look could say, 
^' You would let me stay, if it were not to get rid 
of her." 

^ How can you think of allowing those people to 
pester you as they do ?" this was Miss Hope ; ^^ you 
are far too amiable ; if I were mistress here, you 
would see whether they should torment me. I would 
make use of them instead. Each of the aunts should 
have one of the girls constantly with her on a visit, 



IN heather's dressing-boom. 181 

and Mr. Black and Mr. Ormson should take the 
two boys into their respective offices. The boys 
do not wish to be with their uncles, is that 
what you say ? Well, Heather, I really do wonder 
at your weakness. What have the boys' wishes to 
do in the matter? Is Arthur to keep them for 
ever? Are they never to go out into the world, 
and try to earn an honest living ? Are you to have 
your house full of another woman's children all your 
life, and be worried to death with them ?" 

^^ Please not to talk like that, Miss Hope," Heather 
said, piteously ; ^* the children must go some day, 
I know, but without them Berrie Down will never 
seem the same Berrie Down to me." 

" Do you mean to say you like having them here ?" 
Miss Hope inquired, with a gradual crescendo. 

" You do not know what they have been to me," 
Heather answered, the colour coming up into her 
face, as it always did when she was either excited 
or distressed. ''They have been assistants, com- 
forters, companions, friends I As for Alick " . ^here 
the sweet, low voice faltered . **he has been my 
very right hand; he has thought for me, worked 
for me. I have had but to wish a thing, and if 



182 FAR ABOVE BTJBIES. 

Alick heard, and it were possible to accomplifby 
I never wished vainly. He is going : it is right he 
should. I have striven for him to go ; but I shall 
feel lost without him. Already it is to me as though 
some one in the house were dying." 

Miss Hope solaced herself with a chocolate cream 
at this point. As some people take snuff, so Arthur 
Dudley's aunt took chocolate. Apparently it stimu- 
lated her thoughts, for she said : 

" You are an original, if ever there were one." 
"Do you think I do not mean what I say?" 
asked Heather, uncertain what the observation im- 
plied. " Do you think I do not love my husband's 
brothers and sisters ? Do you imagine any woman 
ever found such brothers and sisters before . such 
bright, wDling helpers . such unselfish, loving, cheer- 
ful boys and girls ?" 

" I think, my dear, any person who could not be 
happy with you could not be happy with any one. 
You certainly are a very sweet creature . don't 
blush, or, yes, rather do, it is becoming to you. I 
saw a face exactly like yours in a studio at Rome 
last year. Did you ever know an artist of the name 
of Whiteman ? No ? . ^ah ! then he could not have 



IN heather's dressing-room. 183 

fallen in love with you in years gone by, and he 
making money out of your beauty now. What did 
that murmur mean ? . that you are not beautiful ? 
Stuff! Excuse me, but it is stuff! I suppose you 
will allow that I know a pretty face when I see it ? 
and I declare you are beautiful . twenty times more 
so than that Bessie Ormson, whom I should not 
have in the house an hour, if I were in your shoes." 
" I like Bessie greatly," Heather remarked. 
" Of course you do . you like every one . a flirty, 
flighty miss, who would take up with your favourite 
Alick if there were no other man in the way, or with 

Arthur, or ^" 

" Why, Arthur and she never speak a civil word 
to each other," Mrs. Dudley objected. 

" That is the way with all those kind of people . 
they begin with quarrelling and end by loving. Of 
course, you know your own business best; but I 
would not have her here. I am sure I have heard of 
such things, and Arthur is such a weak simpleton !" 
 Miss Hope !" 

"Don't be indignant, my dear. Before ever you 
knew Arthur I knew him, and whfet I say is true. 
He is even so weak that he has not the remotest 



184 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

idea what a treasure of a wife fate sent him. 
Arthur is amiable enough, and headstrong enough, 
in some things ; but still I would not trust him too 
far. Look how Mrs. Ormson winds him round 
her finger I Well, if Bessie were to change her 
tactics, and humour him, she might *' 

"It is not right of you," interrupted Heather. 
*^ Indeed, Miss Hope, it is not right ; you should 
not say such things of my husband and your nephew ; 
and as for that poor innocent girl . . " 

^^ Innocent !" interposed Miss Hope, in her turn. 
" An innocent that could buy and sell you, and me 
too . ay, and make money out of both of us ! I would 
have none of her. Not but what the girl is an 
amusing enough companion, and clever too ; and if 
she had loved this man . this Gilbert Harcourt . and 
settled down, she might have become, in her station, 
a respectable enough member of society ; but she 
does not care for him . ^there's the misery." 

^^ I cannot imagine what makes you think Sessie 
does not care for him," persisted Heather. 

^^ I imagine what my eyes tell me to be the truth, 
and nothing more," answered Miss Hope. " She is 
too anxious to please him, far too careful of what 



IN heather's dressing-room. 185 

she saySy much too ready to do what he asks her, 
keeps that sweet temper of hers too much under . ^is, 
in fact, much too good and saintlike for a happy 
young woman. Why, my dear, they ought to have 
tiffii and sulking fits, quarrels and reconciliations . 
to part eternally one hour, and be kissing like a 
couple of stupids the next. But why do I talk like 
this to you, who have gone through it all yourself?" 
Heather made no answer, but, turning a little 
towards the window, removed her face from Miss 
Hope's observation. Had she gone through it; had 
she ever held such a power over Arthur as this indi- 
cated ; had she herself even ever gone through the 
heat and the cold, the crater and the snowdrift ; had 
she ever smiled those smiles, and wept those tears, 
which a woman only smiles and weeps when she is 
dreaming her love-dreams ; was this mystery, which 
she had been groping about after blindly for years, 
going to be revealed to her at last ; was what Miss 
Hope said true; was the love-play that she saw 
acted out every hour before her eyes, true but as 
regarded one of the performers in it? If it were so, 
what then had that play been which decided the fate 
of her own life . a farce, a tragedy . which ? Was 



186 FAB ABOVE RUBIEa 

light, after the blessed darkness of years, only 
breaking to reveal to her this ? Were other human 
lives but mirrors reflecting back the sad, pitiful face 
of her own married experience ? What had come 
to her . what was coming to her ? Knowledge 1 and, 
with an undefined dread of what knowledge might 
bring with it. Heather, standing by the open 
window, looking adown the smooth green slope, and 
so away to the far still country lying ofif in the dis- 
tance, silently prayed that she might hear and 
understand no more . that as knowledge had come 
so late, it might never come at all. 

It was growing upon her that Arthur did not love 
her . ^had never loved her. Everybody said he did 
not guess how good a wife had fallen to his share ; 
and little as, in her modesty, she believed there was 
to call "good" about her, still Heather thought that 
if Arthur really cared for her he would overrate rather 
than underrate her better qualities, and try to be 
satisfied with her endeavours to please him. 

Instead of which, let her do what she would, 
Arthur found fault ; before strangers, too, who took 
her part, and thus drove the nail home. 

" I cannot think what has changed him so much," 



IN heather's dressing-room. 187 

the poor wife thought, her eyes filled with tears that 
prevented her seeing any object distinctly. "He 
used to be so different;" which was true to this 
extent, namely, that the writing on Arthur Dudley's 
mind had remained almost undistinguishable till it 
came to be passed through the social fire, which made 
every character traced on it clear even to eyes that 
would rather not have read there any word, likely 
in the future to affect injuriously Heather's happi- 
ness or Heather's peace. 

" And another thing," . ^it was Miss Hope again 
speaking, which brought Heather back from a long 
vague journey to the realities of life . '* I would not 
have that Mr. Black staying here; of course, as 
I said before, you know your own business best, 
but I know how it will all end. That man and 
Mrs. Ormson, between them, will make Arthur 
dissatisfied." 

'* He has long been so," remarked Heather. 

"Let me finish my sentence, if you please," pro- 
ceeded Miss Hope . " will make Arthur dissatisfied 
and induce him to join in some senseless project, 
which will ruin him. Ruin him," repeated the lady. 
" You know what that means, I suppose ; and when 



188 FAR ABOVE RnBIE& 

that day comeSy remember, I am not going to help 
him. You can tell him what I say." 

"I would much rather not," Mrs. Dudley ob- 
served. 

"But I beg that you will, should opportunity 
offer. Tell him I have sunk all my money in an 
annuity, and that I shall not have a sixpence to 
leave or give to anybody." 

" Dear Miss Hope, I trust you do not think that 
we " 

** I think nothing ill of yow," interrupted the old 
lady. *^ And, for that matter, I do not think Arthur 
mercenary, either. He could have packed all those 
children off with their mother years ago, had he not 
been generous as well as foolish : but he is just the 
man first to get rid of all his own money, and then 
to think he can get rid of all mine too, so disabuse his 
mind of that idea, will you, like a dear sweet soul ?" 

" As I am confident such an idea never entered 
his mind, there can be no necessity for me to dis- 
abuse him of it," said Heather, a little stiffly. 

" Well, when it does enter it, do not depend on 
me for help. What, cross?" added Miss Hope. 
** Frowning is not at all becoming to you, Heather ; 



IN heather's dressing-room. 189 

and I did not think your eyes could have held so 
dark a look as I see in them now/* 

" Because everything seems to be going wrong," 
Mrs. Dudley said passionately ; ^^ because one comes 
to me with advice, and another with a caution, till 
I am sick and tired of both; because no person 
seems to like any other person ; because, for peace 
sake, I have even to keep my children constantly out 
of sight ; because there are dreadful things said, and 
dreadful things thought ; because I am miserable, 
and everybody tries, I do believe, to make me more 
miserable still." 

^^Sit down," said Miss Hope ; and when Heatbei^ 
seemed inclined to rebel, the old lady pushed her 
with gentle force into the nearest chair. ^^Mrs. 
Dudley, I am going to talk to you ;" she proceeded; 
but then she paused, and involuntarily, as it seemed, 
put another chocolate into her mouth. 

^^Take one?" she said, handing the box to 
Heather. 

" Not any, thank you ; " the brown eyes looked 
very defiant at the moment, and Heather's tone 
was defiant also. 

" You do not like chocolate ?" 



190 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

** I detest it," was the explicit answer. 

" It is an acquired taste, and you have acquired 
very few tastes as yet, I fancy," said Miss Hope ; 
" you have much to leara." 

^^ I am not bound to learn, I suppose," was Mrs. 
Dudley's reply. 

** There is a school, my dear, in which it does not 
much matter whether the pupils be apt or not . will- 
ing or unwilling, they cannot help but learn. I 
should rather like to keep you out of that school ; 
it is a very absurd thing for an old woman who has 
no heart and no sympathy to say ; but it is true, for 
all that I am very fond of you. Heather Dudley." 

" You are very kind. Miss Hope." 

^'You are not in a mood to think so at this 
moment," said Arthur's aunt ; ** but wait a little. I 
have known your husband longer than you have; 
I am slightly better acquainted with the world, and 
the men and women in it, than you are ; and I want 
to tell you, that if Arthur and Mr. Black are much 
together, my nephew will make ducks and drakes of 
Berrie Down, and you and he and the children 
won't have sixpence a-year." 

It was not a pleasant picture to contemplate. Let 



IN heather's dbessing-room. 191 

a woman be as I'tUe soidid as she please, still th3 
interest on sixpence paid quarterly must seem an 
insufficient income; and Heather sat silent for a 
minute considering Miss Hope's words. She was a 
wise wife, though a lojal; andj though her com- 
panion had hurt and irritated her, still she would 
not let the bark containing Arthur Dudley's fortune 
go down, if timely knowledge could prevent its 
doing so. 

" What is the danger ?" she asked at length ; 
*' what is the precise danger you think an intimacy 
with Mr. Black involves ?" 

** His drawing Arthur into some of his schemes," 
was the reply. " You know, of course, Mr. Black 
is a man who has always lived by his wits." 

" No, I do not," answered Heather. " I should 
have thought they would have yielded him an insuf- 
ficient income." 

" On the contrary, they have yielded him a very 
good income," said Miss Hope ; *' and for this reason, 
that he cannot be put down. His impudence and, 
I may add, his energy, are inexhaustible. He is 
like a cork . he will float where much more valu- 
able people founder. Now, if Arthur go with him, 
At bur will founder." 



192 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

**Howdo yon mean, go with him?"* asked Heather. 

^* Join him, embark in any of his numerous specu- 
lations. Wait a moment ; I have got a letter oon- 
ceming our friend in my pocket Let me turn the 
key in your door first, to keep out some of those 
irrepressible people whom I hear coming in search of 
you. I am not going to show you that letter, but I 
will read you a few paragraphs out of it. There, I 
told you . knock away . ^who's there ? . what do you 
want ?.' 

^ May I come in ?*' asked Mrs. Qrmson, vainly 
trying to open the door. ^ Is Heather to be 
seen?" 

*'No/' almost screamed Miss Hope; ^'she is 
lying down with a very bad headache, and must not 
be disturbed." 

^* May I not speak to her for a moment ?" 

** Certainly not ; I will come downstairs presently 
and hear all you have got to say." 

** That you won't," thought Mrs. Ormson. 

^' Now, do go away, please Mrs. Ormson, and tell 
your daughter not to come worrying. There, that's 
a good riddance ; how frightened you look, child !" 

" She will be so angry . so offended." 

" Let her be offended. Is the house not your 



IN heather's dressing-room. 193 

own? Have you no right to ten minutes' quiet in 
the day ? Are you to be at the beck and call of a 
parcel of people who would like you to slave for 
their amusement? I'm out of patience with it. 
And, besides, your head is aching. Don't contra- 
dict me ; I know better." 

" I had no intention of contradicting you," 
Heather answered. "Now about the letter, Miss 
Hope . that is, if you think it quite right for me to 
hear it." 

In reply to which last clause, Arthur's aunt told 
Heather not to be absurd, but to listen attentively. 

"Respecting Mr. Black, I should recommend 
great caution. He is a person who has had almost 
every known iron in the fire, and burnt other men's 
fingers with all of them. He has made a composi- 
tion with his creditors three times a . (composition 
means, that if you owe a person a hundred pounds, 
you pay him ten shillings, and the debt is done 
with." This, Miss Hope.) " Passed through the In- 
solvent Court thrice, and been bankrupt twice . 
(bankruptcies, and insolvencies, and compositions 
all pretty nearly come to the same thing." Miss 
Hope in explanation again.) " He has embarked in 
VOL. L * o 



194 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

almost every trade which can be commenoed without 
either knowledge or cajntaL He is suspected of 
having been connected with several of the shilling 
swindles. (that is, send twelve stamps, and by 
retmrn *^ Enlightened Miss Hope ! 

**I know about that," said Heather, proud at 
last of being acquainted with some of the world's 
wickednes ; ^ for I sent the twelve stamps, 
and got back a reply advising me to sell baked 
potatoes." 

*' Very probably Mr. Black wrote it," suggested 
Miss Hope; *^but to go on. Several of the 
shilling swindles, and particularly with one, which 
was carried on very successfully in the City, and 
which realised a very large sum to the persons 
engaged in it. I know about that," confided 
Miss Hope, repeating Heather's words. ^^The 
shares were five shillings each, and I took fifty, lost 
my twelve pounds ten, and think I bought my 
wisdom cheap. Mr. Black is at present engaged 
in promoting and carrying through four or five 
difierent companies. For one of these, a very large 
undertaking, he is looking up directors, and has, I 
am told, got some good names . amongst others. 



IN heatheb's dressing-room. 195 

that of Mr. Allan Stewart. What makes you look 
fio astonished, child ?" 

^^ Allan Stewart was the name of my god- 
father/' explained Heather. ''He had property 
near Layford." 

" This Mr. Stewart is old, rich, and cross," said 
Miss Hope. 

** And our Mr. Stewart was rich and cross like- 
wise," Heather answered; whereupon Miss Hope 
laid down her letter, and wondered if the two could 
by any possibility be one and the same. 

" Did you ever happen to hear him speak of a 
nephew called Douglas Aymescourt?" inquired 
Miss Hope. 

'' I never heard him speak about any one/' was 
Heather s reply ; " for, before I could speak myself, 
he and my father had some little difference in 
opinion, which finally swelled into such a quarrel 
that all visiting ceased. But who is Mr. Aynies- 
court? I have heard of him, though not from Mr. 
Stewart" 

" What have you heard about him ?" Miss Hope 

asked. 

" Nothing, excepting that you knew him" 

2 



196 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" And who told you I knew him ?" 

** Arthur; at least, he and Mrs; Ormson were 
talking here one evening, and there was something 
said about your knowing him and his wife. Who 
are they T 

*'Well, Mr. Aymescourt is Mr. Stewart's ne- 
phew, and Mrs. Aymescourt is Mrs. Aymescourt," 
answered Miss Hope, shortly. 

" But who was she ?" persisted Heather. 

''She was a Miss Laxton in the days when I 
knew anything about her/' said Miss Hope; ''a 
handsome girl, with a detestable temper and a fine 
fortune. They say she and her husband live like 
cat and dog ; but all this has nothing to do with 
my friend's letter. Listen to it, please ;" and Miss 
Hope proceeded : "There can be no doubt but that, 
were this company once formed, Mr. Black, and 
probably many others, would make a good thing of 
it ; but the difficulty in carrying it through appears 
to be want of capital for advertising and various 
other expenses. Mr. Stewart, as you are aware, is 
not a person likely to give away his name uselessly. 
I have no doubt he is to be liberally paid for 
allowing it to appear on the Direction. 



IN heather's dressinq-room. 197 

'^Paid for his name? Wliat is the translation 
of that?" inquired Heather. 

" The translation of that is, Mr. Stewart will be 
either paid in shares or money for allowing his name 
to appear on the Direction," said Miss Hope, who, 
for a woman that had bought her experience for 
twelve pounds ten, seemed wonderfully at home in 
the intricacies of City matters ; " and if the gentle- 
man in whom you are interested," proceeded 
Arthur's aunt, once again reading from the letter, 
^'be, as you seem to imply, not merely a person 
inexperienced in business, but also speculative, 
there can be no doubt Mr. Black's purpose is to 
obtain money from him in order to float his 
company." 

Here Miss Hope folded up her manuscript, and 
looked at Heather. 

"But we have no money," said the latter, an-^ 
swering Miss Hope's look. 

'* No, but you have Berrie Down." 

** And you think Arthur would be so mad ?*' 

began Heather. 

" I am sure he will be so mad, if some one do not 
put a stop to these private walks and talks . these 



198 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

wanderings over the fields . these ooofidential 
whisperings.'* 

*' Shall yoa read him that letter, Miss Hc^?** 
yentored the poor wife, timidly. 

*^ Do yon think I am mad, too, Heather Dnd* 
ley ?" ad^ed Miss Hope ; '^ do you think I want 
every word in it to be repeated to Mr. Black? 
No ; yoa must meet influence with influence ; you 
must dieckmate stratagem by stratagem. For 
Arthur's sake and for the sake of your children, yo 
must avert this great evil which is coming upon you. 
This man must go, and Mrs. Ormson also, and 
Arthur must not follow them to London. Berrie 
Down is not gone yet ; but Berrie Down will go, if 
you do not exert yourself to save it." 

For a moment Heather bent her head on her 
hands before she replied ; then, ^* Berrie Down is 
not mine, to keep or to lose T she said. 

"No; but you can prevent Arthur losing it." 

** How ?" Heather lifted her eyes, and looked 
straight into Miss Hope's face as she asked this 
question. 

" How ?" repeated her companion ; " why, you 
must talk to Arthur, find out what he is thinking of 



m heather's drbssino-room. 199 

joining ; and, if it be as we imagine, prevent his doing 
anything so utterly suicidal." 

" And you think I could prevent him ?' 

^^ If you have any influence at all over him, and I 
suppose no other human being has so much, and 
like to exert it, I should think you might." 

** Miss Hope, I have no influence." 

Many a time afterwards, Heather marvelled how 
she came to utter that sentence, . utter it as calmly 
as though no bitterness lurked in the words. She 
marvelled how everything grew clear to her in a 
moment, as it seemed; how, for the time, she 
appeared to be another person lookmg calmly and 
dispassionately at her own position, and forming a 
conclusion concerning that position. The years came 
and stood before her then . the years during which 
she had loved and laboured in vain, in which she 
had spent her strength for nought, in which she had 
been happy and unsuspecting, in which she had 
never been other than vaguely conscious of a want 
in which, though her life had always lacked the 
principal ingredient all lives require before they can 
be pronounced happy, she had yet believed herself 
so . ^believed that hers was a lot to be desired. 



200 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

The years came and stood before her, and each 
had the same story to tell, . ^that during its course she 
had grown no more necessary to her husband, no 
nearer to his confidence, no dearer to his heart, no 
more appreciated by him. 

At last, the question which had long been tor- 
menting her was put in a tangible form, the enigma 
that had puzzled her was solved in a single sentence 
spoken by her own lips, . 

" I have no influence." 

Miss Hope did not immediately answer. She sat 
looking in the sad, lovely face before her, till at last 
she arrived at a perfect conviction of the truth con- 
veyed in Heather's worda In all her life before 
she had never met a woman who possessed no power 
either to lead or drive, to coax, to flatter, to delude 
or to bully a husband; and, although she saw 
Arthur did not appreciate Heather, she had not 
dreamed of his wife havuig not the slightest influence 
over him. 

'^ So that is the way of it," she said, after a long 
pause. 

** That is the way of it," Heather answered, rising 
as she spoke. 



IN HteATHEh's DRESSING-ROOM. 201 

Next moment she dropped back into her chair. 
'^ It is nothing. I am not going to faint," she said, 
detaining Miss Hope, who was darting off for water. 
'' Only this talk has tried me. Don't you under, 
stand ?" 

Miss Hope was not much given to such demon- 
strations, but she knelt down on the floor beside 
Heather, and twined her arms round her nephew s 
wife. 

"Lay your head on my shoulder, dear," she 
whispered ; and Heather drooped it wearily as she 
was desired. 

She did not cry. She did not make any lamenta- 
tion ; but she sat witli her head drooped, thinking 
out her trouble, vaguely wondering through it all, 
whether . when Mrs. Ormson said, as she was often 
kind enough to do, "Arthur ought to have married 
a rich wife," and when Miss Hope, kneeling on the 
ground, murmured '^ You are too good for Arthur ; 
be ought to have married a virago," . they had 
mutually in their minds' eyes Mrs. Aymescourt, nSe 
Laxton. 



2U2 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 



CHAPTER IX. 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 



It is a curious question to consider how very fre- 
quently the same matter is being discussed at the 
same time by different people; to notice bow a 
similar idea is germinated in utterly dissimilar 
minds, and becomes for a period the subject of 
animated discussion between yarious pairs and 
groups of people. There is no reason, so far as we 
can tell, why two men should talk on any given 
topic at any given time ; but, supposing that two 
men do so converse, we may be morally certain 

that two other people, and many other twos besides, 
either have got, or immediately will get, hold of 
the theme also, and commence tearing it to rags 
straight away. 

Various questions go the round of families, little 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 203 

communities, large masses, the bulk of the popular 
tioD, the inhabitants of countries, all about the same 
time. Different subjects seem to come in the air 
like influenza, cholera, the cattle plague, without 
rhyme or reason ; they affect the whole of society to a 
greater or less extent ; and when they are exhausted, 
another idea, like another epidemic, takes the place 
of its predecessor. 

There is no accounting for these things, no account- 
ing for the fact that often, when you are thinking or 
talking of a friend long absent, he walks into your 
chambers, or stops you in the street ; no accounting 
for the very disagreeable fact, that if you find a 
creditor straying into your mind, if you begin won- 
dering why he has ^ven you peace for so long, 
the next post is almost certain to bring a little re- 
minder from him ; no accounting for the ill-fortune 
which if, Jones, shall we say, take to writing a 
memoir of Fan: Rosamond, sets all the Browns, 
Smiths, and Bobinsons writing books about that 
frail beauty also. 

Once upon a time, two people, unknown to each 
other, resident as far apart as Northumberland and 
Cornwall, shall we say, composed two melodies, and, 



204 FAR ABOVE KUUIES. 

behold, when a common friend beard the twain, they 
were identical. It is the same with works of imag^- 
nation : a dozen people, writing novels in one yeai% 
are almost certain to handle identical subjects with 
a difference. 

People cannot be original either, even in their 
travels. Imagine that Jones, exhausted with his 
literary propping-up of Fair Rosamond's reputation, 
says secretly to his own soul, ''I will eschew my 
kind, and take holiday where the heart of man 
never dreamed of taking holiday before, in the 
smallest county in England." He thinks he has 
conceived a new thing, yet Smith is on the station 
when he gets to King's Cross, with travelling-bag 
labelled " Oakham," also. It is a marvel the pair 
do not kill each other ; but, instead of that, they 
exchange cigars, and the newspapers, and stop at 
the same hotel. 

It is a law of nature, we may conclude, this 
rotatory cropping-up of ideas, this constant evidence 
that nothing we do, or say, or think, is in itself 
perfectly new or original ; and, however unpleasant 
many natural laws may be, still we cannot get rid 
of them, nor escape from their control 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 205 

And, indeed . though we always are . why should 
we even be astonished at these coincidences ? When 
we see one primrose on a bank, we may feel pretty 
certain there are other primroses not far off. They 
come in their season like the thoughts of men ; th^y 
dot the hedgerows, and spring amongst the woods ; 
they show their faces boldly by the road-side, and 
they hide them shyly amid the grass ; they are sold 
in the market-place, and the children gather them 
for posies; they bloom; they are sought after; they 
are taken to grace lordly rooms ; they remain unseen ; 
they wither ; they pass away ; they are forgotten ; 
like the thoughts of the best men, they but serve 
their purpose and depart, to make way for fresh 
flowers, and for fresh thinkers ; for there is nothing 
new under the sun. 

All of which may help to explain the fact, that 
although Mr. Black's latest financial unidertaking 
resembled the root of a primrose as little as any 
two things on the face of the earth could do by 
possibility, still his scheme bore many flowers of 
?peech in Berne Down Hollow. 

On the day when Miss Hope broke ground in 
Heather's dressing-room, many other people broke 



206 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

up the game ground, though with different intentions, 
and in different language, 

Gilbert told Beeae how Mr. Black had offered 
him the business of a ^^ large company " (Mr. Har- 
conrt was a young solicitor) ; at least, said he would 
try to get it for him, whereupon Besae remarked she 
hoped it would turn out a good company, for she 
thought, during the course of his life, her undo 
had often got into very questionable society. 

Likewise, lying on the drawing-room sofa, Mrs. 
Ormson discoursed to her nster about business, 
and supposed she would soon be riding in her 
carriage now, and grow too proud to find her way 
to Guildford Street at all ! 

Speaking of his new prospects to Alick, Mr. 
Ormson, an utterly inoffensive individual, remarked, 
he hoped the lad ^^ would not let himself be led away 
by Mr. Black, or made dissatisfied with his small 
salary, for, whatever some people might imagine, 
fortunes were not to be picked up out of the gutter ; 
at least, not with clean hands," added Mr. Ormson, 
after a pause ; . ^while riding side by side with Lord 
Kemms along Berrie Down Lane, Mr. Compton 
Baidsford, beholding Arthur Dudley and Mr. Black 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 207 

walking together up and down one of the broad 
green meadows, shaded by a pleasant hedgerow, 
remarked to his companion : . 

" I hope Dudley won't suffer that fellow to drag 
him into any of his rotten companies. If he do, 
Berrie Down Hollow will soon be in the market" 

** In which case I shall buy it," said his lordship. 

** I do not think you will, excepting at something 
condderably beyond its value, for I have set my 
heart upon it too," observed Mr. Raidsford ; where- 
upon the pair laughed, and Lord Eemms, reverting 
to Mr. Black, informed his companion ^'he had 
been asking him to allow his name to appear on the 
Direction." 

"Which Direction?" inquired Mr. Raidsford. 
"He is floating, >r rather trying to float, several 
companies. For which of them does he solicit the 
honour of Lord Kemms' name ?" 

" For the * Protector Bread and Flour Company,' " 
answered his lordship. 

" Oh !" exclaimed Mr. Raidsford. Then, after a 
moment's silence, he asked, " And what terms does 
he offer? I suppose there is no secret about the 
matter ?'' 



208 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" None that I am aware of," was the reply ; " at 
least, be made no mention of secrecy to me. He 
offered two hundred paud-up shares, and he showed 
me names he had got, that, I confess, made me 
hesitate about refusing. In fact, I meant to ask 
your advice. You know, every one goes in for these 
kind of things now-a-days, and some people must 
make money out of them." 

** Yes, but not people who are associated mth Mr. 
Black," replied Compton Raidsford. 

*' And yet he has got the name of one man who 
is considered unusually wary in his investments, Mr. 
Allan Stewart" 

"Allan Stewart," repeated Mr. Raidsford ; "now 
you do surprise me." And he rode on for a while, 
tui*ning the matter over in his mind. 

" And he expects to get Douglas Croft." 

" The deuce he does 1" 

" So you see it is all in the family, at least in one 
branch of it," continued his lordship. 

" Ay, and if I were Lord Eemms, it might stay 
in one branch of it for me," was the quick reply. 

"But still money is made out of these kind of 
things," said Lord Kemms, harking back to the 
point from which he had started. 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 209 

" And lost," added Mr. Raidsford, quietly. 

*' But I could not lose money." 

''No, but you might be the cause of making 
others lose it," Mr. Raidsford observed. 

" I did not think of that," said Lord Kemms. 

" Every person should think of that before lend- 
ing, giving, or selling his name," answered Mr. Raids- 
ford, a little bitterly. '* Do you not know," went on 
this man, who had made every sixpence of his money 
for himself honestly, " do you not know that you, and 
sucli as you, are used by adventurers like Mr. Black 
for decoy ducks ? Could they afford to pay you the 
sums they do for the sake of mere ornament ? No, 
they use you. They do not use your money, whica 
you will not give them , nor your business capabi- 
lities, which you do not possess ; nor your influence, 
which you would not be troubled employing in their 
behalf; but they use your names. When a half- 
column advertisement appears in the TimeSy with my 
Lord This, and Sir Something That, General So and 
So, and a few esquires, living at Parks, Courts, and the 
rest of it, on the Direction, the British public comes 
up for shares like sheep to the slaughter. It does not 
matter to you when the bubble bui'sts, but it matters 

VOL. L P 



210 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

to widows and orphans, to country clergymen, to 

governesses, to all the poor deluded creatures, in 

fact, who have inyested money in the undertaking." 

'^That is supposing the thing fail, Mr. Raidsford," 

remarked Lord Kemms. 

^' I cannot suppose anything likely to succeed, 
my lord, in which Mr. Black acts as fugleman," was 

the reply. 

" Do you know much of Mr. Black ?" 

" Yes, I have known about him all my life . in 

fact, at one time, I did business with him . for he 

was town-traveller for a house which supplied us 

with tools. He was always a clever, pushing fellow, 

possessed of a tongue that would have persuaded a 

man almost to buy old castings for steel (here Lord 

Kemms smiled as though he understood the meaning 

of the illustration), and I think he might have done 

well, if he could have been but content ; however, 

he could not. His employers found out he was 

doing a little business for himself, and making a 

connexion while receiving a salary from them ; so 

they turned him adrift, and then he started on his 

own account. If he had been honest, he might still 

have succeeded ; but he fell into a bad habit of 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 211 

supplying extraordinarily bad goods, while selling 
at ordinary prices, fle had a small warehouse in 
Clerkenwell in those days, and certainly never was 
above his business, I will say that for him . am I 
wearying you, my lord ?" 

" No, the biography is interesting." 

'^ After a time, things began to go badly with 
him." proceeded Mr. Baidsford ; but here he sud- 
denly paused . " They are crossing the field so as to 
meet us," he said ; " suppose I finish my story 
afterwards." 

" No, they are not coming to meet us," said Lord 
Kemms, ** they only turned so as to make sure of 
who we were . excuse me for a moment, but I want 
to speak to Mr. Dudley ;" and his lordship shouted 
out a greeting to the Squire, who, standing on his 
dignity, only raised his hat in acknowledgment, and 
resumed his conversation with Mr. Black. 

But Lord Kemms was not a man to be so easily 
diverted from his purpose. Backing his horse to 
the other side of the road, he put him at the ditch, 
and next moment was cantering across the field 
towards his neighbour. 

.' Don't bring an action for trespass against me, 

p2 



212 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

Mr. Dudley," be said, laugbing ; ^ you are so hard 
to catch, I could not resist the opportunity of speak- 
ing to you about that filly your brother was training. 
Do you really wish to keep her ? she is exactly what 
I want for my niece.'' 

With his hands buried in his pockets, Squire 
Dudley stood silent, looking at the mane of Lord 
Kemms' Black Knight 

Truth was, brought face to face with this would- 
be purchaser, he did not know exactly what answer 
to make. 

"If you really mean to keep her,** proceeded 
Lord Eemms, growing a little hot and uncomfort- 
able, " of course I can only apologise for my mis- 
take ; but the fact is, I heard you were going to 
sell her, and . and . being neighbours, and so forth, 
I thought you might as well sell her to me as to 
anybody else." 

Still Arthur did not speak . and there is no 
knowing when he would have spoken to the purpose, 
had not Mr. Black rushed in with . 

^ I suppose it resolyes itself into a money question, 
my lord. of course I know nothing about the horse 
or the offer, but my experience is that everything is 
fl money question now-a-days." 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY, 218 

"If that be the case . " began Lord Kemms, 
good humouredly . but Arthur cut across his sen- 
tence: 

"It is not so with me," he said, deliberately 
turning his back on Mr. Black, so as to cut him 
out of the conversation ; " it is not so with me. 
For the sake of a few pounds, I would not haggle 
and bargain with any man . more especially your 
lordship. I did intend to keep the filly . not 
exactly for my own riding, but because I thought, 
and think still, she would be worth three times over 
what you offered me in another twelve months ; but 
I have changed my mind about the matter, and, if 
you like to have her on the terms you offered before, 
I will send her over to the Park to-night She is fit 
for any light weight to ride ; my brother can break 
a horse better than anyone I know." 

Arthur spoke rapidly : there was a look in his 
&ce, and a decision about his manner, Lord Kemms 
had never noticed before ; but then, to be sure, his 
opportunities of witnessing the Squire's moods had 
been few and far between. 

From the Squire it was natural Lord Kemms' 
glance should wander to Mr. Black, and written on 



214 FAR ABOVE BUBIES. 

tjiat gentleman's expres^ve countenance, the peer 
read such intense disgust at Arthur's folly, that he 
could scarcely refrain from laughing. 

^' Thank you, Mr. Dudley," he said, gathering up 
his reins and stroking the Black Knight's neck as 
he spoke ; '^ thank you very much. I shall be very 
proud of Nellie, and think her a great addition to 
my stud . she is a perfect beauty I" 

" I would not sell her to you, if I did not believe 
her to be every bit as good as she looks," answered 
the Squire. 

** Of thai I am certain," was the reply ; and Lord 
Eemms held out his hand to Arthur, . a courtesy 
which he did not think it necessary to extend to 
Mr. Black. 

" Then you will send her over this evening ?" were 
his last words, as, with a farewell nod to Mr. Black, 
he galloped across the field to rejoin Mr. Raidsford, 
whose horse had been regaling iteelf at the expense 
of Mr. Dudley's thorn-hedge during the time oc- 
cupied by the preceding conversation. 

"Well, it is no wonder you are a poor man, 
Dudley," remarked Mr. Black, the moment Lord 
Kemms was out of earshot ; '^ he would have given 



A LITTLE BIOGBAPHT. 215 

you fifty guineas more for that Nellie creature, as 
easily as fifty pence." 

** I am not a horse-dealer," returned the Squire, 
coldly. '^ And have you not secured what you 
wanted ? You said a hundred pounds would be suf- 
ficient to commence your advertising ; you have got 
your hundred pounds, and Nellie is gone." 

** You speak as if you regretted her," said Mr. 
Black. 

*' Whether I do or not is my concern," was the 
reply. 

" Of course ; only, if you do regret her, say the 
word, and I will go to Runcorn. He would take it 
up, pretty sharp, I can tell you ; only, as I explained, 
those fellows always want the biggest share for 
themselves." 

^^ I have sold the mare, and there's an end of it^" 
answered Arthur, resuming his walk up and down 
the meadow. 

^ There's the beginning of it," was Mr. Raidsford's 
somewhat different comment when Lord Kemms told 
him the result of the interview. *^ Your cheque will 
be passed through Mr. Black's bank before the 
week 18 over. Well, I am heartily sorry for Dudley. 



216 FAB ABOVE BT7BIBS. 

Even from this simple transactaon it is easy to see 
what the result will prove. A man like that stands 
no chance with Mr. Peter Black." 

" You were telling me Mr. Black's history," sug- 
gested Lord Kemms. ^ We left him in Qerkenwell, 
on his own account, and not above liis bu^ness." 

^^Your lordship must kindly excuse my Qty 
slang," answered Mr. Baidsford. 

** On the contrary . excuse me. or rather let me 
assure you my quotations were intended as compli- 
mentary, not satirical. Your story interests me 
immensely. I wish I could relate a man's biography 
as well." 

^' Although he stuck to his business^" proceeded 
Mr. Baidsford, without directly readying to his com- 
panion's gracious remark, ^' he fell into difficulties ; 
perhaps, because he did not stick to it solely, but 
served himself precisely as he had served his employers. 
Speculated ; tried to attend to two things at onoe 
and, as is usual in such cases, neither answered. 
Then he failed, and passed through the Court." 

" The Bankruptcy Court, do you mean ?" inquired 
Lord Eemms. 

^^No, the Insolvent," was the reply. He has 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 217 

been through them both more than once. I was in 
wit 1 him the first time for about a couple of 
hundreds, and I remember the estate paid a shilling 
in the pound. I have never lost much by him since, 
however. 

" After this whitewashing, he began the world 
again as clerk to a wine-merchant, in Devonshii'e 
Square. While he was in that employment, he met 
with some man who had a few hundreds, and the 
pair went into partnership. For a time everything 
progressed swimmingly, but at last they failed and 
passed through the Bankruptcy Court, creditably 
enough, if I recollect rightly. 

" Mr. Black next turned up in an alley oflF Corn- 
hill, as agent for Messrs. Murphy and Hatchford's 
celebrated Epping ales. You might think a man 
who was merely an agent could not well contract 
business debts ; but Mr. Black proved the contrary, 
and although Messrs. Murphy and Hatchford paid, 
as it afterwards turned out, rent, taxes, wages^ and 
advertising expenses, Mr. Black made a thorough 
smash, and was whitewashed again. 

" After that, things went very badly with him for 
a long time. Sometimes he used to do me the 



218 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

favour of calling at my office and borrowing small 
sums of money ; and, indeed, I did feel sorry for the 
fellow in those days, for it seemed as though IwA. and 
be bad bidden good-bye for ever. He wanted me 
to give him a berth, but I did not think he was 
exactly the kind of person I required, and told him 
so as delicately as I could. 

'' * If you would only take me for a month,' be 
said ; ' I eould get a situation from you.' 

^^ Instead <^ doing that I gave him a sovereign, 
and beard no more of his prospects for a considerable 
time. Occasionally I saw him in the street, looking 
very seedy and ill-fed, but he never came to my 
place of business. During that lull I have reason 
to believe be travelled for a lead-pencil manu- 
facturer, held a situation in a tract repository, was 
collector to some charitable institution, started a 
suburban newspaper (all the original matter in which 
be wrote himself), and had a commission from some 
glass-house on all the orders he could bring in. 
Suddenly be fell out of my observation altogether, 
and for full two years I never even met him in the 
street I thought be was dead, in fiict, when one 
day, happening to call about some business at an 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 219 

office in Alderman's Walk, I met Mr. Black on tbe 
staircase, well-dressed, plump as a partridge, fluent 
and self-sufficient as ever. He was kind enough to 
stop and speak to me/' went on Mr. Baidsford, with 
an amused smile, '^and to tell me he was doing 
well, remarkably well, indeed. He added, also, he 
was glad to hear I had got some good contracts, 
and assured me I possessed his best wishes for my 
welfare. He said he bad fallen into a capital con- 
cern, and was managing partner for Hume, Holme, 
Draycott, and Co. 

** Further, without the slightest solicitation on my 
part, . ^indeed, without the slightest desire for the 
information, . he confided to me the fact that he was 
going to be married to a daughter of Alderman 
Cuthbert. 

^* * Good City connection,' he added, with a wink, 
^ and likelihood of money. If you are ever passing 
my way, come in and smoke a cigar, will you 7 I 
noTer inquired which way his might be, but I said I 
would, and so we parted. I had a curiosity to know 
who Hume, Holme, Draycott, and Co. were, and 
accordingly I discovered that there was no Hume in 
the firm, and no Holme.; no Draycott, and no Com- 



220 FAB ABOVE BUBIE& 

pany, except Mr. Black, who was, indeed, managing 
and principal partner, and everything, in the 
concern. 

'*' Then I lost sight of him again ; bnt it is a 
curious fact about London, at least, about the City, 
that in it one never is able to lose sight of any 
person for ever. A man new to London might feel 
inclined to doubt this fact, but it is perfectly true, I 
assure you. People seem to move in circles which 
always bring them back to some ^ven spot Even 
the re-appearance of comets like Mr. Black, that 
one might imagine were governed by no certain law, 
may safely be predicted, and accordingly I heard of 
him again. His name came to me in the ordinary 
way of trade as acceptor of a bill that was offered to 
me in payment of an account, which bill I refused. 
Where Hume, Holme, and Draycott had vanished to 
I never could ascertain ; but on that bill he came to 
me in his own proper identity. 

^* Soon afterwards he fsdled once more. I declare 
when I talk of Peter Black it seems to me he must 
have been fifty men instead of one. 

^^ Before long, I discovered him managing a small 
house property for a man in the City, who was 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 221 

in the habit of purchasing on short repairiiig 
leases. 

" I will not trouble your lordship with the roguery 
Mr. Black became acquainted with in that employ- 
ment The school was a very bad one, and Mr. Black 
a very apt pupil. 

" ' It is not what I like, you know/ he said to 
me, ^but it is a stepping-stone,' which opinion 
proved to be correct, for he stepped from that into 
the office of a man who had made a fortune by 
speculating in railway shares. There he would 
have acquired great experience ; but his principal 
falling into difficulties, Mr. Black was adrift once 
more." 

" I never heard such a history," remarked Lord 
Kemms; '^what indomitable energy the man must 
have had !" 

" True," was the reply ; " and yet I do not know 
whether the man who works hard in some one busi- 
ness day after day, week after week, year after year, 
have not a greater share of what I should call indomi- 
table energy than Mr. Black, I am not thinking of 
myself now," added Mr. Raidsford, noticing his 
companion smile, " because, of course, there was 



222 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

plenty of variety in my life, and, though I stuck 
close to one trade, plenty of variety too ; but I was 
thinking of lots of hard-working men I know who 
come into the City every day, and see the same 
people, and do the same work, and go the same 
rounds, and cheerfully, and by dint of very perse- 
verance, finally conquer fortune ; or, at least, earn a 
competence," which last clause came apparently as 
an after-thought ^* In a life like Mr. Black's, the 
excitement of the game is almost recompense enough 
for a man. It is not legitimate work, you know ; it 
is commercial pitch and toss; it is Cockney rouge el 
nair ; it is gambling of the worst kind . gambling 
when the player has everything to gain and nothing 
to risk. It is the old story, ^ heads I win, tails you 
lose.' That is Mr. Black's system of betting, at all 
events." 

Lord Kemms laughed. "And yet," he said, "even 
if a man be riding a borrowed horse, we cannot help 
a certain admiration in seeing him take dangerous 
leaps. Of course, the life of a trader, who goes 
round and round on a business treadmill, is more 
useful, and decidedly more monotonous; but you 
cannot expect him to command our interest, how- 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 223 

ever much he may deserve our respect As for Mr. 
Black, I own I am charmed with him. If I am not 
unreasonable, I should like to hear more." 

" Once again," resumed Mr. Raidsford, thus en- 
treated, '^ there is a blank in my knowledge of his 
history. He referred two or three people to me for 
his character, and for his means of paying house- 
rent, which I considered a liberty, but still, unwilling 
to injure the man, said what I could in his favour. 
He never came near me himself, however; and I 
subsequently discovered that he used one of the 
offices, which my representation enabled him to enter, 
for one of the many shilling swindles, with which, I 
fear, he was afterwards connected. Of course I got 
into trouble through my recommendation, and since 
that time I have dropped all acquaintance with Mr. 
Peter Black." 

^^I do not quite understand what you mean by 
shilling swindles," said Lord Kemms. 

" You must have seen those advertisements to 
ladies of reduced incomes,' to * persons in search 
of employment,' to * persons of limited incomes,' 
how to ' secure a fortune,' * for twelve postage- 
stamps a certain income may be secured!' To 



224 FAB ABOVE BUBIESl 

that . to common trickery . ^Mr. Black descended 
but not alone, remember, my lord. He was con- 
nected with one of the cleverest and most plausible 
swindles that I can remember ever haying been 
attempted on a small scale, and his partners in 
were men in your own rank of life . noblemen and 
gentlemen . or, at least, honourables and baronets. 
These highly-principled individuals were not above 
taking the money of foolish women and inexperienced 
men ; they sold their names, and, when written to 
on the subject, said they believed the secretary to 
be a man of the highest standing and principle. 

^^ Doubtless they were but the black sheep of your 
order ; but, when there are black sheep in that order, 
it behoves you, and such as you, my lord, to be 
careful." 

" What was this swindle ?" asked the owner of 
Kemms Park. 

" It was one in which all the tickets sold were to 
draw prizes," was the reply ; " in which shares were 
regularly issued, and prospectuses carefully drawn 
up and freely forwarded ; in which samples of goods 
were sent to agents on deposit of two pounds ; in 
which the hopes of fortune held out were so great. 



1 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 225 

that money poured in from the provinces like water, 
and would have continued to pour in but for a 
smashing article on the subject, which appeared in 
a respectable journal. That proved a death-blow 
to the scheme, and the reputable little lot had to 
close their concern, and adopt some other means of 
subsistence. What the others did I am unable to 
say: one appeared in the Bankruptcy Court, but 
that was some time afterwards. 

" To Mr. Peter Black, however, * Limited Lia- 
bility,' in which the concern I have mentioned was 
his first venture, appeared in the very nick of time. 

'^He had tried his hand at most other trades; 
why not at the promotion of large companies ? 

*' The shilling swindles, the wonderful City fraud, 
were but introductions to this mightier arena, and 
the first time, after years, when I met Mr- Black 
again, was when I saw him in splendid offices m 
Cannon Street, sipping Madeira, and issuing his 
orders as though poverty and he had never been 
even on speaking terms. I am not easily surprised, 
but I confess those offices and Mr. Peter Black 
himself astonished me. 

" There was not a thing under heaven in those days 

VOL. I. Q 



226 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

that could not be formed into a company, and ac- 
cordingly Mr. Black was secretary to a Limited 
Liability for supplying England and the world with 
hermetically-sealed soups made from the flesh of 
South American oxen." 

Here Lord Kemms laughed outright. 

^' There was nothing impossible about the matter/' 
said Mr. Raidsford^ quietly. " 1*11 be bound, if any 
man liked to go in single-handed for a project of the 
kind to-morrow, he could compass it . ^ay, and make 
money out of it too ; but what a man may do, a com- 
pany cannot do, and accordingly the soup never came 
from South America, and the bullocks Mr. Black 
represented in his reports as slain and in the English 
market may, for aught I know, be still roaming 
over the prairies." 

" And after that company collapsed ?" inquired 
his lordship. 

" Why, since that, Mr. Black has been sometimes 
up and sometimes down . sometimes living in retire- 
ment with his banking account drawn down to two and 
three half-pence ; and again, giving grand dinners 
and living utterly regardless of expense. He is in 
the latter state at present . has a house in Stanley 



A LITTLE BIOGRAPHY. 227 

Crescent, servants in livery ; dinners from Gunter's ; 
Mrs. Black "receives" on Tuesdays; Mr. Black 
asks great people to dinner any day in the week 
that suits his purpose. He has three separate bank- 
ing accounts . ^he is promoting four different com- 
panies; he has offices in Cannon Street, Broad 
Street, and George Street, Westminster. He has 
an efficient staff of clerks . ^he has got, it is said, a 
couple of first-rate backers ; he has all his past ex- 
perience to guide him safely through the quagmires 
of limited liability ; and, in short, if Mr. Black do 
not now make his fortune, he never will. My own 
opinion is, he never will ; but that, of necessity, is 
merely an opinion." 

"And suppose Squire Dudley embark with 
him ?" asked Lord Kemm& 

"Squire Dudley will never come back to land," 
was the significant reply ; after which the pair rode 
on in silence. 

At Mr. Baidsford's gates they parted company. 

" I shall see you again ths evening, you know," 
said my lord, waving his hand as he struck his 
horse's flank and galloped off. 

Mr. Raidsford looked after the retreating figure 

Q2 



228 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of his companion for a minute before entering his 
own gates, then he passed into his domain and rode 
slowly up the ayenue, thinking as he rode. 

" I wonder how he will decide ?' was the burden 
of his mental discourse; "but I shall learn this 
evening." 

Now the reason he said so was, that Lord Kemms 
had promised to come over and dine with him tMe-d- 
tHe . the ladies of Mr. Raidsford's family being 
absent. 



229 



CHAPTER X. 

MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 

Without in the least intending to do so, Lord 
Kemms had put a trump card into Mr. Black's hand 
. the trump card, in fact, which enabled him to 
win his little game ; and the way this undesirable 
result came about was as follows : 

For days, Mr. Black had been dangling the specu- 
lative coral and bells before Squire Dudley's eyes, 
amusing and interesting that grown-up child thereby. 
For days, the man who knew London off by heart, 
every turn in its dirty streets, every trick and move 
the dwellers in that great Babylon were up to, had 
been leading on towards the point he desired to 
reach, viz., that of enlisting Arthur in his company, 
of bribing him with his delusive shilling to serve the 
great King Mammon for ever and for aye ! 



230 PAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

To do Mr. Black justice, however, he had not the 
slightest idea of ruining his kinsman. 

That blood is thicker than water, even though 
the blood be only consanguineous by reason of many 
and far-out marriages, was a creed of the pro- 
moter's . the only one he held, so far as I know, and 
for this reason he would not have drawn Arthur into 
anything doubtful ; doubtful, that is, as he under- 
stood the meaning of the word. 

Decidedly not ; he wanted to help himself on in 
the world, and, if Arthur would only aid him with 
money, Squire Dudley too. 

In the distance, Mr. Black prophetically beheld 
Arthur rich, happy, prosperous. He saw him, not 
a tiller of the ground, but a coiner of gold. If Mr. 
Black believed implicitly in anything excepting 
himself, it was in the vast capabilities of the Pro- 
tector Bread and Flour Company, Limited. 

It was his ship; let him but once launch the 
scheme and the world should see. It should plough 
the ocean and bring back cargoes of gold ; it should 
place Mr. Black beyond the frowns of fortune ; it 
should make a man of Arthur Dudley ; it should place 
him in that pecuniary harbour where the world's 



MR. BLACK GAINES HIS POINT. 231 

storms are unheeded, in which to the gallant vessel, 
riding safely at anchor, the waves of the great sea 

signify as little as ripples on the stream. 

What Mr. Black had always wanted was, accord- 
ing to his own statement, capital . given to him at 
any stage of his career (depending somewhat, how- 
ever, on the stage he had reached), one hundred, 
five hundred, one thousand pounds, and Mr. Black 
saw his way clear to fortune. 

All his life he had been racing after this phantom, 
which as constantly eluded his grasp, for what seemed 
capital to him one day was not capital the next. 
Suppose, for instance, this week one hundred pounds 
bounded the horizon of his desires, next week he 
discovered two were needed to accomplish his object. 
Truth was, his appetite grew by what it fed on, and 
the meal which one day he fancied would prove a 
feast, he turned from the following, as unfit to satisfy 
even a beggar. 

To have heard Mr. Black discourse about a resi- 
dence, for instance, concerning the accommodation 
be considered necessary^ the worldly position he 
regarded as essential to happiness, the servants 
such an establishment required, no one would have 



232 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

imagined be had ever been reduced to lodgings in 
Hoxton, wbere be was served by tbe dirtiest of slip- 
shod maids, and had his beer . when he could pay 
for it . ^from " round the comer." 

Living in Stanley Crescent, which would once have 
seemed a flight too great for even his imagination to 
achieve, within a stone's throw of Hyde Park, with 
his rooms upholstered in velvet and satin, with 
curtains such as the ima^nation of Mr. Peter Black 
had never previously conceived could be manufac- 
tured, with carpets such as the feet of Mr. Black 
had never before trodden upon, surrounded by 
mirrors and gilding, by pictures and statuettes, 
waited upon by silent human automatons, his wants 
almost anticipated, his orders obeyed to the letter, 
his commands remembered, his word law, the 
promoter's fancy pourtrayed for him yet greater 
things to come. Even in the matter of personal 
gratification it would seem that there is such a thing 
necessary as education . the education of what to 
desire ; and this instruction Mr. Black's youth had 
lacked; consequently, as the sailor's desires were 
for << an ocean of rum," and then " as much tobacco 
as he could chew," and then '^ more rum," so Mr. 



MR. BLACK GAIKS HIS POINT. 233 

Black's ignorant soul craved only for more luxury, 
a larger house, and a still better situation ; more 
rooms to be upholstered in a still more magnificent 
style ; costlier pictures, older china, softer carpets ; 
a larger number of servants, equipages in which to 
drive round the Park; and money, money, money 
with which to keep up the show, and maintain still 
grander appearances. 

A change that, from the retirement of White- 
cross Street; from the shabby bed-room with use 
of sitting-room in Hoxton ; from even more wretched 
lod^ngs into which he had been glad to creep at 
so much a night I In those weary days he envied 
Johnson driving the stout wife of his bosom out in 
the cart which, on week-days, delivered shoulders 
of mutton and sirloins of beef at the house of the 
said Johnson's customers; he grudged the good 
fortune of every man he saw with a decent coat 
on his back. He would gladly have changed 
places with young Tomkins, who could afford apple 
tart and Stilton cheese after his steak in a quiet 
eating-house situate in Pope's Head Alley. When a 
man, seated opposite to him in an omnibus, pulled 
out a handful of silver in order to look through it 



234 PAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

for a fourpenny or threepenny piece, Mr. Black felt 
that individual had wronged him. 

After all, it was natural enough. When the starved 
ragged little beggar who has stood with his nose flat- 
tened against the pastrycook's window, sees Master 
Tommy come forth, crammed to repletion with 
tarts and cheesecakes, his pockets fiill of sweets, and 
his hands of suggestive paper parcels, do you 
think the dirty, hungry imp likes the over-fed child, 
and never grudges him the contents of every one 
of those tempting paper bags ? 

And it is precisely the same with adults. The 
man, lacking even dry bread, cannot be supposed to 
gaze with unenvying idolatry at the man who has 
his six or eight courses for dinner ; and, therefore, 
and for all these reasons, there had been a time 
when Mr. Black regarded the man who could pay 
his way with a pardonable feeling of antagonism. 

But all that was changed. On Mr. Johnson and 
his kind, on the poor creatures who were content to 
drone away at the business task, Mr. Black looked 
with ill-concealed contempt. 

That any man should walk while others drove in 
their carriages . walk without lifting a hand to 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 235 

oetter themselves . filled the promoter's mind with 
profound astonishment. Of necessity he knew there 
must be rich and poor ; labourers and employers ; 
workers and idlers ; but that any person should be 
poor, and not cry aloud ; that any human being 
should labour, and be satisfied ; that any person 
should work, and accept such work as his portion 
thankfully, was a step beyond Mr. Black's philo- 
sophy. 

Not to comprehend such a state of mental ob- 
tuseness had his talents been given to him, but 
rather that he might raise himself to a prominent 
position, where it would be possible for him to stand 
in a public place, high above his fellows, and thank 
God that he was not as other men ; but, rather, 
Peter Black, Esquire, worth hundreds and hundreds 
of thousands of pounds. 

And very earnestly Mr. Peter Black believed he 
was at last on the high road to fortune. If he 
broke down by the way, he knew it would be for 
want of capital . not for lack of geographical infor- 
mation. 

Unfortunately when, in a moment of sudden 
inspiration, he struck out the idea of " The Protec- 



236 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

tor Bread and Flour Company !" he was up to the 
neck in three other companies, which were but as 
dross beside this mine of virgin gold. 

" And it is a good thing, Dudley. By Jove, if 
old Stewart knew how hard I was pressed, he'd take 
it up himself, and cut me out of it, and make his 
fortune over again, the miserly old scamp ! I'm in 
two minds to take the whole scheme to Runcorn, 
the advertising agent, and sell it to him . but there ! 
I'll pull it through somehow. I'll find somebody to 
advance the needful, though this is the very worst 
time of the year for raising the wind." Which was a 
perfectly true statement, it may here be remarked ; 
though Arthur Dudley, not being a commercial 
man, could scarcely be expected to know how true. 

"It is the best thing I ever had to do with," 
went on Mr. Black, ** and I have done some tidy 
little strokes of business in my time. Why, it is 
only nine months since I netted five hundred in 
one day, without spending a farthing, either, beyond 
fifty pounds deposit. There was a business for sale 
in the City, old established ; man's health was bad ; 
wife had grown genteel, perhaps; daughters were 
settled; sons in professions; good business, but 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 237 

latterly neglected ; heard of it by chance . bought 
it, and paid a deposit Mentioned it casually to 
Venney, whose fingers were itching for something of 
the sort. Venney went straight away to Paul, the 
member of Parliament who does in those kind of 
affairs, you know. Paul looked over his names, and, 
seeing he could form a company, sent Venney back 
to me with the cheque for five hundred pounds for 
my bargain. What do you think of that? and yet, 
if I had only held on for another fortnight, I might 
have doubled the five hundred. It is better than 
farming, that, is not it. Squire ? You might plough 
up a good many acres of land before you would 
come on a find like that." 

^^Ah! London is the place,'* sighed Arthur 
Dudley. 

"* To be sure it is, for man, woman, and child," 
replied Mr. Black. ^^ It is the place to make money, 
and to spend it when you have made it. What 
good has a man of his life who resides continually 
in the country ? I often wonder, Dudley, you don't 
come up to town for a few months in every year." 

"Where should I get the money, Mr. Black, 
to do so ?" questioned the younger man. " As you 



?38 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

justly remarked, a few minutes since, my land is 
not rich enough to grow five-hundred pound Bank 
of England notes." 

*'Good that . devilish good," chuckled Mr. 
Black. 

" It is easy for a man like you to talk," went on 
Arthur, pleased with this flattering acknowledgment 
of his wit, " for a man with lots of money " 

" My dear fellow, that is the very thing I stand in 
need of at this moment," interrupted Mr. Black. 

"Well, with money's worth, then," continued 
Arthur. But Mr. Black cut across his sentence again. 

*' Not with more money's worth than you have. 
Squire. If I had your property, it would not be 
long before I began to dig nuggets out of it. If I 
had your stock, I would make five hundred pounds 
a-piece out of every head of cattle on your land. If 
I were a man of substance like you, I would never 
spend my life dragging after a lot of stupid yokels. 
I might keep my farm, but it would be for pleasure, 
for turning myself out to grass on, so to speak, 
after the fatigue of a London season. Be hanged 
if I would go on year after year seeing money made 
without having a try at the cards myself." 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 239 

"It IS all very well for men who have been 
brought up to it," remarked Arthur. 

" Brought up to it I What do you mean ?* asked 
Mr. Black. " Do you think I was brought up to 
all the trades I have made money by ? What do 
you think I started in the world with? A plain 
commercial education, a mother and a lame sister 
to keep, and twenty pounds. I never served my 
time ; I never had the chance of learning a business 
like Baidsford; I was always dragged back by 
having those two poor useless women to keep ; and 
yet, still, see what I have done !" 

" But you began early ?" suggested Arthur. 

" If I had not begun early, I should have begun 
late," was the reply. 

" And then I am tied to this place." 

" No, you are not," was the reply. " But you are 
like all men possessed of a small income . afraid of 
losing it A man who begins with nothing has a 
far better chance of success than his neighbour, who 
starts on five or six hundred." 

" Besides, I ought to have begun long ago," per- 
sisted Arthur. 

" Better late than never," quoted Mr. Black. " I 



240 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

tell you what it is now, Dudley, as long as we have 
got on this subject, let us talk about it You want 
to make money, don't you ?" 

"The question is scarcely necessary," answered 
Squire Dudley, with a faint smile. .' Do you chance 
to know any man who does not ?" 

"Yes," was the ready reply. "I know several 
who think themselves so deucedly safe, and comfort- 
able, and secure, and all the rest of it, that they 
would not take a share in Rothschild's, if it were 
offered to them for an old song. There is your 
friend Raidsford, for instance." 

" Oh ! he's no friend of mine," corrected Arthur. 

" Well, he is a case in point, at any rate. Lord 
Kemms does not consider our new company beneath 
his consideration, at any rate, and what is worth 
his attention ought not to be below that of a two- 
penny-halfpenny contractor, though that contractor 
may think there is nobody like Compton Raidsford, 
Esquire, in the world." 

" You do not mean to say there is a likelihood of 
Lord Kemms going into your company?" said 
Arthur, eagerly. 

" A likelihood ? there is a certainty," was the 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 241 

rep.y. " I have set my heart on getting him, and 
I will get him, no matter what it costs me to do 
so. But if I were to go to Compton Raidsford " 

"You will not go, though," interrupted Squire 
Dudley. 

"Trust me," answered the promoter. "I was 
only instancing him as one of the men who do not 
want to make money. He is so puffed up with his 
park, and his deer, and his carriages, and his riding 
horses, and the infernal fuss that. is made about him, 
it would lie, ' No, thank you, Mr. Black. I have one 
business, and that is enough for me. I find it as much 
as I can manage. Oood morning !' But you are dif- 
ferently situated, Dudley. You, like Lord Kemms, 
could do with a larger balance at your banker's." 

" You amaze me about Lord Kemms," said Arthur, 
thoughtfully. 

" And I believe I should amaze you still more if 
I showed you the list of names I expect to get on the 
Direction. Allan Stewart will bring them up like a 
huntsman the hounds ; but he cost me dear. Would 
you believe I had to give him five hundred pounds 
in hard cash . not bills, mind you . before he would 
even listen to me ?" 

vol.. I. R 



242 FAR ABOVE RUBIEa 

"Dear me I I should not have supposed any man's 
name was worth so much," observed the Squire. 

" Worth it I he could be worth five thousand, if one 
only had had the money to give him, but just now I 
found even the five hundred a pull. You know he 
stands between the nobility and the commercial men. 
5e is good to bring both, and he promises me to 
get his nephew." 

"You don't mean Aymescourt?" 

" Yes, Aymescourt, only his name is Croft now, 
you know ; he came into such a switching property 
when old Croft died. Of course I am telling you 
all this in strict confidence, Dudley. Not a soul 
knows about these things except yourself." 

" Of course," Arthur agreed. Believing implicitly 
in Mr. Black's statement, he felt flattered accordingly. 

" By Jove," proceeded Mr. Black, invoking his 
favourite god, " won't some of the City people 
stare when they see our prospectus in the Times! 
Won't some of them wish they had thought of such 
a scheme ! Rather," finished Mr. Black with a 
chuckle, *' ra . a . ther." And Mr. Black took off 
his hat and wiped his forehead, and the pair had 
another turn on the grass under the trees in silence. 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 243 

" I only wish," began Mr. Black again, " I could 
begin advertising, for the great thing in all such 
matters is to make hay while the sun shines . a leaf 
out of your book, Dudley ; but, till some of my other 
small fish are fried, I don't see my way, unless I go 
to Runcorn, and then he gets the flesh, and leaves 
the bones to me. It is that advertising ! it is the 
devil, it is cash on the nail . money down, or else 
no advertisement appears ; and, good gracious ! think 
of how a few quarter-column advertisements in the 
Times run up ; why, it is like printing in gold." 

Still Arthur made no comment. 

" OflSces, furniture, printing, even clerks, can be 
got on credit," continued Mr. Black, after allowing 
Arthur full time for the observation he did not 
make ; '^ and credit gives one time to turn round 
and get the shares in, but the expense of advertising 
has nipped many a promising scheme in the bud. 
Does not somebody say something about there being 
a tide in the afiairs of men ? I am not a very good 
hand at remembering any quotation except prices," 
added Mr. Black, with the laugh which had excited 
Lally's uncomplimentary comparison ; ** but I dare 
say you do, and I know there is a tide in my afiairs 

r2 



244 FAB ABOVE BURIEa 

now, which would float my ship, if I could only take 
advant^lge of it However, 111 go back to town ou 
Monday and see what can be done." 

** How much money do you want ?" asked Arthur ; 
perhaps he was thinking, too, that a tide had come 
in his affairs, across which he might be able to steer 
his course to fortune. 

" How much ? Oh ! I am sure I could not say," 
was the reply. *' In some cases ready money goes 
so far, can be so well worked, that I might, perhaps, 
be able to do with very little. If I went to a 
capitalist, of com*se I should ask him for a good 
round sum ; but if I can find a friend, I shall only 
just borrow enough to keep me going fromi hand to 
mouth. In any event I must make it worth somebody s 
while to help me ; but I don't mind that, if I am 
only left what I consider a fair share of the profit." 

" What do you call a fair share ?" 

" Well, that depends. I should not mind giving 
any one a third who helped me through the matter. 
Nor even a half, if the help were really serviceable ; 
but I should object to taking a tenth, or anything of 
that kind, atfer all the worry I have had in the 
affair." 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 245 

** Do you know any one who you think would go 
into it with you on what you consider equal terms ?' 
was the Squire's next question. 

"He's nibbling," thought Mr.. Black; so he let 
the line float loose for a moment, while he answered, 
** Yes, I think I do ; that man I spoke of just now, 
Vanney, would, if he is in London, but I am afraid 
he is off to Scotland, and won't be back for some 
weeks ; that is the way just at this time x)f the year, 
everybody is off, or starting off. Certainly 1 might 
go to Scotland after him." 

" I wish I had ready money," said Arthur ; " I 
should not mind risking a little on it myself." 

'* Oh yes, you would," answered Mr. Black ; " if 
you had been inclined for any mischief of that kind, 
you would not have kept your hands out of it so 
long." 

^^ How the deuce is a man to mix up in anything 
of the kind, if opportunity never offer ?" Arthur 
demanded. 

"But opportunity does offer; opportunities are 
always lying under people's feet, only some are too 
proud, or too cautious, or too lazy, to stoop and pick 
them up. No, no, Squire, you had better stick to 



246 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

your farming ; you must be making a lot of money 
here, and your wife would not like you to go into 
business." 

" My wife would wish me to do whatever was best 
for all our interests," said Arthur, sharply. 

*' Perhaps so ; but, if she would, she diflFers won- 
derfully from mine," was the reply, *' Lord knows 
I have often been thankful I never cared twopence 
about her, or she would have kept me a go-by-the- 
ground all my life. When a man is fond of hb wife, 
naturally he does not like to cross her. I can 
quite understand what has kept you back, Dudley ; 
you ought, as Mrs. Ormson says, to have married 
a rich wife, and then you could have afforded to 
humour her." 

''No man ever had a better wife than I have, 
Mr. Black." 

''Is not that what I have just said? and 
naturally she influences you. I think it is a pity, 
you know, because women do not know what is best 
either for their husbands or themselves ; but it 
is vei7 greatly to your credit. I dare say, if I 
had married differently, I should feel like you. 
After looking at Mrs. Dudley, I think what a pity 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 247 

it is to see her wasting her life at Berrie Down. 
By Jove ! if I had a wife like her, it would be 
worth a thousand a year to me. Don't she set off 
the head of a man's table ! Wouldn't she be the 
one to entertain the great people I want to make 
useful I And your sisters, Dudley. It's a sin to 
see them buried here . girls who might marry well 
to-morrow. Mrs. Ormson and I often talk it over ; 
but we have agreed it is of no use fretting about the 
business, which is just one of those matters we were 
not sent into the world to right." 

In which last portion of his sentence, had Mr. 
Black omitted the "not,'' he would much more 
truthfully have stated his own and Mrs. Ormson's 
opinions. At all events, if the pair had not suf- 
ficient reliance on Providence to believe they were 
sent to right the matter, they thought they ought to 
have been, and were not slow about asserting their 
conviction, which comes to nearly the same thing. 

** Supposing your scheme turned out well, how 
soon should you expect to make money by it?" 
inquired Arthur, apparently a little irrelevantly. 

" How soon ? Oh ! within a twelvemonth. I 
shall have my shares, of course . paid-up shares. 



248 FAB ABOVE BUSIES. 

mind you . and I shall have my profit on the sale of 
the mills and plant. I don't take all that trouble 
and risk for nothing ; and then there will be various 
pickings. Altogether, to begin with, I shall not 
clear less than ten thousand pounds, and then my 
shares ought to be worth twenty thousand pounds 
more, at least" 

"And how much of that would you give to a 
person who saw you through your present diffi- 
culty T asked Arthur, desperately. 

" If you saw me through, one-half," was the quick 
reply. " Look here, Dudley," went on the pro- 
moter, "if you are thinking of joining me, make up 
your mind at once, and let us talk the matter over. 
This is Saturday. I must do something in it on 
Monday. Don't beat about the bush, man. If you 
want information, I will give it to you ; if you wish 
to make a push for fortune, don't be backward about 
saying so ; if you fancy this venture might suit you, 
inquire into it fully. If you don't like it after 
inquiring, why, there is no harm done. I could not 
ask you to go into it as I might a commercial man- 
being a relation and so forth naturally ties my 
tongue. only I will say this much, it is the best 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 249 

thing I have ever had to do with, and there is no 
reason 1 can see why you should not make your 
fortune out of it too. Keep the money in the 
family, eh, Squire?" and Mr. Black looked 
sharply at Arthur from under his eyelids . looked 
round at him without moving his head to see how 
his companion was taking it. 

Squire Dudley's flood was at its tide then, he 
fancied; and yet he felt nervous about launching 
his boat upon it. He was longing to make money, 
hungering and thirsting for a chance of bettering 
his position, and yet he stood irresolute waiting for 
some chance to decide his purpose, for some hand 
beside his own to unloose his barque, and set it 
floating over the waves of success, to the shores of 
fortune. 

"How much money would be sufficient in the 
first instance?" he inquired for the second time 
during that interview. 

^^Oh! a hundred would start the advertising," 
said Mr. Black ; ^^ that hundred would bring in some 
of the shares ; but between you and me, Dudley, 
what with clerks and one devilment and another in 
the other companies, even a hundred pounds is a 



250 FAB ABOVE RUBIEa 

sum T could not at the instant command. I had to 
pay, as I tell you, five hundred cash to Stewart, and 
a similar sum to Crossenham. Well, you know, a 
few hundreds here and a few hundreds there make a 
hole in a man's banking account, if he be not as rich 
as Miss Coutts. Then I have given a lot of bills 
falling due at different dates for Crossenham's lease ; 
and, although I think my other ventures may give 
me money enough to meet those before they are 
presented, still I must be prepared for the worst 
Altogether . ^but who are those riding up the lane ? 
Raidsford and Lord Kemms, as I live I Raidsford, 
no doubt, trying to put my lord against the company. 
Ah I it is no use, my boy ; you won't checkmate me 
so easily as all that comes to. Now, what the 
deuce is his lordship coming to say?" and then 
ensued the interview at whidi the reader has already 
been present. 

"I am in with you now. Black," said Arthur 
Dudley, when, their talk finished, they retraced their 
steps towards the house. 

"Only so far as Nellie goes," answered Mr. 
Black, reassuringly ; " even that shall be but a loan, 
if you like ;" but Mr. Black knew better than this. 



MR. BLACK GAINS HIS POINT. 251 

He knew Arthur had, as he mentally phrased it, 
" tasted blood," and that, having done so, he would 
never recede from the undertaking to which he had 
put his hand. 



252 FAK ABOVK RUBIES. 



CHAPTER XL 



NELLIE. 



It was after dinner in Mr. Compton Raidsford's 
house. Host and guest had finished their wine, and 
sat with coffee before them, silent. 

Lord Eemms was thinking about Mr. Black and 
that gentleman's proposals ; Mr. Compton Raids- 
ford was thinking, not merely about Mr. Black, but 
also about Lord Kemms, and wondering how that 
nobleman would decide. 

If there were one thing the owner of Moorlands 
conceived ought to be put down with a strong hand 
and a stretched-out arm, that thing was bubble 
companies. 

Even legitimate companies he disliked and 
distrusted. 

A self-made man, he naturally regarded with 



NELLIE. 253 

suspicion the growth of any commercial system 
likely to render success dependent more upon 
capital than individual ability and exertion. 

A business man, who had for his order much the 
same esj^it de corps as an artist or a poet may be 
supposed to possess, he noted jealously the in- 
creasing tendency of the age to keep small capitalists 
or non-capitalists in the position of clerks and ma- 
nagers, to concentrate all manufactures in a few 
hands, and sweep modest master tradesmen off the 
face of the earth ; to do away, in fact, with a business 
middle class at all, and to reduce the whole system 
to that of millionnaire and servant. 

A thoughtful man, he foresaw that if the great 
incentive to labour, the prospect of independence, 
were withdrawn, the employed classes would soon 
become mere eye-servants, that it would be difficult 
to procure thoroughly trustworthy clerks and efficient 
managers. 

Right well he knew that the best servant is he 

who hopes some day to become a master, that the 

man who obeys orders most implicitly is he who 

expects at a future period to have to give orders. 

High wages and large salaries might be all very 



254 FAR ABOVE RUBIES, 

well ; but Mr. Raidsford declared no salary which 
a company was justified in giving could compensate 
a man for the prospect of being some day on his 
" own account." 

" These companies will ruin our legitimate com- 
merce, lead to jobbery of all sorts, and utterly ruin 
our working men. I consider limited liability, 
which is, after all, only the climax of concentration 
of capital, the greatest curse that ever fell upon 
England. It is all very well to talk of the rate of 
discount acting as a beneficial check. The rate of 
discount which only winds up a few companies, 
simply means ruin to hundreds and thousands of 
small traders. In fact, in these days, I do not see 

 

how, unless a man have a large capital or be a' 
swindler, he is to get on at all." 

Holding these cheerful views, even concerning 
legitimate companies, it may readily be imagined 
how sternly Mr. Eaidsford set his face against all 
ventures which would not, to use his own word, 
"wash;" how thoroughly he detested the whole 
system of " getting up " a board ; with what rancour 
he would have pursued " promoters," even through 
the purgatory of Basinghall Street. 



NELLIE. 255 

As for lords and honourables, for generals ana 
colonels, for baronets and "swells" of all kinds, 
Mr. Baidsford would have had them keep to their 
own rank and their own pursuits exclusively. That, 
individually and collectively, they despised business 
. honest work, he called it . the self-made man 
believed, and for this belief he had perhaps sufficient 
grounds. 

If they despised it, why did they meddle with it ? 
Could not they keep to their end of the town, and 
cease troubling the City, which they scoffed at with 
their presence ? Not so did their forefathers. ITiis 
was a good peg for Mr. Raidsford to hang a host of 
disparaging remarks upon! The men who were 
first of their name, who left titles to be borne by 
their descendants, and money to support those titles, 
worked in the CSty, lived in it, would have thought 
shame to sell their honest names in order to lead 
honest men and women into trouble. If the aristo- 
cracy wanted some of the City gold, let them come 
and help coin it first 

Such and much more was the burden of Mr. 
Baidsford's song, and it was pleasant to hear him 
going through that recitative with bold sonorous 



256 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

voice to lord or lady, to capitalist or adventurer, 
whenever chance offered. Pleasant to hear him, a 
successful man, speak thus in the home his in- 
dustry and his abilities had won for him, while he 
was still, not young, it is true, but yet sufficiently 
far removed from old age to hope for many years 
in which to enjoy his good fortune. 

His ideas might not be correct. How far they 
were so, only another generation can tell ; but they 
were his own earnest convictions, and he did not 
hesitate to express them openly, 

" If I had to begin ray life again now," he said, 
" I could never hope to accomplish what I have done." 
And seeing what he had done, caused his opinions 
to carry much weight to the men and women he 
frequently addressed. 

Success has a wonderfully convincing power of 
argument, and it would have been hard for any one 
to look at Moorlands, and not believe (knowing his 
history) that its owner had a right to speak with 
authority. 

Mr. Raidsford perhaps might be aware of this 
fact, for he was never so eloquent on the subject of 
private enterprise as in his own London office. 



NELLIE. 257 

Krhich cummanded a view of his extensive premises 
filled with busy workmen, or down in Hertfordshire, 
where everybody was well aware how he had earned 
enough to buy it all " his-self." 

To the poorest labourer, Compton Baidsford was a 
standing miracle ; from Lord Kemms downward every 
person in the community marvelled at his success. 

The bran new palace to which Arthur Dudley 
took such grievous exception, was a matter of ne- 
cessity rather than choice. If Mr. Baidsford could 
have purchased Berrie Down Hollow, Moorlands 
House would never have been erected. As it was, 
the rich man had found it impossible, with all his 
wealth, to purchase an old residence in the situation 
he desired. As a rule, people who have desirable 
properties like to keep them. Once in a dozen 
years or so, there is "just the place" a man wants 
put up for sale ; but so surely as this happens, that 
man has not the means to make it his own. 

What you like in every respect is difficult to meet 
with, residentially as well as matrimonially, for which 
sufficient reason Mr. Baidsford bought Moorlands 
without a house, and built the edifice that afironted 
Arthur Dudley, on it 

VOL. 1. s 



258 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Before the great building (like a factory, the 
Squire said) was thought of, Moorlands had been a 
picturesque stretch of poor ground, pleasant for 
strolling in the summer's evenings, pleasant for pic- 
nics, pleasant to ride across, without leave asked or 
granted. 

It was bare, meagre land, which had not been 
turned up for years and years, the grass of which 
was nibbled close down by the sheep that could 
scarcely get a scanty living off it There the daisies 
grew in the summer-time, there the children could 
gather enough to make chains for a whole village, 
there in the low parts the rushes sprang likewise in 
sufficient quantities to provide butterfly cages, swords, 
helmets, and umbrellas for the juvenile population 
of North Kemms and its vicinity. There was a 
wood where nuts grew abundantly, a little coppice 
wood on the side of a sloping hill, at the base of 
which the Kemm flowed on its way rejoicingly. In 
the Kemm were silver-backed trout and tench and 
perch. Many a time Arthur had angled in it, and 
there was a pleasant old lane, wide and grassy, 
almost like a forest glade, bordered by fine old 
timber, and entered by a gate swinging on one 



NELLIE. 259 

hinge, which led away not merely to the coppice, but 
to a little piece of rising ground where tradition 
said there had once been a mansion belonging to 
a certain wicked Sir Giles, whose heirs were now 
in foreign parts, and whose bones had been moul- 
dering for a hundred years or more in the vaults 
underneath North Eemms church. 

Certainly the lane led straight up to the hillock, 
on which some remains of walls, some traces of a 
former building, were to be found ; but there was 
nothing much to confirm the idea of a mansion ever 
having occupied the site, though the gossips affirmed 
Sir Giles' had once been a great house, which was 
razed to the ground on account of the wickedness 
enacted within it. Rather hard on the house, 
certainly, considering Sir Giles, the perpetrator of so 
much wickedness, lay in consecrated ground, snugly 
incased in lead and oak ; but none the less likely to 
be true on that account, perhaps. 

A few rose-trees grew in what tradition said had 
once been Sir Giles' pleasure garden ; and there 
was a goodly bush of sweet briar, to say nothing of 
a few evergreens and flowers, such as London pride, 
Canterbury bells, Solomon's seal, double daisies, and 

s 2 



mBaammmmmmw^mmsm^immmmmm^m^ 



260 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

such like, scattered about in beds that had 
apparently been laid out in the Dutch style. But 
still there was no trace of winding walks, or sweeping 
drive, of yew hedges, courtyard or pleasaunce; 
nothing left to tell of a great man's residence ever 
having occupied the site where Mr. Raidsford's 
palace was afterwards erected. 

Lord Kemms' idea of the matter was, perhaps, 
more correct than the popular one. He thought it 
most probable Sir Giles' house had been elsewhere, 
and this smaller abode but a mere country cottage, 
in which the baronet might have drunk, and 
gambled, and sinned, and fought, as was averred. 
It was known that this same wicked Sir Giles, the 
last baronet, had a fine mansion in Lincoln's Inn 
Fields, and there was a report of his having been pos- 
sessed of some broad manors in the North ; but the 
awful stories which were told of his wild life always 
had for their scene Moorlands, where there was 
scarcely one stone left upon another, where the 
daisies sprang and the rushes grew, where the nuts 
ripened on the hazel bushes, and the birds built in 
the hedgerows and laurels, spring aflr spring. 
This place Mr. Raidsford saw, liked, purchased 



NELLIE. 261 

cheap, and spoiled . so Arthur Dudley said. 
Perhaps the Squire was right No doubt the grassy 
lane^ with its gate hanging on one hinge, with the 
branches of its overhanging trees almost touching 
any pedestrian who passed beneath them, was more 
picturesque than Mr. Raidsford's gravelled drive 
and wide sweeping entrance, than the lodges, than 
all the new-cut stone and fresh mortar. 

Doubtless, the daisies were more lovely to the 
eyes than fields of com and mangold-wurzel. 
Without question, the spot where the rushes and the 
yellow lilies grew, did not gain anything in artistic 
effect when drain-tiles and labourers had done their 
work, and the place, ** dry as a bone," produced 
crops of barley better than any Squire Dudley could 
show. It was not to be disputed that the scattered 
stones, the desolate flowers, the neglected garden, 
the tangled little comer of wilderness, were more 
suggestive than Mr. Baidsford's bran new mansion ; 
nor that the wood had been more enjoyable in its 
former neglected condition than it seemed when 
paths were made through it, and a summer*house 
perched above the Kemm ; but still, people must live 
somewhere, and the tents they dwell in must be new 



2(l2 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

at some time. Even Berrie Down Hollow had been 
built once ; it did not come into existence with the 
Creation . ^brambles had been cleared away for it, the 
turf 'had been turned up in the fields which were 
now Arthur's, the picturesque common had been 
divided into meadows and corn-fields, into pastures 
and arable land. 

For all of which reasons, Squire Dudley should 
not have complained when the lane at Moorlands 
was metamorphosed into a drive ; when the ground 
which barely yielded pasturage for a few sheep, was 
ploughed and ploughed again, and finally laid down 
in grass for a deer park ; when wheat sprang up 
where the daisies had grown ; when a new house 
showed its face amongst the trees ; when gardens 
were laid out, and conservatories erected, and stables 
built, and employment given ; and a new neighbour, 
not such an one as the old wicked Sir Giles, who, it 
was stated, cared neither for God nor devil, came to 
dwell at Moorlands, which he had sense enough not 
to re-christen. 

A different man from Mr. Dudley would have 
held out the right hand of fellowship to the stranger, 
walked over and called upon him, and been cordially 



NELLIE. 263 

welcomed in return ; for if Arthur were poor, he was 
of gentle blood, and if Mr. Raidsfdrd had risen, he 
was none the less, indeed perhaps all the more, 
friendly disposed towards one better bom than him- 
self; but the Squire did nothing of the kind. 
Rather he stood on the lawn at Berrie Down and 
cursed his day, lamenting that Compton Raidsford . 
a mushroom, an upstart, a snob . should be so much, 
while he, Arthur Dudley, was nothing. 

Had Arthur been possessed of ten thousand a 
year, he would never have said a word against 
Compton Raidsford, or the alterations at Moorlands ; 
he would have proffered him the hospitalities of 
Berrie Down, and shed the light of his countenance 
on the new coiner; but then, Arthur had not ten 
thousand a vear, which made all the difference. 

There are many children in the world, grown as 
well as little boys and girls, who, though willing 
enough to share a toy if it chance to belong to them, 
will yet refuse to play with a companion who owns 
the toy instead of them. They can be generous and 
patronizing ; but when the tables are reversed, they 
go into a comer and sulk. 

That was precisely Arthur Dudley's case ; the 



264 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

world's toys were in other bands, and he would 
neither look at nor use them. If he could not hare 
them of his own, he would hare none of them ; if he 
could not have silver dishes on his own table, he 
would not eat out of them at another man's. 

A nice, amiable trait to have to record ; and yet 
many a very agreeable fellow, owner of all the pleasant 
things Fortune reserves for her especial favourites, 
might not be one whit more agreeable, or contented, 
or genial than Arthur Dudley, if luck took a notion 
some fine morning of leaving him out at elbows. 
Only people cannot exactly comprehend this truth ; 
and, as a consequence, Arthur's neighbours had long 
been sick of his airs and tempers, as they styled his 
resolution to keep himself to himself. Lord Kemms, 
for instance, would once have been glad enough to 
see him at the Park ; but Arthur rejected all that 
nobleman's well-intended civilities ; and thus, as the 
years went by, the Squire was reduced to that most 
uncomfortable of all positions, viz., having a mere 
speaking acquaintance with his neighbours, whom 
he could not avoid meeting occasionally, and who 
really came in time to feel, as Compton Baidsford 
said, ** out of patience with the fellow." 



NELLIE. 265 

And yet, looking at Berrie Down, which stood on 
its sunny hill, smilingly nestling amid trees and 
plantations with rich green pastures intervening 
between it and Moorlands, both Lord Kemms and 
Mr. Ilaidsford were thinking pityingly of the owner, 
and wishing Arthur had been like anybody else. 

It was impossible for them to have talked about 
Mr. Black, and Mr. Black*s scheme, without bring- 
ing Squu*e Dudley's name into the discussion also ; 
indeed, Mr. Baidsford had instanced him as one of 
the men most likely to be led into trouble on the 
strength of Lord Kemms' name ; ^^ for, although he 
may be too proud to visit at Kemms Park, my lord," 
finished the owner of Moorlands, ^^ he will not be too 
proud to follow your lead, if he believe you are 
taking the road to fortune." 

After which followed a pause, a thoughtful pause, 
that lasted long enough to give Lord Kemms ample 
leisure to frame his ideas into some sort of definite 
shape, if they ever were to be got into shape at all. 
And yet when he broke silence, it was not directly 
of Mr. Black's scheme he spoke. 

I cannot help thinking," he said, *' about Dud- 
ley's manner when he sold that mare to me to-day. 



268 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

book.' I think 111 toss up, Raidsford, or draw 
lots ; you shall hold them." 

" No, my lord, I will not ; you ought not to let 
chance decide this question for you. It is one you 
ought to think out seriously, and ^" 

^^Good heavens! I have been thinking about 
it for a week past," interrupted Lord Kemms, pet- 
tishly. 

*^ Then think of it for a week more ; and think at 
the same time betting on horses is an honest and 
respectable way of amusing yourself, in comparison 
with selling your name to companies. In the one 
case you only ruin yourself, in the latter " 

" Hold, my Mentor," once again interposed Lord 
Kemms, " we have gone over all that ground before ;" 
and he balanced his spoon on the top of his coffee 
cup, and thoughtfully contemplated this feat of skill 
as he spoke. 

^^.So, though you have taken the responsibility of 
advising, you decline that of deciding," he went on. 
'* Decide, and your words shall be to me as the 
laws of the Medes and Persians." 

"If your lordship really wish me to do so," 
began Mr. Raidsford ; . but at this juncture Lord 



NELLIE. 269 

Kemms pushed back his chair irom the table, and 
walked over towards one of the windows. 

" No, no," he said ; " I won't ask you to do that ; 
it would not be fair; besides, I am old enough 
to make up my own mind, and bear the consequence 
of my own acts. I will not be one of Mr. 
Black's decoy ducks, as you are kind enough to 
style his directors. 1 will write to him on Monday, ^ 
and " 

" Mr. Alexander Dudley wishes to speak to your 
lordship," said a servant, entering the room at this 
juncture. 

" Wishes to speak to me ?" repeated Lord Kemms ; 
*' where is he ?" 

" In the library, my lord ;" and forthwith " my 
lord " walked across the hall into the room where 
Alick stood waiting for him. 

The lad had not sat down. He stood beside the 
library table with his hat in his hand ; and even when 
Lord Kemms motioned him to a chair, he declined 
the proffered courtesy. 

" My brother was to have sent you Nellie this 
evening, my lord," he began, *' I have been to the 
Park, but finding you were here, came on. I hope 



270 FAR ABOVE RUBIE& 

you will excuse my doing so. I thought it was 
better for me to see you." 

" Does your brother want to be off his bargain ?" 
asked his lordship, sharply. "If that be what 
you have to say, of course I shall not hold him 
to it." 

"That is not what I have to say," answered 
Alick, boldly. He had felt nervous and fluttered 
at first, but Lord Kemms' manner braced up his 
courage in an instant. He had felt a discrepancy 
between himself, his prospects, his dress, his position, 
and the grand house into which he had been per- 
mitted to enter, almost under protest (so it seemed 
to him), of a servant who evidently thought he had 
no business at Moorlands; but that was all now 
forgotten. 

Lord Kemms had made a great mistake, and 
having made it, Alick could strike him under the 
fifth rib. His irritation had thrown him off his 
guard, and now Alick could deliver his message 
with effect. 

" My brother sold Nellie to you, believing her to 
be, sound. We are not quite certain that she is 
sound ; and, not being certain, my lord, we would 
not send her to you." 



NELLIE. 271 

For a iDoment Lord Kemras' face flushed scarlet ; 
then he said, . 

" I beg your pardon, Mr. Dudley, for my hasty 
speech. The fact is . I . I . had set ray heart on 
haying her ; and . really this is most provoking . I 
wanted her so particularly." 

" And my brother wanted the money particularly, 
my lord," answered the lad ; " at least, so he said," 
added Alick, with a terrible remembrance of Arthur's 
wrath when he first heard there was anything amiss 
with Nellia 

" What the devil is wrong with her ?" asked Lord 
Kemms, irritably. " Sit down, can't you, and tell me 
all about it." 

^^ I am afraid she has got something the matter 
with her sight," was the reply. " When you first 
spoke to me on the subject, that day in the paddock, 
my lord," added the lad, " I thought there was not 
a blemish about her, but this last week I have felt 
uneasy. Of course it is not easj to tell whether it 
is so or not ; only, having been with her all her 
life, I notice what another person might not. I 
did not want to vex my brother unless I felt certain, 
so he knew nothing about the matter till he told me 
he was to be sent over to the Park." 



272 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

** And then ?' inquired Lord Kemms. 

" Then I mentioned my fear to him, and he said 
you ought to be informed of it. We knew, my 
lord, or, at least, we thought, you would not have 
her examined by a veterinary surgeon, coming from 
us ; indeed, I doubt if any stranger could detect a 
thing wrong about her now" 

" But you think there is ?" 

For a moment Alick remained silent ; he felt the 
hundred pounds Arthur wanted so badly might be 
had, if he only appeared doubtful ; and Arthur, he 
knew, was fuming and fretting at home over his 
disappointment. The youth loved his brother, and 
was grateful to him ; further, he was afraid of his 
temper ; but still, right was right, and honour 
honour. 

"My lord, I know there is, though my brother 
does not believe it." 

" Still you might have passed her off as sound 
upon me, even subject to a veterinary opinion ?" 

"No, my lord; a jobber might, but we could 
not," amended Alick, looking every inch a Dudley 
as he spoke. 

" I stand corrected," said Lord Kemms, with a 



NELLIE. 273 

laugh. '^ I quite see ; the thing might be possible, but 
not to you. Now, what does your brother propose ?" 

^ To consider the bargain off/' was the prompt 
reply. 

" Nothing else ?" inquired his lordship. 

"Or otherwise," answered Alick, "to let you 
have her, giving an undertaking that if within six 
months my idea prove to have been correct, he will 
take her back and return your money." 

" Evidently he is not of your o{Hnion ?" 

" No, my lord." 

" Do you think you know more about horses than 
he?" 

" I think I know more about Nellie." 

For a moment Lord Kemms looked hard in Alick 
Dudley's face, which was frank, and young, and 
pleasant. He had not Arthur's delicately-cut fea- 
tures, . he was cast altogether- in a larger and a 
rougher mould ; but he was the making of a finer 
man, the owner of Kemms Park decided. Looking 
at Alick's fEuse, he saw reflected as in a mirror the 
scene which had taken place at Berrie Down, and, 
perhaps, it was this which made him say, suddenly, . 

" Your brother was not very well pleased when 

VOL. I. T 



274 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

you expressed your opinion to him, I suppose . 
blamed you, probably ?" 

"When people are vexed, they usually blame 
the person nearest them at the time," was A lick's 
philosophic reply. 

" You suspected nothing of this when I spoke to 
you in the paddock. If I had bought her then, that 
is, if your brother had taken my offer then, you 
could have sent her to me with a clear conscience." 

"Yes, my lord. There was certainly nothing 
wrong with her then ; at least, nothing that I could 
see," Alick answered. 

" And there is nothing your brother can see the 
matter now ?" 

"Nothing." 

" Then I will take her," said his lordship ; and 
Alick breathed a sigh of intense relief. 

" You shall have her the first thing on Monday 
morning," he said, rising, " and the letter, too." 

 What letter ?" 

"My brother's undertaking to return you the 
money, in case she prove unsound." 

" No, I won't have it," was the reply. " I'll run 
the chance of her." 



NELLIE. 275 

"No, my lord, pray do not do that!" Alick 
entreated. " I am as sure as I can be of anything 
her sight is affected. If you will take her for the 
six months, and pay ray brother for her now, as he 
really wants the money, I shall be very grateful ; 
but 1 would rather repay you myself than think 
hereafter you had bought a useless animal from 
us." 

"And pray, how the deuce should you propose to 
repay me yourself?" inquired Lord Kemms. But 
the words had scarcely passed his lips before he 
repented having uttered them. 

" I hope not to remain a burden on my brother 
aU my life," answered the lad in a low tone, with 
his cheeks aflame, but with eyes boldly looking his 
questioner in the face. 

" My boy," said the nobleman, kindly laying his 
hand on Alick's shoulder, '^that is three times in 
one interview you have rebuked me. I am >sorry to 
have pained you, and I beg your pardon for my 
thoughtlessness. Tell your brother he could not 
have chosen a better messenger. I will take Nellie, 
and, when you have made your fortune, we can talk 
about repayment, if she turn out badly." 

T 2 



276 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"Thank you, my lord." The boy's heart was very 
full, and he could not say another word. 

Silently he moved towards the door, Lord Kemms 
following him. 

"What are you going to be?" inquired the noble- 
man, as they stood together on the threshold. 

" A merchant, if I am fortunate enough ever to 
rise higher than a clerk." 

" Do you think you will like business better than 
farming?" 

^' I mean to try and like anything which offers me 
a chance of getting on in the world," was the reply. 

" Then I hope you may get on, and that I shall 
some day see you rich and prosperous, a millionnaire. 
It is possible ; in this house, it is scarcely needful for 
me to tell you, all things are, humanly speaking, 
possible." And with that Lord Kemms held out 
his hand, which Alick could have kissed for very 
gratitude. 

" I will call at Berrie Down on Monday," said 
his lordship, when Alick had passed through the 
open hall-door. Having announced which intention, 
he returned to the dining-room, where he reported 
the gist of the conversation to Mr. Raidsford. 



NELLIE. 277 

**The greatest kindness you could have done 
Squire Dudley would have been to take him at his 
word," was Mr. Raidsford's practical comment on 
the affair. 

^ Perhaps so ; but I could not afford to be less 
honest and honourable than they," Lord Kemms 
answered. 

*^Ay, that is the misery of it/' said his host. 
-^ Honest and honourable falling among thieves !" 

Some similar thought to this it had been, perhaps, 
which suggested to Lord Kemms the idea of calling 
at Berrie Down. Some vague fancy of saving 
Arthur . of rescuing him from the Philistines ! But 
when once he found himself seated in Squire 
Dudley's drawing-room, he felt how futile was any 
such hope, how utterly vain it would be for him to 
proffer advice, or counsel caution to his neighbour. 

Already the poison had begun to work ; already 
he had dreamed his dreams, and beheld his visions ; 
already he had made his thousands, and spent them 
in imagination; already the glory of the future 
flung a brightness across his path, and made him 
look on life more cheerfully, on his fellow-men more 
kindly. 



278 FAB ABOVE BUBOBS. 

Let success bring what it would, it could not 
bring more than Arthur already saw advancing 
towards him. Prophetically, out of the great City 
he beheld riches^ and honours, and glories, travelling 
northward to Berrie Down. The dust of the 
approaching caravan was clear to his mental vision 
as the turf stretching down to the Hollow. 

If for a moment he was taken aback, it was 
when Lord Kemms told Mr. Black, in his presence, 
he had decided to decline his obliging offer. But 
Mr. Black so coolly pooh-poohed what he called his 
lordship's hasty rejection, . so resolutely refused to 
take "no" for an answer, . eo determinedly, and 
yet pleasantly, said they ** could talk the matter over 
at some future time, there was no hurry about it," . 
so utterly ignored the fact of Lord Kemms having 
assured him his mind was made up, he would have 
nothing whatever to do with the company, . that 
Arthur was reassured, and believed Mr. Black, when 
that gentleman subsequently informed him Lord 
Kemms had only been a little set against the affair 
by " that meddling upstart, Raidsford." 

" He'll be all right enough by the time we want 
him,*' finished the promoter, confidently ; while his 



NELLIE, 279 

lordship was walking down the drive, feeling he 
bad made nothing by his move, rather, on the con- 
trary, given the advantage to a much cleverer and 
more ready man than himself. 

"Hang the fellow!" he thought, "and his con- 
founded self-suflSciency. Ah ! my little .friend," he 
added out loud, as Lally parted the boughs of an 
evergreen oak, and looked out at him from among 
the greenery, " won't you come and speak to me ; 
won't you tell me how you have been this long 
time?" 

Not from any shyness, but from precisely the 
same feeling as that which makes a kitten bound 
off when a hand is stretched out coaxingly towards 
it, Lally allowed the branches to spring back and the 
foliage hide her. 

"Don't be rude, Lally; go and speak to Lord 
Kemms when he asks you," said a voice from behind 
the shrubs, while two very white hands parted the 
branches above Lally 's head, while a very pretty 
face, half concealed by leaves, met the nobleman's 
delighted eyes. 

In a moment a sweet jingle of verse seemed ring- 
ing through the air. 



280 FAB ABOTS RUBIES. 

That pleasant and goodly thing, a woman's 
beauty . ever old, yet erer new. old as the world, 
yet new as the dawning day . chased all disagree- 
able thoughts out of Lord Kemms* mind, while Dr. 
Macka/s lines took their place : . 

'* And now and then FU see thy fiuse, 
'Mid bougha and branches peeping." 

He had never known how beautiful a woman's 
face could look till he beheld Bessie's through that 
tracery of leaf, and twig, and stem. 

More than ever now he desired to renew his 
acquaintance with Lally, who came forth from her 
hiding-place, and, in reply to his tender inquiries, 
informed him she was quite well, . that mamma was 
quite well ; after which conversational effort, Lally . 
a surprised mass of muslin, hair, and freckles . stood, 
her lap full of flowers, looking at Lord Kemms. 

" What lovely flowers 1" he said. 

'^ Bessie's I" explained Lally, nodding in the direc- 
tion of the pretty fiEuse, the owner of which now, with 
the assistance of Lord Kemms, emerged from amid 
the hedge of evergreens, and stood before his lord- 
ship, laughing and blushing, a vision of loveliness 
wortli contemplating. 



NELLIE. 281 

" We were gathering flowers," she said, in eluci- 
dation of Lally's statement. 

" A very appropriate occupation," remarked his 
lordship, gallantly. 

He would have liked nothing better than ten 
minutes' conversation with this young lady, who had 
appeared so unexpectedly before him; but Miss 
Ormson was not inclined to gratify this innocent 
desire, and made her disinclination so prettily 
apparent, that his lordship had no resource left 
but to bid Lally farewell, which he did most afiec- 
tionately. 

" Good-bye, dear." 

^^ Dood-bye !" and Lally confided to him one of 
her little brown hands. 

" Will you give me a kiss ?" 

'^Iss;" and Lally made up her mouth, and went 
through the ceremony with laudable readiness and 
composure. 

** Remember, you promised to marry me. I'm to 
wait for you, you know.'' 

" Iss." Lally was perfectly agreeable. 

"You will not promise so readily fifteen years 
hence, little one," he said; but this being a step 



282 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

beyond Lally's understanding, she kept silence with 
a wisdom which might not have belonged to her 
fifteen years hence, either. 

And, indeed, no answer was required from her, 
Bessie and Lord Kemms having settled the matter 
with a mutual smile, after which, as the leave-taking 
had been already unduly prolonged, the visitor lifted 
his hat in adieu to Bessie, and departed. 

** Why didn't he tiss 'oo ?" Lally inquired, quite 
loud enough for Lord Kemms to hear. 

" You naughty child !" exclaimed Bessie ; " hush ! 
hush ! hush !" and then the pair broke their way 
through the evergreen hedge again, and returned, 
ostensibly, to their former employment of gathering 
flowers. 

But, in reality, both Lally and her companion 
were looking after Lord Kemms' retreating figure. 
From the grass-plot where they stood, a glimpse was 
to be obtained at intervals of the road, and at last 
Bessie relinquished her sham occupation, and stood 
gazing, with a sad, sad look in her face, after the 
owner of Kemms Park. 

All at once the object of so much attention turned 
round, and caught her in the very act 



NELLIE. 283 

Bessie never professed to be more tnan numan, 
and accordingly she said to Lally, angrily . . 
" How can you be so bold, child, as to stare after 

gentlemen like that ?" 

" 'Oo 'taring too !" retorted Lally, indignantly ; 
and, as she could not deny the truth of this state- 
ment, Bessie covered her confusion by a vigorous 
onslaught among the flowers. 

After a few seconds, however, she lifted her head 
again, and looked along the road once more, and as 
she looked she sighed ; but that sigh was not 
breathed for the nobleman whose hair was like 
" Lally's own !" 



284 FAS ABOVE SUBOES. 



CHAPTER XII. 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 



Although, in the course of his conversation with 
Arthur Dudley, Mr. Black had intimated his inten- 
tion of running up to town on the Monday following, 
and probably remaining there, he did not carry that 
desirable project into practice, but rather announced 
his intention of favouring Hertfordshire with his 
presence for some time longer. 

" That is to say, if Mrs. Dudley be not quite weary 
of us," he added ; which, of course, left Heather no 
resource but to entreat a prolongation of Mr. and 
Mrs. Black's stay, which she did so kindly, that 
Mr. Black thanked her for her invitation. 

" Just as if you had given her a chance of not 
inviting: you," remarked Miss Hope, with a sneer. 

** True ; I forgot I was not speaking to Miss 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 285 

Hope, whose frankness is notorious," retorted Mr. 
Black ; having given the lady which tit, for her tat, he 
strolled out, in excellent temper, on to the lawn. 

Spite of his dislike to the country . a dislike that 
was, perhaps, as genuine as anything about him (his 
vanity and selfishness excepted), he liked Berrie 
Down Hollow. It was an establishment which, 
notwithstanding some blemishes, in most respects 
met his views. 

On an income of a few hundreds a year, which 
had to be dragged out of the land, it is scarcely 
needful to say, Mr. Dudley, of Berrie Down, could 
not " do things " in the same style as Mr. Black, of 
Stanley Crescent, who reckoned his returns loosely 
by thousands. 

From cellar to garret, the house in Stanley Cres- 
cent proclaimed the existence either of unlimited 
means, or unlimited credit 

From the hall to the farthest bedchamber, Berrie 
Down Hollow told its tale of shortness of money 
and of utter honesty. 

No bills were run in that pleasant Hertfordshire 
home ; no duns ever came clamouring for payment 
through the gates flanked by pyracantha. 



.^^^^.^^..^^^^.^'^^^HHPHIP^PWIP 



286 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Let post -time bring what ill news it might, 
such ill news never arrived in the shape of an inti- 
mation that any tradesman was weary of waiting for 
a settlement of his '' little account ;" that, if a remit- 
tance for the amount of his bill (inclosed) were not 
immediately forwarded, the writer would place the 
matter forthwith in the hands of his solicitor. 

Honest and honourable, as Lord Kemms had 
said, were these poor incompetent Dudleys. Sense- 
lessly honest, Mr. Black decided. 

To live beyond their means . ^to owe money, the 
payment of which was in the least uncertain or pro- 
blematical, would have seemed to them the depth of 
humiliation. 

A horror of debt, a dread of incurring expenses 
which their income did not fully warrant, a proud 
spirit of independence, a resolute determination to 
spend no more than they could well afford to pay . 
these were the traits in his country relations which 
filled Mr. Black with a vague amazement, with an 
almost contemptuous pity. 

That any man . and, more especially, any woman 
. should hesitate about refurnishing a house, when 
upholsterers existed ready to send in goods on 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 287 

credit, was a want of courage which, though per- 
haps not unnatural, was simply unintelligible to 
Mr. Black. That a family should refrain from 
luxmies, remain quietly at home, dress plainly, and 
strive, by a prudent economy, to make both ends 
meet, seemed to him the very acme of folly. 

To "cut a dash" on nothing . to take a house 
with no certain prospect of ever paying rent for it . 
to furnish that house throughout on credit . to run 
bills for every article under heaven for which bills 
could by possibility be run . to trust to luck for 
meeting the Christmas accounts . to look on every 
tradesman as a mere speculator, who took his risk 
of ever receiving sixpence, to whom customers were 
as uncertain forms of profit as Lim. Lia. Co.s to 
Mr. Black, or else as " knowing cards," who made 
the substantial householders carry them safe through 
the midnight flittings of a dozen less honest neigh- 
bours . these were a few of the articles to be found 
in the only confession of faith to which Mr. Black 
heartily subscribed. 

From his youth upward, no delicate scruples con- 
cerning wronging his fellows had troubled the con- 
science of Mr. Black ; and it seemed quite as strange 



288 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

to him to witness the remarkable honesty which 
obtained at Berrie Down, as it would to a pick- 
pocket to behold a purse found in the street re- 
stored forthwith to its rightful owner. 

No doubt the theory of honesty was an excellent, 
a beautiful science ; but to carry that theory into 
every-day practice, appeared to Mr. Black absurd. 
According to his gospel, it was foolish to do 
without anything which could be procured for the 
ordering. 

" Any fool," he opined, " could buy with money ; 
but it required some cleverness to buy without 
money. If I had been one of that sort, afraid of 
this, and that, and 'tother, I should have stayed oo 
servant to somebody all my life. Success is just 
like a woman . faint heart won't win her ; and see 
what I have done . just look at me." 

This was the fashion in which he addressed Alick 
Dudley, or any other individual on whom he hoped 
the sight of his exalted position might produce a 
beneficial efiect. From the way in which he talked 
of his successes, it was only fair to presume his 
achievements had astonished no one more than him- 
self. Perpetually he seemed trying to lay his hand 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 289 

on his good fortune, in order to realise it ; failing in 
this attempt, he desired to see his neighbour's hand 
touch the glittering heap, so as to make sure it was 
no deception . no sham. 

All his life he had been used to making believe. 
In the days when he lodged at Hoxton, he was wont 
to entertain his landlady with accounts of the great 
people he knew, who were going to do something 
for him ; and shabby, out at elbows, patchy about 
the feet, and much dinged as regarded his head- 
gear, he still, meeting former acquaintances in the 
street, would ignore Hoxton, and ask them, the first 
time they were out Clapham way, to give him a 
call. 

He had been a liar from the beginning, and even 
in prosperity lying forsook him not ; but like as the 
wicked, of whom King David makes mention, were 
clothed with cursing, so falsehood was to Mr. Black 
as the garment which covered him, and as the girdle 
wherewith he was girded continually. 

His life had been a shifting scene of unfair deal- 
ing ; of false pretences ; of uncertain climbing ; of 
incessant struggle either to retain, or to regain, 
a desirable position ; and because . his memory 

VOL. I. U 



I 



2U0 FAR ABOVE RUBIEA. 

retMncd nothing but a confosed recollection of 
excusing, inventing, distorting, misrepresenting, 
sctieming, cheating, planning, the atmosphere at 
Berrie Down almost took away his breath l^ its 
rarity. 

To the advantage, however, of being associated 
with a man like Arthur Dudley . against whose 
honour and integrity even slander could not make 
an accusation . who really had broad acres and 
fair lands . something tangible in the way of pro- 
Itcrty . Mr, Black was by no means blind. 

Society, he knew, bad a foolish confidence in eucb 
individuals ; and now, when, perhaps, for the first 
time in Iiis life he was striving to make his fortune 
honct-tly and legitimately, he could not help feeling 
that the accemou of such an ally gave him greater 
<roiiflilcncc even in liimself. 

\\'alking over the soft green turf at Berrie Down, 
he Wgan to imagine be had done with tacking and 
veering, and hoisting false colours for ever; at 
laxt, it was going to pay him to be straightforward. 
If there were some things concerning the Protector 
ISrcjut Hiul Flour Company, Limited, which he 
ih'i-niL'd it wispT to keep in the background, still 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 2&1 

there was no necessity for beating about the bush. 
There was the Company . a good scheme, a tangible 
scheme, with no humbug about it ; but rather, on 
the contrary, containing in itself almost every ele- 
ment necessarv to insure success. 

Very different was this venture to any with which 
he had ever previously been associated. Hitherto, 
he had looked for nothing beyond what he could 
make by merely promoting a company. He had 
assisted to usher dozens of ill-conditioned, un- 
healthy, rickety commercial infants into the world, 
and when he had pocketed his midwife's fee for his 
services there was an end of the matter. As a rule, 
these infants had either scarcely survived their birth, 
or else had grown up into disreputable swindles; 
and Mr. Black, having sense enough to know this 
kind of practice could scarcely continue to pay him 
for ever, most earnestly desired to get hold of some- 
thing which really had, in its own nature, some fair 
chance of existence ; and working it up thoroughly, 
make that a stepping-stone to future successes, up 
which he could safely climb to the very summit of 
the hill of Fortune. 

He was weary, not of the dishonesty of his pre- 

u 2 



292 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

rious career, but of its anxieties, its uncertainties, 
its never-ending, always beginning worL Thougfa 
a strong and hearty man to look at, be felt the years 
spent in planning and scheming . in '^ raising the 
wind," in getting ^' paper melted," in running 
about praying for bills to be renewed, in staving 
off bankruptcy, in softening the hearts of obdurate 
creditors . had told, and were telling, on his constitu- 
tion. He knew, if no one else did, how often be 
.bad climbed and fallen ; how often he had touched 
Fortune, and been spumed by her; how continually 
luck had travelled with him to a certain point, and 
then, suddenly taken herself off in a huff, leaving 
her former favourite to retrace his steps, or fight bis 
way onward, as best be could. How he had lain 
through the long nights planning; how he had 
thought in the darkness of ways and means; how 
he had racked his brains, marvelling whence help 
was to be obtained ; how he had walked the City 
streets in rain, in snow, in frost, in the broiling 
summer weather, in the winter, when the cruel east 
winds were careering up Cheapside; how he had 
got soaked to the skin, and how his clothes had 
dr;ed again on him ; how he had turned into taverns, 



i 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 293 

and drank brandy till he felt strong enough to go 
out again and face the worst, . ^all these miseries 
were fresh in Mr. Black's mind; to all of them, 
he hoped, with all his heart and soul, he had said 
farewell for ever ! 

The pace at which he had been travelling, he felt, 
must tell at last ; over the stones, over the stones ! 
backward and forward, in all weathers, with all 
sorts of anxieties dogging his steps; up and down 
hundreds of thousands of stairs ; across the thresh- 
holds of scores and scores of offices ; . ^how all this 
had wearied his mind and worn his body, he fiiliy 
understood only when he stood under the trees at 
Berrie Down, resting idly at last. 

There was no sham about Mr. Black's affection for 
London ; but there was equally no question that he 
felt a short stay in the country might do his health 
much good ; might clear his head, as he expressed 
it, and enable him on his return to town to resume 
work with greater energy than ever. 

^' Talk about a change to Hastings or Brighton," 
he said to Arthur Dudley, ^' why, it's nothing to this. 
To walk along the shore in either place, is simply 
walking down Regent Street, nothing else ! Upon 



294 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

my soul, I would quite as soon take a day's holiday 
in one as the other; and as for quiet, could the 
traffic in the City make more noise any time than 
that precious old sea ? No ; giye me this solitude, 
this stillness, this perfect freedom, and I am content 
to leave watering-places to fast young women and 
idle men." 

And no doubt Mr. Black was sincere in this state- 
ment. Though the appointments at Berrie Down 
were not on that scale of magnificence which Mr. 
Black would have liked to see his kinsman afiect, 
still the very absence of this magnificence tended 
to make the house a comfortable one at which to 
visit 

The furniture might be old-fashioned and the 
draperies faded ; yet to Mr. Black there was a certain 
novelty in sitting down on a chair which was un- 
doubtedly paid for, that counterbalanced, to some 
extent, the efiect of well-worn carpets, ancient 
sofas, spider-legged tables, and a square six-octave 
piano. 

Besides, the mere fact of seeing people able to 
do without luxuries, able to resist the lust of the 
eye and the pride of life, produced a salutary 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 295 

though vague impression on the mind of a man who 
had been brought up amongst a class which believes 
almost exclusively in externals, and pins its faith to 
goods and chattels, to fine feat|iers, to unlimited 
gilding, to many servants, and big houses filled 
with much French polish and varnish in profusion, 
wiih silk curtains and soft carpets, and pictures in 
heavy, costly frames. 

If Arthur Dudley could afibrd to live in such 
poor style without losing caste, then what might 
Arthur Dudley not achieve if he were able to live 
in better style ? A desirable connection certainly 
Mr. Black held that man to be, who, without any 
adventitious aid whatsoever, could remain a gentle- 
man amid surroundings that ''would settle me," 
mentally finished the promoter. 

That there was something in birth, beyond a 
father leaving personal and freehold property to his 
son . that there was something also in rank over 
and above houses and lands . money and more money 
. Mr. Black began to believe ; and in the pleasant 
summer time, amongst the green Hertfordshire 
fields, under the drooping trees, the promoter came 
gradually to understand something else, namely, that 



296 FAR ABOVE BUSIES. 

a woman who, like Heather, could manage to make 
herself and others happy, on an utterly inadequate 
income, might, mated to a different husband, have 
proved a treasure beyond all price. 

Even Mrs. Ormson, he knew, could never have 
shed so sweet a content over any home as Heather 
Dudley. "I believe," thought Mr. Black, "she 
would even have made that dog-kennel in Hoxton 
something worth looking forward to coming home to 
at night. She is not clever . that is, she could never 
fight her way in the world, nor go out into it like 
many women-^but she is worth a barge-load of any 
I ever knew, for all that. By Jove ! married to a 
clever man, would not she have made a home for 
him T And then Mr. Black went on to consider, 
in a mournful kind of way, that let him climb to 
what worldly height he would, domestic comfort was 
a thing the future could not hold for him ; that, 
though he might have servants and carriages, a 
house as fine as Lord Kemms, money at his banker's, 
and an income large enough to satisfy even his most 
extravagant desires, he could never expect to pass 
through any door which might afibrd him admission 
to such a paradise as that, in and out of which 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 297 

Arthur Dudley passed at his own sweet pleasure, 
all unconscious of the blessings he enjoyed. 

Never before had Mr. Black remained long 
enough at Berrie Down to appredate the quiet 
beauty of that calm home life. A hurried visit from 
Saturday till Monday, a scramble for trains, a hot 
walk to church, pressing anxieties which made the 
still monotony of the country almost maddening to 
a man whose brain was in a constant whirl of excite- 
ment ; a day or two, perhaps occasionally, through 
the week . when picnics were planned and excursions 
undertaken . ^had formerly been Mr. Black's experi- 
ence of Berrie Down. 

Most people know how wearisome and unen- 
durable the stillness of night is when sleep refuses 
to close the tired eyelids, when either from pain of 
body, or distress of mind, the hours ure passed in 
restlessness instead of rest. The silence of the 
country, its inaction, its dead-aliveness had been 
hitherto to Mr. Black precisely what sleepless nights 
prove to many a sufferer. He could not take repose 
out of it ; and as day, with its work and its turmoil, 
seems preferable to the long, drawn-out darkness, 
through every hour of which ascends the moaning 



298 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

prayer, "Would to God it were morning!" so even 
the noise and tumult of town appeared to Mr. Black 
sounds to be desired in preference to the awful and 
fearful quiet of that still life at Berrie Down. 

But now the Hollow was to him as a calm 
summer's night, when refreshing sleep steals down 
upon the worn and the weary, giving them rest after 
toil, strength to rise and meet the trouble of the 
coming day. 

The silence did not irritate him now, the utter 
repose of the life did not chafe his temper. He 
wanted to think, and he found time to do it. There 
was nothing pressing which required his return to 
town. He could let the express from Palinsbridge 
speed away to London, and leave him still behind at 
Berrie Down; he could lounge about the fields 
and build castles in the air at his leisure ; he could 
stand and listen to the rustling of the wind among 
the trees without a thought of how time was going ; 
he could lie on the grass, and plan his plans, and 
scheme his schemes, without ever a passing footfall 
to disturb him. 

Further, he liked the liberty of the house. He 
could go and come, he could be alone or with the 
family, just as pleased him best 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 299 

There was no fuss about dress, no strict adherence 
to hours. If he went out for a quiet walk, dinner 
did not wait for him, and still he was not expected 
to starve the whole day, in consequence. 

Mrs. Dudley had no black looks for guests who 
lounged in late to breakfast There was always 
sunshine at Berrie Down ; there was always some 
one to giye that soft answer that turneth away 
wrath; there was no squabbling, no jealousy, no 
selfishness. In that house, it was not who should 
retain, but who should give up. Boys and girls alike, 
it was the same, who could do most for each other ; 
and, beyond all, who could do most for Heather. 

Naturally a shrewd man, Mr. Black could not 
choose but notice all these peculiarities of the house- 
hold at Berrie Down ; and as he began to take a 
personal interest in the members composing that 
household, so, in the ordinary course of things, he 
necessarily looked deeper than he had ever done 
before, only to see more and more in Heather to 
admire. 

She was his antagonist, he felt, and yet he would 
have given much to have had her on his side. She 
would be averse to leaving Berrie Down, and yet it 



300 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

was she, more tban any other member of the fiEunily, 
he desired to hare in town. 

**By Jove I she is a woman," he remarked in 
confidence to Mrs. Ormson ; but finding his entfau* 
nasm failed to kindle a corresponding flame in that 
lady's bosom, he pursued the subject no further. 

Even the very animals about Berrie Down seemed 
to Mr. Black difierent to the animals he had seen 
elsewhere : chickens that flew on Agnes' shoulder 
the moment she appeared in the poultry-yard ; dogs 
that relieyed each other at the gate, and sat looking 
up and down Berrie Down Lane the whole day long, 
like sentries on duty ; a terrier that let Lally's pet 
kitten make a pillow of him ; a cat which was 
turned into the pigeon-house every night to prevent 
the rats doing mischief and allowed the pigeons to 
roost on her back without entering the slightest pro- 
test against such a proceeding; horses that ate 
apples and plums in any quantity . ^that would search 
Alick's pockets for bread, and pick the flowers out of 
Agnes' belt daintily and lightly ; a goat which ruled 
supreme in yard and paddock, which reduced even 
a huge Newfoundland to a state of abject terror, 
which played such antics as Mr. Black bad never 



LIFE AT THB HOLLOW. 301 

previously imagined could be gone through by an 
animal . which would get into the dog-kennel and 
keep its rightful occupant at bay . which would 
stand guard over the kennel and prevent Nero 
coming out . which would then be off chasing the 
smaller dogs about . ^butting at the colts, and causing 
them to rear and paw, and then scamper off round 
the fields, followed full flight by Jinny, who was 
fleeter of foot than any of them. She was a 
disreputable goat, of low tastes ; who drank ale 
and ate tobacco ; who preferred sour apples to 
wholesome grass; who had an objection to letting 
herself be milked, and who, when she became the 
mother of a kid, seemed to think the creature had 
been sent into the world to be rolled over and butted, 
and hunted and teazed, from morning till night. 

A shocking thief was Jinny also, who would make 
her way into the larder and eat up bread and pies 
with an appreciative appetite which ought to have 
proved eminently gratifying to Mrs. Piggott ; who 
might be found standing on her hind legs, sharing 
the horses' com ; who was discovered one day, on 
the top of a little rustic summer-house, munching 
with infinite relish the earliest pears that grew on 



302 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the sunniest wall of the garden. Every day Arthur 
vowed vengeance against that goat ; and yet every 
succeeding morrow discovered Jinny at fresh tricks, 
engaged in carrying out some new mischie 

Then the pigeons ! the ridiculous fantails and^the 
consequential pouters, . the pouters so irresistibly like 
a parish clerk, the fantails so vain that, in walking 
backwards to exhibit their outspread feathers, they 
often fell head over heels, to the intense delight of 
Lally. Lovely pigeons ! that would flutter down at 
sound of Heather's voice, and settle on head and 
hand, soft balls of white, smooth feathers, waiting to 
be fed. 

It might, according to Mr. Black's idea, be a 
useless life ; but, for all that, it was very tranquil 
and very sweet, and pleasant also from sunrise to sun- 
set . a succession of summer days without a cloud. 

Further, if, in the midst of so many romantic and 
countrified sights and sounds, it be not prosaic to 
make mention of such common matters as eating 
and drinking, I may add that the edible arrange- 
ments at Berrie Down met with Mr. Black's un- 
qualified approval. 

To a man who had been content for years and 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 303 

years with chops and steaks, a pennyworth, daily, of 
potatoes, and a like value of bread, partaken of 
after the manner of those modern Israelites, City 
people in haste, and washed down by a pint or half 
a pint of bitter, it may readily be believed that the 
orthodox dinners which he deemed it the correct 
thing to partake of in Stanley Ci'escent were rather 
unappreciated luxuries. 

What did he care for white soups and lobster 
patties . for entrees and Italian creams ? The human 
being who had ever thought himself lucky to sit 
down to a pound of thinly-sliced beef or ham which 
he brought in with him wrapped up in a piece of 
newspaper ; who had purchased American cheese, 
and supped on that delicacy in his Hoxton retire- 
ment; who had eaten shrimps at Gravesend, and 
partaken of Delafield and Co.'s entire as supplied 
after due adulteration by the landlord of the " Jolly 
Sandboys," was not likely to contract a passion in 
his later years for Anglo-Gallic cookery, for re- 
chauffes and made dishes, for disguised vegetables 
and non-comprehensible meats ; for sour wines and 
fashionable sweets. On such subjects he and Miss 
Hope stood at opposite poles; and it was the 



304 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

funniest thing imaginable to hear the two wrangling 
over the different opinions which they held. To 
have heard them talk, any outsider might have 
supposed a new religion had been introduced, and 
that while the one held there was no safety out of 
the old faith, the other believed that to like a good- 
sized joint was a remnant of barbarism, a superstition 
only prevalent amongst the very lowest classes in 
the community. 

For Miss Hope likewise^ Berrie Down was liberty 
hall ; and therefore, while Mr. Black breakfasted off 
ham and fowl, eggs, and sirloins of beef, thick slices 
of bread and butter, and tea in quantity, the spinster, 
seated opposite to him, regaled herself with claret, 
fruits, and what Mr. Black vaguely called " green 
meat'' . which meant lettuces, mustard and cress, 
and other delicacies of the same primitive nature. 

Often Mr. Black openly declared his wonder that 
" all the trash she eat did not kill her ;" while Miss 
Hope was eloquent on the subject of nglish glut- 
tony, and declared with more candour and politeness 
that she had never eaten a dinner in England fit 
for a civilized human being to partake of. 

" Not," she added, turning apologetically to Mrs. 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW. 305 

Dudley, "but that I consider Mrs. Piggott for 
England an admirable cook, and if she would only 
allow me to give her a few hints, I think you would 
find a change for the better, both in your expendi- 
ture and in your table." 

Ever ready to meet the views of her husband's 
relations, Heather requested Miss Hope to extend 
to Mrs. Piggott the benefit of her experience ; only 
to find, however, that such benefit had been pre- 
viously offered and unceremoniously declined in 
words following . 

"If I cooked well enough for your sister, Mr. 
Arthur's mamma . Miss Hope, mum . and if I 
please Mrs. Dudley, mum, I don't want no instruct 
tions from you, mum. No offence, I hope; if 
offence, I humbly beg pardon. I'm too old to learn 
new tricks." 

To the truth of which last clause Miss Hope 
assented with such unnecessary readiness, that Mrs. 
Piggott's temper was excited instead of mollified ; 
and when the lady in the kindest manner possible 
subsequently suggested "going into the kitchen 
to prepare a few dishes," Mrs. Piggott locked her- 
self up in the store-room with a huge Bible and her 

VOL. r. X 



306 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

spectacles, and sat there till Bessie came to say the 
performances were over, and the messes ready for 
sending to table. 

'^ And messes they be, miss," declared Mrs. 
Piggott, after due inspection. " If Mr. Arthur or 
Mrs. Dudley either likes that trash, I shall be 
greatly astonished ; but lor, miss ! them old maids 
is all alike. If it's not cats, it's dogs ; and if it's 
not dogs, it's meddling in other folkses business, and 
going about from house to house carrying their 
nasty prying ways about with them among their 
luggage. Who ever heard of boiling lettuce-leaves 
afore, or of putting onions, and sugar, and eggs 
among green pease, spiling the flavour of them? 
It's not Christian, that's what I say ; and you tell 
me she fried them potatoes in oil ; and that soup . 
why, it is thick with grease . butter, is it, miss ? 
I wonder how much she has used ! And a quart of 
cream, do you tell me ? Well, if that is 'conomical 
cooking, I don't know what 'conomy is. I hope 
master will like his dinner, that is all . I only hope 
he may." 

Which was about as great a fib as Mrs. Piggott 
ever uttered; for most devoutly did she hope the 



LIFE AT THB HOLLOW. 307 

good things Miss Hope bad prepared might come 
out untasted. 

" Poking about, indeed ! . ^messing in the kitchen. 
I wonder how she would like me to go into the 
drawing-room this evening, and offer to play the 
pianner to her ? Talk about servants knowing their 
places I It would be well if ladies learnt theirs, I'm 
thinking. Her sister would never have dreamt of 
doing such a thing ; and as for Mr. Arthur's wife, 
she is too soft and easy ; she ought to know better 
than allow such goings on." 

Thus Mrs. Piggott . who, after refusing to take 
service with the second Mrs. Dudley, or in the 
republic which succeeded that lady's marriage to Dr. 
Marsden . had come over to Berrie Down some 
twelve months after Heather's arrival there, and 
stated that, ^^ having heard a good report of Mr. 
Arthur's wife, she had no objection to serve her, ii 
she were in want of a cook." 

With which offer Heather closing, Mrs. Piggott 
a week later entered the gates of Berrie Down, and 
virtually resumed possession of all her old authority. 
Amongst her goods and chattels were a Bible, a 
cookery book, a tea-caddy (with a key), a pair of 



308 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

spectacles, a work-box, and her marriage lines . all 
articles without which Mrs. Piggott never travelled. 

A staunch Protestant, Mrs. Piggott read her Bible 
diligently on Sundays, and on what she called par- 
ticular occasions . such, for instance, as the death of 
a relative, the news of some frightful railway acci- 
dent, shipwreck, or colliery explosion, the sickness 
of any member of the Berrie Down household, the 
birth of a child, or in times of special aggravation. 

But if she perused the sacred volume occasionally, 
she pored over her cookery book daily. From the 
valuable receipts it contained she had culled fragrant 
flowers in the shape of savoury dishes, curious 
puddings, wonderful sweetmeats, and a method of 
making puff-paste, in which even the housekeeper at 
Moorlands had not disdained to request instruction. 

And after that, for Miss Hope to come with " her 
foreign notions, her garlic, her shalots, her tarragon, 
her basil, her clear soups (like dish-water), her meat 
done to rags, her vegetables cooked till all flavour 
was boiled out of them; her fruit breakfasts, her 
messy salads, her pinches of flavouring, her new- 
fangled sauces, her endless dishes, with not a good 
mouthful on each." 



LIFE AT THE HOLLOW, 309 

If Mrs. Piggott had not, at this trying period, 
found a sympathizing listener in Bessie Ormson, for 
want of vent her indignation must ha^e killed her ; 
as it was, Bessie took the keen edge off the knife 
that stabbed the cook, made fiin of Miss Hope and 
Miss Hope's stew-pans, and told poor Mrs. Piggott 
thiit the result of the French dinner had been a 
failure. " We all unaccountably lost our appetites," 
said the young lady, slyly; "the dishes were 
capital, no doubt, but then, if one be not hungry, 
you know," and then Miss Ormson looked archly 
at Mrs. Piggott, and the pair laughed wickedly. 

"I hope you have plenty of cold meat in the 
larder," Bessie went on, " for we shall all be starving 
by supper time;" and these words proving pro- 
phetic, Mrs. Piggott's anger was appeased ; and next 
day she unbent so far as to inform Miss Hope she 
would not mind watching how she made " that there 
sauce," for she thought it very good indeed. 

The conqueror can always afford to be a Utile 
generous, and in this instance Bessie held that Mrs. 
Piggott acquitted herself with considerable credit. 

" Far be it from me to say the things were in their 
own nature detestable," remarked Miss Ormson to 



310 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

her uncle ; ^' under the circumstances, I do not think 
we can tell anything about them. We don't jump 
to the conclusion that an air is unmusical because an 
utterly incompetent person attempts to play it, and 
clearly, Miss Hope knows as much concerning 
cookery as I do." 

** There may be something in that," agreed Mr. 
Black ; '* talking about music, why don't you play 
and sing, like your cousins ?" 

"My brain never would bear the harass and 
excitement of the sharps and flats," answered Bessie, 
plaintively ; and with that reply the promoter, who 
bad lately taken it into his head every member of 
the family ought to do something well, and con- 
tribute to the success of the general social " rising " 
about to take place, was fain to rest satisfied. 



END OF VOL. I. 
FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 


CHAPTER I. 

MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 

Amidst the anxieties of making salads, the desire 
to convert Heather from the evils and dangers of 
English cookery, skirmishes with Mrs. Ormson, 
criticisms on Bessie, and the personal enjoyment 
of such luxuries as ripe fruit, coflFee of her own 
manufacture, chocolate and claret ad libitum^ Miss 
Hope by no means forgot Mr. Black's commercial 
scheme, and the eflForts she felt confident he was 
making to induce Arthur to embark in it with him. 
A woman sharp and clever enough in her genera- 
tion, she was yet no match, either in sharpness or 
cleverness, for Mr. Black. If she knew a few things 

VOL. II. B 



2 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

about him, he " was up," so he phrased it, " to two 
or three of her moves," and could turn the tables on 
her, when she tried his temper, as is often the wise 
fashion of her sex, a little too much. 

The very first morning she opened fire upon him, 
the promoter informed Arthur, he " knew what the 
old lady was up to." 

This was the peculiarly diplomatic manner in 
which Miss Hope, finding that Heather inclined to 
do nothing, commenced her operations. 

The time was breakfast ; scene, the dining-room 
at Berrie Down, with all the windows open ; actors. 
Miss Hope and Mr. Black: interested spectators, 
the family and visitors generally. 

"Pray," began the spinster, coquetting, as she 
spoke, with a peach which might have been grown 
in Eden, it looked so fresh and tempting ; " pray, 
Mr. Black, can you tell me of a good investment for 
a small sum of money ?" 

Across the table Mr. Black looked at her, with a 
merry twinkle in his eyes ; then he answered, . 

" Yes, the Three per Cents." 

" But my friend would not be satisfied with three 
per cent.," said Miss Hope. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 3 

"A mortgage, or some good freehold estate, 
might suit her then," suggested Mr. Black. 

*'I did not say it was a lady, so far as I am 
aware," remarked Miss Hope. 

" No ; but I concluded no man would ask a lady 
friend to make such inquiries for him," explained 
her antagonist. " She might get four, or even four 
and a half, and still be safe enough." 

" But what is four and a half?" observed Miss 
Hope. 

" Four pounds ten shillings per cent, per annum," 
answered Mr. Black, at which reply Arthur laughed. 

" You won't make much of him, aunt," he said ; 
" you cannot get him to advise an unsafe investment" 

For a moment Miss Hope turned towards her 
nephew, evidently meditating an attack on him. 
Changing her mind, however, she addressed herself 
to Mr. Black once more. 

" But there is more surely than four and a half 
per cent to be had now-a-days, is there not ; in 
some of those great companies, for instance ?" 

"All swindles, ma'am," declared the promoter. 
" Should not advise you, or at least your friend, to 
have anything to do with them. In the compglnies 

b2 



I 



4 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

that are hona fide, all the shares are snapped up 
before the project is well before the public. When- 
ever you hear of shares going a-begging, depend 
upon it the whole concern is rotten." 

"You are an authority in such matters?" she 
suggested. 

"Not a better authority than Miss Hope," re- 
plied Mr. Black, gallantly. 

" What do you mean ; do you think 1 know any- 
thing about investments ?" she asked. 

" I have heard that either you or some friend of 
yours does," he answered. " I have heard of very 
good ventures you have made, . of shares sold in the 
nick of time, and bought wisely, and at a very low 
figure." 

"I assure you, Mr, Black, you have been mis- 
informed," said the spinster, eagerly ; " all my 
money is sunk in a life annuity." 

" Which, no doubt, ma'am, you purchased on as 
favourable terms as those shares in the Great 
Britain and Ireland Canal Company." 

'* Then you had to do with that !" exclaimed Miss 
Hope, setting down her claret-glass with most un- 
ladylike vehemence, and looking at the promoter as 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 5 

though he were a culprit caught in the very act. 
" I always thought that was one of your schemes ; 
but never felt sure of it till now." 

" It is not wise to be too sure of anything," Mr. 
Black answered. " I had nothing, as it happened, to 
do with the Great Britain and Ireland Canal Com- 
pany. If I had, perhaps you might not have lost 
by your shares ; but a man I know, a confoundedly 
clever fellow, got rid of his the day before the 
smash came, and it was he who told me you had got 
your fingers burnt. Your friend, Mr. Pembroke, 
did not advise you with his customary caution there. 
Miss Hope." 

"Mr. Pembroke had nothing to do with the 
matter," said Miss Hope, angrily ; " and how you 
happen to be so well acquainted with my private 
afiairs is a mystery to me. I do not consider such 
prying gentlemanly. I do not know what may be 
thought of such conduct among business people, 
Mr. Black, but in a different circle " 

" I thought it was of business we were talking," 
interrupted the promoter, " of affairs which were 
strictly commercial The moment any one goes on 
the market. Miss Hope, either personally or by deputy, 



6 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

that moment he or she becqmes public property. I 
never pretended to be a gentleman ; but I do not 
think I would go prying into my neighbour's secret 
concerns for all that, any more than you would do," 
he added, significantly. 

Almost involuntarily Heather's eyes sought Miss 
Hope's face at this statement, and under Mrs. 
Dudley's look the spinster turned redder even than 
she had done at the conclusion of Mr. Black's 
speech. 

** I am perfectly incapable of impertinent or undue 
meddling in any person's concerns," she said. 
" Thank God, curiosity is a feeling that I was bom 
without." 

" Then you ought to be sent to the South Ken- 
sington Museum," remarked Mr. Black. 

" Don't you think, aunt, that is going a little too 
far ?" inquired Arthur. 

" Miss Hope only meant that she had no curiosity 
about indifierent subjects," put in Mrs. Black, as usual 
making matters worse by trying to mend them. 

" Miss Hope meant no such thing," snapped that 
lady. " 1 meant precisely what I said ; that I have 
no curiosity, and that I never had any." 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 7 

** Not even to see unfinished pictures and statues 
in course of chiselling," suggested Mrs. Ormson. 

" I do not think Miss Hope has any undue 
curiosity," said Heather ; " at least, I know she has 
not nearly so much as I. It interests me to know 
the name, and occupation, and worldly means, even, 
of Dora Scrotter's lover down at the mill. In 
the country one learns to be inquisitive about one*s 
neighboiu-s. There is so little excitement or amuse- 
ment, that every piece of gossip is seized on eagerly." 

" You dear Heather, as if you were a gossip 1" 
exclaimed Bessie. 

"That is just what I say about the country," 
remarked Mr. Black ; " life stagnates here ; you 
should come to London, Mrs. Dudley; come and 
bring the girls, and we will take you about. There 
are lots of rooms in Stanley Crescent crying out for 
some one to come and occupy them. Persuade your 
husband to give himself a holiday whenever the 
crops are in ; you have never paid us a visit yet, 
and I call it meaa" 

" We should be only too delighted if you would 
come," murmured Mrs. Black. 

" Well, all I can say is," remarked Miss Hope, 



8 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" that if I had such a place as Berrie Down, I would 
never leave it." 

" Not even to go abroad ?" asked Mrs. Onnson. 

" Not even to go abroad," answered Miss Hope, 
deliberately . an assertion which took every one so 
much by surprise, that no person disputed its truth- 
fulness; not even Arthur, who, feeling his aunt's 
words were intended as a useful moral lesson for 
him, longed to argue the matter out with her, and 
say he should go to London, or stay at Berrie Down, 
or take a still longer journey if it pleased him to do 
so, without consulting any one in the matter. 

"You would like greatly to have my nephew 
staying in Stanley Crescent?" Miss Hope said to 
Mrs. Black later on in the course of the same day. 

" I should greailyj^ answered the promoter, and 
thus war was declared between them ; and from that 
day forth Miss Hope began unintentionally playing 
into her enemy's hands. 

" Take care what you are about with that man, 
Arthur," she entreated. 

" My dear aunt, I am much obliged to you for 
your kindness, but I believe I can manage my own 
affairs," he returned. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 9 

** Heather, you must speak to Arthur," she then 
declared; **if you do not speak, you will one day 
repenf your weakness." 

" But I am afraid of vexing him," Mrs. Dudley 
objected. 

" Vex, nonsense ; better vex him than lose every 
sixpence you have in the world." 

"Do you think my speaking likely to do any 
good?" 

"It cannot do any harm;" and thus exhorted. 
Heather inquired, . 

*' Have you any intention, Arthur, of . of going 
into business?" 

" Business," he repeated ; " what in the world put 
such an idea as that into your mind ?" 

" You andMr. Black are always talking together." 

" And you object to our talking ?" 

" No ; only I love Berrie Down, Arthur." 

"Which my aunt thinks I am in danger of 
losing ; is that it, Heather ? No, I won't lose Berrie 
Down, nor beggar you and the children. Does that 
content you ?" 

" Yes, Arthur ;" and she put her arm round his 
neck, and kissed him ; and he, in return, kissed her, 



10 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

grateful, perhaps, for a wife whom so little confi- 
dence satisfied, or at least silenced ; and who was 
as grateful for a kind word, for a loving look, as 
many a woman for the devotion of a life. 

In those days, Arthur Dudley was a much more 
agreeable individual than he had seemed for many 
a year previously. 

He was gayer, brighter, kindlier. He refrained 
from grumbling, and ceased to recite the benefits he 
had conferred upon his family. 

There had come a summer to his winter, and in 
the bright sunshine all the good plants that were 
formerly hidden under the snows of adversity, put 
forth and blossomed into flower. 

For such a change, could Heather be otherwise 
than thankful ? Did not every creature about the 
house . every man, woman, and child, and even the 
very dumb animals . ^feel happier and better because 
the head of the family, believing fortune was coming 
towards him, looked out over the world with diflerent 
eyes, and thought there was at last good to be found 
in it? 

The labourers worked more willingly; the very 
cattle seemed to thrive better ; the dogs, forgivingly 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 11 

forgetful that their master had been wont to repulse 
their demonstrations of affections with an angry, 
" Get off, will you !" came bounding towards 
him over the meadows and across the yard. 
They were so pleased with the notice he took of 
them in those days, that they lost their heads and 
made themselves perfectly ridiculous with their 
rejoicings and gambolings. They rolled each other 
over on the grass, and barked and worried each his 
companion in the friendliest manner possible. When 
Arthur entered the room, Muff, Lally*s dearly be- 
loved and much-enduring kitten, now kept her posi- 
tion, instead of walking off gravely shaking her hind 
legs at him as she went He had been wont to 
kick her also out of the way, but now he did not 
disdain to look when Bessie held the saucer of milk 
for which she had taught Muff to beg. 

Even Jinny, the ill-conditioned goat, came in for 
her share of the universal sunshine ; while as for 
Heather, she basked in it. Had it not been for 
Miss Hope's eternal warnings, she would have for- 
gotten her anxieties ; ay, even the unpromising page 
of her own life which had been suddenly opened for 
her inspection. 



12 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Arthur was happy ; and she is but a poor wife to 
whom the sight of her husband's happiness does not 
bring rejoicing also ! As for Lally, a new leaf in her 
book also was turned over. One day she came in to 
her mother . hot, breathless, excited . exclaiming, 
" Lally's been to the mill, and Mr. Scrotter gave 
her two . ^beau . ful bantams !" 

" Who went with you to the mill, my pet ?" asked 
Heather ; little expecting, however, to hear Lally 
say in reply, . 

" Pa tooked me ; and pa says, when Lally's a big 
girl she shall have a nicer pony than Jack to ride, 
and that he'll go out with her. Pa says it !" and 
Lally stood and looked at her mother as though 
expecting Heather to make an immediate memo- 
randum of these remarkable words. 

Ah ! Heaven, how the poor Squire built his castles 
and furnished them in that glorious summer weather ; 
in what a fairy edifice he lived ; through what rose- 
coloured glass he surveyed his future life! How 
different everything looked ; how changed he felt ; 
how swiftly the stream of his existence flowed by ! 
He was galloping on to fortune, and he never 
thought of the chance of fall or accident by the 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 13 

way. He believed in his steed, and the idea of 
stumbling or breaking down never occurred to him. 
He was in for it now; he had . as Mr. Black said to 
himself at the conclusion of their first actual con- 
versation on the subject . " tasted blood ;" and till 
the game was hunted down, Arthur was never likely 
to look back. 

Besides, there was such perpetual excitement 
about the matter. Letters arrived, letters were 
answered, advertisements were drawn up, a pro- 
spectus had to be written. Post time became a 
longed-for hour at Berrie Down. 

There was something to do, something to expect ; 
the monotony of that country existence was broken 
up. Life at the Hollow, all at once, ceased to be 
mere vegetation. For himself the Squire never 
could have made an object and a purpose ; but here, 
constantly at his right hand, was a man full of 
energy and expedients . a man who had confidence 
both in himself and in his project; who, pulling 
away with might and main towards opulence and 
success, was kind enough to take Arthur Dudley 
as a passenger in the same boat, and amuse him, as 
they rowed along, with descriptions of that fair land 
whither they were journeying. 



14 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Many a wiser person than Arthur Dudley has 
been led away by much more delusive prospects of 
fortune than those concerning which Mr. Black 
waxed daily more and more eloquent. 

Besides, the mere fact of having anything actually 
to do . " anything to get up for," so Mr. Black put 
the matter . proved an agreeable variety to the 
Squire. 

He was not yet old enough to prefer repose to 
action, to dislike change, to distrust novelties ; and 
there can be no question but that the brisk con- 
fidence of Mr. Black's ideas . the sharp decision of 
Mr. Black's manner, seemed a pleasant variety to a 
man who had for years and years been droning 
through life, wandering over the fields with his 
hands in his pockets, grumbling at his labourers, 
lamenting concerning his inferior crops, and his 
cattle that would not grow beef fast enough. 

Other trifles also conspired to gratify him at this 
time ; such trifles as a man must have lived very 
quietly and very economically even to notice. But 
then it was 'many a long day since Arthur had lived 
otherwise than quietly and economically, and for that 
reason one or two journeys taken to town about this 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 15 

period with Mr. Black . when the pair went about 
London regardless of expense, rushed from one end 
of town to the other in hansoms, kept cabs waiting 
for them without a thought of the ultimate cost ; 
tipped footmen, porters, watermen ; took trains from 
all parts of London for all suburbs and country 
districts that could be mentioned; treated subor- 
dinates to wonderful luncheons, or else had them up 
for dinner to Stanley Crescent, and went with them 
afterwards to the play . made a curious impression 
on the mind of a man who had hitherto looked con- 
scientiously at a sovereign before spending it ; who 
had almost ever since he left college travelled 
second-class, affected omnibuses, shunned staying in 
great houses on account of needful gratuities, and 
generally pinched himself as much as an honest 
gentleman, left but with a small property and many 
incumbrances, was likely to do. 

Of course, this recital of scraping, careful, unex- 
citing poverty must prove as wearisome and unen- 
durable in a book as the reality does, when your 
neighbour (a person to be shunned) says he has to 
count his sixpences carefully and walk to the station 
for the sake of his family. The least said is soonest 



16 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

mended in such cases, no doubt ; and the terrible 
economics poor Squire Dudley had been guilty of are 
now reluctantly named only to render intelligible 
the reason why rattling about London, in company 
with Mr. Black, seemed to him pleasant by contrast 

To be sure . ^and this is really the singular part of 
the business . what was spent came out of Arthur's 
pocket. Various heads of cattle speedily followed 
Nellie, and the money they yielded was distributed 
by Mr. Black with no niggardly hand. 

He knew the means by which to float a company ; 
he believed that the way to every man's heart was 
through the palm of his right hand. 

Mesmerism, he said, was a round-about way of 
putting yourself en rapport with any one, in com- 
parison to slipping a sovereign between his fingers. 

Further, to get up other people's steam, it is 
necessary, first, to raise your own ; and Mr. Black 
held, and held truly, that there is no easier way of 
doing this than to rush from office to office, from 
station to bank, from bank to private house, all at 
express speed. 

" This is how we live," he was wont to say to 
Arthur Dudley ; and, on the whole, the Squire 



MR, BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 17 

thought such, a way of living far from disagree- 
able. 

They did not ask or want money from anyone, I 
pray you recollect. The great ship was still on the 
stocks ; there had not occurred a single hitch in the 
business ; it was all fair weather work, so far, at 
least, as Arthur could see ; all like ordering goods 
and writing cheques ; giving employment and paying 
cash ; and it never occurred to the Squire that there 
could be another side to the picture ; that sometimes 
business assumed the form of selling goods, and 
asking for payment. He was but a novice, and 
believed implicitly their ship would glide smoothly 
into the water ; that she would carry a good cargo ; 
that the profits on her freight would be enormous ; 
that the passengers would all have a fair voyage, 
and agree well by the way ; that there would be 
plenty, and to spare, for everybody ; and that he 
should never have any harder work to do than 
running up to town with Mr. Black, and holding 
interviews with all sorts and conditions of men. 

They saw printers and got estimates ; they ticked 
off the best advertising media in "Mitchell's 
Newspaper Guide;" they looked at oflSces in the 

VOL. II. c 



18 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

City 9 they had long and confidential discourses with 
auctioneer and house-agents ; they drove to Stan- 
gate and went over the mills, which were in full 
work, and in and out of which went and came men 
covered with flour, and of a generally white and 
dusty appearance ; they dined at Wandsworth with 
Mr. Bailey Crossenham, and at Sydenham with Mr. 
Robert Crossenham. 

They netted their thousands and their tens of 
thousands easily enough, after the ladies left the 
room, over wine which could not have been better. 
Capital, the Messrs. Crossenham agreed, was all 
that any business needed to ensure success. They 
made fortunes by the aid of pen and ink. Hun- 
dreds of tons of wheat . millions upon millions 
of loaves ; the merest gains, the slightest margin of 
profit, swelled up to something almost incredible per 
annum. The Messrs. Crossenham were in the 
highest spirits about the new undertaking ; but then 
certainly one fact concerning those worthy brothers 
must be borne in mind, namely, that they had been 
tottering on the very verge of bankruptcy when Mr. 
Elack rushed to the rescue. This, which of course 
remained a secret amongst the trio, accounted for 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 19 

much that even in those early days puzzled Arthur 
Dudley . as, for instance, the intense respect where- 
with these apparently well-to-do men treated Mr. 
Peter Black ; the deference they paid to his opinions : 
the readiness with which they fell into all his views ; 
the rapidity with which they seized and acted on his 
suggestions. There was not that independence of 
manner about the brothers which Arthur considered 
their means and position might have warranted them 
in assuming; but the conclusion he drew from all 
this was that, clever as he thought Mr. Black to be, 
people who ought to know much more about the 
promoter than it was possible for him to do, thought 
him cleverer still ; and, had anything been wanting 
to increase Squire Dudley's confidence in his 
leader, the manner in which that individual was 
treated by those with whom they came into actual 
contact, must have raised Mr. B^Ack considerably in 
his kinsman's esteem. 

To the men amongst whom they mixed free.y, 
the promoter, in fact, stood precisely in the same 
enviable position as that dog who has got a good 
bone, down to other curs. 

With a certain envious deference they followed 

c2 



20 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

him, hoping to get a portion of the spoil, or the 
reversion, perhaps, of the bone itself, should Mr. 
Black by any accident drop it; whilst as for 
Arthur, the promoter had told and hinted such 
falsenoods concerning his position, his wealth, his 
tremendous pluck, his untiring energy, his determi- 
nation to make the " Protector " a success, that the 
Squire was welcomed in the CSty with open arms, 
and became all of a sudden a person of consequence. 
^^ Lord Kemms walks in and out of his house just 
as I might do in and out of yours," remarked Mr. 
Black, with calm impertinence, to a man who, 
though worth a hundred thousand pounds, and the 
owner of a fine place twenty mUes from town, had 
utterly failed in all his attempts to get grander 
people to dine with him than Miller, a tallow- 
chandler, who dropped his Hs, and then following 
the universal law of compensation picked them up, 
and stuck them in where they had no business to 
mak(!: their appearance ; who was for ever inverting 
his personal pronouns, and vexing the soul of the 
rich man's daughter with reminiscences which, 
though possibly faithful, were by no means pleasant 
to hear related in the presence of a limp young 
curate the lady hoped to fascinate. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 21 

It would have amazed Arthur to know that any 
human being held him in high esteem, because a 
lord was, truly or untruly, reported to be running 
loose about his house ; and it might have annoyed 
him still more to know that the cool insolence of Mr. 
Black's words brought the man who was worth a 
"plum" on to the direction, where certainly no 
politeness or entreaty on the part of the promoter 
could have compassed such an end. 

Behind the scenes Squire Dudley was never, how- 
ever, permitted to peep. He saw the play go on, 
and was fascinated by its variety, its excitement, its 
rapid dialogue, its sunshiny hopefulness. How it 
was really got up, he had not a suspicion. That it 
was all tinsel and paint, and hollowness and sham, 
he had not a ghost of an idea 

It made a good show, and promised fair to draw 
a full house. Was not that the only thing which 
concerned him ? Mr. Black was of this opinion, at 
any rate, and took very good care he should see none 
of the dui;y work in course of execution. The un- 
pleasantnesses and difficulties, present and to come, 
were all kept studiously out of view. The king was 
never beheld without crown and sceptre ; if the queen 



22 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

ate bread and honey, it was partaken of with locked 
doors, and in a decorous privacy. 

No fairy met Arthur's view destitute of gauze ; 
unadorned with spangles, rouge, and pearl powder. 
The back of the canvas had no existence for him. 
If disagreeable letters arrived, Mr. Black did not 
show them to his coadjutor, but stated generally 
these private epistles concerned his other ventures. 
If a man's consent were doubtful, the promoter saw 
him first alone. On insecure ground he knew 
better than to let Arthur step ; and if the Squire 
returned to his country home, thinking the new 
company had hitherto not met with a check, who 
can feel surprised? 

Whenever there was the faintest chance of a gale, 
his clever captain got him into the cabin, and kept 
him there till the storm had blown by, or the danger 
was over. 

He saw the life and the fun of the voyage, but 
none of the peril ; and so he went back to Berrie 
Down brighter and more cheerful than ever, and 
Heather seeing him happy could not brace up her 
courage for the explanation Miss Hope assured her 
was essential, if she would save herself and the 
children from beggary. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 23 

Perhaps the part of the business which Arthur 
enjoyed most was that of assisting to write the 
prospectus. 

^_ On that document, Mr. Black asserted, hung the 
fete of the " Protector Bread and Flour Company, 
Limited," and the mutual talents of Arthur Dudley 
and Peter Black, Esquires, were employed for one 
entire fortnight in writing, correcting, and revising 
the production which ultimately went forth to the 
world, like many another great and good work, 
anonymously. 

** It may seem an easy thing to write a prospectus," 
remarked Mr. Black. " The fellows that do histo- 
ries, and novels, and newspaper articles, I dare say 
imagine there can be no trouble about drawing up 
an attractive advertisement ; but let one of them try 
to do it . that is all I say. Why, a prospectus 
combines within itself every literary difficulty you 
could mention : it has to be got up to suit the tastes 
of all readers ; it must contain something to tickle 
the palate of each man and woman who looks at it. 
Who is to check history, and say whether it is right 
or wrong ? but any fool can check statistics. I had 
a hack once, who used to do some of this kind of 



24 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

work for me, and he said it was all very fine for 
Macaulay and Alison, who could write just what 
they liked, and were not compelled to stick to facts, 
which are such stubborn things there is sometimes 
no dressing them up attractively or even decently ; 
but he declared there was a heap of dry bones flung 
to us, and we have to compose out of those promising 
materials brilliant pictures, exciting romances, per- 
fect blue-books full of sound statistical information. 
And what he said was true. Our style must be at 
once brief and persuasive. We must be eloquent in 
order to draw shareholders, and yet mindful that 
each word costs money. We must say nothing we 
are not prepared to verify. We must be as well up 
in grammar as in the price of shares. We must not 
slander our neighbour, nor unduly exalt ourselves ; and 
yet we are bound to show that, since the beginning 
of time, the heart of man never imagined, and the 
brain of man never conceived, such a project as that 
which we have the honour of submitting to the 
consideration of the intelligent and discriminating 
British public." 

"You should write a pamphlet on the subject," 
suggested Arthur, laughing. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 25 

" I wish I could . ^I wish I dare. It would be a 
comfort and a satisfaction to me to tell that same 
enlightened British public what I think of its sense. 
Upon my honour, Dudley, the worse your company 
is, the easier it is to write a prospectus about it. If 
you only want to float a thing, not to carry it 
through, why, you can say whatever you please 
about the matter, and the more you say the better 
the shares sell." 

" And why do you not put down whatever you 
please about the ' Protector ' ? " asked his com- 
panion. 

" Just because it is lona fide . because I must 
stick to facts and figures . figures that will satisfy 
not country simpletons, and ambitious widows, and 
discontented governesses, but sound commercial 
men. It is a serious matter, my friend, and must 
be wisely concocted and wisely executed. That is 
why I put in merely a preliminary advertisement 
hitherto. I knew the gromd coup would require both 
time and thought. We must have a little of the 
moral, the philanthropic, the hygienic, the scientific, 
the statistical, and the profitable ; and we ought tx) 
put a Latin quotation at the top : it will look 



26 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

classical, and complimentary to the attainments of 
the people to whom it is addressed. Greek might 
be better, or Hebrew; but I suppose you do not 
understand Hebrew ?" 

To which accusation Arthur pleading guilty, Mr. 
Black urged upon him the immediate necessity of 
^'rubbing up" his Latin, and finding an appropriate 
heading for the prospectus. 

" We shall want one to go round the stamp also," 
proceeded the promoter ; " but that is not immedi- 
ately required. Yes, it is, though," he added, " for 
I must mention the stamp at the end of the pro- 
spectus. Now, Dudley, look alive; if I do the 
composing, the compiling, and the inventing, surely 
I may depend on you for the Latin and correct 
Enghsh !" 

After fourteen years, the Squire's classical educa- 
tion had the dust thus brushed off it, in order to 
furnish a plausible swindler with a couple of Latin 
mottoes. 

For twice seven years he had kept this thing by 
him, that it might serve Mr. Black's turn at last 

" Dudley's 1 " said that individual, in frank expla- 
nation to his City friends. " Devilish neat and taking. 



MR. BLACK WRITES HIS PROSPECTUS. 27 

ain't it? Bring in the parsons; they'll think the 
whole thing has been drawn up by some Oxford man, 
as the Latin was, for that matter, out of a well 
which has not had any water pumped from it for 
Heaven knows how long. If you have any suggestion 
to make on the subject make it, or else hereafter hold 
your tongues, for I am going to have the prospectus 
printed off to-morrow." 

" Could not be better ! " answered his friends in 
chorus; and the programme of the "Protector 
Bread and Flour Company, Limited," was accord- 
ingly sent down to Harp Lane, where it was printed 
(on credit) by a protege of Mr. Black's, on a very 
superior satin paper, procured on credit likewise. 

Next day after delivery, proof was duly forwarded, 
and the day afterwards the prospectus was returned 
. ^pressed, folded, multiplied a thousand-fold . to 
Peter Black, Esq., at the Temporary Offices of the 
Company, 220, Dowgate Hill. The bundle, con- 
taining programmes of the ''Protector Bread and 
Flour Company, Limited," was flung down on the 
counter in the outer oflSce of 220, Dowgate Hill, at 
five to five precisely, and, at three minutes to six, 
four hundred and twenty-five prospectuses were 



28 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

wrapped up, directed, stamped, and posted at the 
chief office, Lombard Street. 

" She's off the stocks at last, thank God !" said 
Mr. Black to Squire Dudley, who stood beside him ; 
" she's off the stocks and afloat !" 



29 



CHAPTER II. 

MRS. PIGGOTT'S assistant. 

It was late on in the autumn by this time, and most 
of the visitors who had come down to the Hollow in 
the bright summer weather were now elsewhere. 

Miss Hope, having patched up a peace with her 
nephew, was at Copt Hall; Mrs. Ormson at Torquay, 
with her eldest son, the state of whose health was 
considered unsatisfactory ; Mrs. Black, at Hastings ; 
Mr. Black, much in town ; Mr. Harcourt, in Scotland ; 
and Bessie, at home, keeping house for her father. 

There was no one left at Berrie Down, in fact, ex- 
cepting Master Marsden, who remained on at the 
Hollow, because the state of Dr. Marsden's finances 
prevented the boy being sent to school ; while the 
state of his mother's health rendered it an act of 
real charity to keep the " noisy, ill-mannered, ill-con- 
ditioned young whelp " (this was Arthur's summary 



30 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of him) away from that small, uncomfortable, 
wretchedly-managed suburban house. 

Early in November, Alick was to enter on his 
new duties ; and at Christmas, by special desire oi 
Arthur, there was to be another and larger family 
gathering in Berrie Down. All kinds of people 
were to meet all other kinds of people ; and the 
Hollow, he said, "should see Christmas kept in 
thorough good old English style, for once." 

Already the younger Dudleys were speculating 
as to whether there would be an abundance of berries 
on the holly bushes, and Mrs. Piggott was looking 
to the fattening of her turkeys, and meditatively 
calculating how many of those unfortunate birds the 
expected guests would, in all probability, consume. 

Already she was pouring into the ears of her 
youthful handmaiden. Prissy Dobbin by name, tales 
which sounded to that unsophisticated damsel like 
romances, anent the number of plums she should 
have to stone, currants to wash and dry and pick, 
about the quantity of mixed peel she must cut up, 
and the amount of suet she would have to chop, for 
the Christmas puddings. As for mincemeat, Mrs. 
Piggott avowed her intention of commencing that 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 31 

whenever the twenty-first of November was come 
and past; and had the Israelites been journeying, 
for a second time, out of Egypt, and purposed 
making a halt at Berrie Down on their way, the 
worthy housekeeper could scarcely have "salted 
down " a larger quantity of butter, nor looked more 
anxiously at the tenants of the poultry-yard and the 
contents of the nests than she did. 

As for herbs . Miss Priscilla Dobbin's private 
opinion was, that " the deuce was in Mrs. Piggott 
about them." For ever, so she told her mother, 
she was rubbing off those herbs into bottles, and 
tying them down ; while, in respect of pickles, it is 
on record, the assistant made herself so frightfully 
ill with devouring those exhilarating articles of diet 
wholesale, that the cook assured her she should be 
sent home forthwith if she could not content herself 
for the future with (jooler viands than chilies and 
chutnee. 

" Drat them girls !" exclaimed Mrs. Piggott ; 
" they're every one alike now . for crinolines, and 
vinegar, and piccalilly. I remember a young house- 
maid as used to come and see me when I was taking 
care of General Furdie's house in Gloucester Place 



32 FAR 

. ^I b^Lere dhe ised to Eve on juHts . booglit 
tbeB at tEae oiIiiian*s^ axpexniTviirdi at a iiwmt, and 
if ^ came and sat witb me &r half an boiDv she 
voold finish the lot while ^ sat talking Ah! 
girk ain't like what daer leed to bei' 

^ And a good job too that d^r fauii\' retorted 
PriscCIa. who was certunly as unlike one of Mi& 
Piggoct^s ideal maidexs as can well be eoocnved. 

Hxcept diat she eoold *^ get through her work," 
when ^e diose to derote hersdf to it^ and that 
die was saffidectlT '^ owdacioiis and comical'' to 
make tnne pass ist in the Berrie Down kitdieii, 
Pnscilla Dobbin was not possessed, in Mis^ Piggott*s 
eresv of a sc^tarr Tiitne. 

She was not ** one "* the cook woold ever haTe 
had about the hoose ; but. of course, Mrs. Dudley 
knew bea . a seTerely ironical e^pre^^xi, which 
meant diat Mrs. Dudley knew nothinsr whateTer 
about the matter: indeed. Mrs. Piggott had been 
heard to say, that ^^a baby in arms was as fit to 
dtoose a serrant as her mistress^^ 

After all, howeTer, Priscilla was not exactly an 
importation of Mrsw Dudley's. A girl had been 
wanted, and this giri, a prot^ee of Bessie's^ stejqied 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 33 

at once from a wretched home to service at Berrie 
Down, where she worked harder, and idled more 
persistently, than any young person " of her inches," 
that it had ever been Mrs. Piggott's misfortune pre- 
viously to come into contact with. 

And yet with all she was as good company, in 
her rank, as Bessie Ormson in a higher ; better, 
perhaps, for she possessed artistic, histrionic, and 
imitative powers, of which the young lady was 
utterly destitute. 

Miss Dobbin had been taught at school to curtsey, 
or " bob," as she called it ; but elsewhere she had 
learned to dance with anybody, and to execute 
"steps" which were the delight and envy of the 
kitchen at Berrie Down. At school she had been 
taught psalms and hymns and spiritual songs ; but 
out of hours she had acquired a stock of ballads that 
would have horrified the propriety of the vicar of 
North Kemms, Priscilla' s native parish, had he been 
privileged to hear them. At school she was taught 
to read, write, cipher, and do sampler work ; out of 
school it had ever been her pleasure and delight to 
mimic the peculiarities of mistress and master, of 
clergyman and clergyman's wife, of the ladies who 

VOL. II. D 



34 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

visited the school, and of her fellow-companions, 
playmates, father, mother, and society generally. 

She was but a young thing when she came to the 
Hollow, sixteen or thereabouts, with a scanty supply 
of clothes, a crinoline which was at once the plague 
and delight of her life, a net to contain her hair, and 
induce people to believe it was long like a grown- 
up woman's, and a stock of impudence that was, 
were Mrs. Piggott's testimony on the subject reli- 
able,  more than enough." 

With Priscilla it was not, however, perhaps, that 
she had so much impudence as that she had so little 
reverence ; and for this reason, spite of Mrs. Piggott's 
high social position, her imposing cap, her stately 
manner, and her reminiscences of the good old times, 
the young girl treated her with as little ceremony 
as she might one of her playmates, and " answered 
the housekeeper back," . an indignity which had 
never previously been inflicted on that individual by 
anyone, gentle or simple. 

**She had always lived with people above and 
below, as knew their places and kept to them, till 
' you came,' " she stated to Miss Dobbin ; where- 
upon Miss Dobbin inquired . 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 35 

" O Lor', there, ain't you glad I am come, that 
you may see some new life ?" 

Did Mrs, Piggott threaten to report Prissy to 
Mra Dudley, that young person entreated of her 
to make haste and do so, " before her shoes wore 
out." Did the housekeeper, talking at Priscilla, 
endeavour to point a moral and adorn a tale by 
stating what was done in her young days . and what 
her first mistress, the lady of Mr. Serjeant Hickley, 

counsellor to the King (so Mrs. Piggott understood 
K.C.), said when she saw a servant with a bow or 
a bonnet, let alone a flower, added Mrs. Piggott 
parenthetically . Priscilla, rich in ribbons, flowers, 
and laces, flung to her from Miss Ormson's stores, 
thanked her stars " she had not lived in them days, 
and thought it was quite time the good old times were 
gone and past, if anybody was to have any comfort 
of their lives." 

"I'm sure I'm glad I wam't born then, Mrs. 
Piggott ; for one thing I'd be as old as you, and 
have nothing before me ; I'd have lived it all, and 
not have a thing to look forward to." 

" Better have nothing to look forward to than some 
things to look back upon," answered Mrs. Piggott, 

D 2 



30 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

sententiously ; which immediately elicited from Miss 
Dobbin the inquiry whether she had got that out of 
her own head or somebody else's, and if these were 
some things she did not care to look back upon. 

Clearly, the housekeeper said the girl could come 
to no good, and yet in her heart Mrs. Piggott liked 
this feminine ne'er-do-weel, and would have felt the 
house lonely without her. 

On the whole, she preferred Prissy's chatter to 
the more staid and sensible discourse of Jane, the 
housemaid, or Sarah, her assistant in dairy and 
kitchen. Though torture could not have wrung 
such a confession from her, Mrs. Piggott dearly 
loved gossip; and, if she had searched the home 
counties through, she could not have discovered a 
more industrious collector and retailer of news than 
Priscilla Dobbin. 

From the colour of the moire antique the vicar's 
wife wore when she went to dine at Moorlands, to 
the name of Miss Amy Raidsford's "intended," 
Priscilla had every atom of parish information at 
her fingers' ends. Why the lady's-maid was dis- 
missed from Moorlands . what Lord Kemms said 
when he found his gardener sending all the best 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 37 

fruit to Covent Garden, and only retaining windfalls 
for dessert at the Park . Prissy knew as well as 
though she had been present. 

Nor was it only from the neighbourhood of North 
Kemms that Miss Dobbin collected materials for con- 
versation. She knew all about the low marriage Mr. 
Harry Camperdon, the Fifield rector's son, had con- 
tracted with the sexton's daughter from Palinsbridge. 
" And I wouldn't ha' married her if she had been 
hung with diamonds . should always ha' felt or 
thought she had been dug up out of the graves. 
Seen her ? . to be sure I have, Mrs. Piggott . as thin 
as a hurdle, and as pale and sickly-looking as a bit 
of your underdone crust. She's a contrast to Mrs. 
Eaidsford. You don't mean to say you have never 
had a sight of Mrs. Raidsford 1 then you have a treat 
to come ; like the side of a house, and mean ! would 
look after the candles' ends, if her husband let her, 
and grudges throwing away her nail-parings. There 
is not a servant in the house dare give a glass of 
beer unbeknown, and they all say a nicer gentle- 
man nobody need wish to serve. It is thought Lord 
Kemms would make up to one of the daughters, if 
it wasn't for her ; but he can't abide her. Well, 



38 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

if I was Lord Kemms, I know who I'd have . money 
or no money." 

And so on, ad libitum^ the whole day long. Mak- 
ing beds, cleaning plate, shelling peas, stirring pre- 
serves, Priscilla Dobbin's tongue never ceased ; and 
let the burden of her song be what it would, the' 
refrain never varied, and that refrain was to the 
eflFect, that, since time began, there never had been 
before, and never would be again, such a young 
lady as Bessie Ormsou; Bessie had made her ac- 
quaintance at a period of (to Miss Dobbin) infinite 
trouble. Having been despatched to the mill to 
purchase some flour, she contrived by the way to 
lose the money entrusted to her. Feeling it useless 
to proceed, and being afraid to return home, she 
did the only thing which seems natural to boys and 
girls under such circumstances, namely, lifted up 
her voice and wept. 

While she sat on the stile leading away towards 
North Kemms, with her bonnet tilted over her face, 
her knuckles in her eyes, and making a display of 
feet encased in strong leather boots, and a pair of 
sturdy legs, which only the extremest distress could 
excuse being exhibited to public view, Bessie, 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 39 

coming along the field path, paused to inquire into 
the cause of such despair. 

A greater contrast than that presented by the 
pair could scarcely have been imagined. Hot and 
weary with running about searching after the lost 
money, sick and tired with crying, and the fear of 
the "hiding," which she explained to Bessie was 
sure to follow on confession ; her cheeks wet with 
tears, and her face generally smeared by reason of 
having been rubbed over with her dirty hands, 
Priscilla's personal appearance alone entitled her to 
the profoundest commiseration. 

Attired, on the other hand, in the coolest of muslin 
dresses, with the most coquettish of hats for head- 
gear, with a lace shawl thrown carelessly round her, 
holding a parasol, edged with deep fringe, a little on 
one side, more apparently to protect the trimming 
of her hat than her bright, fresh, beautiful face from 
the rays of the sun, Bessie, leaning against the 
stile, held converse with Miss Dobbin concerning 
the loss she had experienced. 

" It was a whole harf-a-crown. Miss," said the girl, 
amid a perfect gust of sobs, ^^ and I put it in my 
pocket, and I never left the path the whole way, 



40 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

except to pull a branch of roses (the poor things 
were lying withered and miserable, sodden and 
faded in her lap), and I suppose it was when I 
reached up to get them the money jumped out ; but 
I have looked and looked, and I can't see it. No, 
no more nor if it had had legs and run away. See, 
it was over in the comer of that far Held. Ill show 
you, if you like," she added, with a faint hope, 
perhaps, that Bessie might be able to find where she 
had searched in vain. 

"The scene of such a catastrophe has not the 
slightest interest for me," answered Bessie. " I will 
take your word that the half-crown is lost, and I will 
give you another in its place, or at least two shillings 
and sixpence, which comes to much the same thing. 
You go, or have gone, to school, I suppose ?" 

"Yes, Miss." 

" Then you know what a moral means ?' 

" I think so, Miss." 

"Well, the moral of this afternoon's work is: 
For the future, when your mother sends you out for 
flour, don't stop to gather roses by the way, for it is 
extremely unlikely that you will a second time meet 
any one in these fields worth half-a-crown." 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 41 

[aving finished which speech, Bessie, toyiDg with 
her dainty parasol, still stood looking at the girl, for 
whom she felt that compassion, which always moved 
her when she saw anything of the feminine gender 
mokempt, forlorn, untidy, unhopeful, uglier than she 
had " a right to be." 

To her, an ill-dressed girl or woman was precisely 
what a daub is to an artist, a series of discords to 
a musician. She loved prettiness. X.et a woman's 
dress be of cotton or of velvet, she still loved to see 
that dress worn with a certain consciousness ; and 
the terrible want of self-assertion, the utter abandon- 
ment of all self-appreciation in the girl who now 
stood opposite to her, was so distressing to Bessie, 
that she entreated of her as a parting favour to wash 
her face, and push her hair out of her eyes before 
she proceeded to the mill. 

" There is plenty of water in the stream," Bessie 
added ; '' and do make use of it freely, for at present 
you look as if you had been buried without a coflSn." 

A week after, the young lady, who had forgotten 
all about this occurrence, was told that a girl wanted 
to speak to her . a ^1 from North Eemms . Pris- 
cilla Dobbin by name. 



42 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" She does not want another half-crown, I hope," 
laughed Bessie, when she heard the name ; and she 
went out into the hall, looking, as she always did, 
pretty enough to drive any man to distraction. 

*' Well, Priscilla, you have not lost your money 
again, have you ?" thus Bessie commenced the con- 
versation. 

" No, Miss . I found it I could not rest ; and so, 
the first afternoon mother could spare me, I had a 
good look, and I took one of my little brothers, and 
he got it in among a lot of weeds growing in the 
ditch ; and here it is back again, please, Miss . and 
. ^my duty to you," finished Prissy, who evidently 
considered the last four words an appropriate ending 
to her sentence. 

Bessie took the half-crown, and held it in the 
palm of her hand for a moment, doubtfully. 

The coin had evidently been washed, as had also 
Miss Dobbin's face, which was pmnfuUy red and 
shiny. Then she looked at the thick clump boots, 
laced up with a leathern thong . at the sturdy legs, 
showmg below the short, scanty, hailstorm-pattern 
cotton gown . at the little old-fashioned black pele- 
rine . at the coarse school bonnet . at the light brown 




MRS. piggott's assistant. 43 

hair, cut so short all round . ^at the greenish-grey 
eyes, sparkling with pleasure . ^at the unmanageable 
mouth, which would smile and break into grins of 
delight at the recovery, of so great a treasure . at 
the hard hands, that seemed to have done so much 
work . before she said . 

" Sit down for a moment, I shall be back presently." 
She wanted to tell the story to Heather, and ask 
her advice ; but, as Heather happened to be out of 
the way, Bessie returned to the hall discomforted. 

She did not like to give the girl back the money, 
or its equivalent, and she was racking her brains 
what to offer, when Lally appeared on the scene of 
action, with a huge wedge of cake in her hand, 
which it is only right to state she was absolutely 
unable to eat 

" Lally, come here," exclaimed Bessie. " I wish 
to give this little girl something by which to remem- 
ber me . something to remind her of having been 
very careless and very good. What do you think 
she would like best ?" and Bessie took the child in 
her arms and waited, hoping, perhaps, the stranger 
might suggest some desirable memento for herself. 

But Prissy never spoke, nor, for some time, did 



44 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Lally, who first stared at Priscilla from head to foot, 
and then gravely turned and looked at Bessie, 
wondering apparently whether that young lady could 
conveniently part with her face as an appropriate 
offering to the stranger. Then her eyes wandered 
to Bessie's throat, and so fell on a tiny brooch which 
fastened her collar. The moment they did so . 

" Dive her 'at," said Lally, unhesitatingly, a sug- 
gestion which she would have made all the same had 
the trinket been worth a hundred guineas ; as it was, 
Bessie abode by her decision, and taking out the 
brooch, handed it to Priscilla, remarking at the same 
time that, " although she might not care for it then, 
she would perhaps when she grew up to be a woman." 

Not to be outdone in generosity, Lally at once 
presented the girl with her piece of cake, assuring 
her it was " very dood," the truth of which state- 
ment Bessie doubted exceedingly. 

Next day, over came Mrs. Dobbin to know 
whether it was " correct as a young lady at Berrie 
Down had given her gal a golden brooch ? She did 
not think her gal would tell a lie, but still young 
uns wanted to be looked arter." 

Assured of the rectitude of the transaction, Mrs. 



MRS. piggoit's assistant. 45 

Dobbin, after having been refreshed with ale and a 
slice of bread and meat, was permitted to depart 
*' Altogether, the half-crown threatens to prove a 
costly matter," Bessie remarked ; but Heather only 
said they seemed to be very honest, worthy people, 
and the subject dropped. 

But when, a little later on in the summer, Mrs. 
Dudley perceived it would be necessary to procure 
some young person to assist in the housework, Bessie 
proposed that a trial should be given to Priscilla ; 
and never ceased her entreaties for the girl to be 
engaged until Heather said Bessie and the girls 
might walk over to North Kemms and talk to Mrs. 
Dobbin about the matter. 

Nothing loath was Mrs. Dobbin for Priscilla to 
** go out," " except," she said, '' that in the matter of 
clothes she feared Prissy wam't fit to be seen in a 
gentleman's house." 

" Let her come over to me, and we will arrange 
that," Miss Ormson answered; and accordingly, 
when Prissy came, out of her own wardrobe the 
youn<2f lady furnished that of the new servant . 
telling her at the same time, laughingly, she was 
" made up for life." 



46 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" And you may think yourself a lucky gal," re- 
marked the mother on the first Sunday when Priscilla 
went home, about a month after her entrance on her 
duties at Berrie Down . " having plenty of victuals, 
and good clothes to your back, and a kind mistress." 

John Dobbin was sitting in the porch during this 
colloquy, looking askance at his daughters finery 
the while. When she came to exhibit her new dress 
to him, he observed, first, that " fine feathers didn't 
make fine birds," and then inquired . 

" Who was that chap 1 saw thee talking to last 
evening, this side Moorlands ?" 

" I wam't out yesterday evening, father," answered 
the girl. 

" Warn't thou ?" 

" No," was the reply. 

" Thou mayn't have told a lie about that harf-a- 
crown piece, but I doubt thou'rt telling a lie now, 
my lass," he said. 

'' Well, you can ask Mrs. Dudley if I went out 
yesterday," retorted Prissy, defiantly. 

*' I take it Madam Dudley has something else to 
do than watch the coming and going of a wench 
.ike thou," he answered ; " mayhap she don't know 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 47 

the one-half of what anybody in the house does; 
but I can tell thee this much, Prissy . ^that if I 
catches thee going wrong, I'll break every bone in 
thy body, if it was covered an inch thick with silks 
and satins." 

" I warn't out," persisted Prissy. 

" See that thou hain't then," returned her uncom- 
promising parent ; and as the weeks and the months 
passed by without John having any further occasion 
to find fault with his first-born, it may reasonably be 
presumed that she heeded his admonition. 

Further, in a general way, she gave satisfaction at 
the Hollow, where she was on good terms with every 
one, unless, indeed, it might be Master Marsden, who 
was, as she took various opportunities of informing 
him, an ** ill-behaved limb," and no " young gen- 
tleman." 

The last occasion on which Priscilla found herself 
moved to this confession of faith, was when she 
boxed Master Marsden's ears for holding Mufi^, and 
instructing Leonard to rub turpentine over her 
coat, preliminary . so she ascertained from Lally, 
who came rushing to her in an agony of distress . 
to ** making a bonfire of my poor tittens." 



48 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

That Master Marsden never forgave this inter- 
ference with his legitimate pleasures, and that his 
wrath was very grievously moved, both at Lally s 
tale-bearing and Prissy's prompt interference, may 
be gathered from the fact that he informed Lally 
she was a *' nasty little tell-tale tit" 
" Lally not," lamented the child. 
"Yes, you are . and *your tongue shall be slit, 
and every little puppy-dog shall get a little bit,' " 
persisted Master Marsden, with his own tongue 
very far out ; adding, to Priscilla, by way of appendix 
to this poem . 

"As for you, you ugly, snub-nosed, green-eyed 

little " 

''No names, Harry," interposed Alick, who 
chanced to come up at the instant ; " and what have 
you been doing with the cat ? What's all this, I 
ask ?" and he looked angrily round the group. 

" 1 was only going to singe her hair ; it is too 
long, like some people's tongues," answered the boy, 
impudently. 

" Now look here, Harry," said Alick ; " I won't 
take you to Arthur, because he would not lay a 
finger on you ; but I'm your brother, and I'll give 



MRS. piggott's assistant. 49 

you a thrashing for this youll perhaps remember. 
Teaching Leonard such tricks, too, you cruel little 
cur ! " 

" Cur yourself!" retorted Harry; and in a moment 
he was grappling with Alick, trying to wrest the 
riding-whip he held out of his hand . kicking, 
plunging, biting even ; and all the time Alick 
kept shaking and striking him, . Lally crying bit- 
terly the while . till, panting and frightened, the 
boy shrieked out for mercy. 

Then the elder loosed his grasp and bade him go, 
saying, " Though you make such a noise I know you 
are not much hurt, but never let me catch you plajdng 
such tricks again, or I will hurt you next time." 

" rU be even with you all yet," observed Harry, 
gratefully, as he skulked away; and this threat, 
which probably had not the slightest meaning at- 
tached to it in the boy s mind, was remembered to 
his disadvantage subsequently. 

When the day came that it was remembered, no 
one believed his declaration of not having " meant 
anything" . of not having intended to do anybody 
any harm. When every creature in the house treated 
him like a pariah, and avoided him as though he 
VOL. IL E 



50 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

had leprosy, Harry felt that he could better have 
endured a dozen worse thrashings than such social 
ostracism. When his assertions were received with 
silent incredulity . when his questions were answered 
reluctantly and with withering disdain and dislike . 
when his food was handed to him as if he were some 
unclean animal, unfit to eat or associate with civilized 
beings . when there was a great silence in the house 
. ^when people went about on tiptoe, and, if they 
met the boy, passed him either with averted heads 
or with looks of reproach and anger . when Leonard 
turned king's evidence and bore testimony against 
him . when he sat in his own room, or else wandered 
about the farm, kicking twigs and stones listlessly 
before him . Harry felt it was all more than he 
could bear, and, turning at last on Cuthbert, told 
that youth he did not see why they were all so hard 
upon him. " You were not a bit better, any one of 
you, when you were young," he finished, passion- 
ately. 

'' We did not try to kill people," answered his step- 
orother, with dignity, as he retreated from the room, 
followed by Harry's indignant remonstrance of . 
" No more didn't I . no more didn't I !" 



51 



CHAPTER IIL 

heather's darling. 

It was late in the autumn, as I have said ; the leaves 
were falling rapidly, and, but for the constant 
sweeping and supervision of " the boys," the walks 
and lawns at Berrie Down would have been littered 
with the decaying foliage. 

As it was, barrowful after barrowful of dead leaves 
disappeared from the grass in front of the drawing- 
room windows, and often as not Lally sat on the top 
of the load which Alick or Cuthbert wheeled away 
to a corner of the kitchen-garden, and there depo- 
sited in a great heap to make leaf-mould for the 
next year's geraniums. 

No more pride than Lally had these young 
Dudleys. If work were not to them prayer, it was, 
at all events, pleasure. It would have been a weary 

e2 



52 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

life to those lads, lounging about the Hollow, taking 
purposeless walks, rising in the morning to do 
nothing, going to bed at night after having per- 
formed no task, executed no duty ; but, as matters 
stood, each season brought its labours with it to 
them. They loved the place, and they loved 
Heather, and they loved work. 

What need is there to say more ? because of all 
these reasons, Berrie Down looked the Berrie Down 
we have visited. 

But a change was coming, and Heather knew it 
. knew Alick was going away, that her best helper 
was about to be taken from her. Many a talk had 
the pair held together over the inevitable parting ; 
many a word had they exchanged in the twilight, 
under the shadow of those dear old trees ; and, if 
Alick thought Bessie's words and talk had been 
more sad and more attractive, still he knew 
Heather's discourse was the best, and so listened to 
it attentively. 

" You have been my very right hand, Alick," she 
repeated over and over again ; "and I do not know 
vhat I shall do without you." 
* Nor I without you, mother," he answered, sadly. 



heather's darling. 53 

"And you are going all alone, my boy, to a 
place which every one says is very, very wicked. I do 
not know much about wickedness myself, Alick," she 
added, with that sweet simplicity that made her 
seem so inexpressibly innocent to people who did 
know much about that wicked world, which was a 
terra incognita to Heather Dudley ; " but I hope, 
dear, that a person may be as good in London as in 
the country ; that you will not be led away, nor fall 
into expensive habits, nor associate with undesirable 
people, if only for my sake, Alick." 

" You darling mother !" 

" If ever anyone asks you to do what is wrong, it 
you are ever tempted to extravagance, to folly, or to 
sin," she added, " think of me at Berrie Down, 
and of how your trouble would grieve me, Alick, 
will you ?" 

" Mother, there is no need for fear ; I hope there 
is no need." 

" I hope not, either," she answered; " but yet who, 
setting out to travel a strange road, can tell what 
companions he may meet with by the way . what 
troubles may assail him ? More than all, Alick," 
and the sweet voice which was never hurried, never 



54 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

much excited, grew low and pleading as she spoke, 
" If ever you do fall into any trouble, promise to 
come and tell me ; promise, whether I can help you 
or not, to come and talk it over. If you cannot come 
to me, I will go to you ; and do not think any sin or 
sorrow . ^however bad it may seem to you . too bad 
to tell me. If you have to bear its consequences, I 
can bear to hear of it. Promise me, Alick ! If I 
think you mean to keep no great sorrow from me, I 
can let you go . not otherwise." 

*' Mother . Heather . what are you afraid of?" 
he asked. 

" I am airaid of nothing except the indefinite," 
she answered, through her tears. " It is a new 
country to me this life on which you are entering. 
Were I going to explore it myself, probably it 
would not seem so terrible. Promise, Alick." 

"I promise," he answered; and then their talk 
flowed on to calmer ground . to such commonplace 
affairs as, "where he should lodge, what amount of 
worldly belongings he should take- with him, what 
edibles it would be advisable for Heather to send 
for him to his London home." 

In all these minor matters Mrs. Dudley was 



heather's darling. 55 

intensely interested ; not that the other subjects on 
which she had touched lay farther from her heart, 
but only that they seemed less within her province 
than such homely affairs as seeing that his linen was 
in proper order, that he had flannels for the winter, 
and an abundant supply of towels and soap ; to say 
nothing of more animal luxuries, in the shape of 
fresh butter, preserves, poultry, and eggs. 

It was arranged how all these necessaries, which 
Mrs. Piggott believed were to be had genuine 
nowhere out of Hertfordshire, could be forwarded 
periodically to London; and then Heather set to 
work on Alick's wardrobe . condemning socks, ex- 
amining shirts, turning over collars, and so forth. 

" Alick had better take everything new with him," 
she said to Agnes, *' and leave these for Cuthbert ;" 
and the poor soul sighed. 

Perhaps she felt intuitively Alick would never 
require her again to furnish him with an outfit . that 
from the day his foot passed forth from Berrie Down 
he would never need hosen nor shirt from her more. 

The great change was at hand, such as arrives to 
the mother when her darling marries a husband able 
to provide her with her heart's desire, and more than 



56 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

her heart's desire, if such a thing were possible ; to 
the sister, whose brother's wife takes from that day 
forth to all eternity charge of the mending, airing 
and making of an idol's linen, and it was natural 
at such an hour Heather should desire " her boy's " 
wardrobe to be unexceptionable, that she should 
wish the very stitches in his collars, the very marking 
of his clothes, to remind him of the "far-away 
home," where she would never cease praying he 
might be kept from all the temptations of the world, 
the flesh, and the devil. 

Dear Heather; oh! dear, dear Heather ! I know 
cleverer women do greater things than your imagina- 
tion ever compassed . that they write books and 
paint pictures, that they compose music and preach 
sermons, that they scribble reviews and manage 
warehouses, that they are owners of various business 
establishments in the City, and serve writs to unsus- 
pecting debtors ; and yet I doubt if all these me- 
mentoes of women's work and women's talents would 
rest so long in the mind as one sweet word from 
you ! 

All this time she had full leisure to devote to 
Alick, for Arthur was away, staying at no other 



heather's darling. 57 

place than Copt Hall, where, through the instru- 
mentality of Miss Alithea Hope, both he and 
Heather had been invited to spend a week. 

Of his cousin, Arthur had hitherto known as little 
as his cousin knew of him; but on her return to 
Copt Hall, after many years of absence, it became 
the desire of Miss Hope's life to promote an inti- 
macy between the respective families. 

" He is your own cousin," she said to Walter Hope, 
'^ and it is really scandalous that you do not visit each 
other ;" acting on which hint, often repeated, Mrs. 
Walter Hope wrote a very gracious note to Heather, 
trusting she and her husband would spare them a 
few days before all the fine weather was gone. Mrs. 
Walter Hope laid considerable stress on the point, 
that she and Mr. Hope were much distressed at the 
fact of such near relations and neighbours remaining 
for so long a time comparative strangers. She 
hoped for the future they should see more of each 
other. She had heard so much about Mrs. Dudley 
from dear Miss Hope that she felt as if she (Heather) 
were quite an old acquaintance. She described the 
best railway route from Palinsbridge to Foldam (the 
station nearest to Copt Hall), just as if Arthur had 



58 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

never journeyed there in days gone by, and begged 
to know on which day and by what train Mr. and 
Mrs. Dudley were likely to arrive, in order that the 
carriage might meet them. 

Never was a more cordial letter penned, and 
Arthur, with new prospects of wealth before him, 
did not read it ungraciously. 

On the contrary, he extracted an augury of success 
from these overtures of friendship, and urged upon 
Heather the advisability of accepting Mrs. Hope's 
invitation. 

But Heather did not wish to go, at least not at that* 
particular juncture. She had much to do, she told 
Arthur. She had to set her household in order after 
the summer visiting; she had to make and to 
mend; she wanted to be with Alick during the 
latter part of his sojourn at Berrie Down ; she 
was tired, really tired, of talking and company, and 
desired rest; all of which reasons only provoked 
Arthur, and caused him to declare that she thought 
of every person except him, and acceded to every 
person's wishes except his. 

Then Heather, with a smile, told him she knew 
he was not in earnest, and added that she had 



heather's darling. 59 

another reason for wishing to remain at home, viz., 
the state of her wardrobe. 

" Dress which is quite sufficient for me at Berrie 
Down," she said, "would scarcely be suitable at 
Copt Hall." 

Upon that Arthur gave his wife a fifty-pound 
note, and bade her get what she wanted ; but Heather, 
turning very white, folded up the note, and handed 
it back to him, saying, " I would rather not, dear ; I 
would, indeed " 

" And why not ?" he demanded. 

" Because I do not think we can afford it," she 
answered, " at least not yet," she added, seeing how 
vexed he looked. 

"Not yet! Will you tell me what you mean, 
Heather?" 

" Why, I mean, Arthur, that though you have not 
told me anything of what you are doing, still, I can- 
not be blind. I see the stock gone, the crops sold. 
I know you are engaged in some business with Mr. 
Black, and that there is money needed for it. You 
would never have sold the crops so soon, had there 
not been a necessity for selling them; and then, 
Arthur, perhaps, when Christmas comes, you may 



60 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

want all the money we can save, and I should not 
like to spend any unnecessarily now." 

" I shall have money long before Christmas," he 
answered. 

"You may," she said, *^but you may not. I 
cannot tell what it is you are doing or expecting, 
but " 

" Hang it !" broke in Arthur, " is a man bound to 
tell his wife everything? When you can't help 
me . when you would only be trying to dissuade 
me from my. purpose, and keep me from ever 
rising out of the slough of poverty in which I have 
passed year after year . why should I talk to you 
about what I am doing or expecting ? Women's 
ideas are so contracted ; they take such short views ; 
they are so cautious, and so fearful, and so fond of 
certainties, that there is no use in even trying to 
make confidantes of them. Because you are happy 
yourself here, Heather, you think I ought to be so 
too ; because you can endure the cursed monotony of 
such a life, you would keep me bound to the wheel 
for ever." 

" I think you are a little mistaken," she answered. 
*' I have been very happy here ; I do love Berrie 




heather's darling. 61 

Down very mudi ; but I would leave it to-morrow, 
and go with you anywhere in the world, if I thought 
by so doing I could contribute to your comfort, 
happiness, or prosperity." 

"If you thought," he repeated. "Ay, there's 
just the rub ; you never could think so." 

" If you thought that leaving Berrie Down would 
make you happier, I would do it. I would do any- 
thing for you. I have tried to please you, Arthur," 
she went on, speaking almost entreatingly. " I have 
never contradicted your will. I have never put 
myself in oppo^tion to you. I have never teazed 
you with questions. I have striven to do my best ; 
but, as you are not satis6ed, tell me how I can do 
better ; and it shall not be my fault if I fail. Only, 
Arthur, only don't let us drift away from one 
another; don't let us begin to have secrets, and 
treat me as though I had done something to 
shake your trust and confidence in me." 

Never before had Arthur Dudley seen his wife 
80 moved ; never before had he heard such a sen- 
tence from her lipsL For a moment he felt tempted 
to tell her all ; to make a full and ample confession ; 
to explain to her not merely that his stock was gone. 



62 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

and his crops also, but that he had put his ^^ name ^' 
on paper, to an extent which, if the Protector Bread 
and Flour Company failed to fulfil the hopes of its 
promoters, would certainly cripple his resources 
seriously. 

Of course his name was only " lent ;" but occa- 
sionally misgivings would cross his mind that in the 
event of any hitch occurring, he might be liable for 
the whole amount of every bill which was at that 
moment wandering about London, passing from 
hand to hand. 

If the Protector "smashed up," to use Mr. 
Black's concise phrase, Arthur Dudley would be 
smashed up with it ; he had gone on little by little, 
till he was afraid of reckoning how much of Berrie 
Down was $et up in type at Printing House Square, 
and in various newspapers throughout the country. 

If the Protector failed . but then the Protector 
could not fail . and because it could not fail, and 
because if it did fail, so much must go with it, 
Arthur decided not to tell his wife (who would be 
certain to look on the worst side of things), but to 
numour her, as Mr. Black recommended, and 
answer . 



heather's darling. 63 

" I do not know, Heather, what you mean by 
drifting away ; you and the children are never out 
of my thoughts by day or night. I have gone into 
a very good thing with Mr. Black, in company 
with Lord Kemms, Mr. Allan Stewart, Mr. Aymes- 
court Croft, and a number of other persons, all gen- 
tlemen of position and fortune, not likely to rush 
into any foolish speculation. I hope to be a wealthy 
man yet I hope to get rid of this eternal worry 
about money . which makes life not worth the 
having. I know you would help me, Heather, if you 
could ; there, there, don't look pitiful. T can't bear 
it There is nothing you can do for me now, 
except buy yourself some handsome dresses, and 
come over to Copt Hall." 

She put her hand out to take the money, then a 
second time she returned it to him, saying, " Let 
me have my own way this time, Arthur ; when you 
have made your fortune, I will spend as much money 
as you like ; only till you have made it, I should not 
feel happy to be extravagant. Don't be angry, 
love !" she pleaded ; " don't be vexed because I ask 
to have my own will for once in a way." 

** Once in a way !" repeated Arthur. " Always, 



64 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

you mean, don*t you ? No, I'm not angry ; stay at 
home. If you like. I do not think that there are 
many husbands who would press their wives so much 
to accompany them ;" and with this undeniably true 
remark, Arthur Dudley strode out of the room, 
leaving Heather to think over the matter at her 
leisure. 

Very patiently she did so . very resolutely she 
took up the facts of her married life, and looked at 
them from beginning to end. There was nothing 
new in what she saw . nothing. It had been coming 
upon. her for months past, that she did not possess . 
had never possessed . her husband's love. W hen she 
beheld Gilbert Harcourt's devotion to Bessie, she 
knew Arthur had never been similarly devoted to 
her. She was not the love of his life, and neither was 
she the friend of his heart. He trusted in others ; 
he confided in others. What was the reason of all 
this ? Was it a fault in herself, she wondered. If 
it were, how did it happen that the boys and the 
girls, the men-servants and the maid-servants, and 
the stranger who came within their gates, all turned 
to her for sympathy and companionship ? Without 
any undue vanity, it was still impossible for Heather 



heather's darling. 65 

not to know that she was greatly beloved by those 
with whom she came in contact ; and yet, what was 
the use of being beloved, if the one person on earth 
she cared for threw her off? 

Threw her off! Had thev ever been near enou<jh 
for him to do so ; were not they quite as near now 
as ever they had been ? Was it not only the blessed 
darkness of her mental vision which had hitherto 
kept her from discovering this fact ? " He never 
loved me," Heather decided . " never ; and he has 
found it out too late." 

And then there came over her soul a terrible pity 
for him, which swallowed up all sense of personal 
wrong . all anger . all selfishness. She could w^t 
unmarry him ; she could not give him the woman he 
might have loved, the wealth that might have made 
him contented. She was no heroine . this Heather 
of mine ; tragedy was not in her nature. The idea 
of freeing him from the yoke under which he had 
voluntarily put his neck, never occurred to her. To 
flee to the ends of the earth, to part from him, 
leaving a note of insuflScient explanation behind ; 
to rush off with the first man who whispered a few 
civil words to her, and let her husband walk 

VOL. IL F 



66 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

through the Divorce Court to liberty ; to purchase 
a little bottle of poison and kill first her children 
and then herself . these very feasible and proper 
courses, were ideas which never even crossed Mrs. 
Dudley's mind. 

Outside of lunatic asylums, amongst the decorous 
and unexcitable people to be met with in society, or 
when we take our walks abroad, we are told, by those 
who profess to know their fellow-creatures thoroughly, 
that such impulsive, devoted, unselfish creatures 
exist ; but Heather's imagination never soared to such 
heights of passionate self-sacrifice. 

They were married, and the time for even 
thinking of parting with Arthur being past for ever, 
all she could do was to try to make him as happy as 
possible. 

For who could tell ? like David, she thought that 
the Lord might yet be gracious to her, that some 
day, perhaps, Arthur would know how much she 
loved him, and give her back a portion of love in 
return. 

But, meantime, she never blinded herself . from 
the hour knowledge began to dawn, she never 
refused to open her eyes and see the dull grey 



heather's darling. 67 

morniDg-sky of reality which had broken for her. 
Though she did not sit down and weep, still she made 
no attempt to fly from the presence of her trouble. 
There came no change over her face, unless it might be 
that the lookof which I have previously spoken, oftener 
sat like a brooding shadow across her eyes. She 
did not weary her husband with her affection, or load 
him with caresses ; yet, although an ordinary observer 
could have detected no difference in her manner, 
Arthur had long felt there was a change ; that his 
comfort was more considered, if that were possible, 
than formerly ; that his every wish was anticipated ; 
that his caprices were more attended to, his com- 
plainings more rarely combated, than of old. He 
felt there was a change, though he could not have 
put a name on that change ; and as it irritates sick 
people to be humoured, so it irritated Arthur to find 
that even the faint opposition of old was withdrawn 
. that, let bis commands be as unreasonable, as 
fretful, as provoking as they would, they were still 
obeyed implicitly. 

Never, excepting where some question of right 
and wrong was involved, did Heather lift up her 
voice in opposition to his, and he was, therefore, the 

F 2 



6S FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

more annoyed and surprised when Heather ventured 
to demur about going to Copt Hall. 

" So deucedly provoking, too, when I wanted her, 
and just at this time," he remarked to Mr. Black, 
whom he met in London . that being the route he 
took to Copt Hall . whereupon Mr. Black said, 
consolingly . 

" That, perhaps, it was as well ; Mrs. Dudley might 
have put her foot in it." 

** She would have come if I had pressed her, you 
know," continued Arthur, not wishing Mr. Black to 
believe Heather the better horse at Berrie Down ; 
" but I was not going to do that." 

*'You had a bit of a tiff, I suppose, is about 
the English of the matter," commented Mr. Black. 
*' Well, such things will happen, even in the best- 
regulated families." 

" We had no tiff," answered Arthur ; " my wife is 
the last woman on earth to make a row about any- 
thing." 

" I am aware of that, of course," said Mr. Black, 
drily ; " but still she does not go to Copt Hall." 
" Oh ! damn Copt Hall !" exclaimed Arthur. 
" No, no, don't do that yet . not, at any rate, till 



heather's darling. 69 

we see if Walter Hope, Esquire, J.P., will appear on 
our direction. eh !" suggested the promoter, poking 
Arthur in the ribs, and winking slyly as he spoke. 
** Never mind the wife, Dudley, she'll come to, no 
fear, when she sees our spec succeed, and you 
keeping your carriage and horses, and having your 
box at the Opera, and God knows what besides. 
Don't trouble yourself about any persons' thoughts 
now ; their thoughts will be all right when you have 
a clear five thousand a year, and the chance of 
adding another five to that. Never fear ; those that 
win, laugh, you know." 

And with this assurance Arthur departed for Copt 
Hall, where he was most cordially received and 
most hospitably entertained, and where he met 
again, after years, Mr. and Mrs. Douglas Aymescourt 
Croft 

Meanwhile, Heather remained at home, doubtfiil 
whether she had done right in refusing to accompany 
her husband, in throwing cold water on his proposal 
that she should array herself like the Queen of Sheba, 
and thus attired, repair to the courts of Arthur's 
relatives. 

She could not decide the question to her own 



70 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

contentment . she could not satisfy her under- 
standing as to whether, when a woman promises to 
obey a man, she thereby excludes herself ever after 
from all title to take up her own parable and express 
her opinions boldly. 

She knew other women had no such qualms of 
conscience . ^that to most of the wives she knew 
obedience was a dead letter ; but this did not prevent 
Heather fretting and fidgeting. She had vexed her 
husband at a time when she wanted most to please 
him, and he had told her before he left, when he 
saw her busy with preparations for his brother's de- 
parture, that she " liked Alick better than she did 
him . that she thought of studying every person's 
pleasure sooner than his." 

" I do not know what to do, I am sure," she 
reflected, as she drove over to South Kemms in an 
old tumble-down, rattling phaeton, that was the very 
shame of Arthur's life, but which she, nevertheless, 
preferred to the, in her opinion, still more dilapidated 
fly from the Green Man at Fifield, which was in the 
habit of conveying visitors to Palinsbridge Station ; 
" I do not know what to do." She had written every 
day to Arthur since his departure, but never a line 



heather's darling. 71 

(lid he vouchsafe to her in return, and she was won- 
dering whether she ought or ought not to write 
again. 

" Of course, if I do not teaze him to answer, if I 
merely send a line to say we are all well, it cannot 
seem like worrying," she decided ; and having so 
decided, she made her purchases (which were 
principally in Alick's interest) at South Kemms, 
returning home with Ned, who was charioteer, as 
the evening shadows were settling down upon the 
Hollow. 

When she reached the door, Alick was there to 
help her alight, and carry in her shawls, and wraps, 
and parcels. 

She was full of her little purchases : a woman 
must, indeed, be in a terrible state of despair . a 
depth of despondency too great for a spectator to 
contemplate calmly . when the prospect of opening 
a draper's parcel fails to send a thrill of expectant 
pleasure through her heart 

" Take them into the dining-room, Alick," she 
said. " Oh ! I am very glad to see that fire, it is so 
cold out of doors ;" and she walked into the apart- 
ment and pulled off* her bonnet and threw back her 



72 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

mantle, and stood with her hands stretched out 
towards the blazing coals, warming her numbed 
fingers. 

" Where are the girls ?" she asked, at length. 

" Upstairs," Alick answered, stooping over the 
parcels he had brought in as he spoke. 

" Is anything the matter ?" Heather asked, quickly 
turning from the fire. He had only uttered 
one word, and yet his tone filled her with a vague 
alarm. 

" Is anything the matter ?" she repeated, finding 
he did not reply. " Alick, look at me ; why do you 
keep your face turned away ?" 

Then Alick looked up, but his eyes fell under 
Heather's scrutiny. 

" Alick, tell me this instant what is the matter," 
she said. In a moment her fancy conjured up all 
sorts of horrors . ^her husband was dead, there had 
been a railway collision, perhaps. Thought is some- 
times as quick in our waking moments as in our 
dreams ; and her imagination flew to him over all 
the miles that intervened between them. "You 
have heard bad news," she went on. "Is it about 
Arthur ; is he ill ?" 



heather's darling. 73 

" Not that I know of," Alick answered. " But, 
mother, we have had an accident since you went 
away." 

" An accident 1" she repeated. " What kind of 
an accident . what is it . who is it? Alick, you will 
drive me mad if you stand there looking at me 
without speaking." 

He tried to speak, but he could not do it ; he had 
been nerving himself up to tell her, and now, when 
the moment came for explanation, the words died 
away upon his lips. 

*' Heather," he began, in a tone of deprecating 
entreaty, . and then suddenly the truth flashed upon 
her. 

" It's Lally," she cried ;  it s Lally ; oh ! my child." 

He caught her as she was about to rush past him 
out of the room. "Mother, mother," he said, 
" listen to me ; she fell into the mill-pond, and they 
brought her home, and the doctor is here, and we 
have been doing everything." 

" And she is dead !" finished Heather. 

" No, she is not," said Agnes, entering at the 
moment. "She has this instant opened her eyes;" 
and she broke out sobbing almost hysterically. 



74 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Thank God I" exclaimed Alick, solemnly, after 
the manner of a person rescued from some fearful 
danger. 

Then Heather, looking from one to the other, 
understood that while she had been driving to South 
Kemms, and making her purchases, and never think- 
ing of evil, her darling had been standing in the 
very valley of the shadow . that she had brushed 
garments with the angel of Death ; and her first 
feeling, when she did understand all this, was, not one 
of gratitude that her child was saved, but of anger 
and resentment at her ever having been permitted 
to get into danger. 

She had not encountered the ordeal which 
the younger Dudleys passed through while Lally 
lay seemingly dead before them ; she had not 
fought for the child as they did, both before and 
after the doctor's arrival ; she had not endured the 
agony . an agony not to be described . which filled 
Alick's heart when he met the little body being 
carried home across the fields ; she had not ridden 
for the doctor and followed him from house to house 
as hard as the best horse in Arthur's stables could 
gallop ; she had not stood in suspense by the bed- 



heather's darling. 75 

side ; she had not wondered with them, " How shall 
we tell Heather . what will Heather say ?" 

That had been the one thought of every person 
in and about the house, . " What will Heather do ; 
what will Mrs. Dudley say !" 

The very regret for Lally seemed merged in 
dread of her mother's suflFerings. 

How should any one face Heather and tell her 
Lally's life was still problematical ? Who should 
prove brave enough to break the tidings to her, and 
look upon her agony ? 

Through the whole of this suspense and anxiety 
the younger Dudleys had passed ; but how was 
Heather to understand everything in a moment ? 
The only certainty she comprehended was that her 
darling had been left to get into danger . that she 
had almost lost her child ; and so she cried aloud in 
her terror and her anger, . 

" Was there not one of you that could have seen 
to her . not one amongst you all ?" 

They never answered her . they could not tell 
her then how it had come to pass ; they were so 
thankful at even a chance of life being given to 
the child, that they did not mind the mother's 



76 FAR ABOVE RUBIES, 

reproaches, though it seemed strange to them to see 
Heather angry. 

There are times when it appears a less weighty 
trouble to behold a friend angry than sorry ; and so 
they bore her blame in silence, and made way for her 
to pass out, only remarking . 

" She is very ill, remember ; had you not almost 
better stay downstairs for a little time longer ?" 

As if she did not hear their words. Heather 
walked blindly across the hall, groping her way to 
the staircase. When Alick would have taken her 
by the arm, she thrust his proflFered help aside, and 
Riding herself by the balusters managed some- 
how to reach the first floor. 

There she paused, and put her hand to her head, 
seemingly trying to remember something. 

" She is in your room," Alick said, thinking she 
wished to know where the child lay ; but it was not 
that ; as she tried to move forward again, she 
tottered, and, had Alick not caught her, would have 
fallen. 

'* Lay her on my bed," Agnes whispered ; and 
Alick accordingly carried his burden into one of the 
pleasant chambers, the windows of which, however. 



heather's darling. 77 

now looked forth on lifeless trees and bare brown 
branches, waving mournfully to and fro in the 
night, as the autumn wind rushed across the 
deserted fields and over the Hollow. 



78 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER IV. 



POOR LALLY. 



Time and tide, we are assured, wait for no man ; 
which, though a truth, is but a portion of one, since 
happy would we be if, in this world, time and tide 
were the only things that refused to delay their 
departure for our convenience. 

There are many circumstances of our daily lives 
against which it would be as vain to appeal . to 
which it would serve quite as good a purpose to cry 
aloud for mercy, as the typical hour and tide. 

For the first time in his life, Alick Dudley 
realised this fact, when he found he must depart for 
London, and leave Heather in the very midst of her 
trouble, with no one at hand to "see after her," 
so the lad expressed himself. 

" I will," said Agnes, reassuringly. 



POOR LALLY. 79 

" Yes ; but you are not a man, Aggy," he 
answered ; '' that is the worst of it." And though, 
in some respects, Agnes was almost as good as a 
man, still she sighed deeply, feeling her inferiority. 

What was there a man could not do ? A man 
could lift heavy weights, and think nothing about 
them ; a man could fling a saddle on a horse, and 
put a bridle in his mouth, and gallop off for a 
doctor, without first going about the house wondering 
whom he could send ; a man could jump into the 
mill-pond and bring Lally out, holding her sus- 
pended in mid-air^ as a cat does its kitten ; a man 
could go out in all weathers, he could undertake to 
break bad news ; the very sound of his voice in the 
house was a reassurance ; his Vfery tone of command 
a trumpet which recalled the scattered senses of a 
tribe of frightened females. Without Alick . boy 
though he almost was . what would Berrie Down be ? 
a camp without a chief. Even if Arthur were back, 
they would all miss Alick. He was so prompt, he 
was so daring, he was so utterly unferainine in 
every respect 

Now, many feminine qualities were possessed by 
Arthur ; and, therefore, even if the Squire had been 



1 



80 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

at home, he could never have proved of the same 
use in the house as his much younger brother 
Alick. 

There has been a great deal written of late years 
about masculine women. It seems rather one-sided 
for no one to preach against feminine men ; for if 
a woman be objectionable in so far as she resemble 
a man, a man must surely be objectionable in so far 
as he is dependent, and weak, and timid, and faint- 
hearted, and undecided, and variable, and impulsive, 
and easily influenced, and speedily depressed, and 
equally speedily rejoiced, and governed by the 
opinions of others, and dependent on external in- 
fluences, like a woman. 

I lift my hand in supplications, and cry earnestly 
for mercy, ladies, as I finish this sentence, which I 
believe to be true as sorrow and pain. There is 
another cry which is popular now-a-days, and the 
man or the woman who raises an opposition shout is 
likely to find small favour in the crowd ; but the 
opposition shout is none the worse for that. 

A man is a divine institution, even in a domestic 
point of view. He may not be charming pottering 
about a house, counting the camellias, and instituting 




POOli LALLY. 81 

inquiries into the items of a grocer's bill ; but he is 
at a premium when a gun wants cleaning, or a 
troublesome tramp grows insolent. 

In precise proportion as he fails to load his 
pistols, or face a danger, whether moral or physical, 
as he is lazy, self-indulgent, wanting in energy, his 
merits fall below par; and the man, spite of his 
sex, in point of usefulness is at a discount. 

Never at a discount Alick Dudley was likely to 
be ; and that truth, even while she sighed, Agnes 
dimly grasped. She did not know, she really could 
not imagine, what they were all to do without her 
brother ; more especially at that juncture, when 
there was terrible sickness in the house . when, 
more than ever before in her life, Heather wanted 
help, and consolation, and encouragement. And 
yet Alick must go ; the laws of the Medes and 
Persians were as likely to be reversed as the rules 
hung up in the clerks' office in the great warehouse 
of Messrs. Elser, Wire, Hook, and Elser, Wood 
Street, City. 

Time and tide would about as probably wait the 
convenience of mankind, or humour the whims of 
womankind, as those gentlemen accept as apologv 

VOL. II. G 



82 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

for Alick's Don-appearance the &ct of his niece 
being ill, and his sister-in-law in tronble. 

According to the mood in which the firm chanced 
to be, the members composing it would have 
intimated to Alick, either that it was a matter of the 
supremest indifierence to them if the whole of his 
relations were dead and boried, or suggested that 
he had made a mistake in applying to them for a 
situation^ since it was evidently a nurse's berth he 
wanted at one of the hospitals. 

But, in whatever form of words they had couched 
their rejection, that rejection would have certainly 
been inevitable. No blame to the ^Messrs. Elser and 
Co. Of course the world cannot stand still because 
children fell ill, and women like to have their 
male relations near them in times of trouble. 

Heather, indeed, would have been the first to 
recognise this truth, had there arisen any question 
concerning it ; but in that quiet Hertfordshire home 
it never occurred to a single soul within its walls that 
there could be a moment's hesitation in the matter. 
Alick had to go ; and, accordingly, he packed up 
his clothes, bade good-bye to "the mother," not 
without tears, kissed all his sisters, received 



^ 



POOR LALLY. 83 

quite a volume of maternal advice from Mrs. 
Piggott, together with a box of sandwiches, pre- 
pared, apparently, under an impression that he was 
going to the Canary Isles, and had not the remotest 
chance of getting anything to eat till he arrived there ; 
and, in the grey dawn, drove over in the pony cart 
to Palinsbridge, where he caught the eight o'clock 
up-express, and entered the oflSce of Messrs. Elser, 
Wire, Hook, and Elser, at ten . the hour* at which 
he had been bidden to put in his first appearance. 

On the same day two letters were posted at Fifield : 
one to Arthur from Agnes . written in defiance of 
Heather's wishes . telling the Squire of Lally's acci- 
dent, not lightly, as Heather had done, but fully 
and circumstantially, and informing him how ill, 
how very ill the child had remained ever since ; and 
another, which having been penned with a great expen- 
diture both of thought and ink, it may be as well to 
print it in extenso, for the information of my readers : 
At " bury-donne yollow 

" fiefield 

'* arforshyre," 
it purported to be written, and the date was 

Monday, 18 . : . 

G 2 



84 FAU. ABOVE KUBIKS. 

"dere mis" . it began . "this corns with my 
dewtey hopeingyu ayre in good helth az it leves mee 
at preasant. 

" dere mis, i hope yu will pardon the libberty i 
tayke in riling, but az wee are all in grate distres i 
thought praphs az yu mite like toe no. 

" it's along of mis laly, who was nere drownded 
last Weak and who as layd almost for Ded yver 
since. d6re mis it was al along of mastar marresden 
Which is az yu no a very bade Buoy, tha was al 
down at the mil, and miss laly She were a-standin 
cloze up to the brinck, wich were rong in she, but 
the Pore darelying new no Beter, when mastar mar- 
resden he sais to mastar lenarde . gbe and giv her A 
Pusche and soe he Pusched hur inn, and she Was 
for Yver and Yver soe long in the Watter for the 
tew others was soe frytenned thay colde doe no- 
thyng but schream, and at Laste the myler's yf . She 
herde the crise and mr. scrotor he Mayde noe 
more addoo than intoe the Watter after hur, and Shee 
has bene verry bade yver sine and Pore mrs. duddeley 
is like wun broaken Harted. She Wente of wen 
shee yerd the Knus, and it was a Long time befor 
shee comnd too agen. mis laly is rowled up in 



POOR LALLY. 85 

franell and cryse a gode diel and dere mis i doant 

no wot is the mater with shee, but 1 Am Afraide it 

is hur death, mrs. duddeley she sais her Pore 

chylde is beter too-nite but i think it is Only a 

temporeairy feling. mrs. pigot sais shee thinks 

mrs. duddeley would be beter if her concert wuz at 

whome, but mrs. duddeley woan't hav him rote for, 

were i think she is rong. but dere mis i rite to yu 

without askhing noboddy's lefe, and i hbp as you 

will Xuse the libberty. i have knot seen yu no 

whu sine yu Went . and pies mis knot to sai az i 

have rote, becaus mrs. duddeley mite think az i had 

took to Mutch on mee, but i beleav yu augt to 

noe, and so hopeaing i have don rite i remain dere 

miss, with dewty, 

" Yur y ver afeckshionate thoe umble 

" serveant 

" prishila dobin." 

Without photographing the original document, 
which cost Miss Dobbin quite as much mental 
anxiety as an official dispatch, it would be vain to 
hope to give an idea of the sort of manuscript through 
which Bessie Ormson at length arrived at the fact of 
Lally's serious illness. 



86 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

It was blotted all over by accident and design. If 
by chance Priscilla spelt a word rightly, so surely she 
rubbed her finger through it, and wrote in another as 
unlike what it ought to have been as can well be 
imagined. 

She had not a capital letter in its proper place 
from first to last, and it was many a day, in fact, 
before Bessie fully mastered the contents of that 
epistle. 

But she gathered enough, almost in a first perusal, 
to convince her something was very wrong at the 
Hollow ; and, although she had no invitation from 
Heather to do so, still she instantly resolved to 
start for Berne Down. 

With Bessie, as a rule, to resolve was to perform; 
and, accordingly, that very same evening, she aston- 
ished the Dudley household by walking coolly in 
amongst her cousins as they were sitting down to 
tea. 

" Well, and what is this about Lally ? " she asked, 
after she had kissed the girls, and inquired for 
Heather ; " what is the matter with her ? " 

'* Did Alick not tell you ?" answered the assembled 
Dudleys in chorus. 



POOR LALLY. 87 

** Alick," repeated Miss Ormson. " I have not 
seen Alick. I only heard a vague rumour this room- 
ing about something wonderful having occurred, and 
so I thought that I would come down and learn the 
certainties of the matter for myself. One of you 
girls, I think, might have written to tell me ; but I 
suppose it is with you as with the rest of the world 
. out of sight, out of mind." 

" Heather would not let us write to any one," said 
Agnes. 

"Then Heather ouffht not to have had her own 
way," retorted Bessie ; " and then, I suppose, she has 
been up with that child night after night, taking no 
rest, eating nothing, fretting herself to death." 

"We all wanted to sit up," exclaimed Lucy 
Dudley, " but she would trust no person." 

" Precisely what I expected," said Bessie, who 
had by this time divested herself of cloak and 
bonnet, and now stood beside the fire looking as 
trim and pretty as though she had just stepped out 
of her dressing-room. "And so Lally is very 
bad?" 

" That is precisely what she says herself," 
answered Laura. "Whenever the pain leaves her 



88 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

for a minute or two, she settles down a little in the 
bed and whispers, * Poor Lally's very bad.' " 

'* Is she in danger T asked Bessie. 

" I do not know ; the doctor will not tell us." 

" Is Arthur at home ?' 

" No ; Heather would not let him know how ill 
Lally was," answered Agnes ; "but I wrote yesterday 

. not that I suppose he could do any good, if he 

were here." 

'*She fell into the mill-pond?" . this was interro- 
gative. 

" She was pushed in," answered Cuthbert, with a 
vicious look towards Harry, who sat at the farthest 
corner of the table with his legs tucked up under his 
chair, a great slice of bread and butter and honey 
in one hand, and a huge cup of tea in the other. 

"I didn't push her in," remarked that young 
gentleman. 

"No, but you told Leonard to shove her," 
said Cuthbert, shaking his hand at his brother 
menacingly. 

" Well, how was I to know she would topple over 
like that ?" persisted Harry. " If she was loose on 
her perch, that wasn't my fault, was it ? and it's not 



POOR LALLY. 89 

right of you to go on like that at me. Mrs. Dudley 
said you wasn't to do it ; she came and she talked 
to me, she did, and said she believed me, if nobody 
else didn't." 

"She must have great faith," remarked Bessie, 
meditatively. " If I had been here, Harry, I should 
have taken you down to the pond and given you a 
ducking on my own responsibility." 

" I shouldn't have cared if you had drowned me, 
then," retorted Harry. " There was not one of them 
would speak to me, and Alick would not let even 
Leonard come and say a word to me ; and I was so 
miserable, I often thought of going out at night and 
throwing myself into the water, and that I knew would 
vex them all . only I was afraid of crossing the fields 
by myself in the dark ;" and at the bare recollection 
of his fear and trouble, Harry began to whimper. 

" If you had done that, you know," said Bessie, 
coolly, "you would have been buried at the four 
cross-roads on the way to South Kemms, with a 
stake through your body." 

" I should not have minded what was done to me 
when once I was dead," said Harry, philosophically. 

" If you do not mind what you are about while 



90 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

you are living," answered Bessie, " you will come to 
the gallows," 

" No more likely to come to the gallows than 
you, Miss Impudence, for all your red-and-white 
face and shiny hair, that you think so much of ;" 
and Harry put out his tongue as far as he could 
thrust it at Bessie, who, without "more ado," to 
appropriate an expression from Priscilla's letter, 
walked round the table, and would have boxed the 
offender's ears but that he disappeared from hiis 
ohair and dived among the feet of the four Dudleys, 
one of whom, Cuthbert, was not slow about availing 
himself of the tempting opportunity thus offered. 

"You're a coward," said the boy, reappearing 
on the other side with a very red face, and his hair 
all in a tangle, looking, as Laura said, like one of 
those things chimneys are swept with. " You're a 
coward, to kick a man when he's down. Come on, 
and fight it out." 

" You had better behave yourself, Harry," 
answered Cuthbert, "or I will give you toko for 
yam," which mysterious threat evidently conveyed 
some definite idea to Master Marsden's mind, for 
he answered : . 



POOR LALLY. 91 

" You could not, nor two like you." 

** Shall I try ?' asked Cuthbert, rising ; but Harry 
fled towards the door, and Agnes ended the quarrel 
by bringing the boy back to the table and seating 
' him in .his place, and warning both him and Cuth- 
bert that they must not make a noise . that the 
doctor had said the house was to be kept as still and 
quiet as possible. " So, Harry," continued his sister, 
" do be good for once in your life ; finish your tea 
and go to bed." 

"Yes, that's the way," grumbled Harry, his 
mouth full of bread, and his lips smeary and 
sticky with honey . " that's the way ; finish, and 
go to bed ; finish, and go into the garden ; finish, 
and see what the men are doing ; it is always go, 
go, go, from morning till night." 

"Will you be quiet, and let other people hear 
themselves talking?" said Bessie, sharply. 

" There are not many that would care to hear you 
talk, at any rate," retorted Master Marsden ; " it is 
gab . ^gab . gab ; bub . abub . abub . wherever you 
are, just like a meat-fly, or a wasp, or a mosquito." 

"I declare, Harry, I will write to your papa," 
averred Bessie, solemnly. 



92 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Write . who cares . and send somebody to read 
it, will you ? We always call yours fat writing at 
home, and pa says if there was many hands like it, 
ink could not be made fast enough to supply people. 
Writing, do you call it? I could write as well 
with a paste-brush." 

" Are you going to be quiet, Harry, or are you 
not ?" asked Bessie, taking a step towards him ; " for, 
if you make another saucy speech, I will box your 
ears, as sure as my name is Bessie Ormson." 

" Who gave you that name ?" mocked the boy ; 
whereupon Bessie proved as good as her word, and, 
seizing him, was about to administer condign punish- 
ment, when Harry cried out . 

" If you do . if you do . 111 make a noise, and 
then Mrs. Dudley will come down to know what is 
the matter, and then I'll tell her, and then she'll be 
angry with you, for she said nobody was to speak 
crossly to me while I stayed in the house." 

"It is quite true," Agnes said, in answer to 
Bessie's look of inquiry. "She thought we were 
not kind to him, and scolded him about Lally; 
and in the middle of all her own trouble, of course, 
she had time to consider Harry. You see the result." 



POOR LALLY. 93 

"And pray, Harry, how long are you going to 
stay in the house ?" inquired Bessie. 

*' As long as I like . as long as I find it con- 
venient," replied the boy ; *' but now, I tell you 
what ; I am quiet mostly, not because I care a 
button for all their threats, but because I promised 
Mrs. Dudley I would . there now !" 

" You are a curiosity," remarked Bessie. 

*' Not so much of one as you are. I don't wear 
frizzle-gigs of things in my hair ; I don't live in a 
steel cage ; I don't screw myself in round the waist 
and walk this way," added Master Marsden, march- 
ing up and down the room in a style which he firmly 
believed to be an exact imitation of Bessie. " I don't 
look firom under my parasol . so ! and make up my 
face when anybody is in the room 1 want to think 
well of me ; I don't wear kicking straps and drets 
improvers to make my petticoats stick out . like 
that;" and Master Marsden pulled out his knicker- 
bockers to their fullest width, and treated society to 
another representation of Bessie ''sailing across a 
room." 

If every one belonging to her had been dying 
at that moraeht, Lessie could not have refraii.ed 



94 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

from laughing; and in this mirth her cousins 
joined. 

"I suppose Harry thinks that is holding the 
mirror up to nature," said Lucy Dudley, at length. 

** No, Harry does not," retorted the young gentle- 
man ; " he thinks it is holding the mirror up to art." 

"I am art, then, am I?" inquired Bessie; and 
Harry nodded assent. 

" Well," she said, ''since it seems you have en- 
gaged this room for your performances, I will go 
upstairs and see Heather." 

"Had not I better go up first, and tell her?" 
suggested Agnes. 

"Oh no," answered Bessie; ''good wine, you 
know, needs no bush ;" and with that she left the 
apartment, and ascended to the sick chamber, at the 
threshold of which she paused for a moment irre- 
solute. 

The door stood wide open, and across the entrance 
was hung a curtain, so that the watchers could pass 
in and out noiselessly. 

Lightly Bessie lifted this curtain, and looked in. 
On the bed lay Lally, quiet enough to have satisfied 
all Mrs. Ormson's requirements . quiet enough and 



POOR LALLY. 95 

changed enough . a mere shadow of the Lally Bessie 
had scMDlded and teazed, and loved and petted in the 
glorious summer weather . a poor wasted little 
Lally . a Lally who was, as she herself said, '* very 
bad indeed." 

And beside the bed sat Heather, looking so pale 
and worn that it might well have been supposed she 
also had passed through very grievous sickness. 
The blue-veined lids were closed over the weary, 
aching eyes, when Bessie first lifted the curtain; 
but she had scarcely time to glance at the child and 
her mother, before Heather, feeling there was some 
one standing in the doorway, awoke and recognised 
her visitor with a start of glad surprise. 

Making a sign for Bessie not to make a noise, 
she rose and came across the room. 

" I only heard this morning," the girl whispered, 
" and I could not rest. How is she ?" 

" Better, I trust," Heather answered. They were 
by this time in Bessie's old apartment, which looked 
as though she had only left it about an hour pre- 
viously. That was the beauty of the Hollow . any 
one could drop into his accustomed place there, even 
after long absence, in five minutes. 



96 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Heather dear, you have suffered dreadfully." 
"Yes; but God has been very merciful," Mrs. 
Dudley answered. " Oh ! Bessie, if she had died 
without my seeing her, I could not have borne it ; 
there is no use in saying I could, for my heart must 
have broken. She has been frightfully ill. She was 
so long in the water, and then lying in her wet 
clothes while they carried her here. It was this 
side of the pond, you know, Bessie ; and though 
Mr. Scrotter's house might have been nearer, still it 
could not have made much difference in her re- 
covery, and it has made all the difference to me 
having her at home. Fortunately, there were good 
fires in the house, and plenty of hot water. If there 
had been any longer delay, we cannot tell how it 
might have turned out. The girls and Mrs. Piggott, 
Doctor Williams says, really saved her life ; but I do 
not know . it seems to me everybody did what was 
possible. The worst of it was her being so long in 
the water, and so warm when she fell in . they had 
been racing, it appears ; but if we can get her over 
this . and, please God, she will get over it. Doctor 
Williams assures me there is no reason why she 
should not be as strong as ever." 



POOR LALLY. 97 

" I have come down to help you nurse her," 
said Bessie. " Now, don't begin making objections, 
Heather, because I know every sentence you would 
speak, and all I intend to reply is, that I mean to do 
my share of the watching, or else let Agnes take 
it in turns with you, and I will try and see to things 
about the house . only I am resolved you shall not 
kill yourself. What will Arthur say when he comes 
home, and sees you looking like a ghost ? I declare, 
if I met you in the dark you would frighten me. 
Now, you shall lie down on the sofa to-night, and I 
will sit beside Lally." 

" But you will be completely knocked up." 

'* You do not know much about my constitution, 
evidently," answered Bessie, smiling: and thus the 
difficult matter was arranged, and thus once again 
Bessie Ormson became an inmate of the Hollow, 
where Arthur arrived on the following day, greatly 
to Heather's vexation; for she had tried to keep 
this trouble from him, not wishing, poor soul, to 
" spoil his holiday."  

But Agnes' letter was so imperative, that the 
moment he read it he packed his portmanteau, 
asked his cousin to let him have the dog-cart as far 

VOL. ir. H 



98 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

as Foldam Station, and travelled by various circuitous 
routes from that out-of-the-world-place to Hertford, 
where he thanked Heaven when he exchanged the 
Eastern Counties line of rail for the Great Northern. 
"That Copt Hall is the most cursed place in 
England to get either to or from," he remarked to 
Bessie. 

'' I have heard some ignorant people remark that 
Berrie Down Hollow is not the most accessible spot 
on earth ; and I know I thought it rather out of the 
way the other evening," answered Miss Ormson. 

" It is next door to everywhere in comparison to 
Copt Hall," he replied. . " So you really think," he 
went on to say, " there is no fear for Lally now . 
little monkey ! Heather looks bad, though, does not 
she ? I declare, Bessie, it was very kind indeed of you 
to come down, and I am greatly obliged to you for it." 
"Thank you, Arthur," answered Bessie, demurely ; 
" it is a happiness to know that my poor endeavours to 
give satisfaction have found favour in your eyes." But 
although Miss Ormson replied to his gracious speech 
with so little appearance of astonishment, still she 
was secretly greatly surprised at the increased 
urbanity of his manners. " Arthur is growing like 



POOR LALLY. 99 

other people," she said to Agnes Dudley. " Saul 
is coming among the Prophets. I wonder if the 
Protector Bread Company have had any share in 
effecting this great change ; if so, success to it, say 
I ; may its career be happy and glorious . may its 
dividends prove satisfactory, and my uncle grow 
more prosperous, and more like a Puffin than ever !" 
And then she returned to her watch beside Lally, 
who crept out of absolute danger, surely though 
slowly, and at length grew strong enough to sit up 
in bed, supported by pillows, and toss over scraps of 
colorued ribbons and bits of silk that Bessie would 
spread out over the coverlet for her. 

After a minute or two, however, she would get 
weary of this game ; the red and the blue would 
begin to dazzle her eyes; the little hands would 
grow too weak to toy among the bright trifles ; the 
head would get tired with trying to raise itself over 
the edge of the sheet ; and when all these things 
came to pass, Lally would drop the latest scrap of 
silk . heave a heavy sigh . look piteously at Bessie, 
and declare " Lally's very bad aden." 

*' No, you are not," Bessie invariably answered ; 
'* you are scheming . you like being in bed this cold 

H 2 



100 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

weather, and having nice things to eat, and being 
made much of; but wait a little. Some fine morn- 
ing I will rout you up, and chase you about the 
lawn, and run you to earth in the Hollow. Won't 
I ; do you think I won't?" and the lovely face was 
laid on the pillow beside the child, and Lally made 
nests for herself in Bessie's hair, and was fain to 
fall asleep holding on by her pretty nurse's gown, 
or sleeve, or collar. 

"Oh Lor', Miss, ain't she like wax-work!" re- 
marked Priscilla Dobbin, the first time she beheld 
Lally sitting up on Miss Ormson's lap . held in Miss 
Ormson's arms. 

" She is much more like bone-work to my mind," 
answered Bessie, kissing the little white arms ; " but 
we are going to feed her up, and send her to market 
next time her papa goes to London . are not we, 
Lally ?' 

And Lally, complaisant as ever, answered, while 
busily engaged in counting over the buttons on 
Bessie's dress, "Iss." 



101 



CHAPTER V. 

MR. black's tartar. 

Peter Black, Esquire, of Stanley Crescent, sat in 
the Secretary's room at the temporary oflBces of the 
Protector Bread and Flour Company, Limited, 220, 
Dowgate Hill, looking as much like a thrashed 
hound as it was possible for so pompous, and pros- 
perous, and self-sufficient a gentleman to look. 

As a rule, wherever he went, and with whatsoever 
manner of person he came in contact, Mr. Black 
comported himself as if, so Mr. Ormson familiarly 
said, " he was cock of the walk ;" but now Mr. 
Black had met with a bigger and stronger, and 
more arrogant cock than himself; a bird whose 
beak was strong and spurs sharp . who was accus- 
tomed to lording it over creatures of his own species 
. who would have been immensely astonished had 



102 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Mr. Black flown at him, and disputed his supre- 
macy ; but who, had such an aflront been offered, 
would soon have cowed and discomforted his 
adversary. 

Mr. Black, however, mindful perhaps of his vic- 
tories on other fields, was content to rest on his 
laurels, and refrained from striving to wrest any 
from the crown that bound in City circles the 
brow of Allan Stewart, Esquire, of Walsey Manor, 
Layford ; Careyby Castle, Perthshire ; Hyde Park 
Gardens, London; and 92, King's Arms Yard, 
Moorgate Street. 

With a man who gave himself airs, Mr. Black 
might perhaps have tried to get the mastery with 
success. He might have deferred, and flattered, and 
listened with apparent earnestness, while all the time 
he was winding his opponent round his finger ; but 
Mr. Stewart gave himself no airs ; he did not aw . 
aw like the half-pay majors and poor middle-aged, 
dilapidated, disreputable swells with whom Mr, 
Black had so often come in contact. He did not 
quote Latin, and talk of his great friends, like the 
patientless doctors and surgeons, and the parishless 
parsons and the clientless lawyers, who also had been 



MR. black's tartar. 103 

unto Mr. Black's eyes familiar as the breath of life 
in his nostrils. 

He was not recklessly indifferent to results, 
shamelessly greedy concerning money, openly care- 
less as to whether a scheme floated or not, so long 
as he got out safe and netted a few hundreds, after 
the fashion of the insolvent esquires and bankrupt 
merchants, who woidd not . so Mr. Stewart declared 
. have scrupled to put their names on the direction 
of a railway to the infernal regions, if only such 
statistics with regard to fares had been procurable 
as would have enabled them to show shareholders 
a prospect of a large dividend. 

" They would glibly tell the British public what 
Charon clears per annum, and state that great incon- 
venience was felt by passengers when the Styx was 
rough and the winds contrary. They would sell 
their names to anything on the earth, or in the 
waters under the earth ; in land, or sea, or sky ; in 
this world or the next, if only promoters' and 
directors' fees were to be had out of the scheme. 
Those are the kind of men you have been accus- 
tomed to deal with, Mr. Black. It may save us, 
therefore, a vast amount of trouble hereafter if you 



104 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

clearly understand now that I am a different sort of 
man altogether." 

Mr. Black inclined his head, and observed, some- 
what confusedly, that he did not doubt it in the 
least. 

" Excuse me," said Mr. Stewart, " but you did 
doubt it. You thought when you paid me that 
money, and promised me so many shares, and I 
<i[ave you leave to use my name, and said I should 
go into the thing with you, that there was an end 
of me. You thought, when you heard I was 
abroad in the autumn, and at Walsey since my 
return, that I meant to leave the company in your 
hands, and meddle no further in the matter ; but, 
pray, do not think so any longer. I intend to take 
an active part in this business, I mean that it shall 
succeed ; and I have not the slightest scruple in 
informing you that it shall not be made a refuge for 
the destitute by anybody." 

" I am at a loss to follow your meaning, Mr. 
Stewart," said Mr. Black, in answer. 

" I will try to explain myself more clearly," went 
on the great man. " When you came to me, and 
I said I could not entertain your proposal without a 



MR. black's tartar. 105 

retainer, do you know what my object was ? No ! 
Well, then, I took your five hundred pounds as a 
guarantee for your honesty. The sum was nothing 
to me ; but I had no intention of having my time 
taken up about a company, the shares in which 
might never be worth thatT and Mr. Stewart 
snapped his fingers contemptuously. "I am per- 
fectly plain, you see. I knew you had been con- 
nected with company after company. I knew, in 
fact, you were by profession a promoter of very bad 
schemes ; but I knew, also, you had plenty of push, 
and that, if you saw it was worth your while to make 
a company succeed, you stood a fair chance of 
forcing it to do so." 

Mr. Black bowed. These were the first civil 
words Mr. Stewart had addressed to him during the 
interview ; and, although the amount of compliment 
they contained might not be excessive, still there 
was a certain recognition of his executive and 
imaginative talents conveyed in them. 

For which reason Mr. Black bowed. 

" Now, if the thing be to succeed, it must not be 
swamped with sinecures and a multitude of ground 
landlords." 



106 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Well enough Mr. Black knew all Mr. Stewart 
implied by that sentence; but, nevertheless, he asked 
him for further information. 

" By ground landlords, I understand a number of 
persons who, considering the newly-discovered land 
their own, want to make off it as much as they can 
before anybody else touches a farthing . ^for instance, 
you are a ground landlord. Quite as well as I you 
know that Crossenhams' mills are not worth the 
name of the price you have put upon them.'* 

**I assure you it is the very lowest price the 
Messrs. Crossenham would take." 

** And that lowest price you share with them. I 
am not quarrelling with such an arrangement. The 
prospectus could not have been put forth without 
some mills being secured . and, perhaps, those mills 
are as good for the purpose of advertising from as 
any other ; but still I happen to know all the ins 
and outs of that transaction, . that your paper has 
been keeping Crossenham afloat, that the machinery 
is very old, that the buildings are very dilapidated, 
and that, in fact, if you had not rushed to the 
rescue, Messrs. Bailey and Bobert Crossenham 
must have been gazetted ere this, and that, in the 



MR. black's tartar. 107 

event of such a calamity happening to them, the 
premises could have been bought for an old song." 

" What has that to do with me ?' asked Mr. 
Black. " A man must live ; and, like you, I cannot 
afford to spend all my time, and strength, and thought, 
and^money, only to receive payment in shares." 

" True," said Mr. Stewart, with a dubious smile, 
which, however, encouraged the promoter to remark 
further . 

" The labourer is worthy of his hire." 

" Humph ! that depends," observed Mr. Stewart. 

 On what ?" asked Mr. Black. 

" On how much work the labourer does, and on 
the extent of his hire." 

" Oh I" murmured the promoter. 

" Your hire has not been excessive, as hire goes," 
went on Mr. Stewart, " so far; but I think you have 
run about the length of your just tether. I suppose, 
Mr. Black, you are now satisfied, and mean for the 
future to rest content, with your extremely moderate 
supply of paid-up shares ?" 

** Did you think I was going to give the public 
this company ?" demanded the promoter. 

** If I had ever entertained such an idea . ^which 



108 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

I never did . you would speedily have disabused me of 
it," answered Mr. Stewart ; " but the point on which I 
now desire information is this : Are you going to be 
content with your promoter's fees, with your shares, 
with your profits on the Stangate mills, with your com- 
mission on printing, advertising, travelling, and the 
Lord knows what besides, or are you not ?" 

" I desire to make no further claim," answered 
Mr. Black. 

" Then what is the English of this item . * Lease 
of premises in Lincoln's Inn Fields ?' " demanded 
Mr. Stewart, referring to a paper in his hand. 
" What the devil do you mean by even proposing 
that the offices of the company should, be stuck up 
there ? We shall next be paying for the goodwills of 
depots in Highbury New Park and Camden Square." 

" I do not see why the offices should not be in 
Lincoln's Inn Fields," observed Mr. Black. 

" And I do not see why they should be in any 
such graveyard," answered Mr. Stewart. " Deuce a 
thing there is in Lincoln's Inn except lawyers' offices, 
and one or two places where they insure lives, and 
preserve skeletons, and grant licences to kill. What 
connection has Lincoln's Inn with bread-making? 



MR. black's tartar. 109 

I must bring this matter before the board, but 
thought, in the first instance, I would give you a 
chance of explaining yourself to me." 

Mr. Black looked at the speaker, and turned the 
last clause of his sentence over before replying. 
Meanwhile, Mr. Stewart stood on the hearth-rug, 
with his coat-tails tucked up over his arms, airing 
himself in true British fashion in front of the fire. 
In this attitude he looked a man of whom no person 
would have cared to solicit a cheque . to whom no 
defaulting debtor would have cared to prefer a 
petition for time in which to pay. 

A gentlemanly-looking individual, no doubt, who 
could have handed Lady Grace down to dinner in 
an aristocratic and suitable manner . who could 
have received one of the blood royal after the fashion 
which is popularly supposed to obtain at Court 
ceremonials ; a very charming personage, doubtless, 
when complimenting young ladies on their singing, 
or asking materfamilias if all those velvet-tuniced 
lads were hers; but not a nice man with whom to 
discuss money matters, not a pleasant man to try 
to take in . to strive to wind round your finger . to 
endeavour to make use of. 



110 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Vaguely, Mr. Black, looking up at his grey-haired, 
hard-featured, plain-spoken visitor, grasped all this 
ere he answered : 

" Lincoln's Inn Fields is as good a place as any 
other in which to have our permanent offices. The 
address reads well. It implies to the country ima- 
ginative lawyers; and lawyers, it pleases country 
people to think, know what they are about. Further, 
it is central. Gentlemen will not get their broughams 
knocked to pieces coming there, as they would do if 
they ventured with West End coachmen into the city. 
Moreover, if strangers staying at an hotel ask for 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, any idiot of a waiter can direct 
them to the place. There is something about the 
sound of Lincoln's Inn Fields which recommends 
itself to me. I cannot think why you object to the 
situation, Mr. Stewart." 

" I object," answered Mr. Stewart, " on two 
grounds : first, that I consider Lincoln's Inn Fields 
an unsuitable position ; and secondly, that I consider 
the whole affair a job." 

" A job !" repeated Mr. Black, reddening. 

'' Yes, sir, a job," was the reply. " Who is this 
Mr. Dudley ? How does he chance to be the owner 



MR. black's tartar. Ill 

of that desirable leasehold property which you are 
trying to get the company to buy ? I see his name 
on the direction. Who is he? . what is he? Is 
there such a person as Arthur Dudley, Esquire ? Is 
there such a place as Berrie Down Hollow at 
all r 

'^ What have I done, Mr. Stewart, to justify such 
suspicion?' the promoter virtuously demanded. 
" Have I tried to deceive you ; have I made any 
false representations ; did I enlist you in our ranks 
by any undue means ? If you are not satisfied with 
the company and with me, why not resign ; why not 
disassociate yourself from us in ioio ?" 

Mr. Stewart laughed. " How long would your 
company live without me ?" he asked : " how long 
would your other directors remain on the board, if I 
withdrew my name from it ? Rather, Mr. Black, I 
might say, if you do not relish my interference, why 
do you not resign, why do you not take your shares 
and your promoter's fees, and your various little 
perquisites, and devote yourself to those other com- 
panies which have very decidedly been neglected 
while you were employed in dry-nursing the Pro- 
tector Bread and Flour Company, Limited ?" 



Wi* 



112 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" That, then, is what you want me to do ?" said 
Mr. Black. 

" No ; I only, following your lead, suggested a 
course which I thought you might find it advisable 
to pursue. I mean to interfere in this company. I 
mean that it shall pay, and I do not mean that 
it shall expend enormous sums on the purchase of 
freehold, copyhold, or leasehold property, when 
renting offices and shops will serve our purpose 
equally well, or better. That house in Lincoln's 
Inn Fields shall not be bought . at that point I 
take my stand. The proposal is ridiculous ; the situa- 
tion is undesirable ; the price asked preposterous. 
Mr. Dudley seems not to be overwhelmed with 
modesty, or he never would have even thought of 
mentioning such a sum." 

" He knows nothing on earth of the value of pro- 
perty," Mr. Black declared. 

" Oh, then it is your price. I thought as much ; 
and you are to share the profit with him ?'* 

" No," the promoter eagerly replied ; glad, at 
last, perhaps, to find some point where he could con- 
tradict Mr. Stewart with advantage. " No, Mr. 
Dudley is the person who found the capital to work 



MR. black's tartar. 113 

this company. So far, he has not derived one 
shilling benefit from it He is not a business man ; 
he has gone into this scheme solely on my recom- 
mendation." 

" Is he an idiot ?" asked Mr. Stewart. 

* . I have not associated much with idiots," was the 
reply, "and am therefore less competent to decide 
that question than you might be. But I should say, 
no. Considering he is a gentleman, and apt to 
believe what people tell him, I never saw any espe- 
cial weakness of intellect about him. He is not 
rich, and yet he has, as I said, found the money to 
carry this matter through. When those premises 
in Lincoln's Inn were for sale, I advised him to buy 
them, and promised that they should be purchased 
by the company at a considerable advance on the 
price he paid. I consider the sum asked a fair 
sum ; whether he make a profit or not, is no con- 
cern of ours." 

" Of mine, you mean," amended Mr. Stewart. 
" It may be very much of your concern." 

" I am not to have a penny piece out of the 
transaction, if that be what you would imply," Mr. 
Black replied. 

VOL. II. I 



114 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" That was what I intended to imply," said the 
other ; " and if it be a fair question, Mr. Black, 
how did you chance to meet with this rara avis, who 
found the money to start your company and be- 
lieved all vou told him ?" 

Many a time in his life Mr. Black had been 
bullied, and rebuffed, and snubbed, and irritated, 
but never before, never, had he been so coolly 
insulted . so insolently addressed, as by the very 
ordinary-looking, elderly individual, who, still airing 
himself at the fire, looked the promoter over . 
turned him inside out, as calmly as though Mr. 
Black had been a bale of inferior goods submitted 
to his inspection. 

There was an offensive superiority in Mr. Stewart's 
manner which was very gall and wormwood to the 
person he addressed. Mr. Black would have liked to 
order him out of the office, and to have enforced that 
order with a due administration of boot leather; but, 
I'ecollecting that kicking Mr. Stewart out would not 
help him personally along the road to fortune, he 
wisely restrained his feelings, and answered . 

.' I do not consider your question a fair one at 
all, sir. I never before came in contact with a 



MR. black's tartar. 115 

gentleman who would not have hesitated about 
inquiring into such private particulars ; but I have 
no objection to telling you how Mr. Dudley and 
I became acquainted. My wife is his aunt by 
marriage; that is how I came to know anything 
of Squire Dudley, of Berrie Down." 

"Now what the deuce does that mean?" said Mr. 
Stewart, reflectively ; " aunt by marriage. You are 
not Mr. Dudley's uncle, I presume ?" 

'* Certainly nbt." 

" Then is Mrs. Black's sister Mrs. Dudley ?" 

" She was until after her husband's death, when 
she married a second time. There were four 
sisters," glibly proceeded Mr. Black, " all daughters 
of Alderman Cuthbert ; one died young, unmarried." 

"The gods loved her, then, we may conclude," 
said Mr. Stewart, grimly. 

" The eldest daughter toarried Mr. Ormson, of 
Cushion Court, with whose name, I dare say, you 
are well acquainted." 

" Yes, as that of a very honest, respectable man," 
acquiesced Mr. Stewart, in a tone which implied 
that he never expected to hear one-half so much 
good of the person he addressed. 

I 2 



116 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

 

*' The second did me the honour of linking her 
fortunes with mine," went on Mr. Black, at which 
speech his auditor smiled again, not pleasantly. 
*' The youngest married Major Dudley, of Berrie 
Down, and " 

" Is, consequently, this Squire Dudley's mother," 
suggested Mr. Stewart. 

"No, his mother-in-law," amended the pro- 
moter. 

" Stepmother, you would say, I presume," cor- 
rected Mr. Stewart. " So that is the relationship, 
is it?" and apparently he constructed a genealo- 
gical tree for his own edification on the instant, 
where hung prominently a matrimonial excrescence, 
with a pretty face and vulgar manners, sister-in- 
law to Peter Black, Esquire, of Stanley Crescent 

"Major Dudley's first wife, the present Squire 
Dudley's mother, was a daughter of Arthur Hope, 
Esquire, of Copt Hall, Essex." 

" Indeed !" 

" You may have observed Mr. Walter Hope's 
name on our direction ? " 

" I believe I did notice it." 

" You can make what inquiries you please about 



MR. black's tartar. 117 

Squire Dudley," went on Mr. Black ; " indeed, the 
more inquiries you make, the better I shall be 
pleased. His position is perfectly unimpeachable. 
Excepting that he has not so much money as his 
friends could wish, I am not aware that there is a 
fault to be found with him or his surroundings." 

" For a man short of money, the purchase of a 
house in Lincoln's Inn Fields was surely a venture," 
remarked Mr. Stewart. 

" He bought it, as I have said, on my advice," 
answered Mr. Black, who could be brave on occasion ; 
brave as well as self-asserting. " I thought, con- 
sidering that with me originated the idea of this 
company; with me rested its very existence ; on me 
devolved the organizing, carrying out, and per- 
fecting of this scheme ; I thought, I say, considering 
all these things, that when the concern came to be 
floated, a few of my suggestions would be received, 
and that I might do, at once, a good stroke of 
business for the company with which I was con- 
nected, and for the man who had stood by me 
and backed me up through thick and thin." 

" Your imagination outran your discretion, then," 
remarked Mr. Stewart. " It is a dangerous thing 



118 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

for a man to try to benefit other people. Observe, 
the financial field has been reaped almost bare 
before he thinks of his acquaintances. You reaped 
and gleaned, Mr. Black, and then you wanted 
a second crop for your friend. We allow your 
claims, but the claims of your acquaintances and 
relations must go to the wall." 

" I will give up three hundred of my claim on the 
mills, Mr. Stewart, if you do not oppose the pur- 
chase of those premises in Lincoln's Inn Fields," 
said the promoter, earnestly. 

**Then the affair is serious?" suggested Mr. 
Stewart 

"It is very serious," answered Mr. Black. 
"Here is a man with property, worth, at the 
outside, ten thousand pounds, shall we say, and he 
advances money for advertising, and backs us up in 
every possible way with money, influence, connec- 
tions. As a douceur for that, I advise him to buy 
that damned place in Lincoln's Inn Fields, fiilly 
intending that he should receive a good price for it 
from our company ; and now you come, Mr. Stewart, 
and put your foot in it ; you come interfering, and 
meddling, and *' 



MR. black's tartar. 119 

" Mr. Black, do you know how many shares I 
hold in this company ?" asked Mr. Stewart. 

** A couple of hundred," was the reply. 

" Exactly two thousand," answered Mr. Stewart, 
" and I mean them to repay me. They will not do 
so, as I said before, if we commence by making this 
company a refuge for the destitute ; and although, no 
doubt, your friend Dudley is a delightful fellow and 
a confounded fool, still, with him I take my stand. 
Those premises may be rented if you will, but 
never purchased. Please to remember what I say, 
Mr. Black . never purchased." 

Utterly crestfallen the promoter looked . utterly 
like a thrashed hound or a disappointed pick- 
pocket. Stronger and stronger grew the inclina- 
tion to kick Mr. Stewart off the premises ; 
feebler and feebler grew his hopes of controlling the 
operations of the Protector Bread Company, 
Limited ; and through all there was an awful sense 
of injustice . of it being a sin for him not to be able 
to do what he liked with " his own ;" with the baby 
he had conceived and brought into the world, and 
nursed into a great prosperous creature, the shares 
in which were already being eagerly inquired for. 



120 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Then, what is Dudley to do ?" he asked, feebly 
and impotently. 

^^ Sell the place again as soon as possible," advised 
Mr. Stewart. 

'* That is all very well ; but if he cannot sell ?" 

" In that case he must let" 

*' And if he do not let T 

^' In that case he must make the best he can of 
a bad bargain," . and Mr. Stewart shrugged his 
shoulders, as much as to say, ^' If a man will be a 
simpleton, he must bear the consequences." 

*' The matter shall come before the board," re- 
marked Mr. Black. 

" There is nothing to prevent its doing so, is 
there ?" inquired Mr. Stewart. 

" And I wish to Heaven, sir . ^I wish to Heaven . I 
had been content to abide by good advice, and never 
asked you for your name, or influence, or . or any- 
thing," finished Mr. Black, in a fine frenzy. " I 
could have carried the company through without your 
help ; I should have been better without your inter- 
ference; I should have had the management, to a 
certain extent, in my own power, instead " 

'* Instead of having some one on the direction 



MR. black's tartar. 121 



with an interest in the well-being of the concern," 
finished Mr. Stewart, who had by this time changed 
his position, and stood with one arm resting on the 
chimney-piece, staring into the fire. "Look here, 
sir," he went on, suddenly altering the tone in which 
he had hitherto spoken, " it is as much your interest 
as mine that this company shall succeed. It may 
make a rich man of you if it do . it will certainly ease 
me of a considerable sum of money if it do not Our 
hopes, therefore, are, or should be, identical Is it 
to be peace or war between us ? Will you work 
with me, or will you work against me ? Are you 
going to make posts and give salaries to all the men 
you ever knew since you started in business ? Do 
you mean to show Squire This and Captain That 
where a good stroke of business is to be done-^where 
a snug nest-egg is to be obtained ? Are you going 
to advance the well-being of the company, or make 
it subservient to the well-being of Jack, Tom, and 
Harry? How is this to be, sir? . ^let us clearly 
understand one another at once." 

" Is all this tirade merely because I advised 
Squire Dudley to purchase that house in Lincoln's 
Inn Fields ?" asked Mr. Black, sneeringly. 



122 FAR ABOVE RUBIES 

" No, sir ; all this tirade, as you are pleased to 
call it, originates not at the doings in Lincoln's Inn, 
but at the various other doings in Dowgate Hill. 
Here, for example, who the deuce is this fellow 
Harcourt, solicitor ? Nobody knows who he may be, 
except that he is some friend or relative of yours. 
Then, again, there is Bayley Crossenham, Esquire, 
manager; Bobert Crossenham, Esquire, secretary jpro 
tern. It shall not be pro tern, long, believe me. 
Then the bankers are your own ; the auditors are the 
same whose names were appended to that most rotten 
scheme of yours, the City and Suburban Gas Com- 
pany ; the brokers are men of comparatively no 
standing whatever ; not a soul on the direction but 
has been ** qualified " by the gift of paid-up shares. 
I do not quarrel with that latter arrangement, for, 
with one exception, I think you have, so far as I 
can see, got a list of very good names . names that, 
perhaps, were worth paying for. By-the-way, I per- 
ceive Lord Kemms is on the Direction." 

'*Yes," replied Mr. Black, wincing, however, a 
little at the implied question ; " he is next neighbour 
almost. to Squire Dudley." 

"Indeed, what a delightful person this Squire 



\ 



MR. black's tartar. 123 

Dudley must be ! And so, because Lord Kemms 
chances to be near neighbour to Squire Dudley, he 
allows his name to grace our prospectus ? I should 
not have thought it." 

** Why should you not?" asked Mr. Black, sullenly. 

"Well, for one reason, because he has been at 
Vienna for the last four months." 

"I saw hira, at any rate, in Squire Dudley's 
house, when I was down in Hertfordshire last 
summer," answered Mr. Black. 

" And he gave you permission to use his name ?" 

" Certainly. Do you think I should put it on the 
direction if he had not?" asked Mr. Black. 

" Have you any letter from him to that effect . 
any written authority to do so ?" 

" Even in the City we think a man's word suflScient 
authority," was the reply. " I do not know what 
code of honour may be observed among your rela- 
tions, Mr. Stewart." 

" It is best not to depend too much on honour," 
answered that gentleman, coolly. " If Lord Kemms 
took it into his head, on his return home, to re- 
pudiate the transaction, do you know what would be 
the result ?" 



124 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Our company would probably find itself in 
Queer Street," replied Mr. Black ; " but I am not 
afraid of that. Lord Kemms is not a man to back 
out of a promise, particularly if it can be made 
worth his while to keep it," added the promoter, 
dotto voce. 

" I did not quite catch the last portion of your 
sentence," remarked Mr. Stewart. 

**It was of no consequence . merely a passing 
reflection," said Mr. Black. "I can show you 
Mr. Hope's authority, and that of your nephew, 
Mr. Croft, if the sight would afibrd you any grati- 
fication." 

" Thank you . they are of no consequence," was 
the reply. " I should have liked to see Lord Kemms', 
because, from .* infonnation I have received,' I did 
not think his lordship would join us." 

" He would not have joined us had Mr. Raids- 
ford's persuasion carried much weight." 

" Indeed ! Who is Mr. Raidsford . his confessor?" 

"Come, come, Mr. Stewart, do you think I am 
quite a simpleton ?" demanded Mr. Black. '* Do 
you imagine that piece of acting can take me in? 
I know who has been setting you against me . 



MR. black's TARTAR, 125 

I know who has been putting you up to ask if the 
names are genuine . if permission to use them have 
really been given. You have not so long left Mr. 
Raidsford's office as to have forgotten who and what 
he is ; and I know who and what he is . a sneak and 
a toady, who has worked himself up from nothing 
with a smooth tongue and a spying nature. It was 
through tale-bearing he got on . ^perhaps it will be 
through tale-bearing he may get down." 
. ** He is rich, then T . this was interrogative. 

" Mr. Stewart," said the promoter, desperately, 
"don't you know all about Compton Raidsford, as 
well as I know about you? Don't you know he is 
very rich . so rich that he would not touch shares in 
the Bank of England ? Don't you know he hates 
all companies . that having grubbed his own way 
up, he believes anybody else can grub up unassisted 
also? Don't you know he is a prying, meddling, 
conceited, cursed upstart?" finished Mr. Black. 

*' I cannot say that I do . in fact, I cannot say 
that I know the man at all," answered Mr. Stewart. 

" Well, you need not say, but I may think," 
snapped up Mr. Black ; " and, with regard to the 
question you put to me some time since, all I have 



126 FAB ABOVE BUMES. 

got to remari^ is this . ^I will work widi jou, and for 
yoa and myself if joa will let me ; bot there is a 
limit to all diingsw I cannot stand being bolUed 
and interfered with. Let me work the company 
my own way, and I will take what amount of advice 
yoa diooee to give, and act on it if I can. I am a 
good g^rant, if I am let alone . interfere with this^ 
that, and the other, and I am apt to torn restiTe. If 
yon take the right way with me, yoa will not find 
me nnreascmable ; bat I teQ you fairly to begin 
with, that though a child might lead, the deiil 
himself should not driye me.'' 

^ I must advertise for an intelligent three-year- 
old, then," laughed Mr. Stewart, " for I shall cer- 
tainly not attempt driving you. Only, I mean 
to have my way in some things, remember. I am a 
little like you, Mr. Black . averse to being crossed ; 
so it will be better for us to agree to go the same 
road, rather than always be pulling contrary ways. 
You will bear in mind what I said about our com- 
pany being made a refuge, and not repeat such a 
mistake. I shall look in again after Christmas; 
meantime, allow me to wi^ you the compliments of 
the season.'' 



MR. black's tartar. 127 

" Thank you ; same to you, sir," answered Mr. 
.Black, forced to accept the civility, but by no means 
mollified by it. 

" I hope the new year may prove a prosperous 
one to us all," said Mr. Stewart, meditatively, looking 
into his hat. 

" I hope so too," the promoter agreed ; ** it shall 
not be for want of any exertions on my part if the 
company fail." 

"Fail," repeated Mr. Stewart; '*faill it shall 
not fail ! Conducted with ordinary prudence, it 
should be a perfect mine of wealth. There is 
scarcely a public bakery in England which has not 
paid the most enormous dividends ; and what is the 
field in any county or provincial town in comparison 
to that which is open for us in London ? Three 
millions of bread-eaters, and not a large bakery to 
supply them !" 

" You may remember that I make a somewhat 
similar observation in the prospectus," remarked 
Mr. Black, not sorry to have an opportunity of 
indirectly accusing Mr. Stewart of plagiarism. 

" Did you ? How very singular ! Is it copyright ? 
If so, I will not infringe again. And that reminds 



128 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

ine what induces you to stick the Mount Casbell 
motto at the heads of each advertisement" 

** I suppose the motto was in existence before the 
Mount Cashells were thought of," retorted Mr. 
Black '* It is none the worse for their having used 

it, IS it t 

" It is none the better," was the reply ; *' still," 
went on Mr. Stewart, ** the prospectus, as a whole, 
does you credit. It is very moderate in its tone . a 
great matter in these days of bounce and swagger ; 
and that allusion to the ' Give us bread and the 
games' is rather neat. I like the stamp motto also, 
* Sweet and wholesome.' Altogether, that Latin of 
yours is a good idea." 

" The idea was mine^ but not the Latin," answered 
Mr. Black, frankly. " I do not pretend to be much 
of a scholar myself; I had something else to do 
when I was young than pore over any book, unless, 
indeed, it might be a day-book ; but I know even 
the appearance of learning has an effect on the 
general public, and so I begged Dudley to look me 
up one or two appropriate quot^itioiis. He is a 
gentleman, you know . been to college, and all that 
sort of thing." 



MR. black's tartar. 129 

" They do not sell brains at college, it appears, 
however, though they may learning," remarked 
Mr. Stewart, drily; after which speech, intended, 
evidently, as a delicate compliment to Arthur 
Dudley's understanding, the great director put his 
hat on his head, and said ^'Good afternoon" to 
Mr. Black, and, walking out of the oflSce, took his 
way westward through Cloak and Trinity Lanes, 
thinking as he went, " That is a sharp, clever fellow. 
Now I wonder if he can and will be honest, even 
to answer his own purpose." 

Meanwhile, the subject of this speculation stood 
shaking his clenched fist after Mr. Stewart. 

" I wish to God I dare have kicked the old 
humbug up Cannon Street/' he said in his rage, 
quite out loud. " I should not mind paying a 
hundred pounds to have the pleasure of telling the 
cursed upstart that I don't care a damn for him, 
or his connection, or his standing, or anything about 
him. Here have I had all the trouble, all the 
anxiety, all the work, while ray gentleman was 
amusing himself doing the grand in foreign coun- 
tries; and then, when I, after having stood the 
racket, began to hope the rest would be smooth 

VOL. ir. K 



130 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

sailing, down he comes with his capital, and sweeps 
away all chance of profit. Capital, indeed ; damn 
capital, say I !" 

Thus the man whose life had been one long 
struggle to gain capital, who was never weary of 
writing prospectus after prospectus in order to prove 
that without capital nothing good or great ever had 
been, or ever would be, accomplished ; the ostensible 
object of whose existence it was to demor strate that 
individual exertion was useless ; that it was only the 
united wealth of a number of individuals . which 
could hope to effect large results ; the actual end of 
whose labours . could those labours have been 
carried out according to the programme he had 
arranged . was to exterminate all small tradesmen, 
all struggling merchants . almost unconsciously 
paraphrased the sense of Mr. Raidsford's lamen- 
tation. 

Great wits and little wits, we are assured, often- 
times jump together, and on this occasion, certainly, 
the man of large resources and the man of none 
expressed nearly identical opinions. 

" The concentration of capital will be the ruin of 
England," said Mr. Raidsford, who felt how such a 



MR. black's tartar. 131 

coDcentration might have neutralized his own eflTorts 
to rise in the world. 

" Damn capital !" said Mr. Black, smarting under 
Mr. Stewart's insolence ; ** it is capital, and nothing 
but capital, which enables these fellows to give 
themselves such airs." 

" But the game is not finished yet," added the 
promoter, next instant ; " when it is, Mr. Stewart, 
you will perhaps find out to your cost which of us 
rises the winner." 



K 2 



132 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER VI. 



HOLLY BERRIES. 



The accident at Benie Down brought, during the 
course of the few weeks preceding Christmas, an 
unprecedented number of visitors to the Hollow. 
Never before in the memory of any individual con- 
nected with the establishment had so many carriages 
driven up to the door in the course of one day as 
was the case when once news of Lally's precarious 
state came to be bruited abroad. 

People who had never called on Mrs. Dudley now 
called to inquire after her child, and there had to be 
a piece of cork fastened under the knocker, and 
some baize tied round the clapper of the bell, in 
order to prevent Heather being maddened by the 
incessant rat-tat-tat and ting-ting-ting of her neigh- 
bours' grand footmen. 



HOLLY BERRIES. 133 

Very little social courtesy had been extended to 
Mrs. Dudley since her marriaga Long before her 
advent, the Dudleys had dropped off the visiting lists 
of their more aristocratic acquaintances, and no one 
felt much inclined to take steps towards reviving the 
old intimacy when Arthur Dudley brought home to 
the Hollow a wife of whom no one knew anything, 
who might, in fact, be " anybody" . as Mrs. Poole 
Seymour, the great lady of North Kemms, vaguely 
expressed herself. 

When society does not take notice of a woman on 
the occasion of her marriage, it is difficult for any 
member composing it subsequently to repair that 
omission ; and thus, although there was scarcely a 
lady in the three parishes who would not willingly 
enough have extended her countenance to Mrs. 
Dudley, and although most persons' consciences 
pricked them when they passed the Hollow, or met 
the pretty woman and her children, and the brothers 
and sisters-in-law whom she had so speedily tamed 
and civilized, in Berrie Down Lane, still Heather's 
circle of acquaintances had remained extremely 
limited, and might have remained so for many a 
year longer, had not Lally's accident broken the 



134 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

conventional ice, and brought, as I have said, 
visitors and kind inquiries to Berne Down in 
abundance. 

The excitement produced by the little girl's 
illness and danger was, indeed, something astonish- 
ing. Mothers had a fellow-feeling for the poor 
creature who sat . so the doctor reported . day and 
night by her little girl's side. Those who were 
childless had perhaps even a keener, because a more 
imaginative and sentimental sympathy in the matter. 
Gentlemen, as a rule, admired Heather, and re- 
gretted that any trouble should fall upon her ; and, 
added to all these causes of compassion, there was a 
strong feeling in the small community round about 
Berrie Down that Mrs. Dudley was a victim . an 
unappreciated victim, moreover ; that she must have 
had a hard time of it with those boys and girls, and 
that " proud, useless husband," and that it was quite 
time somebody took her up and made her position 
more endurable. 

The world's pity is usually abundant in inverse 
proportion to the necessity that exists for it to 
be vouchsafed at all. 

Certainly, Heather did not consider the five 



HOLLY BERRIES. 135 

brothers and sisters a cause for repining, nor had she 
ever murmured because she and her husband often 
found it a hard struggle to make the two ends of 
their income meet. 

If, of late, she had occasionally wept over any 
paragraph in her life's story, those tears were never 
shed in public . of their bitterness she never com- 
plained to any created being. 

Her happiness the world could not mar, her grief 
the world could not cure; and, perhaps for both 
these reasons, and also because she felt that society 
was by no means an inexpensive luxury, she did not 
respond to the advances now made with so much 
alacrity as the ladies of the three parishes thought 
she might have done under the circumstances. 

" Under the circumstances " meant, that, although 
they . the ladies . had neglected Mrs. Dudley at 
first, still they had availed themselves of the earliest 
opportunity which offered of making amends to her 
for their former want of attention. 

They were willing to forget all the years during 
which the Dudleys had voluntarily put themselves 
on one side, if the Dudleys would forget those 
years likewise ; but Heather did not, as has been 



136 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



Stated, appear unduly elated by the somewhat tardy 
honour which was now sought to be thrust upon her. 
It was not in her nature to be unthankful or ungra- 
cious; but her mind was troubled about her child, 
she said, and she trusted visitors would excuse her 
coming down to them. 

Thus Bessie Ornison and Agnes Dudley were in 
the habit of repulsing great ladies day after day ; 
but, somehow, the autocrats of their various ilks did 
not take these apologetic messages in bad part, . 
rather, on the contrary, they professed their anxiety 
that poor dear Mrs. Dudley should not leave her little 
girl, and appeared quite content to hear the story 
of the accident from the lips of other members of 
Squire Dudley's family. 

Hitherto, most decidedly, the younger Dudleys 
had been rather a trouble to the minds of those 
exalted persons who occasionally deigned to discuss 
Berrie Down Hollow and the persons who dwelt there. 

They were regarded as a species of fungus which 
had been permitted to grow upon and disfigure a 
very old and a very good tree. Grandchildren 
were they of an alderman . a poor alderman, be it 
remembered, who had not even thought it worth 



\ 



HOLLY BERRIES. 137 

his while to recognise the honour birth had con- 
ferred on him and his, by leaving a sufficient 
amount of money behind to patch up the broken 
fortunes of the Dudleys of Berrie Down. 

If trade were to be tolerated at all, it could only 
be tolerated for the sake of the wealth it brought to 
aristocratic, but empty coffers. 

In itself, like a servant, it was an evil ; but like 
a servant also, if it did its work, its presence might 
be both tolerated and approved. 

If it failed to perform its appointed task . if it 
grew poor and pretentious, like its betters, then the 
sooner it was stamped out the better. 

A poor alderman seemed in the eyes of those 
great people nothing more nor less than an arrant 
impostor. Of course, any gentleman marrying the 
daughter of such a person would conclude she had 
money, and for her not to have money was a down- 
right deception. 

Then for her to have five children. "Those 
kind of vulgar women always have tribes of chil- 
dren, my dear," said Mrs. Poole Seymour, who was 
childless, to the Honourable Augusta Baldwin (Lord 
Kemms' aunt), who was popularly supposed never to 



138 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

have had an offer. " If poor Major Dudley had lived 
much longer, there is no telling how many sons and 
daughters might have been left for his heir to sup- 
port. Shocking I call it. You remember, the first 
wife had only one child, and this present Mrs. 
Dudley but two. Quite enough, to my mind . just 
a nice number ; but as for those five other creatures, 
it is perfectly heartbreaking to think of any man 
being burdened with them." 

This was the bird's-eye view of the question which 
society from an exalted position was good enough to 
take. 

When, however, society condescended to a nearer 
inspection, affairs assumed a somewhat different 
aspect. The Dudley girls were not uncouth young 
women, with large bones, rough hair, loud voices, 
and red hands ; rather they were, to borrow from 
Mrs. Poole Seymour once more, decidedly pleasing 
girls . very nice and unaffected in their manners, and 
irreproachable as to their accent. Altogether, a call 
at Berrie Down grew to be considered an agreeable 
object for a morning drive. The ladies of the three 
parishes were, perhaps, a trifle weary of each other, 
and liked, moreover, having something to do. 



HOLLY BERRIES. 139 

Fruit and flowers, game, picture-books, dolls, 
toys, came daily to the Hollow, together with com- 
pliments and kind inquiries. Callers arrived also, 
assured that some day Heather herself would be- 
come visible, and also very certain that half an 
hour at Berrie Down passed more rapidly than ten 
minutes anywhere else. 

Bessie did her best to amuse the great people, 
and the great people were pleased to approve her 
efibrts. *' You and your sisters, really must come 
over and stay with me," Mrs. Poole Seymour was 
good enough at last to declare ; and then Bessie had 
to explain she was not a Miss Dudley at all, . 
only a cousin wishful to help Mrs. Dudley at that 
trying period. A " sort of nurse," added Bessie, 
mischievously, whereupon Agnes Dudley observed, 
'* A very pearl of nurses ; I do not know what we 
should have done without her;" at which little 
speech Mrs. Poole Seymour smiled graciously, and 
said they were good, sweet girls, of whom she trusted 
she should yet have the pleasure of seeing a great 
deal. 

"She has all the trust, and all the pleasure 
on her side, then," remarked Bessie, after their 



140 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

visitor departed; but, in spite of this depreciating 
observation, there can be no question but that Miss 
Ormson liked playing hostess . that she delighted 
in trying her strength and testing her power on 
grand ladies who were to the manner born, and 
never seemed disturbed or put out by any circum- 
stance, or any person. 

Another thing pleased her also . the vain coquet- 
tish puss . namely, to run up to her room aft^r the 
various callers had departed, and looking in the 
glass consider how much prettier . how much more 
graceful she was than any of them. 

Mrs. Crompton Raidsford was amongst the earliest 
of Mrs. Dudley's visitors. No one, not even the 
Earl's daughter, who married Mr. Plimpton, of 
Thomfield . a man commonly believed to be rolling 
in wealth . came in such style to Berrie Down as 
the contractor s wife. 

She had the shortest distance to drive of any lady 
in the neighbourhood, yet she arrived in a great 
chariot, drawn by a pair of horses, seventeen hands 
high if they were an inch, with coachman and foot- 
man on the box, and another footman behind. 

As Bessie subsequently remarked, " Anybody 



HOLLY BERRIES. 141 

might have thought the Lord Mayor of London had 
come out in his state carriage to visit us. I really felt 
quite subdued by such unnecessary magnificence." 

" And if you only saw Mrs. Raidsford, Heather," 
she went on ; *' if you could only imagine the mass 
of satin, and velvet, and sable, and pretension and 
vulgarity, which descended, assisted by two foot- 
men, from that chariot, you would be astonished 
to think Mr. Eaidsford has lived with her so long. 
I never did behold such a woman. I dare not look 
at Agnes while she was talking. Do you think 
I could at first imagine whom she meant by 'your 
gentleman,' or conceive why she wanted to know 
what sized nursery you had? I consider it was 
most clever of Agnes to interrupt me when I was 
going to say I could get a rule from Cuthbert and 
measure it for her. How came you to guess, Aggy, 
that was her way of inquiring how many children 
Heather had ? She said she hoped you would not 
think she had condescended in coming over so soon . " 

" What ! " exclaimed Heather in astonishment. 

"^rhe meant intruded, I believe," explained 
Bessie, " for that Mr. Raidsford had never given 
her a moment's peace about calling ever since he 



142 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

heard of the collusion your little girl had met with. 
I may safely say," proceeded Bessie, " that she did 
not use a single long word in its right sense. She 
informed us . talking of ghosts, that she was not 
supercilious . that if we would come over to Moor- 
lands any day she would be very glad to show us 
the apiary Mr. R. had built for British birds ; that 
her young ladies were not much of ones for pedes- 
trian exercise, that they preferred walking to riding, 
only their * papar ' thought it was well for them to 
be learned how to do it. She told us her nerves 
never would have been strong enough for her to do 
anything in that way ; in fact, it always put her heart 
in her mouth to see Lord Kemms a leaping of that 
Black Knight of his over the fossil on the lawn. If 
she mentioned Lord Kemms once during the time 
she was here," went on Bessie, " she did sixty 
times. That is the worst of a man rising ; he has 
to carry his wife a dead weight, up with him. Well, 
there must be some of her to be some of all sorts . 
so let us rest and be thankful" 

Utterly astonished was Arthur at sight of the 
visitors who came to inquire concerning the health 
of his eldest bom. 



HOLLY BERRIES. 143 

" Leonard might have broken every bone in his 
body before they would have ofifered any such 
civility," he grumbled ; but Bessie bade him " hush 
_sh_sh. " 

" It was really your good child Leonard, Arthur, 
who pushed her in," she said ; " and if we have 
been wise enough to keep that fact in the back- 
ground, I pray you not to be ungrateful. It was 
poor Heather's sinner who fell into the water, but it 
was your saint who was the cause of her doing so. 
And it is natural such a catastrophe should bring 
wives and mothers to Berrie Down. It brought me, 
so you ought not to be surprised at anything after 
that" 

" It was very kind of you, Bessie," answered Squire 
Dudley ; but, nevertheless, he refused to see their 
visitors, and it was long before the honours of 
Berrie Down were done by Heather in person. 

Then, indeed, Mrs. Poole Seymour, and the 
Honourable Augusta Baldwin, Mrs. Plimpton, and 
Mrs. Carroll, and Mrs. Raidsford, and Mrs. Lynford, 
and Mrs. Hulst, and a multitude of other morning 
callers, professed themselves charmed, and wondered 
how it happened they could have resided for so long 



144 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

a time within visitinsr distance of Berrie Down with- 
out knowing that dear, sweet, gentle Mrs. Dudley. 

" Anything prettier than Mrs. Dudley and her little 
girl," opined society, " had never been exhibited at 
the Royal Academy;" and, certainly, in those days, 
both mother and child were very touching . Heather 
pathetic, with pale thin face and anxious eyes ; Lally 
so easily tired, so soon wearied, even with fresh toys 
and strange faces. 

"Oo dood to Lally," she said to Mrs. Poole 
Seymour when that lady bought her a doll's house 
furnished complete, and would have had the child 
play with and enjoy it; '*oo dood to Lally, but 
Lally tired mamma . tell lady . Lally's very bad." 

There was not a woman who went up in due 
time to the room where Lally lay that left it with 
dry eyes. Even Mrs. Raidsford declared the scene 
was " quite effective." As for Mrs. Poole Seymour, 
she was never weary of bringing over toys for the 
child, which the poor little creature always clutched 
with weak avidity, and then next moment almost 
wearily relinquished. 

There were two spirits in poor Lally then ; the 
spirit of health and the spirit of sickness, the spirit 



HOLLY BERRIES. 145 

of her former self, and the spirit which entered into 
her body as she rose for the last time struggling for 
life in the cold waters of Mr. Scrotter's pond. The 
first was all eagerness, excitement, vivacity; the 
last was languid, weary, inactive ; the first hastened 
her pulses, sent the blood to her cheeks, loaded her 
tongue with eager words, and tipped her fingers 
with quicksilver ; the second laid a depressing 
weight on her heart, caused the unspoken words to 
die away on her white lips, drew the bright colour 
from her face, checked the impulses of the little 
hands, and caused the tired head to be laid on her 
mothers breast almost before the new toys were 
examined, . the latest wonder in doll creation 
critically inspected. 

" Put 'em away," she was wont to say with the 
air of a matron of forty, " put 'em away, Lally 
look at 'em by-and-by." 

But by-and-by came and went, . came and went 
without bringing much more inclination to Lally 
to inspect her new possessions. 

The loveliest doll on earth could not have retained 
her attention very long in the days of which I am 
writing. She would look at it for a moment and 

VOL. IE. L 



146 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

then turn her eyes wearily away. " Lally not well," 
that was the burden of the song then ; " Ma, . Lally 
not well." 

" But you are better, my pet," Heather was wont 
to say. " You are not very bad now, Lally." 

" No, but Lally not well ;" and then mother and 
doctor and friends would look at each other and 
declare " she is much better, and the spring will do 
wonders for her." 

Of that spring and of the summer Lally might 
have been said to rave. Each morning when she 
opened her eyes, she would ask between sleeping and 
waking, " Bessie, are the leaves come yet ?" or " are 
the trees green ? Is it spring now ?" 

" Nonsense, puss," Bessie always answered, 
*' Christmas has not come yet ; you are to get well, 
you know, and be carried downstairs to eat your 
plum pudding. Little girls who sham sickness are 
not to have any good things at all. You are to be 
taken into the drawing-room and kissed under the 
misletoe . kissed till you are black and blue, you bad 
child, for all the trouble and anxiety you have 
caused us." 

Whereupon Lally would declare she " wadn't 



HOLLY BERRIES. 147 

bad tild, and she wouldn't be tissed back and bue ; 
Lally has had more tisses than ze liked these days ; 
Lally tired of ladies tissing of her." 

" You little ungrateful monkey !" 

" Big fat ooman tissed Lally, and hurt her with 
her beard," the child complained, " and Lally did 
not like her sweet-sweets; they were nasty." 

" You ought not to have had any, you know, you 
dreadful child !" 

" Lally ought ; Lally would like some this minute, 
if they was dood, and not mortar. Issy said they 
were mortar, and that Mrs. Aidsford had no bussi- 
ness to bring them : but Issy says wicked things, 
and Lally isn't to 'tend to her." 

Having finished which speech, Lilian Dudley 
nestled her head in her pillow, and thought over her 
various visitors. 

'* I'd like to have Muff," she said at last, as a 
consolatory conclusion; and, accordingly. Muff was 
brought ; and from that day forth the cat rarely 
left its little mistress's side. By some mysterious 
means, the creature seemed to understand there was 
a terrible fight going on in the silent room, and it 
would lie for hours quietly beside the child, purring 

L 2 



148 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

vigorously, never moving, unless Lally said, ten- 
derly, "poor titty," or "poor puss," in which case 
it would open its eyes and blink at her gratefully, 
or else march backwards and forwards over her 
breast, rubbing sides, and head, and tail against the 
pinched, changed face of the little child. 

There was nothing much sadder, in those days, 
than the contemplation of Lally and " pussens," as 
she styled her cat. 

There was the meek, unassuming, yet intense 
sympathy of the dumb creature, not unmixed, it 
might be, with a perfect appreciation of the physical 
comforts which Lally's illness provided for her. 
There was, on the other hand, the irritable and unrea- 
sonable affection of the higher creature . the exact- 
ing fondness of a mistress who expected Muff con- 
tinually to get up out of her sleep, to rub against 
and make much of her. 

Which Muff did . greatly to her credit, as I 
consider. 

A dozen times in an hour the cat was roused 
from her slumber, with invariably the same result ; 
and, sleepy or not sleepy, she was always expected, 
if Lally wished that she should do so, to fold her 



HOLLY BERRIES. 149 

paws, lie quiet, put down her head, commence pui*- 
ring, and so wander into dreamland once again. 

"Poor pussens, poor tittens, poor MufF!" and so 
mistress and cat would fall to rest, mutually caress- 
ing each other; and sometimes Bessie, watching 
the pair, would turn her head aside and cry 
silently. 

They were gathering holly berries in those days ; 
and Lally had longed to go out and watch the holly 
being cut " in Berrie Down Lane, and just round 
about, ma," she said ; but in this matter Heather was 
firm. " My pet must not put her little face outside 
the doors till spring comes," she answered ; and then 
Lally very piteously asked, " Will spring be long, 
ma,. will spring be long?" 

" Look at the beautiful dress I have made for 
Lally's own self," said Bessie on Christmas-eve . 
holding up a little frock of white cashmere, which 
she had bound and trimmed, and decked out 
prettily with light blue ribbon. " My child is to be 
dressed up in all this loveliness'to-night, and carried 
down in Bessie's arms, to say to mamma and papa 
' merry Christmas, happy new year.' Lally won't be 
awake soon enough in the morning to say all that 



150 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

long sentence. Would Lally like to be dressed, 
and go now ?' 

Lally conceiving that she would, the grand dress 
was slipped on over her little night-gown, then a 
soft blue shawl was thrown round her neck, and thus 
attired, with her head resting on Bessie's shoulder, 
Lally put in her first appearance in the family circle. 

" My darling, my darling !" Heather said ; and 
she stood up white and trembling as she spoke. 

" Is that my little girl ?" Arthur exclaimed, making 
a movement to take her, in which he was restrained, 
however, by Lally's statement that she was not to be 
hurt " Lally's been very sore, pa," she explained. 
" Merry Chris-mes, dood new year !" 

" That is not it," whispered Bessie, giving her a 
little admonitory shake, . " happy." 

"Ma, happy Chris-mes, merry new year!" and 
the little creature made the round of the family, not 
forgetting Master Marsden, whom Bessie reluctantly 
allowed to kiss her. Surreptitiously and remorsefully 
that young gentleman conveyed into Lally's hand 
five or six marbles, which had been secreted about 
his person. 

'* They are for you," he whispered ; and the gift 



HOLLY BERRIES. 151 

Lally religiously carried up-stairs, falling asleep with 
the precious stones laid in a heap beside her. 

" Ver pret," she said, pointing to the great branch 
of holly, with its red berries glowing among the 
glossy leaves, which Bessie had suspended over the 
top of her little bed, " ver . pret." 

" Yes, my darling, they are ver-ver pret," answered 
Bessie, while she took off Lally's finery, and laid her 
down among the snowy napery ; and when all that 
was done, and Lally was tucked up for the night, 
Bessie took her seat beside the bed, and told the 
child, as well as she could, what event the holly 
berries were hung there to commemorate ; told her 
how, more than eighteen centuries before, the wise 
men came to worship at Bethlehem, and how the 
star had gone before them, and stood over the 
manger where Jesus was laid. 

"That is why we hang our houses with holly 
branches, Lally," Bessie went on, " because to- 
morrow is the birthday of One who loved us all 
exceedingly. Do you understand me, pet ? " 

" Iss," was the reply, " Lally does ; Lally heard 
all that before long ago, that is why we have plum- 
pudden too." 



152 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

Rather disheartened at this view of the question, 
Bessie observed, that when people were glad they 
prepare a feast, and ** make merry," and that plum- 
pudding happened to be part of the good things 
provided at Christmas. 

" Did He have dood tings ?" Lally immediately 
inquired, with the terrible perception of the incon- 
gruous, which makes it so difficult to talk to children 
on serious subjects in connection with their daily 
life. 

Altogether, it seemed to Bessie that she had 
better have left her religious instruction alone ; but 
she had gone too far to recede, and accordingly she 
answered that " He had been poorly lodged, poorly 
fed, evilly treated while He remained on earth ; that 
though He had done so much for men, men had 
used Him despitefully, and mocked and forsaken 
Him. But He loved little children, Lally," finished 
Bessie, " and so, when you look at the holly berries, 
you must always think of Him. He was so good, 
Lally, that Child bom eighteen hundred years ago. 
He was so good I" 

" Are you dood, Bessie ?" asked the little 
creature. 



HOLLY BERRIES. 153 

" No, my darling, I am not ; I wish I were ; oh ! 
Lally, I wish I were !" 

" You are dood to Lally," was the encom'aging 
reply. '' Bessie, I do love 'oo ; thing to I, please ; 
thing I to thleep." 

But Bessie refused to sing at all till Lally said 
" sleep " properly. 

" Seep dere den," Lally exclaimed in a tone of such 
triumph that Bessie was fain to kiss her a dozen 
times ere commencing one of those dear old Christmas 
carols that one never hears now-a-days, that went 
out of fashion with the Christmas frosts and 
snows. 

By the time the strain was ended, Lally had 
fallen asleep; but through the night she wakened 
and asked Agnes, who sat beside her bed, to tell her 
more about the Child. 

"What child, dear?" said Agnes, who thought 
she was dreaming or wandering. 

" It is His birthday, you know ; the Child ;" and 
then Agnes knew what she meant, and told her 
stories about Him and His goodness till Lally said 
plaintively, " I wis He was here now, Aggy." 

" I wish He were, my darling, for He would make 



154 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

you better in a moment," Agnes answered, sorrow- 
fully. 

"Agnes!" . ^it was Heather coming into the 
room with a loose dressing-gown thrown around her 
that made Agnes turn at this point, . ** He is here, 
and He will make my child well, if it seemeth Him 
good. I prayed for her all the time she was so 
very ill, as it would have been impossible for me to 
have prayed, had I not felt He was with me, 
standing near; but I tried not to pray too much, 
dear, lest in granting my petition He should punish 
me for it." 

And so mother and aunt talked while the child 
dropped off into slumber once again, and so the 
Christmas morning dawned. fine, and clear, and 
bright ; and the holly berries looked red and warm 
as the December sun peered through the windows 
of the Hollow, and found everything there in due 
order for a quiet, happy Christmas. 

The child was not well, but she was out of 
danger, and Heather felt she must that day go to 
church and thank God for delivering her darling from 
the lions . for giving her back from the very jaws 
of death, to life, and hope, to parents, and friends. 



155 



CHAPTER VIL 



GONE. 



It was a lovely morning, and every one was going 
to walk over to Fifield church except Laura, who 
had almost tearfully entreated to be left in charge of 
Lally. 

" I love her as much as any of you," she said, 
^' and still I have the least to do with her." 

So it was settled that Laura should remain at 
home, and all the rest proceed along Berrie Down 
Lane, . up which we walked slowly and lingeringly 
in the first chapter in this book . to Fifield. 

A large party . for, although the intended fes- 
tivities had been given up, and no visitors were 
invited to Berrie Down Hollow, still, the Dudleys 
themselves made a goodly number . eight, in- 
cluding Bessie . who looked pale and tired when 



156 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

she came into the drawing-room, "dressed in all 
her best ;" so shrieked Harry Marsden . and ready 
to go to church. 

" Mayn't I go too ?" asked that young gentleman, 
pulling at Heather's dress ; " I'd like the walk as 
well as anybody." 

*^ Do you think it is only for the sake of the walk 
we are going to church, Harry?" asked Agnes, 
virtuously drawing on her gloves as she spoke. 

" How should I know ? Bessie's likely going for 
the sake of the young men ; that's what pa says takes 
all girls to church," answered the enfant terrible. 

" Well, I daresay Mrs. Dudley will not object to 
your seeing whether that is what we go for," said 
Bessie. "I will brush your hair and put you to 
rights, for you are a perfect scarecrow now." 

And thus it was settled Master Marsden should 
. accompany the party ; and Alick, home for Christ- 
mas, had not a chance given him of looking at Agnes 
to see how she took Harry's remark about the object 
for which young ladies went to church. 

" What had taken her to North Kemms," he won- 
dered; "whom could the man be they had met 
there ? what his connection with Bessie ? " 



GONE. 157 

These questions Alick stood striving vainly to 
answer, while Master Marsden was being brushed 
and made look respectable by Bessie^Ormson. 

" I am as good as a mother to you, Harry," she 
said. 

" I am sure you are ; but that's not sajring much," 
answered the boy. " Mine has always a headache, 
and is constantly telling us not to make a noise. 
Noise, indeed ! Women can make enough noise 
themselves, when they want to." 

" Do not say ' want to,' Harry, it is vulgar." 
" No more vulgar than you are," he replied. " I 
shall talk as I like. What is good enough for pa 
ought to be good enough for you." 

" It is a fortunate thing for both of us that I am 
not your pa, as you call him," Bessie answered, " for 
I should shake you to death some day. Now, are 
you ready, or are you going to keep us waiting all 
day ?" 

" You think you look so nice in that bonnet," 
Harry sneered, " that you want to be off like a flash 
of lightning. You are none so pretty, some people 
think, though Harcourt, as my papa says, does 
imagine there is nobody like you. Pa says he 



158 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

would not marry you. I heard pa tell ma so, not 
a week before I came here." 

" I can't wonder at that," Bessie replied ; " your 
papa probably finds he has married one too many of 
the family already." 

But this side stroke Master Marsden seemed 
unable perfectly to understand ; wherefore he asked 
Bessie what she meant ; in reply to which question 
he received the information that *' children should 
not ask too many questions ; and that, if he intended 
going with ihem to Fifield church, it was time he 
got his cap and went downstairs." 

In acknowledgment of all this instruction, Harry, 
pulling a face at Bessie, that young lady forthwith un- 
ceremoniously marched him off and gave him in charge 
of Cuthbert, who grumbled a little over the trust. 

Human nature is much the same on Christmas 
as on any other day in the week, and every creature 
in Berrie Down . Heather herself not excepted . 
felt Harry Marsden to be a burden and a tax. 

Never before . never, Heather thought, had 
Berrie Down Lane looked so lovely as it did on that 
morning when they all paced it side by side. She 
had not been out for weeks previously, and the verv 



*^ 



GONE. 159 

branches of the trees seemed to bend and greet her 
as she passed. 

There were few leaves, and there were no wild 
flowers, yet the banks and hedgerows looked warm 
and pleasant, the ivy was trailing over the sward 
and twining fresh and green round the roots of the 
elms and beeches; the spruce laurel put forth 
its glossy foliage between the bare boughs of the 
thorn, and its bluish-black berries formed a contrast 
to those of the holly, red and glowing in the 
sunshine. 

Everything looked fair and lovely to Heather on 
that Christmas morning. Arthur had been so kind 
to her for weeks past, had never grumbled about 
Lally's illness, nor complained concerning the child 
having occupied too much of her time and thoughts. 

Alick was back amongst them . not much changed 
by his sojourn in town . good, and considerate, and 
helpful as ever. He talked hopefully of a vacant 
situation in Messrs. Elser's oflSce, which he thought 
Cuthbert might fill ; and Heather s secret desire for 
many a day previously had been that when Cuthbert 
went forth into the world it might be under Alick's 
auspices. 



160 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

She did not feel quite so certain of the one boy 
as of the other ; she did not think that as Cuthbert 
grew up she could manage him without Alick's aid. 
He was more uncertain in his temper, less to be 
depended on in any way, weaker for good, stronger 
for evil than his brother. Altogether, Heather 
desired that Alick should have the supervision of him ; 
and, behold, there was already a chance of the desire 
being gratified. 

Then Lally was better ; though not yet strong, 
she was certainly better, and the girls were well ; 
even Bessie made no complaint, though Heather 
thought she looked a trifle pale in her pretty bonnet, 
made of violet velvet, which was about the most 
becoming colour and material possible to the com- 
plexion of that young belle. Miss Ormson. 

*' What a shame, dear, that Gilbert is not with us," 
Heather had laughingly said the same morning, 
standing under the misletoe. " Let me kiss you for 
him." 

" Kiss me for yourself. Heather," Bessie answered, 
colouring up to her very temples, "but not for 
him." 

" And why not for him ? " asked Heather. 



Tl 



GONE. 161 

"I will tell you to-morrow, not to-day," was the 
reply. " To-morrow, perhaps." 

And then, irresistibly, there came back to Heather's 
mind that passage in " Elizabeth, or the Exiles of 
Siberia," where Elizabeth, repeating the woid ** to- 
morrow," sighs. 

" You look pale, Bessie," Heather remarked, when 
they had almost reached the foot of Berrie Down 
Lane. " Are you getting tired, dear ?" 

" I do not feel very well," Bessie answered ; " I 
think I will go back again, if you have no objection." 

Immediately, every one offered to return with her, 
even Harry Marsden, who, being debarred from 
throwing stones at the birds, was beginning to feel 
weary of the walk. 

'* I do not mind going to church." " Let me walk 
back with you." " No, I will go." " No, you 
have not been out for ever so long." " Let me " . 
" me"." me." 

All of which polite offers Bessie declined, saying, 
" if any one insisted on returning with her, she should 
walk on to church." 

*^ I am not ill," she finished, " I am only tired ; 
when I get home, I shall lie down and be as bright by 

VOL. II. M 



162 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the time you come back as any of you. Good-bye, 
. au revoir .'" . and with that she kissed her hand, 
and commenced slowly retracing her steps . Heather 
turning every now and then to watch her progress. 

The farther the distance between them became, 
the silenter grew Heather. She felt a nameless 
anxiety about Bessie, . an anxiety which she could 
neither conquer nor analyze, but which, nevertheless, 
increased until when, almost within sight of Fifield 
church, she remarked to her husband that she 
really thought she must return home also. 

" I am uneasy about Bessie," she said ; " the girl 
certainly did not look well." i 

" Pooh !" exclaimed Arthur, " she is only a little 
tired. It would vex her if you went home now ; I 
should not think of doing such a thing, I really 
should not, Heather." 

And so Heather was persuaded not to follow 
after Bessie, but go on to church. 

" You will find her well enough on our return," 
remarked Arthur ; and his prophecy proved correct, 
for Bessie met them at the gate looking bright and 
happy, and with as rich a colour as she had ever 
boasted mantling in her cheeks. 



GONE, 163 

" Hollo ! you've been painting," cried out Master 
Marsden. "Hasn't she, Alick? nobody's face was 
ever like that, without paint." 

"Harry, I really shall have to write to your 
mamma if you make such rude remarks," said 
Heather, rebukingly. "And so," she added, ad- 
dressing Bessie, " you do feel quite well again ? I 
felt so uneasy after you left us that I should have 
turned, had it not been for Arthur's remonstrance." 

"I am glad he did remonstrate," answered 
Bessie, " it would have been a real grief to me if 
you had come home on my account. I felt a little 
tired, that was all, and I am quite rested now." 

So, indeed, it seemed, for never had Bessie been 
so gay as on that Christmas afternoon. And she 
was very sweet too, as well as gay ; she uttered no 
sharp speeches ; she was ready to play at cat's-cradle 
with Leonard, and even refrained from scolding 
when Harry Marsden, who must needs take a hand 
in that scientific game also, tore her lace sleeve to 
shreds. 

She made herself agreeable to Arthur likewise, 

talking to him, while Heather was upstairs, concem- 

ng London, and her father's business, and her 

m2 



164 FAR AROVE RUBIES. 

father s anxieties, and the Squire's own prospects, 
as quietly and sensibly, her cousin subsequently de- 
clared, as her mother might have done. 

" And I think. Heather, she must be very fond 
of her father," Arthur informed his wife ; " for once 
when she was speaking about him, and how hard he 
worked, and of how little help her brothers were to 
him, her voice quite shook, and the tears came into 
her eyes. I had not given Bessie credit for so much 
feeling." 

" She is a dear, sweet girl," Heather answered. 
" I am glad she did not insist, as I feared she might, 
on sitting up with Lally. She is completely worn 
out, I think. Did you notice how pale she turned 
when she was bidding us good-night ?" 

Other people beside Heather had observed this 
pallor. Mrs. Piggott, who, making a grievous com- 
plaint concerning Priscilla Dobbin's shortcomings 
and habit of always being out of the way when 
wanted, was silenced by the sight of Bessie's wan 
face, and by Bessie's entreaty for her not to be hard 
on Priscilla. 

" She was with me a long time, you know, Mrs. 
Piggott, to-day," she said ; " I did not feel very well 



GONE. 165 

when I returned this morning, and Prissy put away 
my bonnet, and did a few other things for me that I 
was not inclined to do for myself." 

" There, there, Miss, don't say another word, but 
go away to bed ; you look like a ghost this minute ; 
you have been trying to kill yourself lately, that is my 
opinion ;'^but, please God, we will all turn round now." 

" Where shall we turn to, Mrs. Piggott ?" asked 
Bessie, with a smile, and then she re-crossed the hall 
and ascended the stairs to her own room, only 
pausing for a moment ere she went, to ^k Alick if 
he would take a letter up to town for her on the 
following morning. 

" It is to papa, and he will receive it earlier if 
you post it in London. Thank you. I will leave it 
on the hall-table to-night. Good-bye, Alick, good- 
bye !" and Alick imagined she pressed his hand 
tighter than ever she had done before, and that 
there was a very plaintive tone in her voice as she 
uttered that word, " Good-bye." 

Later on in the night, when every one except 
Lucy Dudley, who sat up with Lally, was supposed 
to be in bed, Bessie stole into the nursery, " to have 
another peep at her child," she said. 



166 FAR ABOVE KUIJIES. 

" You ought to have been asleep long ago," Lucy 

remarked, rebukingly ; but Bessie explained she had 

been writing to her father a very long letter on an 

important subject, which Alick was going to take to 

town with him. 

"About your marriage?" Lucy inquired, and 
Bessie answered, " Yes." 

" If we talk any more, we shall waken Lally," 
the girl added. " Good-night, Lucy . good-night, 
my bad child . my poor little Lally !" 

And stooping, she put her lips to Lally's hand, 
which lay outside the coverlet, and kissed it softly. 
When she lifted her head, Lucy saw that her eyes 
were full of tears. 

*^ Bessie, Bessie, darling, what is the matter ?" she 
whispered, putting her arms round her cousin's 
neck, and striving to detain her; but Bessie 
gently disengaged herself from the embrace, and 
saying, "we shall waken Lally; there is nothing 
the matter with me," left the room . her face 
buried in her handkerchief, sobbing, sobbing as 
she went. Lucy would have followed her, but 
Bessie motioned her not to do so. Then, gliding 
noiselessly along the passage, she entered her 



1^ 



GONE. 167 

own room, and Agnes heard the key turned in 
the lock. 

Some hours afterwards, when Heather, as was her 
custom, came to relieve the watcher, Lucy expressed 
her fear that Bessie could not be well. " She cried 
so bitterly," the girl explained. 

Hearing this, Mrs. Dudley went to Bessie's door, 
and quietly turned the handle. 

Contrary to her expectations, the bolt was not 
drawn inside, and she stepped into the apartment. 

In the darkness she stood, holding her breath and 
listening. Bessie was asleep. Heather heard the 
regular respiration of what she considered sound 
slumber, and felt satisfied. 

" I do not imagine she can be ill," Mrs. Dudley 
remarked, on her return to Lucy. *' She is sleeping 
quietly enough now, at all events. Tell me, dear," 
she added, " have you heard any noise at all during 
the night ? I fancied I caught a sound something 
like footsteps crunching on the gravel, and got up 
to see. Arthur said it was all my fancy. Did 
you hear anything ?" 

"No," Lucy replied, " nothing whatever. Bessie 
was downstairs again, you know, leaving out that 



168 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

letter for Alick to take to town ; but she was very 
quiet. I do not think you could have heai'd her." 

*' It was my fancy, I suppose," remarked Heather. 
" I have felt restless and nervous all the night long. 
I was quite glad when four o'clock struck to get up. 
Now, go to bed, Lucy, or you will feel ill for want of 
sleep.'* 

"No likelihood of that," Lucy answered, sup- 
pressing a yawn, however, as she spoke, and went 
off, leaving mother and child alone. 

Sitting there quite alone with her little girl, the 
restlessness of which Heather had complained re- 
turned upon her with double force. She tried to 
read ; she fetched her work-basket, and commenced 
sewing ; she went and stood by the window looking 
out into the darkness, and longed for five o'clock, 
when there would come some sounds of life about the 
house. It was a still, cold morning, pitch dark. 
Not a dog barked . not a leaf stirred. The silence 
was almost insupportable, and Heather felt it to be 
so, as she left the window and returned to Lally's 
side. 

Still, the child slept quietly ; and now Heather s 
thoughts reverted to Bessie. What could be the 



GONE. 169 

matter with the gbl ? Why had she been cryhig 
the previous night ? Why did she so persistently 
ignore Mr. Harcourt's very existence ? How did it 
happen that the time for her marriage seemed no 
nearer now than it had done in the summer ? 

That Mr. Harcourt was a devoted correspondent, 
Heather knew by the evidence of her own eyes. 
Scarcely a morning passed without the post-bag 
bringing a long epistle from him to his affianced 
wife. Bessie's acknowledgments of these epistles 
were despatched at much longer and more un- 
certain intervals ; but then Bessie did not profess to 
be a good correspondent. " She hated letter-writing 
and letter-writers," she openly declared ; so that her 
negligence in this particular proved nothing. Be- 
sides, her time had been much occupied with Lally, 
and altogether 

As she reached this point in her mental argu- 
ment, Mrs. Dudley heard a sound as though a door 
were being softly opened and closed at the end of 
the corridor. With that nervous fear upon her, 
which seems so often the advance courier of some 
disaster, the messenger spurring on to tell us of the 
approach of misfortune, Heather went out into the 



170 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

passage and listened. Yes, there was some one 
moving stealthily and cautiously in the direction of 
the back staircase . a woman, for Mrs. Dudley could 
hear the skirt of her dress brushing against the wall, 
as she stole along. 

It could not be any of the servants, because they 
had no business in that part of the house ; . their 
sleeping-rooms being in the roof, and access to those 
apartments only possible by means of the back 
staircase which opened out of the front kitchen. 

There was a door of communication, however, 
between the long south corridor, where the principal 
bedchambers were situated, and the other portion of 
the house ; and this door Heather now heard close 
softly, as the first had done. 

Satisfied that Bessie must be ill and about to seek 
Mrs. Piggott's apartment, Heather hurried after ; 
but when she came to try to open the door, it 
resisted all her efforts. As a rule, the key remained 
on the side next the main staircase. Now, Heather 
found it had been removed, and the door locked 
from within. Not knowing what all this could 
mean, she went back to Lally's room, took a candle, 
and, descending into the hall, made her way along a 



GONE. 171 

passage which led in the direction of the oflSces. 

Crossing the front kitchen, she opened the door 

which led towards the back staircase, and there on 

the last step stood Priscilla Dobbin. 

" What are you doing? where are you going?" 
asked her mistress. 

" I was coming down to look at the clock, ma'am," 
answered the girl. 

" You have just left Miss Ormson's room . is she 
ill ?" 

"No, ma'am, not as I know of. She told me 
last night to go to her room when I got up for a 
letter for Master Alick to take to town." 

*' And where is that letter ?" asked Mrs. Dudley. 

"On the hall table, ma'am, I believe. Miss 
Bessie left it there herself after she had wrote it" 

" What made you lock the passage-door after you?" 

" Miss Bessie told me to, ma'am." 

Heather could not understand the matter at all. 
She did not believe that there was a sentence of 
truth in the girl's statement ; but what her object 
might be in speaking falsely, she was unable to 
imagine. 

" Miss Ormson is awake, then ?" she said, at length. 



172 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"Yes, ma'am . ^leastways she was when I saw 
her." 

Without another word, Mrs. Dudley turned to 
regain the hall. She wanted to see if the letter 
were really on the slab, and then she meant to go to 
Bessie's room and ascertain whether or not Priscilla 
had spoken falsely. 

The whole thing baffled Heather. But for the 
locking of the door, she should have thought nothing 
more about the matter; but what object either 
Bessie or Priscilla could have in thus cutting off 
immediate communication between the two parts of 
the house, she was quite unable to divine. 

There on the slab lay Bessie's letter . a thick 
letter, for Heather lifted and held it in her hand 
for a moment; then she laid it down again, and 
ascended the front staircase, slowly and thoughtfully. 

She had not reached the landing, however, before 
Priscilla was beside her. 

'* Ma'am . Mrs. Dudley," began the girl, " you 
can turn me out of the house this moment, if you 
like. I told you a lie about that letter. I did not 
go to Miss Bessie's room for it. Miss Bessie is 
gone." 



GONE. 173 

" Gone !" Heather looked at the girl, and blankly 
repeated that word after her. 

" Yes, ma'am ; and there is a letter for you, 
please, on the toilet-table," at which point in her 
confession Prissy began to whimper. 

" Don't do that," said Mrs. Dudley, almost 
angrily. "Go on before me to Miss Ormson's 
room, and be quiet." 

Thus ordered, Priscilla walked along the passage, 
and, opening the door of Bessie's bedchamber, stood 
aside to allow Mrs. Dudley to enter. 

Heather, as she did so, glanced hurriedly round 
the apartment. There was no disorder, no confu- 
sion ; everything looked precisely as it might have 
done, had Bessie been there . only Bessie was not 
there. 

Heather went up to the bed, and put her hand on 
the sheet. It felt warm, and she turned to Priscilla, 
saying, interrogatively . 

" She has only just left the house ?" 

'' She went at one o'clock, ma'am." 

" Impossible ! I have been in the room myself 
since four o'clock, and she was sleeping then." 

" That was me, ma'am ; and I was not asleep. I 



174 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

heard you come in . I never went to sleep all night. 
I'd have given anything, ma'am, if I might have 
told you. I never was so miserable in all my life . 
and poor Miss Bessie, she were a-crying dreadful." 
*' Where is she gone ?" 
" I don't know, ma'am." 
'* Who is she gone with ?'* 
" That gentleman as is so sweet on her." 
" You don't mean Mr. Harcourt ?" 
" Lor' ! no, ma'am ; that other what she came back 
from church to meet yesterday." 

Utterly bewildered. Heather stood in the middle 
of the room, cx)nfounded and almost stupified. 

Had any one come to her and said Bessie was 
dead, she could not have felt more shocked . more 
grieved. Under her eyes this thing had been going 
on . this deception from day to day, and from week 
to week . and she had never even suspected its 
existence. Her very servant had been cognisant 
of it ; this girl, this false, cheating, untruthful Prissy 
Dobbin, bad been persuaded by Bessie to conceal the 
mischief until it was too late to repair it. And 
Bessie, too, that bright, gay, affectionate creature, 
was but a hypocrite and a deceiver ! Mrs. Dudley 



GONE. 175 

felt this to be the last drop in the cup, and, coverixig 
her face, wept bitterly. 

" Don't ee, ma'am," implored Priscilla, '* don't 
'ee take on so ! Read what Miss Bessie says, may- 
hap that 'ill tell you where she's gone. The gentle- 
man worships the very ground she treads on ; and 
they would have told you, only something about his 
father, I don't rightly know what, prevented them. 
Miss Bessie prayed and begged him yesterday to 
let her speak to you. He wanted her, right or wrong, 
to go off with him then, but she wouldn't ; she said 
she wouldn't spoil your Christmas Day, not for fifty 
husbands . she did." 

"You were very fond of Miss Bessie?" Mrs. 
Dudley said, inquiringly. 

" Main fond, ma'am," answered the girl. " I took 
to her from the day she talked to me in the field, 
and give I that harf a crown." 

" Then don't go chattering about her having gone 
off with any one. Prissy. If you are fond of her, 
show your fondness by keeping silence." 

And with that, Mrs. Dudley, first bidding Prissy 
stay with Lally, in case she wakened, went and 
roused her husband. 



176 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"Arthur," she said, "Bessie is off . she has 
eloped. What are we to do ?" 

"Bessie eloped . Bessie off! Heather, you must 
be dreaming !" 

"I wish I were," answered his wife. "Is there 
any use in trying to follow her, do you think ?" 

"There might be, if we knew where she was 
gone," Arthur replied. "What does she say in 
her letter?" he added, noticing the paper in his 
wife's hand. 

" She does not give a clue," said Heather. " She 
merely states she is gone to be married, and that, 
whenever her husband allows her, she will write 
again." 

" Better call up Alick," suggested Arthur ; and, 
accordingly, Alick was called. 

" They have four hours' start," said the young 
man, practically, when he had heard Heather s story, 
" and their plans must have been well laid. I will 
follow if you like, but I think it is useless. They 
are in London by this time." 

" What makes you think they have gone to 
London ?" asked Heather. 

" Because it is the only place in which to be lost," 



GONE. 177 

answered the youth. And the three stood and 
looked at each other for a few moments in utter 
silence. 

A great blow had suddenly fallen on them, and 
they felt stunned with its force. 

That such a thing should have happened there ! 
that they should all have bidden each other good- 
night, without a suspicion of coming evil . and that 
this should have come to pass before morning ! 

Heather was the first to speak. 

" And Mr. Harcourt, too . what will he say ?" 

" If he be a wise man, * that he is well rid of 
her,' " answered Arthur. *' She must be a bad girl 
. a bad, false girl." 

"But, oh! so good to Lally," said Heather, 
deprecatingly ; " and I do not think it was of her 
own free will she went now . I do not . I believe 
she was driven to it. Read her letter, Arthur . read 
how she says she tried to like Mr. Harcourt, and 
bow her mother forced her on. If I only knew she 
were married, I could rest satisfied." 

And so husband and wife talked on, while Alick, 
standing by, remained resolutely silent. 

He would tell nothing about it ; he would say 

VOL. II. N 



178 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

nothing concerning the stranger they had met at 
North Kemms; he would not utterly destroy 
Heather's faith, and show her that Bessie had been a 
deceiver from the beginning. His heart was yearn- 
ing after the girl, but he would not speak a word that 
could give a clue as to whom she had eloped with. 

She had prayed him not to tell Heather, and he 
would be faithful to his trust From him Heather 
never should know how false this girl had been . 
this girl with the lovely face, and the sweet, winning 
manners, which had gained her so many friends. 

" The matter should be kept quiet ;" each at- 
tributing diflferent meanings to that expression, 
agreed as to the expediency of this course. Arthur 
said he would go to town with Alick, and take 
Bessie's letter on to her father. 

"Then, Mr. Ormson can do whatever he thinks 
best," said the Squire ; and Heather at once went to 
see that breakfast was got ready for the brothers 
before their departure. 

" I wonder who the devil she can have picked 
up," remarked Squire Dudley, when his wife left the 
room ; " you never saw anybody hanging about the 
p ace, did you, Alick ?" 



GONE. 179 

Very truthfully, Alick answered that he had not ; 
but still in his own soul he felt satisfied Bessie had 
gone off with the stranger, who sat in the same pew 
with them, and restored Miss Ormson's prayer-book 
on that Sunday when he and his cousin walked 
across the fields to North Kemras church, talking 
as they went. 



N 2 



180 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 



The woman who would rule her household well, had 
need to be endowed by Heaven with almost every 
virtue. She should be quick to perceive and slow 
to act ; not given to rash judgments, nor easily moved 
to anger. She should be patient and long-suffering. 
She should remember that she is an absolute auto- 
crat in her small domain, and be merciful accord- 
ingly. Her servants are but after all as children, 
who have no claim to a parent's care and affection. 
She can take the bread out of their mouths, and, if 
they have been happy with her, drive them forth 
from Eden into the cold bleak world which is all 
before them ; she can make or mar their futures ; 
she can be lenient, or she can be harsh. She can 
be cruel . like the servant wlio, going out loosed 




MR. STEWARl's PROPOSAL. 181 

from his lord's presence, seized upon his fellow- 
servant, crying, " Pay rae that thou owest ;" or she 
can have compassion on their infirmities, remem- 
bering that the God of the whole earth has had 
compassion on her. 

She can be hard and exacting, demanding full 
measure and strict change ; she can hold the scales 
steadily, and if there be a feather s weight too little, 
cast them out ; or she may be merciful as her Father 
in Heaven is merciful, and be very patient towards 
those who try her patience, and her temper, and 
her Christianity daily. She can be the model, 
managing, worldly mistress, or she may be the 
mistress which the Lord shall approve when He 
cometh to His kingdom. She can resolve the whole 
question into one of work and wage, or she can go 
further, and strive so to rule herself, and those she 
has under her, that when the long account comes to 
be made up . that account between rich and poor, 
which will never be closed till eternity . the Great 
Judge shall say she has done her feeble best, that 
although only one talent was given unto her, it was 
not buried in the ground, but put out to usury, re- 
turning ample interest 



182 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

So far, this story has been written in vain, if any 
reader have failed to comprehend that Heather 
Dudley was one of those women, " the eyes of whose 
maidens turned unto her;" and it will, therefore, 
readily be conceived, that although many persons 
would have incontinently turned Priscilla Dobbin 
out of the house, and refused to sleep another night 
under the same roof with such a double-faced, artful 
little minx, Mrs. Dudley felt sorry for the 'girl and 
inclined to make allowances. 

She had loved Bessie greatly, and she was but 
young. Her life was all before her, and Heather could 
not reconcile it to her conscience to mar it at the out- 
set. She had her talk with the girl, during the course 
of which Prissy was, after the manner of her class, 
silent, and apparently sulky. Nevertheless, she de- 
parted from the audience-chamber red around the 
nose, watery about her eyes, and generally de- 
pressed in her spirits. 

She had thought Miss Bessie's elopement a fine 
thing till " it came to the bit," thus she expressed 
herself; but when they mutually had that bit between 
their teeth she did not much relish the undertaking. 

" She was to take me as her maid, mum," Pris- 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 183 

cilia informed Heather ; " but he would not let her. 
He said she could send for me afterwards ; but now, 
ma'am, if you'll let me stay with you, I would 
rather. I'll never even think about leaving you 
again." 

This piece of information was imparted some 
weeks subsequently; during the course of those 
weeks, nothing had been heard of or from Bessie. 
Where she was gone, with whom she was gone off, 
remained as great enigmas to the family at the 
Hollow, as they did to her friends in town. From 
Priscilla, indeed. Heather gathered that the cavalier 
was tall, dark, handsome, and liberal ; but this was 
but a poor clue with which to start on a search after 
Bessie, and so no one attempted to follow it. 

She had chosen her own course, and her place 
knew her no more. All m vain. Heather looked for 
a letter each morning . no letter ever came. All in 
vain, Lally fretted after Bessie, and stretched out 
her arms for the pretty cousin who was gone no 
one knew where. Mr. Ormson advertised daily in 
the Times to B . ss . e O n, without ever re- 
ceiving a ghost of a reply. Mr. Harcourt paid 
"private inquiry fees," but still nothing came of all 



< 



184 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

his searching. Mrs. Ormson, figuratively, washed her 
hands of Bessie, and scored her name out of the 
family Bible . ^a volume she never opened except upon 
high and rare occasions ; the poor father watched 
his opportunity, and wrote the name in again, the 
first time Mrs. Ormson left her keys in the door 
of the cupboard where she kept this tell-tale volume 
of dates and ages. Dr. Marsden said he had always 
expected something of the kind, and Heather almost 
began to ^hate this strange man who came in as 
chorus to every misfortune of the family. 

"I knew she never would marry Harcourt," 
affirmed this clever practitioner, the first time he and 
Mrs. Dudley met after the occurrence ; " the fellow 
must have been a fool to believe her." 

" And why did you not think she would marry 
him ?" asked Heather, meekly. 

*'0h! her head was always running on a very 
diflTerent kind of husband to a struggling lawyer ; 
and I only hope it is a husband she has got, and 
not a lover, who will be packing her home to be a 
disgrace and burden to her family some of these fine 
days." 

" I should not think Bessie very likely to return 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 185 

to her family, whether she be married or not," 
Heather answered, a little bitterly. She could not 
help being a trifle short with Dr. Marsden, whose 
first-born was still at Berrie Down, a very thorn in 
the flesh of every member composing the house- 
hold. 

Never out of mischief, never still, always teasing, 
eternally prying about, listening and meddling, 
even Heather at last declared, if she only had the 
money to spare, she would rather pay for Harry's 
education than be tormented with him. 

But there was an end coming to all such torments 
and discomforts . an end which found Heather but 
poorly prepared for its advent ; and the beginning 
of this end was a visit Arthur received on the 2nd 
of January, from a tall, thin, grey-haired, hard- 
featured individual, who sent in his card as . 

" Mr. Allan Stewart " 

"Being at Kerams Park," he stated, after the 
first civilities had been gone through, " I thought 
you would excuse my caUing, and talking over a 
little matter of business with you. It is about that 
house in Lincoln's Inn Fields; you know, Mr. 
Dudley, we cannot purchase it from you. I am 



186 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

very sorry indeed, but such a thing is quite out of 
the question." 

" Why ?' Arthur demanded. 

" Well, in the first place, the position is anything 
but desirable ; and, in the second, the price you ask 
is prohibitory. Besides, what do we want with pur- 
chasing properties? we need only rent offices. It 
would be the merest waste of money for us to do 
otherwise.^' 

"Mr. Black assured me there was not the slight- 
est doubt of the Company purchasing my lease,'^ 
answered Squire Dudley. 

" Yes, because Mr. Black thought the manage- 
ment was going to be left entirely to him," was the 
reply. " Mr. Black now finds he was a little mis- 
taken, and that, being mistaken, he led you astray." 

" He was the originator of the Company, or else 
I have been greatly misinformed," said Arthur, 
defiantly. 

" You have not been misinformed," Mr. Stewart 
answered ; " but the originator of a company does 
not necessarily mean the proprietor." 

Squire Dudley remained silent, digesting this piece 
of knowledge, while Mr. Stewart proceeded . 



MK. Stewart's proposal. 187 

*' We directors are not necessarily his puppets be- 
cause he brought us together. Although he obtained 
our names, and qualified us to act on the board, he 
did not thereby obtain dominion over us, body and 
soul for ever. Evidently, Mr. Dudley, you are 
not a man of business, and you do not understand 
much about commercial matters . indeed, Mr. Black 
implied that fact to me ; therefore, as I happened 
to be staying with Miss Baldwin, I thought I would 
walk over, and have a little friendly conversation 
with you." 

" Do you mean," asked Mr. Dudley, harking back 
to the original question, *' that you absolutely refuse 
to purchase these premises in Lincoln's Inn Fields ?" 

'' That is my meaning," was the reply ; " if you 
press the matter, of course it will be brought before 
the board, Mr. Black, probably, acting as your 
mouthpiece ; but if you take my advice, you will not 
press the point, nor have it brought before the board ; 
for I tell you fairly, the line must be drawn some- 
where, and at that point I mean it to be marked 
broadly." 

" You are not the proprietor of the Company, are 
you ?" asked Arthur. 



188 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" No ; but I am the largest shareholder and 
the most influential man on the board," was the 
reply. 

" And what do you think of the scheme ?" inquired 
Arthur, eagerly. 

*'I think the scheme a good one, if it be not 
swamped ; if the capital be not all jobbed away on 
such purchases, for instance, as this house of yours." 

'' Do you imply that I ," began the Squire ; 

but Mr. Stewart cut across his sentence with . 

" I imply nothing ; all I would suggest is, that 
as at Mr. Black's instance you bought a very 
bad bargain, you should not seek to foist that 
bargain at a profit on your own Company, but 
wait patiently for dividends, and be thankful for 
any profit on your shares the Lord may in due time 
send you." 

**Do you know, sir," asked Arthur, "that my 
money has advertised this Company ? 

"Black said something of the kind," answered 
Mr. Stewart ; " and what he said, I am very sorry 
to hear confirmed by you." 

" I have sold my crops, I have sold my stock, I 
have accepted bills, all on the faith of making my 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 189 

fortune out of this bread affair. Mr. Black declared 
I could get my money back three times over by 
buying from time to time such properties as he 
might advise . shops, mills, and so forth. He as- 
sured me he could and would guarantee the Com- 
pany purchasing them from me on the most favour- 
able terms. He mentioned to me the names of 
several individuals who have all made large fortunes 
in the same way." 

" Yes, I know many men, as you say, who have 
obtained their money by jobbing," was the calm 
answer ; '* but they should not have got fat so soon 
had I been on the direction." 

'* It is rather hard upon me, though, to be made 
your scapegoat," said Arthur. 

"Perhaps so," agreed Mr. Stewart; "but you 
know the innocent often suffer for the guilty. In 
fact, the scapegoat of which you have just spoken 
had not, so far as I am aware, committed any sin 
that should have doomed him to go unto a land not 
inhabited. He was selected impartially by lot, 
and then had to bear the iniquities of the children 
of Israel. You, Mr. Dudley, are chosen by accident 
to bear by proxy Mr. Black's sins of over- appropria- 



190 FAU ABOVE RUBIES. 

tion. He has already had quite as many pickings 
for himself as any company can bear, and we cannot 
now tolerate his beginning to pick for his friends." 

" And your object in coming to tell me all this, 
Mr. Stewart ?" demanded Arthur. 

" Come, he is not quite an idiot," reflected that 
gentleman, while he answered aloud . " My object 
is bona fide ; I want to benefit you and myself also. 
I wish to explain exactly what I will and what I will 
not do. To begin with the last. I will not agree 
to the purchase of those premises in Lincoln's Inn, 
but I shall not oppose the Company renting them 
from year to year ; and, if you like to resign your 
directorship, I will see that you are appointed secre- 
tary at a commencing salary of one thousand pounds 
per annum. 

" What has the secretary to do ?" asked Arthur. 

"Very little, except remain honest," was the 
reply. 

*' And why do you wish me to be secretary ?" 
he further demanded. 

" Because I think we may depend upon you ; 
because I know we could not depend on the secre- 
tary nominated by Mr. Black. In matters of this 



^ 



MR. STEWART'S PROPOSAL. 191 

kind it does not do to stand too much upon cere- 
mony. Am I wrong, Mr. Dudley, in supposing a 
thousand a year would prove an agreeable addition 
to your income ?" 

"I am not aware, sir," answered Arthur, in a 
moment all in a flame with anger, " that I have, in 
the course of our conversation, led you to believe 
I am short of money." 

"There is a diflerence between being short of 
money and desiring more money," answered Mr. 
Stewart, calmly. " I concluded that, if you were a 
perfectly satisfied man, you would have rested con- 
tent among your herds and flocks, and not sought to 
increase your store in the City. I thought I would 
come and talk this aflair over with you before our 
next meeting ; but if my doing so has assumed the 
character of an intrusion, I can only apologise and 
withdraw." 

Having concluded which speech, Mr. Stewart rose 
from his chair, and, bowing to Arthur, would have left 
the room, had his host not entreated him to remain. 

"I am almost mad, I think," said the Squire, 
putting his hand to his forehead. " Excuse me if 
I seemed rude. I do not believe I knew what I was 



192 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

saying. It is a desperate experiment, Mr. Stewart, 

for a man who knows nothing whatever of business 

to allow him'selfto be drawn into it" 

'* Yes," answered the director, coolly ; " and it is 

in the interests of such men that I decline permit- 
ting this Company to be made a job, for the ad- 
vancement and enriching of the few at the expense 
of the many. In my opinion, you have acted foolishly 
in advancing large sums of money to Mr. Black ; 
but it is to Mr. Black you should look for repay- 
ment, not to the shareholders." 

Arthur made no reply. He sat with his head 
bent forward thinking to himself, "what a cursed 
idiot I have been !" This was the first check he 
had met with, and he bore it with proportionate 
impatience. When a man has grown used to dis- 
appointment and reverses ; when he has met with a 
long series of losses and failures ; when his temper 
has become, after a fashion, macadamized, and his 
spirit broken under the wheels of constantly passing 
hearses containing the bodies of his hopes, his 
certainties, his ambitious aspirings ; then the 
sharp pang which was once so impossible to en- 
dure, IS dulled to a kind of quiet aching. The 



MR. STEWART'S PROPOSAL. 193 

pain wears itself out;^ as the montlis and the years go 
by ; and he who once chafed, grows apathetic ; and 
she who formerly wept, now smiles and bears in 
silence. 

But Arthur Dudley's pain was fresh, and it had, 
moreover, come sharply and suddenly upon him. 

He had been stricken unprepared, and, though 
the wound inflicted might not be very severe, still it 
smarted as much as though his life had been placed 
in jeopardy. 

All this Mr. Stewart observed and noted. 

" That man has (for him) played high," he thought, 
**and staked not merely money but hope on the 
game ;" then finding Arthur still resolutely kept 
silence, he proceeded : 

"Mr. Black will altogether make a handsome 
thing out of this Company." 

" Yes, and he promised to go halves with me !" 
interrupted Arthur, hoarsely. 

" Indeed ! and now he would fulfil that promise 
by showing you what to buy, and then recommend- 
ing us to purchase from you ; a very nice way 
of doing business for him, doubtless . very nice 
indeed." 

VOL. II. 



194 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

'^ I wish to God I had never gone into the Com- 
pany at all I" broke out the Squire, weakly and 
passionately ; '^ and I did it on the strength of your 
name, and the names of men like you." 

" That was foolish," said Mr. Stewart ; " if you had 
asked me for advice, I should decidedly have recom- 
mended you to leave the Protector Hour and 
Bread Company, Limited, alone." 

" But you expect to make money out of it," said 
Arthur, obstinately. 

" Yes, but I am also prepared to lose money," 
was the reply ; " which fact constitutes the diflTerence 
between us. If a man be, as I have always been, a 
speculator, he takes the rough with the smooth, the 
failure with the success. I lay out my plans as 
well as I can, but I, at the same time, take my 
chance. Moreover, Mr. Dudley, I can afford to 
wait for success ; you, perhaps, are not quite so 
fortunately situated." 

" Did you come here to insult me ?" asked the 
Squire. 

" No ; on the contrary, I came here to help you, 
if you will permit me to do so. We are not play- 
ing quite a fair game," added the director, with 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 195 

sudden frankness. ''You are showing me your 
hand . I have scarcely given you a sight of mine. 
Suppose, 1 say unreservedly, I also have embarked 
more money in this venture than I should care to 
lose, we should then stand on more equal terms. 
You have advanced money to float the Company ; I 
am a shareholder . a hona-fde shareholder, remem- 
ber . to a large amount ; I do not want our ship to 
go to the bottom, neither do you ; Mr. Black, a 
vevy worthy individual, no doubt, has a knack of 
floating companies, and then sinking them. Now, it 
is not your interest, any more than it is mine, that 
this Company should fail ; we want to see the shares 
at a premium, and to secure regularly-paid and 
satisfactory dividends. There is nothing to prevent 
such a desirable consummation, if the afiairs of the 
Company be only properly managed. Now, if any 
nominee of your friend, Mr. Black, be appointed 
permanent secretary, there is no telling what the 
end of the matter may prove. Therefore, I offer 
you this secretaryship; say the word, and you 
shall have it. We will rent the Lincoln's Imi 
premises from you; there is a good house there 
in which you might reside, and you would then 

02 



196 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

be on the spot to look after your own interests, 
and those cf your fellow-shareholders." 

Arthur wavered: the temptation was great, the 
salary sounded large, but he did not feel inclined 
so readily to turn his back on an old friend. 

" If you had such an opinion of Mr. Black," he 
said, " why did you ever go into this Company with 
him ?' 

"As for that," answered Mr. Stewart, with a 
smile, " there is scarcely an undertaking of the kind 
which has not one b ack sheep at least in its 
ranks. Now, I am quite aware of the nature of 
Mr. Black's weakness, and, you may recollect, it is 
stated to be better to have to do with a devil you 
know, than a devil you do not know. Further, 
Mr. Black is undeniably clever, and he has, equally 
undeniably, got hold of a good thing." 

*' And yet you say, had I consulted you in the 
first instance, you would have advised me to keep 
clear of it !" 

** On the terms . yes," was Mr. Stewart's reply. 
"Had Mr. Black come to you and said, 'Here are 
a couple of hundred shares, paid up, which will 
qualify you to act as a director, let me have your 



MR. stewakt's proposal. 197 

name on our board in exchange/ I should have re^ 
commended you to accept his offer, because, if the 
Company succeeded, there were the shares; if it 
failed, you had no liability ; either way, you would 
have been safe. But when it comes to advancing 
money . even on the best security that Mr. Black 
could offer . the case is materially altered. I should 
not have counselled such a risk as that, Mr. Dudley, 
depend upon it I" 

" Do you think Mr. Black will not repay me, 
then ?" asked Arthur. 

"I do not think Mr. Black can repay you," 
amended Mr. Stewart ; " with the best will in the 
world, I am confident that he has not the means 
of doing so at present His other companies will 
swallow up every available sixpence he can scrape 
together for the next twelvemonth." 

" But I have my shares," said the Squire. 

** True ; but paid-up shares are never of any 
real marketable value, unless all the shares are 
paid up." 

" Why ?" was the next inquiry. 

" Because," explained Mr. Stewart, " no man will 
pay ten pounds for that which he can buy imme- 



198 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

diately for two : as, for instance, if you went on the 
TDarket to-morrow, you would not be so foolish as to 
purchase a paid-up share, in any company, for 
twenty pounds, if you could procure exactly the 
same advantages for five. You could but pay your 
calls, if they were demanded ; you would not rush to 
your bankers and write a cheque for the full sum at 
once. In some prospectuses . in one of Mr. Black's, 
by-the-bye . there is a very delicious paragraph, to 
the efiect, that * although no further calls will be 
made at shorter intervals than three months, and 
then in amounts not exceeding one pound per share, 
still the shareholders may, at any time after allot- 
ment, pay up their shares in full, receiving interest 
on such payments at the rate of six per cent, per 
annum 1' I never met with a man desirous of paying 
up his shares in full, however," finished Mr. Stewart 
with a quiet laugh. 

** Do you mean, then, to tell me that until all the 
shares are paid up, those I have will remain value- 
less T demanded Arthur. 

** Comparatively so," was the reply. 

" Then what good. if I cannot sell my shares, nor 
dispose of my property, and if there be no chance 



MR. Stewart's proposal. 199 

of Mr. Black dividing his profits with tne . ^is this 
Company likely to do to me or mine ? " 

" You will have your dividends, if we are lucky 
enough ever to get any," answered Mr. Stewart; 
'^ and, should you entertain my proposal, I promise 
you the secretaryship also ; that will yield you a 
thousand a year. Perhaps you will consider the 
matter, Mr. Dudley, and let me know your decision 
before Saturday next. You have my address. I 
shall be returning to town to-morrow." 

And the great man rose to go, having, as he felt 
confident, settled the business which had brought 
him down into Hertfordshire. 

Arthur accompanied him to the outer door. 

" What a lovely place you have I" said the di- 
rector, looking round, approvingly. "A spot I 
should covet, if it were twenty miles nearer London/' 

" It is very inaccessible," Arthur agreed. This 
light kind of conversation appeared to him very 
much like the political small talk to which a sur- 
geon will sometimes treat a patient next day after 
an operation. 

'^It would not be exactly convenient for a man 
who wished to be in town every day at eight o'clock," 



200 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

suggested Mr. Stewart ; *^ but it is very charming, 
nevertheless. Good-morning !" And this man, who 
was between seventy and eighty years of age, started 
off to walk back to Kemms Park, as briskly as 
Arthur himself might have done. 

^^Old enough to have given up grubbing after 
money," muttered Arthur, criticizing his viator's 
retreating figure; as though a man ever fancied 
himself old enough to relinquish the occupation of 
his life, so long as he could hold a pen or dictate a 
letter, bring a bill into Parliament, or buy to advan- 
tage on the Stock Exchange. 

Old enough ! Is it not only the young, now-a- 
days, who feel old and cry aloud for rest ; who grow 
weary and tired of the heat and burden of the noon- 
tide? When the back has become used to the 
pack, and the world's collar has ceased to gall, the 
horse, let it be ever so old, will amble along the 
familiar road, without whip or spur to urge him on. 
It is the colts who turn aside, who long for the idle 
days and the green pastures, for the meadows where 
the holiday-folks are making merry, and the silvery 
streams flowing through the midst 



201 



CHAPTER IX. 



A FEW BILLS. 



Hitherto, Squire Dudley had, since his connec- 
tion with Mr. Black, experienced no shortness of 
money. The man who spends two years* income 
in one, does not, as a rule, find the pecuniary shoe 
begin to pinch until he enters on the second twelve- 
month, and realises to himself the truth that it is 
impossible both to spend and to have. 

There is a time of plenty during which the pro- 
digal wastes his substance and takes life easily, and 
then after that comes the season of famine, when 
he is fain to content himself with very roots and 
husks . ^when, having once entertained like a prince, 
he is compelled to expiate his folly in retirement, 
and refresh his spirit with herbs of the field, and 
water from the brook. 



202 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

In Joseph's dream, the seven fat kine preceded 
the seven lean; the same rule was observed also 
in Squire Dudley's less prudent experience, though 
it produced by no means a like result Never, for 
many and many a long year, had Arthur been so 
flush of cash, and so careless about expending it, as 
in the days before Mr. Stewart's friendly visit 

Lightly come, lightly gone, that was the way 
with his money then I It is difficult for a man, such 
as Arthur Dudley, exactly to realise the fact that 
lending his name may eventually prove the hardest 
day's work he ever did in his life ; in truth, it is a 
fact difficult for any one unacquainted with business, 
to understand theoretically. It is but a few strokes 
of the pen, aud the thing is dona Your obliging 
friend, who has been kind enough to draw out the 
document for you, and perhaps even buy the stamp, 
gets the paper discounted. He takes out of it what 
you promised to let him have, and duly hands over 
the remainder. 

The money is then a certainty . the bill, an 
illusion, is gone; your friend will meet it, never 
fear. He tells you not to trouble your head about 
the matter. Like Mr. Black, he will ^^ take a 



A FEW BILLS. 203 

memorandum of it," and that memorandum seems 
to you a perfect security for the genuineness of the 
transaction. 

Time, however, goes by ; the money is spent, the 
bill is coming due ; then it is the first item which 
appears the illusion ; the latter, the certainty. Con- 
cerning wasted sovereigns and mis-spent five-pound 
notes, a useless jeremiade is sung. 

If you had but the past to live over again, you 
think, how differently you would act; meantime, 
however, you cannot live the past over again, and 
the bill is coming due. 

When it does come due, there is only one thing of 
which you may be morally certain, namely, that 
you will have to take it up; that, spite of your 
friend's memorandum and assurances, he will be at 
the last moment disappointed, and so disappoint 
you. 

You have had your cake, or at least a portion of 
that dainty ; you have eaten and digested it ; and 
now comes the time for payment; now come the 
anxious days and sleepless nights ; now begins the 
begging, borrowing, realising ; you have within five 
pounds of the amount required . ^you might as well 



20 ( FAR ABOVE RTSIES. 

not hare a penny; too most scrape Ihoae odier 
hundred shillings together before fire o*clo^ on the 
erening of the day of pr^entatioo, or dse your 
predoos document aJls into the notary^s hands. 
In his hands there is still another short chance for 
yonr credit ; but foil to avail yourself of that, and 
what ensues? 

Mr. Black was die man to hare given every pos- 
nble information on this subject I do not think 
any other human being ever had so many bills re- 
turned to him as he ; it is doubtfol if any one in 
the leDeth and breadth of London had devoted so 
much time to raiang the wind ; whether there ever 
existed any one who, so almc^ invariably, never took 
up his bills at all, or drove up with what he caUed 
the needful to the door of his bank, at the verv 
stroke almost of four, or rushed away to the other 
bank where the bill was lying, or else to the notary's 
in Finch Lane. 

What a reality dishonoured bills may prove, Mr. 
Peter Black had, many a time and oft, personally 
tested, in the pleasant retirement of the Cripplegate 
Hotel 

In the lofty public room of that desirable house 



A FEW BILLS. 205 

of public entertainment, he had frequently made 
vows against paper, and mentally signed the pledge 
of total abstinence against all accommodation bills , 
but vows registered among a number of fellow-vic- 
tims, amid a Babel of strange tongues, or in the 
shady courts and cool corridors that used to be so 
much approved and patronized by former dwellers 
in Whitecross Street ; with visions of angry creditors, 
and an unsympathetic commissioner in perspective, 
are apt to be forgotten when the man is free again 
. free to push his way forward . to trade, and 
struggle, and strive, and get into trouble again, if 
he list. 

A bill was nothing to Mr. Black. He had done 
in bills all his life. Trading, as was his fashion, 
always in advance of his fortune, it will readily be 
believed that " paper" was to him the very soul of 
business . that soul, in fact, which animated what 
would otherwise have been a very dead, stupid, 
helpless sort of body. 

Mr. Black's diary of bills to meet was a literary 
curiosity well worth inspecting, if it were borne at 
the same time in mind that the promoter had not 
sixpenny-worth of real tangible property in the 
world. 



206 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

But he had that which often stands a man in 
much better stead than property : he had faith ; and 
it is not in religious matters only that faith is able 
to remove mountains. 

He believed utterly in himself and in his own 
financial abihties ; by means of this belief, he was 
enabled not merely to remove mountains, but also 
to create them out of molehills; wonderful com- 
panies . endless Limited Liabilities . great works 
were developed from the merest, paltriest, smallest 
businesses that any one could mention. 

And because of his faith he was, conversationally, 
rather a pleasant man with whom to be connected 
in business. Let who else would, sing a poor song, 
he " never said die ;" let who might be cross and 
changeable, faint-hearted and desponding, Mr. Black 
was always the same. 

Always self-reliant, cheery, hopeful, certain of 
success, that sort of man who never meets an ac- 
quaintance with a long face ; who is not affected by 
the weather, who shakes hands just as hearti y if 
the rain be pouring down Heavens hard, as he would 
if it were the finest day in summer ; who considers 
snow a joke, and frost an agreeable change ; who is 



A FEW BILLS. 207 

never down on his luck ; whose barometer, accord- 
ing to his own showing, is always rising ; with whom 
it is, at least, fair weather from January till Decem- 
ber ; who, if he do chance to get a heavy blow, is 
only staggered by it for the moment ; who is not 
eternally complaining about his own health, or his 
wife's health, or the sickness of his ten children, 
or the bad state of trade, or the difficulties of fight- 
ing through, but who always says, with a cheery 
nod . 

^^ Quite well, thank you. Business ? oli, capital ; 
never had such a month . ^more work to do than I 
can get through. Wish I could cut myself up to be 
in a dozen places at once. AH well with you? 
that's right ; good-day, good-day !" 

To a man like this, it may readily be imagined, 
Arthur Dudley proved a perfect mine of wealth . ^a 
true God- send, as he reverently remarked to Mr. 
Bailey Crossenham. 

When first he and Arthur started together in the 
new Company, Mr. Black informed the Brothers 
Crossenham that " he drew it mild with the Squire ;" 
but soon, finding that gentleman believed every 
word he told him, the promoter grew less delicate. 



208 FAR ABOYB STBIKL 

aod would persuade his kinsmmn to accept three or 
fear Inlk for him in the course of a week. 

It was SQch a rare experiaMe for Mr. Black to 
hold thoroughly good paper . patper coDceming 
which no objection could be made, that he feh it 
would be quite a slighting of Fh>Tideiice not to enjonr 
that strange sensation thoroughly. 

To aUow a name like Dudlev's to waste its sweet- 
neas among the Hertfordshire fields, and never 
figure on stamped slips of foolscap in banks and 
^aoount offices, would have seemed to Mr. Black 
the merest quixotism. 

Here was what he had always si^rhed for . a good 
name. Like the individual who would have given 
ten thousand pounds for a good character, because, 
on the strength of that character, he could have 
trebled that sum immediately, Mr. Black conceived 
that one good name must inevitably lead to more. 
Should he suflFer this gift to lie unused . should he 
allow this talent to remain buried in a napkin? 
Never; a thousand times, never. And, accord- 
ingly, he employed Arthur's name as freely as he 
might his own, which is saying a good deal ; and 
Arthur rested satisfied. 



A FEW BILLS* 2Q9 

Would not money turn in after Christmas. Were 
he and Mr. Black not to go shares ? Would those 
thousands not be returning to him from the sale of 
the Lincoln's Inn property ? Was the Company not 
well thought of . well talked about? Had not 
Walter Hope . spite of his aunt's remonstrances . 
added his name to the Direction, without a moment's 
hesitation ? Had he not said to Mrs. Walter Hope,. 
" And the dividends shall be yours, my love P" 
an arrangement which met with that lady's entire 
approval. Had Mr. Douglas Croft not remarked 
that Black was ^^ a sly fox, but a devilish clever 
fellow . a fellow who could float anything, if he 
only took it into his head to do so?' Had he not 
tasted of the sweets of spending money freely . of 
spending without pausing first to consider, "Can I 
afford this expense ?" 

His deeds now went in front, and his prudent 
thoughts lagged slowly behind. After the long 
Lent of fasting and humiliation . of poverty and 
^strict abstinence from all extravagance-^. from all 
worldly pleasures . all social amusements -. there 
suddenly dawned an Easter morning on his life, 
full of brightness and pleasure . a morning when the 

VOL. II. p 



210 FAB ABOE RUBIBS. 

<dd traditions were forgotteD, and a new era was 
begmu 

Mr. Stewart's visit was the first occurrence which 
cast an actual shadow over all this radiam^. Pre- 
viously, light clouds might have swept across the 
skj . ^a few misgivings through his heart . so &r, he 
had neither seen nor heard anything of the money, 
some portion of which he knew, for certain, Mr. 
Black must have received. Neither had letters 
from that gentleman arrived with quite their accus- 
tomed punctuality at Berrie Down. '^Christmas- 
time/' the promoter stated, threw everything, for 
a short period, out of gear, and then ensued 
silence, until on the morning of Mr. Stewarts 
visit came a communication ending with these 
ominous words, . 

'' I am right for the bill due on Saturday, but 
should like to see you about the others." 

About the others! Good Heavens, what con- 
cern were they of Squire Dudley's ? Mr. Black, or 
the bank, or the Company, or somebody, was to take 
them up ; certainly not Arthur. 

The herds and flocks, the crops and Nellie, had 
represented to Squire Dudley tangible property 



A FEW BUjIS, 211 

advanced into the "Protector Bread and Flour 
Company, Limited,'* but his name seemed the very 
vaguest valuable possible, and he had stared at 
first, when Mr. Black suggested using it. 

Now, however, the very vagueness of the 
threatened peril filled his mind with alarm. What 
could Mr. Black want with him ? and what did he 
mean by being "right for that on Saturday?" 
Was he not right for all ? and if he were not, how 
did he expect the sight of Squire Dudley to put 
him so ? 

There was a terrible uncertainty about the matter 
which seemed very frightful to Arthur; and then, 
on the top of this letter . following it almost as 
swiftly as the thunderclap does lightning . came 
Mr. Stewart, and the interview already detailed. 

Altogether, the second day in the new year was 
not one marked with a white stone in Squire 
Dudley's memory, yet it brought, in due time, its 
consolation, for pondering over the matter, Arthur 
discovered two tangible pieces of comfort on which 
to hang his hopes : one, the ofifer of the secretary- 
ship ; the other, Mr. Stewart's own evident belief in 
the ultimate success of the Company. 

p 2 



212 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"So I will run up to town to-morrow and sec 
Black," decided Squire Dudley . ^who had vainly 
striven to catch a glimpse of that gentleman on 
Boxing Day, when he went to inform Mr. Ormson of 
his daughter's misdemeanor . " and I will tell him 
frankly about the secretaryship, so that there may 
be no underhand dealing in the matter, and I can 
see how the place in Lincoln's Inn would suit for a 
residence, and then give Mr. Stewart a decided 
answer." 

Already his opera-box and horses and carriages, 
his grand town residence, his hunters, his hacks, 
his fashionable friends, were dwindling down to 
a thousand a<year and a free house . to work which, 
slight though it might be, was more than he had 
ever thought of previously attempting. Already the 
dream-castle was beginning to fade away, and the 
sober stone-and-mortar building of reality taking 
its place ; but Arthur Dudley resolutely refused to 
see the inevitable change which had commenced 
being wrought. 

Bitten by the mania prevalent amongst those men 
with whom he had latterly freely associated, the 
Squire would not regard the secretaryship as any 



A FEW BILLS. 218 

thing except a useful step onward . a mare trifle 
which would keep him in funds till the Company 
began to pay dividends, and shares rose to some 
enormous premium. 

When a person is making an imaginative fortun^^ 
there can be no possible reason why he should not 
do the thing thoroughly. 

Mentally, it is as easy to nett fifty thousand 
pounds as one . to send shares up to fabulous 
prices as to keep them at par ; in fact, if a man 
once lets his fancy get the reins, he may mount 
to whatever height pleases him and his charioteer 
best 

The only drawback to which proceeding is, that 
if he get a fa 1, he stands a chance of being badly 
injured by it. Even Fancy seldom travels with a 
free ticket . there are expenses incident on a too 
great intimacy with that fair lady. She is apt to 
lead people a good deal astray sometimes, with her 
glancing smiles and her bright bewitching eyes . 
with her sweet tones, which fall so pleasantly on the 
ear . with her seductive words, which ring such 
pleasant changes on the usually prosaic bells of 
Ufe. 



214 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

But Arthur Dudley was not a man to turn back 
into the cold realms of reality when once he had 
basked in the sunshine of prospective succesa Chil- 
dren think that they can keep back the rain-cloud 
by turning their eyes away from that comer of the 
heavens whence the wind is blowing ; and, in like 
manner, Squire Dudley persisted in looking at the 
spot of blue which revealed itself in his sky, and 
resolutely ignoring all the blackness which was 
sweeping up behind. 

" The * Protector ' should pay " . even Mr. Stewart 
had said something to that effect ; and the very first 
thing which met Arthur's delighted gaze, as he 
walked down Gray's Inn Lane from the King's 
Cross Station, was a huge vehicle . ^apparently con- 
structed on the joint models of a police-van and a 
cattle-truck, driven by a man in a quiet livery of 
Orange and green, and guarded by a hanging foot- 
man, decked out in the like complimentary colours 
. ^which vehicle bore on its sides this inscription : . 

"Vis Unita Fortior," 

the motto of the Company, its device being a bundle 
of sticks firmly tied together. 



A FEW BILLS. 215 

Then followed . 

*' Protector " 
FLOUB AND BEEAD COMPANY (LIMITED). 

mOOBFORATED UNDER ACT OF PARLIAMENT, 

For the purpose of Supplying the Public with the 
Best Bread at the Lowest Possible Price. 



If this did not look like business, Arthur won- 
dered what would. If all that varnish and gilding, 
all that lettering and painting, did not indicate suc- 
cess, he was very much out in his calculations. It 
was only the third day for the vans to be out, and 
they had not yet lost their pristine brilliancy. They 
were dean and fresh, as though they had that mo- 
ment come out of the builder's hands . the liveries 
were free from spot or stain . the brass of the harness 
was bright as lacquer . the horses were groomed to 
perfection . the drivers and the men behind both 
looked, in their fine conspicuous clothing, conscious 
and conceited, and, perhaps, a little shamefaced 
besides. 

The London boys cheered the splendid convey- 



216 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

ance, and put, at the same time, various rude ques- 
tions to the individuals in charge* 

The idle, dirty, half-starved looking women who 
are always gathered round the entrance to those 
wretched courts leading out of Gray's Inn Lane, 
stared after the vehicle, and made audible comments 
upon it, which Arthur could hear as he passed by. 

Very well-dressed people also took notice of the 
van, and wondered what the meaning of the motto 
might be. Ladies were especially interested in tliis 
question ; and Arthur longed to stop and tell a few 
of the sweet creatures . not merely the English of 
Vis TJnUa Fortior, but also that he was one of the 
directors in the great Company. 

Walking down Gray's Inn Lane, the Squire cer- 
tainly was a proof of the truth of his own quotation. 
As a master baker, singly, he would have felt very 
much ashamed of his trade, and vexed by any public 
recognition of it. As a master baker, associated 
with other gentlemen and noblemen also bakers, 
Squire Dudley conceived himself a person of import- 
ance, one of a body of philanthropists, who, *' hear- 
ing the cry of the people for bread, pure bread, 
sweet, wholesome, nutritious bread, at a moderate 



A FEW BILLS. . 217 

price, had determined on forming themselves into a 
Company which, under the name of the * Protector,' 
should guard alike the rights of producer and con- 
sumer . ^supply the public with the best bread at the 
lowest remunerative prices . ensure to the share- 
holders a fair and certain return for capital . do 
away with unwholesome, ill-ventilated, badly-con- 
structed, insufficient and uncleanly bakehouses, and 
render the trade wholesome and remunerative to the 
employes connected with it, instead of permitting it 
to remain, as hitherto, a blot on nineteenth century 
civilization . one of the most enervating, pestiferous, 
dangerous trades which could be conceived." . Vide 
Prospectus. 

This is one of the many beauties of a Limited 
Liability Company : a man can have all the excite- 
ment, profit, and pleasure of trade, without any of 
its unpleasantness. 

If he be one of the directors on the board of, 
say **The Private Dwelling Chimney-Sweeping 
Association," he still remains a gentleman. 

In the Bankruptcy Court, indeed, where some 
singular anomalies are still permitted to exist, he 
might be styled a dealer and chapman ; but in West 



218 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

End drawing-rooms his standing is above suspicion. 
He is a wise individual who, despising trade, is still 
not above making use of it ; who, knowing nothing 
of business, would nevertheless go and reap of the 
com which his hand neither planted nor watered ; 
he can do, as Squire Dudley wished to do, ** gather 
where he has not strawed," and march in and out 
of City offices as though the whole of the Lord 
Mayor's kingdom from Ludgate to the Tower, and 
from Moorgate to London Bridge, belonged to him. 

It was with this feeling Arthur Dudley, spite of 
his anxieties, entered the temporary offices in Dow- 
gate Hill, where he was greeted by Mr. Black with 
an uproarious joviality. 

"Well, old fellow, and how are you? Bills 
brought you up express, I see ; thought nothing 
short of them could get me a speedy sight of you. 
I did not want you about them at all, you know, 
really, for I could have sent you the renewals to sign by 
post as easily as not Yes, we must renew. I have 
such a devil of a lot of things on hand at the present 
time . ^good things, but still all crying out for money. 
Well, and how are you ? and your charming lady, and 
my friend Lally, you know ? Poor little cricket ! I 



A FEW BILLS. 219 

was deucedly sorry to hear of her beuig so ill ; and 
oh ! isn't that a business about Ormson's daughter ! 
By Jove I the old man is cut up, and no mistake. 
Mrs. O. takes it better than he . comes the Roman 
matron and that sort of thing; think I liked her 
quite as well before I heard her declaiming against 
the girl. Mrs. Black believes her sister forced 
Bessie to accept Harcourt against her will, and led 
her a nice life at home over it. I always considered 
Mrs. O. a very superior sort of woman; but I 
suppose God who made it is the only one who 
rightly understands female nature. It is an enigma 
to me. Who's she off with, Squire ? Come, it is 
all in the family, and you need not keep the matter 
dark here." 

" I have not the remotest idea," answered Arthur. 
** No one seems able to give the slightest clue. She 
must have been a sly, deep girl to make a flight 
like that She bribed one of the servants, went 
down the back staircase, out across the farmyard, 
away along the field avenue, and so into Berrie 
Down Lane, where her lover, it appears, was 
waiting for her." 

" She was a very pretty girl, Dudley," said Mr. 



1^20 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Black, meditatively, speaking of her beauty already 
in the past tense. 

" I never saw anything so particularly wonderful 
about her," answered Arthur, coolly. 

*' Well, she might not be your style, you know; 
but still she was undeniably pretty. Talking about 
style, by-the-bye, I saw your old flame, Mrs. Croft, 
yesterday. I suppose you are not touchy about a 
fellow speaking his mind concerning her ? You had 
a miss there . such as a man might have of losing 
his life. I'd as lief be married to the devil Croft 
asked me up to dinner, and I don't think that 
madame liked it; at any rate, she made herself 
so confoundedly disagreeable that Croft seemed 
downright ashamed of her. And didn't she nag 
him ! that is enough. lie broke a vase on the 
drawing-room chimney-piece after dinner, and I 
never heard a poor beast so pitched into in all my 
.ife. And before the servants, too! If she had 
said the one-half to me she said to him, I should not 
have minded doing six months for what I would have 
^ven her. A man was telling me a good thing 
about Croft the other day. It appears he had been 
complaining to some of his wife's male relations about 



*^ 



A FEW BILLS. 221 

die way she goes on, and this fellow, some fool of a 
swell, did not seem able to make out what exact 
fault Croft laid to her charge. ' Isn't she pwoper ? 
he drawled out * Proper !' says Croft, in that sharp 
off-hand way of his, 'damnably proper.' Ah, we 
may laugh at it," went on Mr. Black, doubtless 
speaking figuratively, for he was not laughing, and 
not a ghost of a smile could have been detected on 
Arthur's face ; " but it must be the very deuce to be 
tied to a woman like that While she was going on 
at him, blowing him up sky-high, and sweeping about 
in her grand dress, with a crinoline big enough to 
have camped out under, I thought of your wife, 
Squire, and I said to a man this very morning, not 
half-an-hour ago, . 

" Well, Dudley must be a deuced lucky fellow . 
not merely to have missed that woman, but to have 
got the wife he has. There is no sham there . no 
angel one day, and devil the next." 

Arthur cleared his throat. He felt as though he 
were choking ; he wanted to make some withering 
speech in answer to this officious fool, but he was no 
quick of wit nor ready with repartee. 

First, to lose a woman, to be jilted, to have an 



222 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

heiress slip out of his fingers, to be supplanted by a 
wealthier suitor, to be flung back from the height of 
prospective affluence to the dead level of certain 
poverty, and then to be congratulated on the sub- 
ject, and called a lucky fellow ! To hear another 
man who had gmned the prize pitied for his success, 
and hey Arthur, felicitated on having chosen a wife 
who did not suit him in the least. Arthur knew 
Heather did not suit him . that she was not the woman 
he ought to have married. At that moment he felt 
very ungrateful both towards Heaven and the help- 
meet Heaven had sent him^ and he felt further that 
he hated Mr. Black with a perfect hatred, for which 
reason, as he could not think of any specially clever 
or cutting remark that might advantageously be 
uttered, he turned the conversation into a channel 
which he thought must prove disagreeable to Mr. 
Black, and said, . 

" Speaking of Croft, Stewart called on me 
yesterday." 

" Ah, yes," answered the promoter, briskly ; 
" been down staying with his cousin, the Honourable 
Augusta, I hear. That would be a nice suitable 
match, now ; thought it likely he might call. He 



A FEW BILLS. 223 

told you he meant to oppose the purchase of your 
Lincohi's Inn speculation, I suppose?" 

" Your Lincoln's Inn speculation, rather," re- 
torted Arthur, a little indignantly. 

*' Our Lincoln's Inn speculation, then, to meet the 
views of both parties," proposed Mr. Black. " So 
he called to tell you about that, did he ? People's 
ideas of civility differ. I would just as soon call 
on a man to pick his pocket as to inform him I 
meant to overthrow his plans." 

"That was not Mr. Stewart's sole object in 
calling," remarked Arthur. 

*' Oh ! indeed ; and what might his object be, if 
I am not too inquisitive ?" 

" Not at all ; I came up partly on purpose to tell 
you. Guess the nature of the proposal he made.'^ 

"That you should wind up the Company, or try 
to do so ; that he and you and Mr. Raidsford and 
Lord Kemms should start an opposition bakery of 
your own ; that you should purchase Mr. Scrotter^s 
flour-mill, and sell it to the Company ; that you and 
Mr. Stewart should agree to support each other 
through everything. There, I have guessed often 
enough* What i this wonderful proposal whidi he 
made to you yesterday ?" 



224 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

^' Guess again. I would rather that you jumped 
at it yourself." 

** Hang it ! I can't guess what the old humbug 
wanted with you. Did he propose marrying one of 

your sisters ? . or 1 have it !" exclain^ed Mr 

Black ; " he oflFered you the secretaryship ?*' 

" He did." 

" And you accepted it ?" 

" No, I did not : I felt a delicacy " 

" Felt nonsense !" interrupted Mr. Black ; " how 
could you be such a simpleton ? You must be rich to 
throw away a thousand a year for delicacy ! Deuce 
a thing to do except sit before the fire for a certain 
number of hours reading the Times . have clerks 
under you to do everything . read the Times for 
you, if you like ! And a secretaryship to which you 
are appointed through the interest of Allan Stewart ! 
By Jove I it is as good as an annuity. You felt a 
delicacy about interfering with Mr. Crossenham . 
that's the hitch, is it ? Very nice, and proper, and 
gentlemanly indeed . very; but Crossenham, you 
see, is not going to retain the secretaryship . no, 
not if we went down on our knees and prayed him 
to keep it, which I, for one, have no intention of 
doing." 



. A FEW BILLS. 225 

" Why will he not keep it ?" asked Arthur, in 
amazement. 

"Because it don't suit him," was the reply. "He 
has always been used to work, and he don't like 
idling. He says he has no fancy for loafing about, 
with his hands in his pockets, drawing only a poor 
two hundred and fifty a quarter, when there are 
thousands of pounds to be picked up by any one 
willing to look out for chances. Of course, he is 
quite another style of fellow from what you are, 
Dudley. He has been in business all his life ; and 
what really is a very good appointment for you, 
seems almost like shelving him. I thought, as his 
health was not very good, he might be glad of such 
a berth. But no ; he is hungering and thirsting 
after work . work, and no gammon . that is what he 
calls it. Besides, he hates talking to those swells 
who are quite in your way, you know. If Crossenham 
be your only objection, here is pen, ink, and paper . 
write at once to Mr. Stewart, and say you accept his 
off'er." 

" But if I do that, I bind myself not to ask the 
('ompany to purchase my Lincoln's Inn property." 

" And much good it would do if you did ask the 

VOL. II. Q 



226 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Company to purchase it, with Allan Stewart against 
you ! Look here, Dudley. Stewart is going to be 
the god of our board ; so your best plan, if you 
want things to go pretty square, is, thankfully to 
receive all he likes to offer you. My power is gone, 
you know. Whenever he came crowing it over me, 
with his shares, and his influence, and his wealth, 
and his connection, I gave in at once ; so take a 
friend's advice, and accept Did he promise to rent 
the house from you ? That is right. He proposed 
you should live there 1 The very best thing pos- 
sible. Good airy rooms, central situation, near the 
theatres, accessible to everywhere !" 
" And about those bills, Mr. Black ?' 
" Yes, about those bills ! We must renew for a 
few months, till my ventures begin to make me some 
return. A mere matter of form ! I will pay the 
interest, of course, and you shall have back the old 
bills. Here, Collins," cried Mr. Black, opening the 
door between the two offices, "run over the way 
and get me a pound's worth of bill-stamps. Three 
shilling and two shilling . four of each. Look 
sharp now, and don't be the whole day about it. 
While we are * melting ,' you might as well have 



A FEW BILLS. 227 

a few hundreds, might you not, Dudley ? You will 
want some money to carry you over till quarter-day, 
and there will be the expenses connected with moving, 
and so forth. How much ? . say three ! You know 
we can always get more, if you run short." 

" But supposing that you are unable to meet those 
bills ?" ventured Arthur. 

"Why, then, we must renew again," answered 
Mr. Black, cheerily, "and renew, and renew, and 
renew till one or other of us comes into his fortune. 
We cannot be kept out of it for ever," added Mr. 
Black, jocularly. There was no having this man ; 
once afloat with him, no one need ever after expect 
to touch solid land . once launched in the same 
boat, and you had to obey Captain Black, who 
would have laughed while sending one of the crew 
to his death, and kept ^^up the steam" had his 
nearest friend been dying. 

Spite of his good spirits, however, Arthur ventured 
to interrogate him concerning the marketable value 
of paid-up shares, as to which the promoter's opinion 
was almost identical with that of Mr. Stewart. 

" But they are available as security," proceeded 
Mr. Black. " For instance,, if you were pushed for 

Q2 



228 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

money, you could get an advance upon them. They 
are much the same as Berrie Down, you understand, 
tangible property . something to show, if a creditor 
turns crusty, or discount rises too high. We shall, 
all of us, do very well yet ; and I am glad you are 
coming to town. You will never care to go back to 
Hertfordshire afterwards, even when you are worth 
ten thousand a year. Here are the stamps ; that is 
right. Now, Dudley, I must trouble you for a 
moment. Let us first see the amounts, however, of 
those we must renew ;" and Mr. Black, pulling out 
his pocket-book, consulted various memoranda which 
it contained, all having reference to certain of the 
bills coming due as fast as the autumn peaches 
ripen. 

" I may as well give you a cheque for three 
hundred," said Mr. Black ; " no need to be sending 
it down after you ;" and Peter Black forthwith drew 
a cheque for three hundred pounds in favour of 
Arthur Dudley, Esquire, oi order, which document 
he crossed, " Hertford and South Kemms' Banking 
Company." 

Mr. Stewart would have known that he did this in 
order to give himself time to get some of Arthur's 



k 



A FEW BILLS. 229 

acceptances discounted before the cheque came back 
to his bankers ; but Squire Dudley, being less ac- 
quainted with business manceuvres than the great 
director, thought it was all in the ordinary course 
of affairs. 

It did not occur to him either as singular that 
many of the bills he accepted should bear no 
drawer's signature attached . ^an omission Mr. Stewart 
would at once have detected and challenged. . 

Truth was, Mr. Black and the two Crossenhams 
played into each other's hands, thus : the Crossenhams 
would get a bill discounted at their bankers, the 
produce of which Black would then pay into his 
own bank. Then he would get a bill discounted, 
with Crossenhams' name to it as drawer, and hand 
that amount over to Crossenhams. Thus, the bills 
went dancing about like shuttlecocks . they were paid 
away, they were discouoted, they were given as 
security, and nobody but Mr. Black knew for what 
exact sum Arthur had made himself liable. 

"Enough to puzzle Berrie Down," said Mr. Black 
to himself, thoughtfully, as, after Arthur's departure, 
he totted up the amounts attached to the memoranda 
of which mention has previously been made; " enough 



230 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

to puzzle Berrie Down, if the * Protector' come to 
grief; but it shall not do that, not, at any rate, 
until I have had my penn'orths out of it." 

Having arrived at which prudent and honest con- 
clusion, Mr. Black closed his pocket-book, circling it 
for extra security with an india-rubber band. That 
pocket-book, which never left Mr. Black's person ex- 
cept when he was asleep (and then he locked it up in 
a small safe in his dressing-room), contained all the 
present secrets of the promoter's life. 

Had Mr. Stewart only obtained a sight of the 
pages that band kept so tightly together, he might 
reasonably have considered the ultimate success of 
the "Protector Bread and Flour Company, Limited," 
problematical. 



2^1 



CHAPTER X. 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 



The secretaryship was duly accepted, although not 
by letter; Arthur Dudley thought it best to call 
upon Mr. Stewart, and express in person his willing- 
ness to fill up the post offered. 

Probably a secret pride influenced this determi- 
nation. After a fashion, he was going to be the 
man's servant ; but that was no reason why he 
should not return Mr. Stewart's call, and place 
himself on a footing of social equality with him. 

For this reason, also, he did not walk from Dow- 
gate Hill to King's Arm Yard, and take his chance 
of seeing Mr. Stewart at his oBce, as anybody else, 
standing less upon his dignity, might have done ; 
but, at considerable inconvenience, repaired next 
afternoon to the great director's house, where, of 
course, he did not find him. 



232 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

This, however, was a matter of secondary im- 
portance. The Squire had done the proper thing in 
the proper manner, and, having left his card, went 
back to Mr. Black^s abode satisfied. 

The same evening a messenger arrived in Stanley 
Crescent with a note from Mr. Stewart, expressive of 
regret at having missed seeing Mr. Dudley, and beg- 
ging him to breakfast with the writer the following 
morning at ten o'clock. 

"A business fellow," observed Mr. Black, ap- 
provingly, *' and worth such a lot of money ; I 
wonder who will have it when he dies. Croft, 
likely as not. Is there not some scripture about 
people who have much, getting more ?" 

Very heartily Arthur Dudley secretly anathe- 
matised this Croft, who seemed to be now, as he 
thought, for ever under his nose. 

Already he was beginning to have personal 
experience of the truth Mr. Raidsford had men- 
tioned to Lord Kemms . namely, that people always 
meet again ; that, let the circle in which they revolve 
be large or small, still they ultimately come back to 
the point whence they started, and are brought once 
more into contact with the men and the women they 
knew at that period in their career. 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 233 

If he please, a man may, like Arthur Dudley, 
curse the old ties, and strive to break away from 
them ; but, like Arthur Dudley also, he will find 
after the years that there is no severance possible. 

Friends and acquaintances ; those whom we once 
knew well ; those whom we have merely met, crop 
up continually in our path. We come across them 
in unlikely places ; we encounter them in strange 
houses ; we are thrown against them under the most 
singular circumstances. We leave them, as we 
think, behind, and behold, we discover, when the 
years roll by, that they have been travelling also ; 
that, during all the time which seemed to be in- 
creasing the distance between us, we have really 
been traversing gradually converging lines, which 
bring us, after the springs, and the summers, 
and the autumns, and the winters, face to face at 
last 

Here, after years, for instance, was Squire Dudley 
brought into contact once again with the people he 
had known and dwelt among in his earlier manhood ; 
here, also, he was going to breakfast with the 
bachelor of Scotch proclivities, who had so long ago 
influenced the name bestowed upon Heather at her 



234 FAR ABOVE RUBIESL 

baptism.- Once more there was a likelihood of Mrs. 
Dudley reyiving the aasociatioiis of her childhood* 
and meeting with some of the members of her own 
kith and kin. 

The Bells of Lay ford . amongst whom %aTed 
prominently a Sir Wingrave Bell . had long been 
friends of Mr. Allan Stewart 

Scottish people all, come southward, they hung 
together after the goodly manner of their country ; 
and, very probably, had it not been for the unhappy 
quarrel which ended in utter alienation between the 
Rector of Layford, and his cou.in and patron's eldest 
friend and ally, Mr. Stewart would have done well 
for his god-child when she was left an orphan, and 
not relinquished her without a struggle into the 
hands of Mrs. Travers, who had proved herself, 
perhaps, a little unduly anxious to be rid of such 
a trust. 

As it was, when Mr. Bell died, Mr. Stewart 
chanced to be abroad. On his return he casually 
inquired what had become of the daughter, and 
being informed that her aunt had taken the orphan 
to her own home, let the matter drop out of his 
recollection. Of Heather's connection with Arthur 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 235 

Dudley he was completely ignorant, and Arthur 
was not the man to acquaint him with it 

But yet, while the Squire sat opposite to his host 
at breakfast, he was wondering whether in due 
course of time, if the fact did by any chance come 
to Mr. Stewart's knowledge, it might not prove 
beneficial to himself; induce the director to with- 
draw his opposition concerning the purchase of that 
" desirable house in Lincoln's Inn Fields, with yard 
at the back, over which a large room could be built 
(see advertisement), and the right of walking in the 
gardens of the Square." 

Why this last clause always presented itself to 
Arthur Dudley's mind, it would be somewhat diflScult 
to say, since a board of directors is not usually alive 
to the advantages of a " key to the Square ;" but 
still, that it did present itself is unquestionable, and 
he thought about it while Mr. Stewart said he was 
glad to hear his visitor had decided not to press the 
matter on the Company, but to accept the secretary- 
ship, and take up his residence in Lincoln's Inn. 

" A very good situation for a dwelling," finished 
Mr. Stewart, who would as soon have thought of 
living in Lincoln's Inn as he would have thought 



236 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of flying ; '* and a good house too. You are married, 
I presume?" 

Arthur admitted the correctness of Mr. Stewart's 
supposition. 

** That is right ; every man ought to marry," said 
the bachelor. *' Have you any children ?" 

" Two . a boy and girl," said the Squire ; " one 
of them is in very bad health. I do not know what 
her mother will think about bringing her to town." 

" You have not mentioned your intentions, then, 
to Mrs. Dudley ?" said Mr. Stewart, apparently 
surprised. 

" I thought it would be time enough to tell her 
when the matter was settled," answered Arthur. 

" Evidently, then, you will not consider it neces- 
sary to take your wife into your confidence concern- 
ing all the afiairs of our Company ?" suggested the 
director. 

"I do not think women ever understand anything 
of business matters," Arthur replied ; then, noticing 
Mr. Stewart smile, he added, *'and I am positive 
my wife would not wish me to tell her any of the 
afiairs of my principals." 

" I have heard of Mrs, Dudley as a lady of an 
excellent discretion," said Mr. Stewart 



^ 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 237 

" You do not expect me to praise my own wife," 
answered Arthur, deprecating this praise ; and the 
evasion was really rather a clever one for him. If 
he had praised her at all, however, it would simply 
have been as his wife, and because she belonged to 
him, not in her mere capacity as a woman. 

Mr. Stewart felt curious about this Mrs. Dudley, 
whose husband so decidedly refused to speak of her. 
Miss Baldwin had been by no means so reticent. 
She had described Heather to her cousin, and told 
him all about the brothers and sisters who used to 
run wild before the young wife's arrival at Berrie 
Down. Lally also was not left out of the narra- 
tive. " The sweetest little creature in the world," 
the Honourable Augusta declared ; "just the child 
you would love, Mr Stewart." 

" I never saw the child I loved yet," said the old 
bachelor, somewhat incredulously, "and I do not 
think I ever shall." 

Notwithstanding this speech, however, Mr. Stewart 
had been secretly touched by Miss Baldwin's de- 
scription of mother and child, which description 
caused him to form a mental picture of Mrs. Dudley 
that did not exactly frame in the setting Arthur 
now provided for her. 



238 FAR ABOVE RnBIE& 

^' Is this fellow such a weak fool as to be envious 
of his wife," thought the director ; " or is there 
really some flaw in his pearl of which the little 
world of South Kemms is not cognisant ?" Mr. Stewart 
could not understand his companion's domestic rela- 
tions, so he thought he would try him on another 
tack . ^his children. 

" I heard something, when I was at Kemms Park, 
about your little girl having met with an accident," 
he began. 

" Yes, she fell into that mill-pond at the bottom 
of my farm, and was nearly drowned," Arthur 
replied, shortly. 

" She has been very ill since that, though, has 
she not ?* asked Mr. Stewart, who was beffinninsr to 
think his visitor carried his ideas of politeness a little 
too far. 

** Very ill ; but she is now out of danger." 

" Do you think of bringing her up to town ?" 

"That will be a question for her mother to 
decide." 

" Was there ever such a prig before !" thought 
the director ; but he said out loud, " Then you take 
nothing to do with such minor matters ?" 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 239 

" Nothing," answered Arthur, decidedly ; " my 
wife has had a vast amount of anxiety concerning 
the child, and I should not like to interfere ; though, 
I should think," added the Squire, ** that if once we 
could get her up to London and under better medica. 
treatment, she would soon be well again." 

" Why do you not take a doctor down to see 
her ?'' asked Mr. Stewart. 

" The expense," murmured his guest. 

" True, I had forgotten," said the director apolo- 
getically ; but while he meditatively finished his tea, 
he remembered the money Arthur had advanced to 
Mr. Black, and spent uselessly on the piu'chase of 
the house he now proposed occupying. 

'* I presume that, whether or not Mrs. Dudley 
come to town at once, you can enter on the duties 
of your new post immediately ?" Mr. Stewart said, at 
length. 

" Certainly ; if my wife be afraid of leaving home, 
one of my sisters must come up and keep house for 
me. 

" You have sisters, then ?" 

This was enough ; that question speedily loosened 
Arthur's tongue; on that portion of his family 



240 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

history he was never . the chance of speaking being 
given to him . dumb. 

" Yes, he had sisters, but they were not his own, 
they were sisters by a second marriage. His father 
had made a most imprudent choice of a wife without 
money or connection, who brought five children into 
the world that I," said Arthur, "have had to clothe, 
educate, and support That is what has kept me a 
poor man. For thirteen years I have had that 
burden to carry. You cannot wonder at my being 
as I am. One of the boys has now got a situation, 
but he is only earning thirty pounds a year, and that 
will not do much towards keeping him. You per- 
ceive how necessary it is for me to add to my 
income. With my own children growing up, it is 
impossible for me to avoid feeling uneasy." 

" Your sisters will marry ?" suggested Mr. 

Stewart. 

"I do not know who is to marry them," said 

Arthur, ruefully. 

" People do not know generally, until the right 
man comes," said the bachelor, laughing. 

Arthur struck him as being eminently absurd. It 
was long since he had come in contact with a man 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 241 

he more thoroughly despised ; but, all unconscious of 
the impresssion he was producing, Arthur went on 
talking of his grievances, of how badly fortune had 
treated him, and Mr. Stewart encouraged such talk. 
He wanted to know of what stuff his companion was 
made ; and so Arthur proceeded, without the faintest 
idea crossing his mind that he was revealing himself 
all the while in a most unfavourable light ; that there 
was not a speck, or flaw, or weak point, in his most 
weak character, which his host was not examining 
critically and cynically. 

Away from Heather, away from that most beauti- 
fying influence, which made even his faults seem 
errors, to be lightly viewed and tenderly treated for 
the sake of the love she bore him ; away from the 
wife, who was unto him as a crown giving some faint 
semblance of man's royalty to that poor weak brow, 
Arthur stood confessed for what he was . a feeble, im- 
pulsive, wearisome, selfish egotist, who had a quarrel 
with the world, because, while it contained rich 
and poor, and he did not stand amongst the former ; 
who laid the burden of his ill-success on every back 
save his own ; who would not look on the bright 
side of his actual existence, but had sufiered himself 

VOL. II. R 



242 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

to be led away after a will-o'-the-wisp by Mr. 
Black, and who lacked, as Mr. Stewart delicately 
implied to him, sense and energy sufficient to make 
a good thing of his life, and a good income out of 
Berrie Down. 

" You have no rent to pay," said the director ; 
^' it seems to me you might have got a fortune out 
of that lovely place of yours, had you only gone to 
work thoroughly." 

** How ?" asked Arthur, helplessly. 

" How ? why, how do other people make money 
out of land . make money and pay heavy rents into 
the bargain ? Do not think me impertinent, if I say 
I would rather have trusted to the sense and grati- 
tude of Berrie Down Hollow than of Mr. Black." 

Arthur could not help thinking Mr. Stewart not 
merely impertinent but foolish, although he replied, 

" I do not think there is much money to be made 
by farming." 

" Don't you !" said Mr. Stewart. " I fancy I 
have made more money by farming than by any- 
thing else ; but, however, no doubt you know your 
own business best . every man does." 

Arthur imagined he did, at any rate ; nevertheless. 



i 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 243 

he left Mr. Stewart with a certain depression of 
spirit, which was, however, in due time chased away 
by Mr. Black. 

" Come up again 1" said that gentleman. ** No, 
you need not; deuce a bit of necessity for any- 
thing of the kind. Leave all to me. Til see the 
house is ready for you ; Mrs. Black will send in a 
charwoman, and all that sort of thing. I shouldn't 
move even a table from Berrie Down; nothing 
but plate and linea No use breaking up a 
home. You'll want to run down there occa- 
sionally from Saturday till Monday. We'll all 
run down. Should not go to the expense ; you -will 
furnish as cheaply as you could move your sticks. 
Leave all to me. Til not put you to unnecessary 
expense; but you know you must have decent 
furniture about you. Servants ! Oh, better let Mrs. . 
Dudley see to them . whatever messenger we have 
can be made useful as footman also, remember. You'll 
charge him to the Company, as well as coals, gas, 
taxes, and so forth. By Jove ! Dudley, it will be a 
first-rate thing for you. Living free, as one may 
say, and drawing a thousand a year. I'll get the 
painters and paper-hangers in at once, and report 

R 2 



244 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

progress. The place shall be ready for you in a 
fortnight. There, there, no thanks ; tut, tut, man, 
don't make a fuss over such a trifle. Good-bye ! 
Remember me to Mrs. Dudley. Good-bye !'* and, 
amid much waving of hands and excited adieux, the 
train steamed out of the station, and Arthur was off 
for Palinsbridge, while Mr. Black returned to the 
City. 

All the way down Arthur thought how he should 
best break the news to Heather, It seemed to him 
now, that if he had only made a confidante of her 
all along, his way would have proved easier. He 
should now have to tell her the whole from the 
beginning, or at least as much of the whole as he 
ever meant to tell her. How he had listened to the 
voice of the charmer ; how the charmer had given 
him shares in the Protector Bread Company, 
Limited; how he had been offered the secretary- 
ship of that thriving company ; how he thought a 
thousand a year much too good a chance to be re- 
fused; how he had promised Mr. Stewart to enter 
on his duties at once; how there was a house in 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, rented by the Company, which 
they were to inhabit. 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 245 

He would have to tell her all this, but he need 
tell her no more ; he need not add how foolish and 
trustful he had been ; he need make no mention of 
bills or money ; there was no nee ssity for him to 
say anything about the house in Lincoln's Inn, 
which he had purchased. 

As for Berrie Down, to which some one must see, 
could not Mrs. Piggott. take charge of it? Mrs. 
Piggott and Ned. Suppose Ned and Mrs. Piggott 
made a match of it. 

Mrs. Piggott had, indeed, if all accounts were to 
be believed, led her deceased husband such a " devil 
of a life," that he was glad, after three years' patient 
endurance of her temper, to skulk under ground to 
get rid of it ; but then those days lay very far back 
in the woman's life ; she had been forced to struggle 
with the world ; she had buried two children ; she 
had " supped sorrow with the spoon of grief," and 
there are some natures to whom sorrow taken in any 
form proves a very wholesome medicine. 

It had done so in Mrs. Piggott's case ; the years 
had softened her, tamed her spirit, subdued her 
temper. She would have made a very good wife to 
any one wanting an elderly managing woman to 



246 FAB ABOVE KUBIES. 

cook his dinner and keep bis house tidy; a very 
good wife indeed for Ned, who had worshipped his 
lost and lamented Polly . ^a "fine woman," large, 
well-developed, and handsome, whose only fault was 
mildly represented by Ned to have been, that her 
delicate health obliged her to take more gin than 
was always good for her. 

Like Mr. Piggott, Polly had long been slumber- 
ing where gin is not procurable ; and thus Squire 
Dudley's idea concerning a match being got up 
between the pair was. perfectly feasible, and likely, 
so he thought, to meet the views of all parties 
interested in the matter. 

Mrs. Piggott was faithful and trustworthy. So 
also was Mr. Edward Byrne, a gentleman of Irish 
extraction on his father's side . a soft, willing, hard- 
working fellow, full of odd sayings, and possessed of 
unfailing spirits, which kept him continually at high 
pressure, and ready at all times for anything, ** from 
pitch-and-toss to manslaughter." 

Byrne could saddle a horse, and ride it afterwards ; 
harness one or a pair, and drive it or them like- 
wise; he could churn and he would pump; he 
darned his own stockings, and he cobbled his own 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 247 

shoes. He was always up betimes in the morning, 
and could be depended on to see to the feeding of 
the sheep and the foddering of the cattle. To Ned 
was intrusted the key of the oat-bin, and he always 
presided over the brewing of the ale. It was he 
who had the mowers at work by four o'clock in the 
summer's mornings, whilst the grass was still wet 
and heavy with dew ; he who stacked the oats and 
went to market for Squire Dudley. And yet, Ned 
was not proud. Mrs. Piggott objected to young 
men and boys about the house, so he did not disdain 
cleaning the knives and polishing the boots, singing 
to himself all the while like a perfect nightingale, 
or else talking to Mrs. Piggott or the servants, and 
recounting to them tales of a far remote period in 
his life when he was "devil" in a printing-oflSce, 
and had to " cut about " with proof 

Then, Ned had acquired literary tastes and a 
knowledge of minstrelsy, which made him a per- 
fect treasure at harvest-homes, sheep-shearings, and 
such-like. Amongst his class he was considered an 
orator, and it is greatly to be questioned whether 
Mario was ever more warmly applauded than Mr. 
Byrne, when at the festive board he " favoured the 
company " with " Auld Lang Syne." 



248 FAB ABOYB RUBIES. 

A tme diplomatist, he always selected songs 
which would bear a choms, well knowing that the 
true secret of personal popularity is to induce CTery 
one to believe that some portion of that popularity 
is reflected on him or her. 

A man is, as a rule, much more heartily clapped 
when the audience feel they are clapping themselves 
at the same time . clapping their own talents, sen- 
timents, virtues; and Ned's admirers accordingly 
stamped their feet, and hammered on the table with 
their spoons and knives in precise proportion as the 
chorus to Mr. Byrne's melody had been long, loud, 
and discordant 

After leaving the printing-office, which he quitted, 
because, as he stated, the hours kept by authors 
were bad for his constitution, he obtained a situa- 
tion with a lawyer residing in the Temple, whose 
hours proved to be still worse than those affected 
by the authors with whom Ned had previously 
associated. 

" You might get some sleep in the one case, drop 
off in the hall, or have forty winks sitting on the 
stairs, but with Mr. Froom there was rest neither 
day nor night," he said ; so, finding that town habits 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 249 

were not to his mind, that be had to work harder in 
London than " anybody ever was asked to work in the 
country," Ned, then a stunted, pale-faced, sickly lad, 
resolved to cut the undesirable acquaintance of mem- 
bers both of the literary and legal professions, and 
return home to those peaceful shades where, in 
former days, he had digested fat bacon, cheese in 
quantity, and . 

" Home-made bread 
As heavy as lead ;" 

to say nothing of various other delicacies: such as 
batter and Yorkshire puddings, treacle roll -up, 
bubble-and squeak, toad-in-the-hole; harslet-pie, and 
liver-and-crow . fearful combinations, which are all 
as appetising to the agricultural classes as the 
daintiest dishes of a French chef to the upper ten 
thousand. 

Upon this fare, Ned, in the pure country air, 
throve and grew apace, and when, in due time, he 
took service with Major Dudley, of Berrie Down, he 
was a tine, strapping fellow, willing and able to do 
almost anything in the way of farm labour, and not 
above putting his hand to whatever his hand found 
to do. He had been '^ odd aiid useful man " at 



250 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Berrie Down so long back as the memory of Arthur 
Dudley extended. His hair had grown grey from 
the passage of years spent at the Hollow, and not, 
as he facetiously informed young women, from its 
having stayed out too long in the wet one night and 
got mouldy. 

He was faithful and unambitious ; but, neverthe- 
less, he had money to the good in South Kemms 
Bank, . a fact which it is fortunate Mr. Black never 
suspected, or he might, in the course of his wan- 
derings over the farm, and long discourses with 
Ned, have induced him to go in for shares, and 
inoculated man as well as master with a mania for 
speculation. 

Mrs. Piggott, likewise, had saved money. Why 
should the pair not marry, and unite their common 
earnings against the day when more work for either 
would be impossible? Ned would make a good 
husband to any woman ; Mrs. Piggott would see to 
his meals and bis comforts, and, perhaps, not be too 
hard upon him if he did take a pint too much ale 
at any of the rustic gatherings. 

Why should they not marry ? why, at all events, 
should they not be put in charge? That is, if 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 251 

Heather objected, as Arthur feared she would, to 
leaving the girls and Cuthbert at the Hollow ; while 
he, and she, and Lally, and Leonard, went up to 
town. 

"Fact is," was the solemn truth with which 
Squire Dudley came home after his mental excur- 
sion, " I never ought to have married. See how it 
ties a man at the most important crisis of his life !" 

Having arrived at which pleasant conclusion, 
Arthur reached Palinsbridge, where Ned and a 
horse awaited him. 

As he rode homeward he pondered over and over 
how he should best "break the news" to Heather. 
Any one following his train of reflection might have 
thought Mrs. Dudley was a perfect virago, so much 
did her husband dread her reception of the intelli- 
gence that he had accepted the secretaryship, and 
meant, for the future, to reside in London. 

Almost he wished he had asked Mr. Black to 
come down and make the communication for him. 
He knew Heather would not scold, or nag, or 
strive to render him miserable about the matter, but 
he knew also she would feel hurt at his reserve, his 
secrecy, his want of trustfulness. 



252 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Long ago she had asked him not to let them 
drift away one from the other . what had she meant 
by that? Was it possible Heather should ever 
become reserved towards him ? that her love should 
ever grow less ? her devotion ever dwindle and die 
away altogether? Was what his aunt had told him 
at Copt Hall true ? . *' You will not be able to re- 
tain Heather's affection for ever, Arthur, if you give 
her none in return. You have got a wife such as 
no man ever found before ; take care lest you sustain 
a loss such as no man ever can repair." 

What did it mean? Arthur Dudley pulled up 
his horse to a walk, and asked himself this question 
as he entered Berrie Down Lane. 

He had heard men say they never valued a 
mother s love till it could be given to them never more. 
Was this what Miss Hope desired to imply ? Did 
she think Heather delicate? Did she imagine 
there was any fear of her fading away and leaving 
him? What would his life be without Heather? 
Who would ever again bear with him, think for him, 
love him, like the woman whom he now feared to 
face, . whom he now rode slowly on to meet, slowly 
though he knew she was waiting and watching for 
his arrival ? 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 253 

 

What a game of cross-purposes love is altogether ! 
What a stake some people throw down on the board, 
what despairing losers many walk forth again into 
the world ! 

Make your game, gentlemen, make your game, 
it is all a matter of business ! The world must not 
stand still, even though hearts be broken. 

Make your game ! The game is made, and here 
is the result : a great intellect mated to a fool, a 
fond woman mismatched with a weak, or brutal, or 
unloving husband ! 

What, complaining? You played for happiness 
and you have lost. There are other gamblers 
coming forward . pray stand aside. 

Or it is a lottery, and the people come up to 
draw. Only a doll, only an idiot, a shrew, a 
tyrant, a faithless husband, a coquettish wife, a 
plausible pretender: a woman all paint and pad- 
ding, all affectation and extravagance, . a man 
polished enough in his manners, yet coarse and 
repulsive in the ordinary course of every-day do- 
mestic life ! 

And you grumble ? Pray, Sir, and Madam, did 
you not pay your money and take your chance? 



254 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Have you not drawn something out of the matri- 
monial lottery ? It does not suit you ? Oh ! we 
can have no exchanges here ! there are your goods, 
take them. " Here's a lottery in which no man 
draws a blank !" and so forth till the end of time ; 
so forth, while the men and the women go home 
with their purchases, and shrine them or curse them, 
according as the goods suit or their tempers incline. 

What a game of cross-purposes! what a lottery 
of incongruous chances! What a singular thing 
that Arthur and Heather should ever have married 1 
What a still more marvellous affair, that only after 
the years, the possibility should occur to him of 
her affection weakening, of her love decaying 1 

What an awful mistake it is men and women 
alike make, when they imagine that because love 
has been, love will be, always ! 

As though there were any human attachment 
which constant dropping could not wear away ; as 
though the devotion existed which neglect and dis- 
trust, unkindness and coldness, would not ultimately 
alienate 1 

Can the tendrils go on for ever feeling after a 
support which is removed from them ? Will there 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 255 

not come a day when they will either wither away, 
or otherwise turn elsewhere for something around 
which to twine? Was that what Miss Hope 
meant ? or did she only intend to imply that one 
day, when he wanted the love, and the help, and the 
companionship he now spurned, he should stretch 
forth bis hands in vain to meet only vacancy ? 

Strange things often ride beside a man^ keep his 
company in the night watches, walk with him along 
the familiar paths; strange things the ghosts of 
" what has been," the shadows of " what is to be ;" 
and it was most probably a mixture of both these 
phantoms that caused Squire Dudley to spur his 
horse, shying in the moonlight . on . and to push 
forward more rapidly under the elms and the 
beeches, beside the hedge-rows, bare of flower and 
leaf, across the gleaming brook . home. 

Where Heather was waiting for him with the old 
glad look of welcome in her face, with the soft 
pleading tone in her voice, with the half timid 
touch laid on his shoulder, ^'so pleased to see 
him home again," she said ; " so thankful to be 
able to tell him Lally was better . much better, and 
she herself quite rested. Had he been well, and 



256 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

bad he settled his business satis&ctorilT ?** He was 
mated before the fire by this time with his top-coat 
oS, and his feet stretched out towards the warmth. 

He was at home, and the little bustle of arriTal 
over. The ineyitable moment had come at last . 
the moment when, if he ever were to tell his wife of 
the impending change, the communication mpst be 
made. 

And yet, looking round, it did seem hard to break 
up that pleasant home, to leave the &miliar placesw 
and strive to set up the household gods of Berrie 
Down on a strange shrine . in strange niches. 

The shadows which had pursued him up the Lane 
must have entered at the open door and sat down 
beside the Squire, for there was something, not 
merely of dread, but also of regret, in his heart, 
when turning, he said to Heather, . 

" I have news for you." 

" Good news," she said ; *' anything about Bessie?" 

" No, nothing to do with any one but ourselves. 
As for whether my news be good or bad, I cannot 
tell, for that will depend somewhat on how you take 
it. What should you say if I told you I had added 
a thousand a year to our income ?" 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 257 

'' I should say it was almost too good to be true," 
she answered 

" But it is true," he said, " only there is one draw- 
back . we must leave Berrie Down." 

" Leave Berrie Down !" she repeated. 

" I do not mean leave it entirely," he explained ; 
'^ but still, for a considerable part of each year, it 
will be necessary for us to reside in town. We 
shall have a large house there, rent free, and " 

'*' Tell me what it all means, Arthur," she said, 
interrupting his confused sentence. '^ Begin at the 
beginning, and explain it to me. Where is this 
thousand a year coming irom ? Why is it necessary 
we should live in town ?" 

She knelt down beside him as she spoke : knelt 
down, and leaning her elbows on the arm of the 
chair he occupied, looked up in his face, dth those 
lovely, pleading, sad eyes, that had still the brooding 
sorrow in them. 

For the first time, that expression struck Arthur 
painfully ; that expression of all not being happy in 
her life, which it is so bitter a thing to behold in 
the face of any one near and dear to us ; that expres- 
sion of terrible though almost unconscious loneliness, 

VOL. IL 8 



258 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

which is so pit i fl, so pathetic, we can scarcely look 
upon it without tears. 

Once more let me paint her for you as she kneels 
there in the fire-light, . ^let me paint her in the very 
prime of her womanhood, with the rich warm tints 
of her hair contrasting against her clear white skin, 
with her small ears peeping out from below the 
heavy braids which were wreathed round and round 
her head, with her face uplifted towards Arthur, her 
lips parted, her hands clasped, and that pleading 
look in her eyes . that look which had in it some- 
thing of a dumb appeal . of an entreaty, which, 
although the heart could conceive, the tongue 
refused to utter. 

Before he could answer her, Arthur had to turn 
his head away, and fix his eyes on the dancing fire- 
light. Passing through the world's long picture 
gallery, it is oftentimes not the great paintings, not 
the court ceremonials, not the huge sea pieces, not 
the representations of battle-fields, not the important 
portraits and the historical incidents which are 
photographed on our memories, which are stamped 
on our mental retina so indelibly, that through the 
years they are never forgotten. It is not the large 



i 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 259 

finished pictures which we went out to see, which we 
took, perhaps, much notice of at the time, that stay 
with us and remain in our memories longest ; rather 
it is the figure of some beggar child, the little 
glimpse of woodland scenery, the barren bleakness 
of some desolate moor, the hopeless languor of 
a dying man's hand, . these are the trifles which, 
God knows why, we carry away with ua The 
scenes of great account at which we have been 
present, on which we have gazed, in which, per- 
chance, we have been actors, pale and fade away 
from the canvas of our brains; but so long as 
memory remains, there are slight gestures and 
passing expressions which recur to us again and 
again, and which will recur, till life leave us and 
the mould be heaped up over the spot where we lie. 
The tone of a voice, the look in a face, the pres- 
sure of a hand, a chance word spoken in love or in 
anger, a stray sentence in a book . these things stay 
with us when, to our thinking, weightier matters 
are forgotten, when the passions and the sorrows, 
the struggles and the successes of the years departed 
have come to be in our recollections but as a flower 
which has bloomed. a leaf which has faded. 

s 2 



260 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Many a time in the after-days, when all the im- 
portant events and exciting interviews of that period 
of his life had become blurred and indistinct, there 
would rise up before Arthur Dudley's mental sight 
a vision of a woman kneeling beside him in the 
fire-light, of a soft, tender voice entreating him to tell 
her all . of white hands clasped tightly, in mute 
supplication . of eyes uplifted, pleading for a fullef 
confidence, for more perfect faith and love. 

Did he give her any one of the things she thus 
ilently asked for? Ah! it is hard for a man 
who has started on a wrong road to retrace his 
steps ; it is well-nigh impossible for any one who 
has been led on, and on, from less to more, from 
little to much, to go back to the beginning, and 
explain circumstantially how he has gradually be- 
come entangled, deeper and deeper ; how, meaning 
to put forth for only a short sail, he has drifted 
away to lands he never intended visiting . to shores 
where he encountered strange people and formed 
undesirable acquaintances, destined to change the 
whole course of his life, to make a difference in his 
career here, and, it may be . who can tell? . in his 
state hereafter. 



HOW HEATHEK TOOK IT. 261 

So he was not frank, and the chance of a full and 
free understanding between the husband and wife 
ebbed back among the waves, to be restored by them 
no more. 

He told her precisely what he had determined to 
tell : he said he had been offered the secretary- 
ship ; that he considered it too good a proposal to 
refuse, and so he closed with it at once. He was 
eloquent concerning the relief such a salary must 
bring ; he described all the advantages a residence in 
town would ensure ; was fluent about the house in 
Lincoln's Inn Fields . the wide staircase, the lofty 
rooms, the airy situation, the pleasant gardens of 
the Square ; and then he wound up by saying, that 
the only drawback to his perfect happiness and con- 
tentment in the matter, was his fear lest Heather 
should object to living in town . lest, being so much 
attached to Berrie Down, she should dislike leaving 
it. 

As he said this he took courage and turned and 
looked at her, and, behold ! the sad, lonely expres- 
sion was gone, and another, more difficult, perhaps, 
to analyze, had come in its place. 

"Arthur," she answered, and the low, sweet 



262 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

voice . in which, as I wrote once before, there was 
a great virtue of leisure . was broken neither by 
sorrow nor passion, as she spoke, '* I love Berrie 
Down much, but I love you better ; I had not seen 
this place when I married you. You need not be 
afraid of it parting us now." 

And that was all ! The dreaded confession was 
made, and this was how she took it. Could any- 
thing have been quieter, calmer, more satisfac- 
tory ? Yes ; if she had been vexed and angry, 
Arthur could have understood her better. If 
she had cross-questioned him, and uttered re- 
proaches about his not having previously made a 
confidante of her, he would have escaped that sense 
of something being amiss which fell like ice upon 
his heart. 

He could not know what a world of feeling was 
contained in the short sentence she had uttered. 
How should he know ? this man who never took his 
wife in his arms, when she said she loved him better 
than Berrie Down ; nor told how she was more to 
him than houses and lands . than gold and silver ; 
who allowed her to rise from the ground and stand 
looking steadfastly into the fire,' and only marvelled 



HOW HEATHER TOOK IT. 263 

what she could be thinking of . where on earth her 
mind was wandering. 

Already that scene was for both of them a thing 
of the past ; already the lichens and the mosses of 
memory were growing around, and taking the fresh 
bareness off it, destroying the harshness of the cold, 
grey outline. 

But half an hour before, and the news had still to 
be imparted; and now the tidings were told and 
received, and all difficulty was over ; all doubt of 
her concurrence removed. 

Down the gallery of Time already the footsteps of 
the past were echoing, carrying away that scene 
from memory, in order to fling it into the lumber- 
room containing life's unused opportunities. 

It had been with him but a moment before to be 
employed as a shield and a buckler, as a^ safeguard 
from trouble, as a sword against the enemy ; and, 
behold, the man was so blind, so feeble, so incom- 
petent, as to let it slip from his fingers, and glide 
away to be seized and borne off, and recalled no 
more, save in sorrowful memories with unavailing 
regrets. 

For when return to the land is impossible, even 



264 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the most reckless will perceive the extent of the 
danger he has courted, and stretch forth his hands 
despairingly towards that fmr shore which is receding 
from his gaze for ever. 



265 



CHAPTER XI. 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 



The programme of domestic arrangements which 
Arthur Dudley had so ingeniously sketched out, as 
he travelled from London to Palinsbridge, was, like 
many other programmes, destined to undergo much 
revision before being presented to the public. 

In the first place, Mrs. Piggott's prudence, or pos- 
sibly, even her morality, objected to being left alone 
with Ned at Berrie Down in charge of that estab- 
lishment A house without a mistress had always 
been Mrs. Piggott's special ^bhorrence, . a house 
where things, as she said, "ran wild." 

Further, Mrs. Dudley most earnestly desired that 
if her lot were to be cast in town, it should not be 
cast there in company with strange servants ; and, 
after much anxious discussion, it was accordingly 



266 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

agreed that Susan should take Mrs. Piggott's posi- 
tion, and a new housemaid be engaged to fiUJane's 
place, while Prissy and Jane and Mrs. Piggott accom- 
panied the family to London. As an almost necessary 
consequence of this arrangement, it was decided that 
Agnes and Laura should remain at the Hollow ; 
Agnes willingly undertaking to " see to things " as 
much as possible, and write Heather an account of 
the farm proceedings every week. 

Ned, of course, was to take charge of out-door 
matters, as hitherto ; and Lucy and Cuthbert were 
to proceed to town. 

It seemed to Mr. Black, when he heard these 
various decisions, that the whole family must sud- 
denly have taken leave of their senses. 

" Why the deuce you could not have put in a 
care-taker, and sold the cows, and got rid of all the 
poultry, and let that Ned fellow see to the ploughing 
and sowing, passes my comprehension. The girls 
will never get married down there ; why, I don't 
suppose they see a man from one years end to 
another 1" 

" There is one of them coming up, remember," 
said Arthur Dudley, in a tone of apology, as though 



LEAVING BERRDS DOWN. 267 

some excuse were necessary for not putting his 
sisters in the way of matrimonial chances; ''and 
Heather and they settled it, somehow, amongst 
them. It appeared to me rather a good arrange- 
ment" 

** Well, it may be, if you wish to have them on 
your hands for e?er," answered Mr. Black ; at 
which remark Arthur bit his lip. 

He did not like being interfered with, or advised 
overmuch. If he wished his sisters to stay at Berrie 
Down, what business was it of Mr. Black's whether 
they remained there or not ? He had maintained 
them when no other member of the family could or 
would have done so, and he did not see that any 
person had a right to make comments on what he 
did or left undone. 

" You need not look crusty, Squire," proceeded 
Mr. Black ; '' what I said is merely my opinion, and 
you may take it for what it is worth ; only I con- 
sider it to be a confoundedly bad plan to have two 
establishments, and so I tell you. I would shut up 
Berrie Down, and move the whole party, bag and 
baggage, to town. That is what I should do ; but, 
of course, you can do as you like." 



268 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Yes ; and that is what I intend to do : much 
obliged, at the same time, for your kind permission." 

** Hoity-toity !" said Mr. Black, taking off his 
hat, and bowing low as he spoke ; . it was in one of 
the empty rooms of Arthur's house in Lincoln's Inn 
Fields that this conversation occurred, . *' hoity- 
toity ! your most obedient, sir, and humbly beg 
pardon for the liberty." 

In a pet, Arthur turned away, and walking to one 
of the windows, looked out over the Square, while 
Mr. Black regarded him with a smile, in which there 
lurked not merely amusement, but also triumph and 
contempt 

" You're a nice chicken, you are," thus ran the 
promoter's secret thought ; " and you have a sweet 
temper, Mister Squire Dudley ; and you think you 
are able to manage your affairs, though anybody, 
willing to take the trouble, might put a ring through 
your nose, and lead you from here to Jericho. And 
so you intend to do as you like ! It will be as i like 
before we have done with one another, I fancy ; a 
conceited, upsetting ass I" 

But Mr. Black was much too wise a man to allow 
even a word of all this to pass his lips. He had his 



LEAVING BERKIE DOWN. 269 

game still to play; and he would not mar the 
chances of success by any irritated or indiscreet 
remark. 

''Come, Dudley," he said, "we are not going to 
quarrel over trifles, are we ? I meant no offence, 
and am sorry if you have taken any. I have 
knocked about the world too much to be as mealy- 
mouthed as most of your acquaintances, but I should 
be as sorry to vex you, perhaps, as any of them. I 
am glad you like the papers I have chosen ; you 
will find everything in apple-pie order when you 
bring up Mrs. Dudley and the children. So your 
wife is going to try moving Miss Lally ? I am glad 
of it ; I believe she will get well in half the time in 
town." 

That was what Heather trusted also ; she hoped 
that some of the great doctors in London would be 
able to do more for her little girl in a month than 
the general practitioner at Fifield had eflfected in 
five. Every one told her she was doing the wisest 
thing possible in taking Lally to town ! every one 
was so kind and good ! 

Mrs. Poole Seymour sent her carriage to convey 
mother and child to the station, and Mr. Plimpton 



270 FAR ABOVE BUBIES. 

was at Palinsbridge, ready to conduct Lally across 
the bridge, and deposit her safely in the compart- 
ment he had secured for the travellers. 

Miss Baldwin promised to call upon the girls 
*' very often," and said she should not " forget to 
find her way to Lincoln's Inn when in town ;" while 
Mrs. Raidsford came lumbering over in the great 
family chariot, and, not to be outdone in neighbourly 
thoughtfulness and delicate consideration, brought 
Heat^ier a basket of the worst grapes growing in 
the Moorlands conservatory, and offered to lend her 
" one of the footmen," if he could be of any service 
in seeing to her luggage. 

It was fortunate for Heather she had, towards the 
last, so many people to see, so many things to occupy 
and distract her mind, or else that parting from 
Berrie Down, when the spring flowers were budding, 
when the fresh leaves were clothing all the trees, 
when the birds were singing on every branch and 
bough, must almost have broken her heart 

She loved the spring-time . that time which always 
seems more full of hope, and joy, and life, and pro- 
mise than any other period in the year. It had 
been her delight ever since she came to Berrie 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 271 

Down, to watch the buds gradually forming, to peep 
with the children at the nests, where eggs, speckled, 
and blue, and white, and green, were covered by 
birds that rarely took fright at sight of the familiar 
faces ; to her, the lambing season was the pleasantest 
of the four . the long, long summer stretched away 
beyond the spring, and the rich, glowing autumn 
beyond that, and all these good things were to be 
had and enjoyed before the winter, with its leafless 
trees, with its snows and frosts, with its rain and 
storms, came again to Berrie Down. 

To any person passionately fond of the country, of 
its sights, and sounds, and pleasures, the coming of 
spring is as the beginning of a feast, as the sunrise 
on the morning of a bright glad holiday. To Heather, 
this had always been the happiest, most delicious 
time at Berrie Down . these months when the lambs 
commenced to dot the fields, when the daisies perked 
up their faces among the green grass, when the hya- 
cinths began to bud in the dells, when the " sunny 
celandine " opened on the hedge-bank, when the chil- 
dren gathered branches of the crab-apple, when the 
first broods of chickens chipped their shells and 
went chirruping and scratching about the warmest 



272 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

corners of the farm-yard . when the sun really had 
some power, when the fruit-trees were in blossom 
and the lilacs showed for flower, when the tiger- 
lily reared its head in the garden, when every 
hedge-row was clad in its fresh robe of green, and 
there was that nameless scent of spring pervading 
that air . ^that scent with which the summer odours 
vainly strive to compete. 

With a new sense of happiness upon her, with a 
sensuous delight in the soft balmy air, in the fra- 
grance which pervaded the atmosphere, in the sunny 
smile which shone on the face of Nature, in the 
sudden stir which there seemed on every bough, in 
every blade of grass . Heather, I say, when all the 
things I have mentioned came to pass, would stand at 
the open window of the drawing-room, looking down 
over the Hollow, and away to the woods surround- 
ing Kemms' Park, repeating to herself the while . 

" The winter is past .the rain is over and gone . 
the flowers appear on the earth . the time for the 
singing-birds is come . and the voice of the turtle 
is heard in the land." 

And now this time was come, and she had to 
leave it behind. 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 273 

Just when the hawthorn-buds were forming . 
when the chestnut-trees were clothing themselves in 
great masses of foliage, to be relieved presently and 
lighted up with cone after cone of pure white flowers 
. when the laburnums were about loosening their 
golden curls, and the lilacs bethought themselves of 
filling the air with a delicious fragrance . when the 
westeria was hanging out its purple clusters, and the 
pyracanthas at the gate were a perfect sheet of 
bloom . when the white anemone and the starry 
stitchworth dotted the woods . when everything 
was looking its loveliest, and brightest, and purest. 
Heather was compelled to leave the place her heart 
had grown to during the years of her married life. 

For some time previously, Arthur had been resi- 
dent in town ; but Mrs. Dudley, having many pre- 
parations to make, many arrangements to complete, 
remained at Berrie Down, not merely until the spring 
blossoms were come, but also until Lally was suffi- 
ciently recovered to travel. 

The child still kept weakly and delicate ; her once 
tireless limbs now refused to carry her for any long 
period. If she started to run along one of the 
garden walks, she soon returned to her mother with, 

VOL. II. T 



274 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"Carry me, pease . ^legs ache." The colour did 
not return to her cheeks, nor strength to her body, 
i^either did she get plump and soft again, as Heather 
hoped would haye been the case. 

The poor wasted arms, and little white face, and 
thin slight figure, had a pleading pitifulness about 
them, which the child*s eager desire for exercise, 
her unquenched yivacity, made more pathetic still. 

Whatever Lally saw any other creature doing, 
that she desired to essay also. She wanted to run 
after the lambs, and scamper like the dogs, and be 
out over the fields with Cuthbert, and trotting be- 
hind Agnes and Mrs. Piggott, to dairy, and poultry- 
yard, and paddock ; but it was not to be ! The 
spirit was there . strong, restless, excitable as ever ; 
but the body was changed. No more gallops for 
Lally on any one's shoulder . no more charming 
excursions in Ned's wheelbarrow . no more clamber- 
ing up ladders, and lofty thrones on the top of hay- 
stacks and corn-ricks . no more playing at hide-and- 
seek in the hollow . no more running after the ducks, 
and shrill laughter at seeing them take to the water 
in order to escape the pursuit of their tin} persecu- 
tor-^no more searchings after hens that had stolen 




LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 275 

away to lay . no more of these old happinesses for 
Lally. Sickness had caught her one day, when his 
advent was least looked for . caught and put her in 
a cage, which would not pennit her to move far in 
any direction, against the bars of which the little rest- 
less heart fluttered and beat only to its own hurt . a 
cage from which no human hand could release her, 
though loving friends were all around, and kindly 
eyes, often with tears in them, regarded the im- 
patient child. 

Tired . tired . always tired ! Many and many a 
time, when Heather, hearing this plaint, lifted her 
child in her arms, she had to turn aside lest Lally 
should see she was weeping; but one day Lally, 
peeping round, beheld the tears on her mother's 
face, and said . 

" 'Oo crying, ma ? . is it about Lally ? Big, fat' 
lady told Lally she'll get some-sing when she goes 
to London, that will make her better as well. When 
are we going, ma . when ?" 

And lecause her own hopes were identical with 
Lally's words, Mrs. Dudley did not grieve so much 
concerning leaving Berrie Down as might otherwise 
have been the casa As regarded the increase of 

t2 



276 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

income, the prospect of greater pecuniary comfort. 
Heather felt no elation whatever. 

If Arthur were satisfied, she could easily make 
herself satisfied also ; but she had little faith that 
anything in which Mr. Black figured as prime 
mover would ultimately prove advantageous to her 
husband. 

Besides, if a person have half a million a year, he 
can but be happy ; and Heather knew perfectly well 
that the secret of being happy, even on two hundred 
a year, is to be satisfied therewith. 

Arthur had never been contented, and she 
was quite aware that the increase to his income 
could not make him so. She understood her hus- 
band's peculiarities sufficiently by this time to know 
that his wants would only grow with what they 
fed on. 

If Mr. Black's cry were always more capital, 
Arthur's had always been a larger revenue. 

Looking back over her married life with eyes 
from which the glamour of early love was now com- 
pletely cleared away, Heather saw that money 
matters might have been better with them for years 
past, had Arthur only been energetic, and strong, and 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 277 

determined, like other men . had he finished his 
draining instead of leaving it half completed . had 
he turned up his land and laid out money by 
degrees^ as he could spare it^ on that which never 
proves ungrateful for capital wisely expended, for 
care judiciously bestowed. 

She could not be blind to the fact that, as a rule, 
they had bought stock dear and sold it cheap . that 
what Alick had often said, "Arthur is neither 
master nor man : neither master to give orders and 
see them carried out, nor man to obey orders if given 
by anybody else," was true. 

There was no fairy mist hanging before her mental 
vision now. Like Mr. Stewart, she feared the person 
who could not make money at Berrie Down, plainly 
and economically as they had lived for years, would 
not be likely to make or to keep much money else- 
where. Certainly the thousand a year was something 
tangible . a peg on which to hang her faith, had any 
faith been left; but, like most women who have 
passed all the most important years of their lives in 
the country, Heather entertained a perfect horror of 
the expenses of living in town. 

She did not believe one sentence of what Mn 



278 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Black said about an income going as far there as in 
the country. She knew, no one better, how very 
small a money outlay had sufficed to maintain the 
family at Berrie Down comfortably and respectably. 

Those only who have eaten of the fat of their own 
ands, and beheld the wheat growing which is after- 
wards to be ground into flour . who have scarcely 
missed from amongst the rough abundance of all 
farm produce, the poultry and milk, the butter, 
eggs, hams, vegetables, and meat necessary for the 
consumption even of a large family . can tell what a 
very difficult thing it is to cater for an establishment 
in town, where everything, to the country imagina- 
tion, seems sold according to its weight in gold . 
where a housekeeper's hand is never out of her 
pocket from one week's end to another . where it is 
either bills or cash, but, in any case, ultimately 
money . where even a few sprigs of parsley, even a 
bunch of savoury herbs, cannot be procured without 
purchase, without going through the ceremony of 
buying that which, at the old home, grew wild, 
almost, along the sunniest borders . wild, to be had 
for the mere trouble of gathering. 

Of that mongrel country life which eidsts in the 



.\ 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 279 

suburbs of great towns, and which has given rise to 
various sayings concerning home-laid eggs at a 
shilling a-piece, carrots at half-a-guinea the bunch, 
butter half-a-crown a pound, and milk eighteen- 
pence a quart, Heather had no experience. She 
only knew that her father's glebe lands and Arthur's 
farm had enabled their respective families to make 
both ends meet, without pinching in the parlour, or 
an over-strict and painful economy in the kitchen ; 
and she dreaded entering on what was to her an 
utterly untried career . that of managing a town 
establishment, and entering every item, from cream 
to laundry work, in her formerly easily-kept house- 
keeping book. 

All these matters she had discussed, after a 
woman's diffuse fashion, with Agnes and Mrs. 
Piggott; and Agnes and Mrs. Piggott had both 
agreed that much might still be forwarded from 
Berrie Down ; that it would only be Ned's time and 
the pony's to run over to Palinsbridge with a weekly 
hamper for town ; ** and besides, you will be often 
down yourself, I hope. Heather," added Agnes ; but 
Heather shook her head. 

" The expense/' she said, " will be more than I 



280 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

should like to incur frequently. I am afraid, 
although a thousand a year sounds a great deal, 
it will not go very far in London, more especially in 
the style Arthur talks of living." 

" But his shares, you know, Heather ?" suggested 
Agnes, hopefully. 

" Yes, I had forgotten them," was the reply, 
evidently intended to be affirmative of the girl's 
cheerful views, but failing of its purpose, because 
Mrs. Dudley's tone implied that, now she did re- 
member the shares, her spirits were not unduly raised. 

She had heard too many revelations from Mrs. 
Black to be mightily exalted at the idea of being 
even indirectly connected with a company. That 
lady had favoured her with too many descriptions of 
how they had " up and down," " seeing and sawing," 
for Mrs. Dudley's heart to flutter at the prospect of 
wealth suddenly spread out before them. 

" If it was here to-day, it was gone to-morrow," 
Mrs. Black had sadly lamented ; " and, while it was 
here, we had nothing but anxiety ; and when it was 
there, we had a trouble to keep the wolf from the 
door. I am sure, my dear, what I have gone through 
would make a history." 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 281 

Heather Dudley not having the slightest desire to 
go through experiences suflScieutly varied and unplea- 
sant to justify any one compiling a history concerning 
her, would, had the choice been oflFered, decidedly 
have preferred remaining where there was no chance 
of such ups and downs as Mrs. Black mentioned 
occurring in her life. 

The choice, however, not being offered, she had 
at last no alternative left but to bid adieu to Berrie 
Down ; and, accompanied by Miss Hope, who kindly 
came up from Tunbridge Wells to " see the last " 
of her old favourite drive over to Palinsbridge, 
whence she travelled by one of the afternoon trains 
to I^ondon. 

" I told you how it would be," said that Job's 
comforter, Alithea Hope, spinster, as she and Mrs. 
Dudley drove along the pleasant country roads to 
the station . Heather crouched up into one comer of 
Mrs. Seymour's carriage, so that her child might lie 
on the seat with her head resting on her mother's lap 
. " I told you how it would be, if you refused to take 
my advice ; and now I hope you are satisfied at the 
result of your non-interference principle. Sweetness, 
and amiability, and submission, and all that kind of 



282 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

thing, are delightful traits, no doubt, in a wife, but 
they are qualities thrown away on Arthur Dudley . 
and so you will find out some day. The kindest 
thing you could have done to your husband would 
have been to say : 

** ' Now, look here, Arthur : if you are resolved to 
make a fool of yourself, I won't make a fool of 
myself with you. Go to town if you like, hut I stay 
at Berrie Down. If you are determined to take the 
bread out of your children's mouths, I am equally 
resolved we shall not all be left paupers, if I can 
prevent it ; therefore, I mean to remain and manage 
the farm, and whenever you are tired of your shares 
and your companies, and your Blacks and your 
town life, you can come home again.' " 

Heather laughed ; she was a little hysterical about 
leaving Berrie Down and all the kind friends she 
had recently found there, and so even while she 
laughed the tears came into her eyes again. 

The idea of her making such a speech to Arthur ; 
of her taking such a stand and setting her will up 
in open defiance of his ; of her twitting her husband 
with his decision, and prophesying failure for him ! 
Heather could not choose but laugh, and then she 



\ 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 283 

cried ; and then Miss Hope told her she was a soft, 
silly, stupid creature, who had no more business to 
marry Arthur Dudley than Mr. Raidsford had to 
marry that great vulgar illiterate dowdy, who " came 
over in her caravan to see you this morning ; you 
don't want me to speak about Mrs. Raidsford before 
Lally, . is that the meaning of all those signs ? The 
sooner Lally is taught to repeat nothing she hears, 
the better ; the sooner little girls learn their mouths 
and ears were given them to be kept tight shut, the 
more sugar-plums will be bought and popped in 
between their little red lips. Are you attending to 
me, Lally ?" 

" Iss ; but how*s me to eat sugar-plums if I keeps 
mows shut ?^' inquired Miss Hope's pupil. 

" You are to open it at proper times," answered 
her teacher; " but not to repeat what older people 
say before you." 

"Lally don't 'peat," replied the child, wearily. 
" Ma, is it far to London now ? will it be long 
before we are there ? me so tired . me so tired I" 

Whereupon mother and aunt looked at each 
other, and Miss Hope said, . 

" You will send for a doctor soon, Heather ; and 



284 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

do try that delightful man I was speaking to you 
about His manner with children is quite charming : 
wins their little hearts, and makes them feel at 
home with him directly. I am sure, when I went to 
him with Mrs. Walter Hope about her Charlie's 
legs, if he had been the boy's father he could not 
have taken more interest in his case ; said he must 
see him at least once a week, for six months ; took 
the child on his knee, and made himself so pleasant. 
There was only one stupid remark he made, which 
surprised me in so clever a man, namely, that he 
could tell in a moment whose child Charlie was, his 
likeness to his mother being remarkable. I longed 
to ask him where his eyes were, for the boy is a 
Hope, every inch of him, and very like me, . even 
his own father admits that." 

Heather laughed again ; she was evidently in a 
laughing mood, for the slightest thing provoked her 
merriment Perhaps it was a comfort to this '* silly 
goose " to discover that even Miss Hope had her 
weak points, and could be touched through them 
like her neighbours; perhaps the description of 
Charlie's model doctor tickled her fancy ; any way 
she laughed ; and Lally, putting up her little hand, 



k 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 285 

patted her mother's cheek, and smiled a weak, faint 
smile in sympathy, while she asked,. 

*' Ma, was that 'tild as ill as me?" 

" Now I wonder," broke out Miss Hope, " if it 
be a consequence of 'original sin' that children 
always speak bad grammar. Is it the depravity of 
our human nature which always confounds the parts of 
speech, and makes a jumble of the personal pro- 
nouns ? She never heard bad grammar spoken by 
any one belonging to her, and only listen to her 
English ; if you can call such a language as she 
speaks English. You want to know if Charlie was as 
ill as *me,'" added the spinster, directly addressing 
Lally; "yes; and a great deal worse; his legs 
were like a bow, bent out like that;" and Miss 
Hope would have practically demonstrated what 
Charlie's legs were like on Lally's person, but 
that the child resisted any such experiments being 
attempted with her limbs. " Positively, Heather, 
you never saw such a sight as the child was," she 
continued ; '* but Doctor Chickton assured Fannv 
he could make a perfect cure." 

" Will he cure me ?'* asked Lally, egotistical as 
most sick people are. Months of undivided materna 



286 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

solicitude, the devotion of a whole household, the 
visits of ladies vieing one with another who should 
bring Lally inost toys and dainties, had spoiled the 
child a little, perhaps ; or it may be that long illness 
and a close and undivided consideration of her own 
ailments, had produced a certain self-consciousness 
and absorption. In either case, there can be no 
question but that Lally was exceedingly sorry for 
herself, that she felt her case to be a very hard one ; 
and that she was precisely in that state of mind and 
body which might well tire out any love except a 
mother's, any patience save that which seems well- 
nigh inexhaustible. 

On the previous day Leonard and Lucy, and 
Cuthbert, together with Mrs. Piggott and Priscilla 
Dobbin, had journeyed to town, and now Heather 
and her first-bom were bringing up the rear of the 
Dudley domestic array. It was a great point that 
Heather should have nothing to attend to excepting 
Lally, that she should not be troubled with luggage 
or parcels, or anything besides the sick child ; and all 
the otliers being gone before, was a relief to her, so 
as to obviate the necessity for conversation or move- 
ment, or stir or sound, likely to disturb the little girl. 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 287 

Mr. Plimpton, one of the most good-natured men 
who ever existed, saw Mrs. Dudley into her com- 
partment, and impressed the guard with the import- 
ance of permitting no other passengers to intrude 
into it 

" The child is very ill indeed," he explained ; 
which explanation he perhaps made clearer by 
slipping half-a-crown into the man's hand. 

" I declare, if it were not tliat Lady Emily might 
wonder what had become of me, I would run up to 
town with you myself, Mrs. Dudley, and see you 
safe ; but I think the guard will take care that no 
other passengers get in. Good-bye . ^good-bye. 
Miss Lally ; don't quite forget me, though you are 
going to live in London. Have you any message 
for my wife ? she will be certain to inquire whether 
you sent her one." 

" Lally's love give her," said the child, who was 
now all excitement at the bustle, and the noise, and 
the steam, and the number of the people, and the 
general variety, . " Lally's love .and a tiss ;" and 
she kissed the tall gentleman, spite of his bushy 
whiskers and bristling moustache, both articles which 
ordinarily tried her equanimity and temper not a 
little. 



288 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" That child will never be better," was Mr. 
Plimpton's summary of Lally's state on his return 
home. " They may take her where they like, and 
send for whom they like, but she will never be strong 
again. Poor Mrs. Dudley believes it to be a question 
of treatment, but I am confident no treatment will 
ever put the little creature to-rights." 

As for Miss Hope, she drove back to Berrie Down 
** crying like an idiot," so she informed Agnes all 
the way. " Dear me, I wish people would not have 
children," she said ; " that Lally is enough to break 
a person's heart. Why cannot she get strong as 
any other child would? I declare I am out of 
patience with her, month after month, and like a bag 
of bones at the end. And of all things on earth she 
must set up a lamentation for that Bessie, whom she 
ought to have forgotten long ago ; asking her 
mother if they should see her in London, and 
whether she would not be with them always, and 
sing to her at night. As if Heather were not 
vexed enough and sad enough without that ;" and 
Miss Hope tossed aside her bonnet, which Laura 
carried up-stairs, for the spinster was going to stay 
with the girls for a time, to see how they went on 
and managed by themselves. 



LEAVING BERRIE DOWN. 289 

Then came a millennium of *' Christian cookery," 
and of " coffee fit to be swallowed ;" then Miss Hope 
was in her element, . a mistress over two young 
mistresses, who obeyed her implicitly, and allowed 
her to order Susan about as much as she pleased. 

But having one's own way is not always conducive 
to perfect happiness; being monarch of all one's 
surveys does not invariably produce perfect content- 
ment. Even a contest with Mi's. Piggott would occa- 
sionally have served to break the monotony of being 
able to do as she pleased, which Miss Hope at length 
felt to be insupportable ; and every day, and a score 
of times during the course of every day, she repeated 
that Berrie Down was not Berrie Down without 
Heather, who, the guard proving faithful to the 
trust reposed in him, travelled alone to London with 
Lally, and was met at King s Cross by Alick and 
Lucy, the former of whom could only say, *' Well, 
mother, this is a happy change for me," as he helped 
her out of the carriage, and walked beside her 
along the platform, carrying Lally in his arms. 

There was no loneliness about that arrival in the 
great Babylon, even although Arthur could not meet 
his wife ; . for the strong hands which bad smoothed 

VOL. II. U 



290 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

her way, and helped her through many a difficulty 
at Berrie Down, were stretched forth now to guide 
and guard her through the midst of the human 
wilderness whither she had come. 



1- 



, 



291 



CHAPTER XII. 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 



Time went by once more ; not as it had done at 
Berrie Down, smoothly as a calm river gliding noise- 
lessly to the sea, but swiftly and excitedly, splashing 
among the stones, dashing between rocks, rushing 
over slight obstacles, eddying round larger impedi- 
ment43, rapid as a mountain stream speeding to the 
valley, with as great a roar and hurry and excite- 
ment as that wherewith water falls from a vast 
height into the basin it has through the centuries 
worn for itself below. Thus time sped by in 
London, so rapidly, so like an arrow cleaving the 
air, that often Heather's breath was almost taken 
from her by the swiftness and impetuosity of its 
passage. 

And yet the change was not wholly or even 

U 2 



292 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

partially unpleasant. There is a great adaptability 
about some natures which makes the work of trans- 
plantation easy and pleasant to accomplish. Their 
roots are not ungrateful ; move them where you will 
almost, they contrive to extract nourishment from 
the soil, and put forth their leaves, and their flowers, 
and their fruits, in the city, as in the field ; in the 
midst of bricks and mortar, as away in the far 
country where the air is pure and pleasant. 

They take good out of all things, whence good is 
possible to be extracted ; they are willing to sing 
songs in a strange land, and will take down their 
harps and tune them in whatsoever household their 
lot is cast. The man or woman who enjoys one 
pleasure keenly is not likely to be insensible to 
another ; and therefore, although Heather's first love 
was her last, still she made herself very contented in 
London . was amused with the excitement and the 
variety that surrounded her ; went to concerts and 
theatres with all the pleasure a young girl might 
have evinced, and conducted herself, on the whole, 
not merely to the satisfaction of her husband, but 
also to that of Mr. Black. 

Who was now a power not to be despised, a man 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 293 

worth ever so much money, and likely to be worth 
ever so much more, a man engaged in floating fresh 
companies, and successful in obtaining grants and 
concessions, and first refusals, and early information 
to an extent which it would be quite outside the 
province of this story to explain more fully. 

He had bought a splendid house out at Ealing, 
and was fitting it up regardless of expense. In 
Stanley Crescent he gave the most wonderful parties 
that it had ever entered into Mrs. Dudley's imagina- 
tion to conceive could be given by any one not pos- 
sessed of a ducal revenue. She had thought the 
furniture in Lincoln's Inn Fields far and away more 
expensive than any Mr. Black should have per- 
suaded Arthur into purchasing, but the promoter 
assured her it was " all right ; upon his sacred word 
of honour, it had not cost a sixpence more than 
Dudley was perfectly justified in spending." And 
when she beheld Adamant House, as Mr. Black's 
new house at Ealing was happily called, she thought 
if one of the chiefs of the Company could afibrd such 
magnificence, their own, by comparison modest 
establishment, could not be considered " over-tim- 
bered," to quote from the promoter's vocabulary over 
again. 



294 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

From room to room she walked, dazzled and 
bewildered, and Mr. Black walked beside, enjoying 
her astonishment, and kindly acting as cicerone to 
her inexperienced country understanding. 

- Now, is not this better than grubbing on T he 
triumphantly inquired, when, seated in his carriage, 
they were driving back to Lincoln's Inn. " This 
is what a man can do who is not afraid, who feels 
his own strength, and is sure of being able to keep 
his feet under him. Ay, and by Jove, Dudley shall do 
as well yet as I have done 1 He deserves to do well, 
and so do you, Mrs. Dudley ; for a more sensible 
woman, and one less under the dominion of preju- 
dice, I never met. Many a wife would have striven 
to keep Dudley back . to dissuade him from coming 
to London, but you were too wise to attempt such 
interference, and therefore I say you deserve to 
succeed, and to have every bit as fine a carriage as 
this to bowl about in.*' 

Which termination struck Heather as being so 
intensely ludicrous that she laughed outright, laughed 
even while she thought gravely enough that, had 
her interference been likely to produce the slightest 
good result, she would never have refrained from 




NOT QUITE SATISFIED. ?95 

attempting it. This little explanation, however, 
being quite unnecessary to offer to Mr. Black, she 
took his compliment as though she deserved it 
every word, and laughed while the promoter thought, 
in his own elegant language, '^ that he had got to 
the blind side of Mrs. Dudley also, and would be 
shortly able to wind her round his finger as he had 
done the Squire." 

In those early days, Arthur Dudley certainly 
proved himself to be as foolish and confiding a 
gentleman as any rogue need have desired to meet 
with. 

Although he saw the grand house at Ealing, 
although every morning Mr. Black, en route to the 
City, thundered up to the door of the Protector 
Company's offices in his carriage and pair, and 
swaggered and blustered about the place as though 
the clerks, and the secretary, and the cashier, and 
the whole concern, in fact, were his own personal 
and exclusive property, still Arthur never insisted 
on a settlement of their accounts, never objected to 
renew bills, never made any difficulty about accept- 
ing new ones. He believed implicitly every sen- 
tence Mr. Black told him, and had much greater 



296 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

faith in the promoter's genius than in that of his 
own especial principal, Mr. Stewart, who, having 
put in a secretary and cashier of his own cboosing, 
now rarely came near the office excepting on special 
board days, and when he paid formal visits to 
Mrs. Dudley, who always received him with the un- 
comfortable feeling, that if he knew who she really 
was, his calls would be fewer and shorter still. 

But at length there came a certain coolness 
between the promoter and the secretary, which 
commenced in this wise : . 

"Now I tell you what it is, Dudley," said Mr. 
Black, one day when, for the third time, his kins- 
man's renewals had been required and effected ; " I 
tell you what it is, . this paper of yours has been 
through the fire often enough, it will never do to 
run it on till it gets scorched. You don't know 
what I mean, I see, but it is just this : a girl may 
walk out with a man once, and people think nothing 
about it . they may have met by accident, no con- 
sequence . but if she goes on walking, talk begins, 
there is some game up. Now, a man's credit 
is much in the same position. He may renew 
once or twice, and nobody thinks anything str^uage 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 297 

of his doing so ; if he continue renewing, however, 
his name gets blown upon, and banks begin . 
especially if he be in no business . to look askance 
on his paper. That is your position at the pre- 
sent time; you must not ask for more discount, 
or, at least, if you do, you will not get it I 
have done my best for you this time, and so has 
Crossenham, but I am greatly afraid we shall not 
be able to get you passed agaia'* 

" Then I suppose you will take up the bills next 
time?" suggested Arthur. 

" I have no objection to taking up those that I 
have had value for," answered Mr. Black, a little 
astonished, perhaps, at Arthur's so speedily dis- 
covering the weak point in his armour ; " but what 
are you to do with yours ? ,TJiat is the important 
part of the business, is it not?" 

"I do not know,*' Arthur replied; "I should 
have supposed one part of it to be about as impor- 
tant as the other." 

" Well, you would have supposed wrong, then," 
retorted Mr. Black ; " because, though I am deucedly 
short, and shall be short for the next twelvemonth, 
still I could make a pinch of meeting my bills; 



298 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

but how you are to take up yours, until the shares 
become marketable, I confess puzzles me to imagine 
. unless, indeed, you decide to raise a few thou- 
sands on Berrie Down." 

" A few thousands !" repeated Arthur, in amaze- 
ment^ " a few thousands 1 Why, my bills altogether 
cannot amount to more than a few hundreds !" 

" Don't they, by Jove 1" said Mr. Black, coolly. 
"Just run your eye over that little list . there is 
not sixpence of mine among it, . and you will soon 
change your opinion. You have had a lot of money, 
one time and another. Then you bought this place ; 
then there is the discount" 

''I thought you were going to pay that?" Arthur 
interrupted. 

" On those which were drawn for my accommo- 
dation, of course," replied Mr. Black. " I am now 
talking of yours. Then there was the doing up of 
this house " 

"You told me the Company would put it in 
proper order for me to live in," once again inter- 
posed Mr. Dudley. 

" So they would, had it been for any other person 
excepting the owner of the house," answered Mr. 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 299 

Black. " I had, as I told you, to waive that point. 
I wrote you all about it after you were up at the 
beginning of the year." 

" Indeed, you are mistaken," said Arthur ; " you 
never wrote a syllable to me on the subject !" 

"All I can say is, then, that I either wrote or 
intended to write," answered Mr. Black ; " but I 
had such a deuce of a lot of things to attend to 
about that time, your letter may have slipped my 
memory. However, that's nothing to do with what 
we are talking of now. If you will consider the 
affair, it was absurd to expect the Company both to 
pay you rent and to paint and paper your house. 
They could not do it. I forgot about its being your 
own property . about your, in fact, being landlord 
and our being tenants, till you were back at Berrie 
Down. We pay you a very good rent, so you must 
not be dissatisfied. Then, you see, there is the 
fiirniture." 

" Good Heavens!" exclaimed Arthur, "you never 
mean to say that the furniture we have in this house 
cost twelve hundred and seventy -eight pounds? 
Where could twelve hundred and seventy-eight 
pounds worth be put ?" 



300 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"My dear fellow, how you talk!" said Mr. Black, 
with a smile of infinite superiority, " why, you might 
put double the money up in a comer and scarcely 
see it ! Most economical I call the whole arrange- 
ment. You have a drawing-room fit to ask anybody 
into, a grand trichord thingumygig of Erard's, 
good solid chairs and tables, every room fully car- 
peted, dinner and dessert services complete, glasses 
large enough for Buckingham Palace, bed-chambers 
that you need not mind putting a duke to sleep in 
. all for twelve hundred odd pounds !" 

" But that is more than a year's income," Arthur 
persisted. 

" I beg your pardon . taking rent and everything, 
it is not nearly a year's income ; but, even if it were, 
the man who can rig a house up like this for a twelve 
months' pay, is a very fortunate fellow. I told you, 
I would not run you to a farthing's unnecessary 
expense, and neither I did. In your position here, 
in London, it would not do for you to have the same 
old-fashioned curiosities that served your purpose 
very well at Berrie Down ; besides, the money is 
not lost, there is the furniture . well kept, it would 
fetch its cost any day by auction ; now tot up those 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 301 

items, and let us see the sum total. Yes ; that is 
just what I made it, running through the account 
roughly . four thousand six hundred and eleven 
pounds, seventeen shiUings and nine pence." 

" Mr. Black ! I never had that sum of money," 
said Arthur, excitedly. 

" If you had not money, you had goods," answered 
Mr. Black ; '^ but you have had a smartish sum of 
money too. The pace you have gone at the last 
twelvemonth has not been a slow one. Those 
dinners you gave . and the money you spent 
town " 

" But you said the Company would pay all that." 

*' So it has ; you have your shares and your 
salary, and your good rent for these premises. I 
never meant direct payment. The idea is absurd. 
How would an entry like this sound : 

" '^Dinner at the Wellington, to six desirable 
City men,' or * Treating Cadger s managing clerk to 
the theatre, with supper after,' or * Stall tickets to 
the Misses Smithers,' or * Half a sov. to Jenkins' 
footman I' Just bring the thing home, Dudley; 
think how ridiculous it would sound, and don't be 
unreasonable. You have had your penn'orths, and 



302 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

you will have more . besides, it really is this bouse 
and furniture, neither of which is likely to run 
away, that has walked into the money. Think over 
the matter, will you ? any time during the course of 
the next two months, and let me know what you 
decide;" and with that, the promoter was airily 
taking himself out of the room, when ''Black!" 
sharply spoken by his companion, arrested his 
departure. 

" I never had this money," Mr. Dudley repeated. 
" I never could have had it ; where has it gone . 
what has been done with it ?" 

" As for that, Dudley," was the reply . " take my 
advice, and never waste your time inquiring after 
spent money. Enough for you, or any man, to 
know that it has gone . to the tomb of all those 
people one hears about. No use trying to hold a 
post-mortem examination on the body of a defunct 
ten-pound note. For the rest, you both could and 
did have all the sums I have debited you with ; they 
are regularly entered on their dates of payment in 
my books. First day you are down in the City, 
call in and check them off. I'd rather you would 
do so . more satisfactory for us both." 



NOT QUITE SATISFIED. 303 

And with this Parthian shot, Mr. Black said 
"Good-day," and shut the office-door after him, 
leaving Arthur far too much perplexed and bewil- 
dered to consider that a lie can be written as well 
as spoken, any day in the year, and that the mere 
fact of an entry to his debit being made on such 
and such a date, did not by any means of necessity 
prove that such debt had ever been incurred. 



END OP VOL. II. 
CHAPTER I. 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 



Whether the moneys, with a memorandum of 
which the promoter so obligingly furnished him, 
I'l had ever come into his hands or not, Arthur Dudley 
still felt a certain sense of having been cheated . 
of having been made the cat's-paw wherewith Mr. 
Black's chestnuts were drawn out of the fire. He 
knew, although to the letter Mr. Black's statements 
might be correct, still that in the spirit he had 
deceived him grossly. 

He was perfectly well aware the meaning con- 
veyed to him by the Company "paying all," was 
that he, Arthur Dudley, should never have to meet 

VOL. IIL B 



2 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

a single bill, nor be a penny the worse for the money 
he had advanced to float the Protector. 

Bitterly now he remembered Nellie and his stock 
. the latter sold at a considerable sacrifice. The 
young bullocks and the fat beeves, the flocks of 
sheep, and the lambs which ought to have been kept 
over the winter, appeared again, and formed a sad 
procession before his mind's eye. Hay parted with 
before the price rose at the turn of the year ; wheat 
threshed ofl^ and sent to market, when the markets 
were falling instead of rising ; straw disposed of at 
rates which scarcely left a margin of profit, after 
deducting cartage and expenses . these things re- 
curred to the Squire's memory, and roused fresh 
anger in his heart against the man who had led him 
so grievously astray. 

Now he recollected Mr. Stewart's prophetic words, 
and cursed that gentleman's dear-sightedness as he 
did so. Now he recalled those sentences.*' I am 
prepared to lose, and you are not ;" " I can aflbrd 
to wait; you, perhaps, are difierently situated;" and 
they seemed to make his diflSculty clear in a 
moment. " He was not prepared to lose . he was 
not able to wait." He had stretched his arm out 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 6 

farther than he could draw it back ; to lose, with 
him meant ruin; to wait, meant anxiety and distress 
unutterable. 

What should he do? Looking back over the 
events of the previous twelve months, Squire Dudley 
lamented his own credulity and anathematized Mr. 
Black. He did not regret joining the Protector, or 
accepting the secretaryship, or leaving Berrie Down, 
but he bit his nails and drummed upon the table, 
and then, rising, kicked his chair over, and walked 
up and down the room, while he called himself all 
the names imaginable for having accepted bills and 
spent money, and bought the house in Lincoln's 
Lin Fields. 

He had been eager to buy that house the moment 
Mr. Black said it was in the market He would 
scarcely take time to look over the premises before 
closing with the owner, so fearful was he of another 
purchaser forestalling him ; but he forgot all this 
now, and worked himself up into the belief that the 
promoter had given him no rest till the deposit was 
paid and the deeds were signed. 

He had thought himself so clever, and, behold, 
another hand stretched out beyond his, secured the 

B 2 



4 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

prize. He had got nothing but a thousand a year 
and his shares, and he had to work for his thousand 
a year, do a vast amount more than "read the 
Times^ and talk to people." He had to write 
letters, at least dictate them, or else put down the 
heads which were to be written, and then see that 
his clerk filled them in properly, which the clerk 
never did sufficiently well to satisfy Arthur, who, 
on the whole, declared he found it easier to take 
the correspondence himself, than " to try to hammer 
the sense of what he wanted conveyed into any 
other person's stupid head.** 

He had to be at the office for a certain number 
of hours every day, and to see and discourse with 
hundreds of " perfect idiots" . shareholders . who, it 
is only fair to add, went away with the impression 
that Mr. Dudley was far too fine a gentleman to 
understand anything of the affairs of the Company 
to which he was secretary. 

Further, the directors expected him to know every 
circumstance connected directly or indirectly with 
the Protector, whether that circumstance were in his 
department or not Especially, there sat on the 
board a General Sinclair, C.B., who was the very 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 5 

phigue and torment of Arthur Dudley's life ; who 
was always asking for information ; eternally want- 
ing the secretary to " refer back," continually re- 
verting to something which had occurred at the 
very creation of the Company, and of which the 
present secretary had no cognizance whatever. 

A change this from Berrie Down Hollow ; from 
doing what he liked, as he liked, without question 
asked by any one ; a change this from coming and 
going as he pleased; from refraining from work; 
from wandering idly and purposelessly round the 
farm. 

He detested the work, but he liked the thousand 
a year; he could not bear what he called the 
drudgery of London life, but he delighted in Lon- 
don gaiety, and in that gaiety he had expected to 
participate without ever having to labour before he 
enjoyed. 

This life which he was leading; this life . and 
one a hundred times more agreeable, Mr. Black 
had told him, should be his . ^for the mere price of 
Nellie advanced into the Protector, Limited ; and 
now it was no thanks to Mr. Black he was even in 
London at all ; Mr. Stewart had procured him this 



6 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

trashy appointment, which he would have spurned 
excepting as a stepping-stone to something much 
better. Everybody had made^ and was making, a 
fortune out of the Company excepting himself, and ' 
it was his money which had floated it ; his money 
which had enabled Mr. Black to buy that place at 
Ealing, and iurnish it without a second thought as 
to the cost 1 

But in this conclusion, Arthur Dudley . ^like all 
people who, reasoning in a passion, reason illogically 
. chanced to be wrong. His few thousands would 
have made but a very poor figure when placed to 
the credit of Mr. Black's recent purchases ; they 
would have been a drop in the ocean, a blade of 
grass on the prairie, a single crow amongst the 
occupants of a rookery. Those poor thousands were 
many for a poor man to lose; but even had he 
pocketed every sixpence of the money for which 
Arthur was responsible, the whole amount would not 
have tided Mr. Black over three months' expenditure. 

For in those days he was " going in for the whole 
thing." He meant either to rise or to fall . so he 
informed the Crossenhams. His companies were 
now all floated ; some of them, indeed, in course 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 7 

of winding up, and out of eax^h, and all, the pro- 
moter either had reaped, or was hoping to reap, 
largely. He had a dozen irons in the fire. On 
the strength of his connection with the Protector, 
he had suddenly become a man " looked after " by 
those who had a " good thing " in view. 

As he had looked after Allan Stewart, so minor 
promoters now began to look after and solicit him. 
He dressed as Peter Black, Esquire, had never 
dressed before. His light summer overcoat was a 
work of art to be admired by clerks and porters as 
a ** West End cut ;" his boots were articles of attire 
to be envied ; while his hats looked as though they 
had been that moment taken out of silk paper, and 
placed jauntily on his head. He had abundant 
leisure now for attending to the adornment of his 
outward man, and he did attend to it thoroughly. 

The Hoxton days, when he shaved before a piece 
of broken looking-glass, and performed the very 
slight ablutions to which he treated his person in a 
blue Delft washing-basin about six inches in diameter, 
were left at a convenient distance ; and Peter Black, 
Esquire . quite another individual from the Mister 
Black who inhabited those wretched lodgings in a 



8 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

street leading out of Pitfield Street, Hoxton . had 
his house fitted up with hot and cold baths (which 
he used), while his dressing-table was furnished with 
as many oils, and scents, and pomades, as might 
have suflSced to dress up an old beauty for her three 
thousandth ball. 

All of which things Arthur remembered, and was 
wroth accordingly. Had his money not helped to 
start the Protector ? and had Mr. Black not pro- 
mised to go shares with him ? Certainly he had 
told him as plainly as he could speak that he should 
have the half of that twenty or thirty thousand 
pounds he expected to make out of the Company, 
providing only he lent him in the first instance a 
hundred pounds ! 

Arthur Dudley had neither sense enough nor 
wit enough to perceive the absurdity of this climax. 
He was awfully stupid, and he had implicitly be- 
lieved, and here was the result. 

He had really thought he should, from one seed, 
reap immediately a whole field of wheat ; he had 
really credited what a very clever and a very 
plausible man implied to be the fact, and many a 
reader will, I know, laugh at him for his credulity. 



k 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 9 

or else scoff at me for drawing the portrait of an 
impossibly confiding man. 

We may presume, and we do presume, of 
course, that ladies and gentlemen who subscribe to 
Mudie's would be much cleverer than all this comes 
to, but still there are other ladies and gentlemen 
who, taking in the daily papers and reading therein : 
" Ten pounds wanted for one week ; fifteen pounds 
will be given for the above at the end of seven days; 
ample security deposited," see and believe just as 
Arthur Dudley heard and believed likewise. Even 
amongst the ladies and gentlemen who do subscribe 
to Mudie's, it is most probable there may have been 
a few who, in times gone by, deluded by plausible 
circulars, took shares in some of Mr. Black's com- 
panies, and, as a natural consequence, lost their 
money ; and . since there is no one who speaks so 
loudly against the errors of his former religion as 
an apostate . doubtless the individuals to whom I 
refer will declare Arthur Dudley's credulity to be 
wicked, if not impossible. 

Deferentially I stand aside, while the book is laid 
down, and the suitable oration delivered, then with 
all due respect I take up the thread of my story 



10 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

once again, and speak of things which are taking 
place every day in the City, where fresh dupes come 
hourly to be fleeced, and fresh shearers, no more 
tender or scrupulous than Mr. Black, attend to 
relieve the unsuspecting sheep of their superfluous 
wool. 

Arthur Dudley was to have had half ! 

Remembering this, which in the hurry and confu- 
sion of his interview with Mr. Black he had for- 
gotten, the secretary took his hat, and walked 
ofiF to the City. 

Sooner than his friend had expected he accepted 
that gentleman's invitation, and entering the offices 
in Dowgate Hill, where another company . the 
"Universal Law Stationery" . was in course of 
formation, found the promoter up to his ears in busi- 
ness, with half a dozen people waiting to see him. 

"Tell Mr. Black I will not detain him five 
minutes," said Arthur, quite loud enough for the 
whole congregation to hear, after, it may be re- 
marked, the pleasing fashion of country people in 
London. "You know me, don't you?" he added, 
seeing the clerk hesitate, "I am the secretary of 
the Protector Bread Company." 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 11 

Thereupon the visitors each drew his own conclu- 
sion. Some, very green indeed, thought what a 
great man Mr. Dudley must be, thus to force him- 
self into the presence of the magnificent director ; 
others, less easily impressionable, decided that a 
screw had got loose in the Protector, which Mr. Black 
was expected to set right. At all events, they each 
and all began working out the problem of what the 
secretary could want with his principal, while Arthur 
marched into the presence of the great man, and 
found him not engaged with any individual, but 
simply writing his letters for post. 

"What's up with you?" were his first words; 
" has any one come for a million of shares ? or is 
there a fire at Stangate . or . or what the devil 
brings you into the City at such a time of day as 
this?" 

"Our conversation this afternoon," Arthur an- 
swered, boldly. "I could not rest; it is not fair, Mr. 
Black; you have not treated me as I should have 
treated you. Do you remember what you said to 
me that day when this matter was first mooted 
between us?" 

" Pray sit down," said Mr. Black, magnificently. 



12 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

waving his visitor to a seat, "and explain your 
meaning to me quietly, if you can. Do I remember 
what ? we said so many things that day it would be 
impossible for me to recollect all, or indeed any, of 
them, unless recalled to my memory." 

" Do you remember what you said about going 
half profits with me ?" Arthur asked. 

"I can't say that I do. Were there any profits 

then to share ?" 

" Prospective profits," the other answered. "You 

said you expected twenty or thirty thousand pounds 

out of the * Protector,' and that whatever you got, 

you would go shares with me." 

" Did I ?" asked Mr. Black, innocently. " I wish, 
Dudley, you had chosen any other time in the day 
than this for coming to pester about bygones," he 
added, " for I have no end of letters to write ; but^ 
however, as you are here, say all you have got to 
say." 

"I have nothing to say excepting what I have 
already said," answered Arthur, " namely, that 
you promised to go shares with me in the Bread 
Company." 

"Now, that is exactly the objection I have to 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 13 

doing business with a gentleman," remarked Mr. 
Black ; '^ it is impossible to make him understand, 
excepting literally, a sentence which would be plain 
as a pikestaff to a boy in the 'London streets. Tell 
me the construction you took out of that speech, 
which, I confess, I never remember to have uttered." 

" You said you would have twenty or thirty thou- 
sand out of this bakery affair, and were willing to 
give me half." 

" Precisely ! not willing to give you half of my 
earnings, but willing to give you a chance of winning 
fifteen thousand, which you would have done but for 
that meddling idiot, Stewart. He has dished me, 
too, you know. Deuce a thing I have had out of 
the Company except trouble, my shares, and posi- 
tion. It certainly has given me position. I meant 
we should have made . you and I together . thou- 
sands and thousands out of it, instead of which, when 
I had served my gentleman's turn, he bows me off 
with, * The Company won't bear this, and the Com- 
pany can't afford that. Whatever houses and offices 
we buy, must be bought on the mart. Our grain shall 
not be supplied through any friend of yours. I shall 
put in my own people to see you do not make sixpence 



14 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

out of that which owes its very existence to you/ 
Damn him," added Mr. Black, heartily ; " the next 
time I go praying and begging for a great man's 
name, I'll get what I have got this time . ^insolence 
instead of thanks . the door instead of money." 

There was no sham about Mr. Black's manner 
while he delivered himself of this sentence. 

Clearly, Allan Stewart had rubbed his hair up the 
wrong way, and hurt the promoter grievously in the 
process. Arthur sat silent for a moment, surprised 
. wondering what he had best say next, an(i, while 
he meditated, Mr. Black opened his mouth again : 

" And, on the top of all this, you come," he pro- 
ceeded; "you come dissatisfied with what I have 
done for you . indignant that I have failed to do 
more. You are angry because I could not force the 
Company to buy that cursed place of yours in 
Lincoln's Inn, which, I wish to Heaven, had never 
been for sale, just as though Stewart did not serve me 
the same trick about that shop in the Poultry. I 
bought it on spec, pulled the old buildings down, 
ran up a splendid new shop as far as the fii-st floor, 
and then offered it to the board. Do you think 
they would have it? 'Pooh, pooh!' says Mr 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 15 

Stewart ; * what do we want with establishments in 
the Poultry ? Less expensive situations will do for 
us;' and the confounded thing was thrown upon my 
hands. Had it not been for the * London and 
Home Counties Bank/ which had on its board a 
man I knew, I should have been swamped . I tell 
you fairly that I should, Dudley. As it was, I sold 
my interest to the Company at a switching profit, 
which enabled me to give my friend ten per cent on 
the purchase-money, and that pulled me through; 
and ^re the bank is now as prosperous a concern 
as any in London. Shares up to eight premium." 

It might all be true. With a terrible shock it 
occurred to Squire Dudley that there were other 
people besides himself in the world . other people 
looking for their halves, and percentages, and paid- 
up shares also. 

In a moment he seemed to understand that he had 
taken a hand at a game of chances, in which no one, 
not even those best experienced in the cards, could 
ensure success. It was a lottery in which he had 
embarked ; and, although he might blame those who 
had led him up to the wheel, still he felt he could 
not complain when the man who had been most 



16 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

sanguine of success drew a blank also. He was a 
gentleman. Even in his blackest hour of need, 
Arthur, with all his faults, weaknesses, and sins, 
never was untrue to his training and his ancestry. 
He had been bom . weak fool though he was . ^a 
gentleman, bred one, remained one, and he could 
not bandy words with this clever, plausible 
swindler, who, seeing his companion's hesitation, 
continued : 

"I have not much time to spare this afternoon, 
for I have letters to write, and lots of people to see ; 
but as I perceive you are dissatisfied, Dudley, I'll 
tell you what I'll do : ti'ansfer to you a couple of 
hundred of my shares in the ' Protector,' paid up. 
That's two thousand pounds, at the worst ; and if I 
see I can do anything more for you, I will. Don't 
be in too great a hurry, old fellow. That is the 
worst of all you country people . you think a fortune 
is to be made just in a minute. I'll stand by you, if 
you stand by me. I swear it to you, Dudley; 
there's my hand upon it Now, do not . do not, I 
entreat of you, go and make yourself and that dear 
wife of yours uncomfortable. If you have to raise a 
few thousands on Berrie Down, what matter ? Did 



A GLIMPSE OF THE CANVAS. 17 

Berrie Down ever do anything for you that you 
should do anything for it ? Stick to the Protector 
and Allan Stewart . that's my advice ; and when you 
are in any difficulty come to me . that is my advice 
also. Now, good-hye . ta-ta . God bless you, 
Dudley !" 

And thus exit Squire Dudley without speaking 
a word he had intended, but with a very strong 
impression on his mind that Mr. Black, having been 
making free with the contents of a certain bottle, 
labelled "Martell," ordinarily concealed in the 
recesses of one of Tann's " Reliance " safes, must, 
therefore, have spoken the truth, the whole truth, 
and nothing but the truth. 

As though people did not tell worse fibs when 
they are drunk than when they are sober, more es- 
pecially in London . as though " In vino Veritas " 
were not an exploded creed with the rising genera- 
tion, many of whom do not speak truth either in 
their cups or out of them. 



VOL. III. 



18 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER II. 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 



While the events I have related were influencing, 
more or less, the Dudley family history, the " Pro- 
tector Flour and Bread Company" was succeeding 
to an extent which it is given to few companies in 
our time to equal 

If a person be suflSciently interested in the prices 
of miscellaneous companies' shares, to run his eye 
down a list of, say, a hundred and fifty of the new 
Limited Liabilities, he will be surprised to find how 
few out of the number are quoted as being at par, to 
say nothing of at a premium. Dis., dis., dis., is the 
encouraging legend attached to one after another ; 
but it was not thus with the Protector . steadily its 
shares went up. It grew to be considered a good 
investment. The ten pound shares (two pounds paid) 



GREAT SUCCESSES. IP 

were eagerly sought afiter; and, had an intending 
investor gone, about that period, to any broker, and 
expressed his desire of purchasing into the Pro- 
tector Bread Company, he would have been advised 
he was acting wisely . that the shares were very good 
property indeed. 

And so every one believed. In all directions the 
Company's vans were to be encountered conveying 
bread to the far-g^way depots, or else returning 
empty from the extremest ends of London. The 
bread was good ; the directors . greatly to the dis- 
gust of their housekeepers and cooks, who were 
thus cheated out of a legitimate perquisite in the 
shape of commission . ate of the staflF of life kneaded 
at their own bakeries, and were satisfied. 

If an inferior batch were produced, woe to the 
master baker, on whom, straight away. General 
Sinclair poured his vials of wrath. If the flour 
were sour, as servants frequently declared it to be, 
Mr. Bailey Crossenham's ears tingled for a week. 

Never was a company better managed ; never a 
staff more rigidly superintended. 

Did Linnor, at the most easterly point of London, 
running short of bread, borrow a few loaves from 

C 2 



20 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

his neighbour, Mr. Bickley, and supply them as the 
genuine product of the Protector, Limited, down 
came a note from the Secretary's oflSce, informing 
Mr. Linnor, by " order of the board," that if such 
dereliction from the paths of duty occurred again, 
he, Mr. Linnor, would forthwith be dismissed from 
the responsible position which he held. 

Neither for those brilliant creatures, dressed in 
orange and green, who conveyed the bread from 
Stangate to all parts of the metropolis, was there 
such a thing as liberty. Their carts were numbered, 
and if, on the hottest day in summer, they stopped 
at the " Spotted Stag," in Mile End Road, or the 
" White Hart," in Newington, or the " Greyhound," 
in Fulham, or any other favourite house of call, for 
a pot of beer, 16, or 48, or 33, or 27, was bad up 
the same evening before the yard superintendent, 
and " cautioned " for all the world . so the men them- 
selves said . ^as if the " governor was a beak." 

If, after this caution, any one still preferred ale 
to employment, he was paid his wages and dis- 
charged on the spot. 

Altogether, it was a very perfectly-managed Com- 
pany, and quite a credit to its directors. 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 21 

Great people, when the periodical philanthropic 
fit attacked their ranks, were not above driving over 
to Stangate, and inspecting the works ; and, on the 
occasion of such visits, the Times would come 
out with a leader, concerning pure bread and the 
adulteration of food, which always sent the shares 
up on the Stock Exchange, and made the aristo- 
cracy feel that they had conferred vast benefits on 
the labouring classes. 

It was nice to be associated with so excellent a 
Company. Good people felt that the blessing of the 
Almighty must rest upon an enterprise, undertaken 
in so Christian a Spirit (there was much mention of 
the poor in the prospectus), and that He, who had 
fed the Israelites with manna in the wilderness, 
would likewise satisfactorily regulate the Protector's 
dividends ; for which reason, and others too numerous 
and varied to mention, both great people and good 
people, and good and great combined in the same 
people, bought shares in the Company, sincerely 
believing that, since time began, there had never 
been any creature born so deserving of universal 
support and encouragement as Mr. Black's baby, 
which was now a great child able to run alone, and 



22 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

earn something for itself, and even repay its bene- 
factors a portion of the money advanced to start 
it fairly in the world. 

When the first half-yearly meeting was held, the 
directors not merely announced a dividend at the 
rate of fifteen per cent, per annum, but also stated 
their conviction, that the close of another half vear 
would exhibit a much larger proportion of profit, 
since the expenses of conducting such a business in 
the first instance were necessarily greater than 
would subsequently prove the case. 

Moreover, it was resolved that no further call 
should be made on the shareholders, except in the 
event of larger mills and more extensive premises 
being required, when, as a natural consequence, 
higher dividends might confidently be expected. 

The directors had pleasure in communicating 
the existence of a large reserve fund ; and in stating 
that the mills at Stangate had been greatly increased 
in size, that the machinery was the very best known 
for the purposes required, that every modern im- 
provement in the grinding of wheat and manufacture 
of flour was to be found on the premises, and that, 
as regarded the bakehouse, it was decidedly the 



GREAT SUOCIlSSES. 23 

most spacious, convenient^ and best ventilated in the 
kingdom. 

All this, and a vast amount more, being duly 
reported in the daily and weekly papers, shares 
(money at the time chancing to be cheap) went up 
again. 

Then, the magazine-writers got hold of the Pro- 
tector as a nucleus on which might be constructed a 
few light and entertaining papers concerning bread- 
making from the beginning of time, tracing the 
progress of the staff of life from the kneading- 
troughs of the Israelites down to the works of the 
new Company at Stangate. 

There was no difficulty about inspecting the 
Protector's premises. A man, salaried on purpose, 
received ordinary visitors at the gates, and escorted 
them through the whole process from grinding to 
kneading, that is, if they came at an hour when 
kneading was in progress. as literary gentlemen 
always did. 

 Wheat, fi^m the Ear to the Breakfast Table," 
was the exhaustive title of one paper. Another, 
supposed to be written by the same author, appeared 
as " Hot Rolls!" "Our Daily Bread " graced the 



24 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

columns of one of the religious periodicals ; while, 
" Adulteration Considered Morally and Socially," 
was universally attributed by the critics to the pen 
of one of the most gifted and thoughtful authoresses 
of the day. 

With all these helps, was it any wonder that the 
shares of the Protector should soon be at a premium ? 
that every one connected with the Company felt 
himself to be to some extent a person of consequence ; 
that Arthur Dudley forgot his fears, and only re- 
membered his interest in the great concern ; that even 
the mortgaging of Berrie Down grew in time to be 
a mere bagatelle . a trifle not worth fretting about ? 

What might the shares not ultimately touch ! 
Supposing the ten pound share, paid up, came in 
time to be worth a hundred pounds, why, his income 
would be enormous ; and there was nothing to pre- 
vent the shares going on rising, rising in value. If 
they reached fifty, would he sell ? Arthur could not 
decide this point to his own satisfaction. If he 
sold, he should then have no anxiety about loss; 
but, on the other hand, would it be wise to sell 
before they reached their maximum ? Then, who 
ever could tell when the maximum was reached? 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 25 

These were the questions which perplexed the 
Squire, building his castles in th^ air, while pacing 
on the calm summer evenings round and round 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, smoking the while such cigars 
as never fall to the lot of any one, save secretaries 
and others of the same ilk, who get all sorts of good 
things given to them by all kinds of singular people. 

Arthur, in the days of which I am now writing, 
never bought a cigar by any chance. He had boxes 
of the best Havannas sent him, which he was now 
not too proud to accept. 

The world had gone round since he strolled 
a poor man through the fields at Berrie Down. 
Accepting a favour did not, according to the new 
code, mean placing himself under an obligation. 
No; it rather meant conferring an obligation on 
the donor. 

What those donors expected Arthur Dudley 
would be able to do for them, it is impossible even 
to conjecture. Arthur himself never knew ; and so, 
with an untroubled conscience, he smoked his cigars 
and dreamed his dreams. 

At this time. Heather was away from home . 
away at the seaside with her children, whom she 



26 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

took down to Hastings, for a month, in the hope 
that sea-air might do Lally more good than all 
Dr. Chickton's prescriptions. 

Quite as tenderly as he had treated Master 
Charles Hope, that renowned practitioner inquired 
into Lally's symptoms, and devoted himself to the 
restoration of her health ; but for all this care the 
child proved ungrateful. 

She did not get much better. All the tonics 
Doctor Chickton could prescribe, and Heather 
with difficulty persuade her to take, failed to restore 
her health, to make the little feet patter, patter over 
the floor as of old. 

She could walk a short distance, certainly, without 
much fatigue, and drive for an hour or so at a time, 
but still she was not the Lally of a twelvemonth 
previously. 

" What's the use of cramming the child with all 
that physic?" Doctor Marsden inquired one day 
when he called in Lincoln's Inn Fields. " Chick- 
ton ordered it, did he ? of course he did. When 
you go and pay a man a guinea, he must order you 
something ; but now, without a guinea at all, I will 
give you my advice, which is none the worse for 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 27 

being gratuitous. Take her to the seaside ; let her 
be out all day long ; if she will bear bathing, bathe 
her ; if that don't set her up, nothing will." 

Very heartily Heather wished she could have 
told Doctor Marsden, that, considering his son was 
the cause of Lally's illness, she thought the least he 
could do was to proffer his advice civilly; but advice 
in any shape was not to be despised, and accordingly 
she adopted his suggestion, and bore Lally off. 

At Hastings, she met not merely Mr. and Mrs. 
Compton Raidsford and family, but also Mr. Allan 
Stewart; who, after a time, took rather kindly to 
Lally, and became interested in her recovery. 

Like all the rest of the world, he too had his 
eivourite medical man, whom he not merely coun- 
selled Heather to consult, but to whom also, he 
wrote a letter of introduction, in which he described 
her as his friend, Mrs. Dudley. 

They had been the merest acquaintances in town ; 
but intimacy is of quick growth when people mejBt 
every day, and fifty times a day, on the sands, on 
the Parade, in the lodgings of mutual friends, stand- 
ing listening to the bands, and to the solitary 
murmur of the sea as it flows in on the shore. 



28 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

From Mrs. Raidsford, Heather heard how ad- 
mirably Agnes was managing Berrie Down. 

" What a wonderful creature she must be !" con- 
tinued the lady ; and yet, Heather fancied there was 
a tone of disparagement in Mrs. Raidsford s remark, 
for which she was at a loss to account, until informed 
that **Miss Baldwin was never out of the house;" 
" has taken to your sisters quite as if they were her 
own." 

This was not exactly news to Heather, for she 
had understood from Agnes that Miss Baldwin con- 
tinued very kind indeed ; but why the fact should 
irritate Mrs. Raidsford puzzled her, until one of the 
Misses Raidsford, observing, " Yes, we are entirely 
forgotten now . Miss Baldwin is fond of new faces," 
threw some light upon the subject. 

That Miss Baldwin should ever have been fond of 
the Misses Raidsford's faces, surprised Heather not 
a little ; but still she knew that Kemms Park had 
at one time patronized Moorlands, and was able to 
comprehend now where the sting of the Berrie 
Down acquaintanceship lay. 

With all her heart she wished Miss Baldwin 
would leave the girls alone. Beyond all things she 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 29 

dreaded their being exposed to jealous and envious 
remarks. The blessed seclusion, the utter privacy 
in which they had hitherto lived, must, she knew, 
have qutie unfitted them to bear unkind speeches, 
or ill-natured inuendoes with equanimity. 

Had she acted rightly in leaving them alone at 
Berrie Down . alone to receive many visitors, and 
to bear the brunt of such gossip as that in which 
she perceived Mrs. Raidsford was not above in- 
dulging? The new acquaintances, whom Heather 
in her innocence had imagined would make the 
country a pleasanter residence for the girls, might 
only expose their conduct to misconstruction. She 
had no fear of anything Agnes and Laura might 
say or do, but she felt afraid of what might be said 
of them. Lord Kemms, she knew, was now at the 
Park, having at length returned from Austria ; and 
in one of her letters Agnes mentioned his having 
called at Berrie Down with his aunt. 

Could this be another thorn in Mrs. Raidsford's 
side ? Small as was the amount of tittle-tattle which 
reached Heather's ears, still she had heard some 
talk of an attachment between Lord Kemms and 
one of the young ladies at Moorlands. And, 



30 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

although it never entered into her mind to imagine 
her husband's portionless sisters could prove rivals 
to the great contractor's daughters, she yet gra- 
dually came to understand that Mrs. Raidsford was 
of a different opinion, and felt Berrie Down to be 
a stumbling-block in her path. 

" There is some distinction come between Mr. R. 
and his Lordship," Mrs. Raidsford was kind enough 
to explain to Mrs. Dudley ; " we are not on the 
same terms of equality with him that we used to 
be. I must say, I think the coolness began on our 
side, for Mr. R., as you, no doubt, have heard, has a 
perfect maniac against companies of all kinds, just 
as though people had not a right to make them- 
selves into companies if they like, and it seems his 
Lordship told him he would have nothing to do with 
that ' Protective ' affair of yours . no offence, Mrs. 
Dudley . ^after which he went away and becomes 
one of the fundamental proprietors of it. So, when 
his Lordship came home, Mr. R. put on his high and 
mighty, and would not call at the Park . as if the 
 Protective ' was any business of his . and so, when 
we meet, we only bow ; and I am as satisfied as I can 
be of anything that his Lordship knows no more than 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 31 

the babe unborn what the reason of our distance is. 
Indeed, he was beginning to ask me at the station, 
when we met him, only the train moved oflF before 
he could complete his inquiry. I think I shall 
write to his Lordship, and detail the matter. If 
Mr. R. likes to disseparate himself from old friends, 
that is no reason why we should . is it, Mrs. 
Dudley?" 

In answer to which appeal. Heather said she did 
not know. She thought, however, she should not 
like to be on friendly terms with any one to whose 
acquaintance her husband objected. 

" But, then, you are like nobody else," retorted 
Mrs. Raidsford. 

This remark, intended to be both hurtful and 
depreciating, failed of its effect, because Heather 
mentally hoped she was not much like Mrs. Eaids- 
ford. " A woman whom Haidsford ought to have been 
pilloried for marrying," observed Mr. Stewart ; " ap- 
parently, he is a very worthy fellow himself, but I 
am quite satisfied there must be some terrible want 
in the character of any person who could make such 
a creature his wife. There ought to be a law against 
those kind of marriages." 



32 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'* Perhaps ," began Heather, and then she 

stopped, colouring a little. 

"Pray, complete your sentence, Mrs. Dudley," 
said Mr. Stewart ; " you have roused my curiosity, 
and it is not fair to have it unsatisfied." 

" I only hesitated lest what rose to my mind might 
sound ill-natured. I do not mean, however, any sneer 
when I say, that perhaps Mrs. Eaidsford may have 
been very suitable to her husband when he married 
her. It is so difficult to express an opinion like that 
without appearing to reflect on a man's origin," she 
added, getting into unutterable depths of confusion ; 
" but I often think about a speech, a very dear girl 
I once knew made, concerning Mrs. Eaidsford. She 
said, ' it was such a pity a man could not choose again 
when he came to years of social discretion.' " 

" She used to say also," remarked Lucy Dudley, 
'* that if Mr. Eaidsford could only have foreseen how 
high he was to rise in the world, Mrs. Eaidsford 
would probably now have been wife to some mechanic 
. cooking steaks for his one o'clock dinner, instead 
of being mistress of Moorlands, and having servants 
much more ladylike than herself under her. Bessie 
never was weary of mimicking Mrs. Eaidsford." 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 33 

*' Who was this clever young lady ?" asked Mr. 
Stewart, for whom the very bitterness of such a 
speech had its peculiar charm. 

" A 6ousin of ours," Lucy answered. 

"Married, or still eligible?" inquired the old 
bachelor. 

Lucy did not reply 5 she looked at Heather, who, 
after a moment's embarrassed pause, repUed, . 

" She was engaged to be married, when with us, 
last winter ; but we have not heard from her since 
she left Berrie Down." 

" Some feminine quarrel," thought Mr. Stewart ; 
and, looking out over the sea, he laughed softly to 
himself at the idea that all women were alike, . that 
no two women could agree ; that, let them be young 
or old, pretty or ugly, sweet or sour, they could still 
jangle and dispute like the veriest viragoes. 

And yet, this Mrs. Dudley puzzled him : if she 
had a temper, she must, he thought, have it under 
wonderful control ; if there were any evil in her, she 
must have an astonishing power of concealing its 
existence. To sisters and children, to friends and 
servants, she was alike, gentle and forbearing. Never 
but once did Mr. Stewart see her eyes darken, and 
VOL. in. D 



34 FAR ABOVE IIUBIES. 

her face flush under the influence of any strong emo- 
tion ; and then it was a slight thing which caused the 
tell-tale blood to rush to brow, and cheek, and neck. 

'* I expect my niece, Mrs. Croft, to-morrow," he 
said; "I am happy to think she will be able to 
make your acquaintance." 

Then there came that look, which was not quite 
pleasant, over Heather's face, . that look which set 
Mr. Stewart marvelling as to " what could be up " 
between the two women ? Not an early jealousy, he 
decided ; for Mrs. Croft was many a year older than 
Mrs. Dudley. What could it be? He was an 
especially inquisitive old gentleman, as sharp and 
keen concerning matters of feeling, as he was about 
matters of business, and so he went on, . 

" You have never met her, I think ?" 

" Never," Heather answered; "but my husband 
knew Mrs. Croft very well indeed at one time, and 
quite recently they renewed their former acquaint- 
ance at Copt Hall." 

" Copt Hall . is not that Mr. Hope's place ? I 
recollect now, Douglas and his wife were staying 
there last autumn. Your husband is some relation 
of the Essex Hopes, is he not ?" 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 35 

"His mother was a Miss Hope," Heather ex- 
plained ; and shortly afterwards Mr. Stewart took his 
leaye, trying to remember something he had heard 
about Miss Laxton having jilted a former suitor 
when she married his nephew. " Was Dudley the 
lucky fellow's name ?" he asked himself. " I'll find 
out all about it when madam comes." 

In due time, madam came, and her husband with 
her; and from the hour of their arrival. Heather 
commenced longing to return to town. Had it not 
been, indeed, that Lally was decidedly gaining 
strength, she would forthwith have packed up and 
departed ; but the child was better ; she could run 
about a little, and at times there was a colour in her 
face which made the poor mother trust the health 
and the gaiety of old was about to be restored 
to her. 

How Mrs. Croft ridiculed Heather's anxiety 
about the little girl ; how scornfully she would listen 
to Lally's prattle; with what open contempt she 
watched the child sometimes struggling into 
Mr. Stewart's arms, and beheld him fondling and 
caressing her, were things to be seen, not described. 

A stately woman, who looked bom to rule a 

d2 



36 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

nation of slaves, and seemed to regard every one 
with whom she came in contact, her husband in- 
cluded, as so much dirt under feet ; a woman who 
would have been beautiful but for the expression of 
habitual bad temper on her face ; a woman who 
made every creature she met uncomfortable; who 
treated Heather with supercilious insolence, and at 
length told her without the slightest reserve she had 
instructed her child well. '* She is playing her cards 
quite as cleverly as you," finished Mrs. Croft, in a 
tone of suppressed fury, one day when she saw Lally 
throw down her wooden spade, and run with out- 
stretched arms to meet Mr. Stewart. " Commend 
me to a meek, quiet woman when underhand means 
are to be employed, and a legacy is in questioa" 

'' Do you imagine I am expecting a legacy from 
any one T asked Heather. 

" Of course I do," was the reply, spoken while 
Mrs. Croft swept along the Marina with her dress 
trailing about two yards on the ground behind her ; 
" of course I do," and her dark eyes looked over 
Heather scornfiilly; "people generally expect their 
godfathers to leave them something, do they not? and 
your godfather s money is well worth finessing for. 



GREAT SUCCESSKS. 37 

I commend your prudence; some persons might 
not think such conduct quite honourable, but that 
never seems to have occurred to you. Mr. Stewart 
has hitherto treated Mr. Croft as his heir. Now, 
however " 

" Mr. Stewart's aflFairs have not the slightest 
interest for me," interrupted Heather, hastily. 
" Good morning !" and, without giving her com- 
panion time to utter another word, Mrs. Dudley 
turned and walked back along the Parade to the 
point where Lally was still engaged in animated 
conversation with her two gentlemen friends. 

" It is time for you to come in, my pet," she said, 
descending one of the flights of wooden steps, and 
making her way with difficulty over the shingle to 
the sands. " If you see my sister, Mr. Stewart, 
would you kindly ask her to bring Leonard back ? I 
do not like him to be out in the heat of the day. I 
do not think it is good for children to be on the 
shore when the sun has so much power." 

"Now, they have had a quarrel," decided Mr. 
Stewart, glancing along the Parade, where he 
descried Mrs. Aymescourt Croft wending her way 
homewards, solitary and stately, haughty and 



t( 



ti 



38 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

defiant. " I should like immensely to know what it is 
all about. There is something very decidedly amiss 
between my amiable niece and Mrs. Dudley." 

"Your wife and our pretty friend do not seem 
able to stable their horses comfortably together," he 
said to Mr. Croft, when Heather, who declined all 
offers both of companionship and of assistance, had 
borne Lally . bitterly protesting against such in- 
justice . away. " How is it, do you think ?" 
My wife is jealous," was the prompt reply 
Does she fancy you are smitten ?" 
" No ; but she thinks you are," Mr. Croft an- 
swered. " She considers that Mrs. Dudley stands 
too good a chance of being favourably remembered 
in your will, for much cordial feeling to exist 
amongst us." 

" And why the devil should I leave Mrs. Dudley 
sixpence ?" asked Mr. Stewart. " What is she to me 
that I should bequeath anything to her, more than 
to the first stranger I meet on the Marina ?" 

" My charming wife," replied Mr. Croft, in that 
daring tone of off-hand recklessness which, as Mr. 
Black had remarked, was one of his peculiarities, 
" my charming wife, giving you credit for a vein of 



k 



GREAT SUCCESSES. * 39 

romance, and a depth of sensibility which, I confess, 
I never noticed in your character, imagines that the 
revival of old associations, the thoughts of * Auld Lang 
Syne,' in fact, which the sight of Mrs. Dudley must 
naturally have awakened, may produce an undesirable 
effect upon the ultimate disposal of your property. 
For my part, I am delighted at the opportunity now 
afforded of assuring you I would much rather you 
left your money to Mrs. Dudley than to my wife." 

" What are you talking about, Douglas ?" asked 
his uncle. From the drawing-room window of the 
house they occupied Mrs. Croft could, with the 
aid of an opera-glass, see, not merely that Mr. 
Stewart stopped as he put this question, but that 
he looked excited and perplexed. " What is Mrs. 
Dudley to me, I ask again, that I should leave her 
sixpence ? She is a sweet woman, and pretty, and 
devoted to her blockhead of a husband, but I should 
not care if I never saw her again. Does your wife 
think I am in love with her? Does she imagine I 
am so nearly doting as all that comes to ?" 

Douglas Croft looked steadily in his uncle's face 
for a moment, and then burst out laughing. 

"It really is too amusing," he said. "Do you 



40 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

mean to tell me you do not know who Mrs. Dudley 
was?" 

"No; who the deuce was Mrs. Dudley?" in- 
quired the other, testily. 

" And she never has enlightened you ?" persisted 
Mr. Croft. 

" If she had enlightened me I should have known, 
I suppose, and I do not know who or what she was, 
excepting a simpleton to marry Dudley. As you 
seem so well informed, tell me this wonderful secret 
Who was Mrs. Dudley ?" 

" Heather Bell," answered Mr. Croft 

" You do not mean that ?" 

" I do, upon my honour. Miss Hope told me and 
my wife, and explained that it was you who selected 
the name which seems to suit her so admirably." 

Mr. Stewart did not take any direct notice of this 
information ; he only resumed his walk over the 
sands, saying to himself, . 

" And so that is Heather Bell . so that is Heather 

Bell !" 

" You understand now why my wife regards her 
with but small favour," continued Mr. Croft ; 
"indeed, there is another reason why, perhaps. 



GREAT SUCCESSES. 41 

mutually the two ladies dislike and distrust each 
other. Years ago, Dudley and Miss Laxton were 
engaged. I knew nothing of it when I met her . 
when I proposed to her . when she accepted me ; 
but the engagement was a fact, nevertheless. I am 
so devotedly attached to her now, that there can 
be no indiscretion in merely alluding to her one 
fault . a love of money. I am confident that 
she liked Dudley better than she ever liked me ; 
but I, being the richer of the two, gained the prize. 
Of course, it is not in a woman's nature, at least 
it is not in Arabella's nature, to look kindly on the 
wife whom the man she jilted afterwards married. 
On the other hand, all the world knows Dudley does 
not appreciate quite so highly the blessing he has 
gained, as the blessing he has lost ; and for that 
reason I fancy poor Mrs. Dudley does not feel par- 
ticularly comfortable in my Arabella's society. 
Further, there may be a little mutual jealousy, both 
being above the average in appearance. Now, you 
have the exact state of the case, so far as I know it." 
Still Mr. Stewart made no reply ; he only walked 
on more swiftly over the sands, which were at this 
point wet and disagreeable, while the waves came 



42 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

lapping in . lapping in ; and the burden of his 
reverie was, "So that is Heather Bell . that is 
Heather Bell !" 

There was a story in the man's life, though no 
one of his kith or kin suspected it. He had loved 
once . once in his middle age, when the dis- 
ease always leaves traces behind . passionately! 
and the woman he loved was Heather's mother; 
but the secret of his unrequited attachment had lain 
between the two ; and now she was dead, and here 
was her child, and the child of the man who took 
the best hope of his life away, thrown across his 
path once more. 

Heather Bell . ^Heather Bell, the waves seemed 
to murmur the name as they stole upon the sands ; 
and the old man grew young again as the years 
faded away ; and he saw, reflected as in a mirror, the 
bright glad face of the long, and long ago, when he 
first, at Sir Wingrave Bell's, met Lilian Gladwin, 
who was even in those days engaged to the baronet's 
cousin, William, then a poor curate in London, and 
afterwards the poor rector of Layford, Derbyshire. 



43 



CHAPTER III. 



 LIKE A man's hand." 



What a cruel world it is ; what a hard, wicked, 
misjudging, uncharitable, mercenary world ! Thus 
Heather Dudley reflected, while, without waiting 
for Lucy or Leonard, she walked homewards with 
Lally, the hot tears filling her eyes and coursing 
down her cheeks as she recalled Mrs. Croft's in- 
sulting words, as she came gradually to comprehend 
the full meaning of her insolent accusation. 

She could not help crying; the world's cruelty 
and the world's' wickedness were new experiences 
to her. 

The maladies of being thought ill of, of having 
her most innocent notions misconstrued, of hearing 
intentions imputed to her which she was utterly 
incapable of harbouring, had not fallen to her when 



44 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

young, and now taken in her maturer years they 
seemed so severe that it was almost impossible for 
her to endure them patiently. 

To be accused of toadying any person ; that it 
should for a moment be supposed she could ever have 
mentioned the name of her family to Mr. Stewart, 
when, lest it might even seem as though she were 
thereby preferring any claim to old acquaintanceship 
on him, she had sedulously avoided all allusions to 
her former home, or any of her early reoollections. 

** I . I . do such a thing I" she thought ; " I pay 
court to him for his money ; I, who detest money ; 
I, who could live on the merest pittance anywhere 
and be happy; and who would rather live on a 
pittance than mix amongst hard, cruel, mercenary 
people ; and to imply that I was such a wretch as to 
school my innocent child in deceit and affectation. 
Ah !" she reflected, softening a little ; " it is plain 
she never was a mother ; if she had been, she could 
not have imputed trickery of that kind to me;" 
which speech showed, not how much Heather knew 
of mothers, but how little she knew of the world. 
"It was cruel, though . " thus the mental strain 
ran on . *' cruel to imagine such a thing ; cruel to 



"LIKE A man's hand." 45 

express it ;" and Heather would probably have con- 
tinued making these statements silently to her own 
heart, whilst her tears flowed as fast as her thoughts, 
had Lally not caused a diversion by stating : 

" You walk too quick, ma ; you tire me." Then 
Heather sat down upon one of the benches and 
caught Lally to her ; she was ashamed that even for 
a moment her own anger should have made her 
forget the child's possible weariness. She had gone 
on, dragging Lally after her, and the little one was 
both warm and tired with the unwonted exercise. 

" Are you hot, too, ma ?" she asked, trying to 
push up her mother's veil, an attempt which Heather 
strove too late to resist. "Oh! you've been cry- 
ing, ma ; you've been vexed ; was it tall wicked 
lady ? Never mind . Lally's better . arn't you glad 
Lally 's nearly better as well ? Do not cry, pease, 
mamma . pease . pease." 

And the poor, little, eager face puckered itself up 
to weep also ; and the brown eyes . which had in 
them at times a look of Heather . filled with tears, 
and the thin arms twined themselves about her 
mother's neck, and Lally became altogether very 
piteous on the subject of her mother's grief. 



46 FAB ABOYK RUBIES. 

Looking out over the danciDg sea, so bright, so 
sunshiny, so smooth, clasping her firstrbom to her 
heart, Heather felt that there was reason in the 
child's words ; that, seeing Lally's health even par- 
tially restored, she had no right to weep or lament 
over any mere worldly grievance. 

What was Mrs. Croft to her, that she should 
attach weight to her angry sentences, her slanderous 
accusations? What were they all . ^Mr. Stewart, 
and his nephew and niece? Nothing but people 
whom she had met for a day or two, and should 
perhaps meet again never more. Why should she 
fret over a false and libellous charge ? If she were 
capable of such conduct as that whereof Mrs. Croft 
had accused her, she might then weep, but not 
otherwise. 

She would endeavour for the future to avoid 
St Leonard's. Her children should keep down by 
the East Parade, or amuse themselves on the Castle 
Hill, for the few days she purposed remaining at 
Hastings. No one should say she put herself or 
them in the way of rich people . at least, no one 
should say so with even a shadow of a foundation 
of truthfulness. 



"LIKE A man's hand." 47 

She would not do what she had in the first smart 
of the blow intended . pack up, and leave Hastings 
by the next train . but she would never subject her- 
self to such an imputation again. She could, and 
she would, be out for the future when Mr. Stewart 
called, and she might walk at such hours and in 
such directions as should separate her and hers 
altogether from their more wealthy acquaintances. 

It is quite unnecessary to add that she and Lucy 
had a thoroughly comfortable and exhaustive con- 
versation on the subject that same evening after 
the children were in bed ; in the course of which 
Lucy expressed her opinion, not merely that dear 
Heather was quite right in her decision about Mr. 
Stewart, but also concerning the girls at Berrie 
Down. 

*' We should all be ever so much happier together 
in town," the young lady opined ; " together any- 
where. Could not Arthur let Berrie Down, or 
put in a care-taker, as Mr. Black has so often 
suggested ? not but that it would seem terrible to 
leave the Hollow altogether ; still, if we are not to 
live there, what is the use of having it lying empty ?" 
In reply to which Heather could only answer: 



48 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

*' There is no place in the world like Berne Down." 
And then the pair had a little sympathetic cry, which 
did them both a considerable amount of good. 

After all, they had spent a very pleasant month 
at Hastings ; and though a cloud had towards the 
last darkened their sky, still who can expect fair 
weather to continue day after day? 

Is not it the inevitable rule that storms must 
come, if only to clear the air ; that women should 
shed tears in order that their eyes may be all 
the brighter afterwards? What right had Mrs. 
Dudley to look for a succession of sunshiny hours, 
when Douglas Croft, who was popularly supposed to 
be the most lucky fellow on earth, met with nothing 
but contrary winds and heavy rains during the short 
periods in the year he and his wife reluctantly spent 
together ? 

If there were any state of life in which Mrs. 
Douglas Croft would have been content, that state 
had still to be discovered ; if there were anything 
her husband could have done to please her, he had 
certainly never hit upon it 

Did he keep the windows shut, she wondered 
what he was made of to sit in such a suffocating 



''LIKE A man's hand." 49 

room ; did he fling them wide open in the morning, 
he knew she detested a draught, and the sight of 
that glitter on the sea ; did he wish to ride, she 
thought he might have more consideration than to 
propose his wife mounting a hired horse; did he 
suggest driving, she wondered, if he were so fond of 
seeing the country, he had not brought down his 
servants and carriages, as other ^ople did ; did he 
offer to walk with her, she was invariably tired ; 
did he even mention leaving the house without her, 
she thought, " considering he favoured her with so 
little of his society, he might remain indoors for half 
an hour in the course of the day ;" did he go out in 
a boat, she might as well have married a London 
tradesman ; did he finally ask her what the devil 
she would have him do, since he had come to the 
slowest place on earth to please her and not himself, 
she replied, that if he had not sufficiently gentle- 
manly, or even manly, feeling to know how to treat 
his wife properly, it was a pity he ever married 
any one higher in rank than some poor factory 
girl." 

" I could not have married you, remember," an- 
swered Mr. Croft, " had you not first jilted Dudley ;" 

VOL. m. E 



50 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

whereupon she sighed, " Poor Arthur !" and declared 
" he never would have broken a woman's heart" 

" You would very soon have broken his," retorted 
her husband ; '* though, upon my honour, Dudley 
is the only man I should not have pitied seeing 
married to you." 

" Because you admire that creature with red hair, 
whom he chose after me ! after me by way of con- 
trast, I suppose. Oh ! she has not red hair ? I 
confess I was under the delusion she had ; but no 
doubt your opportunities of judging have been 
greater than mine. She is a very pretty woman, 
you say ; of course you think every woman pretty, 
excepting your own wife. She is the kind of creature 
some men do admire, and she has that manner . 
that meek, mild, submissive, milk-and-water manner 
. which always makes me long to strike her and 
ask how she likes that. I do detest those amiable 
hypocrites. It is a pity you cannot get rid of me, 
and marry her." 

" If I were to marry all the women I admire, I 
should have as many wives as Brigham Young," 
answered Mr. Croft : ** besides, I am not quite cer- 
tain that Mrs. Dudley is my style. She has too 



"LIKE A man's hand." 51 

much of the angel about her ; certainly, * extremes 
meet'; but still, after you, that change would be 
almost too se ere :" and so the pair were wont to 
wrangle on, while Mr. Stewart sat calmly reading 
the Times, or else remarked that he never so 
much regretted his single condition as when he 
witnessed his nephew's connubial felicity. 

" It is all his fault," Mrs. Croft was in the habit 
of asserting, to which Mr. Stewart invariably made 
reply : 

** I know that, my dear Arabella, perfectly well ; 
no wife ever is in fault." 

" Mrs. Dudley could not be, we may suppose," 
Mrs. Croft snapped back, on the day following her 
quarrel with Heather. 

" If she could, she must difier greatly from the 
remainder of her sex," answered Mr. Stewart, who 
was, Mrs. Croft frequently assured those lady friends 
that she honoured with her confidence, ** one of the 
most disagreeable, cynical old bores a woman ever 
had to tolerate for the sake of his money." 

On the whole, visits from his niece were amongst 
the number of those blessings with which Mr. Stewart 
could very readily have dispensed. He liked his 

e2 



52 FAR ABOVE BUBIESL 

nephew, and he pitied him ; but Mrs. Croft was 
decidedly de trap in any house which held at the 
same time Allan Stewart, Esquire, of Layford. 

Very frequently, people wondered why unde and 
nephew kept up separate establishments, but then it 
was remembered that more than once Mr. Stewart 
had openly regretted the fact of his only near rela- 
tion having married a woman whom he never could 
-regard in the light of a daughter. 

Of this fact Mrs. Croft was perfectly well aware, 
and she felt madly jealous accordingly, when she 
beheld the increasing intimacy between Heather and 
her godfather. 

" She will supplant you to a certainty, Douglas," 
the amiable wife remarked. 

" Well, my love, if she do, I dare say we can 
still, with economy, manage to exist," answered 
Mr. Croft. "Upon strict principles of justice, 
indeed, I think Dudley ought to have my uncle^s 
money ; I won you from him, you remember ; now, 
it seems to me, he ought to have a turn. Do not 
fret yourself about the matter, Arabella . I take it 
philosophically . why cannot you do the same ?" 
"The same! I have no patience with such 



"LIKE A man's hand." 53 

absurdity ; but 1 think I have showed Mrs. Dudley 
there is one of the family, at least, clever enough to 
see what she is trying for." 

" Do you not think it possible for a woman to be 
too clever, occasionally?" inquired her husband; 
" because it occurs to my mind you have overshot 
the mark by the merest trifle. My uncle did not 
know the touching relation in which he stood to Mrs. 
Dudley, until you quarrelled with her. Very possibly 
he would never have known, had I not, in consequence 
of that little flourish up the Marina, told him." 

'' You. told him r 

" Yes, my love ; I considered it was only right he 
should know the great provocation you had received, 
so that he might not think the slight coolness be- 
tween you and Mrs. Dudley originated in any fault 
on your side. He quite understands your feelings, 
and appreciates them fully." 

" Douglas, you are either mad or infatuated." 

" Do not moot the former idea before my uncle, 
or he may cut me ofi^ with a shilling, and so deprive 
you of all chance of ever managing his estates. For 
myself, I do not care for more money ; I am think- 
ing of going out to Australia, and taking a sheep- 



54 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

farm ; of doing the Arcadian for a few years, during 
which time you will marry some one else, and I 
shall enjoy a bachelor's existence by way of variety. 
I am growing horribly tired of the monotony of 
civilised life. I wonder if I could join a mission as 
a muscular Christian, and go out to convert the 
heathen. I should like to see how a fellow with a 
lot of wives manages them. I should preach the 
same doctrines as " 

But at this point Mrs. Croft swept out of the 
room, and her husband took advantage of her 
absence to seize his hat and leave the house, and 
march away in a blazing sun to Hastings, where, 
according to the programme she had sketched for 
her own guidance. Heather was not at home. 

" I am getting confoundedly tired of this," Mr. 
Croft remarked to his uncle next day, as they 
lounged together along the Marina ; '' suppose we 
swear business requires our immediate presence in 
town ; cannot we have letters by the five o'clock 
post, compelling us to go up by the express to- 
morrow morning ? Madam in town is bad enough, 
but madam at a watering-place, or in the country, 
is scarcely to be borne." 



"LIKE A man's hand." 55 

^^ What a choice you made, Douglas !" said his 
uncle, in a tone of plaintive rebuke. 

"Did I choose at all? I doubt it," was the 
reply. " Since my marr age, I often should have 
liked to choose ; but perhaps, had power been given 
me to do so, I might only have made a worse mess 
of it. The best of a marriage like mine is, it makes 
a man so philosophical. It leaves one nothing to 
wish for, nothing to desire ; jealousy, over-affection, 
anxiety about the dear creature's health ; sleepless 
nights if her finger aches ; torturing doubts if another 
fellow is over-zealous in finding her shawls . from 
all these troubles I am exempt. My domestic life 
leaves me nothing to fret about. Like that young 
man m Longfellow's poem, . 

*' ' Light-hearted and content, 
I wander through the world ;* 

only I do not carry two locks of hair about witn 
me and sentimentalize concerning them, so that in 
one respect I have an advantage over the widower." 
" If your wife were in heaven, I do not think you 
would carry one of her curls done up in note-paper 
in your left-hand waistcoat pocket, after the fashion 



56 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of a man I once knew," remarked Mr. Stewart a 
little grimly. 

" Well, now, do you know I think I should," an- 
swered Mr. Croft ; " when a woman is so kind as to 
die, it seems to me the least in common gratitude 
her husband can do, is to use his handkerchief 
freely, and publicly preserve little mementoes of 
her . the stalk of the last bunch of grapes she 
ate, for instance, her box of rouge, or the puff 
wherewith she powdered her face. To me there is 
something inexpressibly touching about relics ; most 
probably because they are useless. I always notice 
people admire and reverence things which are utterly 
useless, that is one reason I am so fond of my wife. 
Oh ! Arabella ; oh, my beloved ! there she stands at 
the window awaiting my return. Signalling for it, 
too, by all that's wonderful ; shall we go and ascer- 
tain the cause of that waving cambric ?" And Mr. 
Stewart agreeing, the pair crossed the road and 
entered the house, when they soon discovered the 
reason of Mrs. Croft's anxiety for their return in the 
shape of a telegram for Mr. Stewart, which had 
arrived about an hour previously. 

*^It is from Dudley," said that gentleman, placing 



'*LIKE A man's hand." 57 

the paper in his nephew's hand. " Nice kettle of 
fish, is not it ? We can catch the next train, I 
suppose ?" 

" What is the matter ; what has happened ?" 
inquired Mrs. Croft. 

" Nothing, except that a gentleman on our board 
will not be reasonable," answered Mr. Stewart. 
** He wants talking to, I think. Come, Douglas . 
that is, if you are coming with me. Good-bye, 
Arabella, we shall be down again to-morrow." 

"Good-bye, my dear," repeated Mr. Croft. 
" Comfort yourself, as I do, that the parting is not 
for ever ;" and the pair hurried off to St. Leonard's 
Station, talking as they went about the telegram, 
which Mr. Stewart now tore up into little scraps, 
and scattered to the wind. 

" My mind always misgave me concerning him," 
said Mr. Stewart. " I asked Black specially if he 
had authority for putting his name on the direc- 
tion." 

" It is an old trick of Black's, I believe, that of 
using names without permission," answered Mr. 
Croft ; " you will see Frank, I suppose, and try to 
alter his purpose ?" 



58 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Yes, that is why I am now going to town ; and 
I asked you to accompany me, thinking you would 
be glad of a holiday." 

" You are very kind. I do not fancy I should 
have much cared for a tete-a-tete with madam by the 
sad sea waves ; and Mrs. Dudley reftises to be at 
home to me." 

" You can scarcely blame her for that," remarked 
his uncle. 

" I am not blaming her, only I think it is carry- 
ing the theory of husband and wife being one, a little 
too fer. However, if such be her will, I must resign 
myself to it." 

They were standing on the platform at St. 
Leonard's as Mr. Croft spoke thus, and even as he 
spoke, the train came out of the first tunnel and 
stopped to take up its passengers. 

'* Why, good heavens, there is Mrs. Dudley," ex- 
claimed Mr. Croft. " Can you make room for us T 
he asked, eagerly opening the door of the compart- 
ment she occupied. "Are you all returning to 
town ? I had not the slightest expectation of meet- 
ing you here." 

" We always meant to return to-day," answered 



"LIKE A man's hand." 59 

Heather, after she had spoken to Mr. Stewart, and 
the two gentlemen were seated vis-^-vis. ^ But I 
thought you were going to remain for some time 
longer T' 

"So we are, unhappily, I believe," he replied, 
putting up the window in order to keep the smoke 
out of the carriage while passing through the second 
tunnel. '^ I only wish," he added, as they sped on 
out into the sunshine again, " we were not going to 
remain. I think St. Leonard's the most wearisome 
spot on the face of the whole earth." 

^^ And we have enjoyed our visit so much !" said 
Heather. 

" But then ladies have resources within them- 
selves of which we men know nothing," he answered. 

"I cannot agree with that,** Heather replied; 
^ we may have resources at home, but certainly not 
in lodgings ; and there is one thing you can do which 
we cannot . smoke ; Lucy and I, for instance, could 
not have amused ourselves for a whole evening walk- 
ing up and down the Parade slowly puffing cigars, 
as I have seen you and Mr. Stewart doing." 

" No, but you could let your dresses sweep the 
ground," answered Mr. Croft. '^ I often sLncy that 



60 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

swish-swish of my wife's train must produce the same 
soothing eflFect upon her nerves as a cigar does on 
mine. Now, Miss Lally, you have not spoken one 
word to me for the last four days, and my heart is 
broken iu consequence. Will you be good and talk 
to me now T and Mr. Croft put out his hand to the 
little girl, who came tumbling over from the opposite 
corner to make up friends again with her old 
admirer, who took her on his knee, and instituted 
particular inquiries into the state of her health. 

" Was she better . much better . able to run half 
a mile without getting tired ?" 

"Yes," she declared, "more than 'at; *ook at 
mine face ; ma says it has got fat ;" and she put up 
her little hands to her cheeks, and so drew all the 
flesh forward for Mr. Croft to contemplate. 

" Fat, are you, little one ?" broke in Mr. Stewart ; 
"not much of that, I fear; let me look at you. 
She does seem considerably better," he added, 
addressing Mrs. Dudley. "You will take her to 
see Mr. Henry, though, will you not ?" 

Heather answered that she certainly should, 
whereupon Lally insisted on knowing exactly who 
Mr. Henry was, and being informed a doctor, de- 



"LIKE A man's hand." 61 

clared she would rather not see him. "Other 
doctor gave me nasty stuff to drink, sour, and Lally 
did not like him." 

" Very ungrateful on your part," remarked Lucy, 
"for Doctor Chickton was exceedingly kind to 
you." 

"Didn't like him," repeated the child, deter- 
minedly ; " said sour stuff wasn't bad to take, and 
it was dre'fiil ; said it would make Lally well, and 
it didn't He told 'tones, he did." 

" Are you glad you are going back to London ?" 
inquired Mr. Stewart. 

" No," said LaUy, " don't like it either. I'd like 
to go home and see the chick-a-biddies, and Dash, 
and Nip and Nep, and the ponies, and Ned ;" and 
so the child talked on, her eyes dancing with de- 
light as she spoke of the old home any other little 
girl might almost have forgotten in the time, while 
Mr. Stewart looked thoughtfully in her face flushed 
with excitement, and wondered what value his friend, 
Mr. Rymner Henry, might set on her chances of 
life. 

Mr. Crofl delighted greatly in Lally. He en- 
couraged her to be what her mamma called naughty. 



62 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

to chatter away at express speed, to tell him all 
about Berrie Down, and Aggy, and Laura, " and 
then there used to be Bessie, you know," added the 
child. "Ah! Bessie was good to Lally. She 
singed to her, and dressed the beau-ful-lest dolls ; 
but Lally will never see Bessie no more . no, never 
no more ;" and the little face began to twitch, and 
the lips to tremble, and then the brown eyes filled 
with tears, and finally Lally lifted up her voice and 
wept. 

" What is the matter ?" inquired Mr. Stewart, who 
had been engaged in a conversation with Lucy. 
"What have you done, Douglas, to cause such 
grief?" 

" I want to see Bessie," sobbed the child. 

"And who is it that is so cruel as to prevent 
your seeing her ?" asked Mr. Stewart. 

" She is not with us now," explained Mrs. Dudley. 
" She was staying at the Hollow for some months 
before we left Hertfordshire, and Lally grew 
very fond of her. I cannot imagine why she so 
continually talks about her now, though ; I do not 
fancy other children have such tenacious memories. 
Sometimes for weeks together she will never mention 



 T TTTI? A -U- & -Vr'a TT A XTTX  



LIKE A MAN S HAND." 63 

Bessie's name, and then she breaks out as you see. 
I wish she would not do it. It is veiy bad for her, 
fretting so much after any one. Lally, my darling, 
you must be patient ; whenever Bessie can come to 
see you, she will.*' 

" No," moaned Lally, " no more. Bessie will come 
to Lally back again, never no more." 

There was something terribly pathetic about the 
child's grief even to those who knew nothing what- 
ever of Bessie, or of the circumstances connected 
with her departure. 

" Can't she come and see the child ?" asked Mr. 
Stewart, a little testily. " Surely, if she be at all 
within reach, such a yearning as this might be 
gratified." 

" Perhaps so," Heather answered, " if we knew 
where she was; but I have never heard from her 
since she last left Berrie Down." 

"Did you part in anger then?" Mr. Stewart 
inquired, true to his theory concerning women's 
quarrels. 

" In anger !" Heather repeated in astonishment, 
" when we all loved Bessie as though she had been 
one of our own household ! Why she does not write to 



64 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

me, I cannot tell, only I know she has some good 
reason for her silence ; and I would rather not talk 
about her any more, or, perhaps, like Lally, I shall 
begin to be foolish and cry too." An explanation 
necessitated by the fact that Mrs. Dudley was crying 
partly because of her child's grief, and partly 
because she never could speak of Bessie without a 
feeling of bitter sorrow. 

After that there fell a sudden silence on the 
party, during the continuance of which Heather 
epaployed herself in adjusting Master Leonard's 
collar, which was crooked to an unimaginable 
extent; Mr. Stewart read the newspaper; Lucy 
looked at Heather ; and Mr. Croft, his chin resting 
on Lally's head, gazed out of the window, his 
thoughts wandering the while miles, and miles 
away. 

" Do you expect Mr. Dudley to meet you ?" asked 
Mr. Stewart, when the train had passed New Cross, 
and was speeding on through Bermondsey. 

" No," Heather answered ; " but his brother will 
be at the station." 

" Oh ! he has brothers." 

"Two," Heather explained; and a few minutes 



" LIKE A man's hand." 65 

afterwards she was introducing Alick to Mr. Stewart, 
who looked on him not ungraciously, while Mr. 
Croft stood a little apart, apparently by no means 
desirous of making Mr. Alexander Dudley's ac- 
quaintance. 

" We are detaining you,* Heather said, at length, 
to Mr. Stewart; who remarked, as he bade her 
" Good-bye," that he also was going to Lincoln's 
Inn Fields, and should probably arrive there 
first. 

Then she turned and looked for Mr. Croft, who, 
unable longer to avoid the situation, now came 
forward, and assisted her into a cab. 

As he did so, Alick, with a sudden amazement, 
recognised him. 

"Who is that gentleman?" he asked Heather; 
while the object of this inquiry followed Mr. 
Stewart into a hansom, which immediately drove 
oflF. 

"Mr. Croft . Mr. Douglas Aymescourt Croft. 
Why ? Do you know him ; have you ever seen him 
before?" 

" 1 think I have once," Alick answered, remem- 
bering for certain he had met that same individual 

VOL. III. F 



64 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

me, I cannot tell, only I know she has some good 
reason for her silence ; and I would rather not talk 
about her any more, or, perhaps, like Lally, I shall 
begin to be foolish and cry too." An explanation 
necessitated by the fact that Mrs. Dudley was crying 
partly because of her child's grief, and partly 
because she never could speak of Bessie without a 
feeling of bitter sorrow. 

After that there fell a sudden silence on the 
party, during the continuance of which Heather 
einployed herself in adjusting Master Leonard's 
collar, which was crooked to an unimaginable 
extent; Mr. Stewart read the newspaper; Lucy 
looked at Heather ; and Mr. Croft, his chin resting 
on Lally's head, gazed out of the window, his 
thoughts wandering the while miles, and miles 
away. 

" Do you expect Mr. Dudley to meet you ?" asked 
Mr. Stewart, when the train had passed New Cross, 
and was speeding on through Bermondsey. 

" No," Heather answered ; " but his brother will 
be at the station." 

" Oh ! he has brothers." 

" Two," Heather explained ; and a few minutes 



" LIKE A man's hand." 65 

afterwards she was introducing Alick to Mr. Stewart, 
who looked on him not ungraciously, while Mr. 
Croft stood a little apart, apparently by no means 
desirous of making Mr. Alexander Dudley's ac- 
quaintance. 

" We are detaining you,* Heather said, at length, 
to Mr. Stewart; who remarked, as he bade her 
" Good-bye," that he also was going to Lincoln's 
Inn Fields, and should probably arrive there 
first. 

Then she turned and looked for Mr. Croft, who, 
unable longer to avoid the situation, now came 
forward, and assisted her into a cab. 

As he did so, Alick, with a sudden amazement, 
recognised him. 

"Who is that gentleman?" he asked Heather; 
while the object of this inquiry followed Mr. 
Stewart into a hansom, which immediately drove 
off. 

"Mr. Croft . Mr. Douglas Aymescourt Croft. 
Why ? Do you know him ; have you ever seen him 
before ?" 

" 1 think I have once," Alick answered, remem- 
bering for certain he had met that same individual 

VOL. III. P 



68 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of the Times would insert his letter, and thus give 
him (Lord Kerams) an opportunity of setting him- 
self right with the general public." 

This letter was written after a somewhat stormy 
interview with Arthur Dudley and Mr. Black, and 
despatched to the Times oflSce hours before Mr. 
Stewart's arrival in town. When that gentleman, 
after touching en route at the oflSces in Lincoln's 
Inn Fields, did reach Lord Kemms' town house, he 
was informed his Lordship had left for KemmsPark 
by the 5.8 express. 

On receiving this intelligence, Mr. Stewart and 
his nephew drove straight to King's Cross, where 
they caught the 7.15 to Palinsbridge, from which 
place they proceeded in a fly, procured at the Plough 
Hotel, to Kemms' Park. 

Arrived there, between ten and eleven o'clock at 
night, Mr. Stewart bade the driver wait ; and then, 
following the butler, who stared to see visitors at 
such an hour, was ushered into the drawing-room, 
where were seated Miss Augusta Baldwin, Lord 
Kemms, and Mr. Compton Raidsford. 

" If 1 were inclined to quote Mr. Black," remarked 
Mr. Stewart, after exchanging greetings with his 



AT EEMMS PARK. 69 

relations, "I should say, here we drop upon the 
conspirators. Now, Frank, what is all this about 
you and our Company ? Nice dance you have led 
me over it ! Why could you not have stopped in 
town till you had seen some of us, as any other 
human being would, I think, excepting yourself?" 

^^ Mr. Raidsford had kindly promised to dine with 
me to-day." 

"Very good of Mr. Raidsford," answered Mr. 
Stewart, with a look towards that gentleman, which 
seemed to say " I know all about it ;" " and I suppose 
you and Mr. Raidsford have been settling our con- 
cerns for us over your claret. We stand at opposite 
poles," he added, addressing the contractor ; " there 
can be no doubt but that in some previous state of 
existence you were bitten by a company, and have 
had a kind of hydrophobic horror of Limited Liability 
ever since. Now, Frank, tell me all your grievances ; 
what is this about your good name being taken 
from you ?" 

" It has been used without my authority," an- 
swered his Lordship. " I told Mr. Black distinctly 
I would have nothing to do with his venture, and 
after that he coolly went and put my name on the 
T)irection." 



70 PAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

^^He quite understood, I think^ that you had 
given your consent?" 

" I beg your pardon : the last interview I ever 
had with Mr. Black, until to-day, was at Berrie 
Down, and I then told him nothing should induce 
me to lend my countenance to any undertaking of 
the kind." 

^' It was a pity Mr. Black did not take you at 
your word, Frank," said Mr. Douglas Croft ; " we 
could have done without you." 

" You will have to do without me now," retorted 
Lord Kemms. " I have written to the Times to say 
that my name was used without my authority." 

" You are confoundedly touchy about your name, 
if Miss Baldwin will excuse my saying so," observed 
Mr. Stewart ; which remark Miss Baldwin apparently 
took as a hint that the presence of ladies was un- 
desired, for she rose and left the room, statmg, with 
a gracious smile to Mr. Stewart, that she would not 
remain, and so prevent his saying whatever he liked. 
^* I consider Frank has been very hasty," she added, 
glancing defiantly in the direction where Mr. Raidsford 
sat; "but I profess to know nothing of business." 

" Then I wish, aunt, you would not interfere in 



AT REMMS PARK. 71 

mine," answered Lord Kemms ; " and, as for my 
name," he went on, addressing Mr. Stewart, " how 
should you like yours to be put on any board of 
direction without your authority ?" 

** I should not like it at all," replied his visitor 
^' but still I should not think it necessary to go per- 
fectly insane on the subject, as you appear to have 
done. Dudley tells me you stormed at Mr. Black 
to-day like a woman ; that you would not listen to 
a word of explanation ; and that you dashed out of 
the office without giving either of them an oppor- 
tunity of even attempting to arrange the matter 
with you." 

** Because Black had the audacity to tell me I 
did give him permission, and adhered to the state- 
ment. He first insinuated I was trying to back out 
of the afiair, and then wished to know if some 
pecuniary compromise could not be eflFected. The 
insolent vagabond coolly told me, ^ that was always 
the way with gentlemen, . that a merchant's word 
was as good as his bond, but that, unless you had 
everything with a swell (the expression he used) in 
black and white, there was no dependence to be 
placed upon how matters might turn out.' " 



72 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

" Very foolish of Black to make such a speech,** 
Mr. Stewart commented. " You must have put up 
his temper by some means, Frank." 

^^ I made him confess he was a liar,** said Lord 
Kemms. 

** My dear fellow, how very vehement you are !*' 
expostulated his kinsman ; ^* you could not express 
your meaning more strongly if you were a coster- 
monger 1** 

" I do not see why I should not employ the only 
word which thoroughly expresses my meaning, even 
though it be used by a costermonger also. * Mr. 
Black stated that I allowed my name to be put on 
the Direction. I asked him when ? He declared at 
the time we were staying at Berrie Down. I re- 
minded him, that the last occasion on which we met 
in Hertfordshire was one day I called at the Hollow, 
when I told him, in Mr. Dudley's presence, 1 would 
have nothing to do with the Company. Then he 
said, he had made a mistake . ^it was when he saw 
me at my house in London. I told him he had 
never seen me at my house in London . that, at the 
time he inquired there for me, I was in Paris. Then 
he declared it must have been at Palinsbridge 



AT KEMMS PARK. 73 

station ; at any rate, he knew I had promised to let 
him have my name^ and that it was too absurd for 
me, after having seen myself advertised for twelve 
months, to try to repudiate connection with the 
* Protector ' now." 

"And he was quite right there," observed Mr. 
Stewart. 

" I regret to differ from you," here put in Mr. 
Baidsford ; " but I cannot agree with that opinion." 

Mr. Stewart looked over at the speaker with an 
expression which seemed to say, that it was a matter 
of supreme indifference to him whether Mr. Raids- 
ford agreed or not, but still he condescended to 
explain that " Lord Kemms had suffered judgment 
to go by default." 

" Mr. Black's very remark !" said Lord Kemms. 
" He drew his shoulders up to his ears, and stuffed 
his hands under the waistband of his trousers " 

" Really, Frank, you are needlessly descriptive," 
expostulated Mr. Stewart 

" And said," proceeded Lord Kemms, unheeding 
the interruption, " you know, my Lord, it is of no 
sort of manner of use your kicking up an infernal 
row about the matter now. You have suffered 



74 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

judgment to go by default ; and whether you in- 
tended your name to be on our board or not, cannot 
make any difference at this time of day ; so you had 
better let us come to some arrangement. Speaking 
on behalf of the other directors, 1 am certain the 
Company will do what it can to meet your views." 

" Could a man have spoken any fairer than that ?" 
inquired Mr. Stewart. 

** Fairer! I never heard anything so perfectly 
cool and impertinent in my life 1" exclaimed Lord 
Kemms. ^^ First, to use my name, and then dare to 
say, * I need not try to set myself right with the 
public !' " 

** What do you suppose the public cares about 
the affair ?" asked Mr. Croft. " To whom, do you 
imagine, it signifies in the least whether your name 
is on the Direction or not ?" 

" It signifies to me," replied his Lordship. 

" Why ?" demanded Mr. Stewart. 

" Because I do not choose to be mixed up with 
speculations of the kind ; because I refused to be 
associated with your Company ; because I won't be 
overreached in this way ; because other names may 
have been used in the same manner, and it is time 



AT KEMMS PARK. 75 

promoters were taught such liberties cannot be taken 
with impunity." 

"Our Company is a good one . paying very 
good dividends, and you have risked no money in 
it," suggested Mr. Croft. 

*' Your Company may be a good one, or it may 
not," replied Lord Kemms ; " but, good or bad, 1 
won't be mixed up with it. I will have nothing to 
do with adventures or speculations of any kind." 

" It is a pity you were not always so particular 
concerning the things you connected yourself with, 
Frank," remarked his cousin. 

" Let by-gones be by-gones, Douglas," interposed 
Mr. Stewart, hastily ; '^ because a man sees the folly 
of his ways now, there is no justice in twitting him 
with having been less far-sighted formerly. No 
doubt, Frank is right as to the general principle; 
but this is rather a special case, with some peculiari- 
ties about it, which he will, doubtless, take into 
consideration. In the first place," he added, ad- 
dressing Lord Kemms, ''we will admit there has 
been some misunderstanding on the subject ^" 

" No," was the reply, " I will admit nothing of 
the kind. Black understood me perfectly " 



76 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Well, granting that he did understand you, what 
particular harm has his use of your name done ? It 
is associated not with obscure Cockneys or swindlers, 
but with decently - respectable, solvent men, like 
Douglas and myself, for example. Of course, we 
know, we are not lords ; but still, we have a fancy 
we are honest, and possess some money. Our 
venture is turning out very well. No doubt the 
proper number of shares has been allotted to you. 
You take no responsibility . ^you run no risk; by 
making a fuss over the affair, you will do yourself 
no good, and may do us considerable harm. You 
will take time to think over the matter, and 
you will, when you have cooled down a little, 
decide to make no public scandal concerning the 
affair." 

" I have already written to the TimeSy* answered 
his Lordship. 

"But not posted the letter, I hope. Bring it 
here, Frank, and we will smoke a calumet of peace 
over its ashes:" 

" Impossible ! I sent it to the limes' office before 
I left London." 

"If we had known that, we might have saved 



AT KEMMS PARK. 77 

ourselves this agreeable journey," said Mr. Croft ; 
while Mr. Stewart observed : 

** Well, Frank, all I can say is, I am very sorry ; 
for now we shall have to fight you as best we 
can. Once in the Times, it is war to the death, you 
know." 

" It was not I who sought the war," answered 
Lord Kemms. 

" After waiting nearly twelve months, you might 
surely have waited another day." 

"It was only yesterday I knew anything about 
the matter. I happened to be over at the Hollow 
with my aunt, and on the drawing-room table I saw 
one of the 'Protector' prospectuses. Glancing at 
it, I knew for the first time the use Black had made 
of my name." 

" It is singular your friend, Mr. Raidsford, did 
not communicate the fact to you before," observed 
Mr. Stewart, with a slight sneer. 

*' There has been a coolness between me and Lord 
Kemms for some time past," interposed Mr. Raids- 
ford, " originating in this very afiair. Lord Kemms 
assured me he would have nothing to do with your 
Company; and when, after that assurance, I saw 



78 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

his name amongst the directors^ I confess I felt 
both surprised and nettled." 

" And pray, sir, if the question be not indiscreet, 
what interest was it of yours whether Lord Kemms 
became a director of our (company or not ?" 

" It was no personal interest of mine," answered 
the contractor ; " but believing, as I do, such com- 
panies to be the curse of commerce . the very death 
of legitimate trade . when I am asked for my poor 
opinion, I do not hesitate about expressing it" 

"You consider capital, then, which employs 
abour, which builds bridges, constructs railways, 
digs canals, sends out vessels, the death of legitimate 
trade ?" inquired Mr. Stewart. 

*' Capital, no," was the reply ; " companies, yes . 
at least, limited liability companies." 

" And yet the idea of the man who brought in, 
and the majority which passed, the Limited Liability 
Act, was, that, so far from killing trade, it would 
foster and encourage commerce." 

" So we may conclude, or else it would never have 
become law," was the reply. 

"Trade has always been crippled for want of 
capital," remarked Mr. Croft. 



AT KEMMS PARK. 79 

"And trade always will be," answered Mr. 
Raidsford ; " it is in the nature of trade to find what- 
ever capital it may have insufficient. In precise pro- 
portion to the extent of his business are a man's 
outstanding debts ; consequently, the larger his busi- 
ness is, the greater are the number of his debtors. 
His capital, in fact, goes into his books ; and instead 
of so much in the bank, he has so many hundreds of 
people owing him money." 

" The idea of limited liability was to enable a man 
to put a certain sum of money into a business, and 
have no further responsibility," said Mr. Stewart 

" Any man could have compassed the same object 
by lending money into a business," replied Mr. 
Raidsford ; " since the usury laws were repealed, he 
might have taken what percentage he pleased, and 
run no more risk than he does under the Limited 
liability Act ; but the real mischief of the present 
system, to my mind, is, not that large capitalists are 
thereby enabled to advance money to small working 
men, but that the large capitalists are thereby enabled 
to combine together, and crush the smalj working 
men. Precisely as you are doing at present : you are 
ruining hundreds of respectable tradesmen, and when 




nO FAR ABOrE BUSIES. 

your crash comes, as come it wiD, thoee men will not 
be benefited thereby ; the; bare lost their cajMtal, 
mall or great, aa the case may be, and must coDtent 
themselves with sitnations for the reminder of 
their lives." 

" You are extremely kind to prophesy such a plea- 
DftDt future for the Protector," stud Mr. Croft 

" Where there are many masters, there are bad 
servants," was the reply; "at least, such is my 
opinion. My notion is, indeed, that in a company 
there is no master at all ; there b no one person 
whose business and interest it is to see that things 
arc properly and economically conducted." 

" We have our manager," suggested Mr. Stewart 

"You have an admirably efficient manager at 
your works now, I do not doubt," said Mr. Ealdsford. 

" What do you mean by that remark ?" asked 
Mr. Stewart 

" Simply, that I should not give Mr. Crossenham 
mxpence a week for managing any concern of mine ; 
but^ without question, he is perfectly competent to 
fill the poffltion he occupies with you." 

" Once again, Mr. Raidsford, 1 must ask yon to 
explain your meaning?" 



AT EEMMS PAKK. 81 

" Then, Mr. Stewart, you certainly will ask in 
vain," was the reply. " When, eight months since, 
we met in Moorgate Street, you did me the honour 
of asking my opinion about this Company, . and I 
gave you that opinion to the best of my ability, . 
what was your course of action ? You certainly got 
rid of Bayley Crossenham, but you put in his shoes 
a man utterly incompetent to manage even his own 
business, how much less yours ; a man, who, though 
perfectly honest himself, could never detect dis- 
honesty in others. I asked you then, if Lord 
Kemms' name had been really added to the Direc- 
tion by his authority ? and it is now evident you took 
no steps to ascertain the truth of the matter. I 
counselled you to be exceedingly wary in dealing 
with Mr. Black, andyet Mr. Black is now virtually 
master of the * Protector,' as he is of every other 
company with which he is connected." 

" He is not master of the * Protector,' " answered 
Mr. Stewart 

*' He must be master of its funds, or he never 
could have such an amount of money to spend, as is 
the case at present," was the reply. 

*' He is no such thing," repeated Mr. Stewart. 
VOL. in. G 



82 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

^^ I am happy to hear it, for the sake of the share- 
holders,** answered Mr. Baidsford, coolly ; ** and 
that brings me to another phase of limited liability, 
.iz., that this boasted union of capitalists, of whidi 
we hear so much, is, in many cases, neither more 
nor less than the accumulation of five and ten pounds 
scraped from the savings of the lower middle class ; 
the money of people who, deluded by spedous adyer- 
tisements and good names, send up their post-office 
orders and receive their shares, and lose their cash, 
and thereby afford a living to a dass of men who 
otherwise would be exeidsing their talents in some 
very difierent mode indeed from that cS * jnomoting ' 
public companies.^' 

^* What a pity you do not go into Parliament, and 
fevour the nation with an exposition of your views V 
said Mr. Stewart 

*^ I should not be the first man to advance them," 
was the reply. ^ In both Houses somewhat similar 
opinions have been expressed before now ; of course, 
my views may be wrong " 

"^ You do not mean, Mr. Raidsford, that yoo have 
ever contemplated such a posalnlity ?^ intemptBd 
Mr. Stewart. 




AT KEMMS PARK. 83 

"Yes, |[ have," was the reply; "contemplated, 
much more closely, the pros and cons of limited 
liability, than you have the Protector's chances of 
ultimate success. The system is rotten, Mr. Stewart, 
and you and such men as you, who derive profit 
from these ventures without incurring one halfpenny 
of risk, ought to be the first to confess that it 
is so." 

"I have two thousand shares in the Protector 
Bread Company on my own risk, at all events," said 
Mr. Stewart. 

" I am delighted to hear it, in one way," answered 
Mr. Eaidsford ; " delighted, because it proves you 
to be a thoroughly honest man ; but sorry, because 
if anything do go wrong with the Company, your 
loss will be considerable." 

" But I am determined nothing shall go wrong 
with the Company." 

" In that case, doubtless you devote a consider* 
able amount of attention to the mills !" 

"Mr. Raidsford, have you any specific charge to 
make against our manager ?" 

"If I had," was the reply, "I should go before 
the board and prefer it. I make no charge, but I 

G 2 



84 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

recommend caution. I was right about Lord 
Kemms, you perceive." 

"We do not admit that," broke in Douglas 
Croft ; " we are his opponents now, and must fight 
the matter out with him." 

" Or, rather, Mr. Black musli" added Mr. Stewart. 
" He got us into this scrape, and he must get us out 
of it ; so, remember, Frank, you are in for a paper 
war with one of the shrewdest men I know; you 
and Mr. Raidsford will have to muster your forces 
so as to come out of the struggle with edat, I am 
sorry it has so happened, I must confess ; sorry that 
Lord Kemms has been . ^I am obliged to use a harsh 
word, Mr. Raidsford . so ill-advised. With the 
best intentions, I feel confident, you have counselled 
him to hurry into print (a course always to be 
avoided, if possible), but still, you have led him 
wrong. Had you left the matter in my hands, 
Frank," he added, "I should myself have stated 
publicly that there had been some misunderstanding, 
and so withdrawn your name, without any fiiss or 
anger. As it is . why it is . and there is no use in 
further discussion. We must now do the best we can 
for ourselves," and Mr. Stewart rose to depart. 



AT EMMS PARK. 85 

" You are not thinking of going to-night ?" ex- 
claimed Lord Kemms, in astonishment ; ^^ because 
we differ in opinion, we are not, I trust, to swear 
eternal enmity." 

" Not with my good-will," replied Mr. Stewart ; 
" but because we have differed in opinion, I must get 
back to town by the first train to-morrow morning. 
Had your letter to the Times not been despatched I 
would gladly have remained here, instead of return- 
ing to Palinsbridge to-night ; but needs must, you 
know ; and you, Frank, are our driver." 

" I am sorry for it, extremely sorry I" exclaimed 
Lord Kemms. 

" Sorry for having appealed to the god of English 
breakfast-tables?" asked Mr. SteWart "Come, I 
am glad to see some signs of repentance about you." 

"1 did not mean that ; I am not sorry for having 
written and despatched my letter, I only regret that 
there should be any necessity for you to drive back 
to Palinsbridge to-night. But, at least, you will 
have something to eat before you start ?" 

" It appears to me we ought not to break bread 
under your roof," said his cousin ; "but, considering 
we have had nothing since we left Hastings, ten 



86 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

hours since, except a glass of sherry and seltzer 
water at Palinsbridge, I think it would be carrying 
animosity farther than human nature could endure, 
to refuse your obliging though tardy oflFer." 

'* For my part, I shall be very glad to accept it," 
declared Mr. Stewart ; " worry always gives me an 
appetite ; and I should not care to be dependent on 
the good offices of mine landlord at the Plough, for 
supper. His seltzer water was as hot as though 
drawn from one of the Geyser springs. And will 
you let some of your people tell the fellow, who 
brought us over, to give that poor devil of a horse 
of his a feed ? Nice creature it is; trots about three 
miles an hour !" 

" Will you allow my man to drive you back, Mr. 
Stewart?" sadd the contractor. "I shall be very 
happy if you will make use of my carriage." 

*' Thank you, no," was the reply ; " the fly must 
return, and so Douglas and I may as well go in it. 
We are not exactly like man and wife, apt to 
quarrel by the way. If he were my better half, I 
would accept your offer. at once; as it is, we will 
n am as we came . ^much obliged, nevertheless." 

Then Mr. Baidsford thought he must return home. 



AT KEMMS PARK. 87 

" Good-night/' said Mr. Stewart ; " though your 
views differ from mine, I do not say but there is 
much truth in them. That is the worst of our im- 
perfect state of existence, there is truth in every- 
thing." 

" Even in a promoter," suggested Douglas Croft ; 
and then the three shook hands with Mr. Raidsford, 
who drove back to Moorlands thinking to himself . 

** These great people are very curious individuals. 
If three men in my own rank of life had come to- 
gether under such circumstances, there would have 
been hard words used, and a quarrel to a certainty. 
Is it that they are not in earnest, or isitciviUzation? 
One hears a great deal about civilization ; is this 
one of its fruits ?" and thus pondering, Mr. Raids- 
ford returned home to the wife of his bosom, who, 
back from Hastings, was conducting her household 
on principles which seemed to the servants the 
reverse either of Christian or civilized. 

Perhaps this fact made the amicable warfare at 
Kemms Park seem all the more astonishing to the 
.contractor, who had many things still to learn, though 
he was so clever about business and business 
matters. 



88 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"If that be the way gentlemen quarrel,** he 
thought, " I cannot wonder at their looking down 
on us ; I wonder now what they are thinking about 
me?" 

Had a little bird of the air carried what the trio 
were saying about him to Mr. Raidsford, he need 
not have covered his face and shut his eyes. 

" Spite of his crotchets I really like Raidsford," 
remarked Mr. Croft. " What do you suppose he 
meant, uncle, when he spoke about the Company 
failing?' 

" He meant," answered Mr. Stewart, " what I have 
often suspected myself, . that Black is too great a 
rogue to be honest, even if honesty be to his interest. 
Raidsford is a well-intentioned fellow, but he has 
not much information outside his business. Still, 
his ideas are worth consideration, and I shall con- 
sider them, and look up Mr. Crossenham," added 
Mr. Stewart in a lower tone, as he went downstairs 
to the dining-room, where a substantial supper was 
already spread. 



89 



CHAPTER V. 



THE PAPER WAR. 



The eight o'clock up express only stopped once 
between Palinsbridge and HoUoway; but on the 
occasion of that one pause, Mr. Stewart procured a 
copy of the morning's Times, where, occupying 
a prominent position, he found Lord Kemms' 
letter. 

" It is a mercy Frank is a Lord," remarked Mr. 
Croft, drily ; " for I do not think he would ever have 
got through the world in a subordinate capacity. 
The longer I live, the more satisfied I feel Provi- 
dence orders these things a vast deal better than we 
could do." 

" You think, I suppose. Providence made him a 
Lord on the same principle as it makes so many poor 
men inventors. If an individual have not five pounds 



i 



90 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

in the world, he has a patent . the compensating 
balance . is that what you mean, Douglas ?** 

" Something of that kind," answered his nephew. 
"I have often wondered how Frank would have 
pushed his way had he been turned adrift at ten 
years of age with half-a-crown in his pocket ; one 
cannot marvel at men like Baidsford being a little 
elated at the contemplation of their own exploits, 
when one thinks of how few people there really are 
in the world with any brains at all. Now, unprin- 
cipled though he may be, can you help admiring 
Black ? I confess, I have the very highest opinion 
possible of that honest individual's talent" 

'^ Much the same sort of talent as pickpockets 
and burglars are made of," answered Mr. Stewart 

" Oh ! you are wrong there," was the reply ; " de- 
cidedly wrong ; Black's is an administrative genius, 
mental . ^not physical. The pickpocket's clever^ 
ness is merely highly-cultivated manual dexterity, 
the same kind of thing that makes some women clever 
at fancy work, at crochet, and netting, and those 
fearful groups of flowers executed in Berlin wool, 
which my Arabella's soul delights in. A burglar, 
again, is merely an advanced mechanic, but Black's 



^ 



THE PAPER WAR. 91 

genius is of a very different order. He has ability 
to conceive and impudence to execute ; he has an 
immense faculty of organization ; he would have 
made a good Chancellor of the Exchequer, I fancy ; 
his resources are inexhaustible ; his power of con- 
struction enormous. No undertaking is too large 
for him to fear carrying through. He puts me often 
in mind of those fellows at the Circus, who can ride 
four horses at once. He could manage fifty com- 
panies. I often think, when I am talking to Black, 
about what judges sometimes say to criminals, 
namely, that it is a pity to see such talents applied 
to such purposes; in another walk of life, Black's 
genius ought to have carried him to eminence." 

" Don't waste your regrets upon such an arrant 
humbug," Mr. Stewart replied. " Nature has fitted 
him into the only hole he could by possibility have 
filled. Black's genius is a lying genius. Had it been 
clothed by circumstances decently, externally ap- 
parelled with honesty, and virtu and truth, it would 
soon have got rid of those incumbrances, and come 
forth in its primitive nakedness. I tell you Black 
has no talent, save for dishonesty; if that devil were 
cast out of him, he would be strong no longer. As 



92 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Samson's strength lay in his hair, so Black's lies in 
his falsehood, his cunning, his impudence, and his 
plausibility. Take these things from him and he 
would be but as other ordinary men ; honest, per- 
haps, but weak ; able to earn a living, but certainly 
not to make a fortune. It is quite a mistake to 
imagine because a man is clever in one walk, he 
could be clever if he pleased in another. The walk 
is dictated by his particular cleverness, and Black's 
talent, as I said before, is lying. 

" Yet he professes to be weary of planning, and 
scheming, and uncertainty " 

" And very possibly that profession is true. A 
man may be weary of the devil which possesses him, 
even though he be unable to get rid of it. At one 
time, I confess, I thought Black was going to turn 
over a new leaf, and content himself with the fine 
things the Protector had in store for him, but now I 
fear the old Adam is too strong in Black ever to give 
him a chance of turning from the evil of his former 
ways, and I am satisfied if he can ruin our Company 
he will do it somehow. This business of Kemms' is 
bad too. How many shares have you, Douglas, 
besides your qualification ?" 



THE PAPER WAR. 93 

" Five hundred," was the reply ; " and I shall 
give my broker instructions to sell them." 

" You do not mean that?* 

" Indeed I do ; I have no intention of losing six- 
pence, if I can help it. I have never lost money by a 
company yet, and I do not purpose beginning now." 

"But it is so confoundedly mean to desert a 
failing cause." 

" I never made any pretension to Quixotism. The 
moment Frank said he had written to the Times, I 
made up my mind to sell ; and, if you were wise, 
vou would sell also." 

"No; I shall not adopt that course," said Mr. 
Stewart ; but he did not tell his nephew what course 
he intended to adopt. 

" It will be a bad business for Dudley, if anything 
should go wrong with the Protector," remarked Mr. 
Croft, after an uncomfortable pause. "He has 
mortgaged Berrie Down." 

" Surely not !" exclaimed Mr. Stewart 

" Surely yes," was the reply. " Old Craddock 
has advanced five thousand pounds upon it at four 
and a half. good interest too, I call that, on secu- 
rity good as the Bank of England." 



94 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" I wish I had heard of it." 

"So do I," was the reply; "but my lawyer 
knew nothing about the matter till it was all 
settled." 

"What did he want the money for; do you 
know r 

" Bills, I understand ; and that the sura I have 
mentioned will not meet the one-half of those he has 
out. 'Pon my honour, I am very sorry for Dudley. 
He will be a beggar before he is ten years older." 

" He is an awful fool," observed Mr. Stewart 

" So he may be ; but folly is not a sin, is it ?" 

" It is sin's half-brother, or whole father, or some- 
thing of the kind, at any rate," retorted Mr. Stewart ; 
" but here is King's Cross, and now for Mr. Black," 
and so saying the old man sprang as lightly from 
the compartment as his much younger companion ; 
and, bustling out of the station, hailed a cab, which 
speedily conveyed the pair to Lincoln's Inn Fields. 

"Where Mr. Black had already been," Arthur 
informed them. " He is gone on to Dowgate Hill, 
where, he told me, any message would find him 
until one o'clock. Shall I send and ask him to 
come up ?" 



THE PAPER WAR. 95 

** No," Mr. Stewart decided ; " we will follow him." 

"I saw Lord Kemms' letter in this morning's 
Times," Arthur remarked. 

"Yes; his Lordship ought to have a straight 
waistcoat, and bread-and-water diet for a week, to 
teach him not to be so hasty," answered Mr. Stewart. 
" Black must answer him." 

" He said, he hoped you would leave him to do 
so," Arthur replied. " He does not seem to attach 
much importance to the matter." 

"Does he not? I wish I could think it of no 
consequence," replied Mr. Stewart. " Now, Douglas, 
are you ready?" and he again bustled out, and 
seated himself in the hansom which had waited for 
them. 

" Mr. Croft !" it was Arthur, who, following the 
younger man out, spoke now in a lowered tone of 
voice, " do you think this will affect the Company ?" 

" There is no telling," the other answered ; " only, 
if you have many shares, take my advice and get 
rid of them . quietly, you know, quietly." 

" What was Dudley saying to you ?" Mr. Stewart 
inquired as they drove off in the direction of the 
City. 



96 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

'^ Asking me how this would affect the Protector, 
and I advised him to sell his shares." 

^' He has not a share beyond those Black gave 
him. A couple of hundred, paid-up." 

'^ Then, what has he done with all the money for 
which Berrie Down is mortgaged and to be mort- 
gaged?^ 

" God knows ! ^ven it to Black, most probably." 

"Then he is virtually a ruined man." 

" Time will show," answered Mr. Stewart, philo- 
sophically. "I do not think he will get much 
back from Black, at all events." 

" Those are the kind of men, then, Raidsford had 
in his mind, when he was speaking about companies 
last night." 

" Likely enough ; but there were idiots in the 
world before Limited Liability was thought of, and 
there will be idiots in the world when Limited Lia- 
bility is no more." 

" Still, it does seem hard." 

" That if a man will rush into the flame he should 
be burnt. Do you propose, Douglas, constituting 
yourself a species of knight-errant to rescue dis- 
tressed gentlemen from the consequences of their 



THE PAPER WAR. 97 

folly ? You could never prevent a man like Dudley 
getting into trouble. By right, he was Black's 
natural prey, natural and legitimate. You do not 
quarrel with a cat for catching a mouse; why 
should you bemoan Dudley losing his money to 
Black r 

" I pity his wife." 

" Ah 1 there I go with you ; but she followed her 
fancy in marrying him, and she must pay for the 
indulgence of her fancy sooner or later. The best 
thing which could happen for her ultimate happiness 
would be for her husband to get a thorough sicken* 
ing of following his own courses. I consider him 
one of the most conceited prigs I ever met. He 
won't take a hint from me on any subject." 

" On what sort of subject ?" inquired Mr. Croft, 
a little curiously. 

" Why, you know he might learn a little of busi- 
ness, fit himself for some more lucrative post, but 
the moment I mentioned my idea he was up ike a 
rocket. * He did not intend to retain the secre- 
taryship an hour longer than he could advantageously 
dispose of his shares. If I imagined he was going to 
remain at the beck and call of every one who liked 

VOL. III. H 



tin I'AS A^OVE Bifuies. 

is PftJJ n4 IwekoH, I neyer wm more miBtaken in my 
Ufe,' Whw^upon," added Mr. Stewart, " I, of course, 
hHmbly piilogi*ed i and remarked that I had cer- 
tftinly haei) und^r the deluiion he wished to add to 
his Inpome. but I was happy to find I had been 
jonletAkpn i heoauie. (torn my own limited experience 
ef the eifpetiHea of living in London, I felt satisfied 
h^ wuld tiot long aftord to live at the rate he was 
dfttflfi on a thouaaud a year." 

 Wft not that a little " 

** Jmpertineati you would say," finished Mr. 
8t^w(1, aa hi aeplww paused; "that is precisely 
w^t I Kwartse^ to you a few moments ance . 
kflight--WfifttT'y Sh the niftetewoth century is always 
(^|>(1tH^t i twit atillt if ou ses a man walking 
^^l^gt^t  ^ tW tKrinfe of a pfeci{Mce, inrohintarilT 
W bttt iJM*  wwaieg to. tuw. That b what I 
<M^^Mit ^1 fe wito* 1 g^ fcr my pains. Now. 
3fe. Bwdtejt Wfl^- S* l (to stewS, fer any tirooiM 
1 ^h# twAfe It* fiiWMft & toawKiig ifiat ffiy 

" <c>iiu ut^ tM^ qftiK&wii wilt ba^Ilf naffir mtetS  




THE PAPER WAR. 99 

other is a boy. As for Mrs. Dudley, we have talked 
that over before ; and, speaking of her, Douglas, 
may I inquire the reason of the special interest you 
seem to feel about her? A charming lady, doubt- 
less, but still, a recent acquaintance. You are not 
in love with her, I hope ?" 

" No," Douglas Croft answered, "I do not love 
her." 

** What is the link, then ? for a link of some kind 
there must be." 

" Perhaps that my wife dislikes her," suggested 
Mr. Croft ; then he added, in a different tone : " I 
have been a stupid ass and an awful sinner . ^that is 
the reason I Uke Mrs. Dudley." 

" Complimentary to Mrs. Dudley." 

*' True, nevertheless," answered Mr. Croft ; and 
at this moment they arrived at Mr. Black's offices 
in Dowgate Hill, where they found that gentleman 
thoroughly enjoying himself. 

" So you are really going to leave his Lordship in 
my hands for execution?" he said, when Mr. Stewart 
had explained the purpose of their visit. ** I am 
delighted to hear it, for I was just sketching out a 
letter in answer to his. May I read it to you ?" 

H 2 



100 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

" No," answered Mr. Stewart, " I do not wish to 
be mixed up with it in any way. The matter rests 
between you and Lord Kemms, and we must decline 
all interference. Fight it out yourselves. Whether 
the letter ought to be answered at all, until after the 
next board-day, is a question for you to decide." 

** I will take that responsibility on my own shoul- 
ders," remarked Mr. Black. " Of course, all this is 
Mr. Raidsford's doing, not Lord Kemms'. I only 
wish it was Raidsford I had to answer, I would give 
him a dose that ought to cure him of meddling for 
a while again." 

"Could you not publish the formula?" asked Mr. 
Croft ; " it might be useful to the general public" 

" There are some medicines the success of which 
depends as much on the person who administers 
them as on the drugs they actually contain," laughed 
Mr. Black ; " and I don't think my physic would 
do Mr. Raidsford much good, unless I gave it to 
him with my own hands. Meddling humbug 1 what 
the deuce does he know about companies ?" 

" I suppose it is true concerning things as well as 
people . ^that we generally dislike that which we do 
not know," said Mr. Stewart 



THE PAPER WAR. 101 

" And a vast number of both things and people 
that we do," added Mr. Black. Shortly after which 
speech his visitors took their departure, leaving him 
to finish his letter at his leisure. 

Next day it appeared in the Times, and ran to 
the following efiect : . 

" Sir, . ^In the Times of to-day I see (unlike his 
Lordship, I read the papers) that Lord Kemms wish- 
ing, for some inscrutable reason, to ^set himself 
straight with the general public,' repudiates all 
connection with the Protector Bread and Flour 
Company (Limited). How such repudiation is to 
efiect the difficult task Lord Kemms has set himself, 
he, perhaps, can explain ; but as his letter is calcu- 
lated to injure our credit, I beg leave to state, 
first . 

" That Lord Kemms distinctly gave me permis- 
sion to place his name on our Direction. 

"Secondly. That the terms on which his name 
was to appear were fully settled between us. 

" Thirdly. That the list of directors was published 
in almost every respectable paper throughout the 
kingdom, and daily for some weeks in the TimS ; 



102 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

and that, consequently, Lord Kemms must have been 
perfectly well aware his name was placed on the 
Direction. 

"Fourthly. That Lord Kemms gave no oppor- 
tunity, either to myself or our secretary, Mr. Dudley, 
of entering into the slightest explanation on the 
subject. He called at the offices of the Company, 
in Lincoln's Inn Fields, but only for the purpose, 
apparently, of indulging in a monologue, since, 
when Mr. Dudley and I endeavoured to utter a few 
words concerning the question in dispute, he indig- 
nantly rushed out of the secretary's room, declaring 
he should write to the Times. Under the unfortu- 
nate impression that the matter can have the slightest 
interest for the general public, he haa carried out 
his threat, and I am therefore compelled to request 
the insertion of this letter. 

"I have not the remotest idea of the source of 
Lord Kemms' irritation, and can only say, that 
nothing could be farther from the intention of any 
person connected with the Company than to give his 
Lordship the least cause of offence. 

" Your obedient Servant, 

'* Sept., 18. '' Peter Black." 



THE PAPER WAR. 103 

Next day but one appeared another letter from 
Lord Kenuns, stating that every " fact " contained 
in Mr. Black's letter was untrue . that he had never 
given permission for his name to be published . that 
he had never known it was so published, until some 
time after his return from the Continent, when he 
happened to meet with a prospectus of the " Pro- 
tector Bread and Flour Company (Limited)," and 
then for the first time became aware of the use 
which had been made of his name. He considered 
that in the interests of the general public, he was 
bound openly to state the nature of the fraud which 
had been practised. He pointed confidently for 
authentication of his statement, if authentication 
were necessary, to the fact of his never having been 
registered even as a shareholder ; and he declared 
he had given both Mr. Dudley and Mr. Black ample 
opportunity of explaining the line of conduct which 
had been pursued. 

This epistle immediately elicited two in reply: 
one from Arthur Dudley, to the efiect that Lord 
Kemms was mistaken in imagining he had afforded 
an opportunity either for discussion or explanation. 
" Not," added Arthur, ** that it would have been in 



104 FAB ABOVE RUBQ^ 

my power to give his Lordship any information on 
the subject, as I am in utter ignorance of the facts 
of the case ; but, had this been otherwise, I should 
still have failed to obtain a hearing/' 

Mr. Black followed suit by remarking, that a 
nobleman who could consider seeing a prospectus 
'^ having his attention called," might reasonably be 
supposed ignorant of the true meaning of words, and 
through the whole of his letter gave his Lordship the 
benefit of this doubt Mr. Black stated that though 
shares had been duly allotted, whilst Lord Kemms 
was abroad, registration of course was difficult ; that 
his name, failing the legal qualifications, had re- 
mained on the Direction as a matter of courtesy, 
since, having fisdled to take any steps to constitute 
himself a director, by attendance or otherwise, the 
business of the Company had been conducted with- 
out his presence or concurrence, to which circum- 
stance, Mr. Black adroitly more than hinted. Lord 
Kemms s iU-humour was attributable. 

To these letters Lord Kemms replied in a singu- 
larly conAised epistle, which branched ofi^ from the 
question really at issue, to vague statements con- 
cerning companies in general, and limited liability 



THE PAPER WAR. 105 

in particular. Mr. Raidsford being a much cleverer 
contractor than author, really did his Lordship an 
immense deal of mischief over these letters, and, 
although the editor of the Times kindly spared 
the owner of Kemms Park nearly a column of small 
type, and stated at the foot, *'we can insert no 
more letters on this subject," thus leaving the ball 
with his Lordship, still that general public, with 
which Lord Kemms had been so eagerly anxious to 
set himself right, was greatly divided in opinion, 
and vexed in spirit as to who was to blame . whether 
Lord Kemms, or Mr. Black, or both, or neither. 

To settle the matter, there ensued a most volu- 
minous correspondence between the pair . a cor- 
respondence which, unrestricted by any fear of the 
Times' editor, swelled out to sheet after sheet of 
letter-paper closely written. 

A few copies of that correspondence, printed at 
the time for general circulation, and freely adver- 
tised in the TimeSy are still extant, and may be 
perused by the curious in such matters, when down 
for a month at the seashore, or recovering from serious 
illness, or at any other peculiarly leisure period. 

The pamphlet was to be had gratis at the 



106 FAR A5OVE RUBIES. 

Company's oflSces, Lincoln's Inn Fields ; it was for- 
warded free by post to all parts of England ; it was 
made the subject of newspaper comment and private 
criticism, until, in absolute despair, Lord Kemms 
cursed the Protector, and Mr. Black, and all his 
own kindred, and, under the shades of his ancestral 
tr^es, vowed a vow that the next time he rushed 
into print he might be pilloried, and pelted with 
eg^, and bespattered with mud and dirt, as had 
been the case latterly. 

But he stuck to his point ; and, although right is 
not always might, in the hands even of a nobleman, 
still Lord Kemms may have been pronounced the 
victor, insomuch as he contrived to do the Protector 
a vast deal of injury ; to shake the Company to its 
very foundation ; to create an enormous amount of 
alarm amongst the shareholders ; and to cause the 
directors much perplexity and annoyance. 

After all, a company is very like a woman ; once 
blown upon, its credit is worth but little from that 
time forth for ever. It may demean itself with the 
extremest propriety ; under circumstances of temp- 
tation it may remain honest and fair dealing, it may 
struggle for a livelihood, and earn one in the 



k 



THE PAPER WAR. 107 

properest manner possible ; and yet, when all these 
things are placed to the credit side of the account, 
they shall not outweigh the damning fact that a 
shadow once fell over it; that it was "talked about;" 
that there were diversities of opinion as to its con- 
duct; that there were doubts expressed as to its 
perfect and immaculate purity. 

Thus, at any rate, aftkirs turned out with the 
Protector. By a curious feminine logic, ladies dis- 
covered that the quality of the Company's bread 
was aflTected by the newspaper correspondence. 

Heaven knows ! perhaps the fair creatures were 
weary of waging an unprofitable war with their 
servants . those real chiefs of London households; 
perhaps the entreaties . very humble and servile . 
of Markby, round the corner, carried due weight 
with the so-called mistresses of town mansions and 
suburban villas ; perhaps the " cash down '^ prin- 
ciples of the Company were too strict to suit the 
laxer views of people who had been accustomed to 
the greater freedom of a " six months' run ;" perhaps 
. but why go on multiplying suppositions, when the 
actual result is all which need be stated ? . customers 
fell off in abundance ; week after week a smaller 



108 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

 

quantity of bread required to be b^ked, a more 
limited supply of flour was demanded; till at length 
the directors began to look gloomily in each other's 
faces, and inquire "what business was coming to." 
The shares also decreased in value, and by the time 
another half year came round, things had begun to 
look, as Mr. Black declared, " very blue." 

As for Arthur Dudley, he had reluctantly renewed 
those bills, for which Mr. Black was, he considered, 
responsible, once again, and paid off the others out 
of the money raised on Berrie Down. 

He did not, so he conceived, owe a sixpence in 
the world, and he had the property in Lincoln's Inn, 
his furniture and 'his salary, but still things were 
** looking blue " with him also. When he came to 
cast up his year's expenditure, he discovered a 
thousand pounds would nothing like see him 
through it. 

He was an honest man, as I have said before, 
but he had gone on spending . spending . without a 
thought of how all this spending was to be provided 
for, until the gradual depreciation of the Protector's 
shares roused him from his dream of security, and 
compelled him to look his position in the face. 



THE PAPEK WAR. 109 

Then he realised to himself for the first time, 
how much easier it is to be economical in the 
country than in London ; how much less chance 
there is of a person living beyond his income amidst 
green fields than amongst bricks and mortar. At 
Berrie Down, he could have accounted for every 
sixpence ; in town, all he could clearly determine 
was that the money had gone . where it was gone 
he might have defied a conjuror accurately to tell. 

Cabs here ; expenses there ; a luncheon with so-and- 
so, a dinner with some one else ; a picnic at Bushey ; 
Heather's visit to Hastings ; fees to Dr. Chickton. 
It was but a guinea now, and ten pounds again, and 
half a sovereign on such a date ; and yet, these items 
mounted up. 

There are only ten hundred single pounds in a 
thousand a year, and a five-pound note Arthur knew 
had often not covered his daily expenditure. 

If he dare have told Heather then . if he only 
dare have left that miserable oflSce of his, where he 
kept poring over bills and cursing impatient 
creditors . it would have been a comfort to the man ; 
but there had arisen a coolness between him and 
Heather of late. She was either jealous or exact- 



110 FAR ABOVE RUBIES, 

ing . perhaps both ; she objected, not by words, 
which he might have combated, but by manner to 
his excessive intimacy with Mrs. Croft. 

And it was so perfectly ridiculous! jealousy in 
the matter was so utterly uncalled for 1 There was 
nothing wrong in his friendship for Mrs. Croft . 
nothing; therefore ill-humour, even dissatisfaction, 
was quite unreasonable. 

If he had given his wife cause for anger, Arthur 
could have understood her antagonism . but without 
cause ? Just as though a flirtation were not fifty 
times harder to endure patiently than a liaison ; as 
though the external caution which the latter demands 
were not preferable to the flaunting boldness of that 
virtue which fearlessly laughs aloud while looking 
down into the very pit of Vice. 

Sin does not, as a rule, voluntarily walk on the 
same pavement with injured wives, staring them out of 
countenance ; sin does not come to a woman's house, 
dressed out in the extreme of the fashion, trailing 
its silks and satins over carpets which are trodden 
by the feet of sorrowful and neglected women. 

There is something to be urged against sin ! 
Injured husbands and wives have decidedly the best 



THE PAPER WAR, 111 

of the argument when once the seventh command- 
ment i broken and strange idols occupy the shrines 
which once were consecrated to the household 
deities; but against flirtation conjugal jealousy is 
powerless: it can suspect all things, and confirm 
none ; it has no cause to bring openly, even into the 
domestic court ; it suffers and yet has no disease ; it 
feels the smart, yet can lay its hand on no open 
wound. 

Flirtation is like a shadow : it follows you about, 
and still no man can lay a hand upon it ; it may 
dog your footsteps and disturb your peace, and yet, 
if complaint be made of it, you are assured it is only 
a fancy which is distressing you. 

It is the person who complains in this case who is 
in fault, not the person who offends ; it is the exactr 
ing wife or jealous husband, not the foolish man, or 
forgetful woman, who is to blame if domestic un- 
happiness accrue from an over-appreciation of Mr. 
This, or Mrs. That 

What folly to strive to keep a husband eternally 
at home ! What absurdity to suppose a wife is 
never to speak civilly to a male acquaintance ! so 
the defence runs, while it is not thought necessary 



112 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

even to keep the cause of offence discreetly in the 
background. The whole affair is so moral, so strictly 
proper, that it is never supposed possible dear John 
can grow weary of seeing Alonzo, nor Mary become 
tired of hearing Imogen's praises sounded. 

There is no sin . of course not . and therefore, no 
harm being done, every one ought to be satisfied ; 
only when flirting Virtue becomes, as it does in such 
cases, brazen-faced, the question arises whether Sin, 
with averted head and downcast eyes, be not the 
easier vanquished opponent of the two. 

At all events, without for a moment insinuating 
that Mrs. Douglas Croft was other than the most 
discreet of British matrons, it is open to doubt 
whether the most indiscreet of women could have 
given Heather Dudley one-half so many heart-aches 
as did that amiable and estimable wife. 

Had Mrs. Dudley been wise and philosophic, she 
would doubtless have reflected that Arthur, never 
having been a peculiarly agreeable addition to the 
family circle, was quite as well out of it ; but then, 
Heather, being neither wise nor philosophic, fretted 
herself over her husband's defection till she almost 
lost her beauty. A great mistake ! 



THE PAPEU WAR. 113 

She had loved this poor, weak husband, borne with 
him through the years, lightened his troubles, been 
obedient to his slightest wish, and this was the 
result ; . that he deserted her whenever the woman 
who had jilted him held up her finger to beckon 
him back ; that he forgot all his wife's faith, and 
truth, and tenderness, and remembered only he had 
once been attached to this handsome virago, whose 
preference flattered his vanity ; who felt pleased to 
have this old admirer following in her train. 

Well ! Heather had long known she did not possess 
her husband's heart ; and if this were a fact, what 
could it matter to whom he gave it ? 

Thus she strove to reason herself into content- 
ment ; but a woman is not the most reasonable crea- 
ture in existence where her afiections are interested, 
end accordingly, perhaps, she was as Arthur decided, 
a little wayward and exacting ; a wife burdened at 
that time with many anxieties, amongst which, 
perhaps, the worst was . Lally. 

For as the leaves fell, Lally had drooped, and 
now, when Christmas was at hand once again, the 
child drooped more and more. 

There could be no question about the matter, 
VOL. ni. I 



114 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

Lally was very ill indeed; far more seriously ill 
than when twelve months previously Bessie had 
^^ kissed her to pieces " under the misletoe, and hung 
up holly branches over her bed. 



115 



CHAPTER VI. 



FOR EVERMORE. 



After her return from Hastings, Heather lost 
no time in taking Lally and Mr. Stewart's letter to 
Mr. Rymner Henry. 

That great man did not pay quite such devoted 
attention to his new patient as Doctor Chickton had 
considered necessary; on the contrary, Mrs. Dudley 
thought him a little negligent. He asked few 
questions ; he did not " take much notice " of the 
child ; he was a little stand-off and ceremonious ; he 
was at no pains to win Lally's heart He expressed 
no opinion on the case, and declined to say how long 

he thought it might be before she was well. 

The proximate cause of her delicacy did uot 
appear to interest him as it had done Dr. Chickton. 
As a narrative, Heather's story might have its 

I 2 



116 FAR ABOVE KUBIES. 

merits, so his maimer seemed to imply ; but, in so 
far as it afforded the slightest assistance to his com- 
prehension of the disease, she might have spared 
herself the trouble of repeating it 

He wrote a prescription, against his will, Heather 
imagined, and then he rose, signifying thereby that 
the interview was terminated. 

**What do you think of her?" Mrs. Dudley 
ventured to inquire, as she laid the fee wrapped up 
like the curl of which Mr. Stewart had spoken, in a 
piece of note-paper on the table, guiltily, and as if 
she had committed a sin, "what do you think 
of her?" 

"I should like to look at her again," said Mr. 
Henry. " No, you need not bring her here ; I will 
call some day when I am in your neighbourhood. 
Have you seen Mr. Stewart lately ?" 

** Last week," Heather answered. 

"Was he quite well? Ah! glad to hear that; 
wonderful man ; astonishing energy ; wonderful . 
wonderful!" and, amidst these exclamations, Mr. 
Henry cleverly manoBvred his visitors to the door of 
his consulting-room, where he consigned them to the 
care of an individual who, although he demeaned 



FOR EVERMORE. 117 

himself like an archbishop, and looked like a master 
undertaker, was yet kind enough to see Mrs. Dudley 
into her cab, and tell the driver to return to Lincoln's 
Inn Fields. 

Before Heather expected him to do so, Mr. 
Kymner Henry called. In her drawing-room, he 
seemed a very diflFerent individual to the Mr. Henry 
who had been so stiff and so stand- off in his own 
domains. 

He talked a good deal to Mrs. Dudley, and 
some amenities were exchanged between him and 
Lally, who preferred a petition on her own account 
against any more medicine, " for I am well now," 
she assured him, *' better as well." 

" What does she mean by that expression ?" in- 
quired Mr. Henry. 

''Better than well, I imagine," Heather ex- 
plained. "I do not know where she heard the 
phrase, but she adopted it during her first severe 
illness, and has since continued to use it." 

"And you think you are too well to require 
medicine ?" he added, addressing the child. 

" Iss." Lally 's speaking was still, as Mrs. Orm- 
son declared, in a deplorably backward condition. 



118 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

** But if you do not take the medicine I order, you 
may get ill again." 

Lally turned this view of the question over in her 
mind, and then remarked, " it would be time enough 
to have the medicine when she did get ill again." 

" Tour mamma does not think so." 

" But then ma has not to take it" 

** Your mamma would not object to taking any- 
thing I ordered, if she thought that would cure her 
little girl," . at which remark Heather held out her 
arms to Lally, and the mother and child went through 
one of those pantomimes which supply the place of 
all assurance, as they elude all description. 

Inexpressibly touching, too, become such panto- 
mimes when the spectator knows the time during 
which they can be repeated is but short ; when he is 
quite well aware that the days are drawing near 
on which the child so loved, so idolized, must be laid 
in the arms of a colder and grimmer nurse to be 
caressed and hushed to sleep, and pressed close to 
her mother's breast, never more, ah ! never. 

And of this fact Mr. Henry was only too confi- 
dent. The moment he looked in Lally 's face, he 
knew for a certainty that which Mr. Stewart had 



FOR EVERMORE. 119 

vaguely comprehended. The temporary improve- 
ment Heather talked of so thankfully, could not 
deceive his experience. He understood the nature 
of such varieties too well to be deceived by theia ; 
he knew Lally was doomed, and the bright sunny 
November day, spite of all its delusive light and 
glitter, could not blind him to the fact that winter 
was close at hand. 

For which reason he wished Mr. Stewart had not 
sent Mrs. Dudley to him. He was not a man to 
delude with false hopes such as Dr. Chickton had 
held out, and yet to tell this fond, foolish mother 
that it was a mere question of time and cure, was 
beyond his ability. 

To refuse to treat the hopeless case, to decline 
ordering vain remedies, would have been almost 
barbarous, when the poor creature apparently be- 
lieved the very strength and might of her own love 
could save her darling from the grasp of a foe too 
terrible to mention. 

" It will dawn upon her by degrees," the surgeon 
thought, " there is no need for me to tell her ;" and so, 
after a few minutes' more conversation, he departed, 
utterly ignoring the fee which Heather would have 



120 FAR ABOVE RUBIKS. 

pressed upon him. He would not see, or feel, or 
take it ; and when at length he could not avoid 
noticing the shy, puzzled look in her face, he said, . 

** I do not come professionally, you know ; I shall 
only call when I am in your neighbourhood, and 
have a quarter of an hour to spare. Good-morn- 
ing !'* and he was off, leaving Heather much sur- 
prised, and perhaps, also, a little vexed. 

For it occurred to her Mr. Stewart must have 
arranged to pay Mr. Henry for his services. After 
her experience of Dr. Chickton, and his guinea a* 
week, she never imagined any one would take the 
trouble of attending even Lally gratuitously. 

The child might be, as Dr. Chickton had remarked, 
one of the most interesting little creatures he ever 
beheld ; but even supposing Mr. Henry to be of the 
same opinion (and Heather with all her maternal 
vanity and affection could not persuade herself the 
surgeon was anything of the kind), still that opinion 
need not prevent his taking a fee, since it had not 
produced a similarly deterrent effect on Dr. Chickton. 

Altogether, Mrs. Dudley thought she would write 
to Mr. Stewart on the subject ; and, while expressing 
her obligations for his intended kindness, assure him he 



FOR EVERMORE. , 121 

was depriving her of a pleasure in not suflFering her to 
pay for anything which might hasten Lally's recovery. 

She told him, truthfully enough, God knows, she 
would rather save and economize in every possible 
way, than that Lally should want for the best help 
money could procure. She said, what also she be- 
lieved to be a literal fact, that her husband was per- 
fectly well able to afford Mr. Henry's fees ; and she 
entreated him to allow her to send him whatever 
sum he had placed in his friend s hands for attending 
Lally. 

And then, almost against her will, but still of 
necessity, because it was not in her nature to be 
abrupt or ungracious, she added some words of 
gratitude for all his kindness to her little girl, and 
" remained his sincerely, . H. Dudley." 

She would not sign herself " Heather," lest the 
name should attract his attention, and Mr. Stewart 
noticed the omission. He knew enough of women 
to be aware that, when possessed of a pretty or un- 
common name, they always write it in full, and he 
liked Mrs. Dudley too much to believe for a moment 
she was superior to the little foibles and weaknesses 
of her sex. 



122 FAR ABOVE BURIES. 

" She is a good girl," he thought, as he replaced 
her note in its envelope ; ^^ I wish she had married 
any other man than Dudley ;" after which mental 
remark he wrote her a few lines, saying she was 
quite mistaken in her idea, " that he had not men- 
tioned the question of money in any way to Mr. 
Henry, and explained that, very possibly, if fees 
were forced upon his acceptance, the surgeon might 
feel a delicacy in seeing Lally so frequently as 
the child's state of health required. Mr. Stewart 
added, he trusted he should on his return to town 
(the letter was dated from Careyby Castle) hear a 
good account of his little friend." 

But, long before Mr. Stewart's return to London, 
the temporary improvement in Lally gave place to 
increased weariness, to weakness worse than pain, 
to peevish complainings of "being tired, ma, tired ;" 
and then, in despair. Heather looked upon Mr. 
Henry's now frequent visits as matters of course, 
and began to watch his face and ponder his words 
anxiously and fearfiiUy. 

She did not know exactly what she dreaded ; she 
could not bear to put it to her own soul that Lally 
was in danger . ^that Lally was incurable. 



FOR EVERMORE. 123 

She would sit and think, poor weak heart, of those 
bright sunshiny days at Hastings, when the progress 
of her child's disease had stood still, when it even 
seemed to retrograde and allowed her to play on 
the sands, and pick up shells among the shingle, 
and run screaming with delight over the grass ; and 
while she thought, she would persuade herself that 
change was all Lally needed, that health resided 
wholly out of town, and sickness solely amongst 
the wilderness of houses, the labyrinth of streets. 
That brief reprieve made the subsequent relapse 
seem all the harder to endure patiently ; it was like 
the hope of a fortune held out to a beggar and then 
withdrawn, only to plunge him into a deeper and 
blacker poverty than before. 

Against her own fears, Heather fought madly; 
she could not endure that any one should say Lally 
looked ill, that Lally grew thinner ; she could not 
bear that Lally herself should complain of weariness. 
Her love made her at times seem almost harsh ; 
her passionate struggle with the dread which would 
not now be refused entrance, made her fiercely deny 
the existence of danger. That which had at one 
time only caused her anxiety, now rendered her 



124 FAR ABOVE RUBlSTS. 

nearly frantia She grew irritable and impatient. 
The sweet repose of old, gave place to a constant 
desire to be up and doing. Could Mr. Henry give 
Lally no different medicine ? should he advise taking 
her away? Mr. Dudley's aunt was wintering in 
the south of France, might it not be better to try a 
total change of climate ? She would go with her, 
if Mr. Henry thought a different air would restore 
her strength ; but Mr. Henry declined to recommend 
travelling at such a season. He said the child was 
better at home; better in that warm town-house, 
with every comfort around her, than she could pos- 
^bly be elsewhere. And thus things went on, till 
at length Lally had to be carried up and down- 
stairs, and lay most of the day on a sofa, drawn 
close beside one of the drawing-room windows, from 
which she could look out over the Square. 

Even then Heather would not despair ; she thought 
when once the spring came, Lally was certain to get 
better ; she was always saying, that the moment mild 
weather arrived she must take her child to the sea-side, 
and the pair never wearied of planning the journey, 
of picturing the waves rippling in upon the shore, of 
gathering, in imagination, shells and pebbles and 



FOR EVERMORE. 125 

weed ; of fancying how pleasant it would be to see 
the sun shining upon the waters, as they used to do 
. as they used . ah ! Heaven. 

Once again Lally took up her former cry of 
"Will it be spring soon, mamma? Will it be 
spring before very long ?" And she would repeat 
the same inquiry to Mr. Henry, with the addition 
of . " And when the spring comes, shall I be well ?' 

The first time she put this question. Heather 
looked swiftly and sharply towards the surgeon, but 
she could read nothing from his face. 

" Well," he repeated, " are you not well now ? " 

"No;" and the poor little head was shaken in 
confirmation of this hopeless negative. 

" Tell me where you feel ill," he said ; but Lally 
was incapable of this descriptive flight 

" Has she pain ?" he asked ; and Mrs. Dudley 
answered, " Very rarely." 

She would have liked Mr. Henry to pursue the 
subject and investigate it more thoroughly, but in- 
stead of doing so, the surgeon only took up one of 
Lally's hands, and looked at it absently. 

He knew, and had always known, that the malady 
which was on the child, his skill, great though it 



126 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

might be, could never cure. He knew the disease 
she had in her, call it by what other technical name 
his profession might, was, in plain English, Death ; 
and the man who shall discover a cure for that 
complaint has yet to be bom. 

He knew her body would grow more feeble, her 
limbs more easily tired, her poor pinched little face 
more pinched as the days went by. 

He knew, that in the whole of the pharmacopoeia, 
there was not a drug which might give her even a 
chance of life. He knew this, he had always known 
it; and yet he could not bring himself to tell Heather 
the naked truth. He saw the woman's heart was bound 
up in her child ; he guessed, perhaps, that her husband 
was not likely to be much stay or comfort to her when 
the hour of trial came ; and yet, at length, he decided 
to speak to Arthur, to tell him his little girl was 
dangerously ill . ill past all hope of recovery. 

Which, of course, when communicated to him, 
Arthur did not believe. He sent for further advice 
. for lying prophets, who spoke of healing when 
there was no chance of healing ; and softly descended 
the staircase, whispering peace in a house where 
there cotdd be no peace. 



FOR EVERMORE. 127 

And yet, what need was there for them to be 
cruelly conscientious . unmercifully truthful ? If 
their words broke the force of the descending blow, 
kept it suspended in Heather's sight, without abso- 
lutely crushing her heart, who may say that their 
subterfuges were wrong . their suggestions useless ? 

The evil days when no telling should be required, 
were drawing very nigh ; and there was no one, 
save Arthur, who remained quite blind to their 
approach. 

He had always preferred to ignore facts, if there 
were any treacherous, illusive, pleasant hope that 
his feeble nature could clutch. He was not one 
likely to believe there was any actual danger to be 
apprehended, so long as he could pay the veriest 
quack to come and tell him the child's life might 
be saved. He hearkened to Mrs. Croft, when she 
assured him all mothers were alike . so easily 
frightened, so over-anxious, so wearisomely careful 
about their petted darlings, Scoffingly, almost, she 
would declare, that but for these " women's fancies " 
doctors never could earn a living ; and she insinu- 
ated that, so long as fees were to be had, it was not 
likely they would pronounce Lally convalescent. 



128 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Possibly, she did not herself believe the child's 
life was in absolute danger ; but she did know, not 
merely that Lally was very ill, but that, by keeping 
Arthur so much from home, she was infusing another 
drop of bitterness into Heather's cup. 

Had Mrs. Dudley remonstrated on the subject, 
which she felt far too weary and broken-spirited to 
attempt, there can be little question but that Mrs. 
Croft would have retorted, she, at all events, had no 
right to complain, " considering my husband is con-* 
tinually in Lincoln's Inn Fields," which was true, 
though, certainly. Heather could not be accused of 
encouraging his visits. 

Five times out of six she was " not at home," and 
yet he haunted the house. He never seemed tired 
of bringing little luxuries for Lally, The fruit he 
procured moistened the parched lips ; the flowers he 
sent lay on her pillow ; the oldest wine in his cellars, 
the choicest grapes from his uncle's forcing-houses 
at Layford, found their way to the sick room, 
which Lally now never left. 

He was fond of children, this man who was 
childless, and Lallv had twined herself into his 
afiections. He would have done anything to save 



FOR EVERMORE. 129 

her, and he importuned Mr. Henry about Lally till 
that great man became perfectly sick of the sight of 
his old friend's nephew. 

Well, it was down a lane bordered by roses she 
went to her long home ; soft hands tended her ; a 
loving breast pillowed her; friends bore her com- 
pany sorrowfully while she glided . ^glided adown 
that road, the descent in which is, towards the last, 
so steep and sudden. 

Even Heather was deceived concerning the end, 
which drew nearer day by day, and hour by hour. 

It was so gradual, no one could say when the 
change came . no one could tell exactly when 
Hope finally left the house, closing the door behind 
her. No one could remember when the child 
ceased to make lamentations concerning her own 
sickness, and grew patient; no one could quite 
recollect when it was every person about the house, 
save Arthur, commenced to realise that Lally . the 
little Lally of a happier time . might never roam 
again with tireless feet from parlour to dairy, from 
garden to paddock, of that old home which they 
seemed to have left so long and long ago. 

There was very bitter sorrow in that dear old 

VOL. III. K 



130 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

house; to their business Alick and Cuthbert went 
daily with hearts which were heavy with grief for 
the little plaything about to be taken from them for 
ever; the girls up from Hertfordshire could not 
settle to their usual occupations, but wandered idly 
and purposelessly about the house ; the servants 
crept to their work, feeling the burden of a great 
trouble oppressing them. Mrs. Piggott could neither 
rest nor eat, and Priscilla Dobbin's eyes were con- 
stantly so red that Harry Marsden's remark con- 
cerning them was no longer applicable. Ned took 
a dreary holiday to come and have a look at 
"Missie," but had to beat a hasty retreat down- 
stairs, where he sat in the kitchen and cried like a 
child ; but still death was slow about coming ; and 
still Heather kept her weary vigils, and still Arthur 
would not comprehend. 

One evening, utterly exhausted, she had thrown 
herself on the sofa, leaving Agnes to keep watch 
beside Lally, when the man who acted as messenger 
to the company and footman to the Dudleys, entered 
the room, where no candles were lighted, and nothing 
dispelled the gloom except the fire burning not over 
brightly, to inform Heather . 



FOR EVEKMORE. 131 

" A young person wished to speak to her." 

" I cannot see any one," Mrs. Dudley replied. 

"I told her you could not, ma'am," the man 
replied. He was a very magnificent individual, 
who impressed shareholders wonderfully, and cer- 
tainly considered himself a much more important 
personage than the secretary ; yet, notwithstanding 
his superiority over every one else connected with 
the "Protector," he had always been graciously 
affable towards Mrs. Dudley, and now, in her trouble, 
he felt very sorry for her indeed. He had children 
of his own, so he informed Mrs. Piggott, and " knew 
what it was ;" whereupon he had taken upon himself 
to assure the stranger Mrs. Dudley could not pos- 
sibly be disturbed, and that he should decline deli- 
vering any message whatever to her. 

But the " young person" had been importunate . 
she had resolutely refused to take "no" for an 
answer . and she so persistently insisted on a note 
she produced being given to Mrs. Dudley, that 
Tifford at length wavered. 

" If you give her that note," the stranger asserted, 
" she will see me ; and if you do not give it to her, 
she will be sorry hereafter to know it was kept from 

K 2 



132 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

her. I will wait outside till she has read it" And 
so saying, she coolly stepped out into the night 
through the open hall-door, whereat she had found 
Mr. Tifford meditating, in the midst of a silence 
which seemed, no doubt, to him, as great as that 
Harvey found amongst the tombs. 

Frequently, Mr. TiflTord declared Lincoln's Inn 
Fields was as lively as a churchyard ; and, at the 
precise moment the young woman came up and 
accosted him, he was thinking he might as well be 
buried alive as shut up there. 

" You can close the door," she remarked, noticing 
his hesitation ; whereupon Mr. Tifford at once in- 
vited her to " step inside" and sit down, while he 
went upstairs to his mistress. 

The stranger stepped inside as permitted, but did 
not sit down ; she stood on the mat, with her shawl 
wrapped tightly around her and her thick veil tied 
close under her chin, until Tifford returning bade 
her follow him upstairs. 

He ushered her into the dim drawing-room, and 
then shut the door. 

By the hearth stood Mrs. Dudley. 

" You bring me news," she said, " of '* But 



FOR EVERMORE. 133 

before she could finish her sentence the stranger 
advanced out of the gloom, and flinging herself on 
Heather's neck, broke out into a passion of weeping. 
It was the wanderer come home at last! . it was 
Bessie, so long mourned, so long looked for, restored 
at an hour when her advent was least expected. 

To Heather it seemed almost as though one had 
been given back to her from the grave, and for a 
moment she drew out of it a vague augury of reco- 
very for Lally. 

" Bessie ! Bessie I" she exclaimed, clasping the 
girl to her heart; "Bessie . dear Bessie!" And 
then there were kisses, and sobs, and low-murmured 
exclamations; they could not ask questions, they 
were so moved . ^they could not talk, for very excess 
of thronging words . they could not speak, because 
they had so much to say. 

At length they stepped back a pace or two, so 
that each might look in her friend's face. 

They had been parted little more than a year, 
and yet how changed were both ! 

" You have suffered, Heather," Bessie said ; and 
then she took the dear face between her hands and 
turned it so that the firelight might fall upon it. 



131 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Yes . ^Lally," the other answered, and her tears 
began to flow once more. 

^* It was hearing about her brought me to yon. I 
must see her. Heather, though she has forgotten me, 
of course.^* 

" If she have, it must be very recently," was the 
reply. " How did you hear of her illness ?'* 

"From Ned," Bessie answered. **I did not 
know anything about your having left the Hollow, 
and went there, hoping to be able to see and speak 
to you alone, but I found the place deserted . oh, 
it did not seem like Berrie Down any longer ! . and 
then Ned told me Lally was very ill. So, as I could 
not rest without looking in my child's face . she was 
almost mine, Heather ^" 

With a sob, Bessie broke off. The past came 
back to her as she spoke . ^the past, with its sunshine, 
its purity, its peace. She thought of the evening 
Heather returned from London . ^the evening when 
this poor story opened . when she and the child sat 
upon the grass dividing their bonbons, and a glory 
lay over the landscape . a glory wrought out of the 
beams of the setting sun which sank to rest as she 
and Heather walked slowly towards the house, 



X 



FOR EVERMORE. 135 

talking of Gilbert Harcourt and her own future. 
Counted by time, that evening did not lie so very 
far back in the past . ^but computed by events, it 
seemed to Bessie as though half a lifetime had 
come and gone since then. 

It was like looking back to childhood from the 
confines of middle age ; it was like recalling one's 
youth when tottering feebly to the grave. It was so 
far away, and yet so near. It was as though for 
years and years she had been climbing to the 
summit of some steep hill, tiU suddenly she reached 
a point where she was able to pause and glance 
behind, and from whence she could see close to her, 
and yet separated by all that lapse of time, by all 
the toil and labour of the ascent, the happy valley 
she had left There, steeped in the sunshine of old, 
were spread out before her the plains of her earthly 
heaven. Once again she felt the breath of the 
sweet west wind upon her cheek; she beheld the 
westeria with its wealth of leaves; she saw the 
windows of those pleasant rooms wreathed with 
roses, festooned with honeysuckles. There was a 
great peace in the air, and the woman whose &ce 
had the sad forecasting expression walked beside her 
over the sward. 



136 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

There had been a little jealousy between them 
then; but that was gone and past . passed like 
winter's frosts, melted like December's snow. 

And this was how they met once more, with the 
child dear to both of them so ill, that, had Bessie 
returned but a few hours later, she might never have 
looked upon her living again. 

Quietly they passed upstairs together; with 
silent feet they entered the room where Lally lay, 
with Agnes still keeping watch beside her. 

Heather, as they drew near the bed, put her 
finger to her lips, as a warning for Agnes to utter 
no exclamation of surprise. 

" I do not want any one to know I am here," 
Bessie whispered in her ear ; " but I could not rest 
without seeing her. How is she now ?" 

" Very quiet," Agnes answered. 

Very quiet. Yes, too quiet, Bessie thought, as 
she bent over the child, for the great change to be 
far distant. Very quiet. Oh, woe ! that the little 
busy feet should ever have grown so idle . that the 
restless body should ever have become so still ! 

Very quiet . too quiet, for Bessie had to stoop 
down to hear if she still breathed. Quiet with the 



FOR EVERMORE, 137 

skin drawn tight over her face ; with her hair, damp 
and thin, pushed back from her forehead ; with her 
poor hands, which were now but skin and bone, 
lying listlessly out upon the coverlet, with her eyes 
closed and the fringed lashes sweeping her cheek ; 
with her mouth parted a little, Lally was indeed at 
last very quiet . quiet enough to have contented any 
one who had ever thought her too full of health, 
and mirth, and spirits. 

Silently Agnes gave place to Bessie. She took 
her shawl away, and removed her bonnet, and 
carried them to a distant sofa. With a glance 
Bessie thanked her, and then she turned to the 
child again . her child . whom she had loved, petted, 
scolded, kissed, and teazed in the bright summer 
weather, and loved, and nursed, and tended, and 
left when the holly berries were shining above the 
little bed . her child of whom she had been so fond . 
her child who had been so fond of her, who had 
made such moan for Bessie, and yet who had now 
too nearly done with this world's loves and pleasures 
to be told her old playmate was returned and stand- 
ing close beside her. 

There was a great silence in the room. Upon 



138 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the threshold stood the universal Conqueror, and 
already the child felt the chilling influence of his 
presence. With her hand clasped in Bessie's the 
mother sat watching ; with her head resting on the 
pillow Bessie looked at Lally, never removing her 
eyes from the child's face. 

On the other side of the bed stood Agnes, leaning 
against the wall, weary and faint ; but there was no 
sound of weeping in the apartment ; they would not 
sob, they would not make lamentation to vex or 
disturb the spirit hovering on the dark shores of 
Eternity's mighty ocean. 

They hushed their grief, and they bowed their 
heads in silent prayer, and the rustle of the angel's 
wings . the angel who was come to fetch their 
darling . might almost have been heard through the 
stillness which abode in the room. 

All at once Bessie rose, and passing round the 
bed, asked Agnes in a whisper, . 

" Where is Arthur ?" 

"At Mr. Crofts'," was the reply. 

" Send for him," said Bessie, and Agnes left the 
room. 

After a while the rest of the family came in one 



FOR EVERMORE. 139 

by one . Alick and Cuthbert, Lucy and Laura, and 
the servants, Mrs. Piggott, and Prissy, and Jane ; 
but when the silence was thus broken, the child 
grew restless, and then Heather motioned them to 
go . all save Agnes, and Bessie, who, crouched up in 
a dark corner, escaped observation. Time passed by, 
and still there came no tidings of Arthur. Once 
again Bessie spoke to Agnes, and again Agnes went 
softly downstairs ; when she returned, she whispered 
that Alick was gone to fetch his brother. 

With her anxious eyes Heather followed every 
movement of the pair, and at length she asked 
Bessie . " Is it so near ?" 

A silent pressure of her hand was Bessie's only 
answer. 

"Would you send dome one for Mr. Henry?" 
the poor mother whispered. 

"My darling, what good can he do?' Bessie 
inquired; but Cuthbert was despatched for him, 
nevertheless. 

Before many minutes more, however, had elapsed, 
the child began to move from side to side, and talk 
wanderingly. She moaned gently, and tried to 
raise herself in bed. Agnes put her arm behind 



140 FAE ABOVE RUBIES. 

the pillow, and lifted her a little. Involuntarily 
Heather and Bessie stood up, as though they heard 
and felt something approaching, and the former 
murmured in the very extremity of her anguish, 
 My child. my child !" 

*' Don't, Heather . don't?" Bessie said, in an 
agony of entreaty. 

At sound of her voice, Lally opened her eyes 
wide and looked on the speaker with an expression 
of recognition. 

Almost immediately her moaning ceased, her 
restlessness subsided ; there came a glimmer into 
her face of remembrance, and a smile . a very 
ghost of the old whimsical smile . played about 
her lips as she stretched out her little arms and 
said, . 

*' Bessie carry me down among the blackberries, 
and cover me with leaves ?" 

Oh Lord! in the days when that was their 
pastime, who would have dreamed of so pitiful an 
ending to the short story ! 

For a moment, for her . for the child . no doubt 
the chamber was flooded with golden sunbeams . 
without question she saw the landscape lying still 




FOR EVERMORE. 141 

and tranquil in the clear, calm, bright light of those 
summer evenings which had been so happy and so 
glad. 

She beheld the trees gently waving their branches 
in the soft breeze ; she heard the light stirring of 
the wind amongst the foliage; she saw the lawn 
sloping away to the Hollow, the sheep dotting the 
fields beyond ; she was in her home . her own very 
home . as she had often called it; the past was 
present with her once again, and Bessie stood beside 
her on the smooth green turf. 

The mortal sickness was gone; the months of 
feeble health were wiped out ; the limbs felt tireless 
as of old ; pain was to her an unknown experience, 
weakness a thing she had never felt ; she was lithe, 
and active, and strong ; restless and insatiable for 
movement, as ever ; the game they had played at 
so often was to be played once more ; adown the 
slope they were to go, swift, and happy, and free ; 
adown the slope, over the grass, under the trees, 
into the Hollow, among the blackberry bushes, and 
then 

Bessie lifted the child, and laying her in her 
mother's arms, said, " Take her. Heather." 



142 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

That was all . ^a moment after in this world there 
was no Lally, she had passed to the Eternal Shore. 

Ah me ! ah me ! who in the days not so very long 
departed would ever have thought that the little 
comedy of Lally's life should come to hold within it 
so bitter a tragedy for Heather ; who would ever 
have fancied that the fair freckled face should wear 
so worn and wasted a look, that the little hands 
should be crossed and lie so motionless upon her 
breast, that the eyes should never sparkle with glee 
nor fill with tears again, that the sound of her laugh 
should never be heard more ? 

No more, no more ! it all came to Heather's mind 
as she laid her first-born on the bed . dead. No 
more, no more I and then the torrent of her grief, 
like a tide which has for a brief period been kept 
back by a feeble barrier, broke bounds and swept 
everything before it in a resistless flood. 

No more, no more! never to part the laurels 
again and peep forth from amongst the green leaves 
gleefully, never to stand amidst the flowers, with 
her little frock held up to receive the buds Bessie 
showered into it, never to sit with Mufi^ in her lap, 
never to kneel on the sward hugging Nep's great 



FOR EVERMORE. 143 

head, never to be in and out, out and in, never to go 
to the sea-side as they had pictured, and gather 
shell, and weed, and pebble, never to see the spring 
come round again, and the primroses dot the copse. 
No more . ^no more ! 

Never more either to grow older and to change, 
never to be a grown-up daughter, never to be taught 
anything, never to alter, never to be either sorrow 
or comfort, curse or blessing in the future, never to 
have a bitter memory attached to her ; always to be 
" little Lally," always to be a child. 

In the future there came consolation to the mother 
from this thought, but that Aiture was &r off in the 
hour when she knelt beside the bed weeping as 
though her very heart would break. 

Somehow they got her out of the room, and 
Agnes stayed with Heather while Bessie dressed 
" her child " for the last time, and left her, a smile 
still hovering on her lips, to sleep the soundest sleep 
even Lally had ever known. 

Stealing softly down the stairs Bessie met Arthur. 
She had her bonnet on and veil down, so as she 
stood aside on one of the landings to let him pass, 
he did so without recognising her. 



144 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

The man was white as his dead child, and 
trembling like a leaf. 

He had come too late ! there was no LaUy now 
in the silent room ; there would be no Lally in any 
room which his feet might enter for evermore. 



145 



CHAPTER VII. 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 



It was all over ! Skill could do nothing more for 
her. Love itself was impotent now. 

They brought flowers, and strewed them on her ; 
but their bright colours, their sweet perfume, could 
delight the child no longer. They passed into the 
room where she lay a score times a day ; but Lally 
never said, " Who's 'at ?" or weakly put out her 
hand to welcome one of them. 

Bessie might steal in at night to look once again, 
and still once more, at the child she had loved so 
much ; but Lally needed no one to sing her to sleep 
now . she had ceased wearying for her old playmate, 
and tears for her loss could trickle down her little 
white face no more. 

Even Arthur, who stealthily and like a criminal 

VOL. in. L 



146 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

watched his opportunity of yisiting the chamber at 
times when no one should witness his grief . even he, 
with all his sorrow and contrition, could not win a 
word from Lally, whom he had so pen^stently, until 
the Tery end, indeed, declared to be in no danger. 

Not from any evil intention, but merely because 
his Tanity and his weakness were great, he had 
suffered himself to be led away by the still beautiful 
woman who had been the love of his youtL He 
had neglected Heather in days which he now under- 
stood must haye been yery dark to her; he had 
seen little of his child, who lay before him with her 
formerly eager face cold and fixed, with her limbs 
still, with her hand at rest, with the bright flowers 
already fading on her breast, yery qiuet . oh! so 
perfectly still. 

What was Heather's grief to his . ^her passionate 
woman's sorrow to his? She had sat with the 
child, nursed her, heard every word the lips now so 
mute had uttered, supplied every want the body, 
which now needed nothing, had fretfully desired. 
Her grief might be very terrible, very hard to bear, 
but there was no remorse mingled with it. Her 
tears might flow unceasingly, but th^e was no 




IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 147 

bitterness in them. She could talk of her lost one, 
and receive sympathy from every person around; 
but Arthur . ^he had rarely seen Lally . he had 
been glad to forget her illness . ^he had listened to 
false words of comfort, and now, when his eyes were 
opened, it was only to look on . death. 

An awful repentance had seized him when Alick, 
having at length succeeded in tracing his brother to 
one of the theatres, whither he was gone with Mr. 
and Mrs. Croft to see a new piece which at the time 
chanced to be creating a sensation, brought him out 
of the building with one sentence . 

"If you want to see Lally alive, come home 
immediately !" 

How he ever reached Lincoln's Inn Fields, Arthur 
did not know. He had some faint remembrance of 
walking down steps, and entering a cab, and driving 
.it might have been for miles, or only for a hundred 
yards^ so far as his recollection of the matter en- 
lightened him. 

The blow Tifford dealt him at the door blotted 
every antecedent event out of his memory. 

"Too late, sir," said that individual, in a low 
tone to Alick. ^^ It is all over I" 

L 2 



148 FAB ABOVE BUBIEa 

"What is over?" Tifford subsequently informed 
his friends, Mr. Dudley demanded, adding, " And 
then, poor gentleman, I told him she was gone." 

Arthur was precisely the man to feel a shock of 
this kind keenly; a stronger nature could never 
have suffered itself to be so deluded ; and the servants 
about the house, the only people who noted his visit 
to the close shut room, suspected that Mrs. Dudley's 
grief was less bitter than his ; that her open lamen- 
tations, her fast-flowing tears were preferable to this 
silent sorrow . to this tardy repentance which kept 
him haunting the death-chamber . dragging him 
continually away both from business and irom rest 
to look on the face of the child he had only grown 
to love much when she needed no more love from 
any human being. 

It has before been stated, that Arthur Dudley 
always rated more highly the blessings he lacked 
than the blessings he enjoyed, and this very pe- 
culiarity of his temperament increased the grief 
which his affection, and his repentance alike were 
sure to produce when once affection and repentance 
were useless. 

Never before in his life had Arthur Dudley felt 



m BERBIE DOWN LANE. 149 

SO lonely and so miserable as during the week 
which succeeded Lally's death. For some time 
previously he had been gradually estranging himself 
from every member of his family, and now there was 
a restraint evident in their manner towards him . a 
restraint and an awkwardness which neither he nor 
they, knew exactly how to overcome. 

In those days even Heather grew hard, and would 
not of her own free will speak to him as she did to 
others about their child, whom he had, as she fancied, 
neglected. 

** She was mine," the poor mother repeated, when 
Bessie would fain have had her talk to Arthur of 
Lally, " she was mine, and mine only ; he never 
cared for her. Even strangers . even Mr. Croft 
and Mr. Stewart, and Mr. Henry . were kinder to my 
darling than her own father. No, Bessie, I am not 
unfeeling . it is the truth. He was never with me 
nor with her ; always with that wicked, cruel woman 
. always . al ways." 

It is a curious anomaly to notice how harsh the 
very excess of a woman's sensibility frequently 
renders her. 

She feels one side of a question so deeply, that 



150 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

there is no room left in her nature for conadering 
even the possibility of there being another side at 
all. And, in that hour of mortal sorrow. Heather 
had no leisure to bestow a thought on any one 
except her dead child. Even her lore for Arthur 
seemed blotted out in indignation at his neglect of 
their first-bom. 

And yet the iron had entered yery deep into the 
man's soul . so deep, that the day when he followed 
Lally to her last resting-place was perhaps the 
bitterest of his life. 

They buried her at Fifield. Not so yery far from 
the old home . ^under the shadow of the grey church- 
tower . ^they laid Heather's darling down to sleep 

" Lilian, aged six years and four months " . that 
was the legend her little coffin bore. *^ Lilian !" No 
fear of offending the unities now, she was gone 
where names do not convey much meaning. 

" Six years and four months !" She was gone, also, 
where age and time are not of much account either. 

Poor Lally . ^nay, happy Lally . to have had a 
life at once so bright and so short, so brimful of 
everything which can be packed by possibility into 
the longest span of human existence. 




IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 151 

Sunshine and mirth, and love and friendship, and 
care and devotion. 

What . ^though *' finis " was written to the earthly 
story after a few short chapters . say, iriends, was 
the story less round and perfect in its symmetry for 
that? 

Was the ending in Fifield churchyard all sorrow? 
Nay, rather there came a time when Heather was 
able to think, almost with thankfulness, of that child 
face which should never grow old, nor changed, nor 
wrinkled, nor careworn, nor other than innocent and 
pure, waiting for her in that far-oflF land, where the 
" ransomed of the Lord shall obtain joy and glad- 
ness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away." 

All who had been so kind to her in her first illness, 
came to see the last they could of ^' poor little Lally 
Dudley," together with those who had grown fond 
of the child towards the end. 

Alick was glad there were so many round the 
grave, for he felt that the presence of strangers 
would exercise a beneficial influence on his brother, 
who had been in such grief all the way down . in 
such sore distress for the loss of the little one he 
should never in this world see again. 



152 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 



Betnming on sach an errand to the old place . 
which he had left with high hopes of success, with 
ahnost the certainty, as he thought, of conquering 
fortune . would have been inexpressibly bitter to 
Arthur, eyen without the reflection that his child 
had died far firom him . farther away than though 
oceans and continents, mountains and riyers, had 
diyided them; and it needed all his strength to 
carry him through the ordeal bravely, and with 
good courage. 

Mr. Croft was present; but from him, Alick 
Dudley kept aloof. Even amongst the moss-grown 
headstones in Fifield graveyard, he could not foi^t 
what he had seen amidst the tombs at North 
Kemms. 

He would not break faith with Bes^e ; but he 
could not be cordial to the man, although he had 
been kind to Heather and fond of Lally. 

Alick was able, ptrhaps, now to guess the reason 
of his fancy for the child ; but that did not soften 
him much towards the offender. 

Bather the reverse, possibly ; young people are, 
like most women, apt to be a trifle intolerant. They 
are very ignorant, and they are very virtuous ; their 




IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 153 

standard of right is happily high, their idea of sin 
is, fortunately, that it is black as night. There are 
two colours only for them in this world ; of the 
delicate shades of grey into which, as the years go 
by, every human feeling seems ultimately to resolve 
itself, they have no understanding. It is entire 
innocence, or entire vice . ^it is either devil or angel. 
What is the good of a man being a man, if he cannot 
resist temptation ? where is the boasted purity of a 
woman, if she have ever even looked on sin ? 

Very nice sentiments, doubtless, and appropriate 
to the season and state of life in which they are 
generally expressed and believed. Too much 
toleration in the young would prove as dangerous 
as too many open windows in the spring; to the 
fleshly mansions, doubtful winds of doctrine would 
thus be permitted ingress. It is better for young 
people to continue, as their charming fashion is, de- 
lightfully bigoted, than to learn charity from practical 
knowledge of those temptations which make older 
persons question whether it be not possible for 
virtue to drag her spotless robes through the mire, and 
for vice to go through such an explanatory purifica- 
tion as might almost make a blackamoor clean. 



154 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

And it was perfectly natural, considering his 
age, his character, his education, and the circum- 
stances of the case so far as he knew them, that 
AUck Dudley should take the worst view possible of 
Mr. Croft's conduct. 

Had he not deliberately, and of malice afore- 
thought, come like a wolf in the night, and stolen 
Bessie away . he with a wife living, too ? 

Well might Bessie not write to Heather (Alick 
was not aware that Bessie had returned to the one 
friend, of whose love and faithfulness she felt con- 
fident) ; well might the guilty creature hold herself 
aloof from all communication with relative or ac- 
quaintance. That Bessie had been deceived, Alick 
never imagined ; that Mr. Croft had not jumped into 
sin at a single leap, was an idea he would have 
scouted. How easy, how gradual, how pleasant are 
the slopes leading down into the valley where Vice 
holds her court, this young Joshua had no conception. 
He thought that every ofifender, every one who went 
so far wrong as he felt confident Mr. Croft had 
strayed, ought to be stoned like Achan, so that he 
might trouble the peace of Israel no more. 

Comfortable thoughts these, to fill the mind when 



IX BERRIE DOWN LANE. 155 

standing beside an open grave ; but they were Alick 
Dudley's thoughts, nevertheless, and they made him 
hold himself aloof as far as possible from the man 
who had, he believed, first stolen Bessie away, and 
then striven to be kind to I^ly, as a sort of oflFset 
against the shame he had brought amongst them. 

He was contemptible altogether, the lad decided, 
too mean for him even to despise, and yet Alick 
would have liked to fight this despicable individual 
. to put some terrible afiront on him . ^to do him a 
serious bodily injury . to tell him, that although 
Bessie was not worth fretting after, still the man 
who had lured her away was worth punishing. 

Nothing Mr. Croft could say or do, Alick kept 
declaring to himself, should ever induce him to 
grasp his hand in friendship ; and when all was over, 
when the body of the child who had never known of 
her own experience the meaning of the word " loneli- 
ness," was left to lie solitary under the shadow of 
that grey church-tower till the day of judgment, 
Alick acted upon this decision, and drawing back from 
the little group which clustered around Arthur, found 
himself walking side by side with Lord Eemms. 

Heaven knows what put such a thought into the 



156 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

young man's mind at the moment ; but, after they 
had passed through the gates, Alick suddenly asked 
his companion : 

"How is Nellie?" 

" Stone blind, as you said she would be," was the 
reply. 

"And I have not yet made the fortune out oi 
which I was to repay you," remarked Alick. 

** I am sorry to hear it, though not for the reason 
you mention," Lord Kemms answered. *' It would 
have been better, however, perhaps, for all of you had 
I never bought her. The money she fetched was 
the first your brother advanced into the Protector." 

" Poor Arthur !" murmured the Squire's brother ; 
" but it was not the Protector that brought us back 
to Fifield toKlay." 

" True," rejoined his companion ; " but, perhaps, 
your brother's child might have lived a little longer 
had she never left Berrie Down." 

" You are wrong there, my Lord," Alick replied ; 
"nothing could have saved her; she was dying 
when she left here, and it was owing entirely to the 
care and skill of the London doctors she stayed 
with us so long. It is bad enough as it is, but w 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE, 157 

could scarcely have borne the loss had it been as 
you supposed." 

Which view of the case happened to be perfectly 
true, although Lord Kemms imagined the speaker 
was mistaken. 

Having had a hand in damaging the Protector, 
his Lordship felt, naturally, anxious to prove that 
Company the origin of all evil. 

Since, in the course of a mysterious Providence, 
Lally was to die, he would have felt happy to de- 
monstrate that the Protector had, directly or in- 
directly, been instrumental in killing her. 

Now, however, Alick Dudley cut the gi*ound 
from under his feet. K Lally's short existence had 
been prolonged, even for an hour, by the skill and 
kindness of the London doctors, it was impossible 
for Lord Kemms ever again to insinuate that re- 
siding in town had hastened her death. 

On that score, at all events, Arthur had no reason 
to reproach himself, which was fortunate, since when 
he returned to Berrie Down after the funeral, he 
felt his burden was quite as heavy as he could bear. 

He was pressed for money ; his dreams of wealth 
were vanishing away like mist wreaths ; his shares 



158 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

he feared would never return him even a quarter of 
the sum he had expected to make by them ; the 
half-yearly dividend had been unsatisfactory ; his 
directors were irritable, the shareholders discon- 
tented. 

He knew he must shordy let the Hollow, in order 
to rid himself of farming expenses, and to provide 
certain funds for paying the interest of the money 
for which Berrie Down was already mortgaged. He 
had not merely lost money senselessly, but squan- 
dered it foolishly ; and to a man who had for so 
many years of his life looked honestly after six- 
pences, there was something very terrible in the 
reflection that he had got himself into debt through 
unthinkingly spending sovereigns. 

In addition to all these causes for regret, Arthur 
added that peculiarity of his own temperament, 
which valued whatever was lost or in jeopardy far 
above any secure or present possession ; and the 
feeling that the Hollow would soon to a great 
extent cease to be his own property, caused him to 
view every tree and shrub about it, every stick and 
thorn, with an appreciative affection as novel as it 
was painful. 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 159 

His love for wife, children, property, kindred lay 
latent until some chance circumstance accidentally 
revealed its existence to himself ; and most probably 
the first time he ever really placed a proper value 
on Berrie Down was when he saw it in the dead of 
winter, its evergreens bright and glossy as ever ; its 
lawn sloping away towards the west, the grand old 
trees tossing their branches in the keen north blast, 
all passing away irom him and his ; passing away 
from the descendants of those who had held the 
place for centuries. 

He meant to remain at the Hollow for the night ; 
he had much to talk over with Ned, many arrange- 
ments to make, fifty things to see to ; and so he and 
Cuthbert, and Mr. Croft, who had declined the hos- 
pitality of Kemms' Park, were all to stay in the 
now deserted-looking rooms until the following 
morning, while Alick returned to town by the latest 
night-train from Palinsbridge. 

It was necessary for him, if he wished to catch 
this train, to start away from Berrie Down before 
nine o'clock ; and while the young man was out in 
the yard hnpressing this fact on Ned's comprehen- 
sion, Mr. Croft came and stood beside him. 



IfK) FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

It was a moonlight night, stormy but still fine. 
The wind blew great masses of clouds over the 
moon's face, and then swept it. dean and bright 
again. 

** You will have rather a rough drive over,** Mr. 
Croft remarked ; and Alick, backing the pony into 
the shafts, sulkily answered, '^ Yes, it looks like it" 

** Can Ned not harness the pony for you ?** was 
the next question. 

" If he tried very hard, perhaps he might," Alick 
replied. 

^^ Perhaps he will be good enough to try hard, 
then," said Mr. Croft; ^and perhaps you would 
have the kindness to walk a few yards with me down 
the Lane. I want to speak to you." 

*' To me ?" repeated Alick, in surprise. 

" Yes ; to you, particularly," was the reply. 

"I will bid Arthur * good-night,' and be with you 
directly," the other agreed; and accordingly in a 
few minutes Mr. Croft and he were walking along 
Berrie Down Lane, past the pond, and under the 
ehns and beeches that sheltered the road beyond. 

^^Hiere is bad blood between ns," began the 
elder man, after they had paced on for a ebcui 



\ 



IN BEBBIE DOWN LANE. 161 

distance side by side in lence. ^' There is bad 
blood between us, and I am sony for it ; but it is 
natural that you should^ both dislike and distrust 
me. 

" Was that what you brought me here to say T 
Alick inquired. 

" No ; consider it as my opening sentence, . ^the 
stamp with which I have broken the conversational 
ice ; now I can go on. You remember, of course, 
where you first saw me r 

'^It is not likely I should soon forget such a 
pleasure," was the reply. 

** You are satirical, but I am shot proof," Mr. 
Croft remarked; "you recollect, then, that Sunday 
afternoon in North Kemms' church, and the girl who 
kept her eyes fixed so demurely on her prayer- 
book, which I had afterwards the happiness of re- 
storing to her 7* 

" And in which you placed a letter," added Alick. 

" And in which I placed one of a series of letters," 
amended Mr. Croft ; ** good . ^you remember her ?" 

" As well as I remember you," was the reply. 

" Where is she now T 

The moon sailed out firom behind a doud, as 

VOL. HL H 



162 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

suddenly and sharply Mr. Croft put this question, 
looking full in A lick's (ace while he did so. 

** Where is she now ?" the younger man repeated, 
" why, do you not know ?" 

" If I did, I should not come to you for informa- 
tion. Listen to me," he rapidly proceeded, "I 
would give my right hand to know where she is. I 
would give a man anything almost he liked to ask, 
if he only proved to me she were alive and well. 
You were fond of her, were you not, boy ? it vexes 
you to hear that there is no one belonging to her, no 
one on whom she has a claim . ^not even myself who 
can say where she is, whether living or dead ; but 
what is your trouble to mine ? When I looked in 
your face a moment since, my last hope vanished. I 
thought perhaps she might have gone to Heather . 
to Mrs. Dudley, I mean." 

" Would you have me understand that she never 
went off with you?*' Alick interrupted. He stood 
still in the very middle of Berrie Down Lane as he 
spoke, and the shifting light gave a wild, curious 
expression to his face. "Do you think I am so 

simple as to believe " 

*' My dear fellow, I do not think you simple, and 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 163 

it is immaterial to me what you believe ; but I want 
to know where your cousin is to be found. I desire, 
at least, assurance of her safety, comfort, and . 
should such a miracle be possible . happiness." 

" And by what right do you dare to ask anything 
about her," demanded Alick ; " you a married man, 
you who never ought to have written her a line, or 
met her, or . or " 

" I did not beg you to walk on here with me to- 
night in order to answer your questions," Mr. Croft 
interrupted ; " my object was merely to put one or 
two of my own. To my first, your face has already 
replied. I see you know nothing of your cousin's 
whereabouts. If you should do so, will you at all 
events let me know that you have heard from or 
seen her, and that she is well T 

" No," Alick Dudley replied,  I will not." 

" That settles my second question," observed Mr. 
Croft. " Now, the last point on which I desire in- 
formation is this : does Mrs. Dudley know we have 
met before, and where ?" 

"She knows I have seen you," was the answer; 
" but I have not told her when, or where, or what 
I suspect." 

M 2 



164 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

** That is to say, Mrs. Dudley does not in any 
way connect me with your cousin's disappearance?" 
Mr. Croft remarked inquiringly ; and when Alick 
answered in the affirmative, he proceeded : 

"Will you still respect my secret, so far as you 
know it r 

" I shall make no promise," Alick answered. 

" At least, will you let me tell my story for myself?" 

" There is nothing to prevent your doing that," 
the other replied, " any more than there is to prevent 
my telling mine." 

"You are sternly uncompromising," sjud Mr. 
Croft 

" I should be sorry to compromise with a seducer 
and a villain," was the reply. 

" You are talking at random, boy, on a matter 
concerning which you know literally nothing," the 
person so politely addressed observed, sadly. " Had 
I spoken to an older man, as I have spoken to you 
to-night, I should not have been so repulsed." 

"Possibly not by an older man like yourself," 
retorted Alick, with a sneer. 

"Good-night," said Mr. Croft, "we will not 
spoil our naturally sweet tempers by further argu- 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE, 165 

ment. Here comes Ned. Shall we shake hands 
over it ? No ; good-bye then, and pleasant thoughts 
as you travel to town. Some day you will think 
you have not been all in the right in your judgment 
of me ; but I do not quarrel with you for that 
judgment. It is human to err, and your humanity 
has erred, perhaps, on the safest side. On a safer 
side than mine, certainly," he muttered, as Alick, 
jumping up beside Ned, took the reins, and, with a 
cold farewell to Mr. Croft, drove off at a rattling 
trot along Berne Down Lane, and thence through 
Fifield to Palinsbridge. 

As they passed Fifield church, the moonlight fell 
clear and cold on the mound of freshly-turned 
mould, which was heaped over the spot where 
Heather's darling lay all alone, and the tears came 
welling up into Alick's eyes when he thought of the 
dead child. 

Any one might have imagined that such tears 
must soften the heart, and render it for the time, at 
least, pitiful and tender even to a sinner; but no 
such change was wrought on Alick Dudley's 
mood. 

All the way up to town, sitting in a comer of the 



1G6 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

compartment, he pondered over his interview with 
Mr. Croft . pondered and wondered ; but it never 
once occmred to him that perhaps he had judged 
the man harshly, that he had repulsed his semi-con- 
fidence very rudely. 

He was a sinner . he was all Alick had said ; over 
and over again the youth kept repeating these state- 
ments to himself; over and over he found it neces- 
sary to refresh his spirit with them, for his con- 
science did not feel quite satisfied concerning the 
interview. 

Still he had done right, and though the right 
might be unpleasant and ungracious, it was never- 
theless necessary to be performed. Young though 
he might be, Alick Dudley knew enough of human 
nature to be aware Mr. Croft was for some reason 
or other in very grievous trouble : to be confident, 
he never would have spoken to him had the subject 
not been one, as he implied, of vital importance to 
his peace ; but what of that? If he were in trouble, 
so much the better ; if he were anxious and grieved, 
it was nothing but what he deserved. 

He had been kind to Lally, it is true ; but, again, 
what of that? In the eyes of Alick Dudley, 



> 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE. 167 

Douglas Aymescourt Croft seemed the incarnation 
of evil, of hypocrisy, of treachery, and of sin. 

With all his heart and with all his soul, Alick 
hated the man . hated him all the more, perhaps, 
because he felt quite confident, if Mr. Croft once 
told his tale to Heather, he would deceive her also 
somehow, perhaps even move her to pity. 

And Alick held in those days the pleasant creed, 
that no human being who went wrong should ever 
be pitied. Not even the look of Mr. Croft's face, as 
he stood eager and anxious, waiting for Alick's 
answer, had been able to soften the youth. Rather, 
in his stern rectitude, he now blamed himself for 
having been over-lenient, for having been unduly 
tender to this wretch who had deceived Bessie, and 
wrought for her perhaps such misery as he himself 
was unable to contemplate calmly. 

Out and away with him ; on a gallows as high as 
Haman's, Alick would willingly have hung him; 
and, afi;er all, to come to me ! thought this modern 
Joshua . ^to come to me ! 

Ay, there was Mr. Croft's mistake ; perhaps he 
never had been very young himself, or perhaps the 
feelings of his youth lay so far back in the book of 



168 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

years, that he forgot how stem and hard young 
people, who can be trusted, usually are in their 
judgments. Be this as it may, the result of 
the interview had proved different to what he ex- 
pected, and he returned to the Hollow, smiling a 
little bitterly as he thought time would teach 
Alick Dudley a different lesson ; that possibly out 
of his own experience he might after a while 
acquire a little toleration in judging of others. 
And in this idea, who may say Douglas Croft was 
wrong? 

True, it is only God who, knowing all about our 
sins and our temptations, is ever entirely merciful ; 
but still, the more men learn of their own natures, 
the more fully they come to comprehend how easy 
it is to do wrong, and how difficult to do right ; the 
closer they form an acquaintance with that lore 
which nothing except sorrow, and trial, and trouble, 
and experience can teach, the greater is the tole- 
ration with which they regard error ; the greater is 
the diffidence which they feel about affirming of any 
human being, " In the sight of the Almighty, you 
are a very grievous sinner." 

In precise proportion, as a man towards the close 



IN BERRIE DOWN LANE, 169 

of his life is harsh and bitter, as he views with 
loathing not the crime but the criminal, as he ven- 
tures to pass severe judgments on his fellow-creatures, 
so we may be certain his earthly education has been 
wasted. 

It is natural for the young to air their indigna- 
tion ; natural and right, for they cannot conceive the 
power and might of those temptations which are 
strong enough to lead wiser people than themselves 
astray; which meet poor humanity like an armed 
man; which lurk like lions in the path, yea, are 
" like lions roaring on their prey." 

In the young, it may reasonably be hoped that 
intolerance is an outward and visible sign of inex- 
perience and innocence, but in the old and the 
middle-aged it can be regarded but as a token of 
folly, as a sign of a Pharasaic rather than a humble 
spirit ; of a mental constitution swift to forget per- 
sonal sins and to notice defects in others; of a 
bigoted proneness to measure the com of all men's 
lives out of one bushel ; of a pompous giving thanks 
to God for having made some people so much better 
than that poor, low, wretched, tabooed publican ; of 
a disposition ready to find a mote in a brother's 



170 FAR ABOVE BUSIES. 

eye, forgetful of the beam which was so utterly 
displeasing in the sight of Him who has with his 
own lips assured us, that ^ Blessed are the merciful, 
for they shall obtain mercy." 




171 



CHAPTER VIII. 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 



Feminine curiosity, we may take it for granted, is 
sometimes less keen than feminine grief. If it were 
otherwise, in what way, I pray you, should any one 
account for the fact, that some weeks passed 
away, from the night of Lally's death, without 
Heather Dudley knowing all the particulars of 
Bessie's existence from the hour when she left Berrie 
Down, till she reappeared in Lincoln's Inn Fields r 

In truth, the mother's sorrow was very terrible ; 
so engrossing, that it nearly deadened all desire to 
ascertain the particulars of another human being's 
life; besides which, there was a mystery about 
Bessie . a mystery Heather, in the midst of her 
grief, intuitively felt chary of intruding on. She 
wished no one to hear of her return ; she came at 



172 



FAR ABOVE RUBIE3. 



.ight to Lincoln's Inn Fields, and was admittei 
pririly by Tifford, whom probably she had bribei 
to secrecy, for none of the other Beirants ever hear 
of her visits. She wore a ring, a golden wed 
ding-ring, and yet her face was not the face o 
a happy woman. She volunteered no particulars c 
the events which had intervened between the tim 
when she stole away from tlie Hollow like a thief i 
the night, till she returned to see Lally before sh 
died. She was sweeter than of old, but she wa 
also sadder, and her beauty, neither dimmed no 
diminished, was yet changed. 

All these things Mrs. Dudley beholding, eve 
through ber tears, might have marvelled at, thong 
she never inquired into them, until one day ther 
arrived a note from Bessie, saying, " I can tell yo 
no more, dear Heather, unless you will visit mt 
Come to me once, at all events ; I want to speak t 
you, and I want to show you something." 

Dressed in her deep mourning. Heather repaire 
to the address given . a first floor in Roscommo 
Street, PentonvUle. 

What a mean street it waa . what small, clos 
rooms that -pretty Bessie bad selected ; and ye 



/-^ 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 173 

when Heather came to sit down beside the fire, with 
her old friend's hand clasping hers, she forgot all the 
words of remonstrance she had intended to speak, 
and listened to Bessie's sorrowfiil apologies. 

" It is not exactly the kind of parlour I should 
have liked to ask you to spend a day in, Heather," 
she said; "but beggars, you know, cannot be 
choosers ; and I wanted to talk to you so much . 
so much . and to show you something, if you do not 
mind." 

" If I do not mind !" Heather repeated, wonderingly. 

"Yes, sweet . my child!" and, with the colour 
mantling in her cheeks, Bessie went into the next 
room, her bedchamber, and brought thence a baby . 
a great, staring, fat baby . with pink feet, and arms 
that looked as though cord had been tied tightly 
round the wrists, so deep were the rolls and wrinkles 
of flesh, so high the mountains and so deep the 
intermediate valley. 

Is it necessary for me to describe what fol- 
lowed during the course of the next ten minutes ? 
What woman is there who does not know exactly 
how Heather took the little fatuous-looking lump of 
mortality to her heart and cried over it ; who cannot 



174 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

conceive how Bessie, sitting on a low stool, gazed at 
the meaningless features of her child, which cooed 
and clung to Heather, and dabbed its fists in her 
face, and crowed with delight at the sweet eyes bent 
upon it, and kicked in an ecstasy of infantile excite- 
ment at all the notice '^ mamma's company" was 
taking of mamma's autocrat 

Of course there was weeping. Heather could 
not so soon forget her own first-bom as to forbear 
shedding tears at sight of Bessie's baby ; and then 
Bessie cried, and, finally, the autocrat yelled, which 
ebullition of feeling did more towards restoring the 
mental equilibrium of the two ladies than one of the 
Church homilies or a charge from the Archbishop of 
Canterbury could have done. 

And still Heather asked no questions, while 
Bessie, having brought in her boy's cradle, sat 
rocking him to sleep. Mrs. Dudley, spite of that 
child, the mean lodgings, the tangible wedding-ring, 
refrained fi'om cross-examination. In an earlier 
part of this story, it has been stated that Squire 
Dudley's wife knew when to keep a discreet silence, 
but it has not been stated that she frequently did 
not know when to speak. 




WOMAN TO WOMAN. 175 

She was sensitive to a fault ; and so now, though 
she felt dying to know, and Bessie sat longing to 
tell, there ensued a silence which the latter at length 
broke with . 

"Heather, why is it that you have never re"- 
proached me? how does it happen you had not a 
single hard word . ^nothing but love, and tears, and 
kisses for me, who repaid your kindness with such 
bitter ingratitude ?" 

"My darling! why should I reproach you?" 
Heather answered. " What am I that I should be 
hard upon you, however it may he .^" 

" And how do you think it is, Heather ?" asked 
her friend, turning from the child, now fast asleep ; 
" what is your opinion about the matter ?" 

" I would rather not form any," was the reply. 
"But you must, dear," Bessie declared; "you 
are thinking even now about me. What is the 
conclusion at which you have arrived?" 

" I was only marvelling !" Mrs. Dudley answered 
" If you are married, where is your husband . why 
are you here ? if you are not married . oh ! Bessie, 
sweet, forgive me !" 

" Forgive you, Heather !" Bessie answered, 



176 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'* forgive you ! If you think even the implication 
of such a misfortune so hurtful to me, what will 
the reality prove to you, Heather? I am not a 
married woman, spite of this. and this" . she 
pointed to ring and infant . " I am no more married 
in the eye of the law, than I was when I left Berne 
Down r 

" God help you !" Heather murmured, softly. 

" Ay, God help me, indeed !" Bessie repeated. 
" Sometimes, sitting here alone, I think He has dealt 
with me very hardly ; hut, then, I look at my child 
and grow patient. I want to tell you my story, if it 
will not weary you.'* 

" Weary me !" Heather exclaimed. 

" You do not draw away from me . ^you do not 
regard me as a pariah," Bessie continued. " If I were 
to go to my mother now, and tell her what I am 
ahout to tell you, she would order me out of the 
house, and address me for ever after with the door- 
chain up. Do you understand me clearly. Heather 
Dudley ?" she said, almost impatiently. " I am not 
a married woman, and yet I am a mother ! Shall I 
fetch your shawl and bonnet, and send for a cab, and 
bid vou farewell for ever ? Don't you hate to touch 



'Tl 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 177 

me ? Is the room not oppressive in which I breathe 
the same air with you?" and, as she spoke, Bessie 
rose excitedly, and would have moved farther away 
but that Heather caught and chid her for her want 
of faith. 

" I am your friend, love," she said in the low tone 
which had such a virtue of healing and leisure in it 
. " not your judge. We are woman to woman now, 
Bessie, tell me what you will." 

Then Bessie, flinging herself on her knees, buried 
her face in the folds of Heather's dress, and sobbed 
aloud. " I have sinned," she said, " I have sinned, 
but not willingly ; my greatest guilt was my deceit- 
fulness, my sly ingratitude." 

" You were deceitful," Heather answered. ** Oh ! 
Bessie, how could you, how was it possible for you, 
to engage yourself to Gilbert Harcourt, caring, as 
you must have done " 

" Heather, you are wrong," broke in Bessie ; " I 
was engaged to Gilbert Harcourt before I ever saw 
the . ^the . father of my child. You know what a 
life I had at home ; you know any life would have 
seemed preferable to that. Across it in an unlucky 
hour Mr. Harcourt walked. He fell in love with 

VOL. Ill, N 



178 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

me . ^he was a good creature and a kindly, and so, 
though I did not care for him in the least, I said 
yes when he asked me to marry him . said yes, 
prompted and badgered thereto by my mother, and 
so became engaged. 

" What is the idea of the world in such matters ? 
Is it not almost that a woman engaged is a woman 
married ? Such was my idea, at all events ; but I 
wearied of the tie before long ; it is hard always to 
remember one is engaged to a man for whom one 
does not care two straws. That was my case with 
Gilbert Harcourt. I tried hard to like him, but I 
failed ; my sin as regards him was ever promising 
to become his wife, not in breaking my promise ; is 
it not better to part even at the altar-rails than to 
take false vows before God? I played a double 
game for months and months . there was my error ; 
but I was a coward, and I dare never have faced my 
mother had I told her my repugnance to marrying 
the suitor she favoured ; besides, my other suitor 
did not come forward. Oh ! Heather, Heather, I 
felt so miserable and so wicked down at the Hollow, 
I felt so deceitful and false amongst you all. My 
love, had you been my mother, I never should have 



.\ 



WOMAN TO WOMAN, 179 

been sitting here to-day, a wife, and yet no wife ; 
had you not been my friend, God only knows where 
I should have been to-day, perhaps dead, perhaps 
living in sin, certainly not here, struggling feebly 
to do right, to atone for my transgression, stilving 
to forget the only man I ever loved, Heather, the 
only man I ever loved." 

She put her hand to her head and moaned as she 
spoke . moaned like one in some bodily pain. 

" Bessie," whispered Heather, bending low, " don't 
speak to me about your trouble, dear, if it pains you 
to do so. I do not require to hear " 

"But I require to tell you," Bessie broke in 
vehemently. " We met, he and I, after I was en- 
gaged to Gilbert, where do you think. Heather ? in a 
railway carriage, and he never spoke to me, and I 
never spoke to him for forty miles while the train 
rushed on to the lonely country place where I was 
travelling to spend my Christmas . the Christmas 
previous to that I passed with you. Mamma and I had 
quarrelled that morning, and, in consequence of our 
quarrel, I missed the train by which my friends ex- 
pected me; the result of this was, that when I 
arrived at Thirkell no one met me, and there I was 

n2 



180 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

stranded at about nine o'clock of a winter's night on 
the platform of a lonely country station, where such 
a luxury as a fly was unknown, and the parsonage 
whither I was bound three miles o 

" Had it not been for the manner in which I 
parted from my mother I should have returned to 
town by the next train due at Thirkell, the station- 
master informed me, at 10.25 p.m. As things were, 
however, I decided on making the best of my way 
to Holston Vicarage on foot, protected by a porter 
six feet high, who declared his willingness to take 
charge of me. 

^^AU this time my travelling companion was 
engaged in sending a telegram to town, to which he 
said he should wait an answer, and ' in the mean- 
while,' he added, turning to me, 'if you are not 
afrsdd of the cold, my man can drive you over to 
Holston and be back here quite as soon as 1 shall 
require him.' 

** What should you have done under the circum- 
stances, Heather ? dropped a pretty curtsey and an- 
swered . * Thank you, sir, but my mamma would not 
be pleased if she heard of my accepting any civility at 
your hands, and as I am a good child and like to do 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 181 

what my mamma tells me, I will walk, if you please, 
all along the dirty lanes to Holston, and make myself 
as uncomfortable as it is possible for a human being 
to render herself?' 

"That would have been proper, would it not, 
man being woman's natural enemy? I, however, 
preferring impropriety to discomfort, accepted his 
offer, was helped by him into a dog-cart, which 
seemed to me about five storeys high, thanked him, 
bade him good night, and in twenty minutes was set 
down at the door of Holston Parsonage, when, of 
course, my friends had quite given me up. Oh ! dear," 
Bessie sighed, " oh ! dear, to think that so simple a 
thing should be the beginning of so much trouble 1" 

" And after that ^" Mrs. Dudley suggested. 

" After that, how did we meet ?" the girl replied ; 
" the first time it was on the road, and we bowed ; 
next time, we spoke. The people I was staying 
with were old as the hills, and never took a walk by 
any chance. I did, unhappily ; and so at length it 
came to pass that we . ^he and I, met on the downs, 
in the lanes . sometimes here, sometimes there . but 
still constantly. I think," added Bessie, " we both 
fought against our wish to see each other in those 



182 FAR ABOVE RUBXES. 

days . I know I did . I know I chose each morning 
I went out a different path, but let me go which way 
I would I met him. 

" At last, I thought I had better return to town, 
but he followed me to London. Can you fancy 
what it was. Heather, to return to that horrible 
engagement . to the sight of a man now grown 
positively distasteful? No, you cannot, love, I 
bnow; God forbid you should. What next? we 
met in town, we met at the sea-shore ; and still 
I did try to avoid him. You believe me, Heather, 
I did strive with all my heart to do my duty to 
Gilbert and forget the other, but it was impossible ; 
I loved the last, 1 had grown absolutely to dislike 
the first. It was no negative feeling I had for my 
affianced husband then, it was active aversion. Oh I 
Heather, then came the part of my life I hate to 
look back upon. I was not honest, I was not open. 
When in a fit of repentance, for such I know now it 
must have been, he disappeared from Southend, 
where we were then staying, I never told Gilbert I 
was changed. I let him come on. on . I allowed 
them all to talk about my marriage ; and I meant 
to marry him, loving the other all the time, and 




WOMAN TO WOMAN. 183 



only angry at his having, as I considered, deserted 



me. 



" Did he . did the one you were fond of know of 
your engagement to Gilbert ?" Mrs. Dudley replied. 

" Ah ! Heather, do you think there was anything 
I kept from him f Bessie answered ; " and, if I had 
not been the stupid goose I was, his manner might 
have told me there must be something wrong. He 
listened to me, and he thought the affair over, as it 
seemed, in his mind ; and then he begged me to give 
Gilbert up, but he never said, ' I will come forward 
and shield you from the storm you dread.' No, he 
only said, * If you love me, you will have nothing to 
do with him.' But I was afraid, afraid of my mother, 
afraid of being found out, afraid of our being 
parted, and I had never seen any good in all my 
life, and how could I be good and firm . how was 
it possible T 

"My poor child 1 my poor darling!" Heather 
murmured. 

" You do not know Southend," Bessie said, look- 
ing up in the face which was bent down over her. 
" You do not know Southend. People tell me it is 
not a nice place, but it was as the kingdom of 



184 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

heaven to me. There are walks along the shore 
to Leigh, and walks beyond Leigh to Hadleigh^ 
there is a way along the shore to Shoeburyness, and 
there are delicious field-paths leading to farm-houses, 
which seemed to me the very abodes of peace and 
contentment. Oh ! those days . those sunshiny 
happy days ! You are crying, love, what is it ? Are 
you sorry for me ? I was a poor weak treacherous 
girl ; but so happy, darling, so blessed !" 

And Bessie covered her face with her hands, and 
the tears came trickling through her fingers. They 
had indeed been happy days, but they were gone, 
and she sat weeping for the bliss which had been ; 
whilst Heather, thinking of the sunshine and bliss 
her own life had lacked, could not choose but weep 
also. 

" Then suddenly he went away," Bessie resumed, 
" and SQon afterwards I came to stay with you ; in 
your house I learned that summer my alphabet of a 
better life. Unconsciously, women like you. Heather, 
mould and purify other women ; you are as the salt 
which salteth the earth . you are as the leaven hid in 
the three measures of meal *' 

"Stop, Bessie dearest," entreated Heather. "Have 




WOMAN TO WOMAN. 185 

not you, even you, said witliin this last fortnight, I 
was hard to my husband, and I have been hard and 
unsympathetic, and wrapped up in my own grief, 
Lord pardon me T 

" But I did not mean that you were really hard," 
Bessie declared; "only that you were not quite 
the Heather you used to be . the Heather who 
thought of Arthur before she thought of any one 
else . there, there . I must get on with my story or 
I shall never finish it. Where was I? . growing 
better . when he came after me once again, praying, 
pleading, assuring me, both by word of mouth and by 
letter, that it could not be right for me to marry a 
man I disliked ; that if I persisted in keeping to my 
engagement I should be preparing misery for myself, 
for Gilbert, and for him. 

" But stiU, he never said, * I will come and claim 
you from him ' . ^never once. 

" How I strove to keep my engagement you may, 
perhaps, remember ; but when he saw I was deter- 
mined to be true to my promise, he grew desperate, 
and would have had me risk everything and go off 
with him then. He explained that he was placed in 
a difficult position in consequence of his father, on 



186 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

whom he was dependent, wishing him to marry a 
rich widow ; and, of course, I was not so selfish as to 
desire that he should beggar himself for my sake ; 
so we parted again. Oh, Heather, I did not sink 
without many a struggle, many a frantic efibrt to 
touch secure ground. Everything he told me was 
false, even to his name ; for he assumed that of a 
cousin the better to deceive me ; but I loved him 
then as I love him now ; and then as now. I found 
it hard to see a fault in him. 

'^ At last I could bear it no longer, and left with 
hun as you know ; we were married next morning at 
a church in the Gty . ^he had been residing in the 
parish for the requisite period . and, as we drove 
away from the door, I saw my father walking along 
the side path. I could have put out my hand and 
touched his shoulder, but he prevented my speaking 
to him. He would not let me write to you or any 
one. He said some day he would avow our mar- 
riage, and, till then, I must be patient ; and I was 
patient. I never wearied him. I never even felt 
fretful ; if he had asked me to go to Iceland with 
him, I would have done it. I would have died for him. 

"We were so happy," she continued, after a 




WOMAN TO WOMAN. 187 

pause; "we had the loveliest cottage you can 
imagine in a distant county ; and, though he said he 
was poor, I never felt any shortness of money ; we 
never seemed to have anxiety about proidding for 
the moi^row's wants. My only trouble was his fre- 
quent absences ; but still, spite of these, he spent a 
considerable part of his time with me, and he grew 
to know you and Arthur, and Lally, and the girls, 
as though you had all be n members of his own 
household." 

" You have more to tell me," Heather said, as 
Bessie paused. 

" Yes," was the reply ; " I have, the end of my 
story. One day, when we were out together, we met 
a gentleman whom my husband greeted with a 
certain annoyance and restraint. They seemed 
very familiar and intimate; but, still, Maurice . I 
always called him Maurice . did not introduce his 
friend to me, nor invite him to our house. After he 
left us, I asked his name. 

" * Oh, that is my rich cousin,' Maurice said in 
reply. * I hope he did not guess who you are.' 

" ' Why, would he tell your father ?' I asked, and 
he answered ' No ; he did not think so. He believed 



188 FAR ABOV RUBIES. 

him to be a better fellow than all that came to ; but 
he is a canting idiot,' he said, ' and has got so many 
strange ideas. If he should happen to call, you 
must not see him ; remember, you must not, Bessie !' 

'^I promised him that I would not, and I meant 
to keep my promise ; but a fortnight afterwards . 
when my husband having gone up to London, I was 
alone . this same man stepped, without any an- 
nouncement whatever, through one of the front 
windows opening into the garden, and, after very 
briefly apolo^sing for his intrusion, and the fright 
he had caused me, commenced one of the most 
dreadful sermons you ever heard. Heather, and 
wound up by inquiring * whether I had ever con- 
sidered I was going down into hell and dragging 
his cousin there with me.' 

'^ Thinking he was mad, I humoured him at first ; 
but, after a time, finding there was a wonderful 
coherence in his discourse . that it was, in fact, too 
stupid to be the speech of a madman . I asked him, 
plainly, what he meant, entreating of him, in the 
same sentence, not to tell Maurice's father of his 
son's marriage ; for that fear of bringing unhappi- 
nesa on my husband was the only grief I had. 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 189 

" Then it was his turn to look bewildered. * Father 
. son . husband . Maurice T he repeated in blank 
astonishment. ^My cousin's name is not Maurice, 
and has no father living. May I ask pardon if you 

are married to my the gentleman I met 

you with the other day ?' 

" ' Certainly/ 1 answered ; * do you think I should 
be here if I were not ?' 

" * Then/ he said, ' it is my duty to tell you my 
cousin has most grossly deceived you. The mar- 
riage is not, cannot be, a legal one; for, to my 
knowledge, his wife is alive at the present moment' 

" After that," proceeded Bessie, " there is a blank 
in my memory . I suppose I fainted ; it was a fearful 
blow to receive, but the man who dealt it stayed 
with me for nearly an hour, and was very kind and 
thoughtful towards me. He did not call the ser- 
vants; he made no fuss; he threw a little water 
on my face, and let me struggle back to con- 
sciousness without drawing the attention of any 
one to my trouble. When I was quite recovered 
he begged my pardon for the mistake he had 
made in the first instance, and assured me, I think 
truly, that, had he guessed for a moment the 



]9(> FAB ABOTE BVBIES. 

depth of his consul's treadienry he nerer would haTe 
been so abrupt 

*^ ' Bat I spoke to him in his own boose about you 
the other day/ he added, ' and he bade me mind 
my own business, and not interfere with his . who 
you were or what you were, he said, was his concern, 
and his only. So then I determined that you should 
not perish eternally for want of a word spoken in 
time.' 

^ I let him go on for some minutes . ^I let him 
preach to his hearths content, and then I said : 

^^ ' You have told me his faults . ^now show me his 
excuse. He was forced to marry against his wilL 
His wife is old, ugly, ill-tempered. He never loved 
her ; it was a marriage of convenience, which he was 
compelled into by others.' 

" He knew what I was thinking of . he guessed I 
was seeking an apology to stay with him. He had 
sense enough to see I would have given life itself to 
hear his wife was a hideous old shrew. He had not 
human feeling sufficient to understand my mad 
jealousy, but he could not help seeing it was not 
accusations against my husband I wanted to hear. 
Oh no 1 it was the defence I was panting for. 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 191 

" * He married young,' was the reply, * a lady of 
equal age, well born, wealthy, beautiful, accom- 
plished, virtuous. They do not live happily, it is 
true; but she was his own free choice. He was 
rich and independent enough always to marry whom- 
soever he pleased.' 

" * And his real name ?' I asked. 

" Then he told me, and then only I fully understood 
how cruelly I had been deceived . what a tissue of 
falsehoods his story had been from first to last, from 
beginning to end. He had passed himself off to me 
as the man who now sat explaining the depth of my 
misery to me. I showed him the certificate of my 
marriage, and he said, * Yes ; according to this the 
bridegroom was myself. What shall you do now ? 
You will not, I trust, make the matter public, nor 
think of prosecuting him.' 

" Prosecuting him ! I stared at him as I repeated 
the words. Bring trouble to the man I loved I 
What did he think I was made of, I wonder, to 
expect I should turn in a moment like that? 
Husband or no husband, he was still dearer to me 
than anything on the face of God's earth ; and so I 
told this bearer of bad tidings, who then seemed to 



192 WAR ABOTE RTBIES^ 

fear I sbcMiIii uL a& he expnssBed rt^ into deeper 
SD. : that mr faeuxtr . be bad the grace to admit I 
was beantrfal . shooLd proTe a worse sxare than ever 
to his coasjL, a lore of die defil to trap itim to 
destmctioiL 

^ I could Eot bear anT nunre afbisr that. I ai^ed 
him if be w^e a dersimiaiu aai he said no : diat 
die sect to whfcii he belocged approved of laj 
preachers^ asd that all men were mincers whom 
the grace of God moTcd to speak His word. 

^ * And do joa imagine acL lectnriiig will do 
me any good? I said; *do too not know Ton 
are taking the most likdj means to make me 
remain where I am ? Do joa consukr it ^ a light 
trouble which has faedlea me? Do yoo expect 
me to feel grateful to you &r bringing news which 
has utterly destroyed my hapjHnes ? for I was so 
happy . so happy. 

^ * Smfully happy/ he said. 

"* At that I fired up. Where was the an. I asked, 
when I knew nothing of it? Why could he not 
hare left me alone, now the thing wss done and 
past, and that no act of mine could undo it ? Why 
did he come there ? 1 raTed, I think I must hare 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 193 

done, for at length he said he would leave me for a 
season, and return the next day when I grew 
calmer, and more willing to listen to the voice of 
consolation. 

" ' Meaning yours,' I suggested. 

" ' I will help you, if you permit me,' he answered ; 
' help you with advice . money to go back to your 
friends.' 

" ' No,' I said, * you will not. You have done 
what you considier your duty ; and, if I do not thank 
you for your misjudged kindness, it is only because 
I find it diflScult to speak ordinary words of courtesy 
when my heart is broken. There is nothing more 
you can do for me . all the rest lies between 
him and me . between him and me and God, and 
in the bitterness of our future no man shall 
meddle.' 

" ' As you wish,' he answered ; ' only tell me one 
thing more: have you friends to whom you can 
apply for assistance ? I only ask that I may feel 
you are not quite desolate.' 

" This touched me a little. * I have one friend,' 
I said, * who would not, I know, turn from me in 
any distress or difficulty.' 

VOL. IIL 



194 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 



" 'And that friend- 



" ' Is a woman/ I finished, ' and one not of my 
own kindred nor of mine own house ; but I shall not 
go to her, and what I mean to do I shall not tell 
you; 

" He turned and looked at me doubtfully ; then he 
said, * May I call to-morrow ? to which I answered, 
' Yes/ if he would only leave me then. 

" Twice on his way to the window he stopped and 
hesitated ; and while he went down the garden, I 
saw him clasp his hands as if praying. 

** I longed to fling a book after him ; but I was 
wrong, Heather, I was wrong. I believe him to 
have been a good man, though he did come and 
take all the sunshine out of my life in a minute, for 
it was such sunshine, and I was so happy. 

"When he left me, then, for the first time, I 
realised my position. I will not tell you. Heather, 
what I passed through during the hours that followed. 
There was a time when I knew, if such a temptation 
had been presented to me, I should have yielded to 
it; but I thought of you, and that thought made 
me strong. I seemed to hear your voice calling 
me away. I fancied I could see your eyes plead- 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 195 

inor . pleading for me to leave; you saved me, 
Heather. I should have stayed on, had I never 
known you ; I should have stayed on or drowned 
myself . the temptation swayed now to sin, now to 
suicide, and when I left his house, I do not think I 
knew exactly whether it was to be life or death, . 
whether I would end the struo^gle or endure it. I 
believe I was mad." 

'' And how long is it since all this happened ?" 
Mrs. Dudley inquired. 

" Months and months ago," was the reply. 
" How far I walked that night, all through the 
darkness, I should be afraid to say ; for how many 
days and nights I wandered purposelessly on, I could 
not tell you : my mind took no account of time or 
distance. It was in the autumn, and the weather 
lovely. I kept to the field-paths and the lonely 
lanes ; I avoided high roads, and railway stations, and 
towns. I had no object in view except to get a long 
distance away from liim ; and where I should ulti- 
mately have walked to, I cannot imagine, had my 
strength been equal to my will ; but it was not. I 
dropped down one morning on a piece of green 
sward under the shelter of some elm-trees, (the 

02 



196 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

place reminded me of Berrie Down Lane,) and 
I thought I was dying. I saw a house in the dis- 
tance, and strove to crawl on towards it, but failed 
in the attempt. I do not remember anything after 
that, until I found myself lying in a strange bed in 
a strange room, with my baby beside me. 

"English Samaritans dwelt in the house I had 
seen amongst the trees, and some of them finding 
me lying dead, as they thought, by the wayside, 
carried me in. I was ill for months, and during 
the whole of that time they never asked me who I 
was, or whence I came. Voluntarily, however, I 
told them my story, and then they would have had 
me stay with them always, and teach their children, 
and give such poor service as I could in exchange 
for board and lodging. 

" I agreed to do so ; but, before I settled down, I 
felt I must see you once more, and hear how Lally 
was. So I made my way to the Hollow, where 
learning from Ned that she was not expected to live, 
I travelled straight on to London, . and you know 
the rest. I will go back to my friends very shortly 
now. I have written to tell them the reason why 
I could not return before." 



^ 



WOMAN TO WOMAN. 197 

*' But why not stay in London, Bessie ?" inquired 
Mrs. Dudley. 

"Because I am poor," was the reply, "and I 
must now work for myself and my child ; because T 
shall be safe there from any fear of meeting him, . 
because I have nothing to keep me in London, 
excepting you ; and you, Heather . will let me write 
to you occasionally, will you not ?" 

" That was not the way in which you intended to 
finish your sentence," remarked Heather, with a 
smile. 

" No," Bessie answered, frankly, " it was not" 

" You were going to say you could not come to 
see me quite safely, because you thought I knew 
something of the person who has brought you to 
this, my child." 

" Don't, Heather . don't !" Bessie pleaded. 

" I am to ask no questions, then ? I am not to 
inquire his name ; but there is one thing I may do, 
love, and that is tell you what his cousin would not, 
that if it be the individual I suspect, he is one of the 
most miserable men on earth." 

" And do you think he really loved me ?" 

" How should I be able to tell that ?" Heather 



108 FAR ABOVE BUBIES. 

answered ; ^^ and you must talk of love do more in 
connectioD with him, Bessie ; for love becomes an, 
when it is impossible for it to produce other fruits 
than shame and sorrow." 

After that the two women ^t silent for a time, . 
Bessie holding Heather's hand, and Heather stroking 
Bessie's hair gently and thoughtfully. 

Little more than twelve months before. Heather 
had told Alick she did not know much about wicked- 
ness herself, and behold, already she was coming dimly 
to understand, that no human comprehension of life 
can be perfect, the boundaries of which exclude from 
sight, all evil, all passion, all temptation, all repent- 
ance, all despair. 



199 



CHAPTER IX. 



DIFFICULTIES. 



The new year brought with it no increase of busi- 
ness to the Protector Bread and Flour Company. 

On the contrary, several pairs of stones were stand- 
ing idle at Stangate, and night-work was now a thing 
unheard of. Many men were discharged on account 
of "slackness," and the labour of those that re- 
mained resulted rather in the accumulation of stock 
than in the execution of orders. 

Orders to be executed had become, in fact, few 
and far between. 

As for the bakehouse, it happened fortunately, 
perhaps, that no gentlemen of the press desired to 
see it in the later days of which I am writing, for it 
had become like one of those places in Pompeii, 
where, although the implements and utensils neces- 



200 FAB ABOVE BUBIEa. 

sarjfor canying on a trade elOl exist, the trade itadf 
is a memory. Sx months in London being aboat 
eqairalent to six hondred yean in Pompeii, the onoe 
busy coortrard and works now resemUed nothing so 
modi as a Citv of the Dead. 

Orer the Protector something worse than la^ahad 
flowed ; and, althoogfa there was stock ererywhere, 
. stock, and to spare . wheat in quantity, sacks and 
sacks of floor, still every one looked gloomy, . every 
one felt that " things were going qoeer." 

Half of the vans were now never palled oat of 
the sheds ; a large number of the horses . creatures 
that, as we know, eat their heads off when standing 
idle in the stable . were sent to Gower s and sold 
there by public auction ; stripped of their fine 
liveries, many of the " Company's servants " were 
now driving unomamental carts about the City, 
thankful to earn their guinea a week and supple- 
mental pots of beer, wherever such terms were ob- 
tainable ; most of the Company's depots were 
closed, and had large bills stuck upon the shutters, 
signifying ''that these desirable premises were to 
LET;" the rounds were shorter than of old, and 
the men now stopped to get half-pints of ale 



DIFFICULTIES. 201 

anywhere they liked without reprimand or dis- 
missal. 

A cloud of general depression had settled down 
upon the directors, the shareholders, and the em- 
ployes of the Company ; there was nothing much 
doing at Stangate, and there was less in Lincoln's 
Inn Fields. About the former establishment, Mr. 
Eobert Crossenham walked disconsolately with his 
hands in his pockets ; before the fire, in the latter, 
Arthur Dudley read the Times diligently, and 
smoked the last Havannas he was ever likely to 
have presented to him free of charge. 

In the outer office, the clerks consumed walnuts in 
quantity, pelted each other with the shells, and 
looked at their watches, or the dock half-ardozen 
times in the course of an hour. 

Business was, in a word, as bad as the weather, 
and that could not by any possibility have been 
worse. The sky, as regarded the physical world, 
was leaden ; the streets, sloppy ; the air, raw ; east 
winds prevalent ; in the City, things were drooping ; 
stocks, heavy ; rhubarb, a drug ; indigo, blue ; 
shares, flat ; com, falling ; sugars, depressed ; money, 
dear. 



202 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

The only branch of commerce, the vigour of which 
did not seem impaired, was that of advertising. 
People advertised their wares in despair, thinking, if 
a smash were to come, they might as well be hung 
for a sheep as a lamb, . as well face Basinghall Street 
with a creditable list of debts as go through the 
Court for a few hundreds. 

It was sink, or swim, with a vast number of persons 
during the earlier months of the year in question, 
and yet the papers never were so full of advertise- 
ments. The Times came out with daily supple- 
ments, and the Telegraph with its extra sheet ; the 
Standard curtailed its usual quantity of letterpress, 
and the weeklies raised their prices per line, and 
would not guarantee immediate insertion. Not to 
be out of the fashion, tlie Protector Bread Com- 
pany, Limited, announced each morning in the 
columns of the daily papers, " that pure bread was 
obtainable nowhere excepting at the depots of the 
Company ;" and every now and then a copy of an 
analysis from Daniel Smith, Esq., M.B., Ph,D., 
M,A., F.R.S., &c., Professor of Chemistry in the 
College of the Home Counties' Hospital, and 
Medical OflScer of Health for Belgravia, was ap- 



DUTICULTIES. 203 

pended, stating that he had found a loaf of the 
Company's bread to contam so much of so many 
things, and to be perfectly free from a certain 
number of other things ; that all articles used were 
of the best quality, and that he considered the pro- 
cess of manufacture employed at the Stangate 
Works, to be highly cleanly, and satisfactory. 

But all this could not make the bread sell. The 
tide of fortune had turned, and the waters of suc- 
cess were ebbing away from the goodly ship 
" Protector " more rapidly than they had ever 
flowed in on the commercial shore, where that once 
promising vessel now lay almost a wreck. 

There was not a creature connected with it, how- 
ever, who would admit that the venture was even in 
danger ; and yet every person's temper became, if 
Arthur Dudley's report were to be believed, un- 
bearable. 

His own temper, never the most pliable, was 
severely tried ; and now, instead of longing for each 
morning to dawn, in order that the business of the 
Protector might advance still further towards suc- 
cess, he hated to see day break . hated leaving his 
breakfast-room and going downstairs to meet those 



204 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

unpleasantnesses which had become of hourly, and 
momentary occurrence in his life. 

Between his principals and the public, in fact, 
Arthur stood exposed to cross fires. He dreaded 
seeing a stranger enter the office ; he looked forward 
to board-days with perfect horror. 

His old enemy, General Sinclair, C.B., tormented 
him beyond all powers of expression. He seemed 
to think, that in Arthur's hands lay the power of 
making the Protector a failure or a success. He 
frequently declared, their secretary was inefficient . 
his business capabilities below contempt When once 
matters began to go a little wrong with the Pro- 
tector, he commenced laying all the blame at Mr. 
Dudley's door. He affirmed that Lord Kemms' 
open repudiation of any connection with the Com- 
pany, was owing entirely to the secretary's lack of 
management ; he called at the office, and told Mr. 
Dudley he considered a person, endowed with even 
the most moderate share of sense . an old fi'iend and 
neighbour, moreover, of his lordship . might have 
arranged the afiair without permitting it to be 
brought under the notice of the public ; and, in the 
course of subsequent conversations, he more than 



DIFFICULTIES. 205 

once hinted his opinion, that, although the gentleman 
he had the pleasure of addressing might be a gentle- 
man, he was not much better than a simpleton. 

To which innuendo, delicately implied, Arthur, 
with more spirit than might have been expected, 
considering the state of his finances, replied, that 
General Sinclair had ample reason for thinking 
any person who relinquished his independence for 
the sake of becoming servant to a dozen masters, 
must be either foolish or mad. 

" For my part," added the secretary, " I believe 
when I was persuaded into having anything to 
do with the Protector, that I was both ; and I can 
very truthfully say, if I could only get back the 
money I have lost by this confounded Company, I 
would cut the whole concern to-morrow. Mean- 
time, sir, if you have any complaint to make of my 
conduct, I would thank you to bring it under the 
notice of the board. I am compelled to bear bully- 
ing once a week, but I will not endure it oftener," 

Upon this. General Sinclair, boiling over with 
rage, inquired if he (Mr. Dudley) knew to whom he 
was speaking ? 

" Yes," Arthur answered, " I do ; to that one of 



206 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the directors of the Protector Bread and Flour 
Company, Limited, who took my place on the 
board when I resigned ; and, with all my heart and 
soul, I wish I had never heard of the Protector, 
nor advanced a penny-piece for the purpose of 
bringing it before the public." 

And every word that Arthur said, he meant. 
He was sick and weary of his thankless oflSce ; of 
the preparation of unsatisfactory reports ; of con- 
versations with disheartened shareholders ; of enter- 
ing minutes of depressing proceedings. 

Adversity, as has been stated, had not proved 
beneficial to the tempers of his directors, and stormy 
meetings were now the rule instead of the ex- 
ception. Every man looked angrily on his neigh- 
bour; every orator believed the last speaker, and 
the speakers who had preceded him, wrong . 
practically and theoretically, root and branch ; 
every creature had his own pet plan for restoring 
public confidence in the Company, and was wont to 
return home full of dismal forebodings, of doleful 
prophecies. 

Mr. Black alone, perhaps, preserved his equa- 
nimity, and assured his colleagues, that, if they 



DIFFICULTIES, 207 

would only have patience, the tide must turn. For 
his part, he said, he had seen so many ebbs and 
flows, that he did not care a snap of the fingers for 
any temporary depression. People had not ceased 
to eat bread ; and, although they might for a time 
have changed their baker, still the best article must 
secure custom in the long run. He vehemently pro- 
tested against the closing of shops, and the reduction 
of vans. " Better to have given the bread to the 
nearest charity," he said, " than to have adopted 
such a course. Penny wise and pound foolish, he 
declared the policy adopted had been. He had 
advised putting on steam, instead of reducing the 
pressure, and reminded his fellow-directors of the 
fact ; but of course," he added, " they knew best ; 
their experience, no doubt, was greater than his; 
there was no knowing, indeed, what the best plan to 
pursue might be, till they found out which plan led 
to fortune or failure. For his part, however, he 
thought it was always judicious in business, as at 
whist, when doubtful to play a trump. He would 
have played a trump, and if the game were to prove 
a losing one, he would, at all events, have lost with 
eclat; but, as he said before, he deferred to the 



208 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

superior wisdom of his colleagues, and only trusted 
their wisdom might in the long run prove profitable 
to all parties interested. 

But the united wisdom of the directors of the 
Protector did not prove profitable, and every board- 
day more temper was exhibited, till at length the 
papers began to take the matter up, and the verv 
journals who had written leaders concerning the 
philanthropic and admirable construction of the 
Company, now found spare corners which they filled 
up with paragraphs, headed, " The Protector Bread 
Company again;" or with letters from indignant 
shareholders, who could not understand the gross 
mismanagement which must exist somewhere in a 
company, the directors of which declared a dividend 
of fifteen per cent, per annum at the first half-yearly 
meeting, and found their profits during the second 
six months only enabled them to pay with difiBcult} 
two and a half per cent. ! Truth was, as Mr. Black 
. who practically knew a vast deal more about the 
mind of the British public than the rest of the 
directors were likely ever to evolve out of their 
internal consciousness . declared, the very honesty 
of the board swamped the Company, or, at leasi., 



DIFFICULTIES. 209 

hastened its extinction. No subterfuges ; no cook- 
ing of accounts ; no hints to the secretary, that at 
the moderate expense of a bottle of good ink, a few 
quires of paper, and a hundred of pens, things might 
be made to look as pleasant as any body of share- 
holders need desire to see them ! it was all as 
though a doctor, being called in to see a bad case, 
were to lay the peril of his position before the 
patient . to exhibit to him, in its appalling naked- 
ness, the poor chance he had of recovery. 

" Enough to kill the man at once !" remarked the 
promoter to Mr. Robert Crossenham ; " and enough 
to kill a company, if it had as many lives as a cat. 
What the devil do we want with directors or any 
board ? If they would only find the money, I swear 
I'd find the brains. It is such a mistake, having so 
many masters. Well, if the * Protector ' goes smash, 
I shall always say, one of the finest pots of broth ever 
a man brought to boiling-point was spoiled by too 
many cooks having a hand in dishing it.'' 

As for Mr. Stewart, he even, had his fits of irri- 
tability- . his hours when he came to Lincoln's Inn 
Fields, and treated Arthur to his opinions. 

He said, he felt perfectly confident there was 

VOL. III. P 



210 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

something radically wrong about the Company, and 
he seemed to imagine Arthur could help him to dis- 
cover where the wrong existed, if the secretary would 
only set his brains to work. 

Some short time after Lally's death, he remarked, 
a little apologetically it is true, . 

" I wish to Heaven, Dudley, you would bestir 
yourself! Surely, it is as much your interest as 
mine to find out what game Black is playing . for 
that he is playing some game, I am satisfied." 

" If he be, I am ignorant of it," Arthur answered. 
" I presume you do not suspect me of playing into his 
hands?" 

"No, Mr. Dudley, I do not," the director an- 
swered ; and from that day Mr. Stewart came seldom 
to Lincoln's Inn Fields. 

Whatever suspicions he might entertain concern- 
ing Mr. Black's immaculate honesty, he did not 
again take Arthur into his confidence, but left the 
secretary in undisturbed enjoyment of his office, 
where he had at least the variety of seeing the 
ship containing his fortunes sink a little lower, week 
by week. 

But trade was bad with every one . so Mr. B ack 



DIFFICULTIES. 211 

declared . so even Mr. Raidsford stated on one occa- 
sion, when he and Arthur, meeting in Lombard 
Street, the pair commenced singing a mutual Jere- 
miad over the state of things in the City. 

" There is a general distrust," remarked the con- 
tractor, " for which I am quite at a loss to account, 
and a pressure for money, even upon good houses, 
which is unprecedented, at all events, in my expe- 
rience. No doubt, as the spring advances, business 
will improve, and I most sincerely hope your 
shares may then feel the effect of greater commercial 
confidence." 

All of which was said in the City oracle style, 
which, unwittingly, perhaps, Mr. Raidsford had con- 
tracted, and which impressed country people with 
the idea that he was a power in the state . a man 
who had risen quite as much by talent as by in- 
dustry ; and yet, spite of his mode of settling 
everything which was to occur in the future, Mr. 
Raidsford was more humble on that occasion than 
Arthur had ever before seen him. 

He had less of the " I am the people, and wisdom 
shall die with me" manner, which had often angered 
the Squire in days gone by, than formerly ; indeed, 

p2 



212 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

if such an expression be not out of place in speaking 
of so great a man, his tone was almost humble ; and 
while he sympathised heartily with Arthur's anxiety, 
he forbore reading him a lecture on the instability 
of all human companies, and did not, even from the 
heights of his own superior position, look down and 
say . *'I told you how it would be. I, of course, 
who always see what is going to occur, told you ; . 
don't blame me." 

No, instead of this, he remarked, "it was a wonder 
the * Protector' did not succeed, since the Company's 
bread was so good, and people must eat, you know." 
He added, " Certainly, however, a company, like an 
individual, adopting, and strictly adhering to, the 
system of ready cash, must be prepared to stand a 
considerable amount of knocking about at first ; but 
I do hope things will brighten with you after a little . 
I really do ;" having finished which speech, Mr. 
Raidsford went his way, and Arthur proceeded on 
his, thinking he liked the contractor better during 
that interview than he had ever done before, and 
regretting to see his former neighbour looking so 
thin, and anxious, and careworn. 

Which facts, when, in due time, Arthur commu- 



DIFFICULTIES. 213 

nicated them to Mr. Black, produced a careless 
comment, to the eflFect, "that very probably his 
Majesty had cause for uneasiness; people do say 
things are going deucedly queer up there ; but there 
is no use talking," added Mr. Black, " things are 
queer with everybody. I never was so hard up in 
my life; discount is a thing past praying for. If 
you take a bill to the bank now, with, say, even my 
Lord Mayor's name on it, the manager looks at 
you as if you were no better than a thief. It is 
no good being down-hearted, though ; if care killed 
the cat, I still see no reason whv care should kill 
us. "We shall find the 'Protector' looking up 
yet, never fear, and the shares at a premium again. 
Deuce a share is at a pretnlura in the City, I think, 
at this present minute of speaking. Where the money 
gets to, every now and then, passes my understanding. 
The parsons talk about riches taking unto them- 
selves legs or wings, and fleeing away, or something 
of that kind, don't they ? If their reverences were 
in my oflSce for a month, they would find out there is 
more truth in the statement than most o{ them 
actually believa Fly ! by Jove ! that's no word to 
express the pace they go at. Electricity is a fool to 



214 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

it;** and so Mr. Black rattled on, till Arthur, 
utterly overwhelmed, bade him " Good-day,** feeling 
much too dispirited to put the question be bad 
intended about those bills which would soon be 
falling due once again. 

For things had come to such a pass, that Squire 
Dudley was compelled to cut down his expenditure 
by every possible means. Even at Berrie Down he 
never more scrupulously looked at a sovereign before 
changing it than now, when it occurred to him not 
merely as a possibility, but as a probability, that 
there might be a terrible reverse to the speculative 
picture to which, while the Protector was still a myth 
of the promoter's fancy, Mr. Black had acted as 
travelling showman. 

No more visions of wealth and position for Ar- 
thur . no more dreams of standing for the county, 
of re-establishing the Dudleys as great people . 
of keeping up a certain state at Berrie Down . of 
ease, and comfort, and competence. 

His ideas in many respects were much chano^ed 
since he came to London ; and had it only been 
possible for him to see a way of ridding the 
Hollow of all the encumbrances he had thrust 



\ 



DIFFICULTIES. 215 

upon it, the secretary would have been a happy 
man. 

Like the prodigal, he had gathered all together, 
and travelled into a far country . a strange country, 
where he met with those who helped him to waste 
his substance and devour his living. 
Z And now, behold, the days of famine were at hand, 
when no man would give unto him ; when he fell into 
even a worse plight than the poor sinner who would 
fain have satisfied his hunger with the husks the 
swine did eat ; for the prodigal had a home to which 
he could return, while Arthur had none. 

Longingly, sickeningly almost, his thoughts turned 

back to Berrie Down as he walked through the 

streets of the accursed City (so he styled London), 

where he had come to seek his fortune. 

If the past could only be restored to him, he 

moaned in spirit, how differently he would act ! If 

he only could have foreseen his present strait . if he 

only could have imagined such a termination to his 

hopes ! 

If . if. ifl So the impotent, feebly-repentant 

strain ran on ; if . if . if . although the measure of 

his misery was as yet nothing like full. 



216 FAR ABOVE RUBKSw 

Berrie Down was still mortgaged for onl j half its 
Talue. He had his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields . 
his regularly paid salary . ^his shares, whidi might 
yet bring him in some return. 

He was not inTolred past hope of extrication. 
Before his bills fell due again, Air. Blad^ would more 
than probably be able to meet them. The future 
did not lie shrouded in total darkness before him ; 
but as he had been unreasonably sanguine, so he 
was now unreasonably depressed. He knew more 
about business, too, than had formerly been the 
case ; he understood better that there were risks in 
it as well as certainties . blanks as well as prizes^ 
and he could not blind himself to the truth that 
Fortune bad not hitherto favoured him with so 
many smiles, as to justiiy his imagining she would 
never dishearten him with her firowns. 

Besides all this, he was for the first time dnce 
his marriage wretched in his home. He could not 
bear to see his wife's sorrow . a sorrow in which she 
gave him no chance of sharing. 

The changed, worn face . the eyes heavy with 
weeping, the weary, unelastic step . the silent grief 
which found no relief in words . were so many tacit 




DIFFICULTIES. 217 

reproaches for the cold selfishness which had kept 
them apart through the course of the years gone by. 

Vaguely it began to dawn upon his understanding 
that nothing earthly can live for ever . ^that there is 
no plant so strong but the keenness of a prolonged 
frost may kill it ; that if men do not enjoy and prize 
a blessing while it is blooming beside them, the day 
will surely come when they shall sigh for its fragrance, 
and its beauty all in vain. 

He had neglected his wife's love in the years 
when that bright stream flowed through the fields of 
his existence, nourishing and making green as it 
poured its treasures on his unthankful heart ; and 
now the fountain gushed no longer ; the spring was 
dried up, the waters made no gladness in the land. 
Where there had been life, there was lifelessness ; 
where there had been devotion, there was indif- 
ference ; where there had been championship, there 
was resentment, . and Arthur did not know how to 
put the wrong right He had not strength suf- 
ficient in his character to set about winning Heather 
for the second time . wooing the woman as he had 
wooed the girl 

She had no idea her husband was in such trouble ; 



218 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

she was ignorant of his fears as she had been of his 
hopes. No one told her Berrie Down was mortgaged 
. that it must be let, in order to pay the interest . 
that the Protector was tottering . that trade was 
wretched, that money was almost an extinct currency. 

Mr. Black was the only person, indeed, she ever 
heard mention financial matters at all, and the 
words he spoke conveyed very little meaning to her 
understanding. 

" Money," said that gentleman to Arthur one day 
when she chanced to be present . " money, what is 
it like ? Can you remember ever having seen the 
article ? The first five-pound note which comes my 
way, I intend to frame and keep by me, lest I should 
never behold another. Some people must be laying 
up for themselves a lot of treasures ; but who they 
can be, puzzles my brain. According to his own 
account, not a soul I meet has sixpence in his pocket 
to keep the devil out of it. Do you happen to know 
any one, Mrs. Dudley, who has money, for I do not ? 
As for me, I am thinking of applying for out-door 
relief. sending Mrs. B. up to the workhouse for a 
couple of loaves. We are coming to it, fast as we 
can run." 



V 



DIFFICULTIES. 219 

" Some people have money, I suppose," answered 
Heather, remembering at that very moment she had 
a good round sum locked up in one of her drawers . 
which sum proved a perpetual plague to her . a 
plague and yet a comfort. 

It was not her own, it was trust-money ; and how 
the amount chanced to come into her hands, Heather 
never told to any one for many a day afterwards . 
for many and many a long day. And yet there was 
no particular mystery about the matter. Heather 
had the money from Mr. Douglas Croft, and it was 
given to her in this fashion : . 

After due time, he came to condole with her on 
the death of Lally, and then his visits were repeated 
and repeated until Heather, who could not avoid 
guessing the nature of the feeling which drew him 
towards any of Bessie's kith or kin, began to grow 
uncomfortable . to imagine she ought to cut short 
the intimacy somehow, though it was beyond her 
imagination to conceive how she ought, under the 
circumstances, to do so. 

Perhaps her manner showed her difficulty ; perhaps 
Mr. Croft fancied truly, as the days went by, there 
was less cordiality in her smile, in the touch of her 



220 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

hand, in the tone of her voice ! Anyhow, be that as 
it will, he took courage one day, and made bis con- 
fession. 

He attempted no apology ; he did not strive to 
whiten the blackness of his sin to her. He did not 
even speak the name of the woman he had wronged. 
He merely said, " Some day she may come to you ; 
some day she may want money. Let me leave a 
sufficient sum in your hands to keep her . if she be 
living . from absolute poverty. Be to me my good 
angel ! do not believe my repentance insincere be- 
cause I cannot talk much about it. You are my last 
hope. If it be impossible for me to reach her through 
you, then indeed my case is desperate." 

Naked he laid his sin out before her . ^naked as 
the new-bom child, and yet he prayed her not to 
look askance upon it, but to pity and forgive. Well 
he understood . ^this man to whom the world and its 
ways were roads he knew from beginning to end, 
from the first chapter to the last . that to the woman 
whom he addressed the book of sin was almost as a 
dead letter, as a language unlearned, as a science 
incomprehensible. 

Passion died out in her presence, vice found no 



DIFFICULTIES. 221 

defence sustainable when pleaded before that calm, 
impartial judge. She could not go with him in his 
agony of love, of struggling virtue, of wicked 
strategy, of unavailing repentance . she, whose life 
had never known the rush and tumult of an over- 
powering affection, who had never been adored, 
idolized, wronged, by any man, as it was in Douglas 
Croft's nature to adore, idolize, and wrong,. she, 
who was pure in thought and deed, pure almost as 
one of God's angels . how could he tell her of the 
over-mastering love which had overleapt all bound- 
aries of prudence, all restraints of society, all divine 
laws, all human restrictions ? 

But he could appeal to her pity, and to her 
generosity. He could lay his future at her feet, 
and pray her to do with it as she would ; to give 
him Bessie's address, if it came to her knowledge, 
or to withhold it ; to mention his name to Bessie, or 
to preserve silence concerning him ; to say, if Bessie 
ever wrote or came near, or to ignore her existence, 
as she pleased . as she deemed best. 

" I make no conditions, I ask no mercy, Mrs. 
Dudley," he said. " I place myself in your hands ; 
and I merely entreat that you will do whatever 



222 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

seems to yon best, regardless of my feelings. If I 
could only know she is liying !" he added. 

" She is living," Heather interrupted. 

" Then you haye seen her !" he said, eagerly; *' is 
she in London T 

" You must not question me," Mrs. Dudley re- 
plied. "All I can tell you is . that . the girl, 
whose future you have made so wretched, is 
living. The greatest kindness you can do her now 
is to forget that such a person ever existed. I will 
keep this money, if you wish, in case she should 
ever really be in want of it. At present, I know, 
she would not take sixpence from you, and I can- 
not wonder at, her feeling as she does towards 

you." 

" Then you have seen her T . he inquired. 

'* Yes, and talked with her ; and guessed who 
stole her from us . stole her away to shame, and 
grief, and suffering " 

At that point he interrupted her, vehemently, 
" Why should she be ashamed," he asked, " for 
that which was no fault of hers ? and was she not 
better, as she lived with me, believing herself to be 
a wife, than legally married to Harcourt . a man for 



k 



DIFFICULTIES. 223 

whom she never cared two straws? Is not any- 
thing, any sin, any disgrace, any suffering, pre- 
ferable to a loveless marriage ? Answer me, truly, 
Mrs. Dudley," he persisted ; " do you not believe 
it is?" 

With her cheeks on fire. Heather rose and an- 
swered him . " Why do you put such a question to 
me, Mr. Croft . to me, of all women living?" and 
then she covered her face, and wept aloud . wept 
for the life she could never live over again, and 
which had been so poor a counterfeit of existence 
that she might almost . but for her early training, 
but for the conviction, that it is better to " suffer 
aflSiction with the people of God, than to enjoy the 
pleasures of sin for a season" . have wished to 
change places with Bessie, in order to experience 
the sensation of being loved wildly and passionately? 
even though it were sinfully, and so round off the 
incompleted paragraph of her life, have the sad 
seventh resolved into the legitimate chord. 

Heaven help her ! she felt very weak and very 
miserable, surrounded by people, whose stories 
seemed all more perfect than her own ; and Douglas 
Croft, beholding that unexpected outburst, felt in 



224 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

his soul there were more ways of deceiving a woman 
than by a sham marriage ; more means of breaking 
a! loving heart than by deceit, and falsehood, and 
wrong. 

" God'pardon me," he thought, as he walked slowly 
home ; " but yet, have I been worse than Dudley ? 
Is it more sinful to love and betray a woman, than 
to marry her without love ?" and, as is usual with all 
such questions, he decided the matter in his own 
favour . never reflecting that two wrongs cannot 
make a right, that a volume of platitudes will never 
patch up a woman's reputation, nor enable her to 
go back again through the years, and begin her life 
anew. 



225 



CHAPTER X. 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 



All this time the aflFairs of the Protector were fall- 
ing into a more hopeless state of confusion than ever. 

No talk now of shares going up to a premium. 
If a man had offered a handful of them to a beggar 
in the street, they would scarcely have been ac- 
cepted, excepting for pipe-lights. On the Stock 
Exchange, every person knew better than to touch 
them. The Company was given over by commer- 
cial doctors, and no one felt inclined to waste a 
guinea on propping it up. If trade would only take 
"a start," the directors remarked; but then, un- 
happily, trade did nothing of the kind. 

Within eighteen months of the promising child's 
birth, one of the very objects for which Limited 
Companies are ostensibly established, namely, to 

VOL m. Q 



22G FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

provide such a capital as shall enable a certain 
number of traders to live through bad seasons, in 
the hope of better days coming . this object, I say, 
was utterly ignored. 

To extend their business, the directors would not 
have hesitated to make a further call upon the 
shareholders ; but to carry their business through a 
time of extreme commercial distress they refused to 
do anything of the kind. To have made a further 
voyage, Mr. Black told them, they would have 
crowded on all sail ; but at sight of the first storm 
their seamanship proved useless, their courage failed 
them. 

All in vain he and Mr. Stewart . united at 
last . moved and seconded various courageous 
resolutions ; the other directors were cowardly, and 
refused to acquiesce. Mr. Black was twitted with 
the ill success of many of his bantlings ; Mr. Stewart 
was reminded of the fact that his nephew had been 
the first to leave the ship. 

" The very fust shares," remarked Mr, Smithers, 
the great miller at Plaistow, worth Heaven only 
knew how much money, and likely, before he died, 
to be worth a few hundreds of thousands more . 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 227 

" the very fust shares as was sold out of this here 
Company below their aktual market value was the 
property of your nephew, Mr. Stewart . your own 
nephew, Mr. Aymescourt Croft." 

"Am I answerable for the misdeeds of my 
nephew?" Mr. Stewart inquired; whereupon Mr. 
Smithers declared he did not know ; that perhaps, 
Mr. Croft had very good reasons for acting as 
he did, and that it might have been better for 
all parties concerned if "everybody had sold 
their shares," when Lord Kemms repudiated the 
Protector. Let the argument commence where it 
would, it always ended in Lord Kemms . it always 
reverted to the fact that Mr. Black had used his 
name without authority, and that Mr. Stewart's noble 
relative had been the first to damage the Company, 
as his nephew was the first to dispose of his shares. 

The business men on the Direction attributed all 
the disasters of the Protector to having so many 
" nobs" on the Board ; while the Sirs, and Generals, 
and gentlemen possessed of landed property con- 
ceived it was the City element which had militated 
against the success of their enterprise. 

One singular fact in connection with this subject 

q2 



228 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

may here be noted, namely, that the men who had 
not paid for their shares at all, such, for example, 
as Mr. Smithers, General Sinclair, &c., were much 
more vehement concerning their disappointment 
than those who really held a large pecuniary stake 
in the Protector. 

It is more difficult, perhaps, to bear with equa- 
nimity the loss of hope than the loss of money, and 
individuals who, like Arthur Dudley, had expected 
to realise fortunes out of nothing, were much more 
disheartened by the prospect of failure than persons 
who, having " paid their shilling, took their risk." 

This remark applies only, however, to the direc- 
tors. The shareholders having, one and all, hoped 
to realize their ten or twenty, or fifty or a hundred 
per cent., were as virtuously indignant as those mem- 
bers of the Board who had sold their names for 
scrip. Speculators all . gamblers as much as the 
man who stakes his last guinea on a throw of the 
dice . they were yet neither to hold nor to bind 
when the speculation turned out ill, when the throw 
of the dice threatened to leave them minus the 
money they had invested I 

Truth is, shareholders have so long been commi- 



THE BUBBLE BUKSTS, 229 

serated instead of blamed ; so long represented as 
victims instead of wilful dupes, that when the crash 
does come, they are for ever airing their grievances 
and wearying the public with records of folly that 
have now grown sickening, by reason of constant 
repetition. 

Any man who, in these days, chooses to invest 
his savings in business, whether on his own sole 
risk or in company with other adventurers, has no 
right to ask for pity if the project fail . if the boat 
sink. Ostensibly, he took his chance ; if the result 
be unfavourable to his hopes, he has no right to 
claim either sympathy or help. 

It is the greed of gain, the dislike of legitimate 
work, the desire for usurious interest, the weak 
senseless refusal to be guided by the experience of 
others, which bring misery to families as to indi- 
viduals. If men are willing to listen to every pleasant 
tale, to believe any lie which is put on paper, to 
think that fortune will make an exception in their 
favour, cause the sun to stand still, and suspend 
all the ordinary laws of commerce for their benefit, 
they must take the consequences. 

No legislation can protect fools against the results 



230 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of their own folly ; no government is bound to find 
brains for the governed. Shall we pity a man who 
is deceived by a thimblerigger, or fleeced by his 
chatty travelling acquaintance who, on the long 
northern journey, produces a pack of cards, and pro- 
poses a game merely to while away the time I And, 
in like manner, shall we, at this age of the world, 
pity those " clergymen and others," without whose 
post-office orders and almost illegibly-signed cheques 
promoters and limited Liability Companies would 
soon have to die a death of sheer inanition, and 
leave the commercial field open for honest labour 
. for legitimate competition. 

When a tradesman exposes his flannels, and cotton 
prints, and stout calicos on the pavement, a magis- 
trate is reluctant to convict even the practised thief 
who walks off with a convenient dress-length secreted 
under her shawl ; and, in like manner, when at this 
time of the world, in spite of newspaper exposures, 
notwithstanding warning "leaders" and magazine 
articles, and the advice of those whose advice is 
really worth following, people will risk their money 
in speculative ventures, shall we be sorry for them ? 
shall we, like Mr. Raidsford, sing a doleful lamen- 



S 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 231 

tation over the mites of widows, and the tithes of 
clergymen ; over the savings of governesses and the 
rents of country gentlemen ; nay, rather shall we 
not say with Mr. Stewart, the mouse is the cat's 
legitimate prey, let promoters devour that sub- 
stance which is theirs by right. 

There is an old saying, that a man is justified iii 
doing what he likes with his own ; and, if a dupe 
be the personal property of a rogue, why should 
the rogue not fleece him, even though such a pro- 
ceeding be disagreeable to the dupe ? 

In business, the millionaire and the curate alike 
must take his chance, only the curate is never 
willing to do so ; he never bears his pain in such dig- 
nified silence as was the case with Compton Raids- 
ford, who, week after week, found that " pressure 
for money" of which he had spoken to Arthur 
Dudley, increase so much, that eventually he began 
to tremble for Moorlands . to believe that the busi- 
ness he had worked so hard to establish was totter- 
ing, and that, before long, he should have to place 
his books in the hands of Messrs. Byrne, Browne, 
Byrne, and Company, accountants, Old Jewry. 

He could not understand it. Never in all his 



232 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

experience before had money been so diflScult to get 
in . so necessary to pay. Houses that fonnerly 
would have trusted him to any amount now abso- 
lutely refused to draw upon him at four months. 
Cash with order was requested in some cases ; and 
although, at first, Mr. Raidsford had treated such 
refusals and demands as mere signs of the times, he 
came before very long to the conclusion that some- 
how his credit had got damaged . that there was 
more than accident in the pecuniary pressure which 
ultimately threatened to crush him to the earth. 

In his distress he had no other confidant than 
Lord Kemms . to no business man dare he have 
confided his difficulties. 

" I am perfectly solvent," he repeated over and 
over again. " My estate ought to pay 60s. in 
the pound any day ; and yet now, if you believe me, 
my Lord, I find a difficulty in getting even a bill 
discounted. If I could only trace the origin of this 
universal distrust, I really should not despair ; but 
as it is, I feel I am fighting in the dark. That 
there is something being urged against me I am 
satisfied, but what that something may be I cannot 
conjecture, I have not speculated ; I have not 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 233 

taken any unprofitable contracts. I have sedulously 
steered clear of railways for the last two years. 
Even that branch which is proposed from South 
Kemms to Palinsbridge, I have refused to touch. 
I wonder if I can have been too cautious . if my 
prudence have been misconstrued !" 

Lord Kemms did not know, but professed him- 
self willing to lend Mr. Raidsford whatever amount 
of money he might at the moment have at his 
bankers, which offer the contractor declined. 

" I do not think, my Lord," he said, " you know 
exactly into what sums our transactions run. No 

amount of money almost could compensate me for 

the loss of credit. If things go on for another 

month as they have done for the last three, I shall 

have to call a meeting. There is no use blinding 

oneself in a case of this kind." 

No use, indeed, when one half-the City was already 
talking of Mr. Raidsford's suspension as imminent . 
when he was spoken of on 'Change as shaky, and 
words of wisdom were uttered in dingy back offices 
concerning the fall of the great contractor. 

It was while things were in this state, both with 
the Protector, Limited, and Compton Raidsford, 



234 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

Unlimited, that one night, by the last post, Arthur 
Dudley received a letter, which at the first glance 
utterly astounded him. It was directed in Mr. 
Black's hand to Arthur Dudley, Esquire ; but the 
enclosure, in feigned writing, was addressed to 
Messrs. Shields and Montgomery, Solar Foundry, 
Wolverhampton. 

Arthur had mastered the contents of this com- 
munication before he comprehended it could not be 
intended for him. He ran his eye over the few 
lines it contained hastily, and then examined the 
envelope ; after that he read the letter again, and 
then, placing letter and envelope together, compared 
both at his leisure. 

" What a d shame I" he at length broke out ; 

and he rose straight away, and taking his hat walked 
forth into the night. He had the letter in his 
pocket-book, and he strode on like a man who 
distrusted the strength of his own resolution if he 
stood still and deliberated about the thing he was 
resolved to do. 

Along Great Queen Street and Long Acre he pro- 
ceeded rapidly. Taking the most direct routes he 
soon reached Regent Street, which he crossed ; thence 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. . 235 

making his way to Bond Street, he commenced 
threading through the maze of squares that lie in 
that part of London t'dl he came to the " Place " in 
which Mr. Raidsford's town house was situated. 

He had chosen a most unseasonable hour at which 
to pay a visit ; but Arthur knew that if Mr. Raids- 
ford were at home he should gain admittance. 
Lights flamed out across the pavement ; the house 
was illuminated as though for a royal marriage ; car- 
riages containing merchant princes, their wives and 
their daughters, were setting down as Mr. Dudley 
drew near the house. 

This was not quite what Arthur had anticipated ; 
but still he held to his resolution, and arrived at 
the door which Lord Kemms was entering at the 
moment 

" My Lord," he said ; and at the words his former 
neighbour turned and recognised him. 

** You here, Dudley?" he exclaimed. "This is 
an unexpected pleasure. Shall we go on ? we are 
stopping the way." 

" I am not a guest," Arthur answered ; " but I 
want to see Mr. Raidsford particularly. I can wait 
until he is at leisure, but I must see him. Will you 



236 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

manage this for me ?" he added, entreatingly, feel- 
ing, perhaps, that in his walking dress amongst all 
that gay company he should stand but a poor chance 
of inducing any servant to carry his message. Good- 
natured as ever, Lord Kemms readily consented to 
do what was required. 

" No bad news, I trust," he whispered, as one 
of the servants was showing Arthur to the library, 
there to wait Mr. Raidsford*s appearance. 

" Not bad news, I hope," Arthur answered ; 
" but, still, news he ought to hear at once." 

" I will tell him," Lord Kemras said, and closing 
the library door he left the secretary marvelling 
whether such an entertainment could be con- 
sidered a sign of impending ruin . of pecuniary 
difficulty. 

There had been a time when Arthur would have 
decided this question in the negative ; but he was 
wiser now, and knew that in London people feast on 
the very brink of commercial death, that they gather 
their friends and give elegant dejeuners, and eat 
with an appetite and enjoy their repast, even though 
they know next hour Jack Ketch is coming to 
arrange the noose and hang them by the neck till 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 237 

all chance of return to respectable West end society 
is past for ever. 

To his country imagination, it was still a fearful 
and a wonderful thing to see people spending, with 
poverty stalking gauntly at the heels of pleasure ; 
but he had acquired suflScient knowledge of town to 
be at the same time aware three or four hundred 
pounds seem a mere bagatelle to a man whose 
liabilities amount to hundreds of thousands. 

With affairs going all cross in the City, Mrs. 
Kaidsford, triumphant in satins and jewellery, was 
''' at home " in Huntingdon Place. 

If another chance were never to offer itself of 
airing her bad grammar, and exhibiting her won- 
derful taste in dress to her rich and grand acquaint- 
ances, that was all the more reason why she should 
avail herself of this opportunity, while opportunity 
lasted. Only stupid, unsophisticated people like the 
Dudleys thought of retrenchment before the final 
crash ; besides, Mrs. Raidsford meant to marry her 
daughters off, if she could, and all the world knows 
the best way to secure a desirable husband is 
to ask a few hundred people to meet and make 
themselves as uncomfoitable as circumstances and 



238 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the construction of modern London houses will 
permit. 

All this and much more to the same effect Arthur 
Dudley had abundant leisure for considering before 
the door opened and Mr. Baidsford entered. 

He made some hurried apology for his delay, and 
then throiving himself into a chair opposite Arthur, 
anxiously demanded his business. 

Amongst his guests in the drawing-rooms, on the 
staircase, in the hall, he had been a prosperous- 
looking, smiling gentleman ; now he flung the mask 
off, and allowed the lines of care to appear in his 
face, a tone of despairing trouble to lurk n his 
voice. 

'* Don't be afraid, man," he said, almost brusquely. 
** Lord Kemms told me your business concerned me ; 
out with it ; I am not a child . I can face the worst 
. I have seen it coming this many a day." 

"Mr. Raidsford," began Arthur, "what you 
have suffered from has been a loss of credit, I 
understand ; a pressure, as you yourself told me, 
for money." 

" Yes," was the reply ; ^* and when this pressure 
commenced, I believed my credit to be as good as 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 239 

that of any man in England ; I believed it to be so 
good, in fact, that I paid no attention to the pres- 
sure for a considerable period . not, in fact, until it 
became almost like a run on a bank." 

*' And to what cause did you attribute that run ?" 
inquired Arthur. 

*' I have never been able to attribute it to any 
cause," was the reply ; " I had no heavy losses ; I 
was engaged in no great ventures ; I was perfectly 
solvent; I am solvent, in fact, now; but still I 
know I must stop; I have fought as long as 
fighting seems of any use ; now I must adopt 
another plan." 

" If you were aware of the cause of your loss 
of credit, would it help you to battle through ?" 
asked Arthur. 

" That would depend enturely on the cause," was 
the reply. 

'* Supposing it were private malice," Arthur sug- 
gested ; " suppose an enemy to have been at work." 

*' I have not an enemy in the world," Mr. Raids- 
ford answered. 

" If you read that, perhaps you will alter your 
opinion," Arthur remarked, handing him the letter 



240 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

he had received. " Mr. Raidsford, I could not rest 
till I had come to you ; I feared my own purpose 
might undergo a change before morning. I knew 
it was right you should be told this thing, and yet I 
hesitated about showing a letter which strictly is 
none of my property. I shall speak to Black about 
what I have done; you know now who has been 
your enemy, and I trust it may not be too late for 
you to repair the mischief he has caused." 

And with that Arthur left the room, and wended 
his way back to Lincoln's Inn Fields, He had 
never liked Mr. Eaidsford, and he could not be 
very cordial to him, even at the moment when he 
was stretching out his hand to save the contractor 
from ruin. 

He had not done him this service out of good- will, 
but because right was right, and justice, justice. 
He had hasted to serve this man, whom he always 
regarded with jealousy and distrust ; but it was not 
in Arthur's nature to feel other than bitterly the 
fact, that while he was able to serve Mr. Raidsford 
he was unable to extricate himself; that though 
Moorlands might be preserved, still Berrie Down 
was heavily mortgaged. 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 241 

The very step he had taken, moreover, would, he 
knew, make his own position more diflScult. With 
Mr. Black for an enemy, what troubles might he not 
expect to have to face in the future . what about his 
bills, what about Berrie Down, what about his means 
of actual subsistence ? If a man could, secretlv and 
anonymously, damage another's credit, plot and 
scheme to beggar a person against whom he had a 
grudge, watch the growth of his plans through 
months, and never flinch nor falter in the execu- 
tion of his purpose, what might Arthur not expect 
at his hands, after having baulked him in his 
design ? 

All that night Squire Dudley lay awake, thinking 
in what words he should tell Mr. Black he had found 
him out, exposed his scheme, and defeated his care- 
fully-prepared plot. 

He knew exactly how the accident, which put him 
in possession of Mr. Black's secret, had occurred ; 
and he was well aware, in due time, the letter in- 
tended for him would be returned by Messrs. Shields 
and Montgomery to Dowgate Hill ; but he resolved 
not to wait for that denouement . instead of doing 
so, he started next morning, directly after breakfast, 

VOL. III. R 



242 ' FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

or the City, where Mr. Black received him with his 
usual easy flow of language. 

" Well, and how is the * Protector ?' " was his 
greeting ; '* anything new ? I think things were a 
shade better on the market yesterday, and I have 
some applications this morning from parsons about 
shares in the * Universal.' Discount is down a half, 
too. By-the-bye, you got my letter, I suppose ? 
There is no help for it, Dudley, we must renew those 
confounded bills again. You noticed what I said 
about knowing a fellow willing to do them ?" 

" I did not," answered Arthur, " for the simple 
reason that I suppose the letter you meant to send 
to me is now at Wolverhampton/' 

" What the devil do you mean ?" 

There was no sham about Mr. Black's tone or 
manner as he put this question. For the first time, 
perhaps, during all the years he had known him, 
Arthur beheld the actual man, and the actual man 
was not pleasant to behold. 

" Messrs. Shields and Montgomery's letter came 
in my envelope," the secretary explained. 

"Indeed I And what have you done with that 
letter ?" 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 243 

" I took it last night to Mr. Eaidsford." 

For a moment Arthur thought his kinsman was 
going to strike him. Mr. Black made a step forward 
towards his visitor, and lifted his clenched hand, but 
next instant he let it drop heavily on the table 
while he asked . 

" Pray, Mister Squire Dudley, was that your idea 
of honour ?" 

" Yes, Mr. Black, it was, strictly," Arthur replied. 

" And how much did he give you for the informa- 
tion ? . come now, be frank. I would have outbid 
him, had you played your cards well. What was the 
figure ? Did you go cheap ? I'll be sworn you did. 
I'll bet ten to one you sold yourself as well as me. 
Oh ! you won't answer . you are sulky. You are 
going to deprive me of the pleasure of your honour- 
able, and gentlemanly, and intellectual society! 
Curse you !" added the promoter, suddenly changing 
his sneering tone for one of the intensest fury, " curse 
you, for a skulking, sneaking, timid fool, who has not 
even sense enough to enjoy seeing a man who ruined 
us ruined likewise ! I'll be even with you yet. I'll 
make you rue the day you meddled in my concerns, 
and spoiled my game. Do you hear me, Dudley ?" 

r2 



244 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

he shouted across the outei office ; " look to your- 
self!" 

" I intend," was Arthur Dudley's reply, as he 
walked into the street, knowing he was a ruined man. 
He did not return to Lincoln's Inn Fields for 
some hours . not, in fact, until after he had seen a 
solicitor, and laid the exact state of his affairs before 
that gentleman. 

Now the worst had come, he felt equal to face it. 
He felt it was better to know the extent of his liabili- 
ties, and to take immediate measures for breaking 
off all dealings with the man who had led him so 
terribly astray. 

For every scrap of paper to which he had ever 
attached his name, he was liable. His shares, he 
knew, were not worth sixpence; the whole of his 
property would barely suffice to pay his debts; 
Berrie Down must go, and also the house in 
Lincoln's Inn Fields. This was the end of the 
dreamer's vision . this was the fortune he had come 
to London to seek ! Beggary ! 

His salary depended on the life of the "Pro- 
tector," and that was scarcely expected to survive 
from day to day. Heather would have to be 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 245 

told now . Heather, whose love he had grown to 
value too late . Heather, whom he had thrust from 
him that night when she knelt beside his chair, 
pleading to be unto him an helpmeet ! Would she 
reproach him . would she ask if he had married her 
to bring her to this? No! . ^he knew she never 
could be so unlike the sweet Heather of old as to 
taunt him with his misfortunes ; but would she be 
cold ; would she be hard and unsympathetic ; would 
she merely bear and leave him to bear also? If 
he only could have been sure of her, Arthur, walking 
about the lanes and alleys of the City, thought he 
should not have cared so much I 

He had despised the crutch in his days of strength 
and independence ; and now, when he was lame, he 
stretched forth his hand to touch some support in 
vain. 

When late in the afternoon he reached Lincoln's 
Inn, he found Mr. Stewart, Mr. Harcourt, and two 
strangers in the oflSce. 

At a glance he knew something disagreeable had 
happened, and, before five minutes were over, he 
was informed the cashier, recommended by Mr. 
Stewart himself, had been embezzling the moneys 



240 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

of the Company ; that he, Mr. Black and Mr. 
Robert Crossenham, and Mr. Bayley Crossenhara, 
the latter trading under the firm of " Stack and Son, 
Corn Factors, Mark Lane," had all been playing 
into each other's hands, buying wheat which never 
was. delivered, charging it to the "Protector" and 
dividing the proceeds thus obtained. 

" We want to look at the register, if you please, 
Mr. Dudley," said Mr. Stewart, with a terrible 
politeness. 

" There," he remarked, turning to Mr. Harcourt, 
when Arthur had produced the book required, "it 
IS as I thought ; and now we shall not have even the 
poor satisfaction of transporting him. Mr. Dudley, I 
should have thought that even you might have con- 
cluded there was something wrong when a clerk 
bought shares in a sinking concern ;" and, with this 
remark, which was so much Hebrew to Arthur, Mr. 
Stewart said, " good evening," and went off with 
the strangers he had brought with him. 

"What is it all about?" Arthur asked of Mr. 
Harcourt, when they were left alone. 

"There has been wholesale robbery," was the 
reply, " and the Company will have to be wound up." 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 247 

" And why can they not prosecute Graham ?" 

" Because, being a shareholder, he is a partner, 
and a man cannot legally embezzle his own pro- 
perty. It is a bad business, a very bad business !" 
added Mr. Harcourt. " I am afraid Mr. Black is a 
thorough-paced scoundrel" 

" I know he is," said Arthur ; but the fact of his 
knowledge did not make matters any the better for 
him or for the Protector. 

After the clerks were gone, and Mr. Harcourt 
had departed, Arthur still sate alone in his office, 
looking his misery in the face. Twice TiflFord had 
been good enough to inform the secretary that 
dinner was ready, but Arthur took no notice of 
the summons. 

How to go upstairs and see Heather . how to 
tell her the game was over, and that it had left him 
a beggar, he could not imagine. What were his 
dreamings in the old days, speeding down to Palins- 
bridge, and planning to communicate the fact of a 
thousand a-year being added to their income, to this ? 

Coldness and doubt had not visited Heather ; Mrs. 
Croft had not aroused her jealousy; Lally was 
still with her, and he had not then neglected his 



248 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

child. Poor Lally, poor little Lally! The man's 
heart must have been very heavy that night, for, 
sitting in the firelight, the tears dropped down from 
his eyes, one by one, as he sat thinking of his living 
wife and his dead child. 

If only the past could come back again, how dif- 
ferently he would act ! if only Heather would be to 
him the wife of old, he might still make a struggle 
and conquer Fortune yet. 

Twice that day Arthur had found his level ; had 
seen in what estimation people held his talents ; and, 
in the years gone by, he had estranged from him the 
woman who believed him perfect . who was unto 
him, in the old, happy time at Berrie Down, though 
he recked not then of his blessing, more than silver 
or gold, Far above Rubies. 

While he was thinking. Heather herself opened 
the door, and glided up to where he sat. For 
weeks previously she had been trying to draw nearer 
to her husband, seeking for an opportunity to pray 
for "forgiveness," Lord help her, "for her selfish 
sorrow ;" and now, in the firelight, she came and 
laying her hand on his shoulder, said, . 

" Is anything the matter, Arthur ? Are you ill ? 



THE BUBBLE BURSTS. 249 

are you vexed? I have sent Tifford twice to tell 
you dinner is ready." 

" I do not want any dinner," he answered. " I 
have had meals enough for one day . meals enough 
to destroy any man's appetite. The ' Protector ' is 
going to be wound up, Heather, and my salary will 
be stopped, of course." 

She hesitated for a moment before replying, then 
she said, " I am very sorry for your sake, dear, for 
you hoped to make so much out of it We must 
return to the Hollow, I suppose." 

" I must sell the Hollow," he answered ; and then, 
in a few hurried sentences, he told her all . his folly, 
his credulity, his disappointed hopes, his ruin. 

He kept nothing back ; and when he had quite 
finished, when there was nothing more to add to 
the dreary recital of loss and misfortune, he paused, 
listening for what she should say, for how she 
should receive his confession. 

For a moment there was silence . a. silence so 
great that the falling of the cinders on to the hearth 
alone broke the stillness. 

" Will she reproach me," he wondered ; " will she 
be angry at last ? will she say nothing, and refuse 



250 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

pity to me, though she can give it to every other 
created being?" : 

" Have you not a word to speak to me, Heather ?" ' 

he asked at last ; and then the tears she had been ' 

striving to keep back burst forth, and flinging her 
arms around his neck, she sobbed out, . 

" Oh, my love, my love !" and as she lay on his 
breast Arthur understood that he was to her, in that 
hour of bitter distress, dearer than the lover of her i 

girlhood, than the husband of her youth. J 



251 



CHAPTER XL 



FORGOTTEN. 



The " Protector " had been dead for two years. Its 
very name was a memory. Lawyers who had assisted 
in holding a legal inquest over its remains . directors 
who had been badgered to death concerning its 
failure . people who had lost money or made money 
by it, recollected that there had once been such a 
Company ; but the grass was growing green above 
its grave . in law courts and the Stock Exchange. So 
many similar ventures had lived, and prospered, and 
died in the time, that its history had become an 
old, old tale, which was never now repeated save 
here and there by one who had lost money 
through it. 

Summer was come once again, and in the close 
streets round about Bethnal Green and Spitalfields 



252 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the hot saltry air which met any adTentarous ex- 
plorer who bravely pursued his way into those 
almost unknown regions, seemed like the breath 
issuing from the mouth of some sulphurous pestilent 
volcano. The thousand and one smells of the East 
of London assailed his nostrils, the sights and sounds 
of that most wretched locality offended his eyes and 
ears. 

Few people who were not called thither by bu^ess 
or necessity jostled the rightful inhabitants in the 
streets ; but it is to the east of Bishopsgate Street 
Without I must, nevertheless, with all due apology 
for even hinting at the existence of such a neigh- 
bourhood, conduct my reader to Silk Street, so 
named, no doubt, in olden times, on account of the 
number of silk-weavers who abode there. 

It had once been a thoroughfare of no small im- 
portance ; but its glory had faded, its trade fallen 
away, although the railway waggons thundered 
through it, and the noise of passing carts and cabs 
never stopped, never from morning till night. It was 
a mean, poor street, composed principally of dilapi- 
dated-looking three- storey houses, in the windows of 
which were exhibited here fruit and vegetables, there 



FORGOTTEN. 253 

drapery goods, and again furniture of the stalest, 
poorest, commonest description. Towards the end of 
the thoroughfare, however, there were erected some 
new warehouses and stores. 

Contrasting gloomily with their bright red-brick 
fronts was the gateway which gave ingress to Mr. 
Lukin's silk-weaving factory. 

A gloomy, disreputable gateway, affording admit- 
tance up a narrow cart-road into a wider court-yard 
beyond, one side of which was occupied by a packing- 
shed and a carpenter's shop ; another by the weaving- 
factory, and a third by the dwelling of the manager ; 
the only picturesque things about the place being the 
windlass and buckets belonging to a disused well. 

We must pass in, if you please, for Arthur Dudley 
is the manager, and this is his house. 

There are high walls all round the court-yard ; 
high walls blackened with smoke, unrelieved by tree, 
or ivy, or climbing Virginian creeper. 

Heather is planning to cover them with greenery, 
but her attempts have hitherto proved abortive ; the 
shrubs all die like the plants in her ghostly, little 
garden, where she can get nothing but double red 
daisies and stocks and pinks to grow. 



254 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

A change this from Berrie Down, you say ! Cer- 
tainly ; but life is full of changes, and Arthur 
Dudley has still much to learn. 

The world's educational establishments are not 
always pleasant places at which to reside ; the play- 
grounds are oftentimes contracted, and the diet not 
suited to delicate palates ; but the lessons taught in 
those seminaries of practical learning prove often- 
times much more useful than the pleasant tasks 
conned beside the singing river, under the rustling 
trees. 

As for Heather, there is no life perfect ; yet it 
may be doubted whether she was very unhappy 
in those days of pecuniary struggle, of pinching 
economy. The high walls which seemed to be 
closing her in were, perhaps, the most active trouble 
of her life. Sometimes she felt as if she were in a 
prison, as if she were a thousand miles from every 
one, as if she should die for want of air, as though, 
if a fire were to break out, she should never reach 
the gates alive. 

At all of which fancies Arthur laughed, and then 
Heather laughed ; and then the two, in the summer 
evenings, would water their tiny bit of garden-ground, 



FORGOTTEN. 255 

and talk about the far-away country, which it almost 
seemed as though they were never to behold again. 

Entirely owing to Arthur's pride. Heather could 
not blind herself to this fact, although she sedulously 
refrained from touching upon it 

When Berrie Down was sold, the gentleman who 
bought it offered Arthur two hundred and fifty 
pounds a year and a free house, if he would take the 
management of the farm, but Arthur refused. 

There was a situation open for him, he said, of 
five hundred a year in London, and he would never 
be servant where he had been master ; so the pro- 
prietor took " no " for an answer, and passing on to 
Alick secured his services for one-half the sum and 
the use of Berrie Down House and farm produce, 
till such time as the proprietor should reqinre the 
residence from him. Two of the girls resided 
with the*" young steward, but Agnes remained with 
Heather ; Cuthbert had left the Messrs. Elser, and 
was now receiving a good salary from Mr. Raidsford. 
Altogether the family prospects were brighter than 
of old, excepting as regarded Arthur, who had 
steadily fallen from height to height, till at length 
he found himself cashier and bookkeeper, and yard- 



256 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

keeper and general manager to Mr. Lukin, who 
had great works in the North, and was reported to 
be enormously rich. 

If he were so, Arthur did not derive much benefit 
from his wealth, for he had but two hundred a year ; 
while Simons, the actual though sub-manager, 
thought himself fortunate to receive two pounds a 
week. 

Certainly Arthur's duties were light . to take 
money and pay it into the bank . to write a report 
of how business progressed to his employer . to 
keep the books, and see to things generally. There 
was no great hardship or difficulty involved in these 
and such like matters ; and yet Arthur was now as 
of old at Berrie Down, a wretched man. 

He had a trouble dogging his footsteps, and that 
trouble was debt. After paying off the most of his 
liabilities, and leaving himself without a sixpence in 
the world, he was still five hundred pounds deficient, 
and five hundred pounds to a man who is trying to 
live respectably on two hundred a year is, with a 
pressing creditor, almost equivalent to utter bank- 
ruptcy. 

His friends would have helped him had they 



FORGOTTEN. 257 

known of his grievous strait ; but Arthur's was not a 
temper to take help or pecuniary assistance from 
any one on earth. With all his heart, Mr. Raids- 
ford desired to show his gratitude to the man who 
had saved him from ruin; but when he came to 
press offers of money, offers of situations, high sala- 
ries, and so forth, on Arthur's acceptance, the poor 
gentleman drew himself up, and made the contractor 
feel he had made a.mistake . that Arthur Dudley of 
Silk Street very much resembled Arthur Dudley 
of Berne Down, only that he was a degree prouder 
than of old. 

Mr. Croft, also, more earnestly desired to do some- 
thing for his friend ; but he was repelled haughtily by 
Arthur, and also, thdugh more gently, by Heather. 

As for Mr. Black, in answer to the solicitor who, 
on Arthur's behalf, waited on him concerning those 
bills for which Squire Dudley was legally liable, he said 
plainly, he never would find sixpence towards helping 
Dudley out of the mess into which he had got himself. 

" If he had stuck to me, I should have stuck to 
him," the promoter answered ; " but he would go 
fishing on his own hook, and if he have come to grie^ 
he has nobody to blame but himselfl" 

VOL. in. s 



258 FAR ABOY RUBIES. 

Mrs. Ormson and the Marsdens^ of course, ignored 
the Tery existence of such peo|de as the Dudleys ; 
and, when they were unhappily mentioned, laid the 
blame of all Arthur's misfortunes at the door of 
the '^ woman he married." As for Miss Hope, from 
foreign parts, she was sympathetic, but necessarily 
vague. She did not know in the least how low her 
nephew had fallen, but hoped, she said, on her 
return to Engla :d, to visit them in their little house, 
which, spite of all Heather told her concerning its 
limited accommodation, she had no doubt would be 
charming, ^^desr Heather having such a taste in 
arrangement" 

In brief, irom all their old haunts, from all their 
old acquaintances, from all their pursuits, and 
thoughts, and ideas, the Dudleys had vanished 
away. 

From the former life they had fallen. As a stone 
drops into the river's depths, so they had sunk to that 
wretched east-end street, and in the circles in vehich 
they once mixed, they were forgotten as a dead man 
out of mind. 

The old servants, too, were gone ; they were 
unable to afford to keep any save Priscilla, and she 



FORGOTTEN. 259 

after a long illness had come back almost from 
death to serve her former mistress . never to leave her, 
she declared to Bessie, who went to see her in the 
hospital . never to leave her more. 

"I always said to Mrs. Piggott, Miss Bessie, 
I hoped I should die before crinoline went out of 
fashion, and when there was a talk of them going to 
be left off, I fell sick ; but now I hear it was all 
nonsense, so I mean to get better, if it was only for 
the sake of Mrs. Dudley, who says she misses me. 
Miss Bessie . misses me !" 

As for Bessie, she too, unable to remain away 
from her old friend, had returned from the country 
farmhouse, and taken up her abode in a street not 
very far away from that where Heather lived. She 
was a good and tastefril needlewoman, and earned a 
tolerable li elihood with her white, pretty iSngers. 

Many an hour she and Heather spent together 
while Arthur was busy ; but Arthur was not taken 
into the secret. Even Heather doubted his discre- 
tion in the matter, and there were ample reasons 
why the girl's whereabouts should be known to as 
few persons as possible. 

Ned and Mrs. Piggott were married and settled 

s2 



260 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

ID a public-booae on the road to South Kemms, 
where^ Alick informed Heather^ tbey did a capital 
buginesB, and kept a most r^ular and respectable 
tavern. ^^ It is quite a little hotel, mother," said 
the young man, adding, ^^ When shall I be able to 
persuade you to come down to the Hollow and see 
how lovely the place looks ?' but, in reply. Heather 
shook her head. 

** Naturally, the very name of Berrie Down is 
painful to Arthur," she answered. " I should like 
to please you, Alick, but I cannot bear to vex him. 
His life has been a very hard one, and I ought not 
to make it any harder.'' 

Then Alick had another project ; he would take 
a house at the sea-side for a month, and Heather, 
and the girls, and Leonard should all go down and 
stay there, and he, and Arthur, and Cuthbert would 
spend their Sundays with them. "It will be like 
the old times, for us all to be together again," 
finished the youth ; " and, dear Heather, I do want 
to see you looking a little better;" whereupon she 
called him a foolish boy, and, drawing his face down 
to hers, kissed it, saying, " people could be well and 
happy anywhere, in London as in the country, if 



FORGOTTEN. 261 

they would only try to be thankful and con- 
tented." 

But the '* foolish boy " resolutely refusing to be 
either contented or thankful, unless she would agree 
to his plan, at length, when it was far on in the 
summer, "between the crops" as he put it, Alick per- 
suaded Heather to make her preparations for leaving 
home, which she did all the more readily, perhaps, 
because Arthur agreed. to come down on the Satur- 
day nights, and remain with them until the Monday 
mornings. 

"I think the change will do us all good," he 
said; but there was a look in his face which 
Heather somehow mistrusted, and which caused 
her to wonder what could be the matter with 
Arthur; whether he had any fresh trouble he was 
keeping from her, or whether he felt ill and would 
not say so, for fear of spoiling her holiday. 

Talking the matter over with Bessie, however, 
that young person combated her friend's fears suc- 
cessfully. " If Arthur should be ill," she said, " I 
shall certainly hear of it from Morrison" (Morrison 
was one of the workmen somewhat devoted to Priscilla, 
in whom both Heather and Bessie trusted, and it 



262 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

is only fair to add, he deserved such trust, for the 
notes they mutually exchanged were never chat- 
tered about ; the name of the young lady, whom 
Mrs. Dudley went to see, was never mentioned to 
any one) ; " and if I do hear of there being anything 
the matter," went on Bessie, " I shall certainly go 
round to nurse him, and telegraph for you ; so make 
yourself happy concerning that dear husband, and 
pack up your clothes at once." 

Which advice Heather followed in a divided 
frame of mind ; divided, because while she longed 
to see the country, she hated leaving Arthur, who, 
on the very Saturday of her departure, said he 
should not be able to accompany her out of town 
that week, because Mr. Lukin was coming to 
London, and might be expected in Silk Street at 
any moment. 

"But you must go, dear," he added, "and I will 
run down through the week, if I possibly can. 
Come now, get your bonnet on, or we shall be too 
late at Waterloo ;" and thus he hurried her on 
till they were fairly in a cab, en rotde to the South 
Western Railway Terminus. 

There were Alick and Cuthbert, Lucy and 




FORGOTTEN. 263 

Laura, all looking as bright and sunshiny as the 
weather. 

" Not coming, Arthur !" exclaimed his brother ; 
" what a shabby trick ! I could not have believed 
you would have served a fellow so !" 

" It is not my fault, Alick," was the reply ; " but 
Mr. Lukin is coming to town, and I must be on 
the spot to receive him ; you will take care of 
Heather, Alick," he added, in a lower and a dif- 
ferent tone, drawing his brother aside ; " you will 
promise me to take care of her ?" 

"Take care of Heather!" answered Alick, "I 
like that ; as though I should not take care of her. 
Do you think I forget, Arthur . do you imagine I 
could possibly forget, the years during which she 
was our mother . the best mother ever any boys and 
girls found ?* 

"Thank you, I shall be easier now," Arthur 
answered ; and then he joined the others and kept 
near his wife till it was time for the little party to 
enter the compartment, which they quite filled. To 
the last, Squire Dudley never took his eyes off his 
wife's face ; and, when the moment of final parting 
came, he kissed her two or three times over, saying 



264 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

"God bless you, Heather! think of me some- 
times." 

When the train moved off, he stood on the plat- 
form, looking after the carriage which contained bis 
wife ; and as the speed increased, Heather saw a 
look come over his countenance which filled her 
with so terrible an alarm, that she cried out in a 
moment, " Alick, I must go back to Arthur ! there 
is something the matter ! I ought never to have 
come !" 

All in vain, thev tried to combat her determina- 
tion ; at the first station where the express stopped. 
Heather alighted, resolved to return to town. She 
would not hear of Alick travelling with her. " No," 
she said ; " if he be in any trouble, I shall be better 
to remain alone with him ; if not, I will go down to 
you by the first train on Monday morning. I pro- 
mbe, Alick, faithfully I Do not try to prevent my 
going home," she pleaded ; " remember, once before 
I wanted to turn back, and Arthur would not let 
me !" 

Which last argument, proving unanswerable, with 
heavy hearts they allowed her to have her own way, 
and she went into the waiting-room, where she 



FORGOTTEN. 265 

stopped for an hour, until the up-express appeared 
in sight, when she took her seat, together with some 
other passengers, and was soon tearing back to 
London, under the glare of the afternoon sun. At 
the terminus she took a cab for Norton Folgate, 
from whence she walked on to Silk Street. She had 
no need to ring the bell, for one of the men coming 
out at the moment, afforded her entrance, without 
attracting, in any way, attention to her return. 

"I fear 1 have done a very foolish thing," she 
thought, as she stepped inside the gateway, and 
any one else might have thought the same, for Arthur 
had complained of neither ache nor pain ; he had been 
in good spirits all the morning ; he had faithfully 
promised to come down through the week ; and, but 
for that expression of hopeless, helpless, blank 
despair in his face as the train swept out of the 
station, Heather would have gone away happy, and 
Arthur's fate proved different 

As it was, he had traversed the road back from 
Waterloo a miserable and a wretched man. 

He had brought much grief to Heather, he would 
bring no more. He had been tempted, and he had 
fallen; he had been pressed for money, and he 



266 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

had " borrowed " . ^that was the way he put it to 
himself . a few hundreds from Mr. Lukin, and he 
had vainly striven to replace those hundreds, and 
now Mr. Lukin was coming to inspect the books, 
and a worse thing than poverty . disgrace ! was with- 
out in the street, waiting to cross their threshold. 

But Heather should never know this; no man, 
nor no woman, should ever say a Dudley of Berrie 
Down had committed a felony. There was one 
way of escape, and his feeble mind clutched hold of 
that poor straw eagerly : one way . he would take 
care of himself, and Alick would take care of 
Heather ! 



267 



CHAPTER XIL 

THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 

Once inside the house, Heather, all in a flutter, 
ran up to her own room, and asked herself why she 
had returned. Even now . even with the conscious- 
ness on her that she had done a very foolish thing, 
at which Arthur would be naturally vexed . she felt 
she could not have gone on ; that the journey, with 
that awful dread weighing her down, would have 
been one of pain instead of pleasure ; that it would 
be far more a holiday to her . far and away more, 
to stay behind with her husband . her poor, care- 
worn, miserable husband . than to travel through 
the loveliest scenery on earth. 

She had told Alick it was a feeling, a foolish 
though uncontrollable feeling, which made her turn 
back ; but she would have spoken more correctly 



208 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

had she said it was the love of her heart . that lore 
which is stronger than death, more constant than 
sorrow. 

Yet she knew she never could make Arthur un- 
derstand this ; knew she never could hope to impress 
upon him how miserable she had f^lt after the fare- 
well at the station ; how utterly impossible it was 
for her to go on and be happy, while he remained 
behind alone. 

How should she tell him ? With a vague desire 
to break the fact of her return to others before 
facing her husband, she went downstairs again, and 
into the kitchen, meaning to tell Prissy, she feared 
Mr. Dudley would be lonely, and so returned, 
sending the rest of the family on. She meant to 
have a comfortable chat with Prissy, for her heart 
was very full, and she longed to have a good talk 
with some one ; but, when she entered the kitchen, 
no Prissy was there ; no Prissy was in the back- 
kitchen either, nor in the washhouse, nor in the 
larder, nor in the coal-cellar, for even into that last 
hiding-place Heather peeped. 

Then it suddenly occurred to Mrs. Dudley that 
there was a terrible look of order about the kitchen ; 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 269 

about the pots and pans, the plates and dishes; 
everything was in its proper position ; the chairs 
were ranged against the wall, the table had no 
crockery heaped upon it, there was not even a glass- 
cloth flung carelessly aside. 

What could it mean ? Heather stood considering 
this question, and all at once her heart gave a great 
leap ; not of joy, but fear. There was no fire ; the 
fact had not struck her at first . perhaps because she 
was then intent on looking for Prissy . now, how- 
ever, it came home to her, not merely that there 
was no fire, but that the wood, paper, and coals, 
were laid ready for lighting ; ready for lighting in 
both kitchens. A woman must, like Heather, be a 
practical housekeeper to understand the full sig- 
nificance of such a spectacle 

Both fires out ; both laid ready for lighting ; that 
bespoke premeditation. 

Now, premeditation meant, not that Prissy had 
gone upstairs to dress, and forgotten her fires ; not 
that Prissy had gone out shopping, and remained to 
gossip ; not that Prissy had met her lover, who made 
time pass so pleasantly, that minutes and fuel were 
alike forgotten ; but that Prissy had gone out with 



270 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

leave to do so granted, and that she had con- 
scientiously waited to put the house into apple-pie 
order before her departure. 

One of Heather's greatest comforts, in leaving 
ome, had been the idea that Prissy wou d see that 
her husband wanted for nothing ; that she would be 
always on guard, always at hand to get him what- 
ever he wanted. 

Mrs. Dudley had arranged that Prissy's mother 
was to come up by the late train that night, and 
keep her company while the family were away ; and 
the very last words she spoke, before leaving home, 
were, " Don't forget, Prissy, to write to me often ; and 
if Mr. Dudley should be ill, I depend upon your 
sending for me ;" in answer to which Prissy said, 
" I will see to everything, mum, as if you was at 
home ; and I'll write every two days, and never be 
out of the house till you come back." 

After that, to return and find tlie bird flown, was 
rather disheartening. Mrs. Dudley could not 
unravel the enigma, and she thereupon slowly as- 
cended the stairs, wondering as she went what it 
all could mean. 

She passed her own room, and wending her way 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 271 

up another flight of stairs, entered that belonging to 
Prissy. There, on the foot of the bed, hung the 
girl's cotton gown, her apron, and various other 
articles of apparel which Heather recognized at a 
glance as her every-day habiliments. 

With an awfiil creeping dread upon her, Heather 
opened the door of the closet where Prissy hung up 
her gown, and found, not the girl's best dress, 
bonnet, and shawl, but empty pegs . a fearful 
vacancy. 

What could it all mean? She looked again around 
the apartment, and perceived Prissy's box was gone. 
Clearly, her trusty domestic had departed, not 
merely for the afternoon but for a longer period. 

With a sense of suflbcation on her. Heather 
walked to the small window which was partially 
open, and stood there wondering what she should 
do next. 

The state of the house increased her difficulty as 
to the best means of explaining her return to 
Arthur. Supposing he had made any arrangement 
with which her presence would interfere ; supposing 
it should seem as though she had come back to play 
the part of a spy, to be a torment instead of a 



272 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

blessing; what could he say, what was there he 
might not imagine ? 

That Prissy ever left the house of her own good 
will, Heather's understanding refused to credit ; and 
why Arthur should have sent her away. Heather 
likewise could not comprehend. 

If she had done anything wrong, and been dis- 
charged, she would have taken all her clothes ; if 
she had not done anything wrong, why did Arthur 
let her go ? Over this question, Heather, still with 
her bonnet on, stood puzzling ; and, as she stood, she 
saw the men leave off work and don their coats, and 
pass out of the 'yard ; at first, in gangs, afterwards 
in twos and threes . ^finally, one by one. 

There they went . foremen, overlookers, clerks, 
sub-manager; finally, Arthur went down to the 
gate, talking to Morrison as they walked. 

At the gate Morrison paused and seemed impress- 
ing something earnestly on Mr. Dudley, to which 
the latter listened with an appearance of interest. 
Then Arthur replied ; and, at length satisfied, as it 
seemed, Morrison touched his hat, and passed 
through the gate, while Arthur looked after him. 
As he came up the yard, Heather, from her post of 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 273 

observation, could see his face distinctly ; that face 
which had struck her girlish fancy, but which, was 
now so changed . so changed ! oh, God ! 

As she looked at him, and remembered the first 
day they had ever set eyes on one another, the tears 
came welling up, and for a moment she could not 
see him because of the mist which blinded her. 

Poor Arthur ! Poor Arthur ! In the after days 
it was a comfort to her to recollect that at that 
moment there came no thought of selfish pity into 
her mind for poor Heather. Poor Heather ! changed 
and broke too. 

If he had sufifered, had not she ? if he had borne, 
had not she? if he had found his cross almost 
heavier than he could endure, had not hers also bowed 
her to the very ground ? had not she wept her tears, 
and fought with her anguish ? Yea, truly ; and yet 
Heather, looking at that pale, worn, haggard man, 
who came slowly lounging up the yard, thought of 
none of these things, but only of the blasted hopes, 
of the proud, disappointed, broken heart of the 
husband of her youth. 

The sunlight, flaring down into the court-yard, 
shone full upon his face as he walked back from the 

VOL. HI. T 



274 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

entrance gates, swinging the great key on his fore- 
finger ; and Heather, sheltered from observation by 
the window-curtain, looked down on the man she 
had returned to comfort, not knowing exactly what 
to do . in what terms to announce her change of 
purpose. 

The expression on his countenance, which had so 
struck her while the train moved out of the station, 
was on his countenance still. He was all alone, as 
he thought, now ; with no need to put on a mask, 
with no necessity to smile, or speak, or deceive ; and 
as Heather, watching him, beheld that look of 
misery deepen and deepen, while he walked so 
slowly back, an awful dread took possession of 
her. a dread of something being about to happen 
which made her tremble as though in an ague-fit. 

He was now beside the well . an old-fashioned 
one, with rope and windlass, up which the men 
had in former days drawn buckets of water, but 
now neglected and disused. It had long been 
covered over for fear of accidents, and though the 
boards had shrunk one from another with the heat 
of many summers, still the planking was secure 
enough to render all dread of accident unnecessary. 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 275 

Beside this well, Arthur now paused for a moment, 
apparently irresolute ; then he stooped, and through 
the stillness the sound of a splash, of something 
falling down, and then touching water, ascended to 
where Heather stood. 

At that moment she could not have moved had it 
been to save her life ; but she could watch, and she 
did, to see Arthur rise with a face from which even 
despair was blotted out ; for despair implies a cer- 
tain ability left to wrestle against, or, at all events, 
to feel utter hopelessness ; but now, the sun looked 
down upon a man who had passed even that stage, 
who had gone through his last struggle, cast his last 
die. 

It was with the expression of a person already 
dead, Arthur turned from the well and walked 
across the courtyard, with the key no longer swinging 
on his forefinger. 

What could he be intending to do? Heather 
dropped on her knees beside the window, and 
watched him enter the carpenter's shop. She dared 
not have met him then. There came upon her such 
an access of terror when she heard that key splash 
into the water, as swept everything else out of her 

T 2 



276 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

heart for the time being, save the most unconquer- 
able, abject fear . a fear which prevented her even 
thinking, which took away the power of putting two 
and two together, and conceiving what project it 
might be Arthur had in hand. 

She was like one in a dream . with a great horror 
on her, she fell on her knees and watched. Through 
it all, there was a vague, night-mare kind of con- 
sciousness that she and Arthur were locked up alone 
together . that escape for either of them was not 
possible . that if help were needed, help was now 
unattainable. 

In her despair she prayed. Holding on by the 
window-sill as if she were going to be torn from it, 
she framed some sort of petition to God to help her. 
Wearied and exhausted, frightened, and with that 
awful, vague, nameless dread at length taking a 
tangible form, it seemed to her as though, for a 
moment, everything faded from her eyes . as though, 
even while her lips were moving and her heart 
uttering some terrified words of supplication, her 
senses left her for a moment . the yard swam round, 
the buildings went up and down before her sight, 
the sunlight turned to darkness, and then 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 277 

Then, as if, after having been swung out into 
space for an immeasurable distance, she came back 
to the same point again . and the mist melted away, 
and the light was clear once more ; and with a keen 
vision, though still with a giddy and confused feeling 
in her head. Heather beheld Arthur coming out of 
the carpenter's shop, dragging a bag of shavings 
after him, which he shot out into one of the lowei* 
floors of the silk factory. 

Still she watched him. He piled shavings, sack- 
ful after sackful, among the bales of raw silk . he 
carried the old wrapperings and more shavings into 
the counting-house . she saw him bring jars of oil 
and turpentine and empty them on the heap he had 
already collected. 

" He has gone mad," she decided, rising up ; 
" he has gone mad, and he is going to set the place 
on fire ; and we cannot get out, and there is no help 
to be obtained." 

None, for they were locked ia She dared not 
go downstairs and beat at the gates, for she felt 
more afraid now of encountering Arthur than even 
of remaining where she was. 

Oh ! those cruel walls, those dead, eyeless, earless 



278 FAB ABOVE BUBIES. 

walls, to which she might scream herself hoarse m 
vain . this solitude in the midst of numbei^ . ^this 
helplessness, with help within a few feet of her . this 
prison without a gaoler . this cage in which they 
were both about to be burned to death. 

Well enough she knew that if once the factory 
caught fire, no living creature could long breathe 
within that confined space. It would be like trying 
to exist in a brick oven with a furnace alight at the 
one end. Already she seemed to feel the hot 
tongues of flame licking her cheek . ^already the 
struggle for life, dear life, appeared to have begun . 
already the scorching heat was drying up her blood 
.already she was beating against the closed gates, 
beating with her clenched hands till they were 
bruised and bleeding, while the fire raged behind, 
and the air became hotter and hotter, the flames 
fiercer and fiercer. 

Already the horror she had often felt of fire in 
that enclosed place seemed to have become a tangible 
reality ; and, with a low cr)'. Heather rushed from 
the room, and down the staircase. 

A moment before Arthur had come back across 
the yard, instinctively she knew for matches. Another 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 279 

second and it would be too late ; all fear of meeting 
him was gone ; all fear, save the dread of an awful 
death for both ; and so she flew down the stairs and 
met him as he came out of his own apartment, with 
a box of yestas in his hand. 

She need not have feared meeting him ; all the 
dread she had felt was as nothing compared to the 
terror which came into his face at sight of his wife. 
They had changed places now, and it was she, not 
he, who was strong and mad ; in her frenzy, she 
struck the box out of his hand, and it fell over the 
banisters, the matches scattering on the floor-cloth 
below. Then she threw herself upon him, and 
asked if he knew what it was he had been about to 
do. With passionate sobs she prayed him to stay 
his hand, and to spare them both. Scarcely know- 
ing what she said, she asked what could have 
tempted him to such a deed ; if he were insane to 
think of committing so great a sin. With her arms 
twined around him, and her words flowing fast and 
unpremeditated, she poured out all her dread, her 
trouble, her horror, in a few hurried sentences. 

She might as well have spared her remonstrances 
and her entreaties. From the moment he beheld 



280 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

his wife, all hope of escape, honourable escape, even 
by death, from the position in which he had placed 
himself, vanished. He had laid his plans so well, as 
he thought; and behold, in a moment, her love 
overthrew them all ! While she, clinging to him, 
went on praying and pleading, weeping and sobbing, 
all this passed through the man's mind. For the 
time, he had been stunned, cowed, as though he had 
met a phantom ; but now, pushing her from him, 
with a sudden force which made her stagger and 
reel, he disengaged himself from her, and backing 
into the room he had just left, locked and bolted 
the door behind him. 

" Arthur !" she cried ; but there came no answer. 
" Arthur 1" she only heard him walking across the 
floor. 

" Arthur !" she shook the handle, and put her 
knee against the panel. 

" Arthur ! for God's sake open the door, and let 
me speak to you !" still no reply. 

Would he drop out by the window, and so escape 
and finish the work he had begun ? She ran down- 
stairs and out of the house; but the sash was not 
lifted. Would he try to fire the place from within ? 




THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 281 

She returned to the door, and beat against it, 
crying, " only a word, dear ; only one word." 

And in reply there came something which somided 
like a gurgle and a sob, followed by a heavy fall, 
which seemed to shake the house to its very founda- 
tion. 

" Arthur !" . there was dead silence. " Arthur !" 
there was not even a breath in answer ; nothing but 
silence . a silence which might be felt. 

She knelt down and tried to look through the 
keyhole, but could distinguish nothing. As she rose, 
she chanced to look down at her light muslin dress, 
and saw that there was blood upon it . blood 
oozing under the door, trickling in a narrow stream 
out upon the landing. 

She ran back the whole width of the lobby, and 
flung herself against the door ; but of what avail 
was her poor strength ? Then she rushed out upon 
the roof of the house, with a vague intention of 
pulling up the ladder after her, and fleeing over 
other roofs for help and succour ; but the inexorable 
walls rose high above ; . there were no means of 
escape, there was no chance of assistance. 

Then she sped down the stairs once more . down 



282 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 

the stairs and past the landing where there was 
already a dark pool of blood forming outside the 
door. She crossed the yard to the carpenter's ehop, 
and, seizing a hammer, ran to the outer gates, and 
struck blow after blow, striving to break the lock ; 
she called and cried, but the people sweeping by 
never heard her, for the noise of passing conveyances 
deadened a voice already hoarse with excitement, 
exhausted with fear. She beat against the solid 
wood, and her blows were but woman's blows, faint, 
and feeble, and weak ; she screamed for help, but 
there was no one to hear. 

In her anguish, in that awful extremity of her life, 
she looked once again round the yard ; and, as she 
did so, her eye fell on the factory bell, which hung 
suspended on the highest point of the building. 

That was her last hope; desperately, almost, 
she flung aside the useless hammer, and sprung to 
the bell ; she seized the rope with her soft, white 
hands, and clang, clang, clang, went the clapper . 
clang, clang, clang. 

Through the summer evening's air, through the 
gathering twilight, the bell rang out . clang, clang ; 
cling, clang, clang ; the arms never grew tired, the 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 283 

hands never felt the blistering of the rope. Clang, 
clang; Heather never ceased till she heard a 
knocking at the gate, and the police inquiring what 
was the matter ? . " who's inside ?" 

Thrice Heather tried to answer them, but her lips 
refused to utter any articulate sound. 

Then, '' Break open the gate !" she at length 
managed to reply. " Make haste ! . make haste !" 

They sent for picks and crowbars, and beat in the 
wood-work ; when that was done a couple of police- 
men stepped inside, whilst a couple more kept the 
crowd back. 

" Come upstairs !" Heather said ; and when they 
reached the landing, she pointed to the floor, and 
then to the room, where some tragedy, she knew, 
had taken place. 

" It is locked !" she replied. " My husband !" 

One of the men put his shoulder to the door and 
forced it open. He could not fling it wide, on 
account of something which barred the entrance; 
but, squeezing himself through the aperture, he 
entered the room, and found Arthur lying on the 
floor with his throat cut, and a razor beside him ! 

" Bear a hand here," the man whispered to his 



284 FAR ABOVE BUSIES. 

fellow, ^ and don't let her come in ;" bat Heather 
was not to be kept back. She crept through the 
opening likewise, and stood face to &ce with that, 
the vijtible presence of the dread which had brougfat 
her back miles and miles to preserve him from one 
crime only . so it seemed to her . in order that he ' 
might commit another I 

Between them, the men lifted the body and placed 
it on the bed ; then one went for a doctor, and the 
other stood waiting for Mrs. Dudley, who had gone 
groping after a light 

She knew where there were matches, and she soon 
found a candle ; and when she had lighted it, she 
returned, and, bravely enough, looked on the tace of 
the only man she ever loved. 

'' I don't think he's dead, ma'am," said the police- 
man, with a rough sympathy. " I have been trying 
to stop the bleeding ; and, if you will give me some 
more handkerchiefs, I'll see what we can do till the 
doctor comes." 

Mechanically, almost. Heather gave him what he 
asked for. Even in the midst of this tremendous 
sorrow, she could not shut out the memory of all 
those upheaped shavings, soaked in oil . of all, per- 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 285 

haps, those terrible men, now they were free of the 
premises, might discover. 

If he were dead, he had left it all . the shame, the 
discovery, the punishment behind ; but if he were 
not dead, and that detection then took place ? 

Had it not been for the fact of the door being 
secured inside, the man would have begun to sus- 
pect strange things of Heather ; her manner was so 
singular, so wandering, so incomprehensible. 

" Do you know how this happened ?" he asked. 

*' He went mad, I think," she answered. " I am 
sure he was mad ; he has been odd, and unlike him- 
self for some time;" and then she began to sob 
convulsively. 

" Come, come, ma'am, you must not give way like 
this, you know," said the doctor, who just then entered 
the apartment. " Take charge of her, will you ?" he 
added, to a person who followed him in, " and don't 
allow her to come back here at present. There, 
ma'am, pray go with this gentleman; we'll see to 
whatever is necessary ; you will only be in our way." 

" That is quite true, Mrs. Dudley," said a familiar 
voice, tenderly and pityingly, and, at the sound of 
it. Heather looked up. 



286 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" Oh ! Mr. Croft," she cried, at sight of his dark 
face, bent down towards her with an ineffable com- 
passion; "thank God . thank God for this!" and, 
clinging to his arm, she rather took him, than he her ; 
out of the apartment, and into one of the lower 
rooms, where her first prayer was that " he would 
keep the people out . keep them away . till she had 
told him everything. ev^-ry thing !" 

In a few minutes, Douglas Croft was in possession 
of the facts of the case, so far as Heather herself 
was cognisant of them, but his clear head saw farther 
than she had been able to do. He understood there 
must be some cause for this sudden freak of mad- 
ness . some reason why Arthur wished the place 
destroyed. 

" And we shall have to find out the reason before 
morning," he said. " Now, Mrs. Dudley, may I 
depend upon your calmness . may I be certain of 
your assistance? There has evidently been more 
than life involved in this matter, and we must sift it 
thoroughly to the bottom. I suppose I may examine 
any papers I find upstairs ? Pray remain here for 
the present ; I shall be back again directly." 

It was no very diflScult undertaking for a man 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 287 

like Douglas Croft to satisfy the police that anything 
which had happened in Lukin's factory during the 
course of the last few hours was perfectly correct, 
and in the ordinary course of every-day events, and 
that the only plan now to be adopted was to send 
for a locksmith, have a new fastening put upon the 
gates, and the needful repairs in the woodwork 
eflFected without delay. 

Neither did he experience any greater trouble in 
making the doctor understand that there was some- 
thing which had preceded the attempt at suicide, 
and which it was desirable on all accounts to attribute 
to temporary insanity. 

"Whether he live or die," finished Mr. Croft, 
" and, in my opinion, it matters very little which he 
does, this freak must be regarded as that of a 
lunatic. Meantime, if you have no objection to 
meeting my friend Mr. Eymner Henry, I think it 
might be a satisfaction to Mrs. Dudley to know you 
have had a consultation." 

In reply to which speech, Doctor Milworth, bowing 
low, expressed himself to the effect, that he had no 
objection whatever to meeting Mr. Henry . that he 
should like to meet him, in fact, which may seem 



288 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

the less astonishing, perhaps, when it is explained, 
that during the entire time Doctor Milworth took 
charge of the case, he was in the habit of going 
about among his other patients, watch in hand, and 
casually remarking he was rather in a hurry to-day, 
because he had to meet Mr. Rymner Henry at a 
quarter pasi two, or a quarter to five, or four pre- 
cisely, according to the hour mentioned by that 
celebrated surgeon, " in consultation on a most im- 
portant case." 

Why Mr. Croft considered it necessary to send 
for further advice, he himself perhaps could not very 
clearly have told, for he knew that if Arthur 
Dudley were to live, Dr. Milworth had done every- 
thing which could be done towards compassing that 
object. Possibly he might have some idea of thereby 
winning the doctor's greater confidence, ensuring 
his greater secrecy, for already Douglas Croft held 
in his hand a letter which he believed would prove 
a clue to all this mystery. 

It was from Mr. Lukin, stating that on the 28rd 
he should be in London to imped the books. 

"That is the secret, then," thought Douglas 
Croft ; " before you inspect the books, though, Mr. 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 289 

Lukin, I will take a look at them myself. I do not 
think there will be much difficulty in unravelling the 
skein ; I am greatly mistaken if he possessed brains 
sufficient to cook his accounts, and perhaps for that 
very reason he may have got them into a confounded 
mess." 

When Mr. Croft, however, tried to pass into the 
office he failed to do so, by reason of the piles of 
shavings and other combustible materials which 
stopped the entrance. 

" I want a reliable man, Mrs. Dudley," he said, 
returning to her ; " a man who can be trusted to 
hold his tongue, if he be paid for doing so. Is there 
amongst the workpeople such a treasure to be found ?" 

" Yes," she answered ; *^ Morrison. I am certain 
we may trust him." 

'* Where is he to be found ?" asked her firiend. 

** I do not know his address, though I could find 
my way to his house. I will go and fetch him this 
moment." 

" I will accompany you," he said ; but next moment, 
remembering some one in the Dudley interest ought 
to remain on the premises, he stood perplexed and 
silent, while Heather said, . 

VOL. IIJ. u 



290 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

** I am not afraid of going. Do you think, after 
to-night, any small thing will ever frighten me 
again ? 

'*Poor child, poor child,'' he murmured, '*what a 
life yours has been I" 

" Don't pity me," she said ; " do not, or my heart 
will break ; it feels almost breaking as it is, and a 
kind word chokes me. I will go for Morrison ; I 
will go at once." 

There was no help for it ; so he went with her as 
far as the gate and watched her while she flitted 
away along the street . watched her till she turned a 
comer and was lost to view. 

Then he went upstairs agidn to hear how the 
patient was doing, and after a chat with the doctor 
and nurse, for whom the doctor had sent, walked 
down to the gates again, and waited till Heather 
entered, bringing Morrison with her. 

" A nice business this 1" remarked Mr. Croft, when 
Mrs. Dudley had left the two men standing together 
in the yard ; ** a nice business it might have turned 
out. Where co ud your eyes have been not to see 
Mr. Dudley was as mad as a March hare when you 
left off work ? If it had not been for Mrs. Dudley, 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 291 

there would have been a fine bonfire here to- 
night." 

" Well, sir, my mind did misgive me," was the 
reply; "and more especially along of these here 
shavings. I told Mr. Dudley they were not safe 
stowed away in that there carpenter's shop, with the 
gas escaping like anything. I wanted to have them 
cleared out, and ofiered to wait and see it properly 
done, but he said he wanted to go out and could not 
have them moved till Monday. He looked real down 
wild when he said it, and my mind misgave me ; but 
I never thought of him trying such a start as this." 

"Mr. Lukin will be here on Monday, and you can 
tell him all about it, just as it happened," said Mr. 
Croft; "but don't let the men get hold of his 
having tried to fire the place. It would not be 
pleasant for poor Mrs. Dudley." 

" Which a real lady is," finished Morrison ; " many 
a time I was sorry to see her here, so unsuitable it 
seemed. Never fear, sir, nobody shall hear the story 
from me, not even Mr. Lukin. I need not tell him 
Mrs. Dudley came for me ; and when we get these 
things out of the way, and the place to rights a bit, 
no one need be any the wiser." 

u 2 



292 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

'^ And, as I cannot find any of the keys, I shall take 
the books in for security, if you will hand them to 
me," said Mr. Croft. And so he had the books 
carried across the yard and placed on the dining- 
room table, where in five minutes he discovered the 
deficiency. 

" If I can only now open the safe, we may snap 
our fingers at Mr. Lukin," thought Heather's friend, 
as he closed the books and shut in the record of the 
Mui rowed money which had almost overturned 
Arthur's reason. 

Then he sought Mrs. Dudley, who was seated in 
an arm-chair, resting her head on both hands. And 
before her on the table lay a little locket, which Mr. 
Croft recognised as having been taken from the poor 
broken creature who, still hanging between life and 
death, was quiet enough upstairs . quiet enough and 
low enough to have contented his enemy, if he had 
one. 

" You are very ill, I fear," Mr. Croft said, in that 
almost caressing tone which had won its way to 
Bessie's heart in the sunshiny days that seemed now 
so far . so far away. He possessed two natures, 
this man, who had loved the girl so passionately and 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 293 

deceived her so grossly: one tender and compas- 
sionate, the otlier reckless and cynical. " You are 
very ill, I fear ; in the press of other matters you 
have been neglected. Let me see to you now a little 
. what is there you can have, likely to do you any 
good?" 

" I do not know," she answered. " I have been 
upstairs and seen him. Oh ! Mr. Croft, what are 
the chances of his recovery ? tell me the truth. It is 
not likely the doctor would be frank with me." 

" I think it greatly depends on his being kept 
quiet ; there is nothing now that ought to distress 
or worry him. I have discovered the cause of all 
this misery ; it is a very trifling cause indeed which 
has produced such results." ~ 

" Is it ?" she lifted her head for a moment as she 
said this, and looked into Mr. Croft's face, then her 
glance wandered towards the locket. He could not 
quite comprehend her. 

" A mere trifle," he repeated ; and then he told her 
all. He thought it best to do this . better that she 
should understand the whole of the circumstances 
clearly, so as to be able to comprehend exactly how 
he intended setting the affair straight. 



294 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

" And I had that money of yours in the house all 
the time," Heather said, with that weary, weary look 
in her face which seemed to Mr. Croft worse than 
the most violent sorrow . " what you gave me, you 
know, to keep . for . Bessie !" 

The last word was spoken more like an exclama- 
tion than as though it had belonged in any way to 
the previous part of the sentence ; and Mr. Croft, 
following the direction of her eyes, beheld the door 
closed hurriedly, and heard the rustle of a dress in 
the passage. 

In a moment he was out in the hall, and had 
caught the retreating figure. 

" Bessie !" he cried ; " Bessie . Bessie ! don't go ! 
I will leave, if you object to my staying here, but we 
can both help Mrs. Dudley. See, I will not follow 
you m I 

She covered her face with the corner of her shawl, 
covered it that he might not even look upon her, and 
passed back into the parlour without a word. 
" Heather, my darling, what is this ?" she asked. 
" Morrison came round for me, but could only give 
the most confused account of what had happened. 
Tell me, love . tell me all ; don't sit looking at me 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 295 

like that, but speak, dear ; what is it ?" Aud she 
crouched down on the ground, and, winding her 
arms round Heather's neck, drew the dear face close 
to her own. "What is this trouble, sweet?" she 
persisted ; but the only answer Heather could make 
was . "Oh! Bessie . oh! Bessie," as she held the 
locket towards her, moaning, moaning all the while. 

" Do you wish me to open it ?" Bessie inquired ; 
and Heather made a gesture of assent. She had 
always been a little jealous, and now she was afraid 
to reveal, with her own hands, the secret it contained. 
And yet she longed to know . was it portrait or hair 
. was it an old love-token, or a more recent souvenir 
which her husband had worn next his heart, next 
where she ought to have been alone ? God keep us 
all from hard and hasty and suspicious judgments. 
With the man upstairs hovering between life and 
death. Heather still could not help misjudging 
him. Worse than the whole of the long ordeal she 
had passed through was the sight of that golden 
trifle, which she dared not examine, which Bessie 
first turned over and then opened, holding it up to 
the light as she did so. 

There was a scrap of hair in it . a tiny curl of 



296 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

golden red, aod " Lall^** CDgraved in black letters 
round the edge. 

"Where did you get this, Heather?'* she in* 
quired. 

" He wore it," Heather answered. 

'* He 1 Oh ! poor . ^poor Arthur I" and the tears 
poured from Bessie's eyes as she looked upon the 
trinket She had never thought to like Arthur 
greatly, or to be sorry for him over much ; but now 
it seemed to her, thinking of the tragedy which had 
just been enacted, that no one had ever quite under- 
stood him, ever imagined it possible Arthur should 
find out his error, and try to repair it too late . too 
late! 

" Why do you say * Poor Arthur 7 " Heather 
broke forth, passionately ; " why do you not pity 
me, finding out, after all, he was wearing next his 
heart a love token from that woman . that bad, 
cruel " 

"Hush, Heather! . hush . hush!" and Bessie 
put the open locket into her friend's hand. '* See 
what it really is . ^not what you imagine at all." 

Incredulously almost, Heather did as she was 
requested ; then " Lally. Lally I" said the bereaved 



THE BITTERNESS OF DEATH. 297 

mother ; *' Lally, Lally !" and she covered the locket 
with hungry kisses. 

"I have passed through the bitterness of death 
to-night, Bessie !" she exclaimed, at length. " I think 
it must be near morning now." 



298 FAB ABOVE RUBIES. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



SUNSET AT BERRIE DOWN. 



It was near morning ; but before that new time, 
full of hope, and joy, and promise, dawned upon her 
life, there came a period of blessed unconsciousness, 
during which Heather Dudley lay ignorant of all 
passing events. 

How Arthur came back from the valley of the 
shadow. ^how the management of their affairs was 
taken by stronger and abler hands than any which 
had hitherto touched them . ^how everything was made 
right with Mr. Lukin, and gossip silenced, and 
ill-nature refuted, she did not know until the lonsr 
fever was over . until, seated again beside one of the 
windows of that pleasant drawing-room at Berrie 
Down, she could have fancied the events I have 
tried in this story to chronicle were all parts 



SUNSET AT BERRIE DOWN. 299 

and portions of some unpleasant dream . of some 
weary attack of delirium. 

For they were once more in the old house which 
Mr. Croft had purchased when it was for sale, and 
the management of which he had offered through his 
agent first to Arthur, and then to AlicL 

" And, had I known who my real master was," 
said that young gentleman, " I never would have 
accepted the post." 

" Are you sorry you were ignorant ?" asked Mr. 
Croft, with a smile, glancing towards Heather. 

" No . oh, no !" was the quick reply ; for every 
one now knew, that when Mr. Croft appeared 
so opportunely in Silk Street, he was coming to 
tell Mrs. Dudley of his wife's death . coming 
to say, that if Bessie could only be induced to 
accept him, he would make reparation . he would 
prove his repentance. 

There was not a relation he had in the world 
who opposed his decision . not one who, hearing the 
full details of that sad story, urged a word against 
the girl whom he desired, after a due interval, to 
make his wife. 

All the reluctance was with Bessie . all the 



300 FAB ABOVE BUSIES. 

difficulty he experienced lay in her disinclination to 
speak to him, or listen to hb suit 

"Her child," she said to Heather, "would be 
looked down on." Her child who, now chatter- 
ing his first intelligible sentences, ran through the 
gardens at Berrie Down, making that sound of young 
life about the place which is always so pleasant to 
hear. 

But there was hope for the suitor, nevertheless. 
In due time, Heather promised to take up his cause. 

" I will talk to her when I get strong," she said 
to Mr. Croft ; and with that assurance he rested 
satisfied. 

As for Mrs. Poole Seymour, she was quite 
enthusiastic about the affair. 

"My dear," she declared, "yon must not be 
cruel. You ought to be the first to forgive him, 
since it was your pretty face led him so far astray ; 
and as for your child . the estate is not entailed . 
what matter ? besides, Mr. Stewart is so rich, and 
has taken to you so immensely I" 

Which was true. Mr. Stewart was delighted 
with Bessie, and perhaps even more delighted with 
her child . a fine, sturdy young fellow, who, riding 



SUNSET AT BERRIE DOWN. 301 

on Nep, encountered Mr. Stewart one day in Berrie 
Down. 

" What Is your name, my little man ?" asked the 
bachelor, stopping him and his nurse, Priscilla. 

"Mamma says, I'm a young Turk," was the 
answer. *' What's yours ?" 

" Oh ! I'm an old Turk !" replied Mr. Stewart ; 
whereupon the child burst out laughing ; and, striking 
Nep with his heels, the dog broke into a sling-trot 
and bore Master Douglas oflF to Berrie Down. 

" He only told you the truth, sir," said Priscilla, 
before she started off in pursuit; **he's an awful 
young Turk." 

In due time, Mr. Stewart reached the Hollow, 
where he found Lord Kemms, who was decidedly 
smitten by Agnes ; and they all spent the evening 
talking quietly together while the sun sank into the 
west, and bathed the whole country lying exposed to 
his beams in a glory of crimson and purple and 
gold. 

" I have brought you a little present, Heather," 
Mr. Stewart said, drawing near the sofa she occupied. 
" It is the custom for god-fathers to give their god- 
children little presents occasionally, and I fear I 



i 



302 FAR ABOVE RUBIES. 

have been somewhat neglectful of you. Open it when 
I am gone," and he slipped a parcel into her hand. 

But Heather, with a pretty wilfulness, opened it 
at once, and drawing out the parchments it contained, 
found them to be the title-deeds of Berrie Down. 

" Yours, my dear," said Mr. Stewart, " to have 
and to hold for ever." 

" Arthur, Arthur !" she cried ; and Arthiu*, look- 
still white and worn, came towards his wife, who 
put the papers into his hand, saying, " See, love, 
what Mr. Stewart has given me I" 

" Only remember, Mr. Dudley, we must have no 
speculating; you must keep it intact for your son," 
added Mr. Stewart . in answer to which remark, 
Arthur took his wife's hand in his, murmuring, 
" So help me God !" 

Before the sun quite set. Heather drew a shawl 
round her, and, leaving the pleasant company, passed 
out on to the lawn, and wandered away towards the 
Hollow. 

"She is thinking of Lally," Alick whispered to 
Arthur ; and Arthur, following his wife, prayed and 
begged of her not to grieve for the child that was 
no more. 



SUNSET AT BERRIE DOWN. 303 

" Heather," he said, humbly, " I have been but a 
poor husband to you ; but I will try in the future, 
to be * better to you than many children.' Do 
not fret, love, do not fret." 

But Heather was not fretting. She felt now that 
her darling was where she could see continually the 
face of " Our Father which is in Heaven." 



THE END. 
