A LONDON ROMANCE. 



i. 




IN A COURT BEHIND THE rEAYHOUSli. 

CHAPTER I. 

j|NCE upon a time . not so very long ago . there 
was quite a little theatrical colony down Stony- 
wold Court, at the back of the Great Sahara 
Theatre. 

Mrs. Pounder, " old woman to combine heavies," lodged 
at No. 4 ; Jinks, " second low comedy," at No. 6 ; Mr. 
Montmorency, "utility," and Miss Jenkinson, "singing 
chambermaid," at No. 7 ; while Mrs. Whitaker, the stage 
carpenter's wife, carried on a newspaper and cigar business 
at the shop at the corner. 

Metropolitan improvements have done away with Stony- 
wold Court these ten years past ; but, once upon a time, if 
you had wished to make a short cut to it, from the box 
entrance of the Great Sahara, it would have been as well, 
perhaps, if you had taken the first turning on the left, when 
you would have found yourself in Little Pannikin Street, 
East, leading from which, upon the right hand side, between 
the Hilarious Hyaena (proprietor, Joe Marjoribanks, ex- 
clown) and Simpson's famous Shaving Shop, was Blue 
Peter Passage, and, at the bottom of that, Stonywold Court. 
It is true that you might have got to your destination by an 
easier route, straight down " the Lane," but, then, we were 
talking of short cuts. 

Now, supposing your business to have lain with Mr. 
Whitaker, it would have been as well . had you not found 
1 



2 A London Romance. 

him lingering at the stage door . to have looked in, on the 
way, at the Hyaena, because Mr. Whitaker was seldom at 
home except on Sunday, so very busy was he at the theatre 
If it were Mrs. Whitaker you came to see, you found her 
easily enough by entering the shop and tapping on the 
counter. 

You found her, then, to be a spare woman, with a griev- 
ous expression of countenance, as of one who had troubles 
and made the most of them. You found her, also, rather 
sharp upon the subject of trade, and intolerant as regarded 
periodicals which she did not happen to keep, if you rashly 
enquired for the same. In a general way, too, she seemed 
to serve you under a sense of injury, and she was inclined 
to be disobliging in the matter of change. Otherwise, her 
manners were, if anything, distinguished, and there was 
about her, as the saying is, " something superior." 

If, however, you had not visited Stonywold Court for the 
purpose of seeing either Mr. or Mrs. Whitaker, but had 
come, instead, to see one of the younger members of the 
family, . in which case it is also to be supposed that you 
were a younger member of some other family yourself, and 
your object was a game of play . you would, during the 
summer months . if it were not meal time or bed time, or 
tub night, which began with weeping and wailing and soap 
in the eye at four on Saturday afternoon, so as to be got 
over early to allow for marketing . have been referred to a 
small concourse of little children generally to be found on 
Mrs. Whitaker's private door-step, a favourite juvenile resort 
and sheltered corner from the north-east-wind. 

Had not the little Whitakers formed a part of this gather- 
ing, loud cries would probably have arisen, responsive to 
your interrogatory, and Ann and William and James would, 
ten to one, have been found over against the pump in the 
middle of Stonywold Court. 

Over against the pump, one heavenly summer's day, the 
game of hop-scotch was at its height, and William Brad- 
shaw, best known as Billy the Bold, and Ann Whitaker, 
otherwise called Tomboy, were trying their skill against 
that of Emma, Mrs. Higgins at the oil-shop's eldest born, 
and Mrs. Praddles's little boy from round the corner, while 
Jimmy Jarman the Moper sat apart and read his book. 

It is an exciting game is hop-scotch, though ignored by 
the upper circles and discountenanced by Mrs, Whitaker, 



/// a Court BeJiind the Playhouse. 3 

who being, as has been seen, " something superior," set her 
face against street children, and their sports and pastimes. 

It was, too, a wondrous sight to see that energetic little 
maiden . she would be eight next birthday, and was a great 
girl for her age . hopping nimbly upon one black-stockinged 
leg, and calling upon the "nicker" to "kim up" as she 
kicked it. But it is hard to see the fun in anything that 
pains you, however funny it may be to a third person to 
look on at. When you want to be still and read your book 
in peace and quietness, and other people come jumping on 
your toes, the annoyance is none the less because the leg 
that deals the kick is shapely. 

If then you had happened to be a sedate and serious old 
person, aged ten-and-a-half, who had seen the folly of things 
and suffered sorely with the rickets, it could not be reason- 
ably expected that you would care to join in such boisterous 
games. Thus was it with Jimmy Jarman the Moper. He 
did not care for hop-scotch. He did not care for rough 
games. He could not bear rough boys and girls : and 
Billy was rough, and Tomboy anything but gentle. 

There then, he sat, this summer's afternoon, basking in a 
patch of sunlight playing on the pump ; there he sat, this 
rickety, careworn old chap of ten-and-a-half, reading a 
penny romance as hard as he could, and from time to time 
in a weak voice complaining of little Ann screaming so 
shrilly, and of Billy bellowing like a bull. 

Twice had Ann jumped upon his toes, and he had on 
each occasion backed his chair a little, complaining bitterly 
that nowhere else would suit her to come and play but just 
where the sun was shining. Once Billy had kicked the 
"nicker" up into his lap, and this had made him very 
angry. Once they had nearly knocked him over, chair and 
all. And, yet, they persisted in their play, and she of the 
shapely leg still called shrilly as ever upon the nicker to 
kim up. 

Until at last (oh ! woe and wailing to come) it kimmed 
up in a way quite unexpected, and went right through Mrs. 
Whitaker's shop-window. 

Another minute and Stonywold Court contained but two 
of its resident juvenile population . Jimmy the Moper, who 
sat speechless in his chair, and little Ann, who had hidden 
herself behind him. 



4 A London Romance. 

To them the smash very soon brought out Mrs. Whitaker, 
in a tremble of rage and terror, the flowers in her cap shak- 
ing portentously. 

"Who threw that stone?" she asked. 

But the boy to whom she directed the enquiry made no 
answer. 

" Who threw that stone?" she asked again. "Are you 
a-going to tell me, James, or shall I have to make you ? " 

" Don't say it was me, Jimmy dear," whispered a small 
voice behind him. 

But by this time Mrs. Whitaker's wrath was growing ter- 
rible. 

"Do you hear me speak, Sir?" she continued. "Who 
was it that did it?" 

" What will you do to them as did ? " the old man en- 
quired cautiously. 

" I'll break their bones," said Mrs. Whitaker. 

" But if I don't tell you ? " 

" I'll break your bones." 

" You'd better break mine enough for both of us," said 
Jimmy Jarman, "because you'll never find out who the 
other is." 

So saying he gave himself over into the hands of the 
tormentor, and, that afternoon, while the juvenile popula- 
tion gamboled, joyously, upon the flags of Stonywold, the 
unrepentant sinner languished in darkness and solitude, and, 
sitting among the coals in Mrs. Whitaker's cellar, played 
the part of martyr, with but short-lived sympathy from those 
for whose sake he suffered. 

Not that we ought to blame that bright-eyed little maiden 
because an hour afterwards she was hop-scotching again as 
hard as ever. One's memory is so short in childhood's 
days : it is only when one grows up that the grateful recol- 
lection of past favours abides with us. 

That evening there was tea-cake for tea because it was 
William's birthday, but James being a bad boy went cake- 
less, and his portion was divided between his cousins. 

" And not a crumb shall he have," said Mrs. Whitaker, 
decisively, "because he's a bad un." 

" Poor Jimmy," thought Ann, with a twinge of conscience. 
And she had half a mind to declare the whole truth, and 
deliver herself up to justice. But, then, what would have 
been the good of that ? If she did so, she, too, would be 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 5 

beaten : and Jimmy had had his beating, and, by this time, 
probably, had nearly got over it. 

" I won't eat his share of the cake, though," she said to 
herself: and she begged of Billy to be equally self-sacrific- 
ing. 

But Master William pulled a long face, and responded 
with his mouth full, "I sha'n't give him none, I'm sure. 
Why should I ? " 

" Because he was punished for my sake." 

"More silly him then," said William : "serve him right." 

" Does it, Sir ? " cried Ann, irate ; "you wouldn't tell a 
story to save me a whipping, / know." 

"No, that I shouldn't," said Billy, "not if you had been 
naughty. Nor if you hadn't neither, for I wouldn't tell a lie 
to save myself." And William, who was always a good boy, 
and, consequently, never was whipped, ate to repletion, and 
was happy. 

" You're a nasty, greedy thing, though," said Ann ; " and 
if you won't give him any of your cake, I'll give him all the 
more." 

"Oh, very well, Miss," said Billy, "then I'll tell your 
mother." 

But, in spite of this threat, Ann carried out her resolve, 
and when, bed-time coming, Jimmy still languished in dur- 
ance vile, the little girl watched her opportunity, and, creep- 
ing down stairs to the cellar-door, did her best to offer her 
captive cousin such consolation as lay in her power. 

"Jimmy," she whispered. 

" Who's that ? " asked the prisoner. 

" It's only me," replied the penitent little girl. " How 
are you, Jimmy dear ? Are you pretty comfortable ? " 

" I aint very comfortable," responded Jimmy from among 
the coals. 

" No, I know you're not, poor dear," cried Ann, wringing 
her small hands and whimpering through the keyhole : "but 
I mean, as comfortable as you can be." 

" Yes, thank you," said Jimmy. " Don't fret about me." 

" Did mother bang you very hard ? " 

" Rather hard," said Jimmy. 

" I know you must hate me for not telling, Jimmy ; but 
oh . I was so afraid and . I've saved some cake for you." 

" Thank you, dear. But don't you fancy I hate you. I 
don't care a bit, Ann, as long as she didn't beat you. Bless 



6 A London Romance. 

you, I should be as right as anything here, if I wasn't so 
afraid of the beedles." 

" I hope they won't bite you much, Jimmy dear, and I'll 
keep you your cake, and . mother's calling. Good-bye, 
Jimmy." 

" Ann," cried the boy from the inside, as she was turning 
away. 

"What is it, dear?" 

"I wish I could kiss you. You are very kind to think 
of me." 

" You can't kiss me till you come out," said Ann, " but 
if you'll kiss that side of the keyhole, I'll kiss this." 

" Go on, then ! " said Jimmy. " I'm a kissing of my side." 












CHAPTER II. 

H me, but it must be a felicitous state of things 
when one is able to be always good and virtuous, 
without an effort ! To have been good so long, 
too, that the stability of one's goodness is 
thoroughly believed in ! And what a happy boy William 
ought to have been, and was ! 

The mothers of all the bad boys round the neighbour- 
hood . and alas ! it was a neighbourhood hugely prolific in 
bad boys . pointed to William's conduct as a bright example, 
worthy of their emulation, and asked them tauntingly, 
whether they ever supposed it likely that they would be 
able to become only half as good as he was. 

Sometimes, though, bad boys, being likewise envious, lay 
in wait for William in lonely spots, thumped him on 
the back in a dark corner of Blue Peter Passage, and threw 
him on his nose in Little Pannikin Street, for no other 
reason than that he was a good boy, and they were bad 
ones. 

But William the Good was also Billy the Bold, and in a 
fair stand-up fight was more than a match for any boy of his 
own weight in or about the parish of St. Starver-cum-bag-o'- 
bones, so that, perhaps, he was feared more than he was 
hated ; and having a strong will of his own, and a strong 
arm to enforce it, he became a leader among the boys of 
those parts, and the cock of his court. 

He was, of course, much more likely to be popular than 
his cousin Jimmy Jarman the Moper, for although the latter 
had the reputation among the unlearned of being a scholard, 



8 A Loudon Romance. 

and a fine reader, and an adder-up unequalled, he was not 
pleasant company. He knew so much better, you see, than 
other boys, and they did not like it. 

He had a wonderful power of story-telling . not fibs, at 
which he was, perhaps, not such a bad hand, either . and 
he was supposed to know right off, by heart, the contents of 
Mrs. Whitaker's six shelves of circulating library. But then 
he required so much pressing before he would exhibit his 
talents, and, after all, listening to "a pack of tale nonsense" 
isn't as good fun as I spy hi, or buttons, even, and, as a rule, 
he could only get a lot of silly girls to sit and listen to him, 
for, as you know, girls are poor hands at games, such as 
strong boys of Billy's sort like to play at. 

Little Ann, of course, preferred William Bradshaw to her 
other cousin, but she was an exception to the ordinary run 
of girls, and was, in William's opinion, making due allow- 
ances for the shortcomings of the sex, " not such a bad sort 
neither." 

What a happy childhood was this which these children 
passed in the shabby little court of Stonywold. It is to 
be feared, though, that, to a well-regulated mind, it must 
have appeared somewhat incorrect, and Mrs. AVhitaker, 
for one, by no means approved of it. But it was awful 
jolly ! 

They thrived on smoke and dirt, these grubby innocents. 
They had scarcely ever heard tell of green fields, and 
had formed an unfavourable opinion respecting them. 
Many of the street children, about there, had never seen 
the parks. There was hardly one who could have taken 
its oath . they did take their oaths pretty frequently . to a 
daisy. 

Some of them had wandered so very little from their 
native squalor, that they had no notion there were streets 
barely a mile off which could have swallowed up the court 
itself, Little Pannikin Street, and Blue Peter Passage, at one 
gulp, without fear of choking. 

Jolly ! Why, if ignorance is bliss, there were some of 
those street children, the young members of the Whit- 
aker family were in the habit of associating with, as 
ignorant as infant Hindoos, and as happy as the day was 
long. 

There was not much money circulating among the Stony- 
wold children, you may be sure; and a halfpenny bundle of 



/;/ a Court Behind the Playhouse. 9 

firewood was considered a perfect godsend, in the way of 
playthings, and served equally well for dressing up as dolls, 
or building houses with, or for fashioning into cats when, 
the tip-cat season setting in with its customary severity, 
there was a great demand for that playful missile in St. 
Starver's. 

The worst of it is though, deuce take it, that even little 
boys and girls must work ; and there was school to go to 
and lessons to learn, and such gettings up before you were 
half awake on cold winter mornings, and so much soap in 
wrong places when your face was washed, and such rough . 
you may well say rough drying, afterwards. 

And, again, was it not a dreadful trial to be obliged to go 
to school, those bright summer mornings, when there were 
so many other boys and girls, who did not go, and could 
stop and play how they liked, and as long- as they liked, out 
in the beautiful streets ? Why if you hadn't to go to school, 
there was that return match at buttons, coming off that very 
morning, between Mrs. Praddles's little boy, and young Mr. 
'Iggins, also from round the corner. 

There was, too, a Punch show at the Lane end of the 
court, and a drunken man, whom Joe Marjoribanks had just 
turned out of the " Hyaena," trying to pick his hat up, and 
not able to do so, in Little Pannikin Street. 

Besides, as this was Saturday, all the penny-odicals were 
out, and Mrs. Whitaker's window was full of new pictures, 
if you had only time to stay and look at them. But you 
had to go to school, worse luck, and so had Jimmy 
Jarman the Moper, and Billy the Bold, and Miss Ann, alias 
Tomboy. 

It was not, by any means, a charity school in which Mrs. 
Whitaker's young charges were educated ; because they were 
paid for, at the rate of sixpence a head per week, and they 
wore no muffin cap, and were not labelled. It was a sort 
of public school, though, much frequented by amateur lady 
teachers, who pounced down upon you when you least ex- 
pected it, for your duty towards your neighbour, or dodged 
you, anyhow, in your multiplication table. 

You were never quite safe, either, with the reverend gen- 
tleman who called sometimes in lavender kid gloves, [and 
who had puzzling posers handy, respecting fractional 
bloaters, and problematical relationships notably in the case 
of John's father and Tom's son, which no living boy in the 



io A London Romance. 

world could have answered, had he not first been told what 
to say, by some other boy who possessed an hereditary 
knowledge of the solution. 

It was a trying school for William, who hated books, as 
much as a good boy can hate anything, and who was always 
being proved a dunce, and laughed at, and who, at times, 
waxed very wroth and, almost, became a bad boy out of 
sheer vexation. Somehow, though he. strove hard, William 
was not as clever at his books as that pale-faced, shambling 
cousin of his, whose head was so large, and whose muscle 
was so small ; and, sometimes, when Mr. Whitaker sat 
smoking his pipe, at home of a Sunday evening, he would 
try the two boys' powers, after a fashion of his own, generally, 
to William's discomfiture. 

" James, my boy," perhaps Mr. Whitaker might observe, 
" let's hear you spell Virginny tobacker," and Jimmy Jarman 
obliges with the requisite information. 

" Right you air," says Mr. Whitaker, checking him by the 
printed label he holds in his hand ; " right you air, Master 
James, that's a chalk to you ; and now, William, where do 
this Virginny tobacker come from ? " 

" From the right-hand drawer in the shop," replies William, 
innocently, at which rejoinder little Ann bursts out laugh- 
ing, and Mrs. Whitaker, looking up from her needlework, 
joins in the merriment, but, discreetly, offers no sugges- 
tion. 

" Where is it, Ann ? " says Mr. Whitaker, with an en- 
couraging smile. 

" From America," says Ann. 

" Right you air," repeats Mr. Whitaker ; "and who were 
it, William, as fun out Amerikey? Were it Capting 
Cook?" he adds, after a pause, looking rather anxiously 
towards Jimmy Jarman, for he is not, altogether, quite 
certain sure upon the point himself, " were it Capting 
Cook?" 

" No," says Jimmy, with a curl of the lip, which the honest 
carpenter does not notice. 

" No," repeats Mr. Whitaker, decisively, and as though 
he knew all about it, all along. " It weren't Capting Cook, 
because it were a little after his time. And who were it, 
Jimmy ? " 

" Christopher Columbus discovered America in 1492," 
says Jimmy Jarman, as though he were reading from a book, 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 1 1 

for, by accident, the young humbug has learnt it, at school, 
only a couple of days ago. 

" Right you air, James," says Mr. Whitaker, patting him 
on the head with the bowl of his pipe, " right you air, and 
very kind it were of him. Christopheer Colom . Columni- 
bus it were, and how is Christopheer Columnibus spelt, 
Master William ? " 





CHAPTER III. 

LL this while, our young folks had been growing up, 
as fast as ever they could grow, and Mrs. Whit- 
aker had begun to say, and kept on saying, for 
that matter, that it was high time James Jarman 
did something for a living, though what that something was 
to be she could not easily decide. 

It was, not unwisely, suggested, by a friendly neighbour . 
Mrs. Praddles, if names must be stated . that a clerkship 
would best suit an adder-up of his ability, and Mr. Whitaker, 
in a vague sort of way, set about making enquiries. Pend- 
ing the result, Jimmy, who seemed to dread a change, went 
on with his schooling. William, however, was only too eager 
to throw his books aside, and, having at a very early age 
displayed what Mr. Whitaker called a natural turn for chips, 
it was agreed that his father should try and get him on in 
the workroom at Great Sahara, at the end of the year's 
schooling, and that he and James should leave school to- 
gether. 

Before the end of six months, however, a great event oc- 
curred which revolutionised the parish of St. Starver's, and 
made, among other things more or less important, a won- 
drous change in the destinies of William the Good. This 
event was the arrival of a new shepherd at the chapel in 
Little Pannikin Street, East, vice another shepherd defunct ; 
and the new comer was an earnest young man, with a loud 
voice and new views. 

The advent of this reverend stranger caused a sort of small 
awakening in Saint Starver's, and there was such a run upon 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 13 

the hard benches of his little chapel that grave thoughts of 
calling in the aid of an architect entered the heads of the 
elders. Under the influence of this good young shepherd's 
persuasive eloquence, Little Pannikin Street took a serious 
turn, which in one direction extended to the Lane, and in 
the other to Blue Peter Passage, and even reached Stony- 
wold Court ; heretofore a black sheep among courts, and the 
abode of the frivolous and ungodly. 

It is pleasant to think that Mrs. Whitaker was one of the 
earliest of the awakened. She had ever, on the Sabbath, 
been a regular attendant at chapel, during the old gentle- 
man's time ; and James and Ann, suffering much from jerks 
in the joints, and irritation in the nose, had with difficulty 
shuffled and rubbed through many hot and weary afternoon 
discourses, which William, on the contrary, survived with 
credit. 

Mr. Whitaker, it must be owned, was not quite as regular 
a chapel-goer as his good lady ; staying at home, when he 
could, upon various pretexts, more or less shallow, to smoke 
his pipe and read the police reports in his Sunday paper. 
But there was no such thing as shirking possible to the olive 
branches. As sure as Sunday came, came also Sunday 
clothes, very shiny and stiff, and tight under the arms, Sunday 
manners as stiff as the clothes ; hard benches, dry discourses, 
and a woefully long, wearisome desert of a day, with but two 
oases . hot baked meat for dinner, and seed cake for tea. 

When the new shepherd arrived, though, these old-fashioned 
Sundays came to be looked back at as holidays and days of 
rest, compared to the Sabbaths of the awakening ; which 
grew at length to be periods of such rigidity and severity, 
with so much hard bench, joint jerking and nasal irritation 
in them, that James in the intensity of his suffering was 
heard to say that two a week would be the death of any boy. 

To William, however, these Sundays contained nothing 
terrible, and indeed it was his custom to lecture his cousins 
upon their naughtiness, to keep them up to the proper pitch 
of wakefulness during chapel, and, generally, to take them to 
task, and set them straight, and call Mrs. Whitaker's atten- 
tion to their shortcomings and backslidings. What was 
more natural than that so good a boy should attract the 
favourable notice of the new shepherd, and that he should 
take William by the hand, and promise Mrs. Whitaker to 
keep his eye upon him? 



14 A London Romance. 

Who, then, shall describe the joy and pride which agitated 
the good woman's heart ? and who, but a thoroughly good 
boy, properly appreciate the benefit conferred upon our 
William when Mr. Wapshot (this was the shepherd's name) 
said that William himself should be brought up to be a shep- 
herd . a shepherd with a flock of his own. 

Under Mr. Wapshot's able tuition, then, did our good boy, 
from this time forward, make rapid strides in book-learning ; 
such strides, indeed, that it began to be a question in the 
school and in the court, whether it would be William or 
James who would carry off a prize for which both were study- 
ing very hard. The odds (in copper) were freely offered and 
taken down the court, and Mr. Whitaker was in the thick of 
the betting, and, going upon the opinion of Mr. Wapshot 
(what better could he have had ?) backed William heavily ; 
though, at times, upon his own judgment, half tempted to 
hedge on James, who was, he could not help thinking, an 
onkimmon long-'eded un. 

But James was not the favourite. Hardly anyone was 
constant in his support, except, perhaps, it was Mr. Mont- 
morency the walking gentleman ; and, if anything, that 
seemed an unlucky augury, for he was proverbial for doing 
the wrong thing. Since that time he has married into the 
ballet, and grown absurdly fat and lost his figure. 

Strange was it, though, that the court, generally, should 
have lost faith in the -wisdom of the small sage, who, near 
upon a decade, had been quoted a scholard and adder-up 
unprecedented. Yet it, nevertheless, was true; and Mr. 
Wapshot's good boy was confidently predicted, by all Mr. 
Wapshot's flock, and by the little theatrical community . of 
whom, by-the-way, Mr. Wapshot, though not intolerant, was 
far from approving . as the future winner of the prize for 
English history. 

And in all this, who was little Ann's favourite, think you ? 
Perhaps, some tender-hearted one has, already, settled the 
matter, in favour of the pale-faced cousin who, so heroically, 
sacrificed himself to toko and the coal-hole in that affair of 
the broken window. Perhaps it should have been so ; but 
how could that poor, rickety weakling be supposed to keep 
his place in a young lady's affections, against the superior 
attractions of William the Bold and Brave, with the blue eyes 
and curly locks ? that great strong boy, who was cock of his 
court, and could punch the heads of half the youth of St. 



Iii a Court Behind the Playhouse. 1 5 

Starver's had he so chosen ; who, moreover, was growing to 
be as clever as he was good, and, on Mrs. Praddles's authority, 
the " beautifulest singer " that ever gave voice to hymn. Be- 
sides, all the world . but, more particularly, the boy part of 
it . knows what silly things girls are ; and how can you expect 
little Ann should set up her opinion against the great majority 
of Stonywold Court, with such an authority as Mr. Wapshot 
at its head ? 

Heartburnings, anger, and envy, arose out of this compe- 
tition, you may be sure, and a dark shadow of anger and 
distrust crept stealthily into the stage-carpenter's little house- 
hold, and fell upon the hearth, between the cousins. Very 
silent and surly sat Jimmy Jarman of a night with his books 
and his slate. He had been proved to be a horrible booby 
at arithmetic in spite of his groundless reputation as adder- 
up, and William, the good boy (he was as open as the day) 
had made no secret of the Moper's shameful failure in the 
multiplication table, and, subsequent humiliation, in a dunce's 
cap, upon a form. 

The excitement was very great, among the good people of 
the court, when the day of the prize distribution drew near, 
for none could say, until the name was called from the plat- 
form, who were the victorious and who the conquered. But 
the AVapshot flock had placed their faith in their good boy, 
and mustered strong upon the front benches. Foremost 
among these was Mrs. Whitaker, with a toilet which did 
honour to the occasion, and an umbrella with a nozzle espe- 
cially adapted for laudatory purposes. By her side sat a 
very demure little girl, in a new pair of cotton gloves with 
no stint of material in the length of finger. 

Among the spectators was, also, Mr. Wapshot, with an un- 
accountable tendency towards chuckle-headedness when seen 
among other men, without the advantage of a pulpit, and 
upon whom the reverend gentleman in the lavender kid 
gloves, of a herring and a half notoriety, looked down, super- 
ciliously, with the aid of a gold-rimmed eye-glass. 

A real member of Parliament had kindly consented to 
make a speech upon the occasion . he was very silent down 
in Westminster . and it was evidently a very clever speech, 
too, for nobody could understand it, and the member's wife, 
the most beautiful lady little Ann had ever seen in her life, 
whose bonnet was a thing of a fairy tale, gave away the 
prizes, and smiled an angel's smile upon the shambling boys 



1 6 A London Romance. 

and girls who blundered up the platform steps when their 
names were called. 

Many names were called that afternoon, and the distribu- 
tion, with its attendant speeches, occupied several hours, so 
that it fell out that, by the time the prize for English history 
had to be distributed, Mrs. Whitaker was not a little irritable 
and hot. But now came the great event on which the odds 
had been laid heavily, these three weeks past, among the 
knowing ones in the court. 

As the member of Parliament took the prize in his hand 
both boys half rose up on their seats, and their hearts 
bumped violently under their little waistcoats. The gentle- 
man reading the names was, like some others among the 
audience, a little weary of the repetition of the ceremony so 
often recurring, and he read, carelessly, in not too distinct a 
tone, from the paper in his hand. But the name reached 
the eager ears listening for it, and it was William Bradshaw, 
followed by thunders of applause from the hands of Mr. 
Wapshot and his flock and good Mrs. Whitaker's umbrella's 
nozzle. 

Yes, it was William Bradshaw who was called to glory, 
and who, with a flush of triumph on his handsome face, 
arose in a flutter and a tremble, and stepped briskly up the 
steps to where the beautiful lady awaited his coming with a 
sweet smile, a crimson-bound book, and a wreath of laurel. 
Oh, glorious victory, and just reward of industry! In all his 
career of goodness, he had never felt half as good a boy as 
he felt now, when the smile of conscious excellence curled 
his lip, and he could hardly believe it possible that he had 
ever, in his secret heart, quaked with fear, and felt by no 
means so sure of himself as Mr. Wapshot and his flock felt 
sure of him. A great victory was it, and a proud and happy 
moment, which you would not, surely, have dimmed by 
thrusting upon his notice the vision of that other, who sat, 
silent and motionless, among the applauding crowd. Does 
the triumphant general in the crowning moment of victory 
bestow a thought on the mangled wreck of humanity left 
upon the battle-field ? No recollection of Jimmy Jarman's 
pitiful defeat marred William's happiness, as he strode on- 
wards, amidst loud acclamations, whilst the sea of faces 
around seemed to dazzle and bewilder him. 

But, as he approached the table, as he stretched out his 
hand to grasp the coveted prize, a horrible shadow arose 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 1 7 

between him and it, and horrible words thrilled through his 
heart, which, in the first bitter disappointment, seemed sud- 
denly to stop beating. 

"A mistake," one of the tutors was heard to say to the 
member of Parliament ; and the member of Parliament, in 
a fluster again, consulted the list, and stammered and flushed 
and said, "Yes, yes, to be sure . a mistake, to be sure . 
bless me, I mistook the line. Certainly; I see . it is William 
Bradshaw who is honourably mentioned. A very good boy, 
Bradshaw. A very good boy, and, next time, I dare say 
he'll get it. Hum, ah, yes, James Jarman ! Step this way, 
James Jarman. This is James Jarman, is it ? Then here's 
your prize for English history." 

It was, then, James Jarman's prize after all ! Oh, hor- 
rible disappointment ! Oh, endless steps, so difficult to 
descend ! Oh awful sea of blank faces ! Is there no outer 
darkness, no hole or corner, into which a poor, disappointed, 
good boy can creep and hide himself? 





CHAPTER IV 

j|HERE were certain important ceremonies to be 
gone through before James Jarman was at liberty 
to leave the platform and return to his friends, 
with his prize in his hand. 

The schoolmaster wished to say a few words to him. The 
reverend gentleman was desirous of adding a few more, and 
the member of Parliament, not yet by any means too certain 
as to which was the right boy, after all, said what he had to 
say to altogether a wrong boy, who was moved to tears by 
his exhortation. 

The prize for English history was the last to be given 
away, and the hall was fast emptying of its hot and weary 
audience. When James reached the place where he had 
left Mrs. Whitaker and little Ann, he found it vacant. In 
the distance he caught a glimpse of Mr. Wapshot looking 
warm and angry, and conversing, earnestly, with one of the 
elders of his church, an austere cheesemonger of Little 
Pannikin Street, who had, also, looked somewhat shyly upon 
the youthful sage, in consequence of his novel-reading pro- 
pensities. Upon any other occasion, James would not have 
dared to address either of these great persons, but, breath- 
less and excited, he now burst in upon them with an "Oh, 
Sir, if you please, Sir.'' 

" Well, James," replied Mr. Wapshot, in freezing tones. 

" I . I, Sir was going to ask, Sir " 

'.Well, James." 

" I beg pardon, Sir, but I've got the prize, and . and " 

" Well, James." 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 1 9 

Colder than ever, was the tone of this last rejoinder of his 
unsympathising auditor, and the half-smiling, half-crying 
look which Jimmy's face had worn whilst speaking, gave 
place to a dismal blankness. 

"I . I wanted my aunt, Sir. I beg your pardon, Sir, 
I. I " 

"I am not your aunt, James Jarman," said the shepherd ; 
and then, he and his companion continued to stare hard at 
the luckless sage, until, with a supreme effort, like that of a 
bird striving against the fascination of a snake, he wrenched 
himself, as it were, out of the depressing presence, and hurried 
from the building. 

But his friends were nowhere to be seen : they had 
missed him, probably, and gone home. He felt very much 
disappointed that they had not waited for him, but, still, 
he was sure it was an accident, and he set off, at a brisk 
pace, for Stonywold Court, expecting to overtake them by 
the way. 

Of course, it must have been an accident, he argued with 
himself. Of course it must, and he would be received with 
open arms when he reached home. The odds before 
alluded to, of course, had not been laid against him in his 
presence, nor his failure prophesied, by Mr. Wapshot and his 
flock, to his face. Yet, somehow, he had, long ago, arrived 
at a faint glimmering of the truth. He was not the favourite. 

He felt sure of that, but the fight had been a fair fight, 
and they must praise him, since he had been victorious. 
Mr. Whitaker would praise him, he was sure, if Mrs. 
Whitaker did not ; or if neither his uncle nor his aunt 
awarded him a kind word, there was one whose approbation 
he valued much more than theirs. Anyhow, Little Ann 
would be glad ; but, after all, when he came to think of it, 
all must rejoice at his success. 

At least, as William had not got the prize, it was much 
better that he should have gained it than that it should have 
been carried off by some strange boy, some outsider not 
mentioned in the betting. 

All the afternoon the sun had been pouring down upon 
the hot streets. As he turned his face towards home,, how- 
ever, the sky seemed to him to become, suddenly, over- 
cast. There was a cold gray shadow in Stonywold Court, 
and, somehow, a chill crept up to his heart, as he came 
within sight of the shop window. Involuntarily he slackened 



20 A London Romance. 

his pace and presently paused, irresolutely, upon the very 
threshold. 

As he did so, William's voice fell upon his ear : the good 
boy was blubbering aloud, as well he might, at his sad dis- 
appointment. 

"It wasn't fair," the poor boy whimpered piteously ; "I 
say it wasn't fair ; they'd no right to give it to that fool, they 
hadn't." 

" No more they had, my dear,'' said Mrs. Whitaker, con- 
solingly ; " but worst luck, they did; so don't you fret your- 
self no more about it." 

" Oh ! how you talk, aunt,'' replied William, naturally 
smarting under a sense of injury, "just as if I could help 
being in a rage to be treated so unfair." 

" It's a great shame, William," cried Mrs. Whitaker, indig- 
nantly, " and I don't mind who hears me say so." 

Though she little thought who did hear her, worthy 
soul. 

" Don't cry any more, Billy, dear," then said a gentle 
little voice, which, it was very evident, belonged to a little 
girl shedding sympathetic tears ; " don't cry about it, Billy ; 
for you know we all love you, ever so much better than it 
you had half-a-dozen of them nasty prizes." 

" Oh, don't you go on about my crying, Miss Wiseacre," 
retorted William, who surely had good reason to cry, and so, 
no wonder he could not be very just. " What do girls 
know about what a fellow feels when he's done out of his 
due?" 

" I am sure I feel for you very much, Billy, dear." 

" You're just as glad that James has got it." 

" I'm not so glad, I'm sure," replied little Ann through 
her sobs, and, perhaps, she to some extent lost sight of the 
truth in this passionate outburst. " You are very, very un- 
kind to say so, for you know I love you a hundred times 
more than him, and I'm very sorry he has got the prize, 
I am." 

So they were all sorry. Jem himself began to feel any- 
thing but rejoiced at his success. But he had got it, never- 
theless, and could not unget it again, and, so, what was to 
be done ? There the matter ended . so far. 
! But, what next ? What ought he to do ? He still stood 
close outside the door, leaning his arm against the doorpost 
and resting his head upon it. A strange confusion of feel- 



In a Court Behind the Ptay house. 2 1 

ings agitated his breast, and his eyes were filled with blinding 
tears. 

Presently, a movement within the shop startled him. He 
felt that he could not bear to speak to anyone just at that 
moment, and he started back, as though he had received a 
blow ; then ran, with all the speed he was capable of, out of 
the court. 

It came on, at this juncture, to pour with rain . or it had 
been raining for some time past, he was not certain which 
. but he kept running on instead of seeking a shelter, so 
that when, at last, he stopped for want of breath, his clothes 
were wet through. Then he had only got as far as Little 
Pannikin Street, and he could not rest there. 

He must run far away to some place where no one would 
be likely to find him. He was scared, out of his life, lest 
somebody should see him in this state of agitation. He 
never wanted to see any of them any more. They, none of 
them, wanted him. No one cared what became of him. 
He was in the way. He had no place in the world. He 
would be better out of it. 

He kept on running as long as he could ; but such a 
poor, weak wisp of humanity was not likely to do so very 
long. Then, he crouched in a doorway until he shivered 
with cold, and set off again, walking i fast to keep himself 
warm. Thus he wandered, far away from the court ; but, 
as twilight set in, he once more turned his face towards 
home. 

It was pitch-dark when he arrived, at last ; and he heard 
the sound of all their voices in the parlour, behind the 
shop. 

" They're having supper," he said, as the rattling of 
crockery reached his ear. " I'm dreadfully hungry ; but I 
don't care. I won't eat their food, any more." 

Of a sudden, the shop door opened. Jimmy shrank back, 
into the darkness. Mrs. Whitaker had come out to look for 
him, and she peered up and down the court, and shaded 
her eyes with her hand. "Whatever has come to that boy?" 
James heard her say ; and then, Mr. Whitaker's voice was 
heard, grumbling, within, and she closed the door again. 

Most of the doors in the court were closed, it being supper- 
time and the night chilly. The windows were lighted up, 
and he could hear the laughter of women and children in a 
house near to him. 



22 A London Romance. 

Presently an organ-grinder, one of those who are such a 
nuisance to studious people, working late, to make up half- 
pence enough for his night's food and shelter, came down 
Blue Peter Passage, bringing with him what seemed to the 
sorrowing boy a sweet melody, tender and thrilling ; listen- 
ing to which, his heart laboured painfully, and he burst into 
a flood of tears. A costermonger's family, being of another 
way of thinking, the stop was changed at their desire, and 
the last new music-hall melody jingled, briskly, whilst some 
ragged brats kept step to the tune. 

Over against the pump, where his white face was hidden 
in deep shadow, the miserable child sobbed as though his 
heart would break, and, in a wild and impotent frenzy of 
grief, called upon God to take away a life which was a misery 
to him. 

But supper being by this time over, many of the court 
folk came to their doors, and Jimmy, fearful of being seen, 
crept up the passage and ran away again. As he turned 
the corner, something hard in his coat-pocket struck against 
his hand, and he recollected that he was still carrying about 
the prize book which was the cause of all his wretchedness. 
In a fury he now dragged it out, and tore from it the white 
paper covering. 

" I won't take that away,'' he said. " They can have it if 
they want it. I wish I'd never seen it. There ! " 

With all his might, as he spoke, he dashed it down upon 
the ground, and raised his foot to trample on it, when a voice 
in his ear stopped him. 

"Why, whativer are you a doin' on ? And aint there just 
been a hullybaloo along on you neither." 

It was Mrs. Praddles's little boy who spoke, and who, 
now, stooped to pick up the book. "What a shame ! " he 
said, " to shy about a thing that aways." 

"Bob," said Jimmy Jarman, taking hold of his arm, 
" don't you say you've seen me. At least . stop. I'll tell 
you what you shall do. Will you do it ? " 

"What is it?" 

" Here's a penny, Bob. I haven't any more, but here's a 
magnet as well . a capital one, worth ever so much. You 
shall have them both if you do what I want you." 

" It aint anything to get me into a row, is it ? " 

" No, no ; it is only to take that book to my cousin Ann, 
and to give it her from me, and to say I don't want to keep 



/// a Court Behind the Play house. 23 

it away from William if she thinks he ought to have it, and 
that I'm going away, myself, for ever, and they'll never hear 
of me any more, and I . I " 

But he broke down here and burst out crying, and then, 
without finishing the sentence, ran away, leaving Mrs. 
Praddles's little boy, from round the corner, in blank amaze- 
ment. 

"Well, I'm blowed ! " said Mrs. Praddles's little boy, and 
perhaps he was ; but, henceforth, this history does not con- 
cern itself with his welfare. 




CHAPTER V. 




j]T is one thing to run away, and another to keep it 
up. Before now, loving couples have made a 
runaway match of it, and run all the way to the 
next street, where they took furnished lodgings, 
and waited, hopefully, until the remorseless relations could 
be pacified ; and there is on record a case of elopement in 
which the elopers were caught and brought back because 
the bridegroom, to save expense, took a twopenny omnibus 
to the railway station instead of chartering a Hansom. 

Our young friend ran away, as hard as he could, deter- 
mined to put the width of the world between him and his 
enemies ; only, when his wind failed him, he was compelled 
to slacken his pace, and, before he had even half-traversed 
the width of London, he was so faint and weary, with the 
day's excitement and exertion, that he was fain to take a 
long rest upon a doorstep, down a lonely City lane. 

He had no idea of going anywhere in particular, and no 
fixed plans for the future. One or two wild schemes had 
crossed his brain, one of which was to go back at mid- 
night, creep in at the window, and shoot his rival dead, 
whilst he slept ; but the great drawback to this plan was 
that he had not got a pistol, and no other sort of weapon 
suited his fancy. 

Then, the idea occurred to him of posting a letter to 
Mr. Whitaker to say that he had drowned himself, and that 
his last prayer was that Heaven might forgive his persecu- 
tors, only he had got neither pencil nor paper, and no money 
to buy them. Therefore, both these desperate deeds were 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 2 5 

abandoned, and, for the present, he took a nap upon a door- 
step. 

The lane was one of those running down to the river, 
near London Bridge, upon the north side of the Thames, 
and it was at this hour very still and lonely. The heavy 
boots of a far-off policeman, growing fainter and fainter as 
he went upon his way, seemed to make the silence he left 
behind him, when he at last became inaudible, quite death- 
like. 

It was a narrow, crooked lane, on either side of which 
were high warehouses, dark and silent, blocking out light 
and air. Afar off, the boy fancied that he could detect the 
sound of the sluggish water, washing against the slimy stone- 
work of the quay, which he had noticed, some twenty yards 
from where he sat. 

Almost opposite to him, was one of those quaint, old city 
churchyards, pinched in betwixt two gaunt brick buildings ; 
and the moonlight, stealing in through the gap, gave a 
ghostly shape to a dilapidated tombstone which the boy 
could catch a glimpse of between the rusty iron railings, 
changing a squat urn into a demon's head, and the handles 
into huge ears. 

So very sail and dreary was the scene, that Jimmy Jar- 
man, having rested himself, began to grow rather timid, 
and was half inclined to continue his running, when the 
door behind him opened suddenly, and some one coming 
out fell over him, exactly as the shopman does in a panto- 
mime, when the clown knocks at the door and lies down in 
front of it, to trip him up. 

The person whose acquaintance he made, under these 
somewhat unfavourable circumstances, was not very long in 
improving it, by slapping Jimmy's head. Seemingly, finding 
solace in this occupation for his own bruised bones, he 
slapped it once more, and then, clutching its owner by the 
collar, shook him till his teeth chattered again, and he, 
himself, was out of breath, when he paused, and surveyed 
Jimmy distrustfully in the gaslight. 

By a certain unsteadiness in his speech, when he spoke, 
and in his legs, when he tried to stand, it was easily to be 
seen that James's assailant was the worse for strong liquor. 
He was an old man with silvery locks, and would have 
been venerable only that his purple nose rather spoilt him. 
He was, also, an unsavory old man, with such damp and 



2 6 A London Romance. 

mouldy raiment . all a long way off fitting him, . that an 
imaginative person might almost have fancied that he 
fished for drowned men in the Thames, and appropriated 
their wardrobe. 

Setting himself straight, now, after his late exertion, he 
seemed to wrench himself round in his clothes, so as to get 
his waistcoat buttons in a line with his chin. 

" That'll teach you," said the old man, when, at last, he 
had breath enough to speak. " Don't try it on again ! " 

" What have I done to you ? " gasped Jimmy, smarting 
under something more than a sense of injury. " It wasn't 
my fault ! " 

" Never you mind whose fault it was," retorted the old 
man, with a dignity which a hiccup seriously interfered with. 
" Don't do it no more, that's what I advise you, and don't 
tell none of your lies to them as is old enough to be your 
father." 

As James Jarman was not anxious to incur another visita- 
tion from the old man's fist, he attempted no further re- 
monstrance, but mentally prayed that his assailant would 
go away. He, however, showed no sign of that being his 
intention, for he was still standing there, feeling in his 
pockets. 

" I know I had a sixpence somewheres,' he said, in a re- 
flective tone. " I'm certain I had a sixpence, . if it had 
been a three-penny-bit, . but it couldn't be that . unless I 
changed it ; and if I did change it, I don't remember, and 
as I don't remember, perhaps I spent it at the same time. 
Anyhow, I'm sure I did have sixpence ! " 

He fixed Jimmy with a watery eye as he thus solilo- 
quised, and the boy began to be very much afraid that he 
would be called upon to supply the loss. 

" That's all my luck, that is," continued the old man pre- 
sently. '. I tumbles down steps as nobody else's luck 
would stick in the way. I tumbles over ragged wagabones, 
as is only born to break the heads of honest coves as un- 
lucky as me. Nobody but had my luck would be servant 
to sich a master as Hankershanks, when it's me instead 
should have the land and houses myself that Hankershanks 
has got this moment in Bloomsbury Square. But listen to 
me " 

In throwing himself into an attitude more suitable to the 
coming revelation the old man lost his balance, and sat 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 2 7 

down in the gutter. When he had picked himself up 
again, he seemed to have forgotten all about his lost six- 
pence and his ill luck, and, shaking his fist at Jimmy, who 
was watching him in fear and trembling, he struggled up 
the street, now and again cannoning off the wall against a 
street lamp, and cannoning back again, until, finally, he 
pocketed himself, as it were, round the corner. 

When he was clean gone, the bov sat down again to rub 
himself and rearrange his collar and neckerchief, which the 
old man had torn and crumpled. He did not intend to 
stay very long, though, for fear his late assailant should 
return and again belabour him, and was rising to go when 
something lying on the pavement caught his eye. He 
stooped, and picked it up ; it was the sixpence the un- 
lucky old man had dropped. 

Jimmy Jarman stood undecided. He had some notion 
of throwing the money down again and walking away. He 
never dreamt of appropriating it. Should he wait for a 
time, and see if the old man returned, and give it to him ? 

His time was his own. As he was going nowhere in 
particular, it could not much matter when he got there. 
He therefore, once again, took up [his position on the door- 
step, and waited, patiently. He was very weary, and closed 
his eyes for what he intended should be five minutes, and 
fell asleep. He slept nearly a couple of hours, and, when he 
awoke, immediately began to cough. 

He had been dreaming that the chimney was smoking at 
home, and now he was awake the smoke was still there. 
But it was not from a chimney. It came, on the contrary, 
through the crevices of the door against which he was 
leaning. The door, too, felt very hot, and beneath it shone 
a bright light. 

Jimmy got up, and ran out into the road to look up at 
the windows with a frightened face. Then, ran back to the 
door again, and, this time, could distinctly hear the crack- 
ling of wood and the roaring of flames within. Almost at 
the same moment, the old man came back, much more un- 
steady than he had gone away, and Jimmy, in a horrified 
voice, told him that the house was on fire. 

" The housh-a-fire ? " the old man muttered, indistinctly, 
pressing his trembling hand to his muddled head and 
gazing around him in bewilderment. But then, the truth 
dawning on him, all at once, he seemed to sober himself, as 



28 A London Romance. 

though by magic, and clutching Jimmy by the throat, 
pinned him panting against the wall. 

" You, you have done this. You have set it alight," he 
said in a hoarse whisper. " You've done it to ruin me!" 

" It's not true," replied the boy, half choked. " Don't 
strangle me. I tell you I didn't do it ! " 

" Why are you lurking about then ? Why are you hang- 
ing round the place ? " 

" I found the money you dropped, and stopped to give it 
to you. Let me go and fetch some help. See, the flames 
have got into the floor above." 

" No ! no ! Stop where you are. Be still, or I'll twist 
your young life out of vou. Be still. We must get away. 
They'll say I did it, else." 

" Let me go for help, or the house will be burnt down. 
Let me fetch the gentleman you spoke of from Bloomsbury 
Square." 

" What, Hankershanks ? No . yes. Perhaps that will be 
best. But see here ; don't say you saw me leave the place 
two hours ago. I'll unlock the door, and say I was asleep 
in bed when the fire broke out. Come ! do you swear to 
Heaven you won't tell what you saw ? Swear, or I'll throttle 
you now." 

Indeed, it seemed as though the old man had concluded 
that such a course would, perhaps, be the best, for his 
fingers tightened more and more in the boy's twisted necker- 
chief, and Jimmy Jarman, with the blood rushing in a torrent 
to his head, began to feel his senses were leaving him. 




CHAPTER VI. 

j]EAVE go of me, will you? Leave go of me!" 
gasped the boy, struggling in wild terror, 
and then, breaking loose from the old man's 
clutches, he shrieked out, " Fire ! " and 
" Murder ! " with all the strength of his lungs. 

In freeing himself he lost his balance and fell heavily 
to the ground, but next moment he was on his feet again, 
and the next running, at full speed, up the crooked lane, 
awakening a hundred echoes in its lonely houses by his 
piercing cries. 

He ran along until he reached a leading thoroughfare, 
where there was still much traffic, and there, breathless 
and bewildered, he began to ask his way to Bloomsbury 
Square. Bloomsbury Square was a long way off, and the 
road to it difficult to find, for he was too confused to re- 
recollect the directions which passengers gave him, and had, 
over and over again, to retrace his steps. 

When, at last, he reached his destination, there was a still 
more difficult task to perform, which was to find Mr. 
Hankershanks's house, the number of which he had neglected 
to enquire. He asked everybody he met. A policeman 
on duty, the waterman at a cab-stand close by, the loiterers 
in the street. 

It was, at last, from a doctor who by chance came out of 
his house, that he obtained the desired information ; and 
presently was pulling with all his might at Mr. Hanker- 
shanks's bell. a harsh, jangling bell, which sounded very 
loudly, as though there were no furniture in Mr. Hanker- 
shanks's dwelling. 



30 A London Romance. 

Repeated ringing brought, at length, a head in a nightcap 
to one of the upper windows, from which a voice, as harsh 
as the bell and, moreover, slightly cracked, demanded what 
the ringer meant by making such a disturbance. 

"Is this Mr. Hankershanks's ?" asked Jimmy Jarman. 

" What if it is ? " retorted the man in the nightcap. 

" I want to see him, if it is." 

" I won't see anybody to-night. Go away ! " 

" It's very important, Sir ! " 

" I don't care what it is. I'm not well. I'm out. I'm 
gone to bed. Call again to-morrow." 

" To-morrow, Sir, will be too late. It's your house on 
fire, Sir, in the City, and I should think it's nearly burnt 
down by this time." 

The head at the window popped in so suddenly upon 
receipt of this alarming intelligence, that, in the action, the 
nightcap, scraped off by the frame of the lower sash, fell 
down into the street. There followed a moment's silence 
after this, and, then, a scuttering sound, as though some 
four-footed animal were descending the stairs, but which, 
instead, proceeded from Mr. Hankershanks's slippers, very 
much too large for him. 

A very haggard, hard-featured old man, in a dirty dress- 
ing-gown, carrying a flaring candle, opened the door, 
stretched forth a thin arm, grasped Jimmy by the collar, 
dragged him inside the house, slammed-to the door, and 
pinned him up against the wall. 

"You atrocious young scoundrel, what's these lies you've 
been telling me ? " 

" It's the truth, Sir," said Jimmy, who, this evening, 
seemed, in all conscience, to have quite enough to do to tell 
it and take the consequences. " I've run all the way, Sir, 
and it was blazing when I left." 

" You'll be blazing too, you young villain, before you're 
done with," said the old gentleman. "Who are you, and 
who sent you, and who did it ? But never mind, hold your 
tongue, and don't waste any more time. Come up stairs 
with me while I get on my clothes. I sha'n't lose sight of 
you, you young miscreant, till I know the truth." 

Dragging Jimmy by the collar, as he might have dragged 
a large carpet-bag, and bumping him unmercifully by the 
way, the old gentleman mounted the bare stairs to an upper 
story, and entered an apartment which appeared to serve as 



Iii a Court Behind the Playhouse. 3 1 

bed and sitting-room. There, having threatened his life 
with a bootjack, the old gentleman stood Jimmy in a corner 
whilst he dressed himself; and then collaring him once 
more in the carpet-bag fashion, hauled him down stairs to 
the street, where he hailed a passing cab. 

They drove rapidly enough through the empty streets, 
until they almost reached the top of the lane down which 
Mr. Hankershanks's warehouse was situated, and there a 
great crowd stopped the way . a great scrambling, jostling 
assemblage of greasy rags and patches, some of the out- 
pourings of the back slums and alleys lying hidden away 
behind the merchant princes' premises . an unknown, un- 
seen world of squalor, the extent of which could only be 
guessed at upon such occasions as the present. 

A lurid glare in the sky lighted up the little City church 
and the grim churchyard, with its gaunt white stones, and 
its neglected mounds, on which the long weedy grass, 
" the uncut hair of graves," bristled and quivered in the 
scorching heat. The fire sparkled in the black windows of 
the high warehouses. The mob swaying to and fro, but 
more like the writhing of snakes than the roll of an 
angry sea, blocked up the street at either end . a dense, 
dingy mass, with a white fringe of upturned faces; until, 
with a thundering tramp and clatter and gleam and glitter, 
the fire-engines scattered the people, right and left, like chaff 
before the wind. 

An awfully strange and terrible night, this, to the tremb- 
ling boy, whom the gentleman, still holding in custody, had 
dragged to the spot . a horrible dream made up of flames, 
shouts, screams, deafening noise and choking heat . a score 
of conflicting terrors ; foremost, and above all others the 
most terrible, the vision of an old man bare-headed and 
with torn clothes and naked breast, alternately imploring 
mercy and threatening vengeance. He was released, at 
last, from Hankershanks's clutches, and was, now, in the 
front ranks of the crowd, driven backwards and forwards, 
and thrown from side to side like a cork in a tempest, till, 
all at once, there was a loud cry of " Make way ! make 
way ! " and another engine, with vengeful gleaming eyes, 
came thundering on, and then a sudden rush, a shriek, and 
he was dashed to the ground, . the world went out and all 
was blank and dark. 

"A boy, Sir, run over, Sir." 



32 A London Romance. 

" What boy ? " 

" A blackguard boy, Sir, please Sir." 

A very muddy boy, a ragged and vagabond boy, evi- 
dently. But no ; on inspection, a boy with some signs of 
respectability, with a clean shirt, and boots with some soles 
and heels to them. 

" I know the fellow," said Mr. Hankershanks. "Is he 
much hurt ? " 

"If you know his friends," said a young man who was 
kneeling by the boy's side feeling his pulse, and who re- 
moved a meerschaum pipe from his mouth to make the 
reply, " if you know his friends they had better be sent for. 
He's got his marching orders." 

It was not, however, Jimmy's fate to receive his death- 
blow thus, as his mother had hers before him. They carried 
him to the hospital, where, for many days to come, he 
hovered 'twixt life and death. 

" Have I been very ill, Ma'am ? " he asked, one morning, 
of the hospital nurse, who came to his bedside. 

" Yes ; but you're not well yet, and you mustn't talk." 

" No, Ma'am, I only wanted to know, please, how long 
I've been here." 

"A week." 

"Has Ann . has anybody been to see'me, Ma'am?" 

" No. Be quiet." 

But there was no need to tell him this. He had no other 
questions to ask. She had not been to see him. They did not 
care what became of him. Perhaps they thought he was 
dead, and they were glad of it. Why was he not dead ? 

He turned his face round on the pillow, so that the nurse 
might not see the tears in his eyes, and he bit his lips to 
smother his sobs. Poor little wretch ! life was very hard with 
him just now. 



CHAPTER VII. 




NE day, a gray-haired old gentleman, hard-featured, 
and of a sour and discontented aspect, came 
through Little Pannikin Street, past the Hilarious 
Hysena, up Blue Peter Passage, into Stonywold 
Court, and paused at its entrance to enquire for Mrs, 
Whitaker's shop. 

The infant population, arising as it were as one child, 
volunteered shrill information profusely, and presently he 
found himself in Mrs. Whitaker's shop, where he knocked 
with his knuckles upon the counter. 

Coming forth, in answer to this summons, with that dis- 
couraging expression of countenance with which it was her 
habit to meet enquiries for new publications she had not 
" taken up," the good lady found herself facing Mr. Hanker- 
shanks, of Hankershanks Bros. 

" Have you a nephew of the name of James Jarman ? " 

" I had." 

" What has become of him ? " 

" He was a very bad boy, and ran away." 

"He is dead, perhaps." 

" I hope not ; but we don't know where he's got to." 

" I suppose you have taken some trouble to find out." 

Upon this, Mrs. Whitaker described at length how she 
had run about asking, here and there and everywhere, and 
how other persons had run about, also, and how no clue 
could be obtained to the truant's whereabouts, and how it 
was supposed he had in all probability gone to sea, a 
course of conduct common with bad boys, under like cir- 
3 



34 A London Romance. 

cumstances. Hankershanks listened, impatiently, and at 
last interrupted with . 

" No matter what you did. The boy's alive, you'll be 
glad to hear, though it is a miracle he has lived through it." 

Mrs. Whitaker was very glad, she said, but had no time 
to ask particulars respecting James's illness, having, herself, 
so many to give regarding her efforts to find him. Inter- 
rupting again, more impatiently, Mr. Hankershanks went 
on to say that James Jarman had done him a service, and 
he was willing to testify his gratitude by making the family 
some return. 

" I employ a good many hands," he said, " in my ware- 
house. I could give a sharp young fellow a good chance, 
if he chose to stick to his work. I don't care to be in any 
one's debt. I owe your family one, and I'd like to pay it 
this way." 

Mrs. Whitaker received the offer with a certain amount 
of suspicion, which, perhaps, was not unnatural ; for one 
doesn't look for this eagerness on the part of debtors to 
discharge their liabilities, unasked. But when, at length, 
she was assured of the sincerity of his professions, an idea 
occurred to her. 

Here was the opportunity she had long been looking for, 
the opportunity of providing for William genteelly. 

" I have a second nephew, Sir," she said. " A really 
good boy, most studious, with fixed religious principles. If 
you were to ask Mr. Wapshot " 

" But why not this other fellow ? " said Mr. Hankershanks 
in a pig-headed way. 

" It is very kind of you, Sir, but William . I arn sure if 
you were to see Mr. Wapshot." 

" Hang Mr. Wapshot ! Why shouldn't I take the other 
fellow ? " 

When Sam Whitaker came in from the theatre, he had 
the case put to him by his good lady, and, at a glance, saw 
what ought to be. 

" If William had a berth in such a house with a chance 
of rising, he would rise. There would be no keeping a boy 
like that down. Most likely he'd come to be a partner in 
course of time . more than likely." 

But yet, Hankershanks, more pig-headed than ever, kept 
on singing the same old song, " Why not the other fellow ? " 



In a Court Behind the Playhouse. 35 

William Bradshaw was a son of a sister of Mrs. Whitaker's, 
who had married unluckily, and whom, Mrs. Whitaker had 
always insisted, it was the very least Samuel could do to 
provide for, under the circumstances ; more especially as he 
already provided for James, who had no claim on him. 
James Jarman was the son of Samuel's sister, but this sister 
had not exactly married unluckily, not, indeed, having 
married at all; only wished to very much, and was rather 
too confiding. 

When Hankershanks came to hear the history of James 
Jarman's mother's death, he found it was in this wise, . 
commonplace enough, in all conscience, a sort of death, in- 
deed, which is somewhat hackneyed in story-books, where 
it happens, very frequently, to the mothers of heroes : 

A winter's night. A pale and ragged woman, wandering, 
footsore and famished . a ragged woman, weary of strug- 
gling to live, weary of living, weary of herself and the world 
that had been so hard on her, . heart-broken, crushed, and 
spiritless. Not hungry, only bitterly cold, and wretched, 
hopeless and sick unto death. 

Such a wanderer, houseless for eight long days and 
nights, creeping forth, upon the ninth day, from some back 
slum, where she had dozed away the last few hours of day, 
mingled with the busy crowd in a great thoroughfare. 

It was, then, a young lord's cabriolet . so runs the legend 
. but, perhaps, the title was thrown in for effect, for such 
things are done sometimes, even by the most trustworthy 
historians . it was at any rate a cabriolet, which, in an un- 
lucky moment, swept, like a whirlwind, round a corner, and, 
bearing down upon her, before she had time to arouse her- 
self sufficiently from her walking dream, to decide which 
way she ought to run, hurled her bloody and senseless in 
the mud, where she lay until they picked her up, a bundle 
of greasy rags with a ghastly face and a naked arm, long 
and fleshless, showing very white in the gaslight. Then it 
was . so runs the legend . a doctor's little boy carrying a 
basket with, if you will, the anxiously-expected mixture for 
a baby in convulsions, who saw it done, and who with the 
Misses Tag and Rag and Masters Bobtail whom the 
accident soon collected, followed the policemen carrying 
the wounded woman on a shutter to the station-house, and 
stood, awestruck, without the dread portal, banged to in 
their faces. 

3.2 



36 A London Romance. 

It was Hardstaff, of the double X division, who picked 
her up, and who, with that wondrous faculty of seeing to 
the bottom of things, with which policemen alone are 
gifted, pronounced her, off-hand, to be intoxicated, and 
shook her well and bade her bear in mind that he would 
not put up with any of her nonsense. 

It was the inspector, taking down the night charges that 
evening, who, though agreeing with Mr. Hardstaff that it 
was decidedly " a case of drunk," thought that it might, 
also, be a case of broken bones, and so, humanely, sent the 
ragged creature to the hospital. 

It was Jack Rabid, an operative " on the strike,' - who 
said he thought the whole affair was monstrous, and asked 
whether this was a Christian country, and who was, very 
properly, moved on and warned by Mr. Hardstaff that his 
character was well-known to the civil executive, and that he 
had better mind what he was up to. 

Lastly, it was the mother of the hero of this book . her- 
self the heroine of one of those stale old stories of dis- 
grace, dishonour, and desertion, by far too stale a story to 
be here related . who, dying that night in a London hospital, 
left behind a poor, sickly little wretch, with no right to its 
father's name . a miserable weakling who, had it pleased 
God to take him away then, would never have been missed 
by living soul. But it was not to be, and he lived . to what 
end ? 



II. 



DOWN A CROOKED LANE. 



CHAPTER I. 




XCEPT that it was a noisy business, and a hot and 
dusty business, somewhat too stifling and choky, 
and with a tendency to weaken lungs and whiten 
faces, it matters litde to the reader or writer of 
this history what Hankershanks's business was. Whatever 
it might have been, however, it was, seemingly, of a character 
necessitating unreasonably early hours in the morning and 
late hours at night . vast quantities of dust and a large 
amount of noise and confusion. 

The hirelings at Hankershanks's had, at all seasons, a hot 
and jaded air, and were always in a hurry. At any time, 
during business hours, overheated men were to be seen run- 
ning, feverishly, in and out of Hankershanks's premises, and 
up and down the lane leading thereto, for the most part 
mopping their heads as they went : and though, elsewhere, 
other fellows might be said to put their whole souls into 
their employer's business, souls and heels too were worn 
out in the exhaustive service of the house of Hanker- 
shanks. 

A sort of intensity of expression was, also, a peculiarity of 
the persons in this employment, which, notably, increased 
under the eye of Hankershanks himself, whose presence 
indeed imparted an impulse of uncommon energy to every 
one within reach of his eye. 

It was not a place, however, where much shirking wes 



38 A London Romance. 

practicable, under any circumstances. There was not the 
ghost of a chance of a surreptitious pipe round any corner on 
the premises ; for, round every corner, somebody was always 
coming full-drive, wiping his head as he came. 

When the midsummer's sun was hottest in the straggling 
lane without . in which animate nature was represented by 
a shrivelled ancient, dozing in the porch of the little church, 
and a vagabond dog, as fast asleep upon the flagstones in 
front of it as the fates and the flies Avould permit . the house 
of Hankershanks was hard at it. 

In the drowsy afternoon-time . when the scene, riverwards, 
with its murky waters creeping, sluggishly, past the moss- 
grown stones of the disused landing-place, the moored 
lighters with deserted decks, the black, bubbling mud, 
stretching far out where the tide had left it, looked at its 
deadly-liveliest . the house of Hankershanks was harder at 
it still. 

Hard at it, as ever, throughout the livelong day, banging 
and clanging, and bumping and thumping, far away into the 
stilly night, long after the other warehouses down the crooked 
City lane had put their shutters up, and sent their work-folks 
home to the four quarters of the town. 

Hard at it, often enough, for some time beyond the 
nominal hour for closing, till, in fact, it pleased the all- 
powerful Hankershanks himself to knock off work and go 
his way, when, his back being turned, the strained muscles 
slackened instantaneously, the expression of interest faded 
away, and, with something of a guilty, hang-dog look about 
them, the Hankershanks creatures crawled homewards, 
dejectedly. 

But rare rollicking dogs were some of these at the bars of 
far-away suburban " pubs ; " crack hands at pool, knowing 
ones in the dry skittle ground, familiar "regulars" in the 
"body of the hall," constant visitors, at half price, to the pit 
of the theatre, indefatigable disciples of Terpsichore at the 
casino. Up to a thing or two were these. wide-awake, " all 
there," "no green about them ! " who saw a deal of life on 
reasonable terms, and would have gone the pace, fast and 
furiously, had not the scale of salary in the house of 
Hankershanks been of the lowest. 

Milder and more timid, another set of clerks taking their 
pleasure in less feverish pastimes . in the round game and 
rubber of domestic life . the cup of tea and the little music ; 



Down a Crooked Lane. 



39 



and there were rare instances, quoted as awful examples, 
where the utterly reckless among them had fallen in love, 
got married, and even gone as far as to have families, though 
not without some fear and trembling, we may reasonably 
suppose, of Hankershanks finding it out, and putting a stop 
to it. 




CHAPTER II. 




CERTAIN young gentleman in Mr. Hanker- 
shanks's office, one Frank Pickering by name, tall 
and slim, eighteen years of age, and the only son 
of a widow lady in the fancy goods line, was one 
of those who fell in love. after business hours, and took his 
fellow-clerk, James Jarman, into his confidence. 

It may not be necessary to fall in love, the cynical would 
have us believe ; but, having so fallen, the necessity for a 
confidant is imperative; and so Frank Pickering, casting 
his eyes around in search of a sympathetic soul, looked 
approvingly upon James's sad pale face, and one evening 
Jimmy became aware that commonplace creation was 
brightened by the presence of an Evelina. 

Upon Frank Pickering's way home . James was carried 
out of his way by the length of the communication, which 
he had not the courage to interrupt . certain disclosures of 
a fragmentary character were made to James Jarman re- 
specting Miss Evelina Hickson, which, James proving a 
good listener, were, upon future occasions, repeated ; par- 
taking, after a time, of the nature of a narrative that em- 
braced the minutest particulars (with the exact dates) of Mr. 
Pickering's first meeting with the loved one, during festivities 
in Mr. Hickson's front parlour, the plighting of their troth 
on the first-floor landing, their first quarrel on the kitchen 
stairs, and the reconciliation in the back garden. 

To the hypercritical these little details may seem poor 
and paltry, and the limited sphere of action indicated in this 
record of the course of Mr. Pickering's true love, lead the 



Down a Crooked Lane. 41 

supercilious to suppose that there is little of romantic in- 
cident, deep passion, or exalted heroism to follow ; but wait 
a while. 

From Mr. Pickering's description of her, James Jarman, 
unused to the flowery terms with which true love adorns its 
rhetoric, was prepared to find Frank's Evelina superlatively- 
beautiful, and burnt with impatience to behold her. Was 
she dark or fair ? he asked. 

" Oh, very dark," said Mr. Pickering, "with great black 
eyes and raven tresses." 

" Tall or short? " asked Jimmy. 

" Oh, very tall," answered Mr. Pickering, " and very 
cold." 

"Cold?" repeated Jimmy, with a vague notion of im- 
perfect circulation. 

" Cold and proud, I mean," continued Mr. Pickering, 
" very proud ! A splendid creature, and worthy of a prince. 
But it can never be." 

As, however, he did not clearly explain whether the im- 
possibility was his own marriage or the prince's, James, 
with some diffidence, questioned him upon the subject. 

" No, it cannot be ; her parents will not listen to it." 

" No ? " said Jimmy, interrogatively. 

" No, it will never happen with their consent, and 
without " 

" She would not run away ? " 

"She could not." 

" Couldn't she ? " 

" Of course she couldn't. Didn't I tell you she was an 
invalid, and generally lay on the sofa. It's something the 
matter with the spine." 

This something the matter with Evelina's spine proved a 
serious obstacle in the course of Frank Pickering's true love, 
for it rendered it almost impossible ever to obtain an interview 
with the young lady elsewhere than in the parlour contain- 
ing the sofa of which mention has been made, and in the pre- 
sence of one or both of Miss Hickson's parents, two or 
more sisters, and, occasionally, a distant relative or a neigh- 
bour dropped in to tea. 

At these times, too, it was customary for the other persons 
present to maintain a dead silence during Frank's visit ; for 
the most part, fixing their eyes upon him, and watching his 
every movement with a most embarrassing persistency. 



42 A London Romance. 

Chafing somewhat under this state of things, it not un- 
frequently happened that when Frank got a chance of 
spending half-an-hour alone with his Evelina, the priceless 
moments were wasted by the lovers in unprofitable bicker- 
ings- 

Indeed, it must be owned, by an unprejudiced third 
person, that Evelina was somewhat wayward and unreason- 
able, when the publicity of the interviews is considered, in 
expecting that Mr. Pickering should say many tender things 
to her. Nor, indeed, with fairness, could his powers of con- 
versation be fairly judged of under such circumstances ; but 
Evelina was most exacting. 

Thus, if for a moment he was silent, she would say, 
"What are you thinking of, Frank?" If for a moment 
he took up a book from the table, before he had well 
opened it she would ask, " What is it interests you so much ?" 
Or, again, " What ails you to-night ? " or, " Something must 
have happened," or, " Frank, you are keeping something 
from me." 

It was, therefore, in a measure, necessary that Mr. 
Pickering should be spasmodically lively during these 
visits ; though not too lively, either, as, in that case, his 
levity was apt to have a contrary effect to that desired ; 
and Evelina, bursting into tears, would wonder how he 
could have such spirits, and wish that she, too, could be so 
gay and light-hearted. 

"She has money of her own," Mr. Pickering one day 
said, when talking of the future; "and, though I would a 
thousand times rather she had not a penny in the world, I 
hardly think that, otherwise, my prospects at Hanker- 
shanks's would have justified me in proposing;" and, as his 
salary was fifty pounds a year, with only a problematical rise 
of fivelpounds at Christmas, it must be allowed that there 
was reason in what he said. 

Oh, how they loved each other, these two young hearts ! 
. to distraction, if not further; and many tender epistles 
passed between them ; those from dearest Frank mostly 
written during Hankershanks's time, with the aid of Hanker- 
shanks's stationery. 

A clandestine correspondence was this, unknown to 
Evelina's parents, who, it should be stated, had never 
exactly forbidden the match, because, in fact, Mr. Pickering, 
dreading refusal and subsequent banishment into outer 



Down a Crooked Lane. 43 

darkness . that is to say, outside Mr. Hickson's street-door 
. had never summoned up courage to break the matter to 
the young lady's papa. 

But their troth, as we have seen, was already plighted, 
and in their letters Evelina was ever his, and Frank was 
hers to death, and they were both one another's to all 
eternity. To keep up a secret correspondence with a 
carefully guarded invalid young lady, was, as may be 
supposed, no very easy matter, and it could hardly be ex- 
pected that so great a passion (they call this sort of thing 
a "grand passion " in French) could accommodate itself to 
the limited dimensions of Mr. Hickson's back parlour. 

That there was something between their Lena and that 
young Pickering, ere long became evident to the watchful 
mamma, who presently intercepted some of the corre- 
spondence, and dearest Frank was called upon to make an 
explanation. Then came the blow, and all was 

Desolation 

and 
Despair ! ! 




CHAPTER III. 




T may seem dreadfully cruel to those who, happily, 
know but little of life's trials, that Hankershanks, 
just about this period, when Frank Pickering's 
cup of bitterness was brimming, should have made 
himself more disagreeable than usual. 

It was, however, true ; and this the very moment he 
selected for finding out that Mr. Pickering's handwriting 
was not what it ought to be ; and, for some time, he seemed 
to be, almost hourly, discovering yet another and another 
blot in that young gentleman's ledgers. 

To have to listen to a rating upon the subject of a smear 
of ink, among Hankershanks' paltry accounts, when all was 
a weary blank in the world, was agony indeed ! But to be told, 
when he came in the morning, after one of those awful nights 
of sleepless misery, that he had better look sharp and set 
about his work, for he had done a precious little for the last 
fortnight, and Hankershanks was not going to pay people 
for nothing ! 

Then to be aroused out of the dream of what might have 
been, to carry a message ! To have to be light of heel when 
he was heavy of heart . to be obliged to struggle with a 
sickening despair, and to take care his balances tallied to a 
farthing ! Oh ! these were sufferings too great to be 
endured, and, yet, they had to be endured, or he would 
lose his situation. 

During this awful time, the pale-faced clerkling from 
Stonywold Court -was, more than ever, taken into Mr. Picker- 
ing's confidence, and was, also, taken unreasonable walks, in 



Down a Crooked Lane. 45 

a north-easterly direction, upon an empty stomach ; for 
Frank would often make a pilgrimage to Holloway, and 
feast his eyes upon the window of the parlour he must never 
enter more. At other times, James was taken to tea in a 
little room at the back of the fancy repository, where he was 
introduced to a mild old lady, the relict of a departed 
Pickering, who on earth had been a tide-waiter, but was 
now in heaven. 

" You are my dearest Frank's dearest friend," she said, 
when first they met. " He is always talking about you." 

James alone with his friend, very seldom spoke upon 
any other subject than his Evelina; but he might, perhaps, 
have another subject for other people . for instance, Han- 
kershanks . and, perhaps, for his mother. She, too, how- 
ever, appeared to be well posted up in the last particulars 
relating to the long and mournful story. 

She, too, had heard extracts from the loved one's letters 
. they were in a tangled handwriting, almost impossible for 
any but loving eyes to unravel . and had seen the loved 
one's daguerreotype, from which she had partially faded . a 
very faint young lady indeed, with no outline to her nose, 
and a bluish mark, like half a flash of lightning, across her left 
eye. 

James Jarman behaved himself with propriety during these 
visits, consuming large quantities of muffins, and absorbing 
his share of moisture in the shape of scalding tea. 

A well-conducted, quiet youth, according to Mrs. Picker- 
ing's opinion ; and he certainly did what was expected of 
him, which was to sit silently and listen whilst the good lady 
and her son did the talking. Mrs. Pickering's subject was 
not, however, always Evelina. Generally, indeed, she de- 
scanted, at length, upon the merits of dear Frank. 

" And he is worthy of any lady in the land," she said with 
enthusiasm, to which Jimmy responded in the same tone, 
" Oh he is, Ma'am ! " for Frank was one of the greatest 
heroes of modern times, in the eyes of his young friend. 

Save for brief digressions, upon the subject of her annual 
attack of neuralgia, and occasional reminiscences of the 
dead and gone tide-waiter, Mrs. Pickering, almost always, 
entertained James Jarman with the fertile theme of dear 
Frank. 

In course of time, Jimmy learnt that when first the great 
Hickson business came upon the carpet, Mrs. P. was a little 



46 A London Romance. 

disappointed at the selection that Frank had made, for he 
might have looked higher, she had thought ; and until it 
became a certainty that the beloved one had a little money 
of her own, the good lady could not help feeling rather 
uneasy about the future. 

" I can always keep house for them," she said, " and 
thank Goodness my dear Henry's misfortunes taught me to 
be a good manager, for the poor thing's back will never 
allow her to take an active part in the household duties." 

One day in the miserable time there came a parcel sent 
by hand, and this being opened, was found to contain a 
pair of Berlin wool-work slippers, worked by the loved one's 
own fair fingers. 

" Oh, look, mother ! Look ! Look ! " cried Frank in 
raptures. "See what she has sent to me. Bless her ! " 

" They're very smart," said the old lady, putting on her 
spectacles to look at them. 

" They're lovely," cried Frank, " and oh, to think that 
she should have taken all this trouble upon my account. 
Why they must have been months in hand, mustn't they, 
mother ? " 

" They'll make up rather short, I'm afraid," said the old 
lady, who had been silently taking measurements ; and she 
was correct in her supposition, for dear Frank had a good pair 
of serviceable feet of his own, and he also had good large 
hands and ears ; which should never have been mentioned 
in this history, had not this circumstance occurred to neces- 
sitate a disclosure of the truth. 

" Why, mammy dear," he cried out, " do you think I'd 
ever be such a brute as to wear them ? What ! trample her 
dear presents under foot? I ought rather to wear them 
next my heart." 

He did not do this, however, which would in truth have 
been an inconveniently romantic proceeding, although he 
certainly carried about in his breast-pocket one of the 
loved one's bell-rope curls, and in preserving it, wore to rags 
several of Hankershanks's strongest envelopes. He loved 
her very dearly, this fine young fellow with the large feet ; 
and was it not natural that his good old mother should, also, 
love what he loved, loving himself so much ? 

One awful night, never to be forgotten, Jimmy came by 
appointment to a little entertainment (a tripe supper, it may 
be stated, though in a whisper too low for ears polite), and 



Down a Crooked Lane. 47 

heard that the blow had fallen, . that Frank had been sent to 
the right-about, and that Evelina could never be his. In an 
agony of grief the poor boy lay upon the sofa . he had on his 
muddy boots, but this was not a moment to think of such trifles. 
He was sobbing bitterly, and tearing his hair, and ever and 
anon, he beat his head against the back of the sofa in a way 
that was terrible to behold. 

"My own dear Frank," his mother cried in pleading 
tones; "for my sake do not give way like this. For my 
sake, bear up, my dear boy, bear up ! " 

" I wish 1 was dead," said Frank in a hollow tone. 

" Oh don't say that, my darling." 

"Why should I live ? It would be better if I were dead 
and done for." 

Indeed, why should he live any longer under these dis- 
tressing circumstances ? A mother's life's devotion was in- 
significant when contrasted with that other love, that grand 
passion for the slender beauty with the languishing black 
eyes, and the weak back. It seemed as though his wish for 
death were soon going to be gratified, so wretchedly ill did he 
look, for some days, after that dreadful night. There were 
no more tripe suppers, after this, you may be sure ; at least, 
no more for Frank, whose appetite Mrs. Pickering appealed 
to through the medium of sweet-breads, roasted pigeons, and 
such like delicate tit bits. Daily he grew thinner and 
thinner, more and more wan and woe-begone. 

"You're too slow for me, young man," said Mr. Hanker- 
shanks, who was not in love himself, and wanted his work 
done. " You must sharpen up a bit, or go about your busi- 
ness." 

At these unfeeling words, Frank, scowling darkly, clenched 
his fist in a determined fashion, and seemed upon the point 
of knocking Hankershanks over among his merchandise. 

But, happily, he restrained himself. One must neces- 
sarily put up with a good deal from those who pay our 
wages, and take at times a stray kick kindly, grinning and 
bearing with as pleasant a face as may be. 

" I'm not long for this world, Jimmy," said Mr. Pickering, 
one evening, when they parted at the door of the fancy re- 
pository. " You'll come in as often as you can, old fellow, 
when I am gone, and try to comfort my poor mother." 

" Of course I will," said Jimmy, deeply affected. " But I 
say, don't, please, talk like that. You . you will get over it." 



48 A London Romance. 

" Get over it ! " shrieked the other with a strident laugh. 
" Heavens ! how you talk ! As if I ever could forget ! " 

As if he ever could ! As if anybody ever did get over it, 
and take on about somebody else ! As if our widows could 
ever smile again, and forget us ; our children grow careless 
of our memory . as if the world, at large, could possibly get 
on more comfortably without us, when the mound has sunken 
and the grass grown thickly over it ! 

At this time, however, when things appeared to have well 
nigh reached their worst, there came a glimpse of sunshine 
through the clouds. Nothing less than a letter from the 
Hicksons, requesting Frank's immediate attendance. 

But after the first few moments of joy, a dreadful thought 
came over him. Something must have happened. He ran 
in wild grief and terror to the loved one's house, and upon 
its threshold the servant told him that the young lady was 
dying. 

He found her lying at death's door, and her relations 
gathered around, mourning as though she were already 
dead. But at the sound of her lover's voice, she turned her 
poor aching head upon the pillow, and smiled on him 
faintly. 

"Do not grieve for me," she said. "And you, mamma, 
do not blame yourself. It cannot be helped now. We 
shall meet again, in heaven." 

There was a hushed silence in the room, in which the 
wretched father's watch was heard to tick with an awful 
distinctness in the depths of his fob. 

" Oh ! why, why did we do as we have done ? " the 
mamma sobbed by the bedside. " Do not go yet, Lena. 
Speak to her, Frank. Your voice may rally her a little." 

He left the room at last, on tip-toe, leaving her asleep, 
and thinking never to see her again, in life. 

He himself came home, more dead than alive, to that silly 
old mother of his, who, you may be sure, did her best to 
soothe him with gentle words and tender caresses. 

As though the cup of bitterness were not full enough, 
there came the next day another cruel blow; this time dealt 
by the hand of Hankershanks the unrelenting. 

It was a rule of Hankershanks's house that every clerk 
should be bound down under heavy penalties, upon a 
stamped document of ten folios, to hold himself in readiness, 



Down a Crooked Lane. 49 

should he be called upon to do so, to go to the branch 
establishment in Jamaica, there to take the place of other 
clerks whom "the fever" had promoted to a happier sphere 
above. 

Of the contents of this alarming document, signed in 
some nervousness by the new clerks and their friends, a 
hazy recollection only was retained by those concerned in 
it. But, as far as they could remember, it would appear 
that Jeremiah Hankershanks on the one hand, his execu- 
tors, administrators and assigns, and So-and-so on the 
other hand, his executors, administrators, and assigns, 
did jointly and severally agree, and whereas, moreover, 
otherwise, and be it further agreed upon, in considera- 
tion of, hereby, without prejudice to the rights and remedies 
of the said Jeremiah, . in witness, etc. ; though as to what 
the rest might be about they had only the very vaguest 
notion, except that somebody forfeited three hundred pounds 
in case the clerk did not fulfil the engagement he thereby 
entered into. 

At this moment another vacancy had to be filled in the 
branch establishment, and Hankershanks looking round to 
see whom he could best spare, decided on sending out 
Frank Pickering. When he heard the awful news, poor 
Frank gasped for breath and clung to the office stool for 
support. 

He went home to his mother, who from the first glance at 
his face knew that something terrible must have befallen 
him. But she little dreamt what was the nature of the 
calamity. 

She had supposed that if he were ever to go away, the 
hour of departure was yet far distant. She had cherished a 
hope, too, that her Frank would be an exception to the rule, 
and that his services would always be retained at the Lon- 
don establishment. But the time had come, and there was 
now no help for it. He must go and take his luck in 
Jamaica, or go about his business altogether. 

" Is it not hard ?" he asked his bosom friend, "at such a 
time too ! when her dear life is hanging by a thread. Oh, if 
this had not happened, she might have recovered, we might 
even have been happy. That wretch is her murderer ! " 

He burst into a violent fit of weeping at the thought of 
what might have been . of the inexpressible happiness, irre- 
vocably lost. 
4 



50 A London Romance. 

It was night time, and he and Jimmy were talking to- 
gether in a gloomy City lane where there were few passers- 
by to observe them. One evil-disposed boy, however, 
caught sight of Frank's tears, and thrusting his knuckles into 
the corners of his eyes, bellowed out, it is to be presumed, 
derisively, " Boohoo ! boohoo ! who's lost a farden ? " 

The news of Hankershanks's fell decree caused a relapse 
in Minerva Place, just when favourable symptoms were 
manifesting themselves. 

" You have killed her now," cried Mrs. Hickson ; " you 
should not have told her. How could you be so cruel ? 
You could never have loved her." 

" I not love ! I cruel ! " retorted Frank in indignant 
amazement, " when you know that this is all your work, 
Madam." 

" If you leave her now, she will certainly die," said 
Evelina's mother, and, so alarming was the change that had 
come over the suffering fair one, since the dreadful intel- 
ligence of his approaching departure had reached her, that 
Mrs. Hickson's words seemed only too likely to come true. 
But what was to be done? Mr. Hickson, when appealed to, 
could offer no suggestion. He was, himself, in a very small 
way, something in the City ; that is, he rented a second 
floor front in Pudding Lane, wherein were to be found a 
lopsided desk and a rickety table, some muddy ink and a 
rusty pen, a twisted poker and last year's almanac. 

Mr. Hickson had no situation in his gift, for he kept no 
clerk. When he wanted to go out, he went, wafering a 
paper on his door, with a vague promise of returning, which 
he kept or not as it suited his convenience. 

What . oh ! what was to be done ? How . oh ! how was 
this wretchedness to terminate ? Frank Pickering could see 
no way of escape from his engagement unless his mother 
paid the forfeit of three hundred pounds, and the profits of 
the fancy repository would scarcely justify this sacrifice. 

One thing was very certain, Evelina could not accompany 
her Frank to Jamaica. Separation then was inevitable, and 
death to one, at least, must follow. 

And now the dread day was rapidly approaching. Evelina 
had a series of relapses. Poor Mrs. Pickering's tears were 
never dry. Poor Frank was as thin and pale as a ghost. 
In fact things were reaching a climax, when Jimmy Jarman 
came to a determination. 



CHAPTER IV. 




T was, withal, so weary a life at the busy warehouse 

down this crooked City lane, that, many times, 

James Jarman was tempted to wish when he had 

run away he had run a little further. 

The week was so very long and Sunday so short, and the 

prospect of Monday morning so hopeless and dispiriting, no 

wonder James's heart grew no lighter and his cheeks no 

rosier. 

Not that a Sunday was, strictly speaking, a day of rest in 
Mrs. Whitaker's little household since the new shepherd, 
Mr. Wapshot, had begun his good work of awakening. It 
was the reverend gentleman's custom, not unfrequently, to 
drop in, of an evening, after chapel, and explain such 
knotty points in his discourses, as had appeared obscure to 
the lady of the house. Anent these explanatory statements, 
Sam Whitaker . an unreliable vessel, who preferred his pipe 
to polemics' . [had been heard in confidence to say he did 
not know which was worst, the knotty points or the un- 
picking. 

As has been already stated, Stonywold Court was, at one 
time, in its way, a small theatrical colony, in which several 
workmen attached to the Great Sahara resided, and which 
was also enlivened by the presence of certain rising mem- 
bers of the profession. The good works of the Reverend 
Wapshot found more favour among the former than the 
latter, the minds of the generality of persons employed in 
the mechanical work of theatres being of a practical and 
plodding, rather than an imaginative nature ; as, for in^ 
4.2 



52 A Londoji Romance. 

stance, it was Sam Whitaker's honest boast that he had 
never yet seen a play right through, and never wanted to, 
although he spent two-thirds of every night of his life upon 
a stage. 

" You see, it's a sort of thing I don't at all care for . not 
the words and that," he would explain. " There's some as 
do, I don't deny, and I've no fault to find with 'em. It's 
not my taste, that's all. I've got my work cut out for me, 
and I've got to see ,it done at the right time. When I aint 
wanted behind, I drop into the Hyaeny or the Sairy Arms, 
opposyte the stage door, and I wait till the time comes on 
again. I leave the speechifying and the hollering and hulla- 
balooing to them whose trade it is. I've nothing to say 
agen 'em. They're some of 'em very respectable . as re- 
spectable as you and me." 

Thus Sam Whitaker was more favourably inclined to- 
wards Mr. Wapshot than was Mrs. Pounder, Mr. Jinks, 
Miss Jenkinson, or Mr. Montmorency, members of the 
Sahara company, residing in Stonywold Court. But when 
one day Mr. Wapshot suggested that Sam should give up 
working in the theatre, and find employment elsewhere, he 
was surprised and indignant. 

'. ^'here's the harm in it? " he asked. Mr. Wapshot ex- 
plained where the harm was ; and for his arguments on this 
head, the reader is referred" to a series of able articles in the 
Thirsty Soul, a dissenting temperance organ, very popular 
at the period of this history. 

" I am not as bad as the play actors, surely," Sam 
reasoned ; but Mr. Wapshot would have it that all were 
bad alike, who earned their living within a playhouse's 
walls. 

" At any rate, let me entreat of you, my dear friend, not 
to sully the purity of that poor boy's life with such a tainted 
atmosphere." 

It was William to whom he alluded, who had had about 
a week's day work, at the time, in the theatre ; a grand new 
pantomime being then in hasty preparation, and extra hands 
required. 

" The boy has got his living to earn," said Sam, with a 
self-sacrificing air. " If you could find him anything else 
as good, I've no objection." Indeed, why should he have 
had ? He knew the job was only a short one, and there 
was nothing certain for the future. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 53 

" Let him earn his living in another way . where you like 
. anywhere ; but let him not breathe the same air with 
those painted women." 

Sam Whitaker, also, had his ideas about the painted 
women. He smiled, sarcastically, as he sometimes passed 
a miniature brougham waiting in Little Pannikin Street. 
He and the other carpenters were just as uncivil as they 
dared be to the ladies of the establishment, who persever- 
ingly laboured at their conciliation by sweet smiles and 
civil speeches, and by addressing them by their surnames 
with a respectful prefix ; for stage carpenters are a mighty 
power in a theatre, and a trap may be opened too slowly or 
a flat closed in too suddenly, or a change of scenery pain- 
fully procrastinated, when a graceful attitude is struck. 

At last, it was agreed that William, for the present, 
should be put with a cabinet-maker, a friend of Mr. Wap- 
shot's, until Mr. Wapshot saw his way to do something 
better for him. From this time, then, William was taken 
under Mr. Wapshot's special guidance and patronage, and 
the very least the Whi takers could do, in return for his 
kindness, was to ask him in, pretty frequently, to dinner, 
tea, and supper. 

Often, when that black sheep, James, crawled home dead 
beat from an unusually hard dose of unpaid "overtime," 
he would find Mr. Wapshot seated at the supper-table, over 
which, when the cloth was removed, he would expound, 
somewhat lengthily. 

Occasionally, forgetting his manners, James would close 
his eyes and nod his head upon his breast, when Mrs. 
Whitaker, very properly, would rap him on the crown with 
a knife-handle, asking him how he dared thus to misconduct 
himself. 

Little Ann, who was now, as the saying goes, growing to 
be a big girl (she never grew to be a very big one), sat up- 
right and serious and, preternaturally, wide-awake, and, 
when she was compelled to yawn, effected the manoeuvre 
with great artfulness, behind her little, mittened hand. 

But William was ever brisk and lively, thoughtful, atten- 
tive, tremendously in earnest. It wanted little prophetic 
power to foretell that, some day, William Bradshaw would 
come to be a light among chapel-goers . that he would have 
something to say, himself, at the proper season, and would 
say it loudly, with great self-reliance. He was no genius. 



54 A London Romance. 

He had little sense of the beautiful, was scarcely more 
imaginative than a turnip, but he believed in himself with 
a deep trustfulness. He was one of the sort wh© do not 
know when they are beaten . who cannot understand they 
have had the worst of it. He would make his way in the 
world, would William. 

His sphere might be limited, but he would take a fore- 
most place in that narrow circle, and the rest would look 
up to and respect him. Some of these things to come 
were, at this time, shadowed forth by surprising outbursts 
upon William's part, that took the rest of the little com- 
munity's breath away. 

Already, he had begun to show he had a strong will of 
his own, and would often take the family under his wing, 
and set them straight, and indicate the paths in which they 
should walk. He said grace when Mr. Wapshot was not 
present. He also instituted family prayers. 

Sam Whitaker, coming in the first night when William 
was reading aloud from the Bible, was lost in amazement. 
William read on without heeding him, and the stage car- 
penter, taking a seat on the edge of the nearest vacant 
chair, nursed his cap on his knee, and coughed behind his 
hand. As William continued to read, he presently stole 
out again, his boots creaking amazingly, and took a stroll 
in the court until the chapter was concluded. 

Mrs. Whitaker was a little doubtful with regard to these 
innovations. She was not sure Sam would like it. Pro- 
bably Sam did not, but William's will was stronger than the 
rest, and he carried the day: thus family prayers became 
an institution. But whilst William led the way, the other 
two young people gave but small indications of future 
conduct. 

Little Ann was too old, now, to romp in the streets. 
These were 'days of darning and hemming. She had her 
share of household duties allotted to her, and helped her 
mother in the shop. A phrase, "When you have a house 
of your own," was not unfrequently in Mrs. Whitaker's 
mouth. 

To provide for this emergency, the secret of pudding- 
making, or as much as Mrs. Whitaker knew of it . the good 
soul's hand was heavy on the paste-board . was imparted 
to the young girl, and, with occasional contradictions, the 
household duties were explained to her. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 55 

Already was her life mapped out for her. If nothing un- 
foreseen occurred to alter the course of events, she was to 
be married to make puddings and have babies. When the 
old people died, she would have the shop. There was 
always a living to be got at it, if kept within bounds, with- 
out any wild launchings forth and accumulations of back 
stock. 

" Don't touch the new rubbish," Mrs. Whitaker said ; 
" there's half too many things already, and they're trouble 
enough, as it is." 

Sometimes the impudent fellows who had called on her to 
beg that she would speculate in the early numbers of a strug- 
gling publication, would secretly paste up a flaring bill upon 
the side of her house ; one usually committing this outrage 
whilst the other tried to talk the old lady over inside ; and 
on discovering this trick, her indignation was great. She 
never afterwards, under any circumstances, had anything to 
say to the publication which they had attempted thus to 
foist upon her. 

It was not only settled, in a general way, that Ann was 
to be married when she was " old enough," but it was an 
understood thing she was to marry William. 

"He is a good boy," Mrs. Whitaker would say; "he 
will grow up to be a good man. Try and be worthy 
of him." 

The dark-eyed little girl would make no answer ; indeed, 
what answer could she make ? There is a singular indeli- 
cacy among women when upon these subjects. Men, as a 
rule, make sacred idols of the women they are about to 
marry, and their most intimate friends scarce ever venture 
upon a word with regard to them. Perhaps they think all 
the more. 

Who could doubt that Ann" loved her suckling shepherd ? 
How could she have helped it ? He was brave, handsome, 
good. Besides, as has been said . it was an understood 
thing she was to marry him ; and, of course, we take the 
love for granted. 

At this period, then, she had become a dark-eyed, quiet 
little girl, not thoroughly understood ; herself, all uncon- 
scious of the stormy passages to come. 

There was one more person whose nature was an incom- 
prehensible puzzle to those among whom he lived : who 
was, perhaps, a puzzle to himself, sitting alone, brooding, 



56 A London Romance. 

silent. A dull, unappreciative hobble-de-hoy, an ever-pre- 
sent contrast to the bright, self-reliant cousin who had a 
way to make in the world, and meant to make it. 

Sometimes Mrs. Whitaker was moved to pity at the sight 
of this hopelessly dull and dreamy nature. " He'll never 
do any good for himself, poor fellow ! " she said ; " and I 
thank Goodness that he has found some one to see some- 
thing in him." 

It was a consolation to think that, so far, the black sheep 
of the family was provided for. Sam felt very thankful ; 
not that he grudged the boy his keep, but his presence in 
the house had been the cause of some connubial bicker- 
ings. Was it likely that the good lady could ever entirely 
forget and forgive that creature who had disgraced Mr. 
Whitaker's name? 

It would be a great blessing if this branch of the family 
were respectfully disposed of ; and William, too, was of this 
way of thinking ; for though he was yet a boy, he had his 
own shrewd, worldly notions, and saw that if he were to get 
on and make a name for himself, a connexion of that sort 
might be a great drawback to his future progress. 

Presently, there was another cause for wishing James 
Jarman well disposed of. The Whitakers seemed likely to 
rise in the world. Sam Whitaker had saved a little money, 
and was in search of a good investment. Somebody sug- 
gested railway shares. This was the Hudsonian age, and 
everybody was dabbling in this sort of speculation. Sam 
Whitaker dabbled, also, very blindly, and made, in con- 
sequence, a very good thing of it. 

Knowing ones said to Sam, do so and so ; but Sam 
hesitated, and saved his money. Downy cards suggested 
such and such a venture ; but Sam was slow, and allowed 
the golden opportunities, that were to have been, to slip by 
him, and his money to lie where he had first placed it. It 
seemed more than probable that by sheer stupidity and 
pigheadedness, Sam Whitaker was going to make a fortune. 

He had already quadrupled his little capital. When 
Mr. Wapshot next urged him to quit the wicked playhouse 
people, he said, with a quiet smile, " Some of these fine 
days I may . perhaps, sooner than you think for." 

If there had been a true prophet to be found down 
Stonywold Court way, he would have said, . Those 
Whitaker people are upon the eve of bettering their con- 



Down a Crooked Lane. 



57 



dition. They will seek a brighter and genteeler sphere of 
existence, beyond the ken of Saint Starver's. 

That good and handsome young fellow will have a 
chance in life he never dreamed of. And that strange, 
sickly-looking thing . what a pity that a rising family should 
have such a clog tied to their legs ! 

He cannot rise with them, that is certain. 




CHAPTER V 




NE side of the premises occupied by Hankershanks's 
business bulged out riverwards, and was propped 
up by worm-eaten piles, so that a fanciful person 
might have said it stood with its feet in water, 
only it was seldom the tide was high enough to bring the 
water underneath. Generally there was, instead, much 
black mud and a great profusion of oyster shells. The 
house had been, report said, some time or other, some- 
body's palace ; but if this were the case, it had been so 
knocked about, in these latter days, and so many ugly 
alterations made in it, there was nothing palatial remaining. 

The room which Mr. Hankershanks occupied was, pro- 
perly speaking, only a third of a room, and, as the only 
fireplace was in it, the other two-thirds, used as offices for 
the book-keeper and four clerks, were not as comfortable as 
they might have been in cold weather. As some of the 
window-sashes had been taken out, and from others panes of 
glass removed, the wind from the river blew in at all times, 
and, in winter, most parts of the house were intolerably cold. 

It was a favourite theory of Hankershanks, that no one 
could feel cold unless he were skulking ; and he was wont 
to say he had himself no time to feel cold, having too much 
else to think of. 

" He'll be a good deal too warm when he reaches his 
journey's end," one of the clerks had been heard to say, as 
he sat shivering at his desk ; " and if we're there together, I 
hope they'll make me stoker.'' 

This clerk's name was Starkey. He was, perhaps, of a 
more chilly nature than his fellows ; for he had been to 



Down a Crooked Lane. 5 9 

Jamaica, to the unhealthy settlement where Hankershanks's 
branch establishment was situated, and had returned in- 
valided. There was, indeed, a strange interest attached to 
this same Starkey, as being the only one who bad come 
back at all. He had not come back safe and sound, 
and hale and hearty, like the person in the song. He 
had left behind him over there . " in that accursed swamp " 
. the greater part of his teeth, the best part of his eyesight, 
and, according to his own account, the whole of his liver. 
He had gone out, he was fond of saying, in the bloom of his 
youth, and he had returned a wreck. 

" I've wasted my life, that's what I've done," he would 
observe, taking Josh Waddiman, the porter, into his con- 
fidence. 

They often drank together at the bar of the beetle-browed 
little beershop, further up the lane, this clerk and porter. 
He was the same porter that had threatened Jimmy upon 
the night of the fire, and since then he had done his best 
to conciliate the boy, who never having been closely 
questioned with respect to the events of that memorable 
evening, had not told anything which reflected upon Josh 
Waddiman's trustworthiness. 

Upon one or two occasions, when the porter and Starkey 
were in the beershop, and Jimmy passed by, the former had 
invited the lad to enter. Although he did not drink with 
them, he had gone in and chatted awhile, and he had, also, 
chatted with these two at other times ; so that, presently, 
he, somehow, came to feel himself, in a manner of speaking, 
a party, tacitly, to the ill-wishes against the tyrant Hanker- 
shanks, whose downfall Starkey and the porter devotedly 
prayed for. 

It was doubtful why. If Hankershanks were done away 
with, the business would be done away with also. He was 
quite alone in the world, it was said, without a relation 
living. Starkey would exclaim indignantly, 

" The brute has money enough, in all conscience. Why 
doesn't he give over his money grubbing ? Why doesn't he 
spend what he has got, and enjoy himself?" 

But, although he had the means, this poor lonely creature 
would have found it rather more difficult than they supposed, 
to find any pleasure away from the dusty old ledgers in his 
counting-house. Not that he found much pleasure in their 
company, either. 



60 A London Romance. 

His had been a weary life, full of disappointments and 
blighted hopes. Those he had loved, had cheated him 
most cruelly. The hands he had kissed lovingly, had struck 
him the foulest blows. A cold, hard man, he had been 
thought, when his coldness was but timidity and awkward- 
ness. Now he had grown cold, and harsh, and callous, in 
reality. 

" I'll have a day's work for a day's wage," he said. " I'll 
have no skulking here. I'll have my money's worth* do 
you hear ? and if I can't get it out of you, I'll get it out of 
another. Mind that." 

This was favourite talk of his ; but there was no necessity 
for such slave-driving measures. There was not, after all, 
so much to do in Hankershanks's business, that there needed 
this constant wear and tear, and worry. 

As has already been stated, for the sake of seeming to be 
doing, it was the habit of the badgered hirelings to make 
work, to bustle unnecessarily, and affect an intensity of 
application, and preoccupation of an exaggerated character, 
whilst Hankershanks had his eye on them, and to relax, 
suddenly, when it was removed, and skulk upon all possible 
occasions. 

It was not to be wondered at, then, if the generality of 
Hankershanks's clerks and warehousemen were of an inferior 
quality, and that, in spite of their pretended activity, he 
rarely got one fair day's work out of any three of them. 

Notable among Hankershanks's bad bargains was Frank 
Pickering ; that is to say, since his love affairs had gone so 
wrong with him, for, previously, he had been among the 
most energetic; and it was his present listless and des- 
pondent manner, that excited Hankershanks's wrath. 

Others whom he employed wasted much more time, but, 
yet, managed to avoid his censure. There was, indeed, a 
sort of free-masonry existing between the clerks and ware- 
house people, and a code of signals by which the tyrant's 
approach was made known, while he was yet afar off. Up 
aloft little cherubs sat perched watching over the destinies 
of the idly-disposed, and passed the word when a certain 
round-shouldered slouching figure became visible in a distant 
bend of the crooked lane. Then disappeared, as though by 
magic, the surreptitious pewter pot ; the clandestine pipe was 
hastily extinguished, and cranes clanked, and chains rattled, 
and the owners of hoarse voices shouted to distant mates, 



Down a Crooked Lane. 61 

unseen, to " come on now,'' and to " look handy," and to 
"look alive," and not to "keep willing folks a week a- 
waiting." 

The tyrant, ever on the look-out for skulkers, and laying 
artful traps to catch them, was, nevertheless, imposed upon 
at every turn. 

There was, indeed, no living soul in his employ, or with 
whom he came in contact in the world beyond, who did not 
dislike him. There was, to tell the truth, nothing in his 
appearance, his manner, his acts, to recommend him. He 
was ugly and dirty, his clothes were worn and ragged. 
Very often, strangers, calling upon business, mistook him 
for a servant, and addressed him slightingly. 

These accidents, however, pleased him much, for they 
afforded him an opportunity for retort, perhaps for triumph. 

In Bloomsbury Square he had a large house, entirely un- 
furnished, with the exception of an attic in which he lived, 
choosing the upper part of the house, he said, for the sake 
of the fresh air. Here he kept no servant, and had his 
room cleaned out only at rare intervals. 

He might have let the house at a high rental, had he 
thought fit to do so ; and it was because some one, with 
whom he had quarrelled, had moved heaven and earth 
to get hold of it, that he held tight to it himself; and, being 
left to the mercy of the elements, its dilapidated exterior 
soon became an eyesore to its prim neighbours, and a source 
of wondering speculation to passers-by. 

Snarling and snapping at all the world, this forlorn, for- 
saken, loveless old man shut himself up when his day's 
work was over, and passed his nights no one cared to know 
how. There would come a morning, probably, when the 
milkman's ring would be unheeded ; and then, when the 
authorities should resolve to break the door open, some- 
thing shrunken and ape-like would, perhaps, be found, 
curled up upon the bed up stairs ; and there would be one 
old man less in the world, which would revolve upon its 
axis neither faster nor slower on that account. 





CHAPTER VI. 

ENTION has been made, upon more than one oc- 
casion, of Frank Pickering's official shortcomings, 
and of his young friend Jemmy Jarman's devotion. 
The latter, secretly, did a large portion of the for- 
mer's work, without Hankershanks ever suspecting the de- 
ception. Since the course of Frank's true love had run so 
unsmoothlv, Frank's arithmetic had been anything but ac- 
curate, and by no amount of ingenuity could his accounts 
be made to balance. With a perversity, which was quite his 
own, Hankershanks just at this time, too, gave Frank extra 
doses of book-keeping; and, as though he were bent on 
bringing his mental energies to an untimely collapse, gave 
him, in addition to his other duties, the temporary care of 
the petty cash. 

With this press of work upon him, Frank Pickering broke 
down, lamentably, and would inevitably have come to the 
most grievous of grief had not his devoted James stopped 
late of a night to get the arrears up. Frank did not stop 
with him because, as James said, he was not, in his present 
state of mind, of much assistance. James was not great at 
figures himself . you may remember his downfall in the old 
school days . but he worked with a will, and got through his 
task, somehow, with some blundering. 

This state of things had existed for about a fortnight, 
when one day there was an extra crush of business, upon 
the strength of which the tyrant Hankershanks was more 
than usually tyrannical, and Frank more than usually help- 
less. Hankershanks stormed and blustered. Frank, with 



Down a Crooked Lane. 63 

an overwhelming sense of injury, clenched his fists and 
glowered darkly. Hankershanks, all unconscious of these 
signs of a white-heat of anger, blustered more than ever, 
and heaped insult upon injury. There were moments when 
the bully's life was seriously imperilled by the close vicinity 
of a heavy ruler, on which the goaded Pickering's fingers 
closed convulsively. 

" I shall expect this work cleared up before you leave, you 
will please to understand," Hankershanks said as he put on 
his hat to go. 

Frank had an appointment that night with his Evelina, an 
appointment, as you can easily understand, of the most vital 
consequence. To look at things hopefully, the world would 
come to an end, at the very least, if this appointment were 
not kept, but how was he to keep it ? An hour after Hanker- 
shanks had taken his departure, Frank and James were left 
alone. The former, with his head buried in his hands, was 
lost in bitter thought. The latter was pegging away at 
Pickering's arrears. 

Presently Jimmy said, . 

"Don't stop any longer; you'll be too late, won't you?" 

" Of course I shall be too late. She will be waiting. You 
know what a little makes her ill, and most likely she will fret 
herself into a relapse. But never mind," here he clenched 
his fist and frowned darkly, " I'll settle accounts with him, 
some day, never fear." 

" Five and two are seven . nine are sixteen, and four are 
twenty. Nought, and carry two." 

James was totaling up an addition. Presently he left 
off to address his friend. 

" Do go and keep your appointment, Frank. I am sure 
you need not mind about me. I shall be all right." 

" If you stop here to do the work by yourself, it will 
take you all night." 

" Not quite as bad as that . an hour or two, that is all." 

" But you want to get home yourself." 

" No, I'm in no hurry." 

" It's not so very jolly at home, at your place, is it? " 

" Not so very " 

" Well, if you are quite sure it will not put you out '. 

" Quite sure." 

" At some other time, you know, if I can help you any 
way 



64 A London Romance. 

And while thus saying he would not, he did. He had 
brushed his hat with a reluctant air five minutes ago. Three 
minutes since, with an air of great self-sacrifice, he had but- 
toned up his overcoat. Now, with the air of a man who, 
in the cause of friendship, was putting himself out very con- 
siderably, he tied on his comforter, and moved towards the 
door. 

" It's really too bad of Evelina," he said in an injured 
tone, " she is so inconsiderate : the times she appoints are 
so inconvenient,' - and he went away with this, leaving James 
to his arithmetic. 

As soon as he was gone, Jimmy Jarman took a sort of 
general survey of the work that had to be done, and arranged 
it carefully. There was a good deal more than he had cal- 
culated on, for this had been one of Frank's worst days, 
and he had not only left undone the work to which Hanker- 
shanks had alluded, but other work artfully concealed at the 
bottom of baskets, or under paper weights, all now brought 
to light, and proving to be of a pressing nature. 

" I sha'n't get home till after twelve," thought Jimmy. " I 
hope William won't be sitting up." 

As he felt quite certain that he had at least four hours' 
work before him, and as he had not had his tea . a fact 
which Frank Pickering had forgotten in the hurry of de- 
parture . he turned out the contents of his pockets, found a 
matter of sixpence halfpenny, and made his calculations. 

" Hallo, Sir ! You're late, aint you ? " 

Josh Waddiman had put his head in at the door, and 
nodded to him as he spoke. Jimmy explained that he 
would be there for several hours yet, and broached the sub- 
ject of refreshment, which he proposed going out in search 
of. Upon this suggestion Josh Waddiman proposed an 
amendment. Refreshments might be purchased upon more 
reasonable terms in the proper market than at a coffee shop 
. the proper market and its usages being Josh Waddiman's 
private and peculiar secret. Supposing, then, Josh Waddi- 
man were to go in search of the provisions, and were to 
make tea in a pot of his own : it could then be drunk out 
of mugs which from a private store he would produce for 
the occasion? 

It is needless to say that such an offer could not be 
refused, and the arrangement could hardly be considered 
disadvantageous, from Josh Waddiman's point of view, 



Down a Crooked Lane. 65 

when it is borne in mind that, thereby, the two were re- 
galed at the price that would have been paid for one, the 
other way, and that Jimmy paid for both. 

The porter suggested that they should take their meal in 
Mr. Hankershanks's room, where they could light a fire. 

" And hadn't you better bring your work in there with 
you i* " he said. " It's perishing cold out here to-night.'' 

It was indeed a biting winter's night, the coldest that 
year, and there was only one fireplace in the three rooms. 
Jimmy collected his papers, and glanced round to see that 
he had left nothing behind. He also tried the door of an 
iron safe before quitting the room ; it was the safe in which 
Frank Pickering kept his petty cash ; and Jimmy's reason 
for looking at it now was that he fancied his friend might 
have forgotten to take away the key, as he left in a hurry. 
But all seemed secure, and he followed Waddiman into 
the other office. Here, already, the porter had made a 
blazing fire, and the kettle was just upon the boil. 

James, still sticking to his work, took his tea in small 
instalments, with a hasty snatch at the bread and butter, 
when he could find time. Josh Waddiman, on the other 
hand, worked steadily, with but one object in view, that 
of clearing the table. It must not be wondered at, then, 
if the younger of the two tea-takers came off somewhat 
the worst in this joint-stock meal, and found that when the 
platter was clean he had still a craving doomed to remain 
unappeased. 

Stretching forth his hand in search of another slice of 
bread and butter, but without raising his eyes from his 
work, Jimmy encountered only empty air, until, as he still 
kept on groping, Josh Waddiman, with a merry humour, 
thrust the hot teapot forward within his grasp, and laughed, 
uproariously, when he burnt himself. 

" I thought there was some more," said Jimmy, blowing 
his fingers, and colouring. 

" Oh, no," Josh Waddiman responded, smiling pleasantly, 
"not at all. You've been eating hearty, Mr. Jarman, Sir. 
You was occupied, most likely, and didn't notice how 
you put it away. There's lots more hot water, though the 
tea-leaves aint got as much flavour in 'em as I like to 
see ; and I've a somethink here you're welcome to a taste 
of if you choose. I find it brings the flavour out." 

"The somethink" was the contents of a flat, pint bottle 
5 



66 A London Romance. 

of which Josh Waddiman took a liberal supply himself, but 
Jimmy refused, and went on with his work. 

The porter having put away the tea-things, with the ex- 
ception of the mugs out of which they had been drinking, 
took his seat by the fireside, and lighting a pipe, puffed 
the smoke up the chimney. For some time, then, the 
only sounds breaking the silence were the scratching of 
Jimmy's pen, and the occasional cracking of the burning 
coal. Josh Waddiman finished his pipe, and took a nap, 
woke up and lit a fresh pipe ; finished it, and had another 
nap. Meanwhile Jimmy's pen still kept on scratching. 

" Most done your work, Sir ? " asked Waddiman. " It's 
near nine, I should think. I've half a mind to step out 
and see." 

This idea about the time had only occurred to him after 
looking inside the flat pint bottle, now empty ; and Jimmy 
observing the movement, hastened to offer a remark. 

"I sha'n't be very long now," he said. "If you are going 
out, you will come back before I go away ? " 

" I shouldn't be long, of course, Mr. Jarman," replied 
the other in an injured tone. "You don't suppose I'd leave 
the place to take care of itself, when I was left in 
charge ? " 

Jimmy could not help smiling, for he had a vivid recollec- 
tion of such a circumstance occurring upon a certain memor- 
able occasion. Josh Waddiman might have noticed the 
smile, but, if he did, he indignantly ignored it and went on. 

" I shouldn't leave the premises without you was a-stop- 
ping here. do you understand that, Mr. Jarman ? I suppose 
I aint wrong in a leaving you in charge . I'm sure 1 hope 
not ; and I hope I sha'n't come to grief along of trusting 
you.' : 

Jimmy looked up with a flushed face, and would have re- 
turned an angry reply, but he saw from a ' sort of wild fixed- 
ness about the old man's eye, that the contents of the flat 
bottle had something to do with the line of argument he had 
taken up, and he refrained from making any rejoinder. Josh 
Waddiman took this silence as an insult, and glared at him 
savagely, but presently he forgot his anger. 

"The premises is left to my care," he went on, "and has 
been so for some time, Sir, if I'm not mistaken. There's no 
particular harm come to the premises while I've had charge 
of them." 



Down a Crooked Lane. 67 

" Except their having been burnt to the ground," Jimmy 
could not refrain from remarking. 

Josh Waddiman took the correction in good part. 

"Except when they was burnt down," he continued, very 
seriously. " But perhaps the governor didn't lose much over 
that job, neither, seeing he was insured a good third over the 
stock's value, we being half empty at the time, Sir, as per- 
haps you may have heard. I'll step round the corner, Mr. 
Jarman, with your leave, and I'll place the premises under 
your care while I'm gone. I hope I sha'n't do wrong in 
doing so." 

With this virtuous aspiration the old man took his depar- 
ture, taking the flat bottle with him, which, in an accidental 
sort of way, he had dropped into his pocket while he talked. 
Jimmy listened to his retreating steps as he blundered along 
the passage to the outer door, and then heard him fumbling 
with the bolts. He also heard the door open, but did not 
hear it close again. 

" He's left it on the jar,'' thought Jimmy ; " he doesn't 
mean to stop long then, I suppose." 

Almost as he spoke the wind rose and angrily rattled at 
the window-frame, blowing a window open up stairs with a 
loud crash. 

" The place isn't very safe in his keeping if there were 
much money left here of a night." 

This idea occurred to him as he resumed his work, and 
also another idea, which was that it was rather lonely to be 
left by oneself in that great rambling house, up the quiet 
City lane. 

" I shall be glad when be comes back again," said Jimmy 
half aloud. 




5.2 



CHAPTER VII. 




UT it took a long while, upon Josh Waddiman's 
system, to ascertain the hour, although the public- 
house clock he had gone to look at was not a 
hundred yards away, up the lane. Jimmy worked 
away, finished his work, and sat waiting for the old man's 
return. 

Drawing his chair up to the fire when he had packed up 
his papers, Jimmy presently felt that the heat was sending 
him off into a dose, and only aroused himself, after a 
momentary oblivion, upon the very eve of butting at the 
iron bars. 

"I wonder how long he has been gone," the lad asked 
himself. " I wish he would come back." 

It was surprising how lonely the house seemed, and how 
cold ; and he shivered and drew nearer to the fire, gradually 
nodding off to sleep again, in spite of his efforts to be lively. 

Opening his eyes, however, after another momentary 
lapse, he began to wonder whether all this time the street- 
door had been standing open, and to ask himself whether 
or not he ought, under the circumstances, to go down and 
shut it. 

But while he was debating, he heard a footstep in the 



passage without, 
turned at last. 



Thank Goodness ! the old man had re- 



The lad, who had risen from his chair at the first sound 
and stood with his eyes fixed on the door, began to wonder 
why Waddiman was so long in making his appearance. The 



Down a Crooked Lane. 69 

thought struck him, then, did the old man mean to play 
him some sort of trick ? The footstep had passed the door, 
and there was a movement in the next room. What did it 
mean? 

In a tremble of apprehension . for he felt as though 
something strange and terrible were about to take place . 
he stepped, swiftly, towards the partition-door, and jerked 
it open. There was a light in the room, and a figure at the 
safe, with its back turned towards him. 

"Waddiman!" 

The figure turned quickly and extinguished the light ; but 
the light from the other room revealed to him the intruder's 
face. It was not the porter, as he had expected ; but his 
first sensation was one of relief, at finding that it was a face 
he knew . the face of Starkey. Next moment, however, he 
saw a key shining in the other's hand, and all the truth 
Hashed upon him. 

He had to do with a thief. 

An instant later, without reflecting upon possible conse- 
quences, he had a tight hold of Starkey, and, by a sudden 
snatch, had possessed himself of the key. Starkey, though 
much his superior in size and strength, was, for the time, 
powerless with terror and astonishment, and he shook as 
though the hand of a policeman were upon his shoulder. 

"Don't ruin me, Jarman," he stammered out when, at 
last, he recovered the use of his tongue : " I never did you 
any harm. How many are here besides you ? You won't 
peach on me, will you ? " 

"You would have ruined my friend Pickering if you had 
taken the money," James retorted : " or me, perhaps, for 
the place was left in my charge. Where's Waddiman all 
this while ? Is he in league with you ? " 

" No, no, Jarman. No one knows of this but you and I. 
Nobody need know, need they? The old man's at the 
public-house ; someone is standing him some drink. He's 
good for ever so long yet." 

Many years afterwards, when he looked back at the 
events of this night . when he and Starkey had met again, 
one a rich man, the other a homeless outcast . he recol- 
lected the abject, craven aspect of the detected thief; his 
whining tones, his appealing looks, his cowardly helpless- 
ness. 

It was evident he had screwed up all the courage he 



70 A London Romance. 

possessed to make the burglarious attempt. He had made 
it, and now, in the moment of detection, he was utterly 
prostrated. Without a noti.on of defending himself, he 
stood there, quite passive in his youthful captor's hands. 

Afterwards, he confessed that he had been an hour and 
more hanging about the open door, undecided whether or 
not he should make the venture. 

He continued his pitiful appeal. " You won't let this go 
further, Jarman, will you ? You don't know how I was tempted 
to it. You don't know what an awful strait I am in for 
money. I didn't mean to keep it altogether . I swear I 
didn't. I would have paid it back before it was found out 
. before the end of the week, when Pickering balances his 
book. You know he doesn't balance every day. Leave 
go of my coat. You'll let me go, Jarman, won't you, as 
there's been no harm done ? " 

"How do I know there hasn't?" asked Jimmy, doubt- 
fully. " Had you opened the safe ? " 

" No, no," the other replied, with great eagerness. " Look 
for yourself. Do you think I would try to deceive you in 
that way, Jarman ? Trust your own eyes, if you won't trust 
me." 

The safe was certainly locked, and then Jimmy reflected 
he could hardly have had time to take anything out, and 
lock it up again. He began to debate in his own mind 
what he should do. Instead of acting as anyone else would, 
in all probability, have done . that is, instead of calling for 
assistance and, if possible, giving the self-accused thief into 
custody, or at any rate, keeping him till the porter returned, 
and telling him all that had occurred . James Jarman began 
to reason with himself, and, finally, decided to settle the 
affair according to his own idea of justice. 

We may see more of this fatal reasoning, and its conse- 
quences, in the course of our story. 

While he was undecided, however, there reached him, 
from the passage without, the sound of the porter's banging- 
to the street-door. 




CHAPTER VIII. 




S the footsteps approached, Starkey's terror momen- 
tarily increased, and his teeth fairly chattered in 
his head. 

" You . you won't tell him ? You . you won't 
ruin me ? " 

"What am I to do? There is no time for you to get 
away. . The door is closed." 

"Let me stop here, and hide?" 

" No, not in this room. Where else can you go ? " 

" I can get down stairs into the cellar, without him hear- 
ing me." 

"Go!" 

Scarcely was the word spoken, when Josh Waddiman 
opened the door of Hankershanks's room, Jimmy went 
hastily forward to meet him, and thus covered Starkey's 
retreat. Noiselessly, then, the thief stole down stairs, his 
presence in the house wholly unsuspected by the porter. 

Indeed, Josh Waddiman's state was somewhat favourable 
to Starkey's evasion. He had been looking at the clock so 
long, it had got into his head. He had a rolling motion, 
while he stood steadying himself by the door-post, as though 
his body had been a pendulum. There was, at intervals, a 
sort of catch in his throat, not much unlike the tick of a 
wheezy old cuckoo. 

" Done your work yet, Mr. Jarman ? " 

Jimmy answered in some confusion that he had nearly 
done, and asked if Josh wanted to go to bed. 

"It's perhaps the warmest place one could be in, such a 



72 A London Romance. 

night as this. I've half a mind to make up my bed on the 
box here, by the side of the fire." 

Jimmy heard this news uneasily. How was Starkey to 
make his escape, without being detected ? Perhaps, though, 
he had d one it already? Was that a stealthy footfall in the 
passage ? The old man's yawning continued, . 

" I'll make up my bed when I've let you out You won't 
be very long, I dare say ! " 

" Not so long ; but you need not keep awake for me. 
I'll be sure to pull the door to." 

"I'd rather see myself it's all right, Sir. I've got the 
premises to take care of, you know. I've got . Hollo, I've 
got the key ! " 

It was the door-key he alluded to, which as he spoke he 
drew forth from his pocket, and contemplated, with tipsy 
gravity. Presently, the reason for its presence in that locality 
dawned upon him, and he smiled, good-humouredly. 

" I recollect, now," he said. " As I'd been detained a little 
longer nor I thought I should ha' been . I fancied you might 
ha' gone, and so I locked up and brought away the key." 

It must be confessed that this speech might not have 
been, to an unprejudiced third person, altogether confirma- 
tory of Josh Waddiman's trustworthiness. Jimmy, how- 
ever, made no remark, but pretended to go on with his 
work. The old man, meanwhile, settling himself comfort- 
ably in his chair, began to nod again. 

" He'll fall fast off to sleep presently," the young clerk 
thought, "and then I may be able to get hold of the key." 

To pass the time, however, he had better find some em- 
ployment. Frank Pickering's work was all done, but he 
had some work of his own, which he had intended to begin 
upon next morning. Among this was an account which 
Hankershanks had given him before he went away, saying 
he was to take it up in the regular course. On referring to 
it now, Jimmy concluded that his employer must have only 
carelessly read the particulars, as the account ought evi- 
dently to have been done at once. 

He set to work at it, then, glad of finding something to 
employ his time, and looked up every now and then to see 
how Waddiman was going on. But Waddiman's slumbers 
were light and broken. He nodded and lurched, and 
started back and snorted, and every five minutes, he was 
sitting up again as wide awake as ever. 



Down a Crooked Latie. 73 

In one of these periods of wakefulness, the old man threw 
on some more coal and stirred the fire up. " I don't think 
I shall move away from this to-night," he said, "and it's too 
cold to trouble to go up stairs for the bed-clothes. Whew ! 
it's cold enough to freeze the marrow in one's bones." 

It was, indeed, a bitter night, and boisterous, too ; and 
the crazy old woodwork of the overhanging house side 
strained and creaked like the timbers of a tempest-tossed 
ship. Where could that unhappy Starkey be hiding ? He 
must, by this time, be half-perished with cold. Jimmy 
began to feel very uneasy. What would the Whitakers 
think of his prolonged absence? It was too late to go 
home. A neighbouring church clock had just struck one. 

To pass the time, Jimmy went on with his work. He 
had, probably, never laboured with such energy in the cause 
of Hankershanks, certainly, never with such a result. Grind- 
ing away, if for nothing else, to keep himself awake, he very 
soon had made head against the formidable pile of papers 
he had first started upon, and it seemed not unlikely that, if 
he worked much longer, there would be no work left to do. 

Yet must he, perforce, remain where he was. The old 
man had dropped off to sleep at last ; but he was lying on 
the side where the pocket was which contained the key. 

Twice, losing all patience, Jimmy had made an attempt 
to possess himself of the coveted object, but without suc- 
cess. The second time, when his hand was on the key, an 
incautious movement aroused the sleeping man, who, start- 
ing up, glared at him in stupid terror. 

" What are you doing ? what do you want ? " 

" To poke the fire." 

" Haven't you most done your work ? I oughtn't to let 
the clerks stay here all night. I don't say there aint no 
exact order agin it, for I suppose the gov'nor thought you 
weren't likely to want to do two days' work for one days' 
wages. But it's not taking care of the premises to let such 
things go on. You must make haste." 

"Yes, yes : I sha'n't be long now." 

When three o'clock struck, the old man was fast asleep ; 
but the door-key was more inaccessible than ever. The 
time began to hang very heavily upon James Jarman's 
hands ; but how much heavier must the shivering wretch 
have found it, skulking in the cellars, dreading lest the 
slightest movement he made should lead to his detection ! 



74 A London Romance. 

Once Jimmy fancied he heard a sound as of some one 
breathing at the keyhole, and then a slight stumbling noise 
in the passage. The old porter, who was awake when the 
second sound was audible, turned his head to listen. 

"That's the rats," he said; "they come into the cellars 
by swarms. When the tide is high, they're driven upwards. 
I've seen one in this office." 

The weary hours dragged on, the old man passing the 
time in fitful slumber. The young clerk working desperately, 
resolved not to go to sleep, and so at length the first faint 
streaks of daylight stole between the great grim warehouses 
in the lane, and even penetrated the dingy office where 
James Jarman stooped over his desk. 

It was time now for Josh Waddiman to begin his day's 
work and to open the outer door. He awoke of his own 
accord, and seemed in no small degree surprised to find he 
still had company. 

"You've never been working all this time, surely? " 

" I had more to do than I thought for." 

" You must be mortal tired." 

"I am tired." 

" The Lord be thanked it's morning, anyways. That's 
the stiffest-backed beast of a chair I've ever had a nightmare 
in. There's too much wood in the seat of it to allow one 
ease, in any shape a human form can double up into." 

" Thank God, it's morning." 

The old man made up the fire afresh, and opened the window. 

" It has been a black frost all night," he said, shivering, 
" and it's cold enough now to ice one's vitals. I shall be 
no good till I've taken a thimbleful of something short." 

"If you are going to get your breakfast," said Jimmy 
Jarman, " I wish you would let me breakfast with you, and 
I will bring the money to pay for my share to-morrow. It's 
not worth while going home now." 

The old man agreed to this, and presently departed to 
make the necessary purchases. Here was the moment he 
had waited for so long, arrived at last. As soon as Josh 
had disappeared round a twist of the lane, Jimmy ran to the 
top of the cellar, and called aloud to Starkey. 

The other, looking more dead than alive, crawled forth 
in answer to his name. His face was pinched and blue 
with cold, and he trembled so violently, that he appeared to 
be scarcely able to walk. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 75 

Jimmy made some conciliatory remark, but he passed by 
without heeding it, and crouching down before the office 
fire, thrust out his hands within an inch of the flames. 

"I'm glad you managed it at last," he said ; "it's only 
just time. An hour more and I must have given in. This 
night will be my death." 

" It was not my fault," replied the younger clerk, angrily. 
" I have been waiting here all night, only to get a chance 
of letting you out. Go now, before he returns ; it will be 
best for him not to see you here so early." 

"It doesn't much matter; I've done no harm . -thanks to 
you, I shall do no harm to anyone very long. I'm booked, 
I am." 

Without one word of thanks, without one grateful expres- 
sion, he went away, and the lad turned, wearily, to his 
papers, and began to pack them up. Pausing in this occu- 
pation, he asked himself whether he had done the man who 
had just left him an injury or a service. Was it to be al- 
ways thus ? . that those for whom he made sacrifices . those 
he ran risks to serve, should turn upon him ? Would his 
motives be ever misconstrued, would he never be under- 
stood ? 




CHAPTER IX. 

ITH a very dark and gloomy face, he was gazing 
vacantly into the fire, when he heard a footstep 
in the passage. It was not the porter's shuffling 
step : it was not Starkey's. He half turned his 
head, wondering, and saw Hankershanks in the doorway. 

It wanted at least two hours of the usual time of his em- 
ployer's arrival, and James, with. his guilty knowledge of 
the past night, started and trembled at sight of him, and 
made as though he would have left the room. But Hanker- 
shanks stopped him. 

" I want to look at the papers I gave you the last thing 
yesterday evening," he said. " I'm afraid there's one I 
made a mistake about." 

Jimmy held forth the papers upon which he had'been at 
work. His heart palpitated violently, and he dare not trust 
himself to speak. The other, however, quite unconscious 
of his emotion, busied himself with the various letters and 
documents before him, and scanned their contents rapidly. 

"Hallo!" he exclaimed, "how's this? It's done then, 
is it? Who's done it? Oh, I see. You found out I'd 
made an error, and came early to make up the account. 
That's very good ! That's very sharp of you. You've saved 
me a lot of money. It's very sharp indeed. Here's a five- 
pound note for your trouble." 

He had said this, thrust the money into Jimmy's hand, 
and gone away into another office, rapidly checking the 
boy's arithmetic as he went, and Jimmy was left there, 
standing speechless, the bank-note between his fingers. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 77 

What should he do ? What could he do ? He could not tell 
Hankershanks that his reason for working after office-hours 
was to get down Frank Pickering's arrears. As little could 
he explain his prolonged stay throughout the night. No, it 
would be best to allow his employer to suppose that things 
were as he had said. But the five-pound note seemed to 
blister his hand ; somehow at the moment, he felt that he 
was ever so much more culpable than Starkey. 

He carried the other papers to his own desk, and, when 
feeling for his purse in which to place the note, felt the key 
of the safe, that he had wrested from his fellow-clerk's grasp. 
He put this away now, in his desk, and being anxious to 
see Josh Waddiman and make some fresh arrangements 
with respect to breakfast (those previously made being im- 
practicable owing to Hankershanks's return), he went out 
into the crooked lane, and looked about. 

It occurred to him, after gazing fruitlessly around for 
some five minutes or so, that the old porter might have 
looked in at his favourite public-house, and thither he bent 
his steps. Josh was not there, but he found Starkey seated 
on a bench behind the door on which, by his side, stood a 
pewter quartern measure empty. His hat was pushed far 
back upon his head, and his hair hung down over his eyes. 
He sat with his shoulders up, and his hands thrust deeply 
into his trousers pockets, one leg in the air with his foot 
against the Avail, and between his teeth he held an empty 
pipe, at which he was contentedly puffing. 

Jimmy came to a stand-still before this wretched figure, 
and contemplated it half wondering, half ashamed. An 
elderly woman serving behind the bar, seemed far from well- 
disposed towards Mr. Starkey's lounging position at so early 
an hour, and presently, finding that verbal hints were thrown 
away upon him, made believe to have some sweeping to do, 
and charged him with a broom. 

Starkey, grumbling, sat upright, and his eyes rested on 
Jimmy's face. 

"Hallo, you, what do you want?" 

Jimmy making no reply, was going away again, when the 
other stopped him. 

" Look here ; I want to have a word with you. Give me 
another half-quartern, Missus. This night's most killed me, 
Jarman. I shall never be worth a curse again. I ought to 
be at home in my bed, if I had a home or a bed. What's 



7 8 A London Romance. 

it matter, though, whether it kills me or not ? Who cares ? 
I don't." 

Jimmy looked at his companion with alarm, and seeing 
him raise the replenished measure to his lips, instinctively 
stretched forth his hand to stop him. 

"Starkey, don't drink any more." 

Starkey laughed, and holding Jimmy at arm's-length with 
his hand upon his shoulder, regarded him with an expres- 
sion which was one-third ironical, and two-thirds gin. 

u Don't you frighten yourself on my account, Mr. Jarman. 
It's not at all necessary, thank you ! What I'm drinking 
won't hurt me very much. It'll warm me perhaps, that's 
all, for the cold of that infernal cellar's eating right into my 
bones. I'm taking it neat, you see, but it's just probable 
I'll take the water separately . afterwards. Afterwards. Do 
you understand?" 

" No ; what do you mean ? " 

" My time's up, that's all, and my game played out ; at 
least, I don't care to stop for another act. I'll pull the cur- 
tain down myself, and cut the drama short. That's what 
I'll do " 

Jimmy was frightened. 

" You don't know what you are saying. Come away from 
here . out into the lane. You have not had any breakfast." 

" I don't want any. Leave go of me, will you ? You 
can't help me more than you have. If I could have borrowed 
a matter of four or five pounds . three pounds even would 
have been enough . if I could have had them for forty-eight 
hours. . And who was to have been a bit the wiser ? " 

" How do you mean ? it might have been discovered the 
first thing in the morning. The money might have been 
missed directly, and my friend Frank Pickering brought 
into trouble on your account." 

" It isn't likely. You know he doesn't balance every 
day." 

" Perhaps not. At any rate . But what do you mean ? 
You don't suppose I could see you breaking into the safe, 
and not interfere," James retorted angrily. " I should have 
been as bad as you. Even as it is, I ought " 

" Oh yes, I know," cried the other in a loud voice ; " you 
ought to do your duty. Why don't you ? "Why don't you 
give me up ? It might as well end that way as any other, 
for what I can see." 



Down a Crooked Lane. 7 9 

Perhaps Starkey was better acquainted with the nature of 
the person he was addressing than the person was himself, 
for Jimmy, fearful lest his companion should say anything 
of a compromising nature, hastily silenced him, and dragged 
him away. 

" Don't . don't talk so loud," he said, breathlessly. " Tell 
me, are you in some great difficulty, and will three pounds 
really get you out of it ? " 

" I am in the greatest possible want of that sum, and if 
you could manage so that I borrowed it from the safe " 

" No, no ! How dare you ? How can you talk like 
that?" He was silent for a moment, too angry to speak, 
but mastering his emotion with a great effort, continued, " I 
was going to say that if three pounds would be of such great 
service, I would lend them to you. See, here is a five-pound 
note. Can you get me change ? " 

Starkey took it in his hand, and stared at it amazed. At 
that moment the old porter became visible, turning the 
corner of a street about a dozen yards from where they 
stood. Anxious that Josh Waddiman should not see him 
lending the money . his motive for concealing the action he 
could not have explained to himself . James hastily motioned 
his companion to hide the note away, and said, " You can 
give me the change presently in the office." 

With a nod of intelligence which, however, was not alto- 
gether intelligible to the person to whom it was addressed, 
Starkey re-entered the public-house, and Jimmy hurried for- 
ward to meet the old man. 




CHAPTER X. 




i]T was a bitterly cold morning, almost as cold as it 
had been overnight, and Hankershanks's people 
were slow to arrive at their posts. 

As we have seen, Hankershanks himself was 
earlier than usual ; his anger, therefore, was very naturally 
excited by the tardiness of his staff. "When the hour of 
beginning work drew near, he lay in wait for them, watch in 
hand. He fell foul of the first comer two minutes and a 
half (Hankershanks's mean time) too late ; he bore down 
upon the second . five minutes late . with vulture swoop ; he 
utterly annihilated (figuratively speaking) the third, seven 
minutes behind ; the fourth slipped in unobserved while he 
was bullying the third, and affected preternatural zeal, with a 
dry pen ; the fifth, a warehouseman of irreproachable char- 
acter, got warning on the spot, and then Frank Pickering 
arrived. 

Things, since he left overnight, had gone badly with Frank 
Pickering. His Evelina and he had had some unpleasant- 
ness. There had been accusations and recriminations. At 
one period of the evening it was agreed that, all things con- 
sidered, it would be as well if they never met again. Later 
on they had made it up, but they had had a trifling misunder- 
standing at the last moment, and Mrs. Hickson insisting that 
it was time, Mr. Pickering took his leave ; going away much 
aggrieved, and passing in consequence a wretched night. 

He turned up next day at his place of business very weary 
and worn. The lane seemed more crooked and ill-paved 
than ever, as he came stumbling down it. There was the 



Down a Crooked Lane. 81 

same hateful old smoke-blackened building . the same hate- 
ful energy upon the part of the employed . the same bump- 
ing and thumping . banging and clanging. He would have 
given the world, he thought, at the moment he ascended the 
doorstep, with a heavy sigh . to be able to dream through 
the day in peace . to nurse his own wretched thoughts in 
comfort, and while away the miserable hours in a soft arm- 
chair by the fireside. 

But such was not to be. Hankershanks was waiting for 
him upon the threshold of the office. 

" What the devil do you mean, Sir, by coming here at 
this hour?" 

Frank had no reply to make. He looked at his employer 
darkly, and hung his hat upon a peg. To himself he observed 
whilst so doing, " I don't care how soon this life is at an 
end : I can't bear it much longer." 

The brute Hankershanks, yet unsated by the feast of 
lamb's blood he had had, came raging at the unhappy 
Pickering's heels. 

" What makes you come at all ? It's hardly worth while. 
But, let me tell you, my good Sir, this way of going on won't 
answer with me. Understand that. You'll have to brighten 
up, though, where you're going to." 

Frank held his peace, and got out his papers. He was 
labouring under an overwhelming sense of injury, and vented 
his just indignation upon inanimate objects . the ruler, the 
penknife, and the pens. 

Presently, Hankershanks having gone out, he was able to 
give his anger voice, and turned round to complain of his 
humble friend James. 

" What a confusion you've left everything in ! " he said. 
" This comes of asking you to help one." 

Perhaps Jimmy might have expostulated, but Hanker- 
shanks returned at the moment. 

" What are you all doing now ? " he roared out. " Why 
aren't you at your work, Jones ? Now, Smith, skulking again, 
as usual. I'll send you about your business before you're a 
week older. Here, Jarman," he added in quite a different 
tone, "come up with me to the docks. You're the only 
fellow in the place who's worth his salt. Come with me, 
and we'll take this account you made out, to the ship- 
broker's." 

There were some wondering looks exchanged when 
6 



82 A London Romance. 

Hankershanks and the young clerk had taken their departure. 
Jones wanted to know what was in the wind. Smith would 
have felt obliged if any one could tell him what was coming 
next. Robinson's smile was full of meaning, though that 
meaning was unfathomable. Frank Pickering went on turning 
over his papers, looking very angry whilst thus employed. 

Finding all his work already done, he was somewhat 
puzzled to discover some occupation for his time, and having 
taken it into his head to feel industriously inclined, he 
opened his safe and began to count over his petty cash. 

He had not been thus engaged very long, before he began 
to exclaim loudly. One of the others asked what was the 
matter. 

" I can't make the money right. Just reckon this up, 
Jones, will you? I've gone over it twice already, and 
cannot make it agree." 

Jones went through the figures. "There's five pounds 
short, if that's all the cash you have in hand." 

" That's all the cash I've got. Somebody must " 

The rest looked up. Somebody must what? was the 
question their eyes asked. Frank Pickering was examining 
the safe, and had found a deep scratch running across the 
surface of green paint, from the keyhole towards one side. 
Noting this circumstance, without knowing what importance 
to attach to it, but with a vague notion of something wrong, 
he went back to his desk and recounted the balance of cash 
in hand. Then, with a suspicion that some of his arithmetic 
might after all be a little faulty, he raised the lid of Jimmy's 
desk to get some account-book he knew was there, and 
found a key. 

The key was of a peculiar make, and not easily to be 
mistaken ; it was the key of the iron safe. But what key ? 
There should have been but one. 

Frank, holding it in his hand, looked back at the other key 
he had left in the lock, and then back again at this one, and 
then, he noticed something very singular. Upon the end of 
the barrel was sticking a little of the green paint that had 
been scratched off the door. 




CHAPTER XI. 

jjHILE he was yet endeavouring to find an answer to 
this riddle, Starkey came slouching in at the door, 
and took his seat, sulkily, in the corner he usually 
occupied. 

" Where's Jarman ? " he asked. 

"The model clerk, you mean," responded Jones, with fine 
irony. " The junior partner that is to be." 

"Junior what? What's the joke? I don't see it.'' 

Smith, taking up the story, then related how Hankershanks 
had spoken of Jimmy before them, and how such compli- 
mentary expressions, never before within the memory of 
mortal clerk, had been applied to one of them by Hanker- 
shanks the insatiable, exacting and abusive. 

Frank Pickering here broke in with this astounding in- 
telligence : . - 

" Somebody's been at my safe. I've been robbed of five 
pounds." 

" Robbed ! How ? When ? " 

" Last night. Here's the key that was used." 

" In Jarman's desk ? " 

"Yes." 

Starkey, with a very white and unwholesome face, was 
listening to these remarks, holding on to the edge of the 
table with a tight grip, as though otherwise he feared he 
might lose his balance and fall to the ground. The rest 
crowded round Frank Pickering, who in a great state of ex- 
citement, and very red in the face, was making incoherent 
declarations regarding his own punctuality and exactitude, 
6.2 



84 A London Romance. 

the baseness of James Jarman's treachery, etc. etc., some ot 
which he lived long enough to be much ashamed of. 

Jones and Smith, too, rushing at hasty conclusions, had 
already tried and convicted the absentee, and sentenced him 
to an impossible term of penal servitude. Robinson, for the 
sake of argument, took an opposite view of the case. 

" It's strange he should have another key, and you not 
know of it. I admit that, but then mightn't the gov'nor 
have given it to him ? . they seem to be hand and glove." 

" But the five pounds ? " 

"He authorised him, perhaps, to take it out of the safe." 

" But why did he not say he had done so ? " 

" He forgot it, perhaps." 

" Forgot it ! How could he ? " 

" He hadn't time to tell you. The gov'nor took him out, 
you know." 

Starkey took no part in the argument. He was still very 
white, and still clung to the sides of his desk, something like 
a drowning man clinging to a rock. Robinson appealed to 
him : . 

" What do yon say ? Is it likely he has taken the 
money ? " 

" Let me look at the key." 

Starkey spoke in a thick voice, and stretched forth an un- 
steady hand. 

When the key was handed to him he turned it over and 
over. The others looking on noticed that he had been 
drinking, but this was not a very unusual occurrence with 
him. He was very often a little fresh during office hours ; 
sometimes quite early in the morning, as upon this occasion. 

" Does this key unlock the safe ? You've never tried it, 
have you ? " 

It was true that this formality had not been deemed neces- 
sary. Robinson was temporarily triumphant; but not for 
long. The key on being tried was found to open the iron 
safe easily. Starkey spoke again. 

" I saw Jarman with that key yesterday morning. He had 
it on his desk, and I went to speak to him, and he seemed 
not to want me to see it, and hid it away." 

This statement was made in something of a jerky and 
hesitating fashion, as though the facts were wrung out of him 
much against his will. His manner of giving evidence was 
not quite as honest and truthful as a court of justice would 



Down a Crooked Lane. 85 

have required, but the hearers accepted what he said as 
damning evidence of Jarman's guilt, and the case was 
already very positively made out against him. 

Starkey said no more then, but he wiohed to get away 
somewhere and think matters over quietly. One thing seemed 
to him as clear as day . Jarman had used the key to abstract 
the five-pound note from the safe, the five-pound note out of 
which he had received a loan of three pounds. The recol- 
lection of Jarman's virtuous indignation made his blood 
boil ; but he congratulated himself upon his own sharpness 
in the business ; there was some consolation in that. 

"When he found that he was discovered, he'd have blurted 
out the whole truth, that's very sure. I've stolen a march 
on him by being the first to peach." 





CHAPTER XII. 

did not occur to Frank Pickering, at this early 
stage of the affair, to feel sorry for his humble 
friend's unhappy crime, and the certain disgrace 
and punishment awaiting him. Nor did any 
tender memory of the poor youth's blind devotion and dog- 
like fidelity, during the course of the great Evelina love- 
match, in any way prompt him to try to screen the wrongdoer, 
or maintain any degree of silence upon the subject of his 
defalcation. 

The object in life of Frank Pickering just now seemed to 
be to prove that he was the most accurate of book-keepers 
and reliable of arithmeticians, and also the most injured 
person upon the face of the earth. 

Before the day was half-an-hour older all the persons em- 
ployed upon Hankershanks's extensive premises were dis- 
cussing the scandal, and the clerks and workpeople next 
door were soon well-informed upon the subject; so that the 
news spreading, with a gently-increasing exaggeration as to 
the amount of money missing, it was reported at the public- 
house Josh Waddiman used about two hours afterwards that 
there had been a great robbery down the lane. 

" One of Hankershanks's chaps has bolted with a matter of 
five hundred pounds." 

It was not until some time after noon that James Jarman 
returned. He came in advance of his employer, who called 
in somewhere on his way. 

Frank and the other clerks were waiting in a flutter of 
excitement for Hankershanks's return, and were somewhat 



Down a Crooked Lane. 87 

shy in the culprit's presence. It might almost have been 
supposed, by anyone who knew no better, that Jones, Smith, 
and Robinson were the veritable robbers ; with such a 
shamefaced aspect did they regard Jimmy Jarman's approach, 
and so studiously did they avoid his eye. 

The felonious one came in looking as usual . he had 
always a hang-dog air with him, and a furtive, sneaking way ; 
everybody of course had noticed that over and over again. 
He came in now, perhaps, more briskly than he had ever 
clone, and went straight to his desk. 

They all watched him searching for something, and 
noticed that he glanced uneasily across at Starkey. Then 
he rose and made a sign to that person to follow him 
out. 

Starkey affected surprise. " What do you want ? " he asked, 
innocently. 

Jimmy was anxious, it seemed, not to attract general 
attention. He nodded mysteriously, and made telegraphic 
signs. The others, watching every movement furtively from 
behind their desks, lost none of this. 

" Come out. I must speak to you." 

"Tome! What about ? " 

Starkey followed with these words, and with an expression 
of injured innocence. Turning at the door, however, he 
signalled intelligence with the others. 

James, not a little surprised at Starkey's manner, awaited 
his coming, but Hankershanks appearing at that moment 
upon the threshold of the street-door, he led the way into a 
warehouse room a little farther on, vacant just then, owing to 
the workpeople having gone to dinner. 

Here, finding they were alone, James at once said what 
he had got to say. 

" I went away in a hurry, and left my desk unlocked." 

" Well ? " 

" I left the key in it, and it has been taken out." 

"Well?" 

" Do you not understand? I mean the key of the safe." 

Starkey did not immediately reply. Although he had 
been expecting this interview for the last three hours, and 
had been endeavouring to prepare himself for it, he was yet 
unprepared. 

Jimmy went on, " You have got it, of course. But yoy 
must give it me back." ' ' ' 



88 A London Romance. 

Starkey had hitherto kept his eyes averted. Now he raised 
them, screwing up his courage with a great effort. 

" I've not got your key. I know nothing of it. "What 
do you mean ? " 

Jimmy was dumbfounded. He gasped again. 

Starkey continued, " There's been a fine row, I can tell 
you. They know you've been at the safe." 

" I been at the safe ! How dare you say such a thing?" 

Starkey raised his voice and assumed a bullying tone. 

" Don't bawl at me like that. I say I know nothing of it, 
and you know very well where you got that five-pound note." 

" The five-pound note I lent you three pounds out of? 
By-the-way, you have not given me back the change." 

" No fear. I'll give that back to the person it belongs to. 
You're a nice fellow, Jarman, I must say, to come the virtuous 
adviser over me. It was a pretty 'cute idea of yours, wasn't 
it, to lecture me, when I talked of borrowing a pound or 
two, and then when I had shown you the way, to do it your- 
self, and oblige me with a loan ? Now look here, suppose I 
tell the whole affair ? " 

" Suppose you did, who would believe that you were not 
an accomplice," asked James Jarman, very quietly, "after 
changing the note ? " 

Starkey rejoined savagely, " What proof is there of the 
truth of your story ? Nobody knows I was here last night. 
And after all I only meant to open the safe. I did not do 
it. You're not going to get the better of me, please to un- 
derstand ; and if it's to be a matter of swearing, one can 
swear as well as another." 

Poor Jimmy lost all patience. He would have given the 
world, he thought just then, to be able to heap writhing sar- 
casm upon this ungrateful wretch, and yet when he would 
have spoken there were tears trembling in his eyes. 

" How can you treat me so ? You would have been a 
thief . a convicted thief, perhaps, if I had not come in 
time, and as it is " 

" As it is, you stole the money yourself." 

"I did not!" 

"Come, I say, where did you get your five pounds from? 
You got it somewhere very early this morning, for last night 
Josh Waddiman tells me you had only got one shilling in 
your pocket, when he got you some tea. Who gave you 
five pounds this morning? Hankershanks himself, perhaps?" 



Down a Crooked Lane. 



89 



" Yes ! " replied Jimmy. 

"Yes !" exclaimed Starkey, derisively. 

" YES," another voice rejoined . a voice behind them, 
which they both well knew. It was the voice of the person 
whose name they had last used. 

Hankershanks himself stood in the doorway. 






m^S! 


in 


far 


rei^ 






(jm 


j2pC%. 'itf frSi 


\J$k 


Z£Sk 


1b 


iaSiScS 


^^36&^| 



CHAPTER XIII. 




HEN the head of the house entered the office, a few 
minutes previously, he saw by the excited looks of 
the assembled clerks that some startling event had 
taken place. Frank Pickering had his statement 
to make. 

" Somebody's been at my safe, Sir . where I keep my petty 
cash, and there's five pounds missing, and another key of the 
safe, Sir . we found it in Jarman's desk, Sir." 

Hankershanks did not wait for further explanation, but 
followed James Jarman, pushed open the door of the room 
where he and Starkey were talking, listened, and interrupted 
the conference, as has been described. 

A little crowd of clerks and warehousemen awaited the 
result of Hankershanks's movements. More than one held 
himself in readiness to fetch the police. 

Hankershanks having his back turned towards them, they 
followed closely on his heels, and, when he looked round, 
retreated in haste, bumping up against one another in a way 
which was wanting in dignity. Presently he came back to 
the office, followed by Starkey and James, and took his seat 
at a raised desk, as though on a judgment seat; the two cul- 
prits arranging themselves one on* either side, with an expres- 
sion as though of preparation for a great struggle to 
come. 

The other clerks gathered round eagerly, all those getting 
seats who could do so ; the warehousemen, being of an in- 
ferior class, keeping in the background and peeping over one 
another at the open door, Ij; #ac auite a d^matic scene 



Down a Crooked Lane. o i 

with all the enthusiasm about it of a theatrical trial ; a great 
eagerness to act as witness on either side, and about any- 
thing, was particularly noticeable. 

Hankershanks opened the enquiry. 

" You accuse Jarman of stealing a five-pound note out of 
the safe ? " he said to Starkey. 

Starkey here would have amended his accusation. " Yes 
or no?" enquired the judge imperiously. 

Then Starkey put on a bold front. " Yes, I do," he said 
bluntly. 

Hankershanks went on. " He gave you the note, too, if 
I understand rightly ? " 

" Yes, he did," defiantly. 

" Have you got the note here ? " 

" No, I changed it." 

"Where?" 

"At the Feathers, up the lane." 

Hankershanks here produced five sovereigns, and with a 
wave of his hand indicated that he required the assistance of 
a messenger. A rush of hirelings thereupon arising, he 
selected one, whom he despatched to " the Feathers up the 
lane " in search of the note ; and while he was gone the court 
waited in silence. 

" This note," said Hankershanks when the note had been 
brought back, "is one I gave Jarman myself this morning . . 
one I made him a present of. I received it last night, and 
made an entry of the number in my pocket-book. Picker- 
ing ! " 

"Yes, Sir," from Pickering, with much briskness of 
manner. 

" You are five pounds short in your accounts ? Let me 
see your accounts." 

Accounts produced. Elaborate explanation from PicLer- 
ing as to the meaning of certain erasures, underlinings, and 
marginal memoranda; Hankershanks, very calm and col- 
lected, adding up large rows of figures with a steady deter- 
mination, his brows knitted the while. 

Breathless interest among the assembled clerks ; some 
pushing and shoving in the passage without, and snatches of 
whispered remonstrance. 

Suddenly Hankershanks looked up . 

" Here, Pickering, I don't see any mention made of the 
money you paid for me yesterday afternoon. Here are the 



92 A London Romance. 

bills, though, receipted. How much do they make to- 
gether ? " 

Pickering, blushing very red, then turning very white, be- 
gan to stammer . 

" One is three, seventeen, six, Sir. The other is two, two, 
six, Sir." 

" That makes five pounds, I think," said Hankershanks . 
" that makes the five pounds you missed, doesn't it ? " 

Frank Pickering returned an inaudible reply. Poor Picker- 
ing ! this made matters worse, for Hankershanks roared out 
in a voice of thunder . 

" Is that the five pounds you have been making all this 
to-do about ? Is it owing to your confounded blunder, that 
your fellow clerk has been called a thief?" 

The warehousemen outside . owing to the pushing and 
shoving, and a timidity among those in the front row, who 
fell back and half closed the door whenever Hankershanks 
glanced in their direction . had not followed the course of 
events too closely ; and an idea was prevalent in the passages 
that Pickering had been convicted a robber, and that it was 
for him the policeman would, presently, have to be fetched. 
It was, at any rate, some sort of satisfaction to know that a 
policeman was to be fetched at all, and many held themselves 
in readiness to go upon the errand, when the order should 
come, with all despatch. 

Frank Pickering, meanwhile, was making a further reply . 
still inaudible. Hankershanks waved him off, and went on 
in his voice of thunder. 

" There turns out to be no five pounds missing, and the 
five pounds this fellow Starkey accuses Jarman here of steal- 
ing was given to Jarman by myself. So far, then, the whole 
of this story of Pickering's is a cock-and-bull story, without a 
shadow of foundation, and arising only out of his own 
blunder-headed stupidity." 

Mental writhings, as it were, on Frank's part . a whisper 
circulated in the passage to this effect, "Aint Pickering 
a-getting of it hot, neither ! Aint the gov'nor just a-dusting 
of his jacket ! " Frantic delight among the crowd outside, 
for no particular reason, except that it is some one else " get- 
ting it," . somebody else's "jacket being dusted" . upon the 
same principle as that actuating the humble retainers of a 
pantomime king (King Payne, for instance), when his majesty 
kicks and cuffs one of their number. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 93 

Hankershanks went on : . " So far, then, the whole business 
is so much waste of time ; but now with respect to this fellow 
Starkey, it would seem that very early this morning he broke 
into the office and made an attempt to rob the safe." 

" It is a lie," from Starkey. 

Hankershanks, without heeding him : " Had not Jarman 
here been fortunately present, engaged upon some important 
work I gave him to do, this fellow Starkey would have com- 
mitted a robbery. As it is, he stole nothing, because he was 
prevented. You can take yourself off, if you do it quickly. 
I don't care to take the trouble to prosecute you. Move out 
of the way, you there at the door, and let him pass." 

Starkey, making some unintelligible protestation, moved to- 
ward the door, perhaps not altogether sorry to get off so 
easily. Upon the threshold, however, Hankershanks called 
to him. 

" Stop, though, if you please : give Jarman back his five 
pounds." 

Starkey turned, and answered doggedly . 

" I haven't got them. I've spent three pounds." 

" Where are the other two ? " 

He came back, and feeling in his pockets very slowly, 
produced two sovereigns. 

" Bring or send three pounds here between this and six 
o'clock, and you are at liberty to go where you choose ; if 
not, I set the police upon you." 

Starkey went away this time without further interruption, 
and somehow, by hook or by crook, he found the money re- 
quired of him, and sent it by hand to the office within five 
minutes of the expiration of the time allowed him. But they 
saw no more of Starkey himself down that crooked City lane; 
nor was he ever after heard of by any except one of the 
actors in the little drama. 

When Starkey was disposed of it was Josh Waddiman's 
turn, and terrible was the fury of Hankershanks which de- 
scended upon his head. Frank Pickering anon came from 
the presence in a limp and despondent state, and sat upon 
the stairs leading to the warehouse rooms above, and wept. 

Jimmy found him thus employed, and offered consolation. 

" Don't take on so about it. What does it matter ? I am 
sure I don't care." 

"I don't see what you've got to care about," retorted 
Frank. " You haven't come out of it so badly, and if it 



94 A London Romance. 

hadn't been for you muddling up the accounts so I shouldn't 
have got into the row at all." 

" I'm very sorry if it was my fault," said Jimmy ; " you 
know I did it to help you, anyhow. I know I'm not a 
very good one at figures, but then I went over them very 
carefully once or twice. Besides, I didn't touch your petty- 
cash account. However, I'm sure I'm very sorry." 

On the whole, perhaps, it was noble conduct on Frank's 
part to forgive the friend he had falsely accused. You will 
find as you grow older, sanguine and youthful reader, that 
you must expect to be hated when you are injured, for it is 
found easier to love one's enemy than one's ill-used friend. 

It was altogether an extraordinary day's experiences for 
James Jarman, following a strangely-eventful night ; and one 
of the most curious of its many curious incidents had yet 
to come. 

Hankershanks bade him come into his private room 
during the afternoon, and having fastened the door, shook 
hands with him. 

" You're a queer sort of mixture, Jarman," he said. 
"You're an unhappy young devil, and will have a miser- 
able time of it before you die, or I'm very much mistaken. 
But I can understand you a little, I think ; and as far as I 
can like anyone I like you. You acted to that fellow 
Starkey very much as I acted a good many years ago to 
just .such another fellow, when I was a clerk myself. He 
turned round on me afterwards, and robbed me of the love 
of the only person in the world I ever cared for. I might 
have died of a broken heart, if I hadn't made up my mind 
instead to make money. You'll find through life most 
people cheat you when they have a chance, and do you 
an injury whenever they get an opportunity. I'll keep my 
eye on you, and I'll . I'll do you a good turn." 

He patted the boy on the back here, and faltered in his 
speech, as though he were almost inclined to say something 
kind to him . as if he would have liked to have done so, but 
was ashamed. Instead, he pushed him towards the door, and 
said, " That's all . you can go." 

So Jimmy went, wondering very much at this strange 
glimpse of Hankershanks in an amiable light, a hitherto un- 
dreamt of phase in his character. 

It was, however, a phase which was seen no more . with 
but one notable exception of which more anon . by either 



Down a Crooked Lane. 95 

Jimmy or an)' other person upon the establishment ; for 
henceforward in his character of employer did Hankershanks 
make the most unmitigated brute of himself, and sorely vex, 
and chafe, and worry all who belonged to him ; to that ex- 
tent, indeed, that the life of his creatures became a burden 
to them, and some abandoned his service, risking the fearful 
penalties set down as heretofore described in the famous 
document signed, sealed and delivered, and sought refuge in 
flight. 




CHAPTER XIY 




HE world up Holloway was going on meanwhile 
about the same as usual. Evelina's back was said 
to be a little better. She was said to be a little 
better generally. 

Nothing more had transpired respecting the proposed tran- 
sportation of dear Frank to the unhealthy part of Jamaica. 
He weakly supposed that the idea had been abandoned, and 
prematurely rejoiced. 

These were indeed happy days . almost. Frank had quite 
forgiven Jimmy now. You see his was a love which over- 
flowed, as it were, verbally, and a bosom friend was an 
absolute necessity. He must have somebody to tell his 
tale to. 

He told his tale to Jimmy at enormous length. There never 
was such a tale, and it required a concentration of attention 
upon the listener's part of a serious nature. It was not at 
all unlikely, that if the listener left off listening even for half 
a moment, he lost the thread of the narrative, took a wrong 
view of the case, and got himself later on into hot water by 
espousing the views of the other side. For there was another 
side, entertaining opposite opinions to those of dear Frank 
. opinions which one need hardly say were in every respect 
monstrously unreasonable and absurd. 

The other side was in point of fact " that ass of an old 
Hickson " . in other words, the beloved one's father . a pig- 
gishly obstinate creature, who never could be got to see the 
point of dear Frank, in whatever light dear Frank was ex- 
hibited to him. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 97 

An amusing feature in this love affair was that the parents 
on either side would have it that their respective offspring 
might have looked higher. There seemed to be a notion 
harboured in the parental mind, upon the Hickson side, that 
it was quite likely some of these fine days a person high up 
in the social scale might be passing by on his prancing 
palfrey, and looking into the front parlour over the flower- 
stand, see the fair Evelina reclining upon her couch, and 
fall in love with and seek her in marriage. 

Again, that silly old woman at the fancy repository be- 
lieved that anyone with the airs and graces of her Frank, 
might aptly mate with the proudest patrician, and that the 
female sex generally would only think itself too much 
honoured by the connexion. 

As to the fond ones themselves, they did not entertain 
these exalted opinions respecting their own worth. Evelina 
was all in all to her Frank, and Frank was all in all to his 
Evelina. 

They were very devoted. On Frank's nights, Evelina 
waited for him in a pretty flutter, trembling and blushing at 
each footfall in the street. Sometimes a common trades- 
person would come to the door, bringing some of his vulgar 
wares . groceries, fire-wood, or the like . and she would 
nutter and tremble at his approach. 

But dear Frank's knock she knew among a hundred, and 
went and opened the door to him herself. The maid-of-all- 
work knew his knock also, and did not interfere. Frank 
and his Evelina were generally seven or eight minutes 
traversing the length of Mr. Hickson's passage from the 
street door to the parlour. 

On Frank's nights he and she sat apart often hand in 
hand, and the rest of the family pretended not to notice it. 
It was known to all visitors to the house that they were 
engaged. Indeed, it was no secret in the street, and the 
servant girls called one another to the windows of the 
houses opposite when Frank was seen coming up. 

Thus passed away some happy weeks, and Frank began to 
forget all about Jamaica, when one day Hankershanks re- 
opened the subject with horrible abruptness. 

"You'll have to start in three weeks from now, Pickering," 
said he one morning : " get yourself ready." 

The terrible tidings fell like a thunderbolt that evening in 
the Hickson's front parlour, and crushed the gentle creature 
7 



98 A London Romance. 

whose life was wrapped up in Hankershanks's unhappy hire- 
ling. A terrible scene ensued- . hysterics, smelling salts> 
burnt feathers; the doctor fetched from the next street; 
some ungenerous abuse of Frank on the mother's part. 

At the fancy repository also there were loud lamenta- 
tions. " Don't, don't, mother, for Heaven's sake ! " Frank 
cried ; " you will drive me mad among you," 

It was wonderful what Jimmy went through at this time 
in his devotion to his friend. He worked like a horse, with- 
out a word of thanks. He performed prodigies of disin- 
terested labour, and nobody took any notice of him what- 
ever. 

He was everlastingly hard at it, with messages and parcels. 
He had not half enough sleep. He had all Frank's work to 
do at the office, for Frank had forgiven him that mistake he 
had never made, and allowed him to render what assistance 
was in his power; . in other words, he conducted Frank's 
duty entirely. 

There never were three such wretched weeks as those 
preceding Frank's departure, nor, indeed, such tedious weeks 
to some concerned. Mrs. Hickson was heard to say she'd 
be glad when it was all over. To Frank and Evelina the 
prospect was dark and dreary enough, and Frank said he did 
not care what became of him when they were parted. Some- 
times in a tremulous voice, he would begin with, " When I 
am gone . " but hysterical indications silenced him. Once 
he said, "When I am no more." 

How terribly quickly the time seemed to have gone, when 
it was gone ! . when the last week came, when the last day 
arrived. For the last day did come in due course, as days 
of happiness and days of sorrow will, no faster and no slower 
for our prayers and tears, our shuddering dread and wild 
longings. 

Your marriage day is settled for to-morrow, and to-morrow 
is the day appointed for the carrying out of Jack Jailbird's 
sentence in the interior of Newgate prison ; and the hours 
fixed for both of these interesting ceremonies will come 
round to those'. and they are many millions. who are not 
the slightest degree interested in the fate of either of you ; 
they will come like any other hours of the twenty-four . 
come and pass unnoticed. 

The awful day arrived for Frank's departure. Everything 
had been got ready. Poor Pickering's box was packed, and 



Down a Crooked Lane. 99 

his fate was sealed, and he was booked for the dismal swamp 
in Jamaica. 

Those who knew nothing of the tales of deadly snakes 
and deadlier fever, said that his fortune was made. There 
were many thousands of desperate wretches who would have 
clutched eagerly at the chance, bad as it was ; but Frank 
was in love, you must remember, and even if he could have 
seen his way to fortune quite clearly, without the fever or the 
snakes, he would not have been happy, . for what was 
fortune without the beloved one ? and the beloved one 
being a fixture in England, and fortune only obtainable in 
Jamaica, there was no temptation for the devoted Frank. 

Indeed the poor young fellow's plight was a most deplor- 
able one. Ke could not shirk the journey, for his mother 
would have been ruined by Hankershanks holding her to the 
letter of her bond. He knew that his affianced bride was 
too ill to go with him, and believed the shock of their part- 
ing would in all probability kill her, and yet how could he 
avert this evil ? He was penniless . powerless. 

During the Reign of Terror the condemned Royalists in 
the Paris prisons, we are told, made merry and made love, 
ate, drank, danced, diced, passed wild nights of mad merri- 
ment and drunken orgie, expecting always that as likely as 
not the next morning might be their last, and that the dread 
tumbril would call to take them on their last drive, to where 
Doctor Guillotin's clever invention was to "make an end 
on 't." They said in excuse that they wished to show the 
canaille how blue blood bore itself in the hour of trial, and 
how game the ancient noblesse could die. 

Dear Frank, it is to be regretted, was not as heroical as he 
might have been, as the last day approached. He broke 
down frequently and bewailed his fate. As a general rule 
he bewailed it in his Evelina's presence, when surely he 
ought rather to have supported and encouraged her in this 
hour of trial. 

Strange to say, several quarrels arose between the true lovers 
just at the last, and Frank, in great bitterness of spirit, told 
his mother he was sure that heartless girl would forget him 
as soon as he was gone. The old lady thought such an 
event by no means unlikely, but she did not tell her darling 
so. Instead, she comforted him to the best of her ability, 
which was not great. 



ioo A London Romance. 

Now and then Frank's mother perhaps felt a little jealous 
of the sallow beauty's dominion over her darling's heart. To 
her, Evelina had always been a lean lackadaisical creature, 
with deep-set eyes, large irregular features, and with some- 
thing of a discontented poodle-like expression, which the 
heavy bell-rope curls heightened considerably. 

" I can't tell what my Frank can see in her ! " was the old 
lady's exclamation one day when she and Jimmy were upon 
the everlasting subject. 

But that is the way with women. They never can see 
what we see in other women, and we can never see what 
they see in other men. 

Frank did see a great deal in her. Sometimes he left her 
presence in a rage and came stamping home to be cross to 
his mother ; but next night he was again at the beloved one's 
sofa-side, and then they made it up, and then it was . Oh 
blissful, with a big O. 

The poor old mother meanwhile pined hopelessly for the 
love " that girl " had robbed her of. She would sit and 
watch her darling whilst he ate and drank at tea-time. 
He often found her eyes filled with tears when he looked at 
her across [the tea-table. During the evening she would 
make all manner of small excuses for being near him, and 
she would often gently press his hand or pat his head. She 
would have liked to have sat at the foot of his bed and 
watched her hero slumber. When slumbering he generally 
lay on his back and snored. 

He was so wrapt up in the great and overwhelming 
passion, that he had hardly time to notice all this, and 
the old lady's little love offerings were for the most part 
thrown away. But what did she care ? She wanted no re- 
turn ; so that she might not altogether lose her darling, that 
was all she cared for. 

" Oh ! I shall be so lonely when he is gone,'' she said to 
James. " How shall I ever bear up against it ? But I must, 
you know ; and I must not let my poor boy think I take on 
so, or else it will make him more unhappy than he is. He 
has quite enough to bear." 

'.' I wish I could go in his place," said Jimmy. 

" Ah, if you could ! You have no mother to grieve for 
you." 

"I don't think I have anybody to grieve for me," said 
Jimmy ; " I mean not very much." 



Down a Crooked Lane. 101 

From this day James Jarman had a great notion, which 
was a profound secret, to be imparted to nobody . not 
even to the friend of his bosom. Henceforth he wrapt him- 
self, as it were, in a cloak of mystery, and took melodramatic 
strides to appropriate music. 

He was more silent than ever, thoughtful, preoccupied. A 
grand scheme was hatching in his brain ; presently he would 
astonish everybody, or he thought he would. The hour of 
triumph was approaching. These selfish wretches would be 
put to shame, would see him in his true light, would know 
how nobly he had sacrificed himself. 

During these days of mystery Jemmy was absent many 
hours of an evening on secret errands. He was often sur- 
prised making inexplicable calculations in his pocket-book, 
or upon odd scraps of paper. It was said that he had 
saved money since he had been in Hankershanks's employ. 
He was heard to jingle gold, and when he thought himself 
unobserved, he counted and recounted a very small hand- 
ful of sovereigns. 

One day a glimpse of the truth revealed itself. He had 
made the necessary enquiries and calculations, and found 
that he had just money enough, if he could get some one to 
assist him with five pounds, to buy a small a small outfit of 
the extremest limit of smallness which would serve him for 
the voyage. If, then, he could get his friends to give their 
consent, and to help him a little, he might take Frank's 
place, provided Hankershanks had no objection. 

At first sight there seemed no insurmountable difficulties 
in the way. At home the Whitakers were for ever regret- 
ting that he was not permanently provided for, for they 
could not believe in anybody else employing him should 
Hankershanks withdraw his patronage. 

" Mark my words," the Reverend Mr. Wapshot had often 
remarked, "that boy will never get on in the world . 
no, never. That boy wants rousing . he ought to be 
roused." 

The idea that Jimmy wanted rousing was a prevailing idea 
in the stage carpenter's family ; and they roused him pretty 
frequently, and to such an extent indeed, that the poor 
little beggar had small peace of his life. 

" It is a pity," Mr. Wapshot continued, " that he does 
not emigrate. In some new country, with plenty of hard 
work before him, with no kind friends upon whom he could 



io2 A London Romance. 

lean for support, he must rouse himself . he couldn't help 
himself." 

" Do for Goodness' sake, boy," cried Mrs. Whitaker, " take 
your hands out of your pockets and sit up straight, and look 
as if you had some life in you." 

It seemed to Jimmy that after what had been said he 
ought not to have much difficulty in persuading the family to 
see that his transportation in the place of Frank Pickering 
would be a very good thing indeed ; and one Saturday night 
he made up his mind to break the matter to them. 

He thought it well over, and arranged very carefully all he 
was going to say. Indeed, he threw a great deal of the 
nicest ingenuity into his selection of phraseology, and the 
little plots and plans he formed for leading up to the subject 
in an artistic style. 




CHAPTER XV 




JIT was a very good night to talk the matter over. 
The Great Sahara was shut up just at the time, 
and Sam Whitaker would be at home. There was 
not much doing in the shop after nine o'clock on 
a Saturday evening, and Mrs. Whitaker generally put forth 
all her culinary powers on that day, and made a pie. 

Mr. Wapshot, too, very seldom came in on a Saturday : 
he had his discourses to prepare for the coming Sabbath. 
Altogether, there could not be a more favourable oppor- 
tunity. 

On his way home Jimmy repeated again and again what 
he had to say, and more than once came to a standstill, and 
asked himself in a nervous flutter what the first sentence was 
to be, which he had forgotten whilst rehearsing the second. 

So engrossed was he with his thoughts that his legs could 
not keep time with them, and again and again he broke out 
into a run, and yet, when he reached Stonywold Court, he 
was a little late. The fact was, Mrs. Whitaker's clock was 
fast, and she had served up supper earlier than usual. 

The customary pie had been made, but here again the 
fates were against James Jarman's little scheme. The cus- 
tomary pie-dish had been accidentally broken, and, at the 
last moment, a smaller one employed perforce in its stead. 
Most unexpectedly too Mr. Wapshot had dropped in, and 
though saying every moment he could not possibly stop 
another, had at last allowed himself to be persuaded to stop 
to supper. 

Owing, then, to the good lady's perturbation upon this ac- 



104 A London Romance. 

count, she had somehow made a miscalculation regarding 
the capabilities of this said pie, and when Jimmy made his 
appearance he found it all served out in portions, and none 
left for him. 

" Why, bless the boy," cried Mrs. Whitaker, very angry 
at having made a mistake, "he's always behindhand. There, 
sit down, will you ? It's your own fault." 

Jimmy would have explained that if anything he was 
rather earlier than usual ; but had he done so Mrs. Whitaker 
would have been angrier still, and he was particularly anxious 
to have her in a good temper. 

"The pie's all gone now," said Mrs. Whitaker; "you 
can't expect people to wait all night for you." 

Jimmy was rather hungry, but he knew it would only make 
matters worse to say so ; besides, as the pie was gone, what 
could be the use of doing so ? He therefore said he didn't 
care for anything particularly. He thought bread and cheese 
would do. 

Mr. Wapshot looked over at him with his mouth full of pie. 

" Bread and cheese will do ? " he repeated. " What a 
strange expression, James. How many poor creatures 
are there who haven't even got bread, without the 
cheese ? " 

Jimmy offered no remark. He began to fear that this 
would not prove as good an opportunity as he had hoped 
for breaking the matter uppermost in his mind. Pulling the 
bread and cheese towards him he helped himself, and was 
just going to begin to eat; but Mr. Wapshot still had his 
eye on him. 

" What, without asking a blessing ? " 

Hereupon Jimmy was brought up short with a sharp rap 
on the head from Mrs. Whitaker's knife-handle. 

" How can you, James ? Put it down, Sir, do, and do 
what Mr. Wapshot tells you." 

But a sort of lump rising in Jimmy's throat, choked his 
utterance ; so Mr. Wapshot, folding his hands over his pie, 
said grace for him instead, and William, folding his hands 
over his pie, said "Amen;" and then Jimmy ate several 
mouthfuls of bread and cheese, that took a great deal of 
swallowing, and Mrs. Whitaker, shaking her head, said, " Ah, 
James, I'm afraid you've got a bad heart." 

During this episode Sam Whitaker went on steadily with 
his supper. There was reason to believe that he thought 



Down a Crooked Lane. 105 

Mr. Wapshot's way of asking a blessing unnecessarily 
lengthy. He did not, however, make any objection, or 
openly rebel against these newly-imported ceremonies. Upon 
one occasion, while one of these long graces was going on, 
he made a sort of feint of making ready to begin to eat, but 
he never did actually begin until the grace was quite finished. 

Jimmy kept his eye upon the stage carpenter. It was to 
him he intended to state his case, and he wanted to do so 
before all the rest, because otherwise he would have to tell 
his stoiy over and over half a dozen times. But no favour- 
able opportunity occurred, and the supper was ended before 
he had spoken. 

After supper Mr. Wapshot began to talk, and Jimmy saw 
no chance of getting in a word. Sam, sitting by the fire- 
side, smoked his pipe, and then, growing sleepy, pulled off 
his boots and prepared to take his departure on tiptoe, so 
as not to interrupt Mr. Wapshot's discourse, or perhaps . 
who knows ? . to avoid having to shake hands and say good- 
night to him. 

Jimmy saw that the last moment had come, and started up. 

"Oh, uncle, have you any objection to my going to 
Jamaica ? " 

Sam Whitaker was much astonished. 

" This evening ? " he asked. 

The rest listened, open-mouthed. Jimmy explained, not 
that evening, of course ; but very soon . in a few days. 

Sam said, " Why Jamaica ? Why not Australy ? " It took 
some time to explain to him that it must be Jamaica under 
the circumstances. 

" I'll go and see Mr. Hankershanks on Monday morning, 
and talk the thing over," Mr. Whitaker said ; but this plan 
Jimmy did not approve of. At any rate, he would like to 
break the matter first, as he had not yet got Hankershanks's 
permission. The question was, would Mr. Whitaker find 
five pounds to put to the other money James already had, 
to buy the outfit ? 

But Mrs. Whitaker was of opinion that the least that 
Hankershanks could do was to find the outfit himself. 
" Or else," she said, " let him find somebody else." 

Jimmy then explained that he had found somebody 
else, and that it was a favour to be allowed to go in this 
other person's place; but Mrs. Whitaker said she would 
like to hear a little more upon that subject, and she her- 



io6 A London Romance. 

self would go down the first thing on Monday morning 
and speak to Mr. Hankershanks. 

Here Mr. Wapshot came into the discussion, and sug- 
gested that as it was very clear James would never make 
a place for himself in the world unless he were thoroughly 
roused, it would be as well to give him the chance, as he 
had reason to believe some portions of Jamaica might have 
the desired effect; and he reminded the family that, for a 
long time past, they had been wishing for an opportunity 
of finding an opening for James Jarman in the colonies. 

The family seemed inclined to take a more favourable 
view of the case upon this, and it was settled before bed- 
time that he had better go. The subject was resumed 
next day and further discussed, and it was settled then 
that it was the very best thing that could possibly happen 
to him. In the course of the discussion, some allusion 
being made by Jimmy to snakes and yellow fever, Mr. 
Wapshot took the matter up very warmly, and hoped that 
James would not throw away what was, perhaps, his only 
chance in life. 

From the turn the conversation took at this point it 
would almost have appeared as though all his life through 
Jimmy had most selfishly kept on refusing to go and make 
his fortune in Jamaica, because of some cock-and-bull 
story about snakes and yellow fever. 

When at last Jimmy had obtained everybody's consent at 
home, he went to Hankershanks, who refused point-blank. 



CHAPTER XVI. 




ND now the last day had really come. All was 
settled. Frank was to be the victim. The hour 
that the ship was to sail had been ascertained, 
and poor old Mrs. Pickering was to go down 
with and bid her darling farewell on board. 

It had been settled that Jimmy was to accompany them, 
and they waited until the last moment, in the hope of his 
arrival. But there must have been some mistake. He was 
not there at the starting-place to meet them. 

"He must have made some blunder," said Mrs. Picker- 
ing. "Do you recollect, dear, what you arranged ? '' But 
Frank recollected nothing ; indeed the cab had twice to 
return for odds and ends forgotten in the hurry of de- 
parture. 

Although much out of the way, he insisted that they 
should pass through the street in which his Evelina resided. 
She was not to be seen at the window, and all the blinds 
were down. 

" Can anything have happened ? " he cried. " Oh, 
mother, shall I jump out and ask ? " 

" No, no. We are very late as it is. No, I am sure 
there is nothing the matter." 

And to herself the old lady could not help adding, 
" Drat those Hicksons' stupidity ! Why on earth must 
they leave their blinds down, in that idiotic fashion, just to 
frighten my poor boy.'' 

She was not at all nervous upon Evelina's account. She 
never quite believed that Evelina was really as ill as was re- 



108 A London Romance. 

presented. It was only because her Frank was so fond of 
her, that she believed in Evelina at all. 

After some delay, they continued their journey. They 
had to travel to Bristol by rail, and were in hopes of 
finding Jimmy waiting for them at the station. But he 
was not there. Frank was very vexed at this . somewhat 
indignant indeed. 

" He must have known what train we were to take, we 
have talked so much upon the subject." 

" He will surely never let you go, Frank, without saying 
good-bye. It is really very inconsiderate, when he knows 
how we depended on him. He might have made himself 
useful " 

Frank was inclined to take a gloomy view of life, of 
everybody, and everything. 

" Oh, it is all alike ! " he said. " Who ever heard of one's 
friends helping one ? Who ever heard of friendship lasting 
. of love enduring ? Catch him putting himself to any 
trouble ! " 

Mrs. Pickering, however, was tempted to give Jimmy 
another chance of redeeming his character. 

" We mustn't judge him unfairly," she said ; " you know 
he has run about for us a good deal altogether." 

" Oh, yes . certainly, certainly," cried the cynical Frank. 
" He has been devotion itself. I have been inconsiderate. 
I have overtaxed his powers of endurance." 

Upon making enquiries at the station, it turned out that 
there were other trains later. They accidentally met one 
of the officers of the ship, who told them that probably the 
captain would go down by a later train, or perhaps even by 
a train next morning, if by any unforeseen event the ship 
should not sail at the appointed hour. 

There was, then, a probability that even yet Jimmy 
would retrieve his character. Mrs. Pickering, anxious to 
make every allowance for him, suggested they ought not to 
give him up until the last train that night. 

The mother and son made somewhat of a dreary journey 
of it down to Bristol. We all know these journeys pre- 
ceding a parting. How we hope for, and yet dread the 
ride's end . how we console ourselves for the cold and dis- 
comfort by the reflection that even these are far preferable 
to what is coming, that at least we are suffering in company 
with those we love. 



Down a Crooked Lane. 109 

It was a cheap train which conveyed Mr. and Mrs. 
Pickering down to the ancient maritime city and it stopped 
at every station. The officer whom they had spoken to, 
rode with them in a second-class carriage, and did his best 
to cheer them on the way. 

He had made the voyage ever so many times, and had 
seen some rough weather. He did not think that wrecks^ 
very often occurred. The ship was a good one, was at any 
rate seaworthy, but the accommodation for officers and 
crew was as bad as it well could be. When once fairly 
started upon this subject, their companion grumbled at his 
own lot, at intervals, all the rest of the journey. 

When they arrived at their journey's end, they went 
straight on board, and Mrs. Pickering immediately insisted 
on seeing which was Frank's berth, and judging with her 
own eyes whether it looked comfortable. It looked any- 
thing but comfortable, she thought, and there was, it 
seemed to her, no room to turn round in it. 

" Quite room enough," their friend the officer told 
them ; " one wants to be snug and close when the rolling 
sets in." 

After all, then, there were to be rolling seas, mountains 
high ! angry waves ! furious winds ! this great ship tossed to 
and fro like a chip upon the raging waters, and her darling 
at the mercy of the elements ! 

She sat down for a moment feeling faint and giddy. The 
scene in all its terrors came before her, and instinctively 
her fingers tightened upon her boy's arm. At any rate she 
had him safe yet. The wind had not risen. 

" The old lady is poorly, I think," the officer whispered ; 
"the fatigue of the railway has been too much for her. 
Stay, and I will run and fetch her something from the 
steward." 

When they were left alone the mother could sob for a 
few moments unrestrained upon her child's breast. But 
she calmed herself quickly, knowing that this display of 
emotion would unman him. 

" It is very selfish of me to grieve so at losing you, 
dear," she said, "when I know that this change will be the 
making of you. And seven years at the outside, what is it 
. if you only keep your health ? " 

That was the point. If he only kept his health ! But 
the place where Hankershanks's branch establishment was 



no A London Romance. 

situated seemed to have been a perfect sepulchre for 
Hankershanks's clerks. Fever had swept away two-thirds. 
The snakes had bitten the remainder. Their friend the 
officer had been compelled to admit, when closely pressed, 
that the climate in some parts of Jamaica was uncom- 
monly trying, and that if he might believe what he had 
been told, the bite of the Jamaica snakes was particularly 
deadly. 

The mother and son went on shore, and had a meat tea 
at an hotel, where the old lady engaged a bed. Then they 
walked about the town, and as they found the walk par- 
ticularly dull, they went to the theatre. Long afterwards 
they recollected this miserable evening. The performances 
consisted of Venice Preserved, and a " favourite farce ; " but 
there were two of the audience who did not enjoy them- 
selves in the least. 

Several times during the evening Frank, pulling out his 
watch, wondered how things were going on at Holloway, . 
what Evelina was doing . whether she was very ill. His 
mother, as patiently as die could, talked with him on this 
soul-engrossing topic, and when she lost patience, directed 
his attention to what was passing on the stage. 

He returned to the vessel, and it was agreed that she 
should come and bid him good-bye the first thing in the 
morning. Neither of the two slept much that night. But 
how was it Jimmy had not come ? Was it possible, Mrs. 
Pickering suggested, that Hankershanks would not give 
him a holiday, to see his old friend off? Once Frank 
wondered whether it were possible he had not money 
enough to pay his railway fare. But this could not be the 
cause of his absence, for Mrs. Pickering had given him the 
money, forcing him to take it, in spite of many objections, 
because, as she said, he was putting himself to this expense 
on her son's account. 

" That makes his conduct worse," said Frank ; " I did 
not think so badly of him." 

In the morning all the passengers were assembled on 
board by the captain's express desire at a very early hour, 
but the captain had not come down. He was, however, 
expected by the first train, and presently a cry was raised 
of " Here he is ! " 

The poor mother's heart seemed to stop beating; it was 
as though some one had cried, " Here comes the execu- 



Down a Crooked Lane. 1 1 1 

tioner." But few moments were left to them now. She 
would really have to say good-bye at last. 

But it proved to be a false alarm. The captain had not 
come ; something detained him, an officer said, who was to 
have come down with him, but had come by himself. 

There was some one else for the ship. Another passenger? 
No, all the passengers were on board. Who then ? A very 
pale young lady with heavy black ringlets, that fluttered 
with a green veil in the wind. 

" Look, look, mother ! See who it is ? " 

But the old lady's eyes were dimmed with tears, and she 
could not see plainly, and next moment Frank was pressing 
his Evelina to his heart. 

"Oh! my dearest one," he cried, "what brought you 
here ? Oh, this is noble of you . noble ! " 

Evelina sobbing in his arms replied incoherently, 

" I cannot live without you, Frank. I have tried . oh ! 
I have tried, but I cannot. If you go, Frank, I must go 
with you." 

" But it is impossible." 

Frank naturally thought of the extremely limited scale of 
the accommodation which had been allotted to him, and, as 
it was, how very cramped he had been for space during 
the night. 

Evelina went on sobbing. Then a desperate idea took 
possession of Frank's mind. As it was certain he could 
not take Evelina with him . it was pretty sure the captain 
would not allow it . why not throw up his own passage ? 
Why not defy Hankershanks, run all risks, run away al- 
together, and he and his Evelina begin the world together, 
and seek their fortunes somehow, as true lovers have done 
before and found it answer . in books ? 

But the recollection came to him next moment, that he 
had a mother who had a fancy repository, and that upon 
her and it would fall the chief weight of Hankershanks's 
vengeance, and then he said, " Let us be calm. Let us be 
reasonable." 

They were as calm and reasonable as they could be after 
this, and talked things over quietly, with bursts of rapture 
intervening ; and the time quickly passed away until the 
next train arrived, by which the captain came down at last, 
and preparations for immediate departure were commenced. 

But the captain had not come down alone. There was 



112 



A London Romance. 



somebody else for the ship. A passenger ? No, that could 
not be, and yet it must be a passenger, because he had a 
box with him. Evidently a passenger, and an excited one, 
who waved aloft an umbrella as a signal that the ship was 
not to set sail before he got on board. 

Frank, looking in the direction in which the others were 
looking, recognised James Jarman. 




CHAPTER XVII. 




j]FTER all, then, Jimmy had not forgotten his friend. 
Forgotten him, indeed ! If Frank Pickering had 
only known how hard he had been working in his 
cause ! 

The previous day had been a tremendously busy day at 
the warehouse down the crooked City lane, and Hanker- 
shanks had been in such a bad temper that there was no 
approaching him with safety. Jimmy wanted to get his per- 
mission to leave about noon, but when that hour approached 
it would have been more than his place was worth to make 
such a request. The result was that Jimmy put off asking 
until after office hours, and then Hankershanks having gone 
away, suddenly he determined to call in Bloomsbury Square, 
get leave to stop away next day, and start by one of the 
night trains. 

It was a dangerous experiment to go and beard the lion in 
his den, but then Jimmy could not bear the idea of failing to 
see his friend off. 

" He'll be in an awful rage," the lad thought as he raised 
his hand to the bell-pull ; and when he heard what a noise 
he had made by the jerk he had given the wire, he for a 
moment felt half inclined to run away. 

Hankershanks, after a long pause, came down himself to 
open the door. His greeting was not very encouraging. 

" What the devil do you want ? " 

" I wanted to ask you before you left the office to allow 
me to stop away to-morrow." 

" Why ? " 
8 



ii4 A London Romance. 

'.' I want to see my friend off in his ship." 

" That fool Pickering ? " 

" My friend Pickering." 

" Come inside." 

James followed him in and up stairs to the attic which 
Hankershanks used as sitting-room and bed-room. The 
place was very dirty and smelt strongly of red herrings ; 
the latter circumstance attributable, James presently found 
out, to the fact that certain culinary operations were in 
progress. 

The old man emptied some things off a chair on to the 
floor, . among them a plate which broke as it fell,- . and 
told Jimmy to sit down. He then went to look after his 
gridiron, and was for some minutes occupied in transfer- 
ring its contents to a dish upon the table. This feat 
achieved, he sat down to his tea, and ate and drank in 
silence. Jimmy looked on. He was so long about his 
meal, however, his companion began to feel almost afraid 
that his presence was forgotten ; and yet, as he sat directly 
opposite to Mr. Hankershanks, this was scarcely possible. 

At last the silence was broken. 

"This Pickering is a friend of yours, then, is he?" 

"Yes, Sir, a very dear friend." 

"To be sure. You wanted to take his place at Jamaica, 
didn't you ? " 

" Oh, Sir, if you would have allowed me to do so, you 
would have caused such happiness ! His mother is nearly 
heart-broken about his going, and she cannot afford to 
pay the penalty and keep him here. He was engaged to 
be married, too ; and the poor young lady is too ill to go 
with him. Oh, if you had only let me go ! " 

" Do you still wish to go ? " 

" If there were time, Sir, I should like it above any- 
thing in the world. They would all be so delighted ! It 
would make them so happy ! " 

"To get rid of you, eh? And you would sacrifice 
yourself ? " 

"It is no sacrifice. I have no reason for wishing to 
stop here " 

Hankershanks went on with his tea, for a few more 
minutes. Then sat thinking. 

" Perhaps there's not time ? " 

" Oh yes, Sir, I think so. There's a train to-night abou 



Down a Crooked Lane. 115 

ten, and one to-morrow morning early, if the ship does not 
go exactly when they say it will." 

Hankershanks was silent again, and presently rose to 
look at his watch. 

" It is half-past seven now. You would have time to go 
and fetch a few clothes from home, and bid them good- 
bye. You had better take a cab there and back '" 

Jimmy sprang delightedly to his feet and prepared to go. 
Hankershanks opened his purse. 

"Here are two ten-pound notes. Put them away some- 
where safely. Come back here, and I will go with you to 
the station. Can you let yourself out ? " 

Like one in a dream, Jimmy answered, and walked to- 
wards the door. When he was passing out, Hankershanks 
called to him . 

" You'll think of all this some day, and think what a 
fool you have been. I had taken a fancy to you . never 
mind. Go your own way. There are some people who 
have these chances, and chuck them in the road. I'll do 
something else with my money." 

Jimmy passed out without comprehending his meaning. 
It was only long afterwards that he fully understood what 
his eccentric employer was hinting at, and then Hanker- 
shanks was dead, and it was too late. 

When Jimmy reached Stonywold Court, he found that 
Mrs. Whitaker and William had gone to a prayer-meeting, 
it being Wednesday evening. Sam Whitaker was at the 
theatre, busy with the scenery of a forthcoming novelty. 
Only Ann was left at home. He went into the parlour 
behind the shop, where she was sitting. 

" Well, Ann," he said, "I am going." 

" Going where ? " 

" To Jamaica." 

" To Jamaica, after all ? And when will that be ? " 

" In a few minutes. I have just come in to say good- 
bye, and fetch my things." 

Ann rose in excitement at this news, and let fall her 
work. 

" But, James, you can't go like that ! They are all out. 
You must wait till they come in, or till I fetch them." 

" Never mind them, Ann. You must say good-bye for 
me. Will you come and help me pack my box ? " 

She followed him up stairs, and they got the things read 
8.2 



1 16 A London Romance. 

together, and filled a small trunk with Jimmy's effects. 
When they were all in they shook rather loosely as he carried 
them down stairs. 

While they were packing, Ann said . 

" Jamaica is a long way off, isn't it ? " 

" I think it takes about two months to get there in a 
sailing ship." 

" It is a long way, then." 

They went on packing. 

"You have not been very happy at home here, have 
you, Jimmy ? " 

" Not very happy . lately." 

" I thought you hadn't." 

Down in the parlour Jimmy paused to look around. Had 
he forgotten anything? No: then he had better be off. 
There was no time to spare. 

" I must say good-bye now, Ann, I suppose." 

" Yes, I suppose . Good-bye." 

" Good-bye." 

They shook hands, and Jimmy prepared to lift up his 
trunk. 

" I wish I had been kinder to you, Jimmy." 

Jimmy's eyes filled suddenly. She held out her hand 
again, and her face, and he kissed her. He was going 
to say something, but just then the shop-bell tinkled. Some- 
body had come to spend a penny. As Ann did not go for 
a moment, the penny was knocked impatiently upon the 
counter. 

Meanwhile Jimmy shouldered his small trunk, and then 
walked hurriedly out. Next moment the cab drove away. 
Then Ann served her customer mechanically, and corning 
to the door, looked wistfully out into the darkness. 

A man with a street organ, the very same man who 
came that night two or three years ago, when Jimmy ran 
away, came up, and began to play a simple air popular 
at the time. Ever afterwards, when she heard the same tune 
again, Ann used to think of the old days in Stonywold 
Court . the mean little shop . the prayer-meetings . the 
person who was so impatient to spend a penny . Jimmy, 
going away for ever, carrying his box. 




CHAPTER XVIII. 

j]T was indeed Jimmy, with this same box, and with 
an umbrella which Hankershanks gave him. He 
brought with him, too, a letter for the captain. It 
was from the great Mr. Hankershanks, making 
some monetary arrangements about the change of passengers. 
The captain was personally known to Hankershanks, and 
the matter could therefore be settled without any great diffi- 
culty, when Jimmy's object was once understood. 

But it was not a very easy matter to make all concerned 
understand it. Frank Pickering, for instance, had so 
thoroughly given himself up to despair, that it was almost 
impossible to convince him that all hope was not gone : 
that, on the contrary, he was saved from the jaws of the 
Jamaica snakes . that he and his Evelina need not be parted 
after all. 

At this moment, when all was bustle and confusion, when 
there was not an instant to spare either for explanation or 
future plans, poor Evelina's overtaxed strength unfortunately 
gave way, and she fainted. Therefore, as Frank and Frank's 
mother had enough to do to look after her, and convey her 
safely to the shore, there was nobody to see to Frank's 
luggage but Jimmy Jarman ; and as he was away looking 
after it, there was no time to thank him for the service he 
had rendered his friends. 

It was not possible to get all Pickering's effects away, be- 
cause some were not at the moment come-at-able, and it 
occurred to Jimmy, that as they would be of use to him on 
the voyage, and useless now to his friend, that he might as 



n8 A London Rotiiance. 

well buy them. At the last moment, then, he hurriedly put 
the case to Frank, and thrust one of the ten-pound notes 
into his hand, saying, from what he recollected, that must be 
about the value of the goods. Frank subsequently said that 
Jarman got them a great bargain, but he generously added 
that he did not grudge his gaining by the transaction, after 
the kind way he had acted. 

And now at last all the passengers for shore had departed. 
Frank and his mother, and his Evelina, and his box, were 
all safely landed. Evelina, happily, was showing signs of 
returning consciousness. 

Already she had opened her eyes, and looked wildly 
round . had seen her Frank, and ecstatically murmured his 
name. 

" You are not gone, then ? . not yet ! . not yet ! " 

" I am not going at all, dearest," Frank whispered, and 
pressed her hand in his. 

Meanwhile the ship was in motion, and passing out of 
sight. When they came to think the matter over, during 
their first moments of calmness, they all at once recollected 
that no one had shaken hands with their benefactor and 
wished him good-bye. 

Thus, then, the vessel started on the voyage, which was to 
carry James Jarman to the land of snakes and fever. It was 
a foggy morning, and the rising mists soon hid the ship from 
sight. He was gone for good or for bad. He was gone, 
and they never more were to look upon that strange thought- 
ful face, that slight meagre form, which for some months 
past had been a familiar presence. 

In Stonywold Court they talked the matter over at some 
length. Mr. Wapshot, indeed, discoursed eloquently upon 
the subject, and while he talked Ann sat apart, her chin 
resting on her hand, gazing into the fire. 

"What's the matter, Ann?" Mrs. Whitaker asked. 

"I've got a headache," the girl replied. " I think I'll go 
to bed." 

Down the crooked lane the house of Hankershanks was 
harder at it than ever, and Hankershanks more severe and 
overbearing. Within six months Frank Pickering got his 
fiisrhargej and went home to live with his mother unti} 



Down a Crooked Lane. 119 

something else turned up : but nothing did turn up for some 
time to come. 

Within a year that affair with Evelina Hickson, about 
which a good deal has been said off and on in this volume, 
was finally broken off by the young lady herself; for it fell 
out that when she was at Bristol, she met some friends of 
her family, and they persuaded her to stay there for a few 
days, which she did with her parents' consent, and the 
change of air did her a great deal of good ; and it was, in 
fact, while she was down there that she met the very Captain 
O'Grady who was the cause of an estrangement between 
her and her beloved Frank. 

Thus then the world went round ; and the good ship Sea 
Swallow went upon her way, and fell in with angry winds, 
and went down in lat. 22 10' N., long. 73° 32' W. 




III. 




LAT. 2 2° IO N., LONG. 73" 32' W. 

CHAPTER I. 

j|N board this same Sea Swallow, James Jarman fell 
a-dreaming with his eyes open, and dreamed a 
dreadful dream. 

They had not been out in the open sea more 
than a couple of days, when Jimmy awaking one morning, 
thought he would like to lie a little longer after he had been 
called to breakfast, and lay there in his berth all day. 

Hearing that it was not sea sickness which kept him thus 
confined to his cabin, and wondering somewhat at the de- 
scription given him by the steward, the doctor came to see 
how Jimmy was getting on. A while after, he spoke rather 
gravely to the captain. 

"That young fellow who took his friend's place . I almost 
wish he hadn't been in time.'' 

" Why so ? " the captain asked. 

" Because he might as well have died on shore." 

" As bad as that ? " 

For many days James Jarman still lay in his berth, and 
lying there lost count of time and place. His world grew 
in these weary days to be so very limited a world, and he 
got so used to its narrow dimensions, he could not bring 
himself to believe that there had ever been another and 
wider one in which he had played a part. 

No, it could not be otherwise. All his life he had been 
lying here. He knew the peculiarities of the cabin so well, 
every knot in the wood, every flower in the moulding. He 



Lat. 22" 10' JV., Long. 73° 32' W 121 

could not know these so well if he had not lain always there, 
where he was lying now, listening to that strange rushing 
sound never ceasing upon the outside of the wooden parti- 
tion, outside the world. 

This idle life was not without its anxieties either. Some- 
times he would think to himself, " How can I afford to go 
on lying here for everlasting, doing nothing?" and then 
there came the comforting thought, however it might be 
done, it was done, and things had gone on very comfortably 
for a long while . always, was it not ? 

But when would this life come to an end ? When he 
reached Jamaica? Where was Jamaica? How far off? 
Why was he going there ? Why had not his friend, Jimmy 
Jarman, gone in his stead? Would Hankershanks marry 
Evelina, now that Mr. Wapshot had married Mrs. Picker- 
ing ? What made that rushing noise on the outside of the 
world ? Some one when he asked had said it was the sea. 
What was the sea ? Was it wet ? 

This puzzling question distressed him more than any 
other. He was thoroughly convinced that he had got to do 
with a dry sea. It could not possibly be a sea of water 
similar to any other sort of water, when he so near it was 
yet so hot, and dry, and parched. That point was settled, 
then, it was a dry sea of dead leaves . of bleached bones 
perhaps ; but an ever-restless sea of some sort, always rush- 
ing past . rushing past on the other side of the panel. 

He communicated some of his thoughts upon this point 
to the steward, who said . 

"Try and go to sleep, it will do you good." 



CHAPTER IT. 




HERE came a day at last when the rushing sound 
suddenly ceased, leaving only a faint buzzing in 
the sick lad's ears, and then the world left off 
rocking, and stood quite still. 

The doctor that day came down to see Jimmy in his 
cabin. Jimmy could not for a long while understand who 
this strange gentleman could be who called on him so 
regularly, and shook hands so kindly. And the doctor said, 
" You're better now. You'll be all right soon, I hope ; only 
you must keep very quiet." 

"Yes, I should like to keep quiet," said Jimmy. 

He felt that he ought to keep quiet as long as he could, 
for they had told him he would be sure to be roused when 
he got to Jamaica. 

Now that the sea had stood still, he began to hear 
noises overhead . the swift hurrying to and fro of naked 
feet . the tread of heavy boots . the rattling of chains. 
One day being shaken by a series of severe bumps, he 
asked what was the matter, and was told by the steward 
that they were taking in water on deck. Two days after 
this, the doctor coming down again to see him, said, 
"You must try and get well now; I've so many others to 
attend to." 

After this it seemed to him that the doctor looked very 
pale and worn himself when he paid his next two or three 
visits, and then suddenly his visits ceased, and the steward 
came to him and said . 

" The doctor's dead ! " 



Lat. 22 s 10' N., Long. 73° 32' IV. 123 

A short time after this, Jimmy began to notice that the 
other person who shared his cabin did not go on deck in a 
morning, as he had been wont to do, but lay all day in his 
berth, and rolled from side to side and groaned. Then the 
rushing sound began again, only much louder than it had 
been before, and the world rolled to and fro and pitched 
with an unusual motion. 

This motion continued and grew worse, as it seemed to 
Jimmy, and strange noises overhead annoyed and terrified 
him ; but his illness had grown worse too, and he found it 
more difficult than ever to understand what was passing 
around. Some snatches of talk, however, reached him from 
time to time, and once he heard the captain say . 

" AVe're in a sorry strait now if this gale continues, for 
half our men are laid up, and every one is more or less 
stricken with the malady." 

Jimmy could not tell how he came to know it, but he did 
soon know that the malady the captain had spoken of was 
brought on board in the water, and that from its effects 
many had died, . among them the doctor. 

Waking from his dreams again for a few moments, either 
before or after the captain had spoken, he heard a pas- 
senger speak, . a passenger who had made the voyage 
several times before, and who was complaining of the 
quality of the ship. 

" An old tub like this will never hold out if we're to have 
much rough weather." 

" There's no fear yet though," some one else said. 
" No, not yet. This is nothing." 

A sailor's voice reached him next, answering another 
passenger. 

" Danger ? . no. Danger of what ? It's only a little 
fresh." 

This little freshness which rocked the vessel like a cradle, 
and scattered the contents of the cabin far and wide, 
swelled presently into a raging tempest. Then the wind 
increasing in its fury, shrieked amongst the canvas and 
cordage, and the waves thundered against the ship's sides, 
and rolling over the deck washed away a man or two, 
whose hold upon rope, or rail, or ring-bolt was not firm 
enough ; and then a heavy sea was shipped, and with a 
tremendous crash the mainmast was carried away and the 
ship was all .it once a wreck. 



1 24 A London Romance. 

But all this while the sick lad still lay in a dreamy, 
senseless state, with but a vague glimmering of what was 
passing around. He heard the heavy tramp of feet, the 
sound of angry elevated voices . of an indescribable con- 
fusion. He had a sort of dim notion that it was very 
probable his last moment was not far off, and that he 
would sink with the sinking ship and drown like a rat in 
a hole, but he did not feel sufficiently interested to rouse 
himself. 

Lying there neglected, . for tins was not a time to think 
much of such useless lumber as sick and dying men, . 
Jimmy caught snatches of strange talk from passers-by, 
and now and again pale frightened faces looked in at 
the door, and their owners' eyes wandered wildly round 
as though in search of some place of safety . some means 
of escape. 

He heard a father bidding his wife and children farewell, 
lest when the last dreadful moment should come he might 
be separated from them. He saw a woman, young and 
beautiful, but with disordered dress and loosened hair, who 
tossed on high her arms, and sobbed and raved in her rage 
and terror at having thus to die so young. 

There was one man . a man of about fifty years of age, 
slight, meagre . with sallow cheeks and sharp features, who 
peeped in at the door of the cabin, and fancying the place 
unoccupied came in and was very busy under the swinging 
lamp. Jimmy watched him curiously, and saw that he had 
gold and notes, which he stowed away very carefully in an 
oilskin bag and buttoned in his breast. He evidently had 
made up his mind not to land a beggar upon shore if he 
were lucky enough to reach it with life. But this man, with 
the rest, was doomed to die. 

He saw, too, another passenger who was bent on saving 
all he could of his earthly goods . a scared creature with 
an ashy face ; and this deluded one was holding on most 
tenaciously to a hat-box and an umbrella, as though he 
were only on a Thames steamer, and intended to step 
on shore at the next pier. But this one did not even 
reach the boats in which the others left the fated vessel, 
for a great wave washed him from the deck, luggage 
and all. 

What other sights and sounds were there ! Groups of 
frightened women screaming and sobbing ! Every now 



Lot. 22" 10' N., Long. 73" 32' IV 



125 



and then a sailor rushing below, panting for breath, half 
naked, gazing hurriedly around, . then hurrying away again 
responsive to some loud, impatient voice on deck. 

And then the motion grew more violent, the cabin 
seemed turned upside down, the light went out, and there 
was a deafening crash. Then Jimmy, thrown violently from 
his berth, lay half stunned by the fall. 




CHAPTER III. 




HE sea at rest. A dead silence 
light breaking in through 
head. 

The moon was shining in 



\. faint bluish 
some aperture over- 



upon him. He lay 
cold and wet upon the floor, too weak to move. Some over- 
turned furniture in front of him had hidden him probably, 
if they had come to look for him before they took to the 
boats. 

Perhaps they had not come. At any rate they were gone 
now. They had left him, perhaps thinking him dead. He 
was alone on board the ship ! Quite alone ; in an awful 
silence left to die ! 

But presently, as he lay there helpless, he heard a faint 
rustling sound not far off. Somebody or something, man or 
beast, with a painful motion as though its limbs were crip- 
pled, was crawling down the cabin stairs to the saloon, into 
which the door of James's cabin opened. 

Looking out earnestly, he in a few moments saw come 
between him and the light a man's figure, bare-headed, 
dressed only in shirt and trousers, with naked arms and 
breast. 

He heard 
the violent 
smashing 



then 



jerking 



cautious creeping 
of a 



sound 
the 



followed by 
open ot a door, and the jingling and 
of glass. A moment's silence and then the 
sound of drinking in great gulps. The figure came back 
then into the light, and waved its bare arms, brandishing 
in one hand a bottle, and stood still to gaze in at the cabin 
door. 



Lett. 22 10' N., Long. 73° 32' IV 127 

Witli an instinctive sense that he had to do with a 
drunken madman, and was entirely helpless and at his 
mercy, the lad, exerting all his little strength, strove to 
shrink away into the darkness ; but he had not the power 
to do so, and the moonlight fell full upon his face. 

The other cried out to him, " Hallo there ! aren't you 
dead too ? The rest they've left behind are dead ; I've 
counted them. There are four. We're six in all." 

He raised the bottle to his lips and drank and laughed ; 
and then, to Jimmy's inexpressible relief, turned and crawled 
away again up the cabin stairs to the deck above. 

Then the dead silence was once more unbroken, and the 
moonlight streaming in, in one long narrow ray, alone re- 
lieved the pitchy darkness covering all else. It was bitterly 
cold. 

Later on in the night, the sound of wild laughter reached 
him, and a succession of shrill cries and a splash. Once 
he fancied he heard some one on the cabin stairs, . and 
waiting and watching in intense horror, swooned away 
again. 

When he opened his eyes again, day had broken, and 
the first faint streaks of dawn replaced the moonbeams. 
All was perfectly silent now. He still felt the cold ; but 
had only a confused sense of pain or ought else. He 
had begun to dream again, and in his dreams the long 
hours of day passed away, and the twilight gathered 
round him. 

But then a noise upon the deck above aroused him, 
and steps upon the cabin stairs, and some figures with 
lights came to look in at him, stooped over him and raised 
him up. 

"Here's one here who has yet a spark cf life in him." 

"Not dead?" 

" Not quite." 

No, he was not dead. He had got his part to play in a 
strange drama over there in the old country. It had been 
better, perhaps, had he died here. 

And now, in a few plain words, the history of what had 
happened. The crew and passengers, with the exception of 
Jimmy and the sick and delirious man in his cabin, both 
supposed to be too ill to move . had taken to the boats, 
and those boats were swamped before they could reach 



128 



A Lotidon Romance. 



the shore. James Jarman, thus left to die, was, of all the 
ship's load, the only survivor when a boat's crew from a 
passing vessel boarded the deserted wreck. Within six 
hours of his rescue, the gale again sprang up, and what was 
left of the ill-fated vessel went to the bottom, lat. 22 10' N., 
long. 73 3 2' W. 




IV 



AT A HOUSE WITHOUT A NUMBER. 



CHAPTER I. 




WIDOW lady . a Mrs. Whitaker . lived, just ten 
years ago, with her daughter, at a house without 
a number, in a street without a name, on the 
outskirts of a bran-new rising half-built neigh- 
bourhood, S.E. of London, called Straggleton New Town. 

This neighbourhood had begun some time before with 
a railway station, where trains arriving set passengers down 
in the middle of marshy wastes, a good mile away from any- 
where any one seemed likely to want to go. Then there 
had come a gas works. Several rows of ten-pound tene- 
ments followed. Then a public-house . a Forlorn Hope set 
out so as to catch all four winds without attracting any 
particular custom. 

After this some shops. To begin with, a chemist's. 
Two provision stores opened almost simultaneously, each 
kept in the dark by the landlord regarding the rival establish- 
ment. A draper, a sanguine hatter. Another chemist ! A 
tobacconist, combining periodicals ; a baker, a butcher, a 
green-grocer, an undertaker, . the last on a large scale, 
thoroughly prepared to bury all the rest of the neighbour- 
hood if need be. 

Almost immediately after these shops opened, they began 
to fail. Some of them had a sickly look about them from 
the first day. Their scanty stock spread out left great gaps 
in the windows and on the shelves. Flies settled down 
upon and dealt destruction to the show goods. The sun 
bleached, browned, curled and shrivelled what the flies left 
9 



130 A London Romance. 

unspoilt. As for the public, they did not seem to care about 
buying anything in the New Town, getting credit perhaps at 
other shops a long way off in the Old Town, or obtaining 
their purchases cheaper in London itself. 

Some of the private streets were remarkably unlucky in 
their tenants, and there was one particular street, too, more 
unlucky than the rest. Here, before No. 3 was quite built, 
the people at No. 1 had the brokers in. There were 
tenants who took the houses hopefully, and made all the 
necessary arrangements, except paying in advance, but never 
moved into the houses, and where nowhere to be found 
when wanted for the rent. There were others again who 
moved in, and presently out, just before the rent was due, 
conveying away cartloads of goods right under the very 
noses of the police, who yet saw nothing. 

One day in the London Gazette three bankrupts simul- 
taneously filed their petitions from Straggleton New Town. 
Then the neighbourhood began to get an unlucky name. 
Even the sanguine chemist gave it up as a bad job, and took 
to pool at the hostelry of the Four Winds. 

A rumour spread through the New Town one night that 
the person who had taken the fancy repository . (it began in 
the tobacco line with half a window devoted to current 
periodical literature) . had blown his brains out. This dread- 
ful news proved happily to be without foundation. He 
had only said he had a good mind to blow his brains 
out. Poor creature, trade had been desperately bad with 
him. He had had sufficient provocation to urge him to 
this desperate act, some of the neighbours were willing to 
admit ; but somehow there was something soothing in the 
idea that someone else was making a very poor thing of it. 

A few days afterwards posters were stuck about upon the 
walls and hoardings of the New Town, which bore reference 
to a sale about to take place, the particulars of which 
caused much astonishment to those who stopped to read. 
For instance, the following : . 
"Lot 1. One gross of mixed furniture. 
" Lot 2. Three gross of assorted kites. 
" Lot 3. One gross of dolls' heads, assorted. 
" Lot 4. Two dozen push toys, and various animals loose. 
"Lot 5. One gross of assorted bellows toys. 
" Lot 6. Four gazelle heads, caricature soldiers, dandies 
and bookworms. 



At a House Without a Number. 131 

"Lot 7. Exhibition balls various, marbles, tambourines 
and pianofortes. 

" Lot 8. One gross assorted soldiers of all nations." 

These wonderful things formed part of the stock at the 
repository, for its proprietor, as the man at the Forlorn 
Hope public-house put it, had "broken up . broken up 
very small indeed." Eventually it was believed he did 
really blow his brains out in another new neighbourhood. 

Meanwhile a new man came to Straggleton New Town 
and took the departed toyman's shop, and it got about that 
everybody said, . which meant, one person had said so at 
the Forlorn Hope . that the new man was the right sort, 
and would make his way. It was enquired timidly by some 
already established in trade, who did not make much way 
themselves, and rather dreaded any opposition, what par- 
ticular line the new comer was likely to open in. 

No precise information being forthcoming upon this point, 
those who knew everything said, " Whatever line it is, he's 
the right sort, depend upon it." 

There certainly was a confident style about the new 
man when he talked of what he was going to do, and the 
way it was going to be done. The landlord entered re- 
luctantly into his plans of improvement in the shop and 
premises, but the new man carried his point in many re- 
spects. The new man was young, but he had every faith 
in himself. Though his scheme when revealed did not strike 
the landlord as remarkably likely . apart from the fact that 
whatever so energetic a young man took up must be made 
to pay . the idea of there being at last a faint hope of 
getting some rent somehow carried him away ; he even was 
weak enough to consent to a new shop window. 

The scheme was large and comprehensive. Fancy goods, 
stationery, pianos for hire, a circulating library, a judicious 
selection of magazines and periodicals, bookbinding in all 
its branches, pictures framed, artists' materials, and a post- 
office. 

For many days before the new shop burst forth in all its 
splendour upon the Straggleton New-Towners, notices 
were posted up and freely circulated, and a prospectus was 
left at every house, which was a wonder of composition and 
capital letters. One was left at the house without a number, 
in the street without a name, and Mrs. Whitaker, reading 
it, cried . 

9.2 



13 2 A London Romance. 

" Bless nie ! Frank Pickering ! Can that now be the 
same Frank Pickering, Ann, who was to have gone to 
Jamaica when our poor James went in his stead ? " 

"How can I say, mamma?" replied a pale-faced girl 
wearily, and, without turning to look at the circular, she 
went on staring out of window, and yawned as she did so. 

The look out from this house without a number, down 
this nameless street, into the brickfield beyond, was of the 
dreariest. Opposite was a skeleton-house. Next door a 
foundation only had been laid. It was said that one block 
of desolate and deserted brick frameworks, which seemed 
to be falling to decay before they were half finished, had 
been run up only to borrow money upon, and were " the 
valuable freehold property " alluded to so invitingly in the 
advertisement that caught the capitalist. 

With regard to the street's name, or want of name, no 
exact information was forthcoming. The street of course 
had two sides to it, and each side had a separate proprietor. 
Differences had arisen between these proprietors, and one 
had called his side one thing, and the other another. Then 
the two gentlemen had been brought into friendly communi- 
cation, and a sort of compromise had resulted. Both sides 
of the street in future were to be called alike, and the only 
question was which was to be called which. 

In the end a new name was decided on, and both the old 
names painted out ; but half way through the business, more 
unpleasantness arose between the owners, and the street, in 
the end, was left without any name at all. Nobody knew 
any more about the matter, and things had rested in this way 
For a couple of months or so. 

The house without a number, wherein Mrs. Whitaker re- 
sided, was one of several houses also without numbers, and 
remaining thus unnumbered because the proprietor appeared 
to be in doubt as to which end he should begin at with 
number one. It was a very small house, and new, and 
smelt strongly of paint and damp size. Before it was a very 
small garden, where, alone in their glory, flourished Brobdig- 
nagian marigolds in diminutive beds, hardly less stony than 
the gravel paths surrounding them. 

The Whitakers . mother and daughter . had, upon the 
authority of those Straggleton New-Townspeople, learned in 
the affairs of their neighbours . seen better days, and these 
better days alluded to they had seen since you last heard of 



At a House Without a Number. 133 

them. Those railway shares which you may recollect Sam 
Whitaker was just beginning to dabble in, had turned out 
wonderfully well. There was a golden era in the Whitaker 
chronicles, when the ex-stage-carpenter's family held up 
their heads with the best, and lived most genteelly. 

With his increasing success, Sam Whitaker's ambition 
rose in proportion, and he began to muse on lofty nights not 
dreamt of in the old court philosophy. Hitherto Mrs. 
Whitaker had, as it were, but looked at life from a two- 
penny-half-penny point of view. She could scarcely be- 
lieve her senses when one day Sam began to speak of shut- 
ting up the shop and cutting the carpentering at the Great 
Sahara. 

It may be remembered that Sam's very stupidness in 
speculation was the cause of his greatest successes. He 
was so horribly slow, he never sold out at the moment when 
the knowing ones brought him positive information that an 
immediate smash was inevitable ; and leaving his money in- 
vested in what was " certain sure " to be a failure, found 
curiously enough that it wasn't a failure after all, and that 
he had made a very good thing of it. 

Others besides the knowing ones, too, endeavoured to 
persuade him that the course he was pursuing was a wrong 
one . morally wrong as well as pecuniarily ruinous. Mr. 
Wapshot, upon several occasions, made the evil effects of 
the spirit of gaming the subject of his discourses ; and 
William Bradshaw had something to say also upon the 
matter. 

Though ashamed to own it, during the latter years of his 
life Sam Whitaker grew to be desperately afraid of his 
nephew William, who set him straight upon many occasions, 
cut off his grog, put out his pipe, and gave him, to use the 
carpenter's own words, " chapter and verse for it." One 
thing is certain . however unsatisfactory the moral pointed 
. if Sam Whitaker had only listened to the advice of the 
persons who ought to have known how to advise him, he 
would have lost his money. 

While he " acted like a fool," he made gold out of all he 
touched. It was only when he became a knowing one 
himself, and everybody had learnt to believe in his in- 
fallibility, that he "dropped " so heavily, and at last ruined 
himself altogether by the very "safest thing in all the 
world," about which there wasn't the slightest possible risk. 



134 A London- Romance. 

After his ruin it was a favourite pastime of our bold 
speculator to calculate what he would have gained if he had 
not " put his money on " where he did. He never would 
allow, either, that there was any fault on his side. The un- 
paralleled perversity of circumstances, and the diabolical 
machinations of villains, no man could have stood up against. 

But the splendours of that brief period of prosperity were 
never to be forgotten. At the house without a number, in 
Straggleton New Town, there existed a dusty and much- 
thumbed record of the condescension of the upper classes, 
in a little papier-mache basket, full of fly-blown visitors' 
cards, which stood in the centre of a loo-table in the parlour, 
the most distinguished ones on the top, and the second- 
raters propping them up from underneath. 

A panic, which swept away many fortunes, swept the 
furniture out of one particular house in Porticolo Square, 
where its owner had settled and set up a carriage. At the 
time that Noses' s men were in, Samuel Whi taker lay dying 
in the second-floor, and it was feared that the bed would be 
moved away from under him. Mrs. Whitaker ever after- 
wards remembered, and often spoke of that awful night 
when he rose up after a long fit of delirium and insen- 
sibility, and calling her to him, asked her forgiveness and 
that of his child. 

" God bless you, Martha ! " he said, squeezing her hand. 
"You've been," he hesitated here a moment, and then as re- 
collections of many loveless years came back to him, . " a 
good wife to me," he added. She had at any rate kept 
shop and made puddings, and mended stockings ; managed 
his household affairs generally . shared his joys and sorrows, 
making the most of the last, as many other wives had 
done before her. " God bless you and our little girl ! 
Where's William ? '" 

William was waiting without, the family Bible under his 
arm. He came in now and prepared to read, but Sam 
stopped him. 

" I've only a few minutes left. When I'm gone you'll 
take care of your poor aunt, won't you ? And the little girl 
. you'll be kind to her ? You will be kind ? " 

He was silent then for a little while, and William, seating 
himself by his side, opened the book. Presently Mrs. 
Whitaker saw his lips moving. She thought he was repeat- 
ing the words, and bent down to listen. 



At a House Without a Number. 135 

"I wish the poor boy was here/' he said. "We were very- 
rough with him." 

That creature's son was uppermost in his thoughts. Mrs. 
Whitaker raised her head in anger. After a moment or 
two of quietude, he began to mutter again. 

" If I'd gone in for the little Boddlethorpe Junction I 
should have made a good thing of it." 

Five minutes after he was dead. 

Noses's men down below stole out upon the landing, 
attracted by the sounds of weeping up stairs. Then came 
back to their pipes again. supposed "the old 'un was gone," 
and in deference to the departed, cracked their jokes in a 
lower key. 

After the burial, a hearthrug dangled from the balcony in 
lieu of hatchment, and a certain popular authority, on whom 
the mantle of the great Robins is said to have descended, 
described the household goods in glowing language, though 
it is to be "regretted they fetched but a small price, for all 
his eloquence. 

Thus then it came to pass that the relict of Samuel 
Whitaker, stage carpenter, took a corner house in Straggleton 
New Town, and displaying the wreck of her furniture to the 
best advantage in the little rooms, took her seat behind the 
wire blind in the parlour, and went on with her needlework. 
This needlework was, seemingly, an everlasting bout of 
stocking-mending . a species of industry she had been 
famous for in the Stonywold days ; for there would seem to- 
be women born to mend stockings as there are men born 
to break hearts. 

A little income had happily been preserved to the widow 
and daughter when Sam's ship went down in a gale off Capel 
Court, and on this the two women hoped to be able to live. 
As, however, their life on such limited means must have been 
a very hard one, they also entertained hopes of finding a 
lodger for their first floor. They therefore planted a card of 
"apartments furnished" in a shop window in the neighbour- 
hood, and went to bed sanguine of the result. 

But this little venture did not prove immediately success- 
ful. Mrs. Whitaker pursued her stocking-mending without 
interruption, while Ann gazed listlessly out upon the mari- 
golds, and through the railings into the street beyond ; and 
they waited in vain. 



136 A London Romance. 

They did not think that it would be respectable to hang 
up a card in their own window ; and even if they had done 
so, it was doubtful whether many lodging-seekers would have 
seen it. The nameless street took its rise in a wilderness 
of half-built houses and terminated in a brickfield. At pre- 
sent, it was not quite . as it appeared on the architect's plan 
. a leading thoroughfare. The occasional traveller, who 
lost himself in those parts, seemed more bent on making 
the best of his way out again than upon settling down into 
a permanent resident. 

Thus the days grew into weeks and the weeks into months, 
and yet the card lay in the window at the post office, and 
in course of time fell over on to its face. 



13 




yg&MMk 





CHAPTER II. 




NE day, an extraordinary natural phenomenon 
was observable in Mrs. Whitaker's nameless 
street. This was neither more nor less than a 
stranger, who, as Mrs. Whitaker put it, was 
evidently " on the look out." 

He was not a sauntering stranger . a mere passer-by or 
perplexed wanderer, lost among the Straggletonian in- 
tricacies, . but a person with a settled intention, who came 
slowly and deliberately down the road, eyeing the houses on 
either side, as though in search of a habitation where he could 
take up his abode. Perhaps there was some degree of 
fancifulness in the view the good lady took of the stranger's 
movements ; but she had a sort of presentiment that such 
was the case from the first moment she set eyes on him. 

" If he isn't looking for apartments ! " she cried out, 
abandoning her stocking-mending in the middle of a stitch. 
" I never." 

And then a great idea occurred to her. a stratagem 
worthy of the first or third Napoleon. There was an extra 
card of " Apartments, furnished," carefully hidden away 
behind the chimney-glass, and catching this up suddenly she 
held it up against the window, carefully concealing her hand 
as she did so. 

The stranger stopped. He evidently read what was on 
the card with great attention. He seemed half to make up 
his mind, then he wavered and . walked on again. 

Mrs. "Whitaker, with a blank countenance, watched him 
down the street, and saw him at last turn a corner and dis- 
appear from her view. 



138 A London Romance. 

For ever ? No ! read on. 

The Frank Pickering who had taken the post office was, 
of course, the old original Frank Pickering who was to have 
married Evelina. In his window, after renewing his ac- 
quaintance, Mrs. Whitaker had placed the card before 
alluded to, and he had promised he would try and find her 
a lodger. Had he not had many other things to think of, 
it is probable that he would have given the affair a little 
more of his attention. 

At any rate the card remained where it had been placed, 
in a conspicuous position, and ^a*_found to be an object of 
attraction to the flies. Here it rested among the surprisingly 
cheap packets of stationery, and Frank Pickering's brain 
meanwhile hatched gigantic schemes while he stood with 
folded arms contemplating his extensive stock, pending a 
rush on the part of the public. 

Whilst he was thus engaged one day, a sunburnt stranger 
came to a halt in front of the shop, and looked up at the 
name painted in a bold black letter above the window. 
Then the stranger looked in at Frank from between the 
packets of stationery, and at length making up his mind that 
what he was in search of was there to be found, entered 
and approached the counter. 

"Mr. Pickering?'' 

With a sudden change from cordial welcome to cautious 
reticence, for he at first supposed that the stranger was a 
commercial traveller, or some one calling about an account, 
Mr. Pickering replied " That's my name." 

" You used to live at Holloway some years ago, and were 
once a clerk at Hankershanks's ; isn't it so ? " 

With increased caution, making sure this time that an 
attempt was going to be made to impose upon him. " Well 
. and why ? "' 

" Nothing, but that I am glad to see you again after so 
long." And the stranger obtained possession of Mr. Picker- 
ing's hand with some difficulty, and shook it over the 
counter. 

"I'm pretty well, thank you," said Mr. Pickering, replying 
to no particular enquiry ; " I hope you're well ; but I'm sure 
I don't know who you are." 

The stranger playfully stepped back, and placed his 
arms a-kimbo. 

" Look at me again," he said. 



At a House without a Number. 139 

" I've no idea," replied Pickering, coldly. 

" Don't you remember a little miserable sallow-faced 
fellow you used to take home with you, and give supper to 
in the back parlour behind the shop ? Why, I'm the boy 
who went, in your place to Jamaica." 

" Oh ! are you?" said Frank without emotion. 

" Yes ; only I've grown-up since. And how is your 
mother? Alive and well still, I hope? And . and Evelina; 
you don't mind my calling her so, do you ? You're married, 
of course, long ago ? " 

" My mother's somewhere up stairs. She's a good deal 
aged. That other affair did not come off at all." 

James Jarman looked a little blank. Pickering began 
tying up a parcel. 

'.'I'm sorry for that," said Jarman, after a pause. 

Pickering looked up sharply. 

" Sorry for what? I'm not sorry, I can tell you Mr. . 

I'm very glad of it." 

" Oh ! " 

" Yes, I am. What's the good of a sick wife to a rising 
man ? I didn't want anything to drag me back. I have 
my way to make, and I mean to make it." 

Here he was more vigorous still with the parcel. 

" Yes, to be sure." 

" That's my intention, Mr. , or I'll know why. I was 

very sorry for the girl, but it wouldn't do." 

"No; to be sure." 

Pickering had finished his parcel and looked up. 

" No, Mr. " 

" Jarman," said the other. " Have you forgotten ? " 

" For the moment. I have so much to think of. The 
calls of business . the post office . the pianos. Here's my 
circular ; you may know some one who wants something in 
this way." 

"Thank you, . yes, perhaps." 

Pickering was busy now with the shelves, with his back 
turned to his old friend. When he turned again he seemed 
somewhat surprised and vexed to find that the other had 
taken a seat. He was all at once desperately busy himself, 
but he found time to ask a question. 

"By-the-way, you never did go to Jamaica, if I remember 
rightly. You were wrecked, or something ? " 

" Yes, I was wrecked, or something." 



140 A London Romance. 

"Ah, I mean," said Frank, with a slight blush, "you 
know what I mean : we've been so long apart, . I have 
been so much occupied." 

" Did you ever get the letters I wrote ? " 

" I got some," said Frank ; " I answered." 

" I got one letter," said Jarman. 

" One ! I thought I wrote more. I meant to, anyhow ; 
but what with one thing and another taking up all my time, 
you know, as a man of the world, how one means to do 
things, and keeps putting it off." 

" I don't think I am much of a man of the world yet, 
though I've seen a good deal of the world since I saw you 
last. And you, with all these affairs, I suppose you are quite 
rich ? " 

" I didn't say that," retorted Frank ; " I've made a bit of 
money now and again. One is not always lucky. I don't 
complain ; I shall pull it off yet. I don't want anyone's 
help or sympathy. I'm quite capable of fighting my own 
battles. You know I used to be in the old days." 

" I think you are a good deal changed," said Jarman. 

" I dare say ; I hope for the better. You used to be a 
poor sickly, moping sort of chap. You've been travelling a 
good deal, have you ? Rolling stones, eh ? " 

Frank took a longer look than he had done hitherto at his 
visitor. Was he poorly off ? He was very plainly dressed, 
somewhat shabbily. He had evidently come there to get 
what he could. 

" He won't get much out of me," Pickering thought to 
himself; "this sort of thing must not be encouraged." 

Then he added aloud . 

" I've not much faith in wandering ; it's best to stop at 
home and work, that's what I've always found." 

" If you stop at home and work long enough." 

" Eh ? yes, of course ; and what are you doing, . are you 
in any employment, or seeking any ? " 

" I'm not seeking any." 

"Got into something; that's right. Stick to it, is my 
advice, and give up travelling. There's not one in a thou- 
sand makes a good thing out of emigration." 

James Jarman smiled very quietly. 

" I've no employment," he said, "at present; I'm not look- 
ing for any." 

" Of course you know your own affairs best," said 



At a House without a Number. 141 

Pickering. " It's as well not to get into a lazy way when 
one has to buckle to afterwards and work hard." 

" I don't know that I shall have to buckle to ; I've made 
money enough." 

Frank Pickering looked at him harder than before, then 
laughed somewhat contemptuously. 

" Of course, when a man has no ambition. I couldn't 
bear to settle down myself, to go huggermuggering on on a 
pound a week. I must be doing." 

" I've no ambition myself," said James Jarman, in the 
same quiet tone ; " but I've got a few hundreds lying idle at 
my banker's, and if you come across any safe investment I 
wouldn't mind going into it ; or I might find a little more, 
perhaps, if you have any likely spec you want to start." 

Mr. Pickering's mouth opened very wide. Half an hour 
later, when Jarman left the shop, its proprietor opened the 
door for him and bowed him out; and the reason why Frank 
did not offer to shake hands at parting, was because he was 
afraid the other might think he was making himself rather 
too free. 



CHAPTER III. 




BOUT a couple of hours after Mrs. Whitaker had 
given up all hope of ever again setting eyes on 
that meditative passer by, who she had fairly 
thought was in search of a first floor ; and when 
she had put away the card again, and sat down in low- 
spirits to her tea, there came a ring at the visitors' bell. 

A ring at the bell has, as the reader may probably have 
observed, much the same effect upon some households, as 
the appearance of a fox's head might be supposed to pro- 
duce in a well-regulated hen-roost. There was, when this 
ring came, so violent a scampering and shuffling within, 
accompanied by angry altercation carried on in loud whis- 
pers, and such a flushed and breathless appearance about 
the handmaiden who after a long interval opened the door, 
the arrival must have felt pretty sure that visitors were a 
rarity in Mrs. Whitaker's establishment. 

The servant-girl, having had to wash her face and change 
her frock (which latter Mrs. Whitaker herself had hooked- 
and-eyed with a vengeance), was out of breath when she 
reached the door, and without waiting for the visitor to ask 
any question, blurted out . 

" Do you want to see the apartments ? " 

The visitor, who stood staring at her somewhat vaguely, 
seemed thankful for the suggestion, and replied that he did 
want to do so ; and then Mrs. Whitaker, in a cap of many 
rustling ribbons, burst out upon him from the parlour, and 
bobbed a courtesy. 

Would he walk up stairs ? He would, and followed in a 



At a House Without a Number. i43 

dreamy way. He looked round carelessly, and expressed 
himself satisfied. 

"They're nice rooms," Mrs. Whitaker said. "You'll find 
them nice and comfortable. That's a nice easy chair." 

"Very easy," said the lodger that was to be. Mrs. 
Whitaker looked at him sharply, thinking that he had 
spoken ironically, for it was a brute of a chair, coming of a 
stiff-backed generation, and monstrously hard in the seat. 

But he meant no guile, and agreed to the terms so readily, 
the good lady could not help regretting she had not asked a 
third more. 

" I shall not give you much trouble," the stranger said; 
"I live quietly." 

"It's nice and quiet," said Mrs. Whitaker, who had 
already spoken of the locality as " nice and airy," and " nice 
and handy," as occasion required. 

" It's almost like the country," the gentleman continued. 

"Oh, quite so," responded Mrs. Whitaker; "quite fields." 
And she waved her hand vaguely to the place where the 
bricks were made, and some acres of swamp beyond, which 
was a preserve for tadpoles and efts, bottled off by the youth- 
ful piscatory population during the season. 

"I shall bring my luggage to-night, if agreeable. I have 
just come . from the country, and have few friends in town. 
If, instead of giving references, I could pay, say a month in 
advance ? " 

He produced his purse while speaking, and Mrs. Whitaker 
replied graciously . 

" Of course, Sir, it is always customary to have references.'' 

"Well, in that case, I am afraid " 

" But with you," Mrs. Whitaker hastened to add, " I can 
see that I have to deal with a gentleman, and so, of course 

" Very well, then. I find, though, I have no more loose 
gold than I shall want. I'll pay to-night when I bring the 
boxes." 

Mrs. Whitaker's countenance fell. 

"If, for the sake of clenching the bargain, Sir, as they 
say " 

"lam afraid I can't ; but I will return in three hours' 
time at the most, and then we will settle." 

She was obliged to agree to these terms, but was not 
nearly so hopeful as she had been a few minutes before, and 



144 A London Romance. 

she followed him slowly down stairs. On the threshold she 
stopped him. 

"If you would leave your card, Sir?" 

" I have none with me, but my name is Smith." 

He went away with this, and Mrs. Whitaker returned to 
the parlour, where Ann, in great anxiety, had waited to hear 
what had taken place. 

" Well, what is he like ? " 

" I don't know what he is like," said Mrs. Whitaker, 
leaning back in . her chair. " He's very dark. He's very 
strange. He's very quiet. I don't think he is all he seems. 
He says his name is Smith." 

"That is because it is his name, I suppose, mamma. 
Don't you think so ? " 

"I don't know." 

" But it's not unusual." 

All at once Mrs. Whitaker cried out, " Ann ! " 

"Yes, mamma." 

"Supposing?" 

" Supposing what, mamma ? " 

" Supposing he never comes back again ? " 

He did come back, however. He brought his luggage on 
the top of a cab, riding inside himself. There were several 
boxes, some of which were carried up stairs, but one, the 
largest, was left in the passage for the present, to be put 
away in a store-room on the ground floor. While mamma 
was up stairs settling with the new lodger, Ann made an 
examination of this box, which was of a surprising foreign 
manufacture, and bore several labels whereon were printed 
outlandish foreign names. 

On the lid, however, was pasted a piece of paper on which 
was written in English, " Mr. Smith, passenger to London ; " 
and as Ann had nothing else to do, she sat on the box-lid 
and studied the handwriting of this direction, which was 
somewhat singular in character. Something about the piece 
of paper was, however, even more curious than the writing 
on it. She held a candle in her hand, and upon making a 
closer examination saw that the other side of the paper had 
some printed words on it, and that two of the words were 
" Frank Pickering." 

When Mrs. Whitaker came down stairs again she was in 



At a House Without a Number. 145 

a high state of excitement, and her cap-ribbons rustled un- 
usually. 

" Whatever he may be," she said, "he is well off. Here 
is the first month in advance . four pound four. I said 
guineas when we spoke of the terms the second time, and 
he never made the least murmur." 

This masterly stroke . for the sum originally asked had 
been pounds . put the good lady into capital spirits, and 
she prattled gaily over the supper table. 

" I don't at all dislike that Mr. Smith, now [ I've seen a 
little more of him," she said; "but Ann, tell me, when first 
you saw him, whom did he remind you of?" 

Ann said that she had not seen him very distinctly, in- 
deed had only caught a momentary glimpse of him through 
a chink of the door ; and then she told her mother what a 
strange discovery she had made, and both ladies agreed 
that it was very singular. AVhilst they were still discussing 
the circumstance the up stairs bell rang. 

The servant went up to see what was wanted, and came 
down to say that the gentleman's chimney was " smoking 
dreadful." 

" Ask Mr. Smith if he will kindly step down here while 
the fire burns up. It is only because the chimney is damp." 

"Oh, mamma, don't do that!" said Ann, rising in a 
flutter, and she ran away to make some alteration in her 
toilet ; but something detained her on the way, and as the 
lodger responded very briskly to the invitation, they met in 
the passage and stared at one another. She saw a dark 
young man, looking much older than he really was, rather 
below the middle height, with a sad and somewhat heavy 
face, which yet was not ill-looking, and with a black 
moustache and beard. 

He saw a slender girl with wistful eyes ; by no means a 
beautiful girl . not even pretty, according to received notions 
of prettiness ; but with a face and figure to look back at, 
from preference, had you seen them first among a crowd 
of undoubted beauties. He noted this much all in a 
moment, and then he had entered the parlour, and she had 
run up stairs. 

" I don't know how to apologise about the fire," Mrs. 
Whitaker began, " but as soon as the chimney gets warm 



" Oh, it does not matter,'' he answered, seating himself 
10 



146 A London Romance. 

as he spoke. " Was that your daughter I met in the pas- 
sage ? " 

"Yes, Sir. You must excuse her. Girl-like, she ran 
away " 

" When she heard me coming ? " Mr. Smith smiled at 
this. There seemed something in the thought that pleased 
him. " I beg your pardon, but you are a widow, I under- 
stood." 

Mrs. Whitaker was a widow, she replied ; and with little 
persuasion told her simple story ; dug up again the departed 
carpenter, killed him slowly, and laid him out afresh, with 
the utmost accuracy as to dates ; expatiating upon the par- 
ticulars of the melancholy event with that relish which 
almost all women seem to feel for such disagreeable sub- 
jects. 

The lodger listened very patiently, only turning his head 
now and then, when he fancied he heard a footstep on the 
stairs, and when at last the door opened, sprang eagerly to 
his feet. But it was not Ann returned. It was instead the 
servant, who came to say that the fire was now burning 
beautifully, so the lodger rose and returned somewhat re- 
luctantly to his own apartment. He saw no more of Ann 
that night. 

" Why didn't you come down while Mr. Smith was here ? " 
asked her mamma, impatiently. " I never knew such a 
strange girl as you are, Ann. Never ! " 

She was a strange girl. 



CHAPTER IV 




T may be remarked that it is a peculiarity of the 
heroes of fiction, that they entertain remarkable 
ideas with regard to their beds'. At the termina- 
tion of one of those surprisingly eventful days of 
theirs, they, it would appear as a general rule, will be found 
to throw themselves upon their couches, seemingly caring 
little whether they tumble the sheets or dirty the counter- 
pane ; for evidently the romance writers think it would be 
lowering a hero's dignity to tell us that he took off his boots. 
The heroines, as become persons of a gentler sex, seldom 
throw themselves about ; but they do not go to bed like the 
writer and readers of this matter of fact narrative. They 
are rather given to " seeking " their couch, and usually that 
couch is sleepless. Alas ! there are many of our poor 
brothers and sisters in real life in whose humble homes the 
bed occupies too prominent a position to require to be looked 
for. Indeed, the chief difficulty is to avoid tumbling over 
it at all seasons. 

Our fair young friend, Ann Whitaker, could never have 
been intended for a heroine, for she undressed very care- 
fully, spending a long time over her back hair and a trouble- 
some knot in her petticoat string ; taking off her garments 
one by one, and not even missing her stockings. Then she 
put on a plain nightgown, high in the neck and long in the 
sleeves, and then, to crown all, a nightcap. 

It is pretty generally the custom of females of the middle- 
class to wear this unsightly head-gear, few but the very high 
and very low sleeping bareheaded ; and it would seem that 

10 2 



148 A London Romance. 

they do not adopt these caps as a safeguard against cold, but 
because they keep the hair tidy and the pillow case clean. 
The most popular sort of nightcap, and that which doubt- 
less adorns the head of the beloved one who shall be name- 
less, is not that coquettish, flyaway, lace-edged frivolity one 
sees in the French lithographs ; but a something wrought out 
of plain muslin, that fits tightly, fastening under the chin 
with a string, and giving to the back part of the beauteous 
wearer's head the appearance of the end of a sausage. 

The knowledge of the behind-the-scenes part of the 
beloved one's lives repays us not for the time spent in learn- 
ing it. Better shut our eyes upon its little shifts and contri- 
vances, and wait until she comes upon us in all her glory . 
properly made up . and dazzles us with a blaze of charms 
and graces. 

When Ann had put on her nightcap and said her prayers, 
she got into bed, and read for an hour. It was a most in- 
teresting story that engrossed her attention, published in a 
penny miscellany, and full of the love affairs of the hand- 
somest creatures with whiskers, and the loveliest beings in 
petticoats imaginable; all possessing boundless riches, all 
born peers and peeresses, and all expressing themselves in 
the finest and longest words, although their grammar was at 
times indifferent. 

If the truth must be told, the young lady was not so nicely 
critical as the fair readers of this story, and, sad to relate, 
saw nothing very ridiculous in the stilted balderdash of the 
Honourable Algernon (the readers of the miscellany, for the 
most part, called it HHonouble HHalgernon) and beaute- 
ous Lady Beatrix. Every woman's forte is not humour, and 
some . it is said . even among the young, rich, and beautiful, 
have but a faint appreciation of waggishness, and that only 
in its elementary branches. It has often been a consoling 
thought of the writer that he was born to shine, as the 
reader will perceive, more as a sentimental and romantic 
novelist than as a mere wag. 

Thus then Ann, unconscious of absurdity, read her story- 
book, and whimpered over the touching sorrows of the 
titled heroine . dear, tender-hearted little thing. There are 
hard, yet beautiful eyes which, reading this story, shall have 
no tears in them. 

When she had reached the conclusion of that week's por- 
tion (it was published in " The Back Parlour, a Weekly 



At a House Without a Number. 149 

Emporium of Fiction, Fashion, and Family Economy ") she 
left the Lady Beatrix upon a barren moor, in the clutches of 
the lawless earl, from whose violence, should the author and 
Providence not send the Honourable Algernon to the res- 
cue, she might suffer, who knows what monstrous indigni- 
ties. And being but a young novel reader, how could Ann 
be sure that Algernon would come, as of course he did, at 
the very nick of time, and in the middle of the first column 
of next week's portion ? 

Not having next week's number, however, Ann was 
obliged to go to sleep in fearful doubt as to the result. 
But first she lay awake awhile and thought. She thought 
what she would have done had she been the Lady Beatrix, 
and placed in similar circumstances. Then she thought 
what she would do if she had the Lady Beatrix's wealth and 
position. What she would do if an Honourable Algernon 
were to marry her. What she would wear. What she 
would say. 

She pictured herself at some imposing ceremony in mag- 
nificent apparel, addressing haughty speeches to awe-struck 
inferiors. She pictured all this, and besides, a host of other 
nonsense, which could not possibly come true, for this Ann 
Whitaker was an incorrigible dreamer, whose whole life was 
a long dream, though she knew well enough what she must 
presently awake to. Well, let her dream on awhile. She is 
not quite twenty yet. There are still a few months of 
romance left to her, and then comes stern reality, the plain 
English of which is William Bradshaw. 



CHAPTER V 




HAT person 
every bit 



up 



as big a 



stairs, that first-floor lodger, was 
dreamer as Miss Ann. Also 
was he an impostor, who had taken Mrs. 
Whitaker's apartments under false pretences. 
That fellow's name was no more Smith than it was Jones 
or Johnson. Read, and judge for yourselves. 

Next morning it rained heavily, and Ann, as was her 
wont, when not reading her Back Parlour or Parlour 
Library literature, looked out of window upon the stagnant 
dreariness of the nameless street. A desperately dreary 
look-out was this, conducive to gloom, despondency, and 
despair. There never was a back street with less life in it. 
When the great excitement of the tradesmen calling for 
orders was exhausted, there came a period of utter stag- 
nation, often unbroken for several hours. 

Street hawkers, after glancing disparagingly in at the 
corner of the road, would pass on, thinking it a waste of 
time and energy to try the two or three houses that were 
inhabited. Such of the male population as had employ- 
ment went to the City at an early hour, and the womankind 
left behind rarely showed any signs of life. At the tidiest 
houses a servant would come out and clean the door step. 
Now and then a little drab of a girl would sally forth on a 
suspicious errand with a black bottle. A hand would 
appear at a window pulling up or down a blind, and that 
was all. As a general rule, the neighbours might all have 
been dead and laid out, waiting interment, for what the 
patient watcher at Mrs. Whitaker's parlour window knew 
to the contrary. 



At a House Without a Number. 151 

But strange to say, though so indefatigable at her post, 
Ann took but little note of the doings of her neighbours. 
More often her eyes were fixed upon the scanty patches of 
verdure to be found on a waste track yet untouched by the 
builder . on a hedge and a few stunted trees which hid a 
portion of the adjoining brick-field from sight. Far away 
beyond all this in that direction . much too far for her eye- 
sight, though . were blue hills and the open sea. 

Foreign climes . new and strange scenes . another lan- 
guage . . other customs. Some women there perhaps led 
wild and adventurous lives . did great deeds, fought good 
fights, and nobly won. There must be such things, surely, 
in reality as well as in tale books ! All the world could not 
be the poor, mean world she had known. There must be 
greater things to live for than meal-time and bed-time. 

" Good gracious me, Ann, do come away from that 
window," Mrs. Whi taker cried, impatiently. " You must 
know every one in the street by heart by this time. Why 
don't you sit down, and do something?" 

" Do what, mamma ? " 

" Do anything . needlework, . reading." 

" I've nothing to read." 

"You've not read half those beautiful sermons William 
brought you last Sunday." 

" I shallhave to read sermons, I suppose, when I marry 
William." 

"When you marry William ! What a way to talk." 

" I'm going to marry William, am not I, mamma ? " 

" Of course you are. That's understood, and settled 
long ago, I believe. Isn't it ? " 

" Yes ; it was understood, and settled long ago." 

" Well, then ? There ! I've no patience. Get your 
needlework." 

" Very well, mamma. But what's the good of it ? " 

There was, it must be owned, a great quantity of needle- 
work done beneath Mrs. Whitaker's roof, besides the 
elaborate botching up of dilapidated stockings, which was, 
strictly speaking, little better than waste of time. Patch- 
work counterpanes of savage ugliness, kettle-holders of 
unsightly patterns, and a whole chest of drawers full of mis- 
applied industry in the way of wrappers and covers to 
protect other materials of lesser value. 



152 A London Romance. 

" Oh, mamma," said Ann, laying down her work, after a 
few stitches set very widely apart, " why are we so poor ? '' 

" If your father had only left well alone, we shouldn't 
have been so ; but if I told him once, I told him a hundred 
times . . " 

"You've told me several times, mamma. But I don't 
mean that. I mean, why should it have been our fate to 
lose our money ? Why should some lead such wretched 
lives, and the lives of others be but one long dream of 
pleasure ? Why is the world's happiness so unfairly 
divided ? " 

" I've no idea," said Mrs. Whitaker ; " but I shall have 
to unpick every morsel you're doing, if you take such long 
stitches." 

What women are understood ? Scarcely one, according 
to her own account. What do we know of the hearts we 
fondly suppose are our own ? Our own ! Why, that narrow 
hearthrug.; which divides us, covers in reality a terrible gulf, 
wide and deep, in which the bones of dead loves lie bleach- 
ing. How many of them ? and we, in our smirking self- 
sufficiency, never dreaming there was a single bone. 

Ann sighed a little impatiently, and then concentrating 
her attention upon the sofa-cover in hand, worked more 
neatly. But in a while the action of her needle grew slower 
and slower. Then her hands fell listless in her lap, and she 
fixed her eyes thoughtfully upon her mother's face. The 
good soul was at full stitch. 

What did she see ? A thin little old woman, very gray 
and faded . with no trace of that old prettiness remaining 
which years ago captivated a young stage carpenter of the 
name of Samuel Whitaker. Here was a game of life played 
out. Youth . love . hope . all buried, and nothing left but 
a withered old lady mending stockings. All recollections 
of the old romance, if there had ever been a romance, for- 
gotten, and the aim and object of life reduced to a series of 
mean and petty struggles . two-penny-halfpenny ambitions 
. paltry triumphs and tyrannies over the servant-girl, the 
butcher, or the baker. Breakfast . dinner. tea . supper . 
bed . sleep . death . churchyard . oblivion; and there might 
never have been a Mrs. Whitaker at all ! Half a century 
hence, who was to say there ever had been ? 

Was this fate to be hers also ? Why not ? What was 
she likely to do to cause her name to live longer in the re- 



& 



At a House Without a Number. 153 

collection of those who outlived her ? And if by chance any- 
how she could become famous, what then when she lay dead ? 
Perhaps it were better to die out and be forgotten, than 
have our memory honoured but for a brief span, until the 
fashion changing, the idol grows old-fashioned with the 
change . grows in the end to be ridiculous, absurd . a nick- 
name in the mouths of the rising geniuses of the new school. 
Oh, what a weary life it was ! What a hard fate ! That 
fleeting glimpse of opulence and gentility made this mean 
existence succeeding bitterly hard. She could never bear 
to recall the past. to speak of it. Yet her mother did not 
seem to view things in this light. She was ever ready, 
when a listener was forthcoming, with the records of the 
fine doings of those five years of grandeur. To this day, 
as we know, were treasured tenderly the cards of the 
visitors who had called in Porticolo Square; and at intervals 
she would take them from the basket, dust them carefully, 
and replace them with a nice consideration for their owners' 
social status. 

The old lady made the acquaintance of the other old 
lady at the post office, whom as yet she only knew " by 
hearsay," and visiting her in a cap of state, unfolded thread- 
bare odds and ends of departed grandeur, and related at 
unreasonable length the famous chronicles. The other old 
lady, who had grown to be "a little hard of hearing " and a 
little stupid, listened very patiently to what she could catch 
of this splendid narrative, and sometimes took a short nap 
whilst Mrs. Whitaker in all good faith went on with her 
story. 

When old Mrs. Pickering talked herself, it was of what 
was going to be . of Frank and his stupendous projects. She 
had every faith in Frank, in spite of his not having made 
much progress hitherto ; and felt it not at all unreasonable, 
though perhaps a little hard, that he should now and then 
lose patience with her on account of her slowness and old- 
fashioned ways. 

Sometimes the two old ladies would talk against one an- 
other, and then they once or twice came to high words. As 
usual, Mrs. Pickering was upon the old subject, when her 
Frank did so and so . Ah, wait awhile until her Frank did 
such and such a thing. Then would be seen what would 
be seen. 

But the anticipation of this magnificent state of affairs, 



154 A London Romance. 

aggrieved the other old lady. Whatever Frank might do 
would be very well in its way, no doubt, but what would be 
his success to the splendours of Porticolo Square ! Those 
were times, if you like. There was luxurious ease, wealth, 
elegance, style ! Sometimes as many as two knights at one 
dinner table, and she who spoke, in blue satin, handed 
down stairs by one of them ! 

Then Mrs. Pickering bristled up, and chafed impatiently 
under the narration of these time-honoured stories. 

"It's a pity you couldn't keep your money, my dear, 
when you had got it." 

"You will be more fortunate, I trust, my dear, if Mr. 
Frank's speculations turn out as well as you suppose. Let 
us hope they will." 

" My Frank is a man of business." 

" I think he is a very good tradesman." 

"At any rate it's a legitimate trade, which is more than 
can be said for scene-shifting." 

" Whom do you call a scene-shifter, Ma'am ? I'd have 
you to know " 

But there is no occasion to inflict the remainder of this 
dialogue upon the reader. These little quarrels arose now 
and then, and Mrs. Whitaker, shaking out her feathers, as 
it were, would shake the dust from her shoes at she left the 
back parlour behind the post office, and would vow never 
more to return. But life was long and tiresome in Straggleton 
New Town, and gossip such a relief; therefore, after awhile 
the hatchet was once more buried and the two old women 
renewed their amicable relations. 

Ann did not remain very long at her needlework. Her 
mother having left the room, she was soon back again at 
her favourite post . behind the parlour blind . at her 
favourite occupation of castle-building, and while thus 
engaged, she heard the lodger moving overhead. He had 
been hitherto almost inaudible. The servant who had 
been up into his room, thrice, at long intervals, stated that 
she had each time found him seated before the fire with a 
book in his hand. He wore, too, she reported, very soft 
slippers, in which his tread was noiseless. 

"We couldn't have got a nicer lodger" . Mrs. Whitaker 
said . " if he did not smoke quite so much." 

This smoking was the one bad habit yet discovered of 



At a House Without a Number. 155 

the new lodger. He was an inveterate smoker, and smoked 
a tobacco of so pungent a nature, that the servant-girl came 
out of the room half choked and coughed convulsively in 
the passage. From the appearance of some tobacco-ash 
on the pillow it was also to be feared that he smoked 
in bed. 

"I must speak to him about that," said Mrs. Whitaker. 
" It's a great pity, too, for otherwise he is really a treasure. 
He complains of nothing." 

It must, however, be allowed that the new lodger had 
received some provocation. Mrs. Whitaker and the servant 
had done their worst for him in the way of cookery at his 
supper and breakfast. There had been deeds of darkness 
perpetrated in the matter of fried eggs, and yet he had 
eaten uncomplainingly. Without a murmur he had drained 
the dregs of Mrs. Whitaker's terrible coffee. What was 
left of a broiled sole after it had stuck to and been forcibly 
wrenched off the gridiron, he had some how got through, 
bone and all. Mrs. Whitaker had pronounced him to be a 
hearty eater. 

Only Ann, at her post at the window, had a suspicious 
circumstance to relate. While she was sitting at breakfast, 
and the lodger was supposed to be breakfasting at the same 
time up stairs, she fancied she heard the drawing-room 
window open softly. A few minutes afterwards, looking 
out, she saw, standing without the garden railings, looking 
up very eagerly at the first-floor, a woe-begone vagabond dog, 
who occasionally licked his lips and whined. 

It had been arranged that when he chose the lodger 
should dine at home, but he told Mrs. Whitaker, shortly 
after breakfast, that that day at least he would not require 
dinner to be provided. At this early period of their 
acquaintance Mrs. Whitaker was inclined to be more than 
usually gracious. 

" I'm sure, Sir, if you would like anything' . a little soup 
. . Juliun. A little fish . sole. A chicken to follow . roast 
or boiled. I could serve you up a nice little dinner." . 
(Here the lodger shuddered slightly). " I know how a gentle- 
man likes to dine. You must not think, Sir, because you 

find us in this very humble way Oh, no, we moved in 

quite a different class at one time, before Mr. Whitaker was 
unfortunate." 

She might have added, " or fortunate ; " but the old 



156 A London Romance. 

Stonywold Court days were never alluded to in the course 
of the long stories the lady was so fond of telling. The 
lodger, however, unexpectedly exhibited a knowledge of this 
pre-historic period. 

"So I was told. Mr. Whitaker, I think, was at the 
theatre." 

Mrs. Whitaker blushed a little. 

" Not exactly, Sir. At least, he had an appointment at 
one time at the Sahara." 

" What line was he in ? " 

" What line ? Oh, nothing of that sort, Sir. He was in 
the mechanical . the . you understand, Sir, the scenery and 
all that." 

Who, she wondered, could have been spreading this 
scandal. But of course it must have been those persons at 
the post office. 

" Mr. Pickering at the shop over there mentioned it, I 
suppose. He recommended you, Sir, did he not ? " 

" Yes . the man in the shop. He said you were a friend 
of his." 

" I and my daughter deal there." 

"That's what he meant, I dare say." 

"We have no friends in this neighbourhood. After 
having moved in a different class, and being a little superior 
But you can understand that, Sir, I am sure." 

" Yes, yes, of course." 

" When one has seen better days, one cannot very well 
bring oneself to associate with that class of persons . such 
as the Pickerings . and yet one does not like to be 
thought too proud." 

She had, more than once, partaken of tea in Mrs. 
Pickering's parlour with much condescension and appetite. 

" And it is a hard matter too, Sir, as you may suppose, 
to keep oneself respectable in these times, and with every- 
thing at such an enormous price. Of course, if I had 
hung a bill up in the window I might have let over and 
over again. But I could not bear to do that, and then the 
generality of lodgers would not have suited me." 

" Pickering mentioned a son of yours, I think, who went 
to Jamaica, and made a good thing of it abroad. Am I 
right ? " 

" Not a son . a nephew . an ungrateful boy, who ran 
away and left us without even saying good-bye. But we 



At a House Without a Number. 157 

never heard that he had got on well. I think not. He 
was not very likely to do so. We have not heard from him 
for several years." 

"He did not send and assist you, then, after Mr. 
Whitaker's misfortunes ? " 

" Not he. He may be dead for what I know to the 
contrary." 

" Or he may not know your address, or else perhaps he 
would send." 

" Perhaps so. I am not as young as I was, and I've not 
always been accustomed to scheme and stint and pinch. 
It's very hard, Sir." 

Here the old lady took a seat and produced a pocket- 
handkerchief. The interview seemed to promise to be a 
long one, but at that moment there came a sharp double 
knock at the street door. 

" Oh, there's my nephew William," said Mrs. Whitaker, 
rising hastily. 

" Not the nephew who went to Jamaica ? " 

" Oh no, Sir. You may have heard of him, the Reverend 
Mr. Bradshaw, the minister there has been so much about 
in the papers." 





CHAPTER VI. 

YOUNG man, tall and well-made, rather handsome, 
though perhaps a little too florid of complexion 
for some tastes. Wearing a suit of shiny black 
cloth, and a rather broad brimmed hat with 
a deep mourning band, and black thread gloves. Carrying 
a large silk umbrella infolded in one hand, a packet of loose 
papers in the other . tracts and pamphlets. 

This was William . Billy the Bold of old times, once the 
pupil and protegk of an obscure but well-meaning person of 
the name of Wapshot . now himself a shining light . the 
proprietor of a chapel built for him by subscription by his 
admirers . more than that, the founder of a sect different 
from and improving upon all other sects in many important 
particulars, and having that speciality, quite its own, of being 
the one right belief . the disciples of which modestly desig- 
nated themselves . The Chosen Few. 

" How do you do, William ? " 

He gave her a listless hand to shake without replying, ask- 
ing instead another question. 

"Where's Ann?" 

" In the parlour, I think. Ann, where are you ? Don't 
you hear who it is ? How slow you are." 

Ann, with her back turned towards the light, received her 
cousin in silence. They shook hands, and then all three 
sat down. 

"Oh, such news, William," Mrs. Whitaker went on. 
" We've let." 

"Let?" 



At a House Without a Number. 159 

" The drawing-rooms, you know . up stairs. Isn't that for- 
tunate ? I was afraid we should never get a lodger . but 
such a nice person . so quiet . gives no trouble." 

" I am sorry you should be obliged to let lodgings. If 
you could have added to your income in a less objectionable 
way . less publicly." 

" We never showed the card in the window," said Mrs. 
Whitaker, eagerly, and then of a sudden blushed crimson as 
she recollected that little ruse of hers the day before. 

" Is it so disgraceful ? " asked Ann with some bitterness 
in her tone. " Are we disgracing ourselves and you ? " 

" No . no . not as you are. And in this out of the way 
place it will most likely never be known. I must confess, 
however " 

" I understand, William ; when we are married, of course 
mamma must never let anyone know we have done such a 
thing, or that papa was a carpenter at the theatre " 

" Ann, Ann, how can you ? " broke in Mrs. Whitaker ; 
"you know he . your cousin, objects to that subject . you 
know " 

" I know I wish I had gone on the stage " 

" Ann, how can you ? " 

William was looking very grave. " Of course Ann does 
not mean what she says ? " 

" I do mean it." 

" I should not like to think that you could do so. Lodg- 
ing-letting is far preferable to anything of that sort, of course. 
There is no comparison. Besides, there will be no neces- 
sity . is no necessity. As it is, I am very sorry indeed that 
these lodgings have been let." 

Mrs. Whitaker threw an appealing glance towards him. 
"You know, William, my income is so very small. We 
have to be so careful of every penny. I don't think I ever 
ought to have thought of taking a whole house. We ought 
to have lived in lodgings ourselves." 

"I said you ought," replied William. "That was what I 
advised." 

" You don't suppose I took the house on my own account, 
William ? Wasn't there Ann to be considered, and you too ? 
Would it have been respectable for your future wife and her 
mother to be living in a second floor in a back street ? 
Would you have liked that to become known ? " 

William rose impatiently, pulled on a glove which he had 



160 A London Romance. 

taken off on entering the house, then moved towards the 
door. Mrs. Whitaker expressed astonishment. 

" Are you going so soon ? Are you not going to stop to 
tea ? " 

"Not to-day : I have an important engagement. I hope 
you will change your opinions, Ann ; when you think over 
what you have said, you will be sorry for those hasty words." 

He held out his hand as he spoke, but the girl made no 
response, and then he walked towards the street-door. Mrs. 
Whitaker followed closely. 

" I beg your pardon, William, but you haven't forgot what 
you promised ? " 

" What was that ? " 

" About the landlord. You told me you would help me 
with the rent, you know, William. He will call the day 
after to-morrow, and I said that I would pay it." 

" I will come again to-morrow, and we will talk the matter 
over. Of course, as you have got a lodger now your income 
will be larger, and we must make some other arrangements. 
Good-bye." 

He went away with this, and Mrs. Whitaker returned to 
the parlour not a little excited. 

"We can do without his assistance at all, for that matter, 
and I shall tell your Cousin William so the next time I see 
him. He didn't know Mr. Smith has paid in advance, and 
I certainly wanted the money. We both want some new 
dresses very badly ; but no matter. I'll pay the rent with 
it, and Mr. William can keep his money to himself." 

" Yes, mamma. I'm glad of that." 

" I dare say you are ; but it's every bit your fault that 
William went away angry as he did. You will always say 
something or other. How can you ? " 

" If you please, Ma'am," the servant said, " all the while 
you was a-talking to Mr. Bradshaw at the street-door, the 
gentleman in the drawing-rooms was a standing on the land- 
ing to listen. I was on the landing on the floor above, and 
looked over and see him." 

Mrs. Whitaker blushed. It was to be hoped he had not 
heard what was said about the rent. He might think that 
they were in an insolvent state, and grow alarmed regarding 
the safety of his luggage. Looked at from another point of 
view, too, it was very unpleasant to have any person in the 
house playing the spy, and listening on landings. 



CHAPTER VII. 




hand. 



EXT day something very astonishing occurred. 

Ann, looking in the letter-box, found a letter 
lying there directed to her . a letter which bore no 
postmark, and had evidently been brought by 

She wondered a little that it should be addressed to 



Miss instead of Mrs. Whitaker, for she supposed, of course, 
that it was a tradesman's circular. There were a great many 
circulars and handbills left at the house, containing tempt- 
ing offers of astonishing bargains, and pitiful stories of im- 
pending bankruptcy, forced sales, and enormous sacrifices.- 
The poor shopkeepers in Straggleton New Town spent a 
little fortune in printing these sheets in showy type, and 
yet but little profit resulted therefrom. 

Ann took the letter to the breakfast table, and laid it aside 
whilst she poured out a cup of tea. Then, after drinking a 
little, she tore open the envelope, and examined the en- 
closure. They were five bank of England notes for ten 
pounds each. 

" Oh, mamma ! oh, mamma ! oh, mamma ! " 
" God bless the child ! what's the matter ? " 
" Look here what somebody has sent us ! " 
" Good gracious me ! " said Mrs. Whitaker, after full five 
minutes' silent contemplation of the treasure. 

How was this extraordinary occurrence to be accounted 
for ? Mrs. Whitaker had an explanation. 

" It is William, of course. Look at the writing." 
The writing was looked at. It was not William's, 

TI 



1 62 A London Romance. 

'. But it must be," urged Mrs. Whitaker. " Who else could 
have sent the money ? Besides, he probably disguised his 
hand." 

The question was, however, why should he have disguised 
his hand ? Moreover, why should he send so much 
money ? The sum he had promised to advance Ann's 
mamma was simply ten pounds. 

But then, if William had not sent the money, who could 
have sent it? They knew no one. Actually, the only 
persons with whom they were acquainted in this time of 
tribulation were those Pickerings at the post office. The 
mention of the Pickerings gave Mrs. Whitaker an idea. 
" Supposing . but no, that could not be it." 
" What, mamma ? " 

" Supposing it should be from James ? " 
And the old lady related what Mr. Smith up stairs had 
said upon the subject, 'when he had seemed to hint at a 
rumour of Jimmy's having made a fortune in foreign parts, 
some of which he would have sent home had he known 
their address. Had he, then, found out their address ? If 
so, from whom? From Mr. Smith, perhaps. That Mr. 
Smith was a mysterious person. 

While they were yet discussing his mysterious qualities, 
Mr. Smith came down stairs and left the house. Yesterday 
he had been at home all day. To-day he went out at half- 
past nine, and he had not left word when he would return. 
He was mysterious. 

Ann peeped out at him from behind one of the window 
curtains. His face was thin and worn and sun-burnt. His 
beard and hair and clothes seemed cut somewhat in 
foreign fashion. Perhaps he had met Jimmy abroad . knew 
him . had been commissioned by him to discover their 
whereabouts. While Ann was trying to work this line of 
argument into some probable shape, another idea occurred 
to Mrs. Whitaker. 

" I see it all. It is Mr. Smith himself who sent it. The 
man's in love with you. It's clear as the day. 1 ' 
" Mamma ! " 

" Oh yes he is, though. Now I come to think of it. The 
way he has talked about you . asking a hundred questions ! 
Why should he otherwise take the room in such a hurry, 
and pay a month in advance ? How is it he never grumbles 
at anything ? The way that girl cooked the sole yesterday 



At a House Without a Number. 163 

morning was disgraceful. No. There's only one explana- 
tion. He loves you. I told him we weren't well off. I 
dare say he is very rich . perhaps he is a lord in disguise. 
Such things have often happened, Miss, I can tell you, 
though you may look incredulous." 

" Do you remember, mamma, what I told you about the 
address on his box . that it was written on the back of one 
of Pickering's circulars ? I'll go and compare the two 
writings." 

The comparison made, it appeared there was very strong 
evidence in favour of the supposition that the mysterious 
Smith had sent the money. There was a suspicious simi- 
larity in the crossing of the t's and dotting of the i's. 

"What does he mean by sending it to me?" Ann asked 
with flashing eyes ; and Mrs. Whitaker was not prepared, at 
a moment's notice, to give any very reasonable explanation. 

What was to be done ? To begin with, perhaps it would 
be as well to make sure that there was some foundation for 
this somewhat romantic notion. And how to make one ? 
From the Pickerings, of course ; and Mrs. Whitaker 
straightway put on her bonnet, and tied the strings with 
determination. Then she tore off the lodger's box as much 
of the address as she could get away, and with this in her 
hand departed on her mission. 

Left alone, Ann pondered deeply, arriving, however, at 
but small results. A knock at the door interrupted her. It 
was her cousin William, who had called according to 
promise. 

" How do you do, Ann ? Is your mother at home ? " 

" No. She has gone round to the post office." 

"She ought to have waited at home when she knew I was 
coming. I have so many calls on my time. It is very in- 
convenient." 

"Can you leave the message with me, if you cannot stop ? 
But do stop." 

He was standing up, not yet having taken a seat. As 
usual he was loaded with a number of pamphlets, and with 
the silk umbrella unfastened ; he also held his hat ; and 
presently, when he wanted to use one hand to feel for his 
purse, he shifted the hat and papers into his other hand, 
and held the umbrella between his knees. 

" I'll stop, if you wish me to do so, Ann," he said, some- 
what clumsily. " Do you ? " 
11 . 2 



1 64 A London Romance. 

But Ann made no answer . affected not to hear. He 
looked at her for a minute or two in silence. 

" You are very pale. I hope you are not ill ? " 

" I am very well. It is very dull here." 

" You should go out." 

" Where to ? I don't like walking by myself." 

" I must try and steal an hour from my duties, now and 
then, to take you out. It was a pity your mother chose a 
home so far from the scene of my labours." 

"I thought it was vou who suggested this neighbour- 
hood?" 

"No. I think, though, I expressed my approval. At 
that time I thought it best, all things considered, that our 
engagement should not be made generally public. You 
know how eager the newspapers are to pick up and make 
much out of every scrap of news concerning me." 

" But there is no longer any necessity to keep it a secret ? " 

" A secret ! What an expression ! I should be very glad 
to introduce you to some of the leading members of my 
flock. We must fix upon a day soon." 

They sat for a few moments in silence. Then he said, in 
a sort of hurt tone, " I wish you would not wear your hair 
dressed in that fashion. Would it not be better in plain 
bands?" 

" I don't know. I will alter it, if you wish me to do so." 

She answered in a weary tone, and he looked at her 
sharply, as though he would have read her thoughts. After 
chafing impatiently for a moment or two, he went on to say, "I 
hope you are not of the same opinion you were yesterday ? " 

"What about?" 

" About the . the stage. But of course I knew you did 
not really mean what you said. Only I did not like to 
think that you could willingly say anything to hurt my feel- 
ings." 

" No . I was wrong. As we are to be married, I ought 
to study to know what pleases you and to please you." 

He did not exactly like the tone in which these words 
were said, and yet he did not altogether dislike the words. 

" I trust you will find that I like what is right," he went 
on to remark, " and dislike what is wrong." 

"Yes," she replied, and rising abruptly went to look out of 
the window. 

He looked after her a little uneasily, as though he were 



At a House Without a .Number. 165 

not quite certain whether or not things were going on as satis- 
factorily as might be, and then, producing his purse, told out 
some gold upon the table. 

"Will you give this to your mother, Ann, when she comes 
in ? It is a pity she does not manage better. We must try 
if we cannot do so when our time comes." 

He waited for a reply, but as she made none, he did not 
press her. It seemed to him that she no doubt felt she had 
been in the wrong, and was ashamed to confess her error. 
Well, he would not force an avowal from her. As he was 
strong, he must be generous. He drew on his black thread 
gloves, smiling as he did so. Then, having bidden her 
good-bye in a low tone, took his departure. 

She had left the window as he glanced at it on his way 
past. Perhaps she was crying on the sofa. Had he been 
too severe with her? Should he go back ? Eventually he 
decided he would not, more particularly as he saw in the far 
distance the omnibus approaching in which he wished to 
return to the neighbourhood of his chapel. 

Ann was on the sofa ; whither she had retired because 
she did not wish to be obliged to nod to Mr. Bradshaw, as 
he passed by. She was not crying, however. Only repeat- 
ing to herself, " When our time comes." 

The prospect of that time coming sometimes seemed, if 
anything, a little more dreary than the life as it now existed 
in Straggleton New Town. And yet why should this be ? 
There was a good man who loved her, and had loved her 
many years. It seemed to her, as long as ever she could 
remember, to have been a settled thing that they were to be 
married. She had never associated the idea of marriage 
with any other person. 

And would he not make her happy ? He was very clever 
. . very good. Sometimes she thought almost too good. 
Were they after all, quite matched ? Could she endure the 
regularity, the monotony of the life awaiting her ? And yet 
why not ? What else did she expect ? Marriage life was a 
serious thing . her mother said. " One has much to put up 
with, even from the best of husbands. Your poor father was 
sometimes very trying." 

Mrs. Whitaker was a long while absent upon her mission, 
but she returned at last in some excitement. 



1 66 A London Romance. 

"Oh, my dear! . what do you think? I've found it all 
out. Pickering was evidently bribed to keep the secret, but 
I cross questioned that stupid old woman." 

" And what did she say, mamma ? " 

'. I don't know exactly what she did say, and what she 
didn't say. She chatters so, there's no remembering one- 
half of it, but I formed my own conclusions." 

" And what were they ? " 

" My dear, there's a secret." 

" But what is the secret about ? " 

" That remains to be seen. I haven't found it out as yet 
.but I will." 

This somewhat unsatisfactory termination of Mrs. Whit- 
aker's diplomacy Ann was compelled to be satisfied with. 
What further evidence she wanted she must search for her- 
self. 

" When William comes we'll tell him all about it, and ask 
his advice,'' said Mrs. Whitaker. Then Ann told her 
mother that he had been there, and had left the ten pounds. 
Mrs. Whitaker gathered them up and counted them. 

" I don't think I shall keep them," said the good lady, 
holding them very tightly in her hand while she spoke. 
" William is really so dictatorial, and so exacting, and asks 
so many questions." 

" But if you do not can you pay the rent ? " 

"Why not ? There are those fifty pounds." 

" Mamma, you surely would not touch them ? If it is 
true that that man sent them to me " 

"Well?" 

But here came a rat-tat at the door, which cut the con- 
versation short. The lodger had returned. 

During the afternoon Mrs. Whitaker suggested several 
plans for discovering whether or not Mr. Smith had sent the 
notes. Their numbers were consecutive. Had he any 
more notes in his possession. If so, and the numbers ran 
on before or after these, the case was proved. But how to 
find this out ? Easily enough, by going up and asking if he 
could oblige her with a ten pound note for ten sovereigns. 
This scheme, however, with several others as ingenious, was 
not put into execution, and after tea, Mrs. Whitaker took a 
nap, and forgot all about it. 

But Ann did not. She sat with the envelope in her hand, 
thinking deeply. ., When her mamma began to nod her head 



At a House Without a Number. 167 

she looked over at her anxiously. And on the good lady's 
regular respiration betokening that she slumbered soundly, 
Ann rose and left the room on tiptoe. A few moments 
later she was tapping at Mr. Smith's door. 

He was sitting by the fire in the act of lighting a pipe, 
and paused to call out "Come in." On the table by his 
side there stood a reading-lamp, which threw a bright light 
down upon an open book, and up in a round spot on the 
ceiling, but the room was so dark elsewhere it was impos- 
sible for him to recognise his visitor, and as she stood still 
for a moment he said, " What do you want ? " 

AVithout immediately replying, she approached the table, 
and paused within a yard of him. He saw then for the first 
time who it was, and started to his feet with a strange agita- 
tion visible upon his dark features. 

Then Ann said abruptly, without another word of preface, 
" You addressed this envelope to me, Sir, I think, . is it not 
so?" 

His lips moved, but he made no audible answer. 

"Yes, I see you did," she went on. "Why did you do so?" 

" I didn't say " 

" There was no occasion to say anything. I read it in 
your face. Please take these back, Sir. I dare say it was 
very kindly meant. My mamma and I are poor, but not so 
poor as that. That would insult us." 

He made no attempt at denial now. 

" I meant no insult, God knows. ArniT. Miss Whitaker, 
I " 

" What do you mean ? " she asked, drawing back fright- 
ened from his outstretched hand. " You are a stranger to 
us. Why have you come here? What is all this mystery?" 

" My folly, that is all. There ought to have been none. 
I ought not to have sent the money in that way ! When 
you hear whom it comes from, I hope you will not think its 
being sent to you an insult. Do you remember James ? 
You used to call him Jimmy . who went to Jamaica . who 
was supposed to be dead " 

" Are you ? " 

" Yes. What's the matter? Ann. don't do that ? What's 
the matter ? " 

She had put her hand up to her head with a little cry, and 
burst into tears, and then laughed, and held out her hand 
and said awkwardly, " How do you do, James?" 



1 68 A London Romance. 

James shook her hand more awkwardly still. " How do 
you do ? " he echoed. 

After a pause she asked, " "Why did you not tell us at 
first?" 

" I don't exactly know," replied James ruefully, and he 
didn't just at the moment. " I wish I had," he added, and 
he wished so from his heart. 

As Ann sat very silent in a chair which he had offered 
her, with her hands upon her lap, he found it rather difficult 
to know what to say next, and yet it seemed to him he had 
so much to say . presently . afterwards . when he had said 
the first thing, whatever that might be. But he said nothing. 

Ann rose at last. " Had I not better tell mamma? " 

" Yes . directly. I'll go with you and tell her . in a mo- 
ment. Not yet." 

He had taken her hand in his. 

" You don't know how I've looked forward to seeing you 
again. How I have longed for it. How I have feared to 
come back lest you might all be dead. lest you might all 
have forgotten me. I thought at first I would come straight 
to your house and knock at the door, and cry out " Here I 
am," but I couldn't do that because when I came to look 
for the house I found that the court itself had been pulled 
down . that the whole neighbourhood was swept away. It 
nearly broke my heart, that disappointment." 

Her hand in his pressed it gently. 

" I found out, with a great deal of trouble and a hundred 
enquiries, M-hat had become of you, and learnt that you were 
rich. I don't know whether that did not disappoint me 
more almost. No it didn't. I went on with my enquiries, 
and I found out at last that you were poor again, and had 
come to live here. I would have come then as I had 
thought of doing at first, but I was afraid. I thought then 
I would adopt this silly scheme I have carried out. It was 
silly." 

Her hand pressed his again, and when she spoke the 
tears trembled in her voice as in her eyes. 

" It was not silly. You have the same noble heart you 
had long ago . the same we none of us understood. I . I 
am very happy to see you, James." 

She rose, then leant forward, kissed him, and ran out of 
the room. 

There in the fire-light he sat very motionless, except that 



At a House Without a Number. 169 

his heart throbbed almost audibly. His cheek was wet with 
her tears. Presently his tears also trickled down it. 

" Good gracious ! mercy me . Mr. Smith . Jimmy . where 
is he ? Let me go to him." 

Mrs. AVhitaker was coming up the stairs with the full in- 
tention of straining him to her maternal bosom. 





CHAPTER VIII. 

ilOME really happy days succeeded the events above 
recorded . a period of almost unalloyed happiness 
in which the roses returned now and again to 
Ann's cheeks, and a merry laugh . not often 
heard hitherto . rang gaily through Mrs. Whitaker's re- 
sidence. 

That person of the name of Smith had disappeared for 
good and all, and in his place was the rich Mr. Jarman : 
' : My nephew James, who has been away so long in foreign 
parts." The news spread among the sanguine shopkeepers 
of Straggleton New Town, and very soon extra circulars 
and handbills were thrust into the letter-box bearing Mr. 
Jarman's name. '.' Jarman, Esq." 

Great expectations, it would appear, were entertained re- 
garding Jarman, Esq., among the commercial community 

of those parts. Why should he not want to deal extensively 
in drugs and medicines ? Without doubt he must require 
cigars and tobacco ? Why not " try our best family 
congou ? " &c. &c. Indeed there was no saying what he 
might not purchase, if the case were only properly put to 
him in appropriate capitals. 

He was rich, was the rich Mr. Jarman, there was no 
doubt about that. Wherever he had been, . Mrs. Whitaker 
to her dying day had never any distinct understanding of 
where it was, . it was evident he had been at the right place, 
and had done the right thing at the right time. Wherever 
he had been and whatever he had done, one thing was sure 
. he had made a lot of money. 



At a House Without a Number. 171 

Nor was he stingy. " No, he's not stingy. I must say 
that of James," Mrs. Whitaker had observed upon several 
occasions, and indeed it would have been difficult to point 
out how he could have shown greater liberality, unless it 
were by giving his fortune away altogether. Very soon the 
presence of James Jarman's money began to show itself in 
the little household. A silver tea-urn, which had lain in 
difficulties for some time past, once more decked the tea- 
table upon state occasions. Mrs. Whitaker appeared in a 
new silk gown richly ornamented by a florid sprig. Ann 
wore a darling little gold watch, the winding up and regulat- 
ing of which was half the day's occupation during the first 
happy week of ownership. The servant-girl had new ribbons 
in her cap. Some arrears of wages were paid up, and she 
signalised that event by the purchase of a new pair of boots 
which creaked amazingly. 

" You need want for nothing while I have it," James said 
many times. " This is not a cheerful part of the town to 
reside in. I must look about. I will find some pretty villa 
somewhere, standing in its own grounds. You shall come 
and live with me there, and keep house for me." 

" But some day you will get married," Ann said. 

" And some day Ann will get married," said Mrs. Whitaker. 
" And what will William say ? " 

What would William say, was a question which sometimes 
came in a serious moment to both the ladies. What would 
William say when he heard what wonderful things had come 
to pass, and were to come to pass ? How was it he did not 
know already ? The reason of his ignorance was this. 

There had been a sort of religious festival down in the 
midland counties. The celebrated Mr. Bradshaw had been 
invited thither, and his eloquence had created a profound 
sensation. He had started upon this journey the day after 
that on which he brought Mrs. Whitaker the ten pounds for 
her rent, and his return had been delayed from day to day. 
He had now been absent nearly a fortnight. 

Among the various improvements in Mrs. Whitaker's 
house was the introduction of a piano, which Ann played . 
not very well, but enough to accompany herself in some 
little songs she sang of an evening in a low sweet voice, 
that James found very delightful to listen to. At his desire 
very often the lighting of the lamp was delayed after tea, 
and he and Mrs. Whitaker sat in the fire-light listening to 



*7 2 A London Romance. 

these same songs, and generally the soothing influence of 
the music and the fire upon the top of the hot tea and tea- 
cake, coaxed the good lady off to sleep. 

James, sitting back in the darkest corner he could find, 
was not asleep, although he was very silent. The recollec- 
tion of the old, cruel childhood came back to him then, and 
he thought how he had striven and worked and done his best 
ever to be disappointed. After all, though, what did it 
matter ? He had been lucky. He had found riches. He 
was happy now . for a little while at any rate. How long 
would it last ? 

When the lamp was lit they usually had a game of cards 
. whist with a dummy and sixpenny points, at which Mrs. 
Whitaker generally won from eighteen-pence to five-shillings, 
and pronounced her lucky evenings to be most improving. 
James was a bad player ; he revoked, and forgot to score . 
he never knew whose lead it was . he never gave his partner 
a chance . he never knew what cards were out . when it 
was his lead, he invariably kept the table waiting ; some- 
times he would be found with his cards unsorted after two 
or three tricks had been played. 

"Why ever don't you pay attention?" Mrs. Whitaker 
would say. "See there ! . what on earth made you do that? 
You ought to have played spades. Don't you see you have 
trumped your partner's trick ? Why, bless the man, there 
never was such silly play ! " 

" I'm a poor bungler, I'm afraid," said James, laughing ; 
" I never could play at games. Don't you remember, Ann, 
the old hop-scotch days ? Do you recollect when you broke 
the window, and I would not say who did it ? " 

" Good gracious, James, don't talk about those things ! 
You surely never played at such a low game, Ann. I can't 
believe it." 

"Oh yes, I did, mamma," said Ann, wickedly; "I could 
play at it now." 

"Ann!" cried Mrs. Whitaker, severely; "never let me 
hear you say such a thing again. If William were to hear 
you ! " 

" By-the-way," said James, "does our Cousin William 
approve of cards ? " 

Mrs. AVhitaker knew very well he didn't. She was a 
dreadfully deceitful old woman about some things ; almost 
all woman are deceitful about some tilings. " I'm not quite 



At a House Without a Number : 173 

sure what; William's opinion is upon the subject. I don't 
think we have ever played cards when he has been here, . 
have we ? " 

" You know we haven't, mamma ; " and Mrs. Whitaker 
blushed as deeply as the poppy in her cap. 

" If we hear his knock," said James, " we'll hide the cards 
under the table." 

This was not the only occasion on which that fellow 
Tames endeavoured in a quiet way to inculpate the two 
ladies, as it were, in his dark conspiracies. The notion of 
William's knocking made their hearts beat just a little 
quicker. Many times they said to themselves . 

" What would William say supposing he were to come 
now, . whatever would AVilliam say ? " 

To begin with, would William approve of the piano ? He 
had told Ann that when they were married, he would give 
her a beautiful harmonium. It is not usual to play secular 
tunes on those instruments ; it was then reasonable to sup- 
pose that the harmonium was to be devoted to hymns ; but 
it was not hymns that Ann sang so charmingly. 

Ann arranged her hair in a pretty style of her own ; 
James had praised a stray ringlet which formed part of its 
somewhat elaborate construction ; and Ann wore this curl 
in fear and trembling, intending to tuck it up and fasten it 
with a hair-pin to the other mass the moment she heard 
William's knock at the door. 

Mrs. Whitaker, too, had her doubts about the florid-sprig 
ornamentation. The servant girl knew very well that Mr. 
Bradshaw would disapprove of the colour of her cap ribbons. 
But all these minor peccadilloes sank into insignificance be- 
fore the great wrong-doing to come. 

One day James said, quite calmly and coolly . 

" Suppose we go to the play ? " 



CHAPTER IX. 




| HE play ! " echoed Mrs. Whitaker. 
' ; The play ! " echoed Ann. 
Then they both thought of AVilliam, and 
were silent. Decidedly William would not 
approve of the play. What a long while it was since they 
had been anywhere. How delightful it would be, but how 
angry William would be afterwards. No, it was quite im- 
possible. 

But a ray of hope broke in upon their disappointment. 

" A nice sort of fellow I made acquaintance with the other 
day gave me some tickets," said James. " It's not exactly 
for the regular play, you know; it's for an amateur perform- 
ance at an amateur theatre." 

" Ah ! " cried Mrs. Whitaker, " that makes a difference, 
doesn't it ? " 

It made a very great difference ; all the difference, as 
everybody agreed, when the question was fully discussed. 
Amateur theatricals could not be as objectionable' as real 
theatricals, and plays in a room not nearly so wicked as 
plays in a playhouse. It was quite probable that if the 
matter were put to William, he would really not make any 
objection. Then it was impossible to put it to him, as he 
was away in the country. After all, there could be no great 
harm in his knowing about it, as clearly they were all agreed 
that there was no harm in the act itself. 

In the middle of the important discussion what should 
come but a postman's knock ; and whom should the letter 
be from which he brought but William Bradshaw himself, 



A House Without a Number. 175 

saying that he would be absent for another week at least. 
Under these circumstances what could they do but go to 
the amateur performance ? 
They went. 

It was an evening of great excitement. The ladies began 
to dress in broad daylight, and were some hours engaged 
upon their toilets. As regarded Mrs. Whitaker, imposing 
results accrued from these lengthy operations . the great 
sprig pattern even was not grand enough for the occasion. 
A something of marvellous manufacture . home made . was 
produced, which was neither cape, tippet, pelisse, peplum, 
fichu, nor spencer, and yet partook of the nature of all ! . a 
long and carefully hoarded silk of brilliant hue, which smelt 
strongly of the box where it had been imprisoned. 

Ann looked quite pretty and was in the highest spirits. 
She sang softly to herself as the cab drove along, and, caught 
in the act when they came once unexpectedly to a standstill, 
blushed and laughed. 

" Lor' bless the girl," cried Mrs. Whitaker, " how she 
does love a bit of pleasure ! " 

The old lady was herself in a state of great excitement, 
though she concealed her delight more artfully. There was, 
indeed, an unwonted sprightliness in her movements, and 
she bounced out of the cab, when it at length drew up in 
front of the door of the Boudoir Theatre, like some frisky 
young hoyden. 

" Don't the old gal skip neither ! " was the irreverent ex- 
clamation of one of the common persons assembled at the 
outer portal to see the quality arrive. 

The "auditorium" of the Boudoir was limited in its 
capabilities, and hard-seated. It smelt a good deal like a 
vault, and was chilly at the beginning of the evening and 
very hot at the end. There were some private boxes of very 
small dimensions, which had a stuffy flavour about them, 
similar to that of the interior of an omnibus on a wet day 
in a poor neighbourhood. 

Upon this occasion the theatre had been taken by some 
gentlemen amateurs occupying a higher position in the social 
scale than that which amateurs at such a place generally en- 
joy, and the costumes of the audience were brighter than 
usual. Until the play began, then, and while the musicians 
in the orchestra were tuning their fiddles, the ladies were 



176 A London Romance. 

fully occupied in criticising their neighbours, and then the 
fiddles being tuned, a rather jerky and jingling overture 
ushered in the performances. 

These began with a farce which two gentlemen acted with 
perhaps a little more confidence in their humorous powers, 
than the somewhat feeble mirth of the spectators warranted. 
After this came a good long wait, and then the piece of the 
evening. A murmur of expectation had preceded it. The 
actor of the principal character had achieved a small reputa- 
tion by his previous performances. Some young ladies in 
the seat before the Whitakers were quite ecstatic in their ad- 
miration. 

" Have you ever seen him before ? " 

" Yes, at the last performance." 

" Is it not beautiful, and is he not handsome ? " 

" I went," one young lady said, and even she was not the 
most enthusiastic, " with the Beverley girls and the two Miss 
Starlings, and all seven of us fell in love with him." 

. This conversation was only terminated by the rising of 
the curtain, and then the house was hushed, and very soon 
the hero of the evening was swaggering before his admirers' 
bright eyes. -He played the part of a Spanish nobleman . 
profligate, ragged, penniless, but light of heart as purse. A 
merry cavalier, with an ever-ready sword, now drawn in de- 
fence of a dark-eyed dancing girl, now of a pert page in blue 
satin "trunks". ("The bold thing !" from Mrs. Whitaker). 
A rollicking dare-devil fellow, as brave as he was impudent 
and ready-witted. Presently condemned to death, he bade 
the soldiers who were to shoot him join him in a parting 
glass, and joined them in a merry song; then swaggered 
out to death with a saucy laugh and a wave of his white 
hand. Who that wore petticoats could have helped falling 
in love with this .dear, wicked, handsome gentleman, the 
great Don Caesar de Bazan ? 

And who with whom this history interests itself particu- 
larly fell in love with him that night ? It is not often that 
an author gets the chance of introducing his hero with roll 
of drum and flourish of trumpet, but here, gentle ladies and 
brave gentlemen, enters on the scene the real hero of what 
may prove a sadder and more tragical story than the reader 
wots of. 

Yes, here he made his entrance into the little world of 
which Ann formed a part. Here he came with his ringlets, 



At a House Without a Number. 177 

his drooping moustache, his dark flashing eyes, his richly 
slashed doublet (the Don got rid of his rags, as you know, 
half-way through the piece). Here he came, laughing, sing- 
ing, making love in a deep, tremulous voice, which thrilled 
through the heart of the sympathising little girl, who listened 
breathless. 

What rubbish this must seem to a sensible person of the 
sterner sex . the plain, practical man of business, with an 
honest ugliness upon his open face ! What woman of sense 
would fall in love with a fool of a fellow playing the mounte- 
bank in russet boots and ruffles ? This hero is presently to 
play another part off the stage, and in private clothes to 
walk and talk like any commonplace person ; but to the end 
of time shall Ann still preserve an ineffaceable recollection 
of the dashing Don Csesar. To the last he shall be to her 
Don Caesar . the gay, heroic Don . the brave, generous, 
spendthrift gentleman ! Do no others play such a part in 
the hearts of those who love them . no mean, paltry, shallow 
pretenders live and die heroes, and are never known in their 
real characters ? 

At last the curtain fell amidst great applause, and the hero 
was loudly called for. It was a sight to see him then cross 
the tiny stage . two good strides would have done it . so 
calmly confident of his own merits . graciously acknowledg- 
ing, but by no means flustered by, the universal homage. 
The young ladies in front exclaimed in chorus . " Isn't he 
delightful ? Isn't he splendid ? It is better than anything 
at the theatre." 

Our two female friends were gazing upon him in silent 
admiration, and Ann's eyes were dimmed with tears. Some 
one threw a bouquet, which Don Ceesar picked up gracefully 
and kissed. A common male person laughed jeeringly . 
" The idea of chucking flowers at a fellow ! " But the re- 
mark was drowned in the loud acclamation. 

Then some of the other characters were called for, and 
came eagerly, and bowed, and disappeared again ; but these 
were events of little interest to any but the actors themselves 
and their personal friends. Ann, with a long breath, leant 
back and closed her eyes. James's voice aroused her. He 
was asking a question. What it was she had not heard. 

" Did you like that ? " 

" Oh, so much ! Is he as handsome off the stage ? " 

" He . who . Draper ? " 
12 



178 A London Romance. 

"Draper?" 

" The one who did the Don ? Le Mercier he's called 
upon the bill." 

" That's a prettier name than Draper." 

"But it means the same thing, only it's French. He 
knows his own name isn't a very grand one, and so meets 
criticism half way by the nickname he has chosen ; though, 
if I had been he, I should have called myself Bobbin 
McReel." 

" Would you ?" said Ann, quite seriously. 

" And what's his Christian name ? " 

" Harry." 

"That's pretty. Harry Draper ! I don't think it is such 
an ugly name, after all." 

A minute later she asked . " Do you know him? " 

"Him . always meaning Draper? Yes, I know him a 
little. It was he who gave me the tickets. He'll come up 
here presently, I dare say, and I'll introduce him." 

There was yet another play. Amateur performances can 
seldom be condemned for too great brevity. The conclud- 
ing piece was the " Spitalfields' Weaver," in which a cele- 
brated comic amateur was to take the part of Simmonds. 

" We shall be very late if we stay it all out, sha'n't we ? " 
said Mrs. Whitaker. " Dear me, how very warm and thirsty 
the dust does make one." 

But Ann wanted to stop. " Shall we not stay to see the 
celebrated comic amateur?" James, too, proposed that 
they should go into the saloon, where all the delicacies 
peculiar to the saloons of theatres were procurable. Whilst 
they were there, Ann heard a voice behind her which she 
recognised. 

" Oh, James " 

James turned quickly from the counter on which he had 
been putting down an empty glass. "What is the matter?" 

" Nothing. Only . is that your friend ? " 

" To be sure. Hallo, Draper ! How are you ? Allow 
me to introduce you." 

He was yet Don Csesar, although in modern dress. He 
had lost his long ringlets, and his hair was somewhat closely 
cut, in a military fashion. About the drooping moustache 
there was no deception, however ; nor about the bright, dark, 
searching eyes. He wore a light overcoat, and had a white 



At a House Without a Number. 179 

scarf tied loosely round his throat ; a cigar and a cane he 
carried gave him much of Don Caesar's gay air, but he did 
not swagger nor ogle Ann when introduced to her. 

What had Don Caesar to say for himself in private life ? 
Not very much on that occasion. Mrs. Whitaker told him 
how pleased they had been, and he smiled very sweetly, and 
showed some white and regular teeth. 

" How clever you must be," she said. " And how you 
can remember it all ! It's most astonishing." 

"It went off pretty well, I think," said Don Csesar. "I 
was horribly supported though. Are you going to stop for 
the comic man ? I can't myself, . I've an appointment. 
Good-bye. Good-evening." 

" Now we've had something, I feel quite refreshed," said 
Mrs. Whitaker. " Shall we go back ? " 

" No, mamma," said Ann. " What's the good ? It's very 
late too, I am certain. And after the other piece it can't be 
worth seeing." 

And so they did not stop for the comic man. 




12 . 2 




CHAPTER X. 

URIXG William's absence in the country, the 
Whitakers were kept -well acquainted with his 
sayings and doings. He wrote at great length 
about them himself, and they were also reported 
in the paper. 

The ''Thirsty Soul ' was supplied to them every Saturday 
from Pickering's shop, and there were all the movements of 
the Chosen Few fully set forth, with encouraging comments, 
for this was the special organ of the Chosen, and pealed 
forth their praises loudly. It appeared, from this journal's 
statements, that the new doctrine was rapidly gaining ground 
. that the Few promised before long to become many . 
that the truth would assert itself in spite of all opposition . 
that might would soon be joined to right, and a great and 
glorious triumph ensue. 

All this while there were, however, many thousands upon 
thousands of Catholics, Protestants, High Church, Low 
Church, Middle Church, Methodists, Wesleyans, Indepen- 
dents, Baptists, Anti-baptists, Moravians, Presbyterians, 
Quakers, Shakers, Mormons, Pagans, Jews, and Peculiar 
People, besides other sorts too numerous to mention, who 
were going on in blind ignorance of the Chosen Few and 
their doctrines. It seemed quite likely that some of these 
outsiders would go down to their graves ignoring the right 
path as previous generations had done without number, and 
the Chosen loudly bewailed the inevitable doom of such, 
and held monster meetings to take their sad case into con- 
sideration. 



At a House Without a Number. 181 

At these meetings the celebrated Mr. Bradshaw delivered 
startling discourses, and the good country-people flocked to 
hear him, and listened open-mouthed. There were two 
countrymen once who had been sitting out an exciting 
melodrama, and one asked the other what he "made on't." 

" I don't know rightly what it's all about, but it's blessed 
cutting," was the other one's answer. 

Probably some of these simple rustics did not too clearly 
comprehend what William Bradshaw's discourse was all 
about, but nevertheless found it improving. " He stir'ee 
oop, dont'ee ? " was a question not unfrequently to be heard. 
" Eh, but he do so, sure-ly," was generally the answer. 

They came and listened silently in large numbers. When 
the sermon was over, they gathered up their hats and um- 
brellas, and blundered noisily out into the open air. For 
the most part they separated and went their ways without a 
word. Some hazarded vague enquiries of one another. 

" Well, Maister ? What didst make o' that like ? " 

" He ga' it soom on 'em, . did na he ? " 

" Tha'rt reight there, mon," and they separated, with 
nods and winks full of hidden meaning. 

Yet it must not be supposed from this that the language 
William used was very difficult to comprehend, or that his 
arguments were obscure and complicated. The congregation 
for whom he catered were, perhaps, a little wooden-headed 
and obtuse, and to stir them at all . though not deep enough 
to reach the thicknesses of their understandings . was never- 
theless a triumph. The manner of his discourse was homely 
and simple. He gave a local colouring to his sermon, and 
sometimes even brought in the names of members of the 
congregation, at which names the owners pricked up their 
ears and blushed and shuffled uneasily, whilst the rest turned 
round and craned their necks to get a view of them ; and 
these allusions were surprisingly successful. 

Each discourse, . for he preached only once in each 
village, . was followed by a collection, and some of those 
sitting near the door might, had there been any forewarning 
of the sermon's end, have shuffled out in time to save their 
pockets ; but one peculiarity of William's was to end sud- 
denly without a moment's preparation, and then, at a sign 
from him, the plates were rapidly circulated, the raid begin- 
ning in the neighbourhood of the door. 

Nor was much meanness practicable, for William would, 



1 82 A London Romance. 

whilst the collection was in progress, urge his hearers to give 
all they could ; and not, as he put it, bargain for their soul's 
salvation with a handful of greasy halfpence, when they had 
silver in their pockets they could spare. 

"You're better off in this village than they are at the one 
I've just come from, and I shall expect a richer plate. You'll 
put in all you can now after what I've said, or you ought to 
be ashamed of yourselves. I don't envy any man's feelings 
who at this moment is slipping in a penny, when he ought 
to be giving a shilling." 

These remarks did in truth urge the naturally niggardly 
to unwonted generosity, and few got off as cheaply as they 
intended to have done. Some afterwards, in a fashion, 
apologised to one another for their liberality, as though they 
were ashamed of it ; and some said the discourse was worth 
double the money ; even the scoffers owned it was worth 
listening to, if only for the humorous anecdotes with which 
it was interspersed j not really so very humorous perhaps, 
but a little fun goes a long way under certain circumstances. 

In the house without a number, down the nameless street 
of Straggleton New Town, the unworthy relatives of the 
great reformer were in a sinful and worldly way enjoying 
themselves. 

The card-parties continued. There had been a day- 
journey to the Zoological Gardens, and a night-trip to the 
Polytechnic. Once in a moment of extreme jollity, after a 
glass of something that had followed a crab supper, James 
spoke of the real theatre, and proposed taking a box. Ann's 
eyes sparkled, but Mrs. Whitaker protested. 

" No . no ! I won't do that, James. I never would, and 
I never will. When your uncle was employed there, we had 
often tickets ; but I never thought it was right. We did go 
once, Sam and me. We were late and had a bad place be- 
hind a pillar, with the draught of the door right in the nape 
of my neck. I wasn't at all comfortable all the time, and 
when they began swearing and murdering one another, I 
just got up and said to your uncle, ' You may stop here as 
long as you like, Sam, but I won't' It was that Montmorenci 
at number six in our court was the worst. I never could 
bear the man, and wouldn't have sat down to the same 
table with such wickedness for fear the food should choke 



At a House Without a Number. 1 83 

Under these circumstances all thought of playgoing was 
for the time abandoned, and no more amateur performances 
were just then in progress. Apropos of this subject, how- 
ever, it should be mentioned that Don Csesar called one 
day. 

Upon this occasion again he was without the ringlets and 
russet boots, but the Don Caesar airs and graces were still 
there, and as effective as ever. Now there were probably 
many richer, handsomer, cleverer gentlemen in the world 
than Don Harry Draper de Bazan, but then if there were 
they did not accompany him arm-in-arm to Mrs. Whitaker's 
little drawing-room, and so there was no one there to dispute 
the great and glorious victory our hero achieved. 

There was present at the time, it is true, a somewhat 
mean and meagre dark-faced man called James Jarman, who 
indeed had brought the hero with him, and who sat listen- 
ing with genuine admiration to Don Caesar's talk. This 
talk was not remarkably witty, but there was a certain glib- 
ness about it which was captivating. It very soon appeared 
that such talents and virtues as Mr. Harry Draper possessed 
were not overlooked by their owner ; but it must also be 
owned that he was conscious of his faults. 

" I'm abominably idle," he said ; " I've never had much 
reason to try and make a name for myself. It's been an 
unlucky thing for me in some respects that I was born well 
enough off to be able to live without work ; though if it had 
been otherwise, I should have missed a good many things, 
the pleasure of meeting you among others." 

"How so?" asked Mrs. Whitaker. 

" Did not Jarman tell you how we made each other's ac- 
quaintance ? No ? . then I will. You must know I am 
supposed to be a barrister-at-law . that is, I have a wig and 
gown and chambers in the Temple ; I've tried the two first 
on to see how I looked in them, and I have got them put 
away very carefully in a couple of boxes. The chambers I 
share with another man who is also a barrister-at-law, who 
does nothing in the legal way. He writes for newspapers, 
and I do the same in a small way when the fit takes me. 
Jarman here wanted some lawyer's work done, and made 
enquiries about a barrister. A mutual friend waggishly sug- 
gested my chum. My chum was equal to the occasion and 
suggested me." 

" And so I went to see you," said Jarman. 



184 A London Romance. 

" The visit was unprofessional," continued Don Caesar ; 
" for he ought not to have approached my august presence 
except through the medium of a respectable attorney. But 
he didn't do this, and he paid the penalty. At the time he 
called I was rehearsing." 

"I thought it was a charge to the jury," said Jarman, 
"when I caught a confused sound of it on the staircase." 

At this Don Csesar blushed just a little, for the idea of 
his being overheard spouting blank-verse was not altogether 
dignified ; however, he very readily took the bull by the 
horns, and laughed pleasantly at his own expense. 

" The fact is, I was making a fool of myself. It wasn't 
fair of Jarman to take me unawares in that way . to catch 
me behind the scenes. But I made him promise to keep 
my secret. He will never tell you how ridiculous he thought 
me." 

As Draper left the story here, Jarman took it up, and ex- 
plained how, finding that the barrister was not exactly the 
person he had come in quest of, was going away again in a 
huff, when his new acquaintance offered him a cigar and his 
advice, and he had stopped and smoked, and in the end 
made vows of friendship, eventually taking his departure 
with the tickets in his pocket for the celebrated perform- 
ance. 

Mrs. Whitaker here broke in. 

" Oh, it was capital . capital ! Ann here has done nothing 
but talk of it ever since, and went to town on purpose to 
buy the book. You know you did, Ann. Where's that 
little book now of < Julius Csesar ' ? I dare say Mr. Draper 
would like to look at it." 

" No, no, mamma. How can you ? " 

Mr. Draper, smarting a little at the good lady's blunder 
in the title, looked as pleasant as he could. He turned to 
Ann. 

" You are fond of theatricals ? " 

" I have not had much experience. I think I am." 

" You have never taken any part in a performance ? " 

" Oh, no. never." 

" But you should do. I am sure you would make a good 
actress. You have the face, and figure, the voice. If you 
would only try, I could give you such a nice character in a 
piece we are getting up." 

" I'm sure we are much obliged to you, Sir," Mrs. Whitaker 



At a House Without a Niimber. 185 

said, coming quickly to the rescue. " But I don't think we 
should like that. You know, Ann, how much William would 
disapprove " 

" Your husband, Madam ? " said Draper, interrogatively. 

" No ; my nephew, to whom Ann is " 

"Papa didn't object, as you and William do, to the 
theatre," broke in Ann. " How could he ? or else he would 
not have been at one himself." 

" Ann ! " cried Mrs. Whitaker, in a warning voice and 
with a warning expression of countenance. But the visitor 
did not notice these signs. He went on with great interest. 
" Your papa at the theatre ? Indeed ! Which theatre ? Did 
he act under his own name ? " 

" He was not an actor," said Ann. 

" He was more in the mechanical department," continued 
Mrs. Whitaker ; and then with a bold dash at a word she 
had somewhere heard before, "he mounted all the pieces." 

" Oh," said Draper ; who, like most amateurs, prided 
himself upon his knowledge of the technicalities, and did 
not like to expose his ignorance by asking any further ques- 
tions. 

Shortly afterwards he took his departure, and more than 
once smiled to himself as the Hansom cab he had hailed 
conveyed him swiftly towards the Temple. Arrived here, 
he found the chum he had spoken of preparing to sally 
forth in quest of dinner. The chum asked him to come also. 

"I suppose I might as well, but I'm not at all hungry, 
I've eaten so much tea-cake." 

" Tea-cake ! " the other echoed. " For a wager, perhaps. 
Where ? " 

" No. I've won nothing by it . at least, not as yet. In 
the bosom of a respectable family, if you know what that is, 
Tom Yolland." 

" Good gracious ! " 



CHAPTER XL 




S Draper could not eat very much, he drank a little 
more than usual, and was very merry, smiling 
more than once at his own thoughts without im- 
parting the subject to his friend. 

" What makes you grin so ? " asked the other. " Is it the 
tea-cake ? " 

" Tell me all you know about that fellow Jarman you sent 
to see me the other day. Who is he ?" 

" I know very little about him ; I met him at ' The 
Roughs.' I don't think he's a member of the club, and I 
don't know who brought him there. He joined in the con- 
versation, and somehow he and I walked away together. 
Out in the street he asked me whether I was a barrister, 
and if so whether I would like a brief. I couldn't think of 
anyone who cared less about such a thing, except yourself; 
so I sent him to you." 

" What do you think of him ? " 

" You know more of him than I do. You've seen him 
since, haven't you?" 

" From what you saw of him, what was your opinion ? " 

" I don't know that I've got one. Yes I have though. 
He seemed to entertain some strange ideas about . poetical 
justice, and that sort of thing; and argued the expediency 
of taking the law into one's own hands, under certain cir- 
cumstances. He had travelled abroad a good deal, he said ; 
and it struck me he might have had a sunstroke." 

" What ? you thought him a little wild ? " 



At a House Without a Number. 187 

" Yes, a little. Unpractical, at any rate. What do you 
make of him ? where does he live ? " 

" You can hardly say he belongs to this world at all. At 
least, he resides at a house without a number, in a street 
without a name, in a half-built suburb, altogether beyond 
the realms of civilisation ; and it seems he boards there with 
some relations." 

" What is he ? Anything ? " 

" Less than nothing, as well as I can make out. He 
appears to have money.' 1 

" Not much, I should think, to live in an out-of-the-way 
place like that, unless there are attractions." 

" As far as the locality goes, nothing could be more un- 
desirable." 

" Then there must be some other reason. By-the-way, 
what did he want a barrister for ? " 

" By-the-way, he never told me." 

" But you asked him ? " 

" I certainly did. I asked him twice, now I come to 
think of it, and both times he turned the conversation." 

" Depend upon it, he's a man of mystery. He has most 
likely committed a dreadful crime. You must see to this. 
We ought to work it into something for one of the magazines, 
or couldn't you use it for the famous novel ? " 

This famous novel was one long talked of, which was 
some day to be expected from the pen of Harry Draper, 
Esqre. Other things, too, had been expected from Harry 
Draper. He was one of those young men of brilliant parts 
who are always upon the very eve of achieving fame, but 
don't. 

He was, as has been said, a handsome fellow. He was 
also a clever actor. His contributions to literature evinced 
decided genius . or what passes for it. He had that happy 
way of persuading the reader he had to do with a writer of 
superior information, who took him into his confidence with- 
out being insultingly patronising. 

There were few things that he tried at which he did not 
acquit himself creditably ; but he wanted to be best at 
everything : he was not content unless he was one of the 
foremost in the race, of life : and unfortunately he was not 
strong enough for the hard work. For a short struggle he 
had pluck enough and to spare, but he could not keep up 
the pace. Yet he never owned himself beaten, or cried off. 



188 A London Romance. 

To look at the arrangement of his bed-room one would 
have supposed it to belong to a sort of Guy Livingstone, or, 
say, to one of those impossible heroes of the wonderful 
Ouida. (It must do a cynic's heart good to know that the 
female mind can conceive such a preposterously robust, 
manly, diabolically clever ideal of a trousers-wearer). 

There were, to begin with, toilet arrangements upon a 
large scale. A shower-bath, a sponging-bath, a multiplicity 
of pitchers, towels of exceeding roughness, sand-balls, and 
flesh brushes. The severity of his lavatory operations were 
enough for a timid mollycoddle to wake up in the middle of 
a winter's night and shiver at the thought of. Now, Harry 
Draper's medical adviser had, upon several occasions, sug- 
gested that sanitary measures of a less violent character 
should be adopted, but our hero persevered, though he every 
day underwent a kind of martyrdom. 

Upon the walls hung highly-finished lithographs of female 
loveliness recumbent, together with some sporting prints . 
hunting pictures, and portraits of the winners of the St. 
Leger and the Cesarewitch. There were also boxing-gloves 
and foils, and a hunting whip and a pair of spurs. The 
whole arranged in picturesque confusion, which was the re- 
sult of much study. 

It is the object of life with many beardless youths to be 
thought sad dogs and devils of fellows, and it was Harry 
Draper's ambition to be thus reputed, yet he was not wholly 
a shallow pretender. He lived fast . that is, as fast as he 
could, for it did not particularly agree with him. Sometimes 
he broke down altogether, and was obliged to lay up . then 
he rallied again, and fought his way to the front, jostling the 
heavier weights . the giants of iron frame, who, unconscious 
that an effort was required, had not turned a hair in the heat 
in which our weakling had come to grief. 

Perhaps after all he was a pretender . a sham Guy Living- 
stone . but he never in his life lost faith in his own powers. 
Even when he was gasping on a sick bed he treated his 
sufferings lightly, and was, between paroxysms, the same de- 
fiant fellow he ever had been. 

It was in this wise. At the cigar shop you might have 
found the man packing up a box of large and powerful 
regalias. They were " for Mr. Draper, Sir. He likes them 
very full flavoured." At the wine merchant's that case was 
again " for Mr. Draper, Sir. The very oldest . the very 



At a House Without a Number. 189 

driest.'' Mr. Draper would drink nothing which wasn't the 
very somethingest . the correct thing, in fact. Perhaps, at 
the livery stables, there was an untamed Arab awaiting him. 
What else? He was evidently a very extraordinary person, 
and one was so impressed with his wonderful qualities, be- 
fore seeing him, that it took a long time afterwards to find 
him out. 

As far as Draper himself was concerned, he never 
thoroughly found himself out to his dying day. 

There are three male persons . as the reader may have 
chanced to notice . in this history who resembled one 
another very strongly in one particular, they all believed in 
themselves implicitly. Each of the three had also his ad- 
mirer or admirers, who believed in him also. In the first 
place, there was William Bradshaw, who might have num- 
bered his believers by the thousand. Then there was that 
man at the post office, of the name of Pickering, whose 
believers were less numerous and not so long enduring, but 
then he had a mother whose belief was strong enough to 
have been divided amongst a hundred other persons, allow- 
ing a large share to each. Finally, there was our hero, 
Harry Draper, who did not, as the reader knows already, 
lack admirers. Presently we shall find that there is one in 
particular who is down on her knees worshipping him with a 
blind devotion, which may perhaps distinguish her from the 
rest of the true believers, and even attract the favourable 
attention of the demi-god . hitherto somewhat superciliously 
inclined towards his humble disciples. 

Now what on earth could so distinguished a gentleman . 
so much run after, with so many claims upon his time . want 
wasting his precious hours up a paltry street of Straggleton 
New Town ? There can be no doubt in the world that he 
might have found much better company and spent his time 
more profitably in a score of other places, but here he was, 
three or four times a week, for two or three hours at a stretch, 
in Mrs. Whitaker's parlour, talking of Heaven knows what, 
and the rest of it. But why ? Because, let us suppose, he 
had taken a great fancy to James Jarman. 

One evening he came to dinner. Jarman, without mis- 
trusting Mrs. Whitaker's good intentions, thought it as well 
to enter into a contract for the supply of all the eatables 
from a pastrycook's in the neighbourhood. Upon another 



190 A London Romance. 

occasion the four went together to a panorama, James escort- 
ing the elder lady. 

" I never knew the like,'' said Mrs. Whitaker. " How 
gay we're getting, and whatever will " 

" Mrs. Grundy say ? " added James Jarman. 

The person he thus nicknamed was now expected daily. 
The guilty women quaked and trembled at every double 
knock. What an awful life they had been leading ! Had 
a diary been kept of their words and deeds during the last 
month, there was scarcely a day when something wrong had 
not happened . something, at any rate, that William would 
not have approved of. 

" I do wonder," Mrs. Whitaker said to Ann, . " I do 
wonder how William will get on with James." 

" Oh, very well I should think, mamma," replied the girl ; 
yet she could never have thought anything of the kind. 

" But they are really so different in so many respects," 
said mamma. 

" They are very different," said Ann, thoughtfully. 

Mrs. Whitaker went on wondering. " I wonder," said 
she, "what he will say to Mr. Draper." 

" What has he got to say? " asked Ann. " How do you 
do? I suppose. I don't know what else. I don't see what 
he should have to say to Mr. Draper more than to any other 
person." 

" Certainly not, my dear," replied mamma in a concilia- 
tory tone. " I don't see how he can for a moment ; unless, 
indeed " 

" Unless what ? " 

" Unless, perhaps, he thinks it odd we should have made 
so many new acquaintances." 

" Is one many, mamma ? " 

" One is one too many sometimes, my dear,'' said the old 
lady ; and there is every reason to believe she very nearly 
made a joke this time ; at any rate, she herself laboured 
under the impression that she had done so. 

At last the hour came, and with it the man. Rat-tat- 
atat-tat. 

He had written the day before, and named the hour when 
he might be expected. It is strange how provokingly things 
will happen sometimes. Mr. Harry Draper came the day 
before, just before William's letter arrived, proposing a visit 



At a House J I 'ithout a Number. 191 

to a morning concert next day, for which he had tickets. 
The ladies, dreaming not that the end was nigh, accepted 
his offer readily. Then the postman arrived with news from 
the seat of war, and an apology had to be sent to the 
Temple. 

Rat-tat-atat-tat. This time there could be no mistake 
about it. The servant girl, somehow an accomplice in the 
goings on aforesaid, heard and recognised the knock, and 
came up stairs with a guilty look. 

_" We shall all catch it, I suppose," she said. "I'll get 
mine over first." 

"Hannah," said Mrs. "Whitaker, in astonishment, "I'm 
surprised at you." But she thought afterwards it would have 
been a more dignified course on her part had she pretended 
not to understand. She did understand, however, perfectly, 
and Hannah knew it. 

Upon the very threshold William Bradshaw made his 
first discovery. He stopped short suddenly and sniffed 
the air. 

"What a smell of tobacco ! " he said. " Who has been 
smoking ? " 

Hannah had made up her mind for rebellion. A short 
but desperate struggle she was resolved upon. " Who is he, 
I should like to know, coming here to cross-question one 
upon the door-mat ? " 

She tossed her head, and replied, "I'm sure I don't 
know, Sir." 

William remained stock still, his eyes fixed upon her in a 
sort of sad wonder. " Don't know ! You cannot mean 
that, my good girl. You must know." 

" Well, I've not seen anyone smoking this morning ; but 
if you're particularly anxious about it, I should think it's Mr. 
Jarman. He very seldom has a pipe out of his mouth." 

There was here surely sufficient occasion for the adminis- 
tration of a gentle rebuke, but Mr. Bradshaw seemed too 
much surprised by the matter to think of the manner. Mrs. 
Whitaker, who was half-way up the kitchen stairs at the time, 
overheard what had passed, and came panting to the rescue. 

" How do you do, my dear William ? How can you stand 
there talking such nonsense, Hannah ? " Then, in an apolo- 
getic undertone, "Your cousin does smoke sometimes, 
William. It's being so much abroad, you know. I dare 
say that is where he picked up the habit." 



192 A London Romance. 

" It's almost better to remain in one's own country, than 
to go abroad only to pick up bad habits," William 
said. 

"Oh, but he has picked up other things besides, you 
know, William," Mrs. Whitaker hastened to add. " Such a 
fortune, too, it seems ! " 

William did not look at all pleased. He glanced round 
and saw the piano. 

"What's that?" 

"James bought it for us, William. It is such a nice one 
. such a sweet tone." 

William offered no remark. There were some pieces of 
music lying about, and he raised them one by one to look 
at the names, but without expressing any opinion regarding 
them. Mrs. Whitaker followed his every movement in great 
perturbation. At last he asked impatiently, . 

" Where is she ? Where's Ann ? " 

Ann was all this while up stairs unconscious of William's 
return. She came down singing the air of the Soldiers' 
Chorus from " Don Caesar." That curl, to which allusion 
has been previously made, was floating on her shoulder and 
fluttering in the air as she approached. If she had known 
who had been waiting there to meet her, she would probably 
have pinned it up. Had she known, she might have desisted 
from singing. 

Had she known . but she knew nothing. She opened the 
parlour door without the least idea who was inside, and 
came in radiant . happy . almost beautiful, and found her- 
self face to face with William Bradshaw. 

But William Bradshaw's face did not wear at all the same 
sort of expression it had done when first he smelt the 
tobacco-smoke or dropped his eyes upon the piano. It 
must not be supposed, because he had not the most agree- 
able way in the world of showing his affection, that he did 
not love his cousin Ann. 

He did love her, only he was a little doubtful of the match 
being a suitable one. Just now he had been absent from 
her a full month, and had thought of her many, many 
times, although his attention was so much occupied by 
other more serious matters. He loved her, too, very much 
indeed, in his own way, and that way you may rest as- 
sured he would have logically proved (with, as Mrs. Whit- 
aker would have said, " chapter and verse ") to be 



At a House Without a Number. 193 

the right way and the only way, after which came no 
others. 

He had made his mind up during his homeward journey 
that the marriage should take place at no distant period, 
and he intended proposing this very morning to go into 
the matter . and into another matter, of which more anon. 
He did love Ann, of course, or else it was very certain 
that he need not look far for a wife. There were indeed 
wives in plenty to be had, and rich ones, too, if William 
chose to ask them, but he was proud in his way . proud 
of his own talent and power. It is true that he might 
immediately have obtained an enviable position with the 
means at his command which a rich marriage would pro- 
cure for him ; but then was he not able to earn money 
enough by his talent to keep the wife of his choice . the 
woman of his heart ? It should never be said that William 
Bradshaw sold himself for gold. 

As Ann came in so gay and pretty William advanced 
towards her eagerly. She changed colour slightly at sight 
of him. 

" Oh, William, I did not know you were here." 

"You expected me though, did not you? How very 
well you are looking. Have I not been a long while 
away ? " 

" Yes, a long while." 

" I've come to take you away now. Don't look fright- 
ened. Only to St. Hornet's, to the chapel . the old 
chapel, for it is to be enlarged or rebuilt directly. Will 
you come ? " 

" Of course if you wish it, William." 

" I think you will not object when I tell you why." 

Mrs. Whitaker had left the room, and he was sitting by' 
Ann's side on the sofa. With quite an unusual demon- 
stration of affection his arm stole round her waist. When 
she glanced down, colouring slightly, she saw his hand 
was encased in a black thread glove, and wondered for 
the first time whether he liked them better than kid, or 
wore them because he could not afford the latter. 

" We must get married now, you know, Ann, very soon. 
We have been a long while about it, have not we ? Well, 
there are some people of influence in the parish who at- 
tend my chapel, and with whom I ought to stand well . 

not only for my own sake " Here his encircling arm'' 

13 



194 A Lotidon Romance. 

squeezed her closer. "It would be advisable, ther^ for 
you to make their acquaintance, Ann. Will you let me in- 
troduce you this afternoon ? " 

She was for a moment silent, and he, wondering why she 
was so, looked at her anxiously. Now, the reason of her 
silence was that she was thinking to herself, . 

" We are soon to be married. The time has now arrived 
when the engagement is to take a settled form. I am to be 
introduced to these people as "William's future wife. After 
that there can be no change . I must marry William then." 

"Well, Ann?" 

"Yes . yes, of course.'' 

Certainly of course. Why, had it not all been settled 
ever so long ago ? Of course . very much of course. Why, 
it was such a settled thing now that she was to be William's 
wife when she was a wife at all, that in her eyes marrying 
could have only one meaning . marrying meant marrying 
William. 




CHAPTER XII. 




HEN, some time since, mention was made of a 
chapel that had been built by subscription for 
William Bradshaw, the reader was perhaps in- 
clined to picture to himself a building of about 
the size of Mr. Spurgeon's Tabernacle. But that was not 
the case. This chapel was the same of which William spoke 
as about to be enlarged. 

At present it was capable of holding, when tightly 
packed, about four hundred persons. Of late, since Mr. 
Bradshaw had been so famous, it had generally been very 
tightly packed indeed, and so there was talk of enlarge- 
ment or rebuilding. 

St. Hornet's was every bit as badly disposed a parish as 
St. Starver's. Yet, happily, it numbered among its residents 
many pious people, and these formed a little world all by 
itself, which ignored the outer and wicked world, and was 
very busy over its own little businesses, and made its hay 
whilst the sun shone. This little world, without entirely 
neglecting worldly things, nevertheless paid due regard to 
things spiritual, and supported its chapel staunchly. 

That Mr. Wapshot who first brought William Bradshaw 
out had brought him from the parish of St. Starver's to the 
parish of St. Hornet, when the Board of Works condemned 
Stonywold Court and itssurroundings, and for some time the 
former gentleman continued extremely popular, as we have 
seen he was in the old time. Then William began to be spoken 
of favourably as a rising light-^a sort of smaller light added 
to the Wapshot lustre. Presently he began to show signs 
13.2 



tg6 A London Romance. 

of a style of his own, and then some symptoms of dissent 
from the old orthodox Wapshot doctrine. After a short 
time unpleasantnesses arose between Mr. Wapshot, now 
growing somewhat old and feeble, and William Bradshaw, 
full of strength and vigour, and equal to the slaying of any 
number of controversial giants. Then at last they came to 
an open rupture, and went their separate ways, William 
taking with him three parts of the congregation upon his 
way to an opposition chapel built for him in the next street. 

Putting forth some of his old energy, Mr. Wapshot strove 
hard to regain his lost flock, but William, now fairly 
launched, put forth on his side such new and attractive 
theological wares that there was no fighting against him. 
Furthermore, not only did he keep Mr. Wapshot's hundred 
and fifty, but picked up between two and three hundred 
fresh ones on his own account. 

Under these circumstances it is not surprising that 
William's vanity was flattered by the small crowds gathering 
round him, or that, as is not uncommon with rising lights 
in this world, he began to confound somewhat his real suc- 
cess, as it existed, with the greater successes that were to 
come . sooner or later. When a while ago we heard him 
talk of the newspapers greedily picking up every stray scrap 
of scandal regarding him, or something to that effect, we 
might have thought the whole press was on the look-out, 
note-book in hand, at every turn the gentleman took. But 
this was not, strictly speaking, the fact. 

He had been noticed once or twice in the large daily 
papers . not always flatteringly. His eccentricities had 
brought him into public notice for awhile ; but London 
is a dreadful place for swallowing up lives, and forgetting 
the menu of its yesterday's dinner. There is so much doing, 
there are so many of us . great Heaven, how many of us ! . 
living, breathing men and women, with souls to save or lose, 
go to make up a nought in a million, and that is about all 
the rest of the nation ever know of us. 

Therefore it may not surprise you much to hear that 
there were among the ungodly many, though residing in the 
very street where William's chapel was built, who had never 
heard of him, and in their pig-headed pagan way of looking 
at things, never wanted to. About ten yards off William's 
chapel was the Little Orpheus Music Hall, with the interior 
01 which the ungodly were well acquainted, and the popular 



At a House Without a Number. 1 97 

vocalists of this establishment (the Great Somebody, the 
world-famed Somebody Else, and the inimitable Third 
Person) were well known in other parishes where William 
as yet had not been heard of. 

Strange to say, however, William's chapel was built upon 
the site of a music-hall demolished for that purpose, and 
this was a great triumph for the right-minded, until the un- 
believing got hold of the ground-lease of an old-established 
chapel further up the street, and turned ic into the identical 
Little Orpheus above mentioned. Here, on week nights, 
during the summer months, were holden comic festivals, 
and through the windows floated the tail-ends of popular 
choruses, to the discomfiture of the hymn-singers two doors 
further down, who were either compelled to shut themselves 
up and be half stifled, or be cool and airy and everlastingly 
outraged in their moral feelings. 

Upon the particular afternoon when Ann accompanied 
William to the scene of his spiritual labours, there was 
great excitement, in a small way, in the part of the parish 
of St. Hornet's where William's chapel was situate. In some 
other parts of the parish, indeed in the parish generally, not 
to mention the world beyond, there were a great many per- 
sons in total ignorance of the fact that anything at all out of 
the common was occurring. But the excitement down the 
street in question was tremendous. 

From an early hour there were parties in aprons and 
paper-caps, very hard at work carrying to and fro benches 
and tables, which were being arranged in the vestry. Great 
strokes of carpentering were going on, wood chips and 
shavings littered the chapel floor. An aged person of the 
softer sex, though hardened somewhat in the course of an 
unduly protracted spinsterhood, swept up these same 
shavings and chips at intervals prematurely to find the floor 
a while after littered again. 

One of the ungodly from the Little Orpheus also lent 
assistance, and brought a bench or two, that were passed 
off among the rest quite innocently, and the gross unsuit- 
ableness of their introduction was never commented upon. 
Corrupted, probably, by the music-hall man, some of the 
other workpeople joined in a quart of beer, the tin cans 
presently creating some scandal when found in a quiet 
corner behind the chapel door. 

The work generally had the night before been super- 



198 A London Romance, 

intended by William Bradshaw himself. He was not 
ashamed to let it be known that in his youth he had 
handled a saw and plane. He handled both now very 
cleverly in effecting some little alteration which he thought 
necessary, and aptly improved the occasion with a reference 
to a certain other carpenter who lived a thousand and odd 
years ago. 

Before the tables and benches were arranged, hampers 
began to arrive containing crockery, knives and sppons, 
and then came a large supply of loaves, cakes, butter, and 
watercresses. There was, in fact, going to be a friendly tea- 
meeting, to which the price of admission was only sixpence, 
inclusive of refreshment, physical and mental, without any 
restriction. 

With the avowed intention of having a good sixpenny- 
worth, many worthy persons put in an early appearance 
that afternoon, and appropriated seats in close vicinity to 
the several tea-trays. These visitors were of all ages and of 
both sexes, and some were, perhaps, a little too young, and 
therefore wanting in self-control in the mattfer of seed cakes. 
In the minds of some of the most elderly, too, there ap- 
peared to exist unfounded suspicions of foul play as re- 
garded the quality of the tea received at their particular 
table, and lurking doubts as to whether or not some one in 
some sly corner was not wrongfully getting radishes as well 
as watercresses; but, as a general rule, contentment pre- 
vailed, and, to tell the truth, there was still an abundance of 
food remaining after everybody had eaten plentifully. 

It was at this festival that William was anxious that Ann 
should be present, and she and her mamma accompanied 
him thither at his desire. The latter lady was in all her 
splendour, but William did not particularly notice her. At 
a glance he noted the general effect, which was substantial. 
She might have been an old lady very well off . warm, as 
the saying was, in this little community. At Ann's dress, 
however, he gazed long and somewhat nervously. 

He did not altogether approve of Ann's mode of dressing, 
and yet he cquld not help allowing to himself that it was 
very pretty and becoming. If the truth must be told, there 
was what most ladies will understand by a theatrical style 
about Ann's toilet. This, gentlemen will please to remark, 
does not mean anything gaudy in colour or expensive in 
material, There is a sort of dash and style . which English 



At a House Without a Number. 199 

writers who know a little French are fond of calling chic . 
that may go with very cheap materials, but which the 
generality of respectable middle-class people look at shyly. 

There are scarcely any women of any class of life who 
follow the fashions otherwise than at a distance . for the 
most part accepting a new style only half-way, and with 
extensive modifications. The male persons who have to 
pay the bills for all the newly-invented finery and faldedals, 
very naturally (artful male persons) pooh-pooh all radical 
reforms, while there are some who only unwillingly consent 
to any deviation from the dress that won their hearts at the 
beginning . the dear old unapproachable style of Love's 
young dreamy days. The result of all which is, that the 
generality of women are dowdies, let their age and nation 
be what it may. 

William Bradshaw, eyeing Ann askance, asked himself 
what it was he did not approve of, and where he could 
suggest an alteration ; but he was helpless. Instinctively 
he felt that they would ' not altogether like her at the 
chapel ; but then he said to himself, "Am I not my own 
master ? Am I going to allow them to choose my wife for 
me ? If she pleases me, is not that enough ? I am not one 
to be swayed by the prejudices of others." 

And when he was thus thinking, he really believed that 
public opinion had no weight with him. Very soon he was 
put to the test. 

On their way to the omnibus he noticed more than one 
person turn to look after his cousin, and fancied that their 
faces wore a knowing sort of smile. There certainly was 
what people call a " fastness " about her dress which must 
be rectified at an early date. Still she was very nice. If 
he had had his choice, there was nothing he would have 
changed. After all too, as he had settled long ago, was he 
not his own master? 

" How very quiet you both are," Mrs. Whitaker observed. 
Neither of the lovers had said a word for full twenty-five 
minutes. 

Ann coloured up, for she had been thinking . not of 
William, or of friendly tea-meetings. 

" One can't talk in an omnibus. There's such a noise." 

"Yes, there's such a noise," said William. 

When they reached the chapel, the tea was just going to 
commence. The tea indeed was already made and brewing. 



200 A London Romance. 

The greater part of the company were seated, and it ap- 
peared as though the ceremony was only waiting for William 
Bradshaw's appearance. 

He was vexed at this ; his watch had been five minutes 
slow ; Ann's toilet had kept him waiting. They also had 
to wait for an omnibus. The result was, a forced procession 
down the middle of the room, and under the eyes of the 
assembled company. The table at which seats had been 
retained for him was right at the other end of the room, 
and as he and the ladies passed on their way it seemed to 
him that every eye was fixed upon them. 





CHAPTER XIII. 

IS table was distinguished from the rest by the fact 
that, at one end of it, a dozen chairs were set in- 
stead of forms ; and these were intended for the 
better sort of visitors. 

The better sort were for the most part plump and portly ; 
but there was one dark visaged, mean little man, in a shiny 
new black coat, some sizes too large for him, who was evi- 
dently a person of great importance. 

He was indeed a grocer, of the next street . a bachelor 
and very rich . who was to be one of the great motive- 
powers in the matter of enlargement or rebuilding. Mr. 
Salmon had promised to put down three hundred pounds. 
As yet he would not altogether promise to make William 
Bradshaw a free gift of the money. He proposed that it 
should stand for a while as a friendly loan, without interest. 

Upon the other side of the table, just opposite, sat Mrs. 
and the two Misses Hodson. Mrs. Hodson had put down four 
hundred pounds, and promised more. It was only a ques- 
tion of time and management what that sum was to be. At 
any rate, the ladies were worth cultivating. Upon this 
occasion particular instructions had been given relative to 
her entertainment. Her chair was to be set out of the draught 
from the window, and she and her daughters were to have 
cream in their tea. 

William entered the vestry, in which the entertainment 
was to take place, leading the way, his aunt and cousin 
following. At their approach all heads turned. There 
was some faint applause and unlimited staring. William 



202 4- London Romawe. 

made for his table, and in some confusion almost thrust the 
ladies into their places. Then himself shook hands, right 
and left, rather awkwardly. The eyes of the other people at 
the tea-table settled steadily upon Ann. 

William was fretting at the unlucky way things had fallen 
out. Mrs. Hodson was not sitting where he had understood 
she was to sit, or Ann's chair was lower down. Somebody 
was between, and so an introduction could not be easily 
effected ; nor could any change now be made in the 
arrangement, for everyone was waiting for him to say grace. 

Somewhere or other there must have been a large boiler 
constantly on the boil to supply the ever-empty teapots, 
which in regular succession passed in and out of the vestry- 
door to some unknown regions beyond, to be replenished. 
Who shall say how many cups full some of the fair tea- 
drinkers disposed of? One opposite to Ann drank six, and 
ate eight slices of bread and butter, growing yery hqt and 
flushed towards the close of the banquet. 

Mrs. Hodson was not above partaking of the simple fare here 
set forth, and did so with good will ; but she was not so oc- 
cupied as to have no eyes for the strangers. Between her 
n^outhfujs she whispered Martha, her eldest born . 

" Who is that strange-looking girl Mr. Bradshaw brought 
in with him ? " 

" She's something foreign, I think,'' Martha replied. 

" I don't like the style, whatever it may be," snorted the 
elder lady. 

None of the ladies at this table were very partial to the 
style, which certainly wasn't chapel style, or lower middle- 
class in St. Hornet's. From the first moment Ann took her 
seat amongst them, a feeling of resentment began to 
smoulder in the females around her. When she was dis- 
cussed afterwards at select meetings, it was distinctly 
settled that Ann had not a passable feature in her face. It 
is a provoking fact . there is no denying it though . that it 
is those ones who haven't as much as an eyelash that is al- 
together what it ought to be, who carry off the palm from 
others ever so much their mental and physical superiors. 

The festival proceeded. Ann, as it was afterwards 
described, " sat mincing over " her bread-and-butter. She 
did not, indeed, think very highly of the entertainment. 
She was much diverted by the voracious lady opposite. 
The build . which was amazing . of Mrs. Hodson's bonnet, 



At a House Without a Number. 203 

also afforded her some amusement. She took mental notes, 
with the intention of caricaturing the good company in some 
other company more congenial to her taste. Afterwards, 
this other company laughed heartily at the picture, and said 
what fun she must have had ; hut it was, Ann thought, 
small fun at the time. 

During the repast, there was a little talk, at intervals, 
between the reverend gentlemen present, theological and 
scientific; but of a popular character, with jokes inter- 
spersed, merry hut harmless. For the rest, little was said 
that bore not reference to the passing to and fro of more 
and more tea and slices of bread-and-butter ; and a thou- 
sand times might have been heard repeated such phrases 
as " May I trouble you, Ma'am ? " . " I really must trouble 
you again" . "I'm sure I'm very troublesome " . " It's no 
trouble, I assure you " . " No, I thank you, Ma'am; I've done 
very nicely." "Well, since you are so pressing." 

There were three or four young gentlemen present, who 
did not take their seats at the table. These pic-nicked 
roughly at a window, for the fun of the thing ; but mostly 
attended on the ladies. In this way some of the young and 
homely among the fair tea-drinkers were, if anything, over- 
worried upon the subject of more plum-cake; but were very 
wettily coy and playful, and all ate and drank more than 
was quite comfortable. 

When tea was over, there was general conversation, some 
part-singing, and a little flirting in quiet corners ; and this 
opportunity William chose for introducing his future wife. 

"1 have two ladies here, who are very anxious for your good 
opinion, Mrs. Hodson," William said. " Will you allow me 
to present them to you. One of them I may introduce, at 
some future time, by another name." 

The person to whom he spoke only partly comprehended 
his meaning. She received Ann coldly. 

" This is your first visit, young lady. I hope you like 
us." 

Ann made no apswer, but raised her eyebrows and smiled 
faintly. Mrs. Whitaker, anxious to be affable, hastened to 
say . 

" She will, I'm sure, Mum, when you're better acquainted. 
It's a pretty sight." 

William explained, "This is my aunt, Mrs. Whitaker. I 
think I have spoken of her to you before." 



204 -A London Romance. 

" You do not attend this chapel, Ma'am ? " 

"Well no, Mum, we don't. The fact is, William, 
here '' 

"My aunt lives at some distance." 

Mrs. Whitaker was determined to be amiable. " Not so 
very far, either. We came to-day in a threepenny bus, and 
now we know the way " 

" I live three miles off myself, but I come regularly twice 
every Sunday," said Mrs. Hodson. " For convenience sake, 
I intend to change my house and come nearer. It is not 
easy to find as good a preacher as Mr. Bradshaw. You 
surprise me when you say this is your first visit." 

William came to the rescue, and tried to set matters 
straight. Mrs. Hodson thought too highly of his poor 
talents, &c. Then he nervously whispered to Ann to say 
something of a conciliatory character. But Ann hung back. 

" Who is she ? " she asked. " What a common woman ! 
What frights the girls are." 

One of these frights presently made advances on the sub- 
ject of a recently formed Dorcas society, and descanted 
upon the merits of certain Thursday gatherings, whereat a 
small stock of baby-clothing, fashioned on a principle com- 
bining austere ugliness of cut with scantiness of material, 
was manufactured by the lady members, and got rather dirty 
during the process. 

Ann listened and yawned. All her life she had heard this 
sort of thing. Why was she not interested ? Certainly she 
was not. And why had William brought her there? This 
question she had asked herself more than once during the 
progress of the banquet. How was William's conduct to be 
accounted for ? It seemed to her as though he had all at 
once made up his mind to fulfil the long-pending engage- 
ment, and marry her. She was here then, as it were, upon 
approval. If that were the case, they should have little to 
approve of. Who were they, pray, that she should value 
their good opinions ? 

" Do you do much needlework ? " asked Martha. 

" No, I hate it." 

Martha was staggered, but did not give the case up at 
once. 

" You prefer reading ? " 

" I never read. It sends me to sleep." 

Why should she have said such things ? But perhaps at 



At a House Without a Number. 205 

the moment she believed them to be true. She hated 
everything just then. Leaning over to her mother, who was 
having a very uphill sort of conversation with Mrs. Hodson, 
she said . 

"Are we going to stop much longer, mamma ? I think 
it is coming on to rain." 

" We shall go soon, I suppose," replied Mrs. Whitaker. 
" We are waiting for William, you know. But there's no 
hurry, my dear, I'm sure. It's been a very pleasant after- 
noon." 

" It's dreadfully hot ; and there's such a smell of tallow 
candies ! " replied the perverse girl. 

This smell of tallow candles arose from the fact that some 
were at the moment being lighted in unknown regions 
behind, but Mrs. Hodson did not know that this was the 
case, and frowned and blushed crimson. Only a long while 
afterwards Ann learnt that it was by candle-making the late 
Mr. Hodson had accumulated a large fortune, and that his 
widow still carried on the trade at the manufactory in 
Battersea. 

It was true that it was beginning to rain. Overhead there 
was a skylight upon which the heavy drops rattled noisily. 
Hearing the sound, the majority of the company rose and 
began to talk of taking their departure. 

William at this moment came up to his aunt. 

" I must find you a cab," he said. " You had better get 
away before the rush. " You have a cab, I think you said, 
Mrs. Hodson ? " 

" Yes, thank you. We hired him and told him to wait, 
thinking there might be some trouble to get one when every- 
body was going away." 

The ladies exchanged the stiffest of bows at parting, and 
William hurried his aunt and Ann to the door. 

There was a cab a few yards off, in front of the music 
hall. He called out, and the driver was summoned from 
the bar. 

He gave the direction, and then shook hands very 
coldly with Ann. " Good-bye," he said. " I am sorry now 
I troubled you to come all this way." 

She made him no answer, but turned her face from him. 
Mrs. Whitaker nodded and smiled to him as they drove 
away. Just as they turned the corner, Mrs. Hodson ap- 
peared by his side, and she was seen to wave her umbrella. 



sag A London Romance. 

Mrs. Whitaker, supposing it to be a friendly greeting, waved 
her handkerchief in reply. Then the cab turned down the 
next street, and they Were hidden from view. 

" You don't mean to say r Mr. Bradshaw, you've put your 
people into my cab ? " 

" I had no idea it was your cab. The man said nothing." 

"The man must have been drunk." 

This was in truth the case. The fatal proximity of the 
bar of the music hall was to blame. 




eSigiC/» ~ 


^^^^3^^^ 




^''JEii£iCi&«£to.~j£ 


:=*4-4sld&!&£-T.^^^$&^ 




CHAPTER XIV- 

ERHAPS it was the tea or the seed-cake, or per- 
haps it was the jolting of the " nasty cab." Some- 
thing or other had given Mrs. Whitaker a head- 
ache, and when they reached home, at half-past 
seven o'clock, she went straight to bed. 

James Jarman had just come in, and was sitting before 
his fire with a book. When he heard that Ann was alone 
he came down to keep her company, but he had hardly 
taken his seat before there came a knock at the street door. 

It was Don Caesar, in gorgeous evening dress. He too 
had just dined and driven over in a cab. He had a box 
for the opera, and was to have gone with a friend, but the 
friend had disappointed him. He did not care to go by 
himself. 

" But you will never waste the ticket ! " cried Ann. 

Draped smiled at her earnestness. "I suppose so. 
Why?" 

" Oh, what a pity ! Oh, how I wish " 

"Wish what?" asked Draper, eagerly. "If you would 
only care to go, I would get a box any night." 

" Ah ! if I might " 

"What would William say?" broke in Jarman, with a 
slight curl of his lip. "Yet it would be great fun, wouldn't 
it, after the tea-drinking too ? " 

" What to-night ? " exclaimed Ann, with a bright sparkle 
in her eyes, and then in a moment she was solemn again. 
" Oh, the idea ! It is impossible ! Mamma would not 
allow it." 



208 A London Romance. 

" Mamma would never know," said Jarman the tempter. 
" And there's your old middle-aged relative to take care of 
you. With a fast cab we might get there and back in no 
time, and have an hour or two of paradise. It would be 
like paradise, with the thousand lights, the rich dresses, the 
heavenly music ! " 

" Oh, James, but you know . And a theatre, too ! " 

" Not as bad as a theatre quite, because it is all singing 
and in a foreign language : not nearly so wicked." 

" But mamma " 

" She'll never know, and I'll take the blame if she does." 

" And. and . and " 

"He'll never know either." 

What a night this was ! The girl began a new life from 
this period . a new and wonderful life . so unreal, so fairy- 
like, so bewildering, so confusing by the side of the old 
humdrum existence hitherto. There were other ways of 
spending one's time besides staring hopelessly out of window 
on to a half-built street; there were aims and ends in 
womanly ambition besides being a good manager, clever at 
bakes and boils . a good mother, clever at baby culture. 

Oh glorious dreamland ! where the women were all beau 
t'iful, rich, feted, petted, pampered, madly beloved . dream- 
land of a million glittering gems, insidious scents, soft lan- 
guishing lights, grandly swelling music ! 

This was the opera then, and these real living women, 
sitting in a queenly beauty, calm and splendid. A glittering 
crowd filled the stage, and a hundred voices rose and fell 
as one. Darkness succeeded ; a captive in a cell, a lady 
weeping, a chorus of monks or nuns unseen without. A 
low deep murmur, then a clear sweet voice swelling forth . 
passionately, hopelessly; then another voice despairingly, 
drowned in the rising murmur again. Ann's fingers tight- 
ened on James's arm, and a sob burst forth faintly from her 
white lips. 

It was Draper who gently raised her in his arms and 
carried her towards the door. Jarman hurried away in quest 
of cold water. When he came back she was regaining con- 
sciousness. Just as he re-entered the darkened box her 
eyes opened, and she gazed up into Draper's face with a 
tearful smile. 

" Harry ! " 



At a House Without a Number. 209 



a ( 



: She's better now. Why, Ann . Ann, we must never 
take you to the wicked playhouse any more if you go on 
this way. We had better go now. Have my scarf round 
your neck, dear. Come, Draper." 

A crowd of carriages without, hoarse voices shouting, the 
gleaming of lights, the cab, a strangely confused homeward 
journey, and then again the old familiar parlour and the old 
familiar objects she knew so well. Was it really true that 
there was anything in existence such as she fancied she saw 
awhile ago ? 

Was it fancy, all of it ? Was it fancy that some one had 
kissed her passionately and told her that he loved her ? 

" I hope that you are better now, Miss Whitaker. I have 
the honour of wishing you good-night." 




14 




CHAPTER XV. 

T noon next day came William Bradshaw. The 
servant was speaking to a tradesman at the door, 
and he therefore entered without knocking. 
Ann was seated at the open piano in the 
parlour. She was not playing, but her hands rested list- 
lessly upon the keys. She had been trying to recall some- 
thing of the melody which had so delighted her last night. 
The whole seemed floating confusedly through her brain : 
but as yet she could but seize a stray note here and there. 

As she sat there the recollection of the scene came back 
to her vividly ; the exquisite music, the darkened house 
hushed and breathless, her swoon, the low deep tones of his 
agitated voice. Her hands fell on her lap and her chin sank 
upon her breast. Then the door opened and William 
Bradshaw entered. 

" How do you do, Ann ? " he said. " I hope you have 
recovered from the fatigues of yesterday." 

There was a hidden meaning in his words. Did he 
know? She looked up with a flushed cheek. 

" What fatigues ? " 

" You need not deny it," he replied. " I saw, of course, 
how distasteful our simple merrymaking was to you." 

"Oh! the merrymaking," she said, with a little laugh; 
" that's what you're talking about." 

" I came here to talk about it," said William. 

" Put down your hat then, and sit down." 

Jt was rather a favourite attitude of William's to stand up 
with his umbrella and hat behind him in his left hand, and 
with the right to beat time whilst he delivered himself sen- 
tentiously upon various subjects. 



At a House Without a Number. 211 

He put down his hat now, when told to do so, somewhat 
sheepishly, and loaded it with a small packet of tracts which, 
as usual, he had brought with him. 

" What are you doing, Ann ? " he asked. 

"Nothing." 

" I wish you would try to employ yourself a little more . 
with some useful work. If you would join such a society as 
that Miss Martha Hodson has organised." 

" Ah, yes, she told me. I told her I hated needlework." 

" She repeated your remarks. I am sorry, Ann, that you 
should have lost your temper and spoken so rudely." 

" I am very sorry, I'm sure ; I was not in a good humour." 

" I should have thought that out of consideration for my 
feelings you might have curbed your temper." 

" I couldn't." 

" I am sorry for that, Ann. It will be necessary for you 
to try." 

"Why?" 

'.' Because you must not insult my friends." 

" Nothing is more easily avoided." 

" I hope so." 

" By taking care that we do not come in contact. If in 
future you keep your friends in their own sphere, while I re- 
main in mine. if you remain with your friends . there will 
be no danger then." 

William Bradshaw sat silent for a minute, he fancied he 
could not have heard aright. She had expressed herself 
somewhat obscurely. With an effort, he said . 

" Ann, am I to understand that you wish our engagement 
to come to an end ? " 

" Yes ! " 

His face flushed darkly, and he nervously jerked on his 
gloves. "Very well," was all he said as he rose and took 
up his hat. 

She had left the piano and taken her old favourite place 
at the window with her back turned towards him. His eyes 
wandered towards her again and again, and then round the 
room ; he took off one glove and put it on again ; he ar- 
ranged the tracts and stowed them carefully away in his 
pocket. At last he burst out . 

" Ann ! " 

"Yes." 

" You . you really mean this ? " 
14 . 2 



212 A London Romance. 

" Yes." 

" You will regret it then. I cannot comprehend it. It 
is wholly incomprehensible. It is . it is " 

He could think of no other word, and banging on his hat 
moved towards the door. Here he paused again as though 
to give her a last chance ; she did not take it, and he went 
his way. When he passed out at the end of the street, she 
sat down and began to cry. 

Was she happy or sad at what had taken place? Why 
not happy ? The sooner this mockery of love was brought 
to an end the better ; yes, for now it was impossible that they 

could be married . impossible because After all, though, 

why ? Was she going to marry some one else ? Whom ? 
What reason had she for thinking so ? Why, had he not 
told her that he loved her ? Yes, certainly he had told 
her so. She was not dreaming, then ; but was not he ? Did 
he . could he mean it ? 

A tap at the door, and James Jarman entered. 

"After all," said he, "what does William say? And . 
where is he ? " 

"Gone." 

" What ! gone again ? What a mysterious William. He 
might have stopped to say how do you do to me, though. 
It seems to me very likely that I shall never meet him if he 
goes on in this way." 

"I think he may never come here again, after what has 
happened." 

By her tone James saw then that something had happened. 
He took his seat upon the sofa by her side, and asked her in 
a low voice what was the matter. 

" I have just now been acting very badly . very unkindly. 
But how could I help it when he came here cross-question- 
ing me . lecturing me." 

She was on the point of crying, but did not quite cry, 
keeping her tears down as it were, by mere force . by twist- 
ing her handkerchief very tightly round her left hand. 
James sat and listened. 

" After all, I am glad it is over . I never could love him 
. I never have ! " 

" Never? " 

" No . never ; I am sure of it. Ever since we were 
children it has been a settled thing that we were to be 
married. I have never had a voice in the matter. It is un- 



At a House Without a Number. 213 

fair that I should have been so forced, and he also. He 
does not love me." 

" What makes you think that ? " 

" I know it. Anyhow, he does not act as other people 
do when they love a person." 

" We have all of us such different ways of showing what 
we feel," said James in a low voice ; " and some never do 
make themselves understood . go down into their graves 
acting a part quite unlike their real selves . acting it, too, 
wholly against their own will. Why ? " 

She looked at him in some surprise. It seemed as though 
he were rather giving utterance to his thoughts than address- 
ing these words to her. 

"He would like the engagement broken off, I am sure," 
she went on. " He will be glad it is so when he comes to 
reflect. We are not suited to one another in any respect." 

" Have you ever hinted at such an opinion before ? " 
asked James. " Isn't this all rather sudden ? " 

" I have often thought it." 

" Long ago ? " 

"Yes . no . not long ago." 

" If you are sure that you know your own mind now . if 
you are quite sure . I think you are acting wisely. I have 
no right to interfere in the matter ; but as you have spoken 
to me, will you let me see William and hear what he says ? " 

"No, dear James, I am quite decided . quite. It is im- 
possible now, because " 

" Because what ? " 

He bent down his head eagerly, and the hand holding 
hers trembled. She made no answer. 

"Do you remember, Ann, the old court days . those 
happy, old, ragged days when we were children together, 
before I went to Hankershanks's, when William and I were 
working for that famous prize for English history ? What 
was it they gave me when I won it? . a book of poetry, I 
think ; choice pieces from the best authors, in blue and gold. 
Do you remember ? " 

She nodded, but did not speak. 

" William was a fine fellow in those times ; there wasn't 
anyone of his age in the court . don't you recollect ? . who 
could run, or wrestle, or box with him ; there wasn't a game 
he was not the winner at. He was the handsomest, the 
bravest. He has fought your battles a score of times. 



214 A London Romance. 

What a stupid little wretch I used to be by the side of him. 
Don't you recollect how I used to sit screwed up in a corner 
against that pump? I was awfully disappointed when I 
came back after my long absence to find they had not even left 
the pump." 

He laughed here, but not very gaily. She listened with 
averted head. 

" You did love him then, I think, Ann ; I think I have 
heard you say so. I recollect I used to be very savage and 
jealous." 

" But I do not now, James dear. Within the last week or 
two I have learnt my own mind. I do not . did not love 
bim. I have often thought so, now I am certain, now that 
. I mean since the last week or two." 

The hand holding hers trembled more. She went on . 

" In those old court days I was wrong. How kind you 
always were to me . how blind I was to your kindness ; but 
I am not so now." 

He hung eagerly on each coming word. What next? 

" I understand you now, James dear . I know now that 
you love me " 

" Yes." 

" As a brother. And it is because I am sure that you 
would only advise me for my good that I ask you now what 
I should do. Oh, James, 1 cannot marry William, because 
. because I love another." 

He dared not trust himself to speak. He dared not hope. 
As a prisoner upon his trial, whose life is at stake, eagerly 
scans the faces of the jury, so he sought to read what her 
verdict would be. 

" You will not blame me, James dear, I am sure, although 
the rest may be against me. I could not help loving him. 
You brought him here. You took me first to see him. I 
should never have known him but for you. Oh, I do love 
him so ! " 

Do not we all talk in this fashion ? If so and so had not 
happened ! If you had only said ! If I had only held my 
tongue ! Some hours later James, sitting alone in his bed- 
room, his head resting on his hand, his eyes fixed gloomily 
upon a candle which burnt with a long wick before him, said, 
" If I had died, as I ought to have done, upon the wreck . 
If he had never been born, perhaps it would have been as 
well for both of us." 



V. 



AT AH AMATEUR THEATRE. 

CHAPTER I. 




HERE were many regular playgoers in the world 
taking a great interest in all things theatrical, who 
yet had never heard tell of the Boudoir Theatre. 
The Royal Boudoir . it was familiarly known 
as the Royal Bedroom . was inconveniently situated, as far 
as the general public was concerned, up a very unlikely- 
looking street in an unlikely quarter of the town. From 
the outside its appearance was not inviting, for it had some- 
thing of the look of a small chapel out of repair. Persons 
passing of a night by the open door were often startled 
by solemn and sepulchral sounds, and those who stopped 
and . as was generally the case . finding the doorkeeper's 
back turned peeped in, most likely found the little stage 
occupied by an amateur of melancholy aspect, spouting 
blank verse to a select and dejected audience, who looked 
as if they had all made a mistake in coming, and would like 
to sneak away again if he would only take his eye off 
them. 

Small playbills, very unlike the playbills at a regular 
theatre, were posted up outside the house, and remained 
there a long while after the evening to which they bore 
reference had passed away. The works of the Immortal 
Bard and other dramatic authors that cost nothing were 
generally selected for performance, and it was the habit of 
those who attended as spectators to give the preference to 
the legitimate drama, on account of the beauty of the lan^ 



2 1 6 A London Romance. 

guage, though it must be confessed the language was not 
quite what the poet left it when the amateur had done his 
little best. 

The audience . except on special occasions . was a very 
shabby one, and it was difficult to say to what class of life 
the persons belonged. Most of the spectators were well 
acquainted with the actors on the stage, and applauded 
them loudly upon their entrance. The actors belonged to 
clubs. The bills said that it was the twelfth performance of 
the Kemble-Keans, or the fourteenth of the United 
Thespians, as the case might be, and the audience, with a 
recollection of by-gone triumphs, bade one another prepare 
for good things to come, for Bill This or Bob That was 
" first class " in such and such a character. 

In their small way, then, some of these ladies and gentle- 
men had earned a reputation . had formed the subject of a 
biographical sketch in the Amateur's Journal, wherein the 
various performances were seriously criticised by the editor 
when he had time, or the amateurs themselves when he had 
not. 

It was difficult to understand how some of these amateurs 
could be so lost to all perception of the fitness of things as 
to make an exhibition of their woeful shortcomings, for at 
times there were knock-kneed amateurs, and bandy-legged, 
and squinting, and one-eyed; but again, there were clever 
ones as well, and now and then one left his club and took 
his place upon the boards of a real theatre and got to be a 
public favourite. 

As a rule the actors were during the day shopmen or 
clerks ; the actresses came from warehouses or workrooms. 
Most of the former acted for fun ; the latter had more often 
aspirations. In the far-off future they pictured great dra- 
matic triumphs ; delighted audiences, thunders of applause, 
bouquets from a private box, and a call at the end of the 
act ; but they were for the most part doomed to disappoint- 
ment, these unfortunates, for few had pretty faces or figures, 
without one of which the unreasonable British public does 
not take kindly to female talent, however great it may be. 

As it is in other walks of life, woman was woman's worst 
enemy. The ladies in front sniggered at the ladies on the 
stage. In their turn those on the stage pooh-poohed the 
others' little efforts when they took the place of those before 
the float. They spoke always pityingly of one another. 



At an Amateur Theatre. 217 

"That poor dear Mountmorency. Her friends ought 
not to let her make such a fool of herself. Be quiet now, 
do. It's very unkind of you to laugh." 

Have you ever at the real theatre noted the intense 
delight of the ballet if by ill-luck one of the premiere 
danseuse's petticoats gives way, or some similar misfortune 
befals her? How they stand there smiling sweetly, but 
taking good care not to tell her of it, while she smiles 
sweetly also, all unconscious. When a young lady met 
with a similar misfortune at the Boudoir there was great 
tittering. During the course of the witty old comedies 
and screaming old farces, the mishaps of the performers 
caused the greater part of the laughter. When everything 
went well it was thought to be a dull evening, and for that 
reason the tragic plays of the Swan of Avon were preferred 
by the audience, who, talking over a performance after- 
wards, would say of " Othello " or " Hamlet," perhaps, " I 
laughed, Sir, till my sides ached. We all of us roared till 
we rolled off our seats." 

There was one particular amateur, a large fat man with a 
tremendous voice, who enacted the Moor in a way so out- 
rageously funny the whole house was on the broad grin 
from the time he entered the scene till he left it, and it was 
a thing never to be forgotten . the trick he had of slapping 
his thigh emphatically at the end of a telling speech, leaving 
the imprint of a hot black hand upon his white robe at 
every smack. 

There was a melancholy long young man, who never 
could be induced to let the audience have more than a side 
view of him, and sometimes less than that . a russet boot 
and lanky leg alone being visible whilst he told his tale 
from behind a wing. 

There were many who could not learn their parts, or for- 
got them in their fright when the time came, and these fol- 
lowed the prompter blindly, repeating the words as nearly 
as they could catch them, with now and then diverting 
variations wholly unintentional. Sometimes, too, arguments 
would arise between the prompter and the prompted, which 
mixed in oddly with the proper dialogue of the piece, and 
wholly personal matters were discussed, culminating once 
or twice in fisticuffs and nose-pulling, to the enormous de- 
light of the spectators. 

The stage was often kept waiting whilst these differences 



218 A London Romance. 

among the company were settled behind. Then some of 
the characters would appear prematurely, and deliver 
speeches in haste, which bore reference to events that had 
not yet transpired. As the actors all paid for their parts, 
it not unfrequently happened that one of them, thinking he 
had not been allowed to do enough for his money, would 
remain upon the scene for some time after he should have 
made his exit. The introduction of laboriously comic gag 
was to be expected from this class of amateur, and it was 
not safe to trust him with a riding-whip or other offensive 
weapon, or pleasant to stand within his reach if he had one. 

At all times the amateur crowd was extremely difficult to 
manage, owing not only to an undue rollicksomeness on the 
part of the crowders, but to the impossibility of any rollick- 
ing being done, in the limited space, without a leg or two 
going through the distant landscape. Some of these crowds 
. bands of lawless soldiery, red republicans, enthusiastic 
Irish peasantry, or the like . were pressed into the service 
only at the last moment, and though having but a vague 
notion of the cause of their assembling, were none the less 
excited upon that account. Therefore they occasionally 
hunted down and captured the wrong man, or rushing in at 
the wrong time, seized upon and overcame with unnecessary 
violence an unhappy amateur who had yet a long speech to 
deliver, of which they would not allow him to say a word 
before they dragged him off. 

The proprietor of this abode of the Muses was named 
Toogood . an unimaginative fat man, who took the strange 
things he saw and heard in the course of his professional 
duties as a matter of course, and never exhibited any signs 
of liveliness under any circumstances whatever, except when 
he saw his property being destroyed, and then he was very 
lively indeed. 

Mrs. Toogood was said to have about her the remains of 
a fine woman, and these remains were on a large scale, as 
regarded nose and bust, and symmetrical proportions gener- 
ally. She had been a beauty in her time, and had trod the 
boards as Miss Molfiander, "of the London theatres." In 
those days a wicked lord was said to have ineffectually cast 
his snares around her, but she had given her hand and 
heart to the Toogood of her affections, and leaving the 
stage when her figure began to leave her, instructed pupils 
and got up amateur performances at the Royal Boudoir. 



At an Amateur Theatre. 219 

Even now, upon rare and special occasions, Mrs. Too- 
good (Miss Molflander, in parenthesis) would deliver a 
short address, or give a recitation, which was always ap- 
plauded to the echo. The editor of the Amateur's Journal 
before alluded to was one of the loudest and most persistent 
of the applauders. 

" It's fine, Sir ; it's fine ; it's devilish fine ! " the old gen- 
tleman said, with enthusiasm. "The old style, Sir; the 
right style. I knew that woman when she was a girl, Sir. 
I was in the house, Sir, the first night she ever came out, 
at the little theatre in the Haymarket, Sir, in eighteen hun- 
dred and thirty-seven, when Sam Phelps played Shylock for 
the first time in London, and Molflander there was one of 
Portia's lady attendants. She was, Sir, begad ! " 

But Toogood was not of theatrical antecedents. He had 
simply kept a shoe-shop in his earlier days. He was a 
family connexion of Molflander. They had loved one 
another ever so many years, and in the end had got 
married. Then the shoe-shop was abandoned, and this 
speculation of the Boudoir Theatre entered upon. The 
wear and tear attendant upon the getting up of amateur 
performances and keeping peace between the amateurs 
would have been too much for an excitable temperament, 
but Toogood bore the worry very easily. 

He took no interest whatever in the acting itself . at least 
from an actor's point of view. When the performance was 
short, he called it a nice light night. When it consisted, as 
not unfrequently happened, of two three-act pieces and a 
farce, he called the night " heavy." He professed to pro- 
vide all necessary scenery, but his stock was limited. He 
had only two streets in his collection, and if a third were 
wanted, one of the two had to serve again. In the matter 
of properties he was unreliable. He had been known to 
supply a pincushion instead of the live hen in the " ven- 
detta " scene in the Corsican Brothers. His banquets were 
unusually unreal ; his practicable doors and windows of an 
unmanageable character. His rustic bridge was a structure 
of so rickety a nature that it imperilled the limbs of the 
venturesome; and his mossy bank . an unmistakable egg- 
chest painted green and ridiculously angular . was a thing 
which only the experienced could sit upon without incurring 
an unseemly upset. 

Sometimes, when an actor was pulling or pushing at a 



220 A Londoti Romance. 

door or window, wishing to get in or out, as the case might 
be, a voice from the side would be heard to say, " Shove it 
the other way, can't you ? " This was Toogood's voice, and, 
acting upon the suggestion, the actor shoved the other way, 
and after shaking the whole edifice to its foundation effected 
his purpose. 

It was a wonderful sight to see the simple Toogood in 
the midst of this unreal world, so cool and composed, when 
all others were breathless with excitement. He in his shirt 
sleeves and apron jostled by silks and satins. They rushing 
on and off the stage, giving hasty directions, snatching hur- 
riedly at the properties wanted for the next scene. He 
phlegmatically receiving these directions without changing a 
muscle, to forget all about them the next moment, handing 
out wrong properties, or repudiating all knowledge of such 
articles being required, seeming to have but one aim and 
object in life, the changing of the scenery as soon as might 
be, whether the scene were acted out or not. 

And thus nightly the amateurs fretted their little hour 
upon the stage of the Royal Boudoir. Presently a new 
aspirant to histrionic honours joined their ranks, with whom 
we are already acquainted. 

" I say, Toogood," said one day, in his off-hand style, Mr. 
Harry Draper of the Temple ; " I say, can we give another 
performance here ? " 

" We've a lot of things on," replied Mr. Toogood ; " two 
very heavy nights next week, but you know I'm always very 
happy to have your company here, Sir. As Mrs. Toogood 
says, your real gentlemen it's a pleasure to serve. If they 
want a thing done well they don't mind payin' a fair price." 

" We won't grumble about the money, I dare say," replied 
Draper, " but the thing must be well done ; you understand. 
You'll have to screw up that confounded rustic bridge a 
little bit. We don't want to have anything to say to the 
mossy bank, and you'll most likely have to get a lot 
of new props . a ship, with guns to fire, and a life-sized 
elephant." 

But this Toogood knew to be the gentleman's fun. Had 
he really seriously made a point of the elephant, Toogood 
would have promised it most faithfully, and when the last 
moment arrived, as likely as not would have argued that an 
allusion to its being off at the side would be quite as effec- 
tive as its actual appearance. 



At an Amateur Theatre. 



221 



" Say it's behind," was one of Toogood's favourite sug- 
gestions. If a shot ought to have been fired and was not, 
"Pretend you heard it." Once, when the night came, he 
was unprovided with either scenery or properties for a whole 
act. " Say it's happened," he coolly observed, " and go on 
to the next." 




CHAPTER II. 




|N the heat of her anger, Ann felt that she was quite 
justified in acting in the way she had done to- 
wards William Bradshaw. Upon reflection, how- 
ever, she had her doubts. 

She did not love him . never had done so, she thought 
now. She did not believe that he loved her. How could 
he, lecturing her as he did, and complaining of her every 
word and act. At any rate they were wholly unsuited to 
each other. It was much better that the match should be 
broken off. But then they had been engaged so long. 

How could she break it off now, when it had been 
arranged for them all these years and years. It is true that 
it was broken off in a fashion by the quarrel, but then 
would he believe that she was really in earnest ? When he 
came to think it over, would not he rather suppose that she 
had spoken hastily, and come next day to ask for an ex- 
planation of her conduct ? In that case what could she do 
else but make it up with him again ? 

Mrs. Whitaker took this view of the case when she dis- 
cussed the subject with her daughter. She had one ques- 
tion to ask, and would feel obliged if an answer were given 
her. If Ann did not marry William, whom else did she 
expect to marry ? 

Ann could not point to any probable husband. She 
ventured to suggest that there might be some one or other 
who might marry her even if William were lost. She also 
said that she was young enough yet awhile. 

" Young enough ! " cried Mrs. Whitaker. " How you 



At an Amateur Theatre. 223 

talk ! When I was your age I had been married a year at 
least. As it is, your engagement with William has been 
going on much too long. You shall write to him at once." 

" Write to him, mamma ! " 

" Certainly. This very evening.' - 

Ann did not argue the point. The artful puss perhaps 
supposed that it might be the surest way to gain her own 
ends if she allowed her mamma to think that she had 
carried the day. She thought, too, perhaps the old lady 
might forget to speak any more upon the subject that even- 
ing, and thus at least some time would be gained. 

But in this idea she was wrong. Mrs. Whitaker again 
and again returned to the subject. 

" Yes, decidedly you must write to him, and tell him how 
sorry you are for what you have said." 

" I'm not sorry, mamma," Ann replied, at last losing 
patience. 

" Not. sorry ! " 

"No." 

"Then you ought to be, that's all I've got to say." 

" But I'm not, and I will not tell him that I am. It is all 
his fault." 

" Hush, Miss, hush ! How dare you ! " 

Ann made no reply. It was, however, evident that she 
meant to be rebellious. Mrs. Whitaker sat reflecting, the 
famous half-mended stocking lying neglected in her lap. 

" If you had another offer well and good," she said, pre- 
sently. " Really, William is a little trying sometimes. He 
has no business to take the tone he does towards us." 

" He would be only too happy to break off the engage- 
ment," said Ann. 

Mrs. Whitaker suddenly veered round again. 

" No, he wouldn't, Miss. You know nothing about it. It 
is your bad temper alone that has led to what has hap- 
pened. It is very wicked of you. I wonder how you can. 
But I see it all. It is those stupid tale-books, and plays, 
and nonsense you get hold of. What's that you've got in 
your hand now? Put it down this instant and find some 
needlework." 

Half an hour later the old lady continued in another 
strain . 

" I can't think why on earth James should take it into his 
head to stop out all the afternoon and evening, just when 



224 A Londoti Romance. 

he is wanted, too. I should like to consult him on the 
subject. I don't think it would be right to send a letter to 
William before consulting James. You see James is very- 
well off . in a good position. Indeed I think he is much 
better off than William is ever likely to be for all his 
preaching. And he is extremely sensible. If it were 
James, now, instead of William." 

" Mamma, how can you ? As if it were likely ! James 
does not dream of such a thing. You would never think of 
saying the least word that would let him suppose we had 
ever spoken on the subject. I should die of shame if you 
did. Besides, I do not love him . never could . except as 
a brother. I do love him as a brother. He is very, very 
kind to us." 

Mrs. Whitaker's dignity was ruffled by this appeal. 

" I should hope, Ann, you will give your mother credit 
for not being quite a fool. I should hope so. Do you 
suppose I have no proper pride ? Besides, of course I can 
see quite plainly what prompts James's kindness. It is 
quite humiliating enough, my dear, without your pointing it 
out, thank you. If your father had not been so foolishly 
obstinate we should never have been in this position, be- 
holden for our daily food to another's charity. I am sure 
when I think of it my meals almost choke me." 

She wiped her eyes and whimpered for a few moments, 
then rang for supper. 

" There, put away your needlework, do, and let us have 
a game at cribbage ; it will pass the time away." 

After supper, James still remaining absent, Mrs. Whitaker 
declared her intention] of acting promptly on her own ac- 
count. She fetched her desk, unscrewed the inkstand, 
chose a new pen, spread out her paper, and began com- 
posing. 

Several times she paused to ask Ann how certain words 
were spelt, and upon other occasions, with varying success, 
searched for them herself in the dictionary. The rough 
draught of the letter at length completed, a fair copy was 
made, and then another, and finally the approved copy put 
into an envelope and sealed with elaboration and an unin- 
tentional " kiss." 

Before closing the envelope, however, Ann was asked 
whether she would like to see it. 



At an Amateur Theatre. 225 

" I hope, mamma, you will not send the letter at all ; I 
am determined not to marry him." 

" How dare you, Miss ? " cried her mamma. " I am 
determined that you shall." 

It was settled that the letter should be posted the first 
thing in the morning, after James had been consulted. 
James did not return until after the ladies had retired, let- 
ting himself in with a latch-key. Instead of going to bed 
like a reasonable creature then, he sat before the dying fire 
and smoked a series of pipes. No wonder that his rest was 
broken after such excesses. Mrs. Whitaker more than once 
during the night heard him wandering up and down his 
room. 

Mrs. Whitaker's rest was broken also. She arose later 
than she had intended, and the letter she had written con- 
sequently did not go away by the first post. 

The first post in, however, brought her a letter, which 
materially altered her plans. It was from William, and ran 
thus : . 

" My dear Aunt, 

"Your daughter has doubtlessly communicated to 
you the result of an interview which passed between us this 
morning. I regret that our friendly relations should termi- 
nate thus disagreeably ; but it is a consolation to me to 
reflect that the blame is not upon my side, and that I can 
at least lay my hand upon my heart and say I have acted 
fairly and honourably throughout. 

" It is not for me to blame Ann, or to point out to you 
what possible advantages our union would have possessed, 
Your daughter has chosen for herself: the past is irre- 
vocable. 

" After what has occurred, I need hardly say that all com- 
munication between us it would be advisable should cease. 
It is a source of comfort to me to know that you have found 
new and rich friends, and that when rejecting my assistance 
and co-operation, you will not, for a time at least, suffer in a 
pecuniary sense. 

" As to any debt that may be owing to me from you, I 
beg that you will look upon it as cancelled. 

" In conclusion, my dear aunt, I must once more express 
my sorrow that this should have occurred. I will not speak 
15 



226 A London Romance. 

of my own sufferings, and the way I have been treated; 
there is One only who knoweth all things, and when the 
time cometh shall judge us upon our merits. 

" I am, yours obediently, 

"William Bradshaw." 

The first thing Mrs. Whitaker did when she had read this 
letter was to tear up the one she herself had written into 
very small pieces. Then she re-read William's epistle, and 
was very angry indeed. The bell rang loudly, and Ann was 
fetched. 

"Look here, my dear . look here, if you please. Did 
you ever read anything so . so insolent. Talking of my 
debt too . that ten pounds I suppose he means; but he 
shall have it back, every farthing of it, this very day. Give 
me my purse off the dressing-table." 

The purse in question contained only seven pounds ten 
shillings, half of which sum was wrapped up in a butcher's 
bill it had been intended to settle, according to promise, 
that day. But there was James, was there not ? He would 
not allow his aunt to be so insulted. 

When James was presented with the letter above printed, 
he read it through very carefully folded it up, and handed it 
back without a word. 

" Well ?" said Mrs. Whitaker. 

"That's William, is it?" he asked. 

" Of course it is." 

" Ah ! I don't seem to care so much about renewing his 
acquaintance as I did. On the whole I'm not sorry we 
missed one another." 

" The tone he takes," said Mrs. Whitaker ; "the way he 
talks to us, as if we were I don't know what . the dust 
under his feet; and the way he makes himself out to be all 
that's good, and us all that isn't. That was his way always ; 
he always took the upper hand with us all, and we were 
that meek and lowly . I can't think why. Sam was too. 
I've known your uncle ask William's pardon for saying 
' damn it ' before him." 

" I can't say I like William . on paper," observed James, 
reflectively. " I should like to hear him in the pulpit 
though. I'll go next Sunday." 

"It's more than I shall," said Mrs. Whitaker, warmly. 
" I've had enough of his chapels, and his tea-drinkings, and 



At an Amateur Theatre. 227 

his Mrs. Hodsons, and the rest of it . quite enough, thank 
you kindly. There's a limit to everything. I mayn't be as 
humble as I ought to be, and I'm sorry for it ; but kissing 
the rod wouldn't satisfy some folks unless you kissed every 
individual twig of it." 

" Of course after what has passed, as he says, all com- 
munication should cease between you." 

" That's easy to say, of course ; but how can I submit to 
such insult? That he should have spoken in that way 
about ten pounds ! It is true that it is a large sum to some 
people who are poorly off, but to others . oh, it's disgraceful 
of him ! " 

h "Don't let that bother you," said James; and it is only 
fair to the old lady to add that from that time forth the ten 
pounds did not bother her at all. 

" I suppose he'll send it back again," James said ; but in 
this he was wrong. 




'5- 



CHAPTER III. 




ANOTHER entertainment was given at the Royal 
Boudoir by those distinguished amateurs who 
had taken part in the celebrated Don Caesar 
performance already recorded. 
These entertainments were not quite of the same class 
as those ordinarily given by the amateurs who used 
Toogood's little Theatre. These were "Distinguished" 
amateurs, and this adjective was in some measure a term 
of reproach to the more lowly Thespians. The aspiring 
shop-boys could be rather jealous of them ; when they were 
they obtained admission on the night of the performance 
and cheered derisively. 

The Distinguished called the other set " Cads : " the 
Cads called the Distinguished "Duffers." Mr. Toogood 
liked the Duffers ; they paid much better. They were rather 
troublesome to manage about the shortcomings of the pro- 
perties, yet they were to be managed ; and as the money 
was forthcoming it was as well to strain a point and in- 
dulge them. 

The ladies assisting the Distinguished were not from the 
same class as those who played for the Cads. Some of the 
Cad companies prided themselves upon being working men, 
and had working girls to play for them; but the Dis- 
tinguished hired real actresses, or professional amateur 
ladies. 

These latter were not exactly real actresses, but yet re- 
cognised by the organs of the profession, and their efforts 
were uniformly praised in the reports of the doings at the 



At an Amateur Theatre. 229 

Boudoir. They were the Misses Flo Spanglass, Joey Fitz, 
and Bel Bouncington, whose advertisements the curious 
may have read with wonder. " Miss Flo Spanglass attends 
amateur histrionic entertainments, military and otherwise. 
Rand's End, 1st proximo; Duncansby Head, 2nd; other 
dates vacant. All letters respecting further engagements to 
be addressed to Miss F. S., at her private residence, No. 5, 
Aspasia Villas, St. John's Wood." 

Miss Flo it was who took a prominent part in the fancy 
fairs organised in aid of the almshouses for superannuated 
supernumeraries . "the broken sticks," as they were termed. 
She was pretty and clever ; but for some unexplained reason 
had only had one regular engagement, six weeks or so, 
during Christmas time, at the Great Sahara. It was sup- 
posed that she made a much better thing of it by amateur 
acting. She wore many rings, bracelets, chains, and other 
ornaments, and her terms were generally supposed to be 
expensive. Only the most daring spirits had ventured to 
offer her an engagement at a low price : others she had 
accepted only after swearing all concerned to solemn 
secrecy. 

As for the Distinguished themselves, they belonged, as 
may be judged by the examples given, to the upper classes 
of society. There were a couple of captains, an honour- 
able, a young lord even. They acted for charities, and 
charged their friends large sums for the privilege of seeing 
them do it. 

There was sometimes quite a run upon the front seats, 
and extra front seats had to be improvised. Members of a 
military band performed in the orchestra. Miss Flo and 
Co. were engaged at large salaries. There were refresh- 
ments of a choice character always to be had in the green- 
room, and the entertainment was generally followed by a 
supper. After deducting working expenses, the balance to 
be handed over to the charity was not, as a rule, a very 
large one. 

Mrs. Whitaker, and Ann, and James were invited to the 
next performance, and had free admissions presented to 
them. Henry Draper asked Ann to take a part in one of 
the plays. " Not this time," she said ; and he obtained a 
promise from her that she would certainly act with him next 
time. 

If anything, this second evening was a greater success 



230 A London Romance. 

than that, the particulars of which have been already given. 
Everybody was highly delighted and amused, more parti- 
cularly the Distinguished amateurs themselves who had 
taken part in it. 

James, in that dry way of his . nobody ever distinctly 
understood whether he was in jest or earnest . wanted to 
know whether it was as good fun as a tea-drinking. 
Mrs. Whitaker was a little outraged at this. She did not 
think that such a comparison should be made ; but she was 
not, somehow, nearly as severe in her opinions as hereto- 
fore. 

If anything, Harry Draper surpassed himself. He acted, 
as usual, an heroical character . a hero brave and noble. 
His handsome face, bright smile, and graceful figure kept 
all eyes . ladies' eyes at any rate . riveted upon him ; more 
than one heart fluttered tremulously as its owner watched 
him through her tears, and listened spell-bound to the 
beautiful sentiments he was uttering in the best blank verse. 
And how unworthy of him, they all agreed, was the lady of 
his choice, for whom he had suffered so much and so 
bravely. 

In the afterpiece he also appeared, and this time played 
the part of a gay Lothario, in russet boots. It is doubtful 
whether the ladies did not admire him most in this character. 
Here he was again with the same handsome face . hand- 
somer on account of some becoming ringlets . the same 
musical voice and deep thrilling tones, only his sentiments 
were highly reprehensible. 

It seemed at first qune sad to think that that very good- 
looking young man could have turned so wild ; and yet 
what a persuasive way the rascal had with him ! What 
dreadfully good-looking, diverting dogs some of you naughty 
men are ! Don't you think so yourselves ? 

" Oh, was it not beautiful ! " Ann cried, when the curtain 
descended. 

Harry Draper, abandoning the triumphs yet in store for 
him had he stopped to supper, accompanied the ladies home 
to Straggleton New Town, and there supped upon some 
little delicacies James Jarman had ordered to be sent in 
for their refreshment. 

" Were you really amused ? " Draper asked. He had 
made the enquiry once or twice before. 

" Oh, so much ! " replied Ann, in a low tone, full of 



At an Amateur Theatre. 231 

gratitude and deep admiration. "And I was very- 
frightened, too, at one part ; it was dreadful." 

" You mean where the fellow was coming in to stick me 
at the roadside inn. What a make up that was of the 
captain's, wasn't it ? " 

" Oh, he horrified me, and . and I could not help think- 
ing it was real. Was I not foolish ? " 

" You thought he would hurt me, did you ? " 

"Yes \ and how well you acted ! Did not he, James ? . 
was not the scene dreadful ? " 

" I thought it was beautifully acted," said James. " It 
put me a little in mind of something that occurred to me 
once somewhere in California." 

"California!" echoed Mrs. Whitaker; " have you been 
there, among other places ? It seems to me you've been all 
round the world." 

"A great traveller!" said Harry Draper, with a slight 
suspicion of irony in his tone ; " and what did my humble 
effort remind you of ? Do tell us." 

" No ; it's not worth telling." 

" Do, James," said Mrs. Whitaker ; and they all pressed 
him. 

James coloured up a little, and crumbled a piece of bread 
as he spoke. 

" Oh, bother it ; I wish I had not spoken. Well, then, 
I was lying all night in a log-hut . a sort of roadside inn or 
shanty . and the proprietor, a cut-throat ruffian, and a negro, 
a sort of servant of his, crept in on me, as the man did on 
you to-night. I luckily overheard them planning the busi- 
ness, and more luckily still, only one came in at a time, and 
came in the dark." 

" Yes ; but is that all ? What did you do ? " Ann asked, 
eagerly. 

" I'm not very strong, you know, and I don't think I'm 
any pluckier than I need be ; but of course I saw I should 
be settled if I did not struggle for it ; I could gain nothing 
by not using my knife." 

But here he paused again, as though the story were con- 
cluded. 

Ann asked in a tremble, and looking at him with great 
eyes . 

" Did you use your knife ? " 

" Yes," said James ; " I took the first by surprise. He 



232 A London Romance. 

died without a cry ; but I stabbed him several times to 
make sure. Then I stood flat up against the wall by the 
door, and waited for the other. Of course I had to do the 
same by him, or I should not be here to tell the story." 

There was a little silence after this anecdote. The 
theatrical hero looked at the real hero across the table with 
a little distrust. Ann almost shivered when presently the 
slight white hand of this traveller of terrible experience 
handed her a harmless bread-and-butter knife for which she 
had occasion. 





CHAPTER IV 

jlHE [third entertainment of the Rough Club was 
shortly to take place, and Ann had promised to 
take part in it. Some eccentric geniuses, more 
or less literary and artistic, had organised a club 
in the neighbourhood of the Strand, and called themselves 
the Roughs . hence the name of the amateur theatrical com- 
pany performing at the Royal Boudoir. The members of 
the former club composed the latter, with the exception of 
the ladies, whose services were engaged for the evening 
only. 

So great had been the success attending the former enter- 
tainments, it was resolved that at this should be put forth 
all the strength of the club, and a new and original play, 
written by one of the Roughs, was that night to be first per- 
formed. 

It was a well-written play, and in parts very witty ; but 
the characters generally had a good deal too much to say 
for themselves. Nor could this easily be avoided, for every- 
body wished to have as much to say as possible, and each 
person desired to have the last word . an arrangement 
which threw considerable difficulty in our author's way, and 
appeared impossible to effect, unless the comedy should 
conclude with a chorus or a shout. 

Before he had done with this company, little Addleton 
and his comedy had suffered much, the latter being seriously 
mutilated. He began by calling it " Couleur de Rose ; " but 
this French title was at once objected to. " Rose Colour " 
was not thought to be a sufficiently apt translation. " Life 



234 A London Romance. 

Through Hose-coloured Spectacles " was rather long and 
clumsy ; besides, the principal character, the one who took 
a rosy view of things, did not wear spectacles. 

" Why shouldn't he ? " asked one amateur. 

" Because he is a young man." 

" Why not make an old man of him ? " 

" Because I should have to rewrite the whole piece.' - 

" Why not rewrite it ? " 

Draper's friend, Tom Yolland, came to the rescue with . 
"Look Always on the Sunny Side." This was thought 
rather too long also ; something short and crisp was wanted; 
why not " The Sunny Side ? " 

" You see, so much of the point lies in one of my char- 
acters repeating the words ' couleur de rose,' " . Addleton 
explained. " I have made him a Frenchman for that very 
reason, and taken a great deal of trouble in consequence." 

"There's no novelty in a Frenchman speaking broken 
English," another amateur observed ; but the amateur who 
was cast for the Frenchman's character, and who firmly 
believed he was going to make a great hit with the dialogue, 
loudly protested against any alteration. 

At least half a dozen rehearsals took place before any 
name was decided upon, and little Addleton was well-nigh 
worried out of his life by the various suggestions ; finally, it 
was called " Making the best of it," which was the best that 
could be made of it under the circumstances. 

It was a difficult task to make matters pleasant with the 
ladies. Harry Draper had insisted that Ann should be the 
heroine : the author, not being very sanguine respecting the 
talents of an unknown person, objected with all his might} 
but Draper threatened to throw up his part unless he had 
his way. Draper was the author's great hope, and of course 
he must be humoured. 

But the talented Miss Flo Spanglass was very angry. 
What next? she asked. Was she to play second to a 
nobody-knows-who ? Not she, indeed ! She only engaged 
for leading business. She would rather have nothing to do 
with the thing at all. 

Poor little Addleton made a pilgrimage to St. John's 
Wood, and begged and entreated. He promised that Miss 
Flo's part, though nominally the second, should be really 
the first He would cram it with jokes. He took away the 
copy he had given her, and* sat up all night poking puns 



At an Amateur Theatre. 235 

into its sentences ; but next day when he called upon her 
and read aloud the results of his labour, she received his 
choicest witticisms with icy coldness. 

" Puns are no good," she said ; " I want a song and 
dance." 

" But it is high comedy,'' he gasped. 

" High or low, I can't help that. Come now, there's a dear 
little man, put them in somewhere or let me do so. Take 
it home again and think it over." 

Little Addleton often said that never in his life before had 
he worked so hard, and on this occasion he was giving his 
labours gratuitously. In a usual way he wrote magazine 
articles, and was very popular with magazine proprietors. 
The public knew something about him. The lucky ac- 
cident of his name beginning with an A led to its figuring 
always at the top of lists of contributors. There was very 
little to choose between him and Brown and Cooper ; it 
would have been hard to say which was the best or worst of 
the trio ; but alphabetically Addleton got the advantage, 
and it was many pounds in his pocket. The O's, P's, and 
Q's were passed over unnoticed in the long list of " best 
authors of the day." 

With Toogood, little Addleton had a deal of trouble. 
The number of miscellaneous articles required in every 
scene was, Toogood said, "out of all reason." 

"There's five pound worth of props, wanted," he said to 
his good lady. " A working moon, if you please, and 
stormy waves ! What a pack of nonsense, when twenty 
words would do much better if the character pointed off 
while he talked." 

Ann was excited by the thoughts of what was to come ; 
she could neither sleep nor eat. She was going to act in 
public. She was to wear white satin and stage diamonds, 
and have her hair powdered. How beautiful she would look. 

Before her looking-glass she rehearsed the effect, using 
her violet powder for the purpose. " Gracious goodness 
me!" cried Mrs. Whitaker; "what's the girl done to her- 
self!" 

She was quite perfect in her part twenty-four hours after 
it was given to her, for she thought of nothing else. She 
repeated it to herself, and to herself in the looking-glass, 
and some of it to her mamma. 



236 A London Romance. 

"My lord, I am a poor gentleman's daughter ! " (this was 
in an early part of the play, previous to the white satin). 
" Yonder, peeping through the trees, is the only home I 
have known. That thatch roof covers all on earth that I 
hold dear. A poor place enough, you may think, scarce 
worth while turning from the high road to go look at, but I 
have been very, very happy there, and on my bended knees 
each night I give my heartfelt thanks to Heaven." 

" Lor', how touching ! " Mrs. Whitaker observed, the first 
time she heard this pretty sentence. Little Addleton had 
taken great pains with its composition, although it may not 
strike the critical reader as being particularly brilliant. 

The lord the poor gentleman's daughter thus addressed 
was, you may be sure, a wicked one. A false-hearted, fas- 
cinating nobleman, impersonated by that celebrated amateur 
actor, Harry Draper, otherwise Le Mesurier. The cele- 
brated Harry would insist upon being wicked. This was 
his particular line, and he found it very popular with his 
fashionable audience, who applauded him loudly on his 
entrance and exit, and even received his naughtiest remarks 
with great favour. 

At the performances of the Cad companies, now, this was 
not the case, any more than it is at a real theatre. Though 
the villains were not hissed, as at the latter, the right-minded 
among the audience regretted that the actor should throw 
away his talents in such a cause. 

" It's such a pity he should do those characters." 

The villains of the real theatres, it is well known, bring 
away with them a bad name when they leave the stage life 
for the domestic. There were many thousands of honest 
people who shuddered at the recollection of O. Smith, 
<: that dreadful man ! " 

Two simple country folks went to the play, and saw 
Virginius. It was a fine performance, they agreed, and 
very cutting in parts. The most heartrending scene, how- 
ever, was where the man killed his daughter ; " but that was 
all brought about by that beggar Jones" (the heavy 
villain). " He's always at some mischief or other, he is. 
I sha'n't support him at his benefit if he has one. So I tell 
him ! " 

You may be certain Mrs. Whitaker had a great deal to 
say about the theatricals. At first she was not at all sure it 
was the right thing for Ann to take a part. To play before 



At an Amateur Theatre. 237 

a houseful of people ! To be made love to in public ! No, 
it could not be thought of for an instant. 

James, however, persuaded her that it was all right, and 
if James said so of course it must be. 

" But then she can't be going to and fro alone to the re- 
hearsals." 

" I'll take care of her." 

Therefore when Mrs. Whitaker could not go, which fre- 
quently was the case, in consequence of a severe cold she 
caught from one of the thousand and one draughts of the 
Boudoir Theatre, James accompanied his cousin and saw 
her safe home again. 

" You've brought your body-guard, as usual, I see," ob- 
served Draper. " He seems to have got a deal more time 
on his hands than he knows what to. do with. You're quite 
right to make him useful." 

" He's very kind to mamma and me. I don't think I 
could ever find any one else as kind." 

" He seems to mean well. He don't say much, but I 
suppose he thinks all the more. Couldn't you persuade 
him, though, to buy a differently shaped hat ? " 

" What fun you make of every one. Please don't talk 
like that. I don't like to hear anything against James." 

"No, no; I beg your pardon. What right have I to 
speak at all. It is easy enough to see whom he is in love 
with and who loves him." 

" You know it is not so, Harry. How can you say such 
a thing." 

" I don't know. I'm a fool, I suppose. What does it 
matter to me ! Why should I dream of impossible happi- 
ness ? Ah, if you knew the story of my wretched life." 

" Your wretched life ! Tell me " 

"Lord Ladyslay," called out little Addleton, excitedly. 
" Do, please, Draper, listen to what's going on. You ought 
to be on now. If it isn't done to the moment all the effect 
will be spoilt. Look here now, somebody, please. Don't 
all go away. We must have that scene over again." 

There was not the slightest foundation for this statement 
respecting the wretchedness of Mr. Draper's past life. He 
was always heaving sighs over perfectly imaginary griefs. He 
was always acting a part. He was the Corsair of the 
Middle Temple ! As well as it could be understood by 



238 A London Romance. 

those who gave some time and trouble to deciphering his 
character, he seemed to wish it to be vaguely supposed that 
he had terrible crimes upon his conscience . that he had led 
a wild and reckless life, and the blighting of happy homes 
lay heavy upon his soul. But this was all fiddle-de-dee 
from beginning to end. 

Tom Yolland, that friend of his who shared his rooms, 
noticed some of the by-play at the wing during the re- 
hearsals, and questioned Draper upon the subject. 

" What the deuce are you about with that girl ? Her eyes 
follow you as though you had her purse in your pocket and 
she was afraid you would try to run away unless she kept a 
sharp look-out on your movements." 

" Poor girl ! " said Harry, in his most tragic tone. " Poor 
girl ! But what am I to do ? " 

" Well, I don't know, I'm sure," said Tom Yolland. 

There came on about this time a period of mystery and 
bewilderment, in which nobody exactly knew what anybody 
else meant or was driving at, when all day long it was as it 
is in some melodramas at the transpontine and provincial 
theatres. Anon, anon. Let us bide our time; we must 
dissemble and . . . Hush, we are observed. 





CHAPTER V 

jjOMETIMES Mrs. Whitaker could not help asking 
herself what William would say to this amateur 
business if he knew of it, and she felt occasionally- 
ill at ease. 

William's opinions had always been violently antagonistic 
to things theatrical. Poor Samuel, too, although he was 
professionally engaged at the Great Sahara, had a pious 
horror of those who trod the boards rouged and bewigged. 
He maintained that pure- minded women and children had 
no business at the play. What did they hear there but 
lies and bad language. 

Some people arguing the case with the late Mr. AVhitaker, 
asserted that only the best of morals were inculcated by 
stage representations, pantomimes excepted ; that virtue 
was always rewarded and vice always punished; that the 
lower you - descended in search of the dramatic element, the 
more triumphant virtue was, and the worse punishment 
awaited the vicious. Strange as it might appear, in the 
regular right down bad neighbourhoods the morals were 
more strict, the villain more deeply execrated, the virtue of 
the heroine above price, more intently admired, and her 
welfare watched over with a more anxious solicitude. 

It did one good, the supporters of the drama protested, 
to see the pure and guileless coster in his threepenny 
gallery, following with a childish admiration as much of the 
moral sentiments as he could understand, applauding loudly 
those to whom he thought applause was due, and loading 
with contumely the baffled ruffians of high estate. 



240 A London Romance. 

Gradually Mrs. Whitaker's prejudices gave way. At first 
it was only amateur performances she could countenance ; 
but one night James brought home " dress circles," and 
the ladies accompanied him to see a pantomime. There 
was not any person present, old or young, who laughed 
half as long or loudly at the clown's nonsense . very 
dreary nonsense, by-the-way, as it generally is now-a-days. 

Long after, the bare recollection of this person's comi- 
calities caused Mrs. Whitaker to burst out laughing, and 
she gave hazy accounts of what she had seen to Harry 
Draper, Mrs. Pickering, Hannah the servant even, all of 
whom politely agreed with her that it must have been 
very funny indeed, though they did not distinctly see 
where the fun of the thing lay from her description. 

Ann did not approve of the clowning to the same extent 
as her mamma. She did not care much for that sort of 
thing. Already this young lady had got her notions. 
She wanted to copy Nature . to act her part as a person so 
placed in real life might have done. She once argued a 
point with Little Addleton. 

Little Addleton wished her in one of the scenes " to 
take the stage" with tragic stride whilst giving utterance 
to certain sentiments of a high-flown character. Though 
professing herself an incompetent judge of the suitableness 
of the words employed, she altogether protested against 
the " business." The business meant taking the stage ; or 
in other words, crossing from wing to wing with a tragical 
action. 

Little Addleton was staggered by her objections, and 
gave way. He generally did so. Several times during 
each rehearsal he had to knuckle under to the great Flo 
Spanglass, who had a way of beginning her objections 
with . " Oh, I say, Mr. Addleton, this sort of thing won't 
do at all, you know," which filled our author's heart with 
forebodings of coming evil. 

There was only one person in all the caste who did 
not stand out for sweeping alterations, and he who took 
things quietly did not learn his part at all, but gagged 
every scene when the night came. 

The preparation of Ann's toilet was a work of time. 
There were journeys and journeys between Straggleton 
New Town and the costumiers in Bow Street. The white 
satin was tried and retried, and James acted most un- 



At an Amateur Theatre. 241 

commercially in the transaction by saying upon all oc- 
casions that no expense need be spared. 

In the end, however, the effect was very striking. Ann 
was early at the theatre : only one other person had 
arrived . Little Addleton, who looked worn and weary. 

" That's right," he cried when he saw her. " You're here, 
anyhow. You'll do your best, Miss Mortimer, won't you ? 
(Mortimer was her theatrical name.) I've asked some great 
guns to be here to-night. Jason Burgoyne, the author and 
actor, you know, and Jones from the Strand. Unluckily, 
there's a ben on somewhere that Jones has got to play at. 
Altogether he has to appear in three pieces at his own and 
the other theatre. However, he said he would look in if he 
had time." 

Three of the gentlemen arrived. One sat down directly, 
and began learning his part. Little Addleton looked at 
him uneasily. 

" Do try and stick to the words as much as you can, old 
fellow," said he. 

" I'm all right," the other replied. " I'm perfect in the 
cues, at any rate." 

" He's a perfect cue-er, he means to say," said Miss Flo 
Spanglass, who arrived at this moment. " Look here, you 
dear little man," she continued, to the author, "there's 
something wrong about this song after all. Suppose I leave 
it out, now, and put in one of my old favourites." 

Several other amateurs arrived after this ; but one of the 
principal ones was absent. Report said he had a dreadful 
cold in his head. 

The performances were to begin with an original address 
to be spoken by the absentee. After the overture had been 
played over twice . the audience beginning to get a little 
restive meanwhile . somebody else read the address, and 
then there was an interval of intense excitement, in which 
messengers were despatched right and left in search of the 
missing man. 

This individual came at last after a second apology had 
been made on his account, and then poor little Addleton's 
comedy proceeded somewhat smoothly. Of course there 
were many shortcomings with respect to pioperties, and 
some portion of the action was in consequence rather 
difficult to follow : but the dialogue was generally allowed 
to be witty, and frequent laughter and applause resulted. 
16 



242 A London Romance. 

In the first scene Ann looked very well, but was not quite 
loud enough. This was not to be wondered at in a 
debutante. 

" Speak up," said Little Addleton. " Don't be afraid." 

In the next scene Ann had to act with Harry Draper. 
She had rehearsed this part with him a dozen times at least. 
She acted it with all her heart . all her soul. At some 
points it was scarcely acting. Her supple form and soft 
flowing drapery fell naturally into a score of graceful shapes 
. her fair arms clung to him. There were a good many 
among the audience who would have given a trifle to have 
that young head resting on their breasts. 

The curtain descended on Act I. Hitherto the piece 
had been very successful. The audience, as is usual at 
amateur entertainments, were kindly disposed, and finding 
something that was really not bad, were quite enthusiastic 
in their applause. 

In Act II. the satin dress was to be worn . some deeply 
thrilling love passages were to occur. All little Addleton's 
strength lay in this portion of the drama. 

The first scene opened with a love passage between Ann 
and her virtuous lover. He took his departure. She looked 
off after him with tearful eyes. She owed him a debt of 
gratitude. She gave him her promise that she would be 
his, and she would keep that promise come what might. 

The wicked lover came . Harry Draper, in a travelling 
cloak and jack boots. He threw aside the cloak, and dis- 
covered the most becoming of riding dresses . green and 
gold. He poured forth his love-tale in low earnest tones. 
He entreated her to fly with him. He vowed that his love 
was eternal. The pleading voice seemed to draw her to 
him. How could she resist ? 

A great actress (was it Miss O'Neill ?) thus defined the 
difference between John Kemble and Edmund Kean : 

" If I had been Juliet when Kemble played Romeo, I 
think in the end I should have helped him up to the 
balcony. If it had been Kean making love, I could not 
have helped myself. I must have jumped off the balcony 
to him. 

It is a great art that of making love either on or off the stage, 
and how few men do it well ! Women as a rule make every 
allowance for the love-sick bunglers. Their confusion and 
clumsiness are in a measure flattering. One might imagine 



At an Amateur Theatre. 243 

the noonday sun would wax wrath if a bold-eyed mortal 
stared him out of countenance without blinking. 

Harry Draper made love nearly as well as Fechter, or 
Dominick Murray. How could she resist him ? She 
could not, and would not, had not the exigencies of the 
drama necessitated some procrastination. 

An approaching footstep startled them. Harry sprang 
out of the window. The poor gentleman (Ann's father) en- 
tered. He kissed her and bade her good-night. Left alone 
in the quaint Gothic chamber, she whiled away the time by 
soliloquising before a mirror. 

The moon rose and shone through the lattice window, its 
beams falling upon her face and the white satin dress she 
wore. What was going to happen now i The hushed 
audience in a tremble of excitement waited anxiously. 

All at once a dark figure appeared upon the scene, 
advanced rapidly, and caught the heroine by the wrist. 
Some hurried words passed between them, but in a tone too 
low for those in front to catch, and then the dark figure was 
seen dragging the heroine from the stage, and she suffered 
him to do so without resistance. 

Then a great hubbub arose in front, and some called 
" Shame " and some " Encore," and there were laughter and 
applause and sibilation. For the dark figure was attired in 
modern clothes unlike the dresses of the other characters . 
wearing a broadish brimmed hat, a white neckerchief, and 
black gloves, and in one hand he brandished an umbrella. 

It was William Bradshaw who had thus broken in upon 
the performance of little Addleton's comedy, and who, 
during a moment when the author, Draper, and the stage- 
manager were temporarily absent from the stage, seized on, 
and carried off the heroine, whom he took away speechless 
and helpless in a cab. 

Five minutes afterwards there was such an uproar in the 
Boudoir Theatre as never occurred within its walls before 
or since. 



16- 



CHAPTER VI. 




JIOR the length of two or more streets the cab tra- 
velled before Ann had sufficiently recovered her 
senses to make any effort at resistance. The at- 
tack had been so bold, so sudden, there had been 
no fighting against it. 

She had always been somewhat afraid of William. She 
had dreaded his hearing of the theatricals, to which she 
knew him to be greatly averse. His appearance at that mo- 
ment, when no one was by to help her, had for a time de- 
prived her of all presence of mind. But as the distance 
increased between her and the theatre, the full force of the 
absurdity of her position appeared to her. 

Was she a child to be treated thus ? Was it possible that 
such an outrage could be perpetrated in a free country, et 
cetera ? 

" How dare you act this way ? " she cried. " Stop the 
cab. Let me out ! " 

She turned to open the window, but he held her wrist. 

" How dare you ? " he said. " How dare you degrade 
and disgrace yourself and me and all belonging to you ? If 
you had not that paint upon your face you must blush, un- 
less you are indeed lost to all sense of shame ! " 

She struggled to free her hands, but he held them tightly. 
She could have cried with rage. 

" What do you mean by speaking to me in such a way ? " 
she asked, in a broken voice. " Do you think I care for 
your stupid, bigoted notions? I will be an actress if I 
choose. Others far wiser than you wish me to go upon the 
stage, and I am decided now. I will ! I swear it." 



At an Amateur Theatre. 



HS 



" Hush ! hush ! You cannot mean what you say. I 
thank Heaven I came in time to save you from further 
humiliation. I hope that the mummeries had not been 
going on long." 

" Stop the cab, will you, or I will scream for help ! I 
want to go back. I wit/ go back." 

" No, you shall not do that, Ann. I will take you home 
to your mother. It is without her knowledge that this has 
occurred. I am sure of that." 

" You are quite wrong there," Ann retorted. " She is at 
the theatre, among the audience, and so is James." 

William seemed a little staggered by this intelligence. 
His brows were knit, and his handsome face wore a savage 
and determined expression she had never seen on it 
before. 

"Are you speaking the truth?" he asked. 

"Yes, I am." 

" Then if your mother is incapable of taking charge of 
you, I must do so in her place. I will take you home, and 
we will wait there until they return." 

"No, no," said Ann, losing all control over herself, and 
bursting into a paroxysm of tears. " I will not bear it. 
Help ! help ! " 

The cabman stopped abruptly. Ann cried again for help. 
" Hollo," said' the man, " what's amiss ? " 

" Let me out . let me out ! " 

" Drive on," cried William. But the cab remained sta- 
tionary. Some passers-by halted on the pavement and 
hstened in wonder. 

" I aint going to be a party to anythink o' this sort," the 
cabman said. "What's it all mean, if you please? You're 
a parson, aint you ? What's your game with the young 
woman ? " 

" Do as I order you," said William, in a trembling voice. 
" Drive on. I am a relation of this young lady. She is 
under my charge." 

" It is not true," Ann protested. " Let me out. Help ! 
help ! will nobody help me ? " 

The crowd, greatly augmented, pressed round the door. 
It was a narrow street, and the cab blocked up the road 
in consequence of a van being drawn up against the pave- 
ment just ahead. The driver of a brougham in front was 
calling out impatiently for the cab to move out of the 



246 A London Romance. 

way. A gentleman in the brougham looked out and asked 
what was the matter. 

Various members of the crowd volunteered information. 

" A parson running away with a gal in white satin." 

" A play-acting woman." 

''She's got her hair all over whitening, she has; and 
she's covered all over with diamings, she is." 

The description interested the gentleman in the brougham, 
who himself had a professional air about him. He alighted 
hurriedly. 

" Can I be of any assistance ? " 

Already Ann had opened the door and sprung out. It 
was raining briskly. The streets were very dirty. The train 
of the famous white satin trailed in the mud. 

" Oh, thank you," she said. " I want to go back to the 
theatre. I am an actress, and this . this fanatic has dragged 
me from the stage in the middle of a scene. He has no 
right to do so . no right at all to interfere with my actions." 

" It is only for you to say," the gentleman observed in his 
well-known voice and with his well-known manner. " If you 
place yourself under my protection I will see you safely 
back again." 

The crowd recognised him. 

" It's Jason Burgoyne." 

Burgoyne smiled. He liked this sort of thing. It all did 
in the way of advertisement. 

"Did you wish to return to the theatre, Madam?" he 
asked. 

"Yes, oh yes," said Ann. "If you would kindly find 
me a cab." 

" Which theatre is it you want to go to ? " 

" To the Boudoir." 

" My brougham is at your service. I am going to the 
Boudoir myself." 

All this while William had stood silent, with compressed 
lips and heaving breast, and, altogether, a most unclerical 
look upon his face. 

He here laid his hand on Ann's arm. 

"You will not go back," he said. 

'. Yes, I will." 

" With . this . man ? " 

Ann turned away without a word. 

The rain was coming clown faster. She was glad enough, 



At an Amateur Theatre, 247 

of the brougham's shelter. William looked after Ann's pro- 
tector with a still more angry expression. It is probable 
that the latter gentleman thought it far from unlikely that 
the scene might assume melodramatic proportions. He 
kept his eye fixed upon the minister. 

When Ann had taken her seat, Burgoyne also stepped 
into the brougham, and it began to move on. The van had 
gone by this, and the brougham therefore passed by the 
cab. William stood still a moment as though uncertain 
what to do, then plunged through the mud in pursuit, and 
laying his hand on the door, called out some words which 
were inaudible to the girl. The driver whipped his horses, 
and they dashed on. 

Left in the road, bareheaded . for his hat had fallen oft 
when he sprang forward . splashed with mud from the 
carriage-wheels, the minister presented rather a woeful aspect. 
The driver of the cab not clearly understanding the case, 
but fancying he understood just this much . he was going to 
be done out of his fare . came up with a bullying tone and 
demanded his rights. The crowd around joined in his 
abuse. 

William's enquiry for his hat was met by derisive jeers. 
Somebody from behind pushed some one who stood nearer 
roughly against him. Somebody flung a piece of orange 
peel, which struck him in the face. The crowd laughed 
loudly. 

William grasped his umbrella, and brandished it like a 
sword. He seemed as though he meant to charge his tor- 
mentors, and deal destruction right and left. But his better 
judgment coming to his aid, he thought of the scandal which 
might ensue, and the harm that it would do him, and turned 
away. 

They were only waiting for this. In an instant he was 
hustled and pushed and pelted. Had a policeman not come 
fortunately to his rescue, he might have been rather roughly 
handled. As it was, he only had his pocket picked. 




CHAPTER VII. 

HEN Ann returned to the Boudoir she found affairs 
in an alarming state. Poor little Addleton was 
prostrated, mentally and physically. Harry 
Draper was looking very savage ; the rest were 
complaining loudly, with the exception of Miss Flo Span- 
glass, who looked on with a sarcastic smile. 

" I thought how it would be," she said. 

How could she have expected any such fiasco ? Oh, you 
ladies ! you ladies ! how you do hate one another ! 

They were all dumbfounded at seeing Ann come back ; 
and for some moments it appeared as though the circum- 
stance was not likely to help the actors out of their difficulty. 
Harry Draper, however, his first surprise over, was equal to 
the occasion. 

" I'll go in front and explain matters, and ask for a short 
delay." 

"Oh, how can I go on again?" said Ann. But they 
crowded round and persuaded her. 

Draper stepped in front of the curtain. The audience 
were in an unsettled state ; some were leaving the theatre 
with loud expressions of disgust. 

"Ladies and gentlemen," said Draper, "let me entreat 
your indulgence and consideration for three minutes only, 
and the young lady will resume her performance." 

There was astonishment and applause ; for they had been 
told a few minutes previously that the young lady had been 
taken suddenly ill. 

" Ladies and gentlemen," he continued, " I have a very 



At an Amateur Theatre. 249 

extraordinary revelation to make. You have many of you, 
I dare say, heard of a popular performer of the name of 
William Bradshaw . I mean, of course, the Reverend 
William Bradshaw we read so much about in the papers." 

Here there was a half-laugh. Was a joke coming ? It 
would not do to be premature. 

" He is not, strictly speaking, in the same line of business 
as your humble servant," continued Draper. " He has been 
recently ' starring it in the provinces ; ' but I believe his is 
not exactly the legitimate drama." 

Here the laugh was louder and more general. 

"I am proud to say, that for the Boudoir Theatre this 
very evening has been reserved the honour of his first 
appearance on any stage. Yes, ladies and gentlemen, 
astonishing as it may appear, the mysterious figure you saw 
upon the scene some twenty minutes ago, whose name was 
not to be ' found in the small bills,' was none other than 
the celebrated Mr. Bradshaw." 

Loud applause and laughter. 

"And how do you think it occurred? I will tell you. 
Mr. Bradshaw objects to dramatic entertainments : objects 
to them very much indeed. He means, if he can, to put 
them down altogether ; only I do not think he will be able 
to do so." 

Applause. 

" Not if you will still give your patronage to them, ladies 
and gentlemen." 

Very loud applause indeed. 

" Mr. Bradshaw thought he would begin with the Boudoir. 
He said to himself, I suppose, ' Here is a young lady who will 
make a noise in the world, and a great name for herself in 
the profession.'" 

Tremendous acclamations. 

" ' She sha'n't do it,' said Mr. Bradshaw, waving his um- 
brella. You saw the umbrella, ladies and gentlemen." 

Screams of laughter. 

" And so Mr. Bradshaw and his umbrella triumphed for a 
time . I say for a time . but the young lady was rescued. By 
whom ? By none other than Mr. Jason Burgoyne, the cele- 
brated dramatist, who chanced to be passing in his carriage 
at the moment that this man Bradshaw was dragging the poor 
defenceless young lady away in a street cab. Yes, in a four- 
wheeled street cab," 



250 A London Romance. 

Profound sensation. 

" Ladies and gentlemen, after what I have said, I know I 
need not ask for your forbearance, should the young lady's 
very natural agitation, after such an unusual outrage, some- 
what impair her performance of the other act of our comedy. 
She will, I know, do her best through love of a profession in 
which her beauty, grace, and talent hold forth such bright 
promises for the future. Ladies and gentlemen, I beg to 
apologise for trespassing upon your time." 

There never yet was speech better calculated to enlist an 
audience's sympathy. A round of applause and a " call for 
the heroine of the evening succeeded. She was led on by 
Draper amidst general acclamation. 

There was a call from some unseen quarter for William 
Bradshaw, and to this Draper replied : 

" I think I am authorised to state, ladies and gentlemen, 
that Mr. Bradshaw has run away, umbrella and all. He 
will, however, by particular desire, make his re-appearance 
upon sortie future occasion, and dance a hornpipe." 

The curtain now very shortly drew up upon the inter- 
rupted scene in the comedy, the mud having been wiped off 
the white satin as neatly as could be ; and the act was brought 
to a triumphant conclusion. Poor Ann did certainly exert 
herself to the utmost, and the performance was a creditable 
one : in some parts, really artistic and clever. 

When at last the piece was concluded, there were calls 
for author and actors. Few theatrical triumphs could have 
been more complete ; and one wondered how so successful 
an affair could be disposed of in so few words when the 
theatrical organs treated of it in their Saturday's impression. 

But how about William after his woeful discomfiture ? In 
what out-of-the-way hole-and-corner had he hidden his 
diminished head ? When Ann and her mother, and James 
Jarman, reached home about halkpast one o'clock in the 
morning, they found William waiting for them in the parlour. 
He was sitting bold upright clutching his umbrella. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

fHEY all came to a standstill at sight of the visitor. 
James was the first to speak. He instinctively 
knew that this was his cousin. 
" Why are you here ? " he asked. " What do you 
mean by your conduct of this evening ? You must not act 
in such a way again, or we must treat you like a ruffian or 
a lunatic.' - 

William blushed red, then turned white. 

" Who are you to question my conduct ? Ah, I suppose 
the rich cousin ? Well, I have nothing to say to you. I 
must speak to my aunt." 

" Oh, dear ! oh, dear, William ! I really wish you wouldn't," 
said Mrs. Whitaker. "I don't feel at all well. Do be 
reasonable. Wherever is the harm ? " 

" The harm ! The disgrace . the infamy, you mean. 
AVhere is it to end ? " 

"Your views are very violent," said James. "Even if 
you object to the stage as a profession, you must understand 
that Ann was only acting for amusement." 

Ann broke in, impatiently : 

" I will go on the stage as an actress if I like. Why 
should I not? I think I shall." 

"Oh, dear me, Ann," cried Mrs. Whitaker; "how can 
you go on so before your Cousin William, when you know 
he does not like it?" 

"He has no further claim upon me," said Ann. "All is 
pver between us." 

*' Yes ; I know that," said William, in a clogged tone. H T 



252 A London Romance. 

won't interfere again. I only came here to make quite sure 
that what you were doing was with your mother's consent. 
I cannot understand it ; but, if it is to be, so be it. I wash 
my hands of the affair from this moment." And he moved 
towards the door. 

Mrs. Whitaker, who, with a very miserable aspect, was 
sitting shivering before the fire, as near to it as she could 
get, here interposed : 

" Dear me, how sad all this is ! "When you know too that 
you have both been engaged to be married since you were 
little children. How can you, Ann, want to go on with your 
play-acting if William does not like it ? There, there, sit 
down all of you, and let's have a bit of supper." 

There was no supper to sit down to, for they had supped 
at the theatre itself, with champagne and speeches. Every 
one looked round at the old lady when she made this re- 
mark. She was nodding her head at the flames, and rub- 
bing one hand over the other dreamily. 

"Your mother is not well," said James. "We must not 
keep her up any later. I will call on you and talk this over, 
William. You had better go now." 

William went, and a few minutes later James fetched a 
doctor. 

Next day when the Reverend Mr. Bradshaw was seated 
at his desk jotting down notes for his Sunday's discourse, a 
stranger was announced. It was Mr. Harry Draper. 

" Mr. Bradshaw, I believe ? " 

" Yes. I have not the honour of knowing you" 

" My name is on that card. I will as briefly as possible 
explain the purport of my visit. You took a very strange 
part yesterday at an amateur performance at the Boudoir 
Theatre." 

" I took a part ? " 

" You understand me, I am sure. You interfered with 
a young lady in an unwarrantable and ungentlemanly 
manner. If you were not a clergyman I would horsewhip 
you for it." 

William started to his feet. 

Draper continued . 

" You need not call for assistance. There is no danger.'' 

William laughed harshly. 

" I am quite well aware of that. None at all. You mis- 



At an Amateur Theatre. 253 

took my motive. I wasn't going to ring the bell, I was 
going to knock you down." 

Draper, in a fury, raised his walking-cane. 

"Why, you cur," he cried, "if you threaten me I won't 
spare you after all. Take that." 

William took nothing, however, for he caught Draper by 
the wrist in an iron grip, and wrenched the stick away. The 
other closed with him in the most scientific fashion, but his 
science was as naught against his antagonist's strength. A 
desperate but brief struggle, and he was pinned, panting, to 
the wall. 

Then William said, in a voice which was but little 
agitated . 

"It is as well, perhaps, that I am a clergyman, as you 
say, or I might be tempted to throw you out of window." 

Draper raged furiously but impotently for awhile. At 
last, seeing how hopeless was the case, he mastered his rage. 

" You have got the best oi it so far. I've been ill lately, 
or you would not have come off so well. But for all that 
don't think you can pursue the conduct of yesterday night 
with impunity. There are other weapons besides fists. I 
am determined to protect that young lady, and I will." 

"What is the young lady to you?" 

" No matter. You have no right to ask. All relations 
between you have ceased." 

" She is still my cousin, you must remember, and I shall 
use my own discretion as regards my future acts. You will 
excuse me if I say that I hardly think you are the most de- 
sirable and discreet champion that she could have chosen." 

Draper, still at a great disadvantage, seemed to lose all 
his old power of sarcasm and irony. He could only bluster. 

" I give you fair warning, mind. It will be a dangerous 
game if you persist in it. You have a name and a position 
to lose, and cannot afford to be dragged into a scandal. 
The whole affair shall be made public, rely on that. Now, 
take my advice, and be quiet. Your interference is not 
wanted. Your good advice will be thrown away." 

" Read this," said William, and he handed the other a 
letter, which ran thus : . 

"My dear Nephew, 

" I have been thinking of what occurred last night, 
and have been very unhappy. Ann was wrong, and this 



254 -J London, Romance. 

must not go on as it is. My poor Samuel's dying wish was 
that you should be united. Come to me at once, I am very 
poorly. 

" Your affectionate aunt, 

"Sarah Whitaker." 

" Are you going ? " asked Draper. 

" Certainly." 

" Is it a battle between us, then?" 

William smiled, and resumed his place at the table ; and 
Don Caesar, not quite so Don Caesarlike us usual, took his 
departure. He went home in a fury, and had some notion 
of sending Bradshaw a challenge. 

" The low, canting beggar would not accept if I did. But 
he sha'n't triumph over me for very long, although his muscle 
is a little harder than mine." 

While these thoughts were passing through his brain, our 
hero took up his dumb bells and began to practice. He 
surely never meant to go into training, and have a regular 
set-to with his reverend rival. No, he was not as foolish as 
all that. He had a scheme in his head . a great scheme, by 
which was to be obtained a grand dramatic vengeance. 





CHAPTER IX. 

RS. WHITAKER was very ill indeed. She had 
caught a fresh cold on the top of the old one. 

" Those wretched theatricals," she said. " Ah, 
Ann ! I wish we had never had the misfortune 
to go to such a place. It's a judgment . I'm sure its a judg- 
ment." 

She sat up in bed, and with a painful effort wrote the 
letter just now reported, to William Bradshaw; and while 
she waited for his coming she again and again referred to 
the subject. 

" You must make up your quarrel, Ann. It is my wish 
. my dying wish . for I feel sure I am not long for this 
world. I must see you once more reconciled, and then I 
shall die happy." 

Ann made no reply. It was useless to argue the point 
with the old lady, upon whom words had no effect. Should 
she seek James, and ask his advice ? Unfortunately he had 
gone out. He had been out all day. 

William called in the afternoon, and Ann was present at 
an interview between him and her mother. Mrs. Whitaker 
treated it as a matter of course that a reconciliation must 
take place. William had some good advice to give. He 
regretted that Ann should be so hasty . so wayward. But 
she had a good heart. She would see upon reflection that 
her conduct had been very improper. 

Ann stood by silently. She might have been acquiescing 
in the arrangement. She was, instead, in a fury. 

" The poor child will be homeless and friendless when I 



256 A London Romance. 

die," said Mrs. Whitaker. " What little money remains will 
scarcely support her, and how can she live unprotected ? 
No, I must see her married, and then my mind will be at 
rest." 

When William had gone, Ann burst into a fit of pas- 
sionate tears. 

" How can you, mamma, shame and humiliate me in this 
way ! If I had to beg my bread in the streets, I would 
rather do so than be dependent upon him. I hate him, 
mamma, and I love some one else." 

" Oh, how you talk ! What a strange girl you are ! I'm 
sure I don't understand you." 

She did not, indeed, poor lady, for her wits were wander- 
ing. 

That night, instead of James's return, a letter came from 
him, saying that he was obliged to be away upon some im- 
portant business. He might be absent a couple of days. 
Ann was in great distress. Here, at the moment when she 
most wanted his help, her friend and adviser was absent. 
To whom could she apply ? 

While she was still hesitating, next day William wrote to 
her. It was a long letter, very carefully worded, and very 
precisely written, with not an i undotted or a / uncrossed. 
It said that for his part he was willing to overlook the past, 
and that he should be hopeful of the future, if she but gave 
him her assurance that as soon as the necessary arrange- 
ments could be made, she would dissociate herself entirely 
from all recently-formed friendships. 

He had, he reminded her, yet a way to make in the world. 
He occupied a position where many, many thousands of 
eyes were fixed upon him ; there must not be the faintest 
breath of scandal attached to the woman whom he was to 
make his wife. It was true that several advantageous unions 
were open to him did he choose to contract a matrimonial 
alliance with one of certain members of his congregation ; 
but through life he had never broken his word or departed 
from his promise. He had promised his aunt that he would 
marry Ann, and that promise he was now ready and willing 
to fulfil. 

Ann read all this through . eight closely-written pages 
. with a face which alternately flushed and paled. Then 
she tore the letter up into small pieces, placed the frag- 



At an Amateur Theatre. 



257 



ments in an envelope, and directed it to Mr. William Brad- 
shaw. 

The servant girl, who had unobserved seen the action, 
took the letter to the post with a chuckle. When she re- 
turned she found Ann dressed ready to go out. 

" I sha'n't be long," she said ; and she took a cab to the 
Temple. 




i7 



VI. 



IN PARADISE AND ELSEWHERE. 



CHAPTER I. 




ilHINGS lately had been going very badly indeed 
with the struggling shopkeepers of Straggleton 
New Town. The hostelry of the " Four Winds " 
had changed hands, the late landlord retiring to 
Whitecross-street. Only a little while ago he had been 
sanguine as to the success of his new billiard-room . for at 
first there had been a good deal of custom for it. 

Driven to desperation, the shopkeepers had come there 
to drown their sorrows in the bowl, and in a friendly way 
had taken each other's lives at pool over his green baize 
table. But though things looked promising, the proprietor 
of the house lost patience, and wanted his rent. The 
billiard-table was seized in default. 

So very bad a look-out was there from a commercial point 
of view in Straggleton New Town, that even the most 
sanguine building societies gave up the idea of new streets 
in despair, and endeavoured to dispose of their skeletons 
at a loss. On all sides therefore were to be seen the crum- 
bling frameworks of houses that were never to be. A high 
wind arose and blew a lot of them down. 

Such streets and houses as had been finished before all 
hope of the new town had died out, grew somehow prema- 
turely aged. The gas-works and other works, all of a smoky 
nature, blackened the face of nature round about, so that 
the very buds in spring-time were dirty and soiled. The 
only things indeed that flourished in this unhappy neighbour- 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 259 

hood were babies. There must have been something in the 
air besides the factory smoke, for not only did they thrive 
upon production, but they were produced in unreasonably 
large numbers, so that it seemed that every house had its 
twins, and those twins were always squalling. 

The fathers of this numerous progeny were mostly in a 
bad way as regarded funds. In a time of full work, and 
much overtime they saved nothing. The low beer-houses 
in those parts, fitted up with roughly made deal tables un- 
painted, were full of drunken mechanics every night . work- 
ing men they called themselves . proud of their dirty fists 
and the honest perspiration of their brows. 

Then came a strike, during which the brokers were very 
busy, and the loan-offices . there were two already, both 
doing a roaring trade. showed their teeth at many a fire- 
side. The " United Vultures," and the " Judas Iscariot 
Friendly Discount," were naturally to be expected in such 
a locality. Their advertisements were shown in the beer 
shop windows . " Loans from ^5 to ^500,'' and all the 
rest of the time-honoured story. 

The mothers, too, were at the public-house as often as 
their liege lords. On a Saturday night there were always 
several fights, and the police-station had many inmates on a 
Sunday. 

A squalid, miserable neighbourhood, growing daily more 
hopeless as its outer aspect grew blacker. The poor, half- 
starved, struggling population fighting its grim fights with 
want, selfishly heedless of any other sorrow but its own. 
How many millions are there of such strugglers in as hope- 
less case ! We find them in every young suburb, with the 
same sad faces and eager looks, fighting the same fight, . 
unhappy creatures whose births and deaths are duly noted 
in volumes kept for that purpose ; and when the weary play 
shall be played out, whose good and bad actions will be 
weighed as carefully no doubt as those of their more fortu- 
nate brethren. Of" whom the Recording Angel keeps as 
accurate an account. 

And how fared Frank Pickering all this while ? After so 
promising a start, had his progress been as encouraging ? . 
had energy and perseverance secured to him a well-merited 
success ? No, no, no ! . by no means. 

Frank Pickering's shop stood where it did ; but it was no 
longer a post-office. There were no longer any pianos for 
17 . 2 



260 A London Romance. 

hire ; the stock of stationery had grown scanty ; some of 
those well . too well . selected works of fiction with which 
he had started a year ago, yet hung upon the shopkeeper's 
hands unsold . it had been found advisable to "go in " in- 
stead for cheap newspapers, the broadsheets of crime, the 
pictorial police news, and the most blood-thirsty of the 
penny serials. 

The book-binding branch of business had collapsed. 
Something sickly in the sweet-stuff way was carried on ; 
fireworks were vended ; as far as one box of cigars and three 
dummies went, the tobacco trade might be said to exist. 

But there was .a too evident blight upon the whole affair. 
The very flies seemed to know it ; they settled down upon 
the dead-Stock as vultures do upon the carcass of a desert 
camel. There were sad and solemn echoes in the bare shop 
and the empty house above. The melancholy tink-a-tink of 
the shop-door bell called forth a grim-faced female from the 
back premises, who looked as though she were attending 
her own funeral, or the funeral of the dead-stock. 

As a rule, at this mausoleum of unlikely ventures they 
were out of everything anybody wanted. Intending cus- 
tomers fled precipitately, refusing all offers of having what 
they had asked for sent next day from town. They could 
procure what they wanted twenty yards oft at another shop. 

But how was this ? Only a year had passed away since 
that extremely energetic young shopkeeper, Frank Pickering, 
leased the premises. What had become of him ? who was 
the grim-faced female ? The grim-faced was no relation of 
his. Frank Pickering was far away. Over the shop door 
his name had been painted out ; the name of Walker filled 
its place. Unhappy Walker ! he or she . for Walker might 
have been the grim one . had come to fight and fall upon 
the battle-field where the fallen Frank had found his level 
previously, for Frank had failed too . very miserably. 

The numberless houses of the nameless street were 
numbered now ; the street was named ; it was called a road 
. . Great Something Road, only there was no Little Some- 
thing Road to contrast with its greatness. And it led no- 
where. The brick-field, now deserted, was yet unbuilt on. 
A new church was talked of, and would be erected directly 
the funds were found ; but the subscriptions hitherto had 
been small. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 261 

The corner house, where the Whitakers had lived, was 
now occupied by another family, who let lodgings m a whole- 
sale way, or wanted to, and had cards of "Apartments 
Furnished " in wellnigh every window. Mrs. Whitaker was 
dead, and nobody knew what had become of her daughter 
or of the dark gentleman with the beard from foreign parts. 

A person enquiring after them six months after they went 
away . a person who had been a member of Mr. Bradshaw's 
congregation . enquiring out of curiosity . could find no 
trace of the name of Whitaker in the neighbourhood. There 
seemed to have been a terrible panic in the commercial 
circles, and almost every shop had changed hands. 

" They must have been before my time," was the general 
answer. 

One, however, hesitated. "Whitaker . Whitaker," he 
said, " was that the name of them as bolted from No. 2 in 
the terrace ? " 

" It was either Whitaker or Wilkinson," said this person's 
wife. 

The questioner never got nearer to a solution of the dif- 
ficulty. 

The way Frank Pickering made the acquaintance of 
Harry Draper, Esq., was this : . Draper came in one night 
for a sheet of paper and an envelope. He wanted to write 
a note, for which he also wanted a bearer. An idle boy 
being at that moment standing outside the shop-door, Draper 
called to him, and bade him carry the letter to its address. 

The fact of the idle boy being Pickering's property, how- 
ever, necessitated the asking of Pickering's permission, and 
this being graciously granted, it naturally came about that 
Draper waited for the answer in Pickering's shop. 

While thus waiting, a conversation took place between 
them. It appeared that Pickering was to a certain extent 
acquainted 'with the person to whom the letter had been 
written ; the person's mother visited there. Thus Pickering 
was of necessity taken into Draper's confidence . at first, 
somewhat to that gentleman's disgust ; afterwards, because 
he was a willing and useful person, and existing .circum- 
stances required the employment of secret agents, and 
much mystery and machination. 

As business was in a flat and unprofitable condition, 
Frank had a good deal of spare time upon his hands, and 
as he had also motives of revenge to prompt him ? he lent his 



262 A London Romance. 

aid willingly to what he thought neither Mrs. Whitaker nor 
" that mean humbug, Jarman," would approve of. 

We find then that Jarman was a mean humbug . at any 
rate in his old friend Frank's opinion. Now, how was this ? 
You may remember that day. when James renewed Frank's 
acquaintance, the former made some proposition regarding 
funds to be found for a likely spec. Frank's conclusions as 
to Jarman's meanness arose out of this circumstance. 

Frank had found a spec . several specs, all of which he 
was prepared to prove were extremely likely ones. There 
was but one absolute necessity to ensure the brilliant success 
of any of them, and that was a rush on the part of the public. 
Failing a rush of the public . of which James in his pig- 
headed way seemed doubtful . there was just a faint proba- 
bility that a good deal of money might be dropped. 

"But everything is a risk," said Frank. 

''So it is," said James. 

And then the conversation began to flag. 

Undoubtedly the finest investment for James's money 
proposed was that it should be lent to Frank to do what he 
liked with in his business. The safety of this method was 
so great, the security offered so desirable . strictly personal, 
or if James liked it better, a friendly bill of sale over the 
goods at three times their value. By either of these methods, 
as Jarman could plainly see, he would avoid all trouble and 
anxiety. 

Somehow, though, Jarman would not look at things in a 
proper light. 

" I don't see how the money will help you," he said, after 
glancing over Pickering's books. 

" Don't see how it will help me ? " 

" No. This neighbourhood's worth nothing for trade. 
It seems to me like a quicksand to you unlucky shop- 
keepers." 

" Yes, yes, that's true enough," cried Frank, catching 
readily at the notion ; " a fresh start is what we want . a 
fresh start in a fair field. Something on a large scale." 

"What?" asked James. 

When many hours had at different times been passed 
in consultations and negociations upon this subject, Frank 
began to despair of ever getting hold of the money, and 
then he lost patience and grew very angry. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 263 

" I was a fool to expect anything else ; but he surely 
ought to give me something for all the precious time he has 
made me waste. Not he ! I sha'n't get a penny piece." 

" It's very unkind of him," said Mrs. Pickering. 

" Never mind ; I shall do without his help, I dare say. 
But I must say one thing." 

"Well, dear?" 

" It was deuced bad luck that that fellow should have 
stepped into my shoes in the way he did, and gone and 
made a fortune in Jamaica, while I have been working my 
heart out for nothing in this brute of a country." 

" So it was," said Mrs. Pickering, in all good faith. 

Awhile after another idea occurred to the unhappy shop- 
keeper, which to some extent lightened his spirits. 

" I've one thing to thank him for. He helped me to 
break off that absurd engagement with that girl of" the Hick- 
sons." 

Mrs. Pickering, who could not quite follow this part of 
the argument, asked for an explanation. 

" If I had gone away then, ten to one I should have re- 
turned before the year was over and married her. As it 
was, happily, things went otherwise." 

He ignored altogether the part that the Captain O'Grady 
had taken in marrying Evelina, or the part that Evelina had 
taken in throwing Frank off entirely of her own free will. 
Half a century ago Johnson prosecuted Jackson for kicking 
him publicly. We read the case to-day in an old newspaper 
and five minutes afterwards are quite hazy as to whether 
Jackson were prosecutor or defendant. What does it matter 
now to anybody but Johnson's or Jackson's descendants, 
and perhaps not much to them ? 

There came a time when the affairs at the fancy reposi- 
tory got into a very desperate state, and then Jarman, 
humbly solicited, assisted with a loan of twenty pounds. 
But other loans had previously been effected, notably with 
the Judas Iscariot and United Vultures, and then followed 
writs, judgments, and executions, and other legal unpleasant- 
ness. 

Harry Draper was appealed to among others. 

" What do you propose doing," he asked, smoking his 
cigar while he spoke, " when you've smashed up ? " 

" What I can, I suppose," said Pickering glumly. 



264 A London Romance. 

" Open another shop, and go another cropper ? " 

" I don't know." 

" If you were instead to get some settled salary, would 
not that be better? A clerkship in some government 
office?" 

"There's not much scope for ambition there," said 
Pickering in an injured tone, as though he had been, say 
Napoleon the Third, and had been offered the governorship 
of Jersey. 

" But then it's a certainty." 

" Have you any influence ? " 

" A little. I happen, by the greatest chance, at this 
moment to know of something. The salary is not large, but 
the work is light. You might employ yourself to advantage 
after office-hours. I need not, to a man of your talents, Mr. 
Pickering, point out the way. What say you, now ? and if 
a friendly loan of twenty-five pounds is of any service to you, 
you can pay me back any time when you're able." 

"What is the place?" 

"It is in a registrar's office. A registrar of births and 
deaths and . and marriages." 



CHAPTER II. 




AR away from Straggleton New Town and its 
shabby gentility, beneath a bright blue sky, facing 
the open sea, from which the salt breezes blew 
into its open windows on glorious summer days, 
stood Number One Paradise Row. 

The Paradise Row aforesaid was at a little bathing-place 
east of London, which the reader may christen for herself, 
Whilkington-super-Mare, Shingleshore, Sandstone, or by 
any other fanciful appellation, as it is the custom of modern 
writers to name their localities . as perhaps the present 
writer would do also on this occasion, only all the names he 
can think of have been used before. 

Has not, for that matter, a sea-side town been described 
over and over again . humorously, pathetically, and in the 
guide-book style? Yet if it has, there seems, somehow, 
always a sort of freshness and sea flavour about each 
description. It is what we call the winter season when 
these lines are being written. The leaves have fallen. A 
muggy, wet day, dull and sunless. It requires all one's 
powers of memory to recall the dead-and-gone summer, 
when the sun shone and the sea rolled in at our feet upon 
the sands. 

Ah, how blissful was existence at What's-it's-name-super- 
Mare, during love's young dream . when the world was 
fresh and warm . when there was not the least possible 
doubt upon earth that everything would go on thus gaily 
ever more . that love would grow stronger the longer it 
lived, and that everybody was to be happy ever afterwards 
by special con vt act with Providence. 



266 A London Romance. 

In those delightful days, surely, the face of nature showed 
more lovely than it ever did before or since. The women 
were much more beautiful, and the men more handsome ; 
and the fashions prettier and more becoming. How the 
glorious old sea rolled in too, with his frothy crown ! and 
how the coy nymphs fled at his approach . not fast enough, 
however; for he always caught them . the boisterous old 
fellow . in his wet embrace, and smothered and tumbled 
them mid screams and scrambles. 

How white the houses looked with the glare upon them ! 
and how green the blinds ! How the children laboured at 
their everlasting excavations on the sand ! and what strange 
fatality awaited their tubs and spades ! The rascals at the 
shops must have been in league together, and hired sharp- 
eyed knaves to lie in wait for the toys at all seasons. 

How the donkeys galloped ! . poor donkeys ! they would 
much rather have walked, or better far, stood still and eaten 
their dinners. How the heavy maidens on the donkeys' 
backs squealed with fear, and yet liked it ! How the young 
ladies with literary tastes persevered, to the exclusion of all 
other cares and objects in life, in their novel reading ! How 
those clever at their needle stitched ! How the rest flirted ! 
How all their skirts and ringlets, and wet back hair, fell in 
turns into the power of the raging wind, which ravaged the 
little town on rough days from end to end, carrying away 
after every visit a large spoil in hats, caps, and the like 
articles. 

These rough days, but more especially wet days, were 
fatal to What's-its-name's hopes of keeping its visitors; for 
at the first threat of foul weather coming, boxes were 
packed and trunks corded, and lodgings deserted even at a 
sacrifice; and the up-trains filled to overflowing. But the 
new married couple at Number One cared not the value of 
a brass farthing what weather it was ; for the sun of love 
was shining : and in their eyes all Nature wore a joyous 
aspect, and smiled through her tears . that is to say, the 
rain. 

Some women are many men's idols, and some have but 
one love to boast of. Perhaps the women of one love are 
loved the more passionately. Then again, it is a question 
whether it is not best for a loving woman to be only half 
loved, than to be loved desperately and only half appreciate 
it. Did the husband love the wife in this particular case as 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 267 

much as she loved him? The landlady scarcely thought it 
possible. 

" She's a sweet creature is Mrs. Draper," the landlady 
said. " And, oh ! how she do doat upon that good gentle- 
man of hers ! It makes me quite young again to see 'em." 

She in her time had doated upon her good gentleman . 
doated still just a little ; but his was not a responsive nature. 
That was the landlady's good gentleman sitting on the iron 
railings opposite, with his back to the sea, smoking a pipe 
and staring his wife's lodgers out of countenance . an ugly 
blot of man, dropped as it were right in the centre of a pretty 
picture. That was Mr. Starkey. 

Oh, those were such happy days spent in the airy draw- 
ing-room of Number One ! Such a bright young face peeped 
out from among the flowers on the balcony ! Such merry 
laughter echoed at all times from the open window ! The 
male passers-by envied Draper not a little. The females 
looked on critically : with some disapproval even, and 
suspiciously. 

There was a certain style and air about the young bride 
which was not thoroughly approved of by the other lady 
visitors at this little watering-place. There were large 
numbers of unmarried ladies who tossed their heads and 
sniffed the air at her approach. 

" An actress, or something of that sort," they said ; and 
one of the other lodgers one day asked Mrs. Starkey the 
landlady whether she was quite sure the persons up stairs 
were respectable. 

Nobody could have behaved more like a gentleman than 
Mr. Draper. Even the landlord, who did not usually take 
a hopeful view of things, owned to this. He was a perfect 
gentleman, and parted with his money without a murmur; 
paid all that was asked of him, and asked no questions in 
return. 

" Poor girl ! " the landlady said one day to her husband. 
" I hope it is all right, for her sake. How she loves him ! 
He'd be a bad lot if he treated her unkindly." 

"Ah!" said Mr. Starkey. 

He was not sentimental, nor was he very curious upon 
the subject, not exactly seeing what more he was to make 
by the business even if he found out whether the young 
couple up stairs were all they should be, or the contrary. 



268 A London Romance. 

Being one day, however, by accident, near the drawing-room 
door without his boots, he was not above taking advantage 
of the circumstance, and applied his ear to the keyhole. 
Then he heard this : . 

" My darling Harry, how happy you have made me ! I 
was not worthy of being your wife. What could you have 
seen in me ? I often ask myself. But you did see something. 
Do you know, Sir, it is three months this very day since we 
were joined together in holy matrimony at that funny old 
registrar's office ? " 

" How do you know the time so exactly ? You have been 
looking at the certificate ? " 

" Oh no, I haven't. There was no occasion. Do you 
suppose I shall ever forget the date ? " 

"What made you think it wasn't right?" the landlord 
asked his wife half-an-hour later. 

"It was not me thought it. Some one said so.'' 

" They were fools. It's all right enough." 

" So I said. At any rate, there's the ring all right and 
regular." 

" And the certificate." 

" Have you seen it? " 

" No. I'll have a try, though, if I get a chance.' 

The landlady was not kinder or more attentive after this 
discovery. It would have been difficult for her to be so. 
She had taken an immense liking to the young bride ; and 
gave her and her husband much more than their share of 
the attendance . leaving the other lodgers to shift for them- 
selves. 

But she was very happy indeed to know that it was " all 
right," as her husband had termed it. 

"Poor dear!" she said. "It's a cruel world . a cruel, 
hard world, for anything of that sort. It's very odd, though, 
I don't quite believe in her good gentleman. Even now I 
don't half like him, for all his fine words and handsome 
face." 

It was rather amusing how each of these couples . Mr. 
and Mrs. Draper, and Mr. and Mrs. Starkey . should re- 
spectively have objected to the male on the other side. Mr, 
and Mrs. Draper objected very much to Mr, Starkey, 

Ons day Mrs. Draper said. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 269 

" What trade is your husband ? " 

" He isn't in trade, Ma'am," said Mrs. Starkey, with some 
hesitation. 

" Not in trade ! Doesn't he do anything ? " 

"Oh, lots of things, Ma'am, in the way of help." 

" Is he helping now ? " asked Draper, with a smile, point- 
ing out of window as he spoke to Mr. Starkey's figure, as 
usual perched upon the rails in front. 

Mrs. Starkey coloured, and was a little angry. 

" We can't always be hard at it, Sir," she said. 

" You are though, generally." 

"Well, that's because it's my way, Sir. I like it." 

" He doesn't, I suppose." 

" He has a right to do what he chooses, Sir, I suppose, if 
he can get money enough . honestly," said the landlady ; 
and flounced out of the room with the breakfast things. 

Even a casual observer might have been inclined to think 
that Mr. Starkey was not of a very industrious turn ; he was 
so very often seated smoking on the railings before men- 
tioned, or basking in the sun on the pier, or drinking at the 
bars of the several public-houses. 

He was currently reported to be an educated man. He 
had been something in the commercial way ; and he had 
travelled. He was looked upon with some respect at the 
public-houses, where he was a good customer. He was of 
a cynical turn, and discussed local topics contemptuously. 
He was understood to be Liberal in his politics. His motto 
generally was, Down with everything . more particularly 
church-rates ! 

He wanted to know what was the use of a pack of 
parsons ! Why were they to be fed and pampered ? Who 
fed and pampered him . Starkey ? 

One day some one said . 

"Why, the missis, don't she? She's al'ays a-toiling, and 
a-slaving, anyhow; and if it aint for you, Mr. S., who is it 
for ? " 

Besides Down with the parsons ! Mr. Starkey's motto was 
also Down with all Cockneys ! It is true that he had once 
been a Cockney himself, and had come from London and 
settled down permanently upon the little watering-place. 
He did not particularly object to resident Cockneys. It 
was the visitors . the excursionists . the tag, rag and bob- 
tail, as he called them, coming down in a mob, turning every- 



270 A London Romance. 

thing topsy-turvy; putting folks out of their way ; giving all 
sorts of trouble for precious little profit. 

His listeners shared these sentiments heartily. The 
husbands of all the landladies, to a man, were of Mr. 
Starkey's way of thinking; and objected, with all their 
might and main, to the people out of whom they lived. 

All of them . hotel-keepers, cab-drivers, boatmen, bath- 
ing-machine proprietors . seemed quite agreed upon this 
point. They would be much better without the Cockneys. 
For instance, see how nice and quiet it was in the winter- 
time, when the inhabitants of the town and the north-east 
wind had it all to themselves ! 

The wives, who stopped at home and worked the flesh 
off their bones, as the saying is, did not altogether share in 
this opinion, for they did not see how they could get on if 
there were no season, during which the money for the winter- 
time could be earned and put away. 

But yet in the dead time only was there a chance of rest 
and recreation. The women-kind every now and then, after 
the season was over, went out for walks, by way of recrea- 
tion, and looked at the wonderful sea . wonderful because it 
could form an attraction to draw Cockneys by the thousand 
down to look at it . more wonderful still, because the Cock- 
neys' chief delight seemed to be to wash themselves in it. 

What a notion, the residents thought, " to wash out of 
doors in cold salt water, and dress and undress in an un- 
comfortable, wet box upon wheels, and pay money for the 
privilege of so doing ! " 

" It's a hard life," Mr. Starkey would say sometimes, after 
spending a long summer's day smoking his pipe and watch- 
ing the tide in and out. ' It's a sad thing to have to work 
when everyone else around is idling, and lounging, and 
dreaming away the busy hours. I shall be glad when we've 
put by enough to chuck the whole thing up, and settle down 
and rest our poor bones." 

He was resting his poor bones at the time upon the iron 
railings. 

" Look at those beggars now in our first floor ! That gal 
and her fellow ! What are they, I should like to know, that 
they should roll in the lap of luxury, while I am content to 
pick up the crumbs that fall from their table ? " 

''Good big crumbs some of 'em, aint they, Mr. S. ?" 
asked the friend in whom he was at the time confiding. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 271 

"Perhaps so," replied Stark ey, a little angrily; "but 
they're not large enough either. Never mind : I'll set my 
claws in a big swag some of these days, I hope. I hate 
this humdrum, hand-to-mouth work, I tell you. I want to 
make my money a little quicker." 

" That's what most of us want," said his friend. 

Mr. Starkey said no more, but scowled ominously. His 
friend could not help thinking it would not have been quite 
safe at this moment for a weaker man, carrying a good round 
sum of money, to have met Mr. Starkey in a dark and lonely 
lane. 




CHAPTER III 




pOW happy and careless that young girl was ! Her 
book lay open on its face, thrown down and left 
where she had been reading it. The flowers she 
had meant to put into water were lying faded 
by the empty glass. The piano stood open. Her hat lay on 
the dinner-table : her shawl and scarf . one on the sofa, the 
other on the back of a chair. 

That morning she had intended to get up early . to 
practise a good hour at her music . to finish reading that 
first volume, for which they had already asked her twice at 
the library . to do a score of things all wanting doing 
badly : but here was the day three-parts over, and nothing 
done at all. 

Oh, days of early love ! If there were forty-eight hours 
in each of you, and one hundred and twenty minutes in 
every hour, would there be time enough ? Of course there 
would not. There never had been such happy days as 
these in Ann's wildest imaginings. Such dreamy days of 
endless billing-and-cooing, beyond which, as it seemed to 
her, there was no happiness to wish for. 

What a delightful place this little watering-place appeared 
in her eyes ! She could almost fancy sometimes that the 
whole thing was a sort of play played there for her amuse- 
ment ! There were the gaily dressed young ladies . the 
band . the crowd. The sea itself, perhaps, specially 
engaged to roll and tumble beneath the warm sun ! The 
music of that time ever after haunted her memory, and 
brought back to her, when she heard it, glimpses of the old 
dreamland from which the sunlight had faded, leaving all 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 273 

dull and bleak. Then there came quite vividly before 
her eyes, the fresh white houses . the green blinds . the 
blue sky . the restless sea . the crowded street . the hum of 
voices which Death had hushed. 

He must have loved her at that time, she thought. He 
used to call her pretty; and so indeed in her youth and 
happiness she was ; although it was by no means the 
beauty of a Keepsake heroine. At that remote period of 
English history were worn neat linen collars and cuffs, and 
black-and-white striped dresses, and black leather belts with 
big buckles. Leather boots too were in vogue, with heels 
two inches high at least. It was also the custom to wear 
petticoats elaborately embroidered, frilled, and tucked. 

Crinolines had quite gone out of fashion in civilised 
circles, but were adhered to loyally by the humbler orders, 
who did not think it looked respectable to be without 
them. Those who knew what they were about wore their 
frocks cut with gored skirts, and with just room enough to 
sit down in them with a few creases. 

The hair was worn piled up upon the crown, and pulled 
down over the forehead, sometimes in little fluffy curls, 
sometimes straight, with trimly-cut ends ; the latter style 
being known as the " Jack Sheppard." If possible, it was 
worn golden. At any rate, it was very little pomatumed, 
and worn as light-coloured as could be without the use 
of dye. 

The ladies, just at this period, we see . the monstrous 
whalebone and wickerwork epoch at an end . were'not quite 
so overflowing and boisterously aggressive in the matter of 
petticoat. This was a slim and supple period, in which the 
iron barriers that had kept the sexes apart had fallen down 
for awhile, and lovely woman seemed . always, be it under- 
stoodj, consistently with the strictest rules of propriety . 
generally more cuddleable. 

How busy she was, too, this Ann of ours, although she 
did nothing whatever. It was her duty to make the tea in 
the morning, and she never by any chance was in time to 
do it. And then the pouring out ; what a process was that ! 
It somehow happened . Mrs. Starkey must have done it ©n 
purpose . that everything was always on the other side of 
the table, and when she was obliged to reach over Harry 
to get the articles she required, he used to hold her there 
in a half-flying attitude, like a fairy alighting, and kiss her. 
18 



274 A London Romance. 

During all the length of that memorable honeymoon, she 
did not half a dozen times remember to put sugar in his 
tea ; and when she did, she on those occasions sweetened 
it twice over. She used to lock up a variety of drawers 
and boxes, because Harry said it was the proper thing to 
do ; but then she used to leave the keys lying on the 
corner of the mantelpiece, or on the centre of the table, so 
that there was not much security in this mode of pro- 
ceeding. 

Mr. Starkey had a way of looking into the lodgers' 
rooms when they had gone out for a walk, and .sometimes 
he lost nothing by these little visits. There were odd 
cigars lying about, which had evidently been forgotten, and 
these, if hidden on the ground behind a sideboard, might 
be produced if enquiry were made, or taken away altogether 
if there was no enquiry, next day. The same with small 
coins and other trifles. 

Mr. Starkey found it well worth his while to go upon 
these little tours of inspection, and, indeed, to keep his 
eyes open, as he called it . meaning at keyholes and such- 
like places, against which he also applied his ear when he 
thought he was likely to hear anything to his advantage. 

Mrs. Starkey meanwhile worked away as hard as she 
could work, and found the days too short to rest in. But 
she never grumbled because Mr. Starkey took things easily. 
She had married a gentleman, she said, proudly, and she 
liked him to act as such. He acted as such accordingly. 
He took his rum-and-milk in a morning before breakfast. 
He ate heartily from the lodgers' tables. Then he took his 
lounge, and his cigar or pipe. Then his gin-and-bitters. 
Then his early dinner. He was not so selfish as to stand 
out for a late dinner, because he knew this would have 
been inconvenient for Mrs. Starkey; but he was very 
particular that everything should be served up nice and hot. 

Of an evening he mostly used the parlour at the 
"Admiral Benbow," where he was treated with respect. 
It was, "Good-evening, Mr. Starkey. How do you find 
yourself by this time, Sir ? " and other courteous salutations 
greeted his entrance, to which he replied calmly and with 
dignity. 

Sometimes he took a little more than was good for him, 
and then some of the other gentlemen saw him home, sup- 
porting him by the way. Then Mrs. Starkey, who was 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 27$ 

sitting up for him watching anxiously, would open the door, 
and entreat him to come in quietly and go to bed without 
disturbing the lodgers. Occasionally he complied with a 
good grace, and proceeded as gently as his unsteady legs 
would allow to his sleeping apartment ; but sometimes he 
would assert his right, as a man and a Briton, to make what 
noise he thought fit in his own house, and he had been 
even known to challenge objecting lodgers to come forth and 
try the question by single combat. 

One day, when the happy couple had gone out upon the 
sands, Mr. Starkey accidentally looked into the apartment, 
and found that Ann had left her desk open. 

There was nobody by. It was an opportunity that really 
ought not to be thrown away. He took a chair and sat 
down. First he looked to see whether there was any 
money or trinkets stowed away in its compartments, but 
there was not. Instead he found a ragged little programme 
of a performance at the Boudoir Theatre, very carefully 
wrapped up in several folds of paper. 

Then he found some letters, which he read. They were 
mostly very short ones. 

" My darling . I am waiting ; can you come ? " 

" I am here, my own love ; can you come ? " 

" Do come, if only for a moment, dearest." 

" They're very loving, though they're uncommon short," 
said Mr. Starkey. "I should say by the turn of them, 
too, they're written by some one who didn't want to com- 
promise himself more than he could help. There's no 
signature." 

He looked them through again, and then returned them 
to the envelope from which he had taken them. 

" Dearest ! my own love ! my darling ! " He smiled 
grimly as he repeated the words. "They're as easy to spell 
as any other. There's a genuine sound about 'em, I sup- 
pose a woman thinks, when they're addressed to herself. 
How silly they sound though to a third person, or to a 
court full of third persons when they're read out by the 
counsel on the other side." 

There were several other papers of a private character . 
memoranda of events and payments, which Starkey de- 
signated ''bosh" after perusal; and then, wrapped up care- 
fully by itself, he found a large official-looking instrument . 



2 7 6 A London Romance. 

a copy of a marriage certificate between Harry Draper, 
bachelor, and Ann Whitaker, spinster. 

" Ah ! here," said Starkey, " are the celebrated lines. At 
a registrar's office. Witnesses, John Brown and Mary 
Squires. It would seem, then, from the paper, that the 
relatives of our young turtle doves were not present. Why 
was that, I wonder ? I suppose they did not approve." 

With this reflection he put away the certificate where he 
found it, and as he fancied he heard a footstep approach, 
beat a retreat. 




CHAPTER IV. 




R. STARKEY lit one of his lodger's cigars, and 
took a stroll along the esplanade. It was very- 
hot, and the parlour of the "Benbow" looked 
cool and shady. He dropped in for a glass of 
cold punch . it was the afternoon time . and finding he had 
the room to himself, lay down upon the sofa for a nap. 

The sofa stood in the shadiest corner of the room, and 
in front of it was a screen, pasted over with many pictures. 
The window was open, and there was, Mr. Starkey fancied, 
a slight draught. He was very susceptible of cold, for he 
had spent some years of his life, and considerably impaired 
his constitution, in one of the hottest parts of Jamaica. 
He therefore rose and pulled the screen more round him, 
and then dropped off to sleep. 

He had not been slumbering very long as it seemed to 
him, when the door of the parlour opened, and two persons 
entered. He recognised the voice of one of them at once. 

" Will this do?" said Harry Draper. "We're alone here. 
What on earth are you so mysterious about ? " 

" I couldn't speak before her," said another voice . one 
he did not know, but the reader has already heard tell of 
its owner . Tom Yolland. 

" Is it a secret ? " 

" That's for you to judge when I have told you. You are 
just simply a devilish lucky fellow, Draper. You always 
were, though. You were always confoundedly idle at every- 
thing, and yet always pulled it off. I'm one of the sort who 
are always hard at it, and hard at the wrong thing." 

" Well ! " 



278 A London Romance. 

"Well. You asked for a consulship some months ago, 
and you gave the thing up as hopeless because the appoint- 
ment did not come to you by return of post." 
" Of course I did. It ought to have come.'' 
"Well, it has come after a short delay. You've got what 
you asked for. I had it from a man in the Foreign Office. 
You'll receive the letter to-morrow or next day ; but I thought 
I'd like to tell you the good news myself, so I ran down to 
see you." 

" It was very good of you. Where is it for ? Did you 
hear ? " _ 

" The consulship ? It's for the place you wanted. I sup- 
pose about one of the best ports there is. With your con- 
nexions you will have the entree into the best society. You 
may make a brilliant marriage." 

" Yes, yes," Draper replied, impatiently. " Who the devil 
would have supposed that such a thing would have hap- 
pened after all this delay ? " 

" It's nothing to grumble at though, now it has come." 
" I don't know that. I think I shall refuse it." 
" Refuse it ! Never ! " 

"I have got other plans. I have made other engage- 
ments " 

" Come, Draper, be reasonable. I can understand what 
you mean, but I am sure she is too sensible to stand in your 
way if she cares anything about you. Between you and me, 
Draper, who know the world, do you believe these actresses 
have really any heart except for their profession ? She'll 
see things in the proper light." 

" You don't understand. She won't see it at all. It's not 
nearly as easy as you think." 

" She'd never want to go too. That would be too ab- 
surd. It would be impossible ; it would be known directly, 
and your position would be a barrier to all hope of 
advancement." 

" It's impossible ! " 
" That's what I say." 

"No, no; I mean it is impossible to leave her." 
"Why? Look here, Draper! One word. You're not 
really married." 

Draper answered promptly and decisively, " No. Cer- 
tainly not." 

" And yet you say ." 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 279 

" That it is impossible. Yes, because I love her." 

The door opened here, and some one entered. The two 

speakers rose and left the room, and Mr. Starkey sat up 

and rubbed his eyes. 

" What the deuce and all does that mean?" Mr. Starkey 

asked himself. 

That night, in the same parlour, Mr. Starkey introduced 
marriage as a topic. The marriage ceremonies of all countries 
were discussed at length. A gentleman present who had 
travelled a good deal had some strange stories of what was 
done in foreign parts. Mr. Starkey and two other gentlemen 
had been married in church, and they related their experi- 
ences. A Mr. Watkins who was of the company had been 
married at a registrar's. 

" What may you have to go through in that case, Sir, if 
it's not taking a liberty?" asked Starkey. 

Mr. Watkins was only too glad to give all the information 
in his power. 

" It's not a religious ceremony like that at church," said 
he ; " but you have to use a ring all the same. At least I 
don't think that matters much." 

" Perhaps nothing matters much ? " 

"Oh, yes. There are ceremonies to be observed, and 
very particular ones. For instance, the door must stand ajar 
while the marriage is going on, and there must be four per- 
sons present besides the happy pair." 

" But there are no prayers, are there ? " 

"There are very few words of any kind. The bridegroom 
says, repeating after the registrar, ' I give you this ring in 
token of my love and affection for you ; ' and the bride says 
also, repeating after the registrar, ' I receive it as such.' " 

" Does she say ' as such ? ' " 

" That depends who says it. I think it's generally ' as 
sich.' " 

" However, that is all she does say ? " 

" Every Word. The ceremony lasts about seven or eight 
minutes ; but when it is over they are irrevocably united, to 
be parted only by death or divorce . or the workhouse 
authorities." 

" I beg your pardon, Mr. Watkins," said Mr. Starkey, as 
they walked away together, Mr. Watkins smoking a cigar, 



280 A London Romance. 

which Mr. Starkey had given from his case, " I am most 
awfully curious to have a look at a certificate of a marriage 
before a registrar. Do you think now Mrs. Watkins would 
consider it a liberty if I asked to look at hers ? " 

" I don't see why she should, Mr. Starkey ; the more so 
as you are such a favourite. But come in with me now, and 
we'll ask her." 

Ten minutes afterwards Mr. Starkey had the certificate 
alluded to in his hands and was examining it carefully. To 
all appearance it was very much like the other certificate he 
had looked at that morning. There was a number . in this 
case 96 . and there was a page . page 48. He recollected 
there were number and page on the other one, and that in 
that case the page was 52. 

Both marriages had taken place in London, the other one 
about two months and this ten years ago. There were here 
two witnesses, as in the other case, but in this case one was 
the bride's mother, and the other the bridegroom's brother. 
Mr. Starkey handed back the document when he had men- 
tally noted these particulars, and presently strolled home- 
wards sucking at an unlighted cigar. 

He came to a sudden halt in front of his house and took 
his favourite seat upon the iron rails. The drawing-room 
was lighted up. Ann was seated reading. Draper was 
pacing to and fro. After a turn or two he came forward and 
leant over the balcony. Mr. Starkey smiled. 

" He's thinking it over, he is," said Draper's landlord to 
himself. " He don't half like it. Half like what, though ? 
What the deuce does it all mean ? Is there a marriage or 
isn't there ? And what does it matter to me which is the 
case ? Well, it matters just this much . H. Draper, Esquire ; 
it seems to me you're keeping the thing dark for some reason, 
and it's worth your while it should be kept dark for some 
reason. Now, in that case, you ought to pay for it. Oh no, 
my dear Sir, I'm not above bribing. Don't mention it, I 
beg. I'm a poor man, who can't afford to be either virtuous 
or wicked without he makes something by it. Shall I make 
anything by the business, I wonder? It's hard to say; but 
it's uncommonly interesting in a small way, and I've plenty 
of spare time on my hands ; so why shouldn't I go in for un- 
ravelling the mystery ? By Jove, I will, too ! I ought to 
go to town about my own law business ; I'll kill two birds 
with one stone." 




CHAPTER V 




jjHEN Mr. Starkey made his mind up to do a thing, 
he did it. Next day he went up to London, as 
he had determined he would over night, and he 
went straight to the registrar's office, and asked if 
he could buy a copy of his sister's marriage-certificate. 

" What is her husband's name ? " 

" Draper." 

" And your sister's maiden name ? " 

" Whitaker." 

" Do you know when they were married ? " 

"About two months ago." 

A search was made. " No one of that name has been 
married here during the last twelve months." 

Mr. Starkey was much astonished, but there must be 
some mistake. " Were there no Drapers ? " 

There was a William Draper married to Mary Ann 
Edwards, but no person of the name of Whitaker appeared 
upon the register. 

" It must have been at some other office." 

" Is there another office in this parish ? " 

" No." 

" I recollect one thing. It was on page 52." 

Several pages of that number for various recent periods 
were consulted. Hitherto a clerk had been looking ; now 
the registrar himself lent his assistance. 

" You do not recollect the date ? " 

" It was some time in June." 

The registrar whispered to his companion. 



282 A London Romance. 

"That would be page 52. It can't have been any 
blundering of that fellow Pickering's ? " 

" As he's gone, we can't ask him. But then, if it had been 
here, of course you would have checked the entry." 

"To be sure," said the registrar, and then he turned to 
Starkey. 

"You've made some mistake. It must have been in 
some other parish." 

Here then the enquiry terminated for the present, and 
Mr. Starkey returned home out of temper. 

" What the plague did I expect to find out? Why the 
dickens didn't I make sure which parish it was before I set 
out on this wild-goose chase ? " 

Once or twice during the journey he mentally repeated 
these questions, and felt very much disgusted. 

" I do believe I expected to find out there had been no 
such marriage at all. Weil, it seems as if that was what 
I have found out . that is, if I was right in the office. But 
how could that be ? the girl couldn't be deceived. There 
must have been a marriage, and Pickering . I wonder 
whether it's the same Pickering, the friend of that damned 
Jarman ? I'd like to have it in my power to settle accounts 
with both." 

This Starkey, you see, was, in a small way, quite a melo- 
dramatic villain . one of the sort with a life-long thirst for 
vengeance . only he was more like the villains of real life, 
and forgot his murderous purpose rather frequently. 

Next day some startling events took place, and on the 
whole Mr. Starkey was more astonished than gratified. 

Upon the sands at noon Draper met his friend Tom 
Yolland. 

" Hallo, Tom ! I thought you had gone by the last train 
over-night." 

" I meant to have done so ; but on second thoughts I 
stopped. I have seen her ! " 

" Her ! Who ? Ann ? She has gone to bathe. Do 
you mean you have spoken to her ? " 

"Yes." 

" What about ? You never have dared ? " 

" How you talk, Draper. Come now ; I know you better 
than you know yourself. Haven't you a thousand times ex* 
pressed your sentiments . haven't you over and over again 



/;/ Paradise and Ehtwhere. 283 

said no woman was worth being true to ? Sooner or later 
you would have grown weary and left her . why not now ? 
I need not repeat all I told you about your poor mother's 
law-suit. She will look to you for help now, instead of 
helping you. You must not let this golden opportunity 
pass by." 

"Yes; I know all that . I know all I have said, and I'm 
ashamed of myself. Tom Yolland, I thought I was a rake 
. a profligate of the first water ; I've always acted as though 
I were a villain, and I have this time acted like a greater 
villain than ever ; but I find I am a coward ; I daren't leave 
her." 

" What prevents you ? " 

" Nothing but that I am afraid. Did] you say you had 
spoken to her, Tom ? You don't mean that you have told 
her that. that " 

" I've told her you must leave her/' 

Draper drew a long breath. He was as white as a sheet, 
and shook somewhat. 

" What did she say? " he asked, in a low voice. 

" She consented." 

Mr. Starkey, finding the coast clear after long watching, 
went up stairs to his lodger's room upon one of his little 
tours of inspection. That careless little girl had left her 
keys lying upon the mantelpiece when she had gone out to 
bathe. Mr. Starkey looked through the bunch, selected one, 
and opened the desk. 

There was the certificate as he had last seen it. He took 
it out and looked at it long and carefully. The page was 
fifty-two, as he had thought, and he had hot made a 
mistake about the parish. What did it all mean ? Could 
the registrar and his clerk have overlooked the entry ? That 
was not probable. There must have been some trick per- 
petrated, and the girl was the victim. Harry Draper had 
spoken truly when he said there had been no marriage. 

And what was he, Starkey, to make by this discovery ? 
While he stood asking himself the question, the certificate in 
his hand, the door opened without warning, and Ann stood 
before him. 

But was it Ann ? Assuredly not the Ann of a couple of 
hours ago, who had gone out singing as light-hearted as a 
bird ; not the Ann he had seen so often smiling among thq 



284 A London Romance. 

flowers on the balcony . the prettiest and freshest flower of 
the whole nosegay ; not the Ann with the coquettish little 
airs and graces, the little pet words, pretty wheedling ways, 
soft pattings^and purrings . la petite chatte, as he had loved to 
call her. 

What Ann was this ? 

A woman several years older . dull-eyed, swollen and 
heavy . and with pallid cheeks, on which yet remained the 
traces of tears . with features which, in this brief time, 
seemed to have hardened. 

But it was the same Ann, of course. There was the 
pretty shawl, hanging carelessly, a little crooked, and un- 
fastened ; there was the dainty little hat, the looped-up 
skirt, the frilled petticoat, the high heeled boots ; but the 
old air was gone. The clothes seemed somehow as though 
they no longer fitted her. 

She started at sight of Starkey, uttered a low exclamation, 
sprang forward, and caught his hand in which the certificate 
fluttered. The rascal was too frightened to speak. 

" What are you doing here ? " she said. " Are you, too, 
one of his agents ? Has he sent you in to steal it and 
destroy it ? " 

Starkey recovered some of his courage on hearing no 
mention of police. 

" I was sent by no one. I want to be your friend, Ma'am, 
believe me." 

" My friend," she said, bitterly ; " such as I am now have 
no friends. There, you may steal that thing, if you choose ; 
you're welcome to it . it is only waste paper." 

She turned from him as she spoke, and throwing herself 
into an arm-chair near the window, buried her face in her 
hands. The flowers hid her from the street. Starkey's eyes 
wandered stealthily from the certificate he yet held to the 
slight form trembling there, and back again. She looked 
round in a moment with flashing eyes. 

"What do you want here?" she said; "why don't you 
go ? I suppose I have the right to order you to go ; this is 
my room yet . until he turns me out into the street." 

"Don't. don't talk like that, Ma'am," said Starkey; "it 
can't be as bad as that. Don't talk of turnings out ; he 
mustn't play these tricks without paying for them. Make 
me your friend, and I'll show you how he can be made to 
pay," 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 285 

" To pay ! " she cried ; " to pay for what ? No ; I 
wanted his love . nothing else. He has no money to waste 
on me. His friend has told me all . how his mother is 
badly off, how she will look to him for support, how " 

"Who was this Mary Squires whose name is written 
here?" Starkey asked, interrupting; "and the man? Who 
was present ? " 

"Nobody but the registrar, of course . Mr. Pickering." 

" But there are witnesses' names." 

"They were in the other room, I believe . I was told. 
.But you know well enough. I suppose they deceived me 
in everything ; I had no one to advise me ! I was mad ! 
It was a just punishment.'' 

" No, no : you must not look at it in that way. It is a 
more serious business, this, than you or he think for : 
it may go hard with him and his accomplices if it becomes 
public, and I for one shall not keep the secret." 

" What do you mean ? Upon whose part are you acting ? 
Did he not send you here ? " 

" No ; I am acting as your friend, I tell, you, and I mean 
that you shall have justice. He shall marry you in reality, 
and he shall pay me well to be silent, or " 

She hurried forward and endeavoured to possess herself 
of the paper ; but he was too quick for her, held it aloof, 
and presently thrust it into his pocket. 

" Give it me back ! " she cried, struggling with him ; " give 
it me back, or I will cry for help. You have no right to it : 
you shall not injure him." 

"You will injure him if you make any noise," he replied; 
" because I shall tell the whole truth at once. It's a trans- 
porting matter for your husband, I tell you. Now, be cool 
and reasonable. I can manage it yet, so that he marries 
you. If it is properly put to him, he dare not refuse-" 

She turned away and burst into tears. 

" Keep the paper," she said : " but you can do no harm, 
I am sure, unless I choose to speak, and they should tear 
my tongue out first. Marry him ! " she exclaimed, after a 
pause ; " how low do you think I have fallen ? What kind 
of pitiful creature do you take me for? I would rather die 
than marry him now ! There, leave me for a little while, if 
you please. I want to pack up a few things ; I am going 
away." 

" Going away I" he repeated. " Take my advice. don't do 



286 A London Romance. 

that. Have you seen him since his friend told you every- 
thing ? You must stop and see him." 

" See him ! " she said with a sort of shudder, and turned 
wearily away. 

Starkey left the room, and went thoughtfully down stairs. 

" I ought to make something out of this," he said to 
himself. 

She was left alone. How cold and desolate the room 
looked ! The sun at that moment had hidden itself be- 
hind a cloud ; the scene without was gray and grim ; the 
smooth sea rolled sluggishly in upon and licked the shore. 

There were the flowers she had loved. The little bird he 
had bought her sat silent in its cage, its eyes following her, 
as she fancied, mistrustfully. There, at the top of her desk, 
were his two or three love-letters she had treasured so care- 
fully, kissed so often. She took them up now, and lighting 
a match, burnt them to ashes . without tears, without anger, 
as she might have burnt any other commonplace scraps of 
paper, not these to which his burning words of love seemed 
to have given almost life. 

" My love is dead !" she said, in a low tone; and again 
and again repeated the phrase . " My love is dead ! It is 
all over ! I must go ! " 

Go where ? Here had been her home : she had been so 
happy here, so secure in the durability of his devotion . oh, 
how happy ! What had these two or three weeks been like ? 
A dream in a dream. a game of play : it had been a 
butterfly's life . a flower's life . and now she had served her 
turn, and had faded, and was left to die. 

She gathered together such few odds and ends as she 
treasured most, and packed them in a nonsensical little 
carpet bag, and took up her umbrella and went out as 
though for a stroll. There was all the wide world outside 
for her to stroll in. 

As she passed out of the room the sun burst forth again, 
and the little bird began to carol joyously ; the soft zephyr 
from without wafted towards her the perfume of the flowers. 

Then something within her breast seemed to labour pain- 
fully : was it her heart breaking, she thought ? Her eyes 
filled with tears which blotted out the scene ; she turned 
and hurried down stairs, and next moment was out in the 
road. 



In Paradise and Elsewliere. 



287 



The old busy road, with its restless holiday folks hurrying 
or lounging on their way. The sands were crowded, as she 
had often seen them ; the bands were playing, the sky was 
blue, the sea sparkled. The old life as it had been going 
on before her for years . or only days, was it ? She turned 
her back on it now, and walked quickly towards the railway 
station. 




CHAPTER VI. 




HEN she had been gone about half an hour, Draper 
returned and ran lightly up stairs. He looked 
eagerly round the room, and then hurried into the 
bed-room beyond, and then rang the bell violently. 

Mrs. Starkey came up stairs in answer to the summons ; 
she looked pale and frightened. 

" Where's my wife ? " he asked. " Has she been in ? " 

" The lady's gone, Sir." 

" Gone ! When ? Where ? " 

" Gone a little while ago, Sir . gone for good, I think." 

" What makes you think so ? What has happened ? 
What did she say ? " 

" I didn't see her, Sir; Mr. Starkey knows." 

" Why the devil didn't he answer the bell, then ? " 

Mr. Starkey here put in an appearance, apologetically. 

" I ask your pardon, Sir," he said. Then in a less humble 
tone to the woman . 

"You can go; you're not wanted." 

When they were alone he continued . 

"The lady was very hurt and very angry . very angry 
indeed. I tried to pacify her ; but she would not listen to 
reason." 

" Poor girl-! " muttered Draper, in a low tone. 

" Of course, Sir, I saw at a glance how things were, and 
did my best. I think I persuaded her to take things more 
quietly." 

" What did she want to do, then ? " 

" She talked of appealing to her friends, Sir ; but I did all 



Iii Paradise and Elsewhere. 289 

I could to show her the follv of such a course. I told 
her " 

Draper burst into a passion. 

" Who are you to tell her one thing or the other ? What 
did you know of the matter ? " 

"Don't be violent, Mr. Draper," said the landlord. 
" Don't reject the assistance that was kindly meant." 

"Appeal to her friends ! I can't believe it. It is so un- 
like her. Appeal to her friends ! What do I care for her 
friends ? " 

" I beg your pardon, Sir ; but if I might be allowed to 
suggest, her friends might give you a deal of trouble." 

" Poor girl ! It was quite natural she should be in a fury. 
How she must hate me ! " 

" Fortunately, Mr. Draper, I secured the worst piece of 
evidence." 

" How long has she been gone, did you say ? I am 
wasting the precious time, when I might overtake her." 

" Half an hour ; but I think, Sir, if I might suggest, before 
seeing the lady, you should be aware " 

" I have not a moment to waste now. There is a train 
goes directly, if I remember rightly." 

" One has just gone. She probably caught that. If you 
listen to me now ." 

" Not now . another time. To-morrow . to-morrow week. 
I can listen to nothing, and think of nothing, until I have 
seen her." 

He rushed out of the room and out of the house without 
waiting for another word, leaving Mr. Starkey somewhat 
disappointed. As yet that gentleman's negociations seemed 
likely to be anything -but profitable. 

What must he do next ? He hardly knew what he was 
aiming at himself. Except that he was a scoundrel ready 
for any dirty work that might offer, it was difficult to say 
what might be the part that Starkey was presently to play in 
this little drama. 

Meanwhile, Draper lost no time in reaching the railway 
station. A passing fly took him there as hard as the horse 
could gallop ; but he was too late. A train had been gone 
about ten minutes. From enquiries made of the porters, it 
seemed that a young lady answering to Ann's description 
had been one of its passengers. 

*9 



290 A London Romance. 

Without hesitating a moment, he entered the telegraph- 
office, and sent a telegram to a station a third of the way to 
town, requesting the station-master to be on the look-out, 
and deliver a message to her when she arrived there. 

The message was . 

" For Heaven's sake, return ! I will explain all." 

Then he waited, having given instructions that the result 
should be telegraphed to him at once. In a couple of 
hours' time there came a reply. It was not written by Ann, 
but the station-master. 

" I gave the lady the message." 

'.'Is that all?" cried Draper; and stamped and swore 
with rage. When he was cooler, he sent another message 
back to ask what the lady said, and whether she had gone 
on by the train to town, or was coming back. 

He waited to see the next train, which did not arrive for 
about a couple of hours longer, and he got the answer back 
still later. The lady had received his message . had said 
nothing . and had continued her journey. What to do next? 

He wandered back towards his lodgings, and paused irre- 
solutely before the door. Suddenly the idea struck him that, 
after all, she might have come back, and was waiting for him 
up stairs. In another moment he was in the room calling 
her by name. 

It was twilight. The window stood open. A cold air 
from the sea fluttered a curtain in the inner room. He took 
it for the rustle of a skirt, and started forwards in excite- 
ment. But no ; no one was there. 

Then he stood irresolutely looking out of the window 
upon the water and the deserted sands. Then rang the 
bell. Mrs. Starkey came up to see what he wanted. 

"Your husband? " 

" He has gone out, Sir." 

" Where to ? " 

" I don't think he has gone far. He will be back soon 
to his tea." 

Draper waited until he lost patience ; then started forth 
in search of him, but searched without success. It had just 
occurred to him as not a little odd that his landlord should 
have been mixed up in the affair at all. How did he come 
to know anything about it ? Probably he knew where Ann 
had gone to ? 

While he was looking for Starkey in the various inns, 



In Paradise and Elseivkere. 291 

Draper chanced to notice a clock. The last up-train passed 
in less than five minutes' time. He would go up to town 
yet. Yes, he must go up to town. He could not rest here 
all night. He must see her before he slept. 

There was just time to run up the High-street to the 
station, if the clock were right ; and he did not waste 
another moment. He therefore abandoned the idea of 
looking for Starkey, and set off at a brisk pace. Half-way 
there, he saw another clock. If this one were right, unless 
the train was behind time, there was no hope of catching it. 

He hurried on at full speed. Turning up the road lead- 
ing to the station, he heard the sound of the coming train, 
and saw the red lights gleaming in the distance. At the 
same moment, the tinkling of the telegram-bell was faintly 
audible. As he rushed on, a hand was laid upon his arm. 

" Draper ! where are you going ? " 

It was his friend Tom Yolland. 

" Leave go . damn you ! " the other said, through his set 
teeth. " This is all your work ! " And he darted onwards. 

The train was at the platform now; and Draper knew 
by experience . that the door would be closed, but yet he 
tried it. Then he ran out again, and vaulted lightly over 
some palings dividing the station from the road. 

The train was moving on again by this time at a rapid 
pace. He rushed forward, and caught at the handle of a 
door. There was a shout from the porters . a scream 
from a woman who saw what was taking place. He 
lost his balance but clung, and was dragged, then jerked 
off and . crash and smashed. 

With a shrill shriek the iron monster went upon its way ; 
and a little pale-faced crowd picked up the fallen man, 
terribly hurt, but yet living. 




19.2 



CHAPTER VII. 




|HEN they carried Harry Draper, senseless, bruised, 
and bleeding, back to his lodgings, they found a 
large official despatch awaiting him, on the enve- 
lope of which was printed, " On Her Majesty's 
Service.'' It was the expected appointment. 

Yolland took it up and read the superscription somewhat 
ruefully. 

" Curse the women ! " he said. " What mischief they 
cause ! " 

This Mr. Thomas Yolland was not a magnificent prodigal 
like his friend. He had no private income, and was obliged 
to work hard. He was an author. He was not at all 
popular with the public ; the public . except that portion of 
it which knew him personally . knew nothing about him at 
all ; but yet he made between three and four hundred a year 
by his pen. 

He had not a spark of genius, or a single original notion ; 
but he wrote good English . " good Saxon English " they 
called it in the newspapers, when reviewing his magazine 
articles. He wrote for most of the magazines in, as it is 
termed, a popular style upon popular subjects . mild social 
essays, and wish-wash generally, all second-hand . thrice-told 
stories, which were yet pleasant reading, easily waded through, 
and immediately forgotten. 

The publishers spoke of him as a most reliable man . 
trustworthy, punctual. In an age of duffers Yolland was 
much more likely to make his fortune than any of your mad- 
cap geniuses, intent on striking out new paths and starting 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 293 

on wild nights of fancy of a wholly unprecedented, and 
therefore impracticable character ; who only once in their 
lives at the outside hit the public taste. 

He was eminently respectable, was Yolland . wearing 
always a frock-coat of good cut, and throughout the summer 
a double-breasted white waistcoat. Trimming his whiskers 
very carefully, and abjuring all attempt at moustache. In 
his mild way he thought his friend Harry Draper " a devil 
of a fellow ! " Sometimes he thought him like a young 
prince in a fairy-book. He was much more like a stage 
prince . all dress, padding, and make-up ! 

Yolland was strong and broad shouldered ; but he did not 
take half the amount of violent exercise his friend did. It 
was a part of this sham Hercules' game of life to go in for 
extremes in everything ; and his dumb-bells were some 
pounds too heavy for him. 

He was indeed a miserable sham, this handsome youth ; 
and his life seemed threatening just now to wind-up with a 
dismal failure. The doctor, summoned in haste to the rail- 
way station, had felt the patient's pulse, and shaken his own 
head. 

" He hasn't got strength enough to bear a long illness," 
he said. " If we're not very careful, he'll go out like a 
rushlight." 

Tom Yolland saw his friend put to bed, and sat down by 
the bedside to think what he should do. His presence in 
town was not absolutely necessary for some days at least. 
He could very easily do his work down there, and send it 
up to London by train. He therefore wrote to the laundress 
instructions for clean linen, &c, to be forwarded immedi- 
ately, and made himself as comfortable as could be. 

Harry Draper raved during the night, and called again 
and again for Ann to come to him. Once he was for get- 
ting up to go and catch the next train. Tom Yolland 
thought this conduct highly absurd, and finding that his 
arguments were useless lost all patience. 

" Hanged if I don't leave you," he said, " if you can't 
be a little bit more reasonable." 

In the morning Draper was calmer, and later on they 
talked the matter over. 

" What has become of her ? Where has she gone ? Per- 
haps she has destroyed herself ! " 

" Not she," replied Yolland impatiently. !t Not at ail 



294 d. London Romance, 

likely. She saw it was all over between you, and I dare say 
had some one else in view." 

"That I swear she had not," cried Draper. "You do 
not know her . how she loved me." 

" No," said Yolland, " I don't." 

Later on again Draper cried out remorsefully, . 

" What a wretch I have been ! What have I not to 
answer for ? " 

" There's no doubt you acted very badly,' - said Yolland ; 
" but I suppose it is not the first or the last case of the kind 
in the world. We must take care she does not want. But 
she has a small income of her own, has she not ? " 

"All my life I have been a wild and heartless libertine,'' 
cried Draper, melodramatically. 

" Your beef-tea is ready," observed Yolland, in his prosaic 
way. " You're not to have it too strong ; " and so Don 
Juan sat up with some groaning, and took his spoon food. 

This portion of the sad story is not pleasant writing and 
can hardly be agreeable reading. One does not like to see 
one's hero down and grovelling. Men do not like women 
to know how poor and paltry, mean and pitiful, men can 
be ; and women are all idol worshippers, and won't believe 
any such nonsense. No, Miss or Madam, it is wholly untrue 
what is above written. We are all grand creatures, virtuous 
and noble, or splendidly wicked ! Such as you see us with 
your loving eyes, are we ever ! There is no deception ! 

"I'm afraid it's all over with the consulship," said 
Yolland. " What bad luck ! I wish I could only get such 
a chance." 

" You shall write a letter for me to-night to the head of 
the office, explaining that I have met with an accident. I 
dare say it will be all right." 

" Had I not better write to your mother ? " 

" Not till we hear a little more from the doctor. It will 
only alarm her ; besides, she might take it into her head to 
come and see me." 

"Well?" 

"I don't know who might be here." 

For some days it seemed as though the injuries resulting 
from Draper's accident were to be unattended with any very 
serious results. The letter respecting the appointment hav- 
ing been answered, leave was obtained for a reasonable 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 295 

time, and Draper's general health appeared good ; but this 
state of things was doomed not to last very long. Some in- 
discretion brought on an unfavourable change, and it be- 
came, Yolland thought, absolutely necessary that Mrs. 
Draper should be communicated with. 

Up to now the sick room had not been always so dull as 
it might have been, although Ann's presence had faded from 
it like a ray of sunlight. It fortunately happened that the 
great Jason Burgoyne, little Addleton, and Charley Skylights, 
members of the Rough Club, had come down for a lark to 
the little watering-place, and put up at the Royal. 

These gentlemen dropped in and partook of Draper's 
cigars and claret-cups, and enlivened him with their merry 
prattle. Jason one day, not knowing how matters stood, 
asked carelessly, . . 

"Seen any more of that woman whom the parson fellow 
ran away with ? She really had her notions. I've got 
something in a new piece of mine that she is just cut out 
for. I wish you'd drop a line for me, Draper, and tell her 
what I say." 

They were gay dogs these, and laughed and quaffed and 
consumed large quantities of tobacco in various shapes. 

" Of a morning the place stands a end with the smoke," 
Mrs. Starkey said. " I can't think it's good for the sick 
gentleman." 

It was not good for the little bird Ann had left behind 
her. In fact, one morning after the gentlemen had been 
merrier than usual, and stopped later overnight, it was found 
lying dead at the bottom of the cage. 

It was either the tobacco smoke, or the obstinate nature 
of Draper's internal injuries ; but from whatever cause, his 
case got very bad indeed. The merry gentlemen, when 
they went away, discussed his ailment in the smoking- 
carriage during the journey up to town. 

" He's played out is poor Harry." 

" He hadn't the stamina for the life he led." 

" If he led it." 

Then there was some merriment. They laughed at any- 
thing these hilarious dogs . except adverse notices of their 
own works in the newspapers. 



CHAPTER VIII. 




ilT last Draper's case seemed desperate. He had 
lain in bed more than three weeks and was as 
weak as a rat. He grew light-headed, and Tom 
Yolland got frightened. Yolland was required 
very shortly in town. Who, then, was to take his place at 
the bedside ? 

He was uncertain as to Mrs. Draper's address. She lived 
abroad, and changed her residence pretty frequently, follow- 
ing the progress of the fashionable world and the swallows. 
"When consulted, Draper could give no reasonable answer. 
The only way was to search in his desk in the hope of find- 
ing the address upon some scrap of paper or at the top of 
.one of the lady's recent letters. 

The idea of overhauling his friend's private affairs was 
somewhat repugnant to Yolland's feelings ; but what was to 
be done ? His friend was quite delirious, and the case was 
urgent. He therefore unlocked the desk and searched. 

Oh, what a desk ! There were photographs and locks of 
hair put away in envelopes, and labelled " Clara," " Blanche," 
" Leonie." There were letters in women's hands, numbered 
and tied up in small parcels ; some of the hands were not 
as good as they might be, and even at a passing glimpse it 
was easy to see that the spelling was as wild and hopeless 
as their love had been for this gay deceiver. 

There were besides a few bills settled and unsettled, and 
among them one from the manager of the Boudoir, curious 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 297 

enough in some of its details to be worth while quoting. It 
ran thus : . 

£ s. d. 

Contract for the use of theatre for one night, 
and supplying theatrical dresser, band for 
one night's performance, wigs, 300 tickets, 
door-keeper, livery man, fly-keeper, two Re- 
hearsals, and cleaning the theatre (six ladies 
for minor characters included) 11 o o 

Extra Rehearsal . . . 0100 

2nd Rehearsal, 5 pints Bitter Beer, 19 bottles 

Ginger-beer and Soda-water at \d. per bottle 064 
2 decanters of Sherry 040 

Prompter . . ... 050 

Leader of Band attending Rehearsal 036 

Full Band, ditto . 1 10 o 

Cash paid for procuring an Actress from 

Dramatic Agent and Cab hire . 140 

13 bottles Lemonade and Ginger-beer 040 

18 persons to Supper at 5 s. per head 4 10 o 

12 bottles and 1 pint of Sherry, at 4s. per 

bottle. ... . . . 2 10 o 

Beef, Bread, Pickles, and Porter, For Boots at 

the Swan 010 



^22 7 10 



There was also a collection of autographs from various 
persons, famous and notorious, of whose acquaintance 
Draper boasted a little in a quiet way, all pasted in a book ; 
and there was some artfulness displayed in the arrangement, 
for only a few letters were there in their entirety, and it was 
just possible that some of the others had not really been 
directed to Draper himself. A sceptical person might in- 
deed have been inclined to believe that even here, in his 
desk, there was observable some striving after effect. 

It was surely scarcely probable that when Draper made this 
collection he had said to himself . 

" If anything were to happen to me this is what I would 
leave behind . materials maybe for my biographer. What 
will my biographer say when he sees them ? ' Here are the 
odds and ends of the gay, witty, and wicked Draper I His 



298 A London Romance. 

was a good heart spoilt. He was not without many noble 
qualities. He was undoubtedly clever . nay brilliant ; but a 
shameless scapegrace. His was a perverted genius ! He 
had much to answer for ! ' " 

But it seems almost incredible, does it not, that anyone 
should be so weak ? Since the days of those shallow rogues 
and overrated impostors, the Gallant Highwaymen, men 
have not carved their own epitaphs on "Newgate stone" or 
elsewhere, and posed and mouthed in their dying hour like 
actors at the play. 

Yolland, good simple fellow, took exactly the view which 
the biographer was to take, supposing the absurd theory 
given above to have had any foundation in truth. 

He was both shocked and dazzled, but presently he found 
a letter which set him thinking. 

It was one that Draper must have overlooked, for there 
could be no grand effect got out of it. It was from his 
mother, and Yolland had not the slightest intention of read- 
ing a word, had not the first line so surprised him that he in- 
voluntarily scanned the contents of the first page. 

<: My dearest Harry, . So you are going to marry Miss 
Ann Whitaker, are you. Very well. May you be happy. 
I am sure she must be a sweet girl, and of course you love 
her very much. She may not be rich, and her family may 
not occupy as high a position as my Harry ought to ex- 
pect, but what then ? " 

Here the letter went over leaf. 

What then ? Tom Yolland could not help feeling desper- 
ately curious. What could be the meaning of such a letter 
in the face of the facts of the case. 

" I must know how matters really are," he said to him- 
self, after a moment's reflection, " or I shall be bringing 
about some tremendous quarrel between Harry and his 
mother." 

And with this reflection he read on. 

" Therefore, my dear boy, if you love the young lady, for 
goodness' sake marry her. If I could manage the journey, 
I should so like to be present at the ceremony, but you 
know what a wretched invalid I am. Anyhow, if I cannot 
come, I suppose I can bless you both from a distance. And 
now, with respect to this miserable law business, please go 
at once to that lawyer man in Furnival's Inn, and say exactly 
these words " 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 299 

The next two pages were wholly of a legal character, and 
the four succeeding filled with gossip relating to the society 
at the watering-place in France from which she dated. 

" What does all this mean ? " Yolland asked himself in 
wonder. "She did not object to the marriage, and I am 
certain Draper was in love with the girl. There could not 
possibly have been any obstacle. Why, then " 

Why, then? He was asking himself the same question 
some hours afterwards, and was as far as ever from any 
reasonable solution of the difficulty. There was, indeed, 
only one solution, and that was so outrageously absurd and 
unlikely he could not believe in it. 

For the mere sake of keeping up his ridiculous reputation 
as a magnificent libertine, had he perpetrated the famous old 
mock marriage of romance, and perhaps broken the heart of 
the woman he loved. Love, though ! What could such a 
melancholy jumping Jack of a hero as this know of love? 

Yolland turned towards the bed, and contemplated with 
an expression not far removed from contempt, the pale, 
delicate face lying there. He was thin and haggard with his 
illness, and the other for the first time thought that there 
was a certain meanness and insignificance about the fea- 
tures of his friend, handsome though they were. 

He wrote a letter that night to Draper's mother, telling 
her that her son was in a critical state, and begging her, if 
possible, to come instantly after receipt of his communica- 
tion, as he was obliged very soon to return to town about 
his own affairs. Somehow it all at once occurred to him 
that he had wasted quite enough time by the sick man's 
bedside. 

He waited three days, and then an answer arrived. Mrs. 
Draper was in the deepest distress at the dreadful news. 
She sincerely trusted, however, that things were not as bad 
as Mr. Yolland would have her believe. Unless there was 
a change for the better, she must really beg of him to write 
to her again at once. Being herself in a most precarious 
state, she would not undertake the journey if happily there 
were a favourable change. Otherwise, of course, she must. 

" Pray," said the lady in conclusion, " consider a mother's 
feelings and write by return." 

Yolland threw down the letter in disgust. 

" Write by return," he continued. " If she were at all 
anxious she would say . telegraph." 



300 A London Romance. 

Then he took an uneasy stroll to and fro in the room, and 
asked himself what was to be done next. 

" I can't stop here," he thought, " and yet how can I go 
away and leave him in this pitiful plight. The doctor says 
he is a little worse to-day . may be much worse. I must say 
I don't think it at all fair that I should have the responsi- 
bility of his dying on my hands." 

Eventually he determined upon an energetic course of 
action. 

" I've three clear days I can spare ; hang me if I don't 
fetch that old woman by force, for I do not believe she is 
any more ill than I am ! " 




CHAPTER IX. 




OM YOLLAND found Mrs. Draper in the French 
town, in lodgings up the High-street, not looking 
very ill, but groaning pitifully. She moved here 
in a small circle of English society, and was 
much looked up to. 

It was a poor little shabby-genteel society at best, much 
the same as that Mr. Percy Fitzgerald describes so ably. 
There were a dowager lady of title, a baronet, and an 
honourable as stars, and some twenty families, all more or 
less in straitened circumstances, who found the French 
coast cheaper than the English one. ' 

At the same time in the town was a mob of Parisian lions 
and lionesses, very rich and extravagant, who led a wild 
rackety life, at which the English looked contemptuously. 
There was a Russian princess among other notabilities, who 
changed her toilette four times a day, each change being 
more gorgeous than the last; and there were many others 
. grandes dames and cocottes, whose dresses were sur- 
prisingly rich and costly ; but this unbridled luxury did not 
urge the British maids and matrons to similar displays, for 
with the generality of travelling English a certain frumpish- 
ness of attire is de rigueur. 

They, instead, looked and marvelled perhaps in their 
heart of hearts, as the lady novelists say . envied a little, 
but they outwardly affected contempt, and some of them 
honestly entertained the feeling. Until the crack of doom 
many worthy Britons shall thus despise all foreigners . the 
French more particularly . and they will never believe that 
the nobles of any other than a certain island which shall be 
nameless, are aught else but mushroom-like impostors, 



3 02 A London Romance. 

whom " any of Our people, Sir, could buy up, ten times over, 
root and branch, and never miss the money." 

When first the visitor was- announced, Mrs. Draper 
evidently mistook the name, and took Yolland for quite 
another person ; for by the time she found out who he was, 
she grew gradually more and more ailing. It was very much 
after the fashion of the sham cripples, in that ridiculous 
ballet where the soldiers come in search of recruits, and 
the able-bodied villagers feign various ailments to escape the 
military glories awaiting them. Don't you remember how 
the rogues, when they thought the danger past, casting aside 
their slings and crutches, were dancing merrily, and how the 
recruiting sergeant and his men, returning in the middle of 
the jig, laid their hands upon the impostors' shoulders, and 
how the latter gradually, and by almost imperceptible 
degrees, resumed the crippled and distorted attitudes of five 
minutes previous ? 

A savoury smell pervaded the entire house, and even 
while Yolland was there the French servant came blundering 
in to tell madame that she was " served." 

" Dear me," said the lady, who was savagely hungry ; " I 
could not eat a morsel to save my life, but will you stay and 
dine?" 

The stupid man did so, and the unhappy lady endured a 
small martyrdom in front of the dishes she could not touch. 
He did not eat much, having so much talking to do. He 
tried his best to persuade her to return with him to England ; 
then demonstrated, almost rudely, that it was her duty, and 
the least she could do under the circumstances. At last he 
went away, inwardly cursing the "heartless wretch," and 
next day returned to England alone. 

His sojourn in this, a foreign land, was therefore a brief 
one . scarcely two clear days ; but he must have picked up 
an immensity of information during his short stay, for after 
that date, and solely upon the strength of this flying visit, 
he became a great authority upon all subjects connected 
with foreign life, social and domestic, politics, and political 
economy. 

He came home in a most despondent mood, and was 
particularly sea-sick. When he reached little What's-its- 
Name-super-Mare, he found that some strange events had 
occurred during his absence, and that his services as sick- 
nurse were no longer necessary. 



CHAPTER X. 




j|HE generality of London residents get into a sort 
of way, when they have lived some years in town, 
of thinking that there are only certain districts 
where it would be possible for them to exist. 
Some districts lie low. The air in others is more smoky. 
Some are so deadly lively. No person "with any sort of 
style about them " could live in others. 

And yet London is densely populated in all directions. 
Who are they, for instance, one might well enquire, who 
live down those dismal old shabby-genteel streets, and 
black and gloomy squares, lying between Gray's Inn-lane 
and Tottenham Court-road ? The houses are large. The 
rents of som£ of them must be high, but what a neighbour- 
hood, cut off from fashion and fresh air ! What a death-like 
silence in some of the grass-grown no-thoroughfares. What 
a dismal look-out ! and what a maze of ill-smelling back 
lanes and alleys surrounding the short-cuts from this sepulchre 
of lethargic respectability to the busy haunts of men beyond. 
There are some streets round about this quarter where the 
appearance of the houses reminds one of canvas theatres at 
a fair. Without we have the imposing entrance, the Corin- 
thian pillar, the flight of noble steps, the massive scraper, 
all holding forth delusive hopes of a corresponding scale 
of splendour within, which the first glimpse of the dirty bare 
boards of the lobby is doomed to dispel. 

Within is quite a little colony. Lodgers on every floor . 
two on a floor, for that matter. A colony of desperately poor 
and hard-worked people, who have little time or inclination to 



304 A London Romance. 

fraternise. Here single bed-rooms are let to single men . a 
strange race, coming in late and departing very early in the 
morning . going no one knows whither ; vaguely supposed 
to be " in the City." 

There are also very lonely single women fighting a hard 
battle with fate, and struggling for every mouthful of food. 
These are, if anything, more mysterious than the single men 
in the nature of their callings ; and not unfrequently have- 
no calling at all, but are on the look-out . waiting with wan, 
anxious faces, which grow every day more wan and anxious 
as the hope dies within their breasts. 

At such a house, up such a back street, lived such a 
lonely woman who called herself Mortimer, but was, in 
truth, the Ann Whitaker of the previous chapters of this 
history. Here she had been living about three weeks ; and 
had been trying very hard, and had failed very often, and 
was growing a little heartsick and weary. 

She had come to town, not caring what became of her ; 
and buried herself, as it were, in this melancholy neigh- 
bourhood, abandoning herself to despair, praying for death, 
and wondering how long it would be in coming to her re- 
lief. But after a day or two of such bitter misery, that ever 
more the traces of its passage across her fair brow were 
visible in the tiny lines faintly but indelibly stamped there, 
better thoughts came, and she began to ask herself why 
she should die, and whether there was not still something 
worth living for. 

It seemed to her, then, that the thing worth living for 
was the stage, where, perhaps, she might make a name, 
and win fame and fortune, if she got the chance. 

" I will never love anyone again," she said. " I will, 
till I die, hate all the world. But I -will succeed without 
help. Yes, before I give in, I will work the flesh off my 
bones." 

There are many brave and resolute young hearts who 
have said as much and begun as hopefully. How many go 
forth to battle every day and are left slain upon the field ? 
The story is as old as the hills. We cannot all be suc- 
cessful ; but at least we can all, as we are bound to do, 
strive to succeed. 

Ann was not without means. Her mother's income was 
hers ; but as yet she had not touched it. It had been left 
in trust of James Jarman, and without communicating with 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 305 

him she could not draw any money. The marriage had 
been a secret one, at Draper's desire, and she had obeyed 
blindly. Once she had said . 

" I must let James know, must I not ? " 

" Why ?" Draper asked, coldly. 

She wanted to let him know that she was married. She 
had at the time acted more like one in a dream than in her 
waking senses. The reason for the mystery she had never 
asked herself. She followed blindly Draper's directions. 

Her mother had been buried about three months. James 
Jarman was absent in the country, where the success of 
some speculation he was engaged in required his presence. 
Without anyone to take care of or advise her, seeing scarcely 
a living soul but the man whom she loved and trusted in 
implicitly, it was no wonder he persuaded her as he chose. 
We all know how very differently, and with what superior 
wisdom, we ourselves should have acted had we been in her 
place . particularly now that her melancholy example lies 
before us. Now that the dream was at an end, and the 
stern and hopeless reality stared her in the face, she saw 
what a fool she had been to believe the preposterous ro 
mance he had conjured up for her deception. 

Alone in the world . cut off from all hope of respectability, 
as it seemed to her . branded and disgraced. how dare she 
now face James Jarman ? 

" I will starve first," she thought. " I will work unaided. 
Others have done so before me." 

She set to work hopefully. She called upon several 
metropolitan managers, and stated her case. She found 
many other persons anxious for an audience, and loitering 
round the stage-door. She found too, that as a rule, a 
young, well-dressed, and good-looking woman . . (are not 
"well-dressed." and "good-looking" almost synonymous 
terms ?) . obtained more easily access to the Presence. 

The London managers she found to be pleasant spoken 
and affable. They were in want of every sort of talent but 
her talent. They asked her what she had done before, and 
were sorry she had had no stage experience, or they had 
something which might just have suited her. Some offered 
her a glass of wine and a biscuit, and expressed a wish that 
she would favour them with a call if ever she was passing 
that way. 

She came from the theatre sometimes after one of these 
20 



306 A London Romance. 

interviews quite light-hearted and smiling sweetly. The 
poor shabby folk, yet waiting for their turn . a turn which 
sometimes never came . nudged one another and grumbled. 
They thought, to use their phrase, that she had " pulled it 
off." But it was not so. Ere she reached the street corner, 
the golden vision vaguely shadowed forth in the good 
gentleman's gracious remarks had already begun to fade 
away. After all, he had made no definite promises. She 
was, in fact, just as far off being an actress as ever she was. 

When she had tried the West-end managers, she turned 
her face towards the east. She had once been to an East-end 
theatre, and had laughed heartily at a tragic drama there 
performed. It had seemed to her that nothing could be 
much more absurd than the play itself, and the way it was 
played. There was a ridiculous nobleman, who wore the 
same pair of Hessians throughout a long life of crime, ex- 
tending over fifteen years and four acts ! 

This same person had a way quite his own of strolling up 
and down Fleet Street without his hat. There was another, 
who said, " Here's a go ! " instead of " Years ago " . and 
who told interminable stories to help on the plot. The 
women were wretchedly ugly, and ill-dressed, and vulgar, she 
thought. The management of such places, then, must only 
be too eager to snap up any available talent and beauty. 

Strange to say, though, they were not. These people 
seemed to live in a small world of their own, which the 
four walls of the theatre bounded. They spoke of West-end 
stars familiarly, with an abbreviation of their Christian 
names, and pooh-poohed their worth. 

" Bob Diamond ! Bah ! Had him here, and paid him a 
heap of money. Didn't bring me half of it back again. 
I've a man here of my own who could knock him silly in any 
of his crack pieces." 

One manager was not quite sure something might not be 
done for her. 

" What will you pay?" he said. 

" Pay ! I have no money." 

" Oh, dear me. And your friends ; have they none ? " 

" No." 

" Oh, dear me. Well, I should advise you to give it up. 
The stage is not a fit place for any lady. You'll find it a life 
of great drudgery. You had better go down to the country, 
I should think, and work hard for the next five years." 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 307 

" And then ? " 

" And then go on working ; unless somebody by accident 
comes down and sees you, and offers you two pounds a week 
to take the lead at one of the West-end houses." 

Ann drew down her veil to hide her tears, and took her 
departure. 

She tried the agents next who advertised their power to 
get engagements, and paid certain fees, and had her name 
entered with great formality in certain books, but nothing 
came of it. 

Mr. Mantrapper was very sanguine at first. He leant 
back, and looked at her with a thoughtful air. He said . 

" Bless me ! What a likeness ! Is it Farren or Furtado, 
or one of the Moores? Your voice is just like Vestris's 
was. You can sing and dance, of course ? I wish you were 
in the acrobat way now. I've a splendid opening for a 
female Leotard at the Little Orpheus. Could put you on 
directly." 

Ann timidly expressed her views. She was not particular 
what it was she did, as long as it was not the flying trapeze. 
Mr. Mantrapper took his fee and entered her name. 

After this she called several times and paid some more 
money ; but nothing had turned up that was likely to suit 
her. Her small capital was almost exhausted. Sometimes 
of a night she grew frightened when counting up her slender 
resources. If something did not turn up soon, what was to 
become of her? 

" Ah ! " said Mr. Mantrapper, " if you were regularly one 
of my pupils, you know, I could manage it all easily enough. 
Why not join my class, and begin in the right way? I 
guarantee an engagement as soon as ever you are perfect . 
and that will be very soon, you know, if you will work." 

" What are the terms ? " 

" Five pounds a quarter, paid monthly in advance. What 
do you say ? " 

" I . I am afraid I cannot afford it," she stammered ; " and 
you promised to get me an engagement without that." 

" Not quite promised, I think; said I would if anything 
turned up. I can't make vacancies, you know." 

" But supposing I joined your class, how would you get 
one for me ? " 

" Oh, that's different." 
20 . 2 



308 A London Romance. 

" Why so ? " 

But Mr. Mantrapper did not explain. 

At last, however, there came a letter to say that there was 
an opening. She dressed herself very carefully, even in- 
vested in new gloves. She made her poor pale face look 
its prettiest, and tripped light-heartedly two long miles 
through the rain. 

" Oh, it's you," said Mr. Mantrapper, coming out from his 
back room hastily, and displaying but little enthusiasm at 
sight of her. He had indeed been expecting someone 
else, someone he was waiting for to bring him some money. 

" Yes," replied Ann, very graciously ; " you wrote to 
me." 

" I wrote . my clerk wrote . yes. Ah, that's filled up ! " 

" Filled up ! " she gasped. 

"Yes ; you're too late." 

"The note came by the last post last night." 

'.Ah, these things come and go in a moment; one ought 
to be always on the spot." 

"And I have lost it, then," said Ann, in a trembling 
voice. 

"Yes; lost that, anyhow. I'll tell you what I'll do for 
you, though : there's an opening in tlf£ ballet at the Great 
Sahara . it will be twelve shillings a week to begin with. 
You shall pay me half the first six weeks, and I'll ask for 
no more ; I won't be hard on you." 

.'. Me ! . the ballet ! " the girl said, with a flushed face. 

"Why not? You've nothing to do: you'll be on the 
spot, too, in case anything else turns up." 

Ann's rage was too great for a moment or two to allow 
her to reply. Then, as she bowed and moved towards the 
door, she said . 

" I will not trouble you again, Mr. Mantrapper.'' 

" I sha'n't be sorry for that, Ma'am," Mr. Mantrapper 
observed, when the shop-door had closed between them. 







!li 


^2f 



CHAPTER XI. 




HINGS were beginning to wear an ugly look. Ann 
had changed her last sovereign. Her clothes 
were shabby, her boots worn out. The unusual 
fatigue of the last week or two had overtasked 
her strength. The cold and exposure were beginning to 
tell on her. Her cheeks were very pale now, and some- 
what pinched. 

" What will become of me if I do not get the engagement 
very soon ? " she asked herself. And supposing she were 
to get it, what could she- do even then ? 

There are in all poor neighbourhoods certain good 
Samaritans who are willing to take charge of even the most 
trifling articles, and lend their owners the market value of 
the objects mortgaged. Here, over the same counter, the 
patrician jewel and the plebeian flat-iron make each other's 
acquaintance, probably to their mutual surprise. 

Here its over-sanguine wearer leaves a watch for just five 
minutes, and returns never more. Here are warm overcoats 
deposited upon the eve of frosty weather setting in, with 
promises that they shall be fetched away again directly, and 
an extra fee paid for "the drawer," so as to save time 
when they are fetched, and to avoid the creases. But the 
frost sets in, endures long, and breaks up for spring, and 
yet the drawer holds its contents ; and somewhere in another 
sphere, out in the wind, the coat proprietor makes the best 
use of his arms and legs to keep life in him, and pretends 
he is quite warm enough. 

Ann could see one of these establishments from the 



3 1 o A London Romance. 

window of her bed-room. The legends of its painted doors 
and its golden symbols were quite familiar to her. She did 
not go there, for she thought it " too near ; " but took a 
long walk in search of some other place less public. It was 
a very long walk before it was finished, and the shop she 
fixed upon at last, perhaps, more publicly situated than 
many others she had passed by. 

Even when she had made her selection, and hastily 
entered, after casting a frightened glance around, she went 
in at the wrong door, and was obliged to come back again 
into the street, and go in at another, her cheeks flushing 
with shame ; for she thought the whole street was occupied 
solely with her and her affairs. 

The proper door found at last, and a trembling bargain 
made, she came out again into the street with downcast eyes 
and hurried steps, as though she had come forth from a 
prison with the prison stamp upon her, and was anxious to 
mix with and lose herself in the crowd. Before she had 
gone far, however, a hand plucked her by the sleeve. She 
turned and saw Frank Pickering. 

She was so amazed at his daring to speak to her after the 
part he had taken in the base treachery Draper and he had 
practised towards her, that for a moment she was speechless. 
Then she thought perhaps he did not yet know that she had 
discovered all, and waited with some curiosity to know what 
he was going to say ; while with a rapid glance she took in 
the details of his personal appearance. 

Mr. Pickering's outward man was decidedly shabby. His 
coat was tightly buttoned up upon a greasy and ragged satin 
scarf; but at the corners close to his neck glimpses were 
obtainable of something of a very shady nature in the shape 
of flannel shirt, from which it was to be surmised that Mr. 
Pickering did not wear linen. His collar, which was a paper 
one, was much worn at the edges. He had on one dilapi- 
dated kid glove, and swung another, probably more dilapi- 
dated still, by one finger. He was generally threadbare and 
shiny and white about the seams. His hat was very glossy, 
in consequence of a recent drenching. He smoked the fag 
end of a cigar. 

"Ah, I beg your pardon. How do you do?" he said. 
She drew back and stood motionless, staring at him. Then 
she saw by his eyes that he knew she had found him out, 
He went on as though she had accused him. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 311 

"I should like to have a few words with you, Miss 
Whitaker, about this business." 

She blushed deeply at the name. It was so long since 
she had been called Miss Whitaker. 

"I'm very much ashamed of myself," he went on, "for 
the part I took in it. I really am ; but I was in his power, 
you know. I was so hard up, and he had lent me money. 
I begged of him again and again not to ask me to do such 
a thing. It wasn't fair of him to take advantage of his power 
over me ! It was a great shame ! " 

Ann still said nothing. What could she say ? She turned 
away in silent disgust and hurried on quickly. In another 
moment Pickering was by her side. His boots were in a 
melancholy condition with regard to soles and heels, or 
rather, perhaps, with regard to the want of them, and he 
came upon her almost noiselessly, with a shuffling, sliding 
movement. 

" You won't bear me any ill will in the matter, Miss 
Whitaker?" he pleaded. " I have suffered too . I have lost 
my situation. I have been awfully poor ; I haven't tasted 
food for the last twenty-four hours. He has been a villain 
to both of us. I could tell you how to be revenged on him, 
if you'll promise not to pull me into the job too. I've got 
my way to make, you know, and can't afford to have my 
name pulled in. I expect to go into a business directly, 
which is a dead certainty to turn up trumps, and if it does 



She came to a sudden halt, and faced him again. 

" Will you please to go your way and let me go mine ? I 
neither want your advice nor assistance. You have injured 
me enough as it is. Be content." 

He dropped behind shamefacedly, as she thought, and 
she went on at a quicker pace ; but presently he was again 
at her side. 

" You could not lend me a few shillings for a day or 
two?" he said. "I really wouldn't ask you, but I am so 
hard up. For the love of God do so if you can ! You know 
my poor mother . she used to be so fond of you . she is 
waiting at home expecting I shall bring in something, and I 
have not a farthing in the world." 

" I have no money to give," said Ann through her teeth. 

"Oh, don't say that. If it is only a sixpence. You must 
have something too. I saw where you came out of. If you 



312 A Lo7idon Romance. 

could spare me a shilling. I give you my sacred word of 
honour " 

She gave him a shilling, which he turned over with a dis- 
satisfied look. 

"Thank you," he said. "You can't do any more, I sup- 
pose? Very well. Thank you all the same. Where do 
you live ? I'll bring it you back on Thursday." 

"No. 10, Plantagenet-place, Burton Crescent. But never 
mind. Don't bring it to me ; I don't want it. Good-bye." 

" Good-bye," he said, smiling, and shook her hand before 
she knew what he was about. 

With tears in her eyes and her face aflame, she hurried on 
and got rid of him this time. Turning at the street corner 
to take a last look at her persecutor, she saw him entering 
the swing door of a public-house. 

And now things were beginning to wear an aspect which 
daily grew more seriously alarming. She was already some- 
what in arrears with her rent. She had one by one parted 
with her little stock of valuables. Her clothes were poor 
and shabby, almost too bad to go out in during the day. 

She would not have now been too proud to accept a place 
in the ballet had she been able to obtain one ; but it was too 
early for the Christmas engagements, and just at that time 
business at the theatres was very slack. Of course she had 
tried to get on at a country theatre ; but there had been 
only one opening with salary, and there the money was far 
from sure, and the travelling expenses, without mentioning 
wardrobe, &c, very heavy. 

At last she came to the conclusion that without money -or 
friends it was impossible to get on unaided . a conclusion 
at which any person of experience would have arrived long 
ago. What then was she to do ? She owed money now, 
and it was absurd any longer to allow her pride to stand in 
her way. She must communicate with James Jarman, and 
beg of him to take the necessary steps to enable her to draw 
the little income to which she was entitled. 

She wrote a letter, and awaited the result. 

Three days later, no reply having come, she was asking 
herself what course she ought next to take. She made a 
weary pilgrimage to Straggleton New Town, and made en- 
quiries. Jarman had gone away, leaving no address. She 
made other enquiries in various quarters, but with a similar 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 313 

result. Then she remembered that he was a member of the 
Roughs Club, and thither bent her steps. 

She found the place with some trouble, and asked for her 
cousin. He had not been there for several weeks. He was 
supposed to be away in the country or abroad. As she 
turned away with despair in her heart, a light-haired gentle- 
man of a florid complexion, and very gaily dressed, came 
singing up the steps. It was Jason Burgoyne, the author- 
actor, with a companion. 

"Tra-la-la, tra-la-la," he sang, staring hard at Ann through 
her veil. " Have I the pleasure, or am I mistaken ? " 

"How do you do, Mr. Burgoyne?" Ann stammered, in 
some confusion. She was ashamed of her shabby clothes. 

" Ah," he replied, " I was sure I knew your face . a . 
somewhere . at the . at the " 

"The Boudoir." 

" To be sure. I was going to say the Boudoir. Been 
acting lately in any more of Addleton's pieces ? " 

" I have not been acting lately. I have been trying to 
get an engagement somewhere ; but I am afraid . without 
friends " 

" I don't know why that should be, I'm sure, but so it is ; 
and yet I am positively starving for talent . positively starv- 
ing." 

Ann thought to herself, if that were the case, here was 
talent positively starving for him. Why did he not take 
her? 

"You want a chance . that's what you want," continued 
Burgoyne, as though making a great discovery. "You have 
the genius, and want the bringing out. You know some 
men on the press now, I dare say ? " 

" No." 

"Your relations will pay something, I dare say?" 

"I have been trying to do without that." 

"Of course you have, but you can't reasonably expect to 
make a success out of genius pure and simple. Genius in a 
garret, my dear young lady, must have very powerful lungs 
indeed to make known its whereabouts. Fact is, we don't 
want genius now-a-days, do we, Skylights ? " 

" No ; it's scenery, and scissors and paste. You ought 
to know." 

Jason blushed, but laughed. 

"You're right there. Judicious selection, eh? What's 



314 A London Romance. 

the good of those fellows who cudgel their brains for origin- 
ality? It's wasting precious time; it's doing nothing. 
Careful arrangement, with an eye to dramatic probabilities 
(quite a different thing to real life probabilities, my dear 
Sir), and stage effect ; polish and finish. Then effective 
posters ; and you'll live in a grand house on the proceeds. 
That's genius doing something. There's less laurel-wreath ; 
but in other respects the results are more substantial." 

With this Burgoyne ran up the steps, laughing at his own 
wit. Ann looked after him blankly. 

" If ever there were an impostor," said Skylights, as he 
walked away ; . " but there's one comfort . he knows I 
know it." 

Ann returned home. What on earth was she to do now ? 
She sat down in despair. The landlady knocked and asked 
for her rent. She would like it next day, or, she was sorry 
to say, she must thank Miss Mortimer to leave the lodgings. 

Heigho ! what an old story is this ! But the story of 
human love, grief, passion, misery. have not all possible 
and impossible changes been rung upon it again and again 
since the arts of printing and authorship were first invented ? 

Here is our Ann in the same pitiful plight in which count- 
less heroines have found themselves placed before her, and 
of course the same old threadbare denouement is approach- 
ing. At the eleventh hour there is to be heard the sound 
of horses' hoofs upon the roadway without, and the prince's 
voice clear sounding above the din of the raging tempest, 
bidding her be of heart, as hope and help are near at hand. 

Worse luck, the writer of this history has not got a prince 
on hand, or a galloping steed, or a raging tempest ready ; 
but is compelled to state that the rescue happened in a less 
romantic fashion : . Ann, left to herself when the landlady 
had taken her departure, reviewed the condition of her 
earthly belongings very dismally. She had nothing in the 
world to pawn except the clothes she actually wore, and her 
purse contained . one penny. 







^PI^Hl 


JUjH""! 1 


3g^ 


^W 1 






B 




op8 




%1S 


SP 






ilbar 7 


~Ca «K 


^^h^^^^^s 


a2-sKs 


>w&£r?*« 


.niT^SSjBA 








CHAPTER XII. 

HERE are so many wonderful pennyworths now-a- 
days. Literary pennyworths, which would go a 
long way towards papering a moderately-sized 
room. Toy pennyworths, looking as though they 
must take a week of honest hard work to manufacture. 
Then a penny loaf at a cheap bread-shop, or a pennyworth 
of pudding (" spotted," is not it called ?) is as filling a penny- 
worth in the food way as could be desired. Coals are 
to be bought by the pennyworth in some neighbourhoods 
(you may carry them away, if you like, in your hat or coat- 
tail pocket). As far as clothes go, you can anyhow buy a 
collar and pair of cuffs for a penny. Towards housekeep- 
ing, when you want to begin, a penny will buy your gridiron, 
or your pokerette. With regard to amusement, see what is 
offered to you . there are penny readings (only they gener- 
ally cost upwards of twopence), there are tragedies and pan- 
tomimes at the fairs, wax-work, wild beasts, Albino ladies, 
living skeletons, giants, and what not, all to be seen for one 
penny. 

But how to spend your last penny in the world . that was 
the difficulty in Ann's case ! She was faint and weary, but 
she did not want to buy any food ; she did not want any 
amusement, or clothes, or coals, or aught else that a penny 
could purchase. Her plight was a desperate one . a penny 
would not help her over her troubles. At least she thought 
not . but it did. 

She made up her mind to make one last, desperate effort 
to find something to do, and resolved to go out and buy a 



316 A London Romance. 

newspaper. Therein . who knows ? . she might find a situa- 
tion which would suit her. She hardly knew what ; but she 
was hopeful. In most situations for women . notably, a 
scullery-maid's . an unimpeachable character is strictly 
necessary. For a tragic actress a character is not of such 
moment. Perhaps there might be a tragic actress wanted 
somewhere. 

In a shop near Burton Crescent resided a little sallow- 
complexioned old lady, who kept a small library and sold 
periodicals. Of her Ann made enquiry ; but found that the 
penny newspapers that day were all sold. There was, how- 
ever, a higher-priced journal, which she could read for a 
penny, and this offer Ann readily accepted. 

It was a large journal, containing several pages of adver- 
tisements, and as Ann looked down column after column, 
without finding anything at all likely, her heart grew heavier 
and heavier. 

The old lady seated behind the counter at her needle- 
work peered through her spectacles at the sad young face of 
her customer, and seemed not a little interested in her pro- 
ceedings. At last, with a sigh, Ann folded up the paper 
again and laid it down, and while she took out her purse 
her eyes still lingered on the print, but the tears rising to 
them dimmed her vision. 

The little old lady's spectacles meanwhile were peering 
into the purse, where the penny stood out conspicuous in its 
loneliness. When Ann would have laid her money on the 
counter, she laid her hand upon the girl's arm. 

"You've, not seen anything that will suit you, my dear,'' 
said she. 

" No . nothing," Ann answered, in a low tone. 

"Then you must not pay me, my dear. I shouldn't like 
to take it. There, there, put it back." 

And Ann put back the penny without thanks. She could 
not speak just at that moment. 

She leant her hand upon the counter to steady herself, for 
somehow she felt a little giddy ; and, bending her eyes upon 
the paper, bit her lips. And while she stood thus, strange 
to say . at this critical moment of time, when her future 
happiness or misery were trembling in the balance, through 
her tears she read, as though in letters of fire . 

" Ann Whit aker ! If still in London, pray call without 
loss of time on Mr. Dadson, Solicitor, No. 2, Xew Inn." 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 317 

A moment afterwards she had hurriedly pulled out her 
penny and thrust it into the old lady's hand. 

" God bless you for your kind words," she cried. " It is 
all I have got . all. But I have found something now. God 
bless you ! " 

And she was gone ; and she and that old lady never met 
again on earth : but the latter often told the story. 

"I was sitting as I might be here, Ma'am; and she stood 

as you might be there, and says 1 and says she " 

And so on. 

Ann knew where New Inn was situated ; and all the way 
there she repeated again, and again, and again, the name of 
Dadson, Solicitor, of No. 2. She was not very long in per- 
forming the journey, and reached the office just as a clerk 
was lighting the gas. 

She feared that Mr. Dadson would have left his place of 
business before she arrived ; and was inexpressibly relieved 
to find that such was not the case. But Mr. Dadson was 
engaged. Would she take a seat ? She took a seat, and 
waited as patiently as she could. 

There were two clerks shut off by themselves in a sort of 
pen . an old man and a young one. The young one was 
still lighting the gas. He was of a playful nature, and in a 
sportive mood. He made the gas flare up suddenly, and 
then turned it as suddenly out. 

" What are you doing ? " the old clerk asked, peevishly. 
" What's the good of larking ? " 

" Who's larking ?" the young one retorted. 

" Come, come," said the old one, angrily, " light up, will 
you ? I want to get my work done, and get off home." 

Some more practical joking with the gas followed after 
this, and another remonstrance, and then the two clerks 
went on with their work. Ann listened to the ticking of the 
clock, and read the particulars of some sales by auction, the 
bills of which were wafered against the wall. They were all 
sales which had taken place long ago. 

The young clerk began talking. 

"How long's the old boss going to be to-night, do you 
think?" 

" How am I to know ? " 

" Who's in with him now ? »phe same P art y ? " 

" Of course he is." 



o 



1 8 A London Romance. 



" I hope he pays Dadson well for his time. He takes it 
out of him in that particular, don't he ? " 

" Yes, rather." 

" He's been here twice a day at least for the last six days. 
I never knew such a fidgety beggar." 

"Hold your tongue, can't you?" said the old clerk, and 
the pens went on scratching for some time without in- 
terruption. 

" What does he want to find her for, I wonder," the young 
clerk began again. " There's a fortune hanging to it, per- 
haps. I wish some one would advertise for me." 

Ann listened eagerly ; but no more was said. The old 
clerk presently passed over to his young friend a paper 
which he wanted read aloud. In a droning voice, then, the 
lad began to read, and Ann heard a confused murmur of 
long words and long sentences, which seemed to her to 
have no beginning or end. 

It was a weary time she had to wait, and she was very 
anxious. But yet she did not complain. Here in this 
office was her only hope. What was beyond ? 

She grew impatient at last ; such a long while had passed, 
and yet her turn had not come. Was it possible that they 
had forgotten she was there, and had allowed Mr. Dadson 
to go away for the day without seeing her ? He might have 
gone out by a back door. 

When she reflected upon her desperate condition, this 
thought frightened her, and laying her hand upon her heart 
to stay its throbbing, she rose unsteadily to her feet. But 
at that moment a door opened at the end of a passage lead- 
ing from the office, and footsteps were heard approaching. 

" That's Mr. Dadson, I think," said the young clerk, and 
she turned to meet him. It was Mr. Dadson, a small gray- 
haired man, but there was another figure of a man behind . 
the figure of a man with a beard. 

" Ann ! Ann ! At last ! " 

The figure behind had rushed past the little lawyer, and 
James Jarman held her in his arms . held her close to his 
heart . and kissed her pale face again and again. 

"Why did you not come before?" he asked, breath- 
lessly. " I have advertised a hundred times and more. I 
have searched everywhere. That vagabond Pickering gave 
me the address you told him. Number One, was it not, 
Plantagenet-place ? " 



Iti Paradise and Elsewhere. 319 

" No," said Ann ; and she gave the number correctly. 

" At any rate I asked at every house for you by your own 
name, and . and his." 

" I took the name of Mortimer," said Ann. 

" Then you have not given up all idea of the stage ? " 

"No, I " 

" You chose the same name you acted under that night. 
A name he chose for you, was it not ? " 

Mr. Dadson here interrupted somewhat impatiently, . 

" Perhaps if you would step into my private room, Madam. 
In case any client should drop in." 

The two clerks chuckled slightly at this. In truth the 
scene was scarcely one which could strictly be called official. 
As it was, Mr. Dadson had had a good deal of trouble in 
managing the eccentric Mr. Jarman's business. Certainly 
he had not bargained for this dramatic passage. 

In Mr. Dadson's private room some, comparatively speak- 
ing, rational talk ensued, and arrangements were made for 
the future. 

" You had better go to-night to a respectable hotel," 
James said. " Here is some ready money. I will call in 
the morning and give you the necessary authority to draw 
any sums which you may require in future. If you really 
wish to carry out the idea about the stage, I can be of ser- 
vice. I happen to know that Burgoyne could find you an 
opening at once." 

Ann related what had occurred. 

" I can manage it, I think," said James. 

That very night, in the smoking-room at " The Roughs," 
he found Burgoyne in conversation with a slim, sharp-featured 
man, with a great quantity of wild wiry hair . Charker, the 
manager of the T. R., Yokeltown, where Burgoyne's new 
piece was to be produced, by way of testing its capabilities 
for the London stage. 

" You asked me a week or two since for the address of 
the young lady who acted at the amateur performance at the 
Boudoir," said Jarman. "You wanted her services." 

Burgoyne exchanged a glance with his friend the 
manager. 

" That's true enough ; I did." 

" I have found her now." 

" Yes ; I saw her myself yesterday." 



320 A London Romance. 

"Well?" 

" I'm afraid now the chance is gone." 

They talked for another ten minutes upon the same sub- 
ject, and then the conversation had reached this point. 

" If her friends would be willing to help her now," said 
Charker. 

" With a sort of entrance fee of say fifty pounds," said 
Jarman. " Would you pay her a salary then ? " 

" A salary ! That would be impossible." 

" Not if her friends made it a hundred ? In that case 
you might pay her five pounds a week for a couple of 
months, don't you think ? " 

And all three gentlemen laughed heartily at this droll 
way of putting it. 

When Jarman called next day on Ann he told her that 
she was engaged to play a leading part in Burgoyne's new 
piece, "Autumn Leaves," which was to be produced three 
days hence ; the reason for her performing so important a 
part at so short a notice being, that the lady who was to 
have acted the character had suddenly fallen ill. 

" It's a splendid chance for you," said Jarman. " Are 
you satisfied ? " 

She pressed his hand in reply, and he hurried away to 
make a host of purchases which he said were absolutely 
necessary. She also had to work very hard ; for she must 
leave London at latest by the midnight express. Charker 
came to see her, and his opinion upon the whole appeared 
to be favourable. 

" You're not very strong, are you ? " he said. 

" I have not been very well lately." 

" Well, don't you fall ill just now, you know, or we're clean 
done for." 

" Oh no ; there's no fear of that." 

Throughout the day she rode about almost continuously 
in a cab, buying a great number of articles, a list of which 
had been prepared for her. When night came she went to 
the station, and v/aited for Burgoyne and Charker, who were 
going down with her. She was there about twenty minutes 
before the time the train was to start ; but found that Jar- 
man had got there a few minutes earlier. They walked to- 
gether, arm in arm, to and fro upon the platform. 

"Are you very tired and sleepy?" he asked. " What a 
day you have had of it ! " 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 321 

" It has been like a fairy tale," she said ; " and you are 
the good genius. How kind and noble you are. What do 
I not owe you ? " 

" Would you ever care to pay me ? " 

"Would I ever? I will." 

" No ; the price I should ask might be too high." 

She looked up at him in surprise. There was a strange 
tremor in his voice. 

" What do you mean, James ? You know such kindness 
as yours can never be paid. Is there anyone else in the 
world who would do as you have done, and stretch out a 
hand to help me ? It does not signify that the fault was 
not mine ; the world " 

" Who cares for the world ? " he answered, passionately. 
" I have all my life had the world against me. What then ? 
I have had luck in my favour. I am rich now, and care 
nothing whether the world hate or love me. But, Ann, I 
am very lonely . I am sick for want of one love . one that 
cannot be mine . one that has been stolen from me." 

"I do not understand," she said in a flutter, slightly 
struggling to disengage her hand, and then closing it again 
upon his. " Yet I think I do. I am not worth this. You 
would regret it always. Let me go my way." 

" Regret it ! Not I, if you did not. See, Ann, the train 
is getting ready that is to take you from me. There are two 
lives open to you : one all lights, flowers, music, applauding 
crowds . for a few years, that is. but while it lasts, a magic 
life, fascinating, fatal, which will rob me of you . which will 
rob you of yourself; the other is a life of peace and ease . 
luxury, if you will . or of travel through strange lands such 
as you used to tell me you dreamt of in those days when 
you spent so many long hours in looking out into that lonely 
little street." 

The passengers were hurrying on to the platform. The 
bell was ringing ; all was bustle and confusion. 

" Take your places, gentlemen . take your places. Going 
by this train, Ma'am ? " 

" No . yes . in a moment." 

" Here is our star," cried Burgoyne's voice. " Come 
along; I've got a coupk all to ourselves." 

" Burgoyne said you would not be in time," said Charker. 
" I knew you would though. You are a girl of energy, I 
can see, who means to make the world her footstool ; 
21 



322 A London Romance. 

and by Heaven you will, if you try. You've got it 
in you." 

" What do you say? " asked James. 

Ann hesitated, stammered. "How can we break our 
promise now?" 

" If you say ' Yes,' I'll do it in a moment for you." 

She was silent. A thousand thoughts crowded at once 
upon her mind. Perhaps fortune and fame awaited her 
yonder. Here was her dream about to be realised. Should 
she let the golden opportunity go by ? And if she became 
a great actress, was there not one who, hearing of her name, 
would 

" Come, come, Miss Mortimer ! " 

" Ccme along ; we're just off ! " 

" Will you give me a few hours, James? I will write." 

He only pressed her hand in reply, and helped her into 
the carriage. The guard hastily closed the door, and the 
next moment the train started. The three travellers, look- 
ing back, saw Jarman still gazing after them until the broad- 
ening darkness shut him out from their view. 




CHAPTER XIII. 




HE members of the stock company of the Theatre 
Royal Yokeltown were not much delighted at 
hearing that Mr. Burgoyne was himself coming 
down to superintend the last rehearsals. The 
actors of the leading parts knew very well that there was no 
chance of their getting engagements in town to play the 
same characters. They were only, as it were, keeping the 
beds warm for the lucky ones. It was quite likely that 
Burgoyne might take it into his head to act the principal 
character himself, or else the manager in London would be 
sure to do so. The stage-manager here had some experi- 
ence of him. 

" You'll catch it, some of you," he said. " He'll tell you 
you don't do it right before you speak. I've known him be 
in the house on the quiet, in a dark corner somewhere, at a 
rehearsal, and nobody have a ghost of a notion he was there, 
taking notes of everything. Regular coaching himself up to 
come and pitch into us the first time he publicly put in an 
appearance." 

Somebody in the orchestra at this moment snapped a 
fiddlestring. 

"You'll catch it, too, some of you, 
comes," continued the stage manager, 
you don't." 

When he did come they did catch it. Nothing was right. 
Everything had to be tried over and over again ; and he 
ignored the poor stage-manager's previous directions alto- 
gether. Not only was all the business chopped and changed 
about, but so technical was Mr. Burgoyne's language, that 

21 2 



when Mr. Burgoyne 
" Mind my words if 



324 A London Romance. 

not one in a dozen, even among the carpenters, had the 
vaguest notion what he wanted done. Thus, instead of 
" Shut that trap," it was " Shore your O.P. trap ; "' and he 
was so learned upon the subject of floats, battens, wing- 
lights, and ground rows, the very gasman did not, as he 
afterwards remarked, know exactly where he was to a week 
or two. 

The unhappy machinists, flymen, stagemen, wingmen, 
flatmen, and cellarmen, trembled in their shoes when they 
heard his orders, and wildly pushed and pulled at the 
scenery until everybody . author, manager, and prompter . 
deed them for dullheads in chorus. 

It was really good fun to look on and see the vagaries 
of this irrepressible one when putting his brother actors 
through their paces. Your ordinary author, who is not an 
actor too, is generally a poor meek creature, who is afraid to 
make a suggestion ; but Burgoyne knew all about every- 
thing, and was here, there, and everywhere. 

One moment he was going up on the sloat . the trap or 
slide, by which fairies ascend to or descend from the clouds ; 
then he was going through the " Corsican Brother " business 
on the scruto ; and lastly he was down in the orchestra 
leading the band. 

" Blow this sort of thing," said Brown, the second low 
comedian. '. Everything's going to be cut out. If I'm not 
to have my hiccups in the first act, there's nothing else left 
in the part." 

He was a genuine specimen of his class, was Brown. One 
who invariably took advantage of a serious situation to make 
the people laugh, thereby proving that he ought to be first 
low comedian in place of the gentleman whom the people 
did not laugh at. He usually made himself prominent in 
mobs, and was enormous in a comic " hooray." Put him in 
" Julius Caesar," as one of the citizens, and he was sure to 
be immensely funny, consequently very annoying to Brutus 
or Marc Antony, particularly in the oration scene ; but make 
him a citizen in a burlesque of " Julius Caesar," and tell 
him he was to be funny, and he would throw a gloom over 
the whole performance. 

There was a haughty walking gent . a provincial beau 
jeune komme, who called himself a jeune premier, because he 
thought the other title was not very dignified. 

" Walking gent ! Walking stick, I call him/' said Bur- 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 



325 



goyne. " I'll cut out that man Brown altogether, if he does 
not tone down of his own accord. That White seems a 
modest sort of fellow. I'll get him up to town this winter." 

White was the first low comedian, and he was subsequently- 
taken to London as Burgoyne had promised. Here, at the 
Sahara, he met with the fate of other wags before him. His 
duty was to try to be funny whilst the audience were settling 
themselves in their seats, or while they were turning their 
backs to the stage previous to going home very much ex- 
hausted by the sensation drama occupying the middle of 
the bill. 

The company generally were anything but satisfied with 
the parts allotted to them, and still less with the changes 
which were made in the parts they had taken the trouble to 
learn. Nobody, in fact, was in a very pleasant mood ; and 
Ann's reception was far from being a cordial one. Burgoyne 
was too busy, and Charker too excited, to speak to her. She 
stood alone in a corner of the dark stage, and waited with a 
throbbing heart for her turn to come. 

It seemed to her that a rehearsal was much more trying 
than a public performance. It was a cold wet day ; and 
perhaps it was because of the cold she shivered. She had 
had very little sleep overnight, and had been too fatigued in 
the morning to study her part. It was a much longer part 
than she had thought at first, and contained a vast amount 
of business. 

" Miss Mortimer ! Where's Miss Mortimer ? " 

" Miss Mortimer L Miss Mortimer ! " 

She was called at last, at a moment when she had not ex- 
pected the summons. 

"You ought to be there." 

" No ; she ought to be here." 

" She enters from left third entrance, doesn't she, Sir ? " 

" No ; she doesn't. And if she did, she's not doing it. 
Stay ; that's wrong. Higher up. No ; lower down. Not 
that side at all." 

Poor Ann ! No wonder she lost her presence of mind 
under these various and conflicting orders, and wished her- 
self safe home again . anywhere, in fact, but at the Theatre 
Royal Yokeltown. 

" The whole of the second act goes very flat,'' Burgoyne 
said, when the rehearsal was over. " We must have on the 
limelight at the finish. That'll improve it." 



326 A London Romance. 

The second low comedian sniggered at these words, and 
whispered to Ann . 

" That's right. Limelight again ! What would they do 
without it ? Whenever a situation is a rightdown bad one, 
introduce the limelight and it's a sure success, and never 
mind about its being likely . in a railway tunnel or down a 
coal mine . anywhere." 

" At any rate," said one of the other actors, " I'm glad 
school's broke up for to-day. I'm dead beat." 

"It'll be worse to-morrow, though," said Brown. "I'll 
bet you, he wants everything done just the reverse of what 
it is to-day." 

Thus they separated ; and Ann went home to her lodgings 
to learn her part. She ordered tea to be brought up, and 
while it was being got ready lay down upon the bed to 
take half an hour's nap. She fell asleep for several 
hours. 

When she awoke, the thought that she had wasted so 
much valuable time made her nervous. How was it possible 
now that she could be perfect in her part by the next even- 
ing ? If she sat up all this night she could ; but she felt 
that she had not strength enough for that. She would go 
to bed early and get up early. 

She carried out her intention, but rose very little refreshed, 
after a feverish night. However, she sat down at once to 
study. After an hour or two she began to have a pretty 
good knowledge of the part. The words seemed to come 
to her more readily as she applied herself zealously to the 
task. The rehearsal call was at eleven. There were yet a 
couple of hours. Rap-tap. 

It was the postman's knock which had disturbed her. 
The servant girl came running up stairs with a letter. The 
envelope was in Jarman's writing. Inside on a slip of paper 
was written . 

" When your first performance is over, you will have time 
to think quietly. Then write to me." 

There was another letter, however, round which the slip 
of [paper had been wrapped, and the handwriting was a 
woman's. She opened the second envelope, and read there 
a few scrawled words within. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 327 

" My Dearest, . Can you ever forgive me ? They say I 
am dying. Will you come and see me first ? 

" Harry Draper." 

Wafered up in the passage, upon which the stage-door 
opened, was to be read this announcement . 





Saturday, October 15. 






Ballet, 


Props, Supers, 
Principals at 


Scenes 
12-30. 


at 


IX. 



The actors and actresses had assembled at the hour 
named, and the rehearsal commenced. When Miss 
Mortimer was called; she did not answer. Mr. Charker 
was inclined to be savage, but Burgoyne was anxious that 
the young lady should be treated kindly. 

" Don't frighten her, for goodness' sake. She's mistaken 
the time, I suppose. Here, some one run and fetch her. 
Will you, White, there's a good fellow." 

White found her, seated, as he first thought, asleep. An 
open letter lay in her lap, the copy of her part upon the 
floor at her feet. She looked up at him in a frightened 
way. 

" What has happened . is he worse ? " 

"Who? What . Charker? He only wanted to know 
what had become of you. He was afraid you had run 
away again to London. Come along ; they're all waiting. 
You know your part, of course." 

"Yes, yes. nearly." 

" Come, then. Where's your bonnet ? " 

She seemed as though she were coming away with him 
without making this addition to her toilet. The low come- 
dian looked at her more earnestly, and spoke in a gentle 
voice. 

"You have had bad news in that letter. That is the 
worst of our life, my dear. We must make merry when our 
hearts are sad, We have sold ourselves to the public, and 



328 A London Romance. 

belong to the public. We must try and forget that there 
are any such persons in the world as Miss Mortimer, or Mr. 
White. We are the heroes and heroines of Mr. Burgoyne's 
grand new and original sensation drama, and must break 
our hearts only about the troubles he is kind enough to 
make for us. Is this your shawl ? That's it. Lean on my 
arm, my dear." 

They were waiting in great anxiety at the theatre, but 
no remark was made on the lateness of the young lady's 
arrival. 

" Don't flurry her," said Burgoyne ; " she's fresh at it, you 
know." 

" I hope there won't be anything occur again like that you 
told me happened at the amateur theatre," Charker said. 

" No, no. Besides, that was not her fault. It was the 
fault of the infuriated ecclesiastic." 

" There's no chance of his bearing down upon us here, is 
there?" 

" Not likely. We'll have the stage doors guarded by a 
strong body of police ; and in the orchestra they shall keep 
drawn swords handy in their fiddle-cases." 

But though they thus joked upon the subject, the two 
gentlemen felt anything but easy in their minds. The re- 
hearsal passed off in a halting, jerky way. Ann read her 
part, and said that she would be sure to come perfect in the 
evening. The actors looked askance at one another, and 
smiled. Some of the actresses were not particular in how 
loud a tone they expressed their sentiments regarding the 
debutante. 

Why should a nobody-knows-who be put in there over 
their heads ? What experience could she have had t Not 
much, evidently. She seemed to be ignorant of the oldest 
stage traditions, and as yet she had shown no signs of 
histrionic talent. 

Mr. Charker made no remark. " She's good enough, I 
dare say," he said to himself. Mr. Burgoyne was also of 
his opinion. He belonged to the new school for the level- 
ling of actors and elevation of scenery. His plays were so 
constructed that, unless he acted in them himself, there was 
no leading character. Therefore utility people would do 
well enough for all the parts. 

The rehearsal over, Ann went back to her lodgings and 
tried to study her part. But the words swam before her 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 329 

eyes, and her memory failed her at every moment. How 
could she think upon any but one subject. He was dying, 
and had begged her to come to him. 

Presently she flung down her book, and hurried to the 
railway station. There she entered the telegraph office and 
despatched a message to Mrs. Starkey to ask her im- 
mediately to send back word whether Draper was better or 
worse. 

" When shall I have an answer ? " 

" By eight o'clock." 

She would then be on the stage. 

" Send the answer to me at the theatre.'' 

She went home again and resumed her study. She had 
not sat down at it very long when Burgoyne called. He 
had been very uneasy when he came to think things over 
quietly after the rehearsal. Was there yet time to give the 
character to anybody else ? Who could undertake it? He 
broke the matter gently, and the ladies to whom it was pro- 
posed, in a high state of indignation, offered a hundred 
objections to such a course. 

The facts of the case, if the truth must be told, were not 
exactly as they had been represented. Charker had had 
some trouble with his leading lady, and for reasons of his 
own, wished to show he was independent of her. Upon 
her pleading a slight indisposition therefore at the first re- 
hearsal, Charker had cut her altogether out of the piece. 

" I'm going to give it to some one else," he said. " No 
one here. A young lady of great talent and extremely 
elegant appearance. She'll come back from town with me, 
I dare say." 

He had not the remotest notion who the lady was to be, 
but rushed up to London and consulted Burgoyne, and Ann 
turned up at a lucky moment. Burgoyne had entertained a 
somewhat similar idea of ousting some one from the London 
theatre, where his piece was afterwards to be produced, and 
he had thought of Ann, and therefore spoken to Jarman 
about her. The very night after Ann met the author, 
Charker made his appearance, and Burgoyne was regretting 
that he had neglected to ask her for her address, at the 
identical moment that James entered the room. 

It would, therefore, be not a little mortifying to the 
manager as well as disastrous to the author if Ann failed ; 
and yet they were now far from sanguine of the result. 



33° A London Romance. 

Burgoyne was pleased to find her studying . at any rate to 
find her with the book open before her. 

" Are you getting on all right ? " he asked. " We expect 
great things of you, you know. You must not be frightened." 

" Yes, yes, I will do my best, to be sure . to be sure." 

She spoke in an absent way, however, and as though she 
scarcely knew what she was saying. Burgoyne went away 
less easy in his mind than he had been before he came. 

" Perhaps she is all right after all," he said to himself, 
" and perhaps she does not know a word of it. One alter- 
native is as probable as the other. Confound these women ; 
there's no knowing what to make of them." 

The hour for the performance drew near. Yokeltown has 
theatrical tendencies, and three theatres. Many new pieces 
are produced there ; some written specially for the Yokel- 
town-folk, who are of a critical nature, and award praise 
only where praise is due. At six o'clock there was a good 
crowd at the doors. The people going to the pit and 
gallery were inclined to be noisy. The half-hour having 
gone, they began to bang loudly at the doors. 

"Don't put them out of temper, for God's sake," said 
Burgoyne, who heard the noise from the interior of the 
theatre. " Why don't the fools open the doors ? " 

A moment afterwards the doors were opened and the, 
sound of an army of thick boots was audible upon the 
stone stairs, accompanied by the chink . chink of the tin 
cheques, as the moneytaker rapidly exchanged them for the 
sixpences handed to him. 

" There'll be a fine house, anyhow," said Charker, " but 
a mortal rough lot. I wish we hadn't tried it on a Satur- 
day, under the circumstances." 

"Why?" 

" If that girl should make a mess of it." 

" Oh, she won't." 

" I hope not ! I dare say Farquhar's got some of her 
friends in to hiss. She's quite capable of it." (Farquhar 
was the lady with whom Charker had quarrelled.) 

" You've got in your own people as well, I suppose ? " 

"Oh, of course." 

" There's not much strange paper though, is there ? " 

" None, I hope. It's dangerous to do much of that in a 
country town . even a large town like this. Everybody 



In Paradise and Elsewhere, 331 

knows everybody else, you see, and it would get wind. In 
London it's different." 

" Oh, in London we have to manage the matter carefully 
too. If it's a frost at starting, we advertise crowded houses, 
and all that sort of thing, of course, and stick up a notice of 
no more room in the pit. We have done that often when 
there have not been five pounds in money in the house . 
all paper. But we never let the actors have any. We keep 
them in the dark as much as the public." 

"So that when they want an order they get it second- 
hand from the public-house next door, or the cigar shop 
round the corner." 

" Most probably.'' 

There was a tremendous thumping and a loud hissing 
from the gallery. The orchestra, it had been arranged, 
should play five minutes earlier ; instead, owing to some 
misunderstanding, they began five minutes later than usual. 
At last they came, and played their best. Nobody listened. 
The curtain drew up on the opening farce. The unfortun- 
ate Mr. White was as comic as he could be when there was 
so much noise going on that only a third of what he said 
could be heard. Then the curtain descended with mixed 
applause and hisses ; and the audience got ready for the 
next piece. 

A waiter from the principal hotel had come over late in 
the afternoon and engaged the last private box not disposed 
of. He had taken it in the name of Smith, and it stood 
empty during the farce. When the curtain rose upon the 
great drama, a dark-bearded man entered it and took his 
place at the back, so that it was very difficult to make out 
his features from the stage. 

The music was playing now. Ann had come some time 
ago. She was dressed, and in obediecce to the call, had 
descended to the green-room. White found her here when 
he presently came in from changing his dress. 

"Well, how are you now? You look very nice. Feel 
more at home, now, don't you?" 

" Oh, yes. a little excited. It is the music, I think, and 
I'm so fresh at it. I suppose the music does not excite you 
in that way ? " 

" I don't know. Just a little, perhaps. Take it coolly 
now. Speak up, and don't care a button for anyone." 

" Thank you, thank you." 



33 2 A London Romance. 

The first act was half over. It went rather tamely. A 
favourite appeared, and carried a scene through with con- 
siderable applause. Then came a hitch and loud hissing. 

Charker came in front and begged for indulgence. There 
was applause at this ; and then he said, that he was well- 
informed that there were persons present who had come in 
sworn to make the piece a failure. At this there was loud 
disapprobation. It was one of those rash ventures managers 
are so fond of, but which generally succeed. Burgoyne at 
the wing bit his lips. 

"That Charker always was an ass," he muttered. 

The favourite actor went on again now, and the low 
comedian made his appearance. A telling situation brought 
the act drop down, amidst general applause. One or two 
faint hisses from a back seat were drowned most effectually. 

The second act opened weakly with a " carpenter's 
scene" and a long dialogue, in the words of which the 
actors were not perfect. Then there followed a stage wait. 
The discontented party grew louder in their demonstrations. 
The front scene gave place to an elaborate set piece for 
which there was great applause, and a call for the scenic 
artist. Then some lively business followed . a crowd well 
arranged, and then Ann entered from a bridge and catne 
down front. The crowd ga\e way; the audience in dead 
silence waited. 

Burgoyne whispered savagely, 

" Why don't your people applaud ? " 

" The idiots," muttered Charker, and stamped his foot on 
the ground. Then nervously cried, " Go on, go on. Damn 
it, why don't you prompt. What's she stopping for ? " 

She was stopping. The prompter was prompting but 
she seemed not to hear him. Her lips opened, but she said 
nothing. She put her hand up to her face and seemed to 
stagger. 

White was on the stage and approaching her gave her her 
cue again in an improvised sentence. The audience having 
waited patiently for a few moments, wondering not a little, 
began to laugh and hiss. One solitary person was heard to 
applaud but the hisses frightened him, and he desisted after 
a feeble effort. 

" It's stage fright," cried Charker with an oath. 

" It's idiotcy," exclaimed Burgoyne. Some one standing 
by touched him on the sleeve. 



Tn Paradise and Elsewhere. 333 

'.'A telegram came for the lady just before she went 
on. It was given her at the wing." 

The scene had somehow reached a conclusion amidst 
jeers and hisses and laughter. The curtain had fallen. 
That act at least was a failure. Ann had no sooner escaped 
from the stage than she fled to her dressing-room. Some 
one following in search of her found her with her head 
lying on the table, sobbing pitifully. 

" What do they all say? I am disgraced for ever, and I 
have ruined them, have I not ? Where can I hide myself? " 

" Don't talk like that, my dear. There, there, don't be 
a fool. You must go on again." 

"Again? impossible. I can never go on again." 

"No, no," a voice said. "No more, unless you choose. 
Put on your cloak and bonnet. You shall go away quietly 
with me if you wish. But why are you afraid ? " 

It was James Jarman who spoke . the Mr. Smith, of 
course, of the private box. 

" Oh, James," she said, running to him for help and 
shelter, " it was not that I was afraid, but oh, so wretched ! 
I have had a message. He is dying. He may not live 
through the night. How can I think of anything else at 
such a time ? " 

What a night of shame and humiliation to look back at ! 
Would she ever be able to face the public again after such a 
disgrace ? Yes, before long she shall appear again before a 
crowded audience, but of a different and even less in- 
dulgent kind. She shall appear in her own name then . 
and it shall be when she is being tried at the Old Bailey. 

Now, the playhouse was left far behind, and she was 
speeding on her way across country to the little watering 
place where Harry Draper lay dying. Already she had no 
thought for what had happened . scarcely recollected it. 
One idea only occupied her mind, . would she be in time ? 
Would he be dead before she reached him ? Was there a 
hope of being with him if only for a brief hour ? Was it 
possible that there was hope even beyond this . hope of 
renewed life in renewed love ? 



CHAPTER XIV 




HEN Tom Yolland returned from his unsuccessful 
negotiation with Draper's mother, he found the 
enemy in possession. Poor pretty little pale-faced 
enemy ! She did not look very formidable, but 
he frowned upon her none the less fiercely on that account. 

" That woman here ! " he exclaimed to Mrs. Starkey. 
" What does it mean? How on earth has it come about?" 

Mrs. Starkey, in a flutter, explained. Almost directly 
Thomas Yolland turned his back upon his friend, the poor 
gentleman began to get worse. He got very bad indeed. 
Mrs. Starkey became very frightened. Mr. Starkey said 
something ought to be done ; and Mrs. Starkey asked the 
sick man whether he desired that anybody should be sent 
for, and thus the letter was written, which was the cause of 
Ann's not knowing her part. 

Yolland returned, and walking straight up stairs, met Ann 
upon the first landing. 

" Hush ! " she said. "You must not go in." 

"Not go in?" 

" Not yet." 

'Why?" blustered Tom. He felt that he had a right to 
be by his friend's bedside. What right had this creature 
there . there or anywhere else for that matter ? 

"He is fast asleep," Ann whispered, "and the doctor 
said he was not to be disturbed. AVill you come again 
presently. ? ' 

"Oh. yes, I'll come again," said Tom Yolland, with a 
smile full of meaning .a smile which seemed to say, " You 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 335 

will find me a tough customer, my lady, and not one very 
easily to be dealt with. You need not think to practise 
any of your tricks upon me, because it will not do. No ! 
no ! Have a care. Look out for yourself. It shall be a 
fair battle ; but I give you warning there shall be no 
quarter." 

He turned abruptly on his heel when he had spoken, and 
went his way again in a state of great indignation, and very 
much determined. Good soul, how often are we girding up 
our loins, the rest of us, to do battle with pasteboard giants 
and ogres of lath and plaster, giving ourselves the grandest 
airs imaginable, as though of Christian heroes of great 
prowess ! 

In the end, then, the enemy was left in possession 
triumphant. Not very triumphant, by-the-way, but yet 
having the credit of having played her cards very well, and 
being monstrously wily and designing. 

Ann had found her lover very ill indeed. his state had 
been little, if at all, exaggerated. It was the opinion of the 
doctor that he most likely would not live out the night, but 
yet he had found strength to scribble down the few words 
which had been sent to her under cover to James Jarman. 
When this letter had been sent, he seemed to revive a 
little. 

" I will live till she comes," he said ; " I must see her.'' 
They expected her next morning, then in the afternoon, 
then at night, but she did not come. Mrs. Starkey said . 
"She won't come m time after all," and she asked the 
doctor's opinion. The doctor gave one of those vague 
answers which are so professional : . " He may last an hour 
or two only . perhaps a week." 

But the sick man seemed determined to keep his word. 
He would live till she came. She came before noon the 
next day, having travelled all night. She did not knock at 
the street door. Knowing how it could be opened from 
without, she turned the handle as she had often done before, 
and entered. 

She passed up stairs noiselessly and without meeting any 
person, and opened the sitting-room door. The room was 
dark and silent, not a sound was to be heard within the 
sleeping chamber. She trembled and held her breath. Had 
she arrived too late ? 



336 A London Romance. 

But almost at the same moment that this thought occurred 
to her a low, weak voice called out . 

" Ann ! Ann ! have you come ? " 

She ran forward and took him in her arms. She had for- 
gotten all his treachery to her. The recollection only of 
the old love and happiness lingered in her heart, and she 
laid her pale cheek against his, wasted and haggard by ill- 
ness. 

An hour or so later it seemed as though her presence had 
brought back some of the old gaiety and sunshine which 
had been so long strangers to the invalid's lodgings. She 
opened the windows, pulled back the curtains, sent out for 
flowers, and decorated the apartment. 

She seemed to settle down quite naturally into the task 
of nursing . a work at which all women are clever when 
they love the person whom they nurse. She tasted broths 
and slops, and watched the clock face for the time to come 
when the medicine was to be given. 

Draper lay very silent, but his eyes followed her restlessly 
when she moved to and fro, when she went and came again. 
He seemed afraid that she might once more run away and 
leave him. He would not go to sleep unless she sat by his 
bedside holding his hand in hers. 

When he slept, two tears trickled slowly down his cheeks, 
and his lips moved as though in entreaty. He woke up 
gasping and frightened. 

" I was afraid it was too late,' - he said, hoarsely, " too 
late to repair the wrong I have dene. Thank God, there is 
time ! Ring the bell." 

She rang, and when Mrs. Starkey came he bade her go 
at once for the best solicitor in the neighbourhood, and beg 
him to attend immediately. Mr. Wainwright, from the 
Royal Terrace, came within half an hour, and Draper con- 
sulted with him for some time alone. After this interview 
the solicitor departed in a great hurry, bending his steps in 
the direction of the railway. 

When Mr. Wainwright was gone, Draper called Ann to 
the bedside. 

" You can never love me as much as you once did," he 
said. "You cannot trust me the same." 

" I do not know what other women would do," she an- 
swered, pressing his hand, " or what I ought to do, but I 
think I shall always love you." 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 337 

" Enough to many me in reality ? " 

It presently appeared that Mr. Wainwright's presence had 
been required so that he might be consulted respecting the 
most expeditious mode of procuring a marriage license, and 
that he had departed to take the necessary steps, with in- 
structions that no expense need be spared. It was not 
likely that either Draper or Ann would inform the people 
of the house what business was in hand, but somehow the 
news got wind . probably because Mr. Starkey had listened 
at the keyhole . and there was great excitement in the lower 
regions. Of course this conduct upon Draper's part raised 
him greatly in the estimation of the women. How noble 
was such conduct ! (Noble to leave off acting like a 
scoundrel, and do what he ought to have done at first, did 
they mean?) How princely was the lavish outlay . for it 
was rumoured that the expense would be but little short of 
a hundred pounds. 

Tom Yolland, had he been aware of what was going on, 
would probably have entertained very different opinions to 
these, but his literary business carried him at this moment, 
much against his will, to London, and there was no one by 
to thwart the machinations of the syren. 

Thus one of the great sensation scenes of this little drama 
occurred during his absence. The marriage took place 
under the most romantic circumstances, by candle light, 
with closed doors, with frightened women listening on the 
stairs without. The clergyman's deep voice just faintly 
audible, now and then reached their ears, as also now 
and again a half-suppressed sob. It was more like a 
funeral than a wedding, and those who assisted without 
license upon the stairs crept away trembling when the 
room door opened, and the lawyer, the clergyman, and a 
third person who had been present came solemnly down 
to the street. 

But the doctor's visit an hour or so later brought hope 
of happiness to come to one heart at least. He pro- 
nounced Draper's state to be slightly improved. He might 
even now get all right again if he were kept perfectly 
quiet. 

"I feel much better myself," Draper said. "Why did 
you all try to frighten me ? I shall not die after all . not 
yet. I have a great future before me." 
22 



338 A London Romance. 

She was sitting by his side. Her eyes filled with tears as 
he spoke, and she gently smoothed his cheek, smiling on 
him as she did so. But with a restless motion of his head 
he caused her to desist. 

" Where's Tom Yolland ? " he said. " I ought to see 
him. That affair must not be neglected. I've wasted time 
enough as it is." 

There was not much difficulty about obtaining quiet just 
now in the little watering-place. There were no other 
lodgers in the house. The season was over, and the apart- 
ments in the house on either side stood empty. 

The gay promenaders were gone . the fashionably-dressed 
young ladies and gentlemen. The great army of tag-rag 
had also departed . the nigger melodists, punch show-men, 
fortune-tellers, and the like. The band which had been 
engaged by the tradespeople for the summer months had 
gone too, but it had not yet broken up. Some of the sea- 
side visitors recognised the old band again playing before 
their houses in town, but they did not reward the musicians 
with the same liberality as they used to do in the summer 
days upon the sands. 

Only a few strangers remained in the town, and these 
were an unprofitable lot to deal with. Unreasonable persons 
eking out small incomes, haggling in an unseemly fashion 
over the change of even sixpence . actually living there for 
economy's sake. Everywhere there were bills of " Lodgings 
to Let" in the windows. The long-talked-of happy dull 
season was approaching when there was time for rest and 
pleasure, only the other season had been so bad. It was 
generally allowed that the season had been bad. 
" We stood empty two months." 
"We only had what you might call one good let." 
"The place is nothing to what it used to be." 
" The company is nothing to what it used to be." 
" The seasons are all turned topsy turvy. There's no 
summer now-a-days." 

It was generally supposed, however, that the Starkeys had 
done well. How was it then that Mr. Starkey took even a 
gloomier view of life than was his wont, and loitering longer 
than usual at the Benbow bar, drank deeper ? It had long 
been understood that Mr. Starkey had got a lawsuit on re- 
lating to his wife's property. It was said, by those who 
were not numbered among Mr. Starkey's admirers, that the 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 339 

suit had been instituted by Mr. Starkey to wrongfully obtain 
possession of property belonging to Mr. Starkey's wife's 
sister . a minor. 

This action, after many turns and twistings of a wholly 
unanticipated nature, had concluded adversely to Mr. 
Starkey's interests, and it was a question whether in thus 
trying to get more than belonged to him he had not lost all 
he originally had. Mr. Starkey was evidently, on his own 
showing, in a bad way. 

The town was certainly quiet enough now, and perhaps a 
little dull. The sea waves washed the shore to a sad music. 
A cold land-wind blew down the lonely street, drifting the 
dead leaves it gathered on its way upon the door-steps of 
the dark and desolate-looking houses. 

Only a faint light glimmered here and there, and one of 
these was from the window of the room where all Ann loved 
on earth lay hovering 'twixt life and death. 




22- 



CHAPTER XV 




jlLLIAM BRADSHAW lived in a snug little house 
near his chapel. He might have had a much 
larger house hadj he thought fit to do so, for his 
income was a very comfortable one ; but he was 
careful withal and kept well within it. He had managed 
to save some money, and had invested it advantageously 
in the purchase of literary property. He was now one of 
the principal proprietors of the Thirsty Soul, to which he 
contributed some articles that were very popular. 

There was much talk of a larger chapel being found for 
him. He was so run after now that the accommodation at 
the old chapel was wholly inadequate . people blocking up 
the aisles and crowding the door-ways. The low music 
hall company a few houses off were even tempted to pay 
Mr. Bradshaw a visit to ascertain what made him "draw so." 
Some of the newspapers had begun systematically to write 
him down, and he was getting on famously. 

If another chapel were found for him, or a new one built, 
he might take a larger house adjoining it, or if he had any 
family . for, as ought previously to have been mentioned, 
he had recently married. 

He had been united to one of the daughters of that 
Mrs. Hodson whom we met at the tea-meeting described a 
good many chapters back. It was said to be a very good 
match. She was a very estimable young woman, somewhat 
long of nose and bony of outline ; but in all other respects 
agreeable. They did not begin life as some other married 
couples do, as though matrimony were a game of play, as 
though they were children who had had a present made 
them of a new doll's house. 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 341 

Martha was from the first serious and orderly and econ- 
omical. She quite naturally picked up the bunch of keys 
and glided into the household duties as though she had 
been all her life looking on, waiting for the place. The 
servants very soon found out they had got a mistress in the 
house, and, before a month was over, there were battles 
royal about the waste in the kitchen and the oglements of 
the libertine baker. 

She made him a good wife, everyone said. She kept 
the house well on a surprisingly small allowance. Her 
servants feared and respected her. Her husband also 
feared her a little, and never indulged in a joke when they 
were alone. Nothing, indeed, could be more serious and 
improving than those evenings they spent together tete-a-tete. 
She asked him questions upon various points of belief. His 
talk at times took almost the form of a short sermon, and 
she would listen gravely, inclining her head at intervals 
over her teacup. 

In due course she became sub-editor of the Thirsty Soul, 
and the terror of the " printers' devils," who, by-the-way, 
were not thus named at the establishment where that 
journal was set-up and machined. 

There was, we can readily imagine, about as little " love 
nonsense " talked by this young couple as ever there was 
by any married couple who did not exactly scratch and 
bite each other at the end of the first four and twenty 
hours. Perhaps William did not desire that sort of thing. 
Martha, with all her good qualities, was not one of those 
women men make pets and playthings of. She loved her 
William as a good wife ought to do, and for nearly a year 
after their marriage kissed him regularly when he entered 
or left the house. 

At all times she was solicitous for his comfort, and 
warmed his slippers in the winter time. She was even a 
little jealous. Once or twice she frowned very darkly upon 
such female members of her husband's flock as pressed 
around him at the tea-meetings, and once or twice, when 
occasion offered, she stabbed him sharply with needle- 
pointed epigrams upon the subject of that love affair of 
long ago with that "mountebank girl;" . so Ann was 
spoken of in the Hodson family, where the fact of the 
amateur performance had become known. 

Was William happy ? He was growing fat, at any rate, 



342 A London Romance. 

He took very kindly to his meals, and rode when he went 
his rounds, instead of going, as heretofore, on foot. He 
was looked up to as a king in his little circle, and mornings 
noon, and night he heard his praises sung by many voices. 
It was heavenly music, sweet to listen to. 

That affair of long ago ! But, after all, it was not so 
very long ago as regards actual time. Not more than a 
year ! Yet what a long while since it seemed. He had 
made such strides in life. He was so much more famous, 
and so well married. 

After all he had done well in shaking himself free from 
the Whitaker connexion. No good could have come of it. 
They would have dragged him down. As for the girl, if 
what he had heard had any foundation of truth, he had had 
a lucky escape in breaking off the marriage. 

One morning, when he was seated at breakfast, there 
came a knock at the street-door, and the servant brought 
him in a card on which he read the name of James Jarman. 
He put down again untasted the cup of tea he was raising 
to his lips, and leant back in his chair. Mrs. Bradshaw, 
looking round the tea-urn, saw how uneasy he appeared} 
and asked what had happened. 

" Nothing ! nothing ! " he replied impatiently, and rising, 
left the room. When he had passed through the door, 
Mrs. Bradshaw jumped up and looked at the card. 

James Jarman was waiting in the study where he had 
been shown by the servant. He was standing with his 
back to the fire, and had not taken off his hat. He did 
not take it off now, but, with his hands in his pockets, 
nodded towards his cousin. 

William, without nodding, took a chair, and waited for 
the other to begin the conversation ; and while he did so, 
he made a critical survey of Jarman's general appearance. 
He was not shabbily dressed, but so carelessly that it had 
almost the same effect as shabby clothes. He wore a 
large ragged beard, and his hair was long and untidy. 
There was, too, a wild, haggard look about his face. At 
the first glance, William fancied that he was either mad or 
drunk. 

" You're surprised to see me, I dare say," he said. 

" Yes," said William, shortly. 

" I should not haye called on you if I could have helped 
jt, We have/not seen much of one another since I came 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 343 

back, have we? Well, our paths in life lie in opposite 
directions; but for once they come together." 

" Will you take a chair?" said William. 

" No. You can guess, I dare say, why I am here. It is 
about Ann." 

William made an impatient gesture. The other continued . 

" Do you know what has become of her ? " 

" I do not wish to know." 

" I can understand that, but you must. A cursed villain 
did her as great wrong as man can do to woman. With a 
mock marriage. . " 

William rose abruptly with an expression of disgust. 

" That is her version of the affair. Of course ! Of 
course ! One of the mock marriages of romance . at least, 
what I am told are put into romances. I do not read that 
class of book." 

"There is no occasion for half the words you are wasting. 
What I tell you is the truth, and not what she says. When 
she found out how she had been cheated she left him, and 
being ashamed to apply to me or to you " 

" To me, indeed ! " 

" To me then . she was reduced to the greatest misery. 
She would, I believe, have perished for want had I not 
accidentally discovered her." 

" I saw the advertisements. They were sufficiently public, 
I think, as indeed have been many other details connected 
with this most disgraceful business." 

"This man Draper has . how, I know not . persuaded 
her to go back to him." 

" Easily persuaded, I dare say,'' sneered William. 

" Easily or not, the fact is there. As you observed just 
now, the details of the case have already been too public. 
But will the publicity end where it is? If the circum- 
stances of the case, and your relationship, become known 
to your congregation, what then ? " 

" Become known," said William, with a start. " Who 
would dare ? " 

" Who can say ? Clearly it is best that the matter should 
end at once. She must be brought back again." 

" How? we cannot force her?" 

" No, but we can frighten him. He is a poor weak fool. 
It is your trade to coax and frighten. Suppose you go to 
him." 



344 ~A London Romance. 

" I have met the man once," said William, after a 
moment's silence. "I am afraid that good words would be 
thrown away upon him." 

" But you might try, and if persuasion fail " 

"Well, what then?" 

" You are much the stronger of the two, and in your 
place I'd beat him to death with my walking-stick." 

" I think you're mad," said William. 

James laid- his hat upon the table, and wiped his face. 
" I dare say," he said in a low voice. " I suppose it is 
something of that sort," and there was a silence of some 
moments. 

" I do not see how I can interfere in this matter," said 
William, presently. " My interference might only lead to 
some unpleasant publicity, and cannot possibly do any 
good. If you will take my advice, you also will let the 
affair rest." 

" And is that the religion you teach ? " asked the other, 
bitterly. " Save sinners as long as you can save them with- 
out danger to yourself. After all, why should I be surprised. 
I suppose yours is a business the same as any other." 

William moved towards the door. 

" We need riot prolong this interview, I think." 

" No, I think not," said James, and walked straight out 
into the street without another word. 





CHAPTER XVI. 

soon as Mr. Thomas Yolland had finished his 
business in town, he made up his mind to go 
back to his sick friend, and see what was to be 
done. There was a very determined look about 
his square-cut mouth as he marched down the hill leading 
from the railway station to the lower end of the town, where 
Draper's lodgings were situated. 

There was something about the look of his eye which 
seemed to indicate that he meant to stand no nonsense 
from anybody. 

Nor did he. Therefore, when he arrived at Starkey's 
house, he opened the street-door himself, and marched up 
stairs unannounced. His heavy step, as he crossed the 
little drawing-room, roused Harry Draper, who was at the 
moment asleep. " Is that you, my darling," he asked. 

Tom Yolland's lip curled at this term of endearment. 
" It is I," he said, presenting himself at the foot of the bed. 

Draper regarded him with a very blank expression of 
countenance, and coloured slightly. 

"Oh, it is you, is it? What a while you have been away.' - 

" I hope I've come in time." 

"In time? Oh, yes. I'm much better, the doctor says; 
he has great hopes of me." 

" I did not mean that. When I left you I was afraid you 
were in danger of something else besides death. Look here, 
Draper, are you well enough to bear a long talk ? 1 really 
want to speak to you seriously." 

Draper looked somewhat uneasily towards his friend. He 



346 A IdHitdh Rffltafa*. 

fancied he knietf what the other Would say, but he was 
silent. 

"It is about this connexion, Harry. Unless you would 
blight all your prospects, it must be broken off." 
"You mean if I accept this appointment? " 
"Of course you will do so, if you ever regain your 
health." 

" Oh, I have no fear of that ; I shall be quite well soon 

. in a week or so . but -" 

" But what ? There can be no great difficulty in doing 
what I say." 

" Yes, there is, more than you think." 
" Leave it to me. If you place the matter in my hands, 
you may make your mind quite easy as to the result." 
Draper was silent for a moment. 

" They all made out I was so much worse than I really 
was," he said, in a complaining tone : " I was forced into 
it." 

"I can understand that. She should never have been 
allowed to know you were ill at all. Women know their 
power at such a time ; they are all alike, designing, calculat- 
ing ; I know them well." 

" It was unfair to frighten me . a sick man." 
" It was very unfair, but luckily there is no harm done." 
"What?" 

" Don't be alarmed, Harry, but leave it to me, as I said 
before. If she really cares for you, as she pretends, she will 
sacrifice herself for your sake ; she will not try to drag you 
down. Ah, don't tell me ; women have often made these 
sacrifices where they have truly loved." 
" What, the designing ones ? " 

Tom Yolland saw that there had been some sort, of con- 
tradiction in his argument; he hit on another tack, for he 
was fully determined to save his poor friend, as he thought. 
It seemed to Tom Yolland, from the Tom Yolland point of 
view, that this passion was in all respects mean and vulgar, 
but it occurred to him that perhaps, after all, he was not 
going quite the right way to disgust Draper, even allowing 
the possibility of the existence of any high feelings and sen- 
timents on the part of the enemy. 

"Look here, Harry, I can't recognise you for your old 
self a bit in this business ; you used not to be the sort to be 
talked over so easily by a chit of a girl. I've heard yQU 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 347 

swear a score of times you would never love seriously. 
Why, you were always such a lawless sort of fellow. You 
seemed to snap your fingers, as it were, at all the little 
weaknesses flesh is heir to. You've quite frightened me 
many a time." 

Draper smiled with infinite self-satisfaction. 

"Who says I'm changed?" he asked. "It's not fair to 
criticise a man who's down on a sick bed. You see the 
girl's been very loving and devoted, and all that sort of 
thing. I'm obliged to make her some sort of return ; I 
couldn't really be hard on her.'' 

" Of course not ; I never would have suggested such a 
course ; but there are many ways in which a man of your 
position might show his gratitude to a woman in hers. I 
was afraid that you really were seriously in love with her," 

"Seriously in love!" said Draper, with his old laugh. 
" You ought to have known me better. Of course I love 
now as I have loved before a score of times . no more." 

But close upon his observation followed a sort of sob or 
cry of pain from the drawing-room beyond, the door of 
which stood ajar, and Yolland rose hastily to see who might 
be listening. As he approached, however, a light step fled 
before him. He followed to the head of the stairs and 
looking down saw Ann. 

She turned upon the landing and looked up at him with a 
dull fixedness in her eyes. He called to her but she made 
no answer, and passed quickly downward and out into the 
street. 

" That woman would like to thrust a dagger into me, I 
know," said Yolland to himself. "It was awkward she 
should have heard what she did, but after all perhaps it is 
for the best. The thing must really be broken off." 

"Well," said Draper, when Yolland returned, "who was 
it, the landlady or the landlord ? . I know he listens." 

" No, it was neither." 

Draper started up into a half-sitting posture, with a look 
of terror. 

" You . you do not mean " 

Yolland nodded. "Yes, I do." 

Draper fell back and clasped his hands over his face. 
Then struggled up once more, and gasped in great excite- 
ment . 

" Go for her. Fetch her back ! Do not stop to talk to 



34-8 A Londoji Romance. 

me, I am a pitiful liar and fool ! She is really my wife, and 
I love her more than all the world ! " 

Tom Yolland was rather slow in obeying his friend's com- 
mands. He wanted further explanations and directions. 
When at length he reached the street she was nowhere 
visible. He walked some distance to the right and to the 
left, and looked about him, and made enquiries, and 
eventually bent his steps towards his hotel. 

Here, it being the hour for which he had ordered dinner, 
he partook of it, and over his solitary meal pondered long 
and deeply. Perhaps, after all, he thought to himself, he 
had better leave Harry Draper to go his own way. Perhaps, 
after all, he might have been a trifle too officious. 

" As he is married there's an end of the matter. He's a 
fool, that's all." 

While Mr. Yolland was yet sipping his wine, a face he 
knew passed the window . a thin, dark face, with a bushy 
beard. A minute or two afterwards a voice, which was also 
familiar to him, was heard enquiring of a waiter in the pas- 
sage without for the address of a Mr. Harry Draper. It was, 
of course, James Jarman. 

Yolland watched him from the bow window of the coffee- 
room . a window which commanded a view of the straggling 
High Street, and of Paradise Place in the far distance. He 
saw him walk at a brisk pace to within a dozen yards or so 
of the house, and come to a stand-still to stare up at it from 
those railings on which Mr. Starkey during the season had 
smoked so many pipes. 

After lounging here awhile, instead of entering the house, 
he turned away and took the direction of the sands, and 
presently descended some rugged steps hewn in the chalk 
of the cliff. 

When Ann had left the drawing-room an hour or so pre- 
viously it was in this direction she had turned, and very 
soon was lost to view behind an overhanging rock. Thus 
Yolland had missed her. The steps led down to a wild 
part of the shore which was but little resorted to by the 
visitors. It had the character of being dangerous, for the 
flood-tide often overtook unwary wanderers and cut off all 
hope of retreat. Several people had been drowned here. 

Here among some scattered masses of rock the sea rolled 
in across a flat beach with surprising swiftness even in calm 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 



349 



weather, and when the weather was rough the waves dashed 
over them tumultuously with a mighty froth and bluster, 
towering mountains high. But just now it was low tide. A 
broad waste of wet, black sand lay stretched out towards 
the sea. The sun had set. The sky was dull and leaden 
of hue. Not a living soul was to be seen . not a sail upon 
the sea, or a bird in the air : not a sign of life, except the 
one lonely figure of the despairing woman sitting among the 
rocks. 




CHAPTER XVII. 




HEX James Jarman left "William Bradshaw's pre- 
sence he went straight to the railway terminus 
from which the trains started that in the merry 
*" seaside season took those shoals of pleasure- 
seekers to the little watering-place where Draper lay ill. 

The season being over, however, few trains ran there now, 
and James was told that he would have full three hours to 
wait. He did not, as he probably would have done at any 
other time, go away and return again at the proper time. 
He had nowhere to go, or nowhere he cared to go to. He 
had not eaten or drunk that day, but it did not occur to him to 
go and eat and drink. He sat down upon the nearest seat 
and resolutely made his mind up to sit there till the three 
hours were over. 

A boy selling papers on the platform offered him one, but 
he refused to buy. It seemed to him that there could not 
possibly be anything in any paper in the world he would 
care to read about. The boy held in his hand an enti- 
cing list of contents. A royal marriage, an earthquake, a 
horrible murder, an important article upon the last political 
crisis ! What was all this to him ? He smiled and said, 
" It's not worth a penny." 

The boy did not argue the point. Perhaps he also was 
of that opinion, and wondered at the taste of grown-up 
people. At any rate he went his way and left Jarman at 
peace. He sat therefore a whole hour undisturbed, seeming 
to watch the bustle of the platform, but really watching no- 
thing . seeing nothing . scarcely thinking. 

For he had formed no plan of action. He had vaguely 



I?i Paradise and Elsewhere. 351 

said to himself that he would go down and bring Ann away. 
He would somehow persuade her to come, but he had no 
idea how. He had not prepared a word to say. He tried 
once or twice to think of an argument, but could not do so. 
He would think of one when he saw her. That would be 
time enough. 

Only an hour of the three gone yet. He rose and wan- 
dered to and fro, dreamily staring before him. The railway 
guards wanted to know whether he was " going on." The 
man at the bookstall made excuses for pushing against and 
squeezing in before him ; he stood there so long without 
making a purchase, perhaps blocking out intending pur- 
chasers. He hung about so long and so suspiciously that 
the railway authorities began to form conjectures respecting 
him. He was either a detective officer or a pick-pocket. 

He wandered out into the street during the third hour, 
and paused upon the steps of the station, gazing about in 
the same listless fashion. As is customary when anyone 
with a decent coat upon his back comes to a standstill in 
the street, either to think over his own business or trouble, 
or talk to a friend about his, at least half a dozen street 
hawkers and vagrants came up and told their tales, sang the 
praises of their wares, or whined for halfpence. He scowled 
some of these off, refused others, and turned away from the 
rest. A wan-faced woman came up last, and dropped a 
dismal courtesy, murmuring indistinct prayers. He turned 
upon his heel, and re-entered the station. 

Looking back, however, he saw her still standing gazing 
very wistfully in his direction ; but as he looked she turned 
and crawled onwards despondently. Upon that he hastened 
after her, and feeling in his pocket gave her the first coin 
that came uppermost. a sovereign. She gazed from it to 
him, holding it out in her hand, very much astonished, as 
well she might be, and asked whether he had made a 
mistake. 

"No," he said; "why?" 

She then began to cry and bless him ; but he turned on 
his heel more savagely than before. She still followed, how- 
ever, wishing him all earthly happiness and happiness be- 
yond. He then faced about in a great rage, for people were 
staring at them he found. 

" Confound you," he said, "go away." So she went. 

Puring the last half-hour of his waiting he went to the 



35 2 -d London Romance. 

refreshment bar, and drank a glass of wine. While he was 
there a friend tapped him on the shoulder. James turned 
and stared at him for a moment doubtfully, not remember- 
ing who he was. 

" You recollect me, don't you, Jarman ? " said his friend. 
" I recollect you quite well. We very nearly had our throats 
cut together one night in the lower town of Quebec." 

A veil of years fell from before Jarman's eyes. He 
stretched out his hand and shook the other's warmly. 

" I remember ! " he said. " We both of us almost finished 
our lives in company on that occasion. What have you 
done since?" 

'.' I have been knocking about a good deal since; making 
and losing money." 

" On the whole have vou made more than you have 
lost?" 

" Of course I must have made it first to lose it.' - 

"That does not follow, does it? Where are you going 
now ? " 

" Of all places in the world to What's-it's-name-Super- 
Mare." 

" Of all places in the world, I am going there too. It is 
a matter of five years since we last travelled together, is it 
not ? Why not travel together now ? For the last time per- 
haps . who knows ? Life is so short, and the world so 
wide." 

" Not wide enough for us to pass on this side of it with- 
out meeting one another, I'm glad to say."" 

" Yes, you are right," said James thoughtfully. " The 
world after all cannot be very wide that our loves and hates 
should be centered in so narrow a circle. We cross and re- 
cross each other, brought together again and again, as 
though by fate." 

"You don't object to smoking if I remember rightly,'' 
said his friend when they had taken their seats in the 
carriage. 

" No ; let us smoke. It's a cheap luxury." 

" Not that your cigar looks a cheap one." 

" No, not very. I have no other way of spending my 
money." 

" And you have been lucky, eh, Jarman ? You were lucky 
in old times." 

" I have always done the wrong thing as everybody thought 



Iii Paradise and Elsewhere. 353 

(myself included), and it has generally turned up the only 
right thing. I have prospered by the neglect of good ad- 
vice and the waste of ' golden opportunities.' My greatest 
successes have arisen out of my own negligence. It is be- 
cause I have all my life been ignorant, idle, and lucky that 
I have somehow made a fortune. I speculate because it 
amuses me, and I generally win." 

" I've heard of your good fortune. Suppose now you 
were to speculate for me ! " 

" I might lose your money. There's no rule in the game, 
and, after all, the only stake I ever prayed to win I lost." 

"What stake was that?" the other asked; but James 
made no reply. With the old dreamy look he was gazing 
out upon the seemingly endless marshes, through which the 
train was swiftly bearing them. Out there, spread about 
very far apart upon the swampy meadow-land, were dreary 
little homesteads, poverty-stricken and forlorn in aspect, 
showing no signs of life. Leading from there to who should 
say where, were long straggling roads, on which no travellers 
were visible. 

A desolate region it seemed, well nigh forsaken by man, 
and yet on a swing gate near which the rails ran there was a 
couple making love and kissing. What couple were these 
whom the dreamy passenger thus looking out upon saw thus 
for the first time and the last? Who was she? Who was 
he ? How long had they loved, and did they love each 
other very dearly, and would they go on loving each other 
evermore, or presently quarrel desperately and part for all 
eternity ? 

He thought then with a bitter smile of the course ot 
Frank Pickering's true love, and with a sigh of his own 
journey and its object. 

He found Ann on the sands. He had caught a glimpse 
of her slight figure among the rocks below, and descended 
the steps to speak to her. She was not crying as he had 
fancied at first from her attitude ; for her head was resting 
on her hano", in which she held a pockethandkerchief 
tightly clutched. She did not hear him coming, and he ob- 
tained a view of her pale face and dull lustreless eyes gazing 
out towards the sea. 

He came towards her softly . the sound of his footsteps 
upon the sand drowned by the moaning of the wind . and 
laid his hand upon her shoulder. Then she turned and saw 
23 



354 -^ London Romance. 

him for the first time, but did not seem startled by his 
sudden approach. 

" You here ! " she said, quietly. " How can you con- 
tinue to care for anyone so unworthy, and after the way I 
have treated you ? " 

" It is because I love you," he answered, in a broken 
voice ; " because I hope still against hope." 

" There is no hope now." 

"Why not? " he asked, passionately. " Oh, if you knew 
what a poor fool and shallow rascal this is you have 
wasted your love on . if you could see him with another's 
eyes . if you knew how basely he had acted, and for what 
a contemptible motive . so childish . so puerile . so " 

She put her hand upon his mouth. 

"Do not talk like that," she said. "You can tell me 
nothing I do not know. You cannot dream how much 
at this moment I . I hate him ! " 

He caught her in his arms with a glow upon his face. 
But she shook herself free in a sort of angry terror, and 
ran towards the steps. He overtook her, and gained pos- 
session of her hand. Thus they stood for a moment, both 
breathless. The coming sea rolled and tumbled in the 
distance with a low dull roar. It seemed like some strange 
music accompanying this strange scene. 

"Ann . Ann, I was wrong. I was a fool to speak 
against him. After all, what have I to urge in my own 
behalf? "What can I say except that I shall always love 
you . love you with a deeper love than it is possible for 
another to feel, for my love is a life old. Oh, Ann, how 
can I persuade you? I cannot find words to say half of 
what I think. This is the moment, I know, when I should 
be using every argument, when " 

" No, no ! " she said ; " you must say no more. I am 
afraid I have been a fool. I see that now only too 
plainly ; but it is too late for discoveries." 

" Too late ! " 

"Yes, yes," she cried. " Too late ! . too late ! " 

And following these words, which were uttered in a 
kind of wail, came a wild burst of sobbing, and she ran 
swiftly up the steps, leaving James Jarman silent and 
motionless, at their foot. As she disappeared he turned, 
and noticed that the night was falling fast, and that the 
roar of the coming sea was coming nearer and nearer. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 




ilHEN it was quite dark, there came a knock at Mr. 
Starkey's house, and a gentleman asked to see 
Mr. Draper. He was told that Mr. Draper was 
very ill in bed, and had been so some weeks, and 
he seemed much surprised. He then asked if he could see 
Mrs. Draper, but was told that she had been out all the 
afternoon. He said he would like to wait for the lady, and 
was shown up stairs. 

Left alone in the drawing-room, James threw himself into 
a chair, and rested his aching head upon his hand. Pre- 
sently a moan from the next room attracted his attention. 
The door stood the least in the world ajar. A light was 
burning within, and he could steal a peep at its interior, un- 
observed. He rose, and went on tiptoe to look in. 

There on the bed lay the man who had come between 
him and happiness. He was asleep, and a lamp burning 
near at hand threw deep shadows upon his face, which 
made it look more hollow-cheeked and ghastly even than it 
did in reality. His hair was long, and scattered wildly 
upon the pillow, contrasting strongly with the whiteness of 
his skin. So worn and emaciated did he seem, it was 
difficult to recognise any trace of the gay hearted, roystering 
Don Caesar of the Boudoir Theatre in his feeble frame and 
wasted features. 

And this was the man whom she loved so fondly . who 
had only to raise his hand and beckon and she would 
follow. If what he had been told were true, it was more 
than doubtful that he would ever rise again from his 
sick bed. 

23.2 



35^ A London Romance. 

"The poor gentleman has had a relapse since the lady 
went out," Mrs. Starkey had said; "and his friend Mr. 
Yolland has gone for the doctor. I'm very much afraid for 
him, Sir. The doctor said if he had another attack it 
might be fatal." 

As Jarman stood there watching, the sick man's head 
rolled to and fro uneasily, and his thin hands stretched 
forth upon the coverlet, clawed at it with restless fingers. 
He was delirious, or talking in his sleep. The listener 
caught vague snatches here and there. 

"I must go on to night. They're waiting for me. Has 
the music begun ? " 

He was at the amateur theatre, and another histrionic 
triumph awaited him. He was beating time now to some 
imaginary air, and nodded his head, and laughed faintly. 

" Yes, yes, Tom ; I understand perfectly. I'm not a 
fool, you know. I'm worthy of better things than this. I 
must not throw myself away." 

Jarman smiled bitterly. " Here's a thing to talk about 
throwing itself away." 

" Yes, yes ; I know exactly the sort of life I shall shine 
in. It is fortunate it has not gone too far. It must be 
broken off." 

He was silent for a moment, then laughed, and then the 
wasted hand approached the mouth, as though to twist the 
moustache in the way which had been so popular in the 
Don Caesar performances. 

" I know all that of course. From one point of view, of 
course, I am a villain. It is true, I have spared none. It 
was very cruel of me ; it was indeed ! I have led a fearfully 
wicked life." 

The smile of contempt still played about Jarman's lip as 
he listened, but he could only hear a portion of these 
mutterings. Presently the tone of the sufferer changed 
altogether, and he began to plead pitifully for some one's 
mercy. 

" I'm a pretender,'' he said. " It's all a sham. I know 
you must despise me, but do not tell everybody. Promise 
me you will not tell. I have always told lies, and played 
the fool. I did love her really. It was to keep up my 

character. If I had not been ashamed " 

He muttered a broken sentence or two after this, and 
then subsided into total silence. James came away from 



In Paradise and Elsewhere. 357 

the door and flung himself into the chair. Thus he sat 
waiting for about half an hour, and then in a voice louder 
and more distinct than before, the sick man awoke him 
from his reverie by calling " Ann, Ann ! " 

He raised himself and listened trembling. 

The sick man called again, 

" Where are you, Ann ? Ann, my own darling, come 
and give me something to drink. Oh, I am dying with 
thirst. It is cruel of you to leave me to suffer like this 
all alone." 

He seemed to speak naturally enough this time. He 
was not talking in his sleep. James Jarman rose and again 
approached the door, hesitated for a moment, and passed in. 




VII. 



OUTSIDE THE OLD BAILEY. 



CHAPTER I. 




HE news that things were not going on as satis- 
factorily as could have been wished with Mr. 
Starkey soon spread among the inhabitants of the 
little watering-place, and Mr. Starkey's old friends 
looked shily at him when they met him in the parlour of the 
Benbow or in the street. Since the lawsuit had been decided 
against him he drank rather deeper than usual, and was, if 
possible, more insolent and offensive in his manner towards 
mankind generally. It therefore occurred, not unnaturally, 
to Mr. Starkey's old friends that as he had no money to 
stand treat with and no conversation of an agreeable char- 
acter to offer in its place, it was scarcely worth while putting 
up with his insults. Starkey, therefore, was sent to Coventry. 

While in Coventry he drowned his sorrows in a bowl at 
his own expense, and staggered home late at night to beat 
his wife . a way he always had when in liquor. One parti- 
cular night, when he was not quite as tipsy as usual because 
he had not quite money enough for the purpose, and when 
he had for the same reason returned a trifle earlier than was 
his habit, he found great excitement prevailing in Paradise 
Place, and more particularly at Number One. 

" Oh, Mr. Starkey," said a female neighbour, meeting 
him a few doors off. " Oh, so dreadful ! The poor young 
gentleman, and the poor young lady ! " 

" What has happened to them ? " 

What, indeed ! There were all sorts of conflicting rumours 



Outside the Old Bailey. 359 

abroad. One at least was dead ; perhaps both. Mr. Starkey 
pushed his way past the little crowd with an air of authority 
and entered his house. Mrs. Starkey met him in the pas- 
sage, in tears, and gave him a hurried account of what had 
happened. The gentleman up stairs had had a relapse, and 
while the lady and Mr. Yolland were out had breathed his 
last. The lady, when she returned and found what had 
happened, had taken on in a way which was dreadful to be- 
hold. She had screamed and cried like one distracted. 

The doctor who had been sent for to see if anything could 
be done, stayed to render what assistance lay in his power 
to the lady, and fortunately, a relation of hers . who had 
called earlier in the evening to see her . had now come 
back again and volunteered to keep Mrs. Starkey company 
in sitting up to watch her, lest she might die for want of 
help in one of the series of fainting fits she had been seized 
with. 

While Mr. Starkey and his wife were yet talking the 
doctor came down stairs and recommended the latter to 
keep a sharp eye on the patient, who in her present excit- 
able state it was not really safe to trust for a moment alone. 

"I am afraid, from what I can understand, there was 
some quarrel between her and her husband just before he 
died." 

"I thought they were on such good terms," said Mrs. 
Starkey. 

"Not they," Mr. Starkey interrupted. "There was a 
screw loose you may depend on it. I saw her come out of 
the house this afternoon, and by the look of her face it was 
plain enough to see there was something wrong. He was 
a bad lot, Sir, you may depend upon it." 

" How so ? " the doctor asked ; but Mr. Starkey contented 
himself by smiling mysteriously and shrugging his shoulders, 
which was a favourite custom of his when profoundly ignor- 
ant upon any subject, or when he wanted to give import- 
ance to some infinitesimal scrap of knowledge he chanced 
to have picked up. The doctor, a plump, rosy, simple little 
man, stared at him in surprise, made little out of the ex- 
amination, and took his departure. 

"A disagreeable, underhanded sort of fellow that,' - he 
said to himself as he walked away, and half an hour later 
had forgotten Mr. Starkey's existence. 

When the door was shut behind him, Mr. Starkey had 



360 A London Romance. 

more to say : . " It's all very well this sitting up, and nurs- 
ing and watching. Who's to pay for it all ? We can't do 
the Good Samaritan business, you know. We have our own 
troubles to attend to." 

" Has anything fresh happened ? " 

"I don't know about anything fresh. Something will 
happen very soon, you may be sure of that. I'm just able 
to ward off the smash from day to day ; but it will come. 
Your precious relations will sell us up before many more 
hours have passed over our heads. Mark my words if they 
don't." 

This danger threatening did not however deter Mrs. 
Starkey from the performance of the kind office she had 
undertaken. She was very weary from a long day's work 
and the excitement and confusion of the last few hours, but 
she spoke not of her fatigue. 

Ann had been put to bed in a room on the ground floor, 
where, as the night had turned cold, a fire was lit, on either 
side of which Jarman and the landlady seated themselves, 
and prepared to keep watch. It proved to be a dull busi- 
ness enough, and Mr. Starkey did not volunteer his help, 
but retired early to rest, and that not without complaining 
that he should have to sleep alone at the top of the house 
with a dead body in the room below. 

This dread presence also made itself felt in the room 
where the watchers had taken up their posts, and seemed to 
lend an unwonted gloom and silence to the whole house. 
As they sat there hour after hour, they could hear faint 
noises from without . the murmur and splashing of the sea 
against the wooden breakwater opposite. Now and then 
the howling of a dog . at rare intervals a heavy footstep in 
the street . the tread of a passing fisherman going to his 
boat. 

Within the room the suffering girl lay at times so perfectly 
motionless and quiet, she might have been dead. A kettle 
simmered and sang upon the hob, and an old-fashioned 
watch upon the mantelpiece ticked loudly in a little Gothic 
edifice, where it hung suspended from a nail beneath an 
archway, guarded by two little soldiers with drawn swords. 
Now and then some slight sound, at the moment inexplic- 
able, occurring within the house itself, made the watchers 
hold their breath and listen. 



Outside the Old Bailey. 361 

When she had been keeping watch about three hours, the 
fatigues of the day began to tell upon Mrs. Starkey, and at 
last she nodded her head and slept in her arm-chair. 
Jarman opposite to her, still kept watch. The young widow 
at that moment was sleeping tranquilly. He alone, of all 
the inmates of the house, was awake. He sat and listened 
to the sufferer's regular breathing, glancing at frequent in- 
tervals at the face of the watch upon the mantelpiece, which 
marked the slow progress of time. Once he rose, and going 
noiselessly towards the window, gazed forth upon the sea, 
over which the day was just beginning to break. 

Presently Ann turned her head quickly upon her pillow, 
and begun to mutter some incoherent words, and to throw 
out her arms. She was dreaming or delirious. 

" I killed him . I killed him," she cried ; " I hated him 
so, I killed him. Yes, it was I." 

She had half started into a sitting posture as she spoke 
these words at the top of her voice. Next moment James 
was by her side, pressing her firmly back, and holding his 
hand before her mouth, as though to hinder her from speak- 
ing again. 

"Hush! hush!" he whispered; "what are you doing? 
What are you saying ? " 

She leant back, and was silent, and leaving her James 
Jarman stepped up to Mrs. Starkey's side and held the light 
before her eyes. The worthy landlady was fast asleep, and 
far from dreaming that she was in any particular danger. 

When she awoke an hour or so later, day had broken ; 
the fire had burnt low, and the- candle sputtered in the 
socket. Ann slept more tranquilly, and James Jarman, 
more wakeful than ever, faced her from the other chimney 
corner, looking very gray and grim and haggard. 




CHAPTER II. 

j]HE little doctor had prescribed a composing 
draught for Ann, and the long sleep thus in- 
duced, had had a beneficial effect. When she 
awoke she was calmer, and more reasonable. She 
was, indeed, so calm and self-contained, the lookers mar- 
velled a little at the change, and Mr. Starkey drew a moral 
when he heard of it. 

" That's how it always is," said he, " they weep and tear 
their hair the first five and twenty minutes, and then it 
is all over, and we're forgotten." It would, however, have 
been somewhat difficult to forget a husband of the Starkey 
sort. 

James Jarman took his departure early in the morning 
before the landlord had left his bed, so that as yet these 
two had not met, nor were they indeed aware of each 
other's existence. When Ann opened her eyes she opened 
them upon the sad, silent figure of her cousin keeping 
watch. He came towards her, and gently took her hand 
in his. 

" Well, Ann ? " 

" Are you here, James ? You must not stop here,'' she 
said with a shudder. 

"No, I only waited for an opportunity of speaking to 
you. Here on this card I have written my address. With- 
in a week I shall hope to see you. "We will talk then of the 
future." 

" She took the card he offered her, but made no reply, 
and without another word they parted thus. He slowly 



Outside the Old Bailey, 363 

ascended the hill to the Royal Hotel, and there having 
made enquiries about the trains, ordered some breakfast. 
Whilst he was waiting for it, the friend with whom he had 
made the journey the day before entered the room. At 
sight of James he came forward, eagerly. 

" Jarman ! The very man I wanted to see ! " 

" How so ? " 

" 1 told you yesterday I was coming down here upon a 
spec I thought might turn out well for me. It has turned 
out badly ! " 

" That is a way specs have of turning out. Well ? " 

" Eighteen months ago I brought back with me to this 
cursed country a little fortune of twenty-three thousand 
pounds. Of that sum I have the odd three thousands re- 
maining. From your talk yesterday it seemed to me you 
were heartily sick of England, and the life you were leading 
here." 

" Yes, I am going away for ever in a few days ! " 

" Going where ? What say you ? Put in the same 
amount of money . a trifle to you . and join me in a 
venture out there in Mexico. I know you will like the 
scheme that I can lay before you. It is better than any I 
ever had. What say you to the old free life again ? We 
were so happy together once upon a time." 

" Was I ever happy once upon a time ? " said James with 
a smile. " Well," he added after a pause, " I won't give you 
a promise yet ; but it's not altogether unlikely. How long 
can you give me to decide ? " 

" Why, Jarman," cried the other, seizing his hand, " do 
you really mean it ? Will you really come ? Choose your 
own time, of course. I proposed the thing, it is true, but 
hardly hoped you would agree to it." 

" The chances are I shall," James Jarman replied, with- 
out any manifestation of excitement. " The next few days 
will decide all." 

" You know where to find me when you have made up 
your mind. And now, are you going up to town ? " 

" Yes, I want to see my lawyer at once, I have a good 
many things to settle." 

" I see you are going to have breakfast. We will break- 
fast together, if you are agreeable, and we can go by the 
same train." 

As, after the meal was concluded, there was an hour to 



364 A London Romance. 

spare, the two gentlemen strolled along the High Street, 
and stared into the shop windows, to pass the time away. 
A poor show of wares were those exhibited in the small 
tradesmen's windows in this watering-place, even in the 
full season, but now only a few odds and ends of the 
summer's stock remained. Nevertheless Jarman saw a 
leather pocket-book that took his fancy, and they went 
in to buy it. 

The tradesman came forward with great alacrity to serve 
them. The article in question, he said, was a bargain. It 
had been ordered by a nautical person, and had been pro- 
cured with great trouble from town. The nautical person, 
after several visits, had gone away the day before the 
pocket-book arrived, and it was therefore thrown upon the 
shopkeeper's hands. 

''. It's worth double the money it's marked at, Sir,'' he 
said. " The gent was most particular about it. When it's 
closed this way, you see, it's waterproof. You might, 
begging your pardon, Sir, be drowned, and be under water 
for a day or two, and yet any papers in this pocket-book, if 
you had it on vou at the time, would come out as dry as a 
bone." 

While they were in the shop making this purchase, two 
suspicious-looking men, both, however, decently clad, 
looked in at the door, and one asked the shopkeeper to 
direct him to Paradise Place. 

" It's down the street, right at the bottom, on the left. 
Who did you happen to want ? " 

" The name of Starkey. Do you know it ? " 

"Oh, certainly, that's number one . right opposite the 
breakwater." 

" Starkey," said James, as he put away his purchase in 
the breast pocket of his coat. "I've heard that name 
before. Where was it now? Oh, I remember; it was 
long ago." 

The two suspicious-looking men went their way, as 
directed, and reaching number one in due course, knocked 
at the door. The door being opened, he who had knocked 
immediately put his foot and leg into the passage to 
prevent the door being closed again, and asked for Mn 
Starkey. 



Outside the Old Bailey. 365 

Mr. Starkey appearing, it seemed that there was a claim 
against him for a trifle over two hundred pounds, which one 
of this couple wanted to know whether he was going to 
pay. Mr. Starkey replying, with a dismal laugh, that he 
did not think he had any intention of doing anything of the 
kind, the speaker informed him that he should leave his 
friend in charge, and having done so himself took his de- 
parture. Mr. Starkey's troubles had then commenced in 
earnest. This was the smash of which he had been for 
some, time past in daily expectation. 

The smash having come, he left Mrs. Starkey " to have 
her cry out/' and went down to the Benbow to drown his 
own care in his own way. He was some time thus 
occupied, and it was late in the afternoon, when he turned 
his face again towards home. In front of the door he found 
standing one of the flies from the railway, loaded up with 
boxes. At first he thought his own goods and chattels 
were being moved away. 

But this impression was quickly banished by a lady's 
calling to him from the coach window. 

"Oh, if you please, my good man." 

Mr. Starkey replied, somewhat resentfully : 

" What can I do for you, Ma'am ? " 

" Does Mr. Draper live here ? " 

Mr. Starkey looked hard at the lady, in whose face he 
thought he could trace some likeness to his late lodger. 

" He did live here." 

" Has he gone then ? Where to ? " 

Mr. Starkey looked up at the sky and down at the pave- 
ment, as though uncertain upon this point, and bit his 
thumb. 

"Are you a relation of Mr. Draper's, Ma'am ? " 

" I am his mother." 

" You haven't heard what has happened, then ? " 

" Happened ? Oh ! my poor Harry. Let me get out.'' 

There was a dark, good-looking gentleman, with very fine 
whiskers, sitting in the fly with Mrs. Draper, upon the 
opposite seat. 

He spoke now for the first time, interposing in a soft and 
persuasive tone, and gently possessing himself of the lady's 
wrist as he did so. 

" We must not agitate ourselves. We must be calm and 
brave, and prepared for anything." 



366 A Lotidon Romance. 

Mr. Starkey told his tale in the style peculiar to him, 
putting the worst construction upon things. He supposed 
that he and Mrs. Starkey would never get any return for all 
they had gone through on the poor young man's account- . 
the sleepless nights they had had . the long hours of 
watching . the toil and anxiety. He owed rent, too, for 
some weeks. 

The lady alighted and entered the house, sobbing. Mrs. 
Starkey joined her shortly : 

" How did my poor boy die ? When was it ? " Mrs. 
Draper asked her. 

" It was last night about nine when the young lady came 
back, and he must have been dead then. She sat, she 
said, for some time in the drawing-room . nearly two hours 
. thinking he was asleep, and that he would wake and call 
for her ; and at last, finding he did not wake and call, went 
in to look at him." 

" How strange she should stop away from him so long, 
when she knew he was so ill." 

" Very strange, I think," Mr. Starkey observed, paren- 
thetically. 

" I think," Mrs. Starkey continued, " that the lady 
and gentleman must have quarrelled during the after- 
noon." 

" Where is this woman ? Who is she ? My son was not 
married." 

" He wouldn'tmarry her, that's why she went away and 
left him," said Mr. Starkey. " When she heard he was ill, 
though, she came back and forced him into it. They were 
married by special license. He was so ill at the time, he 
could hardly make the responses." 

Mrs. Starkey would have interruped . " Oh, I don't think 
that, "dear " 

" Hold your tongue," replied her husband. " You know 
nothing about it." 

" What doctor attended Mr. Draper ? " asked the 
strange gentleman, who had accompanied the lady into 
the house, and who it appeared was a doctor also. "I 
must see him at once. I should like to put some ques- 
tions to him. If you will take my advice, my dear 
Madam, you will take up your quarters, for the present, 
at the hotel." 

" But I must see him. After what I have suffered" 



Outside the Old Bailey. 367 

coming over. Ah ! I feel that I shall never recover this 
shock." 

" As your medical adviser, I must forbid you, Madam, to 
excite yourself any more at present. I must beg of you to 
come away at once." 

Mr. Yolland was yet in the town, and came to the hotel, 
where Mrs. Draper had put up, to narrate such circum- 
stances as he was acquainted with respecting his friend's 
last hours. With some reluctance he related the principal 
points of the conversation he had had with Draper, which 
Ann had overheard. 

" When I gave this advice,'' Yolland hastened to add, 
" you will, I trust, believe that I had no idea your son was 
married to the lady." 

'.' Married ! " cried Mrs. Draper, in great excitement. " I 
do not believe that the marriage was legal. Who was pre- 
sent, I should like to know ? We have all heard of these 
designing creatures." 

Mrs. Draper's medical friend here burst into the room. 
He was trembling, and white with rage. 

" What is the matter, Doctor Francis ? " 

" I have never been so insulted in all my life,'' he replied, 
dragging off his gloves, and flinging them into his hat, as he 
spoke ; " I have called upon this fellow . this low provincial 
apothecary. The man was not even civil. He wished to 
know by what right I interfered ; but I will show him that. 
It was easy at a glance to see how wholly incompetent 
the creature was ; but I'll let him see whom he has got 
to deal with. I am resolved on the part I shall take in 
the matter." 

Later on, Mr. Yolland and Doctor Francis had a few 
words together. 

"The whole business seems to me extremely suspicious." 

" Suspicious is a strong word," said Yolland. 

" Not too strong. But this is premature. We shall see 
after the examination." 

" Examination ? " 

" Decidedly. After the post-mortem"*examination." 

Was it possible that the few words Mr. Starkey had let 
fall carelessly could have led to the brewing of such a 
storm, for a storm was brewing . a raging storm, to which 
one life at least will fall a sacrifice ? 



368 A London Romance. 

" I'd like to set them all by the ears, curse them ! " said 
Mr. Starkey. 

" Why ? " his wife asked. 

" We've got our troubles, haven't we ? Why shouldn't 
they have theirs ? " 

" But they have, dear ! " 

" Oh, yes, I dare say. I shouldn't wonder now, if, before 
a month's over, the two women are hard at it. tooth and 
nail. The old one will want to throw over the young one's 
claim. But she can't do that. For that matter, she was 
safe enough while he had lived, even without the second 
marriage. He would never have dared to pretend the first 
a sham one. I would have shown her how to manage it, 
but she would not take my advice." 

" I hope they will not be able to cheat her out of her 
share of what property there is," 

" Why so ? I do not see that it's any business of yours, 
or mine either. They [could only do it though with our 
help. If we proved now that he was of unsound mind, and 
had been so ever so long." 

" But he wasn't." 

" Wasn't he ? Well, if he wasn't, what of that ? I don't 
know that he wasn't though, yet. I shall see what turn 
things take, and then I'll give my opinion. I'm sure I 
don't mind which way it is myself." 

Late over night a message had been sent to an old 
woman living in a back street of the town ; and very 
early in the morning she had come, and in a stealthy 
and noiseless fashion, which had something horribly 
suggestive about it, performed certain offices in the 
darkened chamber up stairs. This creature had also 
swept up and tidied the dead man's room at Mr. Starkey's 
request, and brought down in her hand a dust-shovel full 
of litter. Sorting this over in her husband's presence, 
Mrs. Starkey said, . 

" Here's a piece of paper with some writing on it. What's 
it about, I wonder ? " 

Starkey snatched it. 

" Let me see." 

It was a half-sheet of note paper, on which only a 
few words had been written in straggling and uncertain 
characters, which were difficult to decipher ; but Starkey 



Outside the Old Bailey. 



569 



changed colour as he read it, and rising, approached the 
window, keeping his back turned on his wife. 

"What is it, dear?" 

" What's what ? " 

" The paper." 

"Oh, nothing . nothing. You never told me " 

" Told you what ? " 

" Nothing." 




24 



CHAPTER III. 




|NCE roused, the energy of this Doctor Francis 
seemed to be without bounds. He was heard 
raving loudly against the low provincial apothecary 
in the public room at the Royal. That fellow 
had better have a care. He (Francis) was not to be trifled 
with. All in good time ! 

The country doctor meanwhile went upon his rounds, 
dreaming of no danger. When he heard from a friend that 
there had been " a doctor from London up there at the 
' Royal ' pooh-poohing his medical skill," the good old gen- 
tleman only smiled. 

" My patients know me by this time. I've brought half 
the parish into the world. I suppose I've not made more 
mistakes than my betters. Perhaps he wants to come down 
here and settle. He won't find it a very good spec, I'm 
afraid." 

The old gentleman went home that night and told the 
story to his wife and daughters over his glass of port. He 
thought it, in the innocence of his heart, to be rather a good 
story. He little dreamt what was coming. 

As the sagacious reader may have guessed from the first, 
that man Francis was, to a certain extent, a charlatan and 
impostor. He was not very clever professionally ; but he 
was a great schemer, and though as a rule aiming but at 
paltry results, threw so much artfulness into his game, that 
he frequently came off victorious . for a time at least. He 
had not come from London as stated above, but from the 
French watering-place, where Mrs. Draper had been living 



Outside the Old Bailey. 371 

for some months past. He had sold his practice and was 
going to London with the intention of settling there, and 
called on his patient to inform her of his intention. The 
prospect of a travelling companion decided Mrs. Draper to 
go and see her son, and as the doctor had some few days to 
spare, he proposed to accompany her to the sea-side, and to 
give his advice in the case. 

Some people said that he had other views with regard to 
the widow, who was reported to be tolerably well off. Per- 
haps he wanted to see whether the son was likely to live, 
and if so what sort of person he was ; or whether he was 
likely to die, and if so to whom the money would go. 
Arriving in the little watering-place he had at once taken a 
great fancy to it. There was only one doctor there . an old 
man. There might be a chance for a young one. 

Perhaps the old doctor suspected his intentions when first 
they met. There was of course no reason why every in- 
formation should not have been afforded him respecting all 
the circumstances attending Harry Draper's illness and 
death ; but the enquiries had been put somewhat insolently, 
and the old gentleman's anger was roused. Had not this 
been the case the truth would never have come to light. 

Tom Yolland could not help feeling a little surprise at 
the marked antipathy Mrs. Draper manifested towards her 
son's widow when he recollected the letter the former lady 
had written. " How was it she had changed her opinions 
so decidedly ? " he asked himself. In the first place, how- 
ever, he reflected that she was naturally suspicious of all 
surrounding the loved one who had died. Starkey's ill- 
natured words had helped towards the result. Presently 
came the damning proofs. 

When the scared hound flies panting past with frothy 
mouth, lolling tongue, and bloodshot eyes, a howling crowd 
yelling " mad dog ! " at his heels, which of us pauses to en- 
quire whether the beast is really as mad as its pursuers 
suppose ? To escape from its reach or to strike it dead, 
what other thought have we regarding it ? When the post- 
mortem examination had taken place, . when the little 
scraps of evidence had been gathered together . when 
Yolland's story had been told. when the first whisper of 
foul play and poison had gone forth, who doubted the 
guilt of the culprit ? 
24 . 2 



3/2 d London Romance. 

Even before the proofs were deduced the rumour had 
gained ground in the town. In the public room at the 
Royal it had been talked over. In at the Benbow it had 
been discussed. There never before had been a murder at 
this little watering-place. A man had killed another in a 
stand-up fight in a little village a mile and a half away, but 
that happened thirteen years ago, and then it was only brought 
in manslaughter. There had not been so much general 
excitement, even at regatta time, for many seasons past. 

Having no other topic to converse upon, the landladies 
of the empty houses met together, and lengthily discoursed 
upon the subject in front of their tradesmen's counters. 
The fishermen gathered together in knots at the street 
corners. All day long a little crowd might be seen gazing 
up at the front of the house. 

The local police were in a state of the highest indignation. 
A detective and two London officers had come down. 
These had given themselves .great airs, and pooh-poohed 
local authorities and traditions. The magistrates of the 
borough and of the county had come together, and got by 
the ears over the business. There was a talk of the trial 
being moved to London. Some of the well-informed ones 
repudiated this intelligence with contempt ; but eventually 
it turned out to be correct, for the trial was removed to 
London, on the ground that owing to the prejudice prevail- 
ing against the prisoner in the district, it would be impos- 
sible to have a fair trial there. 

A month had now passed since Harry Draper died. The 
house stood damp and desolate in Paradise Place, destined 
perhaps to stand empty for many seasons to come, for 
clearly it will henceforth be an ill-omened house, and an un- 
lucky house, which no prudent person would venture on 
taking. All good folks shudder as they pass it now, and 
many will not pass it after dark. 

That window over the balcony, the broken window, is 
where she used to sit among the flowers. There's a broken 
piece of one of the very flowerpots lying there now if you 
doubt the story. Her little white hand used to steal out 
among the flowers and wave adieu to him as he walked up 
the High Street. He whom she waved adieu to lies buried 
yonder in the graveyard on the top of the hill. The hand 
she waved was the same hand that poured out the poison. 



Outside the Old Bailey. 373 

Only a few weeks ago, and that was the lightest and 
brightest house of the row. It has been shut up'only a few 
days, and it looks as though it had been deserted for months. 
One or two blades of the straw which was used in the pack- 
ing up of Mr. Starkey's goods and chattels still cling per- 
sistently to the doorstep. Where are the Starkeys gone ? 
Over the way are the rails Mr. Starkey used to sit on so 
long, and on which he smoked so many pipes. One rail is 
bent with Mr. Starkey's weight. The paint is worn from a 
lower one by the friction of his boot soles. Yes, there are 
Mr. Starkey's marks, but where, oh ! where is Mr. Starkey ? 

When the female neighbours talk it over they have a 
hundred and one anecdotes to relate respecting the inmates 
of the Starkeys' drawing-rooms. There was always a some- 
thing.it was difficult to say what, but a certain something 
. about her nobody had liked. Some had always suspected 
she would turn out badly ; some had seen the crime fore- 
shadowed in her face; others had shuddered in her 
presence. 

What of him who lay there dead in the little churchyard 
yonder ? So handsome a gentleman ! so light-hearted ! so 
free spoken, so generous of his money, so noble too to atone 
for his fault upon his deathbed, and to render her so grand 
a reparation ! 

What a change ! Here is the street that used to be so 
gay, now sad and silent. There is the sea the ladies used 
to bathe in, smooth as a duck-pond at that time, or rippling 
gently beneath the summer's sun, now black and boisterous, 
thundering in upon the crazy woodwork of the pier, and 
eating its way into the chalky cliffs which then stood high 
and dry above high water-mark. Yonder, No. 1 shut up 
and left to the ghosts and the rats ; the hero dead and 
buried, the heroine a prisoner in Newgate. 




CHAPTER IV- 

HE sun rose much as usual one December day, 
which was a day of great importance to certain 
persons in this history, and lighted up the ordin- 
ary London street-life in its customary fashion. 
The shops were opened about the usual time. People went 
about their business, made arrangements about their dinner, 
and felt in their usual spirits. There was no visible difference 
in the density of the traffic upon Ludgate Hill or in Cheap- 
side. Round and about Newgate prison the public houses 
were not quite as full as on some busy market-days. There 
were a good many policemen standing about, and some 
bustle among the barristers, their touters and attorneys, 
about the doors of the court. A few more idlers than 
common loitered about the Old Bailey, and now and then 
among them might be seen a pale, wistful face . the face of 
a friend of one on his trial within, for to-day the Sessions 
were sitting, and it was a question of life or death for some 
inside those walls. 

There are some cases which, owing more to accident than 
any peculiarity of their own, excite a large share of public 
notice. On these occasions the court is often crowded, and 
the seats available to the public eagerly appropriated ; but 
very rarely is there even half the excitement in a real trial 
which invariably characterises the trials of romance. There 
is so much else to think of, how are we who are not upon 
our trial to remember when the case comes on. Why, there 
are some people tried and condemned, with more or less 
justice, and hanged out of the way, and we none the wiser 



Outside the Old Bailey. 375 

because on the days that those events were recorded we did 
not happen to read the newspaper. Just at that period 
many important events had occurred to engross the public 
mind . war, a general election, fierce political strife. Upon 
this account, perhaps, the reports of the proceedings hitherto 
had been very meagre. Many details which might have 
provoked curiosity had been omitted. The world at large 
knew very little of Harry Draper's murder, and of his wife's 
trial for the crime. 

Some of the idlers in the street without were not aware 
that a case of such importance was coming on. Most of 
those who had business on hand regarding cases in the 
court, even though those cases were only trivial ones, were 
so engrossed with their own affairs, they had no time or in- 
clination to think of others. A sallow-faced man, with a 
ragged beard, who was wandering vaguely round the prison 
walls, had some difficulty in ascertaining whether there 
actually was a trial for murder about to take place, and 
where it would occur. Whilst he was himself looking for 
the court door, a rustio looking stranger came up and asked 
if he could point out the spot where the " chap were hung." 
Replying in an absent manner that he did not know and 
passing on, the man with the beard, a minute afterwards, 
found the rustic stranger still at his elbow. 

" I be coom oop to Lunon to see th' soits like, don't 'ee 
see. I be coom into a bit a brass and 'ud loike to spend it 
on a lark." 

If anything, perhaps, the rusticity of the stranger was a 
trifle overdone, and strongly suggestive of skittle-grounds 
and sporting wagers. The other turned away impatiently 
and hurried on. A few yards further on he met an old man 
with a profusion of gray locks hanging down upon his collar. 
He was carrying some papers and pressing forward absorbed 
in his own thoughts. 

"Mr. Drake." 

"Ah, Mr. Jarman." 

" What is going on ? How's the case likely to go ? Has 
anything fresh occurred ? " 

" Nothing fresh . nothing done yet. We may hope for a 
favourable result." 

" May hope ? You said an acquittal was certain." 

" Of course nothing is certain in this world ; but I think 
I may say nearly certain . next to certain." 



376 A London Romance. 

" You know, Mr. Drake, I told you when I came to you 
at first why I came. I was recommended to go to the 
cleverest Old Bailey lawyer in London ; I knew you were 
the man, and came to you." 

Mr. Drake, grinning at the intended compliment, but 
wincing somewhat at the way in which it was put, hastened 
to reply. 

" I hope you did not do wrong, Sir ; I'm sure we lose 
very few cases from our office, and we have a deal of busi- 
ness . a great deal. Hi, Jeff ! " 

The person so addressed was a little foxy man, carrying a 
blue bag tightly crammed with papers. He came running 
towards them in answer to his name. 

"Have you seen after Saunders's case?" said Drake, 
"and Williams's? Here's something for you to attend to 
at once. Go back to the office and fetch Pledger's affidavit." 

"Yes, Sir, " 

" Stop ; what have you got in the bag? let me look." 

They were standing in a passage leading into the court 
when this dialogue took place. People were pushing to and 
fro past them. Some of the papers that the lawyer was 
sorting were knocked from his hands by some rough person 
passing by, and scattered on the ground. Jarman looked 
on, scowling with impatience while the documents were 
picked up again. 

" I am afraid you have too much other business, to attend 
to mine," he said. 

"Why, my dear Sir, yours will be attended to all in good 
time. Pray make your mind easy . do make your mind 
easy." 

" That is easy enough to say. This suspense is unendur- 
able." 

" But there is really no cause for alarm." 

" You really mean that the result must be favourable ? " 

" I have not a doubt of it." 

The other groaned. " Why did I leave it as long as this ? 
There was only one course to pursue : I ought to have done 
it long ago." 

" My dear Sir, you seem very excited ; that is natural of 
course ; but pray try and compose yourself. Suppose now 
you go to my office, and sit down and wait. I will at once 
communicate the result." 

With these words, Mr. Drake was for running away again 



Outside the Old Bailey. 377 

having by this time collected together his scattered papers. 
Jarman caught at his sleeve. 

"My dear Sir," said the lawyer, "I . really . my dear 

Sir '" and he tried to disengage himself from the other's 

grasp. 

" One moment," said Jarman, tightening his hold, and 
speaking in a low, earnest tone. "You have other cases on 
to-day ; you did not tell me that. I depended wholly on 
your help . your undivided attention to this cas^. ' 

" But, my dear Sir . so unreasonable a request . so un- 
professional " 

" Chut ! Listen to what I have to say. I told you you 
were to spare no expense." 

Here Jeff the clerk interrupted. 

" Williams's case is on, Sir." 

Mr. Drake shook himself violently loose. 

" I must go, upon my word. Really, I protest ! " 

But once more the other had him tight. " There was 
something really dangerous about the look of the man," the 
lawyer afterwards explained when describing the scene ; " a 
sort of subdued ferocity. I was really almost alarmed." 

If the truth must be told, the worthy gentleman was 
alarmed in reality, and without any further effort abandoned 
himself to his fate, and listened to what Jarman had to say. 

" I told you not to spare any expense," he continued, 
" and to obtain the best counsel that could be procured. 

" I did so. Samson was not able to take the brief, as luck 
would have it, or Sergeant David. I got Goliah, though. 
After David he is the next best." 

" No matter what you did. So far it seems there has 
been nothing but bad luck. I don't say though that it is 
your fault. All I say is this . I want your undivided atten- 
tion, and now tell me in one word what sum will make it 
worth your while to throw everything else over, and give me 
your whole time for the day. Name the sum and I will 
write you out a cheque." 

"Never since I began to practise," Mr. Drake said, when 
telling the story, "did I hear so monstrous a proposition. 
Of course I could not listen to it." 



" My dear Sir ! Really, this way of treating the- matter ! 



37^ A London Romance. 

Of course, if you are willing . in the shape of a retaining 
fee, as it were . but if I could only persuade you to be calm. 
There is a pen and ink at this desk. Mr. Dawson, could 
you oblige me ? Thank you . thank you." 



" And now, my dear Sir, you really must be calm. Our 
case is on the next. Will you come into the court or wait 
here ? Wait here . that's right. Now I will come back to 
you directly, if you will only promise to be reasonable.'' 

" I will be as patient as I can," the other said. " If you 
knew what I suffered ! " 

" But you must be calm," Mr. Drake urged. " Consider, 
my dear Sir, what can your sufferings be to hers ? " 

Where Jarman stood, just outside a door leading into the 
court, he could hear the confused murmur of the voices 
within when the door was closed, and every now and then 
catch a few disjointed sentences when the door opened, 
Sometimes when the voice of one of the witnesses was low, 
it was altogether inaudible without. Then again, when the 
business of the court was suspended, there was a general 
whispering, which presently the voice of the usher quelled. 
The case was a short one, and easily disposed of . highway 
robbery and attempted murder . several previous convictions 
. penal servitude for life. 

Some of the spectators from the court passed out at the 
door. Two barristers, one coming out, one going in, met in 
front of him, and talked together. 

"What's on next?" 

" Murder ! " 

" The woman down at that sea-side place, who killed her 
husband, isn't it ? They'll soon settle that." 

"Yes, I should think so. No case. Wonder they found 
a true bill ; but they must acquit her." 

They passed on their different ways, and Jarman heaved 
a sigh, 

Just at his elbow a remarkably long-winded old man was 
telling a friend an interminable story. Throughout the whole 
time that Jarman stood there waiting anxiously this story 
continued, and involuntarily he found himself listening to 
jsnatches of it, 



Outside the Old Bailey. 379 

"It was just this way, you see . the man either did 
commit the murder or he didn't. It was all a question of 
time and place. If he were at a certain place at a certain 
time it looked black against him; but then his side tried to 
prove he wasn't at this place at this time. A case of alibi, 
you see." 



A loud gabble of voices heard from the court, suddenly 
hushed by the sharp clear voice of the usher. Then the 
door had closed again. Two more barristers had come out 
and lingered to talk a moment. 

" This won't take more than an hour at most. There is 
just time to go and get some lunch." 

" I'm quite willing. There's nothing interesting in this 
thing. I read the evidence over." 

." Nothing fresh going to be brought forward, I suppose ? " 

" Not that I've heard of. Sure to be acquitted." 

They went their way still chatting. Two other legal gen- 
tlemen came hurrying up, and one, red-faced, and good- 
humoured, was laughing at a joke the other was telling him. 
Some one standing by Jarman's side whispered . 

"That's Goliah." 

" Which ? " asked Jarman eagerly. 

The person he addressed did not catch the question. He 
had to repeat it, and by that time the barrister had disap- 
peared. As Jarman pushed forward the person in charge 
of the door refused him admittance. 

Meanwhile the story was going on : . " It was this way, 
you see . Was the woman to be believed or was she not? 
She swore most positively the man never did call at the 
hour he stated ; but then could she positively swear to a 
circumstance so many months afterwards ? The other 
woman, again, the one who lived next door, swore just as 
solemnly the other way, and how could she be sure ? Now 
both the women swore that for some reason or other they 
happened to be watching the clock that particular hour that 
particular day. It was very strange . but one meets with 
strange things of the sort often enough." 



380 A London Romance. 

The door of the court opened for a moment, and a deep 
impressive voice was heard speaking alone. This was the 
attorney-general opening the case. 

" The prisoner at the bar was in the habit of giving the 
deceased all his medicines. Some of the same poison from 
which he met his death was known to be kept in the medi- 
cine-chest in the room, and was found in that chest standing 
open on a side-table " 

A fussy little man carrying a piece of paper in his hand 
pushed his way through the crowd to the door just as it 
closed behind another man coming out. The man coming 
out called to the other by name . 

"Addleton." 

" Ah ! You are the very party I wanted. I've got an 
order to pass me in here. I'm afraid I'm late. That 
woman's trial is on to-day, is it hot ? The woman who killed 
poor Draper." 

" They're trying her now to find out whether she did or 
not. I think not, myself." 

" Oh, she did, you may depend on it. Poor Draper ! By- 
the-way, who is the attorney for the prosecution? I've some- 
thing I can tell him. You must know this woman was a 
near relation of that preaching man, Bradshaw." 

" You don't mean that ? " 

" I do though. Now the fellow's got a spite against me. 
I can't tell you why just at this moment. It's such a pre- 
cious long story ; but I am determined the fact of the re- 
lationship shall be made public." 

The man with the interminable tale was still hard at it. 

" Now, you see the clocks all agreed, and that, Serjeant 
David maintained, was the weak point in the case for the 
prosecution. He argued it was so unlikely that four clocks, 
and all of them cuckoos, could tally to the moment, and it 
was a question of moments, you see. Oh, he's a downy 
card, is David. There's no one like him. If he'd been on 
the other side the fellow would have been hung to a cer- 
tainty." 



A man close by who had caught the last words of the 
last speaker asked a bystander, " Is it not David speaking 
now ? " 



Outside the Old Bailey. 381 

"Yes, that's him sure enough." 

" How will this case go ? " 

"Guilty of course. I saw by the judge's face he'd made 
his mind up before he heard a word. They don't often hang 
women now though, do they ? " 

" Oh, don't they though." 

The opening speech was over. The confused gabble 
arose again. Then the usher's clear voice was heard shout- 
ing silence, and then a name was called out. 

"Thomas Yolland." 

Some more people came out, talking as they came. 

"Did you get a sight of her where you stood? Not 
good-looking is she ? " 

" No, not at all good-looking. Very white and sickly ; 
seems to be in bad health." 

" Poor creature. Don't believe she did it' 

" Nonsense. Not a doubt of it." 

Others came out in a few minutes. 

" The case is as good as broken down already." 

" I don't know that I should say so though if an enlight- 
ened British jury was not trying it. If there's a chance of 
them making fools of themselves, depend upon it they won't 
let the opportunity slip." 

The tale was still in progress : . " The question was, could 
he or could he not have done the distance in three minutes 
and a half? If these clocks were right, he had seven minutes 
to do it in. (Don't you see the point ?) But if, as David 
argued, some of them were wrong, or all of them were 
wrong, and the only reliable clock was that at the railway 
station, why then he had only three minutes and a half." 



Yolland had given his evidence. Mrs. Draper was called, 
and then Doctor Francis. Mr. Drake came out of the court 
for a moment to speak to his client. Jarman fairly gasped 
for breath when he saw him, and caught at his hand as a 
drowning man might catch at a floating fragment of wreck. 

" Well, well, what do you think ? " 

" There must be an acquittal. Pray be calm and leave it 
to me. All that can be done is being done, rest assured of 
that." 



382 A London Romance. 

" Yes, yes, of course ; I know after your promise you will 
do all you can. There, there, excuse me. God knows I 
try to be patient.'' 

Mr. Drake turned to go again. The other stopped him. 

" Are our witnesses here ? Will you want me ? " 

" Xo, no. Our counsel is not in favour of calling any. 
He will let the case stand on its own merits, and knock all 
the other side's evidence to pieces. Make your mind quite 
easy, we are certain to win the day." 

He was gone again. The case for the prosecution was 
over. The counsel for the defence had risen. Jarman, 
leaning against the wall, closed his eyes, and seemed to be 
unconscious of all that was passing around him. Addleton 
came out of the court, looked towards him, started, and 
stood still. Jarman opened his eyes at the moment and 
called him by name. 

"Good Heavens, are you ill?" the other asked. "How 
you are altered. This sad case, I suppose. Well, well, we 
must hope for the best." 

" How do they seem to think it will go ? " 

" I do not know. But you must not despair yet . I am 
so sorry . I must be getting on." 

He got away as quickly as possible. The door swung to 
and the counsel's voice became inaudible. Close to Jarman's 
ear the interminable tale was going on the same as ever. 
Had it always been going on ? Had it ceased for a time, 
and had the speaker gone away and returned again ? Had 
the trial been one or several hours in progress ? These were 
questions he asked himself, but for which he could find no 
answer. In a dreamy way he listened to the story. 

" The way it was done was this. He must have got in 
at the window, taken the old woman unawares, killed her by 
a blow on the back of the head, and let himself out again 
by the door, which had been locked on the inside. Now, 
if the clocks were right, you see, he did all this in less than 
five minutes." 



The speech proceeded, reached its termination, and at 
some applause Jarman started forward. 

"What was that?" he asked eagerly. "Is it the 
verdict ? " 



Outside the Old Bailey. 383 

But the person coming out whom he had addressed un- 
deceived him. 

" Not quite, but nearly as good. The whole case has 
broken down. Upon such evidence it will be perfectly im- 
possible to convict." 

" Thank God ! " muttered Jarman, and once more leant 
back against the wall and closed his eyes. Mr. Drake 
touched him on the arm. 

" The judge is summing up. We are all right now." 

He turned back again after hastily whispering these 
words. 

Some more people came out of the court ; others went in. 
The interminable tale was still in progress, but this time the 
words fell without meaning upon Jarman's ears. The judge 
was speaking now he heard some one say. People pushed 
backwards and forwards past him in and out the door. He 
fixed his eyes wildly upon their faces, and now and then his 
lips moved as though asking a question. 

The judge's even tones still struck his ear whenever the 
court door opened. At last they stopped. A bustle and 
loud murmurs within betokened the end of his address. 
Some broken sentences from those crowding out showed 
what had taken place. 

" Dead against her." 

" Never knew anything like it." 

"Left them nothing for it but a verdict of guilty." 

" Dead against her." 

" Dead against the prisoner ! " 

Trembling in every limb, with wildly-dilated eyes, with 
lips which, though parted as in speech, yet gave out no 
sound, Jarman waited and listened. Drake did not come, 
but some one brought him a line scribbled inside an enve- 
lope. He tried to read, but the letters danced confusedly 
before his eyes, and the paper fell to the ground. 

Now again there was silence within the court. The- jury 
had returned. A moment's pause . 

Guilty ! 

The people were forcing their way out. Jarman rushed 
forward, wildly waving his arms. 

" She's innocent ! " he gasped out almost inaudibly. "I 
will speak ! " 

Drake coming forward caught him round the waist. 
Others closed round. His teeth were set, his eyes blood- 



384 A London Romance. 

shot, his hands clenched ; the blood trickled down from the 
corners of his mouth. 

"The man's in a fit," some one said; "carry him out 
into the open air." 

They carried him out, therefore, struggling and gasping. 
A few moments afterwards he lay quiet enough, . he had 
fainted. 

The passers-by wondered what ailed the gentleman. He 
was carried into an adjoining chemist's shop, and a small 
crowd following hung about the door, and peeped in at the 
window between the coloured bottles. But very few noticed 
this little incident, and then other people in the street bustled 
along, fully occupied with their own affairs, many not even 
glancing towards the gloomy gaol, where at that moment the 
sentence of death was being passed . 

" To be taken back to the place from whence you came, and 
t/ience to a place of execution, there to be hanged by the neck 
until you shall be dead, and may the Lord have mercy upon 
your soul ! " 




VIII. 



INSIDE NEWGATE. 



CHAPTER I. 




ilHE trial was over now. All that could be done 
had been done. All the predictions that had been 
made had been falsified by what had taken place. 
It was but small consolation to those most deeply 
interested to know that, in spite of all law and justice, the 
verdict had been given against the prisoner, and the sentence 
passed. Ann was to die. 

There had been no recommendation to mercy. Next day 
the papers were so full of the visit of that foreign prince to 
the City, of which mention has already been made, that the 
report of the trial was necessarily curtailed. The world at 
large had other matters to occupy it besides the fate of one 
wretched woman lying prisoner in Newgate, who was to be 
hanged by-and-by . three Mondays hence. 

It seemed more than probable that the execution would 
take place, and the body be interred within the prison walls ; 
before the public began to wake up to the fact that this 
little tragedy had been played out without an audience, in a 
quiet corner, and no one the wiser. How was it that this 
trial excited so little interest ? Who can tell ? 

By some fatality this murder had not been a " popular " 
one, and now it was only by accident that public attention 
was directed to it. Poor ill-advised William Bradshaw 
wrote a leading article in the Thirsty Soul against a recently 
published novel by Little Addleton. This was not the first 
25 



386 A London Romance. 

time Mr. Bradshaw's organ had attacked this popular writer. 
He vowed vengeance, and at once set about its accom- 
plishment. 

Two days after the trial a paragraph appeared in the town 
letter of a country paper stating the relationship existing be- 
tween Mr. Bradshaw and the condemned prisoner in New- 
gate. Within a week the paragraph had been copied into 
almost every London paper. A vague statement partly con- 
tradicting the story appeared in the Thirsty Sottl on Saturday, 
which confirmed the truth in the minds of those who doubted, 
and made many thousands acquainted with the fact who 
otherwise would never have heard of it. 

A furiously satirical reply appeared within a day or two 
in one of the comic journals. Another paper in want of a 
subject took up the case. Another reviewed the whole 
story of the murder, and indignantly called attention to the 
unfair summing up of the judge. A rush of letters from 
correspondents immediately followed, and before the week 
was out the whole town was discussing the crime and trial 
of Ann Draper. 

Nothing could have happened more unfortunately as far 
as William Bradshaw's worldly prospects were concerned. 
The new chapel long talked of had not yet been built, owing 
to some disagreement among the gentlemen to whom the 
management of the business had been intrusted. Whilst 
the dispute was at its highest the bank broke where the 
money already subscribed had been deposited. The new 
chapel then never would be built unless fresh subscriptions 
were raised ; and this seemed doubtful, for somehow 
William Bradshaw's popularity was just a little on the wane. 

Just at this moment a" new preacher was founding a new 
sect, right under the noses of the Chosen Few in the same 
parish. His style was directly opposite to that of William. 
His was not the familiar and free-and-easy, but the deeply 
sonorous and denunciatory. He thundered forth terrors of 
bottomless pits and raging furnaces. Every Sunday his 
chapel was filled with frightened women, who screamed and 
fainted and were carried out, only to return in a week to 
seream and faint again. His popularity was enormous ; and 
William's benches were not nearly as full as they were wont 
to be. This was all the greater misfortune for William, be- 
cause unhappily the bulk of his wife's fortune had been lost 
in the same bank that had swallowed up the subscriptions. 



Inside Newgate. 387 

The remainder was invested in the Thirsty Soul, the'circu- 
lation of which was not as good as it had been some time 
ago. 

One day William Bradshaw came home white with rage, 
brandishing a newspaper in his hand. 

His wife began to grumble at the time he had kept the 
dinner waiting. 

" Hold your tongue, woman," he said (they had quarrelled 
a good deal lately). " Do you think I have any appetite 
for dinner after this ? Look there ! Read that ! They are 
bent upon our ruin ! " 

He pointed as he spoke to an article in a serious journal, 
expressing its astonishment that the near relation of a con- 
demned murderess could be allowed to preach the gospel 
even to such a congregation as gathered together in his ob- 
scure chapel. Before the woman was hanged he would 
surely, the journal said, if he had any decency left, with- 
draw himself from the public gaze. 

" Before she is hanged," cried William bitterly. " To 
think that I should have lived to suffer such humiliation ! 
Retire, indeed ! That is true enough. But what dark 
corner shall we find wherein to hide our disgrace ? " 

The next morning, after a sleepless night, William Brad- 
shaw arose pale and haggard, but calmer than he had been 
for some days. He had come to a determination, and set 
off at an early hour for the City. Here he found out the 
counsel who had conducted the defence, and, after a brief 
interview, was referred by him to Mr. Drake's office. He 
had come, he told the latter gentleman, to see whether any 
steps could be taken in " this distressing business," and if 
so, to say that he was willing to pay expenses. 

Mr. Drake informed him that steps were being taken, as 
it was, and the case was being conducted with great energy. 
A representation had been forwarded to the Secretary of 
State. A flaw had been discovered in the legal details. A 
review of the case was hoped for, which must undoubtedly 
result in establishing Ann's innocence. As for the money, 
said Mr. Drake, somewhat contemptuously eyeing a crumpled 
five-pound note the minister had produced from his purse, 
Mr. Jarman had already deposited a hundred pounds to- 
wards the current expenses. 

Mr. Bradshaw put away his money in confusion, but 
25.2 



388 A Loudon Romance. 

felt relieved in his mind. "Where was Mr. Jarman?" he 
asked. 

" Strange to say, I cannot tell you," replied the lawyer. 
" For two days he has disappeared. He certainl) ought to 
be here. It is, indeed, very inconvenient and unfortunate. 
I want his directions before I can act." 

These words were to a certain extent prophetic of the 
disasters to come. The week passed slowly away and yet 
Jarman did not make his appearance. The money was al- 
ready exhausted and large sums would still be required, Mr. 
Drake said, and he wrote to William asking whether he was 
now inclined to advance funds, but his affairs were already 
in a crippled state. He must raise the money himself be- 
fore he could advance it, even if he made up his mind to 
do so. 

" Money," screamed Mrs. Bradshaw. " What for ? In- 
deed you shall not. Not a penny of mine shall go to such 
a cause." 

" Silence," he shouted in return. " Do you know that 
her death will be our disgrace." 

" Is there no other way ? " 

" Only one." 

She pressed him to tell her what this one was ; but he 
blushed deeply and was silent. Later on he yielded to her 
solicitation. 

" I am told that Ann's health has suffered greatly since 
she has been in prison. If the enquiry be prosecuted at 
some length, she may probably die a natural death before 
the day arrives." 





CHAPTER II. 

HE murder at the little watering-place was by this 
time really the town's talk. The newspapers one 
after another took up the story and rang the 
changes upon it. Some professed unbounded 
belief in Ann's innocence, and one, though allowing the 
probability of her guilt, boldly espoused her cause and pro- 
tested that the dastard who had met his death from her 
hand only too richly deserved his fate. 

And yet the few days Ann had still to live passed quickly 
by, and in spite of all the talk nothing seemed to b^ done. 
The document spoken of as being forwarded to the secretary 
of state had not three days before the fatal Monday left Mr. 
Drake's office. Jarman had not yet returned. Money was 
wanted, and the whole business was being muddled for 
want of it. 

Saturday came at last. William had raised a sum 
sufficient for the present to appease the legal wolves. The 
memorial was on its way to the secretary's country seat, 
under charge of a special messenger. The day passed and 
no reply was returned. On Sunday morning the congrega- 
tion at William's chapel waited in vain for their minister. 
He had gone to Newgate to bid the prisoner farewell. 

As he passed through the street he saw many people 
loitering about and peering up at the prison walls. Were 
they already gathering together to take their places for the 
show ? The execution was of course, as this occurred 
some years ago, to be a public one. The fact that it was a 
woman who was to die increased the number of the sight- 



39° A London Romance. 

seers. Although there was a rumour of a probable reprieve, 
before dusk a large crowd had assembled, and the taverns 
round about were densely crowded. 

It was said that the windows had let well. A young 
nobleman had taken one. Surely, not a young nobleman . 
a counter-skipper . a shop boy, perhaps. Not so. A real 
nobleman had paid for his window just as my lord Tom 
Noddy did, about whom Ingoldsby sang in past times, and 
early in the evening his lordship came there with his friends 
. Lieutenant Tregooze was he one of them ? and Sir 
Carnaby and the rest ? Yes ; they were all there, or their 
prototypes, you may be sure. 

And why not ? A party of literary gentlemen had taken 
another window. Little Addleton, Yolland, several others 
besides, who had come there in pursuit of character . for a 
literary purpose . to see what an execution was really like, 
and write a description of it. 

The common herd meanwhile took their places at the 
barriers, and held out resolutely against the heavy down- 
falling rain. There was no other way of securing a good 
point of view, for every hour a fresh influx of sight-seers 
arrived. To pass the time songs were sung . the loud 
choruses of which penetrated the prison walls and reached 
the ears of the woman for whose death agonies the mob 
was waiting. 

More on account of his being a minister of the gospel 
than because he was Ann's- relative, William Bradshaw 
obtained an interview with Ann. He found her pale and 
wasted, as he had expected. She rose when he entered, 
and said calmly, 

"Well, William, what made you come ? " 

" Was it so unnatural ? " he asked almost savagely ; and 
they were for some time silent. 

Throughout the interview they were not left alone ; but 
the warder present .retired to the other side of the room, 
whilst they conversed in a low voice. 

" You know, perhaps, that great efforts have been made 
to save you," he said. 

" I have heard something of it. Without avail ? " 

" Yes ; I am sorry to say we have done no good." 

" I thought you would not," she said ; " I felt that I 
was to die." 



Inside Neivgate. 391 

" Heaven have mercy upon you, Ann," said William ; 
and they were silent again. 

"You think me guilty, like the rest?" she said pre- 
sently, but "without any emotion in her voice. 

" What can I think ? After the trial . after the evidence 
that was produced. But you are so near the end now. You 
would not go out of the world in silence. Confess if you 
are guilty." 

She smiled as she replied, 

" It would avail me little whatever I may say now. It has 
all been settled. They have made up their minds to kill me." 

" Have you thought of the horror and degradation of 
such a death ? " he asked in a low, eager tone. " At least, 
you might escape that." 

" Escape?" 

" By dying another way ! " 

" I do not understand ! " 

" You don't think he is listening, do you ? " 

"No." 

" I could give you the means of instantaneous death 
. to be used only at the last hour . when you are certain 
there is no hope left. Have you the courage ? " 

" What is it ?. Is it " 

"Yes. For your life do not speak the word out loud. I 
have it here in my hand. When I say good-bye, and 
shake you by the hand, I will leave it there." 

When they had been silent for a few more minutes, she said, 

" Why do you do this ? It is from no love for me." 

" You must not say that, Ann," the other replied hastily, 
but trembling as he spoke, and keeping his eyes fixed 
steadfastly upon the ground. "You cannot think that I can 
quite forget the past. You do not know what I have 
suffered . on your account. How else can I help you at 
this dreadful crisis ? They have tried you, and found you 
guilty of the crime. None on earth can say whether justly 
or unjustly. There is, it seems to me, no hope of life ; but 
you may yet defeat those who would couple your memory 
with the ignominy of a scaffold." 

" My memory is of most value to those who are left 
behind," she said, bitterly. 

" You cannot doubt my motive, Ann. You must know 
what a risk I run in doing this. If it were known I 
should be disgraced . ruined." 



39 2 A London Romance. 

" Yes, yes, I know that. Thank you for helping me. 
I am indeed grateful for the greatest boon that I can 
hope for ; after life is death." 

A few minutes after he had taken his leave. She watched 
him until the door closed with a heavy clang ; then listened 
to his footsteps until the sound died away in the distance. 

" What an end to it all ! " she thought, as she covered 
her face with her hands. " What a gloomy farce it has 
been ! What a waste of time ! What folly ! But at least 
I can cheat them at last ! " 

In the bosom of her dress she had concealed a tiny 
phial he had given her . such a tiny phial, but filled with 
what deadly stuff! 






CHAPTER III. 

NE day James Jarman found lying at his hotel a 
letter, written by an old friend. He did not 
recognise the writing, for it was many long years 
since he last saw it. Neither was the signature 
very legible, and for some time he was unable to spell out 
the name of Richard Starkey. During the earlier stages of 
Ann's examination, before she was committed for trial, he 
had several times heard what the landlord was called, but 
never once connected the man with the felonious clerk at 
Hankershanks's warehouse, down the crooked City lane. As 
he read this letter, however, the whole truth flashed upon 
him, and he came once more, though only in imagination 
as yet, face to face with his old enemy. 

The writer said that he would have written sooner, to ask 
for an interview, but had been languishing for more than a 
month past in the county gaol, where he had been in- 
carcerated for debt. Now that he had regained his liberty 
he was in such a destitute condition, he could not scrape 
together the money to pay his fare to town. No time was 
to be lost ; and he therefore begged that James would, if 
possible, at once come down, and see him at the address he 
gave . a village on the outskirts of the little bathing-place 
where the murder had taken place. 

The reason why this interview was requested, was that 
Richard Starkey had valuable information to impart, which 
might be worth a price. He was a poor man, he said, but 
he hoped an honest one, and would not be found unreason- 
able. Without pausing for a moment to ask himself what 



394 A London Romance. 

the information might be, James prepared to obey the other's 
bidding. He called for a railway guide, ascertained the 
time a train would start, put his cheque-book, some gold 
and notes, and a pistol into his pocket, and sent for a cab. 

The village whence Starkey had dated his letter, lay 
about half a mile or so from the town by the side of the 
sea. There was one way to it over the cliffs, but at low 
tide it could be approached much more quickly by the 
sands, only this way was dangerous unless you were quite 
sure when the sea would return again. James Jarman, 
however, chose the latter, for the tide had just turned, and 
was going rapidly out. In a short time, walking at a brisk 
pace, he had reached his journey's end. 

He knocked at the door of a wretchedly-poor-looking 
cottage, scarcely better than a mud hovel, which from the 
directions he had received, he presumed was the place 
where Starkey was to be found. A woman, who answered 
the door, eyed him for some moments suspiciously, before 
making any reply. Then she informed him that Starkey 
had gone out for a walk. 

" Are you the person he expected ? " 

"Yes." 

" He has gone towards" the town then, to meet you." 

If this were the case he had probably gone by the path 
over the cliffs. Jarman suggested this hypothesis. 

" Yes, it was high tide when he left. It's very dangerous 
to go by the lower road when the tide comes in ; it comes 
so fast. There was a man drowned there only this last 
week . but they will go that way. It's a good deal nearer, 
you see." 

James Jarman left word that he would come back in 
about an hour's time, if he should miss the person he 
wanted to see, but that he intended to walk along the top 
of the cliff, and keep a sharp lookout. When he had gone 
a few yards from the door, the woman called to him. 

" If you're a stranger in these parts, I might as well tell 
you to be careful not to go too near the edge of the cliff; it 
has given way in two or three places, this rough weather. 
The whole lot will come down together some of these days." 

" Thank you," he replied, " I will take care." 

As he walked away he looked at his watch . in less than 
two hours' time night would fall. " I hope I shall meet the 



Inside Newsate, 



<s" 



395 



fellow," he thought, " or it may be too dark to travel by 
either road in safety." 

It was not a pleasant day for a walk ; the north-east wind 
drove the rain against his back. In front of him the town 
lay half-hidden in a mist. The naked fields stretched away 
on the right ; on the left lay the sea. There was but one 
solitary sail to be seen : it was too rough for the fishermen 
to venture out, and such strange boats as had taken refuge 
in the bay, were hidden from view by a projecting portion 
of the cliff. As he walked along, he noticed several places 
where the earth had given way, and fallen over on the 
beach below. In others, alarming crevices yawned across 
his path. The roadway had fallen altogether at one point, 
dragging with it some iron railings that had stood between 
it and the edge of the precipice, and which now, twisted 
out of shape, hung over the side, waiting for a violent gust 
of wind to blow them down into the sea. 

James Jarman shaded his eyes, and peered long and 
anxiously across the country towards the town. 

" How provoking that I should have missed him," he 
said ; " what rascality has the fellow to propose ? I must 
see him, I suppose, and yet I have not an hour to waste." 

He wandered on until he reached the top of the steps 
leading down on to the beach, and passed by those railings 
upon which Mr. Starkey in times past had smoked so many 
meditative pipes, to gaze up at the house where Ann had 
lived and Draper had died. Its aspect was at this moment 
more desolate than ever ; the rough weather of the last few 
days had seriously damaged the stucco of the lower story. 
One of the chimney-pots had been blown over, and had 
fallen through the roof. The place had certainly the 
appearance of being under some sort of ban. No wonder 
the children of the neighbourhood fought shy of it at night- 
fall, with the belief that it was haunted. The boldest 
hearted and most audacious urchin of the neighbourhood 
had been known in the broad daylight to knock a loud 
double knock at the door, and call out, " Come on, 
Ghosty ! " but a faint rustle within, responsive as it seemed 
to his voice, had sent him flying in wild terror from thespot. 
James Jarman gazed for some time upon the exterior of 
the dreary building before he turned his face again to the 
east. It was plain to see from his dark brow that his pro- 
tracted meditations had summoned up no pleasant memories. 



396 A London Romance. 

He strode along at a rapid pace now, and reached the little 
village in less than half the time it had previously taken 
him to make the journey, but he had, however, been a long 
while absent, and the twilight was fast changing into darkness. 

Almost at the moment, however, that he was about to 
knock at the cottage door, a voice called to him by name 
from a stile close at hand. He paused and waited, and a 
figure came forward through the twilight. It was Starkey. 

" Oh," said Jarman, " you have come at last. I was 
afraid I could not wait." 

" You did well to wait. What I have to say to you is 
very particular." 

"You are Richard Starkey, are you not?" 

" To be sure, Sir. It is so long ago since we were clerks 
together. You forget me ; I am much changed." 

" You appear to be changed," Jarman replied, carelessly. 
"Well?" 

" I suffered a great deal after I left the house there down 
the City lane. That cold-blooded old scoundrel is dead 
since then. You know that, I suppose ? " 

" I know that Mr. Hankershanks is dead." 

" Well, Mr. Hankershanks, if you like it better. You had 
more cause than I had to cherish his memory. He never 
did me a good turn that I know of. He thrust me out into 
the street like a dog to starve. I never forget an injury, I 
don't. I've sworn a thousand times I would be even with 
all concerned in that business." 

Jarman looked at his watch. 

" I have exactly three quarters of an hour to catch my 
train. I can give you fifteen minutes. Is that time enough 
for you to say what you have got to say ? " 

" Three minutes will do ; but I cannot say it here." 

"Where then?" 

" Somewhere where we can be by ourselves. I'm sorry 
you're in such a hurry, though I shall have to see you 
again, I am afraid." 

" It is your fault that the time has been lost. I have 
been waiting for you two hours at least." 

" I did not expect you down so soon, and I did not want 
to be seen by any of the townspeople. Since my smash up, 
they've been very nasty tempered, some of them. I went 
round through the fields to the railway. That's how we 
missed one another." 



Inside Newgate. 397 

" Do not let us waste any more time now. Which way- 
shall we walk ? You can say what you have to say as we 
go along." 

" You'll hardly catch the train by the upper road. We 
shall see fewer people on the sands. Shall we go that 
way ? " 

"If it is safe." 

" Safe ? How do you mean ? " 

Starkey looked up into his face with an ugly leer, as he 
said this : 

" What are you afraid of? " 

" Of the tide, that's all," replied Jarman, returning his 
look with a hard stare. 





CHAPTER IV 

jjH," said Starkey, " that's all, is it ? There's no 
fear of that," he continued, after peering for a 
few moments silently out towards the sea. 
"We sha'n't take long getting to the steps." 

" Let us set off then at once." 

Without wasting any more time in conversation, they 
started upon their walk, and continued on their way for 
some time in silence. The scene was at that moment 
gloomy enough to have frightened a timid wayfarer who 
might have been passing that way without a guide. The 
sun had some time ago sunk below the horizon. The low 
wailing sound of distant wind crept over the water, betoken- 
ing a coming storm. Some sea birds overhead wheeled 
round in circles, waking the echoes with their shrill cries. 

When they had pursued their journey for some ten 
minutes or so, Starkey, who up to this seemed to have been 
waiting for the other to speak, impatiently broke the long 
silence. 

" Unless we say what we have got to say at once, the 
time will come for us to separate before anything has been 
decided on." 

Jarman came to a standstill. 

" It was you who wrote to me, not I to you. It was you 
who said that you had information to impart. " 

" Yes, I did. About this murder." 

Without one muscle of his face moving, Jarman waited 
with his eves fixed steadily upon the other. 

"Well?" 

"You know what I have got to say, James Jarman, though 



Inside Newgate. . 399 

you may be in ignorance of the means by which I got at the 
truth. You know though that I know the truth, even by 
what I have said ; before, indeed, I have said anything." 

"Perhaps so. Well?" 

" I told you awhile ago I never forget or forgive those 
who have injured me. Don't run away with the idea from 
those words that I want a terrible revenge, like a person in 
a play or a tale-book. I want revenge, of course, but my 
notion of revenge is money. Pay me well, and it will be 
well worth your while to shut my mouth. Do you hear ? " 

" I hear ; but suppose you give me a notion of what you 
are to shut your mouth on. I am quite in the dark so far." 

" Not at all in the dark, begging your pardon, James 
Jarman ; but you wish to be on the safe side, I see, and 
hear what is to be heard before committing yourself." 

" That is quite right. I wish to hear if there be anything 
worth hearing. Only come to the point ; we have no time 
to spare." 

" I need not waste the time, then, by telling you what 
you know. We commence by taking it for granted that the 
person lying in Newgate, accused of Draper's murder, is 
innocent." 

" Of course she is. Well ! " 

" Of course she is ! You own that, then? And pray who 
is guilty ? " 

" I accuse no one. Who says it was a murder at all ? " 

"I do ! " cried Starkey with sudden passion, and shaking 
as he spoke a trembling finger in the other's face . " I do ; 
and that you are the murderer ! " 

There was a momentary silence ; and while Jarman, 
deadly white, stood gazing upon his accuser, his hand crept 
upwards towards his breast pocket, where the pistol was. 
Starkey, without noticing this movement, continued his 
accusation with breathless eagerness. 

" I know you did it, because I have the proof. Because 
I have a scrap of paper that was picked up by the dead 
man's bedside. There are only a few words, but they are 
enough to hang you if they saw the light." 

" And what do you propose ? " 

"To sell them to you." 

" For how much ? " 

" Five thousand pounds. It's dirt cheap to a man with 
your money. Too cheap." 



400 A London Romance. 

" They are a forgery, perhaps." 

"You know they are no forgery, even before you see 
them. They were written by Draper a few minutes after 
they had left and a few moments before he died. They say 
simply that you have been in there to see him, that you 
gave him his medicine, and that you poured in it the poison 
from the medicine chest." 

"Show me the paper." 

" I have not got it here. Bring me the money to-morrow, 
and you shall have it. When the paper is once destroyed 
you will be safe enough, for without proof who would believe 
so wild a tale ? When the girl is dead too " 

The other turned upon him with an oath, which was 
uttered almost like the snarl of a savage beast. 

" You unutterable scoundrel ! do you think I am going 
to let her die as you propose doing ? There are ten days 
left. I am going to wait twelve hours longer for the secre- 
tary's reply. To-night I start for the country to see him. 
If the answer is unfavourable, I give myself into custody ; 
and to guard against the frustration of my purpose by sudden 
death, I have written a full confession of the deed, and 
carry it at this moment in a pocket-book at my breast." 

Starkey was silent for a moment, and seemed to weigh 
the other's reply. 

" Why have you delayed so long? Because you thought 
she was certain to be acquitted ? " 

" Yes ; because I was assured by the best legal authorities 
at every step of the unhappy affair, that at the next her 
release was certain. Because I loved her, and love is 
selfish. Because I knew at any moment I could save her, 
and thus allowed her to suffer the suspense yet a little and 
a little longer in the hope that all would go well, and we 
might be happy together. Can you understand now ? " 

" I think so ; and I can also understand that as her life 
is as dear to you as your own, or more, it will be as much 
worth your while as ever to buy my secret. I will sell it you 
for double the amount I first mentioned." 

During the last few sentences, wholly carried away by the 
interest of the subject in hand, they had remained quite 
motionless. Jarman was the first to make any movement. 

"You must come up to town to-morrow, and we will 
decide what the price is to be when I have the secretary's 
reply. You are without a pound, you say ? " 



Inside Newgate. 401 

" Yes." 

" I will give you some money before I leave ; but we 
must get on now. Is not that the water coming in. I 
cannot see. Good God ! what was that ? " 

Starkey shaded his eyes, and strove to pierce the darkness. 
Then pulled his companion by the arm, and in a frightened 
voice, said, 

" By Heaven ! it is the tide coming in, and some of the 
cliff in front has fallen down. I hope no more will fall." 

" We had better go back." 

" No, no ; the water's in behind us now. This is a sort of 
bay we are in. We must run for it. We shall have to wade 
up to our knees, I expect, to reach the steps." 

" You should have known that there was not time to 
come by the shore. Your stupidity may cost us our lives." 

As Jarman spoke he gazed wistfully up at the beetling 
cliffs overhead. Escape was impracticable in that direction. 
A little further on the base of the cliff could only be seen at 
intervals, between the advancing and retiring waves. The 
sea was making fast, and not a moment was to be lost. 

They were yet four or five hundred yards distant from the 
steps by which they hoped to ascend to the road above. 
Every step, however, that they took brought them further 
out, and the water already reached their knees. 

Breathless and drenched to the skin, they with a desperate 
effort passed the point, but the worst had yet to come. The 
cliffs jutted out again before them, and large masses of rock 
scattered about made it almost impossible to keep a firm 
footing against the violence of the waves. As they turned 
the next corner a large wave came making towards them, 
gathering force as it approached and swelling its gigantic 
mass so as to shut out the view of all beyond. 

As it came, Jarman fixed himself as firmly as he could to 
resist the shock, and bowed his head before the wall of water 
towering over him. 

Next moment, however, with a roll like thunder, it had 
broken above him and he was swept off his feet, and 
hurled headlong beneath the swollen volume of water that 
closed over head. Stunned, but not senseless yet, he struggled 
to his feet again, and looked around for his companion. At a 
dozen yards distant, he heard a faint cry from the sea, which 
bore the drowning wretch away. 

Setting his teeth, and bracing up what strength remained 
26 



402 A London Romance. 

to him, Jarman made another desperate effort to reach the 
point of safety. Another wave came rolling in, and broke 
above his head. Again he was dashed head first among the 
broken rocks. Again, bleeding from his wounds, blinded 
by the foam, he struggled on. The voice of his old enemy 
was long since choked by the water in his throat, but the 
wailing wind seemed to imitate the death-cry he had heard. 
Perhaps he fancied, too, that his own death-knell was ring- 
ing in his ears. 

Overhead somewhere a church bell was tolling, and the 
wind carried the sound towards him. For a moment once, 
out at sea he saw a light flash out across the water, and 
thought he heard a signal of distress". Now he had reached 
the foot of the steps, or the place where the steps had been; 
but there he saw that his case was hopeless. The noise he had 
heard a while ago was that of the falling cliff at this point. 
He was, as it were in a corner, out of reach of all hope, and 
seemed to understand that the supreme moment was at 
hand. Then he turned his back to the town, and faced his 
death. 

Was there borne upon the wind to the world he left be- 
hind . to her whom he had so dearly and so deeply loved . to 
her for whose sake he had imperilled his soul . a stray word 
of the dying prayer he breathed for her happiness and 
safety ? 

A mighty wave came thundering in, and struck him sense- 
less at a blow, then carried him dead out to sea. 




CHAPTER V. 

HIS all happened ten days before the Monday when 
Ann was to be hanged. The hours of that last 
day passed with painful tediousness, although the 
poor girl trembled at each stroke of the clock. 

She sat silent and motionless, her hands clasped, her chin 
resting on her breast. A terrible calmness had come over 
her, for she was weary of struggling against her fate. They 
had condemned her to death . they were going to kill her for 
a crime she was innocent of . but there was no help. 

No ; nothing on earth could save her. If the secretary 
of state had sent a favourable reply, before this she would 
have heard the particulars. They would not keep her in 
ignorance many moments, the chaplain had told her, but she 
must not hope. No ; she must make up her mind that her 
life was over . that to-morrow she must die. 

Finally, she had made up her mind to this, and in a stony 
silence was waiting for the gathering of the darkness of her 
last night on earth. At length the night came on, and then 
the faint murmur of the brutal rabble without swelled into a 
roar. The harsh sound of a song, discordantly chanted 
within only a few yards of her, from a hundred throats, pene- 
trated to her cell. The warder looked towards her with a 
shrinking dread in his eyes, wondering whether she heard. 

She looked up and listened. 

" It is like the theatre," she said. " They are waiting for 
the play to begin. I hardly tremble as much as I did that 
night I acted at the country playhouse." 
26 . 2 



404 A London Romance. 

But as the sound of the song grew louder, she sank down 
shuddering, and hid her face. 

Heaven help the wretched prisoner in such a case ! We 
are accustomed to find authors who would mete out a 
terrible fate for the villain in their books . select many forms 
of death more or less horrible ; but what terrors can really 
surpass those of the condemned cell . of the helpless wretch, 
shivering within earshot of the mob, athirst for his blood, 
knowing that there is no possible chance of escape . that 
he is weak and helpless as a babe, and that a few hours 
hence at most they will come and bind him hand and foot 
and carry him out, if he be too weak with terror to walk, 
and strangle him, while the crowd hoot and hiss ! 

This fearful day at length came to an end. The night set 
in as has been said, and the mob gathered denser and 
denser without the prison walls. But about eleven o'clock 
the door of the cell opened, and the governor, bearing a 
paper in his hand, appeared upon the threshold. She rose all 
in a tremble, and gasping for breath. Had it been a disap- 
pointment, she felt that the shock must have struck her 
dead. But she read in that kind face before her as in a 
book that hope was not dead. 

In that waterproof pocket-book which James Jarman had 
bought at the little sea-side town he had placed the confes- 
sion he had written. When his body was picked up some 
few days after his death by a French fishing-boat the docu- 
ments were forwarded as soon as possible by the consul at 
Calais to the secretary of state in England. Almost at 
the same time the important scrap of paper which Starkey 
had wanted to sell was found among the papers he had left 
at the cottage ; and his dead body soon after being also 
found, this other proof was taken to the nearest magistrate 
by the woman under whose roof he had been living for 
some few days before the accident. 

There were other papers besides the confession found in 
Jarman's pocket-book . a letter of instructions to his solicitor, 
and a letter to Ann. The latter ran thus : . 

" When you read this, my own darling, if ever you do read 
it, you will have learnt to hate me . to execrate my memory. 
How can I hope to prove to you that I did all I have done 
for your sake ? I cannot even persuade myseli that such 



Inside Newgate. 405 

was the case. When I did it I was in ignorance of your 
marriage, and I hoped that if you left him you would come 
to me. It is only such misery as I have suffered that can 
be looked for when we tamper with Heaven's will and seek 
to make our hands the instruments of God's wrath. If you 
live long enough to forget all this and to be happy, dearest, 
as I pray that Heaven in its mercy will permit you, you will 
be rich with the money I have left for you. Do not reject 
it, because he who gave it you was he who killed your love. 
I always meant it should be yours. It was my dream when 
miles and miles away. It was my dream too, then, that I 
might share it with you. But that was not to be. Perhaps 
I shall be dead before you read this. 1 have made up my 
mind to kill myself when 1 am sure of your safety. God 
bless you, my darling. You know not how bitterly I repent 
the sufferings I have caused you ; but you know not how I 
hated him when I did it, and when his baseness and trea- 
chery were fresh in my mind. Forgive me and forget me. 
It is too late now to undo the past. Eut oh, if I could un- 
live my life ! If I could live but one moment in your love 
before what is to come ! " 

The story of James Jarman's love ends here with Ann's 
release from prison. 



POSTSCRIPT. 



IN A BOX AT THE STRAND. 




T was that period of the year when so many people 
are so very miserable, and which . for some 
reason or other hitherto unexplained . it is the 
custom to call Merry Christmas. 

It was one of the "good old-fashioned" Christmases, 
bitterly cold and bleak. The old-fashioned snow, which is 
so trying to the worn-out boots of some poor people, lay 
deep upon the ground. The ice was thick, and there was 
rare skating in the parks. Some thousands who did not 
skate, however, were rather uncomfortable in their cellars 
and attics without any fire. Some even perished from cold 
in the streets. It was merry Christmas time. 

Yes, it was merry Christmas time. The merry tradesmen 
were balancing their books. Presently their merry little bills 
would be sent in to us. The merry butcher had gaily decked 
with mistletoe a coarse kind of meat, specially purchased for 
this festive season, and called Christmas beef". The merry 
publican had, with a free and liberal hand, mixed his 
Christmas gin. The merry grocer, the merry greengrocer . 
all of the merry band, had got their little Christmas swindles 
ready, and they were all joyously decorated -with sprigs of 
holly. As yet the merry chemist showed no sign ; his time 
would come anon. 

First in the field, however, was the merry publisher, who, 
of all his brothers, made the most noise about the coming 
time of jollity and good-fellowship. This year he was going 
in more heavily than usual for his Christmas numbers. He 



In a Box at the Strand. 407 

was going to have lots of pictures and lots of comic stories. 
All the droll dogs upon town we're to kick up their literary 
heels in his journals and magazines. He did not care how 
funny they were at this jovial time, and he patted them on 
the back in his most fatherly style, and bade them, if pos- 
sible, surpass themselves ; only he beat them down to the 
last shilling in their prices, for all that. 

Those open-hearted fellows, too . the theatrical managers 
. were all hard at work getting up their Christmas enter- 
tainments with no other object in life . if you will only 
believe me . than giving us a right down good Christmas 
treat, which we might all of us come and see, if we paid for it. 

It was, as I have said, merry Christmas time, and a couple 
of score and more servants, messengers, shopboys, printers' 
devils, cabmen, 'busmen, and small relations had wished me 
the compliments of the season at an average of two shillings 
and sixpence per head all round. It was boxing-night, and 
there was a new burlesque being performed for the first 
time at the Strand Theatre, and a friend and myself had a 
private box. 

It cannot exactly be said that all the world was that night 
at the Strand, because the little theatre will hold, when at 
its fullest, but few people, and probably there was not a 
seat to spare just then in any house in London, but there 
were many notabilities present. There were gentlemen of 
the press in the stalls, lofty-browed, calm and composed, 
cold and critical. There was also rank and fashion. The 
tawny moustache . the white moustache . the moustache of 
promise, as yet only a hair or two. And there was beauty, or 
what passes for it. There was golden beauty. very golden, 
with if anything an orange tint, except at the roots. There 
was dark beauty, scornfully critical of golden beauty, knowing 
how that sort of thing is done, you know . and just a little 
envious of the effect. There were several celebrated people 
.Jason Burgoyne, Little Addleton, two actresses without 
engagements, a literary lord, a lord famous for being a lord 
or for something else I do not at the moment remember. A 
famous foreigner unknown over here, and pooh-poohed ac- 
cordingly. Some of our princes of commerce . the writer 
of this narrative and his" friend Mr. Sm*th of the St*ck 
E*ch*nge. 

We had all come to see the new burlesque . a burlesque 
by one of the busy B's who have the burlesque monopoly at 



408 A London Romance. 

our London theatres, and we had made up our minds to be 
delighted. Nor were we disappointed. How could we be ? 
There were the gay airs from the music halls (drat those un- 
genteel places for getting hold of all the lively music). 
There were the bright dresses, the high-heeled satin boots, 
the pretty faces and shapely limbs. There were in one scene 
all together doing their best, David James, Thomas Thome, 
and Elise Holt, a trio which, I suppose, was never equalled 
on this or any other stage since burlesque first came into 
fashion. 

But before the burlesque began we had plenty to amuse 
ourselves with in looking at the rest of the company, and 
they too, perhaps, found some amusement in looking at us. 
My friend Sm*th, it is well known in literary and artistic 
circles, is a member of the Arundel, the Junior Garrick, and 
one or two other clubs of that character where he makes 
many friends, whom he afterwards invites down to his villa 
at Putney, at which I may say there are at certain seasons 
jinks of the highest character and without limit. This 
evening he was nodding to one and the othej until the 
present writer began to feel almost savage that he knew no 
friends whom he in his turn could nod to, if only to show 
that he had a friend or two in the world as well as some 
other people. Sm*th even left the box to pay visits to his 
numerous acquaintance, and left the gentleman whom he 
had come with to amuse himself with the playbill. 

He thus amused himself for sometime until presently 
Sm*th came rushing back in a state of great excitement. 

" Didn't I once hear you say you were acquainted with 
Miss Whitaker . Ann Whitaker . Mrs. Draper that was . 
the actress, you know ? " 

" Yes, I do know her," I replied. 

" Then there she is in the box opposite, all by herself, and 
I'm dying to make her acquaintance." 

There, indeed, sat the Ann Whitaker of the foregoing 
narrative, alone, as my friend had said, looking much 
prettier, I thought, than I had ever seen her, and, as usual, 
exquisitely dressed. Many glasses were turned upon her, 
and a murmur of recognition and astonishment passed 
round the house . for it was well known that she was en- 
gaged for the burlesque opening to the pantomime at the 
Great Sahara. 

None of us had seen her for some time. She had been 



In a Box at the Strand. 409 

at Paris for six months,, specially engaged as the Meese 
Anglaise in Offenbach's new opera of Satan en Pantoufle. 
She had grown somewhat plumper, I fancied, and her cheeks 
were rosier than of yore. These changes made me half in- 
clined to think, for a moment, that I might have been mis- 
taken, and that it really was not Mrs. Draper ; but now 
she caught my eye, and the old sweet smile lit up her face, 
and she bowed as she used to do when the "gods" 
thundered out their applause upon her entrance. 

As it was now, some of the "gods " here had recognised 
the favourite, and were pointing her out eagerly to one 
another. Some of them applauded ; and one voice called 
out, " Bravo, Whitaker." This made her glance up and 
smile, but immediately afterwards blush, and draw back as 
much as possible behind the curtain of the box. 

That fellow, Sm*th, would not be content unless he was 
taken round to this comedy queen, and introduced to her 
with all due forms and ceremonies. Burgoyne came up 
into the box also, and Little Addleton, and several others. 
It was fortunate she had the box all to herself, or there would 
not have been anything like room enough for all her 
admirers. As it was some were obliged to stand out in 
the lobby. Under this disadvantage, and from far away 
in the background, one loud-voiced little man addressed 
stentorian compliments to her majesty, which were perfectly 
audible, and highly appreciated by the inmates of the stalls. 

She told us that the reason she was here to-night instead 
of at the Great Sahara, was because she had been compelled, 
owing to the disgraceful behaviour of its manager, to throw 
up her engagement only that very morning. Inquiry was 
made as to the nature of the manager's offence. " Oh," she 
said, impatiently, "it was always the same story . so un- 
reasonable . so absurd ; nobody else in the world, in fact, 
could possibly put up with half she had had to submit to 
from that man." 

We all listened most respectfully to this statement, though 
some of us had heard something of the same sort before, 
with regard to other men, for her majesty was somewhat 
celebrated for her quarrels and law-suits. A misguided 
young fellow present, observed, . 

" You often quarrel with your managers, don't you ? " 

" They quarrel with me," she replied. " I cannot be ex- 
pected to suffer every insult and indignity, can I ? " 



4io A London Romance, 

We all indignantly declared that she had suffered -far too 
much as it was. 

" At any rate, Mr. Russet will have to do without me 
to-night." 

" He can't," said Little Addleton, " he'll break down to a 
certainty." 

"I'm sorry for him, that's all," her majesty replied; "I 
suppose they'll get Panglass to read the part, or poor dear 
old Montflummerie. I wonder how they'll dress the 
character ? I ordered my dresses from Paris ; I wouldn't 
wear any of Russet's rubbish. Mine cost over three thousand 
francs. Grevin gave me the designs." 

We all, in chorus, expressed our conviction that the 
dresses must be very beautiful. 

" Yes, they're well enough," she said, " and after all the 
expense, I cannot help thinking that it is very ungentlemanly 
of Russet." 

We all agreed that Russet was no gentleman. However, 
the loss would be his. 

" You see," said Ann, with a smile, " he has so often 
disappointed the public. In fact, he scarcely ever keeps a 
promise when he makes one. I should not wonder at all 
if the public did not some day tear up his benches." 

We agreed that it was no more than Russet ought to 
expect. I am not quite sure that there was any proposition 
in the world, possible or impossible, that we should not 
have readily agreed to, had it emanated from the same 
source. I will not go as far as to say that we truckled 
somewhat humbly to this imperious beauty ; but it must be 
admitted we were singularly unanimous in our assent to 
whatever she was pleased to observe. 

I have said beauty. Perhaps that is a mistake. She 
was not a beauty ; certainly I never heard any other lady 
allow that she had a perfect feature in her face. She was 
" so made up," the other ladies at the theatre protested. 
Anyone with that quantity of paint on must look pretty, 
they all agreed. She was one of those who attract the eyes 
of all the men among the audience, and the men . a spirit- 
less sex, when argued with by the other and superior sex, 
were generally too cowardly to defend their opinion. Be- 
sides, it was decidedly not a high style of beauty, and to 
admire it must betoken an imperfect judgment. 

Some who sought for an excuse, in an unguarded moment 



In a Box at the Strand. 411 

of enthusiasm, after expressing their unqualified admiration, 
said, 

" It is not so much the face as the] general effect. There 
is an air, a style, eje ne sais quoi." 

Endeavouring to describe what this je-ne-sais-quoishness 
consisted of, some of these gentlemen explained that the 
air and style they alluded to did not depend upon the rich- 
ness of the attire. " A simple muslin dress and a simple 
blue ribbon," they were fond of saying, . and this is the 
idea of most men about women's clothes. Simplicity and 
neatness are, they pretend, the most desirable attributes of 
a pretty toilet. But ladies themselves know the difference 
between a rich simplicity and a poor one. There is a 
simplicity of satin and velvet which will give a piqicante air 
to the plainest featured ; but it costs a good deal of money. 

Ann's dress was generally remarkable by the costliness of 
its details. The effect to a man's eyes was simplicity itself, 
and the very best taste. Only the women noticed the long 
drooping earrings loaded with diamonds ; the profusion 
of rings and bracelets, and the necklace of glittering 
gems. 

While the little court was yet sitting, the curtain rose on 
the burlesque, and we were all dismissed to our places. I 
heard Addleton talking to a friend as they walked away 
together : 

" She looks more at her ease in that box than in another 
we once saw her in, eh ? " 

" Ah ! she owes you more than she thinks for. It was 
you who first took the matter up, was it not ? " 

" Of course it was. These things are so soon forgotten. 
If I had not made a cause celebre of it by my articles in the 
Bombshell." 

"And that Methodist preacher sort-of-fellow, what was 
his name ? that you wrote that tremendous smasher about. 
Let's see, what was he called ? something like Railway ? " 

" Bradshaw." 

" Ah, to be sure. What has become of him ? " 

" He fell all at once as quickly as he had risen. He has 
been dead about a couple of years. I suppose hardly any- 
body remembers him." 

"Not they. Who remembers anything now-a-days? I 
myself forget who it really was who killed poor what's-his- 
name . Thing-em-bob that our friend there was tried about." 



4i2 A London Romance. 

"Jarman, was it not? A sort of madman I always 
thought him. Didn't you, Yolland? " 

" Must have been," said the gentleman appealed to. " I 
suppose he had, though, mad or sane, scraped together a 
tolerably large fortune. He left every penny of it to her, 
I believe." 

" Yes ; she came out of that affair pretty well, all things 
considered. She is about the richest woman there is on 
the stage." 

" I wonder she is on the stage at all. She seems to give 
her managers a good deal of trouble." 

"I suppose it is because she does that they are. so fond 
of her. There's not another woman alive with double her 
talents and good looks, that they would stand her tricks 
from. It's wonderful what luck some people have." 

" Silence ! there in front," cried somebody from the front 
row of the pit behind them, and the gentlemen held their 
tongues, and listened to the wit and humour. Presently, 
my friend Sm*th pulled my arm and pointed to the box 
opposite. There I saw a bald headed gentleman looking 
very hot and excited, endeavouring to make some ex- 
planation to which Ann would not listen. 

" Isn't that Russet ? " 

" Yes." 

" He's come to beg her on his bended knees to go and 
play at his theatre to-night." 

"And she won't." 

" Not she." 

" But he seems to be using strong arguments. Perhaps 
he's offering to double her salary." 

" That's like Russet, who would beat a ballet girl down 
to the utmost farthing." 

" See, she listens favourably. How fast he is talking ! 
She is looking at her watch. He is looking at his." 

" She won't go, though." 

"Yes, she will." 

" She has risen." 

" She is leaving the box on his arm." 

"What do you say to leaving the rest of the burlesque 
unseen and running round to the other theatre to see her 
come on ?" 

" Let's stop another scene to give her time to dress, and 
then we'll rush over in a Hansom." 



In. a Box at the Strand. 413 

It was one of those triumphs, the papers said next day, 
which are so rare on the modern stage. The welcome ac- 
corded to the favourite actress was perfectly overwhelming. 
For many minutes she was unable to speak, but stood 
bowing her acknowledgments to the repeated bursts of 
applause. 

How Russet must have cursed her beneath his breath, 
although he smiled so sweetly. Afterwards he was heard 
to say . 

"That woman is the most heartless, selfish, ungrateful 
alive. What do the public see in her, I should like to 
know ? She shall never again act at my theatre. Crowded 
houses every night, do you say ? Yes, that's all very well, 
but look what she costs me." 

Nevertheless, in spite of this resolve, he engaged her 
again before the year was out, having lost a mint of 
money by somebody else in the meantime. 

We stayed out the burlesque opening, my friend and I, 
and I never saw Ann to greater advantage. Every dance 
and song of hers were loudly encored, every speech ap- 
plauded to the echo. When the Harlequinade was about 
half over, and we were standing under the pillars of the 
front entrance, her brougham passed by, and she nodded 
and smiled to us. A ragged rascal, who early in the even- 
ing, probably, had been selling bills, and was now touting 
for odd jobs . hailing cabs, opening the doors, and the 
like . caught sight of her, and ran by the side, touch- 
ing the brim of his greasy hat, and whining out his little 
story. 

" Good-evening to you, Miss ! A happy new year to 
you, Miss. You haven't forgot me, Miss, I'm sure. 
Pickering, Miss; don't you remember?- Happy to drink 
your health, Miss. Thank you kindly. God bless you." 

Next moment the darkness of night had swallowed her 
up. She faded from our view as she will fade presently 
from the recollection of the reader who a moment hence 
lays down this volume. Our last glimpse of her is of a bright 
face and a merry smile. Perhaps Avhen she had leant back 
and closed the window, with the recollection of the life that 
was gone for ever, and the love that lay for ever dead, some 
bitter tears rose to her eyes. 

For my part I cannot bear to think of her thus, alone 
in the world, with those who loved her, and whom she 



414 A London Romance. 

loved all dead. I like to think of her best as she appears 
at v night in the lighted theatre, when the overture has 
ceased, and the curtain rises, and she comes forward, 
bright and flashing with a joyous laugh . a laugh that 
rings in my memory now as I lay down my pen. 



THE END. 
