THE EIDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



CHAPTEE I. 

THE COURSE OE TRUE LOVE AT NORTH BRIXTOKT. 

'1 E fell in love with her from the 
' | free seats. 

She . Miss Pamela Simpson 
. was a parlour boarder in Miss 
MacSpartan's Select Establish- 
ment for Young Ladies, Vir- 
ginia House, North Brixton; 
^ and, when he saw her first, was 
in the MacSpartan pew in 
Brixton church. Her eyes 
meeting his, accidentally, trans- 
-^ fixed him, as it were, so that 
M IS he remained standing up after 
Hfci TrjtjTl the rest of the congregation had 
*.£. -^ssat down; to the great scandal 
j|§=jy of the beadle, who, following 
the direction of Adolphus's 
ardent gaze, saw the whole 
affair at a glance. Yes, their 
eyes had met ; but she, on her 
part, took no notice of him. 
Next minute her attention was 
t^g attracted by some other object, 
and she thought of him no more. 




!> 




10 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

The thrilling incident here described occurred just after tho 
Second Lesson ; and throughout the remainder of the morning ser- 
vice, and the sermon folio-wing it, he kept his eyes so perseveringly 
fixed upon Miss Simpson's pretty face, that, if there were really any 
faith to be placed in mesmeric influence, she must have looked back 
at "him . only she did not. 

He -was lowly born, though hopeful, while she belonged to a 
higher sphere. He was, it must be confessed, but a chemist's 
assistant; while her papa was 'in the city,' and resided in close 
vicinity to Gloucester Grate. 

"When next he saw her, it was from the door of his employer's 
commercial establishment ; and having his apron on at the time, he 
retired precipitately . only, however, to steal forth again when she 
had passed, and contemplate, longingly and lovingly, from between 
the red and blue bottles, the back of the 'white chip' which covered 
his charmer's head. He met her in the Brixton Road after this. 
She was heading the MacSpartan ' advertisement' . by which name 
those stately diurnal processions were enviously styled by the other 
rival seminaries. He was, as luck would have it, carrying a physic 
bottle, which he scrambled into his coat-tail pocket; at the same 
time rummaging fruitlessly after his gloves. 

When she caught sight of him he was blushing crimson, and 
his legs were altogether unmanageable, as it is the nature of modest 
young men's legs to be, under the public eye. So weak did he feel 
about the knees, and so difficult did he find it to lift his feet off the 
pavement, that, trying to make room for the young ladies to pass, 
he slipped off the curb, and only by a miracle avoided sprawling. 

The young lady walking with Miss Simpson, whose name was 
Topsawyer, giggled audibly. A smile was also perceptible upon 
Pamela's pretty face. As the young ladies turned the corner of the 
street they turned their heads to look after him, and he was still 
standing where they had left him, and still gazing after the young 
lady, spell bound, with his hat on the back of his head. 

'Decidedly he is struck,' said Miss Topsawyer. 

' Struck with whom ? ' innocently inquired her friend. 

' Need you ask, my dear ? ' said Miss Topsawyer. 

And, to tell the truth, it was not because she had any doubt in 



TBUE LOVE AT NOETH BEIXTON. 11 

her own mind upon the subject that Miss Simpson had inquired, but 
just to see whether Miss Topsawyer's conceit could so far carry her 
away as to cause her to suppose that her own pale, pasty countenance 
and ugly brown bell-rope curls had fascinated the susceptible chemist. 

' Don't be so absurd ! ' said Pamela, with bewitching coyness. 
' The idea of such a thing ! ' 

'I'm sure he looks very gentlemanly . for his class in life,' said 
the withering Topsawyer. 

' Who is he, pray ? ' 

' Don't you know ? ' 

' I never saw him before, that I am aware of.' 

' How very strange, and he for ever crossing your path. Toor 
dear youth! But I see his case is hopeless.' 

' Who is he ? ' asked Miss Simpson impatiently. 

' He is the young man at the lozenge shop.' 

It was cruelly sarcastic thus to describe him, because his employer 
dispensed drugs and sold leeches and blisters, tooth-brushes and a 
variety of other fancy articles. It is true Mr. Gulphy's dealings 
with the young ladies from Miss MacSpartan's school were confined 
almost entirely to lozenges and sweet stuff. But it was not their 
custom upon which he alone depended, and Adolphus was not there 
so much to serve out paltry pennyworths of acidulated drops and 
insignificant three-ha'p'orths of rose and lavender lozenges, as to 
render himself familiar with the mysteries of ' Mixture as before.' 

It was a great shame, then, thus to ridicule the honourable 
calling of one who, though lowly born, possessed a hero's heart and 
a poet's soul. And surely the fact of wearing an apron should not 
dim the lustre of soaring genius ! Upon a subsequent occasion 
Miss Topsawyer spoke of him as 'the doctor's boy,' and she also, 
with bitter irony, called him ' Jujubes.' 

Miss Pamela, for her own part, was well aware that he occupied 
but a humble sphere in comparison to that of a daughter of a gen- 
tleman in the city, residing in the close vicinity of Gloucester Gate ; 
but she was rather flattered by the idea of this lowly-born but 
handsome hero worshipping her hopelessly at a distance. When 
next she saw him he had had his hair cut, and looked paler and 
thinner ; and she thought to herself, with a soothing kind of sorrow, 



12 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



that lie was wasting away upon her account. Perhaps, when he 
knew how hopeless was his case, he would go off in a decline! 
He might, in his agony of mind, help himself to the contents of his 
employer's bottles in an unadulterated form, and perish in the 
flower of his youth, his apron, and the chemist's hack parlour. 
Altogether, it was very awful ; but what could she do if lowly-born 
persons in aprons would persist in falling in love with her? Of 
course, there was no hope for them, for she meant to marry only 
for money. She had quite settled that, and many times, when look- 
ing in at a jeweller's shop, had chosen the ornaments in "which she 
was to be presented to her sovereign. 
U 




CHOOSING THE JEWELS. 



TRUE LOVE AT NORTH BRIXTON. 



13 



She had hitherto been in the habit of sending for her sweet 
stuff, and had not gone herself. It was thus that she had never 
seen Adolphus at his place of business. However, one day she 
thought she would go, and, having given the governess the slip 
during the promenade, entered the chemist's shop with Miss Top- 
sawyer, and asked the perplexed assistant for a pennyworth of 
'kisses.' 

While he made her up a little packet of these most improperly- 
named sweetmeats, burning his trembling fingers dreadfully, with 
the sealing-wax, during the operation, she had time to observe him 




THEY WATCHED FROM THE PASTRYCOOK'S. 

closely. He had an expressive eye, and what people call fine eye- 
brows, which generally means a good deal too much of them. He 
had on a purple satin tie, and wore beautiful studs in the front of a 
shirt which was well displayed by an open waistcoat. His hair 



14 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



was carefully brushed and highly pomatumed ; and it was, 
indeed, to be regretted that an otherwise noble exterior should 
have been marred by that dreadful apron. While he was serving 
her, however, in spite of his confusion he contrived to summon up 
sufficient courage to enter into conversation. The first words that 
ever passed between them were upon the subject of the weather. 
He said it was a fine day, and she agreed with him, although at the 
time it was beginning to rain. But there is no occasion to tell you 




'it must be the lotion.' 



TRUE LOVE AT NORTH BRIXTON. 



15 



what else they said. When next Miss Simpson went to the 
chemist's for 'kisses,' he with the hero's soul ventured upon a 
compliment which he had studied while dispensing, . let us trust 
not seriously to the disadvantage of the future consumer of the 
mixture in hand. Two of her schoolfellows, at the pastrycook's 
opposite, were watching them, and Pamela smiled and blushed. 

This was about the beginning of February. On the fourteenth, 
he wrote a beautiful valentine upon lace-edged paper, and, mistrust- 




WAS IT HEE FAULT IF 



ing the post, watched his opportunity and flung it weighted by a 
stone over the playground wall at Pamela's feet. The verses were 
very spirited ; and the originality of the idea of calling her his 
Heart's Idol was not spoilt in her eyes by his eccentricity in spelling 
idol with two Pa. After this he wrote several epistles, some in 
verse and some in prose; and, in all probability, he made several 
copies of each, for Mr. Gulphy, about this time, could not understand 
what on earth became of his stationery. 



!6 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

It cannot be denied that, at this period, Adolphus, also, began 
very seriously to neglect his duties. He was for ever meditating over 
new sonnets, and laboriously struggling with impromptus, while 
making up the physic ; and some of Mr. Grulphy's customers com- 
plained that what they had bought at his shop had nearly been the 
death of them ; which arose from Adolphus's having affixed mixture 
labels to bottles of lotion, and being somewhat reckless with respect 
to the quantity composing the doses. 

Now all this, certainly, was highly improper; but how, Miss 
Simpson indignantly inquired of Miss Topsawyer when they con- 
versed upon the subject, could she prevent his writing to her ? She 
might just as well, she said, as she tied her bonnet-strings at the 
bedroom looking-glass, have been blamed because the young man 
fell in love with her, or because she had the misfortune to have 
golden hair and blue eyes, and to be beautiful. Did Miss 
Topsawyer mean to insinuate that she replied to his ridiculous 
epistles ? But Miss Topsawyer did not argue the question, and 
Miss Simpson's biographer has a right to have his own opinion on 
the subject. Pamela may or may not have replied to the poetic 
outpourings of her devoted Adolphus ; but if no correspondence 
had taken place between them, it is difficult to account for some 
stolen interviews behind a certain pump in the most sequestered 
part of the MacSpartan estate. 

"Well, she was only eighteen ; and some people scarcely reach the 
age of wisdom before threescore-and-ten. It is not everybody who 
is as wise as you and the writer, and we ought to make allowances, 
accordingly. Poor turtledoves! their dream of happiness is doomed 
to be but of short duration. Even now the horizon is overcast; 
treachery is at work ; and Nemesis, with an umbrella, approaches 
with gigantic strides. 



17 



CHAPTER II 

A TRAGEDY BEHIND A PUMP. 

Jane Tattiman was a spinster. She was thirty-five years old, 
large boned, and angular ; being also very poor, her chance of 
forming a matrimonial connection was rather remote. Very early 
in life she had gone out teaching, and was a teacher still. 

Her present proprietor was Miss MacSpartan ; and, one cheerless 
March morning, that lady sat by her parlour fire, beguiling a dull 
half-hour, as was her wont, by teaching Jane Tattiman to know her 
place. Jane Tattiman, who had very frequently been taught her 
place before, and knew it, was very humble. 

'Don't talk to me,' said Miss MacSpartan, Roman-nosed and 
majestic. 

It was not Jane Tattiman' s habit to talk to Miss MacSpartan. 
It would not have been safe for Jane Tattiman to have said her 
soul was her own, in Miss MacSpartan's service, or the property 
might have been taxed, and the tax deducted from Jane Tattiman's 
stipend ; so, therefore, this humble person looked humbler still, and 
held her tongue. 

'Don't talk to me, Tattiman, if you please,' continued Tatti- 
man's proprietor; 'because I won't put up with it. You need 
not try to excuse yourself by saying that you did not know there 
were any carryings on, because you ought to have known ; and if 
you weren't as blind as a bat and more stupider than a beetle, you 
would have found out these carryings on before, and then there 
would have been an end of them, as there shall be an end of them 
now ; for in my establishment, Tattiman, there shall be no carry- 
ings on at all . of no sort whatsoever.' 

' You didn't find them out,' Jane Tattiman retorted; for surely 
a mouse with a mouse's spirit would have ventured upon some 
rejoinder. 

' Leave the room ! ' screamed Miss MacSpartan, ' and don't 
think that I shall suffer such impertinence in my establishment. 



18 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

Leave tie room this instant, and never dare to speak to me in such 
a way again. Leave the room, I say, and . come back ! How dare 
you go like that, without even so much as a curtsey? . take care 
you don't slam the door, and tell that infamous girl, Miss Simpson, 
I want to speak to her.' 

If ever in her life there was a time when Tattiman felt inclined 
to speak her mind, and tell Miss MacSpartan once and for all how 
she pitied and despised her, that was the moment ; but quarrelling 
with Miss MacSpartan was quarrelling with her own bread and 
butter ; and Jane Tattiman had never quarrelled with that, although 
she may have had differences of opinion with the nearest and dearest 
of her relations. She knew MacSpartan would have liked to have 
been able to pull her ears, as she did those of an unhappy nephew 
who came there to spend his holidays. Perhaps she would have 
gladly increased her salary for that privilege, if she had only known 
how to propose it. 

And, after all, is. not humble pie the daily food of all dependents ? 
And who is there who does not bully some one ? The writer of this 
work has known one of the sweetest girls to browbeat her mamma 
in private, and an angel of a woman to cuff and buffet her footboy 
without mercy. She had taken her victim from the workhouse, and 
he had no other friends but the overseer and the beadle, and she 
knew that she could box him with impunity. Ah, me ! it is not 
every one with strong boots on who can resist the temptation of 
treading on a worm ! 

Jane Tattiman said nothing, therefore, but, dropping her meekest 
curtsey, went in search of Miss Simpson. That young lady was 
walking in the garden with Miss Topsawyer and another bosom 
friend, their arms twined round each other's waists like the arms of 
a rustic garden chair. Hearing Miss Tattiman's message, Miss 
Simpson coloured crimson and turned pale : for young ladies were 
seldom sent for except to be reproved. But after a moment's hesi- 
tation, hastily arranging her hair by the glass at the back of a 
pocket hair-brush, Pamela ran away to see the Lady Superior. 

She ran, indeed, so fast that she was out of breath when she 
reached the first-floor landing, and was obliged to lean against the 
wall, and press her hand upon her side to stay the flutter of her 



TEAGEDY BEHIND A PUMP. 19 

heart. And Pamela's heart beat violently, too, with the fear that 
something had been found out ; and the consequences resulting from 
that something's discovery must of necessity have been so over- 
whelming, that, after a moment's pause, the very terror drove her 
forward to hear the worst. 

Miss MacSpartan was still seated as Tattiman had left her, with 
her hands in her lap, and her gold eyeglasses perched astride upon 
the bridge of her classical nose, looking awfully solemn and severe. 
Miss Simpson tapped at the door. 

'Come in,' said Miss MacSpartan; and Pamela came in, trem- 
bling. 

'I have sent for you,' said Miss MacSpartan, sententiously, 
'because . ' [Poor Pamela felt ready to faint] . 'because,' pursued 
Miss MacSpartan, with increasing severity, 'because I want to 
speak to you.' 

' Ye-es, ma'am,' stammered Pamela, only retaining her equilib- 
rium by clinging to the door-handle. 

' The object of my sending for you, Miss Simpson,' continued the 
Lady Superior, ' is to inform you that you are about to quit my 
establishment. Your parents are of opinion that your education is 
sufficiently complete for the sphere in which you are destined to 
move. You will be fetched away to-day.' 

' Am I . am I coming back any more ? ' asked Pamela in a 
flutter. 

'No,' replied Miss MacSpartan. 

' Oh, my ! ' cried Pamela in an ecstasy. 

' Miss Simpson ! ' exclaimed Miss MacSpartan, in terrific accents, 
' I'm ashamed of you.' 

'I beg your pardon, ma'am,' said Miss Simpson, becoming pre- 
ternaturally serious. 

Miss MacSpartan glared at her for a moment, appeared to bo 
about to say something, but changed her mind, and said something 
else. 

'Your silver fork and spoon,' she observed, 'together with your 
towels and sheets, you will leave as usual in my charge, to be . 
ahem . to be bestowed in charity in the customary manner. If. you 
are desirous of giving five shillings to each of the domestics, as all 



20 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



other young ladies have done before you . ahem, . I will, with your 
authority, charge your papa with the amount in your quarterly 
account, and bestow it upon the grateful recipients in the . ahem . 
usual manner.' 

' Thank you, ma'am.' 




SOMETHING LIKE A HOLIDAY. 



' Stay a moment. I wish you clearly to understand that you are 
leaving my establishment wholly and solely because your parents 
are of opinion that your education is sufficiently complete, and for 
no other reason. Now you may go.' 



TRAGEDY BEHIND A PUMP. 



21 



Whereupon Pamela bounded out of the room ; and Miss Mao- 
Spartan, taking off her eyeglasses, wiped them carefully and 
chuckled. 

'After all,' said the Lady Superior when left to herself, ' that is 
a great deal better than telling her she has been expelled.' 

Meanwhile Miss Simpson had rejoined the young ladies in the 
garden, and her heightened colour told them that something delight- 
ful must have happened. 




'that's his whistle.' 



'Are you going to have a holiday? ' asked Miss Topsawyer. 
'Better than that,' replied Pamela. 

'Goodness gracious! What is it?' cried all the other youna- 
ladies, gathering round. h 



22 THE ELDEST MIS:.; SIMPSON. 

' I'm going home ! ' 

' Going home ? ' 

' Yes, and for good. ' 

'Going home for good?' echoed all the other young ladies, in 
the greatest excitement. ' Oh dear ! Yon don't say so ! Isn't she 
lucky? How happy she must feel!' Then, after a pause, 'I wish 
it was me ! ' 

Miss Topsawyer at once plunged into the future. 'When do 
you think you will .bo presented at court ? ' she inquired. 

'Most likely to-morrow,' replied Miss Simpson, carelessly; 'at 
least so Miss MacSpartan tells me.' 

' But you won't have time to have your dress made,' said an in- 
credulous young lady, ' will you, dear ? ' 

' Suppose I don't want it, dear ? ' retorted Miss Simpson ; 'sup- 
pose it is made already, and waiting for me at home ? ' 

' How very quiet you've been about it, dear, if it is,' said the 
incredulous young lady, with a titter. 

But Pamela had no time to quarrel. Jane Tattiman required 
her assistance to pack the boxes in the bedroom, and thus she was 
occupied the remainder of the day. 

Oh, how happy she was to go home ! To have done for ever 
with school and schoolmistresses ! To have learnt the last of Mang- 
nall and Brewer, Pinnock and Walkinghame, Tasso, Penelon, and 
the rest of them ! To have done with back-boards and impositions ! 
To have seen the last of the unboltable roly-polies, and that never- 
to-be-forgotten resurrection pie ! To be going home ; to be going 
into the world ! . how much larger than usual the 'world' sounded ! 
To be going into 'society' ! To be going, perhaps, to be married! 

But what dreadful thought was it -which suddenly arrested all 
her joyful anticipations, and caused the smile to fade from her lips 
and the colour from her cheek ? Married ! If she were married 
what would become of him. of poor Adolphus, who worshipped the 
ground on which she trod ? Poor Adolphus ! who wrote such beau- 
tiful letters, quoting Longfellow by the page and Tennyson by the 
half-quire (note-paper size). What would become of Adolphus . 
the humble assistant in the chemist's shop, who wore an apron over 
a hero's soul? What would become of him? 



TRAGEDY BEHIND A PUMP. 23 

' Oh, he will break his heart . he will, he will ! ' Miss Simpson 
sobbed in an agony of remorse ; ' how shall I ever be able to tell 
him ? ' 

And even as she spoke a low plaintive whistle from without 
apprised her of the fact of Adolphus at that moment waiting for her 
at their old trysting-place, behind the pump at the bottom of the 
playground. 

It was close upon five o'clock now, and twilight was fast changing 
to darkness. The young ladies had all left the playground for tho 
school-room, and it was this half-hour before tea which was the safest 
of all others for an interview. Miss Simpson left her bedroom, stole 
cautiously downstairs and out at the back door. In another minute 
she was behind the pump. 

'Pamela,' said a well-known voice in a thrilling whisper ; and, 
looking up to the top of the wall, there, among the broken bottle 
ends, she saw the well-known expressive eyes and fine eyebrows . 
'Pamela, I thought you had gone in.' 

'I am not gone . yet,' replied Pamela, 'but I'm going.' 

' Not so soon, surely ! It wants ten minutes to five.' 

'I don't mean that,' said Pamela; 'I mean I am going home 
for good. I am going far away . never to see you more ! ' 

'Good gracious! Pamela,' said a faint voice from among the 
broken glass, ' you . you don't mean it ? ' 

' But I do,' replied Miss Simpson, in an awful tone ; ' our fate is 
sealed. Don't kill yourself, if you can help it, Adolphus; and 
whatever you do . don't kill any one else. I'm sure I'm very, very 
sorry for you.' 

'But, Pamela,' said the chemist's assistant, who, urged to des- 
peration, was clambering over the wall, quite reckless of the damage 
the broken bottle ends might do to his wardrobe, ' you will not . you 
cannot . leave me thus ! You will not . you cannot . forget the vows 
we have exchanged here on this very spot, behind this very ' 

He was iipon the point of saying 'pump,' but deeming the 
word at such a time rather inappropriate, wound up his speech, 
instead, with tragic pantomime. Then he endeavoured to take 
Pamela's hand in his, but she gently repulsed him. 

'No, no,' she replied, with great firmness, considering the pain- 



24 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

ful circumstances, ' I shall never smile again ; but no matter. My 
heart is broken ; but that is of no consequence.' 

' Oh ! Pam . am . amela!' sobbed the bereaved one, propped up 
against the wall, his very legs looking limp with emotion. 

He had in his last letter conjured her to fly with him from the 
world, though without any definite notion, as it appeared, where 
they were going to when they got away from it. He had no inten- 
tion of taking a blue-bottle shop on his own account, nor, indeed, 
had he any prospect, for some time to come, of being able to do so. 
But he never, for a moment, connected her with the drug trade, or 
any of the vulgar necessities of life. She was far above all that. 
He would never have had the hardihood to appear before her in 
the character of a husband with that apron on. 

'Pamela,' said Adolphus, presently, in a deep voice, which was 
so strangely unlike his usual interesting treble that she took her 
pocket handkerchief from her eyes to look at him . ' Pamela, you 
never truly loved me.' 

' Oh, Adolphus, how can you say so ? ' 

' It is true, Pamela. Your heart is stone ! You are as false as 
you are beautiful. If you have one spark of affection remaining for 
me, let us perish together ! ' 

' Pack of rubbish ! ' broke in a strange voice at this exciting 
juncture . ' don't make a fool of yourself, young man. And you, 
Pamela . I'm surprised at you ! ' 

And as these words struck upon the ears of the equally- 
astonished pair, Miss Simpson's papa made his unexpected ap- 
pearance from round the pump, with Miss MacSpartan herself at 
his elbow. Poor Pamela felt ready to faint, and it must be con- 
fessed that Adolphus, under these trying circumstances, showed-up 
like anything but a hero. 

Miss MacSpartan glared evilly upon them through her glasses, 
and Papa Simpson, . a slender simple-looking gentleman . usually 
among the meekest, was absolutely terrific in his character of injured 
parent. 

'Who are you, sir?' said Mr. Simpson, shaking his umbrella at 
Adolphus. 'Who are you, sir, and where do you come from, and 
what are you doing here ?' 



TRAGEDY BEHIND A PUMP. 25 

' I . I . I'm at the chemist's,' stammered he with the hero's soul. 

'Head man and bottle-washer, I suppose,' said Mr. Simpson, 
coarsely. 

'I don't wash bottles, sir,' retorted Adolphus, mildly. 

'You'd be better employed at that than this,' said Mr. Simpson. 
' How old are you ? ' 

'Nearly nineteen,' replied Adolphus. 

'You don't loot more than fourteen,' observed the stern parent, 
contemptuously, and, certainly, Adolphus's fragile frame and beard- 
less visage were very juvenile. ' You don't look a year older,' said 
Mr. Simpson ; ' but if you are as old as you say, you ought to 
know better, and I've a good mind to . to lay this umbrella about 
you.' 

'Sir!' cried Adolphus, shaking like a leaf, but looking very 
grand and terrible about the eyebrows. 

'Take yourself off,' said the injured parent, 'or I mayn't be 
able to restrain my feelings.' 

Adolphus glanced at the old gentleman for a moment as though 
he intended some resistance ; then he turned his eyes towards the 
perfidious Pamela, who did not look as serious as she might have 
done. Upon second thoughts, he seemed to make his mind up that 
he had better go, and he began to climb the wall. 

But, as his emotion caused his poor legs to be rather shaky, he 
did not get on very fast, and Adolphus's back being turned towards 
him, Mr. Simpson very meanly took advantage of that circumstance 
and resorted to violence with his umbrella. Adolphus, however, 
did not stay to retaliate ; indeed, dropping his hat, he did not even 
stop to pick it up, but, having cleared the wall, ran away as fast as 
his legs would carry him, perhaps, to seek refuge at home, under 
his bed. 

'And now that this tomfoolery is over,' said the remorseless 
parent, 'suppose you go indoors, Miss Pam, and put on your 
bonnet.' 

Pamela did not wait for more, but retired to her bedroom hang- 
ing her head, in great confusion, while Miss MacSpartan and the 
old gentleman went to that lady's best parlour to settle their 
accounts. 



26 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



Misa Simpson found her boxes packed ; Jane Tattiman was 
cording the last when she came in, and, paiising, in her work, 
looked the young lady very hard in the face. 

'Well,' said Tattiman drily. Pamela made no rejoinder. She 
sat down upon the side of her bed and, covering her face with her 
hands, began to cry. 

' What did that old cat say ? ' asked humble, gentle Jane Tatti- 
man, presently. 




THE HERO'S EETEEAT. 

' What about ? ' inquired Pamela in a small voice. 

But Tattiman replied only with an ominous chuckle, and went 
on packing. After a while, Miss Simpson looked up through her 
tears and took a survey of the room. ' Have you packed up every- 
thing ? ' she asked. ' Have you . oh ! ' 

With this exclamation she made a spring towards the table, 



TRAGEDY BEHIND A TUMP. 



27 



caught hold of a little work-box standing there -wide open, looked 
in and found it empty ; found that its late contents . Adolphus's 
letters, copies of some of her own, her private diary . had all been 
removed. Then, with a crimson face, she turned upon her com- 
panion, who, seated upon the bos she had just corded, was contem- 
plating her very quietly. 




P.UIELA S HUMBLE FEIEND. 



'Has anybody been searching my things?' asked Pamela 
hoarsely. ' Has papa ? ' 

' Miss MacSpartan has looked through all your boses.' 

' Through this one ? ' 

'No.' 

' "Who then has dared ? ' 



28 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' I thought you wouldn't like the things there to fall into her 
hands,' replied Jane Tattiman, slowly, 'and so . and so I destroyed 
them.' 

'Thank Heaven!' exclaimed Miss Pamela, fervently. Then in a 
moment, ' Why did you do that ? You might have given them to me.' 

' What were they ? ' 

' A lot of letters and rubbish, and ' 

' And your diary ?' 

'Ye. es.' 

' With all sorts of rubbish written in it. Much better destroyed, 
I thought, for there is no knowing into whose hands it might fall, 
and in the hands of an unscrupulous person there is no knowing what 
harm they might do you in after life.'' 

' But . but nobody did see them ? ' said Pamela, all in a tremble, 
for the manner of our humble Jane terrified her, she knew not why. 

'Nobody but I,' replied the governess in a low tone, 'and your 
secret is safe with me.' 

The single candle which stood upon the table threw hardly any 
light upon Tattiman' s grim face and spare figure ; but Pamela could 
see that her eyes were fixed upon her, and she trembled violently. 

Just then Mr. Simpson's voice was heard calling from below : 
' Are you ready, my dear ? Are you nearly ready ? ' Pamela put 
on her bonnet and shawl silently. When she was dressed she 
turned to bid her companion good-bye. 

' For the present,' said Tattiman, kissing her on the cheek. 

Then as Pamela moved away, she clutched the wrist of the 
shrinking girl and whispered in her ear . . 

' Yoiir secret is safe with me.' 



29 



CHAPTER III 

TEA, MUFFINS, AND A LITTLE MUSIC. 

A quiet cup of tea and a little music. This was the formula of 
the invitation which had brought a score of visitors to Mrs. Simpson's 
drawing-room upon the evening of Miss Pamela's return home. 
The entertainment, it was the Simpsons' desire, should be looked 
upon to a certain extent as impromptu, and the invitations had been 
issued only upon the previous day, though preparations for the 
coming festivities had been going on, on a limited scale, for some 
time past. 

Every morning, for nearly a week, had Mr. Simpson carried an 
empty carpet-bag with him to the office, returning at night with the 
same bag heavily laden. Four bottles of light dinner sherry . pur- 
chased at a certain tavern in the Poultry where Mr. Simpson dined, 
and where being served by the prettiest waiters in London could 
have been no serious drawback . composed part of these loads, and 
six bottles of fine, fruity port ; the preponderance in favour of the 
latter being attributable to a resolve upon Mrs. Simpson's part to go 
in heavily for red wine negus. 

Coming home down the Strand, he bought some extra good tea 
at Twining' s for the occasion ; the ' good family ' from the ordinary 
grocer not being deemed quite up to the mark. He, also, bought 
some mixed biscuits and strawberry -jam at Phythian's; where he 
saw so many tempting things for the table, that it was only because 
he had no more money in his pocket he did not buy them all. 

As it was, he carried away with him a pot of Dundee marmalade, 
for which he had received no instructions, and, afterwards, proposed 
that, as it had been purchased in error, he should eat it himself at 
breakfast. And, as an argument in favour of this course of action, 
Mr. Simpson pointed triumphantly to the legend which proclaimed 
it to be an excellent substitute for butter; a purpose, though, to 
which there is no reason to suppose it has ever been applied, except 
by that clever old lady ' down West,' who fried a pair of soles in it. 



30 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

From the Lowther Arcade he brought some glass ornaments for 
the piano-candlesticks, to prevent the composite from running 
down among the keys, as had occurred upon a previous occasion, 
owing to the draught caused by the skirts of energetic waltzers. 
There was, however, to be no dancing this time, Mr. Simpson had 
decided, for he did not think that the drawing-room floor would 
bear it ; and, in fact, he had determined, as he said, not to have his 
house turned out of window. Therefore, no musician was engaged ; 
but, just to keep up appearances, a porter from his office, who could 
be relied upon, was pressed into the service, and took the hats in 
white cotton gloves in the lobby, with the air of an old English 
gentleman welcoming his tenantry to a banquet in his ancestral 
halls. 

'I know it's a trouble to you, Samuel,' said Mrs. Simpson when 
the old gentleman showed-up one evening very pale and fagged, 
having lugged four bottles all the way from the city, owing to its 
being a wet night and all the omnibuses full. 'I know it's a 
trouble, but then what are we to do if we don't do it?' 

' Don't let's do it,' said poor Mr. Simpson, wiping his head with 
his pocket handkerchief. 

' How you talk ! ' cried the lady, reproachfully, ' as if we could go 
to other people's houses and receive their kindness and make no 
return.' 

'Who's been going to other people's houses?' asked Mr. Simpson, 
faintly. 

' Bah ! ' replied the lady, ' that's just like you. You've no proper 
pride. But it's what I always complained of.' 

' Well, if we must give a party,' said Mr. Simpson, much subdued, 
'let's do it as cheaply as we can.' 

'Nobody is more anxious to be economical than I am,' replied 
the lady, ' and if it wasn't for my desire to save a penny, do you 
think I should allow you to wear yourself to death carrying about 
those bottles ? And, Samuel, while we are on the subject, mind you 
see that the negus is done justice to, and that the young men don't 
get together at the side table over the wine, because a bottle goes 
no way when there's carousing.' 

'I'll take care of that,' said Mr. Simpson; 'I'll have no carous- 



TEA AND MUFFINS. 



31 



ing in my house,' he continued, as he drew forth the light dinner 
sherry from his carpet-bag. 

The old gentleman was by no means fond . indeed, he was a 
little afraid . of a certain genus of young man who haunted his 
drawing-room and found favour with mamma and the girls. Such a 
one at their last evening party had given him his hat and overcoat 




A WAITRESS IN TI1E CITY. 



to hold in the passage, mistaking the old gentleman, who wore 
a white neckerchief and a dress coat of ancient workmanship, for 
a manservant. 

He usually felt himself rather in the way of this sort of young 
man, and not quite up to his standard of conversation. If he could 



32 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

have had his own way, he would, probably, have filled his rooms 
with old folks, whose claim to his consideration lay in the length of 
time he had known them ; but whose eligibility, in other respects, 
was not quite apparent to an unprejudiced stranger. But Mrs. 
Simpson asked, indignantly, what was the good of housing such 
a set of people. They came there and sat bolt upright, and 
very silent. They ate enormously when they had the chance, and, 
probably, they slumbered when left to themselves in a corner, 
until the dancers kicked their shins or trampled on their toes and 
woke them up. 

They had a nasty knack, too, of talking confidentially to the nice 
people, telling them anecdotes of the Simpsons, when they lived in 
lodgings in Oamberwell, at a period Mr. Simpson was not nearly as 
well off as now. 

'Yes, bless you, ma'am, and poor dear Martha . Mrs. Simpson, 
you know . washed the small things at home, herself, for they had 
no money to waste, and two young children to bring up, and very 
creditable of her, too, in my opinion.' 

And who could gainsay the speaker? You can, therefore, 
readily believe that Mrs. Simpson was pleased, to think that all her 
superfine lady friends should be made aware of her praiseworthy 
conduct. Don't we all of us, naturally, fall to talking, when we 
make a new acquaintance, of the number of times we have had 
our boots mended; of the infinite service which our silk gowns 
have done us; turned and re-turned, dyed, darned, and cut down 
into under-petticoats. 

But this sort of unpleasant person the old gentleman insisted 
upon including in the list of invitations to be sent ; only the letters 
were not unfrequently not written, and their agreeable company thus 
evaded. As a rule, though, Mr. Simpson was allowed one particular 
guest of his own, to associate with him and keep him quiet, while 
the young people enjoyed themselves. 

This was, generally, a fellow-clerk from Mr. Simpson's place of 
business (for be it whispered here, parenthetically, that Mr. Simpson 
was a cashier in a private bank) ; a person advanced in years, but, 
still, sprightly and lithesome in the legs; who came in pumps, and took 
part in a quadrille when required, or, at other times, stood looking 



TEA AND MUFFINS. 33 

on, smiling very blandly, even when the dancers jostled him in the 
waistcoat. Upon these occasions he made light of his sufferings, 
and said, while gasping for "breath, that young folks would be young 
folks, and that it made him feel quite a boy again. ' 

Several times during the evening, this ancient clerk, obeying 
certain mysterious winks and beckonings from the host, was spirited 
away into a remote corner, where he was regaled with a glass of 
wine, and told, for goodness' sake, to take care of himself. And 
though, with this warning ringing in his ears, he sometimes winced 
a Little at the vintage, it must be owned that he did ample justice 
to the mixed biscuits. 

Both the old gentlemen held in profound horror the supercilious 
sort of young man before referred to ; who respected not grey hairs, 
and associated age with imbecility ; who entertained opinions con- 
trary to those expressed in newspaper leaders, and settled knotty 
points in political economy in half-a-dozen glib sentences of fault- 
less grammar and unanswerable argument, the very unintelligibility 
of which was its strongest defence. A young man of this kind had 
one evening coolly fastened upon a bottle of very superior port, which 
Mr. Simpson never intended to be so treated; and, fixing the 
old gentleman the while, with an eye, beneath the stern severity 
of which the host quailed visibly, more than half finished the 
decanter; and then, pushing the remainder from him with a 
slight grimace, said simply 'sticky,' as he strolled away to find a 
partner for the next quadrille. 

' What was it that fellow called it ? ' the old gentleman inquired 
of his brother clerk, who happened to be close at hand. ' Do you 
think he did it to insult me ? ' 

' No, no, Sam, by no means,' his friend urged in a pacifying tone ; 
' I don't suppose he meant anything at all, and if he did I think it 
would be beneath you to take any notice of it.' 

'If I did a half of what I should like to do,' said Mr. Simpson 
with determination, ' I should throw him out of the window.' 

'For goodness' sake be calm!' cried his fellow-clerk, pinning 
him against the wall. ' Consider the feelings of the ladies, Sam ; 
and, you know, you're not a fighting man. Besides, he is your 
guest, you know ; and, by the way, who is he ?' 



34 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

'I don't know him from Adam,' replied the host, still very 
wroth. ' He's no friend of mine, and I don't want his company. 
I didn't ask him, and I don't know who did; and . and I won't 
stand it.' 

I dare say he didn't know who you were, Sam,' said the old clerk, 
' or else he would never have abused your wine before your face ; 
and I must say I don't think much of his opinion, for a better glass 
of port I never tasted.' 

And, thus, the storm blew over ; but this insult to his cellar or, 
rather, his cheffonier, determined Mr. Simpson to institute a beer 
jug for the future ; wherein should be found that famous family ale 
which, as the saying goes, required but one more hop to hop into 
water. 

It was extremely awkward for the old gentleman to be obliged 
to fetch his daughter from school just at the very time that ho 
ought to have been at home, preparing himself and his hmise for the 
reception of the guests. And greatly was his loss felt during the 
afternoon in Daffodil Terrace; for he was very great at amateur 
carpentering, and was the only person upon the premises who 
thoroughly understood the moderateur and the kitchen clock; or 
could unravel the deep mystery enshrouding the ball-cock in the 
cistern, to which, with the aid of a flight of steps, he was accustomed 
to pay lengthy visits of inspection, upon Hannah Maria's assurance 
that there 'wasn't not no water again.' 

Just as it always happens, it happened, too, that afternoon that 
something occurred to detain him. He meant to have had a whole 
holiday, but there was no one to take his place. All sorts of things 
turned up to keep him, and it was half-past three before he left the 
city. The consequence was that at the time Mr. Simpson ought to 
have been at home he was at North Brixton, and had a good hour- 
and-a-half's drive before him. 

When Pamela came downstairs from the bedroom, she found 
her papa and Miss MacSpartan awaiting her arrival upon the first- 
floor landing. 

'Good-bye, Miss Simpson,' Miss MacSpartan said, in freezing 
tones ; and she took Pamela's hand in hers for a moment, turned it 
over, and gave it back to the young lady without squeezing it; 



TEA AND MUFFINS. 85 

keeping her eyes, meanwhile, fixed upon a window on the next 
landing above. 

Perhaps she would have liked to improve the occasion with 
a few appropriate remarks; hut she was not quite sure that 
some of the pupils below might not be listening, and so she 
bade her young friend good-bye, and put her indignation into 
the pocket where she had very recently placed the last quarter's 
salary. 

Sure enough the young ladies were all upon the watch. Some- 
how or other, the particulars of that tragic interview behind the 
pump had reached them, and they were waiting in a state of great 
excitement at the school-room door to catch a glimpse of Pamela on 
her way out. 

And now Miss MacSpartan rang the bell ; and Waddiman, the 
page, went up, with cook, to fetch down the boxes, and, together, 
bumped the walls and each other's shins, as they struggled with 
obstinate trunks round unmanageable corners. At last, everything 
had been brought into the passage, and Waddiman asked whether 
he should call the coachman to help to put the luggage into the 
carriage. 

' Thank goodness papa has brought a carriage,' thought Pamela 
to herself; for she heard the schoolgirls sniggering behind her, 
and her heart was full of rage and mortification. 

But, presently, a low, common-looking man, with a many-caped 
overcoat and a badge, and a strong flavour of stale tobacco-smoke, 
came, stumbling in, to lend a hand, and lent it with so good a will 
that Waddiman at the other end of the boxes flew like a feather in 
the wind. 

'To leave in this way,' thought Pamela to herself; . 'it is dis- 
gusting.' And she could hear the girls whispering together : . 

' Is it true she has been sent away ?' 

' Who is that funny old man she has with her ? ' 

'He does not look much like a gentleman.' 

' And that horrid tipsy person carrying the boxes. He isn't a 
private coachman, is he ? ' 
" ' No, he's a cab driver ; but isn't he like the other old man ?' 

' Do you think so ? Why that must be her father.' 



36 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



'Whoever lie is, their noses are exactly alike. Probably the 
cabman's a relation too.' 

Would they never get the boxes out? Would she never be 
able to leave this horrid place . to get out of the sight of those 
creatures ? She had had some idea of going round to say good-bye, 
but she began to doubt whether they would care very much about 
saying good-bye to her. She felt quite certain, too, that they knew 
all that had happened, and that she was expelled. She had told 
the Topsawyer in strict confidence about Adolphus ; and she felt, 
instinctively, that it was the Topsawyer who had betrayed her. 
She was clever at her pencil, and would, no doubt, caricature the 
whole affair, and draw insulting portraits of her as Mrs. Jujubes. 




MB. AND MBS. JUJUBES. 



TEA AND MUFFINS. 37 

How she hated all schoolgirls ! "What a miserable mockery was 
friendship ! She had some of the Topsawyer's hair in a locket, and 
she made up her mind to throw it away directly she got home ; that 
is to say, not the locket but the hair. As for the locket, she might 
hi ve filled it with his ; but now that was all over, too. What a 
weary blank was the world ! and would those bunglers never have 
finished carrying out the boses ! 

' Come along,' said her father, at last. 

' Good-bye, Miss,' said cook, to whom the old gentleman had just 
made a little present; 'good-bye, Miss, and God bless you.' 

Poor Pamela ! The kind words were too much for her, and she 
burst out crying as she gave the servant her hand. Some one, then, 
was sorry to lose her. Should she go back and bid her school- 
fellows good-bye '? She half turned with the intention, but as she did 
so some of the girls began to titter. It was because she had shaken 
hands with cook . a proceeding which no young lady who valued 
herself would, surely, ever think of doing. Pamela did not know 
the cause ; but she heard their mirth, and with a quivering lip and 
a heart full of rage followed her father to the cab. 

' Thank God for that ! ' she thought, as the vehicle turned the 
street corner, and the MacSpartan Establishment vanishing from 
her sight became a thing of the past. ' Thank God I have left for 
good. I hope I may never see any of the cruel wretches anymore.' 

And in her anger she forgot that Tattiman had promised always 
to be a friend to her. No doubt she thought that she could shake 
off Tattiman as she could shake the MacSpartan dust from her 
shoes ; but Tattiman, though humble, was tenacious, and, when she 
got hold, it was her habit to stick like a leech. 

The father and daughter rode along in silence, and the silence, 
to Pamela, was not a little embarrassing. Up to now, there had 
been no opportunity for him to speak to her about Adolphus. Was 
he going to do so ? 

She sat in one corner and he in the other. She sat as far from 
him as possible, and dared not for her life raise her eyes towards his 
face. He was looking at her, she thought. He was thinking of 
that dreadful scene at the bottom of the playground, perhaps, and 
making up his mind what should be her awful fate. And the 



38 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

wretched Adolplius ! His fate, also, had to be decided. Would 
Mr. Simpson seek him out and slay him, or give him into custody ? 
Had he done anything for which he might be transported ? 

And then she thanked Heaven with fervour that Adolphus had 
not struck her father in return when her father had struck him 
with the umbrella, for she had often heard the poetical chemist 
describe what he was like when he was roused. It was therefore 
a consolation to think that he had not been roused upon this 
occasion. 

While she was thus reflecting, the old gentleman took a piece of 
paper out of his pocket, and began very slowly to unfold it. At 
the crackling noise it made Pamela's heart sank within her. Was 
it one of those dear letters which had fallen into the hands of her 
remorseless parent ? She glanced towards him in silent terror, but 
it was so dark she could not distinguish the writing. Indeed the 
old gentleman had some trouble to make out the words himself by 
the light of the shop windows they were passing. 

'What's all this?' he presently said aloud . 'What's all this, 
in the name of goodness? Seven-and-sixpence for hair cutting! 
It's a wonder they left any hair at all. Why it's seven times as 
much as they ought to have charged to shave you.' 

Pamela glanced at him disdainfully, but made no reply. To be 
thinking about the school-bill at such a moment . Was it not mon- 
strous ? But is it not thus that the nearest and dearest to us try 
our love for them? To be treated thus when she had made up 
her mind for something melo-dramatic ; and having rehearsed her 
part of the Injured Heroine, not to get the 'cue' . oh, it was 
shameful ! 

Meanwhile the old gentleman amused himself as best he could 
in the half obscurity, by reading over items in the MacSpartan's 
account, and Pamela could hear him totalling up the figures . 
' Seven and five are twelve,' she heard him say, ' and eight and 
e i<y[it . I don't quite agree with her arithmetic ; but there are so 
many flourishes one can't make out what is what.' 

Pamela volunteered no remark. She crept farther back into 
her own corner, and sobbed gently to herself. Papa Simpson pur- 
sued his totalling under increased difficulties, for, by this time, they 



TEA AND MUFFINS. 39 

had passed the shops and he could only catch a glimpse of the 
figures every now and then when they came to a lamp-post. 

After a while, the same silence continuing, Pamela's grief grew 
more poignant, and she sobbed aloud. 

'What's the matter, my dear?' asked the old gentleman. 

Pamela sobbed louder. 

' Aint you well ? ' inquired her papa. 

'No,' said Pamela, from her pocket-handkerchief. 'I feel very 
ill indeed, and I hope I shall die.' 

' We'll send for the doctor when we get home,' said Mr. Simpson; 
and then reverting to his previous occupation, 'I can't make out 
why they should charge me for dumb-bells if you're not allowed to 
bring them away. It's a regular imposition.' 

It was hopeless to try to elevate such a person as this to the 
proper heroic altitude, and Pamela remained silent for the rest of 
the joiirney. But she made up her mind that there should be a 
sensation scene when they reached Daffodil Terrace. 

When, at last, the cab stopped before the door, Pamela, look- 
ing through her tears and the cab window, saw, by the light 
shining through the blinds, that the rooms were brilliantly illu- 
minated. 

'Is there a party?' she asked, for the moment forgetting her 
recent sorrow. 

' It's all your mamma's doing,' replied Mr. Simpson, with a 
grunt. ' Don't knock, cabman, I've got a key. Confound him, 
now he has done it !' 

The cabman had already seized the knocker, and beat a loud 
tattoo which brought heads to the parlour windows of the houses 
upon either side ; for the Simpsons did not belong to the same set 
as the Tompkinses and the Tooks, and an implacable feud existed' 
between the female heads of the three families, which extended 
down to the olive branches, and led to the confiscation of shuttle- 
cocks when an adverse wind blow down the rival areas. 

Immediately following the double knock a great movement of 
feet was heard within, mingled with the sound of angry altercation, 
carried on in half-stifled whispers ; and after a pause Hannah Maria, 
with a very red face, which had evidently been dry-rubbed round 



40 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

the wrong way upon her apron on her journey upstairs, appeared 
at the door, in answer to the summons. 

But upon Mr. Simpson's voice becoming audible, confidence 
appeared to some extent re-established, and Mrs. Simpson and Miss 
Simpson's younger sister made their appearance from a little room 
at the end of the passage. 

' It's only Pamela and myself, my dear,' said the old gentleman ; 
'I couldn't prevent him knocking.' 

' "We thought it was the visitors,' said Hannah Maria, grinning 
like a pagan idol, with a smut on her nose. 

'Mamma, mamma!' cried Pamela, as she ran into the house. 
' My own dear mamma ! ' and next moment she was sobbing on her 
mother's breast. 

'Bless you, my dear,' the mother answered, gently stroking her 
child's soft golden hair. 'I'll talk to you presently. And you, 
Samuel, what a time to come home, when you knew everything 
would be topsy-turvy ! There's no place for you to dress in, now ; 
and something's the matter with the lamp in the ante-room; and 
the cheesecakes and things are all covered half an inch thick with 
the nasty blacks ! ' 

And this was Pamela's welcome home 



41 



CHAPTER IV 

A SENSATION SCENE IN DAFFODIL TERRACE. 

You must allow that it was likely to be somewhat mortifying to 
the eldest Miss Simpson to come home in the full expectation of being 
a heroine, and then to find that there was no audience. If there is 
anything that could make Bill Sykes's execution, in front of the 
Old Bailey, a more disagreeable prospect for him to look forward to, 




whbee's the atjdiencs? 

it would surely be the certainty that nobody would come to see him 
turned off. Think of his being hanged to empty benches . of shuf- 
fling off the mortal coil and nobody to see him do it! It would 
really be too disgusting. 



42 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



' Gro upstairs and dress yourself, my dear,' said Pamela's mamma ; 
'it's gone seven now, and we said tea at half-past.' 

Pamela made no reply, but ran upstairs to her old room, to 
which Hannah Maria very shortly followed her with the boxes. 
"When she was left to herself she sat down upon the biggest trunk 
and sobbed afresh. But it was not for long, this time. 

"Why should she break her heart if nobody took any notice of 
her ? Did they mean to treat her attachment to Adolphus as though 
it were all nonsense ? "What was there . she asked herself, with an 
angry stamp of the foot . what was there ridiculous about it ? She 
could see no absurdity herself. But while occupied by these 
thoughts the sound of a double knock at the street door aroused her. 
The first visitor had come, and she must commence her toilet. 




CIETT. 



A SENSATION SCENE. 



43 



There was no time for sorrow, even had she intended any longer to 
give way to it. Why should she ? Nobody cared what she suffered, 
not even Adolphus, or he would never have run away as he did . 
and how he did run! And, then, the recollection of that paltry 
young chemist, stuck fast upon the bottle ends, made her burst out 
laughing, in spite of herself; and she unlocked one of the boxes 
to take out her best silk, began to brush her hair, and forgot all 
her troubles. 




SOCIETY (AKOIiiliH V1EV 



44 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' They'll know I've been crying,' she said to herself, examining 
her reflection in the glass ; and she bathed her face in cold water, 
powdered it plentifully, brushed and bandolined her hair, and 
smoothed down her ruffled eyebrows. Then . ' They won't now,' 
she added. 'I look very nice,' she thought to herself, 'and not so 
horrid rosy as usual. I'm much prettier when I'm pale,' and, her 
thoughts reverting to the cause of her paleness, she sighed very 
heavily, and dabbed her eyes with the powder puff. After all, it 
would have been rather absurd to throw herself away on the Brixton 
shopman, when, in society, she might receive many brilliant offers. 
Her ideas about society were rather vague as yet ; a sort of confused 
mixture of fierce eyes, cosmetiqued moustachios, sparkling cham- 
pagne, and strawberry ices. 

While she was engaged at her toilet, the youngest Miss Simpson 
entered the room, to see whether she was ready. The youngest 
Miss Simpson . who, by the way, was only half an hour younger, for 
they were twins . was not at all like her sister. She was dark, while 
the other was fair. She was very prim, while the other was impul- 
sive. Her name was Penelope. 

'"What a while you've been,' said the youngest, taking a seat by 
the toilet-table, and scanning her sister's appearance with a critical 
eye. 

' Have I ? ' 

' More than an hour, I should think ; but are you nearly ready ? 
Aren't you going to change your dress ? ' 

'I have.' 

' Good gracious ! ' 

' "What's the matter ?' 

' Only that it isn't half big enough for you. How awfully fat 
you have grown ; and how frightfully short it is behind ! ' 

Pamela winced a little, but kept her countenance. ' It will do 
very well for me,' she said. 

'Well, I daresay,' said Penelope. 'Anyhow, they'll know you've 
just come home from school, and will suppose you hadn't time to get 
a new one.' 

'Yes,' said Pamela. 

'I hope you won't wear these gloves, though, if they've been 
gleaned.' 



A SENSATION SCENE. 45 

' They're new.' 

' What makes you keep them in the same box as the others ? 
They smell dreadfully of turpentine. It's a pity there isn't time to 
send out for some, as those would do very well for the theatre ; and 
you can't wear my size, you know '? ' 

'"We will go downstairs, if you like,' said Pamela. 

' I wish you would let me lend you my net sleeves to hide your 
arms a little. How very red your hair looks by candlelight ! ' 

' Has any one come ? ' 

'Nobody yet.' 

' I heard a knock, though ? ' 

' Oh, that was. Mr. Stilling.' 

Pamela smiled ever so slightly. It was her turn now to take her 
place at the wicket, and she meant to have a good innings. ' Mamma 
told me about him,' she said; and then she laughed, aloud, at some 
imaginary recollection. 

It was now Penelope's turn to suffer. ' Indeed ! ' she said, and 
pursed up her lips. 

' Only a tradesman's son, mamma said, but very steady.' 

' Those gloves are much too small for you. You ought to buy 
the next size.' 

' They will go on with a little coaxing. A candlestick-maker, 
isn't he?' 

' No. A chemist's assistant ! ' 

Poor Pamela staggered beneath the blow. She knew the story, 
then ! How shameful of her mamma to betray her ! They had, 
doubtless, all been laughing heartily over the affair, and cracking 
their stupid jokes at the expense of herself and Adolphus. 

' I want to introduce you to Mr. Stilling,' Penelope said, as they 
went downstairs ; ' you are sure to like him. He is so very gentle- 
manly.' 

And then, with their arms twined around each other's waists, 
these loving twins entered the drawing-room, making a very pretty 
picture of youth, beauty, and innocence, which it was delightful to 
look upon. 

And are you going to grumble, some of you, if the reverse of the 
picture should not please you ? What right have you to turn the 



46 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



painting to examine the ugly canvas ? There nve some things which 
are intended to be seen only from one point of view. The writer of 
this very worldly volume stood among the carpenters, not long a^o, 
behind a transformation scene, listening to the thunders of applause 




A SWEET PICTURE. 



from the house in front, and contemplating the wrong side of the 
'Realms of Bliss,' and it was very dingy. After he had stood 
there a short time, one of the carpenters suggested that he was 
trespassing, and the writer had to pay his footing, which cost him 



A SENSATION SCENE. 



47 



a crown piece. But, perhaps, that is neither here nor there; at 
any rate it is not here. 

Mr. Stilling's appearance was imposing, though peculiar. His 
hair was short and. his neck was long, and he gave you the idea of a 
person straining to get out of reach of the sharp edge of his collar. 
His waistcoat was a good deal off his shoulders, and the collar of his 
coatTtorown back, so that, when waltzing, he appeared to be coming 




c^ 



ME. STILLING. 



to pieces. He kept an eyeglass in one eye with a persistency 
worthy of a better cause, and it was supposed that nothing short of 
an earthquake would have caused him to drop it. 

He was not the son of a candlestick -maker, any more than 
Adolphus was a shop-boy at a lozenge shop. Surely everybody has 
heard of ' Stilling' s Mother's Best Companion,' which answers all 
the purposes of a night-light, at the same time that it keeps the 



48 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

caudle warm, or the baby's food upon the simmer ; and has been 
patronized, the prospectus says, by all the married royalty of Europe. 
This Stilling was a whitesmith, and the uncle of the young 
gentleman now under consideration. The nephew, however, did not 
carry on that business, or any other. Indeed, when waggish people 
were asked what young Stilling did, they paused for a moment, 
appearing to reflect, and said, 'Ah, to be sure ! he wears an* eye- 
glass.' And if you inquired whether Mr. Stilling was well off, the 
same waggish persons, you may be sure, did not lose the oppor- 
tunity of saying that there had always been a good deal of tin in 
his family. 

Several visitors had arrived by this time, and were sitting about 
the drawing-room, nursing the tea-cups, which the bank messenger, 
with the air of an old English gentleman, had supplied them with, 
watching, the while, the younger males' manipulation of the lumps 
of sugar as though he thought they were taking too many, and some- 
what embarrassing their movements by the fixedness of his regard. 

Mrs. Simpson, to whom the absence of her daughters had 
occasioned some confusion and annoyance, presided with a flushed 
face at the tea-table, and, from time to time, entered, spasmodically, 
into the small talk going on around her, with an appearance of 
intense interest, the hollowness of which was immediately afterwards 
exposed by her cutting somebody short, who was weak enough to 
answer her random questions while she gave hurried, whispered 
directions to the Old English Gentleman respecting a fresh supply 
of muffins or another jug of cream. 

'Sothern's very good in the new piece,' said Mr. Stilling; 'but 
I wish they would revive the School for Scandal.' 

'Oh, I do so like Bulwer's plays!' broke in Mrs. Simpson. 
' But who is that absurd creature . I forget his name ?' 

'Buckstone?' 

'No, not there at all. At the Adelphi.' 

'Toole?' 

'No. By the way, Penelope and I went to see him the other 
night, and he was so good in that thing where he is a market- 
gardener.' 

' Oh, Good for Nothing? 



A SENSATION SCENE. 49 

£ No, Claude . Claude du Val. No, that wasn't it . Claude Mel- 
notte.' 

'What, Toole?' 

' Yes, we were so pleased ; and tell me now, Mr. Stilling, don't 
you think he is very handsome ? ' 

< Well ' 

' I'm so glad you think so too. What on earth is Hannah Maria 
about that she doesn't bring up another plate of muffins?' 

To which the Old English Gentleman replies in a stage whisper, 
' I think she's takin' the 'ats.' 

'Then where in goodness' name is Mr. Simpson?' 

'He's doing something to the ante-room lamp.' 

' Gracious goodness, with his white waistcoat on too ! What a 
state he will be in. Ah, I'm quite of your opinion, Mrs. Mount 
Grampion. Give me Sir Walter for fiction. Did you ever read his 
Thaddeus of Warsaw?' 

The conversation just about this period was rather uphill work, 
and it was too soon to open upon the music. Nothing else could be 
done then but to press all within reach to have another cup or half 
a cup, or 'just a little more. Now do. What not another piece of 
muffin? I mustn't offer you the last piece, must I? But there's 
plenty more downstairs. Baker, do see what Hannah Maria is 
doing. I never knew the like. What a bad tea everybody is 
making !' 

Now some of this may, very naturally, strike the countless 
thousands of well-bred readers of this narrative as being rather 
vulgar, and the writer owns with contrition that, while he was about 
it, it would have been as easy to have laid the scene in Belgrave 
Square as in Daffodil Terrace, Regent's Park; for it is, perhaps, 
needless to say that he is equally at home in the gilded saloons 
of the proud patrician as on the modest Brussels of the humble, 
but honest, middle classes. However, the die is cast, and the 
genteel purchaser of this work who expected in its pages to 
encounter only the best of carriage company will, the writer trusts, 
find some amusement in this delineation, as a curious psychological 
study of a class of persons he is never likely to meet in that exalted 
sphere of which he is so bright and shining an ornament. 



50 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

The Misses Simpson having now put in an appearance, their 
mamma, from behind the tea-urn, began to exchange with Miss 
Penelope certain telegraphic signals, full of mysterious import, dark 
and unfathomable. 

' "Whatever are you going on so about, mamma ? ' her daughter 
inquired, when she at last managed to get up to the tea-table. 

'Whatever is your papa about?' Mrs. Simpson asked in an 
anxious whisper. 

' How am I to know, mamma.' 

' I'm certain I smell something curious. I hope he hasn't upset 
the paraffin.' , 

' I shouldn't think so, mamma.' 

'"Well, there's no knowing. He's not like any other man, or 
he'd never leave us here, all alone, in this way.' 

'I don't think anybody has noticed his absence.' 

' What nonsense you talk, Penelope, they're doing nothing else ; 
and I'm sure there mightn't be a master of the house for all the 

good he's of; and I will say, if it's the last word I had to speak 

Yes, certainly, Miss Larkspur, as you say, I'm quite of your 
opinion. There never was a more delightful game invented than 
Lawn Croky.' 

. While this was going on, Pamela was sitting by the side of Mr. 
Stilling, looking very demure and pretty, and Mr. Stilhng was 
taxing his powers of conversation to amuse her, and was succeeding 
admirably. Although the youngest Miss Simpson had promised to 
introduce her sister, as they came downstairs, it must be observed 
that she had no wish to do so, but had only made the remark for 
the sake of saying something, as they were just then passing by a 
couple of young men upon the landing ; and that other little bit of 
business . the arm round the waist . arose from a similar motive. 
But Mr. Stilhng had himself begged to be introduced, and as the 
Simpson family had reasons for believing that he had 'intentions,' 
it was only right that he should be. 

Pamela knew all about him, although this was the first time they 
had met. Mamma had written a full, true, and particular account 
of how they had met him at a party at Mrs. Mount Grrampion's, and 
he had been so agreeable, and ran out to look for a cab, although it 



A SENSATION SCENE. 51 

was raining heavily. And that trivial circumstance had led to an 
intimacy, which had now reached a point where he looked in two or 
three evenings a week to tea, and, as a general rule, came the other 
nights to supper. It was therefore supposed that he had inten- 
tions, although he had never said anything exactly decisive; only, as 
Mrs. Simpson remarked, very logically, ' if he didn't come for any- 
thing, what made him come ? ' 

' Perhaps he comes for what he can catch,' said the father of the 
family, doubtlessly intending to be humorous ; but the ladies did 
not exactly understand the fun, and asked, indignantly, whether he 
had any fault to find with Mr. Stilling. But on this the old gentle- 
man protested that he had not, and that Mr. Stilling and he got on 
capitally ; although he sometimes ventured to hint, in a roundabout 
way, that, perhaps, the young man had not much in him, still, he 
always added, hastily, that he was a perfect gentleman, and 
(perhaps because he wore an eyeglass) that he was very high 
principled. 

Miss Pamela sat, demurely, listening to this young man's prattle, 
and, as he talked, thought how very unlike he was to poor Adolphus. 
He was not poetical, Mr. Stilling allowed, and smiled complacently 
as he said so, as though he would have implied that he knew a trick 
worth two of that. He had read a good deal of poetry, he said 
thoughtfully, looking back at the profound experiences of twenty 
years, and he could not say he cared much about it. Not even 
Tennyson ? No, not "if he knew it. He owned he had never gone 
in for Longfellow, and he did not mind saying he never meant to. 
Pressed into a corner, he allowed that it was his opinion that a little 
of Byron went a long way; but he had, it is true, only tried the 'Don.' 

Perhaps, comic songs were more in his line ; but he did not care 
much about singing, himself. It was such a bore trying to recollect 
the words, and the second parts of most tunes were so jolly hard to 
get hold of. Yes, he was very unlike Adolphus ; and yet, although 
every remark he made would have jarred discordantly upon the 
chemist's soul, the young lady listened not unkindly to Mr. Stilling's 
small talk, thinking the while what a very aristocratic cast of 
features he had, how very beautifully his boots fitted him, and how 
wonderfully well he held his eyeglass. 



52 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

Although, he knew nothing about poetry, he was very great upon 
other subjects. He knew a deal about billiards, and said, ' You play, 
of course?' to which she (pretty storyteller) replied in the affirmative. 
He made an old joke about 'kisses' and 'misses' she scarcely 
understood. He knew what was being worn, who was in town, and 
what set everybody belonged to. And thus, in the Terrace of 
Daffodil, while papa was doing the liberal with his four bottles of 
light dinner and his six of fine fruity, his daughter was talking 
' ton ' with the tinman's heir as genteelly as the most fastidious could 
desire. 

The only drawback to Stilling was, that he was remarkably 
deaf, so that even had Miss Pamela intended to flirt, she must have 
done it at the top of her voice. The consequence of this was, that 
all the room was looking at them, and listening to what they said, 
Penelope among the number. 

' Are you fond of dancing ? ' asked Mr. Stilling. 

' I love it,' replied the young lady. 

' Waltzing, of course ? ' said Mr. Stilling. 

' Of course,' said the young lady. 

' Pity the governor won't tumble to a hop. Suppose we get up 
a quiet gallop while he's got his back turned?' 

' How delightful it wordd be ! But I'm afraid papa would not 
like it.' - 

' Oh, he'll take it like a lamb, if we manage him properly. It 
would be ever so much jollier than all these fantasias, woiddn't it?' 

'A hundred times,' said Pamela, with a pretty shrug of her 
pretty shoulders, and a little expression of patient endurance, which 
suited her admirably. ' But I fear it is impossible.' 

' Oh, my dear Mrs. Simpson,' said old Miss Kaffoosles . who was 
the only one of the dowdy genus who had obtained admission upon 
this occasion to the Simpsons' soiree, and only, then, because she 
happened, most opportunely, to have dropped in during the afternoon, 
curiously enough bringing her cap in paper, pinned to the lining 
of her gown, and had made herself so very useful in cutting the 
sandwiches that Mrs. Simpson had not the heart to send her 
away . 'oh, my clear, is it a case?' 

4 Is what a case ? ' asked mamma in astonishment ; and 



A SENSATION SCENE. 



53 



Miss Kaffoosles, in reply, with a knowing wink, nodded her head 
towards Pamela and Mr. Stilling. 

'Lor, no,' said Mrs. Simpson. 'He is . that is, he isn't exactly, 
only we think he is.' 




hisses" akd "kisses.' 



54 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' Ah. ! I knew how it was they looked so very tender.' 

'Not at all. You're quite wrong.' Then in an impressive 
whisper : ' He's Penelope's.' 

' Oh ! ' said Miss Kaffoosles, with a little grimace; ' he seems very 
fond of both of 'em.' 

And, with this remark, it for the first time dawned upon 
Mrs. Simpson's mind that things were not going on quite as they 
ought to have done. A minute later and Penelope was standing 
by her side, as pretty as ever ; but, this time, with something of a 
savage beauty in her flashing black eyes. 

' Do you see them ?' she asked. 

'Whom?' inquired Mrs. Simpson, rather weakly. 

' Who ? Oh, bother ! How dare he do it before my very face ?' 

'I'll pack her off to school again, upon my word I will,' said 
mamma. 

'You know you can't,' retorted Penelope. 'But make her come 
away ; and, as for him, I should like to . '- . .' 

' Hush, my darling, everybody will hear you. It is a sweet air, 
is it not, Mrs. Mount Grampion ? Pal . la . la ; Pal . la . la ! You 
must hear my Pamela play now. She has so much improved.' 

Ladies do not call their daughters sluts in genteel society, so, of 
course, Mrs. Simpson did not make use of the word when she 
addressed her eldest daughter. I am told, on good authority, that 
ladies are always lady-like, however angry they are. Even men 
don't quarrel now-a-days, and fisticuffs are as much out of fashion 
as hair-triggers and small-swords. We go to law now, and love 
each other none the less because we give one another's pockets a 
trouncing. If a low person should kick us, therefore, let us smile, 
whilst we remove the pain by a gentle friction from the palm of 
our hand . and bide our time. 

Pamela was sent to play on the piano, and Mr. Stilling was 
carried forcibly to the other end of the room and introduced to an 
old lady. Very shortly, however, he managed to break loose, and 
came to turn over the music leaves. 

' Why don't you go and talk to Penelope?' Pamela asked, with 
a bewitching smile; but still he fingered. Was she pleased that 
Stilling should be thus unfaithful ? Who shall say ? It is not in 



A SENSATION SCENE. 55 

the nature of things for all of us to be happy together. While a 
shower of bouquets carries joy to the heart of the prima donna, the 
prompter is annoyed if one of them by chance falls upon and 
deranges the curls of his wig, which his perruquier assures him so 
closely resembles nature as to defy detection. 

Presently she rose and began to look for a waltz upon the top 
of the piano, and he would help her. But, all at once, she recollected 
that it was on the what-not. The what-not stood in a second room, 
opening out of the drawing-room, and hidden by a heavy curtain 
drawn across the doorway. It was hardly a room, it was so small. 
You might have called it an alcove. It was a splendid place for a 
tete-a-tete. It had an imitation stained-glass window, this little 
snuggery ; and a lantern outside, shining through the glass, filled it 
with soft and, as Mrs. Simpson said, ' ecclesiastic light.' 

Pamela left Mr. Stilling at the piano and passed behind the 
curtain; but scarcely had she laid her hand upon the what-not, 
when the curtain was raised behind her, and the audacious young 
man stood by her side. Pamela was slightly confused, for she 
could not help thinking that somebody must have noticed them; 
and, if so, what construction would be put upon the awkward 
incident ? 

'I don't think the music is here,' said she, blushing crimson; 
'never mind it.' 

' But you have not looked ; allow me to lift out the books for you.' 

Before she could prevent him, this dreadfully nimble Mr. Stilling 
was down on his knees at her feet, ready to dive into a large port- 
folio standing on the floor. 

' Could you desire a more devoted slave ? ' he asked, looking 
unutterable things through his eyeglass. 

'Por goodness' sake get up,' said Pamela, who fancied she heard 
a rustle at the curtain. 

But the unhappy Stilling was too deaf to hear anything, and 
his back was turned towards the other room. 

' Oh, pray don't ! ' cried Pamela, now quite certain that the curtain 
was moving. 

' Command me, Miss Simpson,' continued Stilling, pressing one 
hand on his heart, and flinging at her a glance of concentrated 



56 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



passion through his eyeglass. 'If the devotion of a quarter of a 
century, or anything of that sort. . if the ' 

But here the curtain was drawn aside, and a flood of light 
poured in upon them. 

' Tableau and blue fire,' observed a funny man, while somebody 




THE ritiitA du:;:;a, 



A SENSATION SCENE. 



57 



tittered ; and Mr. Simpson's fellow-clerk, who, it is supposed, toot 
it to be part of a charade, clapped his hands and cried 'Bravo! 
bravo ! Very good ;' and began guessing what syllable it was. 

But, before long, the general consternation apprised him of the 
fact of his having made an error ; a conclusion to which Mr. Stilling 
also arrived when, presently, he caught sight of the startled company, 
and, scrambling to his feet, let his glass drop from his eye, for the 
first time that evening. 




U-IR. 



THE PROMPTED* 



At the same moment, piercing shrieks were heard to come 
from the bedroom above. Thither Penelope had fled, on just 
catching sight of the touching scene in the alcove ; and there she 
now lay in violent hysterics, 



58 



CHAPTER V. 

A VACANT STOOL AT KOOTEE, AND PHXIMSY's. 

There comes a time at last, if we have but sufficient patience to 
wait for it, when the longest stoppers take the hint and their hats, 
and go their ways. Sometimes it happens that the first shall be 
last also ; such sticklers are they. But the slowest of the lot crawls 
away in the end ; and, having given him a cheery good-night, we are 
at liberty to put up the chain and yawn profoundly. 

After poor Penelope had been shrieking for about half an hour, 
and all sorts of remedies had been suggested, and tried, and found 
useless; when Pamela had fainted, Hannah Maria gone for the 
doctor, and Mr. and Mrs. Simpson were well-nigh at their wits' 
end ; it began to occur to some of the company that, perhaps, they 
might be rather in the way. 

Many of the ladies, however, lingered persistently; forming a 
sympathetic group round the hysterical Penelope, entreating her, in 
a chorus, to bear up ; at the same time imploring each other, most 
pathetically, to let the poor thing have a little air ; while they, one 
and all, crowded round, as if resolved that the quantity of the pre- 
scribed remedy which could reach the patient should, indeed, be 
only a little. However, finding themselves at last somewhat rudely 
jostled by the paternal Simpson, they presently cleared off, by ones 
and twos, taking their male belongings with them, and registering 
vows upon their way home never more to set foot within those low 
people's house. 

Some of the single gentlemen then strolled away. Three young 
ladies, whose cab had been ordered for a much later hour, sat with 
their opera-cloaks on, in the drawing-room, waiting until some good 
soul could be found who would fetch them another vehicle. These, 
with the exception of two gentlemen, were the only visitors left; 
and the two gentlemen were the ancient clerk and young Stilling. 

Now the rich part of the business was, that Stilling had not a 
notion that his perfidious behaviour had been the cause of all the 



A VACANT STOOL. 59 

mischief. This high-spirited young simpleton had looked upon the 
alcove catastrophe as rather a good bit of fun. He had no idea 
that Penelope's hysterics had therefrom arisen, or that it was such 
a serious attack ; and he was not aware that everybody was rapidly 
taking their departure. 

The old clerk was also in the same state of blissful innocence ; 
and they sauntered downstairs together, and found some wine and 
sandwiches upon the parlour table. 

'This,' said young Stilling gaily, 'is considerate.' 

'And timely, sir,' said the old clerk, who felt peckish. 

'We'll take a snack, if you have no objection,' said Mr. Stilling. 

' None in life, sir,' responded the old clerk ; ' may I assist you to 
a glass of sherry ?' 

Mr. Stilling was open to the offer, and would be proud to take 
wine with him. 

As there was, as Mr. Fondilove facetiously remarked, ' no extra 
charge,' they took a chair while taking their wine and sandwiches, 
and made themselves comfortable, in a small way. Surely, such 
conduct was natural enough ; but mark the terrible results. 

An amusing young dog was that Stilling, when he tried, and the 
old clerk was a man who could appreciate a good joke. What, then, 
was more natural than that, when Mr. Stilling gave a highly 
ludicrous account of a tipsy freemason making an after-dinner 
speech, Mr. Fondilove should lean back in his chair and roar with 
laughter. Finding his comic efforts thus appreciated, what more 
natural, then, than that Mr. Stilling should elaborate his humour, 
and, to give character to the impersonation, turn up one side of his 
collar, drag his necktie awry, and jerk his coat off one shoulder ? 

But, at the same time, it is not to be wondered at if Mr. Simp- 
son, coming suddenly into the room whilst Mr. Stilling was swaying 
to and fro with a wine-glass in his hand, and not being acquainted 
with the circumstances of the case, should come to a hasty conclusion, 
and suppose that Stilling . the miscreant Stilling, . in this, the 
moment of his innocent victim's suffering, was carousing upon his, 
the injured father's, wine and sandwiches. 

The misguided Fondilove, unconscious of wrong-doing, was 
leaning back with his chair up against the wall, and he, also, 



60 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

had a -wine-glass in his hand, and was, evidently, enjoying himself 
immensely. But, at the sight of Mr. Simpson's solemn face, he 
brought his chair down upon its four legs, and sat motionless; his 
wine-glass in one hand and a sandwich in the other. 

Mr. Simpson glared upon the bacchanalians with a terrible ex- 
pression, and, leaning across the table, clutched at the decanter. 

' I didn't think it of you, Bob, by heavens !' he said, in a choking 
voice. ' I shouldn't have looked for it from you, I really shouldn't ! ' 

'I hope I've done no harm, Sam?' said Fondilove, plaintively. 
' What the dickens is the matter ? ' 

' The matter ! ' cried Mr. Simpson, much excited, ' Ha ! ha !. 
Nothing ! ' and then he added, with a wild attempt at harmony, 
' Push around the bowl, for he's a jolly soul. Go on ; why don't you 
push it round ? ' 

It dawning upon Fondilove that his old friend Simpson was 
displeased at finding him refreshing himself, he became immensely 
embarrassed by his handful of sandwich, and would, had he seen a 
way of doing so unobserved, have hidden it away in his pocket. 
Young Stilling, too, reflecting upon the extraordinary appearance 
that he must have presented when imitating the tipsy freemason, 
was anything but comfortable. 

'I don't want anymore, thank you,' he said, as Mr. Simpson 
pushed the decanter towards him. 

'Don't mind me, sir,' said Mr. Simpson, 'I won't be a death's- 
head at the feast. What matter if my child is suffering ? What 
odds if the happiness of my home's blasted ? Let us carouse. Bob 
Fondilove, I call upon you for the next song.' 

Suddenly a light broke in upon the old clerk, though, unfortu- 
nately, it was a wrong light. 

' Sam, old man,' said he, ' I never saw you taken this way before. 
I always thought you'd a head like a rock.' 

' This way ! ' repeated Mr. Simpson, wildly ; ' what way ? ' 

'Don't take any more, Sam,' said Fondilove, laying his hand 
upon his old friend's arm as he was about to help himself to a glass. 
'Be persuaded, old man. You'll be so bad to-morrow.' 

'I'll be bac^now, perhaps,' said the old gentleman, 'if I have 
much more of it,' 



A VACANT STOOL. 01 

' That's what I say,' cried Fondilove, eagerly; 'don't drink any 

more.' 

' What! ' gasped Mr. Simpson, 'do you mean to say . But, damme, 
I see now. They're both of them one as bad as the other. Look 
here, gentlemen ; hospitality's hospitality, but it may be abused ; 
and I shall be glad to wish both of you good evening.' 

'By Jove, I say,' cried Stilling, half angry and half frightened; 
' I say, you know, by Jove, I say ! ' and he looked appealingly towards 
Fondilove. 

But the old clerk made no answer. He had known his friend 
Sam some forty years and more, and he never thought to have been 
so treated. He could not imagine why he was angry ; but he was 
too high-spirited to ask. One thing he understood plainly enough, 
and that was that he was turned out of the house. 

' Good evening, sir, good evening,' he said, as he moved to the 
door, ' I won't intrude again, sir, depend upon it.' 

As he spoke he nervously twitched at the buttons of his coat, 
vainly to fasten it across his breast. ' Thank you, Baker,' he said 
meekly, as he took a hat for which his had been changed by mistake, 
and which was some sizes too large for him, and toddled out into the 
rain. 

Before he had gone many yards Stilling overtook him. 

'Precious like a dirty kick out that was,' observed the young 
man. 

' I wish Sam had kicked me,' observed the old clerk, despondingly ; 
'I shouldn't have been more hurt.' 

'Well, I won't go as far as that,' responded young Stilling. 
'Boots off, as the bootjack said. Old Fireworks must have been 
tight. Don't you think so ?' 

'I have known Sam,' said Mr. Fondilove, taking his companion 
by the button and holding him at bay by the side of a lamp-post. 
' I have known Sam, man and boy, this ever so long. I knew Sam, 
bless you, before he came to our place . that's the bank, you know, . 
and I was his best man when he was married ; and I'm the godfather 
to the twins. If I hadn't gone rather too deep into building specs, 
which didn't turn out quite as they were expected to do, I shotdd be 
pretty warm just now ; but, I won't deceive you, I'm not.' 



62 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

'It is rather chilly,' said Mr. Stilling, turning up his coat collar. 

' That's neither here nor there, though,' continued Fondilove, 
"without noticing the interruption. ' I feel his treatment deeply. If 
I were well off, though, I should not care. If I were not under an 
obligation to him it would not matter. But he has lent me his name, 
Mr. Stilling, and I can't take it up right off as I should like to do. 
I've lent him my name before now ; but, as bad luck will have it, it's 
the other way this time. It only wants a week of renewing, and it 
. it cuts me to the quick.' 

'I don't know anything about quicks,' said Stilling; 'but I tell 
you what, if you don't pretty quick get home you'll get your death 
of cold. Mark my words if you don't. Good-night.' 

He tore himself away with this, and left poor little Fondilove 
under the lamp. When he was alone he leaned his head against the 
post and groaned ; but a policeman passing by and catching sight of 
him, took him by the arm and asked him whether he knew where 
he lived. 

'Yes, I know,' replied the old clerk, looking at him absently. 
' In Clement's Inn.' 

'Better get home, then,' remarked the policeman, with a grim 
smile, 'unless you want a lodging at a half-way house.' 

Fondilove waited for no more, but shuffled off in a southerly 
direction. It was raining very fast now, and when he drew up in 
the Hampstead Road and looked round for a cab he was wet 
through. 

The last yellow omnibus came up while he was waiting. There 
was room for one inside, and he got in. All the way to the Strand 
he shivered miserably, and when he got out, at last, by St. Martin's 
Church, his teeth chattered with the cold. He hurried home as fast 
as he could, but he could not warm himself. He would have made 
a glass of hot grog, with the aid of his bachelor's kettle, but he was 
out of wheels. In lieu thereof, he took a dram neat, tied a stocking 
round his neck, and crept into bed. 

Next day Fondilove's place was vacant at the office. Mr. 
Simpson many times looked, uneasily, in that direction, wishing 
for and yet dreading his arrival. During the afternoon a letter 
came for one of the heads of the firm, to say that the old clerk 



A VACANT STOOL. 63 

had a bad cold and regretted that lie was unable to attend to 
his duties. 

'A cold, he calls it,' said Mr. Simpson to himself, with a chuckle. 

The next day, and the next, however, passed away, and yet 
Fondilove's perch remained unoccupied. 

' I wish you'd go and look him up, Simpson,' one of the partners 
remarked to their cashier; 'the poor fellow must be seriously ill, 
or he would never stay at home in this way.' 

But Mr. Simpson did not relish the notion of a visit, after what 
had occurred. He was trying to think which of the other clerks he 
could persuade to undertake the business in his stead, when a letter 
arrived by the post. 

' Dear Sam,' it said, ' I am very ill, and they say not likely to get 
over it. For the sake of old times, come and see me once more. 
Your old friend, Eobeet Eondilove.' 

Sitting with this letter spread before him upon an open ledger, 
a strange dimness came over Mr. Simpson's eyes, which had nothing 
whatever to do with his spectacle-glasses. 

Just at that moment, he was not any longer head- cashier at 
Kooter and Phlimsy's; but a rising young clerk, on a salary of 
sixty pounds a year. He had got all his hair back upon his head ; 
not grey, though, but light auburn, as it used to be. He had lost 
considerably in the width of waistcoat, and was, generally, much 
slimmer. The world was, at least, thirty years younger, and, dear 
heart, how mariy centuries more innocent and hopeful ! 

Bob Fondilove, too, was young and sanguine. He had his way 
to make ; but, egad, he meant to make it. There was no difficulty 
big enough to block up Bob's high-road to wealth and fame. Oh, 
he was a deuce of a fellow, was Bob, thirty years ago ; and no con- 
nection whatever with the grey-headed, bent, and wrinkled old 
gentleman whose stool stood, over yonder, vacant. 

Thirty years ago ! That was before he went a-courting. Why,- 
it was not more than twenty years ago when he was on his honey- 
moon. Martha was not quite so podgy then; and, perhaps, her 
temper was more desirable. "Why, she must have been very pretty. 
Yes, he was sure she was. On their wedding tour . Gravesend was 
at the sea-side in those days, or, at least, people bathed there. even 



64 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



tlie waiters, at the hotel, nudged one another as she passed, in 
evident admiration. He recollected all that, and events that 
happened ten years before. 

Thirty years ! and yet it seemed like only yesterday. To think 
that he had got thirty years nearer death, and done so little ! 




AT GKAVESEND. 



When the bank closed, at four, and the books were balanced, 
there was a mistake of a penny, which it took the united arithmetical 
powers of the office nigh upon forty minutes to account for ; for 



A VACANT STOOL. 65 

nobody suspected the head-cashier to be capable of making a mis- 
take in addition. As, however, it was customary at Kooter and 
Phlimsy's, as at other banks, to wait until the mystery was cleared 
up, the younger clerks waited, chafing in spirit ; and from that day 
may be dated the impression, which gained ground steadily among 
the juniors, that old Simpson was breaking up, and ought, very 
speedily, to be pensioned off and put away upon a shelf. 

When the great penny difficulty was settled, to the general satis- 
faction, the head-cashier took his way along Cheapside and down 
Fleet Street to Clement's Inn. His friend Fondilove inhabited a 
dreary little third-floor room, singularly dark and misshapen ; the 
ceiling sloped in several directions, while even the floor had a sort 
of hill in it, which was a source of constant surprise and dis- 
comfiture to unwary visitors ; while tables placed on firm ground, 
as regarded three legs, were discovered, upon pressure being applied 
to them, to be balancing a fourth leg in the air in ballet fashion. 

Opening out of this room was a sort of cul-de-sac, or blind alley, 
which had, probably, been a passage, until a doorway at the end of 
it had been bricked up ; and here, in a grim obscurity, Mr. Simpson 
found his old friend in bed ; and found him horribly changed. 

'It's very good of you to come, old man,' was Fondilove's greet- 
ing, in what he tried hard to make a cheery voice, but it was very 
cracked and tremulous. 

'I had no idea you were so ill, Bob . old fellow.' 

' No . no ; how could you, Sam ? Or else you would have come. 
I knew very well it wasn't anything else kept you away ' 

' Of course, it was nothing else,' said Sam, with something like a 
blush, which the darkness of the room, fortunately, concealed. 

He had not quite got over the feeling of resentment at what he 
thought to be such unfeeling conduct on the part of his old friend ; 
but, seeing him lying here stricken down, he made up his mind to 
forgive him. 

On his side, Fondilove had not forgotten Sam Simpson's cruel 
rudeness ; but, attributing it to drink, he, also, had made up his mind 
to let bygones be bygones. And thus they thought, as they shook 
hands here, upon the brink of the grave ; and yet the cloud which 
had come between them, and which a word could have dispelled, 



66 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

remained between them to the end of time . for the word was never 
spoken. After a short pause, Fondilove continued . 

'I wanted to see you, Sam, about . about that bill. It comes 
due in a day or two, you know.' 

'Ah! to be sure,' replied Simpson thoughtfully. 'So it does . . 
in a day or two.' 

' When it is presented, Sam, I. I sha'n't be here, I'm afraid.' 
The other looked at him hard, and was silent. He had, for a 
moment, a vague idea that Fondilove meant to bolt. Slowly, how- 
ever, the truth dawned upon him. 

'You're not as bad as that, Bob,' he said, in a trembling voice; 
but looking into the wan wasted face before him, he saw that his 
old chum was speaking the truth. 

'Yes, T am, Sam; but don't take on on my account. I'm ready, 
if it was not for what I've got on my mind. With all that's due to 
me at the office, Sam, you won't make more than sixty pounds, and 
that will leave a hundred and ten pounds unpaid on the bill. I 
meant to have paid off another thirty again this quarter. I . I never 
counted on dying and leaving you in the lurch.' 

'Don't fret about that,' said his friend, taking his hand again. 
'We've helped one another, Bob, before now. You'd have done 
as much for me, if I had asked you. It can't be helped, Bob . 
don't let it trouble you a bit. Besides, you'll be well and strong 
again, yet. Why, you're worth two such as me . I'll lay my life 
on it !' 

He said as kind and cheering things as he could, and sat some 
hours by his friend's bedside. They talked very little, for the 
sick man's voice was so weak that at times it was scarcely audible. 
Now and then, though, the old clerk would call him to his side, to 
ask whether he recollected such and such a thing that happened 
many years ago. 

He seemed to be, in those few hours, living over again the days 
of his youth ; and, more than once, he mentioned names of men who 
were long since dead, and of firms that had ceased to exist. Several 
times he fell off into a gentle sleep . at other times he was so still 
and silent that his friend, half terrified, would bend his head low 
to the grey quiet face, and listen intently for his breath. 



A VACANT STOOL. 67 

Towards midnight, Mr. Simpson decided that he must go home, 
or his family would be alarmed. He had sent for a nurse, who had 
just arrived; and he stooped down over the invalid to bid him 
good-night, and to promise to call early in the morning ; but poor 
Bob Fondilove would never hear that well-known voice again. 
Death had stolen upon him, gently, in his slumber, and he awoke 
no more in this world. 

After a while Mr. Simpson was sufficiently himself again to take 
his way home through the lonely squares. Perhaps, once or twice, 
he might have paused, in the loneliest places, to wipe away a stray 
tear that was wandering down his cheek. 

There are not many men's friendships that pass the middle age. 
Senility affects the company of youth, which, anyhow, respecting 
age much more than age respects itself, is docile and pliant, and 
listens patiently. There are few more ghastly shams than jolly 
good fellowship ; and, after a time, when we have found one another 
out, we join in that jovial chorus less and less heartily, until we 
drop out of it altogether. 



68 



CHAPTER VI 

' APARTMENTS FURNISHED.' 

In the vicinity of Gloucester Gate patrician mansions proudly 
rear their stuccoed fronts. There are terraces thereabouts where 
only carriage people would think of residing, and where servants in 
livery are as common as blackberries. 

But just round the corner, as it were, you come to less-imposing 
edifices . though, still, highly genteel. Nothing, indeed, looked at 
from a DaffodiLpoint of view, could well be genteeler than Daffodil 
Terrace. 

There was no vulgar public-house at the corner, and no shops, 
not even a brass door-plate in the row, to indicate the existence of a 
professional person. At more than one of the houses they kept a 
real live boy in buttons, and, while they were about it, on the score 
of buttons, used no niggardly hand. 

Quite frequently . several times a week . carriage company made 
calls upon Daffodil Terrace ; on which occasions the thundering rat- 
tat-tats that announced the arrival of these distinguished visitors 
brought heads to all the other parlour windows down the row; 
though the writer must not omit to mention that the greatest possible 
pains were taken by those heads' owners to keep them hidden behind 
the window curtains. 

There, perhaps, never was a terrace within six miles of the Bank 
with such clean door-steps as that of Daffodil, or such very tidy 
servant-girls, in such uncommonly smart cap ribbons. There, 
certainly, never was a terrace which kept up such an aj>pearance on 
as small an expenditure ; and, whatever desperate struggles there 
might have existed within the bosoms of its families to make both 
ends meet, not a glimpse did the outer world obtain of these little 
pinchings and screwings practised by stealth, with double-locked 
doors, far beyond the ken of the ever- vigilant Grundy. 

In such a terrace, then, how could a genteel family let lodgings 
without a loss of dignity? It was a difficult matter ; and, yet, it must 



'APARTMENTS FURNISHED.' 



69 



be tried. Mr. Simpson had clearly proved to the wife of his bosom 
that either the household expenses must be retrenched, or an 
addition made to the family's income. There were a drawing and 
a bed-room which could be dispensed with ; why not try and find a 
quiet, single gentleman, or, better still, a boarder who was willing 
to join a cheerful musical family circle, and would pay handsomely 
for that privilege ? 

The question was, how was it to be done without the dreadful 
secret becoming known to the rest of the Terrace? It had been 
tried by others. An advertisement had appeared in one of the daily 




A MOST OBLIGING FANCY STATIONER. 

papers couched in these terms : . ' A lady, whose house is larger 
than she requires, is desirous of meeting with another lady willing,' 
et ccetera. But the Terrace had looked upon this as a shallow pretence, 
and the finger of scorn was, pitilessly, pointed at the poor pretender. 



70 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

The unfortunate person alluded to had given the number cf 
her house in the advertisement; truly an injudicious proceeding, and, 
taking warning by her fate, another speculator had said, simply, 
'Furnished Apartments in Daffodil Terrace. For cards to view, 
apply to Mr. Figgs, Grocer, Praed Street, Camden Town.' But, 
woe unto him ! Other persons from the Terrace dealt with Figgs, 
and the secret circulated extensively. 

What was to be done ? At length a bright idea occurred to 
Mr. Simpson. A young fancy stationer in the neighbourhood, who 
had just started in business (Miss Penelope had dealt with him some 
time for the Quiver and Sunday at Home), was most anxious to do all 
he could to please his customers. A handsome card, on which the 
words 'Furnished Apartments' were boldly engraved, having been 
purchased at his shop, he, when appealed to, expressed a willing- 
ness to have it placed in his window, where he, also, allowed it to 
occupy a prominent position, to the total extinguishment of a small 
pile of sixpenny water-colour boxes. 

Mr. Simpson, however, not entering with much interest into the 
paint-box question, was highly delighted with the way in which his 
card had been placed, and the news having been imparted to Mrs. 
Simpson, the lady and her two daughters were even tempted to take 
a little promenade in that direction, and, passing rapidly in front of 
the fancy stationer's, cast a sidelong glance as they went, which 
took in all the particulars. 

'Nothing,' said Mrs. Simpson, 'could be more satisfactory.' 

An unfortunate occurrence, however, upon the afternoon of the 
following day, caused the family to alter their opinion. 

The young ladies had been for a stroll in the Eegent's Park, 
and on their way home, not being very -distant from the fancy 
stationer's, they passed that way just to see how the card looked, 
and looking very hard could see nothing of it. Under these circum- 
stances, having passed by the shop a few yards, Pamela proposed 
that they should retrace their steps and look again, which, with a 
pretty affectation of having forgotten something, they did, but with 
no better success. 

'Mamma,' said the eldest Miss Simpson, in great excitement, 
the moment the street door was opened, 'have you done it?' 



'APAETMENTS FURNISHED.' 71 

' Done what ? ' asked Mrs. Simpson in astonishment. 

'Have you let?' 

'Lor bless me, no, my dear.' And hereupon followed an expla- 
nation. 

'Tour papa shall see about it when he comes home,' said 
mamma ; and as soon as Mr. Simpson arrived he was sent out to 
mate inquiries. 

'He was searching after a water-colour box and knocked the 
card over on its face,' explained the head of the family, on his return. 
' Of course I could not say much, you know, for it is very good of the 
man to let it be up at all.' 

' Oh, certainly,' said the young ladies ; and they all tried to look 
as cheerful as possible. 

But next day there was another misfortune. 

'Mamma,' said one of the young ladies, coming in from another 
stroll in the Regent's Park, 'that horrid card is gone again.' 

'You don't mean that?' cried Mrs. Simpson. 

' Yes, we do, and it's worse this time.' 

'Worse?' 

' Ever so much worse. It hasn't tumbled over. It's out of the 
window altogether.' 

The news being reported to Mr. Simpson, he said it looked bad, 
and, moreover, it was rather awkward. 

'I can't keep bothering the man,' he said. 'However, I'll go 
round and buy a packet of envelopes and see what can be done.' 

Half an hour afterwards, returning again, Mr. Simpson said that 
a new course of conduct must be adopted. It would seem that the 
fancy stationer had gone to town early that morning, leaving his 
wife in charge of the shop. A person had come in and asked for a 
card of 'furnished apartments.' The fancy stationer's wife had 
made a search, and replied that she was afraid they were out of 
them. 

' There's one in the window,' the customer remarked. ' So there 
is,' said the fancy stationer's wife, and, not being aware of the 
arrangement her husband had entered into, she sold the card ; and 
the purchaser, departing in triumph, hung up his advertisement 
somewhere in the neighbourhood ; ' and for what I know to the 



72 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

contrary,' said Mr. Simpson, 'lie has potted our lodger, that ought 
to have been, with our own card.' 

Upon receipt of this intelligence, the countenances of the throe 
ladies looked rather blank, and a council of war was hold over tho 
tea-table. 

' There's nothing, in my opinion,' said Mr. Simpson, ' as good as 
a bill in the window.' 

'How ever can you talk like that?' cried Mrs. Simpson, indig- 
nantly. ' As if you wanted all the world to know about it.' 

'As long as we can manago to make one of them know it, I 
f-ha'n't care,' said the old gentleman; 'but don't it strike you that 




THE EQUESTKIAN LODGER. 

we are rather like that reduced gentlewoman who wanted to sell 
matches and was afraid to speak up ? ' 

' I can't think how you can be so low, Sam, to talk about matches; 
as if yoii wanted the children to think there was something degrading 



'APAETMENTS FURNISHED.' 73 

in letting a portion of one's house, for -which one has really no occa- 
sion, when it can be done nice and quietly without anybody knowing 
anything about it.' 

'Exactly,' said Mr. Simpson. 

That something must be done was very evident, and, after all, an 
advertisement in a newspaper seemed to be the best method. 




AN INVALID LODCEH. 

Mr. Simpson, therefore, with the ladies' assistance, drew one up 
and took it to town with him next morning. Some days elapsed 



74 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

before it was inserted, and when it did at last make its appearance, 
although all four made a search, they all four failod to discover it. 
The consequence was, that Mr. Simpson called at the newspaper 
office to complain, and had the advertisement pointed out to him. 

'I only hope,' said the old gentleman, on his way home, 'that 
people who don't feel quite so much interest in the matter as we do 
may be more clear-sighted.' 

Several persons seemed to have discovered the advertisement, 
and wrote to the address given, to know whore the apartments wero 
to be found, and what the terms were. Some of those inquirers, 
however, did not give their own names and addresses, but wished 
the letters to be directed to certain initials, and these, the Simpsons 
. suspecting treachery from the Terrace- . did not reply to. 

Others again wore so flippant in thoir tone that, although they 
were answered, the Simpsons felt certain it was a mere waste of 
stamps and stationery. One, who was kind enough to inform thom 
that he kept his own cab, wanted to know whother there was stabling 
for two horses, which, Mr. Simpson could not help thinking, was an 
unusual appendage to two furnished rooms. One was an invalid, 
whom four doctors attended, and whose lapdog alone would, soem- 
ingly, have necessitated keeping a second cook. And one, a lady, 
whose spelling was indifferent, wrote as though the all'air were 
quite settled, saying, 'I shall probably want it for a long poriod. 
You must, however,, find me another apartment for my ayah. I 
shall dine at home, and occasionally rocoive company, when I shall 
want the use of a second drawing-room.' 

Beading this letter through, Mrs. Simpson observed, in a gonoral 
way, 'I wish she may get it;' and presently addod, 'we don't want 
any ayahs in this house, thank you;' and, from a subsequent romark, 
it would almost have seemed as though she looked upon an ayah 
as some sort of wild quadruped of a dangerous character. In 
answer to the most likoly applications, Mr. Simpson wrote elaborate 
replies, touching upon the salubrity of tho air, the gentility of tho 
neighbourhood, and the facilities for divino worship. The ologance 
of the composition excited justifiable pride in the bosom of its author 
and its author's family ; but the chroniclor of those'ovents regrets to 
add that not the slightest notice was taken of Mr. Simpson's letters, 



.APARTMENTS FURNISHED.' 75 

and, after waiting a week, it was thought advisable to advertise 
again. 

In the meantime, however, the eldest Miss Simpson happened to 
take a walk in the Eegent's Park, from which apparently trivial 
circumstance came the most startling events. Among other extra- 
ordinary results was Spring Green, who surely deserves a chapter to 
himself. 



76 



CHAPTER VII. 

miss Simpson's kouance in the regent's pahk. 

Because our young friend Stilling has rather quietly glided out 
of this history, it must not be supposed that that affair of the alcove 
was forgotten and forgiven all in a moment. 

Of course, Pamela justified herself; indeed she did so with some 
vehemence. She had given Stilling no encouragement, she vowed 
and protested. Besides, after all, he was only on his knees looking 
for a music-book. And then, Mr. Simpson, himself, had proved him 
to be under the influence of strong drinks. 

The affair being talked over, and certain explanations having 
b«en made, the conclusion arrived at by the ladies was that Mr. 
Simpson had been a deal too hasty. Mr. Stilling was very young, 
and his head was notoriously weak. Boys would be boys. It was 
not every one in the world who was capable of resisting the tempta- 
tion of the fine fruity. One glass led to another, and some gentlemen 
are so easily overtaken. His conduct was decidedly wrong; but 
surely not unpardonable. 

Ah! who can plead for us wrong-doers like dear, forgiving 
woman? It struck Mrs. Simpson that young Stilling was far too 
good a match to be flung away thus lightly. Supposing, thought 
the prudent mother, he had preferred Pamela to Penelope. "Well, 
Pamela would then have been provided for, and it would have been 
Penelope's turn nest. But if it were true, as the young lady herself 
protested, that Pamela detested the sight of him, a little clever 
generalship might have brought him back to Penelope's feet. 

It really might have been arranged so nicely, either way, if that 
stupid blundering old father of the family had not turned the young- 
man out of doors. 

Of course they had not the remotest notion that Mr. Simpson had 
made the blunder he had, and that young Stilling was not tipsy at 
all ; so, perhaps, it was not very considerate to poor papa's feelings 
to suggest the course which, after much debate, was thought most 



MISS SIMPSON'S KOMANCE. 77 

advisable. It was decided that young Stilling should he forgiven ; 
and, as he would not come there to receive pardon . they had seen 
nothing of him since the fatal evening, . it was proposed that 
Mr. Simpson should go and beg the young man's pardon. To see 
the expression of the worthy old gentleman's face when this 
idea was delicately broken to him was to see a sight never to be 
forgotten. 

' I'm damned if I do ! ' said Mr. Simpson, from whose mouth so 
wicked a word had not come this many a day ; and the females of 
the family, awed by this terrible outburst, dropped the subject. 

Poor Penelope ! She did not very quickly forgive her sister ; 
but, doubtless, the thought that both had lost him, and that Pamela's 
piratical cuttings out had done her no service after all, may, to some 
extent, have soothed her wounded feelings. 

Penelope was pretty, but pale and thin ; and, indeed, rather what 
may be termed whispy. She had not the style about her that her sister 
had, and she had not a great deal to say for herself. A certain prim 
and perky demeanour, which this slim maiden thought fit to adopt 
towards he-creatures, generally, frightened the bashful sex rather 
than encouraged it. 

Pew young men having been snapped at, and bounced at, and 
put down, and kept in their places, during the first interview, cared 
about trying it on any further. Stilling may have protected himself 
behind his eyeglass, as behind a shield, for he had been very ven- 
turesome, and, evidently, had intentions. 

Pamela, on the other hand, as we have seen, inspired love upon 
very short acquaintance, or, indeed, upon no acquaintance at all. 
She was very pretty, was Pamela. 

Her enemies were wont to assert that her hair was red, and not 
golden. It could not bo denied that it had a reddish tint about it ; 
but its owner, in those days, indignantly denied the fact. Subse- 
quently, public taste having changed, and red hair being suddenly 
discovered to be anything but hideous, Miss Pamela insisted upon 
her redness. 

She had very beautiful eyes, that could fascinate you, or wither 
you, as was her wish. She had such pretty roses on her soft cheeks. 
She had a proud carriage of her head, aud a majestic sweep of skirt. 



78 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



There, surely, was no young woman alive who could have got the 
amount of swish and rustle out of a dyed black silk. 

There, surely, was no other young woman who wore such pretty 
boots ; though, seeing that boots cost a deal of money, and her papa 
was anything but well off, how she managed it was an everlasting 
mystery. 




AT BRIGHTON, 



She was not, it must be confessed, an industrious young person : 
and a piece of needlework assumed a grimy aspect under her fingers, 



MISS SIMPSON'S EOMANCE. 



79 



pretty fingers though they were. How then account for the won- 
drous depths of embroidery upon her under -garments, which the 
improprieties of rude Boreas, or a praiseworthy desire to save the 
hem of her outer garment from the dirt, at times revealed to the 
most fortunate of mortals. Begged, borrowed, or stolen, there 
it was; for it could hardly have been bought upon the small 
allowance on which Miss Pamela somehow contrived to dress herself 




Pamela's bow. 

so becomingly. And, ah me ! when there came a time when silks 
and satins were more plentiful, you should have seen her, as the 
writer did, one season, at Brighton. There was no stint of moire 
about that train of hers ! 

She was, indeed, a very bright and pretty young lady, at whom 



80 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

the male dwellers in the Terrace stared admiringly; whilst the 
women, though staring if anything harder than the men, may 
perhaps have been, on the whole, less enthusiastic. She was just 
that sort of young lady that men must fall in love with whether they 
wish to do so or no ; not that, by the way, they ordinarily struggle 
hard against such a misfortune. 

Young Tompkins, nest door, was decidedly smitten, and proposed 
to his mother and sisters that they should bury the hatchet and end 
the long and deadly feud which had been going on between them 
and the Simpsons any time these five years past. It was the same 
with young Took, nest door on the other side ; and old Took even 
went so far as to say that the Misses Took would do well to have 
bonnets similar to that worn by pretty Pamela ; at which opinion the 
Tookses bridled and looked venomous, while Mrs. Took remarked 
that men only noticed bonnets when they were on pretty women's 
heads : an impeachment to which old Took, monster that he was, 
pleaded guilty, with an unbecoming chuckle. 

Among the humbler classes Pamela also found many admirers. 

'That's a fine figure of a gal!' said Mr. Cobbles, at the coal- 
shed round the corner, to the wife of his bosom. 

'You mind your taters,' responded Mrs. 0. 

At the grocer's shop, in High Street, where her mamma dealt, 
there was sometimes quite a scuffle between the two young shopmen 
as to which should serve her, although the Simpsons' orders were not 
very estensive. 

When she was quite a little girl, and first went to Miss MacSpar- 
tan's, she won the gardener's heart by offering one clay to tie a bow 
for him in a new red silk neckerchief. She never wanted for an 
apple after that. 

One day Pamela had a few words with her sister . sweet girls ! 
they often had these little contests when nobody but mamma, who 
did not signify, was present. And, after the row, the eldest daughter 
went out for a walk, by herself, in the Eegent's Park. 

She took a book with her and sat down to read ; but the story 
was not very interesting, and, soon, her attention strayed from the 
work before her to other objects near at hand. 

Under the head of objects, it would, perhaps, be unfair to class a 



MISS SIMPSON'S ROMANCE. 81 

fair-haired young man of rather rakish aspect, who wore a white 
waistcoat and a white hat, and was smoking a cigar ; but it is very- 
certain that Miss Pamela looked at him particularly. Now she 
could not very well help looking at this young man in the white hat, 
because, had she not done so, she must have dropped her eyes, or 
closed them, twice in three minutes, for, during that short space of 
time, he passed twice before her. 

Of course, as would have been the case with any other young 
lady under similar circumstances, Miss Simpson never for a moment 
imagined that the person in the white hat was staring at her ; and 
though, it is true, she looked at him, it must be added that she 
looked through him with that cold and icy stare with which a 
duchess might regard an omnibus conductor who had winked at her, 
as she passed by in her carriage. 

The first time that he came between her eye and the distant 
landscape she noticed that he had a white hat on, without taking 
in any further details. The next time he passed she became 
conscious of a bright blue scarf and a cigar. 

Two or three minutes afterwards . 

'"What a many white hats there are this season!' 

Two or three minutes after this . 

' It's the same man, I declare ! What on earth is the creature 
staring at ?' 

He was certainly staring ; indeed, to use the parlance in vogue 
among the bucks of a bygone period, he was ogling. 

It is not the nature of young men, generally, to think themselves 
the least worthy of the human family. A young man, in a new 
white hat, may, surely, be pardoned if he courts, rather than shrinks 
from, public scrutiny. That lovely woman was created, wholly and 
solely, to succumb to the fascinations of the male eye, is, naturally, 
the belief of every fine young gentleman ; and it must be allowed, 
however sceptical our fair readers may be on this point, that the 
most hopeless of male monstrosities does, somehow or other, without 
much difficulty, always find a member of the opposite sex to attach 
herself to his interests and take his cuffs and caresses with becoming 
meekness and gratitude. 

When Miss Simpson quite made her mind up that it was she, 



82 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

herself, who was attracting the attention of the owner of the white 
hat, a certain increase of sternness about her eyebrows ought surely 
to have been sufficient to show him that he had better go and stare 
elsewhere. 

Perhaps it did show him that the young lady intended him so 
to understand ; but he was a remarkably impudent fellow, and he 
continued the objectionable course of conduct which he had com- 
menced. Nothing, surely, could have been more icy than the gaze 
with which the indignant virgin's blue eyes regarded him, as she 
rose, slowly, from her seat. Probably, never before or since did 
dyed silk rustle as did the dress of wrathful virtue, as it swept 
past him. 

Oh ! misguided proprietor of a white hat and blue satin scarf, 
ornamented with a golden horse-shoe. "Why could he not have seen 
that his attentions were misplaced, and that his free-and-easy 
gallantry had better have been reserved for the gratification of the 
tender-hearted nursemaids, of whom, no doubt, there was a goodly 
sprinkling over the broad expanse of turf surrounding him ? 

But he did not. On the contrary, he pursued his wild career. 
He followed close upon the heels of the outraged beauty ; he sidled 
up to her, and he said it was a fine day. 

What did it signify to Miss Simpson what might be his opinion 
of the weather ? Can the most unscrupulous of readers pretend to 
argue that, because it happens to be a fine day, a young man . 
although wearing a white hat and a scarf of blue satin, which may, 
or may not, have been decorated by crimson sprigs . should presume 
to communicate the undisputed fact to a fair and perfect stranger ? 
If such a state of things were allowed to exist, it would be almost 
better not to have any fine days. 

' Sir ! ' said Miss Simpson, in a tone which would have filled a 
well-regulated # mind with dire alarm. 

' It is such nice weather for a stroll,' continued this most auda- 
cious person in the white hat. 

' I have not the pleasure of your acquaintance,' said Miss Simpson, 
growing momentarily more and more icy. 

'What can so soon bo rectified?' continued the lawless owner of 
the blue satin scarf. ' It is true that we are strangers ; but when I 



MISS SIMPSON'S ROMANCE. 



83 



look back at bygone years, and think that I have lived so long and 
never known you, I am absolutely lost in wonder. You ask me 
why?' he continued, inquiringly. 

' I ask you nothing,. sir ; except it is how you dare to insult mo ?' 




:~t» 



AUDACIOUS BEHAVIOUR OP SritlNa OKEDX. 



' Insult you ! ' said the person in the white hat, seemingly much 
astonished. ' Not for worlds. If there is anything that I can do to 
prove to you how distant was such a thought from my mind ' 



84 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' If you do not immediately leave me, I will appeal for protection 
to one of the Park-keepers.' 

'It is not because I am afraid of the Park-keeper,' said the 
white-hatted stranger, ' but I will wish you good-morning.' 

' He raised the white hat as he spoke, and bowed and walked 
away; and it must be owned that Miss Simpson could not help 
thinking that the Park-keeper's close proximity had a good deal to 
do with the free-and-easy stranger's rapid departure. 

There was something like a faint smile of contempt upon 
Pamela's pretty face as she pursued her homeward course. It 
seemed to her, when she thought it over, that her admirers were 
singularly unheroic. Although there might be found among them 
an instance of a hero's soul, they all alike beat a rapid retreat in 
the hour of danger. All this was very unsatisfactory, and quite 
contrary to the pictures of life which she had studied weekly in a 
penny miscellany that she and another yoimg lady at Miss Mac- 
Spartan's had subscribed to, each, in turn, defraying the expense 
every alternate week. Ah ! but a hero really was a hero in those 
thrilling pages, and spent half his time, at least, in rescuing beauty 
in distress . in distress, it may be added, beauty in penny miscel- 
lanies generally contrives to be. 

Why could not she, Pamela asked herself, find something heroic, 
at the nick of time, to come to her aid. Just now, there had been a 
good chance, if there had been a hero handy. He, with the white 
hat, might have been felled to the earth. Pamela might have 
fainted in the arms of her preserver, and, when restored to con- 
sciousness, have found that a coronet awaited her acceptance ; which, 
in all probability, had nothing better turned up, she would have 
accepted, and lived happy ever afterwards. But the moment of 
danger had come and passed, and no hero had put in an appearance ; 
and she could not help thinking that had the danger been greater, 
the hero might still have been absent in the moment of need. 

It would be very delightful, she thought, to be rescued by the 
gallant scion of a noble house ; but even the experience of the last 
few minutes was sufficient to convince her that it would not be safe 
to run great risks. The Regent's Canal was close at hand; but 
who could say with certainty that the Royal Humane Society's 



MISS SIMPSON'S ROMANCE. 85 

drags would come in time, much less the- noble scion, who, for 
what she could tell, might be rescuing other beauty in another 
neighbourhood. 

Very despondingly did our pretty Pamela bend her steps towards 
the Terrace of Daffodil, which, though undoubtedly quite as genteel 
as ever, she somehow found this morning to be much narrower, 
and more smoky than usual. She did not feci altogether equal to 
joining in a discussion then in course of progress in the front 
parlour, and having reference to the advisability of turning a grey 
linsey. Such like little economies struck her, at the moment, as 
being rather mean and paltry; so she went straight upstairs and 
had a good cry, and then washed her face and sat down to read one 
of Mr. James's romances. 

Thus occupied, she did not hear a knock at the street door, a 
strange voice in the passage, or footsteps on the stairs ; but when, 
presently, she went down to the parlour she found her mamma and 
Penelope in a great state of excitement. 

'My dear,' said Mrs. Simpson, in a sort of breathless voice, 
'we've let ' 

For a moment Pamela was inclined to treat the matter with 
indifference. She was not quite sure whether a heroine's family 
ought to let lodgings ; but, in spite of that, she could not help feeling 
some curiosity on the subject. 

'It's a single gentleman,' said Penelope; 'and he's to have his 
breakfast and tea and supper in his own apartments, and take 
dinner with us on Sunday.' 

' His friends are all in the country,' said Mrs. Simpson. ' "Where 
did he say he came from, Penelope ? ' 

'I don't know, mamma; but he's in the medical profession; 
that is, he has not passed his examination yet, but he's studying 
at the Hospital.' 

'He's a most quiet and gentlemanly young man,' said mamma; 
'and, I must say, I think we're most fortunate, for he objected to 
nothing.' 

And, indeed, it would have seemed as though this young medical 
gentleman were, really, a noble scion, in disguise, so reckless had he 
appeared to be regarding the price of the extras. 

'Is he upstairs now?' asked Pamela. 



86" THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' Of course not, my dear,' replied her mamma, in a tone of gentle 
reproof. ' It is necessary to be circumspect in these matters. A^ 
scon as your papa comes home this evening he is to go about the 
reference . though I feel quite sure that no inquiries are needed, . . 
and this evening, at eight, Mr. Spring Green will bring his luggage. 

' Will papa send to him, then, to say that the reference is all 
right?' 

'Well, the fact is,' replied Mrs. Simpson, though this time less 
confidently than before, ' I omitted to ask Mr. Spring Green for his 
address ; but, of course, that will not signify, as your papa could 
obtain it from his reference, and send to him in case, which is quite 
unlikely, it was not satisfactory.' 

A little later in the day, however, it struck Mrs. Simpson that, 
as it was nice and fine, and a little walk woidd do her good, and the 
reference lived only in Gower Street, she might, herself, go round to 
make the necessary inquiries. She, therefore, made herself very 
smart, and, taking Penelope with her, set out upon her errand. 

'A clerical gentleman, my dear,' she said, when afterwards 
describing the interview to Pamela, ' though with quite a military 
air . yes, quite military.' 

' And the room smelt dreadfully of tobacco,' said Penelope ; 'but 
he's been a chaplain in the army, and they all smoke in the army, 
you know.' 

Evidently the ladies were quite satisfied with the reference, 
although the appearance of the Reverend Mr. Simple had not been 
altogether what they had expected to find it. When Mr. Simpson 
came home in the evening, he was much gratified by the intelligence 
that he had got an occupant for his drawing-rooms, who was, 
apparently, all that could be desired ; and, the old gentleman having 
been bustled through his tea, the family were in a fever of excite- 
ment until the highly-desirable young medical gentleman arrived. 

He came punctually at eight, in a four-wheeler, which was 
heavily loaded with his luggage . that is to say, there was one very 
long box and one very small carpet-bag ; the long box being on the 
roof, and Mr. Spring Green and the carpet-bag inside. There was 
another person inside with Mr. Spring Green and the carpet-bag, 
who was, Mrs. Simpson said, the clerical gentleman before alluded to. 
A tall commanding person this proved to be, wearing moustachios, 



MISS SIMPSON'S KOMANCE. 



87 




KOT VERY MUCH LIKE A CLERGYMAN. 



88 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

and a light drab coat and a white hat . which might not have looked 
as dashing without the mourning band that half covered it. 

Both gentlemen were smoking when the cab drew up at the 
door ; and Mrs. Simpson was visited by a pang of conscience when 
she suddenly remembered that she had said nothing upon the sub- 
ject of tobacco to the new lodger, who, while studying for the 
medical profession, was quite capable of saturating the whole of 
the drawing-room furniture. He was in other respects, however, 
so extremely desirable, that she secretly determined to allow the 
smoke, if, when reasoned with gently, next day, he should refuse to 
give it up. 

That portion of Mr. Spring Green's luggage which was contained 
in the small carpet-bag was, as the reader may suppose, very soon 
transferred from the cab to the house ; but to get the long box off 
the roof, thimigh the passage, and up the stairs was a process, 
tedious as regarded time, and damaging as regarded Mr. Simpson's 
wall-paper. As, too, the porterage of the box required the united 
efforts of Mr. Spring Green, his clerical friend, and the cabman, 
and there was a good deal of discursive talk among them respecting 
its safe disposal, a small crowd gathered in front of the house, and 
the arrival of the lodger was, evidently, the subject of remark among 
the neighbours. 

Very little, therefore, had been gained by Mrs. Simpson's fore- 
thought in fixing upon twilight for Mr. Spring Green's arrival. 
However, the lodger had come, and Mr. Simpson and the ladies, 
taking turns to peep at him round the window-curtain, could, with 
the exception of the cigar, urge very little against him. 

It is true that Pamela as yet had not been able to catch a glimpse 
of his face. About half an hour after he had come, though, she had 
occasion to go upstairs, and, when coming down again, had reached 
the drawing-room landing, when the drawing-room door opened 
suddenly, and she found herself face to face with the medical gentle- 
man. 

He had not at the moment got on a white hat ; but there, sure 
enough, was the blue satin scarf with the crimson sprigs, and there 
was no mistake about its wearer being that very rude young man in 
the Eegent's Park who had had the impudence to tell Miss Simpson 
that it was a fine day. 



89 



CHAPTER VIII. 

EXTRAORDINARY BEHAVIOUR OF A SINGLE-MAIS' LODGER, 

It has long since been decided by persons of wisdom that we 
should not judge by appearances. There are peers of the realm 
whose bearing is hardly noble, and linen-drapers' assistants who, out 
for a holiday, look like princes of the blood. Perhaps at a cursory 
glance the writer of this work might not be taken for a person of 
exalted genius ; and though, of course, the reader is an exception, 
people somehow generally turn out ever so much worse than you 
expected, if you don't think the worst you can of them at first sight. 

Although, when the climax came, Mr. Simpson was heard to 
assert that there had always been a something about Mr. Spring 
Green he did not quite approve of, his family expressed themselves 
quite positive that if he had had any misgivings he had kept them 
very carefully to himself. Mrs. Simpson, on the contrary, defended 
Mr. Spring Green to the last, and only gave him up, as a bad job, 
when his conduct became thoroughly outrageous. And it was not 
long in reaching this point, as will be seen. 

Poor Pamela's feelings, when she caught sight of and recognized 
the audacious stranger, can easily be imagined. Meeting Mr. 
Spring Green's admiring gaze with an angry stare and frown, she 
swept past him and rustled downstairs, looking, outwardly, very 
fierce and unapproachable, but being, in reality, half-frightened out 
of her wits. 

"What was she to do ? she asked herself, whilst pretending to 
partake of the evening meal, at which her unconscious relatives 
were assembled. How could she reveal the fearful truth to these 
poor happy innocent ones, who thought that Spring Green had come 
in the regular course of events, that he was going to be a model 
lodger, and they were going to make quite a nice little sum out of 
him for extras alone ? 

But she knew the truth. She knew very well that Spring Green 
must have followed her home, and knocked at the door in the 



SO THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

hope of seeing her. Probably, then, it had occurred to him to 
ask, on the chance, whether there were any apartments to let, and 
thus it had come about that he was now the occupant of the 
first floor. 

She felt quite certain of one thing, and that was, that Mr. Spring 
Green had come there, solely, upon her account. But what were his 
intentions? That was a question she found difficult to answer. 
And why had he brought that extraordinary long box ? That was 
another, more difficult still. 

But the most difficult question of all was, what was she to do ? 
How could she tell the family what had happened ? What would 
they say to her? "Was not she always getting into some such 
scrape ? She determined to keep her secret for the present, and say 
nothing, until it became positively necessary to speak. 

"While these reflections were causing Miss Pamela much uneasi- 
ness, the family were quite joyous with their future prospects. Out 
of coals alone, when the chilly nights came on, Mr. Simpson proved 
by arithmetic they would, if the lodger had only one scuttle a day, 
make upwards of two and fourpence profit. 

' Hang it, though, that's too much, isn't it?' said Mr. Simpson, 
with a qualm of conscience. 

'Not at all,' replied mamma, decisively. 'We're not supposed 
to let our apartments for the fun of the thing.' 

Just before the conclusion of supper, there was a temporary 
check to the prevailing contentment. Hannah Maria came in to say 
that the new lodger wanted a pot of ale. Mr. Simpson looked over 
at Mrs. Simpson, as though in some uncertainty, but Mrs. Simpson 
said, with decision : . 

' Draw the large white jug full, and take it upstairs.' 

' Some of that in the cellar, mum ? ' said the handmaiden, doubt- 
fully. 

'Certainly,' replied Mrs. Simpson, and went on with her supper 
as though nothing at all out of the ordinary course of events had 
taken place. Mr. Simpson's countenance, however, might have 
been observed to wear a thoughtful and, even, anxious air, while, 
every now and then, he seemed to be listening. 

Hannah Maria, meanwhile, went downstairs, then upstairs^ 



THE SINGLE-MAN LODGER. 91 

then came downstairs again, and, then, there was a brief pause. 
After this the drawing-room bell rang. 

'Please, mum,' said Hannah Maria, appearing, presently, at the 
parlour door, 'the gentleman says he don't like it.' 

' Don't like what ? ' inquired Mrs. Simpson. 

' It's the ale, if you please, mum. He says I'd better change it, 
or go to a new shop.' 

It had been calculated that the family ale, retailed at eight- 
pence or even sixpence a quart, would realize a very nice profit, 
and the disapproval of the new lodger was one of the last things 
expected. 

Mr. Spring Green and his clerical friend partook of a couple of 
pots of ale, and then Mr. Spring Green's friend was reported by 
Hannah Maria to have said that he must be toddling. Upon this, 
according to the same authority, Mr. Spring Green had volunteered 
to put him in a line, and they had gone out together for this purpose. 

' Has he got a latch key ? ' asked Mr. Simpson ; and Mrs. 
Simpson replying indignantly in the negative, Mr. Simpson sat up 
to let the new lodger in. 

He came home between twelve and one, and threw Mrs. 
Simpson into some alarm by letting fall his boots with a loud crash 
upon the landing. 

' I hope he'll be careful about the candle,' she said; and several 
times, during the night, she sat up and sniifed, under the impression 
that she smelt fire. 

Next morning the family were thrown into a fresh alarm, by 
Hannah Maria making a statement to the effect that Mr. Spring 
Green, when coming home over night, had forgotten the number and 
had knocked them up, by mistake, next door but one. 

'It will be all over the Terrace,' said Mrs. Simpson; and so it 
was before the day was out. 

Shortly after Mr. Simpson had gone to the city, Mr. Spring 
Green went away to his hospital, and mamma made a tour of 
inspection upstairs. There was no doubt about the medical gentle- 
man being a smoker, and, already, to use Mrs. Simpson's expression, 
the window-curtains smelt like a tap-room. There was also a black 
spot upon Mr. Spring Green's pillow, which was suspicious, like 



92 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

what might have been caused by a spark. But, surely, it could not 
be possible that he 'Smoked in bed. 

Tou may be sure that all the doors and windows were set wide 
open, to get rid, as much as possible, of the lingering fumes of the 
narcotic weed; but, strange to say, when they seemed to have 
entirely evaporated, Mrs. Simpson began to sniff harder than ever. 

'Hannah Maria,' said she, 'there's something extraordinary 
somewhere.' 

The morning passed away without the occurrence of any event 
of an unusual character. Mamma and Penelope discussed Mr. Spring 
Green at great length, and arrived at the conclusion that they might 
have done much worse if there had been a chance of picking. But 
before the afternoon was over they began to feel uneasy. 

A man came with three dozens of stout. It was evident that 
there would be no consumption of the. family ale, even if, as had 
been contemplated, a superior quality were laid on for the purpose. 
A couple of dozens of soda-water also arrived during the day, the 
appearance of which awakened a vague suspicion in Mrs. Simpson's 
mind that Mr. Spring Green was not quite as steady as he might 
have been. Nor did the advent of the medical gentleman, himself, 
tend to reassure her ; for he drove up in a cab, nursing a large 
earthenware bottle, and accompanied by his clerical friend, from 
whose pockets the necks of other bottles wrapped in paper were 
seen peeping. 

' There's liquor enough to open a gin-palace,' said Mrs. Simpson, 
whose ideas respecting the consumption of strong drinks were 
naturally rather limited. ' But what on earth will they do with it ?' 

Presently Hannah Maria was in a position to give information 
upon the subject. 

' He says he's got some friends coming,' she told the lady of the 
house ; ' and he wants to know if we've got any spittoons.' 

'Spittoons!' gasped Mrs. Simpson, who would as soon have 
expected to have been asked to provide double-barrelled guns or 
swimming-baths. ' What next ? ' 

About six o'clock the friends began to arrive. There were half 
a dozen of them; they had mostly a jovial appearance; and all 
smoked. Mr. Spring Green, who was upon the balcony, called to 



THE SINGLE-MAN LODGER. 93 

them as they came straggling up the street, searching for the 
number of the house. Upon recognizing their host, some of them 
struck attitudes upon the pavement, and one, picking up a stone, 
made as though he was going to throw it through the drawing- 
room window. They were, generally, rather more frolicsome than 
Mrs. Simpson could have desired, who felt, instinctively, that the eye 
of the Terrace was upon her. 

Going upstairs about half an hour after the company was as- 
sembled, Hannah Maria came down again, coughing violently, and 
observed that it was more than enough to choke a black. She also 
added that she never knew anything like that Mr. Spring Green's 
friend that came yesterday . he kept going on so. 

It would have seemed . to judge by the noise they made . that 
all the company were 'going on;' and more than once Mrs. Simpson 
had serious doubts whether they were not coming through the ceiling. 

Pamela and Penelope sat pale and trembling. 

'I wish papa was at home,' said the eldest, looking wistfully 
out of the window. As yet Mr. Spring Green had made no further 
advances, and, indeed, seemed as though . if such a thing were pos- 
sible . he had forgotten all about her ; and this conduct only made 
her the more nervous. 'He'll burst out presently,' she thought; 
' as soon as he gets tipsy . I'm sure he will.' 

There appeared to be little doubt about their determination to 
enjoy themselves. 'I've ordered some oysters for nine,' Mr. Spring 
Green told Hannah Maria; 'get us some lemons and a heap of bread 
and butter, and that's all we shall want.' Then he added to hi8 
friends, ' Look here, you fellows, we're going to have a roaring 
evening !' 

Mrs. Simpson and the young ladies were far from relishing the 
idea which this announcement suggested, for it appeared to them 
that there could scarcely be much roaring without the whole Terrace 
being alarmed. 

' If I had only dreamt that there was to be anything of this kind, 
my dears,' said Mrs. Simpson, 'I never would have consented to 
your papa taking that young man Spring Green for a lodger ; and 
what will happen next, and how it all will end, is really more than 
I can imagine.' 



94 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

This was one of Mr. Simpson's late nights in the city . once a 
month he stopped to work until half-past eight or nine o'clock, so 
that it was more than ten when he reached home, generally very 
tired and with a bad headache. 

He never felt more tired in his life than he did on this particular 
evening as he turned the street corner; but when he reached his own 
house, the unusual scene there enacting aroused him as effectually as 
if he had walked into a shower-bath and pulled the string. 

The drawing-rooms were a blaze of light ; the blinds were drawn 
up, and gentlemen in shirt sleeves were to be seen reclining grace- 
fully in all varieties of attitude. The roaring part of the evening 
had evidently set in, and the gentlemen were wishing they were 
birds, at the top of their voices. 

A small and admiring crowd, assembled in the street below, 
swelled the chorus, while, at the same time, they watched with in- 
terest the somewhat perilous progress of two gentlemen, evidently 
of the party, who were climbing from one balcony to another half- 
way down the street . a course of conduct which appeared to give 
dissatisfaction to some of the residents of the other houses, who 
came out at their drawing-room windows to argue with them, by 
the way. 

'Is Bedlam broken loose?' was Mr. Simpson's inquiry, when, 
having fought his way up the steps, he got at last into his own 
house, and stood breathless and panting before the terrified ladies. 

'Samuel,' said Mrs. Simpson, 'this is awful! The whole neigh- 
bourhood is aroused ! . we are irretrievably disgraced ! It seems 
there is another young man from a hospital lodging five doors off. 
at the Pilkington's, that we always thought such very superior people, 
. and he and the young men upstairs have been paying one another 
visits up and down the balconies.' 

' And there have been two or three organs,' said Penelope, ' and 
some mountebanks standing on each other's heads, and the top one 
drank a glass of beer that Mr. Spring Green handed to him out of 
the window.' 

' And they've sent in from the houses on both sides,' said Pamela, 
' with their compliments, and they wish we wouldn't make so much 
noise.' 



THE SINGLE-MAN LODGER. 95 

' There's only one course open,' observed Mrs. Simpson, in con- 
clusion, ' and that is, Samuel, that you go upstairs and turn them 
out.' 

At this Mr. Simpson looked thoughtful. Through the -window 
he had caught a glimpse of a roomful of strong young men, all 
more or less intoxicated, and he did not see his way clear. 

' Have you sent up any remonstrance ? ' he asked after a pause. 

' "We've sent up twice, but it seemed only to make them noisier ; 
and we, who thought we could let our apartments so nice and quietly 
and nobody know anything about it, why we might as well have tried 
to hide a roaring lion as that young man, Spring Green !' 

' Hannah Maria,' said Mr. Simpson, sternly, ' go upstairs at once 
to Mr. Spring Green with my compliments, and say that I shall feel 
obliged if he make less noise.' 

'If you please, sir, I'd rather not,' replied Hannah Maria. 

'What do you mean by you'd rather not?' inquired her master, 
with increased severity. 

' Oh, because, sir, if you please,' answered Hannah Maria, with 
confusion, 'that friend of Mr. Spring Green's that came yesterday 
do go on so.' 

Things, however, coidd not thus continue. The noise upstairs 
was growing, momentarily, louder. The company had had their 
supper, and somebody suggested pelting the crowd outside with the 
03'ster-shells. By the bumping on the floor it would almost have 
seemed as though two of the gentlemen were dancing ; one at the 
window, Hannah Maria stated, had kissed his hand to the house- 
maid next door but two, who had been sent out to fetch a Hansom. 
Indeed, things were reaching a climax, and Mr. Simpson resolutely 
buttoned his coat across his breast and prepared for the worst. 

But upon the stairs he met Mr. Spring Green, himself, looking 
very flushed in the face and tumbled about the hair. 

'Misher Whatsh-your-name,' said the new lodger, speaking with 
great determination, but some indistinctness of utterance, ' why, 
doosh! don't they bring hot watersh? Told Hannah Mariash, bring 
hot watersh . why, doosh! don't bring hot watersh?' 

Detecting himself in the act of tumbling forward upon Mr. Simp- 
son while making this inquiry, the new lodger straightened himself 



96 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



up, and, with even a greater show of determination than heretofore, 
repeated, 'Hotwatersh! Misher Whatsh-your-name.' 

'Mr. Spring Green,' said Mr. Simpson, taking the lodger by 
the arm, and regarding him sternly, while the young man, assuming 
an expression of supernatural intelligence, endeavoured to stand 




A HOUSEMAID FEOM THE TEEEAOB. 



upright as he listened. 'Mr. Spring Green, when you took my 
apartments we had no idea there was to be anything of this kind, 
and it won't do !' 



THE SINGLE-MAN LODGER. 



97 



' That's all rightsh, ole fella,' said the lodger, nodding his head 
and frowning, while he winked both eyes violently to show that he 
quite entered into Mr. Simpson's ideas upon the subject ; ' we won't 
do it any more, 'pon m' soul! Let's have hot watersh.' 

'Not a drop, Mr. Spring Green,' replied Mr. Simpson, with reso- 
lution. ' Go upstairs, sir, and tell your friends to go away, or I 
shall send for the police.' 




'who's that CALLING 'POLTCE'Y 



9> 



Upon hearing this, Mr. Spring Green stared very hard at his 
landlord, steadying himself by the balustrade as he did so ; then 
nodded to him mysteriously, and reeled back upstairs. 

'I say, ole fellash,' Mr. Simpson heard him remark upon reach- 

G 



98 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

ing the drawing-room, and by a loud crash which accompanied the 
words it was to be supposed that, in assuming his place at the table, 
Mr. Spring Green had tumbled on to it . ' I say, old fellash, Whatsh- 
his-name says no hot watersh . "Whatsh-his-name ought to know . 
No hot watersh !' 

'Never mind the hot water, Green,' cried his clerical friend, 
cheerfully ; ' we'll do without, first rate . let's have some cold.' 

' Whatsh-his-name says too much row. Better hook it.' 

' Oh ! come, that won't do, Spring !' retorted the clerical gentle- 
man. ' Why, this isn't half an evening yet ! You aren't going to 
turn us out, surely ? ' 

' Dear fella !' replied Mr. Spring Green, knocking over some 
glasses, so as to reach over and shake the speaker by the hand, 
' stop for ever ! Damn Whatsh-his-name ! Hannah Mariash, bring 
hot watersh !' 

' I'll put a stop to this !' cried Mr. Simpson, as soon as the yell 
of defiance which had followed Mr. Spring Green's reply had some- 
what subsided ; and, opening the street door, shouted lustily for the 
police, quite reckless, now, of what the Terrace might think upon the 
subject. 

One of the force was luckily close at hand, and, though disturbed, 
perhaps, in the middle of an agreeable tete-h-tete, came, without delay, 
to render all the assistance that lay in his power. Unfortunately, 
however, this assistance was not very great. 

He had no power, he explained, within a dwelling-house. If 
Mr. Simpson liked to lay hold of the lodger and his seven riotous 
friends, and throw them one after another down into the street, 
he had a perfect right to do so; but the police had no right to 
interfere. 

' Do you mean to tell me that the only way I can clear my house 
is by pitching those vagabonds out of the window?' inquired 
Mr. Simpson, indignantly. 

'Unless you turn them out at the door, that's all you can do,' 
replied the policeman. 

Mr. Simpson was not, in a general way, inclined to acts of violence, 
but, under these desperate circumstances, he felt as though he had, 
suddenly, become possessed of the strength of Sampson, and, backed 



THE SINGLE-MAN LCDGER. 99 

up by the policeman, lie boldly ascended the stairs and faced the 
company. 

When the British lion is thoroughly aroused, as everybody knows, 
his aspect is tremendous, and there was something about the expres- 
sion of Mr. Simpson's eye which, doubtless, struck terror into the 
bosom -of the revellers, for physically he was rather a feeble old 
gentleman, easily to be doubled up. Perhaps, too, the sight of the 
policeman's uniform in the background had something to do with 
it, for Mr. Spring Green's friends, after a momentary hesitation, 
began to look for their hats. 

' Please to go away without any further disturbance,' said Mr. 
Simpson, mildly but firmly. ' And I shall be obliged if you will go 
too, Mr. Spring Green. You have not paid any rent as yet ; and 
you seem,' continued Mr. Simpson, looking about among the frag- 
ments, 'to have done a good pound's worth of damage; but we 
won't mention that. There are also things that you have had to eat 
and drink. We shall be rather out of pocket by your visit; but 
that's our loss. Please to take yourself off, and we'll cry quits.' 

'Misher Whatsh-your-name,' said Mr. Spring Green, trying to 
rise, and breaking another tumbler in so doing. ' I've been very 
comfor'ble and nothing complain of. Saw your daugtersh, shir, in 
park. Thought like come hersh. Devilish fine girlsh. No pology 
needed, Misher Whatsh-your-name.' 

'We'll say nothing about apologies,' replied Mr. Simpson, who 
could not follow the youthful Green in his wanderings. ' Only please 
to take yourself and your friends out of my house.' 

' Look here, Spring,' here observed his clerical friend, taking 
Mr. Green by the arm, ' the old boy puts it very properly. You're 
horribly drunk, or you'd agree with him. Take his tother arm, 
Jones, and we'll help him home to my lodgings.' 

But it was not quite so easy to induce the new lodger to leave a 
house where, he assured them with tears in his eyes, he had been 
very comfortable. At first he suggested that his guests should 
depart, and that he himself should remain to spend a quiet evening 
with the ladies, and have a cup of tea and a little music. Catching 
sight of Mrs. Simpson on the way downstairs, he assured his 
clerical friend that she had been a second mother to him, and wanted 



100 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

him to give up smoking. After this he fell into a despondent state, 
as it occurred to him what he might be if he only did give it up, 
giving up drinking at the same time ; and he apologized to Mr. 
Simpson for not being sober enough, now he came to think of it, to 
be able to appreciate the quiet evening he had previously alluded to. 
Yisited at this juncture, however, by the recollection that, after all, 
Hannah Maria had never brought the hot water, he called for it 
afresh, and was led away, complaining bitterly. 

Before going away Mr. Spring Green's clerical friend had 
promised to send the first thing in the morning for the luggage ; and, 
now, nothing remained but for the family to pay a visit to the vacated 
apartments and estimate the damages. 

' Though really why you should want to charge nothing for all 
that that young man has smashed to pieces, Samuel, is more than I 
can imagine.' 

' If it had been twice as much,' said Mr. Simpson, ' I should have 
thought myself very well paid by getting rid of him ; and if you're 
of my way of thinking this shall be the first lodger and the last.' 

' I'm sure there's nobody was more opposed to the whole scheme 
than I was,' replied the good lady ; ' but why we shoxdd not be paid 
for the breakages, when we have the young man's luggage still in 
our possession, is really more than I can understand.' 

But when the conversation had gone thus far Hannah Maria 
came screaming downstairs, and, to the consternation of the family, 
fainted away in the passage. She had been up in the back drawing- 
room where the luggage was standing, and, the lid of the long box 
being unfastened, she had peeped in, and seen something which 
had thus alarmed her. 

'It's corpses,' explained the horrified handmaiden; and, upon 
inspection, the long box was found to contain three-quarters of a 
subject, and about half a hundred-weight of bones, which, certainly, 
was a kind of luggage they had no wish to detain any longer than 
they could help it. 

' And suppose he never sends,' said Mrs. Simpson ; ' I'm not at all 
too sure that we may dispose of the things, even if we coidd get any 
one to take them off our hands, before we've advertised three times 
in the newspaper. And, before then, if we don't all have a fever, I 
shall be very much astonished.' 



101 



CHAPTER IX. 

TAXTATTLE : A MYSTERY. 

'Mamma,' said the youngest Miss Simpson, about a week after 
Mr. Spring Green had taken his departure, ' I think I have found 
somebody who will take our drawing-rooms.' 

'Bless me, Penelope, how's that?' 

'It was at the stationer's, mamma,' replied the young lady. 'I 
had gone in for this week's Quiver, and I found him there asking 
Mr. Watkins whether he could tell him of any nice quiet apartments. 
He said he did not want them in a regidar lodging-house, or any- 
where where they would take his tea and sugar, or anything of that 
sort ; but he would like a small private family that he could make 
one of, and he would prefer one that was pious and musical.' 

'Certainly, my dear,' said Mrs. Simpson. 

' And, just when he had got that far, mamma,' continued Penelope, 
' Mr. Watkins caught sight of me, for I was waiting for an oppor- 
tunity to give him the penny for the Quiver, and he mentioned to the 
gentleman that we had just exactly what would suit him. So then 
the gentleman took off his hat, and asked when he might be 
permitted to call upon you on the subject. You've no idea, mamma, 
how very gently he speaks. I'm sure he won't turn out like that 
dreadful Mr. Green.' 

'There's really no answering for anybody,' said Mrs. Simpson; 
' but we can only try, my dear, can we ? And when did you say he 
was to come ? ' 

In half an hour's time there came a very soft double knock at 
the street door, and, after a preliminary ahem, a very mild voice 
inquired of Hannah Maria, dry-polished for the occasion, whether 
Mrs. Simpson wore visible. A reply having been given in the 
affirmative, there followed a great deal of very careful boot-wiping, 
and, picking his way across the hall and up the stairs, the visitor left 
between Hannah Maria's finger and thumb a card, on which was 
engraved the single word . 

Pantattle. 



102 



THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 



'Bless me!' said Mrs. Simpson, when she had very carefully 
examined the pasteboard, not only the right way up, but upside 
down, and, then, from each side. ' It's just like one of those checks 
they used to give your papa and me at the theatre when we went 
out between the acts.' 




FIRST APPEARANCE OP PANTATTLE. 



"When the good lady had given a hasty touch to her cap ribbons, 
she went, smiling, upstairs and found a bald, grave gentleman, 
seated in an easy chair, in the drawing-room, who proved to be the 
Pantattle above referred to. 

He certainly was one of the gentlest gentlemen Mrs. Simpson 
had ever met with, and, really, opened the negociation with so much 



PANTATTLE: A MYSTERY. 



103 



delicacy, not to say hesitation, that Mrs. Simpson almost began 
to be afraid that he expected to get his board and lodging for 
nothing. "When the necessary arrangements had been made, 
Mr. Pantattlo toot hia departure, after fixing the nest afternoon 
for his arrival. 

' I only hope we shall get on all right,' said Mr. Simpson, when 
he heard what had been settled upon. ' I expect there have been 




AS IT USKD TO BE. 



some people who hare dropped into the middle of a family circle and 
rather surprised them.' 

'The fact is, Samuel,' said Mrs. Simpson, 'if you had your way 
you would just have us all bottled up like a lot of vinegar plants, 
and see nobody but ourselves from year's end to year's end ; and 



104 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

that's exactly how it is that when you do go out into society you 
don't know how to behave yourself.' 

'I shall take care not to go,' said Mr. Simpson. 

' Bah ! I haven't common patience to hear you,' said his good 
lady. 

Mr. Pantattle's luggage was neat and unpretending. It consisted 
of a portmanteau and a writing-desk. There was no attempt at 
show about him. 

'I never wear anything but what you see,' he said, the first 
evening, alluding to a black suit which was not in its early gloss, 
' and I have no watch.' 

He said this, too, with a kind of air which seemed to imply that 
there was something highly reprehensible in a person's carrying 
their own time about with them; and Pamela felt guiltily con- 
scious of a showy gold chain which papa had given her on her last 
birthday. 

In many respects Mr, Pantattle was peculiar. "When asked if he 
would partake of muffins, which figured on the table, in honour of 
his arrival, he replied : ' We are not for long here, madam. Why 
not ? ' Which observation, seemed to Mrs. Simpson to have some- 
thing of the character of a riddle, and she would have wished 
him to repeat it again slowly, only she did not like to ask him 
to do so. 

She felt rather nervous, too ; for when they first took their seats, 
and, just as she was in the act of raising the teapot to pour out the 
first cup of tea, Mr. Pantattle laid his hand gently upon her arm 
and staid her further progress, whilst he asked a blessing ; a pro- 
ceeding which also caused some embarrassment to the head of the 
family, who, at that moment, had a mouthful of muffin which he 
could not, well, dispose of until the blessing was over. Throughout 
the meal Mr. Pantattle was very calm and grave ; and, excepting 
that he ate and drank rather more than all the rest put together, 
manifested few signs of human weakness. 

He knew nothing of the city, he said to Mrs. Simpson, and very 
little about money matters. 'I have enough, and seek not to 
increase that which I possess, nor to imperil its safe keeping.' Upon 
the subject of ladies' dress he had a remark or two to make. Ho 



PANTATTLE: A MYSTERY. 105 

thought it was better and more simple as it used to be, and it 
would grieve liim very much, to see any one he had a respect for 
following the fashions ; an opinion at which Miss Pamela tossed her 
pretty head. Mrs. Simpson, speaking of him afterwards, said he 
talked like writing lessons in small hand. To the Misses Simpson 
he was bland and courteous ; but the effect of his politeness was, 
upon the whole, depressing. Mr. Simpson felt immensely relieved 
when he could get away from the table, and he made his escape 
under the pretence of having something to look for among his 
papers. 

After tea Mr. Pantattle sat bolt upright in an arm-chair by the 
window, and the conversation wearing itself out, very gradually, he 
fell into a gentle doze. Aroused from this by a suggestion on Mrs. 
Simpson's part that the lamp should be lighted, he protested mildly 
against shutting out the day, and the poor ladies acquiescing, meekly, 
they sat three-quarters of an hour longer in the twilight, and Mr. 
Pantattle fell into another doze in which Mrs. Simpson, this time, 
bore an audible part. 

Shortly after eight, the new lodger sought his chamber, and a 
rather tedious evening thus concluded. 

'I rather think Pantattle will be one too many for us,' said Mr. 
Simpson ; ' but we'll give him a fair trial.' 

He was easier to bear with next night, perhaps because the 
strangeness had worn off a little ; and nothing occurred to break the 
oven monotony until the lamp was lighted, when, drawing a leather- 
bound volume from his pocket, he said that, if not disagreeable, he 
would like to read a chapter. 

'Make yourself quite at home, sir,' said Mr. Simpson, in the 
innocence of his heart, little dreaming what was coming ; and, thus 
encouraged, Mr. Pantattle read them a chapter of Job, and, kindly, 
explained his notion of its meaning. 

'I rather think,' said Mr. Simpson, when, once more, they had 
said good-night to the new lodger, 'we shall have to get rid of 
Pantattle.' 

Next night, when the young ladies were at the piano, he expressed 
a desire to try his voice, and sang a hymn or two. Mr. Simpson 
had formed a desperate resolution if he offered to expound again ; 



106 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

but lie did not do so. Indeed, he seemed light-hearted and almost 
frolicsome, this evening, and entertained the ladies with an anecdote 
and some tricks with a piece of string. "When he was gone, 
Mr. Simpson observed . ' Pantattle's coming out.' 

'You always take such violent prejudices, Samuel,' said 
Mrs. Simpson. 'I'm sure he's, really, most inoffensive.' 

A week wore away, something in this fashion, Mr. Pantattle 
remaining in-doors almost all day long, and receiving and writing a 
good many letters, which, latter, he took to the post himself. It was 
evident that he had a good deal of business, of some kind or other, 
to transact, although he knew little about money matters; and 
Mr. Simpson, who had been told by the reference that Mr. Pantattle 
was an independent gentleman, wondered not a little what could be 
the cause of such an extensive correspondence. Presently, the 
explanation was forthcoming. 

There were some gay young dogs and rollicking blades at Kooter 
and Phlimsy's, who met other gay young dogs, from other banks, at 
an hostelry in Bucklersbury, whereat they partook, in company, of 
their mid-day meal. 

' Say,' said one of these rollicking blades to another, one morn- 
ing, whilst eating his steak and reading the paper, 'doesn't old 
Simpson, at our place, live at No. . , Daffodil Terrace, Gloucester 
Gate?' 

'I think that was where I sent him his letters, when he was 
away for a holiday,' replied the person addressed. 

'I'm sure of it,' said the first speaker; 'and here's one of the 
rummest capers you ever tumbled to.' 

With which words the first rollicking blade handed the second 
one the newspaper, pointing with his finger to a particular advertise 
ment. 

' It can't be the old man,' said the second rollicking blade, when, 
after a few exclamations of astonishment, he had calmed down a 
little, and read the advertisement for the second time. ' He would 
never venture to do a thing like that. Why, the bank would no 
more stand a game of that kind than they would his opening an 
opposition shop in our lobby.' 

'Suppose we have a shy at him. Tnen we shall find it out 



PANTATTLE: A MYSTERY. 107 

easy enough. Look here ; let's write an answer, in a sham name, 
and give an address where they'll take the letter in.' 

' That's your sort ; let's do it as soon as we get back.' 

'I'm on.' 

That afternoon, therefore, a mysterious despatch accompanied the 
other letters posted from the bank, to which an answer was received 
during the course of the nest day ; and a long consultation ensued 
between our two rollicking blades, out of hearing upon the stair- 
case, the result of which was as follows : . Mr. Simpson, returning 
to his desk after a momentary absence, found an envelope lying 
there, awaiting his arrival, on which his name was written in a hand 
he did not know. Opening the envelope, he found a sheet of paper ; 
and unfolding this, he read, in blank astonishment, these remark- 
able words : ' How is Pantattle ? ' 

For several minutes Mr. Simpson sat, silently, with the paper in 
his hand, feeling extremely unwell. Then he glanced furtively 
around, to see who it was that could have played him this trick. 
The bank was the last place where he would have wished the fact 
of the lodging-letting to be known ; but, evidently, the secret had 
oozed out, somehow, and the question was, Who had found 
it out? 

He passed the rest of the afternoon uncomfortably enough ; but, 
yet, poor gentleman, he little dreamt how matters really stood, nor 
could Mrs. Simpson, when he related the circumstance, throw any 
new light upon the subject. Next day, though, he found another 
envelope, which contained an advertisement clipped from a news- 
paper, and gummed upon a piece of paper ; reading which, he was 
seized with a sudden giddiness, and felt as though he must have 
fallen backwards off his stool, had he not clung to the desk for 
support. Then, seizing his hat, he staggered rather than walked 
into the manager's room, stammered out something about a domestic 
calamity, and hailing a Hansom cab at the street corner, bade the 
man drive for his life to Daffodil Terrace. His advent there, under 
these circumstances, caused quite a sensation ; and the young ladies 
flew to the door to welcome him, with c vague impression that 
somebody must have left some member of the family a legacy. But 
the expression of his face soon convinced them of their mistake; 



108 THE ELDEST MISS SHirSON. 

and he put them on one side as he asked, in a strange hoarse voice, 
' Is that man upstairs ? ' 

'Mr. Pantattle, papa?' 

'Yes ' 

'Oh! Mr. Pantattle never goes out in the day,' said Penelope. 
' He's very busy, always, and says nobody is to disturb him.' 

'I think I'll disturb him, though,' said Mr. Simpson, doubling 
up his fist. 

' Oh, papa ! what's the matter ?' 

' Go into the parlour, both of you, and don't come out till I tell 
you. I'm going up to talk to the lodger.' 

"When Mr. Simpson reached the drawing-room, he found 
Mr. Pantattle seated at the table, writing a letter. He evidently 
did not expect company, though, for he was seated there in his 
shirt sleeves, and his shirt was of flannel and very much out at 
the elbows. 

' Do you know anything of this ? ' asked Mr. Simpson, laying a 
piece of paper on the table. It was the advertisement above 
referred to, certain derisive commentaries attached. 

'A private gentleman of property,' ran the printed words, 
' having a few thousand pounds at his disposal, will be glad to lend 
the same upon good personal security. . Address, per letter only, 
enclosing stamp for reply, to Mr. Pantattle, No. 9, Daffodil Terrace, 
Gloucester Gate,' 

'Are you the gentleman of property, may I inquire?' said 
Mr. Simpson, eyeing, rather suspiciously, Mr. Pantattle' s general 
appearance, which, certainly, did not give an impression of much 
spare capital. 

'My dear sir,' replied Mr. Pantattle, smiling blandly; but yet 
not, altogether, without a certain uneasiness in his expression; 'you 
have guessed rightly.' 

'Perhaps so,' said Mr. Simpson, sitting down and laying his 
hand very heavily upon the table. ' You don't know much about 
business, you said the other day. Now, I know a little, and about 
your business, particularly. I won't go into the question of the 
liberty you have taken in using my private address for your 
advertisements, without first consulting me upon the subject ; but 



PANTATTLE: A MYSTERY. 



109 




EXIT PANTATTLE. 



110 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

I'll come straight to tlie point. Please to take what belongs to you 
and go about your business, or I'm damned if I don't kick you out 
into the street.' 

If ever there were an expression of blank astonishment depicted 
in a human countenance, it was depicted, then, in that of Mr. Pan- 
tattle ; but Mr. Simpson's quick glance told him that with that 
astonishment was more of fear than anger, and that, after the first 
surprise, the capitalist's next idea was how to save himself from 
the threatened violence. 

' You . you would not think of resorting to any such measures, 
sir, I trust,' said he, with a weak attempt at virtuous indignation ; 
' and you'll please to remember you've engaged to board and lodge 
me for the week, and there's to be a week's notice after that.' 

'You're welcome to your board and lodging so far,' said 
Mr. Simpson, wrathfully, ' for I wouldn't soil my hands with your 
money ; but you'll take yourself out of my house this very moment, 
or, by Jove, I may do you an injury.' 

'My dear sir,' said Pantattle, putting on his coat, in a great 
tremble, ' after what has occurred I could not think of staying any 
longer under your roof. But I cannot go without observing that 
this is not the way one gentleman should act towards another.' 

' Don't you talk about gentlemen,' shouted Mr. Simpson, scarlet 
with rage. 'Do you think I'm such a fool that I don't read all 
your trumpery swindle ? Do you know the name of Eobert Fondi- 
love, may I inquire ? I don't know and don't care a deal whether 
you do or not, but I'll tell you this much. Just such another pack 
of lies as these you've printed here got a bill of exchange out of a 
poor old friend of mine, and when he died cost me near two hundred 
pounds to settle, though he never got one penny piece for his paper. 

You may not be a bill stealer, Mr. Pantattle, but I'll be ' (here 

we are sorry to say Mr. Simpson swore again, though it is not much 
to be wondered at) ' if I believe you're a man of property ; and, so, 
I'll give you the benefit of the doubt, and not kick you out, if you 
go quietly.' 

Something, though, stronger than himself, took possession of 
Mr. Simpson's right boot when Mr. Pantattle, standing upon the 
landing, ventured upon a feeble threat of legal proceedings, and the 



PANTATTLE: A MYSTEEY. Ill 

owner of the spare thousands made the descent of the stairs more 
rapidly than he had calculated upon, and sprawled like an ugly 
black beetle upon the mat. 

But here a wholly unlooked-for episode took place ; for, when 
Mr. Simpson followed Pantattle downstairs, his youngest daughter 
flung herself before him, and besought him, passionately, to stay his 
arm. 

'You shall not raise your hand against him, papa,' cried the 
excited young lady. 'You shall not. You shall not. You shall 
not.' 

' "Why, what on earth do you mean, my dear ? I'm more likely 
to spoil my boots on him ! Here, Martha ; look here, I say. "Why, 
the girl's going to hare hysterics ! Now, you, sir, clear out, or it 
will be the worse for you. That's right ! . shut the door, Hannah 
Maria ; there's an end of that vagabond.' 

' Vagabond !' said Mrs. Simpson. ' "Will you please to explain ? ' 

'All in good time, my dear,' replied the master of the house ; 
' look after Penelope first. Had you any notion that there was any- 
thing ? . but there's no accounting for girls' fancies. Anyhow, thank 
God, we're in time to put a stop to it.' 

'So much for our second lodger,' said Mrs. Simpson, just before 
she went to sleep that night. 

' Second and last, if I have my way,' said her partner; but in 
less than a month the drawing-room was let again. 



112 



CHAPTER X. 



TATTJltAN IN HER NIGHTCAP. 

It happened in this wise. 

One bright summer's morning, a middle-aged young lady . some- 
where upon the sunny side of fifty . wearing a green gown and a blue 
bonnet, and carrying a dilapidated parasol and small brown-paper 
parcel, knocked a double rat-tat at Mr. Simpson's door, and looked 
down his area. The head of Hannah Maria there appearing, for 




LOOKING OUT AFAR. 



TATTIMAN'S NIGHTCAP. 



113 



the purpose of taking observations, and retreating again with con- 
fusion, upon being detected, the door was opened, and the middle- 
aged young lady informed, in answer to her inquiry, that Miss 
Pamela Simpson was at home. 

It was her old friend, humble Miss Tattiman, who had come 




MEKMAIDS AT HERNE BAY. 



H 



114 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

to see her dear pupil; and you should have been there to see the 
meeting! As regarded Tattiman, nothing could have been more 
ecstatic. For weeks, for months, . it seemed like years . she had 
been longing to see her Pamela, and at last her dearest wish was 
fulfilled. At the same time, too, she had found an unexpected 
pleasure . the pleasure of making Pamela's mamma's acquaintance. 

'Oh, my dear madam, your dear daughter is absolutely, if possible, 
far prettier than ever!' cried the gushing Tattiman, clapping together 
as she spoke a very old pair of green kid gloves, ever so much too 
long at the finger-ends, ' She was the belle of our school when she 
was with us ; but what is she now ? I have a sketch of her among 
my treasures, done by an old friend of hers . you recollect that dear 
Topsawyer girl, Pamela. It is you, my dear, at a balcony, with an 
opera-glass, looking out afar . though I forget what it was you were 
looking for ; do you remember, my darling '?' 

While thus she chatted pleasantly, humble Jane Tattiman's eyes 
. good, serviceable eyes, though not a pretty colour . took in many 
details connected with the Simpsons' domestic economy. If she had 
had any vague idea of disposing of a certain small packet she had 
brought with her, carefully sealed up and labelled a diary, and a 
few letters, or something of that sort, she changed her mind before 
the visit reached its conclusion. Before that time arrived she had 
learnt that the Simpsons had lodgings to let, but no lodger. 

She was herself without a home at that present moment. This 
was the holiday-time at the MacSpartan establishment, and the 
young ladies had gone to the sea-side. Tattiman had had some idea 
of being a mermaid at Heme Bay, but had changed her mind. Be- 
sides, she had other matters to think of. The MacSpartan and she 
had parted . there were limits to the endurance of a packhorse. 
That woman had heard the truth about herself for once, and Tatti- 
man hoped she had liked it. When Mrs. Simpson was so pressing, 
how could Tattiman help stopping to lunch ? On the contrary, she 
stopped and ate heartily. 

A day or two afterwards, there came such a brisk rat-a-tat-tat at 
the street door that the ladies were thrown into a gentle flutter of 
excitement. Who should it be but Tattiman, and more excited 
than the ladies. She did not dare to tell them her errand though ; 



TATTIMAN'S NIGHTCAP. 115 

she was SO afraid that they would think she was taking a liberty, 
and Tattiman was one of those persons who would rather die than 
do such a thing. "When encouraged, however, by the assurance 
that they knew her to be all she said of herself, and a good deal 
more besides that was sweet and amiable, Tattiman told them that 
she had an elderly male relative of the name of Bodgerby, a rich 
single gentleman, who had come up from the country, and wanted 
some quiet apartments. 

So desirable a person was this Mr. Bodgerby, according to the 
account which Miss Tattiman gave of him, that Mrs. Simpson saw, 
at a glance, here was exactly the kind of lodger they had so long 
been looking for; and, indeed, when, in the course of the following 
day, he arrived with his luggage in Daffodil Terrace, he appeared 
to be quite as desirable as he had been depicted. He was one of 
those lodgers whose bill was brought to him, by his express order, 
every Monday morning at half-past nine, and paid, the moment 
he received it, with no further examination than a glance at 
the total. 

He Tvas one of that sort, too, who did not want to see anything 
more of the fragments of yesterday's meals, when they had once left 
the table. He had a way, too, of bringing home little presents for 
the ladies of the house, which was not a disagreeable trait in his 
character; as, for instance, when he bought himself some asparagus 
in Covent Garden, he would send home a second bundle for the 
Simpsons. 

Before the end of the first week, he had taken mamma and the 
girls to the dress-circle at the Haymarket ; and when, in return, they 
asked him to dinner on Sunday, he sent in three parts of the dinner 
himself. He did not board with them, but had such a number of 
delicacies for his breakfasts and suppers, and sent so much away 
untasted, that it was, really, as much as the family could do to pre- 
vent the good things being wasted. 

'Upon my word,' said Mr. Simpson one day, while in the act 
of eating some Strasburg pie, ' this sort of thing is really quite . 
quite prodigal ! ' 

The second week he was there, there- was more holiday-making 
. a box at the theatre and a trip to Hampton Court. 



116 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' He is liberality itself !' said Mrs. Simpson, when relating the 
particulars of these high jinks and junketings to humble Tattiman ; 
and humble Tattiman assented, with a quiet smile. She knew more 
of her relative than this worthy family, and knew him to be not 
quite so unselfish as they supposed. They, too, in clue time, found 
that Mr. Bodgerby's liberality was of that order which includes itself 
in the treat. He was a very rich old gentleman, and, any day, when 
the fancy took him, would have paid the expenses of a tableful of 
good company ; but a starving wretch whom he passed by on his 
way to the banquet wordd have supplicated vainly for a penny. 

' I like something for my money,' he remarked, on one occasion. 
' I don't mind paying dear ; but I like something for my money.' 

Jane Tattiman had, long ago, endeavoured to negociate a little 
loan from her wealthy relative, but had tried in vain. Finding he 
had come to town and wanted lodgings, she had recommended those 
of the Simpsons', because . but surely we need not seek for a reason 
when the desire to do a friendly act so, naturally, suggests itself as 
the most probable. 

She was just at that time, as we have seen, without employment, 
and often looked in upon the family in Daffodil Terrace ; who, feel- 
ing themselves to be under no small obligation to her, were only too 
happy to give her a kindly welcome ; and she, frequently, took her 
place at their table, and even slept beneath their roof, when, the 
time slipping away unobserved, it was all at once found to be too 
late for her to catch her omnibus. 

But she did not make one of those pleasure parties before men- 
tioned, and, strange to say, Mr. Bodgerby did not care for much of 
Jane Tattiman's society. 

Thus time wore away ; Mr. Bodgerby being even more liberal 
than usual, and Tattiman calling quite as frequently, and, occasion- 
ally, helping mamma and the young girls with their needlework; for 
they went out so much now that constant changes in their toilet 
were necessary. The new lodger had been with them more than 
two months when, one day, Mrs. Simpson asked herself a question. 

They were going to the theatre, that night, and Pamela was 
dressed and ready to start,. and Mr. Bodgerby stood looking at her 
whilst she fluttered her fan, unconscious of his attention. 



TATTTMAN'S NIGHTCAP. 



117 



' Does he mean anything ?' Mrs. Simpson asked herself, and sub- 
sequently asked Mr. Simpson the same question. 

'Nonsense!' said that gentleman, ' The idea of such a thing! 
He's much too old.' 

'I'm not so sure of that,' said mamma, after due reflection. 
'He certainly is much older; but really for my part I have no 




'does he mean anything?' 



patience with your very young men, who, half their time, don't know 
their own mind. Besides, really, with such an income.' 

Only a night or two after this remark was made, however, Jane 
Tattiman saw Mr. Bodgerby helping Pamela on with her opera 



118 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

cloak, and all the way home, that evening, in the "Waterloo omnibus, 
she sat up in the corner, looking very grim and thoughtful. 

'I hope,' said she, addressing the looking-glass, when, having 
reached home, that night she sat facing it in a highly unbecoming 
nightcap, ' I hope you've not made a fool of yourself, Jane Tatti- 
man. You may come into something, if nobody comes in between 
and cuts you out, when that old wretch has eaten himself into 
another world; that is, you may, if he doesn't leave it all to a 
charity, which he is very capable of doing. Now, look here, Jane 
Tattiman, what you've got to consider is, what will be the best thing 
for you. You're no beauty, Jane, and you're never very likely to 
get married yourself. Pamela Simpson is a fool, and might easily 
be managed. You might, perhaps, find a comfortable home under 
her roof, if that old wretch does not quarrel with you, or you might 
sell those letters to advantage. Yes, decidedly. The creature any 
day might find a wife, and one of his own picking. Why should 
he not have one that you picked ? He shall, Jane Tattiman. The 
future happiness of the interesting lovers rests in your hands. Jane 
Tattiman, your blessing is required. Lord love your long nose ! 
What a hobby-my-goblin you look in that nightcap ! ' 

Next morning, quite early, Miss Tattiman paid her rich relative 
a visit, and, when he came into the breakfast-room, he found her 
waiting for him, her bonnet and shawl on a chair beside her. To 
tell the truth, he looked more surprised than pleased at this matu- 
tinal visit ; but he was more amiable than usual, and asked her to 
have some breakfast. Jane said she didn't want anything. Then 
she stood looking at him a moment. Then made a rush at him, 
caught his head between her hands, and, shaking her nose at him 
playfully, 

' Oh, you sly old boots ! ' said she. ' I've found you out, have I ? ' 

As he expressed some surprise, she told him, then, that she knew 
his secret, and that he had fallen in love with Pamela. 

' Do any of the rest of them know it ? ' asked Mr. Bodgerby. 

' Of course they do, you old silly,' said the playful Jane. 

'Oh,' said Mr. Bodgerby. 

Somehow there was something rather funny about Mr. Bodgerby's 
manner that morning, and, when Jane Tattiman went away, she 



TATTIMAN'S NIGHTCAP. 



119 



half wished she had been more cautious in opening the negocia- 
tion. She and the Simpson ladies went out a walk in the Begent's 
Park that afternoon, and the matter was discussed at some length ; 




'oh, tou sly old boots !' 



but when they returned home they found Hannah Maria with an 
enormously long face. 

'Oh, if you please, mum,' said she, 'he's gone.' 



120 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

' Who's gone ? ' asked Mrs. Simpson. 

'Mr. Bodgerby, mum,' replied Hannah Maria, and handed Mrs. 
Simpson an envelope addressed to her. Opening this she found a 
ten-pound note, and the words 'I will send for the difference,' 
written inside. He had taken away some of his luggage, leaving 
the rest locked up; but nothing to give a clue to his whereabouts, or 
the reason for his sudden flight. 

'It's scandalous,' said Mrs. Simpson. 

'It's astonishing,' said Miss Tattiman. 

'It's all your stupid meddling,' said Mrs. Simpson; and the two 
ladies straightway had a quarrel upon the subject. 

' Don't ask me to help again, that's all,' said Miss Tattiman. 

'I never did ask you.' 

'You may do yet.' 

' I don't think it.' 

'We shall see.' 

And Tattiman retired with a toss of the head and a scornful 
sniff. 



121 



CHAPTER XL 

THE LAST OF BODGERBY. 

How strangely things do come about. Who could have dreamt, 
when old Bob Fondilove lay dying in that ill-shaped room in 
Clement's Inn, that the Simpsons would ever have come down to 
letting lodgings ! Who could have dreamt that a lodger of theirs 
would ever come to live upon the self-same landing, and that, 
under any possible combination of circumstances, Jane Tattiman 
and our pretty Pamela should chance to pay liim a visit upon the 
same day ! 

Surely, little better than the ghost of a lodger was that which 
humble Jane found, stowed away there, in a little stived-up room . 
a wan and haggard ghost, with a ragged grisly beard . the shadow 
of that Bodgerby who used to partake of such a profusion of good 
things in Daffodil Terrace. 

Nothing like the old voice, which she so well remembered, was 
the weak treble that bade her enter ; and, for a moment, she started 
back, affrighted, by the ghastly figure, in the dingy dressing-gown, 
crouched by the side of the fire. 

' Tou didn't expect to see me, I suppose,' said the visitor, coming 
forward. 

' I didn't want to,' answered Mr. Bodgerby. 

'No doubt,' observed Miss Tattiman, with a grim smile. 
' There's no love lost between us, I dare say. I've come on a matter 
of business, that's all.' 

' Get through it and leave me/ said Mr. Bodgerby, without 
much waste of politeness. 

'Very well, then, this is it. The Simpsons are bringing an 
action against you for breach of promise of marriage, and the cause 
is to be heard to-morrow. Am I right so far ? ' 



122 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

'I believe you are.' 

' Do you suppose that they have got any case against you ? 
'I suppose so, or they would not try it.' 

' Well, I think they cannot do much, unless I help them. I'm 
not very well off, you know, and I can't afford to stand in my own 
light. But I would rather be on your side, Bodgerby, if it's 
worth your while to make it worth mine. Now I've got here a 
little packet of papers. a diary, and some love-letters, and such 
like, which might be of some use to you if we can come to an 
arrangement.' 

It was about four o'clock in that winter's afternoon when 
Tattiman took her departure, and twilight was gathering in the 
distant corners of the room and out upon the silent staircase. 
When the laundress came, presently, to light the gas upon the stairs, 
she, also, lit a candle for Mr. Bodgerby, and asked him whether he 
wanted anything. 

'No, thank you,' he answered, 'I'm all right. Don't bother.' 
' That old man gets more of a brute, every day,' was the worthy 
woman's reflection, as she closed the door behind her. 

Left to himself, he sat, silently, by the fireside, gazing in a dreamy 
way upon the dying ashes. When, after a while, he rose from his 
seat to put on some coals, he almost lost his balance. 

'I'm very ill, I suppose,' he muttered. 'I haven't the appetite 
I used to have ; that's what's wrong with me. To-morrow I must 
send for a doctor.' 

He went back to his seat and fell, again, into a brown study, 
still gazing on the smouldering embers. But, presently, he pressed 
his hand to his head and murmured some words, confusedly. Then, 
rising, he, with great difficulty, fetched his desk from the other 
side of the room; and, drawing the candle towards him, began 
to examine his papers, tearing some up, and flinging others into 
the fireplace. 

Near upon nine o'clock, a young lady, who had ascertained from 
the porter which were Mr. Bodgerby' s chambers, slowly ascended the 
crooked stairs and knocked, timidly, at the door. 

'Perhaps he is out,' this young lady thought to herself, 'and I 
may not have the opportunity of acquainting him that this is not 



BODGEBBY. 



123 



my doing, that it is all that horrid woman's fault, who has per- 
suaded and misled mamma and papa. Oh, I must see him and tell 
him that I will not go into court, and beg his pardon and pray of 
him not to despise me for what has been done.' 




OUTSIDE THE DOOB. 



When, however, Pamela had knocked two or three times 
without receiving any reply, she ventured to open the door. 
Something seemed to warn her, then, that she was on the eve of 



124 THE ELDEST MISS SIMPSON. 

a terrible discovery; and she paused, irresolute, her hand pressed 
to her heart, listening. At last she went forward into the silent 
room. 

He lay, there, dead, with his head on the table, and the papers he 
had been destroying scattered around ; among which were a young 
lady's diary and some dog-eared love-letters, dated from North 
Brixton. His hand clutched a document having the appearance of 
a legal instrument, and which, when examined, proved to be his 
will; but none could say whether or not that, also, would have 
been destroyed, had not death thus stayed the old man's hand. 
When his lawyer, in due course, came to read it, he, as well as 
many others, was much surprised, but there was no reason for 
supposing it not to be genuine. 

'It's an extraordinary world,' this gentleman observed. 'The 
old fellow must, actually, have loved the girl after all ; and her 
family, somehow, must have bungled matters very strangely. How- 
ever, Miss Pamela Simpson is pretty sure of a husband now, with 
fifteen hundred a year.' 

But did she ever get married? Ah! that is a question to bo, 
hereafter, solved. The adventures of Miss Simpson are, with the 
reader's kind permission, to be resumed at an early date. If her 
history thus far has pleased you, the writer can confidently promise, 
next time, new scenery and dresses, and something very thrilling in 
the way of plot. 

I made a pretty good thing by those letters,' thought Tattiman 
to herself; ' but I sold them to the wrong side after all, and if she's 
only found out the truth, there's good-bye to all my chances of getting 
anything else out of Miss Pamela.' 

'I wonder what the Terrace will say now,' was Mrs. Simpson's 
observation. ' I saw them turning up their noses, and I haven't 
forgotten it.' 

' Supposing he had left the money to me,' thought Penelope. 

'Supposing I had thrown myself away upon that chemist's 
assistant,' thought Pamela ; ' and yet ' 

' Fifteen hundred a year ! ' thought Hannah Maria, whose -wages 
were twelve pounds per annum ; ' I wonder whether anybody ever 
spent as much.' 



BODGERBY. 



125 



'What a world it is,' thought Mr. Simpson, on his way to town 
outside an omnibus. ' I, really, never supposed our Pamela would 
have cut such a figure.' 




THE END. 
