THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 



CHAP. I. 



THE MOKXIXG. 



'l^'HIRTY years- since there stood (it stands 
now) in London Town, an inconsider- 
able slip of a thoroughfare, which was (and 
is still) one of the channels of commu- 
nication between the grand street that Nash, 
Prince of Architects, built for George the 
Fourth, and the grander square erected by 
some other Yitruvius or Palladio . whose name 
I never knew, but who was probably a German 
. for George the First, The great street is 
all stucco, and the great square is all red 
brick: but my inconsiderable slip inclined 
(and inclines still) more to the dinginess of 

VOL. I. B 



2 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the last than to the flnnsiness of the first. 
This street (as it was, and is, and is to be, I 
presume, to the end of genteel Time, I will 
speak of it in the present tense) is not a 
handsome street. It is not a wide street. 
It has shops . . shops both small and mean. 
A grocer, who sells candles, lives at one of its 
corners. He is not a wholesale grocer, not an 
Italian warehouseman; and his groceries are 
of so small a description, as to warrant the 
suspicion that he was, at no very remote 
period of time, a chandler's shoplceeper. 
Nearly opposite to him there is a barber (he 
calls himself a peruke-maker, hut he shaves^ 
and for three halfpence : selling also valen- 
tines in the season, kites, penny canes, and 
cheap periodicals all the year round). There 
was, when I first knew the street, a green- 
grocer's within its precincts. There are yet 
several lodging-houses, a boot-shop, and two 
taverns that flout its gentility. Yet, with all 
these plebeian drawbacks. Little Maddox 
Street, Hanover Square, was, in eighteen 
hundred and thirty, as it is now in eighteen 



THE MORNING. 3 

hundred and sixty . the most fashionable 
street in the greatest city of the world. 

For in that formal, grey-stone, big- wig 
church of St. George's, right over against the 
street I have named. Fashion . etherial, capri- 
cious, beauteous, glittering, happy Fashion . 
has, for upwards of a century, erected a high 
altar for the Solemnisation of Matrimony, 
Since the death of Queen Anne, Fashion has 
elected to be married at St. George's. Fashion 
flutters and faints, and is flounced and furbe- 
lowed, there. It signs its name in the register ; 
its jewelled hand trembling, its peachy cheek 
blushing through the roseate cosmetics pre- 
pared by Mr. Atkinson of Old Bond Street; 
it leaves an odour of millefleurs in the vestry, 
it comes forth, smiling and skirt-trailing, all 
lace and rich silks, and gems, and perfect 
felicity (of course), down these fashion-worn 
vestry-room steps, to where the lightly-hung 
chariots, with their gleaming wheels and foot- 
men in embroidery, are waiting; to where the 
silky-skinned horses curvet in their armoried 
harness, pacing and stamping, and champing 



4 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

their bits proudly, yet not with such a grace 
and dignity as are the special gifts of those 
other long -tailed, long-maned, coal-black 
steeds, which ^fr. Resurgam, the undertaker, 
who lives only next door to the vestry-room, 
in Mill Street, owns, steeds which, in the course 
of time and business, have not unfrequently to 
curvet and stamp at Fashion's door, when the 
shutters are up and the blinds are down . 
vrhen there are to be no more marriages, or 
giving away in marriage, and when Fashion is 
no longer Fashion, but Mortality. 

You know that the vestry-room is but the 
second entrance . the back-door, in fact . of 
this aristocratic Temple ; that in stately 
George Street, with its tall, shining windows, 
and red brick fronts with stone dressings, are 
the portico of the fane, and the broad flight of 
stone steps. I could never justly understand 
why the wedding procession should, so to 
speak, sneak out of the back-door, when, round 
the corner, it could come down to its chariots 
triumphantly, with room for coaches-and-six 
to turn, with ample space for a crowd to ad- 



THE MORNING. 5 

mire . for the charity boys to be ranged in line 
. for the beadle, in his scarlet and lace, to be 
seen to advantage . for the bride to shine forth 
in all her beauty, youth, happiness, wealth . 
for the brilliant following to show their gay 
feathers in all their iridescence . for all the 
spectators to shout, and throw up their caps, 
if so they listed. But Fashion has said that it 
will come down those steps; and Fashion is 
an institution of so Eleusinian and inscrutable 
a nature, that it baffles reason and calmly 
crushes consistency. Its laws, whatever they 
may be, and whoever framed them, are as 
those of the Medes and Persians. It is not for 
us, plebeians as we are, to question them ; and 
they will endure, my brother, long after you 
and I have done with the two first sections of 
the first column of the " Times" Supplement 
(obtaining perchance not so much as a fleeting 
notice in the third compartment of that 
column), and are out of Fashion altogether. 

One Tuesday, in the month of November, 
eighteen hundred and thirty, there was a grand 
wedding at St. George's, Hanover Square, . so 



6 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

grand, indeed, that Mr. Scrattle, the beadle . 
that stern boy-compeller, with the large bright 
waistcoat . had not later than that morning 
expressed his surprise to Mrs. Muffit, landlady 
of the Silver Fish public-house, that the parties 
about to be joined together in holy matrimony 
were not " titled folk ;" for, as Mr. Scrattle 
observed, " the dressins was perdigious, least- 
ways like a Lord (as there is Two follerin, and 
a real Lord the bridegroom's best-man looks), 
and the bridesmaids, which you could measure 
tAvice your harm on their sleeves, lettin' alone 
'ats with ribbing enough to set you up, mum, 
in an 'aberdasher's shop; likewise more car- 
ridges as was seen since the day that Lord 
Viscount Baddington . and a noble gentleman 
he was . married Miss Truepenny, ten years 
ago come Christmas." 

A score of carriages at least . no pill-box- 
looking broughams; no dowdy clarences fit 
only for nursemaids to take their charges an 
airing in; no perched up cabriolets, with 
conceited horses and self-sufficient tigers; no 
compromises between chariots and flvs . but 



THE MORNING. 7 

real roomy, thirtv-years-ago carriages. They 
were mostly bright yellow, or of that 
peculiar shade of green known as " snuffy." 
They were addicted to red wheels ; they had a 
leaning to hammercloths, trimmed with fringe 
like that which my Lord, the chimney sweep, 
wears on his coat on May Day; they ^vere 
bountifully plastered with the heraldic patch- 
work of their noble owners ; they were, to say 
the truth, clumsy, ugly, old-fashioned vehicles, 
but they were comfortable, substantial, and 
luxurious. What has become of them now? 
I know many of them fell into decadence and 
hackney-coach-hood ; but what has become of 
the hackney-coaches themselves ? Where are 
they gone ? Have they been transplanted and 
transported far beyond the seas? Are the 
aristocracy of the Cannibal Islands borne to 
his anthropophagic Majesty's levees in those 
bygone equipages? Are they driven by Cuman- 
chee coachmen in some out of the way South 
American Republic, so happy that it is never 
heard of in Europe? Are they the roosting 
places of fowls in backyards beyond mortal 



b THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hen? Or are the}^ indeed utterly broken up 
and scattered? 

There was no possibility of mistaking the 
bride's carriage . it was so grand. It was a 
chariot with four grays; and the whole equi- 
page may be emphatically characterised as 
"shiny." For metal and glass, and rubbing 
and polishing, and rich, smooth stuffs, had 
been employed with so lavish a hand iu that 
connubial caravan, that you could see yourself 
in the window-panes, the panels, the horses 
coats, the harness, the crimson jackets and 
brilliant tops of the postilions, their rubicund 
faces, white, fluffy, silky hats, shining spurs 
and glistening favours, the very rumble and 
imperial, and axle-boxes, even. The vehicle 
diffused a perfume of affluence . Fashionable 
afiiuence, mind . that floated through Maddox 
Street, and was wafted up Mill Street, across 
Conduit Street, and so into Savile Row, where 
it stole into faded consulting rooms of pippin- 
faced old sages of the Fashionable faculty, and 
made those wise old ravens chuckle even as 
they coughed, thinking that Fashion, being 



THE MOKXING. V 

married, would have children that would have 
chicken-pox and croup, and other ailments, 
from which even infant Fashion is not exempt. 
What does it matter if this effulgent equipage 
came indeed from a job-master's, and had its 
ordinary habitation in a livery stable instead of 
the coach-house of a grand seigneur^ and had in 
its time conveyed plebeian couples . the sons 
and daughters of enriched Piccadilly trades- 
men, perhaps, from humbler temples of Hymen ? 
The banquet pro\'ided by Mr. Gunter is as 
succulent as the one dressed for us by our own 
professed cook. The stock of wine sent in 
half an hour ago by Messrs. Fortnum and 
Mason is as racy and enlivening as though it 
had lain for years in the dusty bins of our own 
cellar. Borrowed plate shines as brightly as 
our own silver, which we have not had time 
to send for from the bankers' ; Mrs. Buck of 
Covent Garden will accommodate us with bou- 
quets as bright and sweet-smelling as those 
grown in our own conservatories at Ealing or 
Eoehampton. People job a good many things 
now-a-days besides horses. Borrowed plumes 



iO THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

are much worn this month . thoucfh I have 
not seen that announcement as yet in the 
Follet or the Journal des Modes ; and I dont 
think we are a thousand miles distant from a 
favoured country, where a man may job titles 
and decorations that shall stand him in as good 
stead as the coronet of a Howard or the riband 
of the Garter. 

Lord Viscount Baddington's carriage-horses 
were rubbing their nose against the rumble of the 
bride'schariot, sympathising doubtless with their 
noble owner, who was at that very moment of 
time engaged in saluting the bride in the vestry. 
His Lordship's carriage was sympathetic too. 
It had a gouty look : his Lordship was afflicted 
with podagra. It was very yellow : his Lord- 
ship's complexion was that of an over-ripe shad- 
dock. It shook a good deal : so did his Lordship. 
It was very soft and luxurious, very warm and 
lazy -looking, very lofty and quite empty; all 
of which the world (which I do not believe) 
said were characteristics of his Lordship. 

There was the carriage of the bride's papa 
and mamma, cosy and unpretentious, but 



THE MORNING. 11 

wealthy-looking . 1 quite Croesus-like in yel- 
lowness. There was the private carriage of 
Sir William Guy, Baronet, of Oldtress ^lanor, 
in the County of Kent, and Member of Par- 
liament for the borough of May ford, which 
imposing coach (plum-coloured, turned up with 
scarlet) was not on the present occasion (and 
for certain reasons) in the occupancy of its 
proprietor, but had brought to this most 
Fashionable wedding, Compton Guy, Esq., the 
Baronet's only brother, and a cornet in His 
Majesty's Horse Guards Blue. There was old 
Lady Tottringham's carriage, with the well- 
kno^vii pair of vicious black horses which fought 
with and bit each other as they trotted; the 
carriage was at every wedding . nobody exactly 
knew why; and there were half-a-dozen more 
carriao:es and chariots belonfrino^ to nameless 
notabilities . the "supers" of fashion, they may 
be called, whose principal occupation, it would 
seem, is to be rich, and drive about leaving 
cards, and fill up the backgrounds at births, 
and deaths, and marriages, whenever Fashion 
is born, or is wedded, or buried. 



12 THE BADDIAGTON PEERAGE. 

It had apparently snowed white favours 
during the night, so plentifully were those 
tokens of bridal felicity displayed on hats and 
jackets, in button-holes and horses' ears. 
Young girls in the crowd looked with a smil- 
ing roguish envy on those satin rosettes, think- 
ing, perhaps, how many cap-ribbons had been 
spoiled for the decoration of grooms, and por- 
ters, and lacqueys; thinking, perchance, how 
agreeable it would be to have a display of 
similar white favours at one's own wedding, 
instead of sitting up half the night in the mil- 
liner's stifling workroom, making them. For 
1 have heard my grandmother say, that a wise 
cruel Ruler, once, addressing his subjects from 
his throne, told them that the march of civilis- 
ation was like that of an army, and could not 
be accomplished without leaving some victims 
in its wake; and my grandmother, good soul, 
had heard from her grandmamma, I think, 
that Fashion marched somewhat like an army 
too; and would sometimes, in its advance to- 
wards Ineffable Perfection and Belofravian 
Beatitude, leave behind it pale cheeks, and 



THE MORNING. 13 

swollen eyes, and aching hearts, with some 
poverty, and considerable anguish, and a little 
Death. 

The elements had been favourable to Fashion 
on this joyful occasion, and had politely pro- 
vided a fine day with as cheerful a promptitude 
as the pastrycooks had provided the wedding 
breakfast, as the job-master had sent the four 
grays and the crimson- vested postilions, or as 
the Rector of St. Georg^e's had laid on an extra 
curate to assist him in his arduous labour of 
reading the marriage service. There was a 
November crimson fire-ball in the heavens like 
an artificial firework that Fashion could order 
and pay for. The fog had gone out of town 
for the day, to look up a friend in Essex ( Wil- 
liam-of-the-AVisp, Esq., the Marshes, near 
Plaistow), and the sky was of that reluctantly 
cerulean tint that resembles a rather vellow 
muslin window curtain through which the sun 
is shining. But though passably fine overhead, 
there was underfoot as rich a stratum of good, 
thick, clinging mud as any covetous crossing 
sweeper Avould desire to see and make a harvest 



14 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

by. There had been several political meetings 
of some low people called Radicals during the 
past week . fellows who wanted to be Repre- 
sented, or something of that sort, and were 
very troublesome; and the elements, again 
acting with Fashionable high-toryism,had come 
down upon the rogues with rain, and had so 
drenched them, that they had remained, perforce, 
in their squalid homes, and the Prime Minister's 
windows had remained unbroken from Satur- 
day to Monday. Hence the mud in Little 
Maddox Street; and hence the great agony 
and tribulation undergone by sundry exqui- 
sites, inappreciably more fashionable than any 
of the titled persons I have yet mentioned, 
more richly dressed, comelier in feature, taller 
in figure, loftier in demeanour, haughtier in 
conversation; but who, through the gross in- 
justice, envy and partiality of Society, are 
never mentioned in the " Court Guide," or the 
'' Morning Post," or the *' Royal Red Book." 
I mean those honest gentlemen, who, for a 
certain yearly stipend, consent to put flour on 
their heads, and coals on the fire, and victuals 



THE MORNING. 15 

on the table; to be called " John" when their 
name may be Peter; to wear silk stockings and 
j^arti-coloured clothes ; to walk before lap-dogs, 
and behind old ladies; to be, what should pro- 
perly and courteously be termed retainers, 
henchmen, adherents, servitors, attendants, 
vassals if you will, but what irreverent men 
persist in calling flunkies. 

There stood in the mud . the vile ple- 
beian mud . an honest British man of this 
category, and he shall stand, too, as a 
model for all his brethren . the bride's 
father's sergeant-footman, none else. Six feet 
in height; a shapely man, broad shoulders, 
beef-asserting chest, lusty calves clad in silk, 
like pink balustrades supporting an architrave 
of plush. Large, glossy, protruding whiskers, 
wino;s to the calm edifice of his face . whiskers 
that an ambitious little foot-page might be 
tempted to lay hold of, that he might pull 
himself up to footmanhood. A front . not 
exactly " like Jove to threaten or command," 
but a good solid head for all that, with plenty 
of front and plenty of back, and bushels of 



16 THE BADDIXGTOK PEERAGE. 

powder. White teeth, white gloves, white 
neckcloth, white favours, a delicate bloom on 
each cheek, a pensive but complacent smile, 
(the mud lay heavy on his soul, but the sense 
of duty to the Fair made him hold up), a grace- 
ful aiguillette, and the largest cocked-hat that 
ever was seen since the lamented demise of his 
late Eoyal Highness the Duke of York. Such 
was the outward semblance of John, whose 
name might have been Peter, as he stood in 
his varnished, silver buckled shoes, gracefully 
reclining on his gold-tipped bamboo, and wait- 
ing for his masters and mistresses to come out 
of church. He had the mien and bearing of a 
Prince; yet who would have thought that this 
prince was not proud, but was in secret affable, 
and had, only five minutes since, condescended 
to cross the road with Tummas, his companion, 
and to partake at that thirsty " Silver Fish" of 
Geneva and cloves? 

'^ Who's funeral is this, footman?" 
Now I put it to you if you were so dressed, 
so appointed, so turned out . for that is the 
word . from a band-box of splendour; and if 



THE MORXING. 17 

you had the same '' high disdain and sense of 
merit" as had this magnificent creature : how 
would you like to be addressed as " Footman," 
and to be asked whose funeral it was on the 
occasion of the most fashionable wedding that 
had occurred for ten years ? 

More than this, how would you like to be so 
spoken to by a shameful thing, who had the^ 
form and garments of a woman, the face, 
and voice, and gestures of no sex, but of a 
phantom; whose horrible, swolleUj reeling, 
ragged presence was a blot upon the Sun, and 
a shame to the day, and a scandal to the occa- 
sion ; who was young in years by her black 
hair, and a hundred years old by her Death- 
discs of eyes; who looked as if she had risen 
suddenly from the mud, and was its sister ? 

I am glad that John-Peter did not fell her 
to the earth with his golden-tipped bamboo. 
He would have been justified, of course, his 
feelings were so dreadfully outraged ; but he 
was a chivalrous man, devoted to the sex, and 
he spoke her fair. 

" It aint a funeral," he responded un- 

VOL. I. c 



18 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

affectedly; " it's a marriage. Can't you see, 
stupid?" 

'' Curse you," the woman resumed quite 
rudely; "you know what I mean. Whose 
marriage is it, fool?" 

Again the cheeks of the insulted John 
Thomas glowed with virtuous resentment; 
again the bamboo quivered for a moment in 
his hand, but again he withheld himself. 

"Gaw'long," he said, with great forbearance. 

" If you don't give me an answer, you jack- 
anapes," the woman exclaimed, as calmly as 
though she had been addressing an Equal, 
though every muscle in her face was trembling 
with suppressed passion^ " I'll heave this mud 
over you." 

She stooped as she spoke, and actually 
plunged her scooped hands into the kennel. 
The suddenness, and desperation, and abnega- 
tion of womanliood in the action . her furious 
face, her wild appearance, that dreadful dress, 
which was not that of a peasant, nor that of a 
beggar, nor that of a wanton, but a mixture of 
alltiiree: all these things, together with her 



THE MORNING. 19 

threat, so discomposed John-Peter, that he 
knew not for the nonce what to reply. He 
looked round helplessly for Mr. Scrattle, the 
beadle; but that official was in the church. 
There was a coach-door between him and his 
brethren . there was no new policeman at 
his elbow, and he was positively constrained 
to give his questioner an answer. 

" It's Mr. Falcon's eldest daughter, which is 
married to Sir William Guy, Barrinet," he ex- 
plained, " which is Mr. Falcon, of Grosvenor 
Square, and is Lord Wycount Baddington's 
nevay; and now you know all about it, and . 
and" ; but here he broke down in his oratory, 
and recommending the woman to "gaw'long," 
so concluded. 

She needed no second bidding. She had 
turned, and taken her wretched body away, 
before the footman had closed his mouth. Fie, 
making a feint of driving her oif by a gentle 
movement of the bamboo stick, was pleased 
to find her gone ; and felt not even hurt when 
an angry costermonger and a street-boy, who 
stood upon his dignity, asked him derisively 



20 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" vere he vos a-drivin to?" adding to the in- 
quiry the insulting epithet of "welvet shanks." 
Xor did he show much indignation when the 
depraved crowd, stirred up by the costermon- 
ger's sarcasm, saluted him and Tummas, his 
companion, and Chawles, his fellow, and 'Enry, 
his mate in servitude, with ironical cheers of 
" Bravo, knobsticks !" and recommendations to 
look at the backs of their heads, because mis- 
chievous boys had spilt bags of flour over 
them. For to say the truth, the woman had 
been too much for John-Peter's nervous 
system ; he trembled, he winked, his whiskers 
became flaccid with agitation, and he did 
not recover his equilibrium till the appear- 
ance of Mr. Scrattle at the top of the vestry- 
room steps, in a high state of inflammation of 
face and Avaist-coat, announced to all concerned 
that the wedding party was about to descend. 
The boys in the crowd began to cheer lustily 
as the people who had had to do with Hymen 
appeared on the threshold of a New Life. 
Aime, what a threshold ! O'lbb, what a life ! 
There are two gates to Saint George's, one of 



THE M0RX1^'G. 21 

Ivory and one of Horn; and where is that 
which is of Ivory but in Little Maddox Street ? 
And lo, through the Ivory teeth of that door 
come the couple who have been joined together 
in holy matrimony, into a fantastic dreamy 
reo^ion where there is nothino^ certain . nothinn: 
real. She, whom the parson asks at the com- 
munion-rails if she will have yonder man in 
the dress-coat to be her wedded husband, takes, 
unconsciously, a lottery ticket from the hands 
of the mumbling clerk when she falters forth 
''yes;'* and the Three Fates cower at the 
bottom of the vestry-room steps, and give her, 
as she passes the Threshold of Ivory, a prize 
or a blank . oft-times the latter; a Prize that 
shaU make her fruitful, and loved, and 
honoured, and a crown to her husband; a 
Blank, that shall tell her she is voked to a 
ruffian or a sot, whom she has taken for life, 
for poorer and poorer, for worse and worse, in 
health, sickness, and in soul-sorrow, for him 
to outrage and oppress, till merciful Death do 
them part. 

But there was no just cause or impediment 



22 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

(there never is in fashionable marriages), why 
these two parties should not come together. 
So down they came together accordingly, in 
this order of procession : . 

Mr. Scrattle, Beadle^ agitated, but equal to 
the emergency; telegraphing all the way to 
John who might have been Peter, who tele- 
graphed to Tummas; so he to Chawles, 'Enry 
on the coach-box in outlying Mill Street not 
being forgotten; and Jems (Lady Tottring- 
ham's particular, grown on her Ladyship's 
estate), being summoned by instantaneous 
(juvenile and penny-feed) messengers from 
Mrs. Muffit's hostelry, telegraphs followed by 
a simultaneous and wide-spreading adjust- 
ment of cocked-hats, couching of gold-headed 
batons, and opening of carriage doors with a 
clang. 

Next : .the Bride and Bridegroom. Here 
is something official, which, like a flourish of 
trumpets, will serve to introduce two j>er- 
sonages so important. Read this from the 
Times newspaper, of the . th November, 
eio'hteeen hundred and thirty. 



THE MORNING. 23 



a 



Marriages. . At. St. George's, Hanover 
*' Square, by the Rev. Lawrence Grylls, M.A., 
'' assisted by the Rev. Caseous Lacteal, B.A., 
'' Sir William Katesby Rookwood Fox Guy, 
" son and heir of the late Sir Ambrose Percy 
" Powderham Guy, of Oldtress Manor, near 
" Mayford, Kent, Bart., to Caroline Amy, 
'' eldest daughter of Gervase Falcon, Esq., 
" of his Majesty's Carpet-bag, and Hat-box 
" office, and of Grosvenor Square." 



I flatter myself that by the judicious em- 
ployment of those editorial bosom-friends, 
the sharp-cutting scissors, I have avoided a 
very great difficulty, and almost imperative 
necessity for digression, in explaining to you 
'' who was who " (to employ an ungram- 
matical but popular idiotism) in eighteen 
hundred and thirty. 

A hat, then thought the acme of taste, 
elegance and beauty, but which, now-a-days, 
would be considered as hideous, absurd, and 
unbecoming, as I fervently trust blue uglies 
and crinoline petticoats will be thought ten 
years hence . a satin cart-wheel, about which 
had been entangled some ribbon harness; a 



24 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

white gros-de-Naples pelisse (yes, ladies and 
gentlemen, a pelisse); sleeves like balloons, 
like Titanic legs of mutton, like Brobdignag 
pears, like Polyphemus pegtops painted white ; 
a lace collar something like an Elizabethan 
ruff, something like Herodias's charger, with 
. not the Baptist's head in it . but the 
pretty, blushing, happy face of Caroline 
Amy the Bride; skirts of extreme brevity, 
pink silk stockings, wdth open work on the 
instep; white satin shoes, with strings crossed 
over the foot ; and . shall it be told in Gath ? 
. it shall, for this is a faithful chronicle . some 
curious Yandyking and frilling manifest be- 
tween the end of the skirts and the beginning 
of the ancle, which would have delighted the 
aesthetic eyes of Mrs. Amelia Bloomer, who 
(for gallantry's sake let me hasten to remark) 
could not, by any possibility, have passed 
the verge of infancy thirty years ago. Is 
not this the fact, you, gentlemen who were 
married in eighteen hundred and thirty? 
Didn't you wed a young lady in a coach- 
wheel hat, leg-of-mutton sleeves, short skirts. 



THE MORNING. 25 

and Vandvked trousers ? Were you not 
married yourselves in a hat with a turned-up 
brim, a chocolate coat with the collar up to 
your ears, Cossack pantaloons, peaked boots, 
and three under-waistcoats ? Go, tell vour 
children this, and they in their turn shall 
tell their grandchildren that they married a 
young lady in a hoop of iron, horse-hair, and 
gutta-percha, with a cushion on the top of 
her head, and her hair scragged back like 
unto a ^Mandarin's wife of Shanghai; being 
themselves arrayed in a costume, in which 
the semblance of the tavern waiter struo-^les 
for mastery with the undertaker out for a 
holiday. This was the Bride ; eighteen sum- 
mers, bright eyes, smiles, a little foot, and . 
if you desire a closer portraiture, go read 
Sir John Sucklino-'s ballad on a weddino:. 

The chocolate coat, underwaistcoats, and 
Cossack pantaloons hinted at, and to fill this 
equipment a long, strange, bony body; a 
longer, stranger, bonier, face; long hands; 
long feet; a curious, shambling, awkward 
gait ; sleepy, yet restless, gray eyes ; an ex- 



26 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

pression of mouth, half amountino^ to a yawn, 
and half to a sneer; hair of no particular 
colour, but with a lingering suspicion of sandi- 
ness . hair that would obstinately persist in 
lying the contrary way to that in which it 
was brushed', and with an inequality in its 
length and thickness that made you involun- 
tarily surmise that its owaier had gone to 
bed without a nightcap in a room troubled 
with rats, and had had a portion of his chevelure 
bitten off by those voracious animals during 
the nio;ht. This was the Bride2:room. 

A stout, well-to-do, crimson-faced gentle- 
man, in the prime of life ; his stiff, black hair 
a little shot with gray; white waistcoat and 
white neckcloth, both capacious; diamond 
stud buttons; heavy gold chain, seals and 
key. This was the Bride's Father, Gervase 
Falcon, Esq., of his Majesty's Carpet-bag and 
Hat-box Office . a sinecure, value two thou- 
sand five hundred pounds per annum. 

A larger pelisse than any present, but of 
discreet gray silk; a larger hat and feathers, 
larger sleeves, longer ribbons; a larger and 



THE MORXIXG. 1'7 

more comfortable person, and lavender kid 
boots. Make way, you beadle, and scatter 
the boys, for this is the Bride's Mamma. 

A fur collar, fringino^ a snuff-coloured 
frock, brave in braiding; John-Peter, the 
footman's legs, but cased in black silk stock- 
ings; small, delicate, white hands, covered 
with signet and antique gems and brilliant 
rings, and disdaining the white kid gloves 
which were carried, as a matter of form, 
crumpled up in one palm ; a white head, and 
a purple face, with twinkling gray eyes and 
a flexible mouth ; large ears (even lords must 
have ears; and Midas, though more than a 
lord . for he was a king . had ears) ; a large 
shirt-collar; a very large hat with a broad 
brim; a double gold-rimmed eyeglass; the 
daintiest of varnished pumps; a gold-headed 
stick (John- Peter's baton's noble relative) ; 
a great deal of feebleness, and shaking, and 
tottering; but 0! such true nobility of move- 
ment, action, gesture! Who could be the 
possessor of all these things but Lord Viscount 
Baddington, mincing along with the youngest 



28 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and prettiest of the bridesmaids on his 
arm ? 

But why this noble lord at the wedding of 
a mere commoner? Why this condescension 
on the part of his Lordship in attending 
this wedding? Why so grand a wedding at 
all? 

So much. If you had ever seen the edition 
of the peerage published in the year of grace 
eighteen hundred and thirty, you Avould have 
read therein that the Christian and family 
names of Lord Yiscount Baddington in the 
Peerage of Ireland were Charles Rook Dela- 
hawk Falcon; and if you had known any- 
thing of fashionable genealogy, you would 
have been cognisant of the facts that his 
Lordship's only and younger brother, the 
Honorable Hew Hernshaw Falcon, a captain' 
in his Majesty's land forces, was slain in 
action in Spain in eighteen hundred and 
ten ; that it was through the noble Viscount's 
influence that the deceased Captain's son and 
heir (to nothing), Gervase Falcon, Esq., 
obtained that responsible position in the 



THE MORNING. 29 

Carpet-bag and Hat- box Office, whose duties 
he discharged with such admirable efficiency, 
and the salary attached to Avhich he drew 
with such praiseworthy regularity. What, 
then, so natural as for his Lordship to attend 
his grand-niece's wedding? 

Behind this Noble Peer came another 
couple through the Ivory gate. Only Corapton 
Guy, of the Blues, as tall as his brother, but 
not awkward, not grotesque, . only very list- 
less, tired, and washed-out in appearance, 
and in a state of unmistakeable despair and 
terror at being obliged to give his arm to 
that immense old Lady Tottringham, who 
always reminded you of a trifle . not that 
she was of delicate dimensions, but that she 
irresistibly suggested a piled-up hecatomb of 
quivering jelly, cream sweetmeats, macaroons, 
and tipsy-cake. Waggish children of Fashion 
used to call her the bride-cake, so loaded 
was she with ornaments, so rich was she 
without and within. 

Who next in the wedding train? Who 
next ? I hope I shall not be accused of un- 



30 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

due familiarity with regard to Fashion, if I 
sum the rest of the attendants up as the 
Right Honourable Tag, the Honourable Rag, 
and the Very Reverend Bobtail. But all 
bravely dressed . all glittering, and shining, 
and gleaming in the red sun, which, with an 
extra stretch of courtesy to Fashion, burst 
out again in augmented splendour, as the pro- 
cession made its descent. 

Then the bells rang out, and the boys 
cheered again; the noble company entered 
their chariots of state, the stalwart footmen 
jumped up behind. Away went bride and 
bridegroom, with their four grays and crim- 
son-vested postilions ; away went that portly 
papa, and portlier mamma of the bride, in 
their carriage; away went Lord Viscount 
Baddington and Compton Guy, and all the 
pretty bridesmaids and aristocratic Tags, and 
Rags, and Bobtails, . like the baseless fabric 
of a story-teller's vision, leaving not a wreck 
in Little ]\Iaddox Street behind. 

Yet This was not a dream, nay, nor the 
shadow of a vain imagining, but a Truth: 



THE MORNING. 31 

that as the carriage of the bride's father 
drove away, there suddenly stept out from 
the cheering-, admiring crowd, a dreadful, 
haggard, ragged Woman, who did not cheer, 
and did not admire, and did not wave her 
handkerchief, but with a hell-glance in her 
evil face, flung through the open carriage- 
window something like a letter, but crushed 
and crumpled up into a ball. It fell on 
Gervase Falcon's lap, and the Woman who 
threw it was o:one asfain in an instant, as in 
the Footman's time before. 

"Wot is he a doin' of?" asked of Mr. 
Scrattle, one of the then (very new) police- 
men, who, prospectively true to the future 
traditions of his order, had sauntered up when 
there was no longer the slightest occasion for 
his services. 

" He's a readin' of a pepper " Mr. Scrattle 
rejoined; " and, bless my 'art alive, 'ow pale 
he looks!" 



32 



A 



CHAP. 11. 

.'watchman . WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 

PRECISELY analogous remark to that 
uttered by the Beadle, though couched 
in language more refined, broke from the 
lips of Mrs. Gervase Falcon, as, when the 
happy wedding-party drove away from Saint 
George's, Hanover Square, the missive, which 
might have been a missile, skimmed through 
the window, and fell on her husband's lap. 

'^ Good gracious ! how pale you are, my 
dear ! " This was what Mrs. Gervase Falcon 
exclaimed. I think a similar exclamation 
mit>-ht be condoned even in you^ stoic of 
stoics . to whom the sight, maybe, of your 
grandmother's ghost would cause no greater 



"watchman . WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 33 

emotion than an oscillation of the eyelid, if 
you were to see the face of a person, five 
seconds before rubicund with health and 
apparent happiness, suddenly assume the hue 
of modellers' clay, and then a tinge more 
awfully resembling the Clay into which God 
resolves this poor potsherd when the stream 
is dried up on which the Earthen and the 
Brazen float, and they come into collision and 
are shattered for ever. . 

Not much less pale than the face opposite 
were the hands which, shaking as with the 
palsy, unrolled that paper ball ; and not much 
less fiery than a furnace were the eyes which 
scorched up and sucked in the writing on 
the crumpled, ragged scrap. One hand closed 
on the letter, summons, death-warrant, ballad 
. whatever it may have been . closed on it 
rolled up into a ball again ; the other sought 
a certain place on the buff waistcoat, perhaps 
to feel the links of the heavy gold chain, 
perhaps to feel the pulsations of the heavier 
human heart beneath. 

" My dear," the happy bride's Papa rejoined 

VOL. I. D 



34 THK BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

to the enquiry of his spouse, " My dear, I feel 

. I felt . that is, I don't feel as if . My 

God^ is there anybody there f " 

"Anybody there? Mr. Falcon . my dear 
Gervase. Shall I stop the carriage? Are you 
ill?" 

" Anybody there . anybody where ? " In 
the squabs of the carriage . he looked at thera. 
In his hat . he looked at it. Under the 
geat . he looked there. In the street . the 
sky . the sun that had gone into the gray 
clouds . the moon that had not risen from 
them yet ; for Mr. Falcon had thrust his head, 
first out of one window, next out of the 
other, searching the whole prospect with those 
eager eyes. 

Drawing in his head at last, and wiping 
his face, not so pale now, but very clammy, 
disordered, and scared, he began to laugh in 
a hard, dry manner. 

" It's nothing, my dear Caroline, nothing," 
he said, with^ Heavens and Earth! such a 
something in every denial. "Nothing . a 
begging letter. Yes; that's it. A begging 



"watchman WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 35 

letter. Some vagabond has been writing me a 
begging letter. What a curious occasion to 
choose! Ha! ha! Our dear girl's wedding- 
day, and the church door! The church door, 
too!" 

" What a cur'ous place, and what a cur'ous 
party!" John-Peter, on the knifeboard behind, 
with his gold-tipped stick at an angle of forty- 
five deo^rees with the carria^re roof, was at that 
very instant of time thinking . thinking as at 
this present instant you may be thinking of 
persons thousands of miles away, or as 
thousands may be thinking about you^ at your 
elbow, or at the farthest ends of the earth; 
seemino: enemies with thouo^hts of love, seemins: 
dear friends with thoughts of hatred, but for 
them and for you never to know their truth or 
falsity, or the thoughts themselves, till the End 
is here and the Soul-Silences become eternally 
eloquent. 

. As Gervase Falcon's carriage rolled swiftly 
Grosvenor-squarewards, it may be that its 
owner dreamed a dream ; the ragged scrap of 
paper still clutched in his hand. He dreamed . 



36 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

perchance, that he was at his daughter's wedding 
again, and that he saw the pretty bride blushing, 
the long bridegroom nervously twisting his 
fingers, the gay foUomng rustling their robes 
of silk, and fluttering their garnitures of gauze 
and lace. There was the Reverend Grylls, 
and there the Eeverend Lacteal, Eector and 
Curate, standing within the communion-rails ; 
there was the goodly Church-and- State-pre- 
sence of St. George's, Hanover Square, sugges- 
tive of the Eoyal Arms, the Thirty-nine 
Articles, plenty of plum-cake, red port wine 
and the " John Bull" newspaper. And it fell 
out that dream.ing the dream, Gervase Falcon 
dreamed that he was dreaming another. He 
was still at a wedding; but it was in a little 
old, grey, mossy, country church. There was 
but one clergyman, a very nervous young 
country parson, evidently new to his business, 
who began by opening the Prayer-book at the 
Gunpowder Plot instead of the Marriage 
Service, and stammered wofully, and asked the 
Bride (who did not wear a hat and feathers, 
and w^as not . so curious are dreams . in the 



"watchman WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 37 

least like Caroline Amy, now Lady Guy) ab- 
surd questions : saying to her, " SARAH, wilt 
thou have this woman to be thy wedded 
husband?" and the like; then blushing, and 
trying back, and being brought to great con- 
fusion. Who's wedding was this? Caroline 
Amy's ! But Lord Baddington gave that Bride 
away, and here was a Bride-giver in the person 
of a broad-faced, bald-headed fellow, whose 
waistcoat bore unmistakeable marks of an 
apron-string, and wlio might have been the 
landlord of the village inn, summoned to per- 
form his duties m haste. Who was the Bride- 
groom, too? Not Sir William Guy, Baronet, 
for this espouser was neither tall, nor nervous, 
nor awkward. Was the church itself 
St. George's, or the venerable parish church 
of some quiet village? . Long Mallow, Mal- 
lows Cray, Saint-Mallow-in-the-Marshes, for 
instance. But the parties were married in a 
dream. They swore to love and cherish, to 
honour and obey, in a dream. They were 
joined together . in a dream . by Heaven; and 
no man was to put them asunder. Never to 



38 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

be put asunder, in a dream or in vital reality. 
Never to be put asunder? . But does not 
Novalis say " that when we dream that we are 
dreaming, we are near waking?" . and thus, 
as Gervase Falcon dreamed that he was 
dreaming of a wedding in a village church. a 
wedding at which the costumes of bride and 
bridegroom far more resembled those of 
eighteen hundred and ten, than of eighteen 
hundred and thirty, he woke to iind himself 
at the door of his own mansion in Grosvenor 
Square, with the ragged scrap of paper still 
clutched in his hand. 

So now all this goodly company hied into 
the dining-room, whose mahogany tables 
groaned (they always groan) beneath the 
weio-ht of all the delicacies of the season. Are 
there any seasons, I wonder, in the year with- 
out delicacies? Not for Fashion, surely. In 
the night season, when deep sleep falleth upon 
men, Fashion can have its "delicacies" in 
eiderdown quilts, spring beds, and tables laid 
out en cas de nuit. In that darkest, stillest of 
all seasons . the Winter Season of Life . the 



"watchman WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 39 

last day of the last year, to which no new year 
is to succeed . there are delicacies for Fashion, 
even then. For are not " rich silk hat-bands" 
delicacies ? . and hatchments, and " crimson 
velvet with cherub handles and gilt nails," and 
the " usual achievements ?" 

The delicacies, however, ^fhich Gunter the 
renowned furnished forth for the marriage 
table on the present occasion, were by no 
means funeral baked meats. Xeed I describe 
the weddinsr breakfast? I lono: to do so. I 
dearly wish it were your bridal-feast . Idol of 
my soul with the chesnut locks . I had to de- 
scribe. As the scene cannot here be narrated, 
let it be imagined; which, according to the 
Pandects of penny-a dining, is ''better," under 
all circumstances of "scenes." 

'. For I am sure," Lord Baddington went 

on to say, standing up at the table, quite 
beautifully, on those polished silken legs, and 
holding a champagne glass in his trembling 
white fingers, "for I am sure. Ladies and Gen- 
tlemen, there is not one person present on this 
auspicious, this mirthful, I may say this de- 



40 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

lightful occasion," (''Hear!" from Compton 
Guy, and a sigh from a Bridesmaid who, per- 
fectly agreeing with the poet, that ^"Tis 
distance lends enchantment to the view," 
thought the near prospect of thirty years of 
age and celibacy anything but enchanting), 
" who will not frc^n the bottom of his or her 
heart" (tears from the younger sisters of the 
bride) "respond heartily . nay. enthusiasti- 
cally" ("Good!" from the honourable Tag and 
Co.; " Very Good!" from Compton Guy) "to 
the toast I am about to propose. . The health 
of the Bride." All the honours. Seventeen 
times seven. One cheer more. Six cheers 
more. Any numbers of cheers more. They 
cheered in Ens^land in eio;hteen hundred and 
thirty. They were a vulgar race. Old Lady 
Tottringham not only drank the toast, but ate 
it in lobster salad. Compton Guy broke one 
glass and overturned another. Confusion ! 

A speech from the Bridegroom, consisting 
mainly of monosyllables, blushes and " hems." 
Tremendous cheering. Many more speeches, 
many more cheers, many more healths pro- 



*' WATCHMAN . WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 41 

posed and drunk with all the honours. The 
ladies' eyes began to sparkle as the bubbles of 
Ruinart's and Moet's delicious nectarine poison 
. they did not drink Cliquot then . scintillated 
in the slender glasses. The last speeches were 
somewhat rambling, not to say husky, as re- 
gards utterance . not to say (oh ! not for the 
world to hint at) somewhat incoherently cham- 
pagny. Old Lady Tottringham told Compton 
Guy, flatly to his face, that he was tipsy; and, 
said the jolly old lady, that it reminded her of 
her young days, when Mr. Fox took wine with 
Mr. Sheridan. But it was a brave wedding, 
any way. Was there ever a braver one before 
or since ? 

The proud and happy father of the bride, 
after that grand speech of his, which was so 
much applauded, and which caused him to 
shed tears . of pride and happiness no doubt 
. was standing near the dining-room door, 
holding both his daughter's hands in his : She, 
poor little bird, blushing and sobbing, nestling 
on his breast ; He looking in her face with in- 
expressible tenderness and fondness. Should 



42 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

it not be so, all good people, when the first- 
born, the dear daughter of the house, goes 
forth to new ties, new obligations, and new 
life ? The Bridegroom had spoken some manly, 
sensible words to Mrs. Falcon, though he was 
but an awkward, bony fellow of a baronet, 
who stammered when he spoke. Mrs. Falcon 
was certain, she said, that William would do 
his duty to Caroline. The younger sisters, 
Lucy Falcon of the raven tresses, and Sarah 
(her father had insisted that his youngest 
dauo^hter should be christened Sarah . a name 
which Mrs. Falcon objected to as horribly 
ungenteel, and only admitted, under protest, 
as ''Sara") . Sarah of the clustering ringlets 
clung about Caroline-Amy, and cried, and 
laughed, as girls in such joy-sorrows will do. 
The little family group were somewhat iso- 
lated. Lord Baddington . excellent noble- 
man . left them to the indulgence of their 
natural emotions^ and devoted himself to the 
consolation of a pretty bridesmaid, in peach- 
coloured satin, with a lace scarf in jwint 
d'Alenqon over it; and who, having nothing 



"watchman WHAT OF THE NIGHT?" 43 

particular to cry about, was weeping in a most 
heart-rending manner. Compton Guy had 
gone to the window, and was flattening his 
military nose against the panes, looking at the 
Bride's travelling chariot, with the four grays, 
and the postilions vested in pink, with the 
little ragamuffins, the policemen, the people 
with nothing to do, the nurserymaids, and the 
afternoons' milk waiting to see the Bride and 
Bridegroom come out. Tag and Co. had gone 
to champagne again, whispering witticisms; 
and old Lady Tottringham, after having eaten 
and drunk a good deal more than was good for 
her, had gone to sleep, a glass of maraschino 
beneath her good old nose. 

" Libiamo ne' lieti calici /" Fill up the cup 
once more. A health to their life-long happi- 
ness! A fairy's silver shoe to throw after 
William and Caroline. The Noble Viscount 
suggested to the pretty bridesmaid, who, 
having nothing to cry about, was crying, that 
one of her pink satin shoes would be the 
very thing to throw. The pretty bridesmaid 
blushed. Then they opened the dining-room 



44 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

door; and John-Peter, and Tummas, and 
'Enry and Chawles not being omitted, threw 
wide open the great lions'-head knockered por- 
tals, that gave egress to Grosvenor Square. 

Hark! 

It was no more a Dream, but as true as 
Death, that, just at this moment a Scream . 
long, loud, piercing, horrible to hear^ . rang 
through the entrance-hall, echoing and re- 
echoing from basement; to garret of the whole 
grand house. There was a start and a cry of 
amazement from the gay company, an unlock- 
ing of clasped hands, a suspension of whispers. 
Smiles dropped from lips like withered leaves, 
and fond looks froze in the eyes of women. 
Then the proud and happy father, with an 
awful prescience in his face, sprang through 
the open doorway. 



45 



CHAP. III. 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 



TT needed no second summons beyond that 
Trumpet-Scream to bring the guests pell- 
mell into the hall, Gervase Falcon first and 
foremost. There he . there they . found fight- 
incr. howlino:, and wrestlino^ with the footmen 
on the oil-cloth of the hall, a ragged, shameful 
woman . possibly, to credit one's ears, mad ; 
apparently, to credit one's eyes, in an epileptic 
fit; certainly, to credit one's olfactory organs, 
drunk. 

Amid the noise and confusion, and hurrying 
to and fro of feet, the shrieking of the woman- 
kind, and the clamour of men's tongues, things 
naturally resulting from so untoward, unfore- 



46 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

seen, and unseemly an event as the falling into 
a fit on an oil-cloth, of a drunken mad-woman 
at the threshold of a wedding feast, those whose 
attention had not been exclusively occupied by 
the contemplation of the wretched cause of 
the disturbance, might have noticed that the 
face of Gervase Falcon had assumed that same 
ashy corpse-like hue that overspread his coun- 
tenance when the miserable woman threw the 
crumpled paper in at his carriage-window at 
the church-door. He looked, indeed, so 
ghastly, and shook so in every limb, and 
muscle, and nerve, that the contingency of his, 
too, falling in a fit on the floor of his hall 
appeared by no means improbable of occurrence. 
He mastered himself, however, by some strong 
internal effort ; and, thrusting aside the staring- 
menials, and motioning the wonderstricken 
guests to give the convulsionary room, knelt 
down by her side, and bade somebody fetch a 
surgeon, for God's sake. 

" ] know this woman," he cried out in a 
savage tone, for an apology or an explanation ; 
'' she's a poor rel . , a poor dependent of mine. 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 47 

That is, she was. Help me, some one, to carry 
her upstairs." 

If the poor woman had been one of the 
Demoniacs, who dwelt in caverns and waste- 
places, among bats and dragons in the Old 
Times, and howled their horrid lives out, she 
could not have looked more horrible and less 
earthly than when . the voice of Falcon seem- 
ing to smite her muffled senses and to wake 
her to something like consciousness . she, 
after a desperate plunge or two, sat up in the 
midst of the floor, and began to stare with her 
red eyes, and drag her fingers through her 
matted hair, and croon out some gabble, which, 
though still inarticulate, was yet a thousand 
times nearer human speech than the yells 
which a moment before had been echoino^ 
through the brave house in Grosvenor Square. 
"Do you hear me! John . Charles!" Mr. 
Falcon exclaimed querulously. " Help me to 
carry this poor woman up stairs." 

They had first to help to set the poor woman 
on her legs, prop her up against the wall, 
smooth her disordered garments, and moisten 



48 TPIE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

her lips with water. There was a wide circle 
around her of frightened, astonished faces ; no 
one near her but the two footmen who, with 
scared looks, supported her on either side, as 
their master had bid them, and Gervase Falcon, 
still with his knees trembling, and that old 
corpse-like face. 

They were about (under strong mental pro- 
test from John-Peter, and Chawles his brother) 
to move her again^ when, with a reel that was 
meant for a rush, she extended her gaunt arms 
towards Gervase Falcon, and spake : 

" Do any of you know who this man is ?" 
If the fingers of a Hand had suddenly come 
out upon the wall, and written, as if in sand, 
that the Medes and Persians were at the gate ; 
if she had cast a millstone into the midst of 
them there, and cried out that Babylon the 
Great was fallen, was fallen ; if she had been 
the Witch of Endor, and had suddenly evoked 
the ghost of Samuel from beneath the oil-cloth, 
she could not have caused more terror and 
astonishment than she did by this simple 
question. And there beside her stood the 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 49 

Master of the house, deadlier in hue than be- 
fore, his head bent down, his hands clasped, a 
new palsy in his limbs. 

"Do any of you know who this man is?" 
she asked, elaborating the words this time with 
painful minuteness. Before, they had rushed 
from her lips .like a Lava-torrent. " Do you 
know . do you know who I am? Eot you 
all!" 

No one answered. Who was to answer? 
What answer could be given, save by the 
Master of the house, who had declared this 
tatterdemalion castaway to be his poor rel . , 
his poor dependent. He made a movement, as 
if to place his hand on her mouth, laying the 
other on her arm ; but she broke away from 
him, and, with a fresh sottish reel, cried out to 
the Bride, who was leaning, half swooning, on 
her husband's shoulder, 

" Come here, you girl, and I'll tell you ! " 

"My good woman . !" Sir William Guy 
expostulated. 

"Your good woman! your good Devil!" 
the creature went on, swaying her uncertain 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

arms about. " I'm the worst woman in tlie 
world. He knows I am : ask him ! " 

She pomtecl again to Gervase as she spoke; 
but the Master of the house, though liis lips 
moved, and his knees sliook, seemed utterly 
unable to utter one word, or to move one pace. 
A storm of exclamations and expostulations 
broke from the outraged company. Mr. Falcon 
must be ill. The Bride was fainting; the 
Bride's mother in hysterics ! The woman was 
mad ! Something must be done ! What were 
the servants about? Where were the constables? 
But none of them came near her for all that. 

"Hear me, every one of you!" she said, 
dropping on her knees. " Come nearer, you 
cowards ! Come here, you whimpering girls ! 
Where's that white-headed old sinner that calls 
himself a Lord?" 

There was a stir at this pointed allusion to 
Lord Yiscount Baddington ; and a feeble voice 
from the remote background, where his Lord- 
ship was ensconced behind several tiers of 
gabions and fascines of bridesmaids, made it- 
self heard to the effect, that the woman ought 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 51 

to be ashamed of herself, that he wondered 
what Falcon meant by it, and that he would be 
obliged if somebody would order his carriage. 

" Order a hangman's cart for you all, fine 
gentlemen and fine madams," the woman cried, 
still on her knees. " You shall listen to me. 
You don't know who I am! I'll tell you! 
I've held my tongue for twenty years, but I'll 
speak now ! " 

She rose to her feet again as she said this, 
and stood up, but reeling as she stood. 

^' I'll speak," she went on. "God knows it, 
and man shall know it. I'll have it published 
to the four ends of the earth. They shall all 
know, all know . . every one of them, one of 
'em v'rm. They shall know . why not, eh? 
Why not? Lez ^av a ^rop o' rum.^^ 

So she ended, and fell down flat on the floor 
in a tipsy stupor. And the Master of the house 
raised his head again. 

At this moment a tremendous double knock 
resounded through the hall, and 'Enry, who 
with Tummas had started ofl", in obedience to 
orders, in quest of surgeons, arrived panting 



S.TVOMLUUU. 



52 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

but successful, having for the nonce in the 
handsomest manner replaced the sable-liveried 
lacquies of Mr. Fleem, of the Royal College of 
Surgeons, and ridden behind that eminent 
practitioner's carriage to Grosvenor Square. 

Mr. Fleem, Fellow of the Royal College, etc., 
was a gentleman of such mild, soothing, com- 
fortable manner, that he might have been de- 
scribed as an Emulsion in glossy broadcloth. 
He had a peculiar, quiet, soliloquising inter- 
jection, too, of " T-t,tttttt," which he was conti- 
nually confiding to his snowy shirt-frill in a soft 
whisper which was quite a composing draught 
in itself, and had been found, in its time, of 
infinite comfort and relief to his extensive 
circle of patients. A mild man, Fleem, a 
gentle creature, as delightful a companion as 
ever cut off a leg, or burnt holes in a friend's 
leg with caustic. 

There was nothing serious the matter, Mr. 
Fleem said. Oh dear, no ! Such unavoidable 
accidents would occur. Similar extraordinary 
intrusions had taken place at the Lord Bishop 
of Bosfursus's town mansion. Quite unavoid- 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 53 

able. A pity, perhaps, that the servants had 
not interfered to prevent the poor demented 
creature's entrance ; but all was doubtless for 
the best. A disturbance in the street would 
have been, under the circumstances, and in 
front of the residence of Mr. Fleem's friend, 
Mr. Falcon's eminently respectable residence, 
even more painful. Oh dear, yes ! As to the 
poor woman; she certainly was ill (He had 
done fifty things for the poor woman all in a 
quiet noiseless way by this time). Epilepsy; 
no, he should not say Epilepsy : Incipient De- 
lirium Tremens^ more probable. Had been 
conversing incoherently, eh? "Wandering, of 
course? Just so. Thank you. Wildness of 
the eye. Dear me ! However we should see, 
we should see; and if you, my good fellow 
(John-Peter proudly pleased at being so ad- 
dressed) would fetch a hackney coach, in ten 
minutes we will have her nicely and comfort- 
ably in St. Lazarus's Hospital. 

But to the subdued astonishment of Mr. 
Fleem, who had seen too many wonders of 
nature and art in his time to be violently 



54 THE EADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

astonished at anything under the eventuality 
of a hippopotamus performing a hornpipe, say 
on stihs, or on a tight rope of floss silk, and 
to the horror-struck consternation of the rest 
of the company, the Master of the house 
sternly and positively refused his consent to 
the removal of the woman. She should remain 
there, he said, till she grew better, and he 
bade his servants carry her up stairs forth- 
with. 

" My dear Mr. Falcon, ^^ his wife reasoned, 
" I know this is but kind-heartedness on your 
part ; but you can surely never allow such a 
creature to remain in the house ! " 

"My dear Papa!" said the trembling, 
half-weeping Bride . 

" Falcon, my good fellow! " Lord Viscount 
Baddington . 

" If you would only consider. Sir," the Bride- 
groom . 

" Oh dear, Mr. Falcon ! " a chorus of Brides- 
maids . 

'^ Now, you know," Compton Guy . 

** Bless my heart, my good Mr. Falcon ! " 
Lady Tottringham . 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 55 

" And I'm sorry, Sir, but which it is true, if 
my coat was took hoff my back this minnit, but 
cannot obleege you so to demean myself, and 
likewise my feller-suvvent hobjects to carryin 
sich a ba^g o' rags up," John-Peter said, trem- 
bling at his own audacity, but still determined 
to stand by the dignity of his cloth. But the 
Master of the house was inflexible. 

" Hold your tongues, you fools ! " was his 
uncourteous rejoinder to his retainers in plush, 
" and help me to carry her up stairs, or get 
out of the way, and leave it to me and Mr. 
Fleem. Ladies and Gentlemen, stand back, or 
I shall do you a mischief all of you." 

And with this extraordinary remark from a 
devoted husband and the father of a family, 
who, from the earliest period of authentic re- 
cord had been remarkable for being as mild a 
spoken gentleman as ever inhabited Grosvenor 
Square, John-Peter and Chawles were morally 
coerced into lending their stalwart aid towards 
transporting the disreputable bag o' rags in 
question to one of the upper chambers of the 
mansion. 



56 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Brought thither of course either on some 
magic Arabian carpet, or aided by some Seven - 
League Boots, the property of the medical 
profession, or being in the receipt of fern-seed, 
and so walking invisible, there presently ap- 
peared, no one (save Mr. Fleem) knew how, a 
soft, straAv-coloured as to hair, and raven-hued 
as to costume, assistant of that eminent prac- 
titioner; and before you could say "Paracel- 
sus," the woman w^as quietly in bed, and a 
composing draught had been administered to 
her. She had opened her eyes and moaned 
once or tAvice during her conveyance to the 
bed-chamber, and had taken the draught quiet- 
ly, but still seemed quite unconscious. 

When they had laid her heavy head on the 
pillow, and the footmen being dismissed, there 
was no sound in the room but her stertorous 
breathing and the loud ticking of the Doctor's 
watch, the Master of the house drew the Sear- 
cher of the House of Life into the curtained 
embrasure of the window. He placed his finger 
on his lip first, and pointed, as a measure of 
precaution, to the straw-coloured assistant, 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 57 

who had appeared no one knew how, and who 
was now by the patient's head, bending over a 
table, and performing feats of legerdemain 
with bottles and cups, procured no one knew 
whence. 

** Secret and. trusty," Mr. Fleem replied, in 
a low soft whisper. " Invaluable in family 
matters, my dear Sir. Deaf, dumb, and blind 
to everything but the requirements of his Art. 
Dear me, dear me, I don't know what I should 
do without Mr. Tinctop." 

" I wish you," Gervase Falcon continued, 
with an impatient movement of his hand, '' to 
get me a trusty nurse for this poor creature. 
I don't want her left night or day. She mustn't 
be left, Mr. Fleem, save with the nurse, or 
yourself, or myself." 

" Or Mr. Tinctop," the Surgeon blandly in- 
terposed. " Faithful creature ; as 1 remarked 
before, a deaf-mute and blind to family 
matters." 

" She mustn't be left to anybody ^'^ broke in 
the Master of the house. " With no living soul, 
Mr. Fleem. I tell you she'll rave . rave, Sir. 
Do you know a nurse you can trust? " 



58 THE BADDINGTON TEERAGE. 

He asked the question so suddenly, and in 
such a hoarse, harsh voice, that the Surgeon 
raised his keen gray eyes to his face, with, for 
so mild and composed an eminent practitioner, 
quite an unusual expression of interest. Why 
did Grervase Falcon hang his head guiltily 
when the gray eye met his, and why did the 
old ashy hue come over his face again? 

" Do I know a trusty nurse? " softly repeated 
Mr. Fleem. " Surely, my dear Sir; surely." 

" I confide in you," Mr. Falcon continued, 
resuming his self-possession. '' There is a 
skeleton in every house, my dear Doctor, as 
you know full well ; and I entirely confide in 
youT 

The Doctor, who was aware of a complete 
anatomical museum in half-a-dozen adjacent 
private houses, of an extensive bonehouse in a 
duke's mansion half-a-hundred yards off, and 
of materials for a complete course of lectures 
on osteology in a countess's boudoir in Berke- 
ley Square, nodded his head, as men will do 
when they hear a pleasant truism. 

*' You may confide in me, of course," he 



THE NIGHT COMETH. O^ 

replied. " Tut, tut, an everyday matter. 
Black sheep. Disgrace to respectable families. 
Highly improper to alarm the ladies by the 
sight of such fallen creatures. Mr. Tinctop," 
he said to the deaf and dumb assistant, "if 
you will be good enough to remain here and 
watch the case, in ten minutes you shall be 
relieved by Mrs. Lint. My dear Sir, good 
morning. Thank you . gloves ; ah ! yes ! I 
shall look in aofain in the eveninfr." 

He had taken a farewell resume of the state 
of the patient, whispered final instructions to 
Mr. Tinctop, pocketed his fee, put on his 
gloves, trotted down stairs, slipped into his 
comfortable carriage, and driven away, all in 
his quiet noiseless manner, but with marvel- 
lous celerity. Then Gervase Falcon, casting, 
too, a look upon the slumbering form on the 
bed, went do^Ti to join the wedding guests 
again. 

The end of a feast . a banqueting-table when 
the viands have been duly consumed, and the 
sparkling wines duly poured down . when the 
merriment and speech-making are all over, and 



60 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the flowers begin to fade . is, albeit an Instruc- 
tive, not at any time an enlivening spectacle. 
Mr. Gervase Falcon descended to his breakfast- 
parlour, to find that banqueting-hall almost 
deserted : lights fled, garlands dead, and all, 
save one guest, departed : his wife. 

Mrs. Falcon was one of those comely, fresh- 
coloured, virtuously-composed matrons who 
may be said to smile and sail through life ; . 
a species of Gorgeous Galley . a strong guid- 
ing sense of the Respectabilities at the helm, 
and good looks, and a handsome settlement at 
the prow. She was never flurried ; she was 
never vexed, never cross . in company ; though 
her maid, her children, and her children's go- 
verness, had other tales to tell on the question 
of her equanimity a huis clos. She was one 
of those wives a man may live with for more 
than nineteen years, before he finds out that 
she has a Devil of a temper. There is as pro- 
digious an amount of cecity and surdity in 
Marriage as in Household ing ; and it is gene- 
rally by the neighbours rushing in, and the 
fire-engine coming clanking up to the door, 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 61 

that a man discovers that his house is on fire. 
A score of years had very nearly elapsed since 
that Gordian knot, which it used to take a 
thousand pounds worth of steel to cut, had 
been tied between Gervase Falcon and Caroline 
his wife ; and it was only on re-entering the 
breakfast-roora that Mr. Falcon discovered 
that his wife could be in a rage, and was in 
one. 

There is a process known in feminine war- 
fare as " bouncing," which may be otherwise 
defined as a moral charge of the female heavy 
horse. The strongest man will draw back 
when a lady "bounces" at him. Mrs. Falcon 
commenced her onslaught by that favourite 
movement. 

" I wish to know, Mr. Falcon," she asked, 
in a high, shrill voice, and "bouncing" as she 
spoke ; "whether my house . our house, I mean 
. is to be turned into an hospital, a work- 
house, a rag-shop, for all the vile drunken 
wretches you may choose to pick off the 
streets?" 

For all reply, her husband sat down at the 



62 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

further end of the table, and, with a trembling 
hand, filled a tumbler half full of wine, which 
he drank greedily, moodily gazing at his wife 
meanwhile. 

'' AVill you answer me, Mr. Falcon ? " his 
wife continued, in a yet higher, shriller tone. 
" Who is this woman ? Where does she come 
from ? What does she want here ? Why does 
your confidential surgeon, Mr. Fleem, come 
down to this room, and tell me that I am not 
to seek admittance to the chamber where you 
have presumed to harbour her? I demand 
to know. I insist upon knowing ! " 

" The woman is dangerously ill," her husband 
answered wearily, leaning his head on his hand. 
" It would be as cruel as unsafe to leave her. 
Ask yourself . ask Mr. Fleem! Besides," he 
added, more to himself than to her, " 1 know 
something of her." 

" Know something of her ! " the indignant 
matron retorted, and only, so it seemed, re- 
strained from bounchig bodily as well as 
morally at Mr. Falcon, by the interposition of 
some sixteen good solid feet of breakfast-table 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 63 

between her and her spouse. " Know some- 
thing of her ! I have not the slightest doubt 
you do. More of her than you ought to do. 
Enough to be ashamed of yourself for, I am 
convinced. But I'll not "bear it, Mr. Falcon; 
either she leaves this house, within an hour, 
or I do!" 

"Will vou hold vour tonofue, woman?" her 
husband at the end of the table cried out, 
starting up from his seat so suddenly that the 
chair fell heavily to the ground. 

" Woman ! hold my tongue ! This language 
to me ! to your wife ! to the mother of your 
children ! Ush ! vou wretch ! " 

'* Mrs. Falcon," the husband of that lady 
remarked, stepping as he spoke from the sta- 
tion he had occupied, and clasping one of her 
arms very tightly and very sternly, " I don't 
think, during the twenty years of our mar- 
riage, I have ever given signs of a disposition 
to ^ill-treat you: but, by the Lord! if you 
don't sit down in that chair and hold your 
tongue, except to answer my questions, I'll 
leave such marks on you as you and I will 
both be sorry for ! " 



64 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

There was that m his e}e, his blanched 
cheek, his set lips, which gave indubitable 
proof that he was in earnest, and thoroughly 
so. The bounce was taken out of Mrs. Ger- 
vase Falcon at once . perhaps for good and 
all; and she sat down as she was desired, 
tacitly indignant, but quite obedient. 

" Where are my daughters?" her husband 
asked. 

" Up stairs in the drawing-room. William 
is with Caroline, who is in a state dreadful to 
be imagined." 

" Hold your tongue ! You are talking non- 
sense! Why are not William and Caroline 
gone ? " 

" The travelling carriage was counter- 
manded, and will be here again in half-an- 
hour. We were all waiting to hear an explan- 
ation of your extraordinary conduct . I mean, 
to know your wishes." 

" Those you will hear presently. Where 
are all the people who were eating and drink- 
ing half-an-hour since? 

" All gone . very much shocked and an- 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 65 

noyed, and, I am afraid, scandalised, though I 
implored them to observe secrecy. Your uncle 
went away infuriated." 

"My uncle," Mr. Falcon responded, quite 
leisurely and calmly; " my uncle, Baddington, 
the gaping fools that have been gorging and 
swilling in this respectable house, and you, 
Mrs. Falcon, may go to the devil !" 

Not only his house, but he, too, had been a 
respectable man all his life, with an exquisitely 
keen sense of the proprieties and the conven- 
tionalities, just as she had always been a 
sweetly tempered woman. What had come to 
both of them, for the lamb to turn lion, and 
the turtle-dove tigress ? 

" My dear ! " Mrs. Falcon could only faintly 
ejaculate, "consider the servants." 

" In which recommendation," Mr. Falcon 
continued, composedly resuming the thread of 
his discourse, " I include the servants. They 
may go to the devil too . all of them . all of 
you! Curse you all!" he cried. *'I don't 
care that for you. Who's afraid ? " 

As he strode up to the table again, and 

VOL.1. F 



66 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

emptied some more wine into a tumbler, and 
drank it, snapping his fingers defiantly, the 
husband and father, Grosvenor Square house- 
holder and Prothonotary of his Majesty's 
Carpet-bag and Hat-box Office, quite went out 
from liim, and nothing but a desperate ruffian 
at bay remained behind. Mrs. Falcon, fairly 
frightened that her husband was going mad, 
was timorously moving towards the door, 
when he rushed across the room, and caught 
her by the shoulders. 

''Stay here!" he said. '*No; my dear 
Caroline," he continued, with a strange and 
horrible revulsion of tone and accent, ''pray 
give me your arm, we will go upstairs together 
to my children." 

So they went upstairs together, arm-and- 
arm, to their children, a very unlovely pair to 
look upon. John-Peter (who, by-the-way, 
was in rather suspiciously close proximity to 
the door when Mr, and Mrs. Falcon came out) 
could make nothing of them. He said as 
much to Chawles his friend and help-mate, as, 
profiting by the absence of the heads of the 



THE NIGHT COMETH. G7 

family, he and several other vultures in red 
plush or white aprons hastened to swoop 
down on the debris of the feast, before the 
arrival of Mr. Gunter's men with the green 
boxes. 

" I tell you somethin's wrong, and not a 
little wrong neither," John-Peter remarked 
sententiously, and making a clean breast of a 
cold fowl, if ever one there were, as he did so. 
" What does she come and throw a Manny- 
script into Master's carridge? Why does the 
old 'un turn as white as parsnips when he 
reads it? Wot does she go for to hask me 
wot weddin' it is ? Wot do she come a faintin' 
for 'ere, and a havin' fits in sich like dis- 
repsectable manners? " 

A smart housemaid, allured from the upper 
regions by the prospect of Trifle and Chantilly- 
basket, here observed that in her opinion the 
general proceedings were " howdacious ; " and 
the youngest footman . not so stout or strong in 
the legs as could perhaps be desired, but reputed 
to be a wit, and a great favourite with the ladies, 
. remarked, in an off-hand manner, that the 



6S THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

woman who had fainted was an " 'ussey, and 
that was hall about it." 

So the high life below stairs could make 
nothino^ of the low life that was above stairs. 
They made a good deal, however, of the 
lobster and chicken salads, the game pies, the 
plovers' eggs, the ices, jellies, creams, and 
comfits, that lay in glorious wreck upon the 
table. They made even more of the glass 
dregs, and wine lees, and sundry untouched 
bottles that were there, till Mr. Binns, the 
Butler, who had considerately allowed them 
reasonable grace for living at free quarters, 
came out of his own pantry suite of apart- 
ments with Mrs. Trupple, the housekeeper, 
and scattered the liquorish crew. 

Now, from this time, which might have 
been three of the clock, to seven in the even- 
ing, there reigned great quiet and stillness in 
the house of Falcon, in Grosvenor Square. 
Some few incidents diversified the monotony 
of the November twilight. A voluminous 
mass of faded and slightly mouldy-smelling 
garments, surmounted by a portentous bonnet 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 69 

with a shawl tied over it, the whole ballasted 
on either side by a basket and a bundle, arrived 
early. The voluminous mass announced itself 
(by a printed card . not engraved) to be Lint, 
Nurse, et cetera, Bulgin's Mews, Berkeley 
Square; and also (by voice issuing from 
between a hooked nose and a hooked chin) to 
come by orders of Mr. Fleem, and to be ex- 
tremely anxious to see ** the blessed creetur 
as was a sufferin " directly. Lint, nurse, was 
ushered into the bed-room you are aware of, 
and there saw that unblessed creature who 
was indeed suffering. Not long after this, 
came back to the door the travelling chariot 
and four grays, which have been so frequently 
alluded to as connected with the proceedings 
of the morning. They had not long to wait 
this time. The Bride and the Bridegroom 
came down speedily, not quite so radiant as they 
had been four hours before, but still keeping 
up their state proudly. Doors opened and 
clanged to again ; and Bride and Bridegroom 
were gone upon their honeymoon, and were 
launched upon the illimitable Sea of Human 



70 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Chances. Last there came, toward five o'clock, 
Lord Baddington's own body servant, with a 
letter for Mr. Falcon. He waited an answer, 
and receiving it ultimately from the hands of 
John-Peter, exchanged a wink of mysterious 
import with that servitor, and so departed. 

Mrs. Falcon's maid was summoned soon 
after this to bring a jug of hot water to her 
mistress's room, and the rumour ran through 
the basement floor that she was bathing her 
eyes, after much weeping. She was in her 
room; her two daughters in theirs; but the 
master of the house rang no bell, and troubled 
no one, and was not heard of till it was quite 
dark, when, coming down stairs, and looking 
far more like a ghost than a human being, he 
bade John-Peter fetch him a hackney-coach. 

The footman, who had had little more to do 
during tke last five hours than stare and be 
astonished, was bewildered at so plebeian a 
vehicle being ordered, when his master had 
two carriages in the adjacent mews. What- 
ever was the good of two spacious coach- 
houses and ample stabling, when respectable 



THE NIGHT COMETH. 71 

people in Grosvenor Square took to such 
democratic, radical, hackney-coach ways ? He 
went on his errand though, being, for all his 
six feet and his calves, desperately frightened, 
and as he went along, determined to give 
warning at the first convenient opportunity, 
and leave this fashionable Bedlam to its own 
devices. 

Gervase Falcon remained waiting in his 
lamp-lit hall, till the hackney-coach came 
rumbling up to the door. At this moment 
Mrs. Falcon's own maid Flitters came down 
stairs, and with great fear and trembling, 
and hesitating, stammering, and apron-corner 
twitching, conveyed to him a message from her 
mistress, respectfully asking when Mr. Falcon 
might be expected home. 

" Tell Mrs. Falcon to mind her own ," 

the Master of the house began ; '^ no," he con- 
tinued more mildly; " tell her I am going on 
a Journey." 

A journey! but he had his gala dress on 
beneath his cloak. A journey! but he ordered 
neither carpet-bag nor portmanteau to be 



72 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

packed. A journey ! he had bid none farewell 
. left no instructions behind him. 

A journey whither? . Whither, who should 
say? The Morning was past, and the Night 
was come. The Night . black, secret, and 
impenetrable . ,when treasure is buried, and 
men slain, and murdered corpses iiung into 
pools. The Night was come, full of mystery 
and silence. Who but the Omniscient could 
disclose its secrets fully? 



73 



CHAP. lY. 

INTRODUCES A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 

JOHN POLLYBLAXK, temporarily of the 
Borough of South wark, Esquire, by cour- 
tesy called Captain Pollyblank, but commonly, 
and among his friends and acquaintances, 
known as Jack PoUyblank, condescended, at 
about nine of the clock on the very same 
evening on which this veracious history opens, 
to enter the tap-parlour or coffee-room (there 
was but one room for the " sitting-down " 
customers, so either name will serve) of the 
^' Blue Pump " tavern in Gravel Lane, hard by 
Hatters' Hall, Southwark, and there to order 
of Dick, the unclean but indefatigable waiter, 
a pint of London porter. 



74 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

'' In the which," Mr. Pollyblank, who af- 
fected precision in his diction; '4n the which, 
Richard, you may, the weather being chilly 
(having previously warmed it on the hob, 
mind, not in that tin foolscap of yours) place 
a dash of ginger and twopennyworth of the 
right sort," meaning Old Tom. 

Perfectly definite as was the nature of Mr. 
PoUyblank's instructions, they did not appear 
entirely lucid to Dick the waiter, who stood 
scratching his head, and grinning doubtfully, 
till the expectant guest threw out a mild sug- 
gestion that " Sharp was the word!" 

But sharp, though an excellent word, did 
not appear to be tJie word in this instance, . 
the key to the enigma or the beer-piston of the 
" Blue Pump." 

" Is it trust or pay, Cap'en?" Dick asked 
hesitatingly. 

" Fellow," the gentleman addressed as 
" Cap'en" indignantly retorted; when, appear- 
ing to recollect himself, he added, *' why, Dick, 
it must stand over . only till to-morrow, 
DickF' 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. (O 

This explanation did not seem by any means 
satisfactory to the attendant on the " Blue 
Pump's" parlour customers, who, with a very 
ill-boding shake of the head, and a muttered 
remark that he "must ask mas'r," left the 
room, slamming the door viciously behind 
him. 

" A bad waiter that ! " was Captain Polly- 
blank's observation on the disappearance of 
Richard; "a sulky dog! perhaps the worst 
waiter in the most particularly infamous tavern 
hereabouts. Their beer, too, is villanous ; and 
as to the gin, it reminds me that there was 
once a fox who was passionately fond of the 
ruby-tinted fruit that cluster 'midst the trailing 
vines. Heio^ho ! hei^jho ! " 

Whereupon the Captain fell into a fit of 
head-shaking, boding much more evil, either 
for his chances of obtaining the refreshment he 
had ordered, or for himself, or for society and 
the world generally. He then proceeded to 
seat himself on the edge of the one Pembroke 
table, and to disembarrass his neck of a red 
worsted shawl so long and so attenuated that 



76 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

he looked, under the circumstancs, like a human 
cocoon, who had enjoyed a surfeit of mulberry 
leaves, and was unwinding himself to be able 
to breathe freely. 

When thoroughly unwound, and when his 
face and figure were visible, it must be ad- 
mitted that Captain PoUyblank's personal ap- 
pearance was little, if at all, improved by the 
operation he had just undergone. To be truth- 
ful, too, it must be confessed that he did not 
look in the least like a Captain. There are, I 
know. Captains and Captains. One may be a 
Captain-General and Grandee of Spain, or a 
Captain in the Life Guards Blue, a Captain in 
a marching regiment, of a line-of-battle-ship, 
of the main-top, of a penny steam-boat, of a 
coal-pit, or of a gang of banditti. There is 
even the most dubious Captain of all . the 
" Copper Captain," the Pistol of private life. 
AVell, even he has certain generic and typical 
traits: a braided surtout, lacquered spurs, 
bushy moustache, a half-military, half-j ail-bird 
swagger, tight-strapped trousers, hat on one 
.^ide. cane with a tassel, some semi-martial cha- 



A GEXiXEMAN IN DimCULTIES. 77 

racteristic of costume or demeanour. But 
Captain Pollyblank had none of these. He was 
a very fat, white-faced young man, with a vast 
quantity of coarse black hair on his head, 
combed several ways, and rebelling in each 
separate hair against its neighbour ; but neither 
whiskers nor moustaches, nor chin-tuft. His 
face, cutaneously viewed, was slightly scorbutic; 
he had an ugly gash in the place where his 
mouth ought to have been ; his nose appeared 
to have been originally intended by nature for 
an unpretending and retiring snub, but in some 
fit of passionate caprice, to all appearances, 
had been violently wrenched into a swollen 
and protuberant, though still snubbiform, con- 
dition. I am glad Phrenology was not so 
much talked about thirty years since as 
now; else Mr. Donovan would have augured 
rather dismally for the chances of Captain 
Pollyblank's future career, in consideration of 
the lowness of his forehead, and the peculiar 
bulginess and bumpiness of the back of his 
neck. He had somewhat elevated cheek-bones, 
and somewhat watery eyes ; and . which was 



78 THE BABDINGTON PEERAGE. 

rather ghostly to look at . his eyelashes were, 
if not altogether absent, as few and far between 
as angels' visits are said to be. With reference 
to Mr. Polly blank's attire, I can only say that 
it was strictly in accordance with the latest 
Engravings of the Fashion, allowing such an 
Engraving to be torn, soiled, and fly-blown, 
and hung up in a dolly-shop in Petticoat Lane, 
instead of an aristocratic tailor's show-rooms. 
As to the colour and general state of the Cap- 
tain's garments, both might decidedly have 
been better, though neither could by any pos- 
sibility have been worse. So desperate alto- 
gether was the condition of the Captain's 
costume that his only safeguard against being 
" smugged " for a Guy, or carried off bodily 
for a Scarecrow, seemed to be in his neck- 
shawl, which was so long, so red, and so loudly 
and defiantly vivid in its redness, that it dazzled 
the eyes, and carried off general attention from 
the woeful case of the rest of the PoUyblankian 
entity, and led some unthinking ones to sur- 
mise that the Captain was next door to a Beau, 
when the philosophically-inclined had satisfied 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 79 

themselves that he was in reality next door to 
a Beggar. 

When Captain Pollyblank had quite un- 
wound his shawl, he stuffed it violently into a 
very limp-brimmed hat, and, stirring the fire 
with the thick ash stick he carried, soliloquised 
meanwhile. 

" Coals cost nothing when you don't pay for 
them," was his philosophical observation. 
" Though stony 'hearted landlords may refuse 
beer, and take away pokers, ash seasoned in 
the fire will stir; so let us poke, warm, and be 
merry, even if to-morrow we starve." 

He desisted from knocking the coals about 
for a moment, and inclined his ear as if to 
listen for the advent of the waiter with the 
beer and et ceteras. But it was a false alarm; 
and, sighing, he began to move again. 

" That beast licensed to victual and insult 
gentlemen," he said, " no doubt egged on by 
yonder fiend in pot-boy shape, will, of course, 
pleading some ridiculous three-and-ninepence 
scored against me on the slate, refuse further 
credit. Of course. Jack Pollyblank being 



80 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

penniless, none of the boys, . Tinctop, Skalple, 
Pessel . none of the convivial St. Lazarus' 
brethren, will be here to meet him. Just so. 
Of course." 

There was no gas in the room; none in the 
house, I believe, then. But the fire burned 
with a deep red glow, and the room would 
have been comfortable enough with a pipe, or 
a tankard or so. 

" Upon my word, Jack Pollyblank," the 
Captain exclaimed, finding out perchance an 
image of himself in the face-teeming fire, and 
moodily punching it with his stick; upon my 
word^ you're in for it!" 

" This, then, is the result," he resumed, " of 
the large sums spent by your parents on your 
medical education, and of the immense amount 
of clinical knowledge you never acquired. 
For this have you seen life, spent your own 
patrimony, and helped to spend that of several 
devoted friends ; to say nothing of the encou- 
ragement you have given to commerce by ob- 
taining goods from confiding tradesmen on 
pretences more or less false. For this have 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 81 

you been to India's spicy climes, once, nay, 
thrice; surgeon's mate in an Indiaman. For 
this have you learned to play every game on 
the board ; to be unequalled at skittles ; to have 
no peer at the charming relaxation of bagatelle. 
For this, to be refused trust for thruppence in 
the pot-room of an alehouse!" 

He said " thruppence" as if in defiance to 
the education of which he was vaunting him- 
self; and then began to walk up and down, 
-with his hands in his pockets, to the imminent 
peril of the seams of those garments them- 
selves. It is to be observed, too, that among 
the idiosyncrasies of Mr. or Captain Polly blank 
was that of almost always talking, even to 
himself, in a strain of stilted cynicism, and 
semi-humorous bombast. I dare say, ancient 
Pistol did the same; for you see there are 
some men who, for all their villany, are afraid 
of looking themselves in the face, and dare'nt 
confess in plain language to their own con- 
science what scoundrels they are. 

" Of friends/' he ^vent on, " who'll give me 
the social glass, there are say half-a-dozen; 

VOL. I. G 



82 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

SO long as I gibe and jest for them, and make 
them merry, will they make me drunk ; of 
friends who'd give me a crust of bread to keep 
me from starving, or a nail towards my coffin 
when I am starved and dead, I ca'nt think of 
one . not one. Of clothes, I've just what I 
have on me ; and this ash stick . and, yes, to 
be sure, I still have it . This ! " 

He took These from his waistcoat-pocket, 
and as he fingered them, looked half vengefuUy, 
half contemptuously, at a little square pile 
of pawnbroker's duplicates, the handAvriting 
almost faded, the tickets cracked and limp 
with long wear, and grimy and soiled with 
pocket fluff. 

'' Query," he continued, "when the interest 
exceeds the value of the articles pledged, is 
there much good in redeeming said articles ?'' 

He then took this, not hastily, but very 
slowly and cautiously, and almost fearfully, 
from a breast-pocket. This was wrapped up 
in an old blue silk pocket-handkerchief, holey 
almost like a colander, and again in several 
envelopes of such soft, grey paper as the 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 83 

Nuremberg chapmen used to wrap their toys 
up in. Then he held this to the red fire light, 
having previously opened the dark morocco 
jewel-case, lined with white satin, which held 
it ; in the midst of which this, a bracelet of 
just half-a-dozen curious-looking, semi-trans- 
parent, blackish-blue or blueish-black beads, 
lay coiled up like a shining little Serpent. 

"Here, safe enough," the Captain said 
gloomily, bending his head over the case. 
" This, in the right place with the right man 
to take it off my hands, would make Jack 
Pollyblank's fortune, and yet it would'nt pawn 
for eighteenpence. Mr. Dobree don't know 
what stones the bracelet is made of. Ha ! ha ! 
Where is that queer fellow I had the famous 
drinking bout with here, I wonder? But what's 
the good of asking? He was screwed, . T 
know I was awfully . and never meant it when 
he said he would give me twenty pounds for 
the shining thing. I gave him my address. 
He promised to call. He didn't. Of course 
not. To-morrow I shan't have any address to 
give. Meanwhile, who'd give me anything for 



84 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

this bauble? Eighteenpence, said I. I don^t 
believe I could raise fourpence on it. Four- 
pence? not the price of a pint, even. "Who'd 
believe me when I said that it came from India, 
that it was the young man and the old man's 
best companion under circumstances of peculiar 
difficulty! There isn't a pin's-worth of gold 
and silver about it. However, it may be use- 
ful to you some-day, Jack, my boy, and soon 
too." 

This reflection, with regard to the ultimate 
utility of the bracelet, seemed to impart far 
less comfort than tribulation to Jack, his boy, 
who, wrapping up and replacing this in his 
breast-pocket, set his teeth, and leaning his 
elbows on his hands, his chin on his palms, 
and twining his fingers in his hair, scrooped 
the legs of his chair along the ground in a most 
broken-spirited manner, and gave vent to a 
sound which began like a whistle and ended 
like a groan. 

" Hallo," he cried, starting up as the door 
opened. " That's either Dick with the beer, 
or Dick without it, or a customer. Wrong 
again. Xow for the Blue Pump." 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 85 

It -was, indeed, the Blue Pump, 'in the person 
of Mr. Meggot, its landlord, and not its waiter, 
who entered the room, and, to the intense as- 
tonishment of Captain Pollyblank, with the 
nearest approach to a bow that he could com- 
mand; and, which was far more important, 
with a steaming tankard of purl, two clean 
pipes, and a screw of tobacco, 

" I'm sure, Cap'en," the Blue Pump said 
apologetically to his amazed customer, " I'm 
wery sorry that yare gopus shouldn't for 'ave 
rightly hunderstood your border. 'Ere is the 
stuff, Cap'en, and welcome." 

" The cash," Captain Pollyblank stammered, 
for he was quite taken off his guard by this 
unforeseen attendance to his wishes, " will be 
right to-morrow. It will be righteous. It 
will be jannock. Yea, wholly and entirely 
upon the square. I may say, Meggot, that it 
will be as right as ninepence." So saying, he 
extended one hand for the tankard and another 
for the pipe, and trembled with emotion ; for 
liquor and tobacco were as milk and honey to 
the soul of Jack Pollyblank, yet he was not 



86 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

quite certain but that Meggot was tantalising 
him, and might at last withdraw the coveted 
purl and birdseye. 

*' Eight or wrong," the Pump answered, 
" it^s all one to Sim Mesforot, licensed to be 
drunk on the premises. Its settled." 

" You don't mean to say that youVe going 
to stand it, Sim?" asked the Captain, thinking 
that the Blue Pump had either come into a 
fortune, or gone out of his mind. 

*' I mean to say," was the reply, " that it's 
paid for ; by a gent as wos 'ere five minutes 
ago, come out of a 'ackney coach, basked if you 
wos 'ere. Hasked wot you wos 'avin, sed he'd 
be back directly, and o's 'ere now this blessed 
minit waitin' for to come in." 

" In with him, Sim," Pollyblank said hastily 
and delightedly, and clapping his hand to his 
breast-pocket as he spoke. " By Jove !" he 
muttered aside, as the landlord left the room, 
'' it's that queer fish. Now for business." 

A gentleman, stout, and of the middle 
height, swathed from head to foot in an ample 
cloak, whose collar came far above his ears 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICULTIES. 87 

and almost entirely concealed his face . in the 
which last circumstance there was nothing, 
believe me, very noticeable or mysterious, for 
the November night was raw^ and foggy, and 
in 1830, paletots and talmas w^ere not, and 
cloaks of the Spanish fashion were, very gene- 
rally worn . a gentleman answering to this 
description entered the room as the Blue 
Pump left it, and whispering to that licensed 
victualler as he passed him . w^ho bowed ob- 
sequiously, and retiring, closed the door care- 
fully after him . came up to the red fire, and 
sat down over against Jack Pollyblank. 

" Do you know me again?" he asked, un- 
clasping the collar of his cloak, and showing a 
portly, handsome, middle-aged face, with hair 

just shot with grey: " Mr. ; but I forget 

your name." 

" Know you ?" Jack Pollyblank answered ; 

" I should rather think I did, Mr. . But, 

by Jove, I've forgotten your name, too. Never 
knew^ it, either," he added, mentally. 

" There, it does not much matter," his in- 
terlocutor broke in. " I have not called on 



88 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

you before now, for Reasons. To-night, for 
Reasons, too, I came. The people where you 
live told me, with an ill-grace, that I might 
find you here, and I have found you. You 
know what you promised me, what I offered 
you, and what I want." 

" Exactly so," acquiesced Jack. 

Have you got it with you?" 

" Here." 

*' Let me have it, then, immediately," said 
the middle-aged gentleman, and curious to re- 
late, as he spoke, red as was the glow of the 
fire, Jack Pollyblank observed that his face 
grew ashy pale. 

It was not that facetious but embarrassed 
individual's business to pry into the causes of 
his entertainer's discomposure. He very slowly 
and deliberately took the old pocket-handker- 
chief from his breast, unwrapped it, then 
removed the envelopes of soft grey paper, and 
discovering the morocco jewel case, just opened 
it to show the black, beady serpent coiled up 
inside, held it out to him that wore the cloak, 
and then extended to him his other empty 
palm. 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIEEICULTIES. 89 

" In matters of business," the business-like 
and imperturbable Pollyblank observed, 
"promptitude is everything." 

His middle-aged friend had pounced upon 
the jewel-case, and had the bead-bracelet in 
his hand, and was fondling it, and devouring 
it almost with avid eyes. He seemed not to 
hear the Captain's remark. 

"Take care what you're about," that strange 
dealer in jewels said, raising his voice. " The 
ornament's of a brittle nature . you might 
break it; and there's not one of the same 
pattern on this side the Cape of Good Hope. 
Now, Squire, if I might trouble you for the 
ready." 

" Here are four five-pound notes," the in- 
dividual addressed as " Squire " said, handing 
him a packet as he spoke. " This bracelet for 
twenty pounds. That was our agreement ; 
we are quits! " 

" Pardon me, Squire," Jack Pollyblank re- 
plied politely but decisively ; in these matters 
flimsies are of no account. Bless your heart, 
my worthy Sir, Sim Meggot here, of the Blue 



90 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

Pump, wouldn't give more than three-pound- 
ten for a five-pound note. Twenty pounds 
were our agreement; but I must have those 
twenty pounds in George or William sovereigns, 
or I call 'a go.'" 

"Do you think I'm a thief?" the other 
asked angrily, snatching back the notes ten- 
dered him by Jack, and pouring from a purse 
some gold pieces into his hand, which he 
began to count. 

" Far be from me such a suspicion," the 
Captain, with much unction, explained ; " the 
only danger is, that, particularly if anything 
JiafpenfA^ people might take me for a thief. 
Twenty pounds. That's just it. Thank you. 
You're quite welcome to the bauble, I'm 
sure ! " 

As he greedily clutched at the glittering 
yellow pieces, and crammed them into his 
waistcoat's maw, the other rose up, and had 
wrapped his cloak round him, and had gained 
the door, and his hand was on the handle of 
the lock. 

" Excuse me," said Polly blank, " if I ask 



A GENTLEMAN IN DIFFICCLTJES. 91 

you one question. Quite confidential, you 
know, though I daresay you won't tell me the 
truth. Self or friend?" 

The man in the cloak moved impatiently, 
but muttered something concerning experi- 
ments, at which the Captain, for the third 
time in this chapter, again shook his head, 
but in a manner thrice more ominous and 
evil-boding. 

"Myself, then," his companion cried out, 
with savage brusqueness. 

He had opened the door himself, had passed 
up the narrow entry, and had disappeared 
before Jack could stop him, even if he had 
been so minded. 



92 



CHAP. Y. 



THE NIGHT. 



TTE who had so curious a taste for trinkets 
that he could give without murmuring 
twenty golden pounds for a bracelet of black 
beads, went out from the tavern in Gravel- 
lane into the Night. There was no hackney- 
coach waiting for him now, and there was 
none at hand; but had he not that ample 
Spanish cloak round him ? What, then, should 
he care for the rain ? 

Which began to pour down just then in 
torrents, rapidly, perpendicularly, persistently, 
relentlessly, as though the clerk of the weather 
had been cognisant of the myriads of fools 
who are always going about the world trying 
to set the Thames on fire, and were, himself, 



THE NIGHT. 93' 

benevolently determined to frustrate that 
aquatic arson. It rained so fast and so fiercely, 
that though Gravel Lane at most times swarms 
-svith gossiping women, and beggars, and 
drunkards, and impoverished dogs, and hatters 
more or less mad, the wearer of the Spanish 
cloak had very nearly the whole street to 
himself. What few night wanderers were 
abroad cowered in doorways; the dogs crept 
into dry places, under carts and empty barrels, 
and dreamed of unattainable paunch; the 
hatters went home; and the drunkards 
thronged all the tippling shops, rejoiced for 
once to have a leo^itimate cause for seekinor 
shelter- As the traveller sped onward, and 
meeting from time to time with a hackney- 
coach hailed it, he was answered either surlily 
or derisively that he could by no means lodge 
in one of those vehicles. He seemed to give 
up the pursuit of wheeled vehicles under diffi- 
culties at last, and walked doggedly on. 

It rained so hard that the spirited pro- 
prietors of several small chandlers' shops 
put up their shutters, and betook themselves 



94 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

to pipes, despairing of doing any more trade 
that night; so hard, that the oyster man, 
the sprat and apple woman, the renter of the 
potato-can, and he who sold pies, abandoned 
out-door traffic in despair, and rushing, rain- 
streaming into crowded bars, disposed of their 
merchandise at alarming sacrifices; so hard, 
that the panes of the gas-lamps were obscured, 
and the gas within could only giVe a moist 
and marshy glimmer; so hard, that the 
itinerant vendors of umbrellas, who had 
gone to bed in disgust at the fineness of 
the day's forepart, woke up, hearing the rain 
scourging the window panes, and contem- 
plated dressing, going out, and making a 
little fortune by the sale of ginghams that 
night alone, till, hearing it rain even harder 
still, they concluded there was no place 
like home, and wrapping themselves . secure 
rogues! . in their tattered blankets, went 
to sleep again, and had visions of an Utopia 
of umbrella- selling, where it was always 
raining, and where it was equally punishable 
by death for a man to be without a second- 



THE NIGHT. 95 

hand umbrella as to be with a new one. It 
rained so hard that Gervase Falcon was wet 
through, Spanish cloak and all, by the time 
he had reached the Elephant and Castle. 

Of course he had strayed thither, losing 
his way among the congeries of roads . 
leading all and always to the Elephant, but 
apparently no where else . -with which ma- 
levolent surveyors have ornamented, but 
decidedly failed to utilise, the boroughs of 
Lambeth and Southwark. And the Elephant 
even, to him unused to these unaristocratic 
localities, was not much of an oasis in the 
watery desert. He might have wandered 
up roads and down roads, finding himself 
still close to the Elephant, till morning ; but 
by chance there happened to be a solitary 
hackney-coach disengaged, at the door of that 
renowned hostelry. He cast himself into the 
vehicle, and told the coachman to drive him 
home. Home, you understand; to that fine 
mansion in Grosvenor Square^ where there 
had been the brave wedding that morning. 

Was it that the gas was of inferior quality 



96 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

in 1830, or that indeed the lamps were 
effected by the prevalent moisture, or that 
Gervase Falcon's eyes were dimmed and 
weakly ? For though gas was plentiful 
enough, and there were numerous shops 
still open, he seemed to be journeying 
through a valley of black shadows. He 
did not see the gaily-lit taverns, the flaring 
butchers', which keep open so late as to give 
cause for assumption that the lower classes 
of this country are considerably more ad- 
dicted to hot meat suppers than is generally 
supposed; but he could always see the red 
and green bottles in the chemists' shop win- 
dows, and looked inquisitively at the reflec- 
tions of their parti-coloured show flasks in 
the wet pavement. There were a great many 
chemists' shops between the Elephant and 
Castle and Grosvenor Square. 

So many, that as he was nearing the 
termination of his journey, he stopped the 
coach in Mount Street, and alighting at a 
shop full of Medical Bengal lights in the 
shape of bottles, asked the lad who was 



THE NIGHT. 97 

dozing behind the counter for some scented 
lozenges . something he wanted, he said, 
to take away the smell of smoking. The 
youthful Galen, who was very sleepy and 
very stupid, began to rummage fitfully among 
the stock, in the hope that something might 
turn up . cantharides, tincture of rhubarb, 
colocynth, prepared lint, or spirits of wine . 
which the customer might think was the 
right thing, and so purchase; for chemists 
and chemists' assistants were not nearly so 
careful or so attentive in supplying the right 
drugs in 1830 as in 1860. Accidents did 
really sometimes happen then, from gross 
negligence^ which they never do now . oh 
dear, no ! under any circumstances. 

As the customer, however, wanted lozenges, 
and would have nought but lozenges, the 
sleepy lad was fain to summon his master, 
who . a little, round, punchy man, with a bald 
head like a Dutch cheese . came out of his 
comfortable back parlour, very warm and 
shining, and with a balmy odour of pork- 
chops about him, as if he had been disturbed 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

from his supper. *' Lozenges to take away 
the smell of smoking did the gentleman 
want? Surely, surely. Here were some 
now (taking them triumphantly from a jar 
labelled ' Tamarinds ') that would take away 
the smell of anything from tobacco to tur- 
pentine, but were extra good for smoking. 
Would the gentleman take an ounce of those 
lozenges, the celebrated Tee-loo-goo Pectoral 
Comfits, recommended by the Faculty?" 

Yes, the gentleman would take them. They 
were tied up, he paid for them, and re-entered 
the coach, sucking one of the lozenges as he 
rode . to judge, doubtless, of their efficacy 
in taking away the smell of tobacco smoke ; 
he who had never touched a pipe or a cigar 
in his life. Was he about to commence that 
baleful habit of tobacco smoking now ? 

He dismissed the hackney-coach at the 
corner of Grosvenor Square, and walked 
towards his own house through the rain. 
He paid the coachman his fare, so prodigious 
a one . even for a hackney-coach fare . that 
the Jarvey quite lost his self-possession, and 



THE NIGHT. 99 

was almost inclined to quarrel witli the 
generous traveller, for not giving him cause 
to grumble. He compromised the matter, 
however, by swearing at his horses, and with 
tongue and whip led those forlorn animals 
a terrible life, till he obtained another fare 
in North Audley Street, who was a stingy 
fare, and not paying him more than twice 
his due, afforded Jarvey an opportunity of 
abusing him till he had smoothed his ruffled 
spirits. 

It was strange that a wayfarer from home 
so late, and in so fearful a night, should, 
when close to a luxurious abode, seem re- 
luctant to enter it; yet Gervase Falcon 
walked three times round Grosvenor Square, 
in the rain, before he stopped even, at the 
door of his own fine house. Once he leaned 
against the railings as if faint and weary; 
once he turned as though he would retrace 
his footsteps away from the square altogether ; 
once he stopped beneath a gas-lamp, and drew 
out that morocco case that held the bracelet 
like a serpent, sheltering it as well as he 



100 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

could from the rain with his cloak. But a 
great plash of moisture came, and blurred 
the dainty white satin lining of the case, 
and he hastily shut it, and walked on. 

The neighbouring church clock struck out 
twelve slowly and timidly, as though it too 
were wet through and dispirited. Gervase 
Falcon waited till the last peal of the bell 
had died away with a moist echo, like the 
sigh of an expiring wave, and then he went 
up his white and black marble chequered 
steps, opened his door with a latch-key, and 
so into the hall of his grand house. 

Where all was still as Death. Gervase 
Falcon, being a great, good and rich man, 
kept a hall-porter, of course . a fat hall-porter 
. a very Great Tun of Heidelberg in livery ; 
but being also a merciful man, he was mer- 
ciful to that obese amalgam of three flunkies 
rolled into one, and suffered him to sleep in 
his comfortable bed, instead of keeping night 
watch in the huge, black, alcove of a hall- 
chair, which^ all leather and gilt nails . . a 
very bower of Beef and British respectability 



THE NIGHT. 101 

. . snoozed by itself into a remote corner 
of the great hall, where it loomed among the 
shadows imposingly. His own silver bed- 
candle-stick^ with its waxen taper and chased 
extinguisher, awaited him on a slab. He 
took it, and went up stairs, creeping carefully 
as though he feared to wake the mice, or 
to trouble the innocent dreams of the black- 
beetles in the coal-cellar. I have heard that 
there are black-beetles even in Grosvenor 
Square, and that a daddy-longlegs has been 
detected ere now in the basement of Buck- 
ingham Palace. The most devoted husband, 
coming home from his club, could not have 
been more considerate. But Gervase Falcon 
had always been distinguished as a respect- 
able man. 

There did not, on the face of the facts, 
appear to be much necessity for all this cau- 
tion on the part of the Master of the house. 
It had but just chimed midnight, which was 
by no means a late or dissipated hour for so 
grand and so fashionable a dwelling. Aitch- 
bone, the hall-porter, though released from 



102 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the night watch, it is true, had by no means 
gone to bed yet, but was indulging in 
placid intercommunication with John-Peter 
and his comrades, in the Servants' Hall below. 
But then Mr. Falcon had always been so 
considerate a gentleman, so kind a master. 
He did not like to disturb his servants un- 
necessarily, even at that comparatively early 
hour. 

For so devoted a husband and so respect- 
able a man, it was passing strange that he 
should not at once have repaired to the sleep- 
ing apartment of his own lawful wife. His 
lawful wiie, certainly! But it was not to 
Caroline Falcon's bedchamber that Gervase 
Falcon betook himself, but to that impromptu 
sick-room whither the wretched woman who 
had fallen down dead drunk in the hall had 
been removed. And as he stole softly up, 
like a thief in the night . and, indeed, he 
was intent on Robbery, for he who takes 
away aught, not his own to give, is a Robber 
. he kept whispering to himself, whispering 
over and over again . 



THE NIGHT. 103 

" To unscrew the tail end of the clasp, and 
take the fourth bead on the string, and warm 
it at the candle . warm it at the candle. 
Yes, that was what he told me . that was 
what he told me." 

Softly, oh! so softly he went into the 
room where the sick person had been. Lint, 
nurse, by the side of the bed, the curtains 
of which were closely drawn. Lint, nurse, 
fast in a stolid, stony sleep. He felt im- 
mensely relieved when he found Lint, nurse, 
so fast asleep . so close to the table where 
the physic bottles and empty cups and glasses 
were. 

He had had the morocco case out before 
this, and had drawn off some beads, and 
held ONE between his finger and thumb. 
He cast a covetous eye towards the candle 
in its night-shade, as though he would have 
liked to warm something in its light; but 
Lint, nurse, might wake, so he refrained, 
just then; for he must be cautious. He 
kept repeating to himself that he must be very 
cautious. 



104 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Cautious! the devils must have laughed 
to hear him! With all his caution he 
had been patiently accumulating a body of 
evidence against himself, from the moment 
he had called the hackney-coach that evening 
. enough to hang him as high as Haman. 

He had slipped the shining black bead, 
that was the fourth from the tail-end of the 
clasp, into his waistcoat-pocket. The mo- 
rocco case lay on the table. There was 
a curious clasp to that curious bracelet . 
the head and tail of a serpent; and when 
the clasp was closed the tail was in the ser- 
pent's mouth . a curious emblem, and a very 
fit one. 

He thought it fit and curious, as, glancing 
again at Lint, nurse, and satisfying himself 
that she was still fast asleep, he, with a hand 
that had been unaccountably shaking all that 
day, and was shaking more than ever now, . 
he, with a face ghastlier, and eyes more 
terrible than at any time before, drew aside the 
curtains of the bed to look upon the sick 
woman. 



THE NIGHT. 105 

As Judith to look on Holofernes, as Jael on 
Sisera ; as Brinviliers on her husband ; as Theo- 
dore Broughton, as Castragnes on their victims. 

Murder before Heaven ! Murder most foul 
and most unnatural ! AYilful, barbarous, 
horrid murder ! 

Not yet. 

Stolen out while Lint, nurse, sJept. Spirited 
away . forced away, inveigled away . it 
mattered not. The bed was empty . the 
wretched woman was gone; the Skeleton- 
Secret was abroad again, stalking forth like 
the pestilence at noonday. 

In a paroxysm of rage and terror, he fell 
now to shaking the heavy sleeping nurse, 
now to tugging at the bed-room bell; but 
for all he shook, and almost buffeted the 
insensible Lint, she neither opened eye nor 
spoke word. 

Down stairs they were more wakeful. 
John-Peter came up frightened: imagining 
that the mad woman had arisen from her 
bed, and was performing a fantasia on the 
bell, intending to call him, John-Peter, up 



106 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Stairs, and devour him ; or that she had fallen 
on Mrs. Lint, and rent that attendant on 
the sick asunder. He was the more amazed 
to find the bed empty, and his master standing 
on the carpet, ghastly and furious. 

" Where is she V 

The domestic could no more answer than 
he could have conjugated a Greek verb. All 
he could say was that Mr. Tinctop had visited 
the invalid about nine o'clock . that the porter 
being at supper in the servants' hall, he, John- 
Peter, had let the Surgeon's Assistant out, and 
had been told by him that the patient was 
getting on nicely. And this was all he knew, 
he was sure. 

John-Peter omitted to mention . -perhaps he 
forgot it . that Mr. Tinctop . (haffable gent 
that; no pride about 'im, has there is about 
some deppity doctors) . had, at the time he 
opened the street door fer him, presented him 
with a bright half-crown, wherewith to drink 
his "'elth;" and that he, John-Peter, who had 
partaken of mixed liquors on that exciting 
day, to float a four-oared cutter, had just 



THE NIGHT. 107 

slipped round " promiscuous" to the house 
of refreshment in the adjacent Mews, the 
"Eobin Eedlegs," an establishment much 
frequented by the gentlemen of his cloth, . to 
partake of a "cooler," after his unwonted 
potations. He had discreetly left the door 
ajar, and returning (after some ten minutes' 
enjoyment of the " cooler" and the conversa- 
tion of some other gentlemen in livery, moving 
in the most fashionable circles) found the rain 
beginning to descend. These particulars, 
however, being cosas de Espafia^ "affairs of 
Eg}^pt," or at least, matters appertaining to 
the Royal Arch, the grand orient of masonic 
flunkeydom, could not possibly have interested 
his master . how should they? . So John-Peter 
discreetly said nothing about them. 

Where was Mrs. Falcon ? 

She had ordered the carriage shortly after 
Mr. Falcon left, and had been driven to Lord 
Baddington's, in Curzon Street. The coach- 
man was to fetch her, with 'Enry as footman, 
at twelve. They were gone to fetch her, now. 

He might go. 



108 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

So, John^Peter being also departed, Gervasc. 
Falcon took the candle from the night shade, 
and held it before the face of the sleeping 
nurse. He shook her again roughly by the 
shoulder, and bawled in her ear . still unavail- 
ingly. She snored heavily on. 

He sat down in a chair by the empty bed 
side . the bed which, tumbled and tossed about, 
and with its downy billows throwing great 
black shadows, looked like a grave newly 
rifled of a corpse; the bed, in the folds of 
whose heavy drapery mocking devils seemed 
to hide, pointing at him with denouncing 
fingers ; the bed, every sprig and flower in the 
pattern of whose furniture had a Face in it 
with fierce, staring eyes: and, with his heavy 
hands, tried to think, and to form a plan of 
action. He formed his plans as drunken men 
frame schemes of impossible achievements ; and 
mad letters they will write to women they 
love, believing strongly in their feasibility for 
the thousandth part of a second, and then 
dismissing them with a desperate laugh. The 
nurse had been drugged : it was easy to see 



THE NIGHT. 109 

that. That villain Fleem had stolen the 
woman away. No; it was not Fleem, it was 
Tinctop: a fellow who, yesterday, he would 
have thought unworthy to garter his hose : a 
wretched doctor's boy : a miserable pill-blister 

. a low-life hound of an apothecary . so he 
called him in that proud, vengeful, aristocratic 
mind of his, . but who was his Master now. 
Stay, it was his wife. Should he kill her, 
Tinctop, Fleem? Kill them all? His wife 
was at his Uncle Baddington's. They were 
in full conclave about him. She . the woman 

. was there, denouncing him. His eyeballs 
grey hot at the thought : the vessels in his 
throat seemed to collapse, his teeth chattered, 
a ring of cold sweat crowned his forehead, and 
his heart moved upon itself like a sick man on 
his weary pallet. Just then a cinder fell from 
the grate on to the hearth, and he shivered in 
every limb, and the hair of his flesh stood up. 

Who could he bribe ? Whose silence could 
he buy? Fleem . Tinctop. He was not a 
rich man ; still he could raise thousands on his 
name. But he could not bribe them all. He 
could not bribe her. It was too late. 



110 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

He would fly. But whither? He would 
deny it all. To what avail ? It was too late, 
too late, for all save One thing. 

Should he wait? For what ? For exposure, 
detection, infamy, disgrace, beggary, ruin ? 
No; it were better so, better so, much better 
so. God forgive him. He listened for a 
moment at the door, to be certain that there 
was no one coming up stairs. He held the 
candle again to the nurse's face to see if she 
still slept ; and still did she sleep. He did not 
try to wake her now, for it were better so. 
God forgive him. 

The fourth bead from the tail end of the 
clasp must be warmed at the candle. Sleep 
on. Nurse Lint; for the trembling fingers hold 
the bead, and warm it, warm it . till strangely 
this seeming crystal globule, grows soft and 
elastic. Sleep on Nurse Lint, Gervase Falcon 
has drawn the curtains, and is on his knees by 
the bed-side. He has slipped all the beads, 
save ONE, on to the string, and has closed the 
clasp again, and laid the trinket, coiled up in 
its case, on the table. 



THE NIGHT. Ill 

He raised himself on his knees, and thrusting 
the globule he had warmed into his mouth, 
crunched it between his teeth, and swallowed 
it. Then fell forward on his face dead. 

Watchman, what of the Night ? The Xight 
was gone and past for Gervase Falcon. The 
DAWN was come, paling for him the horizon of 
Eternity. Xow, wake up Nurse Lint, and 
wake up all the house, and take this man, and 
bury him in a crimson velvet box, for he is a 
Lord's nephew. 



112 



CHAP. VL 

CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK SEES IT ALL. 

^VO be ragged, destitute, hungry, and in debt, 
and suddenly to be placed in possession of 
twenty pounds sterling, is in itself an occur- 
'I'ence of so unlooked-for and gratifying a 
nature, that the indulgence of the more jocund 
and convivial feelings of humanity on the part 
of the recipient must be regarded as a natural 
consequence of the event. The present writer 
had once a fourth share in a freehold situate in 
a slum in SomersTown ; and that freehold being, 
under the terms of a Will, sold by auction at 
Garraway's, and realising some score more 
pounds than had been anticipated, the writer 
is not ashamed to confess, that he immediately 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK SEES IT ALL. 113 

cast all his preconceived plans for a chop and 
a glass of sherry at the *' Cock," in Thread- 
needle Street to the winds ; and, for the space 
of about ten minutes, lived at the rate of ten 
thousand a year, inasmuch as he revelled in a 
half-pint basin of real turtle, and a glass of iced 
punch at Birch's. The extravagance was scored 
up against him at the time, doubtless, with 
triply-notched chalk, and he will have to howl 
for it some day ; but the turtle was delicious, 
and he did not forget to drink in iced punch 
the health of the speculative purchaser who 
had bidden so boldly for the freehold ; which 
for his (the writer's) part, albeit it looked very 
well in the auctioneer's advertisement, was, to 
look at, about the dismallest tenement one 
could realise after a conception of Tennyson's 
"Moated Grange," and Hood's "Haunted 
House." 

With twenty golden effigies of his Majesty 
rattling in his trousers' pockets, Captain John 
Pollyblank sat on the edge of the pembroke 
table in the equivocal parlour of the " Blue 
Pump " until very late on the same wet night 

VOL. I. I 



114 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

that the man in the cloak came to buy the 
bracelet of him, and whose use of that bracelet 
a little after midnight you have heard in the 
sixth chapter. The outward appearance . as 
to vestments . of the Captain was in no wise 
changed. He was as shabby, ragged, dirty, 
and disreputable looking as before; but it 
needed no tongue in the Captain's cheek, no 
wink in the Captain's eye, no hand-slapping of 
the Captain's pocket, to tell you that Captain 
Jack Pollyblank was in luck and in funds, and 
didn't care twopence for the Sheriff of 
Surrey, 

He had not been idle since the departure of 
the strange gentleman who had bought the 
bracelet that had not four pennyworth of 
gold in it, but just the worth of One Human 
Life prisoned in the fourth bead from the tail 
end of the clasp. Beef and pickles had been 
ordered for the Captain's refection, and brought 
in and voraciously consumed. The purl had 
been allowed ignominiously to cool, and grow 
flat and mawkish ; and a real bowl of punch . 
the very best, both as to punch and bowl, that 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK SEES IT ALL. 115 

.the " Blue Pump " could put on its pembroke 
for five shillings . steamed at the Captain's 
elbow. He had ordered Dick, the waiter, to 
have what he liked ; and Dick had had what 
he liked, and a great deal more than was good 
for him. He had invited Simon Meggot, 
victualler, to partake of punch. So liberal 
was the Captain on the strength of his newly- 
fledged prosperity, that I have no doubt he 
would have treated the company to glasses 
round of anything to which they chose to give 
a name : only the night was so wet, that the 
''Blue Pump" parlour was deserted by its 
usual frequenters . medical students attached 
to the neighbouring Hospitals, St. Fawkes's, 
St. Griddle's, and St. Catherine Wheeler's ; and 
sometimes even nascent practitioners from the 
great west-end Hospital of St. Lazarus. Me- 
dical students are more choice now-a-days in 
their houses of entertainment, and would in- 
dignantly resent being called " Sawbones." 
The company in the bar, consisting mainly of 
inebriated hatters, and those peripatetic dealers 
in fish, fruit, and vegetables, known under the 



116 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

generic name of " Costers," with a sprinkling 
of slipshod women, babies in arms, and mendi- 
cant cripples without any arms at all, were 
not a company who could be treated by a 
gentleman of the Captain's position and pro- 
spects. So Jack sat and smoked his pipe, and 
drank his punch by himself, indulging in Al- 
naschar-like dreams the while, and fingering 
his twenty golden sovereigns; for his riches 
were still intact. 

"And a remarkable circumstance it is," 
reasoned the Capitalist, " that when a man is 
known to have no money, everybody wants to 
see the colour of that money before they will 
sell him a penny-loaf or a saveloy; whereas, 
directly he is known to have plenty of money, 
nobody wants to see it, but insist on selling 
him turtle or venison on credit. That chuff, 
Meggot, would have refused me trust for four- 
penn'orth of liquor an hour since; and now I 
am at least eight shillings into those flinty ribs 
of his, only because he has caught a glimpse of 
the twenty pounds my uncle from India made 
me a present of. It would be only serving 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK SEES IT ALL. 117 

the rascal out not to pay him at all, even 



now." 



" My uncle from India," he continued, with 
complacent thoughtfulness, emptying the ashes 
from his pipe on the table, and slowly refilling 
that calumet ; '' my uncle from India is a most 
remarkable relation. A species of Dutch uncle, 
I may say. A close card, my uncle. A sly 
card. He wanted that for himself^ did he? 
Ah! I daresay. However, it's no business of 
mine. The stuff will tell no tales." 

It never entered the wretched man's mind 
that it was his own immortal Business to know 
the purpose to which he, to whom he had sold 
a subtile and deadly Poison, intended to apply 
it . a poison that, save a slight odour, would 
leave no mark, no sign, no trace, internal or 
external, on the body of the person to whom 
it had been administered. It never entered 
into his mind to reflect with horror, that he 
was by that time the guilty and cold-blooded 
accomplice in either a murder or a suicide. We 
prate about conscience, and i^-s still, small voice. 
We talk about stifling conscience, drugging it, 



118 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

searing it. I tell you, there are fifty thousand 
villains that swagger in the streets every day 
between Temple Bar and Hyde Park Corner . 
villains with consciences as loud-voiced as the 
trumpets that blew down the walls of Jericho. 
Such villains let their conscience bray out as 
blatantly as it pleases. They laugh at con- 
science, and call it "my boy''; and dig it in 
the ribs, and clap it on the shoulder. Grave 
doctors tell us, that every Murderer is, to a 
certain extent, mad when he murders. I be- 
lieve that Murderers abound, who, calculating 
chances, nicely weigh the odds between im- 
punity and the scaffold ; who, with a Conscience 
wide awake, and watchful as a police-inspector 
or a newspaper editor, go and murder; and 
take conscience with them, simply because they 
want to murder; and even when they hnoiu 
detection to be certain, and the gallows immi- 
nent, yet go and murder, because it suits their 
murderous purpose. And it is certain ,that 
these men go on studying Greek and Hebrew, 
betting on Derby s ' and Oaks innumerable ; 
marrying wives, and rearing children ; cram- 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLAyK SEES IT ALL. 119 

ming stiychnine down the throats of their 
friends and relations; eating pig and plum- 
sauce; and sleeping comfortably in four-post 
beds, and nightcaps with tassels that tie under 
the chin . and murdering still with Conscience 
at their elbow. Paradoxical it may seem ; but 
I believe the poor Archbishop of Paris's con- 
science, or that of anv other thoroughly good, 
harmless man, troubled and pained him about 
five hundred times more, than the conscience 
of M. Yerger . or any other bloodthirsty vil- 
lain . troubled that late ecclesiastic and as- 
sassin. 

'' Some men," was the profound remark of 
the man with a Conscience, his new pipe being 
lighted to his satisfaction, " are said to be ready 
for anything, from pitch-and-toss to man- 
slaughter. To the first I may say I have been 
addicted from my youth upwards. With the 
last. Jack, it strikes me you are not veiy far 
from intimate acquaintance." 

"I wonder what it was," he resumed, "Love, 
Forgery. a Brother, or a Wife, that stood in 
his way. Somebody to get rid of, I'll go bail. 



120 THE BADDINGTON FEERAGE. 

Was there ever such a curious thing as my 
being in this very room, not three months 
since, perdition hard up (though, by the way, 
that isn't so curious a thing), and on a night 
just as miserable as this one? Was there any- 
thing so fortuitous as for that respectable pre- 
occupied individual to come here in that iden- 
tical and interesting Spanish cloak of his, 
quite, as I am willing to believe, by accident, 
and merely driven in by stress of weather, 
while in pursuit of a wild-goose chase after a 
woman . what did he say was the name she 
passed by? . A woman about forty years of 
age, with black hair, and deucedly dissipated- 
looking, who, he said, had been last heard of 
living in a three-pair-back in Sun Court, and 
who, according to him, was a most uncommon 
good one at the rum-bottle ! By the way, he 
had been rather a good one at some bottle or 
another himself, that night ; for I never saw a 
closer imitation of a party who had been going 
in rather freely at the 'maddening wine cup/ 
Maddening wine cup! It must have been 
port by bucketsful, or sherry in quart-pots. 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK SEES IT ALL. 121 

Was there anything ever so curious, either, as 
the way in which he went on here at the mad- 
dening brandy-flask, likewise at the maniacal 
gin-noggin, to say nothing of the frantic 
whisky measure? He emptied them into that 
respectable throttle of his, as though he had 
been a waste butt turned into a churchwarden, 
or banker, or a Lord. He must have been 
one of them.'' 

The bird's-eye had burned down low into 
the bowl again, and Jack Polly blank contem- 
platively used a fork-prong for a tobacco- 
stopper. 

" Drunk as William who came to grief, 
drunk as the pet female spaniel of the tradi- 
tional violinist, was likewise John Pollyblank, 
armiger," he still mused, "on the eventful 
evenino: when it rained cats and doojs. Out 
came the domestic cat from J. P.'s bag. 
Blown was Jack Pollyblank' s gaff . blown as a 
balloon. I told him my own story; I bor- 
rowed a 'quid,' a saffron- coloured jx)und from 
him ; I told him of that bracelet I got hold of 
in the Black Town at Calcutta. I wish I'd 



122 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

never seen it, nor her who gave it me; for 
she's got more of those sort of Avares in stock, 
I know, and she'll murder me with a toothpick, 
or a shirt-pin, or a waistcoat-button, some day, 
I'll be bound. 

" Why should I regret it, though ? He said 
he'd look me up again if he wanted it, and 
now, by Jove ! he has looked me up, and he 
wants it, I suppose, for somebody; and Jack 
Pollyblank is twenty pounds the wiser, and 
can see no law why he should not enjoy him- 
self thereupon. Hoorah!" 

So mused, smoking and drinking, Captain 
Pollyblank. He was an atrocious scoundrel 
and villain, with a dash of humour and a spice 
of honhommie in him; would robbing Peter of 
five pounds invest five pence in treating Paul 
to drink, and would have his joke when he per- 
jured himself. These, ladies and gentlemen, 
are delightful social characteristics of about 
the most dangerous class of these roaring 
lions, who are continually running up and down 
seeking whom they may devour. When the 
demon is a jolly fellow and is fond of his joke, 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLAXK SEES IT ALL. 123 

he is about the worst demon that you can meet 
on this side Tophet. 

Captain Pollyblank's reflections had not 
been wholly of a dry nature ; for at their ter- 
mination he found the punch-bowl empty. 
Rino^ino^ the bell to order that festive vessel 
to be replenished, he suddenly became aware 
of the presence of another visitor in the par- 
lour of the ''Blue Pump." 

In the person of a slight man of no parti- 
cular age, who, if his name had happened to 
have been Smith, might have been called "Old 
Smith" or "Young Smith" indifi'erently, and 
with equal safety; a person who was straw- 
coloured as to hair, and raven-hued as to 
costume, and who must have been, seemingly, 
in the receipt of fern- seed, and so have walked 
invisibly, for he had come no man knew whence, 
and no man knew how. At least. Captain 
Polly blank didn't. But the mysterious ap- 
pearance was there, at all events. 

" Why, it's Sal Tinctop!" the Captain cried 
in a loud, cheer}^ voice. "Welcome, Sal. 
Welcome, little stranger. Welcome^ thou 



124 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

silent, pale-faced, snub-nosed haystack. Wel- 
come to the halls of Pollyblank; for Polly- 
blank is in funds, and will treat thee royally, 
'Chy-ike!'" 

With which mysterious adjuration, or ex- 
pletive, or masonic ^^jodeV^ of "Chy-ike !" what- 
ever it meant, Jack made a feint of embracing 
the straw-coloured man in black, whom he 
addressed as Sal Tinctop, and welcomed him 
to the halls of Pollyblank ; then, and for that 
time situate in the parlour of the *'Blue 
Pump." 

"I see it all," exclaimed the Captain. 

Just then the clock struck twelve. I won- 
der what it was the Captain saw. 



1-25 



CHAP. VIL 

THE MORNING APTER. 

^HE reader who pays attention to the 
march of time, will remember that it was 
twelve o'clock at night when the convivial 
Pollyblank hailed the entrance into the parlour 
of the "Blue Pump/' of a person of light 
complexion known to him by the appellation 
of Tinctop, and who could not by any pos- 
sibility have been a nearer relative to the 
morally deaf and dumb assistant of Mr. Fleem, 
F.R.C.S., than he was, seeing that he hap- 
pened to be that deaf and dumb assistant 
himself. 

The mere appearance of this confidential 
practitioner had been sufficient to cause 



126 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Captain Polly blank to explain that " he saw 
it all," but it was not till about two o'clock 
on the morning after ^ and subsequent to the 
consumption of quantities of punch and to- 
bacco, which to those unacquainted with the 
capacity for holding alcohol and inhaling 
nicotine possessed by the Captain, would 
have seemed unattainably immense, that he 
started up, declaring thafc he saw it now as 
clear as crystal, and that Mr. Tinctop was 
a thrice-distilled ass . only that he did not 
use so mild an epithet as that . for not en- 
abling: him to see it all two hours sooner. 

" You sappy Spooney ! you dolt ! you nin- 
compoop! you jolter-headed, batter-pudding- 
brained griffin ! you bag of soft sawdust from 
a timber head," he cried out in a rage; 
" you've been leading me on the wrong scent, 
with your confounded humming and hawing. 
Why couldn't you come straight to the point, 
pap-skull?" 

" How was I to know that you knew the 
parties?" meekly remonstrated the maligned 
Mr. Tinctop. " What a one you are to go 



THE MORNING AFTER. 127 

on, Jack ! How could I tell that Mr. Falcon 
of Grosvenor Square " 

" There, hold your tongue," hastily inter- 
posed his friend. "Stop," he added sud- 
denly, seizing the deaf and dumb assistant 
by the collar of his coat, and looking steadily, 
and with a kind of humorous ferocity, in his 
face. " Look you here, Tinctop of mine," 

'' W-w-well^ what is it Jack?" stammered 
that gentleman, among whose personal quali- 
ties, it may be observed, once for all, personal 
courage did not by any means shine, 

" You have known me for a long time, 
and you know me pretty well, I think," 
. " Y-y-yes, Jack." 

" Listen, then, to the wisdom of Polly- 
blank, my friend," the Captain resumed quite 
jocosely. " You have made a communication 
to me to-night which you could not help 
yourself in making, . seeing that the Three 
Fates, the Nine Muses, and the Board of 
Ordnance have decreed that you, Seth Tinc- 
top, shall be for ever and a day my Pump, 
and that I, Jack Pollyblank, shall be your 



128 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

sucker. That communication is useful to 
me . may make my fortune, and yours too 
into the bargain. On the other hand, I have 
told you certain things that might, hereafter 
(if supported, which they are not, by credible 
evidence) lead certain fools to believe that 
I have been an accessory before a certain 
fact. Observe: There is an oracle herein 
that I intend to work, a game of hazard at 
which I mean to throw a main. If you at- 
tempt to interfere with, or cross, or counteract 
whatsoever I choose to do . if you don't 
keep that tongue of yours as tight as hand- 
cuffs between your teeth . and if you are 
not in all things my tool, deaf, dumb, blind, 
halt to everything but what I choose to tell 
you, I'll ." 

"What, Jack, what?" the victim asked 
imploringly. 

" I won't say that I'll jump upon you," 
the Captain good-naturedly explained, " or 
that I'll pitch you into the Surrey Canal, 
or that I'll cut your throat, or poison you; 
but by . , Seth Tinctop," and here he swore 



THE MOENING APTER. 1*29 

a frightful oath, " I'll Murder you!" He 
threw his friend away from him as he spoke, ' 
with sportive brutality; and then taking 
his arm in a tight, but most friendly manner, 
and saying that it was "time to travel," swag- 
gered out with him through the bar. 

If Seth Tinctop had heard Captain Polly- 
blank take any oath in the witness-box of any 
court of justice, he would have known very 
well that his friend . false, ruffianly, depraved 
as he was . would immediately afterwards 
have perjured himself chin-deep, had it suited 
him so to do, without the slightest hesitation 
or remorse. But it is a curious fact, that 
Captain Polly blank's remarks, made at two 
o'clock in the morning and when highly 
inflamed with spirituous liquors, were by 
their hearer implicitly believed, and would 
have attained as unequivocal credence had 
they lacked the immoral support of an im- 
precation. For Seth Tinctop knew his man ; 
and Captain Pollyblank knew his also. 

The landlord was fast in a sottish sleep 
behind his bar; and Dick, the waiter, drow- 

VOL. I. K 



130 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

sing by the closed door, woke up to let them 
out. " There was fifteen and eightpence 
to pay," he muttered in leaden language. 
It was perfectly in consonance with the 
more facetious phases of the Captain's cha- 
racter to have at once disabled the somnolent 
servitor by a cunningly-directed blow in some 
sensitive part of his anatomy, and, profiting 
by the bar between himself and the landlord, 
to have made a run for it, without paying 
the score at all. On the present occasion, 
however, with an integrity and a magna- 
nimity and generosity wonderful to record 
and delightful to view, the Captain threw a 
shining sovereign on the beer-stained pewter 
of the bar counter, and bade Dick take it out 
of that, and keep the change. 

Dick wanted no second telling, but sprang 
on the precious coin, taking care to bite it, 
as a measure of precaution, before he drew 
the bolts of the door. So these loving friends 
went out into the morning. 

It had cleared up wonderfully, and the 
moon was out. Interrogated by PoUyblank 



THE MORNING AFTER. 131 

as to whither he was going, Mr. Fleem's 
assistant announced his intention of returning 
home to the residence of his chief, which 
was situate in a grandly dull street, as befitted 
so eminent a practitioner, in the neighbour- 
hood of Park Lane. To this Captain Polly- 
blank rejoined, that, such being the case, 
and in consideration of the fineness of the 
weather, he would walk that way himself, 
for fear, too, he humorously added, his dear 
friend might lose himself or get into mischief. 
It is not improbable that the Captain had 
other motives in thus volunteering to ac- 
company Mr. Tinctop to his domicile. Per- 
haps he wished to walk off the fumes of 
the punch and tobacco; perhaps he desire^ 
to worm out, e7i route^ some further infor- 
mation on a subject so momentous to him. 
Be it as it may, the two walked on together 
down and up and along streets and thorough- 
fares great and small, and over bridges, till 
in due time they reached Grosvenor Square 
itself, and passing through it on their way 
to the grandly dull street close by, found 



132 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

themselves opposite Gervase Falcon's man- 
sion. Late, or rather early, as it was, there 
Tvas a crowd before the house. There were 
carriages . Mr. Fleem's and Lord Bad- 
dington's; there were constables; there was 
the beadle; and there was a miscellaneous 
assemblage of night prowlers, and people 
with apparently no homes to go to. 

The hall door was wide open ; and John- 
Peter, in a distracting des'hahille, was vainly 
endeavouring to answer five hundred ques- 
tions, categorically put, at once. Failing in 
that, he gave five hundred answers in in- 
coherent fragments, anyhow. 

What was the matter? What was the 
noise, the crowd about? Captain Pollyblank 
kept asking the question of everybody. 
Everybody answered. Death was the matter. 
Murder the matter ? No ! not murder, only 
*' sooacide." Mr. Falcon had killed his'self ; 
Mrs. Falcon, the two Misses Falcon, had 
pisoned theirselves. It was pison. And 
above the din you might hear the scared 
treble of eTohn-Feter, making a lexicological 



thp: morning aftee. J 33 

salad of his five hundred answers, and as 
a last resource imploring everybody to 
'^ crawlono;." 

Through the tumult there suddenly came 
out to his carriage, Mr. Fleem, who espying 
Tinctop his assistant, suddenly collared him, 
and demanded to know instanter ^'^wdiere the 
woman was." 

'^ Where is she, you scoundrel? " exclanned 
the indiiJ:nant suro^eon. "Where is she? 
AVhat have you done with her? " 

"I . I . don't know what you mean, 
Mr. Fleem," his deaf and dumb assistant, in 
an agony of terror, answered. He looked 
round hopelessly for Jack Polly bank, but 
the Captain had swiftly and discreetly with- 
drawn himself. 

"Didn't I tell you to let no one come 
near her, you villain?" asked Mr. Fleem. 

" And I let no one come near her," answered 
Tinctop, " except Mrs. Lint, whom you sent, 
I visited her three times during the evening; 
and left her for the last time at nine o'clock, 
and she was then in a comfortable sleep. 



134 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Mrs. Lint said slie was getting on quite 
nicely." 

" Mrs. Lint is a fool," cried his superior. 
" Mrs. Lint is a stupid fool, and a drunken 
fool. Sir; Mrs. Lint went to sleep, and we 
had all the trouble in the world to wake her. 
And she says that she must have been drugged 
with laudanum." 

"And isn't the patient better, Sir?" the 
assistant asked innocently. 

"Better, you Idiot!" exclaimed the sur- 
geon, passionately. " Better . She^s gone. 
What have you done with her ? " 

" Mr. Fleem," replied Tinctop, respectfully, 
but with as much firmness as he could infuse 
into his quavering voice, " I attended to 
your directions. I left the patient with the 
nurse you selected. Mr. Falcon's footman 
let me out at nine o'clock, after my last 
visit, and I'm not further responsible. And 
I'll trouble you, Sir, to take your hand off 
my collar." 

The surgeon unhanded his assistant, look- 
ing at him with a vexed and puzzled air. 



THE MORNING AFTER. 135 

Then he said, "Come in here;" pushed 
Tinctop into his carriage; said "Home" to 
the coachman, and began biting his nails, 
and looking at Mr. Tinctop with a more 
puzzled expression than ever. 

" What do you do in Grosvenor Square 
at three in the morning ? " he asked im- 
periously. 

" You will remember, Sir, that 3^ou gave 
me permission to absent myself after ten 
o'clock last evening, to visit a sick friend. 
I did so, and sat by his bed-side till past 
two o'clock this morning, as you were good 
enough not to limit me to time, and Mr. Scalple 
the junior being at your house. I cajne home 
through the Square, and naturally stopped, 
seeing the crowd. Has anything happened to 
Mr. Falcon, Sir?" 

" Mr. Gervase Falcon," the surgeon slowly 
answered, "has committed suicide!" 

"Good Heaven, Sir! " 

" Poisoned himself How, Heaven may 
know, but I don't. All I can say is, that 
at half-past twelve I found him, by the empty 



136 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

bed-side of that woman, stark, stiff, and dead. 
There was a powerful aromatic smell hanging 
about the body, tallying in odour \vith that 
of a box of lozenges I found on the table. 
Lozenges must be^ analyzed of course. Post- 
mortem, too, as soon as it is daylight." 

" Perhaps he died in a fit," Mr. Tinctop 
suggested. 

'. Died in a fiddlestick ! " Mr. Fleem retorted, 
testily. " I tell you he poisoned himself. 
Though how the deuce," he added, with a des- 
perately puzzled expression, '* he managed 
to do it, I know no more than Lady Eabbet- 
warrenne knows when she is going to leave 
off making Sir Hutchins Rabbetwarrenne a 
father." 

" I suppose Mrs. Falcon is dreadfully af- 
flicted," remarked the assistant, as the carriage 
drew up before Mr. Fleem' s house. 

" What business is that of yours? " was the 
polite reply. " I brought you with me to 
ascertain whether you know anything, not 
to be catechised by you. There, go to bed, 
and hold your tongue. You'll be wanted 



THE MORNING AFTER. 137 

for the post-mortem, in the morning, and for 
the inquest after that." 

So saying, and with a yawn, the dis- 
tinguished Surgeon dismissed his inferior, 
and went up-stairs to his own bed-chamber, 
mutterino^ to himself as he went alonor that it 
was a deuced strange thing, and that he 
couldn't make it out at all. 

'* Go to bed and hold my tongue," said 
the assistant, between the teeth of his mind 
as he snatched up a bed-candle, and went 
up-stairs to bed too. *' Hold my tongue ! 
That's what all of 'em say. We'll see ! We'll 
see." 

" I know more than all of 'em now, I 
think," he resumed when he was safe in his 
own little apartment, and had locked the 
door. "" She is in my hands, oho ! Jack 
can't stir a peg in the matter without me. 
I told him I had got her, and not where. 
A wrong number, oho! and a wrong street. 
He'll go there before he sleeps, ha ! ha ! I 
think I've enough, too, in ray hands, to hang 
Jack Pollyblank, and to bring all these high 



138 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and mighty Falcons on their knees. Perhaps, 
though, I'd better work with Jack; I don't 
like being alone in a swim. Jack's such a 
knowing card . he's such a safe card, too. 
I shall be sure to hear from him in the 
morning, though." 

The thoudits that he should be sure to hear 
from Jack in the morning, and that he had 
deceived Jack as to a certain number of a 
house in a certain street, were sufficient to 
cause Mr. Seth Tinctop to break out into 
a cold perspiration. He began to remember, 
with terrible distinctness, the assurance his 
friend had given him in the " Blue Pump " 
parlour, of his intentions towards him in 
case of misconduct on his part; and, as he 
remembered, he trembled. 

'' I must work with Jack," he groaned at 
last, throwing himself on his bed; "I must 
work with him ; but I'll see him hanged, and 
be the hanging of him too, some day, for all 
that." 

With which Christian hope and resolve 
he put his head on his pillow, and slept very 
soundly. 



THE MORNING AFTER. 139 

Sleep, on such a night ! Ay, they all slept. 
the surgeon and the assistant, the villain and 
the beadle, and the penny-a-liner . the 
daughters of Gervase Falcon in the first 
hours of their bereavement . the widow in 
the first agony of her widowhood ! Sleep 
mercifully knitted up the ravelled sleeve of 
their care, even for the most afflicted. All 
slept ; but none so soundly as Gervase Falcon, 
who lay with his hands clinched, and his 
jaw bound up, on the bed on which the woman 
had lain before . . lay there with lights at his 
bed-head, and the watchers of the dead at his 
feet. 



140 



CHAP. YIII. 

IX WHICH CAPTxilN POLLYBLAXK MAKES ARRANGE- 
MENTS TO INCREASE HIS CAPITAL. 

A NTICIPAXmG a scene of Equivoque of 
some sort or other between Mr. Fleem 
and liis assistant, and one which by some 
remote chance might turn out disagreeable to 
all parties, Captain Jack Pollyblank had, as 
has been hinted in the previous chapter, 
prudently withdrawn himself from the scene 
of conversational operation, immediately he 
heard Tinctop addressed. The singular 
modesty and reticence of Captain Pollyblank 
likewise prompted him to lurk behind walls 
and skulk round corners till Mr. Fleem's car- 
riage had driven away, and was well out of 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK's AERANGEMEXTS. 141 

sight ! . the collateral disappearance of Tinctop 
did not the least disturb him ; . for as his 
friend rightly augured, he knew where to find 
him; and where, and how to have him in the 
morning. 

Thus, too. when the impromptu crowd had 
dispersed, and John-Peter, by a vast exertion 
of physical and moral courage, had refused to 
answer any more questions from anybody, and 
had shut the outer door in everybody's face, 
the cautious captain did not attempt, either by 
rap, or ring, or parley, to obtain ingress to 
that House of Death, out of one, or some, or 
all of whose Living occupants he had already 
settled in his mind . with all the sternness of 
a scoundrel's idee fixe to make his fortune. 

Tinctop had given him, both at the " Blue 
Pump" and in their T^alk thence, a hurried 
outline of the Falcon-cum-Baddington genea- 
logy; and he was now passably acquainted 
with the bearings of that Peerage: still, to 
borrow an expression of the captain's, culled 
from the fruitful vocabulary of his favourite 
game of billiards, he could not yet fit all the 



142 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

right cues to the right balls; and in one or 
two instances he was at fault altogether. For 
instance he had not as yet, from what Tinctop 
had told him^ any reason to believe that the 
woman who had fallen down in the hall that 
morning was not still safely a-bed in the upper 
chamber. You, reader, have been in already. 

Another consideration prompted the captain 
to examine the ground carefully before he 
commenced his financial campaign. It was 
incumbent on him to satisfy himself as to the 
exact circumstances under which Mr. Falcon 
had died, and whether he had left anything 
behind him calculated to compromise him, 
Polly blank. And there was a last and a very 
weighty reason for the captain's reluctance to 
adopt any rash course of procedure, in the fact 
that he had been swallowing strong liquids, 
and inhaling the fumes of strong tobacco for 
the major part of the last five hours, and that 
he was now considerably more than three parts 
drunk. 

" Which is a state," the captain (round the 
corner) soliloquised, quite coherently, but 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK's ARRANGEMENTS. 143 

somewhat huskily as to utterance : " which is 
a state in which I never do business. Seeing 
which, I shall just indulge in a pint of Snob- 
bins and a pipe, till my head gets clear, and 
leave the bereaved swells to their peaceful 
slumbers. Pleasant dreams to 'em!" 

Captain Pollyblank had been brought up in 
quite a Lacedaemonian school of deboshed 
discipline, and looked upon soda-water as a 
new-fangled invention; it was comparatively 
so then . and as the diluent of milksops. 
When he had takan too much, which occurred 
as often as he could get enough, he inclined, 
as a refresher and brain -cooler, to the genial 
" Snobbins," which was indeed the smallest 
ale or the smallest beer that he could obtain 
at the lowest public-house or the humblest 
chandler's shop. There is more virtue in 
small-beer than has yet been chronicled. 

On this occasion, however, the Captain, 
feeling extraordinarily feverish and thirsty, 
looked round for some time vainly for an open 
tavern or shop: for night-houses were, as 
may well be imagined, scouted from the 



144 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

genteel precincts of Grosvenor Square. By 
great good luck, however, the "Eobin Recllegs" 
had opened its doors a good two hours earlier 
than usual, in consequence of the profitably 
mournful event close by, and was already 
driving a brisk trade. Into this ark of refuge 
Jack Pollyblank incontinently dived, and order- 
ing the " Snobbins " in question, proceeded to 
pour that refreshing beverage down his parched 
throat. 

" Hot coppers," the captain said, Avith a 
complacent sigh, as he replaced the pewter 
mug on the counter. 

" Hot, indeed ; comes of being up all night, 
racketting about," said, in a responsive echo, 
a voice close by. 

Captain Pollyblank turned sharply round, 
and was on the point of asking, with consider- 
able irritation, what the Devil the speaker 
meant by taking his words up, when he 
caught sight of the speaker himself; on which 
the expression of his face immediately changed 
from hostility to amity, and he thrust forward 
a bunch of very coarse, clumsy, dirty fingers 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK^S ARRANGEMENTS. 145 

which belonged to a hand of his, and clutched 
the hand of the person who had mentioned 
hot coppers in connection with stooping out 
all night in the most friendly manner. 

'' Why, Zillah the betrayed, my hearty, 
how goes it ?" he cried. 

Zillah the Betrayed was a flat-footed, sham- 
bling, Leaning-Tower-of-Pisa of a man, about 
forty, all askew, like that celebrated sample of 
architecture not quite right in its head. The 
top of Zillah's head was not quite right either, 
for it was flat on the surface, with a round 
fleshy nob like a dome dominating a city. You 
had frequent opportunities of remarking this 
curious feature on Zillah's head formation ; for 
he (he was a he) was continually taking off a 
hat with a rusty crape band to it, and a brim 
quite vandyked with long fingering, extract a 
cotton pocket-handkerchief, literally snuff- 
coloured, for it had only the colour of the snuff 
wherewith it was impregnated^ and wiping 
with it his face, which, though pale, was in a 
state of perpetual perspiration. Desperately 
pock-marked was Zillah the betrayed, and the 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

few tufts of hair he possessed, chiefly about 
the temples and the bumps of the raaxillaries, 
were in colour as red as the foxes of the field. 
He had a flaming red nose, set amidships in 
his face . a nose that was a very cairn of 
crimson cherry-stones, a very standard rose- 
tree of grog-blossoms. An apter simile might 
perhaps be found, were I to compare that 
rubicund truncated cone to a big beet root set 
up on one end in the middle of a ploughed 
field, with twinkling little eyes on either side, 
like field mice eagerly v/atching and anxious 
to nibble it. 

The attire of Zillah the betrayed was black 
in hue, but of the rustiest and the most woe- 
beo-one. There were more button holes than- 
buttons on the breast of his coat, though that 
o*arment was closed right up to the neck, and 
more pins than either. His trousers had 
" knees " to them. You know what " knees '' 
are . unsightly protuberances and bagging of 
the cloth on the region of the patella, due 
somewhat to bad tailoring in principiam, but 
more to long and unrelieved wear. They 



CAPTAIN pollyblank's ^arrangemexts. 147 

were terribly frayed round the bottom edges ; 
and, from one leg of the trousers being much 
longer than the other, grievous cause for sus- 
picion was warranted that the braces of Zillah 
the betrayed were in an abnormal condition. 
Zillah had gloves of brown Berlin; but his 
fingers peeped through them. His hat above 
the rusty crape band was shiny enough ; but 
one skilled in such matters might have known 
that the lustre was due to the friction of a 
wet brush. Zillah carried in that hat, by the 
way, besides the snuiF-coloured handkerchief, 
a quantity of blue-wove foolscap paper, 
wrapped up in a ragged newspaper. Finally, 
from head to heel of him, soap and water 
were as evidently inimical to his habits as 
everybody's enemy is said to be to holy water; 
and there no more appeared about him, at his 
neck or his wrists, the sign of a shirt than 
there appeared a sail during the first two 
days that Mr. Dibden's ship, name unknown, 
lay in the Bay of Biscay. 

Such was Zillah the betrayed, whose name, 
by the way, was Gafi*erer. He was a ragged 



148 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

looking rogue enough, and his attire, taken in 
the aggregate, might in Rag Fair have fetched 
some twopence-halfpenny less than Jack Polly- 
blank's; yet, for all his rags, the man looked 
better to do in the world than his friend with 
the hot coppers^ and he had an expression 
withal of being incomparably more honest. 

"Why, Jack," he said, returning the 
Captain's salutation, '' You're always starting 
up when nobody expects you. Last time was at 
Greenwich fair ; timebeforein Whitecross Street ; 
time before in Smithfield, on a market morning ; 
time before that in the gallery of the Cobourg. 
What have you been doing with yourself?" 

" What have you been doing with yourself, 
Zillah?" retorted the other. " The last time 
/ saw you, you were making a fortune out of 
that immortal 'betrayed one ' of yours. Let 
me see; you had her in a three-act melodrama, 
at the Cobourg; in a novel, at a penny a 
number; in a halfpenny song, in the Dials; 
outside a show, in a comic recitation, at the 
' Admiral Gambler,' in the Borough Road ; in a 
political satire, for the * Reformer's Catechism ; ' 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLAXK's ARRANGEMENTS. 149 

and, if I'm not mistaken, in an acrostic, for 
the blacking man in the Strand. Are you at 
the old game still? Does it pay, Zill ? Will 
it yet wash, Gaff?" 

" Ah," replied Mr. Gafferer, otherwise 
ZiUah, with a touch of melancholy in his 
voice. " I've forsaken Literature and the 
Drama, Jack ; at least, that sort of Literature. 
I've taken to something else now." 

" Undertakino;! " 

" No ; not exactly that . I don't think I could 
exactly bring myself to black work, Jack." 

" I could," answered that gentleman calmly. 
" I should like to be a mute amazingly. If I 
wasn't a gentleman, I'd be one. What are 
you then? Something queer, I'll be bound, 
to be out this time in the morning." 

"Guess!" Zillah the Betrayed said myste- 
riously. 

" Begging-letters?" 

"Well then," Jack impatiently threw in, 
" street preacher, cadger, government spy . 
(there's many of them about) . reform lecturer, 
Sunday-school teacher? Stop! I have it: . 
are you a resurrection-man ? " 



150 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" No, Jack, not quite ; though I have some- 
thin 2: to do with them." 

" I thought," the Captain (who had lighted 
a pipe again by this time) resumed, " that you 
weren't a regular bone-grubber. You 're too 
seedy for that, and resurrectioning pays well 
just now. Perhaps you're a Burker, and trust 
the surgeons too much ; . or what the deuce 
is your business?" 

" Murder's my business," replied, sententi- 
ously, and in a low voice, the individual cate- 
chised. 

'^Murder!" Captain Pollyblank rejoined, 
not exactly starting back, or looking horrified ; 
but still showing signs of very considerable 
astonishment. " Murder ! " 

" Battle, murder, and sudden death," added 
the Betrayed one. " Especially sudden death. 
Shipwrecks, fires, suicides, appalling accidents, 
and singular occurrences : thafs my business. 
I'm on the Press." 

" What Press ? " 

" Why, the newspaper Press, to be sure. I 
do short paragraphs about such things as have 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLAXK's ARRANGEMENTS. 151 

happened round the corner, for instance. I'm 
an occasional reporter. They call me" . he 
added in a low, hissing whisper . *' a ^ liner,' 
. a ' penny-a-liner.' Tell 'em, they're liars. 
Are you going to stand any beer ? " 

"Quarts," cried the generous Pollyblank; 
" and after that some breakfast as well, if you 
like. Lord, Lord! who'd 'a thought of your 
being a lin . , an occasional reporter, I mean. 
And does it pay, Gaff? " 

"But so-so, but so-so, my dear fellow. 
But you, what are you doing? You never did 
much that I know of, Jack, except drink, and 
fight, and swear, and play cards." 

"Oh, I," replied the Captain, changing an- 
other sovereign with a gesture worthy of a 
Louis Quatorze, " I'm making my fortune, my 
dear fellow." 

" Glad to hear it," remarked the Occasional 
Reporter after a pull at the beer Jack had 
ordered and paid for. " You weren't making 
it a year ao^o. Jack." 

" Bother a year ago," interposed the Captain 
testily. " I want to talk to you about this 



152 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

queer start round in the square last night. 
You know all about it, I suppose." 

Zillah the Betrayed winked, laid his fore- 
finger by the right side of that monstrous 
crimson nose of his, and nodded significantly. 

" Well," continued Captain Pollyblank, " I 
want to know all about it, too; and as I'm 
rather ifi a hurry, I should like to hear it now, 
before it gets into one of those newspapers of 
yours, when, of course, all the world will know 
it." 

" I beg your pardon. Jack Pollyblank ; all 
the world won't know it," Mr. Gafi'erer broke 
in, in accents of friendly remonstrance. '' Do 
you think all I know goes into the newspapers ? 
Besides, for aught I know, you may be ' lining' 
. I mean reporting . this case of suicide, I 
mean sudden death, as well as myself. You'd 
better find out for yourself, Mr. P." 

But Zillah the Betrayed, who was as simple- 
minded and guileless-hearted a creature as 
could be found between Grosvenor Square 
and Gorgona, was easily soothed and pacified. 
He had sent his report of the sudden death, or 



CAPTAIN POLLYBLANK'S ARRANGEMENTS. J 53 

suicide, call it which you will, down to the 
newspaper offices by messenger, and was wait- 
ing near the spot, to see if he could obtain any 
'' additional particulars " that might come in 
handy preparatory to the inquest. The pro- 
spect, moreover, of additional beer, and even 
of breakfast in the back ground, may have 
been somewhat of an incentive to Mr. Gaffe rer, 
who, satisfying himself that Pollyblank did not 
belong to the honourable corps of penny-a- 
liners . indeed, he knew most of them inti- 
mately, and all their names familiarly . sat 
down by the Captain's side in the darkest 
corner of the Robin Redlegs' tap; and, in 
accents studiously low, and reading from 
mysterious scraps of paper, told him, who al- 
ready knew something, as much as he knew of 
the circumstances of Gervase Falcon's death. . 



154 



CHAP. IIv. 

" crowner's 'quest." 

T^HE "highly respectable jury" impannellea 
for the purpose, sate upon the body of 
Gervase Falcon, and made very little of him. 
Many of the highly respectable jurymen had 
served the dead man with provisions . butter, 
cheese, and the like . and thought it rather a 
liberty to sit upon him at all. Others were 
indifferent, and others too stupid, and others 
much too clever, attributing the lamented 
gentleman's demise to most astonishing and 
conflictinsr abnormal causes, rans^ino; from sun- 
stroke to spontaneous combustion. The man 
was dead, however, and all the respectable 
juries in the world could not bring him to life 



"CROWNERS QUEST. 155 

Mr. Fleem, F.R.O.S., sat at the head of the 
jury table, and at the right hand of the 
Coroner, as was meet to a man whom that 
functionary delighted to honour. Mr. Fleem 
told his story, which did not add much to any- 
body's information. He had found Mr. Falcon 
dead. He had opened the body, and found 
nothing in it; nothing of a deleterious charac- 
ter, at least. Yes; the brain teas congested 
slightly. Apoplexy? Well, he should say 
that the tissues . and here the learned Fleem 
proceeded to bewilder the jury with such an 
extent of erudition, commencing at tissues ^nd 
ending nowhere, that the highly respectable 
jur}^ made haste to return a verdict of " Death 
from natural causes," and to get out of the 
house, which had already that mysterious 
closeness and leaden oppression in its atmos- 
phere, which hangs about every dwelling 
where Death is. 

The inquest had been held in the parlour 
where the feast had taken place the day before ; 
and the paper and pens and ink coldly fur- 
nished forth the bridal table. The highly 



156 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

respectable jury went bundling through the 
hall, meeting with heart-breaking difficulties 
in the recovery of their hats and coats, and 
treated with the most contemptuous neglect 
by John-Peter and his brother servitors, who 
stood together in a knot, and Avhispered com- 
ments respecting the inquest. It is the 
privilege of Fashion, when it dies suddenly, 
to be sat upon in its own house. If John- 
Peter, or any of his degree, had so ended, they 
would have held an inquest on him at the 
" Robin Redlegs," in the Mews. 

Said the Coroner to Mr. Fleem, drawing on 
his gloves, " A very curious case." 

" Remarkably so," the medical practitioner 
acquiesced. 

There was a dead pause after this; and the 
Coroner took off one of his gloves again, by 
way of diversion. 

" AVmarkably so," Mr. Fleem repeated, 
feeling that the Coroner was looking at him, 
and expected him to say something. 

"A most estimable gentleman, I believe," 
the legal functionary observed, moving towards 
the door. 



" crowner's ^quest." 157 

" Estimable !" Mr. Fleem cried, in a melan- 
choly ecstasy of admiration. " Estimable ! a 
jewel of a man, my dear sir. Husband, father, 
brother, and man, he was estimable in every 
social phase, and in every relation of life. His 
loss will never, never be repaired. I wonder 
what the deuce he poisoned himself for!" 
Mr. Fleem added, but mentally, you may be 
sure. 

" A terrible loss !" remarked the Coroner. 

" Terrible, terrible, terrible !" Mr. Fleem 
sighed, bowing the Coroner through the hall. 
" Terrible !" he said, in an alto key, to remind 
John -Peter that there was a visitor to be let 
out. " So estimable a gentleman !" he con- 
cluded, as the Coroner took his departure. 
Then Mr. Fleem, cogitating very deeply as he 
walked, went upstairs into the drawing-room, 
and the Coroner went to sit on somebody else. 

It was agreed on all sides that the deceased 
was estimable. Nobody said that he was a 
suicide, and ought to be buried in a cross-road 
with a stake through his heart. " Estimable 
in every relation of life" sounded well in 



158 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

eighteen hundred and thirty . sounds weli 
now. The morning newspaper, which in a 
twelve-line paragraph recorded his death, said 
he was estimable. Mr. Eesurgam, the under- 
taker, was quite sure he was estimable, as he 
listened to his assistants driving the nails into 
Gervase Falcon's fine coffin, with the superfine 
cloth and the cherub handles. Mr. Fiddyas, 
the mortuary sculptor, hadn't a doubt about 
his estimable qualities, and had his eye already 
upon " estimable" for the fourth line or so of 
the monumental inscription. How estimable 
he was to his family, those bereaved ones only 
knew. 

There are some men who may be called 
human ravens, and who only make their ap- 
pearance when Death is about. We have all 
of us some special funeral-friends, people we 
don't see for years and years together; but who 
are summoned to meet us, as a matter of 
course, when there is anybody to be buried ; 
then we lose sight of them again till somebody 
else dies. There is another human raven in 
the person of the Death Lawyer, who never 



" crowner's 'qcest." 159 

seems to have anything to do with births or 
marriage settlements, but is always in at the 
Deaths. 

His name was Pratt, and he was the Family 
Lawyer, and sat composedly among the 
weeping Falcons in the drawing-room, and was 
not even awed by the presence of the great 
Lord Baddington himself. He was one of a 
stately firm of lawyers, dwelling in a large 
house, dreadfully ' dingy, but immensely 
respectable, in Bedford Bow. There were 
half-a-dozen partners in the house, and the 
Deaths were his department. He was what 
you may term a built-up man ; that is, to his 
valet de chambre he was very probably less a 
hero, than a long, lean, lank, and shrivelled 
man, not unlike a forked radish; but the 
exterior building-up, including a tall white 
neckcloth, a curly black wig, a heavy gold 
chain, and especially very large white wrist- 
bands, made Mr. Pratt what he was . solemn, 
dignified, stiff, and highly respectable. 

He sat at the table covered with papers, 
which should properly have been secured by 



160 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

black instead of red tape. He sat over against 
Lord Baddington ; and I think that nobleman 
was slightly afraid of him. As Mr. Fleem 
came into the room, and whispered what he 
had to state respecting the result of the 
Inquest, the Family Lawyer, who otherwise 
always sat bolt upright, condescended to 
incline his black-wigged head a little down- 
wards, and on one side, in which position he 
bore no inconsiderable resemblance to a mag- 
pie looking into a marrow bone. 

" I apprehend, my Lord," he said, at length, 
"that it is not necessary for me to go any 
further into detail on this painful topic. I will 
leave the papers here for your Lordship's 
inspection, and hold myself, at any future 
period, at your Lordship's disposal.'' 

He should suddenly have flapped out two 
solemn wings from those shoulder blades of 
his, and flown away, like a bird of ill-omen, as 
he was. But he contented himself with taking 
his black presence out of the room in the 
ordinary manner, and the door downstairs 
closed upon him with a solemn bang, that 



"crowxer's 'quest." 161 

made the hearers upstairs start and ahnost 
shudder in their seats. 

" Oh ! uncle, uncle," Mrs. Falcon cried out, 
bursting into a fresh-flood of tears, '^ this is 
indeed dreadful!" 

The poor woman had been weeping ever 
since the morning . ever since the horrified 
servants had rushed up to her room to tell her 
that her husband was lying on the floor dead. 
She had passed from paroxysm to paroxysm of 
sorrow. She had parted from her husband in 
grief, in doubt, in mystery, and in passionate 
resentment. The sun had gone down upon 
her wrath, but was to rise no more. He was 
afar off . her husband . beyond the Sun and 
Stars, at the other end of a dreadful gulf, 
looking at her with sad eyes. 

There were in the room beside her now only 
Lord Baddington and Mr. Fleem. The girls 
were bewailing in their own bedchambers. A 
messenger had been sent post that morning to 
Brig, Hastings, in whose vicinity the happy 
Bride and Bridegroom were staying, to tell them 
the awful news. Compton Guy had been and 

VOL. I. M 



162 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

was gone again. That youthful Guardsman 
had been dreadfully shocked, and at his club 
that day could ejaculate little beyond "By 
Jove!" He couldn't make it out, he said. 
Xobody could make it out, not even Mr. Fleem. 
Who was sidling mildly from the room, now 
that he had imparted his intelligence; but 
Lord Baddington and Mrs. Falcon both be- 
sought him to stay, for they had something of 
the most vital importance to communicate to 
him. 

His Lordship was slightly nervous as he 
made these inquiries, and glanced with a very 
ambiguous expression at the Doctor. But the 
expression suddenly ceased to be ambiguous. 
Mr. Fleem felt that he was expected to re- 
assure, and, if possible, console Mrs. Falcon ; 
and if long words, mild delivery, and an ela- 
borate disquisition upon nothing, could have 
done it, he would certainly have succeeded. 

" For the tissues you see, my dear madam," 
he was explaining, by way of peroration . 

He was at those tissues again, and would 
have harped upon the congenial chord for an- 



"crowner's quest. 163 

other five minutes, when the widow cut him 
short. 

" Mr. Fleem," without further preface, she 
said, "my husband poisoned himself." 

" My dear Caroline," remonstrated Lord 
Baddington. 

Mr. Fleem said nothing, but looked in mild 
expostulation at the carpet. 

" As there is a Heaven above," Mrs. Falcon 
said again, "he poisoned himself; or there has 
been foul play." 

" My dear Madam," Mr. Fleem rejoined, not 
virtuously indignant, but only shocked . 
severely shocked, "what motive could the late 
Mr. Falcon." 

" What motive ^ AVho was that woman . 
that ragged wretch . that cast-off mistress of 
his, who came here to reproach him?" 

"His cast-off mistress . No!" a voice said 
very calmly and quietly. 

The voice was not that of a Banshee, or of 
an evil spirit ; it only emanated from a person 
straw-coloured as to hair, and raven-hued as 
to costume, who must have been seemingly in 



164 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the receipt of fern-seed, and so walked in- 
visible ; for he had come no man knew whence, 
and no man knew how, and stood at the door 
looking very quietly, but confidently, at the 
Lord, and the Doctor, and the ^Yidow. 

"You impudent dog!" Mr. Fleem cried, 
starting up in passion; ''you impertinent ras- 
cal ! what do you mean by coming here ? Who 
asked for you? Who sent for you?" 

"Yes, sir, who sent for you?" echoed Lord 
Baddington. 

Mrs. Falcon was grief-fully amazed. 

The assistant did not deign to notice his 
master's anger; he simply repeated, 

" His cast-off mistress . no ! " 

"How do you know? what do you know 
about it . about her ? " eagerly asked Mrs. 
Falcon. 

I know all about her," Mr. Tinctop calmly 
answered. 

"Then why the deuce don't you speak!" 
cried his master furiously. "You told me 
this morning, you knew nothing about the 
matter. Speak, you villain ! " 



"CROWNERS QUEST. 165 

'* Yes, sir, speak ! " Lord Baddington added ; 
'* and what the deuce do you mean by stand- 
ing with your back against that door? Ring 
the bell, Fleem, and have him kicked down 
stairs?'' 

" You'd better not," Mr. Tinctop coolly re- 
marked ; '. I've not only got my back against 
the door, but locked it directly I came in ; and 
I've got the key in my pocket." 

"He's mad! " cried Lord Baddington. 

"He's drunk!" exclaimed Mr. Fleem, 
making towards his assistant, as though to 
collar him again. 

" Mr. Fleem," if you lay a finger on me I'll 
run a scalpel into you." 

The surgeon drew back, for his assistant had 
a certain look in his pale face that was very 
ominous and not at all pleasant. 

" He must be mad," he muttered. 

"Neither mad nor drunk," the bold assist- 
ant replied. " Quite sane and sober, and the 
master of you all." 

" In heaven's name, man," cried Mrs. Falcon, 
" do not keep us longer in this agonising sus- 
dense. If you have anything to say . " 



166 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

"7/ I have anything to say!" interrupted 
Mr. Tinctop. "Of course I have something 
to say. I shouldn't have come here, shouldn't 
have locked the door, if I hadn't. But, do 
you want me to say it before old Fleem." 

"Mad as a march hare," the surgeon 
whispered to himself. " Old Fleem, indeed . 
confound his impudence! " 

" Speak, sir," Lord Baddington said, " Mr. 
Fleem is a friend of the family, and enjoys the 
entire confidence both of Mrs. Falcon and of 
myself." 

" Well, then, I'll just go back a little," Mr. 
Tinctop proceeded, very slowly and deliberately. 
" As you were, if you please. Not his cast-off 
mistress . oh, no ! " 

"AVliatthen?" 

" Not by any means his cast-off mistress . 
oh, dear, no! His lawful wedded wife, to 
whom he was married at Mallows Cray Church, 
in Kent, one-and-twenty years ago." 

" Scoundrel and liar ! " the Peer exclaimed, 
starting up. 

" Hands off!" retorted Mr. Tinctop; ^' and 



"crowner's 'quest/' 167 

you, governor, don't look as if you could eat 
me up. Look to that good lady on the carpet 
there; for she's fainted!" 

Mrs. Gervase Falcon no longer. The cast- 
off mistress lay in a faint, on the carpet. His 
WIFE ! Heavens and earth ! his wife ! 



168 



CHAP. X. 

. THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 

TT is stale news to hint that Seth Tinctop 
was a coward. He was indeed as arrant a 
poltroon as was ever capable of holding, with 
shaking hands, a candle, while some bolder 
villain, his companion, did a deed of violence. 
You will remember that it was not till 
after Madame Manning had shot Mr. O'Connor 
with an air-gun, and Mr. George Frederick 
Manning appeared on the scene, and, standing 
over the expiring wretch, did, to use his, Mr. 
G. F. Manning's, own words, " finish him off 
with a ripping chisel. " He was the Captain 
Pen of crime, and not the Captain Sword. 
The statement, therefore, that the pusillani- 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 169 

mous Tinctop had made alone a filibustering 
expedition into an aristocratic drawing-room . 
had actually locked the door thereof, put his 
back against it, and the key in his pocket, 
would seem naturally startling, if not incredi- 
ble, to those acquainted with the assistant's 
want of heroism, but for the fact I now feel it 
my duty to disclose, that Mr. Tinctop was 
throuo^hout actinoj under the instructions of 
Captain Pollyblank, who, with singular deli- 
cacy and moderation, had chosen to remain for 
the nonce in the background, and to delegate 
his medical friend to act as his Minister Pleni- 
potentiary and Envoy Extraordinary. Thus 
Mr. Tinctop, conscious of the support of his 
chief, and strong in the moral force of his cre- 
dentials, stood still, sternly and composedly, 
with his back to the door. He even folded his 
arms in the manner invented by the Great 
Frederic, and perfected by the greater Napo- 
leon, and looked on Avith philosophic calmness, 
w^hile Mr. Fleem applied the usual remedies 
to recover the unhappy Mrs. Falcon from her 
swoon. 



170 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

There were scents and essences in plenty 
about, as was to be expected in so aristocratic 
a saloon; and these, with the openino^ of the 
window^ were sufficient to restore the widow 
to a miserable consciousness, without rendering 
the attendance of her ladies' maid necessary. 
Her ladies' maid ! Would not that chastest and 
most fastidious of Abigails have repudiated her 
mistress on the spot, had she known that the 
name of Falcon, that the state of widowhood, 
no more belonged to her than the state of wife 
had ever done. 

She began to wail and pray incoherently ; 
and, casting herself at length on a sofa, found 
some relief in a flood of tears. But she speedily 
rose, and said she would go to her children, 
and was with difficulty restrained; then she 
cast herself back again, and adjured the dead 
man, now in terms of passionate endearment, 
now in accents of as passionate invective. But 
she was quite useless for any purpose of rational 
discourse ; and Lord Baddington, softly motion- 
ing Mr. Fleem to keep watch over her, beckoned 
to Tinctop; and that assistant quitting his 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 171 

post before the door, drew him into the em- 
brasure of a heavily-curtained window in the 
back drawing-room. 

Mr. Tinctop's vicarious bravery was not 
quite perfect or consistent. He felt as valiant, 
standing against the door, as though he had felt 
Jack Polly blank's back, instead of the wooden 
panels behind him. He could, in verity, have 
perforated, as he had threatened, the diaphragm 
of Mr. Fleem with the instrument of surgery 
before mentioned; but now that he found him- 
self comparatively alone with the Lord, the 
courage he had wrapped around him like a 
mantle, began to hang very loosely and in- 
securely on his shoulders. It fact, it threatened 
to fall off altogether in rags and tatters, like 
the historical mantle of Don Caesar de 
Bazan. 

The Lord was as proud a Lord as could be 
met with in a pleasant stroll through the pages 
of the peerage. He was an old man, too ; and 
Tinctop was afraid of old men. He was a 
clever man, and Tinctop was desperately afraid 
of clever men. 



172 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

" There is either," Lord Bacldington said, in 
a soft, but very determined voice, " some ter- 
rible mystery . more terrible if it happen to 
be true, Mr. Tinctop . in this matter; or there 
is a wanton attempt to cause additional pain 
and misery to this bereaved lady and her rela- 
tives. If you have one feeling, one sentiment 
of humanity in you, I conjure you to give an 
explanation of the extraordinary statement 
you have made." 

Mr. Fleem, F.R.C.S., in the front drawing- 
room, keeping professional watch over Mrs. 
Falcon, sobbing on the drawing-room sofa -. 
Mr. Fleem,F.R.C.S., straining each professional 
tympanum to catch the slightest vibration of 
his Lordship's voice. Confound those old men ! 
how inaudible they were. 

The young men, though, were scarcely more 
audible. One young man, Mr. Tinctop, answered 
his Lordship in a nervous whisper. 

" My Lord, I have stated only what I know 
to be the truth. Here in my hand I have 
documents to prove the marriage between 
Gervase Falcon, Bachelor, of London, and 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 173 

Sarah CoUett, of Mallows Cray, in the county 
of Kent, Spinster. The parties were married 
at Mallows Cray Church, on the tenth of 
February, eighteen hundred and ten; and 
scarcely six months afterwards, the same 
Gervase Falcon, Bachelor . you will remember, 
my Lord, Bachelor . was married at St. 
George's, Hanover Square, to the lady who 
now bears his name and has no right to it, and 
who is lying on that sofa in a bad way, I am 
afraid." 

"And the other ?" 

"The other Lady, who does not bear his 
name, but who has the best right in the world 
to bear his name, is quite safe, and in my keep- 
ing. I am sure I am doing injustice to your 
Lordship's discrimination, in telling you that 
she was the lady who was put to bed yester- 
day afternoon in the bed-room where, early 
this morning, her husband was found a 
corpse." 

" And you . you, Sir," interposed the Peer, 
with a very evil expression in his countenance, 
"you dared to spirit this woman away, after 



174 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

concocting between yon, I suppose, this pre- 
posterous tale." 

" I orot the woman out of the house," was 
the na'ive confession of Mr. Tinctop, " during 
the evening, in the best manner I could, having 
previously arranged to keep the footman out 
of the way, and administer to Mrs. Lint . she 
was always fond of a night-cap, good soul . a 
night-cap so hot, strong, and sweet, that it sent 
her into a dead sleep for hours. Yes, my Lord, 
I took Mrs. Gervase Falcon . Mrs. Sarah 
Collett Falcon . away, as neatly and noiselessly 
as was possible ; and I have her safe and sound 
in a certain locality, known only to myself." 

Safe and sound, oh, Tinctop ! Safe and sound, 
oh^ schemer! There is nothing safe, nothing 
sound, but the safeness and soundness of him 
who lies above stairs. 

"It may be very true, Sir," Lord Badding- 
ton remarked with a dolorous impatience, " that 
you abducted this unhappy, and I believe in- 
sane woman, as you have stated; but what 
proof does that afford that the story you tell 
may not be a monstrous fabrication?" 



THE TUKNING TO A LONG LANE. 175 

" Are certificates monstrous fabrications?" 
was the reply. " Even if they were forged, 
there is the parish registry at Mallows Cray 
Church ; there is the clergyman, there are the 
witnesses; the landlord of the village inn, who 
gave the bride away ; there is the bride herself 
to prove it. Bless your heart, my Lord, I am 
not stating facts without evidence to support 
them. Half an hour's conversation last night, 
and another hour's this morning with the ' un- 
happy, and perhaps insane woman,' as you call 
her, has put in my hands the honour of the 
whole house of Falcon." 

" What do you mean, Sir ?" 

" You know very well what I mean, my 
Lord. You know that it is not only this re- 
spectable lady's fair fame which is at stake; 
not only the honour of that pretty young lady 
who was married yesterday ; not only the 
credit of Sir William, her husband; not only 
the reputation of Mr. Falcon's two unmarried 
daughters; not only your honour, my Lord 
Baddington, purse-proud and pedigree-proud 
as you are." 



176 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" Fellow !" the Lord interposed, the noble- 
man rapidly losing his temper. 

" Fellow or no fellow, you had better hear 
me out. Here, shut those folding-doors, will 
you, my Lord Viscount." 

Tinctop was himself . or rather, was some- 
body else who wasn't a coward . again. The 
peer stared at him for a moment in sheer 
amazement; then slowly, and as it were 
mechanically, he obeyed the mandate of the 
assistant, and returned to the embrasure of 
the w^indow. 

Mrs. Falcon . tJiis Mrs. Falcon a little 
more composed on the sofa, murmuring to 
Mr. Fleem that it could not . no, it could not 
be true, and asking repeatedly if that horrid 
man were gone. She knew very well that he 
was not gone; that by some means he had 
become possessed of an awful secret, and that 
he was telling the story of her shame in the 
adjoining room. 

Mr. Fleem soothing the widow as in duty 
bound, and not asking himself whether the 
horrid man were gone, but frantically wishing 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 177 

tliat he could run rusty pins into the horrid 
man^s eyes, or pull up his lungs piecemeal 
with pliers, or skin him first and boil him 
afterwards. Oh! for the pleasure it would 
be to dissect that villian Tinctop, thought 
Mr. Fleem. 

Lord Baddington came out of the back 
drawing-room some twenty minutes after- 
wards, looking very pale and grave. He was 
followed by Tinctop, not flushed or excited, 
but with a very faint twinkle of exultation in 
his small eyes. Plis Lordship bowed very 
solemnly and courteously to this person ; and 
telling him in a low voice that he would be 
with him very shortly, waited till Tinctop had 
replaced the key in the door, opened it, and 
made his exit down the stairs. Then it was 
Lord Baddington's turn to shut the door and 
to lock it, both of which acts he performed, 
and then he came round to where Mrs. Falcon 
was reclining on the sofa, sat down in a chair 
by her side, and took hold of her hand as 
gently as he could for his great agitation. 

His Lordship was growing old and shaky, 

VOL. I. N 



178 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and some people said, maliciously, was growing 
paralytic, too. Recent events had much dis- 
composed his Lordship; and he was wiping 
his wrinkled face with his cambric handker- 
chief in one hand, and holding the widow^s in 
the other, a very pitiable spectacle of aristo- 
cratic discouraoferaent. A close observer 
might have noticed that one curl of Lord 
Baddington's beautiful brown wig was posi- 
tively out of curl, and that his brilliantly -false 
teeth clacked slightly in his jaws as he spoke. 
" My dear Caroline," he began, after many 
ineffectual attempts to find his usual voice, his 
genteel voice, his Lord-Viscount^s voice, 
and resorting ultimately to the voice of a 
feeble, broken-down old man . " these dread- 
ful news are true. I have heard the whole of 
the story from that man just gone; and after 
what he has told, what he has shown me, 1 
can have, I fear, no reason to doubt its being 
correct. The miserable woman you saw here 
yesterday, and who disappeared so strangely 
yesterday night, was the wedded wife of him, 
with whom for twenty years you lived and 
loved as your husband.'' 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 179 

" And, and . my husband . my children ! 
Oh God, my children !" cried the poor creature, 
starting up. 

" Compose yourself, compose yourself, for 
mercy's sake !" the Peer went on. " Shall I 
leave you? Shall the girls be called?" 

" Heaven forbid!" said Mrs. Falcon (it were 
better to call her so, and not that other 
woman), with a shudder. 

" Have you strength, then, to listen to the 
rest of this wretched tale ?" 

" I have, uncle. I can drink the cup to 
the dregs. Go on. You see I am listening. 
Listening." 

She was listening in a screaming fit of 
hysterics ; laughing and weeping, and throwing 
her arms about wildly. She had been such a 
decorous^ such a genteel woman, all her 
married life, that the revulsion, now, was all 
the more sudden . all the more violent. The 
young ladies had now indeed to be summoned ; 
but both Lucy of the raven tresses, and Sarah 
of the clustering ringlets, happily ascribed their 
mother's paroxsysm to the natural violence of 



180 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

her grief. They, poor children, had been 
weeping ahnost without intermission since the 
morning. They were pained, but not sur- 
prised, to see their mother in hysterics. The 
loss had been so sudden . so awful. 

So in the whole of this fatal house there was 
to be no peace . neither by night nor by day. 
They got Mrs. Falcon comparatively calm at 
last; and Mr. Fleem said she would do very 
well, if she were left alone for some little time 
with her daughters. So, with the girls 
kneelino; at her feet and soothino; and fondlino^ 
her, Mrs. Falcon grew better; and Lord Bad- 
dington, with a, warning glance at his niece- 
in-law, and a warning finger on his lips, took 
Mr. Fie em's arm, and went away. 

" If I don't leave this house for half-an- 
hour," he said, " I shall choke." 

His carriage was at the door in waiting, and 
begging ^Ir. Fleem to accompany him, he 
entered it, and ordered his servant, that he 
might be driven towards the city. Mr. Fleem 
dismissed his own discreet charioteer, and fol- 
lowed his noble companion. 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 181 

" Mr. Fleem," Lord Baddington said, " I've 
just given a promissory note for a thousand 
pounds." 

" A thousand pounds, my Lord !" 

" A thousand pounds ; which I shall redeem 
this evening by payment of that amount in 
cash. I have given this money, which 1 
can't well afford, to save the honor of my 
nephew's family . to save his own prospects 
from being blasted. To save the future of 
that poor boy at Canterbury." 

For nothing beside that, my Lord . for 
nothing beside that? Not to save your own 
honor, your o^svn future? Not to save the 
Baddington Peerao:e? 

" And I don't believe," the Peer continued, 
" after what I have heard from the lawver 
this morning, that, house and furniture, plate 
and pictures, sold and added to the balance 
at his banker's, Gervase Falcon has left money 
enough to pay the twentieth part of what he 
owes. He died a beggar. Sir." 

*' You astonish me, my Lord . you really 
do astonish me," said Fleem, who really was 



182 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

astonished in the highest degree; for in 
common with the fashionable world in general, 
he had always imagined Gervase Falcon to 
be a prudent and prosperous man, who lived 
within his income, and was on the whole 
somewhat better off financially than his 
uncle. " But what connection, may I ask, 
exists between this sad circumstance, and 
your Lordship's parting with so large a 
sum?" 

" The thousand pounds/' continued Lord 
Baddington, " have been given to, and will 
be divided between, two of the most precious 
scoundrels that ever possessed a secret, and 
made use of it for purposes of extortion . 
your assistant, Mr. Tinctop, and some ruffian 
with an unpronounceable name, which I can't 
remember, who is his confederate, and I 
think his master in villany. I bought this 
document, this acknowledgement of marriage 
written by my nephew, with the thousand 
pounds, Mr. Fleem." 

The Surgeon could only read it over, 
wonder, and return it to Lord Baddington. 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 183 

** I am willing to believe," the latter said, 
*' that it was inadvertently that Tinctop made 
his first statement in your presence. I fancy 
that he was instructed to confide it only to 
poor Caroline or to myself, and that he acted 
contrary to his instructions in so doing, and 
that he will probably have his head broken 
(how I hope he may!) by the master villain 
with the unpronounceable name, for liaving 
been so wanting in caution/' 

"'He is a coward, Tinctop," observed 
Mr. Fleem ; " and his fits of Dutch courage 
only last a few minutes. He is soon at low 
watier-mark again." 

"Very low would the water-mark be that 
/ would have him down to/' the Peer said, 
with a malevolent chuckle. " Poltroon or 
paladin, however, he lacks no astuteness, no 
ingenuity, by times. It is perfectly mar- 
vellous how he managed to worm the whole 
of that wretched woman's story out of her; 
to persuade her, that if she would place 
herself in his hands for a few hours, he 
would bring about a reconciliation between 



184 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

her and her husband, to cajole her to entrust 
him with that document you have just 
read." 

"And you have purchased his silence at 
this enormous price! Why not have defied 
Tinctop, and acted on the better feelings 
of the woman herself? A small annuity, 
now " . 

'' Her better feelings . a small annuity ! 
Alas ! my dear Doctor, without meaning it, 
you are talking moonshine. The woman has 
been for years a roaring drunkard; but in 
her sober intervals, rare as they are, has 
the cunning and malignity of a fiend. Ger- 
vase has been buying her silence for years. 
I tell you he spent thousands on her; he 
gagged her with bank-notes. All this money 
she squandered, as only a drunken woman 
can squander money ; then would come rags, 
destitution, frenzy, and a threatening letter 
to her husband. One of these threatening 
letters . a ragged scrap of paper, she threw 
into his carriage at the wedding yesterday. 
She followed the carriage home to Grosvenor 



THE TURNING TO A LONG LANE. 185 

Square . got drunk on the road, I presume; 
you know the rest." 

" But she was very ill, very ill indeed." 

" A drunken fit. Has had them times out 
of number, she told Tinctop. When she 
had slept for an hour or two, she woke up 
cool, cunning, and malignant as ever, and it 
was then she left the house." 

*' And she is now . ? " the surgeon asked 
anxiously. 

*' If I had known where she is this morning, 
Mr. Fleem," Lord Baddington responded 
almost testily, " I would have saved my 
thousand pounds, and would have sent 
Mr. Tinctop and his vagabond friend to 
Botany Bay. Tinctop has the woman in 
keeping, I tell you, and we are going to meet 
her now. See, here is Temple Bar, and here 
is your admirable assistant, Mr. Tinctop, 
waiting. I brought you with me, Doctor, 
for I am sure I . all of us, can trust you . 
and that you don't want bribing." 

The nobleman spoke truth. Mr. Fleem 
was as inquisitive as a magpie; but he scorned 



186 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the dishonest characteristics of that operatic 
bird. He was fond of secrets, garnered them 
up, as the magpie would secrete morsels of 
purloined cheese. He had glory-holes full 
of secrets relating to noble families; but 
Mr. Fleem and Mr. Fleem's secrets were not 
to be bought. He had no need to sell them. 
He was rich enough . unmarried, solitary, 
unambitious to rise higher. He had but one 
care or trouble in life . the lumbago; and 
all the money paid for all the secrets in the 
world would not cure that dorsal ailment. 

The carriage stopped, as Lord Baddington 
spoke, at the inner-side of Temple Bar, and 
Mr. Fleem' s straw-coloured head became 
manifest at the window. 



187 



CHAP. XL 

IN WHICH THE HISTORY GOES BACK TWENTY 
YEARS. 

T EG-OF-MUTTON sleeves were unknown, 
and the genius who was to mvent coach- 
wheel hats, was, if not unborn, certainly as 
as yet in his swaddling clothes, when people 
lived and died in the village of Mallows Cray, 
Kent, nearly forty-eight years ago. 

It was a little village in a little verdant 
hole . a vale would be a more poetical appel- 
lation, but hole is the apter one . approached 
by a narrow tumble-down road, on which the 
milestones and guideposts all stood askew, 
like so many minature leaning-towers of Pisa. 
Through the green hole, there ran a brawling 
little skein of water, by an extreme of courtesy 



188 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

(tailed the river Cray well, which made its ap- 
pearance at its source, a fissure in a scraggy 
liill, with quite a lilliputian Niagara splash and 
bustle, but disappeared at the other end very 
meanly, splitting itself up into a tangled web 
of shiny aqueous threads, by bridges utterly 
disdained, and were only tolerated as a place 
of misanthropic seclusion by sundry piscato- 
rial Timons in the shape of trout, weary of the 
world. The river recovered its health and 
strength afterwards, however, and made a 
grand end of it at Mallow-in-the -Marshes, a 
brackish townlet of a place, where it widened 
surprisingly, and tumbled, somehow calling it- 
self a creek, into the most famous river in the 
world. 

The world did not take much notice of Mal- 
lows Cray in the year eighteen hundred and 
nine ; and in revenge, the Mallows Crayfish or 
men took not the slightest notice of the world ; 
nor had they taken much, it was said, for many 
centuries past. They had very little leaning 
towards politics, save as regarded in so far a 
chronic hatred for the French (generic term, 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. Ib9 

Mounseers), of whose violent invasion of 
England in general, and Mallows Cray in par- 
ticular, the wise men of the village (parish 
clerk, schoolmaster, and fat innkeeper) were in 
continuous and anxious expectation. They 
were much attached to the Lord Bishop of 
Bosfursus, who had a country seat (delight- 
fully old, picturesque, and haunted, and con- 
taining in its vast cellars some of the finest 
port in Europe : " mitre seal " fetches now its 
nine guineas a dozen, some ^ve miles away), 
and did much cosy, old-fashioned unostenta- 
tious good among the villagers. And they 
believed very strongly in the virtues of 
butcher's meat, of which from their tenderest 
years, they consumed vast quantities . the flesh- 
pots of Egypt had been popular among them 
since the days of the Heptarchy; and there 
was even a tradition among sundry of the 
men of Mallow, that raw beefsteak was the 
most nourishing food for a newly-weaned babe, 
and that a nursing mother could not have too 
much roast leg-of-mutton. Beef, in its normal 
and cud-chewing condition, they reared with 



190 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

great success ; the green hole was girt about 
by fat farms, where farmers as fat raised cor- 
pulent crops, and flocks of obese sheep per- 
spired under weighty fleeces. Two or three 
very wealthy squires, together with the Lord 
Bishop, were the territorial suzerains of the 
Mallow land; and as they were liberal of 
butcher's meat and October beer on rent-days, 
the Crayfish paid their rents very cheerfully. 
Men lived to a prodigious age in Mallows Cray. 
There was no pauperism to speak of; for if a 
Crayfish fell into difiiculties in the Cray, the 
villagers either indignantly kicked him out of 
the happy valley, or he "flitted," as it was 
called, of his o^vn accord, paying nobody, and 
not being heard of any more. As for gipsies and 
tramps, they knew better than to trouble Mal- 
lows Cray much or often; for the natives re- 
garded them all as "foreigners," and as natur- 
ally akin to the detested Mounseers;' and as 
they not only had stocks, and cage, and whip- 
ping-post, and all the will to use them, for the 
coercion of vagrants, but likewise incited the 
village boys to pelt all strangers with stones, 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 191 

the tramps and the children of Egypt gave 
Mallows Cray a wide berth, and placed caba- 
listic diagrams of turf-sods at the corners of 
the road, leading to the village, warning, in 
the hieroglyphics of the wandering profession, 
their brother beggars and Bohemians that the 
Crayfish were a bad lot, and that the less they 
had to do with them the better. 

There were pleasing poets at Mallows Cray, 
who wrote epitaphs for one another, in stagger- 
ing rather than halting lines. These poets ate 
butcher's meat, and drank pots of cyder, oc- 
casionally, for wagers. They fought, too, some- 
times^ very fiercely and savagely; not only at 
fisticufi's among themselves, but in the way of 
cock-fighting, dog-fighting, and badger-draw- 
ing. There had been a town-bull in Mallows 
Cray once; and, in remoter ages, a town-bear, 
for sporting purposes, which had been put 
down, according to rumour, by Oliver Crom- 
well, whose memory, on that account, was hated 
by old and young in Mallows Cray. Outdoor 
sports, humorous and athletic, yet obtained; 
and on gala-days it was pleasant to watch, 



192 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

couched on the green sward, and with a tankard 
of the famous October ale by your side, the 
Olympian games of Mallows Cray. Then did 
the uncertain chase after the pig with the sa- 
ponaceous tail take place; then did rubicund 
damsels contend in swiftness of foot for the 
much-prized undergarment, decorated with 
many-coloured ribbons, and, in simple Saxon, 
hight a '' smock" ; then were w^heelbarrows 
trundled up acclivitous chalk-hills for a pinch- 
beck watch; then was the well-greased pole 
ascended in quest of the appetising leg of 
mutton . and loud w^ere the outcries of the 
simple rustics, when, on one fete-day, the meaty 
victor confessed himself to be a w^ashed chim- 
ney-sweep from AYhitechapel . then were the 
lancing poles darted at the rude heap of hinged 
carpenter's work, supposed to represent a Sa- 
racen's head ; and then did strongly competing 
peasants and lancers struggle through their 
appointed heat in sacks, or bob for apples, or 
compete for rolls and treacle. 

There w^as a capital school-house in Mallows 
Cray, with a famous old schoolmaster not quite 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 193 

blind, and not quite deaf, who wore silver 
buckles in his shoes, taught the children a little, 
and thrashed them as much as was requisite 
for the due preservation of their health, morals, 
and loyalty to church and state. The villagers 
married early, and after short courtships . a 
good, hearty meat tea being the usual premier 
pas in amatory matters, and a declaration in 
the form of a decorous tickling of the adored 
object in a hay-field, the culmination. They 
believed in ghosts, witchcraft, wart-charming, 
fortune-telling, and dream-construing. They 
went to bed early, and rose earlier ; they went 
to church, and to sleep in it, once a week, and 
played at bowls afterwards; they made no 
fortunes, but had good wages, ate and drank 
heartily, had large families, smoked long pipes, 
danced at Christmas and Harvest-time, and 
w^ere sufficiently happy in their generation. 

Peaceful and peaceable they were certainly; 
although in 1809 the world was convulsed by 
wars, and rumours of wars ; and there were 
hundreds of hills and valleys all over the world 
that were running with rivers, not of limpid 

VOL. I o 



194 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

water, but of blood. Now and then, a mys- 
terious potentate called the Emperor of Rooshia 
came accidentally on the tapis, or rather on 
the sanded floor of the village inn-parlour; 
and every now and then the dreaded and de- 
tested name of ^' Boney," seldom amplified 
into " Boneypartey/' was used by mothers to 
frighten troublesome children withal ; by quar- 
relling boys as a term of insulting derision ; 
by the three wise men of the village, as a 
clincher to the argument that the French 
must certainly invade England and Mallows 
Cray soon. When a recruiting party came 
down into the little green punchbowl of a 
place, which was of very rare occurrence, the 
village lasses stared a- while at the red coats 
and streaming ribbons; and, in temporary 
agitation of mind, cooked the meals unskil- 
fully for the next twenty-four hours or so; but 
his Majesty's Onety-oneth, or Old Hundredth 
regiment of foot, took no hearts as they marched 
away from the girls they left behind them. 
The village lads listened to the rub-a-dub of 
the drums, the enlivening tootle-tooings of the 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 195 

fifes, and the seductive oratory of the Sergeant 
Kite of the party, with broad grins, and wide- 
staring eyes; but they steadily refused to par- 
take of refreshment with the o:allant sons 
of Mars on these occasions; and to all entice- 
ments to take the Kinor's shillino^, shook their 
shock-heads, and answered, " Naw, naw! Ut 
wor time to ger hard knocks whun a' French 
kum an' ger hard knocks tiv thun ; " which, 
in the Mallows Cray vernacular, meant that 
they didn't see the fun of going to Spain to be 
shot, and preferred shooting or being shot on 
their own hearths, and in their own homes. 
The only exception made to this repudiation of 
the military service of the country, was, of 
course, when the periodical ballots for the mi- 
litia took place, and then the Crayfish bought 
themselves and each other off with all conve- 
nient speed; and again, when any one of the 
village families was troubled with a black sheep, 
in the form of a refractory, good-for-nothing 
son, who was so perpetually told that he would 
come to be hung if he didn't 'list, by all his 
friends and relatives, that, in sheer despair, he 



196 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

generally made haste to enroll himself in the 
service of his king, in order that he might die 
by powder and ball, and not by hemp ; but 
was perhaps eventually hanged after all (such 
is the uncertainty of human destinies) by Lord 
Wellington in Spain, even as Bardolph was 
"hanged for stealing a pix." 

Now, it was because there was a black sheep 
of this description. Will Catteran by name, 
who had so been compelled to enlist in a march- 
ing regiment in 1808, that I have been obliged 
to take this history back twenty long years ; 
that I have said anything about recruiting 
parties coming into Mallows Cray ; that I have 
mentioned Mallows Cray at all. 

For if William Catteran, village-rake, spend- 
thrift, sluggard, pugilist and ne'er-do-weel, had 
not enlisted, Sarah Collett, the Beauty of Mal- 
lows Cray, would not have been left without a 
sweetheart ; and if Sarah had not thus been 
bereft of her dissolute swain, she would not, 
after the first bitterness, and vexation, and 
pining of her virgin widowhood had passed, 
have begun to look out, with eyes which, 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 197 

though not red with weeping, were exceedingly 
sharp, for sweetheart number two. 

She was the daughter of old Daddy Collett, 
the schoolmaster of the Cray. She was not a 
piquante beauty, a fragile beauty, a beauty 
the " irregularity of whose features was re- 
deemed by expression;" she was simply a 
most beautiful young woman, who " felt her 
life in every limb;" who, but a step removed 
from the condition of a peasant, moved, and 
looked, and talked like a Queen who, reared 
among boors, was royally graceful, dignified, 
haughty; who, in fine, was one of those rare 
and perfect gems to be found oft-times in the 
oddest, humblest, plainest caskets, and which 
seem thrown there, hidden there, in some sly 
caprice of nature, and are brought forth to 
the world by times to be encircled with gor- 
geous settings and tributary jewels, humorous 
satires upon the boastings of " unsullied 
pedigree," illustrious ancestry, and sangue 
azul^ and humorous proofs that the obscurest, 
remotest kindred of the " grand old gardener 
and his wife," can, and do, wrench the golden 



198 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

apple sometimes, even from the high-bred 
descendant of Eobert Fitz-Leman or Hugo 
Fitz-Sykes, who came over with the Conqueror 
seven centuries since, as gallant knights, but 
who would have gone over with the Convict- 
ship as felons in this less chivalrous age. 

The girl had no accomplishments ; for, with 
a wonderful natural capacity, she was as lazy 
as she was beautiful. She could neither dance, 
nor play, nor paint, nor sing, as those frivolities 
are understood by the polite world; yet she 
would have been quite at home in the boudoir 
of a duchess ; and her little cottage keeping- 
room looked like a palace-chamber as she sat 
in it. Fond of finery, she had few pence to 
purchase any, and went perforce plainly clad ; 
but the trashiest trinket shone on her magni- 
ficent figure as the famous collier might have 
shone on wretched Marie Antoinette ; and she 
had but to let her black hair down, to be en- 
veloped in the mantle of an empress. 

The girl was proud, and vain, and passionate ; 
and if she possessed any heart at all, it was as 
hard as the nether millstone : but she simulated 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 199 

love . as the priests of heathen temples simu- 
lated piety . that she might have incense for 
her altars and oiferinsfs for her shrines. She 
might, under other influences, have been a 
Semiramis, a Lais, a Phryne, a Dubarry, a 
Pompadour, a Yittoria Colonna, or a second 
Catherine; yet she was but a schoolmaster's 
dauo:hter, livino: amono- rude and io^norant 
cottagers, and tearing her hair with vexation 
because the clumsiest clodhopper of the village, 
Will Catteran . with whom she was, au fondj 
no more in love than you with me, Belinda . 
had chosen to turn out a most notable scamp, 
to snare Squire Lupus's game, to play skittles 
instead of cultivating the soil, and finally, 
being excommunicated by the united body of 
Crayfish, to enlist in the Hundred and Tenth, 
or '* Nottingham Eoughs," Light Infantry. 

A great battle had been fought in Spain ; 
and Britannia, wanting men very badly just 
then, joyfully accepted William Catteran, and, 
giving him a shilling and promising him six 
pounds by way of bounty, made him, densely 
intoxicated, a full private on the spot. Bri- 



200 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tannia was subsequently genial and con- 
descending enough to cheat William Catteran 
out of his six pounds. She gave him, indeed, 
some rubbish which he threw away in the 
first campaign, calling it a " kit," and charg- 
ing a goodly sum for it; she fed him on 
biscuit, which, when it was'nt hard as iron 
was soft with maggoty decay. She gave him 
rations pretty regularly of salt horse and new 
rum; she led him to seek the bubble of a 
Chelsea pension at the cannon's mouth, and 
she never forgot to inculcate the virtues of 
cheerfulness and obedience, telling him that if he 
grumbled he should be flogged, and that if he 
ran away he should be shot. On the other 
hand, Britannia, in the noblest and most 
generous manner, several times, by the 
voice of the Houses of Lords and Com- 
mons, publicly thanked William Catteran 
and some hundred and fifty thousand more 
of his brethren, for their achievements in 
the field ; and he and they had the inestimable 
satisfaction of knowing that the commanders 
of the great army of Catterans had been made 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 201 

peers and Field Marshals, and Knights Grand 
Crosses of the order of the Bath. Sarah 
Collett heard the sound of the last drum and 
the last fife die away as the recruiting party 
wound throuD-h the orano;e and crimson-hued 
lanes (it was autumn time); and when her 
lover was gone, she went out into a corn-field, 
and cast herself down on the scattered sprays of 
gold, and wept for rage and spite, and not for 
sorrow, and much more against the truant 
Will than for him. She would not have 
married the man at any time; she probably 
would have treated him in very dog-like 
fashion, had he returned that very moment. 
I don't think she would have fainted, or gone 
into very violent hysterics, had the constant 
predictions of the Mallows Crayfish respecting 
him been fulfilled, and had William been 
hanged outright. But she was in a rage with 
herself, with him, with all the world, because 
he was gone, because pretty Meggy Saunders, 
and black-eyed Bose Eagle ton, and especially 
Mary Anne Terryton, the baker's daughter . 
. all rival belles, and jealous of her because 



202 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

she was ever so slightly elevated above them 
in social position, and a million degrees in 
majestic beauty . because these lively, and 
not unfrequently uncharitable young ladies, 
would rejoice at her humiliation, and utter 
disparaging remarks concerning her at that 
grand gossiping exchange, the " everything 
shop," where old Mrs. Plaistermidge sold 
linen-drapery and lanterns, sweetstuif and 
scrubbing brushes, beaver hats and birch 
brooms. 

Sarah Collett, the beauty of Mallows Cray, 
sulked in her maiden bower for seven whole 
days. She did not contemplate a funeral 
pyre for herself, like the late unfortunate 
Queen Dido; she did not meditate strangula- 
tion in the manner patronised by the equally 
late and unfortunate Miss Bailey; but she 
was very miserable. But the evening of the 
seventh day happening to be a most gloriously 
mellow and sunny one, and her father having 
gone to sleep, as was his usual evening custom, 
over " Law's Serious Call," she slipped on her 
hat and spencer, and determined to pay a visit 



TWENTY YEAES AGO. 203 

for comfort and condolence to her only chosen 
friend and ally, Miss Tubbs, who was the 
daughter of stout old John Tubbs, the land- 
lord of the village inn, and who, being exceed- 
ingly ugly and exceedingly servile, had been 
discovered to be an admirable and devoted 
friend by the belle of the village. 

Sarah walked down the steep little street, 
sheepishly saluted by three-fourths of the un- 
married male Crayfish, the vast majority of 
whom were madly in love with her, and 
paternally addressed by the married men of 
Mallows, to the great indignation of the sweet- 
hearts of the Bachelors and the wiv^es of the 
Benedicts of Mallows. Miss Saunders passed 
her, and giggled at her; Miss Terryton passed 
her, and tossed her head; Miss Eose Eagleton 
looked over her dimpled shoulder at her, and 
nodded in the most provoking and patronising 
manner; in return for all which amenities of 
salutation it would have been inexpressibly 
delicious to Sarah, the beauteous, but the 
irascible, not to say vindictive, to have torn 



204 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

their hair from their heads and their eyes 
from their sockets . but she didn't. 

There was a handsome gig, with a big 
brown horse in silver-mounted harness, stand- 
ing at the door of the inn, and a groom was 
taking a portmanteau and hat-box from be- 
neath the seat of the vehicle. The apparent 
proprietor of the vehicle stood, whip in hand, 
by the horse, patting the handsome steed on 
the flank. Sarah noticed that he was a tall, 
comely, florid, young man, rather inclined 
to be stout, perhaps, but decidedly good- 
looking. He was clad in the deepest 
mourning. 

He was about to put up, both man and horse, 
at the inn : that was easy to see, for the groom 
carried the portmanteau into the low-roofed 
vestibule, with its bottle and glass furnished 
bar on one side, and the parlour on the other, 
as Joe, the hostler, ran to the horse's head. 
It was curious, too, that as Sarah slipped mo- 
destly into the hostlery in her way to Miss 
Tubbs's private keeping-room, she should have 
been tempted to cast an inquisitive glance on 



TWENTY YEARS AGO. 205 

the portmanteau lying at the foot of the stairs, 
and that she should have noticed a brass plate 
on the top of that article of luggage . a 
brass plate engraved with these initials . 
G.F. 



206 



CHAP. XII. 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 



T^HE same great battle in Spain that had put 
Britannia to the strait of picking up by 
sound of fife and drum such waifs and strays 
as Will Catteran, "had placed" (to use the 
newspaper obituary locution) "many of the 
most distinguished families in mourning." 
For it is a way that Death has in the army 
(and, to do him justice, in the navy, the church, 
and the civil service likewise) of smiting down 
impartially the common soldier, who, wrapped 
up in scarlet blanketing, and carrying the in- 
evitable Brown Bess, sells his liberty and his 
life for thirteenpence a-day, and the gorgeous 
captain in feathers and lace, who has purchased 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 207 

a commission as he would buy a park-hack, to 
amuse himself withal, and who has, maybe, 
not thirteen pence, but thirteen thousand 
pounds a-year in addition to his pay. The 
Spanish battle had been a very bloody one ; 
officers as well as men had fallen thick and 
fast under the scythe of the Great Reaper, who 
respects neither the mammoth ear of corn, nor 
the humble tare that the husbandman has for- 
gotten to pluck up ; and it is not at all unlikely 
that a frao^ment of the same shell that created 
that gap in the ranks of the '' Nottingham 
Roughs," which Will Catteran was destined to 
fill up, was instrumental in plunging into 
mournino^ manv of the most distino-uished fa- 
milies of this favoured country, including that 
of Lord Viscount Baddington, in the Peerage 
of Ireland. 

For in good sooth, his Lordship's younger 
and only brother, Captain the Hon. Hugh 
Hernshaw Falcon, a most promising officer, 
(vide despatches), was in that desperate fray 
slain, as he was valiantly leading on his com- 
pany. 



208 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

The deceased left one son, Gervase, an under- 
graduate at the ancient University of Oxford, 
who, by the lamented Spanish casualty, became 
(his uncle Baddington being a widower, and 
childless) next heir to the Baddington Peerage. 
As the young man happened to be of an im- 
petuously affectionate disposition, he thought 
less of his exalted distinction than, perhaps, as 
a scion of the aristocracy, he should have done. 
He thought, certainly, much more of his wi- 
dowed mother (a consumptive, delicate, high- 
born lady, who did not long survive); he 
thought more still of the awfully sudden death 
of one of the kindest and most affectionate of 
fathers. So violent was his grief, that change 
of air and scenery was imperatively recom- 
mended to him by the fashionable faculty, 
who suggested Weymouth, Scarborough, or 
Brighthelmstone (then just allowing the germ 
of the immortal and inimitable Brighton, that 
was to spring from its shingly bed, to peep out), 
as places where fashionable grief might be de- 
corously consoled, and fashionable cheerfulness 
genteelly restored. But Gervase Falcon, telling 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 209 

the faculty that he would think about it, be- 
thought him of quite another place of rural 
retirement : the little village of Mallows Cray, 
distant about eio^hteen miles from the 2:reat 
metropolis; and where he had, in some long 
vacation gone by, spent a very pleasant fort- 
night . sometimes pretending to read, and 
sometimes pretending to fish ; but in reality 
engrossed in the delightful pursuit of doing 
nothing. So dovni to Mallows Cray he came 
in his orior . orentlemen drove ^i^s then . and, 
putting up at the Angel, the sign of the sole 
inn at the Cray, had not been there a fortnight 
before he fell desperately in love with that other 
Angel of the Cray, Sarah Collett, the school- 
master's daughter. 

'Twas the most natural and yet the most 
accidental thing in the world. The girl was 
always meeting him accidentally . he was al- 
ways meeting her, accidentally, of course. 
Her friend Miss Tubbs was so fond of her dear 
Sarah that she was always sending messages 
to her to come to tea: the yielding Sarah 
could not resist the invitations of her attached 

VOL. I. p 



210 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Tubbs. Then the strange gentleman . who, 
by the way, did not disclose his name, had no 
letters addressed to him, paid his bills regularly 
and munificently, and was known either as 
Number Four, the numeral of his apartment, 
or as Mr. G. F., from the initials on his port- 
manteau . the strange gentleman was at times 
so lonely and out of spirits, that he was glad 
to take a cup of tea in Miss Tubbs's private 
parlour, where he conversed in the most affable 
and condescending manner. It was on these 
occasions that stout Mr. Tubbs, the landlord, 
suddenly remembered that he had not been to 
see his neighbour Collett lately, and went off 
to spend the evening over a pipe with that in- 
structor of youth. So Number Four and 
Sarah took tea in the private parlour; and 
then one of the most remarkable things in the 
world was, that Miss Tubbs always had the 
most important business to attend to, and of 
which she had only just thought, in the bar, 
which would only detain her for a moment, 
but which detained her, somehow, a good many 
moments and a good many half-hours. 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 211 

The son of Captain Falcon met Sarah as he 
went a-fishing . he met her as he returned; in 
his morning walk and his evening walk; when 
he took a drive round the country even he 
was always falling across the Beauty of Mallows 
Cray . of course by the merest accident. 

He grew desperately, fiercely, blindly in 
love, as only a very young and inexperienced 
man can love. If he had been five years 
older, he would have turned bridle-rein, and 
ridden away from a woman beneath him in 
every degree, beautiful as she was, for ever; 
or if he had been ^ve years older, and a villain 
. he was not that in his sunny twenty years 
prime . he would have deceived the girl, 
thrown away the plaything when he had toyed 
with it long enough, and there an end. As it 
was, he had for her that love, stone-blind, 
stone-deaf, but not dumb . no ! burningly elo- 
quent in its clumsy fanaticism . which we all, 
the coldest of us even, have had, or must have 
for a fair woman, once at least in our lives. 
You have so loved, or will so love, my stoical 
friend, one day. You have loved, or love, or 



212 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

will love, SO that you listen for the voice and 
wait for .the shadow, to kiss it, of her you 
love; that you are enraged with the garden 
gravel her foot presses upon ; that you have a 
mad hatred for dogs, and birds, and horses, 
and children, which she will pet and fondle 
with a familiarity she will not admit you to, 
yet ; that if she were to say to you, " Go steal," 
you would rob a church, your father, a poor 
box, or a blind man's tray; that if she were 
to say to you, "Go kill," you would, knife in 
hand, run-a-muck, like a mad Malay, among 
your dearest friends ; that you would dress up 
in the absurdest mountebank costume, to per- 
form as many preposterous tricks as a poodle 
. beg, fetch, carry, dance, stand on your 
head, crawl on all fours, shave oiF your eye- 
brows, paint your face . anything, if she so 
commanded it. He who has not loved in this 
wise, has not yet loved at all. 

The love of a very young man is some- 
times and not inappropriately, termed " calf 
love ; " but the next love of adolescence 
might not inaptly be called "roaring-bull 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 213 

love." For as the bull, blind and un- 
reasoning, dashes at a gate, smashing his 
knees and horns in his onslaught to boot, 
so does the fanatico-bovine lover rush as 
blindly and madly at certain rails that fence 
the church communion-table. He cannot 
help it; the woman he adores is as inacces- 
sible to him as a castle of steel and adamant : 
yet one little word will make the Avhole of 
that fair citadel yield . outwork and keep, 
curtain and bastion . one little word will 
make her all his own, his to have and to 
hold in fee-simple and in frank-pledge for 
ever: so he rushes at the rails as the bull 
at the gate, and as a fool according to his 
folly. 

She had him so well in the toils, that when 
he left Mallow's Cray in the ensuing Novem- 
ber, it was under the solemn promise, sworn 
to with passionate protestations. Heaven 
knows how often, to return and marry her 
in the second month of the next year. He, 
the aristocrat, and nephew to a Lord, had 
plighted his troth to a village schoolmaster's 



214 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

daughter without a farthing to bless herself 
with ! He was to leave Mallows for a time, 
and then return. She had him so well in 
the toils, that he grew more desperately in 
love with her during the eight weeks that 
he was absent; that he came back, furious 
to see her; that in February, 1810, he was 
married to Sarah Collett, before high heaven, 
and in the parish church of Mallows Cray. 
The wedding took place early in the morn- 
ing, by special license, and in the presence, 
besides the clergyman and his clerk, of but 
two witnesses . Tubbs the landlord, and his 
daughter. 

He had wished to be married at some other 
church, but his Sarah, with a strange wil- 
fulness of caprice, had insisted that there 
or not at all the ceremony should take place. 
As it was, the wedding was almost a secret. 
A few of the village gossips had heard from 
the parish clerk, and gossiped over the 
matter at Mrs. Plaistermidge's Everything 
Shop, that Sarah, the Beauty (as she thought 
herself^ they added ironically), had been 



MRS. FALCON AT HOME. 215 

married on the sly to that odd-looking young 
squire in black, who stopped at the " Angel " 
last Autumn ; that they were off to furrin' 
parts somewhere, and that old Daddy Collett 
. " and a heartless puss she must have been 
to leave the poor old man," they said, with 
virtuous ire . " was to have fifty pounds 
a year pension." Some of the young lady 
gossips went so far as to disbelieve the 
marriage story altogether. They hoped it 
was all " c'rect " they hinted, but they 
doubted it. She had always been a " bold 
thing." Well, well! it was no business of 
theirs; but it must be a dreadful thought 
to that poor, dear old man at the school 
yonder. By degrees the interest died away. 
The wedding couple were gone. Daddy Col- 
lett lingered for a few months till he had a 
more serious Call than even the Rev. Mr. 
Law's, and, obepng it, died. The Mallows 
Crayfish had always been remarkable for not 
minding the world; and as Sarah Collett, 
now Falcon, was no longer the Beauty of 
Mallows Cray, but the Beauty of somewhere 



216 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

else, the Crayfish had no longer anything 
to do with her ; so they abandoned her to her 
own devices, and betook themselves with re- 
newed ardour to butcher's meat and cock- 
fighting ; and the petty gossips at the every- 
thing shop, found out another Beauty to talk 
about and be jealous of. 

Only the old landlord of the " Angel " and 
his daughter, an old clergyman, and his 
older clerk were there to witness it . only 
the feebly-scrawled entry in the dusty register 
was there to prove it; but then marriages 
are registered in heaven besides. That we 
know. 



217 



CHAPTER XIII. 

IN WHICH THE HISTORY, AS FAR AS ONE OF ITS 
PERSONAGES IS CONCERNED, STOPS ALTOGETHER. 

pAPTAIN the Honorable Hugh Hernshaw 
Falcon had no money when he died. 
Stay, there may have been half a dozen 
napoleons, a few reals, and a packet of 
English one-pound notes in his pocket-book, 
under his uniform coatee^ when the shell took 
away his life. Of whatever he possessed, he 
was quickly and comfortably relieved the 
evening after the battle, by one of the 
vivandieres, alias Moll Flaggons, attached 
to the baggage department of the British 
army. The same warm-hearted sister was 



218 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

also good enough to strip the lace off his 
uniform, the epaulettes off his shoulders, the 
galloon from his hat, to force the ring from 
his dead finger, and even to remove the 
boots . quite new, and of the latest fashion 
. from his feet. What do dead men want 
with boots? Beyond this, the Honourable 
H. H. Falcon was as insolvent as a patrician 
can well be. To his son Gervase there might 
have been applied the observation made by 
Hostess Quickly respecting Lieutenant Bar- 
dolph : . '' Alas ! he is poor . he hath nothing." 
That rubicund-proboscised boon companion 
was, it will be remembered, advised by 
Falstaff to "coin his nose;" and, alive to 
the exigencies of the situation, for mortal 
man must have bread, and aristocratic men 
must have luxuries, Gervase Falcon lost no 
time in endeavouring to coin his gentility. 
He was more successful than Bardolph. There 
is a certain divinity of credit in England, that 
hedges, not only a king, but a lord, and 
even the remotest connection of a lord; 
and though a scion of the aristocracy may 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 219 

be worth financially, as is very often the 
case, much less than nothing, he is always 
worth something, so long as he has a name 
known at the Herald's College, which is a 
tower of strength. 

Gervase Falcon did not return to London 
from Mallows Cray as the married man he 
really was. He returned as a bachelor, and 
as gay a young bachelor as the very recent 
death of his father would genteelly allow 
him to be. He had, surely, no reason to 
be ashamed of his marriage; but it is a fact 
that he did not inform the polite world of 
the alliance he had just concluded, and that he 
specially kept the interesting event secret 
from his immediate friends and relatives. He 
brought the beautiful woman he had wedded 
to town, and took a Bower of Bliss for her 
in the quiet, courtly vicinage of Kensington; 
then he moved the Venus of the Bower to 
a cottage near Harrow; and then again, 
being unaccountably nervous, to another 
cottage at Richmond; then he began to study 
a mental map of the world in quest of some 



220 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

other locality, where the Bower might be 
with propriety established; and finally an 
impression began to grow on his mind that 
the very best place for the Bower of Bliss 
to be in future maintained in a state of flo- 
rescence, would be the bottom of the Atlantic 
Ocean, with the beautiful woman he had 
wedded sunk there unnumbered fathoms, with 
fifty tons of lead at her head, and fifty at her 
heels. 

For in about two months from the date 
of his miserable wedding-day, he had begun 
to discover that he might just as well have 
been married to a beautiful Fiend, acs to the 
beautiful woman he was bound to by indis- 
soluble ties. He was fettered to a being 
hopelessly and impracticably perverse and 
evil-minded; to a woman who was incapable 
of loving, and consequently, through sheer 
energy of misdirected feeling, began to hate 
him; to a woman whose tastes were foreign 
to his; whose thoughts, whose wishes, whose 
aspirations were all diametrically opposed to 
those which he himself possessed. 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 221 

So to the honeymoon succeeded a gloomy 
bee's-wax moon, and then a moon of gall 
and bitterness, and utter despair. '' Better 
to sit up all night," says the good old Bishop 
of Charles the Second's time, "than to go 
to bed with a dragon." Gervase Falcon 
became gradually to be of this opinion, though 
he had never troubled himself much about 
Bishop Taylor, or any other Father of the 
Church. He evaded the dragon as often 
and as much as he conveniently could. He 
took, if not to sitting up, at least to staying 
away all night . sometimes for weeks and 
weeks together. When he and the dragon 
were together, they quarrelled, reviled, carped 
at, sneered at, insulted one another. They 
were in a fair way to fight. Genteeler 
couples have fought ere now, believe me. 

His love for her was quite, quite gone. 
His amorous day-dream was over; and with 
waking there came a cold, shuddering horror 
and loathing. Such things and such changes 
happen over and over again in marriage; they 
will happen so long as love is blind and deaf 
and mad. 



222 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

All this time he had been coining his 
gentility . that is, borrowing money from 
usurers; for he was a lord's nephew, and 
his Lordship (not a very rich lordship, but 
still a lord), had promised to do something 
for him. He would have given the beautiful 
dragon at home any quantity of rich clothes, 
jewels, money, she chose to ask for ; but the 
dragon wanted more than these ; she wanted 
to be the recognised wife of Gervase Falcon, 
the wife of a " born gentleman " . and to 
parade her gentility before the great world. 
It was but her due, to be sure; but she 
insisted upon it with perhaps needless 
acrimony. 

Time after time, she harried the man who 
had been idiot enough to marry her to make 
their union public; else, she threatened, 
she would herself publish it. She would 
write to Lord Baddington . she would put 
it in the newspapers. By what right was 
she cooped up at home? Was she compelled 
to go to theatres and gardens surreptitiously, 
muffled up . all but disguised ? By what 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 223 

right was her fair fame to be compromised ? 
By what right was an opportunity afforded 
to scandalous tongues to whisper that she 
was Gervase Falcon's mistress, and not Ger- 
vace Falcon's wife? She would not bear it; 
why should she? She was not ashamed of 
her marriage ; why should he be ? 

To quiet her, he took her into Scotland, 
and tried everything in his power to flatter 
and cajole her into silence . even as she 
had cajoled him into marrying her. They 
would not have long to wait, he said; but 
his family was so proud, so vindictive, so 
prejudiced. If his uncle Baddington knew 
that he had married without his consent, 
he would inevitably discard him. He had 
nothing to depend upon but his expectations 
from that nobleman. Surely, his dear Sarah 
did not wish to ruin him, etcetera, etcetera, 
etcetera. 

They led this miserable life for four months. 
I pray Heaven, that you may never live such 
a life as this . to break your dream and find it 
empty ; to stir up the lees of your once spark- 



224 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

ing goblet, to strip away the velvet and gilding 
of the throne, and discover the base deal 
boards beneath . to outlive your liking. To 
find out a new fault every day; to be angry 
with the rustle of a woman's dress; to be 
possessed with a feverish, fretful, morbid de- 
sire . not that she would die, not that she 
would fall sick, for you wish her no harm, but 
that she would put the breadth of fifty oceans 
between you and herself; and the more because 
you have loved her so much, and clasped her 
so fondly. There are two dreadful things in 
the world . yea, two that are utterly appalling 
. a faded letter from a dead friend who has 
died at enmity with you, and a woman you 
have loved, but love no more. 

Without any open compact, there was a tacit 
understanding between them, that it was im- 
possible to live together any longer, and that 
they must soon separate for ever. Just at this 
time the "something" which Viscount Bad- 
dington Was to do for his nephew was done; 
and Gervase entered upon those responsible 
duties in his ^lajesty's Carpet-bag and Hat- 



THE HISTOEY STOPS. 225 

box office, which necessitated his attendance 
at the Treasury no less than four times per 
annum, in order to draw his handsome quar- 
ter's salary. His punctuality in the perform- 
ance of these duties was admirably unvarj-ing. 
Sarah the Beauty went to live at Chelten- 
ham, upon a liberal allowance her husband was 
but too glad to give her. She knew, as well 
as he knew, that she was his wife ; that he was 
about to break his marriage-vow; that he was 
about to commit a great social crime ; that his 
aristocratic friends had found him a wife of 
his own condition ; that he was about to lead 
a wealthy heiress to the altar he had once be- 
fore profaned. Either she was indifferent, or 
she was calculating in her malignity, and chose 
to wait patiently for vengeance. It is certain 
that she gainsaid him not in his wicked pur- 
pose, and saw with calmness in the newspaper 
that he had accomplished it at the grand 
church in London, where twenty years after- 
wards his daughter was to be married. But 
he had not deceived the poor girl who believed 
herself to be Mr. Gervase Falcon's wife many 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

months, before the Mrs. Gervase Falcon who 
lived at Cheltenham, bore the husband she 
was to see no more a Son. The boy was born 
in the winter of eighteen hundred and ten. 

Meanwhile, Gervase lived a grand life in 
Grosvenor Square, and the Caroline who be- 
lieved herself to be his wife bore him children 
too. First a girl, then a boy, who was 
christened Charles, after his uncle Baddington, 
and who has not yet been mentioned in this 
history, for the reason that he was with his 
regiment at Canterbury, were he was in gar- 
rison, a smart young cornet of hussars. 

Mr. Falcon made the woman at Cheltenham 
a gift of a thousand pounds in addition to her 
annual allowance when her son was born. He 
would have taken the child from her, and have 
reared it up himself secretly ; but she steadily 
refused even to let him see it. She lived under 
an assumed name at Cheltenham, as the widow 
of an East Indian colonel ; lived there quietly 
enough till the great peace of 18 J 5, when she 
went abroad. Gervase Falcon heard from the 
bankers through whose hands the money was 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 227 

remitted to her, that she was wandering over 
the Continent, being now in Italy, now in 
France, now in Germany. She had a great 
capacity. She was a schoolmaster's daughter ; 
but she picked up more learning in a month 
in the great world than she would have ac- 
quired in years of painful study in her father's 
schoolroom at Mallows Cray. She graduated 
very rapidly at Cheltenham, and the half illit- 
erate village girl soon became an adept in 
genteel small -talk and fashionable slang. She 
got to know the name of many things, which 
is next door to knowing the things themselves. 
Then, from an aristocratic acquaintance just 
returned from Florence, Gervase Falcon heard 
that the handsome widow, ]\Irs. Colonel Chut- 
nee, was about to be married to an Italian 
Marquis descended from Hercules, son of Ju- 
piter, possessor of a magnificent palace without 
any furniture, and with an income of about 
threepence halfpenny per annum. Then again 
he heard that her reputation was not a very 
good one; next that it was gone altogether, 
and that she was living witli a travelling Irish 



228 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

blackleg, who had been a captain of dragoons. 
This threw him into an agony of terror, till 
she suddenly disappeared altogether, made no 
sign, drew no more money; and he began to 
hope that she was dead. 

"What she did with herself or where she 
went, during ten long years, no one ever 
knew; but one summer's night, in eighteen 
hundred and twenty-six, Gervase Falcon, 
coming out of the crush-room of the King's 
Theatre, alone, waiting under the colonnade 
for his carriage, found crouched by one of the 
columns a babbling, drunken, ragged, miser- 
able object . his wife. All her beauty was 
gone: there was nothing left now but the 
dra2:on . a dra<:ron without burnished scales, 
or green and golden wings and brilliant eyes, 
but as virulent and rapacious as the "blatant 
beast" that Spenser drew. Where her son was 
she refused to tell. That he was alive, was all 
she would confess ; and Gervase Falcon was 
never able to gain the slightest information 
relative to the child, who, son of that debased 
creature, and perhaps a wandering beggar, 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 229 

was yet his lawful son, and the next heir to 
the Baddington peerage. 

She had taken to drinking . drank almost 
incessantly, drank horribly; but was sensible 
and cunnino: enouo:h m her sober moments. 
You may guess the rest of the tragedy's fifth 
act. She was Atra ciira, and sat behind Ger- 
vase Falcon's fine park-hack. She reversed 
Biii^ger's awful ballad, and made Falcon the 
Lenore, while she was the demon trooper 
swiftly riding with him towards Death. To 
give her money was as throwing a handful of 
gold-dust into a quicksand. She spent and 
drank ; and went from one degree of vice to 
the other, always holding the Damocles' sword 
of a Secret over her husband's head. 

Her father, the clergyman and clerk of ]\Ial- 
lows Cray, and Tubbs, the landlord of the 
Angel, were all dead. Miss Tubbs had been 
married, and had gone to Canada with her 
husband years since. The very name of the 
once famous Beauty was heard no more in her 
native village ; but she lived and lived, till in 
the brain of her husband a dreadful Phantom 



230 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of a resolve grew up, that either he or she must 
live no longer. The Phantom grew every day 
stronger and stronger, into a more palpable 
terror of reality. 

The Phantom sprang into life, fully armed, 
on the day of his daughter's wedding. 

The Phantom- Reality said plainly, that she 
. the woman, Sarah . must die, as he stood 
by the sleeping nurse, and with his hand on the 
curtain of the bed. 

But it was a Phantom again, and lied; for 
his murderous scheme was frustrated; and his 
end I have narrated. 

It will be remembered, that Lord Badding- 
ton's carriage drew up at the west side of 
Temple Bar. Descending from it, his Lord- 
ship and Mr, Fleem found Mr. Tinctop, who 
did not look either quite so confident or quite 
so defiant as he had done an hour previously. 

'^Pray make haste, my lord, pray make 
haste, Mr. Fleem," he said, nervously. " She 
is much worse; she is very bad indeed." 

He hurried them up a narrow court^ whose 



THE HISTORY STOPS. 231 

mean houses, crazy and rotten and dingy, were 
shored up by timbers that looked more crazy 
and rotten still. Then to a door, on whose 
steps a brood of ragged children and ragged 
dogs swarmed and cried, and fought and played 
with mud and brickbats. Then up a narrow 
staircase into a darkened room, where there 
was a bed, a chair, and an old trunk, and no- 
thing else : nor fender, nor table, nor window 
curtain. 

" She's been at it again while I was away," 
he whispered, as they entered. " Persuaded 
the people of the house to get her some rum ; 
drunk as a lord . I beg pardon, as a fish . 
when I returned. She's only just coming 
round." 

She lay all her length on the bed, silent, 
save from time to time a low gasp. Mr. Fleem 
went up to her, felt her pulse, felt it again, and 
shook his sapient head. 

She did not gasp any more, nor move, nor 
open her eyes. 

" She will be better presently," Mr. Fleem 
said in a low voice. 



232 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

She was much better already. She was 

dead. 

***** 

" He must pay the promissory note," mused 
Mr. Tinctop to himself as he covered the wasted 
face of her who had once been as beautiful as 
an Angel. " He must pay; for a register's as 
good as a marriage-certificate any day, and she 
told me where to find the hoy . a fine fellow by 
this time. Ho ! ho ! I'll go abroad and lead a 
jolly life till Jack Pollyblank 's hanged." 



233 



CHAP. XIY. 

TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 

r^EORGE the gentleman, by the gi^ace of 
the Act of settlement, King of England, 
Pavilionsburg, and Virginia Water, Defender 
of the Faith . in curly brown wig, fur collar, 
and white kid pantaloons . slept with his 
progenitors, George the bad-oyster-eater, 
George the Hogarth-hater, and George the 
madman; and another king reigned in his 
stead who knew not Perdita, and refused to 
believe in the '^ Lass of Richmond Hill." 
William the Radical . the good, though 
slightly '' cracked" sovereign . was King of 
England ; and the year of grace was eighteen 
hundred and thirty-five. 



234 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Now, in those days there was a great city 
of ships on the river Mersey, in England . a 
city which was vast and astonishing to look 
upon then, but which has grown inconceivably 
vaster and more astonishing in our own day. 
Once a marshy pool, the resort of that now 
fabulous wild-fowl the Liver, which stalked 
about on its attenuated legs in places where 
now are Custom House long-rooms and Ex- 
change flags, where merchants, ship-owners, 
and cotton- brokers meet and chaffer over their 
money bargains; . once an inconsiderable sea- 
port, muddy and fishy, and to the "running" 
of contraband cognac and surreptitious silk 
goods much addicted; . then enriching and 
enlarging itself by a grim perseverance in not 
the most reputable branches of commerce and 
industry in the world, such as crimping, kid- 
napping, and especially slave- trading ; . then 
a huge emporium of trade, famous among 
maritime cities, but unrepresented in Parlia- 
ment, and in the municipal scale weighing not 
half so much as some mouldy little cathedral 
town in an agricultural county, Avith the grass 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 235 

grooving in its High Street, and an enlightened 
constituency of sartorial and sutorial pot- 
wallopers, not half so much, perhaps, as Gram- 
pound's dilapidated hovel, or Old Sarum's 
ruined walls; . and then at last Liverpool, 
twenty years since as now. Empress of Marts, 
sending forth galleons and caravels, bi-remes 
and tri-remes, to the uttermost ends of the 
earth . with its Tyre on the Lancashire, and 
its Sidon on the Cheshire coast; with its acres 
of docks, its miles of ships, ships, ships, and 
still more ships; its bursting bonding ware- 
houses, its gabbling 'Change, its narrow lanes 
choked up with men feverishly, breathlessly, 
pursuing Mammon; its overflowing shops; 
its merchant-palaces, crime-and-^vretchedness- 
breathing cellars ; foundries, ship-yards, 
taverns, jails, wealth, squalor, magnificence, 
and dirt. 

In those days Liverpool had a Sister (who 
lives and flourishes greatly to this day), called 
Manchester, living some five-and-twenty miles 
off. This sister being as comely, and famous, 
and prosperous as she ; and the commencement 



236 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of her splendour having been nearly coeval 
with her own, it was not unnatural that she 
should hate her heartily ; a thing which occurs 
sometimes among brothers and sisters, made 
of quite other materials than bricks and 
mortar. She contemptuously called her 
sister's sons " Manchester men," while her 
own offspring she denominated "Liverpool 
gentlemen." Her sister was not slow to retort. 
Liverpool having spoken slightingly of Salford, 
Manchester abused Birkenhead, (both sisters 
agreed in denouncing Warrington). Liverpool 
said Manchester was grimy with smoke, and 
disfigured with cotton flufi*. Manchester said 
that Liverpool reeked with the odour of tar 
and hemp, and that the blood of enslaved 
niorcrers cried for venojeance from beneath the 

Do O 

very pedestal of Huskisson's statue. In truth 
the sisters were as reciprocally rude as the 
celebrated Saucepan was to the Kettle of pro- 
verbial philosophy : . not Tupper's. 

Their rivalry was meteorological, too. Man- 
chester gloried in having more rainy, and more 
dreadfully rainy, days than any other town 



TIMES, SCENES, AKD PEOPLE CHANGE. 237 

i 

under the sign of Aquarius. Forthwith 
Liverpool enlisted under the united banners of 
Leo and Scorpio ; and while her sister drenched 
you with rain, she baked or broiled you with 
fierce sunshine. 

One certain July afternoon in the year 1835. 
it being of course a day of drenching rain in 
the city of chimneys, it was a glaringly, friz- 
zlingly hot one in the City of Ships. The 
vessels' sides themselves wept tears of tar; and 
the masts, coming in contact with Sol's red- 
tot-pokerlike rays, burnt their taper fingers, 
and had blisters of paint on their knuckles. 
The mutton pies, facetiously supposed (under 
the disguise of cats and dogs) to be falling in 
Manchester, might have been baked to a turn 
on the broad quay flags of Liverpool. The 
nigger cooks on board the ships on the Mersey, 
basked in the hot sun, and joyously fried them- 
selves in it. Malays, Cingalese, and I^ascars, 
were so comfortably warm as only to have 
about half-a-dozen shivering fits per diem. 
Men worth a hundred thousand pounds walked 
the streets with their hats in their hands, till, 



238 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

overcome with thirst, they slid into cool oyster- 
cellars for iced ginger-beer and " shandy gaff," 
and found their own clerks assuaging their 
drought with cider and bitter ale. They could 
not be angry with their subordinates, these 
stern merchants and shipping-brokers ; for 
were they not to the full as thirsty as them- 
selves? The very dogs had hallucinations; 
and in every twinkle of their blood-shot eyes, 
and oscillation of their hot, protruding dessi- 
cated tongues, looked strait waistcoats and 
padded rooms. The crossing-sweepers cast 
their brooms aside^ and took to gambling for 
battered coppers in shady nooks. The ]\Iayor's 
servants regretted for once the splendour of 
their scarlet waistcoats, . those vestments 
made them feel so hot ; forlorn beggars rejoiced 
for once that they had no waistcoats at all, and 
no shirts either, or pantaloons to speak of . 
the want of those garments made them feel so 
cool. Vendors of frigid beverages, salad, and 
shell-fish were likewise jubilant; but eating- 
house keepers, who had cooked large joints of 
meat and found none hungry, not even the 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 239 

destitute, cursed in dark pantries. Everybody 
felt very hot, lazy, thirsty, and strongly dis- 
posed to concur in Sydney Smith's desire to 
take off one's flesh and sit in one's bones. 
Yes; it was a giorno caldissimo, . a roaster. 

Senor Juan Manuel Harispe y Crimpo y 
Malovo, whose high-sounding patronymics 
were by the time-saving Liverpudlians abbre- 
viated into " Old Harispe," was of opinion 
that the day was exceedingly hot, as without 
coat, waistcoat, or shoes, he sat in a rush- 
bottomed chair in front of his own house, in 
Liverpool, with a fragrant cigar of considerable 
length in his mouth, and a Panama straw hat 
of enormous diameter on his head, readino^ the 
last false news of the Christina and Carlist 
squabbles from a ragged old Spanish "Epoca," 
or " Clamor," of some sort, and ever and anon 
turning in the rush-bottomed chair to scream 
out some directions in Iberio-Saxon to an old 
woman, who mio^ht have been descried throuo^h 
the open door slaving in a hot kitchen on the 
ground-floor, and at the back of the house, 
which looked like an interior by Gerard Douw. 



240 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

If Senor Harispe were of the old Castilian 
blood . the blue blood . that blood being of 
the blueness of cheese . I am inclined to think 
that there was some of the mitiness of the real 
Stilton combined therewith. The Senor looked 
not unlike a large human maggot, being sallow 
as to costume and complexion, and having an 
unpleasant habit of wriggling as he sat, and of 
crawling as he walked. He was bald, too, 
although that was immaterial, as he seldom 
removed the Panama straw hat ; but as he also 
wore spectacles, and maggots do not generally 
affect those aids to vision, or straw hats, or, 
indeed, cigars, or newspapers, I will abandon 
the animalcular simile, and say that the Seiior 
was a very diminutive shrunken man, almost 
a dwarf, rather crooked, very short-sighted, 
with a shrill voice and a very vicious dispo- 
sition. 

The Senor was, it was bruited about, a very 
rich man ; yet his mansion was situate in one 
of the worst and most hideous little streets in 
Liverpool; though again, hideous as it was, it 
was hard by the head-quarters of Liverpool 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 241 

wealth and luxury, and rents were prodigious 
in its limits. In this unpleasant neighbour- 
hood was a street, the chosen residence of the 
sons and daughters of Erin, who " waked" 
their dead as loudly as though they wished to 
wake all the dead that had died since the 
Deluge, who broke each other's heads 
periodically in contentions concerning the 
Pope of Kome and the glorious, pious, and 
immortal memory of one William, a Dutch- 
man, connected long since with the orange 
market, and whose porcine friends and rent- 
payers were not always content to dwell in the 
parlours, but wandered about the neighbour- 
hood, and, like most amateurs, prevented the 
dogs from earning a honest livelihood. 

He lay there, just across the door, enjoying 
the blazing sun, quiescent, placid, contented, a 
very lotos-eater, or Oriental sunk in trance of 
theriarki or haschisch. He was enjoying his 
'* A'^/," as the Arabs would say. His small 
eyes were not entirely closed : they indulged 
in a lazy wink from time to time . a peep at 
the beneficent luminary which pleased him so 

VOL. I. R 



242 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

much. He lay on his side, his short legs 
stretched out, a demure smile wrinkling his 
wide mouth, and that which was behind him 
gently agitated, but only for a moment, ever 
and anon. He lay there . this sluggish, 
epicurean, honest fellow of a pig . right 
behind the Sefior's rush-bottomed chair, and 
as he did, he enjoyed himself thoroughly till 
the Seiior, espying him, was rude enough to 
administer unto him a sounding kick, moved 
by which reminder, he stood upon his four 
short legs, wagged his curly tail in meek and 
gentle remonstrance, and with a series of short 
squeaks in his well-known falsetto, betook 
himself to more hospitable regions; and on 
Phelim O'Doolan's door-step, with a saucepan- 
lid for his pillow, and Phelim's youngest son 
but one as his bed-fellow, soundly and tran- 
quilly slept till sundo^vn. 

" Margrat, Margrat!" the diminutive Senor 
cried, rushing into his house in a fury. '' Dog- 
pork of she, yourself! Vat of this must you 
these Irish beestes of pig still here to drive me 
mad allow ? And why ? De dinner he not 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 243 

ready yet, and five hour by San Nicolas he 
strike already gone. Soon come the Senori 
and Senoriti, and you have yet the soup to 
adjust. Eh, doggess, dello!" 

Senor Harispe's English was fluent . in- 
deed, he had resided fifteen years in England 
and in Liverpool ; but it was peculiar, and its 
s}mtax was defective. 

" Shure then, Misther Harisp," replied the 
lady so ungallantly apostrophised as a "doggess," 
"an' it's all the haste- in the wurrold I'm 
makin', an' all to plaze ye ; an' it's little harrum 
the p'hoor dum craturs of p'higs and things 
can do, takin' jest a ha'porth of slape on a 
Christian doorstep. Isn't it slape ye always 
take in the midhst o' the day, yerself, Misther 
Harisp? Though it's litthle of a Christian 
ye is, ye ould wrinkled atomy of a furze sthub," 
she remarked, confidentially, to a saucepan; 
" ye aght to be sho^vn about for a penny, loike 
the pig-faced lady an' the gyrll with two heads, 
ye ould mermaid." 

Not particularly troubling herself about the 
propriety of applying such an epithet as " mer- 



244 THE BADDINGTON PEEEAGE. 

maid" to her master, Margaret the cook turned 
her back in dudgeon, plunged into a grove of 
copper kitchen-utensils, enveloped herself in 
savoury fumes, in which garlic predominated; 
and to further objurgations made no reply. 

Juan Manuel Harispe was the proprietor of 
a Fonda Espanol^ a Spanish hotel and restau- 
rant . dirty, dear, and prosperous . and had 
kept it in the same street in the same town of 
Liverpool, for ten years. He had come to the 
city of ships, steward of a schooner from Cadiz, 
laden with oranges and almonds. He had 
commenced with a very small, nay, almost in- 
visible capital; but was now reputed to be 
exceedingly wealthy. He was not very popu- 
lar among his English neighbours, because he 
was a Papist; among his Irish neighbours, 
because, although enjoying a communion of 
religious creed Avith them, he was stingy, mo- 
rose, abhorred whiskey, and was a sworn foe to 
pigs ; among any class at all, in fact, for that 
he was, as I have hinted, vicious, and that there 
was a peculiar appearance of hardware about 
Lis eyes, when he was moved . a Sheffield 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 245 

cutlery appearance . a ^'knify" appearance, 
in short. 

To Juan Manuel Harispe's Fonda came 
captains, chief mates, and supercargoes of fo- 
reign ships; Spanish merchants of the middle 
class ; Spanish exiles when they had any money 
. for poor exiles were the Senor's great aver- 
sion ; and he always took care to inform them 
where the best English hotels were to be found. 
He was unmarried . though he lived not quite 
alone . was avaricious, bigoted, repulsive, and 
insolent ; and was almost continually smoking 
in his Panama hat and his shirt-sleeves. 

A rage being a luxury that cost nothings 
was by the Senor indulged in, not once a week, 
but rather once a day, if not ten times during 
the twenty-four hours. His rages began with 
an infuriated gobble, like unto that of a turkey 
with an indignant apprehension of Christmas 
and LeadenhalJ Market in his mind, and usually 
ended with a prolonged scream. I will not 
fatigue you with a short-hand report of the 
Seiior's style of eloquence, couched as it was 
in a well-nigh incomprehensible jargon of mixed 



246 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Spanish and English. Suffice it to say, that 
he constantly showered on his cook, "Margrat," 
or Margaret, the most powerfully perfumed, if 
not the choicest, flowers of rhetoric ; and that 
the epithets he selected wherewith to qualify 
the estimate he expressed of that domestic^s 
character, were mainly of a zoological charac- 
ter. On the present occasion, he was fast ap- 
proaching the prolonged scream which was the 
customary climax to his agreeable ebullitions 
of temper, when a young person came through 
a doorway, and, laying her hand on his, said, 
in a soft tone, and, seemingly, not in the least 
afraid of the redoubtable Seiior: . 
"Uncle of mine, what vexes thee?" 
You have seen an angry child, its face all 
smirched with passionate tears, its cheeks 
flushed, hair flustered, eyes swollen, little hands 
clenched ; and, lo ! instantaneously, at the sight 
of a * glorious picture-book (one penny plain, 
twopence coloured), or at a droll grimace made 
by one of the chosen clowns and self-appointed 
jesters to the young, the child will forbear to cry, 
will clinch its tiny palms, raise its vexed lids, 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 247 

beam out joy, and smile a smile of Angels. 
You have seen, through the murkiest cloud, a 
ray of the sudden sun come in jolly triumph, 
and dig its golden finger into the ribs of the 
storm, laughing its ill-humour away. You 
may imagine such a look as Napoleon the Great, 
one day in 1813, sunk in black reverie of ruin 
and despair, might have cast, as, turning his 
eyes from some despatch fraught with news of 
defeat, they lighted on the little King of Eome, 
nestling on the pillow by his side, his golden 
hair flowing over the velvet pillow, his little 
fingers entwined in his father's sword-knot, and 
smiling in his sleep. So Juan Manuel Harispe, 
screaming with rage, forbore to scream any 
longer, and was mollified and appeased, looking 
quite as benignant as his dwarfish stature and 
exceeding ugliness would permit him, when 
the young person I have mentioned, came out 
of the door- way, and laid her hand on his. 

She who had exercised so sudden and salu- 
tary an influence on the temper of the pro- 
prietor of the " Fonda Fulgencia," as Senor 
Harispe's establishment was designated, was 



248 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

but a slight, fragile, mite of a thing . a young 
girl, who had possibly numbered sixteen sum- 
mers, but who had certainly never known an 
inkling of the winters thereof. 

She was adorably pretty, this young person; 
and I want similes to give you a just idea of 
her prettiness. I was myself once over the 
crown of my head with a young lady who 
took it into her pretty, capricious head to fall 
in love, not with the undersigned, but with a 
friend he has, and has still . one of the hand- 
somest, merriest, kindest, worthiest young fel- 
lows of a family, all as handsome, merry, kind 
and worthy as he, and some of them wise. 
She was always teUing me how handsome my 
friend was . ^you may imagine how I winced; 
. he was like "wax- work," she said; and as 1 
felt I did not resemble any "works" to speak 
of, save, perhaps, bone-works, or occasionally 
fire- works, it was with but a rueful relish that 
Orestes listened to these perpetual panegyrics 
on his friend Pylades. I could not help wish- 
ing, sometimes, that he were not quite so 
handsome, aware as I was that her admiration 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 249 

for him might lead her to compare it with the 
personal charms of another^ and conscious as I 
was of the odious nature of comparisons in 
general. But the "wax-work" shall stand me 
in stead for a simile, now. She . not wy she, 
but that other she . was very like one of those 
coquettish-looking Mexican figures which Ma- 
dame Montanari modelled in wax, attired with 
such picturesque elegance, and exhibited in 
the great glass house of 'fifty-one. A very 
dark brunette, but with more of the clear 
olive, and less of the dusky coppery hue of 
the plastic lady's Indian heroines. But the 
same lithe, slim, symmetrical limbs ; the same 
blue-black, silky hair, gorgeous in its length 
and luxuriance; the same ripe rosy lips shaped 
. oh, the trite but true image ! . like Cupid's 
bow; the same dark-pencilled eyes . the brows 
rainbows of the night, the eyelashes' silken 
curtains veiling alcoves of lustrous pupils, 
sable, but full of light and mirroring depths, 
as are the pools of ink which the Magicians of 
Grand Cairo pour into the palms of neophytes 
for them to see strange sights within ; the same 



250 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

gleaming white, semi-transparent, teeth . ivory 
stockades before a fortalice of rubies ; the same 
sharply cut, resentful nostrils; the same mel- 
low bloom on the cheek, like that on a Catha- 
rine pear, "the side that's next the sun;" the 
same suppleness of limb, tigress-like ease of 
attitude and movement . no; not tigress-like, 
say rather jaguar-like; the velvety softness 
and seeming meekness combined with the swift- 
ness and the fierceness when roused to spring, 
to leap upon, to rend and to destroy. Then a 
dress easy^ graceful, flowing . a dress which she 
wore only because she knew people must wear 
dresses. She carried it with impatience as did 
Musidora, and would have dispensed with it 
as readily, had there been a leafy forest and a 
limpid pool at hand. She would much rather 
have been Sara la Baigneuse, swinging in 
her hammock, the lazy thing, the whole 
harvest-day. In her costume, there was a 
dainty mixture of the English and the Spanish 
elements: . the muslin robe of a Lancashire 
witch, and the high comb and lace mantilla of 
a maiden of Seville ; then there was a dimpled 



TIMES, SCENES, AKD PEOPLE CHANGE. 251 

hand whose little fingers seemed longing for a 
fan ; but in these common-place, unpicturesque 
latitudes contented themselves at most seasons 
with some needlework in coloured worsted; 
sometimes with a book. Then a tiny foot shod 
in the nattiest, neatest of bronze kid slippers. 
Diogenes, the cynic, would have crawled forth- 
with from his tub, and kissed those little slip- 
pers: he could not have helped himself, the 
rogue ! And then, finally, in eyevj movement, 
gesture, glance of eye and smile of lip; a 
burning reminiscence of the South . its sun, 
its orange groves, its vineyards, its blue skies, 
and its sparkling fountains. 

All this was not the heiress of the Duke of 
Lerma,the daughter of the Duke of Medina- Celi. 
This was not an Infanta. Only little Manuelita, 
the niece of old Harispe, the eating-house 
keeper, and herself only a dancer at twenty-five 
shillings a week salary at the Apollo Belvidere 
Concert Halls, Paradise Street, Liverpool. 

Her dwarfish uncle certainly loved her 
. certainly doted upon her, certainly 
idolised her more than anything, except 



252 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the money he cozened his guests out of, 
and which he hid (he mistrusted banks, 
and mortgages, and all other investments) in 
rags, old stockings, corners, and in boxes 
under beds. But he let his Manuelita dance 
for a salary of five-and-twenty shillings per 
week, nevertheless. You see money is money ; 
and five-and-twenty shillings are a silver 
crown more than a golden pound. She v/as 
an orphan; father and mother both dead; and 
he had brought her with him a mere babe 
when he first came to England. Early she 
had manifested great talent for dancing ; and 
Harispe had absolutely gone to the length of 
paying money of the coinage of the realm to 
have her instructed in pirouettes and entrechats^ 
first by Mr. Blaber, who taught the Polonaise, 
the Lancers, and the College Hornpipe, in 
addition to that genial dance known as the 
Lancashire Clog -dance, all for twelve-and- 
sixpence a quarter. But the little girl 
manifesting a decided leaning to the chore- 
graphic art as developed on the boards of 
Thespis, her uncle, after a dreadful internal 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 253 

struggle, so far enacted the part of a generons 
Croesus, as to pay a premium of twenty pounds 
to Madame Hyppolite, ballet-mistress of the 
Liverpool Theatre Royal, and was for the 
space of three years one of that ci-devant 
premiere danseuse, but somewhat wrinkled 
Terpsichore's multitudinous articled pupils. 
The little Manuelita played seraphs and sprites, 
zephyrs and wills, peris and houris. She was 
once (a great Italian lyrical star condescending 
to visit Liverpool) promoted to play one of the 
two children of the ill-used Norma (how often 
have I seen those children knock-kneed and 
without pocket-handkerchiefs !) ; and had not 
her pronunciation of the English tongue, fluent 
and correct as was her knowledge of the 
language, been marked by a strong, though 
very pretty, Spanish accent, she would have 
been selected to play the part of Puck in the 
" Midsummer Night's Dream." Madame 
Hyppolite predicted a great career for her. 
She offered to produce. to lancer her. as she 
phrased it, at Manchester, at the King's 
Theatre in London, at the great Academic 



254 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Roy ale of Paris itself. She would be a 
Taglioni, an Elsler . stars just then un- 
rivalled in the choregraphic firmament. 
Manuel Harispe was nothing loth to see his 
Manuelita glorified, and himself enriched ; but 
among the idiosyncrasies of the ballet-mistress 
was one for binding her pupils to her by 
stringent agreements, making them work like 
cart-horses, and drawing their salaries. She 
is Bohemianising about Europe even now, 
is Madame Hyppolite, a more wrinkled 
Terpsichore than ever. I think the last time 
I came across her was at Copenhagen, where 
she had the seventy-four ]\Ioldo-Wallachian 
children whom she had taught to dance like 
sylphs, but whom she beat, and starved a little 
.^people said. 

So Manuelita, her articles being at an end, 
began to dance on her own account; and 
Mr. de Joskins, manager of the Royal Apollo- 
Belvidere Concert Hall, being then in want of 
a prima ballerina to dance between the acts of 
his heterogeneous entertainment, (which 
comprised comic and romantic singing, 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 255 

humorous recitations, running in sacks, sacred 
music, sparring with the gloves, conjuring, 
ventriloquism, tumbling, dancing and pyro- 
technics), offered her the munificent terms of 
five-and-twenty shillings per week salary, 
which at the instance of her uncle she accepted, 
and the Concert Hall being close by the 
" Fonda Fulgencia," tripped gaily to Mr. de 
Joskins's dazzling realms of splendour every 
night . save Sunday . at eight, and danced 
there on her ten toes till eleven. At first, 
Senor Harispe used jealously to accompany 
her to and from the Hall ; waiting behind the 
scenes as she danced, and till she had finished ; 
but finding that Mr. de Joskins allowed no 
smoking in his coulisses ; that if he went in 
front, even with an order, he was expected to 
partake of some refreshment which cost 
money ; and being besides fully persuaded of 
how good a little girl his Manuelita was, he 
allowed her to go to and from Paradise Street, 
under the convoy either of Margaret, or of 
Ogon AUeon, his Spanish and one-eyed head 
waiter. 



256 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Manuelita waited with a pretty patience till 
her uncle^s scream died away into an inarticu- 
late murmur, and said again, and as softly, in 
Spanish : 

''And what vexeth, what aileth thee, uncle 
of mine ?" 

" That brute boor, that kitchen woman, to 
whom the saints send chillblains, lets greasy 
Jews of pigs congregate even on my doorstep," 
replied Harispe, removing the Panama hat for 
a moment to wipe his bald head. " And thou 
knowest, my bird, my angel's pinion feather, 
that the people will be here soon to dinner. 
And that beldam hag of Morocco is late as 
usual. Wasting the precious oil and butter, 
and gravy, too, I will be bound, as though 
they were water. The unburnt sorceress !" 

It was one of the great woes and agonies of 
Manuel Harispe's life, that, though he charged 
them round sums for their board and lodging, 
he was obliged to give his guests anything to 
eat at all. To see them eat precious meat, 
drink up costly soups and sauces, and call for 
wine to pour down their unsatiable throttles, 



TIMES, SCENES, AND PEOPLE CHANGE. 257 

caused bim inexpressible unbappiness. He 
only recovered his equanimity, when, retiring 
to a little private den of his own, smelling very 
powerfully of bees' wax, garlic, and salad oil, 
he visited the gluttonous delinquencies of his 
guests by heavy additions to their bills. 

" To say nothing, little niece of nieces," he 
continued, replacing the Panama straw-hat, 
that thou, thy dear self, must already be 
hungry, and waiting for thy dinner.'^ 

" Say rather," Manuelita interposed, smiling, 
*' that thou hast smelt the puchero^ and art 
hungering for it. I am not so hungry . I," 
she added, half aside, and with half a sigh. 

The sigh seemed involuntary, for, blushing, 
she hung down her head. Why should she 
blush or sigh . and why wasn't she hungry 
at dinner time, this little Manuelita? 

They called her the ''Little Spanish Wonder" 
at the Apollo-Belvidere Concert Hall . some- 
times the " Star of Spain." She drew large 
sums of money, not for her own, but for 
Mr. de Joskins's benefit. She [had scores of 
admirers ; scores of billet-doux were slipped 

VOL. I. s 



258 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

into her hand, or laid on her dressing-room 
table, or left for her at the stage door, or 
given to her by too willing emissaries. But 
she turned a deaf ear to all her admirers, and 
burnt all the hillet-doux. All? Well, perhaps 
s1ie kept one, just for fun, which that grand 
gentleman sent her . that great dandy in the 
beautiful coat with the black velvet collar, and 
the satin stock with the real diamond in it, 
and the red velvet waistcoat, the gold chain, 
the eye-glass, the little shiny boots, and 
especially the beautiful moustaches, w^ho came 
over from Manchester to see Mr. de Joskins, 
and treated him to champagne^ and was so 
affable and kind, and such a real gentleman. 
She knew his name, too; she had seen it in a 
red book, called an " Army List," at the cir- 
culating library. He was a real captain of 
soldiers . a captain of Hussars. There it was. 
" Twenty-First Hussars : Colonel . General 
Lord Pogueysburg, G.C.B. ; Lieutenant- 
Colonel . Snape ; Majors . Widgeon and 
Tealotson; Captains" . ah! now she came to 
it . " Captains . Machoof " . no, that wasn't 



TIMES, SCENES, AXD PEOPLE CHANGE. 259 

it . " Sir Tony Lumpkin" . no . " Lord 
Charles Chiffinch" . no : ah ! here he was . 
" Captain Charles Rook Delahawk Falcon." 
Mr. de Joskins said that he hadn't mucb 
money, but that he was the nephew of the 
great Lord Baddington, and that he would be 
a lord himself some day, for that his Lordship 
was getting very old and feeble now. "He was 
a wild spark, too, the Capting," Mr. de Joskins 
observed. "What could a wild spark be? Was 
Tom Tippercorn, the clown, who drank too 
much, and beat his wife, a wild spark? Was 
^Ir. Eosinupp, the leader of the band, when he 
ran away without paying his rent . was that 
wild sparkishness ? Charles . Captain Falcon, 
she meant . could never be a wild spark ; he 
was such a nice gentleman, had such a soft 
hand, such a sweet smile. He was with his 
beautiful regiment of horse-soldiers in barracks 
at Manchester, and came over in his own dog- 
cart on purpose to see Mr. de Joskins; wasn't 
that kind of him ? He was very young . 
only twenty-four ; and his father, Mr. de 
Joskins told her, was a grand London gentle* 



260 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

man, but he died very suddenly while Charles 
. Captain Falcon, she meant . was with his 
regiment at Canterbury. It had all been in 
the papers, the manager said, and some people 
had said that the old boy . that was old 
Mr. Falcon, she presumed . had destroyed 
himself. But nobody believed that, of course. 
Poor fellow, to lose his father so early and so 
suddenly ! But he had a mother and sisters 
alive . she was glad to hear that. Was she 
glad to hear that ? Finally, Mr. de Joskins 
bade her " play her cards well, and she might 
make a good thing of it." What was playing 
her cards well ; and what good thing could she 
make of it by so playing them? She kept 
Charles's . Captain Falcon's . note just for 
fun; but she refused to accept the emerald 
ring he tried to force upon her; and she 
threatened to box his ears if he attempted to 
kiss her again. She did not box his ears that 
night, however; and he drove back to Man- 
chester in his own dog-cart, with a peculiar 
smile of triumph in his countenance. 



261 



CHAP. XY. 

HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 

" TTOW now, Don Xo-Whiskerandos, thou 
bald-faced Spanish stag? How goes 
it with thee, smooth pate? What thy feelings*, 
thou decayed rind of a mildewed Seville 
orange? And how are you to-morrow, my 
poppet?'* 

These were the words sung out rather than 
spoken, in a loud and confident tone; and, if 
truth must be spoken, in an impudent tone 
likewise, by a big man who became suddenly 
apparent opposite the Fonda Fulgencia . (he 
had come round the adjacent narrow street- 
corner) . and crossing the road unceremo- 
niously, being one of those aggressively 
swaggering and pavement-usurping individuals 



262 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

for whom no thoroughfare . not even the 
Nevskoi Perspective . seems wide enough, 
and who may be said, like the late Lord 
Sandwich, to walk on both sides of the street 
at once, this same portentous appearance 
eclipsed Seiior Harispe and his niece to boot 
with his big blue shadow. 

" Saints in heaven who sing!" the landlord 
of the Fulgencia exclaimed; *'it is the Senor 
Professor. Senor Professor, you arc as wel- 
come as . as the dinner you will be of having 
on this instant of time. Saints in heaven ! " 
the little man continued, but to himself, 
'* how gladly would I burn candles to the 
whole calendar. Saint Nicolas and all, if the 
Professor were in heaven . or somewhere 
else." 

The person to whom the title of Professor 
had been given was a hale tall man, of an 
indefinable age, but seemingly under forty. 
His face was bronzed by long and fierce ex- 
posure to the sun. He was quite beardless, 
while his black hair, being closely cropped to 
his head in the manner affected in those davs 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHDIO. 263 

by the French citizens ill affected to the 
government of the citizen-king Louis Philippe, 
and called a la mecontente^ and furthermore, 
his eyes being well nigh as small as those of 
the quadruped who paid Mr. Phelim O'Doolan's 
rent and slept in his parlour, their facial 
grace gave him a rather Tartar-mandarin, 
and very much of a sinister, expression of 
countenance. He had large coarse hands with 
creases on the knuckles, and the joints of 
which seemed to be particularly supple, the 
thumbs especially were broad, squat, un- 
shapely, yet pliant and plastic-looking. 

The Professor's attire was of the most 
ornate description : an olive-brown surtout 
covered with frogs and braiding, and cuffed 
and faced with a profusion of velvet ; a green 
watered-silk waistcoat, across whose depths 
meandered a golden cable rather than a watch- 
chain ; a deep stock of brocaded satin of many 
colours . a very Joseph's coat cut up for a 
neck-kerchief . in the midst of which was stuck 
an enormous brooch, which may possibly have 
been paste, but which glittered like the bravest 



264 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of diamonds; snowy- white duck trousers, with 
a stripe of golden braid down the outside 
seam; jean boots with tiny varnished tips; a 
white hat with a black band . worn more, to 
judge from the sparkling appearance of the 
remainder of the Professor's costume, for the 
sake of ornamental contrast than as a symbol 
of recent domestic affliction ; a gauzy cream- 
coloured wrapper over the olive-brown surtout 
. not to keep the Professor warm, for of 
the heat of the day you have been told, but 
to keep the Professor free from dust ; the most 
flaming of yellow silk pocket-handkerchiefs; 
sparkling rings on almost every finger of those 
coarse hands; and a Malacca cane with a 
prodigious gold knob on the top, and two long 
silken tassels ; this carried in one hand, and a 
pair of straw-coloured kid gloves in the other, 
thus splendidly and triumphantly ''completed 
the costume" . to adopt the time-honoured 
locution . of this astounding Professor. It was 
not a military costume, a naval, an ecclesias- 
tical, a Spanish, not even exactly a theatrical 
costume; but it was a very wonderful whole 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 265 

to look at . a melange of the riding-master, 
the lover in a pantomime, the Frenchman in a 
farce, a quack doctor, and a member of the 
swell mob . a kind of gauntlet thrown down 
to all the tailors of the universe, from the 
renowned Poole, head of the House of Bur- 
lington, to the Sartor-nonsartus of H.M. the 
King of the Cannibal Islands, with this defiance 
'' Match it if you can ! " 

When little Manuelita saw this splendid 
being, the curious observer might have noticed 
that she shrank back, and caught hold of her 
uncle's arm as she drew him into the door- 
way ; that she made him retreat quite precipi- 
tately in the long, low, unsavoury apartment 
where the table d'hote of the Fonda was held; 
and that, as she encountered the bold stare of 
impudent admiration which the Professor 
deigned to bestow upon her, there came over 
her pretty face a flush that told, unmistakably, 
not of admiration, but of indignant dislike. 

"There! don't pull my arm off, little 
Manuelita!" said her uncle, gently disen- 
gaging himself. '' One would think thou wert 



zoo THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

afraid of the Seiior Professor. Dost thou 
think he will eat thee up?" 

"Eat her up!" cried the Professor, casting 
himself, with a boisterous laugh, on to a 
ricketty chair, and flicking the dust from his 
varnished boot-tips with his yellow pocket- 
handkerchief. " Eat her up ! and so I would 
. without pepper, without salt, without the 
particularly musty and rancid oil which you, 
skinny and shrivelled father of man- 
monkeys, and grandfather of all the chim- 
panzees out of the Zoological Gardens! put 
into all the eatables and drinkables from your 
bread to your beef. Eat her up ! who wouldn't 
eat Manuelita up? Pretty Manuelita ! charm- 
ing Manuelita ! coquettish Manuelita ! nice yet 
naughty, wondrous yet wicked Manuelita! 
rogueish Manuelita! Star of Spain! Iberian 
treasure ! Apple of every body's eye ! Penin- 
sular diamond!" 

He laughed again, more coarsely and bois- 
terously still. A merry man was the Pro- 
fessor . fond of his joke, always. 

The girl looked at him with an expression 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 267 

of unmistakeable loathing, which expression 
of distaste seemed to tickle the Professor im- 
mensely, and made him laugh with renewed 
force. jVlanael Harispe looked too at his 
guest, at first in a very evil manner ; but he 
muttered to himself, between his teeth, " He 
pays so much!" and the dangerous expression 
in his face melted into a cringing, fawning smile. 

" You are so always so good your laugh to 
have, Ballero Professor," he said, rubbing his 
yellow hands together; "always so funny 
man are you . ah, much!" 

''There!" the Professor answered, with 
insolent nonchalance, " that will do, my servile 
friend. Just hurry on with the dinner, for I 
am as hungry as Nimrod, that mighty hunter, 
must have been when he came home from 
shooting hippopotamuses. Dish up, do you 
hear, Shylock! Tell Margaret to put some 
sauce that one can eat in the dishes; . I 
wouldn't mind a beef-steak powdered with 
some of the gold dust thou hast sown up in 
thy flannel waistcoat, thou Infant of Avarice, 
thou griping Don 1 And, Manuelita, my child 



268 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of the sunny South, go you and do up your 
hair, and look as pretty as ever you can, that 
I may make love to you all dinner-time." 

The niece of Manuel Harispe disdained to 
answer, but with an indignant flutter of her 
muslins, brushed past her uncle and out of 
the room. But in the passage she caught 
hold of both Harispe's hands . he had followed 
close at her heels, and in a low . and for so 
pretty, gentle a creature, almost a fierce . 
whisper, hissed in his ear . 

" Uncle, 1 hate that man." 

Manuel Harispe gave a puzzled shrug. 

*' Darling niece of mine," what am I to do? 
I too hate him as a contrahandista hates a 
doganero. Doth not the borrico hate his pack- 
saddle ? Doth not the peasant hate the priest, 
who watches his olive crop and o^'^^ts his 
chesnuts, of tithes thinking? It. is a brute 
beast . an English cow man . but he jjays so 
muchy 

They spoke in Spanish, lowly and softly, 
but with much gesticulation. 

"I tell you I hate him," the dark little 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 269 

maiden went on. ''I who love almost all the 
creatures that live. He is a bad, wicked, 
deceitful, cruel man. Look at his bad eyes! 
hear his bad voice ! Not a day passes but he 
insults your sister's child." 

'^Insults!" the elder savagely interposed; 
'' insults you^ my dove? I should like to have 
his false heart's blood for that.'* 

"Nay, tut, tut," Manuelita whispered; ''I 
meant not so much. If he insulted me there 
should be no need for you to take his blood, 
oh, my uncle; but his voice insults me; his 
manner, his odious smile, his fool's talk, all 
insult me. Have him no more in this house, 
dear uncle." 

" Little darling," the Senor responded, with 
dolorous indecision. " He drinks many, many 
bottles of red wine weekly. He asks never, 
no never, for change. He flings silver crowns 
at the head of Margrat and at the head of 
Ogon Alleon ; and they give me half. He is 
worth to me, my Manuelita, this piece of pork 
and gold, this Morisco mingled with the Jew, 
not three, not four, but five golden English 



270 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

guineas every eiglit days. He has been here 
already three months, while doing his witch- 
craft and devilries at the Minerva Hall; and 
here he says he will stay and pay, misery of 
me! three months longer." 

Manuelita saw that it was in vain to reason 
further with her uncle just then on this topic, 
and that his avarice outweighed even his 
affection for her. She therefore adjourned 
the subject of the hated Professor's presence 
sine die, determined however to resume it on 
a more favourable occasion. She kissed her 
uncle on his skinny forehead, and tripped 
lightly up a narrow jQight of stairs to her own 
little bower, which, indeed, her taste and 
elegance had made as much like a bower as a 
wretched little cockloft was susceptible of 
being made; there to make herself as pretty 
as possible (which was difficult, for that im- 
mortal ladies'-maid. Nature, had made her so 
already); and thus beautified and adorned 
herself, not in obedience to the insolent 
behests of the Professor, but because she felt 
it to be a duty she owed to herself and to 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHLMO. 271 

society, including the other table d'hote guests 
whom she did not hate, to look pretty. 

Down she came in about ten minutes, looking 
of a verity radiant, and with a dimpling smile 
took her accustomed seat at her uncle's right 
hand at the head of the table. She had 
almost forgotten the Professor, no naturally 
pleased was she with the murmur of admiration 
which invariably greeted her every afternoon 
on her entrance into Manuel Harispe's salle a 
manger. 

The guests had been dropping in by twos 
and threes while she had been engaged in her 
brief toilet, and the table was now quite full. 
There might have been some four-and-twenty 
Spaniards, Mexicans, and Italians, all in two 
rows, with a Frenchman here and an Enfrlish- 
man there, like angels* visits, or the plums in 
a school pudding, few and far between. The 
vice-chair was taken by a very long, bony, 
American captain of a brig from Havannah, 
who brought sugar to England, and took 
'' notions" to Cuba, and who, evil-disposed 
people whispered sometimes, by way of diver- 



272 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

sion, traded between Havannah and the West 
Coast of somewhere with certain commodities, 
which certainly were not at all saccharine, and 
which, if they came under the head of 
"notions" at all, were rather dark notions, 
woolly-headed notions, thick-lipped notions, 
and especially handcuffed and bilboed notions? 
who, having human hearts, and being troubled 
with such things as immortal souls, were 
nevertheless shipped and bought and sold, 
like the veriest notions in a dry goods store. 

Nearly all the guests were smoking as they 
came in, and laid their smouldering cigars or 
cigaritos by their plates' sides, resuming them 
with a charming absence of ceremony in the 
intervals of the repast, or so soon as they had 
eaten and drunk enough. There were no 
ladies present save Manuelita. The dinner 
was of a very ambiguous and cosmopolitan 
description . the contents of the dishes being 
mostly dark in colour and powerful in odour ; 
but two things were certain, that the Castalia 
of Margaret, the cook's, inspiration was the 
great river of oil, and the Tree of her culinary 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 273 

knowledge the great clove of garlic. Beyond 
the certainty of these elements' presence, the 
dinner must indubitably have been reckoned 
among the Cosas de Espafia . dark and mysteri- 
ous things, incomprehensible to those who have 
not climbed the pillars of Hercules, assisted at a 
funcion^ or wandered from their youth up- 
wards through the halls of the Abencerrages. 
Marvellous things are the Cosas de Espana ! 
Spanish bonds are among them. Spanish 
gratitude, Spanish cigaritos and mantillas 
and guitars (for where can the first be rolled, 
the second draped, the third drummed, out of 
Spain?) Spanish jackasses, which, I am told, 
are nearly as large as white elephants, and 
Spanish flies. And the most wondrous of 
the Cosas de Espafia we have seen in these 
latter days is the Spanish campaign in Africa, 
and the sublime impudence with which a few 
paltry skirmishes with a pack of ding}^, ill- 
armed, half-naked, and undisciplined Moorish 
rascals have been magnified into a series of 
heroic achievements worthy of Rodrigo de 
Bivar . of the immortal Ruy Cid Campeador 

VOL. I. T 



274 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

himself, his sword Escoriante, and Bavicca his 
steed. 

Margaret, the Milesian, and Ogon Alleon, the 
tawny Spanish waiter, who might have been of 
Moorish extraction, so tawnily complexioned 
was he, waited at table efficiently, but with a 
remarkable freedom from politeness. Every- 
body seemed to do very much as he liked, and 
almost everybody drank water. 

Save the Professor, who, eating mightily, as 
became his stature and strength, was profuse 
in his consumption of red wine. He drank it 
as though he had been accustomed to it all his 
life, which may or may not have been the case. 
He challenged the American captain to drink, 
who responded, nothing loth, to the challenge, 
and, to tell the truth, looked as though he 
could drink the Professor under the table with 
any liquor from champagne to sherry-cobbler. 
He specially invited Manuel Harispe to imbibe 
red wine ; albeit that illustrious Spaniard ab- 
horred fermented liquors, yet knew full well 
that the more he drank at his guest's expense, 
the more he, Manuel Harispe, financially 



HUMOURS OF PROFESSOR JACHIMO. 275 

profited ; so he drank and made wry faces, but 
was gladdened in his inmost heart. But little 
Manuelita steadily refused all invitations, even 
to wet her lips with the Professor's profi'ered 
grape-juice; she would as readily have quaffed 
hemlock. She had, I have said, nearly for- 
gotten her persecutor's presence when she first 
sat doAvn to dinner; but he soon made her 
aware that he, on his part, had not forgotten 
her. He sat as close to her as he possibly 
could, a propinquity which she could not, and 
her uncle would not, prevent. He paid her 
loud, bold compliments, which made her blush 
and tremble with shame and anger. He 
leered at her; he laughed and talked and 
abused Harispe, who, whenever he found the 
dangerous feeling creeping over him, as it 
would sometimes, softly whispered to himself, 
" He pays so much !" 

Who was this bold Professor, and what did 
he profess? He . but he is of sufficient im- 
portance, I think, to demand a fresh chapter 
specially to introduce him. 



276 



CHAP. XVI. 

The dangers of being PRETXr. 

T^HREE months agone, Professor Jachimo, 
Unutterable Wizard of the Eight Hemis- 
pheres, and Chief Magician to the Emperor of 
Seringapatam, had landed in Liverpool from 
an American steamer, having concluded a 
triumphantly prosperous tour in North and 
South America, India, and the adjacent 
countries. Ceding to the repeatedly-urged re- 
quest of the nobility and gentry of Liverpool 
and its dependencies, he had consented to 
give a (strictly limited) number of magical 
representations at the Minerva Hall, in the 
thronged thoroughfare known as Whitechapel, 
in that vast commercial emporium, prior to his 



THE DANGERS OF BEIXG PRETTY. 277 

unavoidable departure to fulfil his numerous 
engagements in British India, Honduras, the 
Bay of Fundy, and the Island of Formosa. 
For particulars see huge wcod-cuts, flaming 
chromo-lithographs, and small bills. 

In good sooth, and in sober earnest, Profes- 
sor Jachimo was a conjuror, and a very good 
conjuror as conjurors go. He had an exten- 
sive magical apparatus, and considerable 
dexterity of sleight of hand. He went about 
the world conjuring pigeons out of pocket- 
handkerchiefs, and half-crowns out of plum- 
cakes, smashing up gold watches in hats, 
burning five-pound notes in candles, cutting 
oiF people's heads before their faces, and other- 
wise setting the laws of gravitation, optics, 
therapeutics, logic, and common sense at defi- 
ance. His entertainment in Liverpool was 
highly successful. Besides his apparatus and 
his facility in feats of legerdemain, he had a 
stock of verbal and facial impudence, always 
on hand and at command, perfectly tremendous 
in its magnitude. He drove a handsome 
mail-phaeton about Liverpool, with two 



278 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

grooms in sky-blue liveries, and with two, and 
occasionally four, fiery horses, on the morrows 
of very successful performances at the Minerva 
Hall, the full team of four-in-hand always 
appeared : but this was not to be taken as an 
infallible criterion of his commercial fluctua- 
tions ; for the Professor was often heard to say 
that if he did badly, he would have six horses 
to his phaeion, and that if he utterly failed 
and went bankrupt, he would have eight. 
He patronised the coffee-rooms of the most 
expensive hotels in the to^vn, and smoked the 
biggest and choicest cigars. With his par- 
tiality for red wine the reader has already 
been made acquainted. Finally, he was very 
generous in the distribution of small change 
and in the discharge of his sumptuary expenses ; 
and he was reported to have amassed immense 
riches during his travels. 

It certainly appeared strange, under these 
circumstances, that, being to such an extent 
the favourite of fortune, Professor Jachimo 
should have chosen to reside in so dubious a 
neighbourhood as that in which the Fonda of 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 279 

Juan Manuel Harispe was situated, and in 
such an inelegant establishment as that Fonda 
itself; for the Adelphi, the George, and the 
Queen's . those sternly frowning hotels of the 
city of ships . would gladly have thrown 
open their several portals to so wealthy a 
wizard, and one who disbursed so largely. 
Again, the Professor's stock of Spanish was 
meagre in quantity, and anything but satis- 
factory in quality : it could scarcely be with a 
view towards perfecting himself in the Iberian 
tono^ue, that he sou^-ht the shelter of Seiior 
Harispe' s roof; for, once there^ he scarcely 
ever condescended to essay a phrase in Spanish, 
and conducted his polite conversation with his 
landlord and his landlord's niece through the 
medium of a well of English not wholly unde- 
filed. The Professor's language was always 
garnished with slang, and sometimes with 
oaths. Chance, or some fellow-passengers in 
the steamer, may have led him in the outset to 
become a guest at the Fonda Fulgencia; but 
he must have had some motive for remaining 
there so long. Whatever that motive might 



280 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

have been, he imparted it to no one, though he 
did not appear to be of a secretive nature, 
generally. 

When the foreign gentlemen had finished 
their repast, they betook themselves to smoking 
Avith sreat vls^our and s^usto. Black coffee, 
too, was brought, and shortly after its con- 
sumption, packs of cards began to be produced ; 
then mysterious squares of green baize, which 
after a short lapse of time began to be covered 
with little heaps of silver, and half-crowns, 
and, at last, half-sovereigns and sovereigns, 
nay, not unfrequently crumpled bank-notes. 
You saw more of the foreign gentlemen's 
hands than of their heads about this time, for 
the former were stretched out on all sides 
eagerly over the squares of green baize, and 
quivered and clawed the air as they were so 
stretched; while the latter were bent down 
almost to a level with the table, in their rapt 
attention to the varying chances of the game. 
The foreign gentlemen who were guests at the 
Fonda Fulgencia, were all gambling for dear 
life, as it is the dearest thing in life for foreign 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 28 1 

. and especially Spanish . gentlemen to 
gamble. And they smoked incessantly, and 
drank little besides cold water. 

Professor Jachimo, whose magical perform- 
ances took place only four nights a week, 
and who had a holiday that evening, entered 
with great ardour into the spirit of the game. 
He played largely himself, and won as largely, 
almost invariably. For it was a remark- 
able circumstance connected with Professor 
Jachimo, that he was very lucky at play, 
and as lucky at games of chance as at games 
of skill. The foreign gentlemen were not 
without misgivings about playing cards with 
a wizard ; but they too kept their eyes open 
to their full amplitude, and were, besides, so 
fond of gambling for gambling's sake, that, 
I doubt not, they would have taken a hand 
at cards with the enemy of mankind himself, 
had that personage offered to cut in. The 
Professor, though with quite enough to 
occupy him with the cards before him, had 
remarkably sharp eyes for other things passing 
around him. He had an eve for Juan Manuel 



282 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Harispe, watching that Hidalgo very much 
in the scrutinising fashion, in which a cat 
watches a mouse. Harispe, for his part, 
sat greedily noting the alternate losses and 
gains of the gamblers, and longing, yet 
fearing, himself, to play. When he began 
he could not leave off; and he was a despe- 
rately unlucky player. Often and often he 
had seen depart from him in a night the 
fruits of a wreck's guest-fleecing. The Pro- 
fessor had eyes for other things too. He 
saw Manuelita leave the room, as was her 
wonted custom, about seven o'clock, and 
small as were his eyes, and palpably dark 
the corridor that led away from the salle 
a manger^ he saw Margaret, the Milesian, slip 
a note into the hands of her young mistress. 
The girl started, whispered the cook, and 
then ran up the narrow stairs. Her foot- 
step seemed lighter than usual, whereat 
Professor Jachimo chuckled. 

He heard her come down again; the door 
was closed this time, but he knew it must 
be about a quarter to eight, and that muffled 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 2^3 

up in a thick mantle, half Sevilian mantilla, 
half Maltese /a^(i^^a, she was about to wend 
her way to the Apollo Behddere Concert 
Hall. What motive, I wonder, could the 
Professor have had in ascertaining, as he had 
done, that Manuelita only danced twice that 
night, and that she would leave Mr. De 
Joskin's temple of delight (he was the 
manager), soon after ten o'clock, nearly two 
hours before her usual time? 

The foreign gentlemen usually continued 
their play deep into the night ; and Professor 
Jachimo ordinarily only commenced devoting 
himself to the pursuit of fortune in her 
gambling chase, on his return from his 
magical entertainment. On the present 
occasion, however, he played till half-past 
nine, and then bidding Don Juan Manuel 
Harispe a humorous good night for the 
present, pocketed his winnings, which had 
been very considerable, and saying he was 
going for a stroll in the cool night air, saun- 
tered leisurely out. 

'. The Englishman is lucky," a tall smoke- 



284 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

dried Mexican, in a full suit of nankeen, 
remarked sententiously, as the door closed on 
the Professor. 

" Lucky ! " Juan Manuel Harispe cried, 
bringing his fist down on the table with as 
much force as the list was capable of, and 
beginning, instead of ending, a rage by a 
long scream. '' Lucky ! he is a beast, a 
devil, a pig, that Englishman. His looks 
poison me. I hate him. My house" . by 
which I presume he meant Manuelita . 
" hate him. He cheats, he lies, he thieves, 
he conjures. I should like to see him hanged. 
I should like to see him drowned. I should 
like to see him burnt." The Seiior concluded 
with another scream. 

" Yet he is a good customer, Papa Harispe," 
observed a mild, fat little man in a jacket, who 
was not unlike Sancho Panza in appearance, 
and was perhaps the most inveterate smoker 
present, but had a curious propensity for 
emitting the fumes of the tobacco he inhaled 
from his eyes, or his nose, or his ears, in 
preference to his mouth. 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 285 

" He drinks much," said the sententious 
^lexican, in corroboration. 

For all reply, Harispe breathed hard, bit 
liis nails, and looked at his guests with an 
air remarkably like that of a disappointed 
wild cat. Then muttering to himself, he slid 
noiselessly out of the room. 

You will have begun to perceive that the 
Professor, although splendid in his attire, 
and liberal in his expenditure, was not 
popular at the Fonda Fulgencia. Of the 
two dozen and odd foreign gentlemen there 
present, there were probably not half a dozen 
whom he had not insulted. On Juan Manuel 
Harispe he had been especially hard, both 
during and after dinner; and the sententious 
Mexican had been looking espingardas at him 
for the last half hour. Nobody seemed in 
the least to appreciate his fine clothes, his 
jewellery, his red wine, or his wit; but all 
experienced a wish to resent his aggressive 
hilarity, and coarse ribaldry, and brutal 
insolence of manner. Little Manuelita could 
have found in that room, and at that hour, 



286 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

full four-and-twenty partizans, to avenge her 
quarrel with Professor Jachimo, even to the 
death. 

All unconscious of, or uncaring for, the 
unfavorable criticisms to which his conduct 
had given rise, the maligned Professor bent 
his steps in a cheerfully independent manner 
towards the Apollo Belvidere Concert Hall. 
He loitered somewhat on his way, as though 
he were rather before than after the time 
of his appointment . if appointment he had. 
He produced from a handsomely embroidered 
case, the largest of Havannah cigars, and 
smoked that fragrant weed down to the very 
butt, strolling along leisurely as he smoked, 
and communing with himself as he strolled. 
He could not have been a gentleman, you 
see, for a real gentleman only smokes two- 
thirds of a real Havannah, which is apt 
to grow bitter towards the butt. He then 
throws it away, and lights another. 

" That little half-bred Spanish filly is 
driving me quite wild," he mused; "was 
there ever such a provoking little minx ? 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 287 

She hates me, I know; is in love with the 
soldier-officer from Manchester, Captain Falcon 
. Captain Falcon, ha, ha ! " 

He stopped in the street, involuntarily as 
it were, and kept repeating the name of 
Falcon, almost mechanically. 

" Five hundred pounds was not much for 
a fellow's share in such a secret; the other 
fellow got as much as I, when it should all 
have been mine. All . confound it, I did 
not play my cards well ; and he played them 
only too well. Yes . yes, he gave me the 
five hundred pounds as per agreement, but 
he kept from me the great secret ; the secret 
that would be worth not five hundred but 
five thousand pounds to me. If I could 
only find out where that boy is! Perhaps 
dead . perhaps never born ; perhaps my pre- 
cious partner never knew, and only lied in 
the matter. All men lie, and especially those 
you do business Avith. I have ever found it 
so ; at least I could never get on in business 
without telling lies. At all events, the villain 
disappeared, and from the day we were to 



288 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

have started for America together till now, 
I have never set eyes on him or heard of 
him. The paltry, treacherous hound ! Upon 
my word," he soliloquised, apostrophising 
his absent friend, " upon my word, my 
attached friend and ancient comrade, if ever 
I come across you again, I'll shake that 
secret out of you, and then murder you after- 
wards . bless you ! " 

He knocked the last bright ashes from his 
cigar, and throwing away the stump, quick- 
ened his pace till he came to the grand 
entrance of the Apollo Belvidere Music 
Hall. 

It was a huge building, one of those over- 
grown places of miscellaneous amusement 
that you only find in a provincial metro- 
polis. The windows were one blaze of light. 
Crowds of people were passing in and out : 
ragged boys, mechanics, sailors . English 
and foreign . cheap Liverpool dandies, and 
women in satin dresses, and bonnets covered 
with artificial flowers. 

The Professor gazed at the exterior of the 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 289 

building with the stale and accustomed air 
of one blase to the outside as well as the 
inside of places of public amusement. He 
waited patiently in the dark shadow of the 
portico, till from a door adjoining the grand 
entrance . a humble little door always on 
the swing . there glided a female figure 
muffled up in some garment resembling a 
mantilla. And this figure, after a momen- 
tary pause, was swiftly but cautiously fol- 
lowed down the gas-lit street by Professor 
Jachimo. 

The entertainments at the Apollo Belvidere 
were varied, not very refined, not very edi- 
fying, but decidedly entertaining. What 
more was wanted? ]\lr. De Joskins under- 
stood the taste of the town, and catered 
for it skilfully. So, while the company at 
the two theatres were playing to empty 
benches, and the Mechanics* Institute was 
falling into debt and decay for want of 
members, the Apollo Belvidere was crowded 
every night. Ladies and gentlemen sang 
comic songs and duets; sometimes (on gala 

VOL. I. u 



290 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

nights especially) mounted on the backs of 
donkeys, or with geese under their arms. 
There were short comic interludes, panto- 
mimes and burlettas. All sorts of people 
danced all sorts of dances: pas seuls^ pas 
de deuce, pas of as many choregraphers as 
Mr. De Joskins chose to engage. He had 
formerly been a clown to a circus; had pro- 
moted himself to the lesseeship of a beer-shop; 
after an unusually successful bespeak, had risen 
to the great altitude of licensed victual- 
lerdom ; and so migrated naturally into some 
theatrical management. Recitations from the 
poets were to be heard at the Apollo Bel- 
videre, also ditties chaunted in the Liver- 
pudlian crambo, and in Tim Bobbin's Lan- 
cashire dialect. Grraceful youths of both 
sexes danced on spades, on stilts, in Highland 
kilts, in clogs and in fetters. Professors of 
renown exercised elaborate hornpipes, amid 
diagrams of broadswords, and mazes of eggi^ 
and crockery-ware, all without cutting their 
shins or breaking the eggs and tea-things. 
There was a string-band and a wind-band at 



THE DANGERS OF BEING PRETTY. 291 

the Apollo Belvidere, a gorgeously- coloured 
and villanously-draAvn act-drop, and a glit- 
tering chandelier. There was a rock-har- 
monicon, a set of musical glasses, and a 
Church -organ. Only nigger- dancing and 
singing, the bones and the banjo, walking on 
the ceiling and balancing on the percA, were 
amusements not yet introduced from the 
United States. Between fifteen hundred and 
two thousand people nightly patronised the 
Apollo Belvidere, where they smoked tobacco, 
drank stout, and rum and water, sometimes 
called for " Rule Britannia," and sometimes 
fought. The Apollo Belvidere had formerly 
been a chapel. 



292 



CHAP. XYII. 

ONLY A PAINTEE. 

]l/f ANTJELITA was in a hurry to reach 
home, and walked at a quick pace . too 
quick a pace, indeed, to please the Professor, 
who was somewhat given to emho7ipoint^ and 
faisait du ventre^ to use the significant ex- 
pression of our Gallic neighbours. She seemed 
nervous too, and looked round once or twice 
as though she were afraid that somebody was 
following her. In fact she was nervous ; she 
scarcely knew why, and could not help wishing 
that her uncle or the Hibernian ^largaret 
were with her. The unpleasant image of her 
necromantic admirer haunted her perpetually ; 
and every passing figure, from the great- 
coated policeman stalking along his beat, to 



ONLY A PAINTER. 293 

the homeless Irish vagrant roaming along the 
inhospitable pavement, and wandering he knew 
not whither, seemed to assume the much- 
bedizened guise of Professor Jachimo. 

She had not proceeded fifty yards on her 
way home, when she felt a hand softly placed 
on her shoulder, and turning suddenly round, 
with an affrighted start and a half-suppressed 
shriek, she found herself face to face with the 
terrible Professor himself. 

" My little angel," he said, " what a deuce 
of a hurry you are in !" 

She tossed her little head indignantly, and 
made as though she would have resumed her 
way; but the Professor was not a man to be 
got rid of so easily; he caught her affection- 
ately but tightly by the wrist, and, in a jaunty 
but still a most offensive manner, placed him- 
self before her, and effectually barred her 
passage. 

" Come, come, duck of diamonds!" he went 
on coaxingly, " don't be so cross to-night. 
Surely you're not afraid of me, my humming- 
bird ! Pve a thousand things to say to you 



294: THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

. sweet things, tender things, delightful 
things. Come, take my arm, and we will 
have a stroll; it's just the evening for a stroll 
. . quite cool after the blazing sun. The silvery 
moon shines brightly, and looks approvingly 
on young lovers. I am not young, but I 
love. You are both young and lovely, and 
loveable. Would that you were as loving. 
Come, bird of paradise, whose home is the 
fleecy cloud in the blue empyrean. Come." 

Will you let me go, Sir?" the girl cried 
violently, when the Professor had rattled off 
'this instalment of his stilted jargon. The 
man seemed to be able to speak in no other 
way ; and, I have little doubt, spoke as bom- 
bastically as he talked. For to this you may 
school yourself, and speak in ancient Pistol or 
Cambyses' vein to your conscience, when you 
want to hush its still small voice. " I'll tell 
my uncle !" Manuelita continued. 

"Tell him as much and as often as you 
like, Sweetlips. He's up to his eyes in cards." 

" I'll call the police, then ! I'll scream, 
Mr. Jachimo! How dare you molest me? 
Will you let me go?" 



ONLY A PAINTER. 295 

" Not unless you take my arm, you pro- 
voking little thing." 

" You shall let me go ! " exclaimed Man- 
uelita, struggling with her unwelcome suitor. 

She had turned out of the gas-glaring and 
crowded Paradise Street, Whitechapel, and 
they were in a silent, shabby, little street, 
never thronged, even at the busiest part of 
the day, full of tall, dingy warehouses that 
smelt of hay and cheese, and now silent and 
deserted. Manuelita looked round in vain for 
assistance ; for as far as her eyes could scan, 
she could not see a solitary figure. 

The Professor laus^hed his coarse lauo^h of 
humorous triumph, and kept tight hold of the 
girl's delicate wrist. He knew that she would 
be loth to scream, and fancied, in his gross 
vanitv . the man, for all his shrewdness, was 
as vain as a woman . even that the dislike 
she manifested for him was assumed, and that 
she would, after some further parley, capitu- 
late, and take the arm he offered her. But 
he was mistaken. Setting her teeth close, 
and concentrating all her strength in one 



296 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

desperate effort, Manuelita actually managed 
to extricate herself from the abhorrent grasp 
of the Professor, and with a gesture of defiance, 
fairly took to her heels and fled. But her 
persecutor was not to be baffled. He followed 
as swiftly as his portliness would permit in 
pursuit, laughing at her anger, and coming 
up with her, caught hold of her mantilla to 
arrest her progress. 

There started all at once, like a spectre, 
from the black shadow of a doorway, the figure 
of a man. A short man, and an old man he 
proved to be, when the light from a gas-lamp 
fell upon him as he emerged from his hiding- 
place . a man marvellously like Don Juan 
Manuel Harispe, landlord of the Fonda Ful- 
gencia . his likeness ceased to be surprising, 
w^ien, addressing himself to speak, he turned 
out to be that avaricious and irascible Iberian 
himself. 

" Dog-beast," was all that the Senor said, 
as he leaped, very much in the manner of a 
tiger-cat, at the Professor. But though his 
words were few, his actions were most eloquent 



ONLY A PAINTER. 297 

and explicit; for there gleamed suddenly in 
the gas-light the blade of a long, murderous 
Knife, and it clove the air, and was aimed 
with most homicidal dexterity right at the 
regionof the Professor's heart ; and Manuelita, 
seeing the weapon uplifted and descending, 
screamed in good ear ii est this time, and her 
piercing shriek issued through the little street. 

All the shrieks in the world would not have 
rescued Professor Jachimo from the impending 
stab, for Harispe stood between her and his 
victim ; but it so fell out that, simultaneously 
with the murderous gesture of the infuriated 
Spaniard, another and a taller figure had 
unobservedly joined the group, and that as the 
Professor, taken quite off his guard, recoiled in 
horror from the deadly steel that flashed 
before his eyes, the arm of Harispe was seized 
in mid-air, the knife wrested from his hand, 
and himself flung violently back by the person 
who had made his appearance in so sudden 
and so opportune a manner. 

''You murderous old villain, you're at your 
stiletto tricks again, I see,'' the unknown 



298 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

benefactor exclaimed; then, addressing the 
Professor, he continued hurriedly, " I hap- 
pened to be passing accidentally, and knowing 
something of this fellow, and mistrusting his 
purpose, I determined to watch him. You 
shall sleep in Bridewell, my Spanish friend, 
to-night," he concluded to Harispe. 

" Not a bit of it/' the Professor interposed, 
evincing a most Christian-like desire for for- 
giveness of injuries. " Pll just take the liberty 
of picking up that knife, and of punching his 
head afterwards; and if ever I catch myself 
in his 'confounded house, or his confounded 
company again, he may spit me and eat me. 
By Jove, it was a near toucher, though ! " 

He had not waited to conclude this speech 
before putting in execution one part of his 
announced intentions . that of picking up the 
knife, which was a clasp one, and shutting it 
up, he slipped it into his pocket. The weapon 
was fair spoil of war ; and so Professor Jachimo 
thought. It seemed very probable, too, that 
he designed putting his threat of '' punching " 
his would-be assassin's head into immediate 



ONLY A PAINTER. 299 

execution; for he made at the Seiior with a 
most menacing gesture, and catching hold of 
his collar, proceeded to inflict a preliminary 
chastisement, in the shape of a violent shaking. 
From further violence, however, he was deterred 
by Manuelita, who threw herself between him 
and the object of his wrath, entreating him to 
spare her uncle. 

A policeman had strolled up during this 
parley, too late, however, to see the knife, or 
to ascertain the primary cause of the quarrel ; 
and he stood looking at the group with a very 
dubious and puzzled look. Perhaps he was 
an Irish policeman, and didn't like to interfere 
in a brawl, of which, in the course of his 
municipal experience, he saw one or two 
dozen, more or less murderous, in the course 
of every day. Perhaps he was a stupid police- 
man, and didn't see that there was any quarrel 
going on at all. Perhaps he ascribed this 
evident misunderstanding either to religion 
or to rum, the two great causes of dissension 
in the Liverpool of those days. The Liver- 
pudlians never quarrel now, save when the 



300 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

frolicsome cotton-brokers, on the Exchange- 
flags, pelt the police too mercilessly with snow- 
balls. Under any circumstances, the constable 
confined himself to taking out his dark-lantern, 
and bringing the belligerents within the focus 
of his bull's-eye. 

The behaviour of Juan Manuel Harispe 
under these trying circumstances was philo- 
sophical, and even dignified. He folded his 
short arms, planted his feet firmly on the 
pavement, and with a scowl of defiance looked 
at his assailant, although evidently prepared 
to stand any amount of shaking. He was 
Regulus come back to Carthage, and ready 
for the worst tubs full of rustiest nails. He 
did not open his lips even, when, apparently 
moved by Manuelita's intercession, the Pro- 
fessor released him from thraldom. 

Meanwhile, the personage whose prevenient 
arrival had been the cause of averting certain 
bloodshed and possibly Death, went up to the 
policeman, and telling him that it was '' all 
right," and that it was only a little bit of mis- 
understanding about a young lady . which 



ONLY A PAINTER. 301 

indeed, in a limited sense of the temi, it was 
. gave that functionary half-a-crown . he did 
not look, this individual, as though he had 
many half crowns to spare . and said he would 
see that all the parties went home quietly. 

The preserver of order now for the first time 
appeared to have something like a definite 
knowledge of the course that events were 
taking. The hazy state of doubt in which he 
had been, appeared to be immediately dispelled 
by the magic, though mute, eloquence of the 
silver effigy of his Majesty William the Fourth, 
pocketing which, and with a wink containing 
whole encyclopaedias of mysterious compre- 
hension, he shut up the slide of his dark 
lantern, and betook himself to fresh fields and 
pastures new, in the shape of a remote slum 
where eight Protestants were breaking the 
heads of eight Papists, on a disputed question 
in which the right of property in a tin-pail 
had merged in general politics, comprising the 
usual bellicose topics, the Battle of the Boyne, 
the Repeal of the Union, and the Pope of 
Rome. 



302 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Juan Manuel Harispe availed himself of his 
unexpected deliverance from the clutches of 
his stalwart enemy to seize his niece and 
hurry her away. Poor little Manuelita, who 
was almost scared out of her wits, gathered 
her mantilla about her, and clinging to her 
uncle, left the Professor and his deliverer 
together, casting a look, in which curiosity 
was mingled with gratitude, at the latter. 

The Professor, on his part, was profuse in 
his professions of gratitude to the person who 
had prevented the commission of a great 
crime, and saved him from, perhaps, an im- 
mediate and final termination to his feats of 
legerdemain. All these professions the un- 
known took very coolly, contenting himself 
with saying that it was all right, and that he 
had suspected the old Spaniard from the com- 
mencement. 

He was a comely young fellow to look 
upon, this unknown deliverer . tall, well made, 
active in his movements (he had given one 
striking sample of his activity a few minutes 
before). In age he might have numbered some 



ONLY A PAINTEU. 303 

five and twenty years. He had a frank, open, 
manly face, bright blue eyes, sparklmg with 
life and gaiety ; light curly hair, and a mouth 
about which played a genial and kindly smile. 
Small hands and feet, that a woman might 
have envied, gave him an air of distinction 
somewhat belied by his attire, which argued 
anything but elevated position or prosperity. 
An old shooting -jacket, most wofully out at 
elbows, a cap carelessly slouched on one side 
of his head, and a shirt-collar turned down 
over a frayed silk neck-kerchief, were the most 
noticeable items in his vestments, if we except 
the fact that he wore a light blonde mous- 
tache. Now moustaches in 1835 were rarities. 
Cavalry officers wore them, artists had begun 
to w^ear them ; couriers wore them, and 
foreigners wore them; but the unknown 
looked neither like a dragoon nor a painter, 
nor a courier, nor a Frenchman. 

"He can't be an actor," mused the Pro- 
fessor as, taking the arm of the unknown 
(who seemed nothing loth), he walked away 
from the scene of contention. '* He'd starve 



304 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

if he were on the boards, that's certain. He 
isn't a gentleman ; he's so deucedly seedy. I 
wonder what he is. I have it," he continued; 
" he's a fiddler. He must be a fiddler." 



305 



CHAP. XYIII. 



PHILIP LESLIE. 



T^HE strange acquaintanceship that had been 
formed between the Professor of the black 
art and the young man whose moustaches 
caused so much perturbation to the necro- 
mancer . an acquaintanceship foiTued, too, 
throuc^h the medium of an assassin's dao^aer 
. was not long in ripening (as such sudden 
acquaintanceships frequently do) into as 
strange a friendship. The moustached un- 
known, had he asked himself the question, 
w^hether he was much and favourably im- 
pressed with what he had already been enabled 
to discern of the character of his new friend, 

VOL. I. X 



306 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

would not probably have been able to give an 
answer in the affirmative; yet, with an odd 
recklessness and insouciance that seemed to be 
part of Ids character, he allowed himself to 
glide into the terms of a treaty of close alliance, 
none the less close because it was temporary 
and ill-assorted. 

The Professor, treating the murderous 
assault upon him by Juan Manuel Harispe 
very lightly, and regarding it simply as a 
significant point d'arret to his gallantries 
towards Manuelita, not to be passed over in 
its portents any more than the first stroke of 
disease which attacks thrice before it kills, 
limited his arrangement of precautionary 
measures to giving Seiior Harispe, his niece, 
and his establishment a^^ery wide berth ; and 
announcing his intention, as a pleasant 
alternative, to be flayed alive rather than 
return there, added that he should send for 
his luggage in the morning, pay the swindling 
old cub of a Spanish cut-throat his bill, and 
knock off half the items, and for the few re- 
maining days that he intended to remain in 



PHILIP LESLIE. 307 

Liverpool set up his tent at some more civilised 
and Christian-like caravanserai. 

" And however," the Professor remarked, as 
arm-in-arm with his new friend he proceeded 
toward the palatial Adelphi Hotel, "however 
I came to make such a consummate fool of 
myself as to remain unnumbered weeks in that 
unmitigated dog-kennel, knocks me into ten- 
penny nails, renders me as soft as the head of 
a cauliflower. I suppose I must have been in 
love with that black-eyed little puss of a niece, 
who is as hard-hearted as cannel coal, as artful 
as a blue-nosed monkey, and as downy as the 
knocker of Xewgate. Were you ever over 
Newgate? As visitor, of course. I have en- 
joyed the acquaintance of several sheriffs. 
Naughty little Manuelita ! However, I 'm well 
out of it, I don't mean Newgate, but my 
vSpanish courtship ; and well rid of you, my 
cherub, as things go. The idea of the eminent 
Professor Jachimo being made cold meat of . 
and deuced ly ugly cold meat, too, knocked 
down like a bullock in the shambles, scored 
like a loin of pork for the bakehouse . and all 



308 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

for the sake of a designing little minx in 
a mantilla, is simply preposterous, simply 
absurd." 

His companion gave a sudden start as he 
mentioned the girl's name, and seemed inclined 
to withdraw his arm. It is given to writers 
of fiction to know intuitively the inmost 
thouo^hts of their heroes . to read in their 
divining crystals the secrets of their heart of 
hearts. When it suits their purpose, but only 
then, they condescend to admit the public to 
a participation in their second-sight ; and being 
in a communicative humour just now, I 
vouchsafe to inform my readers, that when 
Professor Jachimo's new friend heard that 
humorous person speak of Manuelita in the 
terms I have just set down, he experienced an 
almost irresistible desire to fall incontinent on 
the Professor, and to beat, punch, and pound 
him till he assumed the similitude and com- 
plexion of an Egyptian mummy. But he was 
either irresolute, or had a purpose to learn 
something more, for he took no hostile steps. 

The Professor turned his head with a horse- 



PHILIP LESLIE. 309 

laugh when he noticed the slight movement 
we have described, and laughed louder still at 
the sight, perchance, of the reflex of his 
internal opinion to be descried in the coun- 
tenance of his companion. 

"Body of me!" he cried, '* you're not in 
love with her, too, youthful and mysterious 
stranger? Why, everybody's in love with 
her ! The swell captain of dragoons . ha ! ha ! 
what a grand name he has ! . who comes all 
the way from Manchester, and has got no work 
to do save to make love to this brown little 
gipsy. The manager, the fiddlers, the fellows 
who sing the comic songs and dance the clog- 
hornpipe, and your humble servant to com- 
mand. Are you in love with her ? Say, noble 
Eoman !" 

" I'm not a noble Roman," the unknown 
answered, nettled, it would appear, at the 
bantering tone of the Professor. " I'm a poor 
devil of a painter . a scene-painter at the 
Fontenoy Street Theatre ; and as to Manuelita 
Harispe, I think she's an angel. It was for 
her sake, not yours, and to avoid her being 



310 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

brought into trouble, that I kept watch over 
your precious life this night, and prevented 
that Spanish bravo from sheathing his long- 
knife in your body." 

" And very much obliged to you I am," 
exclaimed the Professor, assuming as much 
heartiness into his tone as he could muster. 
" Grateful I am, and grateful I mean to be. 
There, there, I mean no oiFence," he continued, 
seeing that the self-designated "poor devil of 
painter," still continued somewhat sullen. 
" Manuelita is an angel, a seraph. I suppose 
I'm not the Mr. Right of her affections, and 
that she doesn't like me . a great many people 
don't like me, funnily enough. I hope she 
likes you better, my young friend, though I 
am monstrously inclined to fancy that the 
dragoon has the best chance of it. ' With his 
long sword, saddle, bridle, whack, fal de ral' 
. you remember the song ? What ! angry 
again ! Dear, dear ! what a gunpowder 
magazine it is ! You should be anchored in 
the middle of the Mersey, and painted drab to 
prevent danger. There, give us your hand, 



PHILIP LESLIE. 311 

and I'll say no more about it, save to ask you 
to drink Manuelita's health.'' 

He did not wait for a response to his invita- 
tion, but seized the painter's small white hand 
in his own brawny palm, clapping the other 
meanwhile approvingly on his companion's 
shoulder. He had not a wheedling way with 
him, Professor Jachimo, not a coaxing way, 
not a persuasive way . not, generally, a 
pleasant way, by any means; but he had a 
hearty way . a very hearty way with him . 
and that, I entreat you to pardon the tautology, 
went a very great way indeed. Naturalists 
have observed the same heartiness of manner, 
and disinclination to take a denial when on 
hospitable thoughts intent, on the part of that 
social animal the grisly bear. Professor 
Jachimo may have been a grisly bear, very 
closely and clearly shaven. 

The painter, though quick in temper, was 
apparently of a sufficiently placable disposition, 
for he returned the Professor's hand-shake as 
heartily as need be, and echoed his willingness 
to say no more about it. Then the pair went 



312 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

amicably enough up the great steps of the 
Aclelphi, and into the coffee-room of the mam- 
moth haven for travellers. 

There was no one in this saloon (it was now 
nearly midnight; but an American gentleman 

. to judge by his complexion, from the South 

. who, having tried to dissipate the ennui of 
the evening by a succession of juleps, had re- 
sorted to whittling the " Liverpool Albion" up 
into fine shreds, which was no very difficult 
matter, and had then gone fast asleep, with his 
slippered feet on the mahogany table, and his 
face turned upwards towards heaven and the 
coffee-room ceiling, and was probably tran- 
quilly dreaming (with a trombone accompani- 
ment) of docile niggers with small appetites, 
and abundant cotton crops, himself ruling the 
market. There was one waiter . a bald- 
headed man, with a highly-respectable appear- 
ance, and the tie of whose white neckcloth 
would have done honour to any churchwarden 

. who was not quite asleep, but was making 
desperate efforts to keep awake ; and to divert 
his mind, had tortured his erst snowy napkin 



PHILIP LESLIE. 313 

into so many knots and twists, that the most 
rational theory that one could form respecting 
it was, that he wanted to make a halter of it^ 
and hang himself forthwith. 

The Professor . who was known personally 
and by reputation, both by printing types and 
engraved portraits, everywhere in general, 
and all over Liverpool in particular . had no 
difficulty in securing a bed at this aristocratic 
hotel: the general distrust as to travellers 
without luggage common among hotel-keepers 
being in this instance vanquished by the magic 
power (of the purse) well known to be possessed 
by the renowned Professor Jachimo. The 
Magician would have asked his deliverer to take 
up his quarters there, too, and did actually hint 
at the soft couches and luxurious fare which 
the Adelphi afforded to wayfarers; but the 
Painter said, with quiet decision, that he lived 
close by, that he should be glad to take a glass 
of soda and sherry, and that he would then 
bid the Professor good night, for that he was 
tired out of his life. 

The Wizard, whose narrow escape had con- 



oi4: THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tributed, perhaps, to make him hungry, ordered 
some supper, of which he partook with great 
gusto, strongly but ineffectually pressing his 
companion to '' do as he did." All that he 
could persuade him to take was a biscuit and 
the effervescing beverage before named. The 
Painter sat opposite to him, tapping his fingers 
on the table, and glancing at him from time 
to time with looks of considerable curiosity. 
Professor Jachimo, when the first cravings of 
his appetite had been appeased, began to look 
with equal curiosity at the friend who had 
done him such signal service. Finally, he laid 
down his knife and fork, and honoured his 
guest with a prolonged stare. 

" You will excuse my taking a very great 
liberty," he said, '* though perhaps it isn't 
so much a liberty; but might I ask you 
whether you know my name?" 

" I know it well enough," replied the 
Painter, with a careless laugh ; *' I ought to 
know it by this time. It's on every wall, in 
every shop-window . ." 

" On every tongue that can give utterance 



PHILIP LESLIE. 315 

to the praises of art and the inedibility of 
magical paraphernalia," the Professor modestly 
interposed. " You were plain if not com- 
plimentary, young man; so I supplied the 
sugar- candy at my own cost and charges. 
Soap, thank the beneficent stars, is cheap, 
although an Excise duty yet weighs heavily 
on that useful article. Flummery can always 
be got for nothing. You are aware of my 
being the celebrated and accomplished Pro- 
fessor Jachimo ? ^^ 

" 1 know who you are well enough," his 
interlocutor contented himself with repeating, 
thouo^h mth a slio;ht touch of disdain in his 
tone this time. 

" And you, my generous preserver? " 

"As I told you, a scene-painter at the 
Fontenoy Street Theatre." 

" Yes ; you were good enough to inform 
me of that fact before ; and you will not be 
offended if I tell you, that my experience led 
me to form a notion, on first seeing you, 
that you were indeed connected with the 
theatrical profession, but more in a musical 



316 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

than an artistic point of view. To tell the 
truth, I took you for a fiddler." 

" I wonder you didn't take me for a horse- 
rider . I've been that and all the others. I 
paint now." 

*' Anything else? " 

" Starve." 

" I thought so. The Fontenoy Sti-eet 
Theatre . pretentious 'gaff,' as it is . has 
known not the walk of the Treasury -haunting 
ghost these eight weeks. A bad look out." 

" / find it bad enough, I can tell you." 

" Might I be so bold as to ask your name? 
We shall then be quits, so far as preliminary 
introductions go." 

" What the deuce do you want to know 
my name for ? " was the retort, rather fierce 
than courteous, of the individual who was 
being so cross-questioned. " Pshaw ! " he 
continued in a milder tone, "what does it 
matter ? You may see it in the playbills 
any day. New scenery and effects, by 
Mr. Leslie. That's my name . Philip Leslie, 
at your service, at anybody's service except 
his Majesty's." 



PHILIP LESLIE. 317 

'' Is that your real name ? " 

" That's either a very simple or a very in- 
solent question. I shan't answer it." 

" I meant no offence. It's the only gra- 
tuitous thing I never take. I can't make 
money by it; for I've a large stock of offen- 
sive things of my own to give away, always 
on hand. You know as well as I do that 
in the profession names are as easily picked 
up as blackberries oft' a hedge in September. 
My name now," he continued, with a wink 
and smile of much significance, '' has not 
always been Jachimo." 

" What may it have been, then ? '' 

" Well," the Professor replied, jauntily, 
" perhaps Cholmondely, perhaps Howard, per- 
haps Percy, perhaps P , perhaps Pop- 
kins," he in some confusion added, as if he 
wished to correct some mistake he had in- 
advertently committed in his system of nomen- 
clature. 

'' You may have as many aliases as you 
please," his companion wearily returned, '' and 
I dare say you have been known by a good 



318 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

many in the course of your career. But 
Leslie . Philip Leslie . is the only name 
I ever had or care to have; stay, there is 
one other name I should like to chano;e it 
for; or ra,ther there is one little prefix I 
should like to make to it." 

" And that is . " 

" The Za^^ Philip Leslie!" 

"Bah, bah! my young friend," said the 
Professor, in a tone of consoling jocularity; 
" so young and so sick of life." 

" I am sick of it," the Painter said vehe- 
mently. " Sick of it . sick of my name, if 
my real name be Leslie at all ! " 

Why did the Professor . certainly it could 
have been by no effort of volition . -stretch 
forward his head eagerly when he heard this 
last remark, and in a voice that betrayed con- 
siderable nervous anxiety, say : . 

" Your name . your name ! Didn't you 
tell me you had but one . Leslie ? " 

"And but one I have . Leshe. Still, I 
may have reason to doubt its being my real 



PHILIP LESLIE. 319 

^' What reasons?" 

" The same reasons I may have for doubting 
most other things." 

" What name do you imagine, then, is pro- 
perly yours ? " 

'* That's my business," Philii) Leslie an- 
swered unconcernedly. 

" But," the Professor continued, *' might 
I ask if you have any cause to think that 
Leslie is not your real name ? " 

^'I scarcely know; yet, from time to time, 
when I have troubled myself about the matter 
at all, I have wondered who^ I was, what 1 
was, and how much of the Philip or the 
Leslie there was in me. I cannot remember 
my father at all. I can only recollect my 
mother; and I was separated from her at 
a very early age, never to meet her again. 
My eyes, you see, are blue, but her's were 
dark; and I can recall them and her darker 
hair, poor soul, now." 

The Professor gave a shrug. " I have 
talked with five hundred such as he," he 
thought. Lideed, most of the people with 



320 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

whom Professor Jachimo came in contact, 
rejoiced in names that didn't belong to them. 
He lived in a " shadowy land, where all things 
wear an aspect not their own." Most rogues 
do. 

Inquisitive Professor ! what business could 
it have been of his? May he have been, 
perhaps, a man with some engrossing object 
of pursuit always before him ? May he have 
been a man with a fixed idea, and that fixed 
idea the discovery of somebody who bore 
a name that didn't belong to him, but was 
entitled to a name he had never borne? 
Who knows? 



END OF VOL. I. 
THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 



CHAP. XIX. 

CONTINUATION OF THE ADVENTURES OF 
'PHILIP LESLIE. 

TT may be permitted to that novelist, whose 
chief aim is less the elaboration of in- 
trigue, and the niceties of equivoque, than 
the study and elimination of the human 
character in its varied phases of passion . 
in its changing moods, its chequered stages 
of tranquillity and agitation, mansuetude and 
resentment, charity and envy, pride and 
humility, hatred and love: it may be per- 
mitted, I hope, for such a writer to depart 
for an instant from the thread of his nar- 
rative . to step aside from the track he has 

VOL.11. B 



2 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

marked out for himself . a well-beaten track, 
and one which thousands have travelled . 
and to devote a short space to an analysis 
of the character of the last personage intro- 
duced in his drama. 

Philip Leslie indeed (under which name 
the " poor devil of a painter " whom I have 
heretofore occasionally designated under the 
embarrassing cognomen of the " Unknown " 
will be henceforward recognised in this story), 
possessed a character and disposition, and 
was gifted with qualities and attributes, de- 
serving minuter, more extended, and more 
careful notice, than is usually allotted to the 
hero of a romance. Of his outward guise 
I have not felt bound to say much, but as 
regards those inner traits which my power of 
divination as a story-teller privileges me to 
foresee and to foreknow, it behoves me to be 
less concise and more explicit. Bear with 
me, then, while I endeavour to place before 
you the man . not in his habit as he lived, 
for outward garments are but sorry guides, 
and afford but an insufficient key to character 



PHILIP LESLIE. 3 

. but in that inward semblance which defies 
all the masquerading trickeries of life, and 
which is not deceitful, because it is not seen. 
Would I could do as much for real flesh- 
and- blood men and women with whom I 
walk and talk all the days of my life, as I 
am enabled to do for the imaginary personages 
who strut and fret their hour on my mimic 
stage ! 

The French law, as expounded in the Code 
Napoleon, has fixed upon two points in life 
in which a man may attain his majority. 
The first majority is at twenty-one years, 
when the adult, just invested with the toga 
virilis, may assume, and is entitled to some, 
but not all, the rights, privileges, and immu- 
nities of citizenship and self-mastership. But 
the law forbids him to do everything he likes 
with his own, and postpones his enjoyment 
of certain rights . the most grave and im- 
portant of all . till he has attained the 
riper and maturer age of twenty-five years. 
So nature acts with our mind. At twenty- 
one, most ordinarily-constituted men possess 



4 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

certain faculties and perceptions that warrant 
them in forming a judgment, or even acting 
(in strict moderation, be it understood) on 
some of the minor things of life; but it is 
not, in my opinion, till the age of twenty- 
five that a man ought to be entirely and 
wholly free from pupilage, either physical 
or mental. At twenty- five he is entitled to 
say "now or never," and is qualified to form 
an opinion, and to exercise a judgment, 
upon all topics connected with his own pecu- 
liar humanity and the immediate sphere in 
which Providence has been pleased to cast 
him. 

Philip Leslie had just attained his twenty- 
fifth year, and may be reasonably supposed 
to have succeeded to that full inheritance of 
manhood, pleine et entiere, at which I have 
hinted, and which, in my opinion, twenty-five 
years alone can give. I speak, of course, of 
males, and of males alone; for in the female 
organisation, as most physiologists will ob- 
serve, maturity, or majority, or ripeness . 
call it by whatever name you will . comes 



PHILIP LESLIE. 5 

at an earlier age, ending too, alas ! oftentimes 
as early. The lamp burns brighter, but it 
does not burn so long. You shall see a girl 
of sixteen, only just emancipated from the 
thraldom of her schoolmistress, and quite 
young and inexperienced in the ways and 
wiles of this wicked world, a match, and 
more than a match, for a man of forty. 
Dalilah cajoles Sampson the strong every 
day. So it has always been, and so it always 
will be, I suppose. 

Philip Leslie was, then, twenty-five, and in 
the full health and vigour of that age, in 
which, if a man is ever to be worth anything 
at all, he begins to be worth it. He was 
singularly constituted* Of a nature frank, 
impetuous, daring, and somewhat imperious 
at times (and who can avoid a certain arro- 
gance, and an implacable desire of ruling 
the roast, even at the risk of hurting and 
wounding the feelings of those nearest and 
dearest to us, and whom we love best in 
this world of sorrows and joys, at some 
seasons?) . of a nature, I repeat, frank, 



b THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

impetuous, daring, and imperious, there were 
still mingled with his sterner and harsher 
nature many qualities more pertaining to, and 
which would have seemed far more appropriate 
in, a woman. The existence of these qualities 
may be considered as analogous to a pecu- 
liarity I have noticed in his physical con- 
formation, his stalwart frame, yet small 
womanly hands and feet, which, if we are 
to adhere to the opinion of Lord Byron 
(his Lordship having, by-the-way, excessively 
small hands and feet, though one of the 
latter was of the kind of malformation called 
" club ") are to be taken as unmistake- 
able signs of noble, or at least of gentle 
descent. 

Lucid in perception, bold and vigorous 
in forming plans and devising means, there 
wns, for his misfortune, denied to him in 
his organisation that wondrous, indispensable, 
world -compelling muscle of mind which is 
called " will." He was as a gallant bark 
whose rudder is shattered . whose crew are 
too lazy, or too weak, or too despairing to 



PHILIP LESLIE. 7 

rig a new one, and which must needs float 
hither and thither on the ocean of life, the 
butt of every wave, till, for all its mighty 
bulk, its brave armament, its rich cargo, 
it goes down for ever and ever into the 
depths. 

He could not hate at all ; but he could not 
love for long. He heaped up so much fuel 
on the altar which he was continually erecting 
to some divinity or other, that he was soon 
bankrupt as a coal merchant, threw down the 
scuttle, kicked over the altar in a pet, and 
transferred his allegiance to some other 
divinity. When this pantheism, or rather 
polytheism, exists, we know very well that 
there is another theism imminent : the great 
A. But the conflicting series of checks in 
his mental mecanique, which made him very 
like an expensive chronometer . going beau- 
tifully when it did go, but often out of order, 
and frequently not going at all, guarded him 
from degenerating into scepticism in the 
adoration of the beautiful. He was so affec- 
tionate, so kindly, so clinging in his heart- 



8 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

structure, that love some one he must, and 
love some one he always did. The profits 
of his love were very small, but the returns 
were marvellously quick. Men who love like 
this do not generally live long. The fire in 
the soul-range is lighted so frequently . is 
kept burning so incessantly, and the chimney 
is so seldom swept . . that it, too, catches 
fire some day, and the house of life is burnt 
down into dust and ashes, and Eutychus 
falls from the third loft, and is taken up 
dead. Men who have loved often (I do 
not mean such mere slaves of passion as 
Mirabeau or the bad Lord Lyttelton, or 
Byron, . redeemed, to some extent, as were 
their errors, by their noble qualities of mind), 
but have yet lived discreet and sober lives, 
died early, and carried no gray heirs to the 
grave ; but long lovers are long livers : aye, 
both the passionate and the temperate. The 
loves of an Abelard and a Heloise last half 
a century, the stately courtship of a Horace 
AYalpole and a Madame du Deffand defies 
distance and age, and blindness and infirmity. 



PHILIP LESLIE. y 

And believe me, there are no such monsters 
as young ladies are so fond of talking about 
. the tea-table phantasms, the sewing-circle 
chimeras, known as " general lovers." They 
are as fabulous as the phoenix. When a 
man is reported to be desperately in love 
with two women, it is perfectly certain that 
with one (and very often with both of them) 
he is not in love at all. It is impossible (if 
you love at all) to be on with the new love 
before you are off with the old; but it is the 
electric rapidity with which a man of quick 
impulses leaps from old to new, that has 
originated the delusion that the books of love 
can ever be kept en partie double . by double 
entry. 

Have you anything like a conception of this 
Philip Leslie of mine . this frank-hearted, 
strong-limbed, weak-willed fellow? Can you 
not reckon, among those of your own cog- 
nisance, men such as he: jocund, insouciant, 
generous, confiding, confidence-unworthy 
fellows? Brave young cornets and captains, 
who set out every day in the Grand Army to 



10 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

invade a Russian-like frozen society, and fight 
a Borodino battle for bread ; and to capture a 
Moscow that will be burnt about their ears, 
and turn them into an Army of Martyrs 
indeed, but who, having not the Will, will 
never rise to high command or great estate, 
but will be cornets and captains all their lives. 
Such free lances, such social moss-troopers as 
these, are said to be no man's enemies but 
their own. Here is another grievous fallacy : 
they are all men's enemies . for every member 
of the community is a shareholder in a com- 
mercial corporation, and his liability is not 
limited ; so that if he squander, dissipate, or 
malverse, it is not on his own account alone 
that he does these things, but on account, and 
to the prejudice of the corporation, the bank, 
the community . Society, in a word ; and 
Society will have him by the heels some day, 
so sure as his name is Adamson. 

Let me now resume the colloquy between 
Philip Leslie and the worthy Professor 
Jachimo, which I interrupted in order to give 
the reader some insight into the inward being 
of the first-named personage. 



PHILIP LESLIE. 11 

The two friends continued until very late 
in the coffee-room of the Adelphi Hotel, and 
till the American gentleman who had gone to 
sleep before a pile of emptied julep-glasses, 
with his transatlantic feet on the mahogany 
table, and his transatlantic face turned heaven 
and ceilingwards, had summoned the "boots," 
donned his slippers, invested himself with the 
order of the chamber-candlestick, and gone to 
bed by way of a change, and till the waiter 
who had been wavering between waking and 
sleeping, and who had been making those 
desperate efforts to provoke self-strangulation, 
had gone to sleep in right earnest. Then 
Professor Jachimo and Philip Leslie having 
the coast clear, and the field of discussion 
entirely to themselves, began to converse with 
considerably more mutual confidence and 
absence from restraint than had hitherto 
marked their intercourse. 

"You have saved my life," the Professor 
said> " and I naturally feel as grateful as a 
fellow can possibly do under such circum- 
stances. I can't return the obligation, as your 



12 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

life, happily, is not, and does not seem very 
probable to run a chance of being in danger; 
still, I can show a sense of the favour you 
have conferred on me, if you will let me 
know in what manner it will be most accept- 
able to you. What can 1 do for you?" 

" I don't know that you can do anything 
for me." 

" Nonsense," retorted the Professor, with 
that peculiar laugh of his. 

"Everybody wants something done for 
them. I have wanted things done for me 
sometimes, and have had a deuced deal of 
trouble, nay, have frequently absolutely failed, 
in getting anybody to do the something I 
wanted for me." 

" Well, I can scarcely tell you what you 
could do for me." 

" You seem very hard up." 

" 1 am, in verity, as poor as what is face- 
tiously termed a church mouse . much poorer 
even than that impoverished animal, if it were 
possible to be so. I have drawn no salary for 
the last eight weeks, and have been working 



PHILIP LESLIE. 13 

very hard, and eating very little, as is fre- 
quently the lot of persons in my profession." 

11 Have you any money at all?" 

" Not a halfpenny. I just gave away" 



he checked himself, and substituted, with a 
blush, "just lost my last half crown." 

" Well, then, confound it," cried the Pro- 
fessor, with an outburst of generosity, not 
very common to him, " you must have some 
money, you know. A fellow can't get along 
without money. I know what it is to be 
without ASoney. I've been as hard up as you 
often. People look pillories and treadmills at 
you. Tell me how much money you want, 
and you shall have it as welcome as the 
flowers in May. The purse of Professor 
Jachimo is entirely at your service, and that 
humble individual is delighted to say, that it 
is sufficiently well lined at present. Tell me 
then, generous youth, what thou requirest to 
set thee straight with the world, and give thee 
a fresh start in life, and it shall be thine in- 
stantaneously. Stick not at the sum ; I can't 
be buyer and seller too, as the old clothesmen 



14 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

say ; the Professor is liberal, and will disburse 
freely." 

u I'm very much obliged to you," the 
painter said, with some natural hesitation; 
" but I'd rather not." 

i( Rather not ! You must be mad, Mr. Leslie. 
What the deuce are you to do in this flinty 
mammon-shop of a place without any money ? 
Unless, indeed, you have abundant credit, 
which, pardon me if I am taking too great a 
liberty, I scarcely imagine can be enjoyed by 
the scene-painter at the Fontenoy-street 
Theatre, admirably conducted (except in the 
way of paying salaries) as is that Thespian 
establishment." 

" You are quite right. My credit has been 
exhausted, and has died the death." 

" Then excuse me," remarked the Professor, 
"if I tell you in all candour and all honesty, 
that if you do not take the assistance I proffer 
you, you are a very great fool." 

" I may be so. I have been a fool . so 
people tell me . all my life; but I'd rather 
not take your money all the same." 



PHILIP LESLIE. 15 

" Will you tell me why?" 

11 You will be offended with me, perhaps, if 
I give you an honest and candid reason for 
my refusal." 

" Not a bit, I like honesty and candour ; 
they're a change after the rogueries one lives 
amongst daily, and is compelled sometimes to 
practise, in this beautiful half-gipsy, half- 
mountebank, whole-vagabond, semi-theatrical 
profession of ours." 

u "Well, then, Professor Jachimo," resumed 
the Painter, u if you like honesty and candour, 
I .will tell you why I will not take your 
money. I think that I would, sooner starve, 
sooner rot than take it, because I believe that 
of all the consummate scoundrels that ever 
existed, you, Professor Jachimo, are the 
greatest and most consummate." 

M Ha ha! Ho ho! and ha ha! again," cried 
the Professor, starting up, and speaking so 
loud that the sleepy waiter half woke, inclined 
his drowsy ear at an angle of forty-five degrees, 
to intimate that he, the waiter, was in the 
room, and that parties might give their orders ; 



16 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

but hearing none, muttered a sleepy " Coming, 
sir," and relapsed into sleep again. " At last 
I have found the pearl beyond price, the 
ingenuous youth, the man of integrity . 
claritsque parus, if I have not forgotten all the 
Latin they hammered into me at school. I 
am a scoundrel . great, consummate; by Tom 
of Lincoln and Peter the Great, by Jack a* 
Kent, I am; and you, being virtuous, are just 
the man for me. Ring the bell, and have 
some cakes and ale, and some ginger to be 
hot in the mouth withal. The Professor is a 
Shakesperian, you see. He has strutted his 
hour on the boards, and was deemed a not 
uneloquent patterer of the blank verse of the 
immortal Bill, by managers who paid as much 
as fifteen shillings a week salary. You won't 
ring the bell? I was but jesting. You must 
come with me. You shall let me be your 
friend. Tell me, you Paragon, where do you 
live?" 

He put the question with such adroit sud- 
denness . he had such a feline nimbleness of 
address, this Professor, in pouncing upon an 



PHILIP LESLIE. 17 

interlocutor, with those straw-coloured kid 
paws of his, that had griff es of iron beneath, 
that Leslie, taken off his guard, hesitating 
whether he should kick the Professor, laugh 
at the Professor, or evade the Professor's 
question, made a miserable compromise of the 
matter by answering him, and stammering 
out that he lived at No. 8, Mount Pleasant, 
close by. 

u Haste then to the pleasant Mountain," 
exclaimed the lively necromancer, clapping 
his hands on Leslie's shoulders. " The waiter 
wants to go to bed . the bar's closed. You 
want sleep . so do I. I'll call upon you in 
the morning . you'll let me in; I know you 
will. Good night, Heaven bless you. Flare 
up!" 

And with this singular benediction, the 
dexterous Professor Jachimo so managed with 
his guest, that though Leslie felt that he was 
being treated like a child, and was burning to 
knock his persecutor down, he walked, half 
backwards, out of the coffee-room, past the 
night porter, and into the street, and was half 

VOL. II. c 



18 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. "'' 

conscious, too, of having bid the Professor 
good night, and of having half returned the 
grasp of the hand he had conferred upon him 
at parting. What would have been the good 
of the Professor being such an unutterable 
wizard, if he hadn't been able to manage 
things more cleverly than other people ? 

It was curious to observe the change that 
came over the countenance of Professor 
Jachimo when his guest had left. His hila- 
rity, his bonhomie, vanished as instantaneously 
as though he had worn one of those theatrical 
masks which can be drawn off the face by 
means of a string; and in lieu came an 
anxious, covetously-inquisitive, ravenously- 
pondering expression, that had much more of 
malhomie than bonhomie in it. As he pondered 
and pondered, and drew lines of uncertain 
mental circumvallation in some spilt liquor on 
the table, he looked less like a Professor of 
any kind of magic, natural or otherwise, than 
like a certain Captain, not to the purlieus of 
the Borough of Southwark unknown, nor 
wholly a stranger to the purl- perfumed parlour 



PHILIP LESLIE. 19 

of the " Blue Pump," of whom you have, I 
think, heard before in this chronicle. Indeed, 
the mahogany table might, with far more 
regard to the fitness of things, have been 
lowly Pembroke; the choice Havana a clay 
pipe; the stately coffee-room a low pot-house 
parlour. 

" A strange young man, that," he mused to 
himself. " I don't believe in presentiments . 
they're all humbug; yet I can't help having 
something like a presentiment about him. A 
very strange young man! I'll sleep upon it! 
He won't give me the slip, if I can help it. 1 
don't think he wants to, either, for all his 
telling me that I was a scoundrel. There : 
I'll sleep upon it." 

So Professor Jachimo likewise invested 
himself with the order of the chamber-candle- 
stick, and still muttering that Philip Leslie 
was a very strange young man, permitted the 
night porter to conduct him to his bed-chamber, 
and, according to his expressed intention, slept 
upon it. He slept as a child would sleep on a 
beating, and a lover on the receipt of his 



20 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

letters and the lock of his hair from his 
mistress, and a general on his defeat, and an 
emperor on his abdication, and as } r ou, my 
friend, would sleep somehow, if you were to 
be hanged to-morrow morning. For it is 
Mercy that ties our nightcap strings beneath 
our chins; and lays her soft fingers, poppy- 
steeped, on our weary eyelids. 

Philip Leslie, too, went home to sleep upon 
it, in his poor garret, which attic cell was on 
the third storey of a house situated in the de- 
clivitous thoroughfare called Mount Pleasant. 
Unpleasant enough it had lately become to 
him, heaven knows ; for he owed his landlady, 
who was one of the most acrid and ill-con- 
ditioned of the lodging-house-keeper species, 
much rent, for which she dunned him, matu- 
tinally, diurnally, and nocturnally . " from 
morn to dewy eve, a summer's day" . most 
remorselessly. Nervous anxiety with respect 
to Mrs. Cheesewright's unsettled account may 
have had something to do with his holding his 
breath when he turned the latch-key in the 
door; with a sudden flush and tremor coming 



PHILIP LESLIE. 21 

over him, when, owing to the presence, 
perhaps, of some minute particle of foreign 
matter in the barrel of the key, the tumblers 
of the lock refused to obey the potent spell of 
Chubb. He was locked out to a certainty. 
The key of the street was his, and none other ; 
and Mrs. Cheesewright was determined that 
her lodger should sleep, if at all, a la belle etoile. 
Such were the quickly-succeeding thoughts 
that pricked him, halbert-like, as he drew the 
clavial recalcitrant from the key-hole, blew 
into it, whistled into it, tapped it smartly 
against the iron railings, and, as far as a neigh- 
bouring gaslight would permit him, scrutinised 
its interior as narrowly as you have seen a 
cunning magpie look into a marrowbone. 
Then, with a heart that might have beaten 
time to the skeleton chorus in Der Freischtitz, 
so sepulchrally rapid were its pulsations, he 
applied the key once more, but, oh joy ! this 
time with success, and in another instant stood 
trembling on the house-side of the threshold. 
He felt like one who has escaped a great peril, 
has by a sudden leap cleared a gulf of vasty 



22 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

fissure, and stands on the safer side, triumphant 
but astonied. He closed the street-door gin- 
gerly ; put up the chain, biting his lips and 
frowning to himself as a link or two inoppor- 
tunely rattled, lighted his own chamber-candle 
from the funereal dip that flared fitfully on a 
side-slab, blew out the parent luminary . all 
these performances being strictly enjoined and 
enforced by the servile code enacted by the 
Draconian Cheesewright for the guidance of 
her lodgers . and crept upstairs to his own 
humble tenement, scattering mental malisons 
on the stairs of the first flight, which creaked 
abominably, and on those of the second, of 
which the carpet was of the raggedest, and, as 
it seemed maliciously unsecured by stair-rods ; 
so being steps of fearsome peril and ancle- 
spraining eventually to him who mounted. 
Philip did not care to sit up when he had 
reached his lean chamber. He did not waste 
the midnight oil. He had no midnight oil to 
waste . only a tiny stump of farthing rush- 
light, from which a toothsome mouse had 
already that morning nibbled a dejeuner a la 



PHILIP LESLIE. 23 

'dent He did not seem to be imbued with a 
desire to read the only books he possessed . 
a torn copy of Pilkington's Dictionary of 
Painters, and an odd volume of Paradise Lost, 
with four white discs on the upper side of its 
cover, where the second-hand bookstall-keeper's 
placard, setting forth that the book was " only 
threepence," had been torn off . by the light 
of the half-dozen lucifer-matches that lay 
scattered in the rusty candlestick. He would 
have smoked a pipe before retiring to his 
couch; but, oh misery of poverty! though 
there were no less than four cutties, fumigated 
to a most artistic degree of brownness on the 
mantelshelf, and a fantastic German affair with 
a porcelain bowl, on whose smoky sides some 
vestiges of gilding, and a dimly dooming view 
of Cologne Cathedral yet remained, not one 
atom of tobacco, not even a particle of the 
half-smoked pipe-lees known as Mundungus,* 
could he find in ragged pouch, in cutty bowl, 
or in twisted scrap of paper in his thrice- 
searched pockets. Had he the blackened 
* Ambrose Phillips; The " Splendid Shilling." 



24 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

stump of a cigar even, he thought he could 
have chopped it up with that old razor, and 
inhaled a few semi-satisfactory whiffs. 

These are the things that make poverty 
terrible. 

To the habitual smoker, and . a million times 
worse to him who has an imaginative tempera- 
ment . to be without tobacco, is as bad as the 
want of a thimble to an inexperienced needle- 
woman. You bleed at every thought of the 
unattainable sedative. Yet there may be one 
agony more exquisite . one u sorrow's crown 
of sorrow" with thornier prickles: to see the 
much-coveted weed within your reach, and yet 
not be able to use it. I remember, years 
since, going over Kirkdale Gaol, near this same 
Liverpool, and seeing, lying in the midst of 
one of the exercising yards, a little paper 
packet which, a warder informed me, contained 
birdseye tobacco, which had been flung over 
the wall by some sympathising prisoners 7 
friend outside. But not one of the hundreds 
of captives in that gaol, in their daily exercise, 
and under the Argus eyes of their janitors had 
dared to touch the tobacco luxury. It made 



PHILIP LESLIE. 25 

me sick, to think with what a desperate greed 
of concupiscence the eyes of these doomed men 
must have surveyed that parcel of dried leaves ; 
how thoughts of strangling a warder suddenly, 
seizing the tobacco, swallowing it, and then 
giving themselves up to justice and the gallows, 
must have flashed meteor-like before their 
hungry eyes. A little tobacco-trifle such as 
this makes us ask ourselves strange questions. 

Yes. Society must be protected. Yes: rogues 
must tread the wheel and cut-purses turn the 
crank. The Game Laws must be enforced; 
the vagrant must have his fourteen days' hard 
labour : the Law permits, the Court awards it ; 
but where this thy Abstract Right, Man, to 
play these fantastic tricks with thy fellow : to 
coop him up in prison-vans, to cabin him in 
warm air-heated cells, to deprive him of u his 
bed and gas," throttle him in a "punishment 
jacket," stuff his mouth with salt if he halloo 
out, dress him up in grey and yellow, like a 
penal harlequin, call him number eighty-four 
instead of John or Thomas, hide his face, 
made in God's image even as is thine own, 



26 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

behind a leathern mask, gruel him, fetter him, 
scourge him, chaplain him ? He is punished 
according to the Act of Parliament in his case 
made and provided . but . now let us go and 
sit on the petty jury, and send John Smith 
(the scoundrel ! ) to Woolwich for stealing a 
silver tea-pot. 

As Philip Leslie cast his clothes on the chair 
beside his bed, pondering, for his part, on what 
a strange fellow that conjuror was, there 
slipped from the pocket of his well (or rather 
ill) worn shooting-jacket something yellow and 
something shining, which, when he eagerly 
stooped to pick it up, proved to his amazement 
to be a golden sovereign. 

" How on earth did this money come here?" 
he asked himself. " Pshaw!" he continued. 
"I'm a dolt to ask the question. Who could 
have put it there but that rascal of a wizard, 
with some of his merry- Andrew tricks. Con- 
found his impudence! Heigho!" and so lay 
down on his pillow. He was so miserably 
poor that he could not help saying " Heigho ! " 
though he had really a mind . a very great 



PHILIP LESLIE. 27 

mind, though not quite an entire mind . to 
give the Professor back his alms in the 
morning. 

He tossed and tumbled all night, and 
dreamed far more than he slept. He dreamed 
that he had taken the Devil's arles, and was 
bound to one Polliachimo, a demon, by con- 
tracts engrossed with human blood on parch- 
ment made from human skins. He dreamed 
that he had taken a red-hot sovereign from a 
recruiting sergeant with epaulettes of fire, and 
parti-coloured serpents for streamers, that 
twisted about his shako with eyes in all their 
scales; and that he was enlisted, for ever and 
ever, in the Fiends' Light Infantry. Then he 
began to have wandering, incoherent dream- 
memories of his past career. He trod the 
shores of another land, and then another, and 
yet another. He prattled another language, 
and still another, and another. There was a 
nurse who was called Bonne, and who wore a 
high white cap and great golden earrings. 
Bonne meant good, he was told ; yet she could 
not be very good, this Bonne, for she was 



28 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

always talking to a man in a helmet, a big 
beard, and red trousers, and left him, little 
Philip, to sprawl on the ground, and be hustled 
by fowls, and turned over on his little back 
by inquisitive dogs. He was little Philip then, 
little Philip with a strange cap of silk, wadding, 
and basket-work, like a Turk's turban, and a 
great white frill. Who was it used to call him 
not little Philip, but little brute, little pig, 
little devil? Ah! that other gentleman with 
the other big beard . the red one . who gave 
mamma a kiss in the blue dining-room, where 
there was a figure of a man in a great coat, a 
cocked hat, and high boots, and with his arms 
behind him, standing on the mantelpiece. 
This was the gentleman who used to promise to 
take him out to ride on his great white horse. 
He never did, though ; but he wore spurs, and 
cut little Philip across the face with his horse- 
whip, because he would not call him papa. 

These memories merged into more recent 
ones . memories of journeyings to and fro, 
people with rouge and spangles, twanging 
fiddlers, poverty, hardship, contumely. iSo^v 
he was a very very little boy again. How 



PHILIP LESLIE. 29 

blue the sky was; how white the houses; how 
hot in the sun ! What a smell of melons and 
oranges; what a plashing of falling water; 
what curiously striped blinds to all the 
windows ; and how the people held up their 
hands and moved their bodies when they 
talked. A long, long way his mind had 
travelled back; and he began to dream of a tall 
handsome lady with dark hair and eyes . so 
dark! so handsome! who used to fondle him 
on her knee, almost smother him with kisses, 
and weep passionately on his neck, calling him 
her dear, dear, wronged, abandoned child; 
and yet sometimes, with a strange and terrible 
caprice, would fall upon him with blows and 
revilings, and tell him that he was a viper and 
an outcast. It was the tall, handsome, dark 
lady he used to call " Mamma." And that 
lady, too, tall and handsome as she was, used 
to be very fond of drinking something from a 
decanter. Then the dream-memories came 
upon him so rapidly and so distinctly, that he 
perceived that he was wide-awake, and thinking 
very deeply of real things past. Yes : they 
were all true. And, lo, it was morning! 



30 



CHAP. XX. 

THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 

HPHE occurrences of the past day had been of 
such an unusually exciting nature that the 
Professor, not habitually an early riser, felt 
more disposed than ever to prolong his morning 
slumbers. The first summons of the " boots," 
bearing his patent leathers and his shaving 
water at about nine a.m., he utterly dis- 
regarded. " Boots," however, nothing daunted, 
came again, at ten o'clock, and beat a tattoo 
on the door panel; whereupon the drowsy 
Professor began to condescend to entertain 
something like the skeleton of an idea, that it 
was very nearly time for him to get up, espe- 
cially as he had necromantic business of im- 
portance to transact, and that strange young 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 31 

man, Philip Leslie, to look up ; but he still 
seemed perfectly assured that the Painter 
neither could nor would give him the slip ; so 
with another yawn, he announced his definite 
intention of rising at eleven, but he bade the 
M boots " bring him, ad interim, a dish of 
strong tea. 

There were " dishes " of strong tea in those 
days; even until very lately, and until stern 
Improvement Commissioners of Boards and 
Works pulled the venerable, dry-rotten edifice 
down, there were u dishes " of tea to be obtained 
at the old Chapter Coffee-house in St. Paul's 
Churchyard, London. When poor Charlotte 
Bronte, suddenly become famous through the 
publication of " Jane Eyre," came to London 
to see Messrs. Smith and Elder, she alighted 
. in her entire ignorance of town life . at 
the Chapter Coffee-house, and, I daresay, had 
many dishes of tea when she returned from 
the grand soirees where " Currer Bell" was 
lionised. The " dish " of tea resembled, 
perhaps, a slop-basin of tea more closely in 
appearance, or, with even greater accuracy of 



32 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

outline, a small punch-bowl, as though the 
tea-drinker, while confining himself to that 
cheerful but uninebriating beverage, still 
wished to have before him the outward form 
and image of the beloved vessel that was 
wont to hold punch, the equally cheerful, but 
not innocuous. Grand old Chapter Coffee- 
house, what has become of thy frequenters . 
as old, as musty, as time-worn, as ricketty, 
as thou wert? Have ruthless Improve- 
ment Commissioners pulled down the Chap- 
terites as well as the Chapter ? Dove 
sono? . those antediluvian old boys; Saurian 
relics of a small-clothed, gaitered, shirt-frilled, 
powder-headed, pig-tailed generation; cock- 
hatted fragments of a pre- Adamite humanity ! 
What has become of the Plesiosaurian waiter, 
with the head white and bare, and polished as 
a billiard-ball, with the rusty black suit a 
world too wide for his shrunk shanks, with 
the pendant watch-key and seals in gold of 
the dullest hue but the purest assay . the 
waiter who was dry, and crusty, and hung 
round with cobwebs, almost, as his own old 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 33 

port was in reality ? What has become of the 
shabby Sunday morning parsons, who used to 
wait, not to say tout, at the Chapter just 
before service, with a cassock, surplice, and 
bands in a carpet-bag, and a stock sermon 
(warranted orthodox), and generally borrowed 
bodily from some compendious Body of Theo- 
logy, in their coat pockets, ready to fill the 
pulpit of any reverend gentleman who might 
be prevented by indisposition, or Sunday 
business, or Sunday headache, or Sunday 
pleasure, from performing his own service 
to his own congregation . and all for the small 
charge of half-a-guinea ? They must have 
retreated somewhere; they cannot have been 
utterly annihilated. Rats fly from a falling 
house and a leaky ship, but they migrate to 
fresh glory-holes and sewers new; and I sup- 
pose the fossil waiters, and the stalactite old 
gentlemen from the country, and the mummi- 
fied half-guinea parsons, who used to give a 
dim and musty vitality to the Chapter, have 
not yet quite faded away into nothingness, 
but have r ought out some abode as dim and 

VOL. II. d 



34 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

musty as themselves, an abode which Improve- 
ment Commissioners have not yet approached 
with profaning pickaxe, and over whose down- 
fall Boards of Works yet slumber. 

Little recked Professor Jachimo, in the 
summer of eighteen hundred and thirty-five, 
of the connection between a dish of tea and 
the Chapter Coffee-house, in St. Paul's Church- 
yard, London, and little would he have cared 
if such a connection had been suggested to 
him. He was a man of his times, and the 
good and evil of the time . more of the evil 
than of the good . were sufficient for him. 
He ordered a dish of tea, because by that 
name a large ration of the infusion of the 
Chinese leaf was generally designated in pro- 
vincial hotels, and because a cup . two cups 
. three cups, of the ordinary tea-cup size, 
Were insufficient for his large desire. And 
while he waited for the tea, he indulged in 
pleasant visions of a tremendous breakfast he 
intended to consume in the hotel coffee-room. 
For there was one person in the world of whom 
the Professor Jachimo was excessively fond, to 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 6o 

whom he was prodigiously kind, and to whom 
he denied nothing if he could by any possi- 
bility avoid it. That person was Professor 
Jachimo himself; and in his boundless indul- 
gence to his caprices and appetite, he spared 
neither fish, nor flesh, nor fowl . nay, nor 
man, nor woman, nor child besides. It was 
a doctrinal point in the Jachimonian creed, 
that the Jachimonian body must be allowed 
to lack for nothing . neither for food, for 
drink, nor for raiment; and that if these 
things could not always be provided at the 
Jachimonian expense, they must necessarily 
be furnished at somebody else's. 

In this comfortable state of mind, the Pro- 
fessor awaited tranquilly the coming of his 
refreshing draught, indulging in sundry retro^ 
spectiye contemplations and in day-dreani3 
not wholly unpalatable. 

" I haven't done so badly with my five 
hundred pounds," he mused, u though of that 
handsome (but inadequate) sum I managed to 
throw four hundred cleanly and tidily into 
the gutter^ in that infernal Irish campaign of 



36 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

mine, three years since. Going abroad saved 
me from more dangers than losing my remain- 
ing hundred pounds, though ; and let us hope 
the whole of that unlucky affair is blown over 
by this time. It was a narrow escape for 
you, my friend Jachimo . a very narrow 
escape, indeed. It was even a folly of thine, 
an exceedingly close shave, the narrowest 
squeak thou hast known, Jacky the impu- 
dent. Bah," he continued, M what's a narrow 
squeak, a close shave, to such as I am? 
Hasn't my life always been, isn't it now, made 
up of shaves and squeaks, more or less close 
and narrow? I am the weasel. When I am 
found asleep, then may the barber begin to 
lather my eyebrows and brandish- his shining 
razor. A miss is as good as a mile any day, 
and the misses have hitherto been all in my 
favour. I've not made what I term a regular 
mess of it for years. That old Lord's money 
seems to have been lucky cash, as gamblers 
believe pawnbrokers' money to be, and has 
prospered in these humble hands marvellously." 
He gave an ugly grin as he spread his large, 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 37 

coarse, creased hands out of the coverlid, and 
then glanced at the sparkling, showy rings on 
the toilet- table. 

n Who'd believe now," he went on " that 
by just wandering about the Continent for 
three years with these hankey-pankey tricks 
of mine, that I should have managed to set by 
very nearly a thousand pounds in good hard 
cash, besides a ' plant/ if I may call my magic 
paraphernalia by so tradesmanlike a name, 
and jewellery . a safe investment when you 
know where to buy, how to buy, what to buy, 
and when (and to ichom) to sell . worth at least 
five hundred pounds more. And all from that 
one remaining nest-egg of one hundred pounds. 
I wonder whether there is anything more to 
be screwed out of that old Lord. I shouldn't 
wonder. I'll work him, and all the rest of 
the family, as safe as houses, when I get to 
London. It's true we promised not to molest 
him any more; but business is business, and 
must be attended to before all things. I wish 
I could find that straw-coloured medical friend 
of mine. I wish I could find ." 



38 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

He fell into a deeper, darker fit of musing, 
and events long since dead and buried came 
trooping up before him like phantoms, himself 
among the throng. He chased the ugly ones 
away fiercely and remorselessly. Himself more 
vehemently he bade begone ; for of all persons 
he did not like to look in the face, in his real 
habit as he lived, that person was Jachimo, 
professor of legerdemain. Some of the phan- 
toms were pleasant; and he permitted them to 
stay to keep company with him till the dish 
of tea came, and fondled and caressed them. 

And then his thoughts reverted to the 
strange young man with whom he had become 
acquainted the night before, and he began to 
cogitate on him with a serious earnestness 
that even he himself could not account for. 

" Confound the young fellow," he said, half 
aloud; I can't get him out of my head. I 
should like to know what he has been, and 
what he has been doing with himself. He is 
an impudent dog, and as reckless as a gipsy; 
but he's some good stuff about him. He's an 
honest man, that's positive. I like honest men 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 39 

just as I like good pictures. But then my 
name isn't Michael Angelo, and I can't paint. 
There's honesty in his voice, his manner, his 
smile, his clear blue eye. He's very picturesque, 
very rare, just like an old master. And then 
honest men are such uncommonly good eating, 
when you have them all ready trussed, and 
stuffed, and roasted." 

He turned in his bed, and, gazing at the 
wall opposite, saw an engraving, vilely exe- 
cuted in the old pig-tail manner, of the good 
Samaritan picking up the wounded man who 
went down to Jericho and fell among thieves. 
He nodded amicably at the generous Samaritan, 
who was stooping down till his nose nearly 
touched the breast of his prostrate brother, 
notwithstanding an enormous turban as big 
as a pumpkin, sufficient to give its wearer, 
Saxon or Samaritan, determination of blood 
to the head at once. 

u Now there was an honest man," he said. 
" I like such honest fellows as that . fellows 
who will drop you at a first-rate hotel, and 
pay everything you choose to score up f 



40 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

They're getting somewhat difficult to find, 
such honest fellows as this; but they are 
found from time to time, nevertheless. I 
should like to give that young fellow a turn, 
and do a little Samaritan business on my own 
hook. I can afford it; and it's as refreshing 
as a shower-bath. I will, too, with his will or 
without his will," he resumed. " I've a strong 
idea that he'll be useful to me. He'll kick at 
first; has'nt run in harness; is given to shy- 
ing and bolting, and is quiet neither to ride 
nor drive ; would not suit a lady, nor a 
nervous gentleman. I daresay I shall be able 
to bring him to terms at last, and I'll engage 
him, and take him to town at a weekly salary. 
He can paint my paraphernalia, to begin with 
. it wants a new coat of vermilion, emerald 
green, and Dutch metal sadly; and I can 
educate him at last, perhaps, to becoming a 
confederate in the hankey-pankey. He's not 
too honest a man for that, I suppose. Hang 
it! what a long time they are bringing up 
the tea!" 

The delay of which the Professor here 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 41 

complained, was to be thus accounted for . 
" Boots," on going down stairs, delivered 
his message, according to the routine of the 
Adelphi Hotel, at the bar, to the effect that 
Number Twenty-seven stood in need of a 
dish of strong tea. The order being received 
by a clerk of the gentler sex, who presided 
in a handsome glass case over an enormous 
ledger, white vellum ornamented with ara- 
besques of cut morocco, and who was ring- 
leted and ribboned in a delightful manner, 
was by her in due course conveyed to the 
imposing head-waiter, by him again trans- 
mitted to one or two of his immediate sub- 
ordinates, and the dish of tea was finally 
(that is to say, about half an hour after it 
had been ordered) confided to a smart cham- 
bermaid, with instructions to carry it up to 
number Twenty-seven herself. For the Adel- 
phi Hotel was a national establishment, and, 
as in many other national establishments, 
every item in its internal organisation was 
carried out by system and routine, and by 
the rule of thumb and hotel red-tape in all 
cases made and provided. 



42 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Just as the chambermaid had received her 
precious trust of dished bohea at the bar, and 
had raised her drapery the infinitesimal part 
of an inch, in order that her upward progress 
towards the regions of number Twenty-seven 
might not be impeded, there appeared in the 
hotel vestibule . -which was strictly the manner 
of his becoming visible, for he neither walked 
in, nor lounged in, nor ran in, nor rushed in, but 
simply appeared. an individual who, without 
seeming to take particular notice of anybody 
or anything, still, paradoxical as it may ap- 
pear, created an immediate and rather uneasy 
sensation among all present, embracing every- 
thing within an easy circle of observation, 
from the head- waiter to a newly-arrived port- 
manteau, and from the ribboned and ringleted 
clerk to the placard on the wall, telling of the 
effervescing waters of the Brunnen of Nassau, 
bottled on the spot, and hermetically capsuled 
for English invalid consumption, announcing 
the approaching departure of steamers from 
George's Dock to the Isle of Man. 

He was not so remarkable an individual to 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 43 

look at, having somewhat the appearance of a 
farmer, if a white hat and top-boots are to be 
taken as ordinary criteria of agricultural cos- 
tume. But that he was no farmer, was evi- 
dent from his blue coat, red waistcoat, and 
blue Belcher neckerchief with white spots . 
that article of attire which has since become 
so popular among the pugilistic section of the 
sporting community called u the Fancy," and 
is expressively, though irreverently, known as 
u a bird's-eye fogle." 

He had buff leather driving-gloves on his 
large hands, which he seemed to have a pecu- 
liar idiosyncrasy for carrying behind him. 
That he should wear driving-gloves was not 
very unnatural, seeing that there had all at 
once appeared, as suddenly and as mysteri- 
ously as he, at the door of the Adelphi, a solid- 
looking gig drawn by a solid-looking brown 
horse, whose reins were held by another in- 
dividual, the very fetch and counterpart of 
him in the vestibule, with these exceptions . 
that his hands (the reins being taken into 
consideration) were necessarily before him . 



44 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and that he had red hair and red whiskers, 
whereas his confrere within had both those 
hirsute ornaments of a jet-black hue, set off, 
moreover, on a bullet head very closely crop- 
ped, and the whiskers confined to the mutton 
cutlet form and size. Two twinkling little 
black eyes were set on either side of a 
broad somewhat upward-turned nose: sharp 
black eyes, observant black eyes, sly black 
eyes, and knowing . oh! such knowing! . 
black eyes. He might have been about forty 
years of age, and was stout and burly in 
form. 

Such was the individual who, having taken 
a comprehensive survey of the hotel vestibule, 
its furniture and its occupants, sauntered 
leisurely up to the bar, and addressed the 
ringleted clerk: 

a Party by the name of Jachimo stopping 
here, my dear?" 

The fascinating clerk in the ribbons and 
the ringlets, accustomed to a long course of 
reverential homage from all the merchant 
princes of Liverpool, the most dashing Irish 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 45 

country gentlemen, and the sallowest and 
wealthiest dons from the Spanish main and 
the United States of America, felt naturally 
aggrieved at being addressed in so uncere- 
monious a manner. 

" Dear, indeed !" cried the young lady, toss- 
ing her head ; " I am sure 1 never cost you 
anything." 

" Darling, then," pursued the hardened 
man in the top-boots, quite unabashed, " or 
Empress of Kooshia. It's all the same to 
me. Party by the name of Jachimo here, 
Miss?" 

The beauteous book-keeper vouchsafed no 
reply by word of mouth; but she rang a bell 
for the head-waiter. When that functionary, 
who was about half a dozen paces from her 
when she rang, was near enough to the 
glass-case, she leaned towards him, and said, 
tersely : 

" JS T umber Twenty-seven wanted." 

The head-waiter looked first at the stout 
man in the top-boots, and then at the cham- 
bermaid. 



40 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" He isn't up yet." 

That young lady, feeling that she was 
called upon to respond, made answer : 

" I'm just carrying his tea up to him. He 
only came last night." 

" No luggage," murmured the head-waiter; 
not with any intentional disparagement of the 
Professor, but probably only to establish a 
fact that was almost without precedent. For 
in the head-waiter's mind all people who were 
not landlords, chambermaids, or waiters . 
" boots " didn't count for anything . were 
travellers; and these last were divisible into 
two great classes . travellers with luggage 
and travellers without luggage. The first 
were to be trusted and conciliated in propor- 
tion to the magnitude of their impedimenta', 
the second were to be scorned and shunned. 

" That'll do," the stout man said, with a 
nod." "Rather see him in bed than out of it. 
I'll go up Which way, my ducky?" 

It will be seen, that the stout man was as 
gallant as Professor Jachimo, but his gallantry 
was of quite a different order. It was much 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 47 

smoother, and a hundred times more disagree- 
able. His last affectionate apostrophe was 
addressed to the chambermaid, who not only 
indignantly repudiated it, but made ineffectual 
attempts to bar the passage of the adventurous 
stranger, saying: 

" Name, if you please, sir, name. You 
can't go up like that. Number Twenty- 
seven's in bed, and don't like to be dis- 
turbed." 

" Name ! nonsense. Say I'm his aunt 
Sarah. Why he'll be as glad to see me, as if 
I was his rich grandmother come from the 
East Indies with a guinea-pig and a ship full 
of five-shilling pieces. Stop," the undaunted 
man proceeded, "say I'm Mr. Nobody. Mr. 
Nobody come to see number Twenty-seven on 
most partic'lar business. There, there ! That's 
your sort. We're like brothers when we're to- 
gether. Now show me the way, that's a good 
girl. Good bye, Miss." This to the clerk in 
ringlets. 

The chambermaid could never after explain 
how it actually happened; but it is a fact, 



48 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

that before you could pronounce the oft-ban- 
died name of Jack Robinson, the stout and 
persevering stranger whose name was Mr. 
Nobody, had encircled her waist with one of 
his rough gloves, chucked her under the chin, 
slipped a crown-piece into her hand, and was 
gently pushing her and the dish of tea towards 
the upper regions. 

It wasn't, perhaps, so much a push as a 
gentle guiding and directing motion; but it 
answered its purpose very effectually. The 
chambermaid led the way, decidedly against 
her free will, but, considering the circum- 
stances, with much cheerfulness. They were 
not long in reaching the door of number 
Twenty-seven, when Mr. Nobody, clutching 
the girl's arm, as she halted with the tray in 
her hand, muttered in a very decided and 
low-pitched key: 

" Take in the tea. Give it him, but not a 
word of anybody wanting to see him. When 
you come out, leave the door ajar. Take care, 
or it will be the worse for you." 

There was an unmistakeable air of a person 



THE PROFESSOR IS WANTED. 4 ( J 

accustomed to be obeyed in his injunctions. 
There was something in Mr. Nobody's black 
eyes, which showed that he was not a man in 
top-boots to be trifled with, and which made 
the chambermaid tremble. She knocked gen- 
tly at the door ; the strong voice of the Pro- 
fessor cried, " Come in !" and in she went 
with that momentous dish of tea, ordered so 
long since by number Twenty-seven. 



VOL. II. E 



50 



CHAP. XXI. 

THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 

npHE manner in which it was done was thus- 
wise. 
Mr. Nobody, left alone to his nonentity, 
waited very patiently at the bed-room door 
till the chambermaid had done her spiriting, 
emerged from the chamber, and till the last 
sound of her retreating footsteps had died 
away on the staircase. Then cautiously 
pushing the door wider and wider, till the 
opening was sufficient to admit his portly 
body, he first protruded his head into the 
apartment; and, casting a rapid and compre- 
hensive glance around . taking stock of every 
thing within his sphere of vision, from bed- 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 5 1 

tester to portmanteau-stool . first assured 
himself that there was neither looking nor 
cheval-glass so placed as to cause the reflec- 
tion of his person to be visible to the man in 
the bed. Then he stole, as softly as though 
his top-booted feet had been velvet-shod, into 
the area of the room, calculating on every 
step he made, pausing before he ventured on 
another, waiting again to discover whether 
the footsteps themselves produced any effect 
on the person on whom he was making so 
peculiar a morning call. 

But ignorance was bliss to the Professor, so 
far as regarded his unseen visitant ; and it was 
folly to him, under that condition of uncon- 
sciousness, to be wise. He sat up in bed, 
calmly sipping his dish of tea, and from time 
to time yawning slightly. He laid down the 
cup at last, with a satisfied expression of 
countenance, whereupon Mr. Xobody took 
another step forward, with a satisfied expres- 
sion on his countenance too. Then he looked 
around, as men in bed, on the point of rising, 
will do; and it was close betting that his next 



KXnxonumoK 



52 THE BADDIXGTON TKERAGE. 

move would be one towards the evacuation of 
the citadel of his slumbers. 

Now, this happened to be the very moment 
fixed upon by Mr. Nobody for his next move. 
A very rapid, unceremonious, astonishing move 
it was; for it consisted simply in the Bow 
Street Officer giving a jaguar-like leap right 
on to the bed, and pinioning the amazed Pro- 
fessor in his burly arms. 

" John Pollyblank, before our Sovereign 
Lord the King . charge of forgery . Dun- 
dalk," he explained, in sharp, jerking sen- 
tences, and in the intervals of the fierce 
struggle taking place between him and his 
scarcely less robust opponent. 

" It's no use, Jack," was his friendly remon- 
strance, as, after a desperate resistance, the 
Professor began to show signs of being no 
longer sound in wind and limb; "you'd better 
give in." 

Mr. Nobody . otherwise Leathersides - . of 
the Public Office, Bow Street, was right in his 
generation. There was no longer the slightest 
use in Professor Jachimo . or as we may now 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 53 

as well recognise him as an old acquaintance 
. Jack Pollyblank, formerly of the borough 
of Southwark, and 'yclept Captain . offering 
any further resistance. The game was up, 
pro tem., with Captain Jack, and the stakes 
were for Leathersides, the top-booted, to 
claim. No naked, or rather half-dressed man, 
were he as strong as the Russian Count Orloff 
(who, they say, crumples up silver salvers 
with his fingers, as though they were wafer- 
cakes), or Milo of Crotona, has a chance . for 
any continued wrestling . against an opponent 
of his own calibre, fully clad, and doubly 
armed in the advantage of having begun the 
tussle by being uppermost. The astute per- 
ception of the Professor- Captain soon con- 
vinced him of this. He found his muscular 
resources unequal to cope against the odds he 
found arrayed in his disfavour; and, not very 
graciously, but still very unreservedly, with a 
hearty expletive, he "gave in" as requested. 

Mr. Leathersides availed himself of the ca- 
pitulation of the fortress to remove his long 
bony fingers from the very donjon-keep of the 



5-1 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

stronghold, that being the Captain's throat, 
which he had been investing pretty strongly 
lately; and then to produce from the hinder 
pocket of his coat a neat pair of steel hand- 
cuffs. Then seating himself by the side of the 
bed, but still keeping one firm grasp on his 
prisoner's shoulder, and both his lynx eyes on 
his face, he intimated his desire that the Pro- 
fessor should arise and assume his raiment as 
soon as was convenient to him, in order, as 
with Arcadian simplicity of diction he ex- 
pressed himself, that he might make all things 
nice and comfortable. 

u Lord ! only to think, Jack," he added re- 
flectively, "the time I've been looking for 
3 t ou. You thought your Leathersides had 
forgotten you ; but you were never out of his 
thoughts, my pippin. Back'ards and for'ards, 
from pillar to post, have I took journeys from 
Dublin to Liverpool, from Liverpool to Edin- 
burgh, from Edinburgh to London. The 
po'chays you've cost, Jack; the rump-steaks 
and bottles of port; the bread-and-cheeses 
and bottled ales; the goes of brandy-and- 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 55 

water warm with; the shillin's I've given 
to ostlers, and the half-crowns and the hugs 
to chambermaids! Lord bless us. And to 
think I should nab vou at last!" 

u You're a nice bloodhound to track a fellow 
about, grumbled his victim, drawing on his 
stockings with malevolent looks. " I thought 
you were on another tack. They told me the 
scent lay over in New York, and that you 
had gone there, else I'd have seen Liverpool 
broiled alive before I'd have trusted myself in 
it. A nice fool I was to trust myself here at 
all." 

" Not such a fool, Jack, as you think," po- 
litely rejoined the Bow Street Eunner. " The 
scent did lie over yonder" (and he pointed 
with his thumb towards a portrait of Prince 
Leopold, in which direction it may be sup- 
posed he assumed America to be); "but you 
doubled, Jack . you doubled, my lad, and got 
caught at last. Besides, who was goin' to 
pass an Act of Parliament, special, to make 
the 'Merrikens give you up. Capital dodge 
that, thougk . Professor Jachimo, hankey- 



56 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

pankey . eh! Why, they say you've made a 
mint of money." 

And, as he ended thus, Mr. Leathersides, as 
it were abstractedly, began to turn over the 
Captain's coat, take a manipulative bird's-eye 
view of his waistcoat, and hand-survey of his 
pantaloons. He speedily tossed over these 
articles of apparel to his captive, in order that 
he might clothe himself; but it is a remark- 
able phenomenon, that both as regards coat, 
and waistcoat, and pantaloons, the pockets 
were all turned inside out, and that they were 
as empty as the great Tun of Heidelburg. 

Mr. Leathersides had so much confidence in 
the conversion of the Professor- Captain to the 
doctrine of non-resistance, that he quitted his 
hold of him altogether, and sat down in a 
chair some two paces removed from the bed. 
But he was evidently a man of active habits, 
and one emulous of the fame of the diminutive 
but busy bee ; and as he sate, he twiddled now 
those shining steel handcuffs I have spoken 
of; now his equally neat and shining steel- 
barrelled pocket-pistol, with a curiously fretted 
stock. 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 57 

The Professor dressed himself in dogged 
silence. He had no weapons, and he knew 
the man who had captured him was not un- 
supported. To be shot like a dog did not 
enter into the calculations of John Polly- 
blank ; it did into those of a determined Bow 
Street Officer of Eighteen Thirty-five. 

Certainty as to his enemy's reinforcements 
soon became manifest. The eidolon of Mr. 
Leathersides . the same top-booted party who 
has been alreadv introduced as sitting in the 
gig at the hotel door, and who rejoiced in the 
name of Darby . speedily made his appearance 
in the bed-room, not quite so noiselessly as 
Leathersides, his confrere, but still with much 
cautious deliberation. He was a man of few 
words, and confining himself to a gruff inquiry 
of his coadjutor as to whether the job was 
done, and receiving an answer in the affirma- 
tive, sat down on a chair close to the door, 
and chewed a cigar-light with much philo- 
sophic calmness. Simultaneously with his 
friend's arrival, Mr. Leathersides took advan- 
tage of the advanced state of his prisoner's 



58 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

toilette to slip the handcuffs (which he play- 
fully designated "bracelets") over the wrists, 
whose possessor would have so dearly wished 
to have used them as pivots to the hands that 
might strangle him. So here was an end to 
Captain Pollyblank's professorship. All the 
hankey-pankey tricks, the pigeons that flew 
out of the portfolios, the bouquet-yielding 
hats, the inexhaustible bottles, had come to 
this undesirable finale of present capture, and 
handcuffs, and imminent incarceration, and 
prospective transportation beyond the seas on 
a charge of forgery. Where committed? how 
committed? it concerns us not to inquire at 
this moment, since the Professor and the 
Officer, how much they might have differed 
on other points, seemed perfectly well agreed 
upon this : that there existed such an accusa- 
tion, and that it must be answered at the 
proper time. 

While these momentous events had been 
taking place at the Adelphi Hotel, and while 
this stern struggle between law and (alleged) 
crime had been working out in the hotel bed- 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. -S9 

room, another struggle, scarcely less severe, 
had occurred in the humble bed-room in 
Mount Pleasant, where we left Philip Leslie 
on the previous night. 

The poor lad woke up in the morning to 
contemplate a far different horizon to that 
which his professional friend vainly imagined 
was spread before him, when he ordered that 
dish of tea, already so frequently alluded to 
in these columns. To Philip Leslie, this same 
horizon is dark and drear. The sky and sea 
were stormy, perturbed, and dismal; and the 
only sail that he could descry in the otling 
cf his soul was that golden- freighted bark, 
cleared he knew not whence, and bound he 
knew not whither, whose cargo was worth just 
twenty-one shillings. 

And yet the guinea must have come from 
the" conjuror; there could not be any doubt 
of that. Jachimo had some purpose in 
gaming Leslie to himself, . what that pur- 
pose was he knew not; but from what he 
knew of the man, it must be an evil one. 
He hesitated a good half hour as to what 



60 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

he should do, weighing the coin in his hand, 
turning it, trying to form something like a 
theory by which it might have come into his 
pocket by accident . might have lain there 
long unthought of . the residue of some 
by-gone paid-up salary. But, alas! the few 
guineas that he had received during many 
months, he knew by heart . no; the conjuror, 
and no other man, had put the money 
there. 

" I don't know why I should annoy myself 
about it so," he said moodily to himself. 
" I've earned the money honestly enough, 
supposing the fellow's life to be worth a 
guinea at all. Ten shillings of this plaguey 
bit of gold now would change my old land- 
lady's frowns into smiles; the rest would 
carry me on comfortably till the end of the 
week, and by then the ; Cottage-door ' I left 
at old Mac Mull's, the picture dealer's in 
Church Street, might be sold. Might be 
sold ! heigho ! heigho I " 

He looked round the room with a very 
disconsolate air. There was certainly a great 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 6 1 

need for something to be sold, or, perhaps, 
even more for something to be bought, to 
restore anything like comfort to that cheer- 
less apartment. It was an attic commanding 
an extensive but somewhat monotonous 
view of the high dead- wall of a chapel . a 
huge " brick barn of dissent " . opposite. 
The furniture which the iracund Mrs. Craven 
had placed at the disposal of her impoverished 
lodger, was of the scantiest and humblest 
description. A stump bedstead (of the well- 
known Codrus' pattern) which bore an ugly 
resemblance to a bier; a paralytic wash-hand 
stand; one forlorn rush-bottomed chair, from 
whose worn seat, frayed rushes struggled 
and asserted themselves feebly, like bristles 
on a witch's chin; a cracked looking-glass, 
which, even when it was whole, reflected only 
a hideous image; a ragged square of drug- 
getty carpet inefficiently sprawling over the 
rickety flooring, like a dilapidated wig on 
a cranium too large for it; and a deal table 
that, whenever the wind blew in through the 
innumerable crevices, shivered as though with 



6'2 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

palsy, and beat the devil's tattoo with its 
unequal legs ; this was all the domestic fur- 
niture the unpleasant landlady of the Mount 
Pleasantian mansion would vouchsafe to her 
locataire for four shillings and sixpence a 
week. To be sure he owed a good many 
four and sixpences. The grimy-paned bull's- 
eyed window had so many small panes, that 
its chequers looked like the interstices be- 
tween dungeon bars. It had not a vestige 
either of blind or curtain . this garret case- 
ment ; and a window without a curtain is as 
unsightly to look upon as an eye without 
lashes. It was an excellent room to hang one- 
self in, to arsenicate oneself in, to asphyxiate 
oneself with charcoal, or throw oneself out 
of window from; but it was not by any 
means the kind of room in which to indulge 
in a carpet dance, a bowl of punch, or a 
rubber at whist. The bed was a fit one 
to die upon, but not to lie on one's back 
upon, and sing comic songs; which last, is 
one of the pleasantest uses of a bachelor's 
bed. 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 63 

Mrs. Craven had not accomplished every- 
thing in the decoration of this apartment 
for a single gentleman. The semi-theatrical^ 
semi-artistic tastes of the lodger, were shown 
in a paint-stained easel; a battered old oil 
colour box, from which the japan had been 
worn in many places, showing the tin through, 
as the knee of the beggar peeps through his 
tattered trousers; a pair of foils crossed on 
nails on the wall, with a lockless old horse- 
pistol over them ; a besmeared plaster Venus, 
with a broken nose, and one leg wanting; a 
crimson velvet cap with a gold band and 
tassel, but gone to irrevocable seed: some 
odds and ends of the painter's craft, such 
as brushes and pencils, exhausted bladders 
of colour (metallic tubes as yet were not), 
and a portfolio with dog's-eared edges; a 
honeycombed human skull, on a horrible 
grin perpetually; a pair of buff slippers 
covered with tarnished spangles; a hare's 
foot with some rouge on the furry paw; 
a pair of dingy gauntlets, and a collar of 
imitation point-lace, very yellow and quite 



64 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

ragged. For Philip Leslie, though his spe- 
ciality was that of a scene-painter at the 
Royal Fontenoy- street Theatre, had fre- 
quently been compelled, owing to the pau- 
city of the company, to u go on in small parts;" 
and in his time had not only painted GrindofFs 
Mill and the Clachan of Aberfoil, but had 
also worn buff boots as a robber, and tartan 
and bonnet as one of the Highland foes of 
of Bailie Nicol Jar vie. 

Sitting on the bed's edge, in what may 
rather be termed a " blue " than a " brown 
study" . for the fiends, jocosely hight cerulean 
haunted Leslie continually. he remained men- 
tally weighing the pros and cons of the finan- 
cial situation, till by a strong effort he started 
up, clapped his cap on his head, flung the 
door wide open, and made his way down the 
precipitous stairs in a hurry that would have 
been natural in a man who was going to 
receive money, but was difficult to be ac- 
counted for in one who was about to aban- 
don possession thereof. 

He was so afraid of his new-born resolution 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 65 

giving way and coming to an untimely end, 
that he stopped not once in his downward 
course, not even at the door of the mouldy 
little parlour, where . among birds in rusty 
cages, which seemed (the birds) to be per- 
petually moulting, flower-pots which never 
made any greater horticultural display than 
a foundation of brown mould baked into fis- 
sured cracks, and feeble twigs like fragments 
of school-dame's rods past service, and an 
indefinite number of cats . Mrs. Craven sat 
and grumbled, and made out her weekly 
bills. He paused for a moment, and with 
a beating heart, at the street door, as if appre- 
hensively (though it may have been wishfully) 
expectant of the almost every-day visit which, 
on the rasped door-mat, he was wont to re* 
ceive from his landlady and creditor, there 
to be objurgated on his shortcomings. But 
he heard no sound this time, and went out 
into the street. 

"I'll give him back the money," he said, 
walking rapidly towards the Adelphi Hotel, 
" come what may. And if he wont take it, 

VOL. II. F 



66 THE BAbDINGTON PEERAGE. 

I'll throw it at his head. Surely old MacMull 
will do something with the ' Cottage-door,' by- 
Saturday." 

There was a knot of servants on the steps 
of the hotel, who, contrary to all statutes 
of hotel discipline, known and provided, were 
talking noisily together. The cook, who, 
night-capped as he was, ought never to have 
been seen above stairs at all, gave his opinion 
confidently. The head-waiter spoke his mind, 
and the head-chambermaid compared notes 
with the porter; the " boots" was Ciceronian, 
and fly-drivers listened to him with admiring 
looks and applauding murmurs. What could 
have happened! 

There was a strong chaise at the door . a 
four-wheeler . with a strong horse, held by 
the assistant hostler . equipages of that des- 
cription did not often stop at the aristocratic 
Adelphi. 

" Is Professor Jachimo up yet," Leslie, 
considerably astonished, asked of the head- 
waiter. 

" Up," echoed that functionary, with ready 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 67 

derision, u he'll be precious soon down, 1 
think." 

u He's a do," the cook remarked oracularly. 

" A willin," the chambermaid threw in 
affirmatively. 

,; A regular bad un, and an out-and-out 
counterfeit," the porter said conclusively. 

" I don't know what you all mean," ex- 
claimed the painter, somewhat pettishly, 
lt I merely want to know where I can find 
him." 

M And what might you want with him, 
young man? " a shrill voice exclaimed, as the 
young lady of the ringlets and the ribbons, 
who attended to book-keeping by double-entry 
in the glass case, swept through the throng, 
her feelings evidently much exacerbated. 
'* P'raps you can tell us why such carrying 
on should be allowed. Such a thing," she 
continued, with an aggrieved air to the spec- 
tators, " hasn't happened at the Adelphi ; no, 
not since it was built." 

An indignant murmur rose from the group 
of retainers, who appeared to feel their own 



G8 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

reputation compromised by the thing which 
had never happened before, but which had 
seemingly happened now. Many uncom- 
plimentary remarks were aimed, though they 
fell rather wide of the mark, at Philip Leslie; 
and the confident cook intimated his convic- 
tion, that the painter was "one of 'em,' 7 
whoever " 'em," or they may have been. 

But the colloquy received a sudden check ; 
and there was a cry of " They 're coming 
down! They're coming down!" The ser- 
vants formed a lane, a very short one, for it 
had a turning on the chaise at the door, and 
down " they " came. 

A very simple procession. Mr. Leather- 
sides, alias Nobody, on the right hand; 
Mr. Darby, nom de guerre unknown, on the 
left ; both arm in arm with a big, bad-looking 
man, handcuffed, who looked neither to the 
right nor to the left, but straight ahead with 
a grim smile. 

" The Professor, by Jove ! " exclaimed Leslie, 
with a start. 

u At your service, my boy," the victim of 



THE PROFESSOR GIVES A NEW ADDRESS. 69 

mistaken identity or prejudice, or ignorance, 
or whatever else it may have been, replied 
coolly. 

u In Heaven's name, how came you here? " 

u Charge of forgery. Sovereign Lord the 
kin sr. Stand clear! Aid and assist in his 
majesty's name. Now, then, governor, look 
alive!" 

11 Governor " was the Professor, and Mr. 
Leathersides was the respondent good enough 
to reply in his own curt phraseology to Leslie's 
query. Before he could put another, the 
officers, with celerity astonishing, though de- 
liberate, had seated their weighty prisoner in 
the vehicle, had seated themselves beside him, 
and the assistant hostler had given the strong 
horse his head. 

Leslie shrugged his shoulders, and gazed 
bewildered at the spectacle . the prisoner in 
the chaise meanwhile contemplating him scru- 
tinisingly. 

u Here, I've something for you,'' the Painter 
cried out hastily, as if he had in the confusion 
forgotten the original purport of his errand. 



70 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" You must have given me this last night. 
I won't have it; take jt." 

He took as good an aim as he could, and 
threw the coin as he thought on to the chaise- 
apron. But it missed, fell over on the other 
side, and so into the gutter. 

" Keep it, you fool, you," the Professor 
said impatiently. " Here, Leslie, I want to 
speak to you. Leathersides, let me speak to 
him for a minute . a moment." 

But Mr. Leathersides was of opinion that 
he had already waited long enough; and 
giving only a simple response of " gammon " 
to his prisoner's request, whipped the strong 
horse, and rattled away gallantly. The Pro- 
fessor had only time to cry out to Leslie, 
" If you are coming to London, I shall be in 
Newgate." 

Leaving which strange card of address, 
Captain Jack Pollyblank, now more in diffi- 
culties than ever, resigned himself to his 
fate, cursed the united body of Bow Street 
runners all round, and moved not limb, and 
spoke not word, for hours. 



71 



CHAP. XXII. 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 



T ESLIE, as may have been already inferred, 
had no very great liking or respect for 
the equivocal character who had just been 
borne away en route to her Majesty's jail of 
Newgate. The capture and incarceration of 
the Professor, or, indeed, his ultimate trans- 
portation beyond the seas for the term of his 
natural life, seemed sufficiently in accordance 
with the fitness of things; yet, as the vehicle 
faded away into the distance, there seemed to 
fade away, too, from before Philip's inward 
eyes, the last ray of a Hope he nourished, he 
knew not why, and of whose very nature he 
could not. form a definite idea. He disliked 



72 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the man, and had repudiated his assistance: 
yet now he was gone, he regretted not, perhaps, 
that he was gone, but that he had ever come, 
to leave him so, more forlorn than ever. 

" You'd better pick up that yellow boy, 
young man," remarked the assistant hostler, 
looking very covetously at the golden coin as 
it lay in the kennel, as though he would have 
dearly liked to pick it up himself. " You 
don't want the c I lickings to swallow it, do 
you?" 

The first impulse of Philip Leslie, was to 
adhere to his original resolution, and let 
the guinea lie. But the resolve was short- 
lived. A burning blush suffused his face as 
he stooped, picked up the money, and, holding 
it quietly in his hand, walked slowly away from 
the hotel. But he would not have faced that 
group of grinning menials again for any num- 
ber of guineas. 

He went home to his lodging, determined, 
however loosely the money might have been 
come by, to have nothing further to do ; per- 
sonally, with the accursed thing, but to give it 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 73 

to his landlady. Then an inward monitor . 
not conscience, but a monitor of a more 
abdominal nature . told him that he was very 
hungry and had had no breakfast. He would 
give Mrs. Craven ten shillings, he thought, 
then; and, for fear even this new resolve 
should die as soon as conceived, he set off 
running, and never stopped till he came to his 
own door. 

u You don't come in here, Mr. Leslie," an 
acrid voice exclaimed as he neared the 
threshold. " You pay me my rent, or else 
out you go. I'll have no more of such hoity- 
toity jackanapes." 

The speaker was a thin, wiry, acidulated 
female, with a nose "as sharp as a pen;" very 
scant, ropy hair, of a russet colour, ill-con- 
cealed by a cap of texture as equivocal as was 
its colour; and a rusty black gown that fitted 
tightly where it should have been loose, and 
loosely where it should have been tight. 
Mrs. Craven, in truth. 

" I want my rent," the Liverpudlian Nemesis 
resumed. 



74 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

" I have just received a little money," the 
painter hesitatingly answered; "and I can 
spare you, Mrs. Craven, ten shillings out of 
it," 

Heavens and earth, what mean things the 
want of money makes us do ! Here was a 
man . young, comely, strong, talented . 
compelled to cringe before a low-bred shrew. 
He feard her as much as young Biggs, minor 
at Eton, fears Doctor Slashington. He would 
have flattered her, evaded her, if that could 
have availed him aught. He should have paid 
her the entire aggregate of shillings and six- 

DO o o 

penses, you will say, and then there would 
have been no need for him to have suffered 
such humiliation. Virtuous sir, the poor 
fellow couldn't pay all : he was so hungry, so 
forlorn. 

He would have increased his offer, however, 
I have no doubt, to fifteen, seventeen, eighteen 
shillings, leaving himself but the bare where- 
withal to purchase a meal ; had not Mrs. Craven 
scornfully repudiating such instalments alto- 
gether, expressing her determination to have 



SEEKING FORTUNE. iO 

all her rent or none ; and issuing her fiat that 
her recalcitrant lodger should either pay or go. 

" Nine weeks you owes me," she observed 
with more financial than grammatical ac- 
curacy; a and nine weeks I has here, on this 
blessed spot ; and its shameful so to deceive a 
poor lone woman, and the mother of four 
children, one of which has been down with his 
spine nine years come Christmas. Money, 
which it is my right, I'll have, or else out you 
goes like an ingy -rubber ball. You call your- 
self a Hartist, indeed." 

He attempted to reason with her, to soften 
her. He offered her at last the guinea in its 
entirety, but she repeated her intention of 
having all her claim, or none ; and finally, in 
an access of passion, she rushed into the 
passage, slammed the door behind her, and 
Philip Leslie was locked out. 

Perhaps, with the not unusual caprice of the 
sex, she repented of her precipitancy as soon 
as she had regained her sanctum sanctorum, in 
the back kitchen, and had smoothed . partially 
smoothed . her ruffled temper, by making a 



76 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

violent assault upon the nearest cat and the 
nearest child she conld find. Perhaps she re- 
gretted that she had not taken the sum on 
account tendered, however small, for though 
she held the painter's wardrobe and other 
effects in gage, she had weighty misgivings as 
to how far their intrinsic value would be use- 
ful towards defraying her debt. She waited 
very long for Philip to knock, but Philip did 
not knock, and she lost her temper again, and 
the cats and the children had a bad time of it. 
The Painter looked vengefully at the closed 
door, and then at the unchanged guinea in his 
hand. It was his only true friend ; after all. 
It is, it is indeed, the only one. Money! Put 
it in thy purse; garner it up ; throttle thy 
brother, sell thy country, thy friends, to get it ; 
but get it. Rem, rem, quocunque modo, rem. 
Body of Bacchus ! what poor, naked, starveling, 
forked rogues all these ermined, velveted, 
broadclothed thanes and prosperous gentlemen 
would be but for this guinea ! Strive for it ; 
fight for it ; bite and tear for it ; cringe for it ; 
beg for it ; stand on your head for it . but 



SEEKING FORTUNE. , t 

get it. It will wash the blackamoor white, 
and purify Lady Macbeth's hand. It will buy 
you a marble monument, with a Latin inscrip- 
tion by a Fellow of Trinity, accusing you of 
all the virtues under the sun. It will cure the 
leprosy. It is the only true thing under the 
sun. And this counsel, I know, is destruction, 
and he who follows it will probably end at the 
gallows ; but how'many thousands of wise men 
are there who hold this tenet in their hearts, 
if they declare it not with their voices ? And 
who am I, that I should controvert the 
implied philosophy of untold ages? So stick 
to the guinea, my son, and be happy . if you 
can. 

"Come," cried the Painter, "a guinea isn't 
such a very strong sword to open the world's 
oyster with; but I'll do my best. I'il go and 
see if old Mac Mull will give me anything for 
the picture; and if he won't, I'll buy a spare 
shirt and a pair of socks, and walk to London." 

It was but a tiny little morsel of a cabinet 
picture, slightly but prettily painted, in the 
intervals of daubing huge flats and act-drops 



78 THE EADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

with size and whitewash and double-tie bushes. 
Men often accused Philip Leslie of laziness, 
and even hinted at incapacity, because he did 
not paint more, and better, and larger oil 
pictures. How was the poor fellow to paint 
them, without models, frequently without 
sufficient colours and media? Napoleon 
Bonaparte, 'tis said, in an early stage of his 
career, could not accept an appointment in 
India for want of a pair of boots. Philip Leslie 
had been prevented from sending a picture to 
the last exhibition of the Liverpool Academy 
for want of two pennyworth of turpentine. 
The one was kept at home to become, in time, 
an Emperor and King ; whether the other was 
reserved from being a provincial exhibitor to 
become a Eoyal xlcademician remains yet to be 
seen. 

As it was, Mr. MacMull, of Church Street, 
would have nothing whatever to do with the 
11 Cottage-door." He would not buy it; he saw 
no chance of selling it; he refused uncon- 
ditionally to lend money on it. The market 
was overstocked, Mr. MacMull said; so with a 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 79 

heavy heart, Philip took his little picture away 
from the unprofitable mart ; and, having pur- 
chased some trifling articles for the toilette at 
a cheap hosier's close by, tied picture and all 
up in a handkerchief, slung the bundle over 
his shoulder on a short stick, and in broad 
noon -day, set out from Liverpool to walk to 
London, there to seek his fortune. 

It was no good visiting the Fontenoy-street 
Theatre, even to bid adieu to the corpa 
dramatique. The manager was hopelessly 
bankrupt; the company was in a state of 
chronic revolt, and many were on the verge 
of starvation . the only member of the 
histrionic body who fed well being the low 
comedian, who lodged at a butcher's shop, 
inade love to the butcher's daughter, and was 
by her succoured with surreptitious beefsteaks, 
though he lived in perpetual dread (for the 
butcher was a stern man) of the paternal in- 
dignation, and the paternal chopper. It is, 
however, with marrowbones, I believe, that 
butchers ordinarily correct their disobedient 
daughters. 



80 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Two hundred and ten miles to London ! . 
scorching summer-time, and but some loose 
silver in the pocket ! A weary walk ! Who 
but those who have been on the Tramp, and 
have gone through the dreadful valley of the 
shadow of dust, know the agonies of pauper- 
ised pedestrianism ? The heart-weariness, that 
keeps pace with the foot- weariness ; the awful 
monotony of eternal hedges, white turnpike 
roads, distressingly-green trees and park- 
gates, within whose refreshing shades the 
miserable tramp may not enter; of farmers 
in chaise carts, milestones, and straggling 
villages, and staring red-brick country towns, 
all as like one another as pea is unto pea? 
And, when there is no oasis of comfortable 
hotel and succulent repast in the Sahara 
Desert of toe-travel . when the purse is de- 
plenished, the shelter rude, the food scanty, 
or altogether wanting ; and when . above all 
. when the goal is uncertain, and there is no 
anchor of hope hanging to the digits of the 
sign-posts, then does pedestrianism become, 
not a relaxation, but a level treadmill; then 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 81 

does the weary pilgrim . "remote, unfriended, 
melancholy, slow" . long even to meet a 
" lena affamata" a gaunt lioness, or a spotted 
leopard, a Giant Despair, where it is to be 
devoured by him ; long even to find a Slough 
of Despond by the wayside, that he, the tra- 
veller might cast himself into it and be at 
rest. 

Two hundred and ten miles to London; 
and a day nearly consumed in toiling out the 
first ten! Dusty tramps, travel-stained tin- 
kers, slatternly women, imbecile sheep, morose 
pigs, absorbed cows, phlegmatic horses, rattling 
stage-coaches, lumbering waggons and market- 
carts, semi-barbarous children, labourers too 
tired to talk, ale-wives clamorous for cash 
before resigning the cooling mug into the 
eager hands of the " thirsty soul," and shrilly 
repeating that "poor trust was dead;" gipsies 
sometimes abusive and sometimes simply re- 
pulsive in their whining importunities, or 
insidious proposals to open sibylline books in 
travel stained palms; farmers, and farmers' 
wives, too proud in the high estate of their 

VOL. II. G 



82 THE BADD1XGT0X PEERAGE. 

legging chaise-carts to notice the walking wav- 
farer: these were Philip Leslie's travelling 
companions. And the shillings from the 
guinea melted away like wax before the fire ; 
and Time seemed to have dumb-bells tied 
beneath his wings, so slowly did he fly from 
milestone to milestone. 

Two hundred and ten miles to London; 
but the monotonous tale of daily miles had 
been exhausted, recommenced and exhausted 
again, time after time. Four days and nights 
(the latter passed, some in friendly hayricks, 
and some on hard cottage pallets) had elapsed, 
and nearly one hundred miles had been wiped 
off from the tremendous distance-score arrayed 
against Philip Leslie. 

It was nearly the dusk of the evening, as he 
toiled along a high embankment by the weary 
wayside; the eventide, entre chien et hup . 
" between dog and wolf" . as the French pea- 
sants characterised the mysterious season of 
twilight. The Painter was full of thought, 
deep sunk in memories of days that were dead, 
but whose ghosts came now to haunt him. 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 83 

One hundred and ten miles to London ! 
Should he ever, he wondered, reach London 
at all? 

He heard the rattle of wheels behind him. 

He did not heed much . it was a stage 
coach, probably, he thought: the sound the 
rattle, was too rapid for a waggon. Yet it was 
too light for the " Liverpool Wonder," or the 
Manchester " Highflyer," too. He raised his 
head, which had been bent clodwards, and 
with a languid curiosity, looked at the vehicle, 
which, from the louder rattle he knew now 
must be immediately in his rear. 

It turned out to be a yellow post-chaise, and 
it whirled by him at the utmost speed of the 
horses, scattering the evening dust, and con- 
founding the evening birds, which flew aloft, 
and wheeled about the disturbing equipage in 
screaming tumult. 

There was nothing so particularly deserving 
of notice in the sudden apparition of a post- 
chaise, burning the King's Highway at dusk, 
and at full speed. It might have been a 
young couple running away from their parents, 



84 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

or a merchant running away from his creditors, 
or a lawyer hunting a rich client, or a doctor 
hastening to a rich patient, and determined to 
be in at the death. 

But there was this remarkable in the 
rattling carriage, that as it gained on Philip 
Leslie, reached him, passed him, and left him 
far behind, there came upon him with light- 
ning rapidity, the panorama of a post-chaise 
window, and that at the Yvindow, leaning out, 
and gazing at him, as he thought, with eager 
interest, there was the face of Manuelita the 
dancer, niece of Juan Manuel Harispe, who 
kept the Fonda, and was addicted to the use 
of the Knife. 

There could be no mistaking about the girl's 
face. Philip saw it plainly, distinctly, though 
only for a moment, with its pretty hair and 
large clear wistful eyes. But he was not so 
certain as to Manuelita's companion, and could 
not, for the life of him, discern who that 
muffled figure was that sate back in the chaise, 
and had on a cap with somewhat of an undress 
military appearance about it. 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 85 

Two hundred and ten miles to London: 
(one century of the sum abolished) nine days' 
and nine nights' worth of life . sand poured 
from the upper into the lower cone of the 
hour-glass, and the journey was over, and 
Philip Leslie was, for the first time in his life, 
in Babylon the Great . in London, with one 
and-eight pence in his pocket, and the " Cot- 
tage-door" as a reserve, for personal property. 

He had come into London by Pinner, 
Edgeware, Kilburn, and Paddington, and was 
so ignorant of the conditio uivendi of the town, 
that he imagined that he could form no better 
first -sight acquaintance with London than by 
walking to London Bridge ; so toiling through 
the town, amazed and almost stupified at its 
vastness, down' Holborn, up Newgate Street, 
up Cheapside. he found himself upon that 
bridge of Size . the " Sighs" belong to 
Waterloo. 

Half an hour's wandering convinced him, 
that though he was now face to face with the 
great, rampant, sweltering life of London : it 
was not that phase of metropolitan existence 



86 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

which he desiderated. For the poor fellow, 
drowning in the great sea of poverty, was 
clutching desperately at that last straw of 
salvation, the " Cottage-door," and he looked 
anxiously up and down all the streets in the 
vicinity of the bridge in the endeavour to find 
a picture-dealer to whom he might sell his 
canvas-treasure, even for a few shillings. 

Picture-dealers on London Bridge, among 
lighters, panting steamers, wharves, colliers, 
high chimneys, barges and hay-boats ! Picture 
dealers in swarming Thames Street, anions: 
sugar-casks, brewers' drays, piles of dried 
sprats, mounds of kippered salmon and kegs 
of whiskey ! Picture-dealers in High Street, 
Borough, or in Tooley Street, among hop 
factors and marine slop-sellers ! He found, 
indeed, one peripatetic dealer in works of art 
in King William Street, who had two staring 
landscapes in tawdry sham-gilt frames slung 
over his shoulders, one in front and one 
behind; but he sold and did not buy pictures; 
and a glance at his coarsely-daubed wares 
gave Leslie anything but a favourable impres- 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 87 

sion of the state of artistic taste in London. 
There was a real picture-dealer's shop, too, in 
the street of William the King . a street then 
new, and considered very palatial ; into which 
shop, with many misgivings, the Painter 
entered; but the proprietor, a fat gentleman 
of the Jewish dissuasion, wearing a profusion 
of jewellery, dealt in cigars and Turkish pipes 
as well as pictures, and shook his head very 
ominously when Philip tendered the " Cottage- 
door" for sale. Although if what Philip had 
to sell had suited his market he would have 
bought it, as he would have bought a cashmere 
shawl, an ourang outang, a cargo of carbonate 
of soda, or the Koh-i-noor diamond. 

" Vatchyeaschk ;" inquired the proprietor. 

Philip, managing to comprehend that the 
Hebrew gentleman wanted to know what he 
asked for his picture, hesitatingly suggested 
two pounds ten shillings. 

"Itsh vay theep, vay theep indeed, ma 
tear," said the proprietor (who must have been 
quite fresh from Judea, so rich and mellifluous 
was his talmudical brogue) ; im itsh a peautiful 



88 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

pictures . peautiful ! But it ishn't in ma line, 
ma tear." 

Philip bungled out the expression of a lame 
hope that he might find it in his line; but the 
proprietor shook his head again. 

"You're from the country, eh?" he asked. 

Philip was from the country. 

" xSow, don't ye vant some prime Havan- 
nah thigars, now?' asked the dealer, with a 
bland smile and an insinuating manner; 
" they're real cabannash . peautiful thigars . 
and t/w theep !" 

Philip despairingly explained that he was 
lost in London ; that he was almost destitute ; 
that his only chance of succour was in the sale 
of his picture. The dealer was like the ma- 
jority of his co-religionists, a civil fellow, and 
willing to do any one a service . that didn't 
cost him anything. He didn't buy Philip 
Leslie's picture ; but he told him he had better 
u try Y ardour Street, " where there were "lotth 
of dealerth," who would give him at least 
something for his "Cottage-door." And so, 
wandering afresh, and wandering, wandering, 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 89 

wandering . now forgetting the topographical 
directions given to him by the courteous 
Israelite . now taking wrong turnings . now 
mis-directed. now gaining the right road for 
a moment, and then losing it again . the 
Painter came at last into Oxford Street . ;- stony- 
hearted step-mother" . and so at last into that 
famous repository, of things out of date . . 
Wardour Street. 

The Rag Fair of Art, as the mouldy tho- 
roughfare may be called, was in its glory then ; 
and Philip was quite bewildered by the num- 
ber of old curiosity shops and picture -dealers, 
and by the miscellaneous nature of their 
contents. It seemed as though all Vanity 
Fair had been sold up the day before yester- 
day, and the oclds-and-ends of the auction had 
been transported here, en masse. He entered 
one establishment, at last, hap-hazard, attracted 
by the preponderance of pictures in its win- 
dows over the heterogeneous masses of furni- 
ture, armour, old china, and other bric-a-brac 
which crowded the neighbouring shops. 

He was not, at the best of times, a very 



90 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

pushing or importunate fellow, and he stood 
at least ten minutes in a remote corner of the 
warehouse, unnoticed, silent, and abashed, not 
so much by the presence of the well-to-do 
Wardour Street tradesman, as by that of a 
lady . young, beautiful, and richly dressed, 
who was closely examining a picture, and to 
whom he conjectured a carriage at the door, 
with footmen in handsome liveries, must 
belong. 

Pending the condescension of the proprietor 
of the repository to ascertain the object of his 
visit, he employed himself in taking a survey 
of the shop itself. He was an artist, and 
loved art for its own sake ; but the course of 
his love, true as it was, had hitherto run 
anything but smoothly. His lines had been 
cast in the most unpleasant places; and the 
mistress he adored had been of the coyest, 
the cruellest, and the most capricious. She 
had been to him even as the odalisque of 
some haughty Eastern pacha to a despised 
Feringhee : kept in strict seclusion; and the 
stray glimpses he had been enabled to catch 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 91 

of her beauty, and the furtive touches he had 
been permitted to enjoy of her hand, had been 
through a harem-lattice, or as the lumbering 
araba, jealously screened with curtains, only 
from time to time slowly averted, had borne 
her to her caique, or to the valley of Sweet 
Waters, or as, enveloped in yashmak and 
shinty an, she had perambulated the dusky 
avenues of the Bezesteen, or threaded the 
mazy avenues of Stamboul on her way to the 
bath. Pardon the metaphor, for it has a 
foundation in truth. Of all fair women, Art 
is the most difficult of access. How many 
know her only through soiled prints peered at 
through shop- windows, or through cracked 
plaster-casts exhibited among pots and kettles 
at second-hand stalls? Yet these pauper 
devotees, these modest admirers, who, like 
the Fahnenwacht, dare not name the lady of 
their love, but only hope their love will be 
requited, have as heartfelt an adoration for 
the enshrined beautiful, as those who sigh in 
golden boudoirs, and pour out their vows 
beneath silken canopies. 



92 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

The show in the Wardour Street merchant's 
repository, to those accustomed to wander 
through the museums of kings and the gal- 
leries of peers, rich in art-treasures which 
money could scarcely buy, and which money 
would never replace, might not have proved 
either a very rich or a very interesting one; 
but to Philip Leslie, who, in his wandering 
life, had only met with Art by the wayside, 
and Art in a garbled, translated form, the 
picture-dealer's store seemed a galaxy of pic- 
torial splendour, which amazed, and dazzled, 
and delighted him. He had never seen so 
many or such good pictures collected together 
at one time. To him the master-pieces of the 
departed great ones of the easel seemed to be 
here. He took all the pictures cheerfully for 
granted as genuine. Yonder portrait must 
be a Reynolds, yonder sea-piece a Vandevelde ; 
this Dutch fete a genuine Teniers, that smirk- 
ing pastel an undoubted Greuze; the moun- 
tain-pass, to the right, bore unmistakably the 
touch of Salvator, the cows were all by Cuyp, 
the pigs by Morland, the goats by Karl du 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 93 

Jardin, the birch-brooms by Mieris, the water- 
falls by Wilson, the nymphs by Etty, the 
sombre, capuchined monks by Zurbaran, the 
noble Spanish cavaliers by Velasquez, the 
churches by Stein wyck, the dogs and wild 
boars by Snyders, the beggars by Murillo, the 
jolly Flemish burghers carousing by Jordaens, 
the young damsels with stiff necks by Guido, 
the fauns and satyrs by Poussin, the rabbis 
by Rembrandt, and the milk-and-water Ma- 
donne with their bambine by Rafaelle. Poor 
Philip Leslie! He knew not the secrets of 
Wardour Street yet. He knew not that Art 
is as much a manufacture as Birmingham 
halfpence or Manchester madapollams. Guilt- 
less of Art-deception himself, he suspected 
not that fraud might be practised by others. 
So the neophyte, worshipping on the threshold 
of the temple, in fervent devotion, dreams not 
that the high priest is a mountebank and a 
cheat . that the oracle is a sham, the worship 
a juggle, the haruspices tricks done by con- 
jurors to deceive fools. 

He had no eyes for anything save the pic- 



94 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tures in their massive frames, which lined the 
walls, or were arranged on shelves, on either 
side of the shop. Yet there were many more 
objects, had he been archseologically, instead 
of exclusively artistically biassed, to have 
attracted his attention. Old carved chests, 
chairs, tables, prie-dieus, reredos, screens, 
lecterns, rood-screens, and fragments of Eliza- 
bethan columns and mediaeval door-panels; 
ancient armour, in which the rust struggled 
with the rich niello work of gold and silver; 
ancient weapons . halberts, habergeons, poig- 
narcls, maces, arbalestes, Indian sceptres, 
Caraibe tomahawks, Persian tulwars, and 
Australian boomerangs; rapiers, arquebuses, 
inlaid pistols, damascened sabres and Albanian 
yataghans ; old tapestry, old China bowls and 
tea-services; old looking glasses with China 
frames, old porcelain monsters, and shepherds 
and shepherdesses; buhl clocks and cabinets; 
Louis Quinze " gueridons" couches covered 
with Utrecht velvet; steel mirrors, carved 
ivory chessmen, mosaic slabs, Bacchantes, 
Murrhine vases, and Nereids in bronze; old 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 95 

point-lace, dogs in terra cotta, caskets in tor- 
toiseshell and alabaster, and mother of pearl 
and malachite; antique brooches, and signet 
gems from Pompeii; enamels, intaglios, Egyp- 
tian clear bottles, ostrich plumes, warriors' 
shields, ladies' fans of chicken-skin, morions, 
gauntlets, brocade petticoats, high-heeled 
shoes, jewelled snuff-boxes, and chocolate 
cups of pate tendre; illuminated missals, fald- 
stools, candelabra, Indian peggalls, Canton 
lanterns, Moorish slippers, Bohemian glass, 
porphyry patera?, gilt consoles, Dutch pugs in 
Dresden china, Majolica and Palissy ware, 
clouded canes, card cases, patens, rosaries, 
fragments of stained glass, Saxon drinking 
horns, hour-glasses, "vinegar" bibles, Ja- 
panese lacquer-work, antique horologes; Crom- 
wellian buffcoats, Highland dirks, sporans, 
and Cairngorms; astrolabes and miniature 
sun-dials; Irish bog-oak ornaments, fillagree 
baskets, embroidered purses, Persian minia- 
tures, Chinese concentric balls, New Zealand 
canoe-heads, Cingalese pearl and shell-work, 
and diminutive deities in painted and gilded 
clay. 



96 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

When I say he had no eyes for these, I 
am right. He let them pass as mere uphol- 
stery ; but were I to say that he had no eyes 
for anything save the pictures, I am to a 
certain extent in error. He had eyes for one 
other object . the beautiful young lady who 
was talking to the dealer . though, even for 
that matter, k might have been said that she 
was a picture too, and I should be right 
again. 

u You ask a great deal too much for this 
landscape, Mr. Undervamp," she said, with a 
pretty toss of her head. " Five guineas would 
be quite sufficient for such a mere sketch." 

The merchant was glibly pouring out min- 
gled excuses and protestations that the picture 
had cost him all the money . within a few 
shillings . which he demanded for it; that he 
really did not know whether he should not be 
a loser by the bargain, that the work was ex- 
ceedingly cheap, etcetera, etcetera; but his 
fair customer, not heeding his verbiage, it 
seemed, much, swept past him to the window, 
and holding the picture to the light, declared 



SEEKING FORTUNE. 97 

that live guineas were a great deal too much 
for it ; and that it was not worth more than 
three, at the utmost. Beautiful as she was, 
the lady was evidently expert at making a 
bargain. 

As for the bargainer, if I am to continue 
the quotation of art prices, she was worth any 
number of thousand golden guineas, at the 
very least. So, at all events, thought Philip 
Leslie. 



VuL. II. 



98 



CHAP. XXIII. 

HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 

T ET him stand forth who declares that 
beauty unadorned is adorned the most, 
Let him declare it, and I will answer him y 
and tell him that he is a ninny. I grant the 
u Venus" of Milo, the " Venuses" of Cor- 
reggio and Titian. I grant the statue that 
stands in the Pitti Palace in Florence, and so 
standing i4 enchants the world." But the 
beauty of these fair ones is ideal ; and ideality 
clothes them as with a rich garment. The 
beauty of flesh and blood and civilised life 
cannot be so idealised; it would be contra 
bonos mores were it to be so. Not only must 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 99 

it have a toilette, but it must be of the very- 
best . the richest in material that the looms 
of Spitalfields, or Lyons, or Broussa, can send 
out, the most tasteful in fashion that Mes- 
dames Vouillon and Laure (are they Court 
modistes yet, I wonder?) can devise. Amina 
in her simple skirt or bodice, or simpler robe 
of white, is all very well; but when, on her 
marriage with Elvino, the Count Rudolfo, in 
order to make bygones thoroughly bygones, 
comes down with that generous dowry, I will 
wager my dukedom to the good will of a 
street-crossing, that the bride will appear in a 
costume that shall astonish all the lads and 
lasses of the village (or gentlemen and ladies 
of the opera chorus), in its mirobolant varie- 
gations, and make Lisa ready to cry her eyes 
out with envy. I have a tenderness for my 
Xorah Creina dear . my gentle, bashful Norah 
Creina, and for sweet Jenny Wren, who, 
previous to her marriage with Cockrobin (in 
the nursery ballad), promised that red-waist- 
coated swain that she should " wear her 
brown gown and never dress too tine;" but I 



100 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

infinitely prefer Lesbia, the superb . Lesbia. 
who has not only a beaming eye, but a robe 
of silk, and who knows how to flash the one, 
and rustle the other. 

The young lady who had thought five 
guineas two large a sum for Mr. Under- 
vamp's pictorial merchandise, did not appear 
to have passed more than eighteen years in 
this sublunary sphere. In some remote 
planet, she must, Philip thought, have lived 
some thousand years rather as an angel, a 
houri, a sylph, before she had charitably 
visited the dull earth to rain a sunshine of 
beauty on it. She was very fair. Philip 
saw that, with a pang that he felt with 
pleasure, and yet, lying to himself, called 
pain. What business was it of his whether 
she was dark or fair ? and why should he, a 
fair man, have been better or worse pleased 
if she had been a dark woman? She had 
such an abundance of golden hair that any 
attempt to band it, braid it, curl it, twist it, 
force it violently off the temples in the 
manner called in my youthful days " scrag 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 101 

fashion," invented by the Chinese, and to be 
naturalised in Europe by the pretty Empress 
Eugenie, would, she seemed to acknowledge/ 
have been quite useless; so she let the hair 
have its own rebellious way, and it wandered 
at will beneath her bonnet, and formed a 
golden nimbus round her face. Then she 
had a brow, not of marble by any means . 
marble is corpse-like ; not alabaster . alabaster 
is waxy ; not ivory . ivory is milk-and- watery ; 
but a brow of flesh and blood, the most beau- 
tiful a woman could have . high, broad, snow 
white, but voile with the most delicate tint of 
rose, just as is a ball dress of pure white, with 
an almost imperceptible "slip" of pink gauze 
beneath. Her forehead was a beautiful moun- 
tain; and at the delicate declivities of her 
temples tiny blue veins mapped themselves 
out modestly, like nascent rivers, growing as 
they descended into the happy valleys be- 
neath. Her eyes were not blue . deep, ultra- 
marine blue, as Philip had hoped, and the 
discovery of his error caused him to be an- 
gered for a moment . but very large, dark, 



102 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

earnest, gray orbs, with lashes that drooped 
like the fringes of a baldaquin over a cata- 
falque . mournful eyes, that made you sigh . 
dreamy eyes, that made you wonder . stern 
eyes, sometimes, that made you tremble. 
What care I if the rosy blush on her cheek 
were due to rouge, if the arches of her eye- 
brows had been cunningly pencilled, if the 
rubies of her lips had received the last lapi- 
dary's polish from the hands of a subtle 
abigail ? I was not . Philip had not been . 
at her dressing-table to see; and what the 
eye had not seen, the heart had no need to 
grieve at. Her eyes were not painted (I 
have heard that the Eastern ladies can and do 
paint them) ; her hair, her teeth, her dimpled 
chin; her tiny ears, with their small lobes 
quivering almost to pain beneath the weight 
of the massive ear-rings, but resigned to their 
fate, as if knowing that in order to be beau- 
tiful we must suffer; her slender neck, rising 
and falling beneath the yoke of a jewelled 
collerette (for necklaces had not quite gone 
out of fashion two-and-twenty years ago) . 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 103 

surely these things were not due to art. She 
could scarcely have put her hands into lemon- 
squeezers to make them small, or called in a 
Chinese pedicure to diminish her feet . her 
feet, pshaw ! the little Cinderella's shoes would 
have been a world too wide for them. What 
care I . what cared Philip . if she were tight- 
laced? if her handkerchief were redolent with 
one perfume, her robe with another, her 
mantle with a third ? These things must be, 
Pyrrha must not bind her golden hair with 
penny-twine, but a riband of Tyrian dye ; the 
gracilis puer must not be scented with Caven- 
dish, but with Frangipani and Wood- violet. To 
my mind, your satirists and humourists . carne- 
fices of dandyism, whipsters of the follies of 
the age . make too much, and a monstrous 
pother about the little tricks and whim- 
whams that Beauty delights to enhance her 
charms withal. We want the Effect, and the 
effect is there . grand, glorious, transcendant, 
and refulgent ; and what does it matter to us 
how the effect has been produced, and how 
much pretty chicanery and coquettish fraud 



104 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

there may be in it? We are not all going to 
marry Beauty; and he who does is either a 
philosopher or a fool, and in either case will 
do well to hold his tongue about the mys- 
teries of Beauty's toilet-table. "The Shep- 
herd in Virgil grew acquainted with love, 
and found him a native of the rocks, &c, &c." 
If you happen to contract a matrimonial 
alliance with the Honourable Miss de Grey 
Malkyn, and she turns out to be a cat, pur 
sang, ere the honeymoon be four-and-twenty 
hours old, buy her the best of Houbigant's 
mauve kid gloves, and the most expensive of 
point-lace lappets to hide her claws and her 
whiskers withal. If she mews, maintain it is 
a cabaletto from the " Traviata;" if she swears, 
insist that the caterwauling is in the exact 
manner of Mademoiselle Piccolomini. At 
home, you may keep her to her mousing, and 
shoe her with walnut shells if you like. 

As to the lady's dress . but, shade of 
Diana ! what have I to do with, and how can 
I describe a lady's dress ? As well could I 
give a description of the mountains in the 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 105 

moon. To me it is always the same ad- 
mirable extravaganza . to be wondered at 
but not comprehended . this toilette, this sal- 
magundi of rags, tags, bobbins, odds, ends, 
skirts, flounces, flying buttresses of lace, 
towers, campaniles, ogee ornaments, glitter- 
ing baubles, and chain suspension-bridges of 
precious metals. I look at it as I do upon 
one of Mr. William Beverley's culminating 
tableaux in a burlesque. I don't know why 
the young ladies of the ballet should rise 
from the capitals of columns, and form living 
friezes to fairy palaces. I have not the 
slightest notion why the red, blue, and green 
fires should wind up the proceedings in a 
culmination of preternatural splendour; but 
I am delighted with the whole of the gor- 
geous spectacle, and shout as loudly as any 
one, when Mr. Beverley is called for and 
walks across the stage, and after him Mr. 
Roxby, and after him Mr. E. T. Smith. So 
it is with a lady's dress. What it is all 
about, I don't know. How it is put on, and 
how it comes off, are to me mysteries; but 



106 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

I admire and adore it as the shrine of my 
Beloved, and I bow down before it as I would 
have done to Phryne, to Diane de Poitiers, 
to Lady Mary Wortley Montague, before 
she took to painting and left off washing, 
to Molly Lepell and the beautiful Gunnings, 
to Victoria Colonna or Louise de la Valliere, 
to the Duchess of Devonshire, and as I bow 
down now before the adored one of my heart 
who lives in Hyde Park Gardens, and does'nt 
even know of my existence. I am not quite 
sure that I am aware of hers, like the misan- 
thrope who said he thought that he had 
one friend in the world, and when he could re- 
member his name he would write to him. 
However, Hyde Park is a better address than 
Hackney. 

The upshot of all this was, that Philip Leslie 
had been staring at the lady of the picture for 
as long a period as she continued examining 
narrowly . for ladies do not stare. that work 
of art. It so fell out that the young lady, 
of course by chance, raised her eyes at the 
very moment that Philip had his orbs of 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 107 

most earnestly fixed upon her. The painter 
blushed bright crimson, and for the moment 
would have bartered all his future chances of 
fame and fortune, whatever they may have 
been, and visionary as they were, for the tem- 
porary loan of one of Mr. Undervamp's cross- 
barred morions wherein to hide his abashed 
head. The lady did not change colour in the 
slightest degree : how should she . rich, beau- 
tiful, and superb . at the gaze of this man for- 
lorn, and all but tattered and torn ? She simply , 
with the rapid motion of one tiny hand, brought 
a flimsy screen over her face, a mere pretext for 
a veil, on whose cobwebby reticulations silver 
sprigs sparkled; and gently subsiding, with 
an etherial rustle of drapery, into a great, 
carved, antique fauteuil, shrouded herself 
from the painter's gaze, half among some 
antique tapestry, half in the increasing twi- 
light, which began to make the strange old 
furniture of the shop cast dark and mys- 
terious shadows. But, even through the 
obscurity, Philip Leslie felt, if he could not 
see, those earnest gray eyes fixed upon hira 



108 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

with a mournful sternness; and though he 
had done nothing worse than stare at a 
pretty woman, he trembled as though he had 
done a g uilty thing. 

It occurred to Mr. Undervamp too, at pre- 
cisely the same moment, to turn his eyes 
towards the stranger. Mr. Undervamp had 
no beauty with which to entrance, no gray 
eyes (he had but one, indeed, and that of a 
gooseberry hue, in all) with which to awe; 
but he had a loud harsh voice to ask the 
stranger what he wanted, and he made good 
use of it, by asking him accordingly. 

The " Cottage-door" was for sale; would 
Mr. Undervamp buy it ? He would sell it very 
cheap. It was the same mournful litany over 
again, with this addition, that every word that 
Philip said seemed wrung out of him by the 
most exquisite tortures of the Inquisition, and 
that he mentally combated a burning desire to 
break the " Cottage-door " over Mr. Under- 
vamp's head, snatch one embrace from the 
veiled lady, and then either make away with 
himself with one of the damascened poniards, 
or give himself up at once to the police. 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 109 

Mr. Undervamp's idee fixe would probably, 
had his inmost thoughts been analysed, have 
been to kick Philip Leslie out of the shop. 
His spoken answer left very little indeed to 
be desired on the score of plainness ; he simply 
said, " No ; don't want it," and glancing dis- 
dainfully at the painter's worn and travel- 
stained attire, extended his hand towards the 
door. 

Philip Leslie bit his lip nearly till it bled, 
took back his picture, and moved towards the 
gestured portal. The background of hope's 
anchor-foundry faded away, and in its stead 
there came a set-scene of a river under a 
bridge . a river that mirrored the gas-lamps 
on the parapet above, and in whose water 
something heavy, falling through the dark- 
ness, splashed. 

Somebody had been walking by Philip's 
side all through that dreadful two hundred 
and ten-miles pilgrimage . somebody who car- 
ried a stake through his body in lieu of a 
walking-stick . somebody who had an unac- 
countable propensity for loitering at the con- 



110 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

fluence of cross roads; who ever and anon 
whispered to the wanderer : " You are one 
too many j you are indeed. It's all over in a 
moment. Most respectable people have done 
it before. Consider the late Cato, the eminent 
Lucius Junius Brutus, the immortal Castle- 
reagh. Have a dip in the lucky-bag. Don't 
go to London. Come with me to Necropolis. 
It's close by. It isn't very painful. Why 
starve ? Why live ?" 

" Stay : show me the young man's picture, 
Mr. Undervamp." 

The speaker was the lady in the veil. She 
took the young man's picture from the dealer 
without any sign of acknowledgment, rose 
from her chair, walked again to the window, 
and examined it more narrowly than she had 
done the dealer's goods. Philip could have 
fallen down and worshipped her. He could 
have told her, in impassioned accents, that he 
would slave for her night and days and for 
years ; but his tongue clave, to the roof of his 
mouth, and he stood stock-still, and said no- 
thing. He was better dumb. It would have 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. Ill 

been an unwarrantable breach of etiquette to 
have so given vent to the thoughts in his 
heart. 

" Let him call to-morrow at one; mean- 
while I will take away this picture, and look 
at it by a stronger light. You can let him 
have some money if he wants it : he looks as 
if he did." 

She handed a card to the dealer, who, bow- 
ing low, received it. She was not looking at 
Philip now. In that clear, ringing, silvery 
voice of hers, her words sounded so disdain- 
fully contemptuous that the blood rushed to 
the painter's heart, back again and again, and 
he drew himself forward, extending his trem- 
bling hands. 

" Madam, I will take the picture myself; I 
am not accustomed . " 

u You had better," the calm, ringing voice 
interposed; and Philip knew that the eyes 
were fixed on him again. 

He slunk back like a beaten hound; and, 
with her brave drapery all rustling, she swept 
out, beautiful, haughty, scornful, and with 



112 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

his picture in her hand, to her carriage. Mr. 
Undervamp had bowed her out ; the powdered 
menial had bowed her in ; the steps had been 
put up, and the carriage had rattled away, 
and still Philip Leslie stood with his hands 
extended. 

u Well, young man," Mr. Undervamp said 
at last, giving him a sharp pat on the arm, to 
awaken him from his reverie, " you've done it 
at last, and no mistake." 

" Done what?" asked Philip. 

" Why, got an out-and-out good customer, 
to be sure. She paints like an angel, and 
buys pictures of me like a born lady, as she 
is. Mad after pictures, I think," he added 
sotto voce. " There's the card, and mind 
you're there at one o'clock, sharp; for if 
you're five minutes too early, or five minutes 
too late, you'll just get shown to the door for 
your pains." 

Leslie took the card, almost mechanically, 
and read its inscription. 

" Viscountess Baddington, 

14, Curzon Street, May Fair." 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 113 

" Is . is she married?" faltered the painter. 

,; Married ! ay, to be sure she is, and a pre- 
cious old sinner that " . He checked himself 
suddenly, and continued, " But this isn't 
business : mind you're there at the time, that's 
all. And now, as I'm going to shut up, I'll 
say good evening, and wish you luck ; I dare 
say she'll stand a fiver for the picture." 

Philip hesitated, though sorely against his 
will. 

" I. I. I thought," he said, " that the lady 
left word that I might have some money, if, 
as she very considerately remarked, I wanted 
it, and I do want it terribly." 

" Oh, ah, yes," Mr. Undervamp acquiesced 
with anything but a financial readiness of 
speech. " I believe she did mention some- 
thing of the sort. Perhaps you'll look in 
to-morrow, eh? We're shutting up, you see. 
Money's so scarce." 

Mr. Undervamp left to the imagination of 
his hearer to realise the somewhat vague con- 
nection between the scarcity of money and 

VOL. II. I 



114 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the bolting and barring of his strong iron 
shutters. 

" It's so scarce," Philip retorted impa- 
tiently, "that I think I had better look in 
to-night; or else I shall be obliged to look in 
at a baker's shop- window and take a loaf 
from it." 

Mr. Undervamp looked at the Viscountess 
Baddington's protege with a grimly-irresolute 
air. He evidently did not dare to disobey 
the instructions of his aristocratic customer; 
but be as evidently disliked parting with any 
ready money to this unknown and dilapidated 
petitioner. He screwed up his face, however, 
at last, with the expression of one who is 
compelled to do a thing much against the 
grain, and said: 

" I suppose a crown will do ?" 

" Anything will do," muttered Philip. 

" Well, then," the picture dealer continued, 
"you may as well just give me a bit of an 
I U for it, and . " he seemed loth to part 
even with these miserable five shillings, and 
hailed the prospect of the delay that would 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 115 

accrue while the I U was made out as a 
blessed respite. But just as Philip was about 
to signify his willingness to give the requisite, 
or, in fact, any acknowledgment, the door 
opened, and there appeared on the threshold 
a flunkey. 

" Tall, calm, majestic, haughty . one of the 
caryatides to the Temple of Fashion . one 
who had served so long, and with such dig- 
nity, that extremes met, and servitude might 
almost be mistaken for command. He was 
powdered and middle-aged. He was the Lord 
Viscount Baddington's footman; but he had 
served in many noble families previous to his 
appointment, and his name was John Peter 
Plushley. 

" M' lady ses you're to give the young min 
two suffrins, Mr. Undervamp." 

He spoke, and there was silence. He passed 
out of the shop, and left behind him the odour 
of hair-powder and the sanctity of plush. 

Grumbling to himself, Mr. Undervamp re- 
placed his crown-piece in his pocket, and 
going to a drawer, unlocked it, and produced 
the required coins. Philio wrote a hnsty ac- 



116 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

knowledgment, and with a lighter heart than 
lie had borne in his breast for many a day, 
bade the dealer good night, and stepped briskly 
from the shop. He did not ask him his way, 
for two sovereigns are a pioneer all over Lon- 
don. Hope gleamed again before him, and 
the panorama of the gas-lighted bridge, and 
the cold black river, and the Somebody with 
the stake who had been his travelling com- 
panion from Liverpool, passed away from be- 
fore him like the memory of a dream, though 
like, ofttimes, the dream, it was but a few 
minutes old. But dreams, for all their inco- 
herence, die not, and are registered, and have 
their meanings and their recurrences. 

" I thought,'* soliloquised Mr. Undervamp, 
standing on his door-step, with his hands in 
pockets, and snuffing up the evening fragrance 
of Wardour-street, " that I had one of the 
rummest customers in London in my lady 
Viscountess there : but I think I shall have a 
rummer one in this dusty young sign-painter. 
It wasn't a bad bit of colour, though. Wish 
I'd bought it. My lady would have given me 
a tenner for it." 



HOPE IN THE NIGHT. 117 

He strolled into his shop, and, watching his 
shop-boy put up the shutters, soliloquised 
again, and, as he did so, softly whistled. 

u To think of that old Trojan, Baddington, 
who's been a customer of mine and of father 
before me this forty years, going and bringing 
home a bit of a gal from . where' s the place ? . 
Wisbaden, Baden-Baden . something of that 
sort . as Lady Baddington. British chaplain 
at Baden . ha! humph! I wonder what his 
dear niece, Mrs. Falcon, and the family, think 
of it I wonder what that tearing soldier- 
officer, Captain Falcon, thinks of it, even if 
he's heard of it yet. He owes me two pound 
for a pistol; so does his grand-aunt-in-law. 
for cash advanced. Curious, isn't it? I must 
be early at Christie's to-morrow.'' 

He seemed to apostrophise a rusty man-in- 
armour as he spoke ; but there was no specu- 
lation in the warrior's orbless eyes, and Mr. 
Undervamp whistled again, and went to his 
supper; and afterwards to a select club to 
which he belonged, the u Holbein's Head," in 
Berwick-street, where he " swopped " or bar- 



118 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tered a Gerard Douw (warranted) to little 
Mr. Simmons, of Hanway-yard, for a Claude 
(unframed), a skeleton clock, and a piping 
bullfinch. There was a run upon Gerard 
Douws and Claudes just then; and the picture 
forgers could not manufacture them fast 
enough; so both Undervamp and Simmons 
thought that they had made, each, an excel- 
lent bargain. 



119 



CHAP. XXIV. 

PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 

TT7ITH two sovereigns, the Viscountess 
Baddington's card in his pocket, and a 
light heart in his bosom, Philip Leslie strode 
away from Mr. Undervamp's Wardour-street 
Art -repository, building, as he went, castles in 
the air sufficient to relieve London from the 
stigma of architectural sterility for years. 
Money, it has been said, will heal all diseases. 
I have heard of a gentleman, who, on the 
receipt of a ten-pound note from his god- 
mamma, incontinently recovered from a severe 
attack of rheumatic gout. It is certain that 
it is a sovereign remedy for heart-sickness. 



120 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

soul-weariness, faintness of heart, paralysis of 
will, and nausea of mind. 

Our painter was new to London, and found 
himself cast, a mere cock-boat, upon that mighty 
ocean, for ever boiling and surging, and, in its 
insatiable encroachments, submerging islands 
and continents of suburbs, washing them away 
with brick and mortar surf, and whorls of 
waves that roll and moan the whole night- 
season through. Philip, to use a very common 
simile, was as tired as a dog; yet he was to 
the full as lively as the most weary-footed 
canine traveller, who, in the waste of wan- 
dering, has suddenly come on a fontaine de 
Jouvence, with broken meat laid out on its 
marble brim. To pursue the canine meta- 
phorette, the effect of the two sovereigns, so 
ungraciously and scornfully bestowed on him 
by the lady of the veil, had not been unlike 
that experienced by a dog who has been pelted 
with marrow-bones: the bones hurt him, but 
the marrow fed him. 

He walked about four good hours in that 
city whicli might be paved with gold, but 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 121 

which is assuredly roofed with slabs as hard 
as the nether millstone. He grew more fa- 
tigued at every step; but he did not entertain 
the idea of going to bed . first, because he 
had a lordly uncertainty as to where he should 
sleep (having money) ; secondly, because the 
scene was so new and strange to him, that he 
could not resist walking up and down, and 
going to and fro, in the marvellous streets he 
encountered, always finding out something 
new, something astonishing, something pro- 
digious. There are some men whom nothing 
astonishes, and who, were their grandmother's 
ghost to rise before them, would confme them- 
selves to a yawning expostulation with the 
phantom on the impropriety of appearing in a 
bed-gown ; and would finally ring the bell for 
the housemaid, and bid her show the late 
Mrs. S. the door. But Philip Leslie had a 
reverent and an inquiring spirit. The quali- 
ties are compatible. He was always asking 
questions; but he could be astonished to awe 
at the reply. 

So he went up and down, and before mid- 



122 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

night struck, he had seen Hyde Park Corner 
and Temple Bar. He had passed great club- 
houses with windows lighted up, in whose 
embrasures bald-headed old gentlemen dozed 
over the evening paper, and through whose 
plate-glass panes he could see the sumptuous 
coffee-room dinners laid out, and white waist- 
coated diners sipping their wine with a relish 
which might have been enhanced by the con- 
sciousness, that their club subscription enabled 
them to imbibe the best of Port and Bur- 
gundy at trade-price; past grand mansions, 
where there were balls and routs . for routs 
had not quite gone out of fashion then . 
where the thoroughfare was blocked up with 
carriages, where policemen shouted, and coach- 
men swore, and link-boys darted about almost 
as nimbly as the pickpockets; past theatres, 
whose aristocratic audience came mincingly 
out to their carriages in pink capotes and 
crush hats . whose humbler patrons rushed 
feverishly out (for the night was very hot) 
and dived into oyster-shops, and threw them- 
selves into the consumption of cool beverages 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 123 

with a thirsty frenzy. He straggled down 
Eegent Street, almost blinded with the gas, 
dazzled and delighted with the shops over- 
flowing with rich merchandise, jostled and 
hustled by the crowd of bearded foreigners, 
and shopmen, and milliners' apprentices, just 
released from the thraldom of the shop, all 
delighted at having nothing to do, and doing 
it to their hearts' content. He paced those 
two grand streets, Pall Mall and Waterloo 
Place, whose architectural splendours we 
somewhat too superciliously sneer at, but 
which, to my mind, need but a water, instead 
of a macadamised highway throughout their 
length, to rival Venice's Grand Sea-streets, 
and wake the genius of a new Canaletto. 

He passed an ugly stone post, with an uglier 
bronze figure tottering on its summit, and 
descended a giant staircase into the Park. 
Among the green leaves and the glimmering 
gas-lamps he walked a good half-hour, glad as 
a relief to feel his footsteps fall so noiselessly, 
and enjoying a temporary rest from the roar- 
ing of the carriage-wheel waves. Curiously, 



124 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

too, he peered by times at mysterious figures, 
clad . the light was strong enough to see that 
. in dank and greasy rags, who were huddled 
up on the wooden benches, seemingly asleep. 
The intuitive perception of poverty taught 
Philip who these living bundles were. They 
were destitute, and had no beds. He had 
changed one of his sovereigns, of course, by 
this time, and had dined plainly, but plenti- 
fully, at a great flaring eating-house in Oxford 
Street, where a flabby waiter, who seemed . 
so hot and meaty was he . to transpire pork 
gravy, had babbled out to him a wondrously 
incoherent rhapsody about " Veal-an-am- 
ste wed -duck - roast - aunch -lamb's -fry - salmon - 
very-nice sir," and had slapped down before 
him a repast served in pewter, which, in fla- 
vour, appeared to partake of all the viands he 
had mentioned. 

Philip flung a shilling to one of these for- 
lorn wretches, who received it with a dull 
grunt, as though he had a settled hatred 
against society, which could not be appeased 
by such trifling alms; and appeared to think, 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 125 

moreover, that once without a bed, always 
without a bed, so hiding the coin in some 
crevice of his rags, he huddled himself up, 
hedgehog fashion, and went to sleep again. 
Yet by some mysterious shibboleth of free- 
masonry, the secret of the donor's liberality 
seemed to have been instanteously telegraphed 
all over the Park: for battalions of beggars 
began to debouch from leafy coverts, ragged 
regiments deployed from before the Horse 
Guards; from the very ground, even, there 
seemed to start up breadless and bedless vaga- 
bonds . men in rags, children in rags, babies 
in tatters, octogenarians with no shoes, and 
their piteous jerkins slashed with ellipses of 
bare flesh . and they whined and groaned, and 
anon fled swiftly, as a stalwart form in the 
distance seemed to presage an approaching 
policeman. And worse than all these, came 
floating dismally on the night air . even as 
the shadowy form of Francesca of Rimini 
came floating before the sorrowful sight of 
Dante . dreadful phantoms who should have 
been women, and young and fair; phantoms 



] 26 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

with calico bed-gowns and velvet mantles, with 
rich silk dresses and shawls of tattered linsey- 
wolsey, with bonnets all flying and fluttering 
with tarnished ribbons and broken feathers, 
ghastly and garish, so that they looked like 
death's-heads bedizened in pink and blue 
sarsnet. All these strange and dismal things, 
regarding with a mournful surprise, the painter 
fled the Park; and losing his way in the 
mazes of Westminster, battled for another 
half-hour in a dreadful labyrinth of choked 
streets . narrow, crowded, evil-smelling : Great 
Peter Streets, Rochester Rows, Broadways, 
Tothill Streets, Blue Anchor Yards, Palmer's 
Villages, and streets without names, and alleys 
with no outlets, in the midst of a raging, 
roaring saturnalia of oaths, hot eel-pies, al- 
cohol, cheap butchers' meat, costermongers' 
barrows, fried fish, red neckerchiefs, bare 
necks, bad sixpences, false weights, black eyes, 
naked feet, torn trousers, monstrous cabbages, 
rag-shops, comic songs, farthing rushlights, 
bundles of firewood, the overplus of a four 
days' old "take" of mackerel, sweetstuff, adul- 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 127 

terated beer, stale celery, corduroy jackets, 
vice, ignorance, crime, and want. For in this 
guise looked Westminster twenty-two years 
since; and in that guise it stands now, in the 
shadow of the great Abbey, and in the rent- 
roll of the Dean and Chapter, to bear witness 
against me if I exaggerate. 

We Londoners born, who have seen all 
these things unnumbered times, and come to 
look at them at last with a stale and accus- 
tomed air, cannot help the blunting of our 
perception of these marvellous contrasts. We 
see them every day, and they surprise us no 
longer. But he who is new to this gorgeous 
Gehenna of a city, shall hardly fail to come 
away marvelling and pondering, grieving and 
rejoicing, from the first contemplation of the 
night-wonders of London. 

The Abbey encompassed the painter round 
about for many minutes, till he could extri- 
cate himself from the filthy toils in which he 
had become entangled. He saw the two great 
towers, ever close at hand, so it seemed, yet 
every effort he essayed to make for them only 



128 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

threw him further back into the howling wil- 
derness. He asked a policeman at last where 
he was. 

" You're in Westminster," answered the 
functionary ; " and if you'll take my advice, 
you'll get out of it as soon as ever you can." 

Several gratuitous hustlings which Philip 
had already received from ill-looking passers- 
by, evidently volunteered for the purpose of 
provoking a collision, made him much disposed 
to agree with the conclusions of the guardian 
of the Westminster householders' lives and 
properties. So, at a venture, he asked his 
way to Charing- Gross, which he had read of 
as being centrally situated, and where he 
thought it probable he might obtain a bed. 
Probable, indeed! had he not near forty 
shillings about him? The Tavistock would 
have been proud to receive him, and had he 
been able to have raised a carpet-bag and the 
loan of a clothes-brush, there is no saying 
what aristocratic hotel would not have taken 
him in. 

" First turning to the right, second to the 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 129 

left, then go straight on ," the policeman 

was commencing. 

u It's no good," Philip interposed. " You 
might as well talk Hindostanee to me as tell 
me my way. "Will you show it me?" 

The policeman happened to be a good* 
humoured municipal into whose soul the cal- 
lousness of long night duty on dangerous 
beats had not yet entered, and was, moreover, 
in a peculiarly amiable temper that evening, 
having given evidence in the morning, at the 
Old Bailey, against a resurrection-man, who, 
owing to the decline of that drama, had turned 
coiner, and whose exile to Van Diemen's 
Land he had been instrumental in promoting. 
Z. 92 saw the striped bracelet of a sergeant cy 
in perspective. So he not only conducted 
Philip safely out of the Daedalian penetralia of 
Westminster, but did not leave him till he had 
set him fairly on his way up Whitehall . indi- 
cating with his forefinger Charing Cross, 
" which he might know by the. large 'ouse 
with the lion a top a waggin' of his tail," (a 
humorous policeman this) . and directed him 

VOL, II. K 



130 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

to a coffee-house, where he could have a bed 
for a couple of shillings. " The sheets is well 
aired," he remarked to Philip, as a crowning 
witticism, u and the chambermaid's very 
pretty. She squints; but she's civil, and 
knows her catty chism like cream-cheese." So 
saying, he spun the shilling which Philip 
respectfully tendered him up in the air, in 
the manner of tossing piemen; and nodding 
affably to the painter, hummed the refrain of 
a popular air then in vogue, u All Round my 
Hat," and went on his merry way . a very 
Rabelais of the Z division, jocund in his blue 
broadcloth, and humorous in his oilskin and 
his heavily-soled highlows. And how easy it 
is to make the ways of life pleasant ! 

Philip was far too tired, on his arrival at 
the ha*ven of rest pointed out by the police- 
man, to notice the personal appearance of the 
chambermaid, particularly from the visual 
point of view, or to satisfy himself, by exami- 
nation, as to her theological attainments. He 
went to bed, slept with a dead soundness, was 
called at ten o'clock in the morning, and rose 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 131 

up with a clear head, hopeful, and almost 
happy. 

Punctuality in keeping appointments was 
not one of Philip Leslie's virtues; but when 
he did keep one, he was often an hour before 
his time, and rarely surprised the person he 
had to meet by the exact coincidence of his 
appearance with the time specified. In truth, 
he had an amazing stock of new brooms in his 
moral store cup-board; but they k soon were 
worn down to the stump, or else the confining 
band of withies got loose, and the twigs went 
away anywhere. On the present occasion, 
mindful of Mr. Undervamp's caution of the 
previous night, he provided himself with a 
broom, the newest and strongest at his com- 
mand, sternly determined to sweep the 
slightest speck of dust from off the pavement 
of his good intention. He began by investing 
nearly all his surplus capital in improving the 
condition of his costume, and by the kindly 
assistance of a bath and a barber, and the 
adventitious aid of a Jew tailor, who had so 
far forgotten the wrongs of his nation, and his 



132 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

traditional hatred of the Nazarenes, as to offer 
to all the world his gigantic stock of summer 
garments at ridiculously low prices, he found 
himself, within half-an-hour, looking somewhat 
more like an artist, though still sufficiently 
poverty-stricken in appearance, and somewhat 
less like a dusty scarecrow. Young as he was 
to the ways of London, it is surprising that 
he should have been able to effect even this 
metamorphosis with so moderate an outlay. 
Had he been better acquainted with the inner 
mysteries of the Great City, he might have 
changed the semblance of his outer man at 
even a more reasonable figure. For, look 
you, he who knows London may issue forth 
from the Patmos where he hath lain over- 
night . issue forth, ashamed of the morning 
and its bright light, haggard, dirty, ragged, 
beaten, bruised, and seemingly hopelessly 
creased and tumbled; but, within an hour's 
time, and at the cost of a few shillings, he 
may walk down Regent Street a dandy. For 
there are cunning men, dwelling up occult 
courts and dubious " buildings " and equivocal 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 133 

.* rents," who will mend the wayfarer's torn 
habiliments, give a new gloss to his soiled 
broadcloth, paint his black eye with " Solomon's 
seal " or yellow orpiment, give the lustre of 
a Venetian mirror to his bankrupt boots, 
simulate false heels for them, and anoint their 
leather wounds with sable cobblers' wax, 
supply him with snowy fronts and false 
collars, stiff as mill-boards, iron out and build 
up afresh his compound-fractured hat, wash 
him, shave him, curl him, oil him, perfume 
him, send him out as from the nattiest of 
bandboxes, and all within the compass of a 
crown's expenditure. 

There were divers temptations in the way 
when Philip's toilet was completed . tempta- 
tions in the shape of print shops and picture 
dealers, which might, under other circum- 
stances, have confined his peregrinations within 
half a mile of Charing Cross for hours ; but he 
kept Mr. Undervamp's caution steadily in his 
mind; and one had not long struck before 
he found himself (after much direction, mis- 
direction, and re-direction) in Curzon Street, 
Mayfair. 



134 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Satisfying himself that he had the best of 
the venerable sandboy (the only sandboy, by 
the way, who is not jolly) . he walked slowly 
up and down some dozen times, that odd little 
thread of almost underground stone-paved 
passage, which runs from Curzon Street to 
Hay Hill, Berkeley Square, between the high 
brick garden walls of two lordly mansions. 
And there, another refuge from the wheel- 
waves . there, where there was a sweet country 
sound of leaves rustling and rooks cawing, 
and where the distantly-musical butcher or 
baker's boy might have been heard whistling 
o'er the lea, he fell to building castles, and 
musing and musing again. 

Why was she Viscountess Baddington? Why 
was she married ? Why was she always to be 
married to somebody . engaged to somebody 
else ? Why was he always to be falling in love 
with the wrong person ? Falling in love . rather, 
tumbling into ! jumping into love, burglariously 
forcing his way into love ! for a Viscountess, 
and a married Viscountess, must be as a foun- 
tain sealed, and as a gate walled up, and as a 
temple barred with steel and with adamant. 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 1 35 

Some men have a faculty for falling in love 
with the wrong woman. I have. Why did 
I fall in love with the young person aged 
forty, marked with the smallpox, and with 
the stoop in the shoulders, when the grocer's 
daughter would have had me? . (she told me 
so afterwards, when she herself was wrong. 
I quarrelled with her because she insisted on 
pronouncing February " Febuary." I was a 
fool.) The young person aged forty died, 
and the grocer's daughter married the shop- 
man, and they live at Clapham Rise, and have 
land and beeves, or at least money in the 
three per cents., which is as good, if not better 
than beeves. Why did I 

Why did Philip Leslie saunter up and down 
the stone-paved passage, while the leaves 
rustled and the rooks cawed, building those 
absurd air-castles of his, till a neighbouring 
church-clock struck the quarter after the hour ; 
but not a quarter after twelve, no, misery of 
man ! a quarter past one. 

He fled the passage as though he had just 
slain a kinsman or a dear friend, or shot a 



136 " THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

robin-redbreast, or wrung the neck of an 
albatross, or committed some dark and dreadful 
deed of the kind. Late again; always too 
late. 

A dozen times, as he made a half-running 
half-limping progress towards the awful " 14 " 
in Curzon Street, he resolved to abandon the 
" Cottage-door," and his patroness, for good 
and all. He would run away again . but 
whither? He would enlist for a soldier . he 
wasn't athletic enough ; he would enter as a 
sailor on board a man of war . who would 
have him, a lubberly landsman, even for a 
loblolly boy ? No ; he would risk the ire of 
that scornful patroness, be the consequences 
what they might. 

Number 14 was a narrow slip of a mansion ; 
* . they have re-numbered the houses since, 
and the Curzon Street of the day knows not 
its former numerals . a mansion just large 
enough for an old lord, who had a young 
wife, and who was without any very reasonable 
expectation of a small family, to dwell in. 
There was a handsome carriage at the door, 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 137 

the same that . oh woe! woe! . Philip had 
seen the night before in Wardour Street. The 
heart of the painter sank within him, as he 
saw the tall horses, the tall flunkeys, and the 
rosy coachman. 

The door was closed. There was a knocker 
in its midst, so grimly leonine in its cast-iron 
expression, so relentless . so the wretched 
painter fancied . towards those who were un- 
punctual in keeping their appointments, that 
he dared not, for the life of him, have raised 
that knocker, even to inflict a single rap on the 
boss on the panel. There were two evilly- 
disposed looking bells, too, one on either side 
of the door: one labelled " Visitors," the other 
11 Servants." Pride and fear had a hard tussle 
of it in Philip's perturbed mind, as to which 
tintinabulum was to be sounded. Pride said 
" Visitors" . he was an artist, and a gentle- 
man. A gentleman, God help him ! Fear said 
" Servants" . he was an artist ; but such a 
wretchedly poor one; and then, was he not 
twenty minutes behind his time ? 

Pride had the best of it at last, and he pulled 



138 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

the " visitors' " bell . softly, as he thought, 
but it rang out with such a sonorous re- 
echoing, that he felt half-disposed again to run 
for it. 

"What might you want?" asked the same 
majestic flunkey whom he had seen in AVar- 
dour Street, as, opening the door, he held it 
half a-jar, as though afraid that the bell-ringer 
were some wild animal whom it would have 
been dangerous to admit. The footman had 
seen him before; but it was between the lights, 
almost at dark, and who can expect these 
etherial beings to have common mundane 
memories ? 

" This card," the painter said, shortly, 
handing the lacquey the Viscountess of Bad- 
dington's talismanic pasteboard, 

The footman glanced at the card, and 
relaxed the vigour of his defence of the aristo- 
cratic fortress, so far as to admit Philip within 
the door. Then, when he had him on an 
island of door-mat in an ocean of vestibule, 
chequered in black and white marble, he con- 
descended to cross-question him again. 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 139 

" Any name?" 

" Mr. Leslie," the painter answered. " I 
was to call at one o'clock, by appointment, on 
Lady Baddington, but I unfortunately over- 
stayed the time by one quarter of an hour." 

u Mr. Leslie," the footman repeated, moving 
towards the staircase. He seemed sublimely 
heedless of the last part of the painter's com- 
munication, but emphasised the " Mister," as 
though he thought it rather a liberty than 
otherwise for a man with such a shabby look 
about him to give himself a handle to his name, 
and ring the visitors' bell. 

Did your blood never boil, dear reader, at 
the insolence of a footman. Or, perhaps, you 
have been happy enough to avoid contact 
throughout your life with that plush-legged, 
plush-souled class. There is a philosopher I 
have heard of . a captain, who goes about 
London and attends all levees and drawing- 
rooms, balls and soirees (the exterior thereof, 
I mean) with a penny cane, for the express 
purpose of thrashing the footmen's calves, 
when he can catch them perched on the foot- 



140 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

board behind the carriage. He does so, he 
says, in the discharge of a high moral duty. 

He castigates those liveried varlets, not as 
men, but as footmen. 1 revere that martial 
philosopher's code, and only wish that my 
terror of the law of assault did not hinder me 
from following his example. 

The footman came clown after the lapse of a 
few minutes, and saying archly, " You're to 
wait!" exchanged a wink of portentous signifi- 
cance with an obese porter, who was dozing 
like a hippopotamus in gold lace in a huge 
black leathern arbour studded with gilt nails. 
He so far derogated from the icy haughtiness 
of his manner as to point out to the " visitor" 
a very hard, polished hall-chair, with the 
Baddington arms emblazoned on the back ; and 
on this French-polished stool of repentance 
Philip Leslie sat, biting his lips, till the hands 
of the Baddington hall-clock marked two past 
meridian. 

Then a bell rang from above, not with an 
angry clangour, but with a clear, silvery, 
composed sound. The footman went up 



PHILIP LESLIE SEES THE BEST SOCIETY. 141 

stairs, came down again, and addressed the 
painter : . 

"You're to step this way, if you pliz!" he 
vouchsafed to remark. 

He said " pliz," instead of " please," pro- 
bably as a compromise between saying some- 
thing polite and something rude. Philip 
Leslie followed the footman up the softly- 
carpeted stairs, through an ante-chamber and 
a drawing-room, and at last into a deliciously- 
furnished boudoir. Here the footman indicated 
again a chair, but a far different one from the 
hard polished sedilia below stairs, and, with 
another intimation that he was to wait, dis- 
appeared. 

" Carriage is to wait, Tummas," the footman 
remarked to the fat hall porter. " The old 
un's a-goin' out." 

" Sure-lye!" the hippopotamus in gold lace 
returned. " And where may my lord be a- 
goin' now, John* Peter?" He was a reverent 
man, this hippopotamus, and said a my lord." 

" Why, of all places in the world," said the 
footman addressed as John-Peter, " to Xoocate 
prisin." 



142 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

"To Noogate prism! to Noogate prisin! ,, 
mused the fat porter, " what the dickins can 
he be a-goin' a-wisitin' to Noogate prisin for?" 

" To see his relations, 'praps," the sardonic 
John-Peter suggested. 

" Ah, sure-lye, sure-lye," said the fat porter, 
" sure-lye." 

How long he might have gone on solilo- 
quising is uncertain ; but at this moment the 
soft cushions of the black leathern arbour, 
studded with gilt nails, asserted their influence 
over him, and he fell into a fat-headed slumber. 



143 



CHAPTER XXY. 

YOUTH AT THE HELM AND PLEASURE AT 
THE PROW. 

A THICK, soft, moclleux Aubusson carpet, 
so thick and soft that a giant in his 
seven-league boots might have stridden over 
it, without making more noise than a white 
mouse, in those delicate pink slippers with 
which Nature has gifted that pretty but un- 
pleasantly-perfumed little quadruped ; a ceiling 
covered with fluted white and blue satin with 
silver rosettes, and from whose centre hung a 
swing-lamp, formed by a silver Cupid holding 
a censer; walls hung with an arabesque pat- 
tern in pale blue damask; a doorway veiled 
by a richly-embroidered curtain, with a ground 



144 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of deep blue velvet; an abundance of otto- 
mans, cause-uses, boudeuses, solitaires, u pouffs" 
. multitudinous inventions of astute uphol- 
sterers for enervating the art of sitting into 
that of lounging ; frail tables and etageres, in 
ebony, ivory, and mother-of-pearl, among 
which the eager eyes of the Painter noticed 
a marvellous cabinet, with open doors of 
filagree, and whose shelves and summit were 
crowded with delicate little artistic playthings 
. . sugar-plums of refined taste, enamels and 
miniatures by Petit6t and Zincke, ivory carv- 
ings, diminutive tea-services in porcelain, of 
that lustre and glaze known as the " Grand 
mandarin," and the secret of which is lost 
noW, even to the Chinese themselves; varied 
little scraps of Majolica and Palissy ware, and 
sillily amorous little marchionesses disguised 
as shepherdesses, and shepherds disguised as 
marquisses, in Dresden china. But the fit- 
tings of the boudoir were not confined to 
art-curiosities alone. There was a magnifi- 
cent vase in Sevres porcelain, painted with 
the story of Cupid and Psyche, and filled 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 145 

with the rarest flowers; there hung on the 
walls six or eight water-colour drawings, by 
masters of fame . Philip knew their charac- 
teristics at a glance ; a charming little Dutch 
interior . perhaps a Mieris, which, in its unap- 
proachable excellence of execution, made him 
sigh for the inferiority of the " Cottage-door:" 
and a superb Greuze, in a carved frame of 
ebony and mother-of-pearl. There was, be- 
sides, . it was difficult to imagine how so many 
objects could ever find place in the boudoir 
. a wondrous little cabinet piano, all ebony 
and marqueterie work, nestling in one corner. 
There were two windows in the boudoir, hung 
with diaphanous curtains of pale blue silk and 
lace; but the window-glass itself was dis- 
creetly ground, that the effect of the art- 
treasures within might not be neutralised by 
the brick and mortar vulgarities of over the 
way in Curzon Street. And, opposite the 
door, a glazed recess contained a tiny con- 
servatory, where gigantic trailing and climbing 
exotics seemed ea^er to hu^ the whole dimi- 
nutive palace with their Briarian limbs, and 
vol. TT. L 



146 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

crush it altogether, and in whose midst, 
among plants and flowers of the brightest 
hues, a miniature fountain threw up a daz- 
zling jet, and sprayed in its descent the 
rippled surface of the water in an alabaster 
basin. And all over the boudoir lay, scat- 
tered in enchanting confusion, exquisite little 
knick-naeks . jewelled bouquet-holders, fea- 
thery fans, caskets of malachite, paper knives 
in Damascened silver, with coral-sprig handles, 
albums and keepsakes, and scrapbooks, blush- 
ing in morocco and rich gilding. It was a 
place for a thief to have the run of one short 
half hour, and come out too rich ever to care 
about stealing again. 

Have I forgotten aught in the boudoir? 
Ay, one little thing. A slender easel in 
polished maplewood . an easel fitted with 
every subtle improvement and nice device to 
make a royal road to painting that the most 
courtly artists' colourman could invent or 
patent. An open colour-box stood by the 
side of the easel; a palette and its brushes 
were carelessly thrown on a stool before . a 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 147 

stool embroidered in rich needlework ; raid on 
the easel itself was a canvas, stretched on its 
frame, bat with its back turned to Philip. 
For the life of him, the painter could not 
resist the temptation of turning round this 
canvas, to see if there were anything painted 
on the other side. It was a breach of con- 
fidence he felt, guiltily, as he committed the 
act. He would as soon have dreamt of 
breaking open the seal of a letter addressed 
to a stranger, as of opening one of the gilt 
and embossed books on the table; but the 
temptation of looking at this possible picture, 
with its face to the easel, was too much for 
him. So he turned it, and gazed upon it. 

It was the half-length of a woman, life-size 
. a woman arrayed in a costume half classical, 
half oriental, with a species of jewelled diadem 
on her brow, who, with her bare arm extended 
high, clutched a jewelled goblet. It was a 
face so beautiful, so refined, yet so hardened 
and scornful, with its pale yellow hair, and 
cold blue eyes, and exquisitely-formed yet 
thin and close-set lips, that Philip remained 



148 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

gazing at it, minute after minute, forgetful of 
where he was, careless of the danger he was 
incurring. 

" No woman ever painted that head," he 
muttered, half aloud. " The head ! pshaw, 
that arm alone shows the power of a master. 
What force, what power of drawing; how 
grandly the muscles are indicated, how nobly 
the drapery falls ! And the goblet, too ! By 
Jove, what colour 1 What reflected lights! 
Ah ! unfinished, I see. She must have picked 
it up at Rome, or somewhere abroad, and 
won't allow it to be touched now. I know 
that I wouldn't dare to put brush to it. And 
yet, no; why, I declare the colours are wet. 
Can she " 

A spiteful little clock, with snaky figures 
twinkling in gold on a dial-head of blue 
enamel, clicked out the hour of two, with 
accents as bitter as the tongue of a calum- 
niator, ending its performance with a sharp, 
ringing little chuckle. The Painter, as startled 
by the chime as though he had been Macbeth, 
and had heard the fateful bell of Glamis, 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 149 

hastily raised his hand to replace the picture 
in its original position; but he was too late 
again. Louder than the chuckle of the clock, 
the unfortunate heard the rustle of silk and 
lace, and turning his head, beheld the Scorn- 
ful Lady standing in the doorway, holding 
aside the tapestry, and gazing at him with 
inexorable eyes. 

Down, with a crash, fell the portrait of the 
woman with the diadem . down on the Au- 
busson carpet . luckily on its back. Devoutly 
did Philip wish, that he, too, could fall, not 
on the carpet, but right through it and the 
flooring, and into the coal-cellar in Curzon 
Street, and so into George Street, Sydney, 
supposing that point of the antipodes to be 
within just plummet distance, to the bottom- 
less depths of a limbo of annihilation. 

" You begin well," Lady Baddington said. 

Philip felt as though he were choking, and 
so, discreetly, said nothing. 

"Pick up the picture." 

Being addressed as a slave, he obeyed as a 
slave, and tremblingly stoop' ng, replaced the 



150 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

picture on the easel. It had suffered no 
injury. Unluckily, Philip omitted to turn its 
face to the easel again: and leaving it there at 
a signal from Lady Baddington, felt now that 
he had two pairs of stern eyes gazing upon 
him, instead of one. Having picked up the 
picture, his next impulse was to pick up his 
hat, and fly from this boudoir of torture; 
but the cruel footman had taken away his 
head-gear, and was, very probably, at that 
moment, disdainfully perusing the name and 
address of his chapelier. It was a second- 
hand hat, bought cheap. Philip was bound 
to the stake as tightly as a Mohican, who 
has been taken prisoner, and is about to be 
" operated " upon by the Pawnees. 

He felt so immeasurably debased, standing, 
or rather shambling, in the centre of the rich 
carpet . shabby, and worn, and mean-looking, 
in the midst of all this splendour; he felt so 
wretched, abandoned, despised a wayfarer, 
that, strong man as he was, he felt inclined to 
burst out weeping. Despise him not, oh, 
reader of the strong mind, if a tear did, 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 151 

indeed, tremble on his eyelid. It is weak, 
pusillanimous, womanish to cry; but there 
are times when we must either cry or die. 
He had not asked for the patronage of this 
rich, beautiful woman. He would sooner 
have taken a crown and a curse from a coarse 
wretch like Undervamp, than a purse of gold 
from this cold Viscountess in lace, whose very 
condescension seemed an insult. He hung 
his head to hide the tear which might have 
been ready to roll down his cheek. 

" There, there," the Viscountess said; and 
a magic kindness seemed suddenly infused 
into her voice and manner. " You could not 
help peeping at the picture; could you, silly 
boy?" 

She could not have been more than eighteen, 
this Enchantress, and he was twenty-five ; yet 
she called him silly boy. She might have 
called him Caliban, so she spoke him kindly, 
he thought. 

" Sit down here," the lady continued; "I 
want to have a long talk to you." 

She sank right royally on to a luxurious 



152 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

divan as she spoke, and pointed as royally to 
a seat immediately beside her. So close was 
the seat, that her drapery touched him, that 
he felt the presence of her perfumed breath, 
the wind from the waving of her golden hair 
playing on his hot cheek. 

" Your name is Philip Leslie. You need 
not start or look amazed ; if you will sign 
your pictures 'Philip Leslie, Liverpool, 1835/ 
and afterwards offer them for sale, ,you must 
expect your name to be known." 

" Your Ladyship has stated my name cor- 
rectly," was all the Painter could make 
answer. 

u But it was not thus my Ladyship first 
became acquainted with your name," his fair 
interlocutor went on; "though I confess that 
had I not seen your signature to the picture 
you brought to that man in Wardour Street, 
I might never have known that the poor 
artist I saw at dusk yesterday evening, was 
the person of whom I was in quest; yes, of 
whom I was in quest," she repeated, watching 
the expression of astonishment in the painter's 
countenance. 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 153 

" You come from Liverpool," she continued. 
t; One need be no conjuror to know that; but 
you fell in love there." 

11 1, my lady !" 

u Yes, I, my lady. I, my lady, fell desper- 
ately in love with a little black-eyed Spanish 
dancing-girl at some place with an atrocious 
name, which I forget. I, my lady, was fol- 
lowing her home one night, as I, my lady, had 
been in the habit of doing night after night, 
like a brave and loyal young fellow . so, at 
least, the little dancing-girl thought . to see 
that she came to no harm." 

11 It is true," the perplexed painter ac- 
quiesced. 

" Then I . then you, rather," Lady Bad- 
dington resumed, referring to a little mite of 
a volume of ivory tablets, bound in violet, 
velvet and gold, "met and followed . he too 
was following your little dancing-girl . a con- 
juring man . Professor somebody or something. 
This fellow, who ought to have been thrown 
into the river . if there be a river at Liverpool 
. you saved from being stabbed with a knife, 



154 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

wielded by the girl's uncle, an old Spaniard. 
Was not the uncle's name something like 
Harispe?" 

4i It was. it was his very name; but how, 
may I ask, Madam, did your Ladyship " 

" There my conjuring ends," the lady said, 
shutting the golden clasp of the tablet with a 
provoking snap of the metal, and a more 
provoking smile playing over her own red lips. 
" What has become of you ever since, and 
what you have been doing from the time you 
were born till the evening you saved the 
Professor from the poniard, I know no more 
than that I met you yesterday evening in the 
Wardour Street, curiosity-shop. It was to 
learn this, that 1 sent for you this morning. 
Why were you not punctual to your appoint- 
ment?" 

As far as this last query she had spoken 
with a delightful kindness, with a soft frank- 
ness, with a cheery, encouraging manner, that 
had filled Philip's heart with strange but 
blissful emotions. But in the inquiry, " Why 
were you not punctual to your appointment?" 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 155 

she was the old scornful lady again ; and her 
words froze his new-born flow of spirits. He 
blushed, stammered, prevaricated, and became 
a helpless object. 

Heaven assoilzie us ! What shamefaced, awk- 
ward, ungraceful bunglers are the majority of 
us, talking to a pretty woman! What can 
there be in the eyes, the rosy lips, and the 
yards of skirts and flounces ; the wave of a 
little hand, the tap of a tiny foot, to cast all 
our self-possession adrift, dissolve our stern 
resolutions into an anarchical jelly, and turn 
all our flowing eloquence into dry leaves, to 
be tossed about by a November wind of 
trouble? Is a woman a divinity, that we 
should tremble as we adore her? Is she a 
Gorgon, that she should turn us to stone? Is 
she a Circe, that she can make us even as 
swine in stupidity? What spell can there be 
in the eyes, the lips, the skirt, the flounces, the 
hand, and the foot, that can make a little 
school-girl of sixteen, only just emancipated 
from pinafores, frilled trousers, and bread and 
butter, stronger and wiser, and shrewder in 



156 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

her way than a Richelieu or a Lauzun, a 
veteran diplomatist, or astern warrior? How 
brave we men can be among our fellow-men . 
coolly trotting out Lily or Caroline, as though 
she were Blinkbonny, the race- horse, and ex- 
patiating knowingly on her points and paces ; 
how steeled we are against Emily's wiles ; how 
laughingly alive to Lucy's pretty hypocrisies 
and charming treachery! We are not to be 
vanquished; we are not to be deceived. Oh, 
no! But once get us into a drawing-room, 
the fourth seat of a carriage, the vacant chair 
in a private box at the play, and, lo ! the inge- 
nuous Candida will wind astute Ulysses round 
her finger, and tough General Hercules falls 
down straightway at Omphale's feet, and 
holds silken cat's cradles for her to unwind. 

"Do you know," continued -Lady Badding- 
ton. with a slight symptom of return towards 
kindliness, but still with a sufficient infusion 
of scornful bitterness in her manner to make 
the painter miserable; " Do you know that I 
was very nearly sending you away from the 
door this morning for that very want of 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 157 

punctuality? I hate a man who has no energy, 
no purpose, no decision of character, no will," 
she added. 

But added, with such a wild vehemence of 
tone, with a flashing of the eye and a curving 
of the lip, and a throwing out of her round 
white arm . she was in a muslin dishabille . 
that, raising his eyes to her face, Philip thought 
he saw the very counterpart of the diademed 
woman with the goblet. 

"Are you a stock or a stone," she continued, 
sweeping round to him and fixing him with 
her keen eyes, " that you have nothing to say 
for yourself, but sit there blushing and shak- 
ing like a school- boy? Are you accustomed 
to have taunts thrown at your head, that you 
can bear them so meekly as this ? That brown - 
faced dancing-girl of yours can find her 
tongue readily enough." 

There was this, and so much in Philip at 
this very moment, that he rose up, and said it 
manfully : . 

" I have only this to remark, my lady," he 
said, very firmly and respectfully, ' : that I am 



158 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

a very poor, obscure, friendless man. I 
painted a picture, which I presume your 
Ladyship, being a lover of art, entertained 
some notion of purchasing. I know the per- 
formance is slight, and its execution is, I dare 
say, very inferior. But I suppose your Lady- 
ship thought there might be something in it, 
or you would not have been kind enough to 
advance me two sovereigns upon it last night. 
Of the manner in which that money was 
advanced, I have no more to say, save that I 
would much rather have had a limb cut off 
than have taken it, and that I would sacrifice 
two to be able to give it back now. With 
regard to my want of punctuality, I bitterly 
regret it ; and if by it I have lost your Lady- 
ship's patronage, I only hope that you will 
allow me to leave my picture with you as a 
security, and to assure you on my solemn word 
of honour, that within four and twenty hours, 
I will either bring you back your money, or 
throw myself over one of the bridges." 

He was astonished at the length of his own 
speech, but was not frightened now, and stood 
looking on the Viscountess proudly. 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 159 

ct A coward's alternative . money or suicide," 
was the observation of that noble lady. 
" Have you anything else to say?" 

" Very little, save to express my earnest 
and respectful desire that you will allow me 
to quit this house as quickly as ever I can, as 
I don't want to go mad, to bring about which 
consummation seems to be your own particular 
desire." 

He felt, as he uttered these bold words, that 
he had cut away the anchor of hope, and that 
his bark was drifting towards irremediable 
shipwreck. But it was too late to retract, 
and he moved towards the door, still keeping 
his eyes on his tormentor. 

Was the woman mad? or if sane, why was 
she so inexplicably capricious. She sprang 
past him with a movement as swiftly tortuous 
as that of a lizard, held the tapestry behind 
her with her little hands, and barring his 
passage, looked in his face with laughing 
eyes. 

u Not so fast, not so fast, Mr. Philip Leslie," 
she cried, in a mocking but not an unkind 



160 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

voice. " I want to hear a great deal more 
about you before you leave this room. Pray, 
would you like my husband to come in here, 
and find me keeping a gentleman in my 
boudoir by main force ? Hav'n't you heard 
that Lord Baddington is dreadfully jealous ? 
Besides," she concluded, u I don't allow per- 
sons who quarrel w T ith me to leave me in this 
manner. When they offend me I ring the bell, 
and have them turned out by my footman." 

She saw, perhaps . the mischievous child! 
she was but a child, she could not have been 
more than eighteen . that she had gone too far 
again. One little hand released its hold on 
the tapestry behind her. She held it forward, 
first coquettishly inspecting it herself, as 
though to institute a comparison between its 
blanched brightness and the heavy gemmed 
rings that studded her fingers. Then she 
held it forth to the painter amicably. 

Was Philip mad himself now ? What pos- 
sessed him ? What could have dared him 
to the rash attempt . the rasher commission ? 
But he could not help it. He could not have 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 161 

helped it had the headsman of Munich stood 
behind him with that terrible double-handed 
sword, whose blade is hollow and loaded with 
quicksilver, ready to smite off his head the 
moment afterwards. He stooped and kissed 
the lily hand. 

" There now, we are friends," the lady 
said smilingly, withdrawing her hand, and 
not, seemingly, much displeased. "What a 
strange creature you must think me. What 
do you think of me?" 

" That you are an angel." 

"Sir!" 

And there was the old cold look again. 
But simulated, Philip . perhaps conceitedly 
. thought, and with no real anger in it. 
I retract, on reflection, even the hesitating 
"perhaps," and boldly assume that she was 
not offended. Leonardo da Vinci, painter, 
sculptor, architect, chemist, poet, phlosopher, 
mechanician, and astronomer, lays it down 
in one of his axioms that no woman . ugly 
even though she be to the verge of mon- 
trosity . can pass through life without having 

VOL. II. M 



162 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

at least one admirer. I take it as another 
maxim, as trite as true, that no woman, 

"Be she fairer than the day 
" Or the early meads in May," 

be she as magnificent as Cleopatra, as proud 
as Zenobia, or as rough as Christina, who 
murdered Monaldeschi, can be really offended 
. however she may pretend to be so . 
at a compliment whose spontaneity seems 
to argue its sincerity. They can no more 
help a gratified smile at a compliment to their 
beauty, than a dog can help licking his 
lips after swallowing a pound of butter. 
Both are so nice, and slip down so easily. 
But neither compliment nor butter will pre- 
vent either Beauty or the Beast from biting 
you immediately after the nice flavour has 
departed, and biting you, too, till their sharp, 
shining teeth meet in your favourite calf. 

"Now, Sir," resumed the Viscountess, 
" when you have done staring at me, and 
twiddling your fingers as if you had just 
been detected in stealing a pot of currant- 
jelly, perhaps you will sit down exactly where 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 163 

I bid you sit before, and tell me what I ex- 
pressly sent for you to tell me." 

" What may that be, my Lady? " 

"Your history, and the truth. No ro- 
mancing, no calling things by wrong names. 
Speak out plainly, and it will be the better 
for you. Nay," she added, " I don't know 
that I won't even buy that little picture; 
though, allow me to tell you, my young friend, 
that I have seldom seen a painting commenced 
with such good intentions, and finished in 
such a careless and slovenly manner." 

He bowed his head meekly to the censure, 
for he felt that though somewhat unqualified, 
it was not undeserved. Then he sat himself 
down again on the divan, as his lady, his 
tyrant, had commanded him; but she sat 
no more near him. She drew the embroidered 
stool that was before her easel towards her, 
and snatching up her palette and maulstick, 
made a few careless touches on the picture of 
the diademed woman. 

The painter watched her out of the corner 
of his eyes, and could see with what a firm 



164 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hand she held the pencil, with what a broad 
firm sweep she had begun to lay in a fresh 
shadow on the face. But he felt that his 
time for diffidence had ceased, and, bidding 
a long farewell to diffidence, he commenced his 
tale. 

There was no positive reason why he should 
do so. Was it not impertinence on her Lady- 
ship's part to ask him for an account of his 
life, instead of asking him the price of his 
picture, and, paying it down to him there, 
let him go. He felt in the ridiculous position 
of an actor in a drama commencing an ex- 
planatory speech with, "It is now some 
twenty-five years since . ," but he took heart 
of grace at last, and spoke. 

He told her that he was twenty-five years 
old, and that his remembrance could recede 
to a time when he could not have been more 
than four or five years of age. That he 
could remember his mother, a tall handsome 
woman, who often used to cry over him, and 
tell him that he was the image of his father, 
who (she said) was fair, and had blue eyes. 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 165 

In his early youth, he said, they, mother and 
son, appeared to live in affluence, but not in 
comfort. His mother was violent, passionate, 
often cruel, and always perverse to him . 
forbearing to chide him when he deserved 
it, treating him with absurd fondness when 
he least merited caresses, and with unreason- 
able severity when he was not amenable 
to blame. His mother had strange fits 
of hysterics, and stranger trances of deep, 
dead sleep. He admitted with a falter and 
a blush, that his mother's maid had told him, 
when he was about seven, that " mamma got 
tipsy," and though he was ignorant of what 
the thing meant at the time, he had never 
forgotten, and grew afterwards to learn with 
shame and horror, the real meaning of the 
words. He told her that he had visited with 
his mother, while still very young, both France 
and Italy, and in both countries had been for 
a short time at school, and that even after 
this lapse of years, he yet retained some loose 
smattering of the two languages. When he 
was about ten years old, he said, he and his 



163 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

mother were living in Italy, at Florence, he 
thought; but there was another gentleman 
living with them then; a tall, strong, fierce 
gentleman, with long moustaches, who drank 
even more than mamma did, although he 
never seemed to get tipsy, and smoked large 
cigars all day long. This gentleman was 
called Major, and used to call him a little 
ragamuffin. He beat and ill-treated him in 
every possible way; and even his mother's 
affection seemed now entirely departed from 
him ; and she was alternately utterly neglectful, 
or utterly barbarous to him. He admitted 
(with shame and regret of his own, this time) 
that when they came to England some time 
after this, and he was put to a cheap, mean 
boarding school, in a wild part of the West 
of England, near Dartmoor, and close to a 
deserted place which had once been a recep- 
tacle for French prisoners of war . a school 
where he was badly fed, badly treated, and 
scarcely taught at all . he ran away, far, 
far away over the wild country side; and 
whether his schoolmaster thought him so 



YOUTH AT THE HELM. 167 

unremunerative a scholar as not to be worth 
pursuing, or whether he had failed in dis- 
covering his place of retreat, he never knew; 
but that he was never captured, that he had 
never heard from that day to this of school- 
master, his mother, or the strange man who 
was called Major. 

He livedfor days, he said, on raw turnips 
and peas, like the fugitive Duke of Mon- 
mouth, after Sedgemoor, which he took from 
fields, and wild berries. He was on the verge 
of starvation, when he took up with some 
gipsies, rude thievish, kind-hearted vagabonds; 
with whose blanket-tent, camp-kettle, donkey, 
and brown-faced children, he travelled about 
for more than a year. 

" Did you ever steal anything when you 
were a gipsy?" asked the Viscountess, turning 
round from her easel. She had not been 
painting anything for some minutes. 

" Never, on my honour, Madam." 

11 Not a turkey, or a brace of fowls, now 
and then?" 

" Not so much as an egg." 



168 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

" No linen off hedges?" 
" Not even a pair of baby's socks." 
" 1 wonder you did not. I am sure I 
should. Poor fellow ! " said the Viscountess, 
and she rose from her stool and stroked the 
painter's fair curly head. 

The touch of her taper fingers vibrated 
through his brain as though an electric cur- 
rent had passed through it. 

" Now go on," the lady said, passing away 
from him- But she did not return to her 
easel. She sat instead at the wondrous 
piano, all ebony and marqueterie; and as the 
painter resumed his story, ever and anon 
struck a fitful chord on the ivory keys, but 
more frequently remained with her fair head 
bending over the instrument. 



169 



CHAP. XXYI. 

LADY BADDIXGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 

HPHE Painter went on with his story. 

He told the lady that he had ultimately 
abandoned the gipsies, in consequence of a 
slight misunderstanding with a certain 
" Romany chal n of decidedly predatory pro- 
pensities, who, whatever may have been his 
real cognomen among the children of Egypt, 
was known to the world at large as the 
" nimming blacksmith," and who, with ' an 
incurable perversity of low pretension, not 
understanding, or pretending not to under- 
stand, the unwillingness of young Philip to 
"nim" . or, in other words, steal . a pony 
with a swish-tail, the property of a reverend 



170 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

gentleman in Gloucestershire, had manifested 
an intense desire to make an abnormal eyelet- 
hole in his waistcoat with a long knife. So 
he fled from those dark tents of Kedar. 

" After I left the gipsies," continued Philip, 
" I can scarcely tell your Ladyship how I 
managed to live. It must have been some- 
thing, I fancy, after the fashion of the young 
ravens, only the worms came in very slowly 
and in very small quantities. I think I hawked 
tracts and cheap novels for some weeks, and I 
am certain I earned a precarious livelihood 
for some time by reciting ' My name is Norval,' 
4 Now stood Eliza on the wood-crowned height,' 
and similar scraps of the 4 Enfield- Speaker' 
description, the remnants of my school reading, 
in the parlours of way-side inns. But I am 
afraid I weary your Ladyship with such trivial 
details." 

" You would weary my Ladyship much 
less," the Viscountess returned; impatiently 
stamping on the pianoforte pedal with her 
pretty foot, " if you would go straight on with 
your story. Can't you see, silly fellow, how 
it interests me?" 



LADY HADDINGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 171 

"lam sure, my Lady, that I am delighted 



if- 



" There ! don't be vain," and a warning 
finger was held up. "What an impulsive 
creature it is, to be sure! You are not to 
know, sir, or to inquire, why I am interested 
in the recital of your vagabond adventures ; it 
is sufficient for you to know that I wish to 
hear them out; so, pray continue without 
further interruption." 

" I was engaged . after hardships, too 
terrible, some of them, to be described . by 
a company of strolling players, who, with a 
portable theatre (if a few poles, planks, tressels, 
and rudely-daubed canvasses, could be called 
by that name), and a portable stock of tin- 
selled rags of dresses, went about from fair to 
fair. The manager took a fancy to my de- 
clamation of c The Isles of Greece,' and 
' Parrhasius,' and I received the munificent 
sum of five shillings per week for assisting in 
what was termed the ' outside patter ' . that 
is, reciting on the platform before our pro- 
scenium, and acting as a foil to the deep base 



172 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

voice of the principal tragedian. I am afraid 
that to beat a big drum occasionally, in the 
intervals of eloquence, also came within the 
terms of my engagement; and I am not 
ashamed to add that, possessing some personal 
agility . ' heasy and hairy grace,' the manager 
called it . I not unfrequently performed the 
college hornpipe and the Highland fling, when 
Enfield's ' Speaker,' as it sometimes happened, 
was at a discount, and the pennies were slow 
in coming up the ladder." 

" Were you ever a clown . that tumbling 
man with the paint on his face, who says droll 
things and picks pockets ? " Lady Bacldington 
asks. 

" Never, my Lady. Yet I have been in the 
ring, for all that. After perhaps a year of 
i outside pattering,' I was pronounced to be a 
sufficiently ' bould speaker ' to take a part in 
the performances in the interior of the booth. 
But I was not much of a favourite there. I 
believe my fellow performers disliked me 
because my h's were generally in the right 
place ; and I am sure I was not popular with 



LADY BADDINGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 173 

the audience, because I could not strike sparks 
enough from my opponents broadsword in the 
terrific combats. I had plenty of offers, though, 
from other sources. The proprietor of one of 
the most favourite dwarfs in the United King- 
don discovered that I was exactly cut out . 
so soft spoken was I, he said . to act as a 
guardian to the little abortion, who lived in 
the three storeyed house, and rang a diminutive 
door bell ; and to give the explanatory lecture 
upon his birth, parentage, education, and 
experiences of foreign crowned heads and 
fashionable society. But I declined that 
situation, as I did that of secretary to an 
Abyssinian giant, whose name was Jiggins." 

"Why?" 

u Why, your Ladyship, because there had 
been growing on me all that time a love for a 
thing I scarcely knew by its proper name 
then, but which I have since grown more 
familiar with, and adore it." 

" You had a strange education for the 
career of an artist." 

u So strange that I can scarcely realise to 



174 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

myself, now, in what manner I first learnt to 
cut a pencil, or to lay a palette. But I did 
learn this, somehow, and a little more besides. 
I dabbled in painting all the time that I was 
with the strollers, touching up the vile and 
ragged smears . the haunted caverns and 

CO 

baronial chambers they called scenes. I began 
to sketch clumsily and lamely from nature. 
I began to take portraits . dreadful 'Guys' 
those portraits must have been, though I beg 
your Ladyship's pardon for using such a 
word : nay, from time to time I earned a few 
shillings from some village Maecenas for taking 
his ' missis,' or from the proud mother of a 
family of five children for painting the like- 
nesses of those little innocents . all of a row. 
The first really artistic opportunity I had, de- 
termined me to quit the profession of the 
legitimate drama, and I accepted an engage- 
ment in an equestrian company . a travelling 
circus indeed . as scene-painter, property-man, 
and assistant riding master." 

u Who taught you to ride? " 

u Xo one, my Lady; and when I entered 



LADY BADDINGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 175 

Poocherani's Royal Circus I had never ridden 
anything more equine than a rocking-horse. 
It is true that my duties as a riding-master 
did not call for any very daring feats of equi- 
tation. I had merely to put on a braided 
coat, spurs, and a stripe of gold lace to my 
trousers, and crack a long whip to the music 
of the band. These, with occasionally stand- 
ing on the parapet of the circus to hold a hoop 
for a young lady to jump through, and ex- 
changing a very old and very stupid witticism 
now and then with the clown, were all the 
duties of riding-mastership I had to perform. 
But I learnt to cross a horse, and with some 
success too, for all that." 

" But your painting, your art, my young 
friend ?" 

11 There does not seem, at the first glance, 
to be much opportunity for scene-painting in 
a circus ; yet there was always something to 
be done. There was the circus itself to be 
re-painted every time we entered a new town, 
for the kicks of the horses, and the flying 
up of the sawdust, very soon tarnished our 



176 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

decorations. Then there were c properties ' to 
be patched ; triumphal chariots and banners to 
be emblazoned ; and, especially, there were the 
huge pictorial placards describing the extra- 
ordinary feats of horsemanship, and other 
countless attractions of Poocherani's Royal 
Circus. all of which had to be painted in the 
brightest colours, and were liberally displayed 
in front of our establishment. Hundreds of 
such placards have I painted in my time." 

"They were better than yon trifle . the 
' Cottage-door ' . I hope." 

" They were not better, saving your presence, 
Lady Baddington," the Painter answered 
firmly, though modestly. " They were miser- 
able daubs ; but I learnt to do better. 

" 1 am glad to hear it; go on." 

" I have scarcely anything more to tell; my 
life since then has been so devoid of interest 
to others, though so full of it to myself. It 
has been one arduous pursuit of art- . under 
disadvantages, under difficulties, in poverty, 
in misery, in obscurity; but never, I hope, in 
disgrace. I have travelled all England, Ireland, 



LADY BADDINGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 177 

and Scotland ; now with a circus, now as regular 
scene painter at a small country theatre : now 
as an itinerant portrait paintea. I have just 
managed to live, and that is all; and till I had 
the pleasure of meeting your Ladyship last- 
night, I can conscientiously declare that I had 
not one single friend in the world . " 

" He hesitated, stammered, blushed, and 
concluded, " I hope your Ladyship will pardon 
me for qualifying your notice and patronage 
by the name of friendship. But I am so 
solitary and so forlorn, that when a hand has 
been extended to me as yours has been, I cannot 
help fancying that it must be a friend's." 

"I am not going to be angry," Lady 
Baddington said kindly, as she rose from her 
seat, and held forth her hand once more to the 
painter, who, exercising some discretion this 
time, contented himself with bowing over it 
respectfully. " But ( friend ' is a dangerous 
term to use to persons such as I am. We 
can't afford to have friends in Mayfair, my 
young painter, any more than we have human 
breasts or human feelings. AVe have diamonds, 

VOL. II. N 



178 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

/ 

ostrich feathers, and point-lace instead. But 
have you told me all your tale." 

u All, my lady." 

"Hypocrite!" the lady exclaimed, with an 
irritation charmingly feigned, it was easy to 
see. " Where is the record of all the tender 
passions you have sighed and threatened to die 
about ? Speak, Sir, how many ? Let me have 
the list ? How many, before you fell so 
desperately in love with that little brown-faced 
gipsy Manuelita?" 

" I fall in love with Manuelita!" 

"Yes, in love with Manuelita : am I speaking 
Greek, that you don't or won't understand 
me?" 

" I do not even know her personally, Lady 
Baddington. I have seen her very seldom." 

" If you have seen her once or five, or five 
hundred times, you are in love with the girl. 
Don't tell me a falsehood, or I shall be angry 
in right earnest." 

" I certainly had a considerable respect, and 
I may say admiration, for her : but, to the best 
of my knowledge and belief, I have not seen 



LADY BADDINGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 179 

her twenty times in my life, and I am confident 
that I have not interchanged words with her 
more than twice.' ' 

" If what you say be correct, Mr. Philip 
Leslie, and I will not do you the injustice to 
suspect that you are deceiving me, how comes 
it that this same Manuelita is to the full as 
desperately in love with you, as you in all due 
and reciprocal gallantry must be with her?" 

" I do assure you, my Lady . " 

"Assure me nothing !" cried the Viscountess, 
in a pretty pet, "and don't contradict me; or, 
on my word, I '11 withdraw my patronage, or 
friendship, or whatever you may please to call 
it, and send you and your 'Cottage-door' 
packing. There is no harm in your loving 
this little brown-faced child, most romantic of 
artistic wanderers. You have nothing but 
your pencil to depend upon for a livelihood, 
she has nothing but her nimble feet, unless her 
crabbed old Spanish uncle forgive her for 
running away from him, which, from the 
character I heard of him he is not likely to do." 

"Manuelita run away!" ejaculated the 



180 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

painter. And lo ! there passed swiftly before 
the eyes of his mind a vision of a dusty road, 
a yellow post-chaise, and sitting therein a 
figure in a mantilla, and by its side another of 
a man who had something like an undress 
military cap on his head. 

"You are positively the most provoking 
creature 1 ever met with," exclaimed the 
Viscountess impatiently; "you never give a 
direct answer to a question, and echo my ob- 
servations like a parrot." 

" I am very sorry " 

" You have no right to be very sorry, Sir; 
you have a right to be sensible." 

" I should be glad to " 

" You are very glad, and you are very sorry. 
There, hold your tongue for goodness' sake, 
till you have reason to know whether you 
should be one or the other. Wait." 

She said this not angrily, not haughtily, but 
as she said it an arch expression rippled on her 
lips. Then she opened a secret door in the 
blue and silver hung wall . a door of whose 
existence Philip had never dreamt, as who 



LADY BADDIXGTON IS REMARKABLY KIND. 181 

could? so artfully concealed was it . and cried 
softly, "Come!" 

And there came and stood on the sill of the 
secret door, a little trembling, blushing figure, 
a girl with a dark face and large black eyes, 
and this was Manuelita, the niece of Juan 
Manuel Harispe. 



182 



CHAP. XXVII. 

" SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 

TN the very heart of the enormous city, 
between the Gate of Lud and the Gate 
of the Bishop, there is a huge quadrangular 
mass of frowning granite, dignified by the 
name of a gate, and ingress into which is 
obtained through three narrow, low-browed 
doors. It is the eye of a needle through 
which a camel might attempt to pass, but 
would assuredly stick midway in the attempt. 
It is a gate that is freely opened to all who 
knock at it; but its heavy door once closed 
again, egress is difficult, if not impossible. 
This is Newgate Prison, whose walls might be 
built of petrified human hearts, and cemented 



"should old acquaintance be forgot. 183 

with human tears. This is Newgate, the 
implacable, the inexorable, the inevitable, to 
him who forsakes the narrow path for the 
broad. It is the only reality . a stern, re- 
morseless reality, in the shadowy land of crime, 
where all things wear an aspect not their own. 
To me, who am a town-bred man, this jail 
of Newgate has always been an object of 
ravenous interest and of insatiable curiosity. 
There it stands . stern, menacing, silent in 
the midst of the teeming city life . alone 
impassible : alone indifferent to the great 
world's doings. It rouses nature, and is a 
desert in the midst of an oasis. Bustling 
Newgate Market, hard by, overflows with 
rubicund butchers, and more rubicund house- 
keepers laying in a stock of good cheer. Over 
against the north-side of the prison is that 
noble palace of education, the Bluecoat School, 
with its hundreds of little lads in their quaint 
semi-monastic dress, their blue gaberdines 
tucked under their crimson girdles to show 
their yellow petticoats, running, and leaping, 
and capering at football, and shouting, in all the 



184 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hilarity of youth and innocence. But gloomy 
Newgate stands aloof, like the Usher in Hood's 
magnificent poem, and whispers awful tales of 
travellers murdered on lonely heaths, and dead 
bodies hid in caverns. The Old Bailey has its 
thronged taverns, and houses of call for jovial 
graziers; within bowshot on its one side is 
Ludgate Hill, all wealth' and commerce, and 
glistening with its crowds of city beaux and 
city belles ; at the other extremity is Holborn 
Hill, continually, at the period of which I 
write, disgorging its rebellious troops of horned 
cattle, and crowded with lumbering drays. 
Smithfield, rich in reminiscences of jolly, dis- 
orderly, disreputable Bartholomew Fair, is 
close at hand ; the Hospital is there ; studious 
Paternoster Kow, redolent with odours of 
newly-stitched paper, is not far off; the Great 
Post-Office, carrying news and gossip, human 
thoughts and feelings, the expressions of love 
and hatred, sympathy and friendship, all over 
the world, stands at the top of Newgate Street ; 
but the Prison stands still contemptuously 
indifferent to the turmoil of the working world 



" SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 185 

around it. It is complete in itself. Se contiene. 
Fara da se, A hundred hospitals may open 
their beneficent wards to the sick; but what 
cares Newgate ? . it has its infirmary. A 
hundred bells from as many steeples may ring 
in the faithful to prayers . Newgate has its 
chapel, its jail ordinary, its prison communion- 
tables, its condemned pew. Let the dead 
bury their dead in as many cemeteries as they 
choose elsewhere . Newgate buries its own 
sudden dead within its own precincts, in that 
dismal corridor where, beneath the flags, 
moulder a whole hierarchy of assassins. For 
Newgate is a city within a city, and a world 
within a world ; or rather, it is a Cronstadt of 
crime, whose granite ramparts no broadsides 
of virtue can shake, and whose barred windows 
are as embrasures, whence guns of penal 
calibre point menacingly to the world outside. 
On the very same summer afternoon, and 
about the same time, that Philip Leslie was 
conversing with Lady Baddington in her 
boudoir in Curzon-street, Mayfair, the carriage 
of that noble lady's equally noble lord was 



186 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

rolling leisurely through the streets towards 
the prison, the very mention of whose name 
has seduced me into the foregoing digression. 

The Viscount's carriage (the disgust of the 
refulgent flunkies behind, at finding themselves 
journeying towards so low a locality, can be 
better imagined than described) drew up at 
last before the principal entrance of the jail. 
But ere its occupant descends from it, let us 
take a brief glance at that noble personage, 
whom you and I, reader, have not seen since a 
certain wedding-day, in November, eighteen 
hundred and thirty. 

Five years had wrought a marvellous change 
in Viscount Baddington. You must remem- 
ber that the Reform Bill had passed since we 
last met him . a legislative measure which 
was popularly supposed to be the first step 
towards bringing about the millennium, and 
which was to do all sorts of wonderful things 
for all sorts of people. By persons not exactly 
belonging to the popular side, the Reform Bill 
was the inevitable forerunner of the utter 
dissolution and thorough smashing-up of the 



" SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 187 

world ; the cloud-capped towers, solemn temples, 
gorgeous pinnacles, and great globe itself being 
only indulged with a momentary respite, by 
the fortuitous introduction of the Chandos 
clause into Whiggery's detested enactment. 
The contingent effect of the abolition of 
Gatton and Old Sarum upon his Lordship had 
been to change him into quite a young man. 
In 1835, though with many remnants of the 
old beau of the Eegency about him, he had 
yet somewhat of a venerable appearance ; but 
now he was, outwardly at least, entirely 
youthful. Youthful in the possession of a 
splendid head of curly brown hair; }^outhful 
in a pair of bushy whiskers, which would have 
been a little more natural to look at, had they 
not been quite so purple in hue ; youthful in 
a dazzling white set of teeth, a tight waist, 
and blooming cheeks ; youthful in a costume 
adapted to the height of fashion. No more 
fur collars or broad-brimmed hats now; but 
velvet collar, satin stock, under waistcoats, 
gold eye-glass, tightly-strapped trousers, and 
patent-leather boots. That stout bamboo stick 



188 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

on which his Lordship seemed to lean some- 
what heavily, his hands on its knob, his chin 
on his hands, was youthful, too, in its buckish 
silken tassels. As to the double gold eye- 
glass, how many men, quite young, are there 
who, through study or late hours, are near- 
sighted ? And as for the slight bend in the 
back, everybody knows what a slovenly non- 
chalant bearing some young dandies affect. 
Oh, Lord Baddington was very young indeed 
in 1835 . quite a lad; and as for the furrows 
and the crows' feet, and the yellow, goose-skin- 
like integument on his temples and his small 
be-ringed, be- wrinkled hands, why those were 
probably freckles incurred during his Lord- 
ship's late continental trip . a trip whose 
denouement was his bringing to London his 
young and beautiful bride . which a flask or 
so of Rowland's Kalydor would easily eradicate. 
This juvenescent Peer stepped with a senile 
briskness from his carriage when it had 
reached its destination, condescending, how- 
ever, to make pretty liberal use of his bamboo 
cane, and the outstretched arm of one of 



U SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 189 

his attendants as he quitted the vehicle. The 
carriage had been, indeed, so lightly hun 
on its springs by the accomplished Long Acre 
coach-builder from whose atelier it had come, 
that it gave a graceful rebound as the body of 
the Peer left it; and he, having one foot 
on the step at the time, was, in consequence, 
very nearly precipitated on his noble nose on 
the kerbstone. 

Lord Baddington had a special permit from 
the Secretary of State for the Home Depart- 
ment not only to visit the jail of Newgate, 
but a prisoner confined therein . and who 
was confined in Newgate on remand previous 
to his transmission to Ireland, there to purge 
himself of an accusation of forgery . by name 
John Pollyblank. The turnkeys in the outer 
lodge . rough, gruff, curt-spoken, and some- 
what snappish men in general . clustered ob- 
sequiously round the possessor of the fine 
carriage as he entered, and bowed even lower 
when the Home Secretary's order was read, 
and they found with what a noble visitor 
they had to deal. The governor was not, 



190 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

just then, in the way; but was immediately 
sent for to conduct his Lordship round the 
jail, while he, worthy nobleman, for his part 
went about his business in this wise : You are 
to know that when prisoners in Newgate are 
permitted to see their friends, it is only for a 
short time, and from across a double range 
of iron-bars, in the space between which sits 
a turnkey. When, again prisoners have in- 
terviews with their solicitors, it is in a room 
with glass sides, round which walks a turn- 
key who can see everything, but hear nothing. 
But Lord Baddington was the bearer of a 
special order, empowering him to see John 
Pollybank in his cell and alone. I doubt if, 
now-a-days, when tout-se salt, and when the 
smallest laches on the part of authority are 
commented upon with ruthless severity by 
an Argus-eyed press, whether even a noble- 
man could have such a privilege conceded 
to him by the Secretary of State. But 
twenty-two years ago, prison discipline was 
not quite so rigorous, nor the walls within 
which it was maintained quite so transparent 



" SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 191 

as they now are. In this case the high 
official's order was an undisputed u Open 
sesame," which was the abode of not forty, 
but more probably four hundred thieves ; and 
preceded by a turnkey, Lord Baddington tra- 
versed a seemingly interminable series of 
corridors and yards, yards and corridors. 

At last they entered a small paved court, 
two sides of which were studded by cell 
doors. Opening one of them with a resound- 
ing clang, the turnkey called out, " Visitor, 
No. 45 ;" fell back in order to allow Lord 
Baddington to pass, closed the cell-door again 
after him, discreetly turned the huge key 
in the lock . (there was a "Judas," or small 
trap, open in the door itself) . and then lean- 
ing with his back against the wall, fell to 
staring at the quadrangular patch of blue 
sky above him with as much intensity and 
apparent interest as though it had been a 
view of the Bay of Naples or a panorama 
of the Battle of Waterloo. 

No. 45 was sitting on his bedstead (at the 
upper extremity of which the bedclothes were 



192 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

artistically rolled up a la militaire). No* 
45 did not seem to be particularly well 
pleased with his white- washed parlour. 
There was a great Bible with a Hymn- 
book beside it on a reading-desk nailed to 
the wall, but he did not seem to have much 
inclination to read them. He seemed more 
occupied in unfraying the woof of a silk 
pocket handkerchief, thread by thread, in 
whistling with a grim persistency some very 
dismal air, whose dolorous melody seemed 
peculiarly adapted to the atmosphere of a 
prison, and in beating the devil's tattoo with 
his foot on the stone floor. 

"At last!" he said, looking up as the 
nobleman entered. 

Lord Baddington did not seem to relish the 
look or the society generally of No. 45. In 
truth there was a exceedingly ominous and 
dangerous look about Jack Pollyblank, or 
Professor Jachimo, or whatever you may 
choose to call him. His clothes were as fine 
as of yore, but they had the unmistakeable 
jail tarnish and mildew about them. And his 



" SHOULD OLD ACQUAINTANCE BE FORGOT." 193 

grand and glittering jewellery, where was 
that ? Alas ! sequestered by ruthless turn- 
keys, and safe in prison pigeon-holes. 

He was unshaven and dishevelled, it was 
not shaving day in Newgate, and jail-birds 
were not quite such bucks of disciplmarianism 
twenty-five years ago, as now. There were 
brown rings under his eyes. He was not 
at all a loveable sight to look upon ; and so, 
evidently, thought Lord Baddington, who 
started . it may be involuntarily . back as 
the prisoner addressed him; till he bethought 
him of the open trap in the door, and the 
turnkey who was sure to be watching outside, 
which immediately re-assured him. 

" Yes, Mr. Polly, Polly . what's his name? 
. Oh, Pollyblank," he answered hastily, " I'm 
here at last ; and I devoutly wish it was to see 
the last of you. What have you sent for me for?" 

" Why, look you here, Governor," the una- 
bashed Pollyblank replied . " you'll excuse 
the liberty I take in calling you ' Governor' ; 
but it's a way we have in the army, or in 
Newgate. You see the fix I'm in ?" 

VOL. II. o 



194 THE BADD1NGT0N PEERAGE. 

" You have brought it on yourself.' 7 
" I don't deny that for an instant, my 
ancient,' 7 the hardened man continued; " you 
speak like a book, like a Blue Book, like 
a Court Guide; but that's no reason why 
other people shouldn't try to bring me out 
of it. I'm here for a forgery matter yonder" 
. he pointed, as he spoke, to a corner of 
the stone wall which might be supposed to 
represent the direction of Ireland, . " and 
my impression is, that when I go up be- 
fore an Irish jury, the verdict will be ' Guilty, 
my Lord,' against yours truly, and serve him 
right. I like foreign travel, but the climate 
of Tan Diemen's Land, I am afraid, would 
have a noxious effect upon my liver. I have a 
very peculiar liver, and so I'd rather not be 
transported." 

" The best thing that could happen to 
you," grumbled Lord Baddington. 

" May the difference of opinion, et cetera, 
et cetera, et cetera," continued Polly blank, 
with a graceful wave of his hand. " 5ut 
it isn't alone for this forging business that I'm 



"should old acquaintance be forgot." 195 

in here, else I should a week since have been 
packed off to Dublin, via Liverpool. I am 
the victim of prejudice, my Lord; and one 
of those prejudices fomented by that scoun- 
drelly Bow Street Runner, Leathersides, is, 
that I have something to do with a large 
robbery of bank notes, committed some time 
since; the plain truth of the matter being, 
that the notes were lost, and that somebody 
else found them." 

u Well, well!" broke in the Peer impa- 
tiently. 

" It is not at all well, well . you'll excuse 
me," Jack Pollyblank objected. " It's ill, ill, 
and no mistake, with yours obediently ; and if 
it had been well, I shouldn't have sent for 
you, my Lord." 

" What is it you want ?" 

" Want ! Is anything easier than to see 
what I want? How would you like to be 
mewed up in this whitewashed cage like a 
one-eyed weazel with a complaint in his 
lungs? Want! I want to get off Scot-free. 
Want ! Why I want my liberty. I'm a man 



196 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

who lives up to my income. I like good 
wine, pretty girls, and first-rate cigars, 
watches, chains, good clothes, a trap, and 
a fast-trotting horse. So did you when you 
were my age, I'll he bound. So do you 
now, as far as your powers will let you, 
my old bird." 

{t Fellow!" the Peer indignantly exclaimed. 

" Fellow me no fellows, as the man in the 
play would say," retorted Pollyblank, rising 
from his bedstead, and absolutely snapping 
his profane fingers in the face of the heredi- 
tary legislator. " You must get me out of 
this scrape, old boy, or, so surely as my 
name's Pollyblank, you'll get into a deuce of 
a scrape yourself. Look you here," he con- 
tinued, holding out his large, coarse palm 
straight before him, " I hold in my hand the 
honour of the house of Falcon. You know 
that your niece was only your nephew's leman, 
and never his wife. You know that your 
grand-nieces and nephew are all bastards, and 
that Captain Falcon . Captain and Falcon, 
forsooth! . is heir, not to the Baddington 



"should old acquaintance be forgot. 197 

Peerage, but to a bar sinister. You know 
that you gave Seth Tinctop and myself a 
thousand pounds to keep this secret, live 
years since; and that it has been kept, and 
well kept till now. I want to get out of this 
infernal place, and to get some more money 
out of you as a fine for renewing the lease of 
the secret, my old bloke." 

" I cannot compound a felony," the per- 
plexed Lord Baddington expostulated. " I 
have no power to stay the proceedings against 
you. As far as I can see, the law must take 
its course, and . " 

M A fig for the law, compounding of felony, 
proceedings, and all the rest of it. You vote 
against the ministry; can't you vote for them? 
You have shoals of grand friends ; can't you 
make them squeezable? Hang it, man, aren't 
you a Lord ?" 

He had struck the right key-note. Yes, he 
was a Lord, and there is almost as much 
divinity hedging one, as that which is falla- 
ciously supposed to hedge a king. And 
again, the Lord's name, like the King's, is a 



198 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tower of strength. Estates may be sold, or 
mortgaged, and re-mortgaged up to their arm- 
pits; entails may be cut off, plate pawned, 
diamonds sold ; the bailiffs may be waiting in 
livery at the town-house ; the sheriff with his 
writ of fi fa in possession of the country seat ; 
but be a Lord, and you may live, aye, and in 
affluence and in honour, on the credit of your 
Lordship, still. 



199 



CHAP. XXVIII. 

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 

"IV p. POLYGON. Pollyblank, I mean," 
said Lord Baddington, u you must be 
reasonable." 

" I'm reasonable enough," the ex-Professor 
replied, resuming his seat on his iron bed- 
stead; u at the same time, I'm consistent. 1 
ought to be a statesman . Home Secretary at 
least . I'm so full of reason and consistency 
An egg' full of meat is nothing to what I am 
Be you as reasonable and consistent yourself. 
and we shall soon come to terms." 

" The case to be argued, then, between us,' 
resumed the Peer, "is, as far as I can see 
this : You happen to have fallen into difficul 



200 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

ties, and, very naturally, wish to extricate 
yourself from them. You are in possession 
of certain information which you use as a 
lever, whereby to extort . well, to procure . 
money and impunity for yourself from me. 
Now, as I told you before, I am quite un- 
aware to what extent any influence of mine 
may be available to obtain your release ; but 
all that I can do, shall of course be done. If 
you would plead guilty to some transportable 
felony, now, I have no doubt that on your 
arrival in the colony . " 

" I will see you, the judge, the jury, and 
the colony peculiarly well hung before ever I 
leave this place as a felon/' Mr. Pollyblank 
calmly interposed. 

" Well, then, I must consult my lawyer. 
I am no man of business myself, and haven't 
the slightest notion how these things are 
managed. He will call on you to-morrow, and 
I will give him instructions to do everything 
for you in the way of reason." 

" Stop, my Noble Friend, as they say in 
the House of Lords; I shall want something 
else besides liberty." 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 201 

" Something else? What?" 

" c Stumpy,' ' rowdy,' ' blunt/ " answered 
Pollyblank, significantly. 

A Viscount could hardly have possessed an 
acquaintance with the slang phraseology of 
the lower orders ; and it could only have been 
intuitively that he was enabled to jump at 
once at the prisoner's meaning. 

u Do you mean that you want more money?" 
he inquired. 

" Exactly so. I want another thousand 
pounds." 

" A thousand pounds ! Why, you and your 
accomplice Tinctop have already had one 
thousand pounds between you." 

" The firm of Pollyblank and Tinctop," 
the prisoner contemplatively remarked, " have 
now dissolved partnership, and the business 
is carried on by J. Pollyblank, who, while 
returning thanks for past favours, takes this 
opportunity of hoping, by strict attention to 
business, to merit a renewal of them. Orders 
executed with promptitude and despatch." 

" I wish you and your balderdash and vil- 



202 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

lanv were all at the bottom of the sea," mut- 
tered the peer to himself. Then, turning to 
Pollyblank, " What security have I," he asked, 
" that I shall not again be exposed to a similar 
demand, and for a sum, perhaps, as large ?" 

" Security !" echoed Pollyblank, with a loud 
laugh of derision. " No security at all, my 
hearty! Why, what an unsophisticated old 
baby you must be, to imagine that you will 
ever get rid of me. I'm your friend, my 
worthy; your incubus, your Old Man of the 
Sea. You are board, lodging, and washing 
to me. You're my perpetual stocking with 
the money in it. You're my landed estate 
that I draw my rents from. You're my in- 
terminable and never-to-be-deferred annuity. 
You and I are one, are partners, are in the 
same boat, the same swim, and we will never, 
never sever, until death do us part !" 

Lord Baddington could not help shuddering 
as the ruffian spoke ; for he felt how much 
bitter truth lay hidden amidst his ribaldry. 
Save us ! how many incongruous partnerships 
. how many unholy alliances such as this, 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 203 

are there in the world! Not only misery 
makes a man acquainted with strange bed- 
felJows : prosperity will bring as strange help- 
mates, who claim both bed and board with 
a grim pertinacity, and to whom you must 
play Amphitryon, willy-nilly. How many a 
coronetted grandee, rich in the possession of a 
family- tree growing out of the Conqueror's 
double-breasted waistcoat, the boughs all 
bending with golden apples, has for a partner 
. though he would deny the fact were you to 
tax him with it . a low stable tout and race- 
course swindler . a cogger of dice and sleever 
of cards ! How many a fine lady, whom you 
envy as she sits in her diamonds and her box 
of the grand tier at Covent Garden, is in 
secret league, and has a dreadful pact with 
her chambermaid . the woman whose mother 
keeps a coal and potato shed, and doesn't 
aspirate her h's; but who, nevertheless, is my 
lady's guide, philosopher, friend, and accom- 
plice ; knows all her secrets ; where that mag- 
nificent point lace came from, and how long 
the milliner has been waiting for the money; 



204 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

who gave my lady the gold enamelled chate- 
laine, which she said was a present from her 
grandmamma, but which was, in reality, pur- 
chased by Captain Cutchery, of the Governor- 
General of India's body-guard, and some time 
in Europe on sick leave. The worst of these 
alliances is, that the associate has generally 
been a mere office-cleaner or junior clerk to 
the firm; but when taken into the house, 
becomes . he or she whilom so meek and sub- 
servient . a raging tyrant, who bullies the 
senior partner dreadfully. 

" Be it so," Lord Baddington said, wearily, 
as he looked at his watch, and moved slowly 
and nervously towards the door, as though he 
were not quite certain that his entertainer 
would permit the interview to be finished so 
speedily. " I will instruct my solicitor to 
call on you to-morrow ; and I will set to work 
myself at once to see what can be done. But, 
remember, there is a limit even to my patience. 
I am very far from rich. My heir has posi- 
tively nothing but his pay and what I allow 
him ; and if you pull the string too tight, Mr. 
Pollyblank, it will burst, believe me." 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 205 

" I don't want by any means to pull it too 
tight, my lud," the interesting captive re- 
turned. " I only wish to give your ludship 
plenty of rope, and you are sure to hang 
yourself. But I must have the other thousand 
pounds for all that !" 

Lord Baddington winced and turned pale . 
perhaps at the largeness of the sum he was 
called upon to disburse ; perhaps at the hor- 
rible familiarity of his disreputable partner. 
The idea of a Lord hanging himself! 

"One word before 1 go, Polly blank," he 
said. " You may fancy I am an inexhaustible 
reservoir for money, a milch cow that is never 
dry. In that assumption you are mistaken ; 
but let that pass. Let me ask you one ques- 
tion . Why, in heaven's name, when you had 
five hundred pounds, did you not invest them 
in some safe and steady line of business? 
Surely five hundred pounds were a large sum 
for a man in the destitute condition in 
which you appeared to be." 

" Safe and steady ! Haven't I been half 
over the world since then? Haven't I been to 



206 THE BADD1NGTON PEERAGE. 

America? Aren't they a safe and steady 
people ? I was a professor of natural magic 
and preternatural prestidigitation when those 
infernal Bow-street officers took me. Wasn't 
that a safe and steady profession?" 

" You appear to have mixed up forgery and 
robbery with it. Why can't you earn your 
money legitimately, and be prudent when you 
have?" 

" Because," answered the prisoner with 
superb complacency, "I have the tastes and 
feelings of a gentleman, and like to enjoy 
myself, and spend the vile dross freely. You 
need'nt sneer at me, my Lord Viscount Bad- 
dington ; I was a gentleman once . only I let 
my first-floor furnished to a most consummate 
blackguard, the present tenant of the house I 
live in. Did you always earn your money 
legitimately, my noble friend with the eye- 
glass and dyed whiskers ? You've shaken 
that old elbow of yours, and made the bones 
rattle at Watier's many a time and oft, or else 
those wicked Sunday papers tell enormous 
fibs. Were you always prudent when you 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. . 207 

had money, you old painted mummy ? You'd 
do for a penny show, with the spotted girl for 
a sister-in-law. Who spent his wife's fortune 
to the last penny, drawing at the same time 
from the opera treasury the salary of Mamselle 
Follejambe, the dancer? Who's over head 
and ears in debt, and post-obits, and mort- 
gages, and lawyer's costs ? . who but the 
noble Lord, who's going to let me out of this 
blackbird's cage and give me a thousand 
pounds?" 

" To be wasted in the same dissipation, or 
employed to promote the same schemes of 
villany and fraud. Why can't you be an 
honest man, Polly blank ?" 

"A what?" 

" An honest man ;" and while he alluded to 
the poetic abstraction, whom Mr. Pope has 
neatly declared to be the noblest work of God, 
it is a fact that Lord Baddington blushed 
a deeper crimson than that stereotyped per- 
manent blush on his cheeks, which came, not 
from his heart, but from Mr. Atkinson, the 
perfumer's, in Bond Street. 



208 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

"Why can't you, at least;" he added, qua- 
lifying the term, "keep on the safe side oi 
Newgate?" 

The two cynics were face to face. Jack 
Pollyblank looked at the Peer very assidu- 
ously, sitting all the while on his bedstead, 
his hands on his knees, and his head on one 
side. 

" You mean why do I commit crime?" 

" Exactly so," Lord Baddington acquiesced. 

" Why !'' the man on the bed reiterated, as 
with a sort of shriek he leapt up from his 
couch, just as you may see a hyaena from 
a corner of his den, when the keeper with the 
wheelbarrow-full of shinbones of beef comes 
round the corner. "Why! why, because 1 
like it. Because crime is meat and drink to 
me . because the fairest woman, and the 
raciest wine, and the most mettlesome horse, 
and the loudest dice in the world, are all flat 
and insipid, and mawkish, in comparison with 
crime. I've been at it since a boy. I could 
lie before I could speak, and thieve before I 
could walk. I've forced mv schoolmaster's 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 209 

name, and been beaten nearly to death for it. 
I was a young burglar at home, and had 
as much pleasure in breaking open a cupboard 
to get at the cold pie and the bottle of 
currant wine, as I should have now in break- 
ing into Stowe Palace or the Jewel House in 
the Tower. There never was but one great 
man in history, and that was Colonel Blood. 
Jack Sheppard and all the rest of them were 
mean, peddling, worsted-stocking rascals. I 
tell you again, old man, that I was born a 
gentleman ; educated as a gentleman ; that my 
name is no more Jack Polly blank than it 
is Jack Thurtell; that I broke my mother's 
heart, and drove my father to curse me ; that 
I am here now, have been in jail, have com- 
mitted . well, I am not going to give you 
a catalogue of my mistakes just now; that I 
have lived fifteen years by crime; that I 
intend to live by crime for thirty years longer, 
and then I suppose I shall die by crime, 
and the devil will have his own." 

He had been talking with extreme volubi- 
lity; but, from his first exclamation, in a 

VOL. II. p 



210 THE BADDINGTON PEEK AGE. 

subdued tone. The drops were running down 
his face; his eyes were glistening; the little 
muscles in his chin were quivering ; his hands 
kept continually closing and unclosing ; and 
for once, I entreat the reader to believe me, 
Jack Pollyblank was speaking the truth. 

Lord Baddington, an old man, though the 
tailors, barbers, cosmetic vendors, and stay- 
makers had made him so young, trembled 
a little, looking at the man on the bed. His 
noble forehead, and temples, too, assumed 
a certain yellowish and parchment-like hue, 
though the bloom on his cheeks defied alike 
his Lordship's agitation and the unwholesome 
atmosphere of the cell. He was obliged, though, 
to wipe his brow with a cambric handkerchief 
(with a coronet worked in the corner, in Miss 
Golightly's, of the Theatre Royal Covent 
Garden, own hair), for he felt a clammy 
perspiration breaking out in beads. 

" I believe you are the greatest villain in 
the world," he said, very slowly. 

"You're quite right . present company 
always excepted," the prisoner returned, now 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 211 

the old, urbane, humorous Polly bank again. 
" Do you make haste, and commit a little 
more villany on my account. Go and suborn 
somebody, or perjure yourself, or sell yourself 
. anything to get me out of this mantrap. 
The iron's entered in the calf of my leg, I tell 
you, and confoundedly rusty iron it is too. 
There . go along with you : I've had enough 
of the conversation of a Peer of the realm. 
I'm not proud, but my time is precious. 
Don't lose a moment in setting about business. 
You need'nt trouble yourself about the thou- 
sand pounds till I come for them. I won't 
let the grass grow under my feet, you may be 
sure. There . if you hallo through that trap 
in the door the turnkey will come and let you 
out. Bye-bye! love to all at home." 

With which affectionate farewell Mr. Jack 
Pollyblank turned his back on his noble 
friend, and became not only dumb, but appar- 
ently deaf; for to a kind inquiry on the part of 
his Lordship as to whether he required any 
small sum for pocket-money then, he returned 
no word of reply. 



212 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

There was no need for the Peer to " hallo/' 
as he had been advised by the prisoner, 
through the trap in the cell-door. He had 
only to show his noble visage on the horizon 
of that quadrangular aperture, when the turn- 
key, who to all appearances had remained 
immobile, and staring at the sky ever since I 
left him at the commencement of this length- 
ened interview, hastened to release his Lord- 
ship, and then respectfully led him through 
yard and corridor, corridor and yard, towards 
the great entrance-lobby. 

"A curious person that, my man," Lord 
Baddington condescended to say, as they 
paced through the echoing passages. 

" So cur'ous, your Honour's Lordship," re- 
turned the turnkey, touching his cap, " that 
it's uncommon lucky for him that Sir Robert 
Peel's alive and kicking, and that Mr. Justice 
Bayley's dead." 

"How so?" 

"Why, you see, Sir . my Lord, I mean . 
that Sir Robert's done away with all these 
hanging laws; and it's only for murder and 



DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. 213 

one or two things of that sort that they stretch 
a man's neck now. But, Lord bless you . I 
beg pardon, my Lord . if old Mr. Justice 
Bayley had been alive, he'd have had the 
black cap on in a jiffey, and hung that 
precious Number Forty-five, without a jury, 
if the law had allowed him." 

" You don't seem to have a very good 
opinion of him/' the Peer observed, smiling 
uneasily. 

" I've just such an opinion of him, your 
Lordship's honour," returned the official, un- 
locking the last door with which he had to 
deal, and standing on one side, with another 
touch of his cap, to allow the Peer to pass, 
" that I think a little hanging would do him a 
deal o' good; and I tell you what it is, my 
Lord," he added, confidentially, " if he isn't a 
lifer this time, and if he ever comes back here 
again, though Sir Robert is alive, I'm blest if 
Number Forty-five won't be taking a glass of 
wine, and a shaking hands with the sheriffs 
some of these fine Monday mornings. Thank 
ye, my Lord." 



214 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

He significantly closed one eye, dropped his 
head a little to the right, and touched the 
gland beneath the left ear with his forefinger. 
Then pocketed his half-crown, and delivering 
Lord Baddington to other turnkeys, went his 
way up narrow corridors, taking a legion of 
echoes along with him. 



215 



CHAP. XXIX. 

LOED BADDINGTON MEETS WITH AN UNEXPECTED 
SHOCK. 

A GENTLEMAN'S carriage in the crowded, 
narrow streets of the city always puzzles 
me mightily. It seems a social anomaly. I 
look on it as I would at a fly in amber . (did 
I ever happen to see such a phenomenon; 
which I never did). I met the Archbishop of 
Canterbury's chariot once in Barbican: fat 
purple footmen, mitred panels, shovel hat, 
and silk apron inside, complete. I am sure I 
followed the vehicle full two hundred yards, 
and I daresay the devout bystanders thought I 
was desirous of craving the archiepiscopal be- 
nediction. His Grace did not bless me: but 



216 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

I blessed myself if I could account for his 
presence in that dingy locality. What do the 
drones so near the working bees ? What 
did the purple and fine linen of Lambeth 
Palace so near the greasy corduroy and foul 
cotton rags of Smithfield and Whitecross 
Street? To be sure, the good Archibald 
Campbell Tait, Bishop of London, has 
preached to the cabmen in a stable-yard near 
Cow Cross since then. But what could J. B. 
Cantuar want in Barbican? I asked. The 
only private carriage one ought to see in the 
city is the Countess of Jersey's brougham . is 
not her ladyship a partneress in Child's bank? 
. or the Lord Mayor's coach. 

Similar thoughts may have come over peri- 
patetic philosophers in 1835, as the patent 
axle-wheels of Yiscount Baddington's carriage 
honoured the stones of the Old Bailey with 
almost noiseless revolution, and as, his Lord- 
ship inside the vehicle, the horses' heads were 
turned Mayfair-wards. And, of a truth, his 
Lordship seemed in strange companionship; 
for a butcher's boy in a suetty cart, with a 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 217 

trotting pony, dared follow immediately be- 
hind the vice-comital carriage, whistling de- 
fiantly, and ever and anon addressing irre- 
verent witticisms to the vice-comital footmen, 
principally directed against the gleaming 
calves of those officials; while, before the car- 
riage, had the impertinence to rattle on a vile 
knacker' s-cart, bound to Cow Cross, an un- 
handsome van, in front of which sat two 
coarse men, with short pipes in their mouths, 
and the hinder end of which was occupied by 
the carcase of a defunct cab-horse, his poor 
head and neck hanging over the tail-board, 
and swaying to and fro in a ghastly manner, 
to the barking of a yelping cur, which fol- 
lowed behind, jubilant with the prospect of 
teeming dog's-meat barrows, and over-loaded 
skewers. 

Now in those days, it had occurred (not for 
the first or the last time in the history of the 
world) to certain commissioners, or works, or 
boards, or contractors, to tear up the pavement 
of London streets, and lay bare the vitals of 
the city, exposing the mysteries of its gas- 



218 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

pipes and the secrets of its sewers. Not that 
there was anything particularly the matter 
with the gas or the sewers, or the pavement 
just then; but I suppose the Board thought it 
a good thing; and the excavators and mud- 
larks, who went down dirty and came up 
dirtier, thought it a better, working a little 
and smoking a great deal, with considerable 
patriotic enthusiasm; while that wonderful 
army of people, who never seem to have 
anything to do . that army of all ages and all 
sexes, who " moon " about the streets, blinking 
at the print-shops, or glozing over a fallen 
omnibus-horse, or nosing street accidents as 
Hamlet nosed King Claudius's chamberlain in 
the lobby . those wonder-seekers stand gazing 
vaguely upwards, as if they expected the sky 
to rain roasted potatoes, a shoal of sucking- 
pigs in full aerial flight, a comet to hit the 
Admiralty telegraph with its tail, or the lion 
on the top of Northumberland House to per- 
form that long-promised feat of waggery: to 
these good people the disembowelment of the 
thoroughfares was the very best thing that 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 219 

could have happened. The print-shop win- 
dows were deserted immediately; and round 
every gaping trench there gathered troops of 
" mooners," from the wealthy-looking old gen- 
tleman with the vacant face, the buff waist- 
coat, and the watch-seals; the doctors-boy 
with the covered basket, containing that 
11 mixture as before/' with which, if he doesn't 
make haste, Moribund, the sick man, will do 
without as well as with; to that inscrutable 
lone female with the scanty shawl, the pinched 
blue nose, and the key hanging ,from her 
finger, opening, I am sure, nothing but a 
phantom door in Shadowland . who is the 
most pertinacious a mooner" I am aware of, 
who sometimes has a half-starved looking girl 
with her, and who ever and anon scrubs her 
blue nose-tip with a corner of the scanty 
shawl in question. They stared and stared, 
as though a very dirty ditch were a mine of 
Golconda, and as though Roman remains were 
to be thrown up at every turn of the spade. 

" What the deuce are you going down these 
back streets for, instead of Fleet Street?'* 



220 THE BADDINGTCN PEERAGE. 

He had put his noble head out of the win- 
dow, and so deigned to address his coach- 
man. 

" Fleet Street all up, my Lord," he an- 
swered. u Strand all up as far as Hexeter 
Change, so the p'leeseman says. Can't go no 
hother way, my Lord." 

" Drive on," cried the Peer, pettishly. " I 
wish I had walked," he muttered, as the car- 
riage slowly pursued its way through a maze 
of narrow and unwholesome thoroughfares. 

He did|^ot seem at his ease, Lord Viscount 
Baddington. Some blight seemed to have 
fallen on him in Newgate; and, the truth 
must be told, notwithstanding the penalties 
denounced against scandalum magnatum, his 
Lordship, notwithstanding the juvenility of 
his costume and make-up, looked quite an old, 
old man. He tossed to^md fro on his luxurious 
squabs, like a peevish invalid who loathes 
his couch of down from long lying thereon. 
He plucked at the tassels of the window- 
blinds; he crossed and uncrossed his patent 
leather booted legs ; he settled, unsettled, and 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 221 

re-settled his wig . forbid it, delicacy ! . I 
mean his curly head of hair. 

" Was ever a fellow so tormented as I am ! 
At home and abroad, by night and by day. 
As though I had not quite enough trouble 
with those infernal lawyers, and the muddle 
the estates are in, and the difficulty of raising 
ready money. Then there's Genevieve, and 
that precious nephew of mine. The young 
villain will be in town soon, I suppose." He 
gave a sudden start and nervous twitch here, 
as though he had suffered an acute twinge of 
the gout ; then resuming . " Upon my word, 
Charles Falcon, I'll have you out, were you 
twenty times my grand-nephew . what a 
nephew too ! faugh ! . if you make love to my 
wife, I'll blow your brains out, I will. I 
wonder what Genevieve wants with that 
fellow with the picture under his arm. She's 
very fond of painting, the dear, darling, lovely 
angel. What an incomparable little devil it 
is, to be sure ! " 

This was rather an abrupt termination to 
so complimentary an exordium, in the case of 



222 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the lady the Viscount spoke of as Genevieve. 
He seemed to think so himself, for from be- 
neath his gorgeous underwaistcoats he drew 
forth a dainty little filagree locket attached to 
a chain, and in which was set the miniature of 
a very beautiful girl, whose light curling hair 
encircled her face like a golden glory. 

" I wish we were at Baden again," the Peer 
again muttered, as he replaced the locket in 
his bosom of fine linen. " Ah, dear me ! dear 
me! why did I ever bring her to England. 
We might live in Germany in comfort upon 
half what we spend in England ! I might get 
an embassy abroad, too, somewhere. How 
she would shine in society ! How she would 
flirt . confound her; confound me, what a 
jealous old fool I am." 

For though all tell fibs, and the heart of 
man is deceitful above all things and despe- 
rately wicked, there are times when the un- 
adulterated truth wells up from that oft- 
choked up and polluted spring; and Lord 
Baddington spoke as truthfully as man could 
speak. 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 223 

" If I bad stayed abroad," he continued, " I 
should have avoided that unhung desperado . 
that boa-constrictor, who only wants to be let 
out of his cage to tear my flesh, and every 
body else's flesh off their bones. No; he 
isn't a boa-constrictor, he's a tiger . a raging 
lion. What a ruffian the fellow is; what a 
cool, calculating, brazen-faced, incorrigible 
scoundrel! He'll leech and leech, and drain 
and drain me to the last drop. Suppose I 
were to repudiate him; suppose I were to 
dare him to do his worst? Suppose he were 
to divulge his story to the jail governor or the 
jail chaplain ; would any one credit him? Once 
suppose him guilty, who would believe a con- 
victed felon? I'm sure I'm not so fond of my 
nephew Gervase's bastard brood, as to keep 
the story of their mother's shame a secret, at 
the price of two thousand pounds, and per- 
haps more. Still there's the honour of the 

family, still there's . By Jupiter," he 

interposed, interrupting himself, " I wish the 
Baddington Peerage, its heir-apparent, and all 
its belongings, were in the infernal regions." 



224. THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Then a Spirit came and stood over against 
Lord Baddington in his softly -cushioned 
chariot; and, though he saw it not, almost 
made the hair of his flesh stand up. And 
the Spirit said, though it was voiceless, " Lord 
of Baddington, Lord of Baddington, if Gene- 
vieve, thy wife, would but bring forth a male 
child, how happy wouldst thou be to transfer 
the coronet thou must one day lay down 
from thy hated grand-nephew to his baby 
brow? How happy thou wouldst be, if the 
brute Polly blank were to declare the shame of 
thy kinsman and kinswomen, and of the woman 
their mother, from the highest belfry in 
London town ! " And lo ! as the Spirit faded 
away from the vision of the nobleman's soul, 
he made unto himself another dream, of a 
young mother very faint and pale, but with 
a smile like unto that of an angel on her 
beautiful face; and of a child in rich gar- 
ments of lace that was being dandled bv a 
nurse; and a delighted old man walking to 
and fro in a dining-room, giving away guineas 
to servants, and excitedly shaking a doctor by 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 225 

die hand. A very mild, discreet doctor too, 
clad in raven black; Sir Paracelsus Fleem, 
high in office in the College of Surgeons, 
wearing a cocked-hat and a scarlet gown 
on gala-days in Lincoln's Inn Fields^ and the 
King's own doctor, forsooth. And then, which 
was very strange in a man sixty-five years 
old, some tears began to roll from the eyes 
that had the crow's feet beneath, and they 
traced out little rivulets in the island of 
rouge on the wrinkled cheeks. 

Crash! 

There was a shout from the crowd, a gather- 
ing round of bystanders, a tumult, and a mur- 
muring, and a host of conflicting directions 
given, in voices hoarse and shrill. 

The journey through the back streets had 
culminated in that cloaca maxima, into which 
painfully debouch myriads of well-nigh im- 
pervious thoroughfares, Drury Lane. There 
had of course been a stand-still; a gigantic 
coal-waggon was ahead of the Baddington 
carriage; an enormous van, laden with huge 
tubs, and bales, and packing-cases was be- 

VOL. II. Q 



226 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hind. There had been a false alarm of the 
way being clear, and the van had pressed 
forward. The coal- waggon, on its part, made 
a retrograde movement, and the consequence 
was that the carriage, jammed up between 
the two plebeian vehicles, came to a most 
signal and lamentable grief. 

Lord Baddington was startled from his 
reverie by the sudden collision. The back 
part of the panel was smashed completely 
through, and the aged Peer was thrown 
violently forward, and a moment afterwards 
was taken out of his carriage, stunned. It 
was the narrowest part of Drury Lane, close 
to "Wych Street, and over against the quaint 
tumbled -down little tavern which is fondly 
held by tradition to have been the favourite 
resort of the versatile Sixteen-stringed Jack, 
the last of the highway-men . a great man, but 
not understood by the age in which he lived, 
and which ignominiously hanged him. Who 
is understood by his age ? The next age will 
understand Mr. Agar; the next may perhaps 
understand me. The back part of Lord Bad- 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. :227 

dington's carriage was all smashed to pieces, 
his Lordship lay insensible within; one of 
the costly horses had fallen, the coachman 
had been thrown off the box; the flunkeys 
had discreetly jumped off the foot-board just 
before the collision. It was altogether a very 
pretty piece of business; and, of course, 
nobody was to blame. We had the driver of 
the coal-waggon's own word for that, and his 
brother of the goods-van endorsed his opinion 
warmly. 

They picked the coachman up. He, luckily 
for himself, though not quite so fortunately 
for the horse, had been pitched fairly on to 
the back of one of those noble animals, 
and beyond a multiplicity of bruises, and the 
utter ruin of his cauliflower wig, got no hurt 
from his involuntary equestrian feat. But 
with the noble inmate of the carriage the 
case was different. They lifted him out, 
quite insensible. He had no wound ; no frac- 
ture of a limb; it was the Shock, people 
said. 

There had been great cries all this time 



228 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

of " run for a doctor," and the advisers of 
that rational course of proceedings had set 
a bright example, by crowding round the 
injured man, and doing their best towards 
excluding the air from him, and hampering 
the movements of those who were lifting 
him up. The intelligence that it was a 
" swell " who had been hurt, spread with 
great rapidity ; and from all the filthy little 
allevs and courts between Charles Street 
on the one side, and Buckridge Street on 
the other, came trooping forth a ragged con- 
tingent of the lowest orders of English anc i 
Irish, who gazed with avidity at the ruined 
carriage, as though it had been a bark ship- 
wrecked on the wildest shore in Cornwall, 
and they were land-pirates, craving for plun- 
der, and already dividing the rich cargo among 
themselves. 

There was no need to run very far for 
medical assistance; for a chemist's shop stood 
not half-a-dozen yards distant ; and this fact, 
having by a most curious coincidence occurred 
to about half-a-dozen persons at once, Lord 



AN I M : \ PECTED SHOCK. 2 2 9 

BaddingtoD was carried thither, still insen- 
sible, on the braced arms of half-a-dozen 
men. 

It was a dark, dank, dangerous-looking, low- 
browed little shop, the windows, apparently, 
had never been washed since the flood. As 
to painting, it very probably had never under- 
gone that operation at all: its frontage and 
door being simply of the colour of dirt, and 
dirty. There were red and blue bottles in 
the windows; but the red flask was broken, 
and the blue was fast mildewing into green, 
and both were lamentably dingy. There was 
one blister on view, curled up and brown, 
by long dessication and disease, like a child's 
gingerbread " murabo jumbo," by long dry- 
ness and disuse, and which had been some 
years ago, I presume, a slough of despond to 
innumerable flies who had perished miserably 
in its cantharidian stickiness. There was a 
placard relating to leeehes, there was a white 
jar, labelled " tamarinds; " but it had a broken 
top, and held not tamarinds, but dust. There 
was the model of a horse in plaster of Paris; 



230 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the steed had but three legs, performing an 
eternal-goose step, with a bunch of herbs 
shins* across his back. There were a good 
many bunches of herbs, of an indescribably 
soiled, mouldy, unholy, magician's-laboratory 
look, hanging up ; and these, with some dingy 
roots, gave rise to the assumption that the 
proprietor of the establishment added the 
calling of an herbalist to his other avocations. 
It was a shop, in fine, that it seemed inappro- 
priate to call a " chemist's," or a " druggist's." 
It was emphatically a " doctor's shop," where 
they sold " doctor's stuff." 

A grim cat, with an evil eye, and a brindled 
coat, very dingy and rusty in hue, lay couchant 
on a shelf, in one of the upper window panes, 
and lay there stealthily watching the crowd, as 
though they were so many mice, and she waiting 
for a convenient opportunity to rend them in 
pieces, and devour them. 

The door of the doctor's shop was fastened, 
and it was only after considerable rattling 
thereat, agitating a rusty knocker, and pulling 
at a cracked bell, that the door itself was 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 231 

opened, as far as the chain which secured it 
inside would allow, and a head was presented 
through the aperture. It was the head of 
a middle-aged man, rather bald, and garnished 
with hair that was of the colour of hay, and 
whiskers that were of the hue of straw. 

u What do you want? " he not very courte- 
ously asked, for one who spoke with so soft 
a voice. 

"Accident," shouted the many voices. 
" Gent met with a haccident. Let us in. 
Make haste, Dawdle." 

"Go to Doctor Pybus, lower down," 
answered the bald-headed little man. " I 
don't take in accidents. Be off." 

Many cries of indignant remonstrance arose 
at this inhospitable reply. The Doctor seemed 
to be well known, and not very favorably so, 
among his neighbours; for shouts arose of 
"Old screw!" "Flinty heart," "Sold 
himself to the devil," " Who poisoned the 
babby?" and the like; and one little boy, fired 
with virtuous indignation, improved the for- 
tuitous occasion, boldly to smash the left- 



232 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hand bottom corner window pane with his 
hoop-stick ; and then, his young heart failing 
him, took to flight, and never ceased running 
till he got to Broad Street, St. Giles's. 

The bald-headed man had withdrawn that 
first-named portion of his animal economy, 
and was preparing, so it seemed, to close the 
door altogether, when a big brewer's drayman 
thrust his brawn v arm forward, and caught 
the Doctor by the collar. 

" You wizened hatomy of a lilyvite Jew," 
he cried, " if vou don't let us in, we'll smash 
every winder in your mangy crib . we will, 
by Jerry ! " 

But just then the surging of the crowd 
brought the body of the injured Peer full in 
sight of the Doctor. 

" Bless my soul," he cried; " it's his Lord- 
ship, Viscount Baddington. Why didn't you 
tell me so before, stupids? Come in, come 
in ! Stand aside, good people, for Heaven's 
sake!" 

So they bore Lord Baddington in; and the 
crowd, after a desperate effort to follow him, 



AN UNEXPECTED SHOCK. 233 

in which they were baffled by the almost 
instantaneous closing and locking of the door, 
consoled themselves by glueing their noses 
to the window-pane, and frightening the grim 
brindled cat away from her lair. 

I think that I must have forgotten to tell 
you that on the entablature, above the shop- 
front there was, in half-effaced characters, this 
inscription : . 

Tinctop, General Practitioner. 



234 



CHAP. XXX. 



THE DOCTOR'S LADY ERIEXD. 



A LWAYS a lord, for ever a lord : write the 
title on a scroll, and tie it to the tail of 
a kite, or under the wing of a pigeon, and 
let it travel the whole world over. Trumpet 
it forth to the nations; for it is a name of 
power and might and majesty. Fill the ears 
of foreigners with it, for it is a great Sound. 

They took the poor stunned nobleman into 
the general practitioner's back-parlour, and 
applied the usual " restoratives." The usual 
restoratives necessitated the removal of the 
wig, the stays, the padded under-waistcoat, 
and the patent-leather boots. The almost 
indomitable rouge ceded at last to lotions and 



THE DOCTOR'S LADY FRIEND. 235 

bathings; all the paraphernalia of juvenility 
were removed, scrap by scrap; and nothing 
remained lying on the doctor's couch but a 
withered, yellow old man, with false teeth. 

He came to himself by and by, and staring 
around in a vacant manner, asked, nervously 
feeling his jaw and his shoulder meanwhile, 
whether he had not been rather poorly lately. 
For this lord was perpetually haunted by a 
spectre ; and a skeleton sat continually at his 
banquets, whose name was Paralysis; and 
with returning consciousness came a fear that 
the ghost, which he was wont to lay at ordi- 
nary times in a Eed Sea of fashionable enjoy- 
ment, had had him on the hip for once, and 
had smitten him down to be bedridden for 
aye. 

He was soon re-assured on this subject, 
however, and was satisfied that he had sus- 
tained no more serious injury than a violent 
blow on the head. He began to talk cheer- 
fully, on this information being conveyed to 
him . to talk volubly, facetiously, and, if the 
truth must be told, somewhat incoherently. 



236 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

He was very much shaken, evidently. That 
blow on the head had brought no blood, but 
it had made him a very different Lord Bad- 
dington to the one who walked and talked an 
hour since. You may put on his wig again, 
re-rouge his cheeks, re-lace his stays, re-lac- 
quer his boots, oh barbers, valets, and man- 
milliners ! . but neither you, nor all the king's 
horses, nor all the king's men, shall ever 
make him the same Lord Baddington, or set 
him up again. 

He began to babble about his carriage, 
horses, servants. The general practitioner 
had seen to all that. The carriage had been 
removed ; the horses stabled in the neigh- 
bourhood ; the bruised coachman seen to ; the 
footman despatched to his Lordship's resi- 
dence, to break the news of the accident, as 
discreetly, as possible to the Viscountess Bad- 
dington. 

"What the dooce did you do that for?" 
the invalid asked, very testily, but very feebly. 
u What necessity was there for alarming her 
Ladyship at all? Her Ladyship's easily 
excited. I 'm not in any danger, am I ? 



THE DOCTOR S LADY FRIEND. 237 

" I sincerely trust that such is not the case, 
my Lord," the general practitioner answered, 
with his soft voice and a low bow; "but I 
acted for the best, your Lordship having been 
for a very considerable time completely insen- 
sible. I also deemed it my duty, sensible of 
the heavy responsibility that hung over me, 
to send one of your servants to request the 
immediate attendance of your Lordship's re- 
gular medical attendant, Sir Paracelsus Fleem, 
with whose address (your footman told me 
that he was the accredited family surgeon) I 
happened professionally to be acquainted." 

" You 're very good, I'm sure," the Peer 
answered with a languid peevishness; " I 'm 
very much obliged to you. Dooced officious 
you 're making yourself," he added, mentally. 
" 1 won't forget it, Mr., Mr. . " 

u Tinctop, at your Lordship's service." 

" Tinctop, Tinctop . don't I know the 
name? Haven't 1 seen you somewhere be- 
fore, Mr. Tinctop?" 

U I think not, my Lord," answered he of 
the bald head, with another low bow; and I 



238 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

think myself, that if ever any one deserved a 
medal of the brightest brass for telling a cool 
and deliberate lie, that bald-headed general 
practitioner was the man. 

For it was indeed Seth Tinctop, erst as- 
sistant of Mr. Fleem, the fashionable surgeon, 
erst the deaf and dumb recipient of secrets. 
However he had escaped from the search of 
his loving friend Pollyblank, wherever and in 
whatever corner of London he had been 
hiding himself. he who was supposed to be 
abroad, thousands of miles away . can only be 
comprehended by those who are conversant, 
to its fullest extent with the immensity of 
the wilderness of London. It is the only 
place in the world where a man can play 
Timon of Athens to the life, where he can 
steal away and hide himself so that no human 
eye shall have power to see or human ear 
to hear of his whereabouts. If ever you 
commit a robbery or a forgery, my felonious 
friend, who may read these lines, don't run 
away to America . Daniel Forester will follow 
by the next steamer, Don't trust to the Anti- 



THE DOCTOR'S LADY FRIEND. 239 

podes . a detective will bring you back in the 
clipper, Red Jacket, in a neat suit of handcuffs, 
along with the gold-dust and the gold-diggers. 
Hide yourself in London, and you have a 
chance of safety; hide yourself in London, 
and you may read the advertisements in the 
newspapers, offering a reward for your own 
apprehension, and laugh in your sleeve as you 
read: for London is the only real Cave of 
Adullam, the only real city of refuge where 
all who are in debt and in difficulty, in danger 
and in discontent, may find an asylum well 
nigh as inaccessible as the Highland haunt of 
a red deer or the eyrie of an eagle. 

Tin ctop. self-promoted, I presume. pro- 
moted to be a general practitioner, but the 
same stealthy, soft-spoken assistant that we 
have known him of yore . slipped quietly 
off to his surgery to compound some medica- 
ment, and left his patient alone for a few 
minutes. The reflections of Lord Badding- 
ton were not of the most agreeable descrip- 
tion. He was in no immediate danger, of 
course. How could he be? His skin was 



240 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

whole, his bones were unbroken. But he 
felt very ill at ease, notwithstanding. The 
ghost that haunted him would not be ex- 
orcised, but came and sat over against him 
with his arms folded and an ugly leer ; and 
there was no Red Sea of fashionable en- 
joyment to lay the unwelcome guest in just 
then. He was an old man; he had led a 
wicked, graceless, merry, godless life; he had 
a ycung wife of whom he was jealousy he had 
an heir whom he hated. For all his place in the 
House of Peers, his coronet and ermine, his 
flatterers and dependents, the crowds, even, of 
his equals, who were glad to eat his toads and 
hunt his tufts and partake of his rich dinners, 
he could not bring to mind one man among 
the whole brilliant assemblage whom he could 
truly call his friend. These are the things 
that make sickness terrible. When you feel 
you are drifting away to a rock-bound coast, 
where there are no havens whose inhabitants 
will put out in life- boats to save you, mindful 
of the good deeds of charity, and love, and 
mercy you have done to them or theirs in 



THE DOCTOR'S LADY FRIEND. 241 

the old time ; when no hand throws out a 
rope to save you; when there looms not for 
you in the distance that everlasting Rock 
of Faith, from whose sides the waters of life 
ever flow into the great sea of mortality, and 
whose summit is crowned by the Lighthouse 
that is a light to all the world. 

A carriage drove up to the dingy shop 
door, and its occupant, Sir Paracelsus Fleem, 
was received by the bald-headed practitioner. 
The great surgeon recognised his quondam 
assistant at once. 

u Tinctop, by all that's wonderful!" he 
exclaimed. "I thought you were dead, or 
transported, or at least out of England for 
good." 

" Not jet, Sir Paracelsus," returned the 
discreet Mr. Tinctop, with a bow to his former 
chief . a respectful bow, but one not quite so 
subservient as he had thought it decorous to 
bestow on the Lord inside; " still I am highly 
grateful for your good wishes. Will you 
please to walk inside, and look at his Lord- 
ship?" 

VOL. II. R 



242 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" How did he come here ? What is the 
matter with him ?" 

" A heavy vehicle. a van laden with dry 
sroods, I believe . came in collision with his 
Lordship's carriage, about half an hour since. 
The back of the carriage was driven completely 
in. His Lordship was thrown over to the op- 
posite side with considerable violence, striking 
his head I am induced to believe, against the 
sill of the carriage window. He was brought in 
here stunned. I applied the usual remedies, and 
I noAV hand him over to you, holding myself 
completely at your disposal, should my 
services be of any avail." 

" You're the same snaky, civil, soft-spoken 
son of a gun, my friend Tinctop," muttered 
Sir Paracelsus, " that you were five years 
ao-o. You'll have to send for me to the 
Old Bailey yet to give you a character, I 
fancy, though what I could say for or against 
you I'm sure I don't know. You're either 
the worst -looking good fellow or the best- 
looking bad felloAv I ever saw. Which is 
the way to his Lordship, Tinctop?" 



THE DOCTOR S LADY FRIEND. 243 

"This way, Sir; this way, Sir Paracelsus," 
answered the other; and he led the way into 
the parlour behind the shop, where Lord 
Baddington had been lying on the temporary 
couch that had been made up for him. 

Tinctop left him alone with his patient, and 
began making up a prescription in a mortar. 
It must have been a strange sample of the 
jit mistura; for T am certain that ginger, 
sal volatile, benzoin, tincture of rhubarb, 
opium, cocculus indicus, powdered gum arabic, 
sarsaparilla,, bark, alum, essence of cloves, 
lavender water, quinine, ipecacuanha, mag- 
nesia, camomile flowers, cardamom seeds, and 
Dutch drops entered into the composition. 
At least he seemed to pour ingredients from 
bottles so labelled indiscriminately, or, which 
is just as likely, he was pestling the empty 
sides of the mortar. At all events Mr. 
Tinctop was in a profound reverie; and I 
don't think the patient, for whom the mixture 
was designed . supposing that patient ever 
to have existed . would have derived much 
benefit, interiorly or exteriorly, from the 



244 THE BADDINGTON PEEEAGE. 

elaborate nostrum. He left off pestling, and 
walked to the window. Then he took out 
a black pocket-book, and producing from it 
two worn and almost tattered papers, began 
to examine them closely, while a lambent 
light of satisfaction seemed to glow, but in a 
moist and marshy manner, like a will-o'-the 
wisp, over his countenance. 

" All safe, all safe!" he whispered to him- 
self. " All safe, but one solitary paper, one 
that I missed, one that I would give worlds 
to find. Nine-tenths of the evidence, and 
only one little paper-link wanting. The 
newspapers tell me that Jack Pollyblank is 
safe in Newgate; and before another two 
months are over I hope he'll be safe on his 
way to Norfolk Island. And besides, if he 
were to split, he could prove nothing. He 
knows nothing, can do nothing, for he hasn't 
got these . he hasn't got these !" 

He gave a triumphant chuckle, as, glancing 
once more at the papers, he carefully folded 
them up, replaced them once more in the 
pocket-book, and that again in his breast 
pocket. 



THE DOCTOR'S LADY FRIEND. 245 

Just then Sir Paracelsus Fleem came out 
of the parlour. 

u I can't make him out at all, Tinctop," 
he said. " He's not seriously injured, but 
he's in a very bad way. His head's all 
wrong." 

"Do you think his Lordship's life is in 
any danger, Sir?" the practitioner asked 
quietly. 

" I do think ," replied the surgeon. 

He was about to continue, till turning his 
eyes on to Tinctop's face, he seemed to see 
something there that dissuaded him from 
giving further utterance to his opinion, " I 
think," he then went on, modifying his dis- 
course, u that the best thing we can do with 
his Lordship is to take him home at once 
to Curzon Street. My carriage is at the 
door, and if you will get some assistance we'll 
have him placed in it forthwith. Of course, 
you'll be paid liberally for your trouble, 
Tinctop." 

"You are very kind, Sir Paracelsus," the 
inferior said, with a profound obeisance; " but 



246 THE BADDINGTON PEEEAGE. 

I have a little account to settle with my Lord 
Baddington, who will no doubt remunerate 
me for my trouble when that settlement is 
made." 

" A little account ! I thought you had 
settled that years ago," Sir Paracelsus ob- 
served with supreme contempt. " Didn't you 
get enough hush-money from him then ?" 

" You seem to be unaware, sir," Tinctop 
replied, " that such accounts bear interest. 
There is a trifling dividend yet due on my 
claim." 

What answer the irate surgeon (who had the 
heartiest disdain and aversion for his former 
assistant) might have returned is uncertain; 
but at that moment another carriage . an 
honest hackney-coach this time . stumbled up 
to the door, and from it stepped her Lady- 
ship, the Viscountess Baddington. 



247 



CHAP. XXXI. 

CALLED TO THE UPPER HOUSE. 

\I/HO could have been the " lady friend " 
of the general practitioner? and was 
not the title of the last chapter (the reader is 
entitled to ask) somewhat of a misnomer ? 

Not so. Mr. Tinctop's lady friend was no 
other than the Viscountess Baddington; for 
so soon as he had given her admittance, he 
took the liberty of staring in her face, at first 
with a look of blank amazement, then with 
one of familiar recognition, and then seizing 
her by the arm, he ejaculated : . 

" Why, Polly!" 

Polly! how on earth could her name be 
Polly? Wasn't she the Viscountess Badding- 



248 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

ton? AVasn't she the wife of a Peer of the 
realm? Didn't her name appear in (i Debrett" 
as Georgina, only daughter of the late Captain 
Andrew Chutnee, H.E.I.C.S., of . Hall, 
shire ? 

She did not strike the caitiff to the ground, 
or wither him up in the great anger of her dis- 
dainful glance. She whom you have known so 
haughty in her boudoir, so cold, so proud, so 
pitiless in her contempt, so queen-like in her ar- 
rogant beauty . she who but an instant before 
had descended from her carriage radiant and ma- 
jestic . who had sailed into the shop with the 
assured step of one of whom it can be said, 
Incedit Regina . she suddenly cowered and 
turned pale when the chemist's voice addressed 
her, and the chemist's hand was laid on her 
arm; and in a voice very low, but evidently 
agitated by contending emotions, she an- 
swered : . 

" Hush, hush ! for heaven's sake, be silent ! 
You will ruin me if you call me by that name 
again. How is Lord Baddington? Is he in 
danger?" 



CALLED TO THE UPPER HOUSE. 249 

" Before I answer that question, tell me 
what right you have to feel interested in him ? " 

"lam married to him." 

" Are you his wife?" 

" I am married to him." 

u Listen to me, you jade ! " Mr. Tinctop 
exclaimed, pushing his face close to hers, and 
hissing forth the words, rather than speaking 
them. u I'll twist your wrist off if you don't 
give me a direct answer. What have you 
been doing, you she-wolf you, you jewelled 
serpent, you shining crocodile, since you left 
me at Calais, after ruining me : left me with- 
out a franc in my pocket, and over head and 
ears in debt, when you had at least a hundred 
pounds' worth of jewels on that viper's body 
of yours?" 

But he never lost his temper, the ex- 
assistant; his mild, placid face and shining 
bald head belied the vehemence of his words. 
But he kept a tight hold on her wrist the 
while, and his eyes ever and anon shot poisoned 
darts into hers. So I have known men, torn 
within by great passions, seem on the surface 



2,50 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

calm, equable, impassible. There is many a 
volcano in the world from which not even the 
slenderest spiral of smoke escapes ordinarily; 
but the eruption must take place some day, 
and then the floods of boiling lava submerge 
whole cities, and the sky is in a blaze with the 
belching forth of flames. 

" Pity me, pardon me, spare me," the beau- 
tiful woman, thus humbled, went on. " Defer 
your revenge, at least. My husband is rich, 
and I will bribe you to your heart's content." 

" What have you been doing since you left 
me, I ask again? If you don't answer me, 
I'll make my ringers meet in your flesh, I 
will, you green lizard, you." 

"I have been . I have been . Well, I 
have been . " 

" What you always were, what you are in 
your heart, a . " 

u An adventuress. Who made me one, 
Seth Tinctop? I was the orphan of an Indian 
colonel at Baden last autumn. I had a female 
companion . you remember Whiddy; her I 
have pensioned off. I really had some con- 



CALLED TO THE UPPER HOUSE. 251 

nection with the East Indies, for I had been 
the wife of a colonel in the Company's service 
all the winter at Turin. Lord Baddington 
fell in love with me, and married me then and 
there." 

" You are married to him, then ? " 

" Y-y-es." 

11 You are quite sure of that ? " 

" I am." 

She said this in a bold and decided tone, 
and almost out loud. The chemist drew back, 
scrutinising her face narrowly. Then he went 
towards her, and said . 

" If you really are married to him, you 
haven't made quite such a good thing of it in 
a money point of view as you may imagine. 
In my opinion, the life of your dear husband 
(of whom you are, of course, outrageously 
fond) isn't worth three days' purchase. Sir 
Paracelsus Fleem, who is inside with him, 
thinks so too." 

11 I have my jointure." 

" Which isn't worth much, the Noble Lord's 
estates being mortgaged up to the eyes, and 
himself over head and ears in c]^ht. ,J 



252 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" I have my title." 

The woman said this proudly, confidently, 
as though she knew that the possession of a 
coronet . even of a do wager- viscountess . 
secured immunity for her for the future. 

" I don't think that your title will prove a 
very profitable investment, my dear; for if 
this old rip dies, I mean to marry you myself. 
It will sound well, won't it ; Seth Tinctop, Esq., 
and the Dowager Lady Baddington?" 

She shuddered from head to foot, in her 
anger, and would, I am afraid have returned 
some indignant answer; but there was a great 
stir in the inner room, and Sir Paracelsus 
Fleem suddenly burst into the shop. 

" Tinctop, Tinctop ! here, make haste ! His 
Lordship's in a fit! " 

The ex-assistant turned round, laid a finger 
on his lip, and darted one meaning glance at 
Lady Baddington. Then he followed Sir 
Paracelsus into the parlour, she close upon his 
heels, and trembling in every limb. At the 
door Fleem became aware of her presence, 
and bowing low before her, essayed, but with 



CALLED TO THE UPPER HOUSE. 253 

the greatest respect, to stay her further 
progress. 

" My dear madam, if your Ladyship would 
allow me, I think you had better not. Such 
a shock to your Ladyship's nerves." 

But she repulsed him very calmly and 
firmly, saying, " Sir Paracelsus, when my 
husband is ill, his wife's place is by his side. 
Pray do not stop me, I beg." And so passed 
into the chamber. 

Into the dark and dingy chamber, where 
there were more musty herbs hanging up, 
more hideous reptiles in bottles, more odours 
of defunct prescriptions, and as a pictorial 
ornament, a ghostly cartoon of a man out of 
his skin, but in his under layer of muscles, 
coloured au naturel. And on the temporary 
bed, his mouth drawn on one side, the foam 
on his lips, and his eyes upturned, dreadful to 
look at, was the poor old man who had dressed 
so gaily, spoken so mincingly, and stepped so 
gingerly an hour before. The Viscountess, 
his wife, was on her knees by his bed-side, her 
arm supporting his head, in a moment. The 



254- THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tears streamed from her beautiful eyes ; with 
her golden hair fluttering round her face, she 
looked like a ministering angel ; and the Devil, 
who was doubtless at that moment sitting 
with his legs curled round one of the glass 
bottles that had the reptiles inside, must have 
laughed to look at her. 

Charles Delahawk Falcon, Viscount Bad- 
dington in the Peerage of Ireland, died, after 
a rapid succession of fits, at eight o'clock that 
same night. His Lordship's constitution, na- 
turally feeble and already shattered by an 
irregular life, gave way even under the trifling 
injury he had sustained by the collision with 
his carriage. " He died in the arms of his 
bereaved and disconsolate wife, and in the 
presence of Sir Paracelsus Fleem, his regu- 
lar medical attendant, and Mr. Febrifuge, 
F.R.C.S., who had been hastily summoned to 
the bed-side of the deceased nobleman, assisted 
by Mr. Seth Tinctop, M.R.C.S., a respectable 
medical practitioner, close to whose surgery 
in Drury-lane the fatal occurrence which led 
to his Lordship's death took place, and who 



CALLED TO THE UPPER HOUSE. 255 

paid him every attention till the arrival of 
other medical assistance. We are enabled to 
state that . ." But I am quoting the Morning 
Post for July, 1835. 

The remains of Lord Baddington were re- 
moved to his house in Curzon-street, Mayfair, 
the same evening, and there was a grand 
masquerade of the very blackest hue, and of 
the costliest description. They buried him 
in velvet and embroidery, and on his tomb 
they put an infinity of things that were not 
true. For he was a Lord to the last. 



!56 



CHAP. XXXII. 

CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 

T^HE affairs of that Lord of Baddington, 
who came to his end in a doctor's shop 
in Drury Lane, were found, on investigation, 
to be in a most satisfactory state of complica- 
tion and embarrassment. I use the term 
satisfactory advisedly; for the condition of 
semi-bankruptcy in which the peer had died 
was a subject of the most heartfelt gratulation, 
not only to his lordship's professional advisers, 
but to very many gentlemen of the long robe 
and the short coat, who dwelt in chambers of 
the mustiest and most mildewed description . 
chambers of such vile odour, indeed, that it 
seemed as though whole generations of ruined 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 257 

and desperate clients had committed suicide 
within their mouldy precincts, and had been 
buried in the sarcophagi of the japanned 
tin boxes on the shelves . chambers situate 
in divers honourable inns of court. And, 
moreover, not only did these sable and white- 
neck-kerchiefed gentlemen rejoice greatly at 
the dead man's difficulties, but the contagion 
of jubilation spread even to their articled 
clerks, and to the very office boys and pallid- 
visaged runners, and red-nosed laundresses, 
to whom it was given to feed upon the scraps 
of green ferret, and the crumbs of parchment 
that fell from the legal table. The pickings 
were so rich. Oyster-shells were to remain, 
perhaps, eventually for the heirs ; but between 
them there was a dainty mollusc . juicy, suc- 
culent, and appetising; costs, in fact. Many 
conservatories were added to solicitors' villas 
at Tulse Hill ; many barristers' wives had sable 
pelisses, new beaver bonnets, and trips to 
Brighton ; many clerks' daughters listened 
to the troubadour at Beulah Spa, and went 
a donkeying on Margate sands; many office- 

VOL. II. s 



258 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

boys had surreptitious banquets of saveloys 
and porter; many runners and law-writers 
contributed materially to the profits of Messrs. 
Thompson and Fearon the distillers ; many 
rubicund-visaged laundresses supplied their 
husbands . the broker's man, the undertaker's 
assistant, or the Doctors' Commons license tout 
. with delicious little hot suppers of pigs' feet 
or lambs' fry : and all these treats and regale- 
ments owed their origin to the rich pickings 
of the embarrassed Baddington property : to 
the costs, in fact. Wherever those costs came 
from must remain one of those legal mysteries 
to be unravelled only by some future Braeton 
or Noyes. Yet it appears to me incontrovertible, 
that lawyers are the only persons who possess 
the Kosicrucian secret of skinny flints, and 
eliminating the hide and fat from fleas, the 
milk from paving-stones, the butter from egg- 
shells, the sunbeams from cucumbers, and of 
extracting gold from all. They laugh at the 
proverb "ex nihilo" and bring forth bank- 
notes and shining guineas from empty purses 
and pocket-books, with as much facility as 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 259 

my poor Professor Polly blank was wont to 
extract pounds of feathers and legions of toys 
from the seeming vacuum inside an old hat. 
It may be that there is a hocus-pocus and 
hankey-pankey in both professions. 

The Baddington estates, in Ireland, were 
entailed, which must have been a great com- 
fort to the gallant Captain Falcon, the present 
heir to, and possessor of, the family honours : 
seeing it gave him a remote chance of deriving 
. when some millennium of rent-paying ar- 
rived . an income of some thousands per 
annum from them. At present, they were 
capitally managed by an agent . quite an 
aristocrat, who was a half-pay captain, rode 
to hounds, drew a fat salary, visited the first 
families in the county, and proved, without 
the possibility of doubt, that none of the 
tenants ever paid any rent, and were, more- 
over, in the inexorable habit . dating from 
the time of Brian Boru, the Round Towers, 
and the Annals of the Four Masters . of 
throwing all bailiffs, putting in distresses, into 
the River Ballywhack, and compelling all 



260 THE BADDINGTON PEEEAGE. 

process-servers to eat their own writs, under 
pain of death by the shillelagh. So the new 
Lord Baddington was safe as regards Ireland ; 
and much good his estates there were likely 
to do him. 

There was an estate in England, which, 
bein^ mortgaged to above five times its value, 
and unentailed, was sold, by consent of some- 
body and order of somebody else. The insig- 
nificance of the sum it produced was very 
nearly the cause of apoplexy to the heads of 
several highly respectable money-lending firms 
of the Jewish persuasion ; but it having been 
discovered in the nick of time that it ought 
not, at least under existing circumstances, to 
have been sold at all, it was thrown (by order 
of another somebody else) into Chancery, 
where it became a nice quiet little action . 
the costs being costs in the cause ; to the great 
profit of the lawyers aforesaid, who drew upon 
it amazingly, and looked upon it as a very 
good thing, promising quite a tortoise-duration 
of existence. 

So much for the real property, The per- 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 261 

sonalty was sworn as under fifty thousand 
pounds. I think, that if money in the funds, 
and money in the hands of Messrs. Coutts and 
Co., bankers. Strand, had been reckoned, if 
the freehold of a little shooting-box near 
Twickenham, in whose vicinity the partridges, 
goodness help them! (even supposing that 
there were any), had never been disturbed 
in the late lord's time; but within whose sly 
little garden-walls there had been, dans le 
temps ) very many pretty little archery meet- 
ings, one Daniel Cupid being chief bowman, 
and sundry figurantes of the King's Theatre 
toxopholites, the Baddington head gules the 
target, and the bull's-eye gold of the real 
Danaean ring : . if all these had been counted, 
together with the lease, chaste furniture, rich 
decorations, valuable plate, and choice pic- 
tures of the house in Curzon Street, and the 
late peer's wardrobe, books, and linen, down 
to his dog's-eared copy of Catullus, his noble 
waistband, and his most noble shirt, fifty 
hundred pounds would have been nearer the 
mark whereby to estimate this famous per- 



2o2 THE BADDINGTON PEEK AGE. 

sonalty. And even this calculation might 
have been wanting in accuracy; for it ap- 
peared that by a deed of gift executed six 
weeks before Lord Baddington's death, lease, 
furniture, fixtures, pictures, plate, linen, 
decorations, everything appertaining to the 
fairy palace in Curzon Street, became the sole 
and entire property of Genevieve, Viscountess 
Baddington, and were hers and her heirs' . 
to have and to hold for ever. 

Nor was all told yet. It furthermore ap- 
peared, that in the hands of trustees there 
stood in the Three-and-a-quarter per Cent. 
stocks of the Bank of England, for the use and 
benefit of the before-mentioned Genevieve, 
Viscountess Baddington, no less a sum than 
twenty thousand pounds sterling. Wherever 
this sum had come from, what Jews had 
been squeezed, what loan-mongers swindled, 
what rouge -et noir bank at a German water- 
ing place broken, to secure that bonny nest- 
egg, no one could tell; but there it was, 
glistening, exciting, intact, the fury of the 
heir and the creditors, and the chagrin even of 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 263 

certificated attorney and utter barrister; 
for the title to it was indisputable, and 
there were no costs to be gotten from it 
at all. 

Of course, efforts were made to wrench the 
rich prize from the bereaved and disconsolate 
widow, in a genteel court-moving way. But 
the court was not to be moved in any way 
adverse to Lady Baddington. She, too, had 
lawyers of her own . stern men, who would 
not stand any nonsense, and who wanted what 
few costs out of pocket there might be for 
themselves; and so the great army of vultures 
and ravens that were wheeling and croaking 
over the prostrate carcase of nobility got 
nothing by their motion, and the widow held 
her own. 

You, cunning man of law, expert in un- 
ravelling twisted cases, and in finding flaws in 
titles, will quarrel with and carp at me, very 
probably ; and sneer down the picture that I, 
poor-story teller, have drawn of a great man's 
inheritance. Go into your closet, sleek black 
rat, and fetching down those calf-bound re- 



264 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

ports, tell me on your oath . (kissing, not your 
thumb, but the book) . whether I have exag- 
gerated in one tittle . nay, even in the volume 
of a grain of silver sand . nay, even in the 
duration of the life of an ephemeral insect . 
nay, even in the circumference of a single hair 
. the be-devilments with which you and yours 
who have received the baptism of pounce and 
green ferret, who catch up innocent lambs 
that you may turn their skins into vellum 
whereon to inscribe your unholy abracababra 
of ''hereinafter mentioned" and "aforesaid," 
can surround the clearest case of A. having 
nothing to leave to B., or C. leaving all he 
is possessed of to D. "Was there not a great 
painter who died the other day, leaving his 
immense fortune, acquired by his own unaided 
talents, and by as clearly a written will as 
ever was witnessed, to the Nation, to the 
funds of an asylum to be erected for the 
relief of his brother artists fallen upon evil 
days ? Who immediately began to pick nice 
holes (such as magpies pick to hide their 
stolen cheese within) in his will, pleading 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 265 

fervently for nieces and nephews, for whom 
the dead artist cared not one farthing, and 
who would have tranquilly left him to rot if 
he had not been an Academician and a prince 
among painters, and worth a plum ? Who 
but you, sharp men of law . who but you 
will amass fortunes out of the beggar's inheri- 
tance of rags and bones, and yet bring the 
gorged money-bags to an ultimate condition of 
utter shrivelledness ? Who but Law, insatiate, 
insatiable . conniving at its own iniquities, 
sometimes by sly statutes drawn by itself, full 
of loop-holes and snuggeries and safety-valves, 
provided for bursting out more iniquitously 
than ever in a fresh place? 

Exactly one month had elapsed from the 
demise of our dear brother departed, whom 
you wot of; and on an autumnal morning, 
there sat in a private room of an exceedingly 
private hotel, in Jermyn Street, a young gen- 
tleman, attired in deep and decorous black, 
who, a month since, was wont to accept his 
bills of exchange with the name of Charles 
Falcon, but who was now entitled to sign him- 



266 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

self Baddington ; and was, in truth, a peer of 
the realm, and a pillar of the state. 

He was a mild-looking young man, of the 
approved dragoon pattern, as stereographed by 
Mr. John Leech, tall, broad-shouldered, bulky- 
limbed, small-headed, bushy-whiskered, full- 
mustachioed, insolent-looking. His black 
clothes did not make him half mournful 
enough ; for the dandified cut of the West-end 
tailor predominated over the sable hue of the 
garments themselves, and gave him more of 
the air of a Beau Fielding suddenly dipped 
into an ink vat. He was a man whom women 
might have thought very handsome, looking 
at his stature and hirsute face; he was one 
whom observant men must have thought very 
ill-looking, when they took account, his small, 
gray, cruel eyes, large, panting nostrils, and 
mouth with the corners dropping down. 

Lord Baddington, be it said, once for all, 
was a Fool. He was so ignorant . despite the 
assiduous castigation he had received from his 
pastors and masters at school, and the jeers 
and taunts he had undergone from his com- 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 267 

rades at the university and in barracks . 
he was so ignorant that he could scarcely 
spell, and was haunted by an uneasy notion 
that the Straits of Gibraltar were an island in 
the South Sea. He had no observation, 
no wit, no humour, and no thought. His 
manners consisted in being slangy to his 
equals and overbearing to his inferiors . 
superiors he could scarcely have; for as the 
heir to a peerage, though a beggarly one, he 
had been toadied from his cradle. In the 
society of virtuous women he was dumb as a 
stockfish. With actresses and denizens of the 
demi-monde, he was insolent and coarse. He 
was one of fifty thousand "swells" . would 
that I could find a word more expressive and 
less vulgar. as ignorant, as coarse, and as 
foolish as he; but, like the majority of his 
brethren, he possessed all the arts, and graces, 
and allurements of a " swell " de par le monde. 
He could hunt, drive, fish, row, wrestle, smoke 
the largest and strongest cigars, fence, stare 
milliners' girls out of countenance, insult 
civilians, bully servants, persuade himself into 



268 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the conviction that he could crush intellectual 
men with that supreme disdain which with 
the Fool passes for intellect . you know what 
the fool in the Proverbs said in his own heart 
. and get into debt with an imperturbable 
equanimity which instilled confidence into the 
most sceptical of tailors. He could not re- 
member the date of the battle of Waterloo ; 
but he knew the names of all the winners of 
the Derby, and the latest state of the betting 
for ten years back; he would have been 
puzzled to work out a sum in short division; 
but he was wonderful in the calculation of the 
odds at hazard, and at ecarte, and unlimited 
loo, few men could beat him. 

Fool as he was, he knew, to use a trite and 
common colloquialism, " which side his bread 
was buttered." He was a Rogue. For one of 
the most miserable fallacies of axiomatic phi- 
losophy is that which assumes that the world 
is divided into two great classes, " fools and 
rogues.' 7 There are four such classes. The 
rogue-fool . that is merciless Charles the Fifth, 
who casts three empires away to make watches 



CAPTAIN FALCON COMES TO HIS OWN. 269 

and then bleats for his imperial toys again. 
The fool-rogue . that is James the Second of 
England, followed closely in the footsteps of 
Bloody Mary, and nearly driving his subjects 
to chop his half Tom-fool, half Duke of Alva's 
head off, and yet the best meaning man in the 
world. There is the perfect fool. that is 
Edward the Second; there is the perfect 
rogue . that is Edward Agar. 

Lord Baddington was a rogue-fool. His 
folly needed leading-strings, and he made 
them out of roguery. He would be a seducer 
because it was a wet day, and the garrison 
town was dull. He would abandon the woman 
he had wronged, because Maggies, of the 
Seventh, had done it; and it was rather 
the thing than otherwise to do. He would 
borrow money from a friend, and not repay it, 
because it was more convenient than to borrow 
it from a bill discounter, who would exact 
interest, make him take payment half in cash 
and half in pictures, sherry, camel-bits, ivory 
frigates, and paving stones, and would proba- 
bly sue when the bill was dishonoured. Such 



270 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

was Lord Viscount Baddington, the new. A 
credit to his order, n'est ce pas? 

At least there had been this about the old 
bad dead man, that he was refined in his vices, 
polished in his corruption, and humourous in 
his cynicism. We groan about whited sepul- 
chres, and bugs with gilded wings, and painted 
children of dirt ; but let us be consistent. We 
must either pull down Gehenna altogether, 
plough over its wicked site, and sow it with 
salt, or we must whiten the sepulchres, and 
and make them look genteel and decent. 
Open cesspools and yawning charnel-houses 
won't do in the same brave thoroughfares 
where we have Exeter Hall, and the meeting 
of the " Sepoys' Friend Abolition of Capital 
Punishment Society." 



271 



CHAP. XXXIII. 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 



[" ORD BADDIXGTOX was not alone at 
breakfast. There had been admitted to 
the privacy of his Lordship's repast two gen- 
tlemen . one a washed-out, weak-eyed, scro- 
fulous little young man, the son of a bishop, 
who had originally been designed for the 
church, in which his right reverend father held, 
of course, the patronage of several livings of 
great corpulence, but who, failing to show any 
vocation for the Church of England as by law 
established, even to the extent of being able 
to construe any four consecutive lines of any 
Greek play, a familiar acquaintance with the 
vivacious and highly moral comedies of Aris- 



272 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tophanes being of course indispensable to the 
education of a pastor of the Christian church, 
had been pitch-forked into the Foot Guards, 
where, in leading to the deadly parade and the 
imminent field-day grizzly Grenadiers of about 
twice his stature, he gave the liveliest satis- 
faction to his commanding officers, and to the 
country at large. His name was Tiffin ; he 
was a lieutenant and captain, and his father 
was bishop of Bombay. His Lordship's other 
friend was -a fiery old major on half-pay, by 
name Gambroon . the more fiery, perhaps, as 
an uncongenial fortune had never once given 
him an opportunity of distinguishing himself 
in the tented field. He had served all over 
the world in different garrisons; and his 
trophies consisted in a vast store of pickled 
mangoes and curry-powder, dried reindeer 
tongues, beaver skins, and an inflamed coun- 
tenance, the result of innumerable nights at 
mess of the wettest possible description. Being 
such an old boy, he was of course a member 
of the Junior United Service Club, where he 
bullied the waiters fearfully, and let the 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 273 

steward know the full meaning of the articles 
of war and the Queen's regulations. He had 
never been married, and till within a very 
short period had lived on his pay ; but an aunt 
had lately left him a legacy of four thousand 
pounds, in order to spite a niece of hers whom 
she hated, which sum he had at once discreetly 
sunk in an annuity in order to spite a niece of 
his whom he hated. Lastly, hovering about 
the three, and pervading the breakfast-table 
generally, was Lord Baddington's own man 
Coops, who had been a trooper in the regiment 
in which his Lordship had condescended to 
serve; but manifesting a notable incapacity 
for acquiring the commonest rudiments of 
drill, had, after suffering all the anguish of the 
knout of the rough-rider's long whip in the 
riding-school, been promoted to the post of 
Lord Baddington's body servant. 

" Stone walls," it hath been sententiously 
and poetically observed, " do not a prison 
make, nor iron bars a cage." 

" Hearts quiet and contented take 



That for a hermitage. " 



VOL. II. 



274 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

On the other hand, it must he confessed that 
broiled ham, devilled kidneys, cold chickens, 
anchovy toast, potted tongue, kippered salmon, 
brawn, pieds de cocJion truffes, poached eggs, 
Eussian caviar, Dundee marmalade, Yarmouth 
bloaters, pate de foie gras, assisted by Twining's 
tea, Decastes's coffee, and, maybe, a bottle of 
Beaune and a flask of curagoa, although the 
concomitants of as capital a breakfast as the 
most exclusive of London private hotels can 
furnish forth, do not always make up the full 
measure of human felicity. There are times 
when the rich viands pall upon the palate and 
the salt loses its savour, and when our mind 
being somewhat ill at ease, if not diseased, we 
feel inclined to throw not only physic, but 
breakfast, to the dogs, and to have none of it. 
The fire-eating Major did ample justice to 
every viand and condiment on the table, from 
the broiled ham to the curagoa, and when his 
martial countenance from good cheer assumed 
rather the hue of purple than of crimson, be- 
took himself to smoking cigars of prodigious 
size and of a fiery flavour with great gusto. 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 275 

The bishop's little son had been up the whole 
of the previous night on a knocker-hunting 
expedition . (you must remember, reader, 
that this was in the days of the great Marquis, 
when such robbery had not degenerated into 
mere snobbery) . and the pursuit of lions' 
heads and Egyptian brasses, combined with a 
verbal altercation with a cabman in the Hay- 
market, and a personal encounter with a sweep 
in Whetstone Park, in both of which tourna- 
ments Lieutenant Tiffin had had the worst of 
it, had slightly fatigued that youth, and ren- 
dered him for the nonce more partial to the 
consumption of soda water and sherry than of 
the more solid delicacies of the table. He, 
too, was smoking a cigar as large and as fiery^ 
as the Major's; yet it is a fact that Lieutenant 
Tiffin, not nine months previously, when a 
private pupil with the Eev. J. Broomback, 
vicar of Twigmore-in-the- Willows, Berks, had 
been noted for an immoderate partiality for 
the saccharine, though indigestible, cates, 
known as alecampane and Boneyparte's ribs. 
And Lord Baddington, he, too, was smoking, 



276 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

but in a moody, desultory manner, and after 
partaking of no breakfast at all. Now he 
would gnaw the end of his regalia, now throw 
it to smoulder on a plate, now resume it, 
nervously twisting it between his fingers. It 
was plain to see the Noble Lord had something 
the matter with him. 

" And so the little dancer gave you the slip, 
eh, Charley?" said Mr. Tiffin; we will not 
attempt to imitate his lisp, which was of the 
most pantomimically euphuistic description. 
They had apparently resumed a conversation 
which had been suffered to languish for some 
minutes. 

" Always do give you the slip," the Major 
remarked, looking up from the " Morning 
Herald" . people read the "Morning Herald" 
in those days . with which he had chosen to 
diversify the cigar and the curacoa. " Begum 
of Bhawalpore gave me the slip in the year 
'18. Ten lacs and not a tooth in her head. 
Married a half-caste, who sold hair-brushes and 
pomatum in the bazaar. He's coming over 
here to buy a seat in Parliament." Libellous 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 277 

Major! as if seats in Parliament could be 
bought ! 

" Y . yes," said Lord Baddington, in a tone 
of languid vexation, in reply to the Lieutenant's 
query; "the confounded little filly bolted. 
As if I meant her any harm." 

11 As if anybody ever meant anybody any 
harm," the parenthetical Major, who appeared 
desirous of emulating the Chorus in a Greek 
Tragedy, again remarked from behind his 
"Morning Herald." "I never meant any 
harm to Mrs. O'Veal, the widow of the town- 
councillor of Cork, and yet she brought an 
action against me for breach, and recovered 
two hundred and fifty damages." 

14 But how the doose," interposed the epis- 
copal-guardsman, "did she manage to get 
away ? I thought you had her hard and fast ?" 

" Ay ! hard and fast indeed, in a lodging at 
Pentonville, or some horrible place of that sort 
out in the suburbs, by some waterworks and 
an hospital, and that sort of thing. Coops 
took the place for me. Coops you may go." 
(This was addressed to the body-servant, who 



278 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

bowed and withdrew immediately, although I 
am afraid that he only put the width of a door 
and the compass of a keyhole between himself 
and his master). " I left my fellow to mount 
guard there all the night ; and I believe . he's 
an ingenious scoundrel . that he made love 
to the landlady, and had tea with rum in it. 
At any rate I looked down the next morning, 
to open the siege in a regular manner ; when, 
would you believe it, she turned upon me like 
a young tigress, talked a lot of nonsense about 
my having promised to marry her and make 
her a lady, and at last told me to begone, and 
never come near her more, quite in the three- 
novel thingumy style that one gets from the 
circulating library in country quarters." 

" And what did you do?" 

" Do, why take hold of her round the waist 
to be sure, and tell her what a confounded 
obstinate little fool she was." 

" And what did she do then?" asked Tiffin. 

"Knife you, I'll be bound!" quoth the 
Chorus Major. " They always knife you, 
these Spaniards and Portuguese. Was knifed 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 279 

myself when I went out to Portugal in 
Mr. Canning's time, and didn't fight. Brown- 
faced gipsy, who would have been the loveliest 
creature in the world, if she hadn't eaten so 
much garlic." 

" She didn't do anything of the sort," said 
Lord Baddington ; " but, by Jove, she pulled 
out as neat a little pocket-pistol as ever you 
saw in your life, and clapping it so close to me 
that I felt the cold steel ring on my forehead, 
swore she would blow my brains out if I dared 
to lay hands on her again. I think I could 
have twisted it out of her hand easily if I had 
once grappled with her ; but she was as agile as 
a lizard, ran away from me into a corner of 
the room, keeping me in check with the pistol. 
Then she rang the bell and began squealing 
for the landlady, and she came up, and there 
was a doose of a row." 

" Just like 'em, always kicking up a row,'* 
the sage of the Junior United Service per- 
pended. " Always lick you with their squalling 
and screaming. I never knew but one fellow 
who wouldn't give in to a noisy woman, and 



280 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

that was the Dutch consul at St. Thomas, in 
the year '20. He had a clerk that played the 
violoncello capitally, and he used to fiddle 
away his loudest, while the consul thrashed 
his wife with a boot. He fiddled her com- 
pletely down at last, and she was as quiet 
as a lamb afterwards, poor woman." 

" I wish you wouldn't break in with your 
confounded colonial stories, Gambroon," in- 
terrupted Lord Baddington, with a weary 
yawn. " Well, as I was saying, the landlady 
came up." 

" And what did she do?" 

u Took part against me, burn her ! said I 
was an atrocious villain, and a lot of stuff of 
that sort. Called Manuelita a pretty lamh, 
and an innocent creature, and a dooce more. 
Said I ought to be ashamed of myself." 

" You ought to have been ashamed of your- 
self. It 's always best to be ashamed of your- 
self, and ask leave to come again," the 
incorrigible Major broke in. " They're devils 
to forgive are women, and that 's how you 
get the better of them at last." 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 281 

" She even," Lord Baddington continued, 
and not deigning to notice the interruption, 
" threatened to call for the police. Imagine 
such confounded insolence. Call the police 
tome!" 

" And how did it end?" Lieutenant Tiffin 
asked. 

"If you won't be so confoundedly impa- 
tient," was the polite rejoinder, "I'll tell you. 
The landlady's sister came up, and her hus- 
band's grandmother too, for anything I know. 
At all events, there came up such a lot of 
them, and they all squalled and squabbled 
together at me; and the very children . 
there were a lot of them too . began to scream 
and roar ; and, to tell the truth, I was doosed 
glad to cut out of the house, jump into the 
trap, and tool back to the club as fast as I 
could. 

" You went back again." 

" To be sure, next day ; but, like an ass, I 
never sent Coops to keep guard at night. I 
drove down at twelve o'clock with an ame- 
thyst bracelet, that I thought would subdue 
my lady . " 



282 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

" Eight, right, always give 'em bracelets. 
Jewellery always masters 'em." This from 
the Gambroon quarter. 

"With an amethyst bracelet; and when I 
got to the door, I found the bird flown. 
Bolted, by Jove!" 

"And where is she now?" 

11 The devil knows; I don't. The old cata- 
maran who kept the house wouldn't give me 
the slightest information. Said it served me 
right, and that she was glad that the dear 
little thing had got out of my clutches. I 
had been stupid enough, or rather Coops had, 
to pay the rent in advance, so I hadn't even 
the satisfaction of telling her to whistle for 
her money. My clutches, indeed! If ever 
she does get into my clutches . " 

He paused, and swallowed a glass of water. 
The vapid face lighted up for a moment, but 
it was with a reflection as from the fire of the 
bottomless pit. So might you lift up the 
inanimate cap-peak mask, that convicts wear 
in penitentiaries, and show, for an instant, 
flaring beneath, the ravenous, callous, brutal 
face of him who hates society. 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 283 

Just then there came a discreet tap at the 
door. 

It was Mr. Coops, who, on a plated salver, 
brought a three-cornered note written on pink 
paper. 

" Humph ! " Lord Baddington exclaimed, 
taking the missive from his valet, " my dear 
grand-aunt's writing. What can she* want 
with me, I wonder ? Not to give me any of 
that twenty thousand pounds, I '11 be bound. 
Twenty thousand pounds ! She has not a right 
to twenty thousand pence. / ought to have 
had the money." 

So he mused, half aloud, as he lazily scanned 
the contents of the note. The contents were 
brief; but they seemed important, for he rose 
at once, and said that the Dowager wanted 
him, and that he must go to her immediately. 

Were either of "you two fellows" going 
his way ? He would give either of them a 
lift. Yes; Major Gambroon was going Picca- 
dilly wards, and would accept the proffered 
lift. As for Tiffin, who very likely would 
have liked a seat in the Baddington cabriolet* 



284 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

he had lost his chance, as he had not spoken 
first, and strolled away to pass the remainder 
of the morning in the Burlington Arcade, 
where he made large purchases in perfumery, 
and stared all the pretty girls he could meet 
out of countenance. 

Delicately, gracefully balanced on its springs, 
with the highest stepping, most mettlesome 
horses, and the smallest and nattiest of top- 
booted tigers hanging on by the straps behind ; 
glistening, glittering with paint and varnish, 
and bright leather and patent harness, went 
Lord Baddington's cab from Jermyn Street 
to May Fair; his Lordship driving, like an 
accomplished whip, as he was; the Major by 
his side, looking martial and aristocratic, with 
a high black stock, a white moustache, a shiny 
hat, and a buckskin waistcoat. They passed 
a troop of the Royal Horse Guards Blue, on 
their way to the barracks in the Regent's 
Park. They passed Tiffin's papa, the Bombay 
Bishop (home on sick leave), looking ineffably 
right reverend in a shovel hat and apron, and 
on a demure cob. They passed a post-office 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 285 

letter-carrying boy, on a vile " screw," with 
only three available legs, but that seemed, 
nevertheless, to go as swiftly as a Melton 
Mowbray hunter. They passed the great 
Duke of Wellington, in his blue frock and 
white neckcloth, with the rubicund groom 
riding behind, whom you remember so well, if 
not in the flesh, at least in his canvas coun- 
terfeit presentment in Landseer's " Waterloo" 
picture. This hero they saluted, and were in 
turn saluted by him, by the upraising of the 
digits of those immortal buckskin gloves. 
They met and passed omnibuses, donkey-carts, 
mourning-coaches, wedding chariots, nursery- 
maids with their young flocks, hastening to 
the park; men with coffins on their backs, 
grenadiers, loving couples, policemen, Jew 
clothesmen, dandies, and pot-boys carrying 
out the beer; and the poor people, as they 
looked at the superb equipage (unpaid for) 
with the Viscount's coronet on the panel, and 
saw the gallant gentleman who was driving, 
thought, half in admiration and half in envy, 
of what a great man and what a happy fellow 
he must be. 



286 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" Gam," said the unconscious object of 
these thoughts. 

" Yes, Viscount!'' He was a wary man, 
Gam; and though he called the new-made 
Peer "Baddington" usually, he humoured 
him sometimes by the mention of his title. 
But he never my-lorded him. 

" How the doose am I to get my living ? " 

" Aren't you a lord ? " 

" But I haven't got any money," the young 
man answered, with great simplicity; " and I 
owe a lot. I 'in afraid my tick 's getting 
shaky, too." 

" Enlist." 

"You mean sell my commission. Yes; I 
suppose I shall have to do that; but what'll 
that be . a couple of thousand or so : three, 
perhaps. But I want so much a year; an 
income, don't you understand." 

" Get the Ministry to make you something, 
somewhere abroad." 

"But all the fellows say I am such a fool," 
was the ingenuous reply of the noble youth ; 
" and I know myself that I'm not good at 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 287 

speechifying or writing, or that sort of thing. 

Ton my soul, I'm in a doose of mess, Gam. 

There's my mother and sisters . and the girls 

are getting old maids fast, I declare . living, 

positively, on the charity of my brother-in-law 

Guy. He's as rich as a Jew; but he won't 

lend me any money, the covetous hunks. He 

says that 1 spend it all on dice, and drink, and 

actresses. It's all very well to abuse dice; 

but I should like to know what I should do 

without the bones at Crockey's, and whist at 

the club. Why, whist must be worth five 

hundred a-year, at least, to you, Major." 

u More or less ; but I never play for much." 

"But one can't be always playing cards," 

the lordly philosopher resumed. " I want 

rents and estates, and lands that can't be 

mortgaged, and tenants that aint bankrupt. 

I think I shall change my lawyers. Those 

fellows in Lincoln's Inn Fields have made a 

fortune out of me; and yet they say I owe 

them a lot of money too. By Jove, I seem 

to owe everybody a lot of money. I wish my 

grand-uncle Baddington had kept his peerage 

to himself." 



288 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

They had come to Lady Baddington's fairy 
mansion in Curzon Street. The diminutive 
ti^er was at the horses' head. The Peer 
jumped down, followed by the Major, and, 
shaking that warrior's hand, was about to 
knock, when his attention was arrested by the 
stentorian tones of one of those peripatetic 
industrials who perambulate aristocratic back 
streets, proclaiming news, sometimes veracious, 
but more frequently of the apocryphal nature 
known as " cocks." He was a very ragged 
fellow, this street Cicero, but his lungs were 
of leather; and thus ran his tale, continuous, 
if ever a tale were such : . 

" Hegstrawordinerry noose, hunparaliled 
and himpetuous hescape from Noogate yes- 
terday mornin' at a quarter-past sevin 'avin' 
took advantage of the plumbers and glaziers 
which was a whitewashing' the yard hover 
against the sessions-'ouse lowerin' hisself by a 
rope and runnin 5 along four houses, which the 
leads of one was found by the pieman, has 
stated in hevidence before the Lord Mayor 
and Court of Alderman." 



A HAPPY FAMILY. 289 

11 Listen," said Lord Baddington; " what a 
voice the rascal has." ' 

"Ah!" returned the Major, "I think I 
read something of what he is spouting about 
in the Herald this morning. I forget, though, 
the name of the fellow who made his 
escape." 

" Purchase the hegstrawordinerry hescape," 
the "death and fire-hunter " went on, after 
taking a fresh breath, " of John Polly blank 
the sellibrated forger hand suspected hincen- 
diary bein' also haccused of bother crimes. 
Purchase the hegscape of John Pollyblank, 
only hekalled since the days of Jack Sheppard 
and the old Pretender which got out of the 
Tower of London while the gate was hopened 
for the purpis of bringin' in soft soap to wash 
the lions bein' in wimrnen's clothes and con- 
cealed in a warmin' pan. Purchase the hes- 
cape of John Pollyblank hall the perticklers 
and honly a 'apeny." 

"Pollyblank, Pollyblank?" the young gen- 
tleman repeated; "I think there was a con- 
juror of that name when I was in Liverpool. 

VOL. II. u 



290 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

I wonder how he managed to get into New- 
gate." 

u I wonder how he managed to get out of 
it," rejoined the Major; a but see, there's a 
policeman moving our orator on. I won't 
detain you any longer, Viscount. Good 
morning." 

So the Major shouldered his bamboo cane, 
and strode manfully on towards Half-moon 
Street; and Lord Baddington, knocking at 
the door of the fairy mansion, was speedily 
and obsequiously admitted thereinto. 



20] 



CHAP. XXXIY. 

AtTNT AND NEPHEW. 

\TOT in the same fantastically magnificent 
boudoir in which she had received Philip 
Leslie, but in the dining-room of the Curzon 
Street mansion, Genevieve, Viscountess Bad- 
dington . I can scarcely call her Dowager, for 
as yet no lady had a right to wrest her coronet 
from her, leaving her only the titular appella- 
tion and the weeds of widowhood . received 
her grandnephew. Lunch was served, the 
rich viands and wine admirably suggesting 
the funeral baked meats, which coldly fur- 
nished forth the marriage table of her who 
had been so lately a bride. 

She was dressed, of course, in deep black, 



292 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and the splendour of her golden hair was 
imprisoned under the starched lawn and 
gauze gyves of a widow's cap. But she was 
still every inch an empress, scornful, beautiful, 
imperious as she always was, always had been 
. save in the mean chemist's shop in Drury 
Lane, where the man who called himself Tine- 
top had had the impertinence to address her 
by the vulgar cognomen of " Polly." 

This woman, cold as was her proud and 
sarcastic beauty, was born to cast sunshine in 
shady places; and now she glorified her funeral 
garments, and the dismal crape might have 
been imperial purple, so gorgeous sat she 
among its folds. There are some women 
whose beauty cannot be enhanced by dress, 
but to whom dress is a part of their very 
beauty; the dress and the woman being 
wedded to one another. 

So sat she before the table, her little hands, 
quite devoid of any jeweller's ware now, save 
her wedding-ring and keeper, and her hands 
themselves demurely crossed when the foot- 
man announced Lord Baddington. She rose 



AUNT AND NEPHEW. 293 

with a grave curtsey, but without any smile 
or other token of welcome, when her grand- 
nephew entered the room, and. advanced, if 
the truth is to be told, in a somewhat blun- 
dering manner towards her. For Charles 
Viscount Baddincrton, though lon^; an in- 
habitant of that loose world in which the 
female population are not averse to cham- 
pagne, cigarette-smoking, and the occasional 
assumption of male attire, and whose boudoirs 
are theatrical green rooms, cabinets particuliers 
at Richard's, or the Maison Doree at Paris, or 
private rooms at the Greenwich " Trafalgar," 
and the Richmond " Star and Garter," was 
very ill at his ease in the presence of ladies 
who, by their bearing, did not seem to care 
about hearing the probable eventualities of 
the Doncaster St. Leger, or the last anecdote 
from the chronique scandaleuse of the day. 
Beyond his own sisters, whom he very seldom 
saw, and to whom he very scarcely ever spoke, 
it is probable that this Peer of the realm did 
not number half a dozen young ladies of 
unblemished character amon^ his relatives. 



294: THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

He called them " modest women," blushed, 
stammered, and bit his fingers when in their 
society, devoutly wishing that he were well 
out of it, and that he were spending the even- 
ing with Fan, who could swear in French ; or 
Lou, who could drink Maraschino; or Emmy, 
the coryphee-, or Liz, who drove the piebald 
ponies, and rode the skittish mare, played 
billiards, had ruined a duke, and who could 
not write her own name. Oh, thou young 
British man, what a franker, better, honester, 
finer, livelier man thou would'st be, if thou 
would'st snub thy sisters less, if thou would'st 
" go in" for the society of " modest women" 
a little more, and for "life" not quite so 
much ; up and down, down and up, that 
dreadful Haymarket ; train to Richmond, boat 
to Greenwich, brougham to Chiswick, furtive 
trip to Paris. Is a life of all-round collars, 
champagne, lobsters, pink bonnets, vaude- 
villes, crinoline, latch-keys, worth one day 
in the society of a good girl ? For he who 
tells me that he finds it irksome, or namby- 
pamby, or a bore, to sit, and talk, and live with 



AUNT AND NEPHEW. 295 

pure and virtuous women, is either mendax or 
a fool. Their innocence, their weakness, their 
charming candour and loving trustfulness, their 
little angers, and imperfections, and jealousies, 
and harmless scandal-magging, even, are so 
many emanations of joy and tenderness to 
him who has been tempest-tossed for years in 
the Great Black Sea of London worldliness, 
and he who is a-weary, a-weary, and would 
fain lay his head somewhere in peace before 
he dies. And I, who have seen fair young 
form after form droop and die, and have had 
to say of sister after sister, montua est ! eheu ! 
mortua est I and now sit sisterless and celibate, 
like a fly in the heart of an apple, look with 
a kind of silent and melancholy rage upon 
men who have sisters and set no store by 
them, and who are perversely insensible to 
the heaven-blessed, and healing, and softening 
influence that the love of a dear sister might 
have upon the roughest, most world-worn, 
most case-hardened man. 

But all the time that I have been prosing, 
Lord Baddington has been saying absurd 
things about the weather . he may have in- 



296 THE BADD1NGT0N PEERAGE. 

trocluced the crops, too, for aught I know . to 
which his grand-aunt . his grand-aunt, had 
turned, if not a deaf, at least a very inatten- 
tive ear. Perhaps, though, if her grand- 
nephew had known that a shabby little man 
had called her "Polly," he w r ould not have 
been quite so abashed in her presence. He 
was much more at home with divinities who 
might answer to the name of Polly without 
impropriety. 

She cut him short at last, and rather ab- 
ruptly. 

" You received my note, my Lord." 

He had received it. 

" I want to speak to you on a matter of 
business." 

He was delighted, he was sure ( a shaw," he 
said) to receive her Ladyship's commands. 
In fact, he was doosed . that is, he meant . 
here he stopped, conscious of having used an 
expletive, and of having, so to speak, made a 
mess of it. 

"Will you have some lunch?" the noble 
widow asked, suppressing a smile. 



AUNT AND NEPHEW. 297 

He had just lunched . that is, breakfasted . 
thank you. Would take a glass of Madeira. 
He helped himself as he spoke, hoping, per- 
haps, that the wine might act like the bees on 
the infant Plato's lips, and give him eloquence. 

" As vou won't have anv lunch," his fair 
entertainer continued, " we may as well pro- 
ceed to business at once." 

As she spoke, she rose, and traversing the 
room with that majestic step of hers, went to 
the door and quietly and calmly locked it. 

This was rather an alarming proceeding, 
but not so alarming as that which followed it, 
which was simply to open a casket, and to 
take from it a small pocket-pistol, which she 
deliberately laid on the damask table-cloth 
within Lord Baddington's sight, but out of 
his reach. 

"Do you know that pistol?" she asked, 
composedly. 

" Upon my word," Lord Bacldington began. 
" The woman's oin<r mad," he thought. 

" Do you know it ? . I ask you again. Upon 
my word, if you don't answer me, I'll send its 



298 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

contents into your body. See it's capped and 
loaded." 

He knew the pistol well enough; it was 
Manuelita's, and the one with which she had 
threatened him in the lodging-house at Pen- 
tonville. He told Lady Baddington very sul- 
lenly and awkwardly, that he had seen the 
pistol before. 

"Where?" 

" Keally, madam," the young nobleman 
said, haughtily, " I don't see what right you 
have to ask me the question, or to pry into 
my personal affairs. As for your firing off 
that pistol, why it's just like what the people 
do at the play, and you'd better not. 

She smiled scornfully, took up the pistol, 
and threw it on to a sofa behind her. Then, 
in her clear, arrow-like voice, she said : 

" Lord Baddington, you are a villain." 

It was aristocrat to aristocrat, pride to 
pride, disdain to disdain. He tried to look 
her down, but failed miserably in the attempt, 
and then looked very much like a hound who 
stands in imminent peril of a double thonging. 



AUNT AND NEPHEW. 299 

" I say;, Lord Viscount Baddington, that 
you are a villain." 

But the Lord Viscount was dumb. He 
was thinking a good deal, though ; and if the 
door had not been locked and the pistol 
cocked, and he a nobleman and a gentleman 
and his interlocutor a la^y, young and beau- 
tiful, I am afraid it is not improbable that 
he would have knocked her down. 

" A designing, atrocious, cold-blooded vil- 
lain ! I will tell you why . for luring a poor, 
confiding, innocent, inexperienced girl away 
from her home. For deluding her with your 
false promises, and dazzling her with your 
handsome, gaby, wolf-in-sheep's-clothing face. 
You cowardly roue, what have you done with 
Manuelita?" 

" I've done nothing at all with her, Madam," 
the peer cried out in great heat. u I don't 
know how the doose you came to know any- 
thing about her; but all I know is that she 
turned me up, and gave me the slip, and . 
and . I don't know what right you have to 
speak to me in this way. I don't owe you 
any money." 



300 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" Would you like to owe me some ?" 

" That depend?," Lord Baddington replied, 
looking up into his questioner's face with a 
very puzzled and perturbed air. 

" Then just remain perfectly quiet while 
I talk to you," his grand-aunt went on, " and 
I will tell you how you may possibly become 
my debtor, but you must listen to all I say, 
and not interrupt. Come and sit near me." 

She was born, this inexplicable woman, to 
command all men, and to make them obey 
her against their will, their reason, and their 
inclination. Lord Baddington sat down by 
her side, as he was bidden; and, doing so, 
some thoughts such as these raced through 
his mind : . " How beautiful, how fascinating 
she is ; and yet what a tigress, what a venomous 
serpent; I don't wonder, now, that she hooked 
my uncle so easily, and got the house and the 
twenty thousand pounds from him," He 
may not so much have thought this, as 
have been unconsciously impressed with some 
kindred feeling bearing thereupon; but he 
kept gazing in Lady Baddington's beautiful 



AUNT AND NEPHEW. 301 

face, with an expression in which amazement 
was mingled with admiration, and fear with 
both. She triumphing. She, whose delight 
it was to break strong men's wills across her 
little finger, as that man in Raphael's 
u Marriage of the Virgin " breaks the branch 
across his knee. She, who trampled upon, 
scorned, derided everything, and was afraid 
of nothing and no man . out of a doctor's 
shop in Drury Lane. 



END OF VOL. II 
THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE, 



CHAP. XXXV. 

CONTAINS THE PARTICULARS OF ANOTHER 
WEDDING. 

r FHE readers of this story, I am convinced, 
must, as far as a very great majority of 
them are concerned, personally detest me, the 
writer of the .*' Haddington Peerage." For I 
at once acknowledge, and am willing to do 
penance for the offence : I know full well that 
I stand in direct contradistinction to those 
writers of serial romances who possess the 
faculty of " knowing how to leave off at the 
right time." 

I am perfectly aware that I always leave 
off at the wrong time ; and that instead 

VOL. III. B 



Z THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of ending a chapter with an astounding 
incident, or the enunciation of some mys- 
terious proposition to be satisfactorily solved 
in the next published portion, 1 leave my 
readers in a state of uncomfortable suspense 
as to what is going to be done, or " who is 
meaning what " . to paraphrase a late example 
of English elegance of composition in a leader 
in the " Times " newspaper. I have my 
motives for this, as for most things; but, 
think I may as well continue the conversation 
between the Lord and the Lady Baddington, 
cut short in the last Chapter. 

" I am a very young woman, my Lord," 
she commenced, "but I have had, perhaps, 
more opportunities of seeing the world than 
usually fall to the lot of my sex. I called 
you a villain, and I will tell you the reason. 
You did your best . you, Peer, officer, gen- 
tleman, and all the rest of it . you tried 
your hardest to ruin that poor little dancing 
girl." 

" 'Pon my word . " the Peer began in 
half stupid remonstrance. 



PARTICULARS OF ANOTHER WEDDING. 6 

11 Just hear me out," his grandaunt resumed. 
" I daresay I am prosing, and, as you men 
call it, boring you : but at the same time it- 
may do you a little good to listen to what 
I have to say. You met the poor child in 
Liverpool, and filled her silly head with a 
notion that she was to become your wife. 
She was to be your wife. She was to be 
a lady. A lady forsooth! All your arts, 
all your devices, all your cunning wiles, were 
put in force for the miserable purpose of 
calling that girl your own. By the mercy of' 
God she has escaped you." 

"Well, as to that . "the Xobleman in- 
terposed, curling his lip superciliously the 
while. 

" Say that again if you dare," exclaimed 
the Woman . she was a woman, every inch 
of her . " and I will brand you as a liar 
as well as a villain. The girl is as pure as 
unfallen snow." 

" Came away, though, from Liverpool, in a 
post-chaise." 

u You cur, you know very well how she 



4 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

came, and why she came, and how, at the 
last moment, all your schemes were spoiled, 
and all your hopes frustrated. She ran away 
from the lodging you had taken for her 
at Pentonville, Viscount Baddington . that 
lodging which you vainly thought to turn 
into a Capua; she ran away, because she 
had discovered that the god of her idolatry 
was a base fetish; that with the front of 
brass there were feet of clay. She ran away, 
because she had found you out. Now listen, 
and leave off biting your lips. / had been 
to the opera to hear Malibran in Fidelio . 
or, stay, no, it was to hear Pasta utter her 
inimitable Io. My dear departed husband 
left me in the crush room . I suppose at- 
tracted by the charms of some demirep, . and 
when Lady Baddington's carriage stopped 
the way, there was only Lady Baddington 
to occupy it. But, coming out, I saw crouching 
at the base of one of the pillars of the Opera 
Colonnade a little trembling form, that seemed 
strangely out of place in that colonnade. You 
know the ladies who frequent the place, 



PARTICULARS OF ANOTHER WEDDING. 5 

Viscount. Not the viscountesses who come 
out of the Opera, but the viscountesses who 
go into the c Blue Posts.' I will own that 
I am a very odd and eccentric woman ; and, 
something striking me in the appearance of 
this poor little child clinging round the 
column, I took her at once into the carriage, 
to question her, much to the surprise of my 
servants." 

"I really must . " Lord Baddington tried 
to introduce. 

a The girl was Manuelita." 

 By Jove!" 

" She told me the whole story: told it me 
with hysterical sobbings and moanings, and 
almost inarticulate fragments of speech. Do 
you know what she would have done if I had 
not so discovered her . if I had not, wearer of 
a coronet as I am, been odd and eccentric 
enough to put a poor forlorn outcast into my 
<rrand chariot ? She would have drowned 
herself. Every week, Charles Falcon, there 
are scores and scores of wretched things such 
as these, who find their bed in the waters, 



THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and pillow their heads under the tide. And 
most of them are not so happy as Manuelita. 
Most of them are lost, lost, lost, to everything 
in this world ; but to receive, I believe and 
hope, the supreme kind commiserating for- 
giveness in the next. Dissolute man, think 
and tremble! Think of the ocean of tears, 
think of the abyss of unutterable woe . all 
caused by the indulgence of a momentary 
whim!" 

She stood up saying this, her finger pointing 
out . the Cassandra of her sex. I wonder 
whether she meant what she said ! Was 
Sterne sincere when he wrote about the 
prisoner, and Maria, and the recording angel, 
and dying Lieutenant 

And she immediately became Lady Badding- 
ton again. 

" The end of all which is, my Lord, that I 
want you to promise me, on your solemn word 
and honour, as a nobleman and a gentleman, 
that you will never by word or deed, molest 
Manuelita again." 

M The doose of it is . I beg pardon, your 



PARTICULARS OF ANOTHER WEDDING. 7 

Ladyship . I can't make out why you should 
feel such an interest in the little party." 

u I have my own reasons, my Lord. "Will 
you make me the promise?" 

" Too happy, I'm sure " 

" Only mind and keep your word. I will 
illustrate my meaning by a little story, just as 
the people who write in the newspapers begin 
their leading articles with a stale and hack- 
neyed anecdote." 

She knew everything, this woman. To use 
a very vulgar expression, she was "up to 
every move on the board." She could not 
have known, of course, what she did, if the 
druggist in Druiy Lane had not had the right 
to call her " Polly." 

" Once upon a time," she went on, settling 
her muslins, and shaking her golden hair, u an 
officer in the Guards was travelling by the 
express night-train to Southampton. In the 
same first-class carriage there was a lady, very 
young and very handsome, and I am afraid 
that before they reached Winchester . (there 
were no other persons in the carriage) . she 



8 THE BADDINGTON PEEEAGE. 

permitted this bold young guardsman to im- 
print one kiss . he gave, and she allowed 
no more . upon her gloved hand. It was a 
freak, a caprice, a 'bit of fun,' just like the 
kiss which the beautiful Duchess of Devon- 
shire gave a sweep when Mr. Fox was being 
elected for Westminster. But she made him 
take a solemn oath that he would never reveal 
what had taken place. It fell out that our 
guardsman, about six months afterwards, did, 
in the smoking-room of his club in St. James's 
Street, break his oath, and with the boastful, 
lying qualities, common to men, gave the story 
with some additions and alterations perfectly 
and wantonly false. A fortnight afterwards 
he had an invitation to stay a week with a 
distant relation of his . an old admiral, who 
lived in a charming villa on the banks of the 
river Itchen, close to Southampton. He had 
never seen this relative before ; but some 
family matter had to be arranged, and he went 
down. He was received with the most cordial 
hospitality, especially by the admiral's wife, 
who was very young, and very handsome, and 



PARTICULARS OF ANOTHER WEDDING. V 

who, by the merest chance in the world, 
turned out to be the identical lady with whom 
he had travelled, per night express train from 
London to Southampton. She gave him her 
hand, ungloved this time, smiled upon him 
very sweetly, and just before dinner drew him 
on one side, and with a sweeter smile than 
ever, told him, in a discreet whisper, that if he 
would come round at twelve o'clock that 
night to a certain window at the back of the 
house overlooking the river, and only separated 
from its brink by a narrow footway, she had 
something very important, and perhaps plea- 
sant, to communicate to him. He came 
punctually at the appointed time. The moon 
was shining very brightly. The window was 
opened : and a lady in a night-dress beckoned 
a tall and handsome cavalier (as the novels 
say) to advance to her." 

u And she let him in through the window. 
By Jove, what a plucky one !" 

" She said this : ' Captain Darell, you are a 
liar and a traitor/ She did this; she put 
a pistol to his head, right in the centre of his 



10 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

forehead, between his curling locks which 
parted in the middle, and she blew his brains 
out, and Captain Darell fell into the river 
Itchen, and was found there next day, very 
wet and very dead." 

M She was hanged, of course." 

" Not the least in the world. She took the 
precaution of throwing the pistol into the 
river as well as the man. There was a great 
talk about the affair. There was adjourned 
inquest after adjourned inquest ; some called 
it murder, and some suicide; but as Captain 
Darell stood to lose enormously on the next 
Derby, and was dreadfully in debt besides, 
the general opinion inclined towards felo de se. 
He was buried very respectably, and the 
Admiral's wife wore mourning for him." 

"I'll promise," said Lord Baddington. 

" You had better. She was a relative of 
mine." 



11 



c 



CHAP. XXXVI. 

HOW THE PEEK KEPT HIS PROMISE. 

ARXIYAL time, and in Paris. Although 

it was the last of the three jours feries 

the ni^ht of Mardi Gras . the eve of the 



once famous but now degenerated and inglo- 
rious descente de la courtille . there was less 
conversation in the gay city of Paris about 
the Carnival than about the cold ; and men's 
thoughts ran more upon Reaumur and his 
thermometer than on Musard and his bal 
masque. It was so cold, So cold on the 
bridges, that the blind beggars, tootling dis- 
mally on their cracked flutes and rattling their 
battered tin money-boxes, had one and all 
decamped ; that the itinerant cake and sweet- 
meat sellers on the quays were to be found 



12 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

nowhere. A piercing blast went along with 
this cold, which swept before icy gusts of little 
particles of frozen dust, which blew down 
your back and into your eyes, and made you 
generally miserable. The steams of vin chaud, 
or heated and spiced wine, issued from every 
cabaret ; and every cafe was crammed with 
consommateurs. Here also, and in the estami- 
nets, was a tremendous vapour from the largest, 
most powerful , and most evil-smelling cigars, 
and from the blackest and most essential-oily- 
redolent perfume; the rattle of dominoes was 
incessant; the shuffling of the limp, pawn- 
broker's-duplicate-looking cards persistent ; 
the shrieks of the garqons to intimate that 
they were "there" instead of being "here," 
where they were required to be, the growls of 
the customers who wanted more grogs, and 
more boxes of dominoes, and more newspapers, 
were high above the din. The Boulevards 
were nearly deserted by foot passengers, 
though the road was thronged by carriages. 
The bceuf gras and the barouches and carrioles 
. filled with maskers paid and costumed by 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PROMISE. 13 

the police, and whose tawdry trappings, yellow- 
white drapery, and painted faces, looked inex- 
pressibly ghastly against the brilliant, heaven- 
sent snow . had failed in attracting the usual 
scampish crowd of sight-seers, who kept under 
shelter; so the police maskers had it all their 
own way. On they went, these forlorn rogues 
and roguesses, a little excited by gun -powder 
brandy and peppered petit bleu, consumed at 
the barrier cabarets; on they went, forlorn 
mummers, their poor noses a little pinched 
and numbed by the cold; the cold-drawn tears 
from their bleared, winking eyes furrowing a 
little in unseemly streaks the brickdust and 
bismuth on their cheeks. They were not a 
good sight to look at, these fancy-ball guests 
of the Rue- Jerusalem, these carnival proteges 
of the prefecture; they made you shudder 
rather, dreadful beings . for you knew what 
they must become when the saturnalia was over. 
And this rabble rout going by, some in close 
carriages, some in open cabs, cabriolets, and 
carts, shouting and yelling, and pretending to 
throw sweetmeats at the passers by, which 



14 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

they dared not do in reality, in consequence 
of a recent ordinance of the Prefect of Police, 
came out the sudden sun, and shone upon the 
raggamuffins, and upon the virgin snow. 

The day cleared up wonderfully before dusk ; 
but though the snow had ceased to fall, and 
the sky was even a tender, loving blue, the 
cold was still almost intolerably intense. About 
four o'clock or so, some of the most inveterate 
Boulevard flaneurs came out, wrapped up to 
the nose in furs and woollens, to lounge for 
half an hour between the Rue Vivienne and 
the Cafe de la Madeleine ; but the great places 
of resort were the almost innumerable passages. 

Here moved old veterans of the Imperial 
Guard . the old Guard remember . in closely- 
bottomed surtouts, and with tight black stocks, 
and the ribbon of the Legion at their button 
holes. And there were staring young piou- 
pious, fresh from the conscription and the 
drill-sergeants, wandering about with their 
hands in the pockets of their baggy red 
breeches, and gazing at everything, with a 
stupid stare of equal amazement and adinira- 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PROMISE. 15 

tion. And there were gay officers, with shin- 
ing bullion epaulettes, aiguillettes, embroidery, 
crosses and ribbons, plumes, trailing sabres, 
and clanking spurs ; Parisian exquisites of the 
first water, elegantly swaddled in broad-cloth 
pelisses, lined and trimmed with rich furs ; . 
and there were ladies in mantles, and cloaks, 
and pelisses, and capes, likewise furred and 
velveted, and who were otherwise attired with 
delicious and tasteful elegance, and wore 
bonnets of ravishing form on their heads ; who 
were bien gantees, bien chaussees, and bien 
lacees ; . but woe is me for the lowering 
brows, the high cheekbones, the noses too 
much retrousses, or else sinking in the opposite 
extreme, and standing out in arrogant aqui- 
linity, like the prow of a Roman galley; the 
thin lips, the discoloured teeth, the coarse and 
often art-improved complexions. No! no! no! 
Witty if you please, accomplished if you please, 
fascinating without a doubt, graceful beyond 
compare ; but beauteous, no ! I could count 
the fair women of France on the keys of a 
pianoforte, and carry them on my back up all the 
steps of the Monument, without taking breath. 



16 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

So, at least, thought Philip Leslie, who, 
wrapped up in a stout overcoat, walked 
moodily from passage to passage, with his arm 
in that of his "friend" Doctor Ionides, in the 
vain attempt to dispel some portion of the 
gloomy and bitter feelings which hung over 
him like a pall. The Doctor was in high 
spirits, and in an astonishing a carrick ,, of 
apple-green cloth . an article strongly resem- 
bling the a Benjamin " which our hackney- 
coachmen and night-watchmen were formerly 
accustomed to wear . which said "carrick" was 
profusely braided ; and decorated, in addition, 
with collars, cuffs, and trimming of costly 
sable, looked most imposingly wintry. The 
flaxen beard, and flowing hair of the Doctor, 
luxuriant as it was bright in colour, and the 
large green spectacles that he wore, gave him 
moreover a doctorial and erudite look which 
was very grand to see. That Doctor Ionides 
must have been Doctor Ionides, there cannot 
be the slightest doubt ; but I much question 
whether, supposing the astute Mr. Leather- 
sides had been present, he would not have 
been in a slight state of dubiety touching 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PROMISE. 17 

Doctor Ionides's voice, which, if truth must 
be told, bore a very strong resemblance to the 
voice of a friend of ours who once went by 
the name of Jachimo, Professor, but previously 
by that of Pollyblank, Captain. 

Cum multis aliis, very probably. 

11 A fellow asked me at the table d'hote 
yesterday," the Doctor remarked, laughingly, 
" how it happened, if I were a Greek, that I 
spoke English so well, and had such fair hair. 
I settled him in no time; talked to him of 
Sclavism and Panslavism, the Russo-Greek 
Church, the Eurasians of Bombay, the Jews 
of Honan, and the blue-eyed Affghans; told 
him all about the one primeval language ; and 
he gave in, and complimented me upon my 
eruditipn, said he should be delighted if I 
would give his son, who had recently been 
plucked for his u little go " at Oxford, a few 
lessons in universal grammar, and stood a 
bottle of " Liebfraumilch : I'm very fond of 
still Hock, especially Liebfraumilch. 

"You are a curious fellow," his companion 
responded, looking up into his face with an 

vol. in. c 



18 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

expression in which there was, however, far 
more curiosity than admiration. " You seem 
to know a good deal about most things. 
How did you manage to learn so much p " 

" I beg your pardon, my artistic friend, 
how did you manage to learn to paint ?" 
u Oh! I picked it up somehow." 
" And I, likewise, picked up mine some- 
how/' Doctor Jonides complacently con- 
tinued, " very l somehow,' too, it was, indeed. 
I believe that I have read the backs of more 
books than anyone alive, with the excep- 
tion of the man who does the cataloguing 
in the British Museum. For my Latin I am 
indebted to the hatchments on swell houses, 
and the scutcheons in the undertaker's shops, 
and the mottoes in the regimental colours in 
the 4 Army List.' My French and geography 
I picked up from the guide-books and vo- 
cabularies on the book-stalls, and my use of 
the globes from having travelled about from 
one end of the earth to the other, backwards 
and forwards, for twenty years. Add to this 
that my father paid a great deal of money 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PROMISE. 19 

for my schooling, and that I did really 
manage to learn something while at school; 
and that I have seen many men and many 
cities. The celebrated Ulysses did the same, 
you may remember, and may form a definite 
idea as to how the picking up process was 
successfully carried out in my case." 

4i Then why . " The Painter hesitated. 

" Go on, my friend, go on ; you cannot 
offend me. Of the rhinoceros is the hide of 
Doctor Ionides, and of the hippopotamus the 
skin of his moral sensitiveness." 

" Then, why, to be plain with you, do you 
make such a villanous use of your abilities ? 
I don't want to flatter you, for to tell the 
truth, I don't exactly like you ; but you are a 
clever fellow, there's no denying that!" 

" My canvas-covering friend," the Doctor 
composedly replied, laying his large, fur- 
gloved hand on the other's shoulder, M don't 
share with the tens of thousands of two-legged 

CO 

donkeys . don't start, don't be offended . that 
itching desire to pry into the motives of other 
men. As well may you strive to inquire why 



20 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

a dog going down a street, stops as though 
about to turn to the right, then suddenly 
to the right then suddenly changing his mind 
(as if he could have a mind!) crosses the road 
and turns to the left. As well might you 
inquire why the cat is born a deadly enemy to 
the rat ; it is all very well to say to extermi- 
nate the rat, but then why is the rat to be 
exterminated at all ? As well may you ask 
why the ass should bray, or the horse should 
whinny suddenly after hours of dead silence. 
Take my advice, analyse and scan your mo- 
tives and let other men's motives be. Can 
you understand any man ? Can you under- 
stand the man we used to read about at 
school, Sylla? Can you understand why 
Baron should have been a bribe-taker, or the 
Duke of Marlborough the robber of soldier's 
pence ? But, by the way, my friend, may 
I ask you whether you are making the best 
use of your abilities?" 

" I . I" stammered the Painter. "Well, 
well . I have always earned my living 
honestly . honourably. ' ' 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PROMISE. 21 

" Is it earning it honestly . honourably . 
to be here in Paris, kicking about the Passage 
Colbert, and spending the money lent to you 
by the Right Honourable Viscountess Bad- 
dington ?" 

" The money is all advanced to me on 
account of pictures 1 am commissioned to 
paint for her Ladyship," the Painter cried 
out indignantly, but blushing suspiciously as 
he spoke. 

" There ! don't talk so loud ! that old lady 
in the white ringlets and the black calash 
is looking over her shoulder at you, and 
thinks you are an English milord, who has 
had too much rum-grog. They think all 
English milords drink ' rum-grog ' by buckets 
full, these parleyvooing people." 

M Besides," Philip resumed in a sulky but 
lower tone, " I have a motive!" 

M A motive . excellent ! Here we are ! Three 
cheers for the motive! Everybody for his 
motive and Somebody for us all. Now, let 
us have a cigar!" 

They stopped on the threshold of one of 



22 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

those magnificent cigar shops . those temples 
devoted to the worship of the smoky god, 
whoever he may be, which only Paris pos- 
sesses. I say this, without the slightest wish 
to depreciate the stately establishments of 
Messrs Rees, Milo, Buckingham, Hudson, or 
the " African " in Regent Street. But what 
I have said is the fact, and I cannot gainsay 
it. 

They were about to enter, had the door 
half open, when Doctor Ionides turned, and 
pointing to a seated figure who was leaning 
across the counter, condescendingly chatting 
with one of the cigar-serving young ladies, 
said to Philip, but in a whisper . 

" Look there!" 

Philip looked as he was bidden, and saw 
the whiskers, the moustache, the grand cos- 
tume, and the aristocratic mien of Lord Vis- 
count Baddington. 

His fingers would have been at his throat 
a moment afterwards; but the dexterous 
Doctor had him in his iron gripe in an 
instant, and hauled him out with such dex- 



HOW THE PEER KEPT HIS PPOMISE. 23 

terity that the young lady and the young 
Lord had scarcely time to look up at the 
sound of the closing door, when Philip and 
the Doctor were safe outside the shop. 

a Not now! not now! you fool," the latter 
hastily muttered. a Do you want to ruin 
all ? Do you want to spoil the game ? Is 
it this dog of a Lord alone that you want to 
see ? Is there nobody else ? I tell you that 
we must wait till to-night. Then we shall 
by able to bag both birds . the hen pheasant 
as well as this strutting cock." 

" As you will. You are my master for 
a time ; but beware, I have a will of my own, 
and it will assert itself. But I am deter- 
mined to see him, to confront him, to meet 
his eye. I will give you my solemn word of 
honour not to molest him, not even to insult 
him, till you fix the time and give me the 
word." 



24 



CHAP. XXXVII. 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 



"SOLEMN word and honour! Solemn 
word and fiddlestick! Solemn word 
and walnut pickles!" the unceremonious 
Doctor Ionides retorted ; " but stay, I think 
you do really believe in such things; so we 
will go in and have a quiet cigar. You'll find 
it rather a difficult matter to get one in Paris, 
though, my friend." 

And so into the gay cigar-shop, where they 
purchased their ambiguous weed . the higher- 
priced French cigars are, the worse they 
usually turn out to be - . and added their con- 
tribution to the Augean strewings of half- 
burnt cigar-lights on the floor. One of the 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 23 

fair dames de comptoir gazed with some 
curiosity at Doctor Ionides and his notable 
costume, and simperingly muttered something 
about being en carnaval. The Doctor had 
always been a gallant man, and he took off his 
hat, and made the young lady a low bow; 
whereat she smiled again, and whispered 
something to Eulalie, her companion, in 
French. 

" Cest un milord" . u It is an English 
nobleman," she might have whispered. 

a Plutut un mouchard, il forte perruque" . 
u A police-agent rather; he wears a wig" . it 
is not quite improbable that Mademoiselle 
Eulalie may have doubtingly answered. 

" Un voleur, peut-etre" . u A thief, perhaps" 
. was another flattering supposition. 

" Ca sepeut" maybe another. 

" Qu'U est drole /" . " How funny." 

" Tiens" for which idiomatic expression I 
should be very much obliged for a literal 
translation myself. 

The whispered colloquy was here put an end 
to by the entrance of a superb English footman 



26 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

who wanted " Boo soo de tabach a prisy, 
snuffy, you know, byang fort; comprenny vooV 

I wonder which, if any, of the young ladies' 
suppositions, with respect to my friend Doctor 
Ionides, was the correct one. 

Lord Baddington was not alone. The 
episcopal guardsman, indeed, had been de- 
tained in England by a grudging country and 
an invidious commander-in-chief, to do duty 
at some common -place barracks, near Port- 
man Square, London; but, en revanche (I do 
not know how it is, but whenever I find myself 
on French ground, in fact or in fiction, I can't 
help indulging in a Lilliputian French 
quotation now and then), the fiery-faced 
major had accompanied his noble friend to 
Paris as social aide-de-camp ; and the services 
of another henchman . for a lord cannot get 
on without two toadies . had been secured, 
in the person of one Mr. Creamingpett, an 
honourable, and a paid attache of the English 
Embassy, and who was . what paid attaches 
of Embassy are, the whole world over. For 
diplomatists are stamped in a limited mint, the 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 27 

coinage of which, notwithstanding, is wonder- 
fully homogeneous. There is your great 
ambassadorial crown-piece, gouty, dinner- 
giving, and occasionally with his confreres 
squabbling. There is the half-crown, or 
secretary of legation *. sharp, thin, coryphee 
pursuing, and against Guatemalan charge 
d'affaires, or Fee-jee minister plenipotentiary 
intriguing. There are the pert, shining, glossy, 
sparkling shilling-and-sixpenny attaches, paid 
and unpaid, waltzing, flirting, late-supping, 
and occasionally levanting. These coins are 
passed from hand to hand, or from court to 
court, just as is the current money of the 
realm ; but there is no difference in ambassa- 
dorial coinage between Vienna and Petersburg ; 
and the money-changers of Constantinople 
will tell you the exact agio upon the diplomatic 
ducats of Stockholm. 

Is it not time, though, that you, whose 
patience, oh, my reader, rivals that of Grissel, 
famous in mediaeval Chaucerian story . 
exceeds that of him, that literary scoundrel of 
fair Italia's clime during the middle ages, who 



28 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

having the alternative given to him either to 
read Guicciardini through or go to the galleys, 
chose the former, but, breaking down at the 
ninety-ninth siege of Bologna, went back to 
the oar and the chain and the cudgel rejoicing 
. but to that dreadful book no more ? Is it 
not time, long-suffering and forbearing reader 
of mine, that thou shouldst know why Lord 
Bacldington should be found in a cigar-shop 
in a Parisian passage, with a major and a paid 
attache for his squires ; and why he, they . 
Philip Leslie, Doctor Ionides . should be, 
this present night of Mardi Gras, in Paris at 
all? 

Briefly thus : . It will be remembered that 
Lady Bacldington had extorted from her 
grandnephew a solemn promise that he would 
not, for the future, at any time molest or 
interfere with that little " black-eyed dancing- 
girl, whose name was Manuelita." The 
promise was made in the golden Autumn time, 
when the woods wore their richest dresses, 
and there was great joy among trees bearing 
rich fruit. Pleased with the promptness of 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 29 

her relative to promise, her Ladyship had 
evinced her gratitude by generously presenting 
him with a cheque for a thousand pounds, 
adding, that if he behaved himself, there was 
no knowing where her liberality, financially 
speaking, might stop ; for that she intended to 
marry a duke, and to have, not a miserable 
jointure of twenty thousand pounds, but thirty 
thousand, at least, per annum. Lord Bad- 
dington told the anecdote cheerfully at his 
clubs, amidst great applause. Various com- 
ments, but all of them favourable, were made 
on his beautiful grand-aunt, and unanimous 
verdict being passed that she was a " splendid 
woman," and bets were laid as to the particular 
duke who would, eventually, have the honour 
of leading her to the hymeneal altar. That 
he was an aged duke seemed, settled, too, by 
general consent, Major Gambroon facetiously 
remarking, "that such a beauty was the old 
peer's best companion." 

Now, the ostensible motive for the Lady 
Baddington's making her grand-nephew so 
promise was this : that she had made up her 



30 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

imperial mind that Manuelita was to marry 
Philip Leslie, and that the two were to be 
very fond of one another, and were to be 
happy together all 'the days of their lives. 
There was no disparity of age . no disparity 
of station . a painter and a dancing-girl . cela 
se comprend. No disparity of temper, for 
they were both spoiled children; and both, 
her Ladyship deigned to observe, very good- 
looking children too. Her Ladyship was in 
the right. A handsomer pair had hardly been 
seen since John Lord Hervey married Molly 
Lepell. 

So they were to be married, and all the rest 
of it. It was astonishing what a hurry the 
Lady Baddington was in to see them married 
. how she chafed and fretted . nay, almost 
how cross she became at the delay. They 
were to be married, and to be happy. She 
had obtained numerous commissions for Philip 
already. He was to paint large pictures, be 
a Koyal Academician, make his fortune, be 
knighted, que sais-je ? . only they were to be 
married immediately. 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 31 

Was Philip very much in love with 
Manuelita, I wonder? He was in love with 
himself, with the goodness and beauty of his 
patroness, with his new-born fortune, with a 
fine studio, and brave canvases and lay figures, 
and plenty of ultramarine and megilp. He 
was in love with clothes and regular victuals, 
and exemption from the tyranny of a lodging- 
house-keeper. Yes; and I think he must 
have been in love, too, with the dark eyes and 
pouting lips, and artless ways of his future 
wife; but, such was his sense of gratitude to 
his benefactress, that I am persuaded, had she 
brought him by the hand, or rather paw, to 
that poor baboon-woman, whose picture on 
the walls has lately been disgusting the town, 
and whose public exhibition was an insult to 
public decency and an insult to our system of 
police, and said to him, "Philip Leslie! be- 
hold your bride; you must love her very 
much, and be happy together for the rest of 
your lives," Philip would have bowed the 
knee, and hied at once to Doctors' Commons, 
for his name to be filled up on the orthodox 



32 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

parchment containing the benediction of his 
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury and a 
blue stamp, in conjunction with the bearded 
lady. Men go very cheap; brag of devotion, 
honour, disinterestedness, and so on, as we 
may, we sell ourselves, now to pay off some 
debts, and now to increase some luxuries; 
now for a new steam-engine for the u works," 
now for a new cab-horse. And even your 
very disinterested lovers make " time-bar- 
gains " at the altar, as they would in Capel 
Court. They buy for the account, and specu- 
late for a rise; but, ah me! what a dreadful 
wailing and gnashing of teeth there is when a 
nipping "fall" comes among the bulls and the 
bears. 

Thus, as the Lady Baddington had said, sic 
volo sic jubeo, Philip had no course to pursue, 
but to acquiesce in the decision of that 
amiable match-maker. Don't you know, then, 
those dear, delightful, indefatigable assassin- 
esses, who are charmingly determined to " find 
a wife" for every lonely bachelor they come 
across, and pursue him with daggers dressed 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 33 

in myrtle, like Harmodius, and poisoned cha- 
lices wreathed in flowers . marrying him to 
smiling shrews, affable dragons, mild-eyed 
scorpions, and Syren-voiced sea-serpents; 
Venus Aphrodites, who scratch your face, 
and Clios who confiscate your latch-key, lock 
up your tobacco-jar, and tell you, with the 
supremest unconcern in the world, that they 
have thrown your pet cutty-pipe, which took 
you months to colour, into the dust-hole, as a 
"nasty, dirty thing." I knew such a match- 
maker once ( Heaven rest her bones ! for she is 
with the saints), who wanted to marry me to 
a woman who had a wart on the left side of 
her nose, and a pair of shoulders that you 
might have hung a week's washing upon, so 
horizontal were they. She thought she had 
me hard and fast; but I saved myself by 
flight to the Channel Islands, for I am certain 
that woman (Warty) would have had my life 
(with sheer kindness) within six months after 
marriage. Her name was not Helen, alas! 
And who is Helen, now, I should like to 
know? Bah! I sit at the Porte Scie, and 

VOL. III. d 



34 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

adore Helen as she goes by, and forgive her, 
for her beauty's sake, all the woes she has 
caused to Troy ; mais, quant a son am,our,je ne 
m'en soucie plus guere: et d'autres . Helen 
jilted me, and I am consoled. 

The wedding was postponed, unavoidably, 
to the commencement of the new year, 
Eighteen hundred and thirty-six, in conse- 
quence of a very serious fit of illness which 
befell her Ladyship of Baddington ; and during 
one crisis of which, her very life was despaired 
of. She was attended throughout by her 
body surgeon, Sir Paracelsus Fleem, in con- 
sultation with whom was the great Sir Samuel 
Skryer, he who wrote that wondrous book on 
abnormal neuralgia of zymotic pimples, and 
was own physician to Queen Adelaide; and 
the apothecary employed (truly assiduous was 
he in his attendance) was one Mr. Tinctop, of 
Drury Lane. Her Ladyship recovered, to 
look more beautiful than ever; and every 
preparation having been made for the auspi- 
cious event, it was finally arranged to take 
place on the Fourth of February. 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 35 

Everybody was very happy ; the beauteous 
convalescent especially. Manuelita was happier 
than anybody, of course. It is quite con- 
sonant with young ladies who are about to be 
married to cry a good deal, and sit a good 
deal alone in corners, thinking, doubtless, of 
the greater bliss in store for them. Manuelita 
took the fullest advantage of both those pri- 
vileges; so much so, that Lady Baddington 
rated her occasionally, and asked her whether 
she were moping. She could .not have been 
moping, you know. Her patroness was very 
good to her. She was installed in the fairy 
palace in Curzon Street, where her affianced 
husband paid her visits at certain times and 
under strict surveillance. The footmen were 
commanded to do her reverence, the ladies' 
maids (Lady Baddington had two) to pay her 
as much attention as though she were their 
mistress. Even the hall porter unbent to her, 
and called her "Miss." Mr. Tinctop, the 
apothecary from Drury Lane . (and ;t owever 
my lady can habide sich low karackters, and 
from sich neighbourhoods, Hi can't hunder- 



36 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

stand" (sic cook in cog. loq.) . Mr. Tinctop, 
who was a good deal about the house, took 
much notice of little Manuelita. 

The Viscountess, who was indefatigable in 
the matter, had written to the dear child's 
uncle at Liverpool, discreetly, or at least in- 
geniously, accounting for her absence, vouching 
for her good conduct, and informing him of 
his niece's approaching union with a young 
man "moving (0 platitude of platitudes!) 
in a respectable sphere of life." The equally 
respectable but irascible Senor contented him- 
self by sending up his Curse by return of 
post, recommending his niece, with much ur- 
gency, to the especial care of the Principle of 
Evil. He added, in a postcript, that the ab- 
sence of Manuelita had been to him a pecu- 
niary loss of one hundred pounds sterling ; and 
that he would be exceedingly obliged if the 
English lady, who was aiding and abetting 
her in her undutiful practices, would remit 
him that sum per bank post-bill. 

Lady Baddington laughed, and put the 
letter in the fire. 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 37 

There was a night of anxious suspense, and 
pleasurable anticipation . it is to be hoped to 
all parties concerned . but certainly to this 
matrimonial Ladv Bountiful who wore the 
Baddington coronet. She had provided the 
bride's trousseau ; she had chosen the wedding 
dress, fixed upon its colour, determined its 
pattern, devised its trimmings; she, with her 
own hands, tried it on the shrinking form of 
the blushing little bride expectant, by the 
light of her own pink wax toilette-table 
candles; she threw over her shoulders a rich 
shot silk mantle; she adjusted on the nestling 
head a wondrous structure of inscrutable mil- 
linery called a bonnet ; . for it was winter, 
and she was to be married in a bonnet; she 
imprinted a loving kiss on the girl's lips; and 
expatiated on the happiness she would expe- 
rience in the life-long companionship of so 
clever, generous, good-hearted a husband. 
Then she cpened a morocco case, like a crim- 
son oyster-shell, and showed Manuelita a glit- 
tering toy of emeralds and brilliants, which 
she intended to be her special wedding pre- 



38 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

sent. The marriage was to take place, not at 
St. George's or any such ostentatious edifice, 
but at a quiet old church in the city, where 
there was a rector who was very old and very 
deaf, a very low Churchman, and who cured 
the souls of his parishioners, ten months out 
of the twelve, at a briny little watering-place 
on the Sussex coast; and where the curate 
(who was reported to take, commonly, no 
human sustenance, save haricot beans and un- 
buttered muffins) was a furious Tractarian of 
the most milk-and-water description, and read 
sermons, which were paraphrases of the 
" Tracts for the Times " (just then in vogue) 
every Sunday to a congregation composed of 
Lady Mumruffin's charity boys, the clerk, the 
sexton, the sexton's wife, Mr. Deputy Podge's 
maiden sister, who was supposed not to be 
quite right in her head, and the carved and 
gilt lion and unicorn that kept guard at either 
angle of the churchwardens' pew. 

Lord Baddington had not been to his 
grand-aunt's house for at least two months. 
His Lordship had sent in his " papers " to the 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 39 

Horse Guards, and was negotiating the sale of 
his commission, his extensive estates in Ireland 
demanding (in the interest of his tenantry, 
doubtless) all his time and attention. With 
this view he had crossed St. George's Channel, 
and was taking care of his estates at Mor- 
rison's Hotel, Dublin, where he found the 
Sneyd's claret not at all unpalatable, and 
whence he sent frequent and anxiously kind 
inquiries after Lady Baddington's health. 

The marriage-morning came : as the morn- 
ing, however long deferred, must come; the 
morning for joy, and the morning for sorrow; 
the morning for you, your Majesty, to be 
crowned . for you, Jack Suspercoll, to be 
hanged ; the morning for every one of us to 
lay by crinoline and all-round collars, when 
the gay pictures shall be turned with their 
faces to the wall, and those about us open the 
windows, that our souls may have elbow-room 
to flee away from the clay. 

The bridegroom was dressed, and, pale and 
palpitating, was waiting in the musty old 
vestry-room of Saint DufFabox-under-Cruinp, 



40 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

Cramp Lane, City, for the arrival of his bride, 
who was to be driven there in Lady Badding- 
ton's own carriage. Her considerate Ladyship, 
Philip, being quite a stranger in London, had 
provided him, even, with a groomsman, in the 
person of a Mr. Tinctop, apothecary, of Drury 
Lane, who, in a yellow waistcoat, which gave 
him in an intense degree the semblance of a 
canary bird, and a bald head seemingly ex- 
pressly bees'-waxed and polished for the 
occasion, so shining was it, moused about the 
vestry-room, and cunningly contemplated the 
portrait of the Reverend Doctor Mudgett, 
rector ( resting his hand on a corpulent copy of 
Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity), and carefully 
perused all the placards on the walls relative 
to baptisms, marriages, churchings, and burial 
fees. 

Time . eleven, sharp. Clergyman quite 
ready Married some blue pilot cloth, brass 
buttons, and a mahogany-looking hand at- 
tached to the Trinity House . perhaps an 
" elder brother," more probably a pilot, to a 
tremendous bonnet, and a vast circumference 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 41 

of black silk, whose occupant on ordinary days 
transacted business of a piscatorial nature in 
Billingsgate Market. Married a messenger of 
Doctors' Commons, to the mistress of Lady 
Mumruffin's charity school for girls. Married 
two or three other people, who evidently did'nt 
know what they were about, or they would 
have known better. 

Noon: no bride. Twenty minutes, half- 
past, a quarter to; no bride. Bridegroom 
almost in frenzy. Mr. Tine top wiping his 
bald head, clerk very fidgetty about his fees. 
Pew-opener ditto. Clergyman impatient, 
looking at his watch, thinking of his dinner 
(one bean and a muffin), the people he had to 
bury in the afternoon, and his unfinished 
sermon upon St. Simon Stylites, as compared 
with St. Dominic the Cuirassier. 

Ten minutes to, five minutes to ; no bride ; 
but at one, came tearing up to the door one 
of the high yellow cabs with the big wheels, 
and the driver sitting on a perch at one side, 
which were beginning in those days to super- 
sede the lumbering old hackney coaches. 



42 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

From this vehicle descended, with as much 
celerity as his never abandoned dignity would 
permit, that same resplendent flunkey who had 
been sent by Lady Baddington with the mes- 
sage about the money the first night that 
Philip had ever set eyes on her in the 
W ardour Street curiosity shop. 

He wanted Mr. Leslie immediately. Mr. 
Leslie rushed into the vestibule, knocked 
against open pew-doors, stumbling over has- 
socks, and nearly frightening three old pauper 
women . in incessant quest of the clergyman 
for port wine, flannel petticoats, and "stuff for 
the rheumatiz" . nearly out of their lives. 

" Jump in," cried the footman; " my iady 
wants yer d'rectly." 

And away they went; the charity boys, 
who were playing pitch-and-toss close to the 
niche, where once was the statue of the sainted 
Duffabox, wondering; and the old applewoman 
at the corner of Crump Lane lifting up her 
hands in mute astonishmant. Mr. Tinctop, 
not very disturbed, as far as his outward 
seeming went, courteously explained to the 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 43 

clergyman that there must be a screw loose 
somewhere, though these were not the exact 
words he used ; feed the clerk, the pew-opener 
and the beadle, who loudly expressed their 
opinion that he was a "real gentleman," and 
very carefully folding up the marriage license, 
which, in consideration of the sum of three 
pounds twelve shillings and sixpence, his 
Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury had been 
kind enough to grant to his well-beloved 
Philip and Manuelita, placed it in his trousers- 
pocket, and putting his hands in both those 
sartorial appendages, placidly wended his way 
westward. 

" If that thing with the blue seal wasn't 
parchment," he said to himself, alluding, it is 
to be presumed, to the license, " one could cut 
it up for curl papers. Stay, it would do 
capitally to cover a penny-drum with. I 
don't see what other use we could turn it to. 
I thought how it would be. I needn't be in 
a hurry. There's sure to be a blow-up, and I 
may as well get there when it's all over. 
Polly's a divine creature, but she has a Temper, 



44 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

that's undeniable." And it is also a fact, that 
Mr. Tinctop hurried himself so little, that 
he stopped at the Cathedral Coffee-house in 
St. Paul's Churctryard, and comforted himself 
with a steaming bowl of mulligatawny soup. 
I tell you, using the novelist's prescience, that 
which the man said to himself; what he really 
thought in the innermost tabernacle of his 
heart, behind the iconostast of self-deceit, it is 
not for me to know . nee si sciam. dicere ausim . 
Few men lie as much, if not more, to them- 
selves, than they lie to others ; and in very 
many cases, when you say to yourself that it 
is " all right," you think, and are perfectly 
convinced that it is "all wrong." 

Twent) -five minutes' furious driving brought 
the cab, the cabman, the footman, and the 
" bridegroom," to the door of Lady Badding- 
ton's residence. To the reiterated and pas- 
sionate queries of the excited painter, the 
footman had but one answer to give . that he 
11 dursn't tell for his life . that his lady had 
bidden him not to." Just, however, as they 
neared the doors . and just after, it may be, 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 45 

that something bright and yellow had rested 
for a moment in his palm, before it was con- 
signed to the pocket of his crimson plush 
waistcoat . he whispered, so affrightedly that 
some of the powder from his ambrosial curls 
was sprinkled on Philip's coat-collar, these 
remarkable words . 
11 She's bolted!" 

" Who has bolted?" 

i 
" And there's a devil of a row!" 

This was certainly not an answer to the 
point; but there was no time to give another; 
for the cab stopped, the house door opened, 
and the footman disappeared among the other 
flunketry. 

Up-stairs in the drawing-room the painter 
found Lady Baddington alone, raging in her 
weeds . a beautiful black jaguar. She rushed 
at him, rather than to meet him ; and when he 
stooped to make his customary obeisance . for 
she liked to be treated as a queen always . 
flung him on one side with a swirl of her 
drapery. 

11 What have you done with your wife, you 



46 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

fool?" she began in her passion; but she 
relented, and continued in kind accents, though 
her voice quivered with the rage that was 
within her, . " My poor Philip, I know that it 
is not your fault; but you have lost your 
wife." 

" Heavens and earth, Madam ! Can it be 
true that . " 

" She has fled this house. She is gone 
away. How she went I don't know; but the 
time must have been between nine and ten 
this morning. I was dressing in my own 
room. I had ordered Mickwith (lady's maid 
number two) to dress her; but she begged and 
prayed to be left to herself for half-an-hour, 
and alone she was left. The hall porter was 
away from his post. I discharged him on the 
spot. She must have slid down stairs, the 
little lizard, and so out of the house." 

She sat down in a great fauteuil, panting 
with suppressed anger. Then resumed . 

" She had put on her plainest, meanest 
dress. Every gown, every trinket, every 
ornament I had given her, were there, strewn 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 47 

about the room. On the dressing table was 
this letter. Read it." 

She sent a half-sheet of note paper fluttering 
towards Philips, and emptying a flask of 
eau-de-Cologne on her handkerchief, buried her 
face in the cambric ; but not to weep. 

It was a hurried, timorous scrawl, and ran 
thus . 

u I cannot help it. I know how wicked, un- 
grateful, undeserving I am ; but I love him. 
Pray dear Philip to forgive me. Pray to him 
to forget me. I shall never come back. Don't 
seek for me. Oh ! my lady, if you knew how 
miserable I am, you would forgive me too. 

" Manuelita." 

And no more, save that the paper was 
blotted all over with scarcely yet dried tears. 

"What do you intend?" the Lady asked 
abruptly. 

The poor fellow never had much presence of 
mind; and now it was five thousand miles 
distant. He stammered out . 

" Seek her." 

"Seek her! Where?" 



48 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Philip was silent. 

" Do you know with whom she is gone 
away?" Lady Baddington asked, slowly and 
deliberately. " She has fled . bah ! she has 
ran away with my accomplished grandnephew, 
with that fair-faced devil from the pit, the 
unutterable villain, Lord Baddington." 

"Good heavens!" 

" I tell you that with that man, and with 
none other, she has run away to shame, to 
dishonour, to disgrace ! Where she is, I'll find 
out within four-and-twenty hours. As for the 
girl, if I had her here, I'd have her whipped to 
death with knotted cords. As for that titled 
hound, he has broken his promise, and he 
shall die, by " 

She stayed the utterance of a fearful oath, 
and placed her pretty hand on her mouth, then 
with a bitter smile : 

"You did'nt think I could swear, Philip; 
but I can, and I can do what I swear to." 

It is not exactly my purpose how Lady 
Baddington contrived to obtain the informa- 
tion she desired. That she did obtain it is 



A HAPPY MARRIAGE. 49 

certain ; and it was in consequence of the in- 
formation just mentioned, that Philip Leslie was 
in Paris; that he was accompanied by Dr. 
Ionides, that both had procured tickets for the 
great Bal Masque at the Opera, which takes 
place on the night of Mardi Gras. 



VOL. III. 



50 



CHAP. XXXVIII. 

BEFORE THE BALL. 

TN an upper chamber maison garnie, of that 
special street of furnished apartments, that 
Percy Street relique of Paris, the Rue Louis- 
le-Grand, and about eleven at night on Mardi 
Gras, Philip Leslie and Doctor Ionides were 
dressing for the ball. It should with more 
rigid propriety be explained, that the Doctor 
had completed the preliminaries of his toilet 
in one apartment, while his friend had arrayed 
himself for the festin in another; but [their 
two bed-chambers were immediately contigu- 
ous, opened one upon the other, in fact; 
and the Doctor had left the inner room and 
entered that of Philip ; in order that the latter 



BEFORE THE BALL. 51 

might have an opportunity of criticising the 
splendour of his array previous to his putting 
the finishing touches thereto. 

Mr. Philip Leslie had never been at a mas- 
querade in his life ; and with settled obstinacy 
this singular young man pertinaciously re- 
fused to travesty himself in any way, even to 
the assuming of a domino, and persisted in 
dressing himself in a plain suit of evening 
black, which a regard for truth compels me to 
say became him remarkably well. With scorn 
he had contemplated the whole stock-in-trade 
of M. Raphael-ben-Daoud, costumier and mar- 
chant fripier of the Temple and the Rue de 
Seine, and had turned a deaf ear to the 
serpent who had striven to enchant him with 
the sight of gay and resplendent costumes . 
troubadours, pages, Louis Quinze marquises, 
Louis Treize cavaliers, men-at-arms, arque- 
busiers ; and the like. He was not going to 
make a fool of himself, he said ; so adhered to 
his evening suit of black . although I should 
be glad, by the way, to know if in the whole 
annal's of Folly's wardrobe there has even 



Ubra 



52 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

been made mention of a suit of attire more 
preposterously foolish than that same u even- 
ing dress" with which we affoible ourselves 
when we go out to dinner, or to the Honourable 
Mrs. Blank's Thursdays. Thanking heaven 
as I am glad to do sincerely for most things . 
meat, drink, decent raiment, good books, and 
the companionship of dear friends . there is 
vet one thing for which I am even more 
devoutly grateful : that it is not often my lot 
to be asked out to polite dinner parties, and 
that my mantel- piece is seldom cumbered with 
the Honourable Mrs. Blank's cards. Timeo 
Danaos : 1 fear that dreadful dress- coat of 
the evening, that sable anomaly, that long- 
tailed excrescence^ half-bird, half-buffoon like, 
and which always makes me think of Vinny 
Bournes' lines on the jackdaw : . 

" There is a bird, who by his coat, 
And by the hoarseness of his note, 
You might proclaim a crow." 

My good friend, Mr. Lumley of her Majesty's 
Theatre, is good enough at the commence- 
ment of every season, to place my name on 



BEFORE THE BALL. 53 

the free-list of his establishment; yet I de- 
clare, that during the summer last pa:-t \ 
missed seeing Piccolomini no less than eleven 
times, owing to my horror for the tail-coat. 
Yet it is astonishing what importance is 
attached to this ludicrous, unseemly, unmean- 
ing garment. They won't let you look at the 
pictures in the Hermitage at St. Petersburg 
unless you have a tail-coat on; you must 
even pay your morning visits in the vile 
thing; and a Russian Countess, to whom I 
once had a letter of introduction, positively 
cut me after the first interview, because I 
called on her in a cut-away coat. It was 
from a Petropolitan tailor, too, and had cost 
me forty roubles, cash. " II est venu me voir 
enfroc: un cpicier : quoiV she said, 

The views of Doctor Ionides, with respect 
to the proper costume to be worn at a bed 
masque, were of a nature totally opposed to 
those entertained by his friend. The Doctor 
had a pictorial taste and picturesque imagina- 
tion, and delighted in gay and rich apparel. 
He had revolved in his mind the relative 



51 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

expediency of an almost infinite variety of fancy 
dresses, including those of a male debardeur, 
a fort de la halle, and a pierrot, and had at 
last fixed upon an astounding equipment, 
certainly appertaining to no particular age or 
country, but which partook of the character- 
istics of all. It consisted of a cuirass formed 
of gilt scales, a scarlet mantle, a plaid skirt, 
fleshings, top-boots, a Koman helmet and a 
tremendously long Spanish rapier. The Doc- 
tor had preserved the use of his green spec- 
tacles; and, after much anxious deliberation 
and nice weighing of the proprieties of the 
thing, he had determined on affixing to his 
already sufficiently developed nasal organ, an 
enormous false nose in pasteboard, coloured 
in the most violent red. This, as the novelists, 
who delight in describing the wardrobes of 
the last century, say, " completed his cos- 
tume;" and he was in the act of fixing on 
the rubicund appendage I have alluded to, at 
this same time of eleven of the clock. 

" A touch of rouge on either cheek," the 
Doctor remarked, complacently, " and I am 



BEFORE THE BALL. 55 

entirely at your service. Am I going to wear 
white kid gloves? Certainly not. I see that 
you are about to assume those luxuries ; but I 
repudiate them : in the first place, because I 
consider them to be vanities, mockeries, de- 
lusions and snares; secondly, because lemon- 
coloured kids are more fashionable; thirdly, 
because no human glover ever made a pair of 
kids sufficiently large to fit these hands of 
mine." 

He held out, as he spoke, a gigantic pair of 
hands, the fingers in their gnarled thickness 
and clumsiness strongly resembling the great 
crimson wooden monstrosities that hang over 
glovers' shops. They were not very unlike 
them in colour, either. 

Both were now ready for departure; and 
Doctor Ionides was suggesting the expediency 
of blowing out the candles, and telling the 
concierge to fetch a vehicle to convey them 
to the opera-house in the Rue Lepelletier, 
when Philip stopped him. 

" Before we start on this expedition, Polly- 
blank," he commenced . 



56 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" Ionides, Ionides, my dear friend," inter- 
rupted the other, holding up one of the large 
hands with a gesture of caution; " Doctor 
Ionides, if you please. Pollyblank, if that 
mythical personage ever existed, is dead and 
buried. Transported beyond the seas for the 
term of his natural life. Confined in one of 
the secret dungeons of the Spielberg. He 
languishes beneath the piombi of the ducal 
palace of Venice. He is at Cayenne, at Nouka- 
kioa. He is in a chain-gang at Perth, Swan- 
River, Western Australia. He went up in a 
balloon, and has never since been heard of. 
Pollyblank was blown to pieces in the Gun- 
powder Plot; and Ionides rose, Phcenix-like, 
from his ashes. Pray be cautious, imprudent 
youth. Even French lodging-house walls may 
have ears, and little birds may be waiting 
round the corners to carry the name of Polly- 
blank to his Majesty's justices of the peace, 
the judges of his Majesty's Central Criminal 
Court, and the governors of his Majesty's 
jaH." 

" Well, then, Ionides . Doctor Ionides, if 
you like." 



BEFORE THE BALL. 57 

" lam all attention." 

" Tell me, then, what is to be our definite 
and settled purpose to-night?" 

" Have you come all these miles without 
knowing it?" the Doctor somewhat disdain- 
fully asked. u What a man of wind and 
water you are, to be sure. Didn't our gra- 
cious lady give you ample instructions? 
Doesn't your own sense of wrong and out- 
rage tell you plainly what course you ought 
to adopt ? Is there any purpose on earth for 
which you ought to have come here but to 
kill Lord Baddington?" 

" I don't like killing a man in cold blood," 
was Philip's reply. He had thrown himself on a 
sofa, and was moving himself restlessly about. 
" It seems dastardly, mean, cruel. If you had 
allowed me to speak to him in that cigar-shop, 
where he sat, with his toad-eaters, grinning at 
me like a baboon, I would have tolcl him that 
he was a ruffian, and knocked him down then 
and there. If he had chosen to challenge and 
fight me afterwards, well and good. But I 
can't bear the thought of going to a masquerade 



58 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

for the express purpose of quarrelling with a 
man, however great a scoundrel he may be, 
and fighting a duel with him. It's taking a 
low, cowardly advantage." 

" Not so great an advantage," the Doctor 
complacently retorted. u Can you fence ?" 

" Very little." 

" Supposing that he, being the insulted 
party, and having the right to the choice of 
weapons, weere to choose swords ? They 
fight a good deal with swords in France." 

"Well!" 

" Suppose that he, being a cavalry officer 
a blustering, swaggering, dragoon . were to 
know how to use his sabre to Ms advantage?" 

"What then?" 

" Supposing . to put an end to supposition 
. that he were to kill you instead of your 
killing him?" 

" I should be out of a world I am sick of." 

"Misanthropy granted . and I don't be- 
lieve in yours, by the way ; for I am satisfied 
that there is nothing you would like better 
than to live to be fifty years of age, and to 



BEFORE THE BALL. 59 

have live thousand a-year . the advantage is 
neither on one side nor the other. As regards 
iny not permitting you to have a collision with 
the fellow in the cigar shop, 1 had my reasons 
for that. I am acting, I have acted all along, 
under instructions. If it hadn't been for me, 
you would never have known where to find 
the man who has robbed you of your sweet- 
heart, and who, by the living jingo, has se- 
duced her." 

"It's a lie," cried Philip, starting up from 
the sofa, with a fierce cry of rage. " Villain 
as he is, he has never dared to wrong her. 
She resisted him before. She has resisted 
him now, successfully." 

" I tell you," Doctor Ionides repeated, with 
bitter emphasis, "that he has seduced her; 
that she is his mistress ; that he is living with 
her now in a snug little entresol in the Rue 
Taitbout. They go to the theatre together, 
they drive into the Bois de Boulogne together ; 
they will be at the masquerade together, this 
very night. 

u I say again that it is false." 



60 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

" Bah ! we are men. Don't let 's have any 
more child's talk about it. Xow look you 
here, Philip Leslie. You know me well 
enough by this time. Known me as conju- 
rer, mountebank, adventurer, convict, forger, 
scoundrel, anything you like. But I am a 
bigger man than you, simply because I have a 
will. You boasted of yours just now, Philip! 
What is it? . A curd of pigeon's milk, a cob- 
web net, a rope of sand ! If that will had 
been properly directed twenty years ago, it 
might have made me a very different man. 
It might have made me honest, industrious, 
prosperous ; it might have made me a happy 
man at home, with children round my knees. 
But it is too late to talk of all that now. 
Jack Polly blank's will, that he brags so much 
about, has only served to guide him through 
dark and crooked ways, and he is alone now 
. desolate, lost ; with no one but the devil to 
help him, for Heaven will not." 

He uttered these last words in accents very 
different from the boastful, defiant swao-o-er of 

7 CO 

diction in which he ordinarily indulged. He 



BEFORE THE BALL. 61 

paused, and was for some moments silent, 
standing there a strange sight in his absurd 
and uncouth dress, his huge beard and green 
spectacles. Who would believe me if I were 
to say, that the spectacles were, if only for a 
moment, dimmed with an unaccustomed mois- 
ture ; and that two drops of brine rolled down 
the painted cheeks of Jack Polly blank? 

Scoundrels are human. Thieves are not 
always thieving; they think sometimes of 
their childhood . of the time before they 
thieved. The man who murdered the Italian 
boy, set him to play with his children before 
he slew him. 

" I have wandered from the subject," Doc- 
tor Ionides resumed, hi an altered voice; 
" and, unless I am very much mistaken, the 
hand of the clock points to twenty to twelve. 
We must be at the c crib ' by midnight. All 
the fun of the fair begins at midnight. Before 
we go, I have one little thing to ask you. 
Are you very much in love with Manuelita?" 

" How can you ask me?" the Painter cried, 
indignantly. 



62 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

u Because I firmly believe that } T ou don't 
care twopence-halfpenny about her. You are 
angry with this sprig of nobility for making 
you ridiculous, and would like to shoot him, 
if you had a chance ; but as regards the girl, 
I think you are of the opinion of the gentle- 
man who dismounted from the mare that was 
a kicker,' and that you think you are 'well out 
of it.' Isn't that so?" 

" I shall not answer your question," Philip 
replied moodily. " You seem to be my Me- 
phistophiles, and to surround me with your 
infernal spells and enchantments. Now that 
the girl has jilted me, that fop of a Lord, you, 
or anybody, . down to the shoeblack on the 
Boulevard yonder . may have her for me. 
But I did love her very clearly." 

" You did nothing of the sort," was the 
pertinacious denial of the Doctor. " If you 
had valued her at two straws, you would not 
have suffered me, whose former and peculiar 
acquaintance with little Manuelita you re- 
member, to have anything to do with the 
matter. Philip ^Leslie, I will tell you with 



BEFORE THE BALL. 63 

whom you have all along been in love, and 
with whom you are in love now." 

The blood mantled up to Philip's forehead 
when he heard these words. He began to 
stammer out an indignant denial ; but checked 
himself, and said simply . 

14 And with whom am I in love, pray, since 
you know my affairs so well?" 

" With the mistress of us all . Genevieve, 
Viscountess Baddington." 

u You are exceedingly insolent, Mr. Poll . 
Doctor Ionides. ,, 

" I always was troubled with that com- 
plaint," rejoined the Doctor coolly. " I slept 
next to an impudent boy at school, and per- 
haps I caught it from him. It 's no good 
your telling me that you 're not in love with 
the bewitching Viscountess. I am. ] am of 
a loving disposition. Didn't I make love to 
Manuelita, once upon a time? We all are. 
Xow, without pressing you too hard, for I see 
you 're chafing like a horse under a hard bit, 
wouldn't you do anything in the world to 
please the lady who has been your benefac- 
tress, and is your friend? " 



64 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

"Anything . everything!" Philip cried, 
enthusiastically. 

" Wouldn't you obey her slightest com- 
mands ? " 

" I would!" 

" Well, then, not her slight, but her serious 
commands are, that you obey me in every 
particular. Will this satisfy you ? " 

He handed Philip a tiny slip of rose- 
coloured paper in a scented envelope. The 
contents were in Lady Baddington's beautiful 
Italian hand . Philip knew it well; for her 
Ladyship had, on more than one occasion, 
condescended to write to him. In this billet 
she intimated her wish, that he should follow 
implicitly the directions given him by the 
person who accompanied him to Paris. And 
it was signed, G. . G for Genevieve, it is to 
be presumed; for her Ladyship had, when she 
so chose, none of the ordinary haughtiness of 
rank, and was fond of calling herself by her 
own pretty Christian name. 

Philip returned the missive . he could not 
doubt its authenticity . with a deep sigh ; and 



BEFORE THE BALL. 65 

Doctor Ionides, once more becoming the hu- 
morous philosopher, whose guise he generally 
affected, surveyed himself with great compla- 
cency in a cheval glass, and then, humming a 
cheerful tune, intimated his opinion that it 
was pretty nearly time to be moving. 

The pair cast long cloaks over their shoul- 
ders . long cloaks were worn in 1836 . and 
descending the stairs, were soon ensconsed in 
a fiacre, and on their way to the Grand 
Opera. 



VOL. III. F 



66 



CHAP. XXXIX. 



THE BALL. 



T)ARIS had made up its mind to be exceed- 
ingly gay all night long. Very seldom, 
indeed, does fair Lutetia so "keep it up;" 
and with all the gaiety and dissipation of that 
which is said to be the liveliest capital in 
Europe, there is, on ordinary occasions, very 
little stirring that is worth seeing in Paris 
after midnight. But a bat masque at the 
Grand Opera is an occasion on which the 
Parisians forget their generally-early habits, 
and when the disturbance of the peaceful 
slumbers of concierges is disregarded in a city, 
in which, as a rule, there are no latch-keys. 
Mardi-gras stands :^ the threshold of the 



THE BALL. 67 

grim car erne . the forty days of Lent, with its 
fastings and its penances ; and in a country in 
whose religion there is a large admixture of 
enthusiasm (albeit France is by no means the 
most Catholic of Catholic lands), the unre- 
served and almost frantic merriment of a 
saturnalia immediately preceding a season of 
abstinence and tribulation can be readily un- 
derstood and accounted for. 

Do not think that the grand opera mas- 
querade is the only one that takes place in 
Paris on the night of Shrove Tuesday. Such 
entertainments pullulate all over the capital. 
There are masked balls at all the great dancing 
saloons : the Prado, the Salles Valentino and 
Sainte C^cile, the " Wauxhall," and the Salle 
Barthelemy. There are balls at the barriers ; 
there are balls at several of the minor theatres. 
At the period of which I write, there were 
reckoned among the sights . and by some 
among the scandals too . of Paris, that famous 
" Descente de la Courtille" now degenerated 
into a mean jostling of haggard disreputables 
clad in faded frippery ; but which twenty years 



68 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

ago was a very grand, gay, amusing, wicked 
scene indeed; a sort of smudged sketch from 
Nicholas Poussin . all Fauns and Bacchantes, 
Silenuses and Satyrs over-brimming chalices 
and roaring songs, vine-leaves, leopard-skins, 
pipes and tobacco, rouge, spangles, flambeaux, 
and finery. Paris knows such out-door orgies 
no longer. The inebriate jollities of the cour- 
tille can only be enacted now a huis clos, in 
the sanctuary of some cabinet particulier of 
the Maison Doree, or in some petite maison 
of the Bois de Boulogne, where Russian princes 
and magnates of the Bourse may amuse them- 
selves in counterfeiting the amusements of the 
lowest classes of the population. It is edifying 
how outwardly staid and externally decorous 
my Paris is becoming. It gambles still, but 
in the Five per Cents Rentes; it speculates 
not on the chances of the Tapis Vert, but in 
the investments of the Grand Lime. It sings, 
but no longer at the Caveau, or Enfants de 
Sitene; it is morally naughty still, but its 
dames aux camellias die penitent and phthisical ; 
its Jilles de marbre deliver moral apophthegms; 



THE BALL. 69 

and its dames aux perles read Thomas a 
Kempis. No wicked pictures in Parisian 
shops or on Parisian quais now; no galeries 
de bois in the Palais Royal; no Frascati's, no 
Bonjean's. Even the shops begin to be closed 
on Sundays; going to church is becoming 
fashionable; and auricular confession is rec- 
koned rather bon ton than otherwise. It 
would seem as though that strange, stern^ 
inexplicable man who holds France in his iron 
grasp . who sits aloft and aloof, an imperial 
owl, boding, nvysterious, carnivorous, immove- 
able, wise, and blind to the broad noon-day 
glare of public opinion and the aspirations of 
millions of men for rational freedom, yet far- 
seeing in the black night of tumult and trouble, 
has resolved in a sort of cynical remorse for 
his own early excesses to make Paris moral in 
spite of itself. Yes, he who has gone through 
the whole curriculum of the viveur's wild 
existence ; who has diced and drunk and 
heard the chimes at midnight, and long after 
midnight, with Stanley and Chesterfield, 
d'Orsay and Brunswick, whose name was on 



70 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

every discounter's bill, and against whom 
every discounter had his writ, has sternly de- 
termined to put down at least the outward 
semblance of immorality in an abandoned 
capital. It is not the devil sick and wishing 
a monk to be; but the devil putting on a 
shovel hat and a white tie, tucking his tail 
beneath the folds of his silk apron, and setting 
his attendant imps to chant Sternhold and 
Hopkins instead of skylarking with red-hot 
pitchforks. Stranger things may happen, do 
happen every day, and yet may not be incon- 
sistent. Yet may the world see Caesars, owing 
two millions of money, bringing bills into the 
Senate for the punishment of fraudulent bank- 
rupts; Syllas speechifying before the Plebs 
against capital punishment, and denouncing 
the intolerable atrocity of casting malefactors 
from the Tarpeian rock; Mirabeaus moving 
that the infraction of the seventh command- 
ment should be made felony; and Justice 
Fieldings sending Bacchanalians to Bridewell 
for riotous conduct at the Rose, or Tom King's 
Coffee-house. 



THE BALL. 71 

Philip, who was naturally nervous, did not 
experience much inward satisfaction at the 
companionship, in a hackney carriage, of an 
individual attired in the, to say the least,' 
conspicuous style of Doctor Ionides, and was 
not at all certain as to the reception which his 
grotesquely-accoutred friend would meet with 
from the multitude which would probably be 
assembled at the door of the opera-house ; but 
in this he only showed his inexperience and 
want of knowledge of Parisian life; for had 
he chosen to go dressed as a Cherokee Indian 
. wore paint, tomahawk, feathered mocassins, 
trophies of gore, bedewed with scalp and all . 
and had the Doctor assumed the semblance of 
an ostrich, or an elephant, or the colossus of 
Rhodes, or the tower of Babel, the crowd 
would have taken the travesties in good part, 
and saluted them as right worthy keepers up 
of the carnival. 

" I remember," the Doctor remarked, as 
they rattled along the Boulevard, u going to 
this same grand opera turn-out two years ago, 
dressed as Robert the Devil . no, I mean the 



72 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

other fellow . the man with the striped legs, 
the beard, and the bass voice . Bertram. 
There was a gentleman there too, dressed as 
flie postillion of Longjumeau. Tremendous 
jack-boots he had, and all Coventry in ribbons 
on his hat. We fell out about an undersized 
party with corkscrew ringlets and black velvet 
trousers, who was a debardeur there, but a mil- 
liner's assistant when she was at home. The 
postillion was very good at the savate, and very 
nearly succeeded in catching me an ugly blow 
under the chin with the left toe of the jack- 
boots. Then I knocked him down. Then, 
while he sat crying on the ground (they always 
cry when they are hit), a gendarme caught 
me round the waist, and I knocked him down 
too. Then, I think, they must have called in 
the artillery too, and the fire-brigade, and the 
sappers and miners ; at all events, I was cap- 
tured by a whole army, and conducted to the 
nearest poste . the violon they call it . that's a 
station-house in England. They took the 
postillion too . I suppose because he had been 
knocked down, and had so brought discredit 



THE BALL. 73 

upon La Belle France, or perhaps because his 
jack-boots were too much like those of the 
gendarmerie, and were considered libellous. 
At the poste they made the same polite inqui- 
ries as to my age, my birthplace, and my 
papa and mamma, without asking which they 
don't seem to be able to manage anything in 
France. Then all the officials on duty shook 
their heads very gravely, as if to imply that I 
must expect to be sent to the galleys at the 
very least for knocking a man down; and 
then they locked me and the postilion up in 
the violon. There were two or three more 
jolly post-boys there, and one or two forts de 
la halle, with a sprinkling of chiffoniers (rag- 
pickers), drunken blouses, beggars, and thieves. 
Everybody was as drunk as he could wish to 
be, and we were merry indeed. First we sang 
the ' Marseillaise/ and then we danced the 
1 Cancan,' and then we all fell to kicking vio- 
lently at the door. They very soon opened it 
in answer to our summons ; but what do you 
think it was to do? So sure as my name is . 
well, never mind what it is; you know well 



74 THE B ALDINGTON PEERAGE. 

enough . the atrocious myrmidons of a hideous 
despotism made an irruption into the cell, and 
there and then, without asking who was in 
fault, stripped every living soul in that miser- 
able dungeon of their boots or shoes. It was 
no use resisting. Tyranny was triumphant. 
But you should have seen, or rather heard the 
row in the morning, when, previous to taking 
us up before the Commissary of Police, they 
let us out into a court-yard, and bade us, 
every one of us, reclamer or claim our own 
property again. There were the boots and 
shoes all of a heap . all higgledy-piggledy. 
Such a scene I never witnessed before or after. 
Of course everybody wanted the best pair of 
upper leathers' he could lay his foot to. For 
my own part, I think I came away with one 
patent-leather slipper and one of my friend 
the postillion's jack-boots." 

u And how did it end? \Yere you lined or 
imprisoned, or both?" 

u Neither. In his unshod condition, the 
postillion became mollified ; and I believe that 
about four o'clock in the morning we swore 



THE BALL. 75 

eternal friendship, When taken before the 
Commissary in the morning, the original gen- 
darme was not forthcoming. There was, to 
be sure, a supplementary one, who swore that 
I was dressed as Robert Macaire, and that I 
danced prohibited dances; but his evideuce 
went for nothing. In fact, there seemed to 
be a general confusion of ideas as to who was 
whom . or had been whom, the night before; 
and the Commissary, who gave unmistakable 
signs of a lively regret at not having been at 
the masked ball himself, let us off very easily, 
with a suitable admonition on the danger of 
quarrelling, calling us ses enfants . his children. 
Cocker, arretez ! " 

The coachman stopped as he was ordered ; 
for they were before the peristyle of the Grand 
Opera. 

A noise to which that of Babel let loose 
would have been comparative silence . a howl- 
ing, shrieking, leaping, capering, struggling 
mob . a tohu-bohu of extravagant sounds . a 
whirl of human beings of both sexes arrayed 
in every variety of incongruous costume . 



76 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

monks, cavaliers, African kings, Mingrelian 
princesses, Russian boyards, North American 
Indians, fishwomen, debardeurs and debar- 
deuses, marquises, sailors, savages, ballet- 
dancers, co?itadi?ie 1 Pierrots, Eastern sultans, 
negroes, " John Bulls," Jewish Rabbis, field- 
marshals, fairies, griffins, devils, quack doctors, 
grenadiers of the First Empire, crusaders, 
men-at-arms, Punches, mousquetaires gris, 
Highlanders, troubadours, heralds, gipsies, 
lazzaroni, Queen Elizabeths, Henri Quatres, 
Francois Premiers, court jesters, Robert 
Macaires, old women, and Robinson Orusoes, 
were all pent up together in the expanse of 
the boarded parterre of the Academie Imperiale 
de Musique. But it is not to be assumed, that 
the whole of the audience were in fancy 
dresses. A very large proportion . the ladies 
. were in variously-coloured dominoes; a still 
larger proportion . the gentlemen . were in 
plain evening dress, similar to the unpretend- 
ing attire patronised by Philip Leslie; some 
wearing masks with lace fall barbes, as the 
French call them ; others disdaining even that 



THE BALL. 77 

transparent disguise, and walking about un- 
concernedly, as they would have walked about 
the saloons of the Tuileries, or the sky-blue 
halls of Almack's in England. 



78 



CHAP. XL. 



RUN TO EARTH. 



IDHILIP and his friend went into a private 
box on the third tier, and, leaning over 
the velvet parapet, contemplated the brilliant 
surging scene below. It was some time before 
they could accustom their eyes to it, however ; 
for the respiration of so many thousand 
persons, and the glare of the great chandeliers, 
lighted with gas, formed an irridescent cloud 
that canopied the whole audience, and at first 
made it difficult to discern their movements. 
So those who have been hardy . . perhaps fool- 
hardy . enough to take a place in the car of 
a balloon, and have risen with the monster 



RUN TO EARTH. 79 

from Cremorne to Vauxhall, haply in the even- 
tide, have seen hanging close over the brow of 
the Monster City, and cut justly and exactly 
to its shape . to the minutest zigzags of its 
outlying suburbs, a great canopy of exhalation 
. the smoke of London, hideous and Cim- 
merian enough when from terra jirma we see 
it ascending from chimney-pots, or mark its 
blackening or destructive effects upon the most 
beautiful of our architectural monuments ; but 
rendered, when seen from heaven, deliciously 
azure, viewed as it is through the medium of 
n clear and pure atmosphere, and prismatically 
glorious by the rays of the setting sun. 

The Doctor had provided himself with an 
enormous jumelle lorgnette, its barrels of 
papier mache glistening with japan, mother-of- 
pearl enamel, and coloured foil. This instru- 
ment completely put to shame Philip's modest 
little ivory opera-glass, and vexed the Painter 
considerably by its huge size and air of pre- 
tension ; but Doctor Ionides evidently regarded 
it as part and parcel of his equipment, and as 
a necessary item of exaggeration to an ex- 



80 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

aggerated whole. He made good use of it, 
too, glaring into the brilliant space with the 
two huge lenses, till the refractions from the 
facets of the chandelier drops caught his 
spurious eyes, and made them dance in many- 
coloured flashes, so that the people in the 
lower tier must have taken him for a revolving 
light, or an overgrown basilisk. 

" Very good . very good indeed!" the 
Doctor cried out approvingly. 

" What is very good? Who is very good? 
Do you mean that little figure in the pink 
domino talking to the man with the counterfeit 
nose, who appears to have stuffed a chest of 
drawers, or a bed and bedding, at least, under- 
neath his waistcoat?" 

" Quite the contrary ! I mean the distin- 
guished individual in evening dress as faultless 
as yours ; but with a mask on, and with the 
ribbons of half-a-dozen orders at his button- 
hole. Pray remark the Legion of Honour, 
who has just picked the pocket of the man 
with the false nose. A well-lined purse, 
evidently." 



RUN TO EARTH. 81 

" The rascal ! Shall we go down and collar 
him?" 

" Shall we go down and try to find a needle 
in a bottle of hay 1 See ! he has already dis- 
appeared. I couldn't have done a better trick 
than that in the days when I was a professor 
of natural magic. And . ha ! ha ! . the best 
of the joke is, that I know the man with the 
nose and the abdomen. We work together, 
sometimes. Upon my word, very good . very 
good, indeed!" 

For all his rouge, his wig, his spectacles, 
you could see his wicked face radiant with the 
exultation of the cynicism within him. So 
laugh those horrible, bull-necked, low-browed, 
square-jowled, small-eyed men in ragged 
fustain and fur caps, and with blue-and-white- 
spotted Belchers twisted round their foul 
throats; so laugh those lost creatures, born 
irremediably bad; so laugh those hopeless 
ones born irrevocably stupid, into whose souls 
of Erebus not one ray of blessed light shall 
ever penetrate, let the jail chaplain preach till 
he be hoarse . the law of kindness be tried to 

VOL. III. G 



82 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

its blandest enactment . the law of severity 
tried to the last knot in the last cord of its 
scourge . the law of Draco tried till Calcraft 
take the wall of Baring and Rothschild, Mires 
and Pereire, and bid uncompeted with for the 
next Russian loan. So laugh the devil's 
children, who hang about low street corners 
and lean against Seven Dial posts, when they 
hear a ribald expression, when they see an 
animal in torture, when they can stain the 
clean garments of a passer-by with mud, or 
overturn the apple-stall of some poor, honest 
wretch, fighting against starvation like a 
drowning man against the strong, pitiless sea ; 
so must laugh the devils themselves, grinning 
at their own damnation . for despair can laugh 
as well as joy. 

Philip looked as sternly as his irresolute 
eyes would let him at the man-hyaena in the 
masquerade dress; and it may be that for a 
moment he mentally discussed the feasibility 
of lifting his immoral Mentor bodily in his 
arms, and pitching him over the box-ledge into 
the merry slough of despond that weltered 



RUN TO EARTH. 83 

underneath, there to find his level of corrup- 
tion. But he did not do this : he did very- 
few things whose feasibility he discussed, 
preferring to do those things on the impulse 
of the moment, which experience afterwards 
proved to be anything but feasible ; and when 
his companion suggested there was one thing 
for which they might really go down stairs 
with some show of reason . namely, to take 
some refreshment . he allowed Doctor Ionides 
to put his arm through his, and to lead him 
into the box-lobby, very much in the fashion 
that a lamb is led to the slaughter, or as a fool 
to the correction of the stocks. 

All the lobbies were full of maskers . not 
one of them tipsy yet, as their compeers at an 
English masquerade would have been two 
hours before ; but making far more noise over 
their goblets of lemonade and overbrimming 
bumpers of orgeat, their frantic excesses of 
candied chocolate, and their Heliogabalian 
debauches of sugar-plums, than any like num- 
ber of Anglo-Saxon Bacchanalians, already 
deep in their tenth tumblers of strong toddy, 



84 THE BADDINGTON PEEK AGE. 

and making their minds up now to steady 
drinking. There were noisy girls and noisy 
young men. There was gabbling, shouting, 
romping, capering, joking; and all this was 
thought to be dissipation, the wildest frenzy 
of carnivalic excitement. So a neophyte might 
have thought, and so many, doubtless, thought 
that night, ignorant of how readily sugar-and- 
water gets into French people's heads, and 
what a racking headache over-indulgence in 
barley-sugar will bring on the morning after. 
But so thought not certain men with tanned, 
yellow, tired features . men with loose 
wrinkles hanging flaccidly beneath their. eyes 
and round their hollow cheeks . men in black 
suits, patent-leather boots . irreproachably - 
white-cravatted, faultlessly- white-kid-gloved ; 
sometimes wearing moustaches, twisted, waxed, 
and blackened to painful perfection; frequently 
having curly heads of hair, which treacherous 
napes of necks and perfidious partings de- 
nounced as wigs instanter . men who looked 
with a very ill-disguised comtempt upon the 
tomfooleries of the' poor capering debardeurs 



RUN TO EARTH. 85 

and Pierrots, but from time to time singled 
out gliding figures in variously-coloured 
dominoes and closely masked, or were singled 
out by them ; and slipped bits of paper beneath 
drapery, or were playfully stricken with fans, 
or had their hands squeezed by little fingers 
covered with the softest of Jouvin's gloves, 
but which little fingers, as I live, belonged to 
hands whose grip was as that of a steel vice, 
and whose blood-compelling tenacity rivalled 
that of an English bull-doo-. 

u Who is that, I wonder?" Philip asked, 
noticing one of the type I have sketched 
passing him. 

" Am not aware of him," the Doctor 
answered ; " but know the school well. Lots of 
them here. See them in the ' lion's den' . that 
long pit proscenium box yonder . on opera 
nights, but seldom before the ballet comes on ; 
see them in the Bois de Boulogne, not like the 
young French swells on horses which they 
don't know how to ride, but in high tilburies 
with English blood-horses which they allow 
their grooms to drive for them ; see them in 



86 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the snug little baignoires of the minor theatres, 
that is, if your eyes are sharp enough to catch 
a sight of them in the obscurity, and of the 
princess with the diamond, the big fan, and 
the paint, who accompanies them ; see them at 
Longchamps and Chantilly, at Dieppe in the 
summer, after that at the gambling places on 
the Rhine. They dine at the Cafe de Paris ; 
they think the Trois Freres low; but some- 
times condescend to patronise Bignon's or the 
Cafe de Foy, because everything is so very 
dear there, and poached eggs with asparagus 
tips cost ten francs a plate. They belong to 
the Jockey Club; they belong to the Cercle 
des Etrangers. You may see them for one 
hour, and for one hour only, every day during 
the winter season, from four to five, on the 
Boulevard des Italiens. At any other time 
they are to be found wherever there are ex- 
pensive wines, ortolans, pates de foie gras, and 
ladies who call themselves actresses, because 
they must call themselves something. Stop ! 
the atmosphere of playing cards and dice is not 
uncongenial to them; neither are duelling 
pistols; neither are small swords." 



RtJN TO EARTH. 87 

M You seem to know a great deal about 
them without telling me their names," Philip 
said, as threading the crowded passages the 
Doctor rattled out these physiological re- 
marks ; not in one continuous speech, but in 
detached apophthegms, ever and anon inter- 
spersing them with compliments and wit- 
ticisms, both verbal and manual, addressed 
to the prettiest of the debardeurs, and the 
most mysterious of the dominoes whom he 
met, but which I have not deemed necessary 
to interpolate in my narrative. 

a I know them ! Bless your heart, I should 
think I do ! I have had to swindle some of 
them in my time. One famous rendezvous of 
ours, however, is broken up; there is no 
Frascati's now, no . ninety-two ' no ' hundred 
and fourteen' in the Palais Royal. The 
cruel Municipality of Paris has killed the 
gambling-houses ; the number of suicides, they 
say, though I don't believe it, has sensibly 
diminished; and Othello's occupation, includ- 
ing a very lucrative one of your humble 
servant, is gone." 



88 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" Are these men gamblers, then . black- 
legs?" 

" Gamblers, and rare ones, yes. Blacklegs, 
no. Not, at least, till they have spent all 
their money, and can't borrow or win any 
more without cheating. My dear Phil (Philip 
shuddered as the diminutive struck his tym- 
panum) these men are the viveurs de Paris . 
the bucks, sw r ells, bloods, dandies, fast men 
of France. They began under the Restora- 
tion. They inherit the traditions of the 
empire and its wild orgies; they sneer at 
and despise the frivolous gaiety of the shop- 
keeping monarchy. These are Eussian princes, 
French nobles of the old regime, English 
lords; yes, I have passed three or four to- 
night who have inhabited Paris since the year 
'14; bankers, monster stock-jobbers, generals, 
and Spanish hidalgoes. They come to a 
bal masque, as a matter of course; the game 
they hunt is here too, though you see it not. 
But the carnival of these worthy souls won't 
besnn till three or four o'clock this morning. 
There will be no lack of champagne and 



RUN TO EARTH. 89 

screeching then, I promise you ; but it will be 
between four walls thickly padded. How 
thirsty I am to be sure. Suppose we begin 
our champagning now." 

There was a refreshment-stall, with a mob of 
parti-coloured carnivalisers struggling before it ; 
the principal objects of competition being those 
large ribbon-bedecked batons of sucre depomme 
. amysterious species of sweetmeat, into whose 
composition sugar and apples enter, I know, 
but in what proportions I am not prepared to 
say, and which a party of young dandies . 
uot the mature viveurs, you may be sure . 
had been simple enough to purchase at the 
rate of twenty-five francs the baton, and offer 
in a species of scramble among the young 
ladies in the silken skirts, the flaxen wigs, the 
embroidered caps, and the many-hued velvet 
pantaloons; these sticks of sucre de pomme 
being doubly valuable, not only as pledges of 
affection, but as objects of commerce, they 
being susceptible, on (private) presentation at 
the refreshment counter, of conversion into 
cash (by virtue of an occult arrangement 



90 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

between the confectioner and the debardeur), 
at a discount of fifty per cent. The Doctor 
was pushing his way through this covetously- 
saccharine croud, when he suddenly stopped, 
and whispered to Philip . 

"There he is!" 

It was Lord Baddington. Flushed, tum- 
bled, somewhat thick in speech, very much 
gone in champagne, but a mighty nobleman 
still. His Lordship had evidently been 
dining; so had his Lordship's toad-eaters, who 
were more obsequious than ever, though 
somewhat incoherent, not to say drunken in 
their flattery. 

The young Lord was standing with his 
back to the buffet, casting his twenty franc 
pieces about in foolish purchases, cramming 
ill-reckoned change of five-franc pieces into 
his pocket, laughing, swearing, chucking 
a little harem of masquerade beauties under 
the chin, making a very great noise, ordering 
people about, calling the passing French 
dandies (very probably as well born, and most 
certainly better bred than himself) " cads," 



RUN TO EARTH. 91 

and otherwise comporting himself in that 
affably-insolent and condescendingly-ferocious 
manner not quite uncommon among young 
British patricians, and which has earned us 
such a delightful popularity abroad. 

11 Now's your time," Doctor Ionides laconi- 
cally observed. " I'll be back in five minutes. 
Stop ! have a drink first, though I don't think 
you stand much in need of Dutch courage. 
Don't go in for thrashing him. You see he's 
screwed, and the French, besides not liking 
fisticuffs under any circumstances, would call 
hitting a drunken man cowardly. A fillip 
by the side of the nose, a tweak of the ear, 
the slightest flap of a glove, are sufficient. 
I hope to find you in the thick of it when I 
return." 

He had no sooner spoken than he was gone. 
Philip, much as he loathed the man, felt 
disconcerted by his sudden disappearance. 
He did not know exactly how to act; how 
to begin the quarrel; what to say, what to 
do. 

He had not long to wait in indecision. He 



92 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

was looking, I daresay, with a very perturbed 
expression of countenance at Lord Badding- 
ton, when that nobleman was good enough 

to ask him what the he was looking 

at?" 

" I am looking at you," Philip Leslie an- 
swered, with as much coolness as he could 
command, and subduing an impulse to knock 
the Peer down out of hand. " 1 want to 
speak to you, my Lord.'' 

" I thought you were an Englishman," 
the other answered, essaying to steady himself 
on his drunken (though noble) legs. " You 
look so dam like an Englishman." Lord 
Baddington was in a gracious temper that 
night. 

" Here, Gambroon ; Tapetie," he cried out, 
" here's an Englishman. Haven't I seen you 
somewhere, old boy . at Crockey's, eh ? Let's 
have a bottle of sham . a bottle of Roiderer's 
best, hay ? No ; what I am going to . that is 
what . yes, what are you going to stand?" 

u Nothing," Philip answered. " Come here, 
I tell you. I want to speak to you. Do you 
know the name on this card V 



RUN TO EARTH. 93 

He put a card into his hand, with his own 
name, Leslie, upon it. But Lord Baddington, 
regarding it with a hazy stare, shook his head 
from side to side, with an air of the wisest 
foil)', or the most imbecile wisdom ; and again 
stating his opinion that Philip was a good 
fellow, and one of the right sort, suggested 
shandy-gaff, and that they should call the 
waiter in to spar. 

" If you are too drunk to read, you are 
sober enough to hear," answered Philip 
fiercely. " My name, Lord Baddington, is 
Leslie . Philip Leslie. Do you understand 
now?'' 

" Well, Mr. Mesne, and what the doose is 
that to me!" 

He fell back as he said so, however, doubt- 
ful and puzzled in his look, and pressing 
his hand on his hot forehead, as if to recall 
some bygone thought or thing. The mas- 
quers had partly given way before them, 
partly elbowed them into a corner, and they 
were comparatively alone in a grove of drink- 
ing flasks, artificial flowers, and glass jars full 
of cakes and sweetmeats. 



94 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" I am Philip Leslie/' the Artist repeated 
slowly and sternly. 

The Peer suddenly started; with a half 
reel and a half scream, cried out : 

" you, you're that painter fellow; 



you're the low-life cad who " 

" I am the man who, never having harmed 
you by word or deed, you have yet grossly, 
basely, villanously injured. I am he who 
was to have been the husband of the girl 
whom you have taken away in your high and 
mighty caprice to make a plaything of . to 
cast her away when you have done with her. 
Give me back my wife, Lord Baddington !" 

But Lord Baddington stood looking at him 
with a scared fixedness, as though he had 
been some horrible image . Medusa's head . 
a chimera . the ghost of Ban quo . the skull of 
murdered John Hayes, stuck on a pole in St. 
Margaret's Churchyard, Westminster; but not 
a word spake he. The toadies, flurried, and 
(one of them) frightened, hovered about, 
hearing all, and skirmished off another group 
of masquers that had begun to gather. 



RUX TO EARTH. 95 

"You cannot give her back to me," the 
Painter continued, " not as I . as any honest 
man . could desire to receive her. You have 
ruined her, scoundrel as you are. Do you 
hear me, my Lord, . scoundrel ?" 

He heard, but answered never a syllable. 
The toadies winced at the word scoundrel, 
and made ready for the worst. Philip grew 
impatient as he proceeded . 

" You can give me one thing, at least : the 

satisfaction of a gentleman . revenge. I sive 
   

this card to one of your friends, since you are 
not in a state to comprehend its meaning 
yourself. My address is on it ; but I will be 
under the orchestra at the conclusion of the 
ball, if you can take enough soda-water by 
that time to sober yourself by that time, and 
answer me." 

He tendered his card as he spoke to Major 
Gambroon, and was walking away like a man 
of snow, very cool without, though very warm 
within, when Lord Baddington called out 
" Stop," and took the card himself from the 
hand of bis friend. 



96 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

A most remarkable change had come over 
this nobleman. He could not have sobered 
himself in so short a time, violent as might 
have been the revulsion of feeling he had 
experienced; but he began to speak quite 
lucidly and coherently, putting his face close 
to Philip 5 s, and glaring at him with baleful 
eyes. 

"I won't fight you," he said. "That 
yellow-haired cat in Curzon Street has sent 
you here to murder me. I won't fight you. 
I'm no coward. Curse me if I'm a coward; 
but I won't be murdered Go back to 
London. Go back to that young hag. Go to 
the devil." 

He crushed the card into a ball, and flung 
it into Philip's face ; then turned towards his 
toadies with a yell half of cowardice, half of 
defiance. But the next moment, a well- 
directed blow from the painter caused him to 
measure his length upon the ground. 



97 



CHAP. XLI. 

LORD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 

TT was not through any feeling of pusil- 
lanimity that Pollyblank-Ionides . Captain, 
Professor, and Doctor --had abandoned his 
friend under what may appear to have been 
critical circumstances. Cowardice was not 
certainly one of that outlaw's failings; and 
though, like the majority of valiant men, who 
are also prudent, he recognised to its fullest 
extent the valuable expediency of running 
away under certain circumstances . a similar 
retrograde policy having been occasionally 
practised with the utmost success by the most 
illustrious commanders . the multi-named 
companion of Philip Leslie was, when need 

VOL. III. h 



98 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

required it, a chevalier, if not exactly sans re* 
proche, decidedly one sans peur. 

The Doctor's organ of locality was power- 
fully developed, and he knew to a cubic foot, 
a cubic inch, where he had left Philip. But 
he had a visit to pay before he rejoined him, 
and from the manner, while he traversed the 
crowd, in which he kept his gaze fixed on a 
certain box on the ground-tier . a small pit- 
box . it might not unreasonably be conjec- 
tured that he had an affaire de cceur in that 
neighbourhood. He was a gay man, Doctor 
lonides; but he was not, for the moment, 
very popular among the sex, as he strode 
towards his destination; for he elbowed the 
debardeurs and titis mercilessly, and broke 
into and through so many couples and figures 
of the mazy dance, that he was at last pursued 
by yells of Terpsichorean execration ; nay, on 
one or two occasions, the Municipal Guards in 
attendance manifested signs of giving him 
chase, and bringing him to condign punish- 
ment, for his infraction of the laws of cavalier 
seul or chasser-croiser} but either he was 



LORD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 99 

nimble enough to escape the police Nemesis, 
or it may be, his towering plume and stalwart 
limbs dismayed the diminutive alguazils, or . 
and this is the most probable theory of all . 
the police were, like all true Frenchmen, too 
much absorbed in the delirious excitement of 
the saltatory evolutions, to pay attention to a 
transient interruption. 

The Doctor passed up one of the inclined 
planes, covered with crimson cloth, leading to 
the box lobbies, entered one of those couloirs, 
and knocked at the door of box No. 9. He 
had to knock twice, and then the door was 
timidly opened. Inverting the action of Mar- 
garet Douglas, in Scott's immortal tale, who 
used her arm as a bolt, in order that a door 
might remain closed, Doctor Ionides took ad- 
vantage of the door not being a door, but 
rather a-jar, to use his arm as a wedge, and, 
by rapidly thrusting it through the narrow 
aperture, secured the door's remaining open. 
Then, by an agile movement of his foot, he 
widened the opening; soon found himself 
inside the box; closed the door after him; 



100 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

put a chair against it ; turned nimbly on his 
feet ; seized a light chair in his strong grasp ; 
deftly sat himself down thereupon; turned 
towards a closely-masked domino, who was 
crouching in a corner, and affectionately ac- 
costed Manuelita the dancing-girl, who, half 
dead with terror, was trembling now with her 
wrist in his grasp, and his flaming face leering 
under the black lace valance of her mask. 
The satyr had seized the poor little dryad; 
the linnet was in the clutches of the hawk. 

" Who are you?" she gasped. 

" I am Bogey," playfully answered the Doc- 
tor. " The sweep . the black man. the beadle 
. the policeman. I was Professor Jachimo who 
was so fond of you in Liverpool; always fond 
of you, my charming little Manuelita. Good 
Professor Jachimo . clever Professor Jachimo 
. funny Professor Jachimo. Now I'm Doctor 
lonides, quite as good, clever, and funny; and 
if you speak a word above your breath, you 
little minx, I'll wring your neck for you first, 
and cut your throat afterwards." 

She tried to scream; but her respiration 



LOKD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 1 I 

scarcely fluttered the cobweb-lace that guarded 
her lips. Her little pulse trotted like the feet 
of a mouse running away to its hole. She felt 
as though a swoon, tears, hysterics, death, 
would have been a relief; but she was fas- 
cinated by the garish phantom before her, and 
could not move. At last she whispered : 

" You come from Philip?" 

" Not the least in the world, my little pet," 
The Doctor urbanely rejoined. u 1 am my 
own ambassador, town-traveller, gentleman- 
usher, master of the ceremonies, and every- 
thing else included; and I come from myself, 
and I want you to come with me." 

" With you," she murmured ; " with you, 
bad and cruel man!" 

M If you don't" the Doctor explained ; " if 
you don't take my arm this very moment, and 
walk down stairs with me, I'll tell you what 
will happen. Shall I tell you ?" 

She could not answer; she could only look 
at him. 

u Silence gives consent. I'll tell you. Un- 
less you obey me, by six o'clock this morning 



102 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

. it's one now. your duck-of-diamonds, your 
handsome soldier-officer, your fair-haired dandy 
of a lord, shall be a bleeding corpse . dead, 
dead as a leg of Welsh mutton, my dear, and 
with a small sword through his heart." 

" Would you murder him ?" 

" That's my business; I only tell you what 
will take place. I never forget, never forgive 
anything, if you obey me, you shall come to 
no harm, and you will save his life. If you 
refuse, you must take the consequences. Now, 
are you ready?" 

She rose up tottering, and put her flaccid 
arm in his. Why should she believe him, 
this convicted, perjured liar and cheat ? She 
believed in him less, perhaps, for his dire 
threats, and horrible presence, and power of 
terrifying, than because she loved the bad man 
who had taken her away. Find me a woman 
who really loves a man, and 1 will go to her 
without introduction and without credentials, 
and if I tell her he whom she loves is in 
danger or distress, I will make her do any- 
thing I choose, from dancing a saraband to 
pawning her earrings. 



LORD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 103 

He led her into the lobby. A whiskered 
French dandy, with a white waistcoat, and 
white cravat so enormous in their dimensions, 
and with such little black doeskin legs, that he 
looked like a portrait of Mr. Allbody, came up 
to her to whisper some conventional, stereo- 
typed bal masque compliment in her ear. But 
before he had half got through the expression 
of 4iis opinion that she was a Mingrelian 
princess, and that she was adorablement belle 
that evening, the dexterous Doctor adminis- 
tered to him such an elphantine stamp on one 
of his varnished feet, and such a catapultean 
blow with the elbow in his white- vested ribs, 
that the Frenchman was yet screeching with 
pain, and spluttering out a preliminary sacre, 
when the Doctor had divided the crowd, and 
was beneath the portico in the Rue Lepelletier. 

There was as great a crowd without as 
within, but a black crowd, illumined here and 
there by the glare of a gas-lamp. In the 
roadway mounted gendarmes pranced and 
cursed to keep the people back, and the con- 
fusion of coaches and coachmen was awful. 



104 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" This way," the Doctor said, briefly. 

It was the turning point. The girl hung 
back for a second. Had she screamed, had 
she resisted, rescue was certain. There were 
hundreds of policemen round about her. But 
she dared not. She thought of the man 
she loved being foully, cruelly murdered, and 
she obeyed. 

A little voiture de remise, with two horses, 
was drawn up close between the last two 
pillars to the right of the portico. The door 
of this carriage was open, and there was 
an attendant lacquey, in the shape of a long 
man in a very long great coat, a worsted com- 
forter with long straggling ends about his 
neck, and a very tall hat. He did not look 
much like a footman. On the box was a fat 
man in a cap, who looked even less like a 
coachman. Manuelita noticed both these little 
circumstances with the momentary microscopic 
power terror awakens in us. 

" Number twelve," cried the Doctor, thrust 
ing, rather than helping, Manuelita into the 
carriage. 



LORD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 105 

" Numero douze" the long man grumbled, 
bundling himself into the carriage too. 

14 Numero . . " the fat coachman seemed 
to be muttering; but whether it were twelve 
or twelve hundred thousand he meant, matters 
little ; for in another instant a whip was flou- 
rished, the horses plunged, the carriage was 
gone, ploughing up the raging crowd, while 
Doctor Ionides stood under the peristyle with 
his arms akimbo, and laughed, Ha! ha! 

" A clean trick, cleanly done," he chuckled. 
" If she had squeaked it would have been 
awkward. I think two inside can manage 
her. Escargotier has had rougher customers 
than she, poor little doll ; and as to Sacripandot, 
he could master the Dragon of Wantley." 

He had done his ministering very quickly, 
if not very gently, and the whole abduction . 
if abduction it were . of Manuelita had been 
effected in something! under seven minutes. 
He strode back into the theatre. There is a 
law prohibiting re-admission of masquers at 
the Grand Opera ; yet somehow Doctor 
Ionides passed unquestioned, and he reached 



106 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

that refreshment counter already known to 
you, just as a great shout arose among the 
bystanders that deux Anglais se boxaient . that 
two Englishmen were fighting. 

Baddington, felled to the earth, was still an 
old public-school boy, and though just before 
by implication a coward in refusing to fight 
Philip, he was roused and sobered, as most 
Englishman are, however far gone, and when 
not stunned, by a blow. He no longer saw 
before him the minister of his grand-aunt's 
vengeance. He simply saw before him a man 
who had knocked him down, and whom it was 
desirable to kill with his fists, if possible. He 
was up again in a moment, and closed with 
Philip. Both were strong, active, young, well 
set men. One had the advantage of perfect 
sobriety, but he was enraged; to the other, 
partial intoxication lent increase of rage, aug- 
mentation of strength. *The mob around them 
grew thicker and thicker, the police were said 
to be coming up, when Doctor Ionides, burst 
through the throng, and with two movements 
of his big arms . one the movement of a 



LORD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 107 

swimmer plunging, the other that of the sails 
of a windmill when the wind is fresh . 
separated the combatants. 

u I'll knock both of you down if you ain't 
quiet," he cried in his great excitement. 
" The bobbies will be here in a second. La 
police a Vceil sur nous. Soyez tranquille, mes 
enfants. Come away Phil; and you, Mr. 
What's-his-name, take your man away, and let 
me talk to the other . he looks like a fire- 
eater." 

Mr. Tapetie led away Lord Baddington, 
who now began to relapse into something very 
like stupidity again ; but it must be admitted 
that the attache looked as though he would 
most devoutly have wished that he could take 
himself away instead of his friend. Major 
Gambroon, pleased perhaps at the appellation 
of fire-eater, perchance delighted at the pros- 
pect, however remote, of a duel, crossed 
amicably over to Doctor Ionides, who, base- 
born, vulgar, and disreputable as he undoubt- 
edly was, appeared undoubtedly at that 
moment the master of the situation. 



108 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" One moment, Mr. , and then we will 

go to business," he said. " I have a word to 
speak to my friend." 

The Major bowed, and handed him his card. 

u Major Gambroon; ha, delighted, I'm sure. 
United Service Club, I see. Here's my card. 
Sorry I don't belong to any club save one at 
Grand Cairo, and as I haven't paid my sub- 
scription for ten years, I suppose I'm 
scratched." 

The Major took the card, and looked at it 
with somewhat of a puzzled countenance ; but 
he bowed again notwithstanding. 

" Now, Philip," the Doctor whispered, U I 
want you to be a good boy and do as I tell 
you. Will you promise to keep yourself 
quiet . I'll get the enemy away . and meet me 
under the clock of the orchestra at four pre- 
cisely. You shall shoot your foe, I'll promise 
you that; and, on my word and honour . I 
have a word and honour somewhere . you 
shall have some good news of Manuelita." 

"You do not mean to say that?" Philip 
eagerly exclaimed. 



LOKD BADDINGTON SUPS AND BREAKFASTS. 109 

*f 

u I mean to say that you must do what I 
ask you. Will you ?" 

" Yes." 

u Then be off with you. Go and dance, 
sing, eat bon-bons, make love, drink champagne 
. only not too much . anything you like, till 
four. I'll arrange everything." 

He watched Philip, with a cunning twinkle 
in his bad eyes, as the painter strutted away 
into the midst of the harlequinade, lost in 
thought. 

" A good lad, that," said Doctor Ionides to 

himself; " with plenty of stuff in him. It's a 

pity he hasn't more muscle of mind. I think 

I like him better than anybody else in the 

world, bar one, and yet I am afraid I shall be 

obliged to bring him to a bad end. Now, 

Major Gambroon, I am at your service." 
***** 

There were things done in Paris that night 
and morning, at which the very stones should 
have cried out, the sky should have wept tears 
of blood. There were ghastly orgies, ghastlier 
for their splendour; there were the seeds of 



110 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

hatred, and jealousy, and misery, and poverty, 
and robbery, and violence, and death, sown 
before the fiddlers who had fiddled the last 
quadrille were asleep on their pallets in their 
mean attics. 

There was this done in the gray of the win- 
ter's morning, and in a lonely carriere, a glade 
of the wood of Vincennes, whose record the 
Accusing Angel took straightway up on high, 
and saw it written in red letters . for it was 
Murder. Two men in ball-dress met. accom- 
panied by four others variously attired, but 
one of whom had a gilt cuirass under his 
cloak. Paces were measured, stop watches were 
opened, a handkerchief was dropped; and as 
the church clock of Vincennes struck eight, 
there lay on the bloody snow one of these men 
in ball-dress, a tall, young, fair stalwart man, 
his face downwards, and shot to death. 



Ill 



CHAP. XLII. 

EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 

fpEN years. Time to make a fortune, to be 
beggared, to grow gray, to write eques 
after one's name. Time to be in the commis- 
sion of the peace or the liberties of the Fleet 
- . if there were a Fleet, or liberties thereunto, 
now. Time to have a patent of nobility, or a 
ticket-of-leave. Time enough to die. 

Ten years! Ten years is an age. Ten 
years is the last generation . or the next. 
Ten years ago we went gipsying; Plancus 
was consul; times were better, things were 
different . we were twenty-one, and lived in a 
garret, and were happy in it. We believed in 
love and pantomimes; we listened with ere- 



112 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

dulity to the whispers of fancy, and pursued 
with eagerness the phantoms of hope, believing 
that age would fulfil the promises of youth, 
and that the deficiencies of to-day would be 
made up by to-morrow, and not caring to be 
told anything about the history of Rasselas, 
Prince of Abyssinia. Ten years ago we were 
rich in verdant pastures, corn-lands, even as 
Squire Boaz that saw Ruth and Naomi come 
a-gleaning. Now we have stubble on our 
chins, and corns upon our toes, putting our 
trust mainly in Mr. Eisenberg. I have often 
thought, that were I not chained to this pen, 
as Guzman de Alfarache was to his oar, that 
if I could put money in my purse, and get a 
foreign office passport through the kindness of 
the banking firm where "I have that large 
balance lying (I shall surely want a Pickford's 
van or a Panic to carry it away some day) . 
could I only obtain a passport vised for every- 
where, I should like to go away for ten years 
. travelling anywhere; sedulously refraining 
from the perusal of newspapers and period- 
icals, English or foreign; eschewing even 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 1 13 

" Galignani " and the " Cornhill Magazine ;" 
conversing with no men save waiters, barbers, 
shepherds, and flower-maidens; comporting 
myself, enjin, like a Timon of Athens in 
broadcloth, lapidating Apemanthus mercilessly 
if he came to bore me, and turning up my 
nose at Alcibiades, his womankind, his drums 
and his fifes; and then, the lustre out, come 
straightway back to London Bridge, to see 
how the English world was wagging, and 
what had become of all my friends. How 
many were dead, and how many were mar- 
ried? Who had emigrated to Xew Zealand 
and had been scraped to death with oyster- 
shells, or sociably eaten by beat of tom-tom at 
a palaver among the aborigines? How many 
were in Parliament, and how many in the 
"Gazette?" Who among those who were 
once prompt to borrow the lowly shilling, and 
not too proud to accept the twice-worn coat, 
had made large fortunes, and lived in Bel- 
gravia? Who of those who were wont to 
play Amphitryon to me, and chide me if I 
kept the bottle standing, were blear-eyed and 

VOL. III. I 



114 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

rheumy-lipped, quite old and broken, in St. 
Pancras Workhouse, or else starched teeto- 
tallers, talking of the irreparable injury in- 
flicted . on the coats of the stomach by the 
consumption of a glass of Bucellas? How 
many conceited young pretenders had burst 
like bubbles, and withered and grown haggard 
with too much toad-eating, had gone through 
the Insolvent Court, bid a forced adieu to fine 
houses, grand company, and the Grimaldi 
Club, and subsided into shabby clerks, to 
potato salesmen, and rusty-elbowed commis- 
sion agents travelling in coals and corn ? 
How many of the clear girls I know now, 
smiling and blushing in their innocent angling 
for that which Nature bids them fish for . 
sweethearts . were become portly matrons, 
rosy mothers of chubby little Gracchi, and 
intent no more on flower shows or St. Barna- 
bas' church services, but absorbed in the vital 
question of the lancing of Alfred's gums, and 
grave with the responsibility of having Totty's 
ears pierced? I should like to go away so, 
for ten years, and, coming back, find you, 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 115 

Eugenio, a millionnaire ; and you, Saccharissa, 
full of maternal cares; and you, chivalrous 
descendant of the Douglas and the Bruce, 
pitching into Government from the Opposi- 
tion benches of the Commons (having just 
refused a junior Lordship of the Treasury, an 
Irish stipendiary magistracy, and the Governor- 
ship of Cape Coast Castle, successively offered 
by a despairing whipper-in); and you, Robert, 
still driving u the wain of life" (with nuggets 
in the boot) ; and you . not " Blithe Carew," 
but intimate enemy of mine, hanged. Dear 
friends and readers, if I go away so, or am 
called, may these ten years lie lightly on your 
heads : the golden days be merry, the silver 
days be few. There, bah ! I forgive the 
intimate enemy even . poor shallow rogue. I 
don't want him to be hanged, the losel, wor- 
sted-stocking knave, and be hanged to him ! 

Look forward to the ten : it is good to do 
so. Cry out, " Excelsior ! " and climb up 
three hundred and sixty-five better and better 
steps a year. Look forward, but not back . 
not back. Remember Lot's wife. Look not 



116 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

upon the old love-letters, the old love locks, 
the old quarrels, the old hatreds, the old 
opportunities missed, the old days of happi- 
ness gone, never to return. Look not back at 
high noon Only, in the night season, rise 
up, when the moon shines very brightly, and 
the willows whisper their secrets to the secre- 
tive pool beneath, that drinks all in and 
answers not a word; wrap thy cloak about 
thee, and steal to the place of the tombs, and 
weep over those who lie in peace, and whom 
no man can sue now, no woman vex, no anger 
move. Thou shalt look back then . yea, into 
the dimmest recesses of the most distant 
mountains of thy soul-scape, and the angels 

shall keep the secret of thy retrospect. 
# # * * 

Ten years had elapsed since the events nar- 
rated in the forty-first chapter of this history. 
London was still the great city ; but the time 
was Eighteen hundred and forty-five, and 
another king had arisen which knew not 
Joseph. A king, say I? A gracious lady, 
rather, who had come seven years before, a 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 117 

timid, blushing girl, to take possession of the 
throne of silly, white-headed, good King 
William, and corpulent, curly-wigged, bad 
King George. " V. R." flourished over all 
the post-office letter-boxes and on all the 
police- vans. It was Victoria, not William, 
by the grace of God, who sent you greeting 
now, and commanded you that within eight 
days you entered an appearance before Thomas 
Lord Denman at Westminster; it was her 
Majesty the Queen who went to open Parlia- 
ment in the gingerbread coach, drawn by the 
cream-coloured horses ; and it was her Majesty 
Queen Victoria, that the play-house managers 
cried God save, in the Latin language, what 
time they took the liberty of informing the 
public that no babies in arms would be ad- 
mitted, and no money returned. 

One August afternoon, in the year Eighteen 
hundred and forty-five, an old woman was 
crouching over the fire . though the weather 
was passing hot . in the little back parlour of 
a shop in Windmill Street, Tottenham Court 
Road. 



118 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

I don't wish to say anything disrespectful 
of this elderly female, or to prejudice you in 
the outset against her . perish such an ungal- 
lant and unjust thought; but I should be 
sinning against veracity were I to disguise the 
fact, that she was about the ugliest old lady 
that you could wish to meet on an autumnal 
afternoon, or that you would not like the 
adored wife of your bosom, who is in delicate 
health just now, to meet on any day, or in any 
season whatever, under any circumstances at 
all. Neither, 1 hope, will it be libelling the 
venerable individual crouching over the fire, 
to hint that if she had lived in the days of 
King James the First, of blessed memory, the 
odds upon her being arraigned at the very 
next assize of Oyer and Terminer as a witch 
would have been very heavy, and the chances 
of her escape from the faggot and the fire 
very slender indeed. She was, indeed, such a 
weird and uncomfortable-looking old woman 
to view ; and had she, in the present year of 
grace even, inhabited some sequestered village 
in some cross-country between two lines of 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 119 

railway, she would, I am persuaded, have 
been feared as a witch, hated as a witch, 
conciliated and consulted as a witch, and 
hooted . perchance pelted . by the village 
children as a witch. The village blacksmith 
would have driven a brisk trade in horse- 
shoes, in connection with the terror inspired 
by her preternatural appearance; the village 
baker would have made crosses in the dough 
if she happened to pass his shop at kneading 
time. She would have been suffered near no 
hen-roost, no butter-churn, no beer-barrel. 
Housewives would have made impromptu cru- 
cifixes with scissors laid on chairs at her 
approach; and superstitious farmers would 
have attributed the botts in their cattle, the 
smut in their wheat, and the rheumatism in 
themselves, to her maleficent powers. She 
was a very horrible-looking old woman indeed, 
to say the least. She might have been the 
great-great-grand-daughter of the Witch of 
Endor, or a twin -sister of Mademoiselle le 
Normand, or Megasra come to settle in the 
neighbourhood of Tottenham Court Road ; or 



120 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

La Mere Croquemitaine, or the late Caliban's 
mamma, Sycorax, or the Old Woman of 
Berkeley, or Mother Redcap. She was one of 
those old ladies who are called " Goody," 
apparently because the}' look so very like 
" Baddy " ; and she was an uncommonly oggle- 
some sight to see. 

Ten thousand wrinkles ploughed that yellow 
face, as dried up watercourses do a high moun- 
tain. Little trees grew here and there on that 
unlovely plain in the shape of tufts of white 
hair. Shards, and flints, and scoriae of pimples 
were thrown up here and there; but the sub- 
structure was volcanic ; and the red, twinkling 
eyes were craters, and flamed. A nose and 
chin that met ; a yellow fang or two protruding 
from the puckered lip ; a mop of hideous hair 
. half white, half wolfish red . straggling 
from beneath a foul nightcap; a bandage of 
flannel . new in its texture from its raw blue 
tinge, but intolerably dirty . passed beneath 
her chin, as though she were a corpse, and 
this was to tie up her jaw withal; pendulous 
cheeks, and flaccid rolls of skin, so hanging 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 121 

about her neck that she might have been an 
octogenarian cretin with a goitre : these made 
up . and you require nothing more, I hope . 
the ensemble of her head. She was immensely 
old, and bowed, and crooked. Her hands were 
yellow, skinny, and long, with bony fingers, 
armed with talons rather than nails, and the 
whole tesselated with designs in dirt. She 
was pinned up in crasseous rags, rather than 
clothed. She appeared to have elephantiasis 
in her feet, so huge appeared they, swathed in 
bandages and list shoes; and the most dreadful 
thing about this old woman was, that she 
appeared to have a perpetual palsy, and shook 
like a jelly of some foul gelatinous matter, or 
like a blasted tree whose roots are rotten. 

The shop in whose back-parlour this old 
woman sat, was not an old curiosity shop, nor 
a chandler's shop, nor a rag shop, nor an old 
clothes shop, nor a shop whose staple stock-in- 
trade consisted of old metal and bones. It 
certainly could not be called a milliner and 
dressmaker's; it was a long way off being a 
toy shop ; and though dresses, rich and bizarre, 



122 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

abounded on its shelves, it was neither a mas- 
querade warehouse nor a theatrical costumier's. 
It whs a shop not much bigger than a bird- 
cage, sweltering with an amalgamation of all 
of all the attributes of all the shops to which 
I have called attention. It was a shop em- 
phatically of odds and ends, of shreds and 
patches, of waifs and strays, of unconsidered 
trifles, of sweepings and fragments, and bits, 
and rubbish, and treasures. It was a mouldy, 
musty, and ineffably mysterious shop, and 
there are hundreds like it in London. 

The shop was full of secrets; and there 
were more romances of the aristocracy on its 
dusty shelves than ever Sir Bernard Burke 
dreamt of. There were rich silks and brocades 
here that a half spilt glass of wine, a speck of 
sauce from a butter-boat, a drop of wax from 
a taper, had banished from the Queen's palace 
and the " nobility's concerts," and had rele- 
gated to the Road of Tottenham. There were 
ostrich feathers, somewhat dim and jaundiced 
now, and coiffures of bird of paradise and 
marabout plumes, that had waved over the 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 123 

fair heads of England's fairest, noblest daugh- 
ters, or bedizened the turbans of the haughtiest 
of dowagers, with as many creases in their 
chins as they had quarterings in their 
scutcheons. There were sweeping mantles of 
rich silk velvets that had fallen into voluptuous 
folds on the cushions of the carriages of 
duchesses, but which were destined ere long 
to sweep the floors of casinos, and to be de- 
graded by the mud of the Haymarket. There 
were gauzy bonnets, glistening with silver 
sprigs and artificial flowers, through which, 
however, the dull wire and coarse buckram 
began to peep, like the copper in the salver 
whose edges only are of silver, like the flesh 
of the beggar's knee through his torn trousers. 
There were tiny satin shoes, with blackened 
soles and soiled insteps. There were pink 
silk stockings by dozens frayed over the in- 
step, wofully in want of darning. There were 
fribbles and frabbles of lace, falling into rich 
raggedness; bronze kid boots cracked in the 
upper-leathers; muffs, and boas, and pelerines 
of costly fur, where the moth had imitated 



124 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the ringworm's part ; bridal veils, from which 
the silver embroidery had been rudely stripped ; 
white kid gloves, soiled and split, in piles; 
sashes and scarves, tippets and collars, ivory 
fans with broken joints, dressing-cases minus 
the silver tops to the bottles, jet bracelets, 
velvet reticules, embroidered parasols with torn 
fringe and no handles, smelling-bottles with 
no stoppers, lace pocket-handkerchiefs with 
burns through the centre; all sorts of rich 
woman's ware, purple fine linen, goldsmith's 
ware and lace . the whole mixed up with a 
chaos of sheets and blankets, coarse jean stays, 
flannels, nightcaps, tablecloths, pillow cases, 
black cotton stockings, patchwork counter- 
panes, linsey-woolsey jackets, and huge bundles 
bursting with undeniable rags. And there 
was a musty, acrid, vapid odour hanging about 
the place, similar to that which pervades a 
pawnbroker's shop in a low neighbourhood on 
Saturday night, or that department of a jail 
where the prisoners' outer-world clothes are 
kept. A big dog, that had once been white, 
but was now of no particular hue save that of 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 125 

dirt. a wall-eyed dog, irremediably mangy, 
with a chronic cough, and a settled hatred to 
his tail, kept watch and ward in the outer 
shop, sitting by preference on a Marseilles 
quilt with a great russet-brown stain which 
looked horribly like blood upon it, and blink- 
ing lazily at one solitary ray of the golden 
autumnal light, which, in a laudable pursuit 
of polarisation under difficulties, worthy of all 
commendation, was fighting its way into the 
shop against the million motes of dust, and 
the foggy miasma of the place. 

In the room . 1 don't like to call it hole, 
for fear of being thought rude . where the old 
woman crouched, there were more shelves, 
more bundles, more treasures in rags, more 
odds and ends. There was a portrait, too, of 
the lamented and injured Caroline of Bruns- 
wick, sometime Queen of England . a vile 
mezzotinto thing in a tawdry frame, and 
screened by a glass, cracked and smoky, repre- 
senting that Koyal Personage in the act of 
receiving an address from the ladies of England 
(with very short waists and enormous hats 



126 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and feathers), at Brandenburg House, near 
Hammersmith. There was a monster of a 
parrot in a battered cage . a moulting brute, 
with a broken wing, plumage of sooty green, 
and a diabolical head, with eyes like the 
danger-lights of a locomotive . which shrieked, 
and croaked, and swore, and blasphemed, and 
swung himself on his rusty ring, like a Prophet 
of Evil or a bird possessed by a demon. The 
walls of the room . where there were no 
shelves . were plastered thickly over with 
placards relating to sales by auction, chiefly 
of pawnbrokers' unredeemed pledges ; the floor 
was littered with torn catalogues from Oxen- 
ham's, and Debenham and Storr's sale-rooms; 
and on the ricketty table, amid a heap of rags, 
stay-busks, lace-cuffs, halfpence, candle-ends, 
and remnants of cloth and silk, there were 
some hundreds . there could not have been 
less . of little quadrangular scraps of paste- 
board, bent, dirty, torn, inkstained, and pin- 
punctured, which the experienced eye would 
have no difficulty in recognising at once as 
pawnbrokers' duplicates. Pardon the verbosity 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 127 

of this description. The frame was as neces- 
sary as the picture; the setting as the jewel. 
And there is one thing, too, which I have for- 
gotten in my inventory ; this . that over the 
outer door of the shop . which was a remark- 
ably villanous-looking shop, by-the-way, and 
offered no better etalage than bundles and 
lace-rags . in the street there was this inscrip- 
tion . " Mrs. Tinctop. Ladies' Wardrobes 

PURCHASED." 

Mrs. Tinctop . 1 scorn to deceive you . 
was the proprietor of the shop where the 
ladies' wardrobes were purchased; and Mrs. 
Tinctop . I am above hypocrisy, I hope . 
was Mr. Tinctop's mamma . that Mr. Tinctop 
with whom you have been made acquainted, 
more or less, almost since the commencement 
of this chronicle; and, finally, Mrs. Tinctop 
was the veritable old lady who was crooning 
over the fire. 

The wall-eyed dog that took care of the 
outer premises gave an asthmatic growl, which 
ended in a squeak, as the shop-door opened, 
causing at the same time an ill-conditioned 



128 THE BADDISTGTON PEERAGE. 

tinkle on a cracked bell; and there walked in, 
as stealthily as of yore, Mr. Seth Tinctop, 
general practitioner. 

A little balder, a little more weazened as to 
countenance, a little stouter in figure, but the 
same smooth, urbane Seth Tinctop still. He 
had mounted gold-rimmed spectacles and gone 
into goloshes; he carried a plump silk um- 
brella, and wore a substantial watch-chain. 
The ten years seem to have been prosperous 
years, to have used him well, and to have 
done him good. 

He bestowed a subdued whistle of recogni- 
tion upon the dog, who immediately either 
acknowledged or resented that act of courtesy, 
by making a furious onslaught upon his stump 
of a tail. Then Mr. Tinctop walked through 
the miasma of decayed millinery into the hole 
where his mamma dwelt, and, with another 
whistle, to which was superadded a nod, sat 
himself down over against her by the fireside. 

" Good afternoon, mother." 

These people do say " good afternoon," 
u good morning/' " good-bye," and " good 



EIGHTEEN HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE. 129 

night," just as we Christians do. They are 
human . they are mortal. Williams set his 
children to play with the Italian boy before 
he murdered him for the sake of his white 
teeth. If you pinch a thief, he will cry out; 
if you prick a rascal, he will bleed; if you 
tickle him, he will laugh. The robbers of the 
Rhine are not always accoutred in slouched 
hats and buff-boots, and swaggering about 
with Snickasnees. They put on carpet-slippers 
at eventide, smoke their pipes at the ingle- 
nook, kiss their wives, and when they go to 
bed, put on nightcaps with tassels and strings 
that tie underneath the chin. 



VOL. III. 



130 



CHAP. XL1IL 

TO PAKISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 

AS in a wood fire that has been neglected, 
and where the logs, raging hot within, 
are one uniform ashen grey without, one 
whisper of the bellows will illumine the dull 
hearth with a ruddy glow, send the red sparks 
scintillating up the chimney, and set the logs 
themselves flaming; so the filial salutation 
addressed by Mr. Tinctop to his mother 
seemed to light up the hitherto extinguished 
countenance of that ancient dame . to kindle 
the fire of life in those vacuous eyes . to 
change her from an exact counterpart of an 
Egyptian mummy to an indifferent imitation 
of a live old woman. She began to get up 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 131 

from her chair in a doddering, scrambling 
way, and wagged her old jaws amicably at her 
son, who sate himself down over against her 
on a species of beggar's throne, made up of 
rags, bundles, the fragments of an arm-chair, 
a plank or two, and a horse-hair sofa pillow. 
Then he took a long clay pipe from a sort of 
cave of Trophonius of cobwebs and cracked 
crockery ware high up in the wall beyond the 
mantelpiece, filled it with tobacco, lighted it 
gravely", and began to smoke it demurely, 
looking very precise and proper and profes- 
sional, and quite as though he were in posses- 
sion of all due certificates of having passed the 
Hall of Apothecaries and the College of 
Surgeons, and not at all like Bamfylde Moore 
Carew, which renowned King of Beggars he 
should in all consistency, considering the place 
he was in and the company he kept, have 
looked like. 

The old woman tottered to another cup- 
board, opened it, hunted among its shelves to 
the apparent discomposure of a colony of rats 
which, by the quadrupedental puttering noise 



132 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

heard, it may be presumed resided there, and 
at last produced an inconceivably dirty stone 
bottle, which might possibly at some remote 
period of time have been used as an amphora 
for Day and Martin's blacking; which, from 
some pearly drops of congealed adipose matter 
about the neck, appeared to have served at one 
stage of its career as an impromptu candle- 
stick ; and which now might have been taken 
as a receptacle for snuff, or turpentine, or 
mixed pickles, or furniture stuff, or mixture 
to kill cockroaches. From it, however, 
Mrs. Tinctop poured a semi-transparent liquid 
into a battered pewter measure, popped there- 
into a lump of sugar, which she produced 
from the recesses of a faded blue ball . a 
napkin I hope, a pocket-handkerchief I fear . 
and filled the measure up with boiling water 
from a hopelessly-battered and rusty copper 
kettle, with a tin lid, a frayed rope handle like 
that to a gipsy's plunder-pot, and a drooping 
nozzle twisted all awry. Whatever the 
whitish liquid may have been, it seemed to be 
something good to drink, and as Mr. Tinctop 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 133 

drank it, it seemingly did him good too, for he 
smacked his thin lips, and his narrow, bald 
forehead shone again. 

To the great delight of his mamma, who 
went and stroked the said bald os frontis, 
smoothing the spare locks, and gazing with 
inexpressible fondness into his eyes. 

"Does your pipe draw, deary?" she asked 
coaxingly. 

Trivial and absurd, and sordid as the 
question was, there was a profundity of solici- 
tude in it, and made it, comparatively, superior 
to an inquiry as to whether Mr. Tinctop had 
the contents of the mines of Golconda in his 
waistcoat pocket, whether he had the paradise 
of Mahomet at his command, or whether he 
felt as happy as the Grand Turk. 

" Pretty well, mother," answered Mr. Tinc- 
top. " You might keep your snuff out of my 
tobacco. I don't mind the pepper; that gives 
it a flavour; but one can't smoke and sneeze 
at once comfortably. Where do you get your 
whiskey?" 

u Eound the corner, deary." She pointed 



134 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

her skinny thumb over her shoulder and into 
the dim obscurity of a corner. Where that 
may have been . in the Land of Nod, or in 
the kingdom of Cockaigne . anywhere, or 
nowhere . this deponent sayeth not. 

" The next time you get fourpenn'orth," 
remarked her son, " tell them not to put 
poison in it. It interferes with the trade in 
drugs. How's business, mother? . lively? 
plenty coming in, eh?" 

M I ain't got no money, Seth," the old 
woman exclaimed with a sort of feeble scream. 
u I ain't, indeed. I can't get none. Not a 
blessed copper, not a ha'penny, my son." 
And as she spoke she folded her shrivelled 
arms tightly, drawing her tottering knees 
together, and screwing her head on one side, 
with blinking eyes, and trembling lips, like a 
magpie at bay, looking into a marrowbone and 
determined to defend it, 

" Who the deuce wants your money?" 
Mr. Tinctop called out testily. " You're 
always squalling out about your money, you 
covetous old woman, you. I don't want your 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 135 

money. I've plenty of my own. I only 
asked you how business was." 

"Bad! Bad! Bad!" his mother mumbled, 
in reply. " No money to be got, Seth 
dear " 

"Money again !" interrupted her exasperated 
son. u I do believe you think of nothing but 
money. Did I ask you for any? Do I ever 
have any from you ?" 

" Not now, not now, deary !" the old woman 
said hastily. " But you've had a deal . oh 
a deal o' money from me, you know, ducky. 
You'll have it all when I die . all when I die, 
darling; but you must wait . yes, wait . 
wait a bit. Times are so hard, you know." 

" She's doting. She's half silly. She's a 
confounded old idiot!" Mr. Tinctop, neither 
very courteously nor very dutifully, grumbled 
to himself. " Hark ye, mother," he said 
aloud ; u do you want to get some more money ?'> 

The weazened face, which was fast sinking 
into vacuity, lighted up again at the magic 
word. Eyes red with the concupiscence of 
gain shone out of the darkness like glow- 



136 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

worms. She was all huddled, and excited, 
and tumultuous in her chair, and babbled out 
some toothy assurances of how much she liked 
money, and the grand things she would do for 
her darling Seth, if he would only put her in 
the way of making some. 

" Then just tell me who has been here this 
morning?" Mr. Tinctop said, laying down his 
pipe. " That's what I meant when I asked 
you how business was." 

''Let's see . let's see!" the old woman 
answered. a I'll tell you, Seth. First, there 
was the Bishop's man, which his Lordship's 
not expected to live. He brought an a'pn 
and a shovel 'at, and nine o' the beautifullest 
cambric shirts you ever see. Long shirts they 
was, too, a'most as long as night gownds." 

"Anybody else?" 

" Old Sally from the square brought some 
fat, kitchen-stuff, and sich like." 

" What! mother; do you deal in dripping? 
I suppose you give the best price for rags and 
bones, too. Why don't you hang out a black 
doll over the door?" 



TO PARTSH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 137 

"It's all very well laughing at an old 
'ooman like me," his mother retorted in some 
dudgeon ; " but I know my bisness as well as 
most people. I don't deal in rags and bones, 
Mister Seth ; but I buy drippin', Mister Seth 
. 'tickulary when there's a silver spoon or 
two in it, and a malacky brooch . you know 
one of those green ones . in it ; and p'raps a 
bran new pair o' fur cuffs, and a beautiful 
sky blue pairasol. Aha ! what d'ye think o' 
drippin' and black dolls now ! " 

She held her head forward, grinning and 
chattering in a manner half ominous and 
half demoniacal, very terrific to behold. In- 
deed a baboon, possessed by an evil spirit, 
is perhaps the nearest approximation one 
could find to the outward similitude of Mr. 
Ti net op's mamma. 

M Beg your pardon, mother," Mr. Tinctop 
apologetically observed. u All grist that 
comes to the mill, I suppose. Go on with 
your story. Who else, besides the bishop's 
man and ^ally from the square?" 

i4 Wait a bit," his mamma responded, count- 



138 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

ing the while on her skinny fingers, of which 
the veins and arteries seemed all to have been 
injected with purple sealing wax. There's 
been a many more; but my poor old head 
gets crazy and shaky-like now-a-days. There 
was the Duchess of Minnever's maid, now." 

Mr. Tinctop started in his chair, and turned 
a yellow red . a sort of orange tawny in the 
face, remarkably disagreeable to view. 

" The Duchess of Minniver!" he exclaimed. 
" What! has that white-faced cat returned to 
England? I thought she was in Italy." 

" She's in England, and in Belgrave Square, 
sure enough," his mother resumed, nodding 
her head; " Mrs. Cuppings . that's her maid's 
name . was here at twelve o'clock, just arter 
Mr. Premmuneer . that's his lordship the 
bishop's gentleman . which I know him by 
the token of being the nicest spoken gentle- 
man as ever corned to a seckind-'and ward- 
robe-shop, and always sending out for rum 
and shrub to treat a body with like, quite 
genteel; but do stick to his bargins, and 
stand out for money, which have he will, 
ascrewin' of you like an heathen Jew." 



TO PARISH CLERKS AXD OTHERS. 139 

" Never mind the bishop's man, mother; 
I want to know all about my lady the 
Duchess." ("Burn my lady the Duchess !" 
he muttered to himself, between his clenched 
teeth.) 

" Cuppins come with some fal-lals in a 
basket, which her missus give her on'y last 
night as bein' no good to her, and only fit to 
be worn among furrineers. There was a dozen 
pair o' lavender kid, six o' rose colour, four o' 
straw, three caffyolay . I think she called 
them . a bit of a rag of a lace scarf or two, 
a power o' silk stockins agone at the heel . 
she dances, so does the Duchess, Cuppins 
says . a real ingy shawl, but with a 'ole right 
through it, just as if it had been made with a 
red-hot poker; but Cuppins ses as how it was 
one of the Dook's cigars, as he is allers a 
smokin' of; a barridge dress over a pink slip, 
a black morry antick " 

" Stop ! stop !" interrupted the general prac- 
titioner. " I don't want to have the catalogue 
of the woman's wardrobe. I aint a broker's 
man. Tell me all about the jade herself. 



140 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 



The ladies' maid's tongue was sure to run 
nineteen to the dozen when the bargain was 



" Mrs. Cuppins is a pleasant spoken body . 
oh! my bones, my blessed bones!" . the old 
woman moaned, rocking herself to and fro 
and feeling her joints. " She says the Dook's 
mortal fond of her." 

" Of whom, Cuppins?" 

" No: t'other, the Duchess. Spends a 
world of money on her. Ses she's the most 
beautiful creature of the day. So she is . 
Cuppins ses too." 

" So is the Devil!" Tinctop broke in, in an 
irritated tone. " She's thirty-five, if she's 
a day." 

" Cuppins says she aint thirty." 

u Cuppins is a fool. Ten years ago she was 
twenty-five to my certain knowledge, though 
she didn't look more than eighteen, and that 
makes my calculation pretty correct. Go 
on with what the maid said about her." 

a She's a carryin' on the same as usual," Mrs. 
Tinctop mere, proceeded. " Her 'ouse was 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 141 

full o' grand compinny, kings and markees, 
and captings, Rooshian Poles, and Boneypar- 
ties, when she was in them there foring parts; 
and now her 'ouse in London is as full. She 
do 'ave hall her sweets from Gunter's. She's 
got a French cook which speaks four lan- 
guages, writes poetry and stuff, plays on the 
pianer, and sings comic songs beautiful. She's 
goin' to 'ave a grand ball to-morrow night, 
with eight ambassydors and Mr. Collinet's 
band." 

" Anything else?" 

11 Ah ! yes ; w r ell ! 7 here's lots of foring 
markees and captings hanging about the 'ouse, 
and makin' lov' to her, and a follerin' of 
her about like tame monkeys. The Dook 
gets wild at it sometimes, but he's so spooney 
on her he don't dare say nothin'." 

u Go on." 

" I don't know that I've got anything more 
to go on with. Oh, yes ! There's a power of 
beggin' letter w r riters allers a plaguein' of her; 
and there's that painter feller, that crazy 
artist chap, that she's known ever so many 



112 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

years, has been hankerin' a'ter her, has been 
tryin' to get some money out of her." 

"Painter feller! Artist chap! Ah! I 
know whom you mean. Philip Leslie ; that's 
the name, isn't it? 

"Philip Leslie! That's his name sure 
enough. Well, he'd called ever so many 
times while she was out of town; and no 
sooner was she back, but he must come again 
day after day, a wantin' to see her, notcome- 
standing she was always denied to him, wnich 
made him ferocious like a wagabone to the 
gentleman which opened the door, lettin' 
alone his worryin' the hall porter's life out. 
Well; she see him at last." 

" Where ?" Mr. Tinctop asked eagerly. 

" She was at the top of the stairs; he was 
in the hall, with a portfoley of drawings 
under his arm . precious ragged his clothes 
is . and she ordered him out. Told him that 
he was an ungrateful feller, and that she 
didn't want to have no more to do with him. 
Told Mr. Tiffiny, the hall-porter, to give him 
in charge to the pelisse if he come again. He 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 143 

cried, Cuppins ses, in the hall before all the 
servants. He told Tiffiny that the Duchess 
. when she was Lady Baddington, you re- 
member . had been the rooing of him. She 
had made him a murderer, he said. I wonder 
what he meant by that. What does he go 
about calling hisself a murderer for? He'll 
get hung some of these days. He told 
Cuppins which he met her at the airy gate, 
and talked to her through the palms', that he 
had a sick wife and child, and not a mossle 
o* bread to give 'em; and Cuppins, which is a 
tender-hearted girl . and more fool she to be 
so . give him a shillin'; but they saw him 
come out of the public-'ouse by the Mews 
half-an-hour afterwards, which it is supposed 
he drinks; and Mr. Tiffiny says he smelt 
o' rum hawful. And yet, by Mrs. Cuppins 
telling, the Duchess used to be kind enough 
to him. It was who but he with her till he 
married." 

u He was a fool to marry," Mr. Tinctop 
said, softly; " he was a fool to marry, and 
have a sick wife and child. Poor devil! I 



144 THE BADD1NGT0N PEERAGE. 

remember him a fine-looking fellow enough, 
ten years ago, Philip Leslie." 

" He's gray now," mumbled the hag. 

Yes ; gray now. Brother, your locks were 
brown ten years ago. When those ten pro- 
mised years of mine are over, how many 
heads turned gray shall I meet with? And 
my own? Keep looking-glasses well from 
me . ten years hence. 

" Have you anything more to tell me, 
mother ?" asked the general practitioner. 

" Yes ! yes ! Just one bit of a thing more. 
Aha!" 

She looked . her shrewd old head on one 
side again . the cunningest old woman that 
had ever lived since the days of Cumaean sibyl. 
She chuckled out "Aha!" again; and after 
much fumbling and groping in some mys- 
terious and cavernous gap in her garments, 
which might, by an immense stretch of 
courtesy, be called a pocket, she produced 
a small quadrangular brown paper parcel, 
which she held in her shaking palm, regard- 
ing it with covetous eyes. 



TO PARISH CLERKS AXD OTHERS. 145 

"Yes! yes!" she said. "Somebody else 
has been here ! somebody that you've tried 
to see, and to find out for two years and a 
half gone and past, and that you've advertised 
in the noospapers and things for, and spent 
your beautiful money all to no purpose ; 
somebody that you've told me of time after 
time, and that you'd never have got a smell 
of, if it had not been for your poor old 
mother, which you laugh at and despise. 
Mrs. Lint's been here this arternoon, my 
son; and it was on arternoon's leave. She 
was bein' night-nurse at Saint Lazarus Horse- 
pital." 

" Have your own way . talk as much as 
you like.'' 

" And this isn't the fust time I've seen her 
neither. Four times has she been here this 
week, as you well know, for well I've told 
you ; and each time have I pumped her, and 
probed her, and pricked her up; for she's 
dreadful old, and her memory's anigh gone. 
I'm old too," she remarked, parenthetically 
looking down at her dilapidated carcass; 

VOL. III. l 



146 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" but oh ! I'm sharp. I'm sharp enough yet, 
Seth!" 

" You're as sharp as a needle or a weazel, 
I know, mother," Mr. Tinctop interposed- 

" You may well say that," Mrs. Tinctop 
observed, chuckling again with gratification 
at this well-timed compliment. " I got the 
whole story out of her this afternoon. How 
she was sent for by Mr Fleem, which is now 
a Barrownight, to nuss the sick woman on 
the wedding day. How the poor ragged, 
drunkin thing told her that she was Mr. 
Falcon's own lawful wedded wife." 

" She told me that too," Mr. Tinctop 
observed. 

" How you sent her to sleep with some 
laudanum or stuff." 

" I dare say I did; he, he ! " 

"But how she was too clever for you arter 
all. For though the poor wretch, before you 
took her away, told you the whole story, 
thinking she was a going to die . which die 
soon afterwards she did ; and told you too, 
besides, that Mr. Falcon, the grand gentleman 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 147 

as killed hisself in a fit of apoplexy, was the 
father of her child ; that the child was a boy, 
and that he had run away, but she thought he 
was with a lot of circus riders at York, which 
made you take most rampagious journeys all 
over country, to every show, and every horse 
rider's booth that could be seen, and all to 
no purpose : though you was so precious 
clever, she was a little too clever for you." 

" How so?" 

" I am tired, Seth ; my poor old breath 
won't hold out. Give us a drop of comfort ; 
there 's a dear? " 

Mr. Tinctop poured from the candlestick- 
blacking-bottle-spirit-flask a modicum of the 
semi-transparent liquid into a broken egg- 
cup with a club foot, which his parent ten- 
dered to him. The harridan swallowed the 
dram with a prolonged" Haho!" and a 
smack of the lips of satisfaction ; then further 
refreshing herself with a pinch of snuff from 
a screw of paper, which she carried appa- 
rently behind her left ear, she resumed her 
discourse. 



148 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

" When the poor creetur died," she said, 
" in that court in the Strand where you had 
persuaded her to come, thinking to cure her, 
and teach her to dance to your own tune: 
only she was marked for death, and out 
o' that house was never meant to come again, 
but feet foremost : Mr. Fleem he set about 
seeing her bein' berried decent and comfortable 
for the sake of the family. And so he has her 
berried quite genteel, instead of it 's bein' 
a parish job; and gives his 'stifficate to say 
as how she'd died from nat'ral causes, which 
people allers does when they die and nobody 
expects 'em to; and as Mrs. Lint had been 
in the beginnin' of the bisness, and Mr. Fleem 
he wanted, bein' such great people, to keep 
things quiet, he employs Mrs. Lint to do 
all the lay in' out, and everything quite nice 
and comfortable; on'y he gives her a precious 
blowin' up for goin' to sleep by the bed-side, 
tellin' her as how she 'd. sacrificed one, and 
pr'aps more than one, human life by it; but 
on'y excuses her 'cause she must have been 
drugged, ses he, by some scoundrel or other; 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 149 

which it was you, my Seth, that give her 
the sleepy stuff, which well I knows, 'avin' 
told me; and like your mother's son it was, 
on'y you was a bit awk'ard, and didn't 
manage things quite closely enough. You 
should have asked your mammy for a wrinkle 
or two, my dear. Aha ! " 

She was quite garrulous and fluent by this 
time, Mr. Tinctop's mamma. The " drop 
of comfort" seemed to have given her new 
strength. Her son bowed his head and 
smiled grimly at the qualified compliment 
she had vouchsafed to bestow on him. Then 
she went on . 

" She up and told Mr. Fleem the story 
she had heard from the woman; but he 
pooh-poohed her, good gentleman, and sed 
the poor thing must have been ravin', and 
gave her ten pounds to hold her tongue ; and 
between you and me, Mrs. Lint, which is 
rather a muddle-headed woman, though a 
well-meaning soul, couldn't make chalk nor 
cheese, nor yet heads nor tails, out of the 
story she'd heard; and did really think the 



150 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

woman she had nussed was a wanderin' in 
her mind when she told her . she talked so 
wild and foolish like; and as Mrs Lint ses, 
ses she, it isn't onst nor twice, nor three 
times a week, I tell you truly mem, but 
a' most every night at the horsepital, as I 
hear the poor, feverish creeturs, with their 
broken harms and legs, and heads quite made 
into 'natomies with sticking-plaister; bein' 
beat with legs of tables by journeymen 
carpenters, which their husbands ought to 
be hung up by the heels for racketing of 'em 
so: it bein' all along o' the drink, which, 
get it onst into a man's head you can't get 
it out till violence he's done, and blood he 
will have, if it's transportation . though 
oftentimes there's faults on both sides, and 
the woman's the wust. And then, just when 
they're a wantin' the apple teas, and their 
sline draughts, they turn quite silly in their 
heads, and talk about being Popes of Rome 
and Hemperors of China, let alone Queen 
Victoria, and Lewis Phillips, and Win' mil- 
lions of money in the bank which their 



TO PARISH CLERKS AND OTHERS. 151 

relations is a keepin' 'em out of; likewise 
the throne of Spain, which if you were to 
believe half such barnboozlin' nonsense you 'd 
never have done." 

"Do get on, mother," Mr. Tinctop said, 
with a yawn, half of weariness, half of im- 
patience. 

u I am a gettin' on," his mamma answered, 
sharply; "I must have my say, or else none 
at all. Well, she laid her out, and took her 
clothes as her perkysites." 

M What has that to do with the matter? " 

u You'll see. She brought the g duds ' here 
to sell. They warn't worth much, sich rags," 
the old woman added, with ineffable disdain. 
1 I gave her a shillin', and quite enough too, 
for the petticoats and things; but eur'ously 
enough, she took a fancy to the creetur's 
stays, and would n't part with 'em. Lord 
knows why, for they were old and ragged 
enough. She wore them stavs for four 
years, till they nearly fell off of her; then 
pickin' of 'em to pieces to see if she could 'nt 
make a new pair out of 'em, she found this 
little brown paper parcel, folded quite flat, 



152 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and sewed into the linin', and this parcel she 
sold me yesterday for twenty golden suvrins, 
which you give me to pay her; and little 
did she expect to get so much for it, havm' 
forgotten nigh all about the matter years 
ago, and scarce bein' able to read besides. 
And here 's the parcel ; and now I'm tired, 
Seth Tinctop, and mean to go to sleep a 
bit." 

She handed him the packet, and sank back 
yawning, and groaning with fatigue into her 
chair. 

He opened; turned over the enclosures, 
read, carefully refolded, put up the packet 
in his breast pocket, drew on his gloves, put 
on his hat and smiled. 

" That will do," he said more softly than 
ever. "It is all here; everything I want. 
Now, Duchess of Minniver . Polly of Bel- 
grave Square; now Falcons and Guys, and 
grandees, I have you all hard and fast. Mar- 
riage certificate . register of birth . cer- 
tificate of baptism. All in that little packet. 
At last I have found an heir to the Bad- 
dington Peerage." 



153 



CHAP. XLIV. 



HER GRACE. 



TTIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MINNI- 
VER was a great prince in Israel. He 
stood six feet two in his stockings; he was 
freckled; he had a slight tendency to sore 
eyes, and his hair was of a hue so violently 
red, that it had almost a sound, and seemed 
to embody blind Professor Sanderson's idea of 
the colour of scarlet : " the sound of a trum- 
pet." He was very well educated, even for a 
duke, and had written a bulky octavo volume 
on prevenient grace (he was of a theological 
turn of mind), which had been copiously re- 
viewed in the Quarterlies, hebdomadally 
laughed at by " Punch," and which the cynics 



154 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

and sceptics of the Enarcheonologos Club de- 
clared to have been written by his Grace's 
chaplain. He was immensely rich. Cuneiform 
Castle and Babylas Park in England; Ramoth 
Gilead House, all Minnivertown, and half the 
Sesostris Mountains in Ireland ; Glen MacCre- 
mona, and immense pasture lands in the 
Stradivarius burghs in Scotland; besides San- 
dyshell Cottage, UnderclifF, Isle of Wight; 
the entire island of Buigna-Collah in the 
Thulian Archipelago (a region producing 
abundant crops of diminutive ponies, dwarf- 
cows, and sea-kale, and in the caverns of whose 
rocky headlands the well-known Ossian, sur- 
named Macpherson, is supposed to have cor- 
rected his proof sheets, but whose inhabitants 
had an unpleasant custom of dying of starvation 
whenever the oat harvest ran short) ; and the 
great Chateau de Fanfreluche in Dauphine 
(his Grace was Duke of Fanfreluche in 
France, in right of his mother, the last heiress 
to the great house of Frobichon- Fanfreluche . 
see Braguedart and d'Hozier) with its huge 
demesnes, its great vine land, and its impene- 



HER GRACE. 155 

trable forests, yet the lair, it was said, of the 
wolf and the wild boar . these are as many of 
his Grace's possessions as I can, on the spur of 
the moment, call to mind. Hissolicitors, Messrs. 
Huzz, Buzz, and Pildash, of Lincoln's-Inn- 
Fields, knew a great deal more about them 
than I do, and had a prodigious respect for his 
Grace. So also had his bankers, Messrs. Scoop 
and Coupon, of Lombard Street; his agent, 
Lieut. -Colonel Blackship, R.N., in Ireland; 
Mr. Duncan M'Sporan, Writer to the Signet, 
his Grace's homme d'affaires in Edinburgh; 
and his English land steward, Mr. Baglow, 
who was a landed proprietor himself, and had 
thoughts, men whispered, of going into Par- 
liament some day for one of his Grace's 
boroughs. His head-gardener was a fellow of 
the Royal Society and a director of three rail- 
ways. The sons of his tradesmen had com- 
missions in the army, purchased for them by 
their parents from the profits of the Duke of 
Minniver's custom; and if it were possible 
that a greater man in the world could be than 
his Grace, it was certainly his Grace's valet-de- 



156 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

chambre . I beg pardon, u my Lord Duke's 
gentleman " . who had a coronet, worked in 
the hair of a coryphee of her Majesty's Theatre, 
in the corner of his pocket-handkerchief; 
scented his whiskers with " Jockey Club" 
perfume; belonged to a club (in Major Fou- 
bert's passage, Regent Street,) where they 
black-balled more members than the Travel- 
lers', and had positively rejected the Russian 
Ambassador's groom of the chambers, and her 
Royal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge's 
cook ; wore an uncut diamond hanging to his 
watch-chain, and went into the best society . 
below the salt. The Duke of Minniver had 
four livings in his gift, and the Bishop of 
Bosfursus owed his mitre to him. Oxford 
fellows and Cambridge wranglers believed in 
him with intense reverence. He returned a 
Member for Hoggum-cum-Homany (2 mem., 
pop. 9,302) ; he returned one for Ballyminniver, 
County Clare, Ireland; he returned one for 
the Stradivarius burghs, with so much ease, 
and with such an utter absence of opposition, 
that young Fitz-Dufferer, Lord Showful's son, 



HER GRACE. 157 

who was elected during a tour in the Holy- 
Land, was heard afterwards to say, that he 
liked his seat very well, only he could never 
find out in what part of Scotland the Stradi- 
varius burghs were situated. Such, with lands 
and beeves, rivers and lakes, woods and glens, 
mountains and vales, deer forests and salmon 
leaps, sheep walks and cattle pastures, castles 
and palaces, was John Henry Tudor Mont- 
morency Douglas Fanfreluche-Frobichon, 
Fitzleinan, Duke of Minniver, and a Peer of 
the United Kingdom, Duke of Fanfreluche, 
Marquis of Scratchallan, Earl of Mulcreasua, 
Baron Foggo, a Baronet K.G., K.T., D.C.T., 
an Elder Brother of the Trinity House, Here- 
ditary Grand Corn-cutter, a Trustee of the 
British Museum, a Director of the Ancient 
Concerts, Lord- Lieutenant of Yampshire, and 
Colonel-Commandant of the Yampshire Yeo- 
manry Cavalry, President of the Royal 
Society of Lapidaries, Grand Master of the 
Cagliostro Lodge of Freemasons, Chairman of 
the Xor-nor-Eastern Railway, a Governor of 
Christ's Hospital, Member of the Academies 



158 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

of St. Vitus of Bergamo and St. Giles of 
Bologna, and Seneschal of the Manoir of Fan- 
freluche. 

This fortunate man, then . a millionnaire, 
high in the favour of his Sovereign, learned, 
cultivated, a linguist, an artist, a writer on 
prevenient grace, and a frequent lecturer at 
the Hoggum-curn-Homany Literary and Scien- 
tific Institution, and an occasional contributor 
to first-class reviews and magazines, a patron 
of innumerable philanthropic societies, an 
orator on evangelical platforms, a chairman at 
countless charity dinners, a dilettante, the 
friend of the poor, the champion of his order, 
the star of the peerage . had every advantage, 
every gift, that can make life distinguished, 
splendid, happy. His word was law. Miles 
of English soil belonged to him. He had the 
entree of St. James's. Before the magnificence 
of his titles and possessions German grand 
dukedoms and Italian principalities, splendid 
as they were, paled their ineffectual fires. He 
was a greater prince than Schaumburg-Lippe, 
than Hesse -Hombourg, than Turn and Taxis, 



HER GRACE. 159 

than Rudesheimer-Marcobrunncr. Had he 
not a hundred and twenty thousand a year ? 
Huzz, Buzz, and Pildash were his bond-ser- 
vants; Scoop and Coupon did him homage. 
He was surrounded by lip-service and eye- 
service, by vassals and dependents, by courtiers 
and flatterers. He was, from the commence- 
ment, Porphvrogenitus, and his coronet cast a 
purple shadow on him. As an infant in his 
cradle . bald, toothless, naked, and helpless . 
in the first hour of birth, he had more power 
and influence, he commanded more reverence 
and consideration, than all the wisdom and 
learning and virtue of eighty years, in a com- 
mon man, could secure. He ought to have 
been the happiest man alive. He would perhaps 
have enjoyed the maximum of human felicity, 
if he had only been able to open his mouth in 
the House of Lords, and if he had not been 
eaten up with the king's evil. 

Lazarus . Lazarus! ragged forlorn man, 
whom Dives' footman repulses, whom the 
porter of St. Stonyheart's Workhouse won't 
admit into the receiving ward, it being after 



160 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE, 

hours, and who is perforce compelled to crouch 
under the lee of the workhouse wall all night 
. be thou not utterly cast down, Lazarus . 
without bread, without money, without shoes. 
The sun is yours, and the sky, and hope, and 
a better inheritance to come. Envy not yon- 
der countess in the carriage : she may have a 
cancer beneath that Malines lace. Envy not 
Croesus and his millions : he may be a bankrupt 
to-morrow, and a fraudulent one, and three 
months afterwards a felon in hodden gray, 
plaiting chair-bottoms in a whitewashed cell. 
Envy not the king in his crown : he cannot 
eat for fear of being poisoned, nor sleep for 
fear of being strangled. Envy not this 
phantasm Duke of mine. He had a hopeless 
impediment in his speech; and he was incur- 
ably scrofulous. 

His Grace the Duke of Minniver was, at 
the commencement of the year 1842, a widower, 
being then himself in the thirty-seventh year 
of his age. His married life had not been one 
of un mingled felicity. Her Grace the first 
Duchess had been a Muscovite lady, the high- 



HER GRACE. 161 

bom and beautiful Russian Princess Olga 
Sardanapalasoff . daughter of the Emperor 
Paul's Prince Gregory Sardanapalasoff, who 
was such a favourite of that monarch, and 
who afterwards assisted Counts Pahlen and 
Zouboff in strangling him. To the world at 
large she was a magnificent creature, with 
lustrous eyes, with a dress all over diamonds, 
an accomplished Houri, who spoke eight 
languages, and sang like Madame Pasta. To 
the Duke, en petit comite, she was an intoler- 
able shrew, who bullied him. beat her children 
unmercifully, swore in the French and Mus- 
covite languages, and in bed had feet as cold 
as icebergs. Her lady's-maids (she discharged 
about one every fortnight) attributed to her 
other vices, such as smoking cigarettes, playing 
at cards and cheating thereat, and drinking 
Eau-de-Cologne grog. It is certain, that she 
led his Grace a terrible life; and that for the 
last two years of her existence they did not 
see much of one another. She died at Aix- 
la-Chapelle, of a maladie de langueur, which is 
an ailment invented by continental physicians, 

VOL. III. M 



162 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAG 77 . 

and which may be a malady of anything. The 
" Morning Post," at home, was full of the 
record of her virtues, and spoke in feeling 
terms of the agonised bereavement experienced 
by her noble relatives ; but from Aix-la-Cha- 
pelle to Hombourg they talked scandal of her 
in connection with the French Vicomte de 
Confiture-Poivres, and even poor little Baba 
Effendi, the attache to the Turkish Legation at 
Munich. M. de Xhlaibtchick, Russian Minister 
at the latter place, wrote home to bis Govern- 
ment (sous seing prive) that "cette diolesse" 
was dead. They knew all about her in Count 
Orloff's private chancery, and in General 
IgnatiefTs office. It is in this disrespectful 
manner that great people are talked about 
abroad after their death. We manage these 
things better in England. Nobody had a 
word to say, the other day, when Earl Fitz- 
heavenborn died; and clid'ut the Reverend 
Casyus Lacteal preach a funeral sermon over 
the Duchess of Castlefaggot, who was noto- 
rious! v no better than she should have been, 
in which he said that her Grace had been a 



HER GRACE. 163 

good Duchess upon earth, and that there was 
no doubt that in heaven she would occupy 
that distinguished position to which her rank 
and virtues entitled her. 

His Grace of Minniver was not long incon- 
solable. He sought and wooed, not unsuccess- 
fully, the fascinating Dowager Viscountess 
Baddington, who was then turning the heads 
of half London . of all fashionable London, 
rather, which is perhaps the only London 
worth talking about . by her beauty, 'her 
accomplishments, and her wit. Lady Bad- 
dington had been a widow for nearly seven 
years. She had refused numberless offers. 
General Count Schaffskoff I., Ambassador of 
Austria, had asked her in marriage. The 
Right Reverend Charles James Dollyfus, just 
translated from the see of Brentford to the 
archiepiscopal throne of Mortlake, and sur- 
narned u Jumping Jemmy," from his early 
addiction to the pleasures of the dance, had 
placed his crozier, his lawn sleeves, his shovel 
hat, and his rich revenues at her feet. Lord 
Chief Justice Suspercoll had intimated (in 



164 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

broad Scotch) his intention of making her his 
fourth wife. Captain O'Ho the Irish fortune- 
hunter, late of the auxiliary legion of her 
Majesty Isabella the Catholic, and a de- 
scendant of the O'Ho Gurroo spoken of in the 
annals of the Four Masters, had laid such 
violent siege to her . craving at first a reci- 
procation of his passion, and subsequently 
pecuniary assistance . that he had to be 
carried away from her door by the civil force ; 
and the Viscountess's butler had to make 
a police case of it. At last came the Duke of 
Minniver ; and, coming, he saw and conquered. 

And so Genevieve, Viscountess Baddington, 
became Duchess of Minniver. 

When we last parted company with the 
widow of the peer who died in the doctor's 
shop, she was in the possession of a jointure of 
20,000, the fairy mansion in Curzon Street, 
and a considerable amount of plate and 
jewellery. But Genevieve of Baddington was 
a far more advantageous partie when she 
became the spouse of the Duke of Minniver. 

In this wise: Charles Falcon, fifth Lord 



HER GRACE. 165 

Baddington, made a bad end of it in the 
winter of 1835 ; his viscera having been 
transfixed by a pistol-bullet one wintry morn- 
ing after a Bal Masque at the opera. He was 
slain (in perfectly fair fight) by a young 
Englishman named Leslie, with whom he had 
quarrelled on the previous night. By his 
death, the vice-comital title of Baddington 
became extinct; and, there being no other 
heirs in the male line, the estates and other 
entailed property reverted, according to the 
terms of the fourth Lord Baddington* s will, to 
Genevieve, his widow. She inherited, as her 
grandnephew had done so short a time before, 
little save a Gordian knot of embarrassments, 
broad acres ploughed up by post-obits, and 
rent rolls with leaden mortgages attached to 
them. Yet, strangely enough, as though 
Fortune were determined to favour this wo- 
man, as though the Tern-pus edax rerum were 
to be to her a revivifier, the ten years I 
have been harping on succeeded in changing 
most marvellously the complexion of the Bad- 
dington personalty. There were lands sold 



166 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

under the Irish Encumbered Estates Act, and 
the Dowager profited thereby ; there were fat 
leases that fell in, and were renewed on 
payment of heavy fines; there were trunk- 
railways and branch-railways driven through 
the Baddington property by companies who 
took up land peremptorily, whether they 
wanted it or not, and paid for it exorbitantly, 
to the glee of the land-holders and the dismay 
and indignation (expressed by howls of 
"shame" and " chair" at the quarterly meet- 
ings) of the railway shareholders. Finally, a 
sleepy old gentleman in a wig, with a large 
quantity of snuff on his shirtfrill and his 
cambric bands, and a rusty black gown hang- 
ing off rather than on his shoulders, delivered 
himself one day in a back room in Lincoln's- 
Inn-fields of a series of remarks quite inaudible 
to three-fourths of his hearers, but which 
occupied three hours and forty-four minutes in 
their delivery. His auditory comprised some 
horsehair sofa-cushions, several bags of crimson 
moreen, a vast quantity of waste paper, tied 
up with red tape, and scribbled all over with 



HER GRACE. 167 

nonsense in the English and Latin languages; 
a madman or two, a deaf old woman or two, 
an abstracted policeman, grown mildewed with 
constant surveillance of the inns of court ; an 
usher with a red face, some clerks with white 
ones, and a number of counsel more or less 
learned in the law. His decision, whatever it 
was, did not seem to create much excitement, 
and the one short-hand writer present, gave 
suspicious signs of somnolence during its 
enunciation ; but it leaked out from time to 
time that he (the old gentleman in the wig) 
would have liked to have had " more affi- 
davits," and that the "costs must be costs in 
the cause." Half an hour afterwards there were 
little knots of men of legal mien chatting at the 
portals of Serjeant's Inn, at the Burton ale 
and sandwich shop at the corner of Cursitor 
Street, and at the bar of the Mitre at the 
Fleet Street end of Chancery Lane, where the 
sheriffs officers wait for the habeas corpuses 
to take their captives over to the Queen's 
Prison . more familiarly known as the "Bench" 
. where the law writers wait to see if there be 



168 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

any manuscript at twopence per folio, or any 
eleemosynary drams of spirits to be had ; and 
where those mysterious personages who were 
wont in the old time to perambulate the great 
saloon of the futile footsteps, "Westminster 
Hall, with straws in their shoes, and whose 
occupation is not by any means gone nowa- 
days, are always in attendance in a philan- 
thropic eagerness to render service to suffering 
humanity . or, in other words, to become 
"bail" where bail is wanted,, for a gratuity of 
from half-a-crown to twelve and sixpence. 
The barristers who alarm and astonish fo- 
reigners who meet them flying about Chancery 
Lane and the Rolls Yard, bewigged and in 
hybrid attire, had a great deal to say on the 
sleepy old gentleman's decision ; and next 
mornino- the le^al columns of the " Times " 
were filled with a report of the termination of 
the great case of "Falcon and Falcon" (both 
parties to which were dead and buried), where- 
with were connected the kindred suits of 
" Delahawk and another versus Falcon." 
" Falcon versus Rook," " Kitely's Charity," 



HER GRACE. 169 

the M Attorney-General versus Redbreast," and 
the " Churchwardens of Chaffineham-Eegis 
versus the Trustees of St. Yautour's Grammar 
School." Nobody understood much about 
these seemingly interminable cases, whose 
intricacies had almost faded from the memory 
of man, and the ink on whose parchment 
records had grown rusty brown, like the blood 
of a by-gone murder. The spiders must have 
been sorry ; the moths inconsolable ; and I can 
fancy a grim chorus of doleance in some misty 
region of the legal shades of disembodied spirits 
. ghosts of chaffwaxes, filacers, registrars, 
prothonotaries, clerks of the pipe, assessors of 
the petty bag, and tellers of the Exchequer . 
groaning that Ichabod, his glory had departed, 
and that the great Baddington Chancery suit 
was at an end. 

But Genevieve of Baddimrton got . I hate 
the inelegant Saxonism, but she " got " it, 
strictly . ten thousand pounds a year. No 
more, nor less. The Baddington estates were 
hers. The Baddington heritage was hers, 
principal and usufruct, income and mesne 



170 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

profits; for, you see, there was no male heir to 
the peerage. Lord Baddington the fourth had 
not deemed his grand-nieces worthy of a 
thought, and the Lady Genevieve had all. 

Who showed herself, however, generous, 
almost to a fault, towards her impoverished 
connections by marriage; for relatives they 
could not be called. She first addressed most 
sisterly offers of assistance to Lady Guy, wife 
of Sir William Guy, Bart., of Mayford, Kent, 
who was leading a most ridiculously stupid 
and happy life, burying herself in the country, 
making flannel petticoats for old women, and 
having a large family of children. The grand - 
niece-in-law, however, who was a most singular 
young person, and had hitherto pertinaciously 
refused to hold any intercourse with Lord 
Baddington's widow, sent a frigid reply, to 
the effect that her husband's fortune was 
sufficiently ample, and that, thanking Lady 
Baddington, she declined her proposal. 
Nothing daunted, the Lady Genevieve made 
amicable overtures to the widow of the late 
Gervase Falcon, Esq., of Grosvenor Square . . 



HER GRACE. 171 

now very old, and poor, and paralytic. Her 
daughters, now irremediable old maids . they 
were young still, but Time uses poor people 
so cruelly . had been entertaining serious 
thoughts of trying their fortunes in Miss 
Queechy Wetherell's " Wide, Wide World," 
as governesses, replied haughtily, that if the 
Dowager Lady Baddington (they spoke of her 
in their own circle as "that woman") chose 
to render up any portion of the patrimony of 
their ancestors, they would receive it as an act 
of justice, but not of charity. To this com- 
munication, which was written on paper with 
a very black border (they had never gone out 
of mourning for the voung Lord killed in 
Paris), their spiritual adviser, the Reverend 
Brandley Burners, M.A., perpetual curate of 
St. Tarbucket, added eight pages of alternate 
exhortation and denunciation, abundant in 
similes, and likening Lady Baddington, among 
other unhandsome things, to Domdaniel, and 
Eutychus that fell from the third loft. In a 
postscript (p. 4) he dwelt upon the want ex- 
perienced of a new rood-screen for St. Tar- 



172 THE EADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

bucket's lady-chapel, and drew attention to 
the crying claims of the Associate Mission to 
the Web-footed Choctaws and the St. Tar- 
bucket's Curates' Goloshes Mutual Aid Society. 
Lady Baddington laughed, and settled an in- 
come of three hundred and fifty pounds a-year 
upon Mrs. Falcon's daughters. The settlement 
was effected through her solicitors, Messrs. 
Huzz, Buzz, and Pildash; and the Misses 
Falcon improved the first opportunity of 
meeting her in the street, prior to their per- 
manent avatar to Tours in France, to cut 
Lady Baddington dead in the Soho Bazaar. 

So Genevieve, whom Mr. Tinctop called 
Polly, was rich thricefold, and was Duchess of 
Minniver. And so there be some of us who 
ride upon white elephants, and have bangles 
of gold and jewels on our arms ; and some that 
wear hemp on the neck and gyves on the 
ankles, and are handled by the hangman. 



173 



CHAP. XLV. 

THE DUCHESS OF MINNIVER RECEIVES A 
DISTINGUISHED CIRCLE. 

T^HE Lady Genevieve's entertainments were 
the strawberry leaves and cream of 
fashionable life. Almacks was not more 
exclusive. Indeed, many considered it to be 
much easier to procure a voucher granting 
admission to those sky blue saloons with the 
cracked walls, than to secure a card for one of 
the Duchess of Minniver's ineffable entertain- 
ments. The great author of u Vanity Fair" 
once favoured his readers with what he doubt- 
less considered to be an infallible recipe for 
getting into good society. " If you wanted to 
be asked to dinner," he says, "ask to be asked.'" 
I think the Duchess of Minniver would have 



174 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

taken a vast amount of asking before she had 
condescended to ask any one to her board 
whom it was not her gracious pleasure to 
receive. 

The London season had had its triumphs, 
and was now in the wane. Her Majesty's 
Theatre . people had not heard of Mr. Gye 
then . was closed. Grisi and Mario were off 
to the Continent to earn a few hundred 
thousand francs before wintering in St. Peters- 
burg. The men in the red jackets began to 
disappear from St. James's Street and Pall 
Mall ; the fogies began to reign undisturbed 
in the bow- windows of the clubs. There 
were fewer amazons in Rotten Row . fewer 
broughams, with lapdogs looking out of the 
windows, in the Ladies' Mile. The courteous 
shopmen at the circulating libraries were no 
longer overwhelmed with demands for the last 
new novel (no circulating library will ever be 
overwhelmed with demands for this); hot- 
house pines no longer absorbed the attention 
of Mr. Staymaker, of the Grand Avenue, 
Covent Garden Market; Mrs. Buck, over 



THE DUCHESS OF IUINNIVEr's RECEPTION. 175 

against St. Paul's Church, ceased in her 
hitherto ceaseless occupation of making up 
bouquets for fashionable soirees; the affable 
Mr. Shee, at Cramer and Beale's, was pestered 
no more for Linley's ballads or Thalberg's 
variations ; Swan and Edgar, and Howell and 
James's, journeymen had breathing time; 
Mr. Hancock, the jeweller, began to post up 
his diary of conversations with the crowned 
heads of Europe during the past three months; 
the lodging-house keepers of Brighton and 
St. Leonards began to rub their hands. 
Among the continental hotel-keepers, from the 
brigands of Boulogne to the vampires of 
Venice, there arose a shout of gratulation at 
the thought of the approaching rush of 
autumnal tourists; Mr. Albert Smith (had he 
invented Mont Blanc then, which he hadn't) 
would have been rushing in a Hansom to some 
railway terminus whose line had the most 
branches, devising, as he sped, some new way 
of reaching the monarch of mountains . this 
time, perchance via the caves of Elephanta, 
Honolulu, and Lake Tschudi. The House of 



176 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

Commons was massacring new-born bills with 
Heroclian cruelty and celerity ; the Ministerial 
whitebait shuddered, in their tanks off Green- 
wich, at the thought of their coming martyr- 
dom by batter and bedevilment; theatrical 
managers took tickets for Paris, to see what 
was going on at the Palais Royal, or the Porte 
St. Martin; and the London Season was 
doomed. 

But Genevieve, Duchess of Minniver, was 
determined to be in at its death; and she 
issued cards for a grand soiree dansante, to be 
holden at her mansion in Belgravia . Parlia- 
ment sate late that year . in the last half of 
the month of August. The invitation kept 
many noble families in town : tbey could not 
miss the dear Duchess's ball, they said; and 
the Misses Falcon at Boulogne coming from 
M. Adam's, the banker's, where they had been 
drawing their quarterly stipend, and sailing 
into the reading-room in the Rue de l'Ecu to 
read "Galignani," wondered how that de- 
signing creature had ever managed to get into 
society. " If it hadn't been for our poor dear 
uncle's infatuation," they said 



THE DUCHESS OF MINNIVEll's RECEPTION. 177 

Their poor dear grand-aunt was going to 
Grand Cairo, Jerusalem, the white Nile, que 
sais-je ? at the end of the season, and she was 
determined her last ball should be a grand one. 
She took the House of Lords and the House of 
Commons and shook them carefully in a sieve, 
separating the wheat from the chaff; she 
filtered the corps diplomatique, retaining the 
most pellucid drops thereof; she distilled the 
" Court Guide" in an alembic of much power; 
fumigated "Webster's Royal Red Book;" 
visited the fashionable menageries, and took 
the lions that roared the loudest; skimmed off 
the creme de la crerne of rank, beauty, and 
fashion, extracted a few flasks of attar from 
some bushels of aristocratic rose-leaves . and 
issued her cards of invitation accordingly. 

There was wailing and gnashing of teeth, or 
simperings of pleasure, or croakings of envy, 
or titterings of suppressed mortification, as her 
powdered footmen . she had so many now 
that she could scarcely count them . bore 
round her perfumed missives, with the ducal 
coronet on the seal. To be asked to the 

VOL. III. N 



178 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

Duchess of Minniver's was like being asked to 
one of Louis Quatorze's hydraulico-py rotechnic 
fetes. It was etre de Marly, as it is etre de 
Compiegne now-a-clays. So eager were people 
to come to her feasts, that she had but one 
answer declining her invitation. It was from 
old Lady Golgother (Lady Golgother of the 
Regency, and before the Regency; of before 
the Flood, the backbiters whispered), who 
was ninety, and died the week afterwards, and 
could therefore, I think, be rationally excused. 
The fashionable milliners had a hard time of 
it to make the dresses that were required for 
the festivity; but they consoled their over- 
tasked workwomen by telling them that this 
was to be the last ball of the season. Sir 
Townsend Towner, of the Life Guards, who 
was labouring under a temporary difficulty in 
the Yalley of the Shadow of Debt . to the 
extent, indeed, of inhabiting apartment No. 9 
in 2 in the Queen's Bench . regretted his in- 
carceration deeply. Had he been free, or 
rather not supposed to be travelling in Italy, 
he told Lumpey of the Blues and Clumpy of 



THE DUCHESS OF MINNIVERS RECEPTION. 179 

nothing particular save the clubs, he would 
have been sure to have received an invitation 
for the Duchess's ball; in which assurance . 
the Duchess knew perfectly well where he 
was . Sir Town send Towser was grievously 
mistaken. 

Sir Paracelsus Fleem was invited. Yes. He 
went everywhere ; though he confessed himself, 
sometimes quite pleasantly, that his father sold 
coal and potatoes, not in a shop, but in a shed. 
He went everywhere, from the Queen's Palace 
to the most miserable den in the lowest 
lodging-house in St. Giles's. He was asked 
everywhere, and had everybody's ear, though 
he was not a great talker ; but, curiously to 
say it, whenever anybody talked to Sir 
Paracelsus Fleem, they told him the truth. 
For it is no good lying to a doctor, my friend; 
if you do, you die. 

And Mr. Seth Tinctop, M.R.C.S., was he 
invited? No. He was not, you know, "in 
society"- . that is, in the creamy, ineffable, 
Grand Laman Society, which alone could 
satisfy the Minniver exigencies. Yet he was 



180 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

not by any means the same humble Mr. Tine- 
top we knew ten years since, keeping the 
doctor's shop in Drury Lane. The beneficent 
years had done him good too, as it seemed. 
He felt the pulses of titled people now, and 
attended earls' children through the measles. 
But it was always in a sort of secondary 
capacity. He always attended in lieu of 
somebody else, or was providentially in at- 
tendance to supply the place of somebody, 
or in somebody's unavoidable absence was 
kind enough to do what was required; but 
it was always understood, or he made it 
understood, that he was not the genuine 
article, but a substitute, a kind of albata 
or Sheffield plate, very serviceable and useful, 
but not the real thing. Don't you know 
such people, who throughout their lives, 
sometimes involuntarily, but as frequently 
of their own free will, are first lieutenants, 
chief clerks, grand viziers, foremen, and stage 
managers, but never become captains, mer- 
chants, sultans, masters, or lessees ? They 
are marked B 2 for life, and seem to like 



THE DUCHESS OF MIXXIVER's RECEPTION. 181 

it. Mr. Tinctop had a carriage now, a dimi- 
nutive one-horse carriage, and a footman with 
one black epaulette. He gave quiet little 
bachelor dinners, where there was French 
cookerv and good wine. A man of cosmo- 
politan tastes, Tinctop, he could relish his 
pipe and his whiskey-and- water elsewhere; 
and he dwelt . wherever do you think? . 
in the fairy mansion in Curzon Street, which 
he rented of the Duchess of Minniver'a land- 
agents. But it was a fairy mansion no more. 
The door was half covered by a big brass 
plate, highly polished; there was a night 
bell; and within the fairy furniture was 
replaced by steady, medical-looking goods and 
chattels. Double door to dining-room; inner 
one communicating with study of green baize 
with brass nails. Sarcophagus w T ine-cooler. 
Portraits of Sir Astley Cooper and Sir Para- 
celsus Fleem. Bust of Galen. Bust of 
Grecian female, name unknown, with a 
straight nose and a round chin. (Why 
should medical men always have that un- 
named female's bust in their houses ? Is 



182 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

she the Goddess Hygeia, I wonder ?) Round 
table in the waiting-room, with Boyle's " Court 
Guide," the " Medical Directory," and an odd 
volume of " Thaddeus of Warsaw," to amuse 
the patients. Everything decorous, medical, 
strictly in accordance with medical propriety. 
Oh ! he was a wary man ! 

Mr. Tinctop was not asked to the Duchess 
of Minniver's ball, although he was one of 
her medical attendants in ordinary. Her 
Grace would have just as soon perhaps invited 
her grocer or her cheesemonger; yet the 
non-arrival of an invitation did not hinder 
Mr. Tinctop from driving to the Duchess's 
mansion in Belgrave Square . Minniver 
House, in Piccadilly, that great jail-like 
palace with the brick wall in front, edifi- 
catum temp. Georg. III., was under repair 
just then, and they had taken the house in 
Belgravia for two years . did not hinder 
him dismissing his carriage, nodding familiarly 
to the footman, and walking straight up-stairs 
to the Duchess's dressing-room. In truth, 
he was as free of the house as a cat; and the 



THE DUCHESS OF MIXXIVEft's RECEPTION. 183 

Duke, when he met him on the staircase and 
encountered his sly salutation, was rather 
afraid of him than otherwise. 

It was ten o'clock at night, and the house 
was a blaze of light. There were wax candles 
in girandoles everywhere, shouldering the gas, 
as though they considered that outspoken 
element to be a low vulgar fellow, fit only 
to flare in butchers' shops, and not half 
expensive enough. On the grand staircase 
there were rows of exotic plants in boxes; 
the saloons were full of vases of odoriferous 
flowers. Gunter's men were pouring down 
the area steps. The groom of the chambers 
. she had a groom of the chambers ! . . was 
disciplining his larynx with Doctor Stolberg's 
voice lozenges, preparatory to his arduous 
task in announcing the company. The link- 
boys were aware of the great merrymaking, 
and came trooping down, their chief with a 
silver badge on his ragged jacket, hugging 
themselves in the anticipation of half crowns. 
Picked men of the A division of police con- 
descended to partake in the (out-door) solem- 



184 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

nities. The housekeeper was in the still-room 
the butler in the pantry; the reporter for the 
"Morning Post" . a languid gentleman in 
whiskers . was sipping chambertin in a 
private apartment, placidly contemplating the 
cream- laid and gilt-edged paper, the crow- 
quill pens, and the violet ink (scented), with 
which the Duchess's secretaries imagined he 
would indite his lucubrations. The groom 
of the chambers and his Grace's gentleman, 
M. Jabot made much of Mr. Penguin of the 
" Morning Post." Mr. Shantilly, who was 
there from Messrs. Gunter's to supervise, 
made much of him ; Mr. Sphoon, the butler, 
contemplated him with reverential awe, as 
a man " who wrote in the noosepapers ; " the 
Duchess had sent down word that he was to 
be treated with every consideration. The 
lady's maid was captivated with his whiskers, 
and envied his lano-uidness. Mr. Penguin, 
who was a philosopher of the school of 
Democritus, who knew the aristocracy better 
than Garter King-at-Arms, and nearly as well 
as a bill discounter, who exchanged nods with 



THE DUCHESS OF MINNIVER'S RECEPTION. 185 

marquises, and was on pinch of snufftaking 
terms with the corps diplomatique, took all 
this homage in very good part. He might 
have had his brougham filled . Mr. Penguin 
kept a brougham . with cases of champagne, 
trifles, ice-creams, gooseberry fool, pot and 
hothouse flowers, if he liked. Lords made 
quite as much of him as their retainers. 
Prime Ministers clapped him on the shoulder, 
and told him to make as much as he could 
of that little speech at the wedding-breakfast. 
Dowager Countesses were anxious to know 
if he had been made quite comfortable, and 
if he had heard quite distinctly Lord B.'s 
beautiful remarks on conjugal love. He 
looked much more like a Lord than three- 
fifths of the Peerage, and had more than 
once been mistaken for one by the door- 
keepers of the House of Peers. Mr. Penguin 
did not write his report on the cream-laid 
paper, or with the crowquill pens. He wrote 
it instead on little shabby slips of flimsy 
paper, which he delivered to a little ragged 
boy with a gummy face, semz-sable, who was 



186 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

sleeping under a bench at the public-house 
round the corner in the Mews. Then Mr. 
Penguin, with an opera poncho thrown over 
his evening dress, but with his white neck- 
cloth still very resplendent, would walk down 
to the " Crimson Hippopotamus " in the 
Strand . that famous night-house of call 
for morning newspaper men, and have a 
Welsh -rabbit and a glass of hot gin and 
water for his supper. He was always affable 
. never proud, never supercilious, though 
he lived among the haloi kai agapoi. As 
Mr. Tinctop passed upstairs, he became aware 
of the arrival of Mr. Collinet's band, who 
were tuning their instruments, and causing 
them to emit rueful remonstrances of sound, 
in the grand saloon, where the dancing was 
to take place. There was to be a concert 
before the ball, too; and Signor Francisco 
Pulcinella, from Bergamo, the accompanyist, 
was torturing a grand pianoforte to the proper 
concert pitch. Mr. Tinctop winced somewhat 
at the discordant sounds, then grinned that 
own peculiar grin of his, and pursued his way 
upwards. 



THE DUCHESS OF MIXNIVER's RECEPTION. 187 

The Duchess's dressing-room . he knew 
it full well . lay at the extremity of a long 
suite of sumptuous apartments now darkened 
and devious. But Mr. Tinctop threaded 
them all, and arrived at last at the entrance 
to the sacred boudoir, whose portals were 
shrouded by white curtains in cut velvet of 
Utrecht. 

He paused ere he entered, though his hand 
was on the drapery, and with an inexpres- 
sibly cunning face, listened. He heard a 
sound as of some one weeping, and in dire 
distress. 

Had he entered, he would have found, 
kneeling on the ground, with her head buried 
in the cushion of a great carved and gilded 
fauteuil, a beautiful woman half dressed, 
with her golden hair floating over her bare 
shoulders, and sobbing, and murmuring, and 
writhing, and twining her slender fingers, one 
within the other, as though she would have 
broken them. 



188 



CHAP. XLVL 

MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 

HTHE sound of a woman weeping is not ordi- 
narily one of pleasure to manly ears. 
" Beauty disarmed," " Beauty in tears," 
"Beauty in distress:" these are refrains to 
the old nautical or sentimental ditties our 
grandmothers used to sing to the spinet and 
the harpsichords, in the unsophisticated days 
when it was not thought that good music was 
spoilt by having good words set to it. Such 
words awakened enthusiasm, or, at least, sym- 
pathy. Planco consule ; but Mr. Tinctop did 
not recognise Plancus or his consulate, and 
sympathy and enthusiasm were drugs not to 
be found in his pharmacopoeia. To all the 



MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 189 

sobbings of Beauty in distress within . . for he 
knew well enough whose voice it was he heard 
. he replied only by a shrug of the shoulders, 
a shrewd suppression, and then an interroga- 
tive protrusion of the lips, and by waiting. 
Beauty, on the other side of the door, grew 
more tranquil anon; and then Mr. Tinctop 
turned the handle of the lock, and went into 
the chamber. 

The French woman, her maid (Cuppins was 
not de service that evening) . an ill-looking 
handmaiden enough, with two black lustrous 
bandeaux of hair on her temples, eyes that- 
sparkled like jet beads, and a face so yellow 
and wrinkled as to present an unpleasant re- 
semblance to the physiognomy of a toad, that 
had been taking a nap in the centre of a 
block of marble for a century or two . came 
running towards Mr. Tinctop as he entered, 
putting forth her meagre hand as though to 
stay him, and crying, that " Madame la Du- 
chesse etait en deshabille." But the medical 
practitioner continued imperturbably to ad- 
vance; and the Duchess of Minniver, rising 



190 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

from her chair, bade him come in and her 
maid leave the room at one and the same 
time. The Frenchwoman (Mademoiselle Ame- 
naide, I think, was her name, but as you will 
meet her no more in this history, it does not 
much matter) shrugged her lean shoulders, 
paused to envelop her mistress in a loose 
peignoir of white China silk and disappeared. 
Mr. Tinctop very gravely walked up to the 
dressing-table; sat down in the carved and 
gilded fauteuil, on whose cushions the fevered 
cheeks of the Duchess of Minniver had rested 
a few moments before; and took as calm and. 
equable a survey of the apartment and its 
occupant, as though he had been a member of 
the Society of Antiquaries in an inedited ca- 
thedral crypt, or a detective policeman in a 
room where a murder or a burglary had just 
been committed, or a broker's man in a 
household where there was something worth 



seizing. 



He nodded his head softly as he looked, as 
though he approved highly of the internal 
arrangements of her Grace the Duchess of 



MR. TIXCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 191 

Minniver's dressing-room. And, in truth, it 
was a goodly sight, making the fairy palace in 
Curzon Street quite mean and shabby by 
comparison. Silk and gilding, lace and vel- 
vet, rare woods, wax candles, crystal lustres, 
lace fringes and tassels. The dressing-table 
was an altar. The vast mirror was a marvel 
of silver and mother-of-pearl, and was held up 
by alabaster Cupids shrouded in Brussels lace. 
The necessaire de toilette was a casket of 
treasures. There were jewelled nail-scissors, 
bodkin cases of malachite and gold, hair- 
brushes with backs of silver filagree. The 
stoppers of the perfume bottles glistened and 
sparkled in the candle light. The lip-salve 
was in the bosom of a little golden hawk, 
chased and enamelled, with emerald claws and 
ruby eyes. Strewn all about were the plumes, 
the gauzes, the flounces, the braveries and 
fripperies which the beautiful woman was to 
wear that night. Flaming like fire were the 
superb jewels in their morocco cases. Blatant 
everywhere, on jewel-case and toilet linen, on 
the stoppers of flasks and the escocheons of 



192 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

toilet boxes, were the two ducal coronets ; one 
with strawberry leaves, for England, one with 
spikes and fleur-de-lis erased, for France; and 
the two ciphers, M. and F., for Minniver and 
Fanfreluche. 

The Duchess stood up, just opposite Tine- 
top, looking at him. She had folded her arms 
over her beautiful shoulders, which rose and 
fell with the heaving of her bosom. Her little 
feet beat the devil's tattoo impatiently on the 
velvet-piled carpet. Her cheek was flushed, 
her eye flashed. She was a thousand times 
more beautiful than any of the jewelled gew- 
gaws, the luxurious toys in that room; but 
Tinctop scarcely looked at her. At last the 
little silver hammer of an alabaster clock on 
the mantel began to set its bell a-tingling; 
whereupon she spoke. 

u AYhat do you want here, bird of ill 
omen?" she asked, with an assumption of 
cheerfulness, but her voice trembling oddly as 
she spoke. "Tiresome creature; you always 
come when I am dressing. If you were not 
my vicdecin intime my husband would be 
jealous." 



MR. TIXCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 193 

" Your husband !*' 

a The Duke of Minniver," she retorted, 
turning deadly pale, and then as violently 
red. "TVhat do you want, tyrant, persecutor, 
despot? Money? What do you want with it 
all; with your one-horse brougham, your dingy 
furniture, and your white neckcloth? You 
must be as rich as a Jew, or must gamble, or 
else you must spend your money upon opera 
dancers. Tell me, Seth . now there 's a dear 
. what you want to-night? It's getting late, 
and I must be dressed and down stairs by 
eleven. I haven't been home half an hour 
from the Palace" 

She had been dining with her Sovereign 
that verv evening. The Duke of Minniver 
was, as you already know, Hereditary Grand 
Corncutter, an office conferred upon the first 
Duke, Eobert Fitzleman, by his royal master, 
Charles the Second, of philoprogenitive me- 
mory, and for discharging the onerous duties 
of which office he drew an annual salary of 
two thousand pounds from an undertaxed 
country. By the way, the first Fitzleman 

VOL. III. O 



194 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

might, with a little more propriety perhaps, 
have been called Fitztrollop; for his mamma, 
according to the chronique scanclaleuse of the 
Eestoration, was in the habit of dancing 
corantos on a cord distended across two poles, 
at Bartholomew Fair. His sacred Majesty, 
they say . but no, there must be no scandal 
against Queen Elizabeth or King Charles the 
Second, at this time of day. At any rate, the 
first Fitzleman was uncommonly like his papa 
in feature, when he wore a perriwig; and it 
was his good fortune to live in those halcyon 
days, when the sons of tight-rope dancers not 
unfrequently became dukes. 

She had been dining with her Sovereign, 
where she had fed off gold, had only spoken 
when she was spoken to, and had come away 
rather hungrier than she went. Eating at 
dinner was not then considered fashionable at 
Court. The Duke, as Hereditary Grand Corn- 
cutter, had been spoken to twice by H.R.H. 
the Prince Consort; during the rest of the 
repast, the Duke of Minniver crumbled his 
bread, and looked at himself in his golden 



MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 195 

spoon. One of the maids of honour had giggled 
during the entrees, and told her neighbour . 
an Archbishop . that the Duke of Minniver 
used too much Macassar oil to make his hair 
look brown. The Archbishop. our old friend 
" Jumping Jemmy " . suggested hair-dye, and 
chuckled, whereupon Royalty had frowned 
sternly on the pair; in consequence of which, 
I presume the maid of honour was sent to the 
Tower that very night, after having been 
summarily corrected, in nursery fashion, by 
the Court duenna or Mother of the maids, 
and the Archbishop relegated to his see, there 
to translate his Latin Pastorals into Greek 
Iambics, till he showed signs of better beha- 
viour. I know the discipline at Court is very 
strict. There had been a Royal Duke present 
at the dinner, who remarked to the Great 
Captain of the Age (who was dining on a 
French roll) that the vol-au-vent a la finan* 
ciere was " very good, very good, very good," 
three times. There was a prodigious old Guy 
of a German princess, done up in crimson 
satin, who gobbled over her food, and expec- 



196 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

torated freely in Mechlin lace : and this is, I 
declare, an accurate description of the dinner 
at Buckingham Palace, from which Genevieve, 
Duchess of Minniver, had just come. I am 
not drawing from imagination. I had the 
picture from a Royal footman, who turned 
author and died. 

She had driven straight away from the 
royal table (being excused in consequence of 
her entertainment), but was too proud and 
beautiful to wear her dinner-dress. 

"What do you want?" she asked again, 
impatiently, almost harshly, for Mr. Tinctop 
had never answered a word yet. 

He rose, and leaned his back against the 
glittering dressing-table. He took up one of 
the morocco dressing-cases, and with his fore- 
finger . it was an ugly forefinger, with a nail 
which, mown, pared, scraped as it was, looked 
like a claw . struck the coronets and the 
initials stamped in gold upon the leather. 
Struck them violently . struck them scorn- 
fully. 

" Do you see this, you jade?" he said, at 
last. 



MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 197 

" Yes ;" she answered, trembling. 

"You a duchess . you the widow of a 
viscount . you the heiress of all the Badding- 
ton estates . you the leader of rank and 
fashion . you the Queen of Beauty ! I'll queen 
of beaut}^ you, you gipsy !" 

fc< What have I done?" she faltered. 

"Done! What haven't you done? Aren't 
you mine, body and soul? Aren't you my 
goods and chattels, my property, my household 
stuff? Did I pick you up out of the mud, out 
of the gutter, when you were dancing in 
frilled trousers and spangles, with a monkey, 
a white mouse, and a Savoyard organ-grinder, 
in the streets of Genoa?" 

She started at him in dumb horror, but 
pointed to the door. 

" Nobody's listening ; and if anybody should 
be, I do not care," Mr. Tinctop went on. He 
was not, it must be admitted, with all the vio- 
lence of his language, speaking beyond his 
usually calm, equable tone of voice. " I'm 
going to speak my mind to you, my lady ; and 
you shall hear it." 



198 THE B ALDINGTON PEEK AGE. 

" You are speaking it strangely, Seth 
Tinctop." 

" Exactly as I intend to do, Mrs. Tinctop. 
You were Lady Baddington, were you? You 
let me buy your dainty body from the Italian 
showman, who had bought you from the 
English mountebank, who had picked you up 
at an Irish fair, strumming a tambourine in 
front of a booth, and belonging to a gang 
of gipsies, or thieves^ or worse. You let me 
receive your fine ladyship from your play- 
fellows . the monkey and the organ-grinder, 
and the cudgel of Giovanni your master. You 
let me put you to school ; half ruin myself, to 
cram accomplishments into that clever, impish 
head of yours. You let me, before the 
English Consul at Turin, make you my 
wife " 

" For God's sake stop, you madman," the 
woman cried out, springing across the room, 
and placing her hand on her self-styled hus- 
band's mouth. " Do you want us all to be 
ruined?" 

u I want some one to be ruined, and I won't 



MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 199 

stop," rejoined the implacable Mr. Tinctop, 
disengaging his mouth, with a gesture which 
looked very much as though he wished to 
bite the hand before him. " Didn't I marry 
you, Polly Draggletail, which is about all the 
name you have ; my Lady Genevieve, Duchess 
of Minniver, and all the rest of it, as you call 
yourself." 

She looked at him with inexpressible loath- 
ing, hatred, contempt ; but she did not spring 
upon him to rend him; she did not strike him 
with her strong white arm; she did not even 
spit upon him. She was cowed and beaten, 
and pressed her fingers on her throat as 
though she was choking; then replied . 

" You did?" very slowly and subdued. 

u And," Mr. Tinctop continued, speaking 
more rapidly, but not rising a quarter of 
a note in his vocalisation, " didn't you run 
away from me a month after marriage, when I 
had been fool enough to fall in love with you, 
and to spend, in dresses and trinkets for your 
worthless body, nearly all I had left of the 
money I had got from old Lord Baddington? 



200 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

Didn't you go vagabondising about the coun- 
try with swindlers, and horse jockevs, and 
cardsharpers, and half-pay captains, and Ger- 
man barons, and Italian counts, growing more 
beautiful, and more wicked, and more cunning 
every day, till you hooked the superannuated 
old fool Haddington, and decoyed him into 
marrying you? Marry, ecod! a nice wedded 
w r ife you were." 

He had not libelled her . Tinctop. This, 
then, had been her career. It was hard 
to think of her, with her white neck and 
golden hair . so beautiful, so pure, so virginal 
. all widow as she was : it was very hard to 
think of her, depraved, corrupted, abandoned 
. a vicious, hardened wanton. Could a soul 
so blackened dwell in so fair a frame? 

" When you went away . ran away . Polly, 
Jenny, Genevieve, and so forth . ran away and 
left me almost beggared, and three-parts dis- 
tracted at losing you . I swore that sooner or 
later I would be revenged upon you. I'm a 
quiet man, my dear, as you know full well. 
I'm not much given to romantic ideas, or that 



MR. TINCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. '201 

sort of nonsense ; but if I don't bark I bite 
sometimes rather sharply; and I think, when 
I swear to be revenged upon anybody, I can 
take a leaf out of the book of those old Borgias, 
and the people who used to give the Aqua 
Tofana, and that sort of stuff." 

" What do you want?" she murmured, more 
mechanically, it seemed, than with any dis- 
tinct apprehension of the meaning of her 
words. 

" You'll pretty soon know what I want," 
he answered coldly; li and I won't take many 
words to tell you in; for you must finish 
dressing, my angelical partner, and receive your 
grand company. It isn't money, however, I 
want; I've got lots of my own. I could get 
lots more from you. I could draw thousands 
from tiie red-headed dolt who thinks himself 
your husband . draw them from him by 
crooking my little finger. He would do 
anything I ask him, the Duke, for the honour 
of the house of Minniver-Fanfreluche is some- 
thing; and I want to ruin the house of 
Minniver-Fanfreluche, Polly, my dear. I want 



202 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

to drag the coronet and the strawberry leaves 
all down into the mud, and the Duke and the 
Duchess with them. Aha!" 

He spoke out loud for the fi?*st time . this 
ordinarily placid Tinctop. He said " Aha ! " 
almost in a shriek. He was elated, triumph- 
ant; but she flinched no more, and looked at 
him with eyes of fire, daring him. 

" Do your worst. How can you prove it? 
No one will believe your story. The Consul 
went mad and died. I don't believe it was a 
marriage at all. I had the certificate. You 
left it with me, and I burnt it." 

She fired off these dislocated members of a 
phrase, and then began to pant. She was 
exhausted ; she was tired. 

" A fig for the Consul ; a fig for anybody 
believing me or my story. I'll prove it fast 
enough when the time comes. I've another 
story to prove first. I have to prove the 
existence . and to prove it I've certificates that 
you haven't burnt, my lady . of the rightful 
heir to that Baddington peerage which you 
and many other fools thought extinct. I have 



MR. TIXCTOP SPEAKS HIS MIND. 203 

that to prove that the young lordling who was 
killed in Paris was a bastard, and that the 
eldest son of Gervase Falcon, and the rightful 
heir to the peerage, is alive." 

"Who is he; where is he?" she whispered 
hoarsely. 

u Who is he? Where is he? I'll find him 
safe enough. Wire by wire, and link by link, 
I've got this chain of evidence together. I 
tell you I have found him. I tell you that I'll 
spend thousands to establish his claim before 
the House of Lords, to rout you out of the 
possession of his estates. Then when I have 
made him a lord, and brought his half sisters 
to shame, I'll turn to you again my lady, and 
pull your pride down. You a duchess . you 
a viscount's widow! I'll prove to all the 
world that you're no better than the com- 
monest wench that walks the streets. I will, 
by !" 

Why had she not a pistol now to shoot him 
as he spoke ? She used to have pistols. Why 
had she not some subtle poison in her toilet 
case that she misfht cast over him, and burn 



204 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

his wicked tongue out? But she could do 
nothing but clasp her throat again, and in 
stifled accents ejaculate . "Mercy . mercy!" 

"Mercy! I'll see you hanged . I'll see 

you burned in brimstone . first! I've given 

you plenty of law, Mrs. Polly; but now I 

mean to have my innings. There's only one 

more thing I have to tell you. Wouldn't you 

like to know who the new Lord Baddington 

is? I'll tell you. I'm sure you'll be glad to 

hear it. He's an old friend of yours. He's 

the poor devil of a painter whom you took up 

in one of your high and mighty caprices, and 

then cast away like a broken fan. He's the 

miserable, half-starved wretch with the sick 

wife and child, whom you had turned out of 

your house by your servants. He's Philip 

Leslie." 

She might have been Lazarus, standing up 
in his grave in his cerecloth, she looked so 
ghastly, before the glittering toilet table 
standing in her china-silk peignoir. She did 
not scream; she could not scream; but with 
a low moan fell on the floor and fainted. 



MR. TINC10P SPEAKS HIS MIND. 205 

When her maid, hearing the fall, rushed in 
from the adjoining bed-room ; and raised her 
mistress, she found that Mr. Tinctop had 
taken his departure. She thought it odd, as 
she applied the usual restoratives. Ce rtetait 
rlen quune attaque de nerfs, Mademoiselle 
Amenaide told her Grace, when she recovered. 

Mr. Tinctop walked very softly down the 
grand staircase, paying especial attention to 
the exotic plants which lined them, and appa- 
rently thinking them very pretty. He re- 
marked to the hall porter who opened the 
door for him, that it was a beautiful night, 
but rather close. 

The Duchess of Minniver's closing ball was 
the greatest triumph that London season had 
witnessed. The Morning Post had three columns 
of report next day; and his Grace the Duke 
had serious thoughts in his red head of asking 
the Prime Minister whether he could not 
make Mr. Penguin something under Govern- 
ment. The unconscious Penguin (who, to his 
honour be it spoken, would have indignantly 
refused the Goverment appointment, had it 



206 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

been offered to him) was, by the time his 
Grace had begun to speak about him, scouring 
the London and North- Western Railway on a 
special engine, in quest of the earliest infor- 
mation relative to an old woman of eighty- 
five, who had murdered her granddaughter 
with a reaping-hook. 

Her Grace the Duchess was charming, 
Never had she been seen so beautiful, so full of 
spirits, of wit, and repartee. Everybody was 
enchanted; and dancing was kept up till five 
o'clock in the morning. Then Genevieve 
Duchess of Minniver went to bed. 

To bed, but not to sleep. To think. 

" It must be done," she murmured, for the 
twentieth time, tossing her burning head on 
her pillow. "Polly blank! Polly blank! yes, 
that was the wretch's name ! " 

His Grace the Duke had his own apartments 
in a separate part of the house. I wonder, 
had he heard his wife murmur that strange 
name, if any thoughts would have come across 
his mind akin to those that troubled Parisina's 
lord? 



20' 



CHAP. XL VII. 

THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 

fPHE last grand entertainment of the fashion- 
able season being over, and the season 
itself having thus come to a legitimate and satis- 
factory termination, the clerk of the weather de- 
termined, to all appearances, to be also in the 
fashion, made up his meteorological mind to 
give the Londoners no more fine weather, and 
was, accordingly, " down on them " with a first 
of September of the bitterest autumnal de- 
scription. Mr. Kenny Meadows, that delight- 
ful artist, was then at home drawing beautiful 
vignettes of " Autumn " on wood, for the illus- 
trated newspapers. He represented the season 
as a blooming brunette, luxuriously reclining 



208 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

among luscious fruits, in a bower overshadowed 
by pulpy vines. Artists were out on their 
autumnal-sketching tour, running races with 
the mist up Saddleback or Helvellyn, or wash- 
ing in their bits of rock and foliage in the inn- 
parlour of Betty's-y-Coyd ; the smiling Welch 
landlady looking on approvingly as she fried 
her e^s and bacon ; Jack Harold, the man 
who paints sunsets so well, singing that famous 
song of his about the three bank directors 
who went ,c fishing for roach and dace ; " and 
Baronial Hall Springfield, with his tremendous 
red beard, arguing on German art with Water- 
fall Talmash and Bill Rokes, surnamed the 
" indefatigable," because he came to Wales every 
year for artistic purposes, and never painted 
anything but the portrait of the landlady's 
last baby. Men put uncharitable constructions 
even on this solitary pictorial annual ; and said 
that Bill painted the portrait for reasons . for 
causes, in fact, connected with his* weekly 
account current for board and lodging. It 
was the first of September, and they were 
gathering in the hops in Kent, and the apples in 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 209 

Devonshire, and the corn everywhere, save only 
in the bleak uplands of Scotland, where they 
waited for October even to sharpen the sickle. 
Foolish men took out game certificates ; put on 
absurd costumes; tramped over stubble fields, 
bought birds of suburban game-dealers; and, 
coming home to their wives or clubs, said they 
had shot partridges. The grouse were uncom- 
monly strong on the wing on the Scottish 
moors ; and no less stronger on the wing were 
the insolvents of fashion, who flew right away 
to Antwerp and Boulogne, defying the long 
shots of their vengeful creditors, and laughing 
merrily at the facetious proclamations of out- 
lawry made once a month by Mr. Hemp, in 
the Sheriff's Court. It was still hot and 
sultry in Paris; the back streets smelt very 
strongly of melons and peaches; the Bois de 
Boulogne and the Avenue de Neuilly were 
still crowded with fashionable equipages; and 
the minister of public instruction was giving 
away the prizes, the laurel crown, and the 
kisses on both cheeks, to the tight-buttoned 
pupils of the colleges. High festival was being 
vol. in. p 



210 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

held at Dieppe, at Ostend, at Dunkirk. The 
season was just beginning at Baden-Baden; 
and the Jews of Hamburg were flocking over 
to the queer little island of Heligoland . that 
eccentric dependency of the British Crown, 
which it possesses nobody knows how, and 
nobody knows why . to eat large oysters and 
gamble at the trente et quarante tables. In 
three-fourths of habitable Europe the first of 
September was sunny, joyous, balmy ; but in 
London the clerk of the weather ordered it 
otherwise. He bade the slave of his caprice, 
the great metropolis, lay aside her holiday robe 
of gauze and golden tissue ; he tore the summer 
flowers from her coiffure, and commanded her 
to attire herself all in dingy shivering gray. 
It was warm on the sunny side of the way 
even in Stockholm and Copenhagen that year; 
but London was condemned to a sinister chilli- 
ness, akin only to that felt in the great shivery- 
shakery city of Petersburg, when, the first 
fifteen days of August past, they light tbe gas 
on the Nevskoi, and begin to cram the stoves 
with charcoal; while careful housewives look 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 211 

to the state of their double windows and to 
the listing of their doors ; and moody bachelors 
examine what ravages the summer moths have 
made in their fur pelisses. 

It blew great guns all day long, and the 
streets were nearly as empty as on a Derby 
day. People with goloshes, stout overcoats, 
and serviceable umbrellas . their own or 
borrowed . can stand rain. Some like it : I 
do. Furs, comforters, flannels, and woollen 
muffatees will keep out the cold: and hot 
brandy-and-water, when you can get enough 
of it, is a great crutch. In hot weather the 
philosopher can walk in a straw hat and his 
shirtsleeves ; or, if he chooses to sacrifice to 
the graces, he may carry his coat genteelly 
over his arm. But you can't do anything 
with or against a windy day. Omnia vincit 
amor. So does the wind vanquish most things. 
It gets down your back; it insinuates itself 
between the flesh and the wristband of the 
tightest-buttoned glove; it draws tears from 
the eyes and rheum from the corners of the 
mouth; it makes the hair a torment and the 



212 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

cavities of the ears miseries; it causeth the 
teeth to chatter, and the lower garments to 
flap in an unseemly manner against the be- 
numbed calves: it makes the nose to ache, 
and the bristles of the newly-shaven beard to 
tingle, and evoketh crimson blotches, unsightly 
to the eye, on the cheek-bones ; it tyeth knots 
in ladies' cap ribbons, and bloweth their 
bonnets nine-bauble square, and sendeth hats 
away skimming, far aAvay from human heads, 
baffling pursuit, injuring valuable property 
(the intrinsic value of a hat is immense, for it 
is the most difficult article in the whole ward- 
robe to obtain on credit), to the despair of the 
owners and the boisterous merriment of vulgar 
boys ; it sendeth pungent dust up inflated 
nostrils, T hate the wind, It is a stupid 
leveller and irrational democrat; a ruffianly 
swaggerer, wrecking ships, smashing the roof 
of the Crystal Palace, tearing the limbs off 
good old oaks, tumbling over established 
chimney-pots, and weathercocks hallowed by 
time, making doors and windows to creak, 
howling in an unearthly and doggish manner, 



THE ELEVENTH HOUK. 213 

and exposing female ancles that should not be 
seen. I hate the wind; it is a fool . grinding 
corn for it knows not whom, and inflating the 
lungs of other fools to blow their own trumpets 
withal. I hate the wind for its levity; it is 
the lightest thing in the world, except a 
woman. 

This bad wind had howled, and crooned, 
and whistled, and screeched, and gone on 
anyhow all day, playing the very deuce 
among the poles for drying linen in back 
gardens, making nurserymen at Battersea and 
Fulham clinch their fists, and mutter direful 
oaths as they surveyed their menaced hot- 
houses and cucumber frames, and generally 
trying people's tempers, and disturbing do- 
mestic felicity. Cabin-boys had a bad time of 
it that first of September, when the master 
of the collier came on board, after dinner, full 
of salt beef and new rum, and with his 
terrible " Colt " in his hand. Pinched child- 
ren, with harsh stepmothers, had reason to 
rue that windy day. Apprentices were sore 
harassed by the working jewellers, their 



214 THE BADDINGTOX PEERAGE. 

masters, and meditated fleeing from their 
indentures to islands were watches grew on 
trees, and garnet brooches ran wild. Streets 
that had hitherto been hopelessly dirty were 
blown quite clean by the searching blast. 
Fallen leaves from the trees in St. James's 
Park were found high up in St. Martin's 
Lane, Holborn- wards. Beggars struggled up 
the streets under a press of tatters, and were 
compelled ever and anon to take in a reef in 
their rags. The patient cabhorses at the ranks 
bent their meek heads, and took refuge in 
well-sown nose-bags, where wind could not 
penetrate. The Jehus, their masters, crouched 
in rickety coffee-shops, into which the wind 
eddied fearfully, and blew their decoctions 
of burnt beans into brown ripples. The 
policeman had donned his oilskin cape, 
though it rained not, and the garment napped 
and crackled like a dry leaf. Pipes would 
not keep alight, candles would not light at all, 
and if the sacred tire of Zoroaster had been 
kindled in Trafalgar Square, it would have 
<rone out there and then. 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 215 

The old Tower stood the brunt of the blast 
bravely, though the masts of the ships in the 
river bent like whips. The bridges were 
firm; but that of Hungerford, which they had 
been trying to build for some half dozen 
years or so, creaked and moaned dismally in 
its timber frame- work. It should have been 
dark at three, so wretched a day was it; 
but it kept grayly light till seven, when 
shuddering gas-lights began to wink and 
flicker in, as the sly wind insinuated itself 
through the crevices of the lamp-frames. 

It struck seven by the clock of St. Mary-le- 
Strand as a wretched, ragged, forlorn man in 
middle life, by age . at the very bottom of 
life's ladder in misery . passed through the 
Wellington Street turnstile of Waterloo 
Bridge, and began to toil over towards the 
Surrey side. 

He was unshorn, dirty and dishevelled, 
fierce and haggard to look upon; but his 
fierceness and ha2;ardness were those of 
want, not crime. He wore a cloak . strange 
that not-to-be-eradicated propensity of pau- 



216 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

perised men to wear cloaks . but the mantle 
was one rag. You had better not ask me 
whether his battered napless hat had either 
crown or brim. My own private conviction 
is that it had neither; but I don't wish to 
exaggerate matters. Twisted round it, at 
any rate, and, I believe, pinned with one 
black pin and a white one, was a wisp of 
gummy rusty crape : you know . that deadly 
looking crape which forms the trimming to 
the scant mantles of the old women in the 
free seats of the parish church, who hustle 
each other for the lees of the sacramental 
wine, when the "miserable sinners" who are 
better off have finished kneeling on the red 
velvet hassocks round the altar rails, and 
have departed in their carriages. He wore 
this crape hat-rag . hat-band if you will . for 
a little child of his that had died six months 
before. He had another child at home who 
was dying. 

I don't want to be questioned about his 
linen. I hope he had a shirt, but appear- 
ances were against him; and his coat was 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 217 

buttoned up very high. AY hen I say but- 
toned up, I may, I hope, be taken to mean 
pinned up, sewn up, tied up, pasted up, glued 
up, closed somehow tightly across his breast, 
as it was. His boots were such prodigies 
of bankruptcy and distress, that I must 
refrain from describing them. The whole 
man was such a walking tatter, that had 
there been any charitable souls abroad that 
w r indy day, there might have been haply some 
pennies thrown at him, but for a miserable 
compromise he had essayed to make between 
utter present beggary and bygone respect- 
ability. He wore gloves ! Such gloves ! such 
woe-begone hand-slippers of faded Berlin of 
some indescribable colour, if colour they had 
ever possessed, bursting in holes all over, 
through which the starved flesh showed itself 
in discoloured patches, like unwholesome 
blossoms. 

This man, battling with the unkind breeze, 
which blew due east from Shoreditch Bail- 
way Station, and beyond that from the 
bleak headlands of Suffolk, might have been 



218 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

a begging-letter imposter, elaborately u got 
up " to represent a reduced gentleman, or a 
decayed tradesman. Pie might have been 
a destitute Polish refugee, or a professor of 
languages with no pupils, or a man with a 
Chancery suit, or a discoverer of perpetual 
motion, or one of the fifty thousand castaways 
with more brains than bread, who are for 
ever wandering in this metropolis, and whom, 
if they were set in the pillory, it would be 
a mercy to pelt with hard-boiled eggs, so that 
they might eat them afterwards. 

He was none of these, but our old friend 
Philip Leslie, six-and- thirty years of age, 
quite ruined, broken, and hopeless. Time 
had dealt no more hardly with him than she 
had done by thousands of better men, who 
had been in greater straits, who had suffered 
greater agonies, who had deserved richer 
rewards, anft who, in one instance only, had 
been treated with a mercy as yet denied him : 
in being permitted to Die. Pie had worked, 
but nothing had come of it; studied, but 
nothing had come of it; toiled and striven, 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 219 

but nothing" had come of it . save this: The 
rags, a sick wife at home, a dying child. 
His kismet his fate, was against him. He 
had no luck. Such things happen every 
day. 

I will endeavour to relate his sorry history, 
since you last parted from him, in a very 
few words. You have guessed already . I 
need scarcely tell you again . that it was by 
Philip Leslie's hand that Charles Falcon, Lord 
Baddington, fell in the wood of Tineennes, 
the morning after the bal masque. I have 
never been able to ascertain with any degree 
of certainty, how Philip managed to effect 
his escape, which he did quite uninterrupted 
and unmolested immediately after the duel; 
but I have no doubt he was indebted for 
his safety to the good offices of the ubiqui- 
tous Doctor Ionides, who, Philip noticed, 
seemed to be on the very best terms with the 
French police, as far as regarded smoothing 
away passport difficulties, and answering 
embarrassing questions. But though the 
Doctor, or the Professor, or the Captain, or 



220 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

Jack Pollyblank in fact, behaved in the 
kindest manner to him, " like a Dutch uncle," 
as he himself humorously expressed it, in 
bringing him off scot free from the con- 
sequences of his deadly encounter, and land- 
ing him safe and sound in the fairy mansion 
in Curzon Street, and in the presence of 
his lady patroness, Philip could by no means 
prevail upon him to keep another promise 
which he had made him, and with some 
degree of solemnity. Neither entreaties nor 
remonstrances could move him to redeem his 
pledge of giving Philip good news of 
Manuelita, the dancing-girl, or to disclose her 
whereabouts. He persisted in gloomily aver- 
ring that he knew nothing of the "hussey"; 
and after Philip had challenged him to fight 
another duel . having, like the tiger, gotten an 
appetite for blood with the first taste . at 
which cartel he was immensely amused, but 
jocosely declined it; telling Philip in good- 
humoured confidence, that if he attempted 
to have recourse to such personal violence 
as he might deem would force him to demand 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 221 

1 satisfaction, he would feel himself 
called upon to break his jaw, jump on his 
ribs . i; mark him so that his mother wouldn't 
know him," was the Doctor's amicable de- 
finition of the operation . choosing a secluded 
spot for the performance of the feat. Philip 
Leslie thought the wisest thing he could 
do was to leave the depraved giant to his own 
devices, and to abandon the hopeless pursuit. 
Pie revolved all the chances of the matter 
in his mind; but was unable to decide as to 
whether Pollyblank had sequestered Manuelita 
for his own purposes, or whether he was kept 
from her by order of Lady Baddington. 
Both the man and the woman were inscrut- 
able beings to him, and he had neither 
patience enough, nor moral courage nor will 
enough, to probe the subject further. 

" Had he ever loved Manuelita ?" I leave 
you divine. Throughout these hazy pages . 
these sheets written in danger and distress, in 
sickness and contumely . commenced in a 
darkened room surrounded by the shadows 
of death, and drawing rapidly to a limping 



222 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

termination now in a strange land, far away 
from the friends I love and the kinsfolk who 
love me not . I have never dared to decide 
myself what were the real motives, the 
thoughts in the holy of holies of the hearts of 
the people whose shadowy likenesses I have 
drawn. I have endeavoured, so far as my 
lights will permit me, to tell you what they 
thought and felt; but there are secrets in 
their souls I cannot fathom. For all shadowy 
as they are, and rudely and clumsily depicted, 
I Believe in my people. They are not puppets, 
they are not marionettes; they are not stocks 
and stones. They exist. They do. They 
would walk and talk, they would live and 
breathe, if a more cunning hand than mine 
could lift the curtain that veils them. I 
know Jack Pollyblank. I have seen Tinctop. 
I have dined with Lord Baddington, the old 
one and the young one. I have been in love 
with Genevieve; I, who write. But my 
diction is incoherent, and my speech is thick 
and clogged, like that of a dumb man who has 
been but half reclaimed from mutism by the 



THE ELEVENTH HOUR. 223 

care of a learned professor. I can see the 
shapely statue, I can appreciate the glowing 
picture; but my fingers are clumsy, and 
cannot mould; my hand is false to my eye, 
and will not colour. 

Did Philip love Manuelita, and so easily 
resign her? I tell you that question is not 
one easily to be decided, or without a more 
searching perception than falls to the lot of 
most men. I hate such fools, who jump at 
such conclusions hastily. 

For some time after the return of Philip 
Leslie to England, his lines fell into pleasant 
places, and he prospered exceedingly. The 
Lady Baddington was good enough to in- 
troduce him into society. He gave drawing 
lessons, at a guinea a seance, to some of the 
highest families of the aristocracy. His 
manner was spoken of, by dowagers almost 
ineffable in their rank and wealth, as being 
distingue. It was about this time that he 
knew several lords. His pictures sold well. 
He had plenty of commissions. The Marquis 
Tarradiddle talked of sending him to Rome to 



224 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

make water-colour drawings of the arabesques 
in the loggie and stanze of the Vatican. He 
spent a whole month at Loavesandfishes, the 
charming retreat, in the New Forest, of the 
Lord Bishop of Bosfursus. He had the 
grandes and the petites entrees in Curzon 
Street; and her Ladyship was always kind 
and gracious to him. He lived in handsome 
apartments in George Street, Hanover Square ; 
rocle a horse in the park ; was on the can- 
didates' list for the Praxiteles Club; and 
saved five hundred pounds. 

His fortune, you will say, was made; but 
what do you think this ungrateful, infatuated 
young man did? He went and married Lucy 
Stevens, the governess to the Lord Bishop 
Bosfursus' s daughter, a pale-faced young 
creature, not yet eighteen, and without a 
penny to bless herself with. 



225 



CHAP. XLVIII. 

WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 

O PEED thee onward, ragged man over the 
bridge, for there is death before thee and 
death behind thee. Speed thee onward over 
the bridge ; for it is not good to halt in the 
bays or look through the balustrades. Speed 
thee onward. 

And be thou accursed, bridge of the fear- 
some memories, for there is blood upon thy 
coping-stones, and thy parapets are wet with 
the tears of women. Kever came there any 
good out of thee; nor profit to the money- 
spinners that built thee, nor health to those 
who from thy flagged footways inhaled the 
deadly miasma of the river; nor a whisper of 

vot. TTT. Q 



226 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

solace to the wretched, nor of rest to the 
weary. The feet of the night-prowlers have 
worn smooth thy stones, and thy roadway has 
been rutted by the wheels of the chariots that 
drove fools to their folly and the froward to 
their destruction. Malison on thee, bridge, 
that see'st unmoved misery and despair, and 
the cracking of heartstrings ; bridge, at whose 
toll-<rates mi^ht stand Charon on the one side, 
and the dog Cerberus on the other; and o'er 
whose barriers might be written, as above the 
Inferno's doors, " Ye who enter, leave all 
hope behind." 

The ragged man that was Philip Leslie 
struggled over the bridge, speeding him to- 
wards his miserable home. He had married 
the governess, and come to grief. As he had 
made his bed, so he must lie. If he would so 
fly in the face of his best friends, what could 
he expect ? His best friends told him this, 
and a variety of other edifying things, when 
they discarded him. The Viscountess Bad- 
dington, in the few brief words in which she 
informed him that he was never more to expect 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 227 

countenance or assistance from her, took 
occasion to tell him that he was a mean, spirit- 
less fool. Good heaven ! what had the man 
done? what was he to do? He wasn't a lord; 
why should'nt he marry the governess? But 
it was agreed on all sides that he committed 
an act of gross folly, imprudence, and in- 
gratitude. There is a wonderful unanimity 
sometimes among people when the fugleman 
is powerful; and aristocratic England un- 
animously sent Philip Leslie to Coventry: 
those who had ordered pictures countermanded 
them; and some even who had received the 
works for which they had given commissions 
were so indignant at the hideous turpitude dis- 
played by Philip in forming that unfortunate 
matrimonial alliance with the governess, that 
they would have no more to do with him on 
any account . not even to the extent of paying 
him what they owed him. Philip went to law 
with one quondam patron, the Marquis of 
Gumbo, author of the Gumbo overcoat and 
the Gumbo mail-phaeton. His butler called 
to pay the money a few days after Philip had 



228 THE BADDINGTON PEEKAGE. 

been bold enough to issue a writ ; and the next 
day Mr. Fusbos, of Regent Street, the great 
picture-dealer, and extensively patronised by 
Lord Gumbo, refused to buy any more of 
Philip's pictures at any price. 

Genius accompanied by industry, however 
it may have to encounter adversity in the out- 
set, must ever, you may say, triumph in the 
long run? Must it! I tell you that against 
some men there is this kismet, this adverse 
fate; that against them there has gone forth a 
fiat of ill-luck, and that whether the wheel of 
fortune move swiftly or slowly, up-hill, or 
down-hill, still, crushed beneath the tire, at the 
bottommost spoke of the wheel, will those men 
be. They tried a man for vagabondage in 
France, the other day, before some tribunal of 
correctional police. They found, on removing 
his cap, tattooed on his forehead, this strange 
inscription . " Pas cle chance." He had never 
had a chance. He never was to have one. If 
he had painted like Raphael, or sung like 
Tasso, there was yet to be " no luck" about 
that miserable human house of his. These 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 229 

Murads the Unlucky, these John Hardups, 
must always exist, I suppose, in order to pre- 
serve the equal balance of society, teach us 
our duties, the value of contentment, the futi- 
lity of vain efforts, and much more in the 
didactic and generally imbecile department. 

So, after his little brief season of prosperity, 
"swift as an arrow from a Tartar's bow" 
went Philip Leslie to ruin. The fuglewoman 
of his chorus of detractors was powerful, able, 
merciless. He fell into the hands of small 
picture-dealers and disreputable furniture 
brokers. His works figured at low auction- 
rooms in Drury Lane and on Holborn Hill. 
Then he began to work for the Jews; then 
having pawned everything to buy bread, he 
took to selling tickets to buy drink. He was 
kind enough to, and fond enough of, the poor, 
feeble, sickly girl he had married : only they 
were too poor to be fond of one another. I 
have heard of love in a cottage, and believed 
in it. I have tried, myself, love in a back 
kitchen, and have found a cooking-range and 
a mangle things not wholly insupportable. 



230 THE B ALDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Were it not for the black beetles, I should 
prefer it to love in marble halls. But love in 
a second floor back; love in one room, with 
the bed in the corner, the whole place in a 
perpetual state of babytude, with a little pile 
of pawn tickets on the mantelpiece, with the 
landlady coming up every ten minutes to tell 
you, in acrid accents, that her landlord will 
call for his rent to-morrow, so that she will 
trouble you to settle your little account to- 
day; love with no coals in the grate, and none 
in the cupboard, my dear, loses much of its 
poesy . becomes, in fact, something very like 
horrible, soul-grinding, heartbreaking prose. 

They had a baby or two born in due course, 
but death had mercifully cut down the little 
daisies in their meadow till within some 
eighteen months of the time at which I found 
Philip again for you. Baby the last lived, a 
rickety, suffering, feeble little Christian; a 
poor, white thing, with large eyes that kept 
ever regarding you . ah ! so wistfully, ah ! so 
sadly, as though to ask if this squalid misery? 
this pinching penury of second-floor-existence. 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 231 

were the most notable features in the fine 
showy thing called Life, that men make such 
fuss about. This was the baby that was ill; 
and, with its mother, lay on a bed in the corner 
of a back-room lodging, meekly, uncomplain- 
ingly waiting for death. 

He had reached home at last, the ragged 
man. Home had its habitat in a street turning 
out of the Waterloo Koad . a street that I 
may be excused for calling one-eyed, for it had 
houses and windows only on one side; the 
length of the other being entirely occupied by 
the high brick dead wall of a thundering minor 
theatre, the Royal Guelph and Ghibelline 
Theatre, if I am not mistaken. A flaming 
placard of many colours, nearly as long as the 
wall itself was pasted on it, very high up, and 
out of the reach of filibustering billstickers of 
rival establishments. It informed the world that 
the Royal G. G. Theatre was unrivalled. That 
it was the Home of the Drama. That it was 
the favourite resort of the nobility and gentry, 
and that it was favoured with continual over- 
flows and an unprecedented succession of bril- 



232 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

liant novelties. References were made to the 
startling melodrama of " Leary Jem ; or the 
Life Preserver and the Lagged One: " also to 
the forthcoming real old Surrey side domestic 
drama, " Smiles and Tears ; or, the Union, the 
Mill, the Jug, and the Stepper." Talma 
Coggs, the great Transpontine comedian, 
known among his admirers in the New Cut as 
" Speak-out Coggs," had been engaged at an 
immense sacrifice to perform the part of Leary 
Jem for six nights longer at this temple of the 
drama. Philip had vainly tried to obtain 
employment in his old vocation of a scene- 
painter. They had taken him on for about a 
fortnight one Christmas-time to foil-paper-up 
some coral columns in the grand transforma- 
tion scene of the pantomime . the dazzling 
halls of enchanting delight in the realms of 
of Rumtyidity; but the curse of the Vis- 
countess's anger seemed to pursue him every- 
where. The management contemptously re- 
corded its opinion that "there was no good in 
that fellow;" he drank, he smoked, he was 
always playing cribbage, he neglected his wife 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 233 

he didn't wash, he wasn't clever; he was lazy, 
proud, conceited, unprincipled, they said. 
Hundreds of things were said of the same 
sort; for, you see, the world was against him. 
Terrible odes, those : yourself agamst the 
world ! 

He had been out all the morning, trying to 
borrow, or beg, or get a little money anyhow. 
They had physic from the dispensary in suffi- 
cient quantity; but there are times when the 
best dose of physic is a bottle of port wine, 
and the best bolus a beefsteak. But there was 
no money in London that windy day . none, 
at least, for Philip Leslie. There was such a 
tightness in the money-market, and about the 
entrance to the trouser's pockets of mankind 
. such a padlocking of human hearts, and 
hasping, barring, stapling, and chaining up of 
human sympathies . that Philip might as 
well have appealed to Alderman Waithman's 
obelisk at the corner of Fleet Street, or Charles 
the First's statue at Charing Cross, as to men 
and women that day. There was no money in 
the city (where things, by the way, had been 



234 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

terribly bad lately), and no money in West- 
minster. The few friends who yet remained 
to him were either too poor to assist, or tired 
out by repeated loans to him. Misery to you 
when you have worn out the kindness and 
forbearance of your friends! How he had 
succeeded in his interview with her Grace the 
Duchess of Minniver, once Viscountess Bad- 
dington. you have already learnt through the 
medium of Mr. Tinctop's mamma. He had 
seen her Grace again that day . the day of 
the wind . but not to speak to her. Her 
luxurious chariot, the ducal coronet on 
the panels, was rolling swiftly through 
Oxford Street. He had just caught one 
glimpse of her beautiful face, with her golden 
hair shining and wavering amidst the lace of 
her bonnet. He saw it all, for a moment. 
The warm autumn dress, the tiny sable muff, 
the Skye-terrier, sitting in supreme ugliness, 
an animated ball of worsted in her lap. The 
rosy coachman had five capes to his coat, and 
wore a wig; the flour on the footman's head 
would have made bread for the dear ones at 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 235 

home; the trinkets about the small-veined 
heads of the horses would have made the 
second-floor back a palace; the very car- 
riage-rug was ampler, warmer, than all the 
bed-furniture he had, poor man, put toge- 
ther. And he, destitute, forlorn, castaway, 
he had enjoyed all these things. He had sate 
on the soft cushions, ridden in the carriage, 
lain at the woman's feet, kissed her false hand, 
been petted by her . beautiful, cruel, wicked, 
as she was. It was all over, now . never to 
return. Did you never look at a scene, a 
thing, a face you had enjoyed, revelled in, 
played with, caressed, and, revisiting it, or 
seeing it pass, feel that there was a gulf ten 
thousand miles wide between you and what 
was once your goods and chattels . your 
slave and plaything. So, looking, the voice of 
your heart cries " Xever more, never more ! " 
and you slowly and sadly plod on the way of all 
men born to die. And so the carriage passed 
Philip, and left him (with some of the mud 
from its wheels on his torn clothes) in the 
midst of Oxford Street, the opium eater's 



236 THE B ADDING TON PEERAGE. 

"stony-hearted step-mother." The carriage 
stopped at the door of the Pantheon, and the 
Duchess alighted and entered the bazaar. 
What was she doing in town, now that the 
season was over? Why was she not on her 
way to the Continent, to one of her princely 
castles and palaces? With an insane, hopeless, 
almost mechanical clinging to the phantom of 
that which once has been, Philip followed the 
carriage, and was about to enter the building; 
but a sumptuous beadle, with a golden bulb, 
like a pumpkin, at the top of his staff, drove 
him back frowningly, making indignant com- 
ments on his torn apparel, and shapeless, 
shameful boots. Oh ! the unpardonable Sin of 
Poverty! Miss Teazlum's school for young 
ladies was just filing out of the bazaar as the 
repulse took place. Clara Fisher, the belle of 
the school, laughed. Laura Too^ood, the was; 
(a bold girl), made a face at the wretched man 
as she passed him ; but a sigh stole from little 
Kitty Clover's lips, and she said, " Poor 
fellow!" He did look very poor, indeed. But 
for fear of Miss Teazlum, Kitty would have 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 237 

ran after the ragged man and given him that 
fourpenny-piece, the last remains of Uncle 
John's bright silver crown. As it was, a tear 
stood in her eye. She was always crying at 
other people's sorrows, and laughing at her 
own : this foolish little school-girl. God bless 
thee, little Kitty: pleasant little Samaritan, 
with soft brown hair plaited into two tails, the 
gipsy hat and the frilled trousers. God bless 
thee, though I met thee but once, and for a 
moment, in a crowded street. Go thy ways, 
and be happier than the wretched man whom 
thou didst pity. 

Spurned from the door, ragged Philip had 
that afternoon prowled up Poland Street, and 
so into Great Marlborough Street, where you 
know is situated the back entrance to the 
Pantheon Bazaar. And as he passed the door, 
a man went in swiftly ; a man with huge black 
whiskers, and dressed in a showy, flashy, half- 
foreign style. He was visible but for a 
moment, and was gone. 

* As I live," cried Philip, u that must be 
Jack Pollyblank." 



238 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

At other times, long, long ago, he had 
scornfully refused the fellow's proferred aid ; 
but now he would have taken a crown, a 
shilling from him, and have been thankful for 
it. He pressed quickly to the door, and would 
have entered ; but he was repulsed again by a 
second edition of the sumptuous beadle, who 
told him, in no very polite terms, that the 
place was not for such as he. 

" But I have a friend here, a gentleman, 
whom I must see," Philip said, vainly 
struo-^linor to obtain admittance. 

DO  

" A friend, a gentleman ! I dessay," the 
official answered, sneeringly. " A friend, I 
spose, who is fond of priggin things off the 
counters, and isn't at all awerse to the flower- 
pots in the conservatory. Come, git along 
with you, or I'll call the 'plice." 

There was nothing to be done, nothing to 
be said ; and with a heart long since as heavy, 
but now growing harder than the nether mill- 
stone, Philip Leslie turned on his heels, and 
stalked gloomily down Carnaby Street. There 
was mischief in the man. 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 239 

So he had come home to the house in the 
slum, desperate, penniless, for his last half- 
penny had gone to pay the bridge-toll. Some- 
body was walking with him, solitary as he 
seemed. The somebody was not Jack Polly- 
blank: . had the beadle not warned him off 
the Pantheon premises, that somebody would 
not have made his appearance, and all things 
in his life might have been changed. As it was, 
Somebody linked his arm in his. It was the 
same somebody who had been his companion 
along the great north road, as he sped on his 
two hundred and ten miles' journey to London, 
years before. The house in which was his 
miserable room had a shop attached to it, a 
chandler's-shop : a dank little glory -hole of a 
place. It made Philip doubly desperate to 
look at the eatables displayed in the window, 
cumbering the shelves and counter, coarse, 
rank viands at best; mouldy cheese, rancid 
butter, bacon, red herrings, saveloys, and 
loaves of inferior bread. Coarse as they were, 
they would have been luxuries to him; but his 
credit had long since been exhausted. He was 



240 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

in debt for victuals and in debt for rent, and 
not one penny more in cash or kind could he 
raise. 

" I can't go in," he muttered, stopping on 
the threshold of the door; " I can't go in; God 
help me." And burst out crying. 

It was not good to see him cry. I tell you 
that there was mischief in him. His were not 
the tears of a tender sorrow that in weeping 
finds relief, but tears rather of burning im- 
patience and rage against the world that had 
been so hard upon him ; against the men and 
women who had used him so cruelly. Those 
tears were the salt waves of the Black Sea of 
Despair. He repeated again to himself that 
he could not go in yet, and that he would take 
a little walk. Then slunk up the street into 
the Waterloo Road again. 

Oh rash and miserable man, pause and come 
back! The golden prime is come: wealth, 
honours, titles, await thee in the wretched 
two-pair back. There, demurely sitting by 
thy sick wife's side is Seth Tinctop, hiding the 
Levite beneath the Samaritan's robe, and for 



WHITHER TEND THE CROOKED ROADS. 241 

once pouring oil and balm into her wounds. 
There is a flush upon her pallid cheek, as he 
tells her that thou art a peer of the realm . a 
lord of the land . that thou wilt have vast 
estates, and stores of gold, and silver, and 
jewels. There is a viscount's coronet (with a 
slight law-suit attached to it, whose expenses 
Mr. Tinctop will gladly pay) waiting for thee 
upstairs. 

Pause, then. nay, speed thee onward if the 
inexorable fates have willed it so. The curse 
of blood-guiltiness is upon thee, and never 
came happiness yet from that title of Bad- 
dington. So he went onward, and the 
shadows of the evening closed up behind him 
like drapery, as he plunged into the maze of 
streets. 



VOL. III. R 



242 



CHAP. XLIX. 

SHADOWS. 

nPHE Christmas bells ring cheerily across 
the lea as I peri these lines; and carts 
laden with misletoe and holly, sparkling and 
blushing with their crimson and milkwhite 
berries . the rubies and pearls of Flora's 
inexhaustible jewel casket . the horses come 
plodding into the frozen town, bowing their 
heads as though they strove to melt the 
icy ruts with the hot blue breath that curls 
from their nostrils; the carters, pipe in 
mouth, and their hands ill defended by 
worsted mits, tucked beneath their smock- 
frocks, jog by the sides of the Christmas 
chariots. The chubby children, with winter 



SHADOWS. 243 

roses in their cheeks for bloom, and tears 
of joy for Christmas that is coming trembling 
in their eye-corners (for I will not have it 
said, that the tears shed for Christmas' sake 
can ever be sorrowful), follow the bough- 
cumbered cart with much hand -clapping and 
shrill hurraying, picking up, by times, stray 
sprigs of evergreen, or begging from good- 
humoured guardians, the earliest morsels of 
misletoe, with which, incontinent, they make 
themselves brave, and sow pleasant tumult 
and disorder in the breasts of little maidens, 
aged eight, by precocious accolades of the 
most Archi-druidical character. Now do the 
jagged streets of country boroughs become 
immoderately gay; now bow-windows, sacred 
during the rest of the year to the whitest 
of dimity curtains (with that peculiar, fluffy, 
cottony, bed-furniture trimming, which only 
country housekeepers seem to know how to 
knit) windows enlivened only by plants be- 
longing to the severer sections of the Lin- 
nasan system, and cages full of canary-birds, 
whose choristry is so decorous, whose bearing 



244 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

is so demure (they never put their heads 
aggressively on one side, nor peck turbulently 
at the sugar -lumps, like some feathered 
roysterers I know) that you might fancy 
they were trilling hymns, and were, them- 
selves, dissenting dicky-birds: now do these 
ordinarily staid and composed casements, 
with panes so bright that the bellman, as he 
cries the lost or stolen puppy-dog, can see 
his red face reflected in the carreaux ; that 
the curate settles his white neckcloth by their 
aid as he passes, and the two Miss Flosses 
give their auburn ringlets a corkscrew twist 
of arrangement, with those impromptu mirrors' 
assistance: . now do the gleaming but sober 
windows, through which the calm counte- 
nances are visible, of starch- capped old ladies, 
busy over lamb's-wool knitting, or killing the 
sunny hours with such light literature as 
" Bogatsky's Golden Treasury," or good 
Doctor Buchan's "Domestic Medicine:" 
windows that sometimes display the bald 
heads, brass buttons, and ample waistcoats 
of the fathers of families, and sometimes the 



SHADOWS. 2 -to 

wicked, impish visage of that animal I loathe 
chiefly among living creatures . a cat . 
slily watching the canary-birds, and indulging 
with Jesuitical patience and pertinacity, for 
months and months together, in the pursuit 
of unlicensed game under difficulties; and 
sometimes the broad, ruddy, shiny face of a 
housemaid, rather bored and dull when the 
family are from home : a placid Mariana, 
in an unmoated grange, and aweary, aweary 
at the perfidy of the journeyman baker who 
cometh not, she says, and wishing devoutly, 
not that she were dead . she enjoys her life 
too thoroughly, the cheery lass ! . but that 
she were married to a corporal of the 
Sappers and Miners : now, for the last time, 
do these windows blaze forth in leaved and 
berried splendour. Xow shall you see ruddy 
reflections (from the great fire whereon the 
chestnuts roast) on the ceiling within. Xow, 
if your ears be sharp enough, may you hear 
the click of knives and forks, and the cheery 
jingle of young voices; and now, at the 
windows themselves, may you see the clus- 



246 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tering vines of happy children's faces, and 
the blooming fig-trees of innumerable pretty- 
female cousins, and other joys and delights 
of Home, that make me sad to think about. 
Lo Christmas is here, and all the Universe is 
glad. 

And I sit before the murky wood-fire in 
the bare gaunt room, in the strange land 
far away, the bellows on my knees, vainly 
blowing to provoke a few Christmas sparks 
from that grey smouldering log. But the 
bellows' nozzle is rebellious, and the leathern- 
stomached wooden-sided fire-compeller will 
give no freshening blow, but only an asth- 
matic wheeze, so I fling the bellows pettishly 
away ; they fall upon the red-tiled floor, and 
a resident echo jars my heartstrings. I draw 
down the iron-veil of the fire-place, and rake 
together the scattered embers; but the fire 
will not draw, and onlv a dull, murkv smoke 
begins to billow forth, and circles round my 
bed. It is twilight in the street at four 
o'clock, this dismal, alien Christmas time, 
and the room is full of shadows. 



SHADOWS. 247 

Shadows of the real, shadows of the un- 
real . shadows of what has been, and never 
will be again; shadows of what has never 
been, and never can come to pass. They 
commingle and blend duskily ; they are trans- 
muted; light gleams for an instant through 
the crepuscule and darker shadows roll, and 
are for ever rolling. Dim shapes loom faintly 
in the maze, wild shapes, indistinct shapes, 
and yet from time to time they bear a mo- 
mentary semblance to the people who have 
flitted across this tremulous panorama of 
mine. Now I seem to know them well, and 
clutch at their individualities. Genevieve, 
Manuelita, Philip, Tinctop, Pollyblank, the 
dead father Falcon, the dead woman, in her 
first bright beauty in the Kentish village: 
they are all here: and now the shadows 
vanquish me again, and there is darkness. 

A meteoric gleam lights up the troubled 
field of view, and shows me a wretched 
chandler's shop in a shabby street, hard by 
the Waterloo Road. The house is full of 
weeping and wailing and bitter lamentations. 



248 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

In a second-floor back-room there is a sick 
woman with a sick child and a knot of 
gossipping harridans . chattering, magging 
crones . who try to console the invalid in 
her dire affliction. And sore need has she 
of consolation, poor soul! For downstairs, 
in the shabby street, there are Bearers . 
bearers with a dreadful burden. It is in 
a species of long and hideous palanquin, 
placed on a stretcher. It is covered with 
some coarse black drapery. It is girt about 
with ropes and straps, and, with its shrouded 
mystery, freezes and appals. See here: the 
woman in the back-room had a husband, one 
Philip Leslie by name, they say . a forlorn 
man who painted scenes for the theatre. He 
went out early two days ago, and returned 
not. Now he is come back. Recognised by 
a police-constable who knew him well by 
sight when living, he was brought from the 
place where they found him, in the river's 
slimy ooze . blue and bruised, in the mud, 
among the rotting timber, and the river's 
ghastly logs. They have brought his dreadful 



SHADOWS. 249 

dead body home . drowned. What good can 
there be in bringing him here? Take him 
away for pity's sake, to the pauper dead- 
house. Here are no shrouds to enwrap him, 
no biers to coffin him, nothing but a w r retched, 
sickly woman to sob over him, while a feeble 
infant wails. Take him away, and bid the 
beadle apprise the coroner (who will not dine 
at Kensington Gore to day, but will spend 
his evening at a lowering little public-house 
in Lambeth Marsh) and summon the jury for 
the inquest. 

Now with eager but unsteady hands, I try 
to tear the veil away, and seek to dispel 
the shadows that gather over the Future of 
the woman and the child. With ear, in which 
heart-pulses beat, I listen, and still listen for 
tidings of Tinctop. I burn to know how he 
has sped in his mission to restore the coronet 
to the rightful heir. All the magging crones 
are busy, telling the widow that her baby is a 
Lord. Ah ! I hear something, but not from 
her, not from them. The landlady of the 
chandler's shop tells one of her gossips that 



230 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the nice-spoken gentleman who was " drove " 
in his brougham, who came to see Mrs. Leslie 
two days since, and waited to see her husband, 
and who left a sovereign with her as he went 
away, promised to return the next day. But 
he has not been back. 

" P'raps he don't mean to come again," 
says the chandler's shopkeeper. 

" P'raps something's happened to him," 
suggests the gossip. 

Why should anything happen to so nicely- 
spoken a gentleman, and one besides, driven 
in his own brougham, as was Mr. Tinctop ? 

I want to know more about that sick woman 
and her child ; but the shadows are obstinate, 
and the voices are mute. It is impossible that 
the woman and child can live. They are so 
ill, so weak, so destitute, so unhappy. I wait 
and wait for Tinctop to return, and for his 
elaborate plot to be at length unravelled ; for 
his scheme of vengeance against Genevieve, 
sometime Viscountess Baddington, to be at 
length brought to consummation. Now I 
strain my eyes to pierce the shadows' gloomiest 



SHADOWS. 251 

gulfs, and seem to discern a crowded court- 
room in which an action of ejectment is being 
tried before the judges of the land. I listen 
to the arguments for Philip Falcon, falsely 
called Leslie, and claiming to be Viscount 
Baddington in the peerage of Great Britain 
and Ireland, by his next friend. Who is his 
next friend, I wonder? . against the Duke 
and Duchess of Minniver. Sergeant Supple 
will be for the plaintiff; Mr. Lingolong, Q.C., 
for the defendants. There will be paragraphs 
in the Sunday newspapers about the case, 
headed " Romance in High Life." What ex- 
citement there will be, when the Duke and 
Duchess have to disgorge 10,000 a-year, and 
the little boy is legally proved to be heir to 
such a princely income ! Surely Tinctop will 
be triumphant. Then will come the great 
Baddington Peerage case before the Committee 
of Privileges of the House of Lords. Supple 
and Lingolong, with cohorts of junior counsel, 
are at it again, tooth and nail. I seem to hear 
their specious arguments pro and con, their 
glib, oily voices, the rustle of their silk robes, 



252 THE BADDIXGTON PEERAGE. 

the yawns of the grey-headed law lords as they 
fidget on their crimson benches. But ah ! the 
pall of shadows falls over the deceptive picture ; 
and in a mist I seem to see a fleeting image 
of a green churchyard and a new-made grave. 
Before Heaven, this is no shadow, but an 
aw T ful Reality. I see two men in earnest con- 
fabulation together in the back-parlour of a 
shop full of extraordinary odds and ends, and 
rags, and rich dresses, in Windmill Street, 
Tottenham Court Road. One of the men is 
bald and shiny headed, is sleek in face and 
sleek in apparel, and has a quiet, cat-like 
appearance in his gestures. The other is a 
big, stout man, with huge black whiskers and 
a loud coarse voice. He is dressed in a showy 
flashy, half-foreign style, and swears a good 
deal when he talks. The sleek bald-headed 
man calls him Jack, and presses pipes and 
spirits on him; but he seems very uneasy in 
his presence, nevertheless, and continually 
wishes that his mother would come home. 
But the individual addressed as Jack tells him 
that he needn't worry himself, for that Mrs. 



shadows. 253 

Tinctop is not coming home just yet, admitting, 
indeed, having resorted to a pious fraud in 
keeping her out of the way, wishing to have 
some quiet and confidential conversation with 
his dear friend Tinctop. He and his dear 
friend Tinctop talk long and eagerly: their 
voices are somewhat sharply pitched. They 
use high words. I am afraid they are going 
to quarrel. Heavens and earth! what was 
that ? A blow. The whiskered man has felled 
his dear friend Tinctop, and has him on the 
encumbered floor, his fingers on his throat, 
his knee on his chest. 

I hear the wretched man who is undermost 
ejaculate something like a prayer for mercy. 

"You wretched half-bred fox-cub you," the 
whiskered man replied savagely, "I'll warm 
your cockles for you, you mangy rat." 

" Mercy! " Tinctop again moans. 

" Connais pas" the whiskered man returns, 
tightening his grasp. " If it was my game to 
spare you, 1 would. What is a man's life to 
me! Bah! that." 

He taps the nail of his forefinger contemp- 



254 THE B ALDINGTON PEERAGE. 

tuously against his front tooth. I hear the 
sharp click now. The victim takes advantage 
of this movement to endeavour to release him- 
self, and to raise a cry for help; but his foe 
had his knee on his chest and his throat in his 
grip. There is a hideous, hellish struggle. 
Then two blows with something blunt, a 
piercing shriek, a faint moan, a gush of a 
crimson fountain, and then a great bloody 
snake begins to wind and welter along the 
floor among the odds and ends. 

14 And now," says Mr. Jack Polly blank, 
rising from the corpse and shaking himself, 
" I hope you're satisfied, my Lady Duchess." 

The shadows are blacker than ever. Blacker, 
blacker. But now suddenly lighted up by a 
creat conflagration. The ladies' wardrobe 
shop in Windmill Street is burnt to the 
ground. The charred trunk of Mr. Tinctop 
is found, scarcely recognisable, in the back 
parlour. There is a coroner's inquest. Ad- 
journed inquiry. There are additional par- 
ticulars and latest details. There is a verdict : 
Accidental Death. 



SHADOWS. 255 

At least, if human justice be not dead and 
buried for ever, there should be another picture 
among the shadows. I should see that grim 
prison of Newgate whither a Lord of Badding- 
ton went once to visit a prisoner accused of 
forgery, and returning thence was stunned, 
and, after lingering a little while, died. I 
should see a man in a condemned cell, into 
whose deaf ears the ordinary pours hopeless 
messages of hope, and who . the callous ruffian 
. when the Sheriffs ask him if he has any last 
request to make, answers that he is much 
obliged, and that he would like a beefsteak 
and onions . shredded fine . for his breakfast 
on Monday morning. I should see that Monday 
morning, the crowds surging against the 
barriers, the windows of the houses alive with 
anxious human faces; I should hear the bell 
of St. Sepulchre's tolling, and the horrid yell 
that greets the man . the murderer, John 
Pollyblank- . as he comes forth by the debtors' 
door to be hanged by the neck until he is 
dead. I should see the white cap drawn over 
his face, sneering and defiant to the last; I 



256 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

should see the halter adjusted and the drop 
fall ; but there are no such things among the 
shadows. Not that the Pollyblank face dis- 
appears entirely from my vision. He is visible 
in an odd, furtive, masquerading manner. A 
form like Pollyblank' s goes backwards and 
forwards, and wanders up and down in many 
and various costumes, the owner always well 
provided with money. Here is the Sovereign 
of a vast empire come to visit a brother poten- 
tate. She lands at Boulogne, on her way to 
Paris. She is received with cannon and 
shouting, and trumpeting and drumming, and 
banner-waving. She passes from her yacht 
to the quay, and along a richly-piled carpet to 
the railway-station. A lane is formed by two 
lines of bowing, liveried, decorated officials. 
Who is that portly gentleman, slightly bald, 
irreproachably white-cravated, and with the 
ribbon of the Legion of Honour . yes, of 
Honour . at his button-hole. He bows the 
lowest, he smiles the silkiest, as the Queen of 
England passes. Is he a chamberlain, a secre- 
tary of legation, a departmental prefect? 



SHADOWS. 257 

Anon I see him again, in Paris, but in a blouse 
and a fur cap, and wearing a huge red beard, 
swaggering about the Boulevards, and yelling, 
u Vive VEmpereur! Vive la Reine !" as a 
royal and imperial cortege passes. I see him 
again when a great crime is being attempted 
in the Rue Lepelletier, opposite the Grand 
Opera, and a carriage is riddled, and an 
Emperor's hat is grazed, and scores of un- 
offending men and women are torn to death 
by fragments of shells that have been cast 
upon the roadway, filled with fulminating 
mercury. Our portly friend, in full evening 
dress this time, and with a crush hat under 
his arm, is very busy on the occasion, and is 
even slightly wounded in the elbow by a 
splinter. Henceforth he carries his arm in a 
sling, and wears an extra ribbon, even as a 
veteran of Napoleon's grand army. I see him 
again at a trial in the English central criminal 
court. A great political prosecution, affecting 
the life of an exile, is going on. This time 
our stout friend, who is a material witness for 

VOL. III. s 



258 THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

the crown, is profoundly ignorant of English. 
He is examined through an interpreter. His 
name is the Chevalier de la Poulemouillee, 
and he listens, with a puzzled air, admirably 
assumed, to the fervent oration of Mr. Edwin 
James. And the last I see and hear of our 
stout friend among the shadows is at another 
trial, a political prosecution also, but in France. 
Again he is examined for the crown, and de- 
poses to having followed about and watched 
the prisoner for months, and made notes of 
actions and conversation. The counsel for 
the defence elicits from him that he has gone 
under many different aliases. " Bah!" testily 
retorts the Procureur Imperial, settling his 
toque on his head, and looking contemptuously 
at the inexperienced young advocate for the 
defence, u Qu' est-ce-que cela fait? Judas, 
Yidocq, Yautrin, Delahodde, Jachimo, Ionides, 
Polly blank . what does it matter?" The 
honourable President knows de qui ce Monsieur 
releve, who are his employers, and whence he 
comes. The honourable President nods his 



SHADOWS. 259 

head in acquiescence ; the honourable witness 
grins; the young advocate for the defence 
blushes and is silent; the Procureur Imperial 
sums up in a chalereuse allocution, and the 
prisoner is found guilty. If the shadows do 
not deceive me, the honourable witness comes 
from the Eue de Jerusalem, and is a spy of 
the secret police. 

The shadows tell me no more ; but I have 
eyes of my own, and can see things as well as 
most people. I saw her Grace the Duchess 
of Minniver looking more beautiful than ever, 
though she is past thirty now, at the Handel 
Festival, at the Crystal Palace. Her enter- 
tainments are also grander than ever ; and they 
say that she is to be the next Mistress of the 
Robes. She has no children. She is a 
Puseyite of the most advanced category ; and 
her piety and benevolence are in everybody's 
mouth. As for Mademoiselle Manuelita, she 
is a premiere danseuse at the San Carlo at 
Naples, and is much protected by the Russian 
legation. On dit, that the secretary, Count 



2 GO THE BADDINGTON PEERAGE. 

Coatoff, is wild after her, They have offered 
her twenty thousand roubles for a three 
months' season in St. Petersburg. Some- 
body might meet her there again some 
day. 



THE END. 
