THE SNOW SHIP. 



CHAPTEE I. 

OUT WEST. 

Fae away ! Far as the eye of man can reach, naught 
meets the view but forest, bush and water, with the 
arctic sun rising warm and genial over broad waves and 
mighty trees. Taking as a centre a small hill, destitute 
of any vegetation, save scanty grass and one stunted oak, 
millions of acres of wood clothe and conceal a soil richly 
fertile, but fresh as from the hands of the Creator, in all 
its wild, gloomy, and naked sublimity ; while on the 
other hand, to the very roots of the trees, the waves of 
a mighty ocean come rolling in. And all is still. The 
voiceless wind, that harmony of time, scarce shakes the 
tree tops or their sighing boughs, while the glass-like 
surface of the water is all but unruffled. Flowers bloom 
beneath, and the air is balmy above. On what sea-shore, 
then, is this huge forest placed ? On no sea-shore, — for 
the vast expanse of water is fresh as the bubbling stream- 
lets, that run to it down the grassy hill sides. 

"Where are we then ? 

In the land of the grizzly bear and plodding beaver, of 
hungry musquitoes, and grey and clumsy moose deer, of 
peach-flavoured snow apples, and mighty lakes and noble 
forests ; a land vast in extent, unsurpassed in riches, of 

1 



2 THE S!N"OW SHIP. 

admirable climate, whether during the summer heats 
when the sun shines warm, or during the winter when 
covered by its white mantle ; a land of sleighs, snow 
shoes and snow ships — in the interior of Canada, that 
brightest jewel in the British crown, whether we con- 
sider its vast extent, its singular suitability to the Anglo- 
Saxon race, its mighty undeveloped resources, or its 
proximity to our own shores. 

Of late the tide of emigration has flowed so rapidly 
towards this richly endowed land, that settling is com- 
paratively easy, while roads, stage coaches, and steamers 
facilitate the progress of the adventurer, who seeks to ex- 
change the hopeless toils of the old land for the bright 
prospects of the new. But forty years ago, the case was 
different, and whoso ventured beyond certain districts, 
had to endure perils and dangers and difficulties and dis- 
appointments, enough to turn any but a brave and un- 
daunted man from the task. 

Forty years ago, the spot to which we have alluded was 
an untravelled wilderness, hundreds of miles from any 
settlement, while not even a bridle path existed through 
the mighty forest of beech, elm, and bass wood, of sugar 
maple, hemlock, cherry, butternut, oak, and birch ; but 
it was blessed with a salubrious climate and a fertile soil, 
watered by crystal springs and brooks, and bathed by a 
mighty inland sea, to the shores of which we will now 
descend. 

Facing the hillock, to which we have already alluded, 
the forest left a narrow opening where the soil was pro- 
bably too arid to admit of the growth of trees, and any 
one standing with his back to the eminence would have 
a good view of the vast lake, which, though wrapped in 
deceitful repose, could at times be lashed into fury, and 



IWB- nW5T. 



exhibit storms that would have done little discredit to 
old ocean itself. 

Many a time and oft, doubtless, the painted Indian 
had here launched his bark canoe, long ere the white man 
came to overthrow his empire ; bixt now, for reasons which 
%ill appear in the course of our narrative, he seldom 
visited this part of his ancient dominions. 

However, had a warrior been on the spot, his 'concep- 
tions of solitude might have been somewhat disturbed, 
for, just as the sun burst warmly through some water 
clouds, the unmistakable echo of the human voice broke 
the stillness of the woods — which before had been, ap- 
parently, a virgin solitude. 

" Pull her into deeper water, Harry," said a voice, 
" one might as well take pails and dip them out. It is 
awfully slow work." 

"And therefore I like it," replied another voice, in a 
methodical tone ; "it is quiet, easy, and profitable." 

" I am rejoiced to hear you say so," laughed the other, 
" so land me. I may fly at higher game." 

" Very well, my dear Ealph ; — but why give yourself 
so much unnecessary trouble ? " 

"Trouble! — why it is the object of life to be ever 
doing. I can't bear your quiet fishing. There's a good 
fellow." 

And as he spoke, a scow — the most primitive boat ever 
invented — came in sight, containing the two speakers. 
The craft was a long-shaped, flat-bottomed kind of punt, 
of the same width all along, but rising gently at each end, 
built of two-inch plank, very much resembling the rafts 
used to ferry horses and vehicles over rivers. 

The craft contained two youths — the elder of whom, 
habited in the ordinary shooting dress of the British isles, 
lewed on his gun, while he gazed with a half-amused, 



4 THE SNOW SHIP. 

half-contemptuous glance at his companion. He was tall, 
erect, with an open and manly countenance, somewhat 
tanned by exposure to the sun, but with an unmistak- 
able air of refinement about him. His companion was 
shorter and stouter, wearing over the somewhat faded 
garb of the old country, the blouse and red cap of the 
Canadian habitant. This youth was about sixteen, and 
having impelled the scow towards the shore, he again 
threw his bait — a piece of brass about the shape and size 
of a tablespoon bowl, with a hook soldered to the nar- 
row end — at which salmon, trout, and black bass caught 
eagerly, the troller quietly taking one about every five 
minutes. 

The elder brother, for such was their relationship, 
having leaped ashore, the younger put out again, and 
once more casting his trolling line, he again paddled the 
heavy scow into deep water. The other, smiling, looked 
about him, and was preparing for a start towards the 
woods, when a sound fell on his ear which made his whole 
face become radiant with delight. 

" Keep to the right, Harry, out of sight," he said, in a 
loud whisper, which was heard plainer on the placid 
waters than a cry. 

"Ay, ay," said the phlegmatic Harry, but without 
hurrying himself to comply with the other's wishes. 

Nothing more passed, for Ealph at once entered be- 
neath the shelter of the forest, and stooping down, con- 
cealed himself in the deep hollow of a button-tree. 
"What had startled Ealph was a sudden cry in the woods, 
or rather from the slope of a hill at some distance, a wild 
and unearthly din with which he was well acquainted. 

A pack of hungry wolves were in full chase of a deer ; 
and as he well knew that the animal would instinctively 
take to the water, and this open space showed signs of an 



OUT WEST. 5 

old deer path, there was every chance not only of the 
fierce animals being baulked of their prey, but also of its 
becoming his prize. The young man's heart beat wildly. 
During the short space of time he had been in Canada, 
he had used his English practice to advantage, shooting 
ample stores of smaller game, but this was his first deer. 

He had not long to wait. Soon he saw the head and 
horns of a large buck rising over the hill, and next 
moment it came dashing down the slope right for the 
water, followed by the ravenous wolves, which were close 
upon its heels. Ealph, though his heart was thumping 
against his breast with emotion, took steady aim, and 
fired at the fore shoulder just as the animal passed. The 
deer halted not a moment, but bounded even more 
rapidly on towards the placid waters. Not so the wolves, 
which halted, stood still, showed their white-pointed 
teeth, and seemed about to attack the young hunter. 
Hastily loading, he gave the pack both barrels, and then 
rushing towards them, fired a brace of horse pistols into 
their midst. This was too much for the cowardly animals, 
so they turned tail and fled.. 

Ealph now directed his attention towards the deer, 
which after seeking refuge from its four-footed enemies, 
in the deep waters of the lake, was slowly swimming 
ashore, the wavelets all around it tingecT with eddies of 
blood. Eainter and fainter grew its efforts, until just as 
it reached the land it fell on its fore-knees, cast one look' 
as of reproach, at the young hunter, and lay dead. 

With difficulty, Ealph drew his prize to a dry place, 
and then stood still to contemplate, with feelings which 
can scarcely be described, but may be understood, the 
first buck he had ever killed. On examination after- 
wards, it proved that a ball and five buck-shot had pene- 
trated the body, one even entering the heart: but it is 



6 THE SNOW SHIP. 

almost incredible the distance this animal will run after 
being mortally wounded. 

" What a mighty heap of flesh," said the voice of his 
brother, awakening Ealph from a reverie which had 
lasted at least a quarter of an hour ; " who's going to 
farry it ? " 

" We are, to be sure," laughed Ealph, recovering him- 
self, " so lend a hand. It is lucky father made me take a 
few lessons in butchering, or else this Avould prove but 
sorry game. We can cut off a leg, and that, with some 
of your salmon-trout, will make a grand breakfast. The 
rest we can leave in the scow. Come, bear a hand, old 
fellow, or the wolves will be ready to eat us." 

And hastily pulling a long bright knife from its sheath, 
he began to cut up the deer in quite a scientific manner, 
a task in which his phlegmatic brother assisted him with 
apparent reluctance. 

While this duty is being performed, we shall take the 
opportunity to explain how two evidently well-educated 
youths found themselves thus on the very uttermost 
skirts of civilization ; on a spot where never before had 
the foot of white man trodden, and which for ages had 
been the battle-ground of the painted and remorseless 
savage, as well as the retreat of the prowling panther 
and the bear. 

Ealph and Henry were the sons of a gentleman farmer, 
the younger off-shoot of a noble house, too proud to see 
him work for his bread, too extravagant and selfish to 
assist him in the world. Early in life Mr. Hatfield bad 
married the daughter of a neighbour, who was one of his 
uncle's tenants. This lady was remarkable as much for 
her good sense as for her beauty, and brought her hus- 
band as a dowry, her industry, cheerfulness, and gentle 
affection. From that moment his noble relations cut 



SSI . wsar. 7 

him off from the parent-tree, and, not content with this, 
commenced a secret persecution, in the hope of driving 
him from the county where he was known. 

But Mr. Hatfield was brave, firm, and fortified by a 
sense of right, supported by deep religious principles, 
which had been instilled into him by his pious and de- 
voted young wife. He therefore continued on his way 
utterly indifferent to all petty annoyances, and even to 
the painful voice of calumny. Three children were born 
to him, all sons. The eldest selected his father's occu- 
pation, unless, indeed, fortune should favour him enough 
to open the way to the army. His relatives would gladly 
have given him a cominissioa, but he would owe nothing 
to them. Henry, the second son, of a somewhat slow 
nature, but shrewd and studious, passionately fond of 
books and angling, was placed in a solicitor's office, 
though with an ultimate view to the bar. 

John was but a child of eight when the circumstances 
occurred to which we now refer. 

Instead of dissipating his small patrimony when he 
came of age, Mr. Hatfield married a farmer's daughter and 
took the farm off his father-in-law's hands, thus becom- 
ing his uncle's tenant. Had he spent his money in 
fashionable riot, broken Susan's heart, and turned out a 
model rake, not a word would have been said against 
him. It was his prudent resort to labour which ruined 
him with his friends. 

His uncle died suddenly, just as the lease expired, and 
Hatfield found himself at the mercy of a coarse, bloated, 
fox-hunting cousin, who hated him, all the more that in 
days gone by he had dared to look at Susan with a 
favourable eye. Hatfield's next neighbour was perhaps 
the most perfect specimen of a heavy agriculturist that 
the good old days could have ever produced. He had 



8 THE SNOW SHIP. 

not an atom of intelligence beyond money-making; 
knew the value of wheat and oats and sheep to a penny, 
and made the corn laws his god. In everything else he 
was an ignorant stupid boor. 

This man one day, in a most offensive manner, sud- 
denly informed Hatfield, chuckling all the while, that he 
had taken his farm over his head, and that he gave him a 
week to move. Words ensued, the neighbour was grossly 
insulting, Hatfield dealt him one blow, followed by a sound 
drubbing, and then the stout and surly brute, falling on 
a stone, lay for a short time as if dead. The cousin now 
came on the scene. He knew Hatfield's sensitive dislike 
of publicity. The matter he said had better be hushed 
up, and the farm transferred to the neighbour ; and that 
his cousin might remove with his family elsewhere, after 
taking the purchase-money, and a thousand pounds left 
by his uncle, of which Hatfield had not yet heard. 

"Not in this country," he said, sternly, and he kept 
his word, becoming from that moment a most reserved 
man, to whom the sight of any but his own family was 
hateful. 

Canada was then popular. Many retired officers in 
the army, with families, and too poor to live in England, 
had there found a happy home. True, it had its perils 
and its dangers, but none of these were likely to daunt 
Hatfield. Summoning his family around him, he called 
them all to his councils, and laid the whole state of the 
case before them. 

Mrs. Hatfield soon saw that he had set his heart on 
going, and like a good and faithful wife, she at once gave 
her vote in favour of the project. Ealph, who had heard 
much of the variety and quantity of game in the promised 
land, was enthusiastic in furthering his father's views • 
while Henry, though heaving a sigh at his removal from 



OFT WEST. 9 

Lis peculiar field of study, manfully plucked up his spirits 
at the sight of his father's troubles, and after a brief inward 
struggle agreed to go. No sooner had he made this re- 
solve than a recollection of the wondrous abundance of 
fish in Canadian waters, almost reconciled him to this 
sudden change in his fortunes. 

The family had always been so thoroughly united that 
no one thought of a separation. 

Mr. Hatfield, in his leisure hours, had made the colony 
his special study. Under other circumstances, he would 
have hired or bought a lot near the settlements ; but the 
conduct of his immediate neighbour had inflicted a blow 
from which he felt he should not soon recover. A kind 
of quiet but settled misanthropy had fixed upon his soul, 
not making him crabbed, disagreeable, or selfish, but 
creating a desire for solitude, except as regarded his own 
family. 

Ever careful, the father transmitted the bulk of hia 
money to a banker in Canada, retaining only enough to 
pay the family passage and provide such necessaries as 
were best procurable in England. This done, the exiles 
embarked on board a ship on a timber voyage to Quebec. 
It was late in the year, so that they experienced very 
rough weather, with snow and sleet ; and by the shifting 
of the cargo a plank started, and the leak was only stop- 
ped when nearly every particle of food was destroyed, 
Eor four days and four nights their sufferings were fear- 
ful ; but at length, the gale abating, they landed in 
Quebec, five as forlorn-looking wretches as ever emigra- 
tion cast upon the hospitable shores of Canada. 

But theirs were brave hearts, and nothing daunted by 
the sufferings they had endured, no sooner was the winter 
over than the whole party started towards the interior, 
with the intention of selecting a spot for a permanent 



10 THE SNOW SHIP. 

residence, and preparing it to a certain extent ere they 
expended any money in stock. The first part of their 
journey was performed by water, but, when once landed, 
they were obliged to travel, first through partially 
cleared and occupied lands, then through the wild bush 
and dense forest. Hatfield, while staying in Quebec, 
had associated much with an old trapper, himself a 
wanderer and fond of solitude, and this man, discover- 
ing the Englishman to be made of congenial stuff, had 
pointed out a spot on the map where they would find 
grass, wood, and water, the three great requisites of an 
emigrant. 

The whole store and outfit of our adventurers con- 
sisted of a narrow cart on two wheels, drawn by a stout 
and patient ox, some bags of biscuit, coffee, sugar, with a 
box of indispensable tools, some kitchen and other uten- 
sils ; with these the cart was loaded, and upon it, when 
practicable, sat Mrs. Hatfield and her little boy. Each 
of the others carried a haversack, had a gun slung behind, 
while a. huge axe rested on the shoulder ready for action. 
As long as they had not reached the confines of civiliza- 
tion, the way, though rude, was practicable. The roads 
and bridle paths, which we shall have ample opportunities 
of describing more minutely, enabled them to advance, 
though slowly, yet with certainty. 

But the day came when they entered the pathless 
forest, with no guide but a pocket compass and the stars. 

The order of march was now as follows. Mr. Hatfield, 
selecting as open a place between the trees as possible, 
would glance his eye at his compass, then picking out a 
tree as far off in as direct a line as possible, would walk 
straight to it, clearing obvious obstructions by the way 
with his axe, his two elder sons following close ahead of 



OUT WEST. 11 

the ox to remove minor ones, and so on from early morn 
to dewy eve. 

At times much progress was made in a day, while on 
others not a mile of ground was crossed. Courage and 
perseverance however prevailed, and at the end of two 
months from leaving Quebec, they reached the shores of 
the great fresh-water sea, wearied, exhausted, footsore, 
but full of hope, of thankfulness, of wonder, not unmixed 
with admiration at the vast sublimity of the scene which 
lay before them. 

Mr. Hatfield was too experienced a man to rush at 
once to a conclusion. He knew that success depended 
on his selecting a good location, not too far from the 
water, where the land was rich, and oak, ash, elm, beech, 
bass wood, and sugar maple abounded. It was too late 
in the season to sow to any advantage. He decided, 
therefore, to erect a shanty, clear as much land as pos- 
sible, ready for the plough, and then return to the settle- 
ments ere the winter set in. In the spring they would 
come up with their stores and finally settle. 

The spot selected was a natural clearing or beaver 
meadow — a field of some twenty acres, left by these in- 
genious animals, whose dam, however, had long since 
been broken through and destroyed. To the north was 
a grove of pines, while round the whole clearing was a 
close belt of timber, growing thinner, however, outwards, 
until it was so sparsely treed as to be separated from the 
general forest. 

The shanty was erected close to the pine grove. It is 
the rudest kind of dwelling known in 1hp> wouds, and in 
this instance wan composed simply of upright posts stuck 
into th© ground and bound together with wooden spikes 
and withes, while the roof, slanting from the higher side # 



12 THE SNOW SHIP. 

was hastily and rudely formed of poles, boughs, and 
prairie grass. 

There was no help for it but to subsist on fish and 
game, sparing their biscuits and floiir as much as pos- 
sible ; but as Hatfield and his two elder sons were expert 
fowlers and anglers, this was no great trouble. The next 
thing was to commence clearing. This, to a new-comer, 
was work far harder than they could possibly have con- 
ceived. Chopping down trees may sound very easy, but 
Mr. Hatfield and his sons soon discovered that it was an 
art in itself to wield the axe, while in the summer months 
the task was fearfully laborious, especially as during that 
season the musquitoes and black flies were a terrible 
nuisance. 

Of the severity of this species of labour, no one unac- 
quainted with the difficulty of clearing the bark can form 
any accurate conception. Felling the trees, however, 
forms the least part of it. When they are down, they of 
course cannot, with the scanty resources of the emigrant, 
be removed, but must be sawn and cut up into convenient 
blocks for removal or burning. This done, the hardest 
work has to follow. In such forests as these, the roots 
of the giant trees have been spreading underground for 
ages, forming a close and perfect network some eight or 
ten feet beneath the surface. To dig up the mass of 
interlaced roots would defy the strength and patience of 
ordinary men ; and it is only the wonderful dexterity of 
the Canadian — and, indeed, of the American generally — 
in handling his axe, that enables him to enter upon, far 
less accomplish, so difficult a task. Their dexterity is 
indeed truly remarkable. Three men have been seen — 
one without a right arm — to fell a tree four feet in 
diameter in three quarters of an hour. This at first sight 
may appear no very formidable feat ; but, after a few 



OUT "WEST. 13 

days' trial, the tremendous difficulties of such an under- 
taking will begin to loom upon the amateur backwoods- 
man. Not many years ago, an officer of Marines 
quartered in Canada, who thought himself, and who 
really was, no contemptible axeman, undertook for a wager 
to fell a certain tree, some three feet in diameter, in a 
week. He made certain of winning, and commenced 
work in the most sanguine spirits ; but the end of three 
days found his hands blistered painfully, and the tree as 
upright, and almost uninjured, as before. At the ex- 
piration of the time agreed on, another week was given 
him, and still the monarch of the wood held his head 
erect. The story went abroad — this of course after the 
bet was lost — that he was found one night turning out 
some of his men to take a sly chop at the tree in the 
dark. Such is emigrants' work. 

But our adventurers had come out to work, and at it 
they went with a will. At daybreak they were up, and 
every second morning two started in search of fish or 
game, which, being abundant, they never failed to cap- 
ture in sufficient quantities. This dispensation of Provi- 
dence makes Canada one of the safest resorts for the 
hardy and determined settler. Like all other colonies, it 
is no place for idlers or fine gentlemen. Men and women 
must both go prepared to work with great determination 
and energy. 

At the back of the pine grove Mr. Hatfield had dis- 
covered a lot of about forty acres, which seemed to be 
suitable land. It was, it is true, densely covered by 
large trees ; but this is the case in every good farm ; the 
beaver meadow, with its high grass and bushes, being 
only fit for the ox to pasture on. 

These three English-born emigrants, nurtured in com- 
fort, and for whom labourers had done the heavy work of 



14 THE SNOW SHIP. 

farming in England, now began their labour steadily, re- 
solutely, and with a determination never to give up. 
They knew that the trees must come down, and when 
down, that they must be burnt. They were also well 
aware that the stumps must be endured for years, until 
they rotted, were gradually burned, or removed in other 
ways, that will be fully explained as we proceed. 

Mr. Hatfield, Ralph, and Harry began, then, one July 
morning when the sun was hotter than in England at the 
same time. The task at once appeared to them in all its 
herculean magnitude. Ere the sun had half risen to its 
meridian, they were scarcely able to work from actual 
languor ; but all persevered until mid-day, when, with a 
sigh of relief, they rushed beneath the shadow of the 
trees, to seek shelter and refreshment. Eor several days 
after, though continuing resolutely, they were stiff and 
in pain ; this feeling, however, gradually wore off, though 
the work done was for a long time very indifferent. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Hatfield and John were not idle. 
As soon as a tree was down, and certain branches chop- 
ped off, the ox was harnessed to it, and the log drawn 
away towards a pile at the end of the clearing, which pile 
was, when the boughs were dried in the sun, fired and 
burned. "What in other lands is a source of boundless 
wealth, is here destroyed as a thing without value — 
indeed, a nuisance. 

Such was the state of things on the morning to which 
we have already referred in the opening parij of our nar- 
rative. 



15 
CHAPTEE II. 

A FOREST ON FIKE. 

No sooner had Ralph cut such a joint as seemed suitable 
to the wants of the family for the day, placed the rest in 
the scow, and sent it afloat in the lake, anchoring it by 
means of a heavy stone and a long rope, than he took up 
his gun, slung the venison on his back, and, followed by 
Harry with a load of fine fish, started on his way borne, 
where their return, he knew, was impatiently expected. 
Their path was across the hillock already mentioned, and 
when its summit was reached Ralph again halted — he had 
done so dozens of times — to admire the beauty of the 
prospect before him. 

To his left, slumbering in its might, was the silvery 
lake ; while far as the eye could reach, north, east, south, 
waved the tall and varied tree-tops of that mighty forest,, 
which, doubtless, had been growing up and dying away 
again to renew the vigour of the soil, since the days when 
the great earth was prepared for the residence of man. 

At the distance of a little more than a mile could be 
seen the small clearing or beaver meadow, where the 
family shanty stood, marked by its spiral column of blue 
smoke, in striking contrast to the black vaporous cloud 
which rose from the stump clearing, where the huge half- 
green logs and boughs were smouldering away. 

" This is the country for a man to live in," said Ralph, 
striking the butt-end of his gun upon the sward ; " it is 
grand. No petty restrictions of hedges, ditches, or game 
laws. Here, in the sight of heaven, we are free to roam, 
to shoot, to fish, to live and carve cut our fortunes, un- 
controlled by man." 

" It's very well and very fine," said Harry, quietly § 



16 THE SNOW SHIP. 

" but hedges and ditches are excellent boundaries of pro- 
perty, which otherwise might give us lawyers more occu- 
pation than it does now. Free shooting and fishing is 
all very well, but the day will come when that will be as 
impossible here as in England." 

" Heaven forbid ! " cried Ralph, drawing a long breath; 
" I am no misanthrope, but 'tis a glorious feeling to know 
that in these vast solitudes we are unrestrained by con- 
ventionalities and customs ; that all we see before us we 
are free to use as we will — wood, water, game, the beasts 
of the field, and the fowls of the air." 

"Until Government finds us out and makes us pay 
rent and taxes," added Harry, slily. 

" That will be a long time hence, when, perhaps, old 
and sobered down, I may be glad to pay for its pro- 
tection. But come on, Harry, I am getting fearfully 
hungry." 

" Hist," cried Harry, who on an emergency would 
always show an amount of energy that astonished his 
more even-tempered brother ; " look yonder ! " 

Before we record Ralph's reply, we may here mention 
that the season had been unusually dry, not a drop of 
rain having fallen for more than a month, so that the 
trees were far less moist than usual, while the grass was 
dry and inflammable as tinder ; besides which, the broken 
underwood, vegetable substances, fallen branches, bark 
and withered trees, formed admirable conductors. The 
settlers, too, from want of experience, had not sufficiently 
isolated their log-heaps. 

" The clearing is on fire ! " cried Ralph, standing for a 
moment utterly helpless and dumb-founded. 

No one in this country, even those who have witnessed 
some of the fearful conflagrations that sometimes de- 
solate London streets, can form any idea of the fury and 



A FOREST OK FIBE. 17 

rapidity with which fires rage through the vast forests of 
America during a dry, hot season, when the carelessness 
of a settler, or the malicious recklessness of a camper- 
out, has once set a thicket in a blaze. In clearing land, 
much brushwood and lops of trees are cast about, and 
when the weather is hot and dry, with a brisk wind, the 
fire will run along the grass and dry leaves with incon- 
ceivable rapidity. 

"When Harry cried out and drew his brother's atten- 
tion — which was, indeed, needless — he had been startled 
by an extraordinary roaring in the woods, something like 
the crashing, crackling detonation of distant and incessant 
thunder, followed by the uprising of a huge column of 
black and vaporous smoke, to which succeeded, in an 
instant, one vast blaze, the flames ascending straight to 
the sky, a hundred feet and more above the tops of the 
tallest trees. 

They knew at once that the fire was upon their own 
clearing, and for a moment they felt not only no appre- 
hension, but a belief that the devouring element would 
do their work for them. But next instant a faint breeze 
rose, the lake waters were rippled, the tall tree-tops waved 
majestically, and the lurid flames came rolling on towards 
the pine grove in red-hot billows, surmounted by a canopy 
of black, pitchy, sulphurous smoke that overshadowed 
the sky. 

On! on! with a rapidity scarcely to be conceived, spread 
the fearful conflagration, fed at every step by fresh com- 
bustible auxiliaries in the shape of trees, whose trunks, 
bark, and leaves contained vast quantities of inflammable 
resin. Scarcely less quickly did the two youths, now 
seriously alarmed, cast away game, fish, — all save their 
arms and their hunting knives, — and rush with bounding 
steps that emulated the gait of aboriginal settlers. 

2 



18 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The belt of timber that surrounded the clearing was, 
we have already remarked, itself surrounded by an open 
circle — this arising from a simple cause as yet wholly a 
secret to the inexperienced settlers — where, though the 
forest once had been, no trees now grew, save that from 
a mass of decaying vegetable matter young shoots began 
to spring up, giving promise of future maturity. Towards 
this space it was that the two bold and adventurous 
youths hurried, desolation already chilling their hearts, 
for now, like a flash of lightning, the conviction came to 
their minds that the shanty was too near the pine wood. 

Hurrying on with all the agility of youth, and that 
speed which anxiety for others will lend to the human 
frame, they were soon close to the open belt, when, to 
their inexpressible horror and grief, they saw the clear, 
liquid, forked flames playing on the moss and bark of 
the timbered circle, next instant to rise with a rush aud 
a roar upwards, until every leaf and bough was on 
fire. 

Still the trunks were free from fire, and with undaunted 
hearts, the two brave boys rushed beneath the arches 
of burning branches, when, with a crackling roar as of 
desultory musket-shooting, and a rush as of a blast fur- 
nace, the underbrush caught, and drove them back 
blackened, breathless to the open ground. Defeated at 
this point, they at once hurried to another, but every- 
where in vain — trees, grass, bushes, were all kindled, 
and the whole beaver prairie or meadow was encircled 
by a wall of fierce red fiery flame, charred stumps, and 
dense, black, choking smoke. 

"To the stream ! " cried Ralph, fiercely. 

Harry made no reply. These sluggish natures, once 
roused, are terrible for good or evil. With him, all sign 
of sloth and indolence had vanished. He was now the 



A FOREST OK FIRE. 19 

undaunted soldier who would as readily have charged a 
battery of a hundred guns, as have leaped a dike. He 
knew what his brother meant, and wasted no time in 
words. 

On the northern side of the beaver meadow was the 
stream which, previous to the destruction of the beaver 
dam by the redskins, had been the centre of their village. 
It had flashed across the mind of Ealph that they might 
fight their way up this watery path to the vicinity of the 
shanty, and thus discover what had become of their parents 
and younger brother. 

The stream was neither very wide nor very deep, so 
that it was arched over not only by boughs, but by 
parasitical plants, which, just as they reached the vicinity 
of its mouth, were being caught by the curling flames. 
Nothing daunted, they placed their guns and powder in 
a safe place, and stooping low, began to ascend the 
stream, casting glances of deep anxiety overhead, where 
the yellow dancing flames were lapping up the vital sap 
of the trees, and showering every instant a whole volley 
of sparks on their devoted heads. Still on they went, 
though scorched by fire and choked by smoke, until, 
about a hundred feet from the mouth, the crashing fall 
of several withered trees just in front, warned them that 
they could penetrate no farther, but rather to beat a pre- 
cipitate retreat, ere such an accident happening in their 
rear should consign them to certain death. 

The feelings of the young men, cut off from all know- 
ledge of the fate of their relatives, their minds full of 
mysterious dread and terror, alternately racked and 
harassed by doubt and elevated by hope, may now be 
said to have reached a pitch of intensity which could 
scarcely be surpassed. Not that they utterly despaired. 
They knew the calm courage and fertility of invention 



20 THE S2T0W SHIP. 

■which characterized their father, while they entertained 
a faint hope in their inmost hearts as to the centre of 
the beaver meadow being a safe though unpleasant 
retreat. They resolved, then, not utterly to despond, 
but to be ready fdr any emergency that might occur. 

Their first task was to make for the rear of the flames, 
to the clearing whence the conflagration had started, in 
the hope of following up the track of the fire ; but they 
found that though the underbrush and limbs of the trees 
were all consumed, and the wood presented only a mass 
of blackened poles, they were still on fire, while the 
ground was red-hot and utterly impassable. 

Nothing remained to them but to wait patiently. It 
was not clear that the flames would extend across the 
open circle, unless, indeed, the wind rose still higher, 
when whole sheaves of fire would be carried bodily 
through the air ; and then such a disaster as once before 
occurred might again take place, when a conflagration 
raged until it had destroyed a region of forest one 
hundred and forty miles in extent and sixty miles in 
width. 

Eetracing their steps, and again shouldering their 
guns, the two young men, in moody silence, exhausted, 
wearied, and faint, strode from the sickening neighbour- 
hood of the fire to the mound, where, nature asserting 
its rights, they cooked and ate that food which was so 
necessary to support their sinking frames, but from 
which, despite their hunger, their stomachs almost re- 
volted, so powerful is the influence exercised by the 
mind over the body. 

Then they sat upon the sward, their chins resting on 
their knees, around which their arms were clasped • 
watching the huge furnace, that seethed and blazed, and 
crackled and smoked at their feet, like the mouth of 



A EOBEST OK ELBE. 21 

some mighty volcano, whose crater vomited forth fire 
and flame for the first time after ages of quiet and 
repose. Now it seemed to smoulder, as the wind abated ; 
but the burning pile itself rarefying the atmosphere, 
kept up a breeze, which every now and then fanned the 
smouldering mass into fresh bursts of fire. 

And thus the weary day passed, and night fell upon 
the scene, which now assumed an air perfectly hellish. 
The dreary night, the lurid, curling flames, the heavy 
clouds of white and black smoke, the sparks that flew 
upwards, the roaring of the fiery furnace, the hissing of 
the sap in the huge trunks, all presented to the senses 
of sight and hearing a scene and Bounds never to be 
forgotten by the beholder. 

All the afternoon the heat had been intense, irrespec- 
tive of the fire, and both the boys had cast earnest and 
almost imploring glances at the sky, in the hope that 
the heavens would send forth a deluge, and thus assist 
in extinguishing the flames. But not a sign could they 
see of tears in that dry, arid, and sultry-looking sky, 
until just before night-fall some huge, double-headed 
thunder clouds showed themselves on the edge of the 
horizon, rising, as it were, out of the still waters of the 
lake in a north-westerly direction. 

About an hour after sun-down, the distant and rumbling 
growl of the thunder itself warned them to seek some 
kind of shelter. 

" Let us go to the scow," said Ralph, earnestly but 
hoarsely ; " we can do no good here." 

Harry followed with downcast looks. Neither dared 
venture an opinion as to the fate of those dear ones who, 
it was quite clear, were, dead or alive, within the awful 
circle of fire, which yet lay before them in all its horrors. 
The scow was hauled in, a tarpaulin sackcloth, which had 



22 THE SNOW SHIP. 

served to cover their cart during the journey, was cast 
over a cross pole which rested on two short upright 
posts, and then preparations were made for the night. 

Neither thought of sleeping ; but, seatgd side by side, 
with arms entwined around waist and neck as in more 
boyish days, the two sad brothers awaited the coming 
storm and the next day. The scow was anchored stem 
and stern in a shallow pool behind a spit of land, so that, 
come what might, they were comparatively safe. 

About twenty minutes passed, and then, with a rush 
that for a moment rocked the flat boat, a nor'-wester 
was upon them, accompanied by lightning, which soon 
became incessant. Clap after clap of thunder seemed to 
shake the zenith, while the huge sheets of lightning 
seemed to reveal the approach of advancing piles of 
mountains, — the dark clouds that carried the storm with- 
in their centre. Every moment the storm increased in 
grandeur, until at length its wild fury was perfectly awful. 

And not one drop of rain. 

Then suddenly an appalling and blinding flash was 
followed by a succession of fearful and deafening peals, 
that rolled off in tremulous shocks one after another in- 
to the distance, only to be taken up by fresh crashes of 
thunder overhead. Then came the blast howling along, 
and the heavy fall of huge monarchs of the forest soon 
proclaimed its power. 

Then a lull, and along the waters the whispering patter, 
as of tiny feet on soft sand beach — a moment later, the 
sound of heavy rain drops, and then the sluices of heaven 
were opened, and rain, such as is known only where huge 
masses of water are surrounded by mighty forests, fell, 
driving the two lads to the extremity of the scow, where 
they cowered, helpless, cold, and utterly prostrate with 
anxiety and fatigue. 



A FOKEST OS FIEE. 23 

How long this lasted they never knew ; for with the 
rain, the thunder, and the wind dying away, they fell 
into a deep sleep, from which they only awoke when the 
sun shone warmly from a hlue and placid sky. But the 
lake was white with foam, kept up by a steady breeze — 
for that they cared not — their thoughts took in only one 
leading idea. The fire was nearly out, and nothing rose 
to the sky but eolumns of smoke from damp and smoulder- 
ing piles. 

Eagerly they rushed forward until they reached the 
confines of the fire ; when, to their delight, they found 
that, though several trees still smoked and smouldered, 
the torrents of water which had fallen during the night 
had so cooled the ground, that they easily made their 
way through the blackened poles and over the piles of 
ashes and charcoal that strewed their path. 

"We have all felt a peculiar sensation on entering 
within the confines of a venerable church-yard, sacred to 
the dust of ages. The voice is hushed, the thoughts 
subdued, the very foot falls lightly on the soil beneath 
which moulder the bones of our ancestors. Some such 
feeling came over the two boys, as they entered within 
the blackened precincts of the clearing ; which itself 
had evidently suffered the whole force of the devastating 
and remorseless fire. 

Every blade of grass, every bush had been licked up by 
the cruel flames, while the shanty was a mere blackened 
ruin, of which only a few of the stouter poles remained. 
The brothers dared not exchange glances, their eyes 
would have said too much ; dared not speak, their 
bosoms were too full for words ; until at last, hand in 
hand, pale, ghastly, with a shiver \hat shot like an ice- 
bolt from crown to heel, they entered the ruined dwell- 
ing, glancing fearfully around. No sign. 



24 THE SNOW SHIP. 

'/Fatter! mother! brother!" they shouted, by one 
common impulse, " if any be spared unto us— speak, in 
the name of mercy ! " 

A muffled sound, scarcely audible, made them both 
start, and then, with a cry of delight and wonder, rush 
towards the stream, whence at the same time rose first 
the haggard, blackened face of their boy brother, followed 
by those of their father and mother. In another instant 
they were all united, and for ten minutes, broken words, 
half sentences, cries of joy, embraces, precluded all ex- 
planations. 

It was simple. They were surprised by the fire so 
rapidly that none could hope to retreat. Mr. Hatfield 
then at once looked out for a place of safety. Only one 
presented itself. Below where the beaver dam had been, 
the stream was narrow, with high banks. As this was 
their usual way to the clearing, Ralph and Harry had one 
day taken it into their heads to throw a bridge of solid 
logs across, at least ten feet wide. To enable the ox and 
cart the more easily to traverse it, they had laid a layer 
of twigs and then a thick crust of clay and earth, thus 
making an excellent road. 

Beneath this shelter their father had rushed with his 
wife and child, and there had passed the weary hours 
until the presence of his elder sons assured him that 
danger was over. 

Their sufferings had been great. The heat at times 
was intense, especially when burning brands fell on all 
sides into the water. They were, on several occasions 
nearly choked with steam and smoke ; but, sometimes in 
the water, sometimes on a narrow ledge of land, thej 
contrived to pass the weary hours, with no sustenance 
but a few biscuits, which Jack fortunately had in hig 
pocket, and an occasional draught of water. Their firsl 



A NIGHT ENGAGEMENT. 25 

glimpse of hope was in the storm ; while the reason of 
their not being afoot earlier, arose from the fact that 
while Jack had fallen asleep on his mother's lap she had 
done the same on her husband's shoulder, so utterly ex- 
hausted were they by their long and weary vigil. 

"And now," cried the father, earnestly, ".unto God 
let us return thanks for all his mercies. We are once 
more united, and have learned a lesson we shall never 
forget ! " 

Surrounded by so much desolation, and with a wife 
and children dependant on him, Mr, Hatfield's position 
was most trying. 



CHAPTEB III. 

A NIGHT ENGAGEMENT. 

Ail those pictures of emigrant life which depict the 
early career of a settler in roseate colours, are false and 
injurious. The establishment of a new home in a wild, 
savage land, teeming, it may be, with wealth, though 
still in a crude, amorphous state, must be difficult ; while 
many who have undertaken the burden with neither 
bodies nor minds qualified for the task, have suffered 
utter failure. This was more true then than now, when 
roads, railways, and canals afford facilities of which the 
early colonists never dreamed. 

Any one with less courage and perseverance would 
have given up all hope, and, as many have done before, 
would have turned his back on those blackened rafters 
and smouldering acres of forests, and abandoned the 
spot for ever. Such has too often been the hasty re- 
solve of the over sanguine emigrant, who, having ex- 
pected to succeed at once, and not doing so, has hastily 
returned to his former home. 



26 THE SNOW SHIP, 

Collecting together a few necessaries, carefully conceal- 
ing the heavier tools, and, after some search discovering 
their ox, the patient animal was once more harnessed to 
the cart, and the return march entered upon. They had 
resolved to winter in Montreal, and early in the spring, 
to start with more experience and means, again to com- 
mence the battle of life. 

"Father," said Harry, as they reached the outer edge 
of the conflagration, " I have several times reflected as to 
the causes of this strange circle which isolates us, as it 
were, from the rest of the wood. Can you explain it?" 

" I do not believe, my son, that I can offer any ex- 
planation, but while examining it, I have several times 
thought of the sayings of travellers in these woods. One 
in particular, alluding to a fearful tornado, had observed 
with surprise that the fallen trees were twisted off at the 
stumps, and formed circular and wide roads in the forests. 
The explanation of these phenomena I leave to wiser 
heads than mine." 

The sons listened attentively, unable themselves to 
comprehend that which is now no mystery, since it is 
proved that all wind storms move in a circular direction ; 
and the nearer the centre, the more violent the wind. 

The journey to Montreal, about three hundred miles, 
was safely accomplished ; half by land, half by water. 
Their quarters were taken up in a cheap house, and their 
time was chiefly occupied in laying plans for the future, 
in studying the experiences of former settlers, and in 
preparations for the campaign ; varied with an occasional 
sledge party, in which the young people took great de- 
light, enhanced by the pleasant reflection that soon they 
would enjoy the luxury of travelling in these favourite 
vehicles on their own settlement. 

It is well known that this peculiar mode of conveyance, 



A NIGHT ENGAGEMENT. 27 

more than anything else, reconciles the Canadian farmer 
to what is called the rigour of the climate, which, how- 
ever, if it has hard frosts and deep snow, has brilliant 
skies, without sleet, fog, or damp. Many, even now, re- 
gret the diminution of cold produced by felling the trees, 
and look back with a sigh to the old four months of snow, 
when every field, meadow, and plain was a kind of 
macadamized road. 

Before the winter was quite over, the whole party was 
once more ready to enter upon the almost pathless wilder- 
ness ; but this time better provided both for the journey 
and its termination. They had a waggon, which, in 
addition to a store of such furniture as was necessary 
for the requirements of an educated settler, who, if an 
Englishman, will have his comforts, had within its 
capacious canvas roof, seeds, stores, and agricultural 
instruments, as well as a sleeping place for Mrs. Hatfield 
and little Jack, the pet of the party. 

The waggon was drawn by two pair of French Cana- 
dian horses, extremely rough-looking animals, with shaggy 
manes and tails, but plump, active, and strong. Behind 
these came a pair of oxen (their old friend had been left 
at a solitary farm-house, whence they had set out on 
their way down) harnessed in the local fashion, that is, 
with yoke and bows. The ox yoke is made of a piece of 
birch or soft maple wood, four feet in length, and nine 
inches wide in the centre, where a staple is fastened, 
from which hangs an iron ring, about a foot from the 
middle of the yoke each way. The yoke is hollowed out 
so as to fit the oxen's necks ; on each side of this a hole 
is bored through it, into which the bow is passed and 
fastened with a wooden pin, the bow itself being of hick- 
ory, white or rock elm, about five feet and a half long, 
which, when heated by steam, had been bent to the shape 



28 THE SKOW SHI?. 

of a horse-shoe, the upper or narrow ends being passed 
through the yoke. 

This team was unfortunately driven by two young 
Irishmen, engaged by Mr. Hatfield as labourers to assist 
in the clearing of the farm ; we say unfortunately, as no 
greater mistake can be made than to place much depend- 
ance on persons with the traditions of the old country 
still upon them. This was, however, too much the case 
with the whole family of our adventurers, and hence many 
and serious drawbacks to their success. 

The father and his elder sons were clothed in rough 
shooting jackets with many pockets, strong corduroy 
trousers tied under the knees, after the fashion of modern 
English navigators. For wet, windy, and peculiarly cold 
days, there was a Hudson's Bay capot, a sort of blue 
frock-coat with a hood. They were further provided 
with coats and trousers of blue blanket for winter. 

The labourers were warmly clothed, and carried both 
axe and whip. Their " duds," as they called them, were in 
a huge swinging basket under the waggon, in the body 
of which sat Mrs. Hatfield and Young Jack, half envi- 
ous of his brother and father trudging through the snow, 
armed with rifle, and carrying axe and knife. The road 
from the settlement had been worn so hard and smooth 
by sledges, that the journey was quite practicable for the 
emigrants, too eager to await the thaw, with respect to 
which the smiling Tiabitans threw out mysterious hints. 

But though compelled to carry forage on a huge sledge 
behind the waggon, Mr. Hatfield, in his eagerness to 
press forward, was deaf to all advice ; and as nothing 
occurred for some days to change his views, his spirits 
rose considerably, though both he, his sons, and labourers, 
found snow shoeing hard work. 

As time was all-important, it was arranged that they 



A NIGHT ENGAGEMENT. 29 

should not halt for meals, all eating from their hands 
whatever was provided ; while Mrs. Hatfield kept a sup- 
ply of hot coffee by means of a French earthenware stove, 
which consumed about a quart of charcoal a day. At night 
the whole party — Mrs. Hatfield and Jack excepted — ■ 
selecting the skirt of a wood or thicket, scooped out a hole 
in the snow, about ten feet by seven ; two trees were 
felled to within six feet of the ground, and from tree to 
tree a ridge-pole was laid, over which they cast a roof of 
boughs covered with green fir bushes. In the midst 
a fire was made of fir branches ; and thus, wrapped in 
coats, capots, and blankets, they passed the night. Mrs. 
Hatfield and little Jack, closing the leathern front of the 
waggon, and wrapping themselves in huge buffalo skins, 
were scarcely as comfortable. 

Next day they reached a spot where the road began 
to ascend a steep hill, covered with white pine, larch, 
and birch trees, which towered to a height varying from 
fifty to a hundred feet. The nature of the ground being 
flat and no underwood appearing, the head of the family 
woidd willingly have made a dash to the summit, but 
evening approached, the team seemed tired, the labourers 
and boys lagged, and he unwillingly therefore called a 
halt. A slight change of the wind, with a cessation of 
the intense cold, had made him uneasy. 

The tent was however pitched, the animals were se- 
cured, the fire lit, and after a hearty meal all were seated 
round the embers, the Irishmen smoking, and the Hat- 
fields chatting, their capots still on their backs, when 
there rose on the night air such a wild and unearthly 
din, such a fearful and diabolical chorus of yells, fol- 
lowed by the snorting of horses and lowing of cattle, as 
made all start to their feet in terror and amazement. A 
pack of hungry wolves was upon them. 



30 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Down the steep ascent, under the bare and naked pine 
trees, passing like shadows over the white and crisp sur- 
face of the snow, they came — their noses pointed forward, 
their ears erect, their teeth strong and sharp, their eyes 
fierce and sparkling — a drove of savage, hungry and 
voracious demons, that naught but blood could satiate, 
for though a more cowardly wretch in his solitary state 
is not to be found, in droves the wolf is formidable. 
Fortunately, the pack was not so large as usual, but 
made up for its want of force by. hideous and frightful 
clamour. The struggles of the horses and oxen were 
fearful ; but, as good luck would have it, they were so firmly 
fastened, that their efforts to free themselves were vain. 

When within ten yards, the wolves, evidently aware 
of the vicinity of human beings, came to a stop, and 
seated themselves for a moment, as if in council ; but 
finding no notice taken of their presence, they once more 
made a rush, only to be driven back by a volley from 
four guns fired into their midst, which sent them yelling, 
yelping, and limping away. 

The scene now became one of terrible excitement and 
horror— the fierce animals raging around, the men firing 
steadily, but without seriously daunting the famished, 
ravenous beasts, which, if not so large or ferocious as the 
European tribe, are still no contemptible adversaries, 
especially in the dark, when their appalling cries rouse 
the forest echoes. 

It was as much as the travellers could do, firing from 
sledge and waggon, to keep the brutes back, though after 
a while the death of some six or seven, and the disabling 
of twice as many, seemed to discourage their attacks, and 
the little band of adventurers began to beathe again, 
when a long, low, horrid howl over the crest of the hill, 
proclaimed the arrival of reinforcements. 



A NIGHT ENGAGEMENT. 31 

" Fire as fast as you can, boys ! " shouted the father ; 
" spare no powder. If the packs join, we lose our 
cattle." 

The waggon leather was now open, and the pale face 
of Mrs. Hatfield was visible, gazing with anxious eyes 
upon the fearful scene ; whilst master Jack, the ten-year- 
older, clapped his hands with a delight which proclaimed 
him to be a true boy. Both were startled to see Mr. 
Hatfield leap to the ground, after bidding his wife load 
the duck gun and fasten it to the waggon. "With this, 
injunction he hurried forward to the hut, in which they 
had been about to camp, leaving his wife and son busily 
engaged putting powder and shot into the heavy gun, 
which was then lashed to the waggon. This had scarcely 
been done, when a loud cry burst from the agonized 
wife, as three huge beasts, which had approached under 
cover of the hut, attacked Mr. Hatfield as he emerged 
from the camp, and made him stand on the defensive — a 
burning brand his only weapon ! On ordinary occasions 
this would have been enough, but the gnawing pains of 
hunger will give courage to a mouse. The father's posi- 
tion was therefore precarious enough ; and the defenders 
of the sleigh were about to sally forth in his defence, 
when a loud report was heard, a fearful screech, and the 
raging animals fled to rejoin their companions. 

It was Jack who had taken steady aim, and both 
cocked the duck gun and pulled the trigger in defence of 
his father. A loud shout rewarded the brave little lad, 
though no time for congratulations could be spared, for 
a dark stream of fresh and still more hungry brutes — the 
first had devoured their dead and wounded — were now 
pouring helter-skelter down the hill. 

" Give it to them ! they will have found their match," 
cried Mr. Hatfield, in an ezcited tone, and just when the 



32 THE SNOW SHIP. 

junction was formed, lie fired first Jack's redoubtable 
swivel, and then his own fowling-piece. 

As he spoke, a bright light shot up through the roof of 
their camp. The dry fir, larch, and birch, were in flames, 
making a glorious bonfire, and driving back the wolves 
even more effectually than gunpowder. The adventurers 
now understood their father, and, leaping from the 
entrenchment, they soon kindled a wall of fire that effect- 
ually scared the disappointed brutes, which, however, sat 
patiently on the watch until driven away by £he dawn. 



CHAPTBE IV 

TEA VEILING IN THE SNOW. 

Nevee was morning more gladly hailed than that which 
greeted the travellers, as the baulked brutes turned tail 
and fled. It was warm, too, and genial ; and the head of 
the party determined on pushing forward with all speed. 
This he intimated to the weary combatants, who were 
only too glad to leave the scene of their night's encounter ; 
and every one, after clamouring for breakfast, was about 
to prepare for departure, when again their animals began 
to snort and toss their heads, as their bodies sank in the 
snow. 

"Hopple them," said Mr. Hatfield, setting the ex- 
ample. 

In a moment horses and oxen had their fore legs 
fastened sufficiently close together to prevent them stray- 
ing far, when the whole party, pushing the sledge close to 
the waggon, prepared to await whatever might happen. 

The thaw had caught them in a hollow. 

Soon, dark, bare patches on the hill sides began to 
show themselves, and as the sun rose, and a warm south- 



TRAVELLING IN THE SNOW. S3 

easterly breeze came murmuring over the hill tops, whole 
avalanches of snow glided down towards the devoted 
band of emigrants. In selecting their camp, they had 
been guided by the presence of trees, as well as by the 
circumstance that the ground where the waggon stood 
was perfectly flat. Behind them was an extensive plain, 
with, if anything, an inclination towards them. 

rather and sons, standing on the footboard, gazed 
anxiously around, and now first marked the peculiar dis- 
tribution of the trees in their immediate neighbourhood. 
They grew in a kind of winding meandering way, about 
forty feet apart, both to the northward and southward. 

There could he no doubt of it, they were in the bed of a 
watercourse. 

This was a fearful discovery, and one which would 
probably involve the loss of their waggon and stores, and 
consequently the relinquishment of their journey. But 
in this moment of alarming peril, the emigrants showed 
themselves worthy of their mission. A quiet hint was given 
to the Irishmen, who at once removed their boxes and 
parcels to the thicket, where they made them fast as best 
they could. Mr. Hatfield then searched for several coils 
of rope, and a chain, the uses of which were various, and 
lashing a double line to the shafts, tried, by means of two 
stout trees and the pulley, to draw the waggon more to 
the bank. The wheels were, however, too much embed- 
ded in the snow, which, at first soft, soon became slush, 
made so by the little rills and rivulets that came pouring 
from the mountain slopes. There was but one resource. 

The trees to which the cords were attached formed 
part of a thicket, which, as the snow disappeared and the 
inequalities of the soil could be more plainly seen, proved 
to stand upon a knoll. This discovery once made, a hut 
was hastily erected, spacious enough for the whole family, 

3 



34 THE SNOW SHIP. 

within which Mr. Hatfield sent all save himself and 
Ralph, who watched by a huge fire outside. 

There was no dread of wolves just then, but there was 
great fear lest the ark of their fortunes should be 
destroyed, and their hopes frustrated. Down the grassy 
slopes, over rocky precipices, along arid and stony in- 
clines, poured the angry water, not pure and sparkling, 
but intermingled with leaves, twigs and dirt, that soiled 
and tainted its native beauty ; and all came rushing to 
the bed of that stream near which they were encamped, 
until, just after nightfall, the placid, smooth, and once 
hard surface on which they had rested, was changed to 
a seething, boiling, raging torrent, that increased and 
widened every moment with a sullen roar ; — in their 
situation singularly appalling. 

About every five minutes, the anxious sentries felt the 
rope, fearing the tension would become greater, whilst 
their eyes tried iu vain to pierce the gloom. The sky 
was cloudy, there was neither moon nor stars visible — all 
was left to the sense of hearing and feeling. Once Ralph 
started to walk alongside the rope to the waggon, but he 
had not gone three feet when his father heard him 
splashing in water, and called him back, remarking that 
nothing remained but to put their trust in Providence 
and await the morn. Ralph reluctantly yielded, made 
up the fire to a great size and heat, and then, taking ex- 
ample by his parent, lay down in his capote within the 
rude shanty ; and " nature's sweet restorer " overcoming 
all sense of danger, he slept. 

At dawn of day all were out with a rush, and the true 
position of affairs became evident. The adventurers, 
when making their halt at the foot of the hill, had se- 
lected a smooth drift of. snow, covering a rocky ledge 
that ran from the wooded knoll to the very verge of the 



TEA VEILING IN THE SNOW. 35 

stream, which, now swollen by the melting snow, had so 
far overflowed its banks ; and such was the volume of 
water already carried away, that the stream jwas receding 
to its natural bed. But for the timely intervention of 
the rope, the waggon must have been swept away, with 
all its valuable contents, for the hinder wheels hung half 
n, half out of the water. 

Eager as the new settlers were to press forward and 
reach the scene of their future labours, they were 
compelled to halt for several days at this spot, not only 
until the snow cleared away and the ground became hard, 
but until the many watercourses they had to pass, had 
sufficiently diminished in volume to permit of their being 
forded. 

One advantage was derived from the halt, namely, the 
good condition in which the cattle were found at the 
end of a week, after feeding upon young grasses, with 
a proper supply of fodder at night. On the second Sab- 
bath all looked fair for a start ; but Mr. Hatfield, despite 
his impatience, resolved to keep that day holy, and 
accordingly the final "leg up" was made on the following 
Monday morning, soon after daybreak. 

The oxen were put to, the horses harnessed, and under 
the united guidance of the whole party the journey re- 
commenced. Now it was that the real difficulties of a 
new country showed themselves. There was no road 
except what might have been a bridle path, to which each 
passing emigrant had done a little, such as lopping a 
branch here, cutting down a tree there, and filling up a 
hole or two with wood, stones, and rubbish. The waggon 
laboured terribly ; and before the first half day was 
over, such was the fearful nature of the jolts, jerks, and 
threatened spills, that both Mrs. Hatfield and Jack 
resolved to walk. 



36 THE SKOW SHIP. 

They were still within the bounds of scattered settle- 
ments, and here and there they found roads that had 
been turnpiked, that is ploughed on each side, and the 
earth so raised, thrown upon the centre by means of a 
road scraper, or turnpike shovel, worked either by horses 
or oxen. They were approaching by the rude zig-zag 
way which they had themselves, with pocket compass in 
hand, cut through the forest, an undertaking impossible 
to have been carried out had they not taken advantage 
of every accidental opening, glade, or burn, thus increas- 
ing their journey by at least fifty miles. 

As their waggon was a very diiferent sort of thing from 
the one-ox cart of the previous year, the road often re- 
quired widening ; and in order to save delay, Mr. Hatfield 
hit upon a very ingenious device for ascertaining whether 
it could pass, long before the lumbering vehicle itself 
came up. He cut a pole twelve inches longer than the 
width of the widest part of the waggon, so that, wherever 
this pole, held in a horizontal position, could pass, there, 
of course, the waggon also could pass. 

When the ground was even, and no extraneous as- 
sistance was required, the horses and oxen being docile, 
they were given into the charge of Jack and his mother, 
while the Irishmen, with axes r and bill-hooks, followed 
Mr. Hatfield ; the young men being, whenever they 
could be spared, out as a sort of flying column in search 
of game or fish to add to the evening meal, which, rely 
Upon it, no one ever knows how to really enjoy who has 
not earned it in some such way. 

As the obstacles in the shape of trees and shrubs were 
generally small, the Irish labourers were mostly able to 
overcome them ; but when the difficulty presenting itself 
was a hole, all hands were called, and sometimes it was 
as much as the cattle could do, to drag the heavy vehicle 



TRAVELLING IN THE SNOW. 37 

onward, though the whole party assisted to raise it by 
means of handspikes, crowbars, rollers, and other con- 
trivances. It will now be easily understood why they 
sometimes travelled only one mile in a day ; never more 
than twelve ; on the average, six. 

In general, unless recalled by their father's loud- 
tongued horn, the elder brothers were at the intended 
night camp first, their experience indicating a fit distance. 
The camping ground once fixed upon, they collected 
wood, made a fire, found water, cut logs for the night, 
collected fir and hemlock boughs to sleep on, beneath 
a rude tent which generally made its appearance from 
the recesses of the waggon. Then, when the wearied 
voyagers came up, they would prepare dampers, boil a 
kettle, or do any other useful cooking work, while Mrs. 
Hatfield and her husband looked on approvingly. A 
damper, be it known, is a cake of dough rolled out to 
the size of a plate, and from one to two inches thick, and 
either baked in the wood ashes of the fire, or fried in the 
pan with bacon fat. 

All these details may appear very prosaic, but we are 
describing real downright life, the ups and downs of a 
settler ; and if any of our readers in after life should 
shoulder the axe and the rifle, and take to the canoe and 
the saddle, they will thank us for these particulars. Our 
emigrants met with adventures exciting and wonderful 
enough before settling down ; but to them personally, 
these early days of travel were both trying and interest- 
ing. 

All hands retired early, as the word was, start at sun- 
rise, no other breakfast being allowed than what re- 
mained from over night, the first real meal being taken 
between eleven and twelve, so as to break the day for 
the horses and cattle. In this way, with a few accidents, 



38 THE SNOW SHIP. 

with many hardships, after trials which in the old 
country would appear both ludicrous and impossible, the 
whole party reached the favoured spot which was to be, 
as it were, the nucleus of their future home ; although 
Mr. Hatfield had already decided on making a careful 
search for better land ere he finally committed himself. 

It was the beginning of May. They had arrived just 
in time to see to their spring crops, before engaging in 
any other duty. The emigrants now found their Irish 
labourers useful. The object was to plough about six 
acres to bring forth spring crops, such as potatoes and 
Indian corn. The Irishmen stared with open mouths 
and wondering eyes at the clearing, with its charred 
stumps, and ground already beginning to be overrun 
with wild raspberries and Canadian thistles, and still 
more at the odd way of ridding themselves of them. 

Despite their experience of fire as an enemy, they now 
used it as a friend, and thus destroyed l!;0 noxious 
weeds, preparatory to ploughing. For this purpose they 
used the docile and easily-managed oxen, as among the 
green stumps and roots — the plough being continually 
checked by roots and stems— the horses, would have 
been restive. As soon as about six acres had been pre- 
pared, the Indian corn was planted with a hoe, in rows 
three feet apart and thirty inches^ in a row, while between 
every other one a pumpkin seed was thrown in. 

Potatoes, that made the worthy Irishmen grin from 
ear to ear, were also planted with a hoe, in drills, and 
about five thousand to the acre. A hole was made, into 
which four or five sets were dropped ; the earth being 
then heaped over them in the form of a moderate mole- 
hill. The usual yield to an acre was from two hundred 
to five hundred bushels. A few swedes and turnips were 
added ; and then, as nothing more could be done until 



TEAVELLIK& IN THE SNOW. 39 

autumn, the more serious business commenced. Mrs. 
Hatfield having in the meantime produced from a mys- 
terious coop in the waggon, a strutting cock and lively 
brood of hens, that promised wonders to the infant 
colony. 

All emigrants in those days were content with a log- 
house, which, when the settlement came Avithin reach of 
civilization, was replaced by a substantial stone, brick, or 
frame house. Our adventurers were no exception to the 
rule, and accordingly, before entering upon the manifold 
undertakings which make the first years of a settler's 
work exceedingly hard labour, they resolved to erect a 
house, outhouses, stables, pigsties — Ralph undertaking a 
winter's sleigh voyage of discovery in search of pigs — - 
so that, whatever their arduous labours might be, they 
would at least be sure of a comfortable home. 

There was, however, one more day's work before they 
started in life as builders. The six acres of crops had to 
be fenced. In one or two places, the stones of various 
sorts and sizes, which all but the ploughmen had been 
engaged in clearing away, being piled up between stumps, 
made a good wall, but the rest was encircled in the 
usual way. Bass trees of a straight growth — and straight 
also in the grain — were cut into twelve-feet lengths, and 
split into rails as near four inches square as possible ; 
these were laid in a zigzag direction, crossing each other 
about a foot from the end, making an angle of about six 
feet. Seven rails in height, crowned by a stake and a 
rider, completed the fence. 

The Americans — as a rule, push and go-a-head people 
— generally begin with a frame-house. Now, as this 
latter has to be put together " judgmatically," it requires 
time, so that a log-hut is wanted iu the meanwhile. The 
consequence is, that, as no emigrant has much time to 



40 U'HE SNW SHIP. 

spare, little of the frame-house is erected hut the uprights 
and cross-beams, which rot away, a dreary skeleton of 
home, while the pioneer and his family burrow in the 
warm mud and wooden structure. 

But Mr. Hatfield and his family were more methodical ; 
and no sooner had the future been tolerably provided 
for in the way alluded to, than operations were com- 
menced with a view to erect suitable buildings for 
masters, men, and cattle. In the meantime, those who 
did not belong to the tent, lived in slab-houses ; and this 
was all the party, save Mr. and Mrs. Hatfield, and Jack. 

The slab-huts were simple enough. A level spot was 
selected, with two trees behind, which were twelve feet 
apart ; from one to the other a pole was firmly lashed ; 
parallel with this, a huge black oak was felled, and from 
the pole to the log a row of split slabs was laid, while the 
ends were stuffed with hemlock brush, to keep out wind 
and rain, the blankets and coats already alluded to form- 
ing the bed. On the open side was a roaring fire — which 
.served the huts of the two youths and the two labourers. 

Mr. Hatfield and his companions had read about 
erecting log-huts and frame-houses, but they little under- 
stood the difficulty to the uninitiated. It is an art in 
itself, and those who make such buildings without the 
supervision of an experienced hand, must always make a 
bungling job of it, — forgetting, probably, a door, a win- 
dow, or a chimney. In the first place, after selecting a 
suitable spot, they discovered that no wood of the right 
sort grew near at hand, so that they had to cut down 
trees, shape them into logs, planks, and shingles, and 
then haul them, by means of their oxen and horses, to 
the right spot. 

But these were hardships easily overcome. The two 
stumbling-blocks were, how to build a " log," and how 



TEA VEILING IN THE SNOW. 41 

to fell the proper trees for beams, for planks, for shingles, 
of which important fact none were informed. We have 
already alluded to chopping, to which arduous work the 
whole party betook themselves, except Mrs. Hatfield and 
Jack, who mounted their old and faithful ox ; Jack guid- 
ing him, as he drew along the logs, while his mother 
used the goad or whip to urge him on. 

The Irishmen worked with a will for a day or two, 
though the toil was so utterly new to them, that not only 
were their hands blistered, but their backs bent double, 
and they were heard at night moaning and groaning in 
their sleep. This was not so much their fault as Mr. 
Hatfield's, none but emigrants of some years' standing 
knowing the true art of chopping, logging, or fencing. 
One good man will do the work of six new hands. But 
the worthy fellows continued cutting, sweating, and curs- 
ing in their own tongue, imtil Saturday night, when, after 
retiring to their slab-hut, they were no more seen ; they 
had, in fact, " skedaddled," but they took nothing except 
their own " duds," not having waited even for their 
wages. 

This unlooked-for desertion did not dishearten the 
settlers, it being more disastrous in the future than for 
the present ; on the contrary, it roused them to new 
exertions, which were never relaxed one moment, though 
water poured down their bodies like rain, though every 
muscle was strained, and every bone seemed sore as if 
beaten by cudgels. 

Little progress was made. Mr. Hatfield, a man of 
considerable ingenuity, recollected much about the build- 
ing of a log-hut, but knew nothing. A great deal of 
what was done, therefore, was by guess work. Still all 
persevered, and one morning, with the sun shining 
brightly overhead, the scene was not without its pic- 



42 THE SNOW SHIP. 

turesque point of view. Mr. Hatfield, with saw, ham- 
mer, and nails at hand, was busy upon some minor details ; 
Ralph and Henry, the latter sighing a little now and 
then, were shaping a log with their axes ; Jack, with his 
mother by his side, was urging the ox forward, with a 
large log at his heels, when a loud, ringing, merry laugh 
startled them all. 

" Ha ! ha! Monsieur Jone Bool — make one log-hut — 
one frame maison — ha ! ha ! vel, bon jour, how you do ? 
— ver humble sairvant, madam." 

And the speaker — a tall French Canadian, with sallow 
complexion, high cheek bones, a turban-shaped fur cap, a 
blouse over a leather jerkin, high boots, his powerful and 
elastic frame supporting a huge rifle, heavy axe, and all 
the usual accoutrements — stepped into the clearing ; a 
genial, though slightly mocking smile upon his hard, 
weather-beaten features. Mrs. Hatfield stared, Jack 
and Harry looked indignant, but both Ealph and his 
father welcomed the stranger heartily, the latter shaking 
him by the hand ; while JRalph, reddening up to his ears, 
unseen by any one, placed his fingers on his lips, and re- 
ceived an almost imperceptible nod in return. 

Now this involves a mystery, which must be solved. 



CHAPTEE V 

THE LAKE OP THE BURNING PLAINS. 

Baeph Hateield had been unanimously elected hunts- 
man to the party ; and, as a very large store of pro- 
visions was consumed by the hard-working emigrants, 
his expeditions were proportionably numerous. His 
brothers were half inclined to envy him when they saw 
him start, prancing on his shaggy steed, with his bright 



THE IAKE OP THE BtrKNING PLAINS. 43 

feee illumined with smiles ; but Harry, at all events, 
was generally compensated by tlie circumstance that he 
returned nearly always footsore and weary, his horse 
laden with "plunder," as the produce of the chase is 
usually denominated in America. 

Bat in the case of the young man himself, these ex- 
peditions were productive of unmitigated pleasure; 
though such was his genial nature, that he would gladly 
have been accompanied by one of the party, if they 
could have been spared. It certainly did not detract 
from the excitement attendant on these journeys, to 
know that they sometimes brought him within less than 
a hundred miles of the territory of the Six Nations ; this 
spice of danger, indeed, added to the zest with which he 
trod the woods. 

On one occasion, Ealph secretly resolved to make a 
longer journey than usual, as nearly in a northerly 
direction as possible, until he fell in with sufficient game 
to load his horse. Armed with rifle and fowling-piece, 
he waved his cap as he rode forth from the clearing, 
mounted on the best horse that could be found. He 
had intimated his intention to camp out for one night ; 
and, as he invariably brought back interesting reports to 
his father after every expedition, this was rather ap- 
proved of than otherwise. One reason why he had 
selected this route was, that during his wanderings he 
had hit upon an old Indian trail, which had so excited 
his imagination, that he could not rest until he explored 
it. 

Under the greenwood trees then, where the tops 
waved gracefully in the wind, Ealph rode onward, 
neither tempted to the right nor to the left by sight of 
deer tracks, nor lured by the cluck of the wild turkey, 
until, two or three hours before sunset, his constancy 



44 THE SNOW SHIP. 

was rewarded, after a dangerous journey through mighty 
forests, deep ravines, and up steep hills, by suddenly 
emerging upon what are now known as The Plains. 
Beyond these lay, glittering in the golden light of the 
setting sun, the mirror-like surface of The Lake of the 
Burning Plains, dotted here and there with gem-like 
islands, wooded to their summits with sugar maple, that 
towered terrace on terrace, ledge upon ledge, until they 
concealed even the cone-like tops. 

It was a sight well worth all the labour he had en- 
dured ; and he felt, as he rode along, that there it was 
they should have located, amid that park-like scenery, 
amid those flowery knolls, deep ravines, and oak-crowned 
hills, admitting at every step a view of the blue waters 
of the lake ; and he made a vow, that if ever he should 
set up housekeeping for himself, there his home should 
be. The trail now led him through a somewhat gloomy 
but well-wooded ravine, winding round the base of lofty 
hills crowned with oak, until, after nearly a mile of 
sharp descent, the whole lake lake lay before him in all 
its calm and placid beauty. 

But why does the young man start — why do his eyes 
dilate as he reins in his horse ? The secret wish of his 
heart is realized — he is in the presence of a link, at all 
events, in that chain of mystery which so strikingly 
attaches itself to the Indian race. On a small plateau 
close to the water was a redskin village, small in extent, 
but still a redskin village. There were not more than 
eight or nine large wigwams, and all appeared deserted, 
Balph riding into the midst of them without even the 
cry of a child, or the yelping bark of a pack of dogs 
being heard. The village was deserted, and, as was 
subsequently discovered, it was the winter quarters of a 
small branch of the Chippewas, known as the Missis- 



THE 1AKE OP THE BUEKHfTG- PLAINS. 45 

sauga Indians. Dismounting, and giving his horse a 
long lariat to graze by, the young man examined these 
dwellings of the aboriginal inhabitants, with a mixture 
of that curiosity and interest which is always aroused 
in us in connection with savage tribes. 

The poles of these huts were planted about a foot 
apart at the bottom, meeting together -at the top, while 
they were closely and securely covered with birch-bark. 
The diameter of the huts was about twelve feet ; with- a 
fire-place in the centre, and opposite each end of the 
fire a small doorway, which, when the hut was inhabited, 
was covered with a blanket. 

Pleased and gratified by this discovery, the young 
man resolved to use one of them for the night ; though, 
as he was quite alone, he determined on fastening the 
doorways more securely. This decided on, he turned 
towards the lake, not unmindful of the task he had in 
hand. To his no little surprise, and much to his delight, 
he could see, slowly sailing towards him with the wind, 
some hundreds of wood- ducks, which he knew by repu- 
tation to be delicious and beautiful birds, appearing 
always in spring. The head and part of the neck are 
green ; while from the head a long crest depends, richly 
variegated with green, white, and dark purple feathers. 
The lower part of the throat and the breast are cin- 
namon, speckled with white ; but under the wings, and 
the sides towards the tail, grey speckled, and fringed 
with black ; the back of the wings, dark blue and black 
feathers. 

Ealph gazed around. He knew very well that, were 
he in possession of a canoe, he might easily approach 
them; but nothing of the kind was to be expected in 
that vicinity. The wood-ducks were near the shore, 
feeding on the wild rice with which the lake abounds ; 



46 THE SNO.W SHIP. 

while hundreds iipon hundreds were bobbing up the 
closely-wooded streams and little bays, or were seated 
on old logs or limbs of trees that had fallen into the 
water. 

This put an idea into our young sportsman's head. 
Of a keen and quickly observant character, Ealph saw, 
nearly afloat, a large tree, the bushy part of which, from 
the shape of the trunk, rose at a sharp angle upwards. 
A few strokes with the axe at the roots, and a shove or 
two with a hastily cut pole, set the ponderous mass 
fairly out into the scarcely-rippling waters. Ealph was 
delighted, as, the wood-ducks being at no great distance, 
he was soon able to get within five-and-twenty yards of 
the birds, utterly unnoticed. Then he began to work ; 
and being not only a keen, but a careful and cautious 
sportsman, he contrived, before sundown, to kill fourteen 
brace ; with these he returned to the shore, made fast 
his weighty raft, and took up his quarters in the red- 
skin wigwam, where soon a bright blaze, and the odour 
from the cooking, proclaimed the presence of civilized 
man. 

Ealph was tired, but he was now a practised traveller; 
so out he went, took off his horse's harness, hoppled 
him, gave him a handful of beans, and let him loose. 
Then a goodly supply of fuel was thrown within the hut, 
the two doors were closely barred, and Ealph — his two 
guns loaded, and his pistols to his hand — composed him- 
self to sleep. Not a quarter of an hour later, just as he 
had dozed, he had to thank his good fortune, as well as 
to test the stability of his redskin wigwam ; for there 
came a roll of thunder, with vivid flashes of lightning, 
followed by torrents of rain, which, after continuing an 
hour, left him as dry as ever. 

Eeplenishing his fire, and fervently thanking Grod for 



THE LAKE OE THE BTTETQ^G PLAINS. 47 

the goodly shelter he enjoyed, Ealph was soon once 
more in a sound sleep, which lasted for many hours, 
when a violent shaking at the door of his hut startled 
him. With a caution which spoke well for his future 
career as a hunter in the wilds, Ealph drew back from 
the fire, clutched his pistols, and listened. See, he 
could not ; for though there were interstices between 
the bars, there was no moou, and the glow of the embers 
within the wigwam made all dark without. Still Ealph 
could make out a tall figure, two eyes shining like coals, 
and a heavy breathing, as the assailant strove noiselessly 
to push in the doorway. Satisfied no band of marauders 
would take such precautions, Ealph now levelled both 
pistols and fired, by no means afraid to tackle one or 
more ruffians. No words, not a cry, succeeded the 
sharp report ; but when the smoke cleared away, the 
doorway was vacant, and the pale, sickly light of a star 
or two poured into the wigwam. 

But Ealph had no further desire for sleep. He could 
not understand what had happened. Assaults by armed 
bands of Indians, as well as outrages by a single savage, 
were conducted according to rule ; and one of those rules 
was to make the attack just before daybreak, and if 
foiled, to retire until a more favourable opportunity. 
This Ealph knew, and found himself, with all his 
romantic notions about the aborigines, wondering with 
something of anxiety and disgust, to which tribe of the 
Six Nations he was indebted for a visit. 

Half dozing, but never quite sleeping, he was sur- 
prised by dawn, and at once went forth, rifle in -hand. 
But all was still ; the surface of the lake was unrippled, 
the forest tree-tops scarcely moved, the grass waved its 
feathery tips slowly and mutely — while of man, his 
tricks and malefices, there was no sign. Taking heart 



48 THE SNOW SHIP. 

of grace, in the keen morning air, Ralph bathed, his rifle 
close to him, and then having breakfasted, he moved 
slowly along the bank of the lake, in search of some 
larger game than wood-ducks. 

The small-birds, fat and delicious as they were, to a 
hungry party of emigrants working in the open air, would 
prove but tit-bits. Something more solid was required 
to appease their ravenous appetites. A couple of fat 
wild turkeys soon paid the penalty of early rising, and 
were hung high on the branch of a tree, while Ralph 
pursued his way, which he did until at length he reached 
a close cedar swamp, along which it was his intention to 
walk until he could make for the shores of the lake, 
where, doubtless, he would find some deer tracks as 
they went to water. 

The scene was now novel to Ralph. To his left lay 
the cedar swamp, while to his right was a clump of 
American arbor mice, its full juicy verdure sweeping to 
the ground, a marked relief to the monotony of the 
stark stems of the fir forest. 

The trail now plunged into thickets impenetrable but 
for its aid. Where ancient trunks had fallen, there 
they lay ; some had become green mossy mounds, the 
long grave of prostrate giants, so carefully draped in 
their velvety covering, that all sense of ruin was gone ; 
some, more freshly fallen, showed still their purple bark 
deepening in hue, and dotted with tufts of moss. 

Suddenly Ralph, who carried his fowling-piece in his 
hand, his rifle on his back, stood still, as a low growl 
fell upon his ears, and from behind some fallen logs and 
brush, up popped an enormous bear, at once bringing our 
sportsman to a stop, and explaining the aggression of the 
previous night. Now, a bear is no contemptible animal 
at the best of times ; while to attack and kill & grisly bear 



l'UE LAKE OF THE BTJETTING PLAIN'S. 49 

is one of those daring deeds which immortalize a local 
reputation. I know that many persons have ridiculed 
the idea of any one man coping with the huge monarch 
of the Rocky Mountains ; but though many have paid 
the penalty of their rashness, in a contest where courage 
and skill have to compete with fearful brute force, and 
where the snapping of a lock or cap, the miss of an inch 
in hitting the spot on his breast where the hair grows in 
a sort of round, or the want of time to reload, have been 
the occasion of fearful mishaps ; yet have there been many 
renowned white men and Indians, who have, single-handed, 
killed their half-dozen grislies, and worn the claw-collars ; 
while many have escaped by climbing trees, a feat which 
this powerful but ponderous animal cannot perform. 

But it was no wonder that Ralph hesitated. Still he 
did not move, but dropping his fowling-piece, he unslung 
his rifle. The bear all this time had been standing on 
his hind legs, and staring wildly about him, as if in doubt 
whether to fight or run away ; presently, however, he 
began shuffling off at a great pace, which so carried Ralph 
beyond the bounds of prudence, as to make him take aim 
and fire. 

"With a savage growl, the bear turned round, clawed 
at the wound, and stood still, irresolute ; while Ralph, 
whose blood was now up, proceeded to load with as much 
rapidity as possible. Again, while the bear was examin- 
ing his wound, the young man fired, and this time hit 
Bruin on the head, which had the effect of rendering 
him so mad with rage, that he charged Ralph with -a 
velocity which made escape impossible ; indeed, with a 
mounted hunter it is often a question which shall gain 
the day in a fair race. 

Ralph, though fully prepared for a fearful contest. 
retained his coolness, the result of that admirable physical 

4 



50 THE SNOW SHIP. 

and moral training which he had received in a school pur- 
posely selected by- his father. "With the eye of an eagle 
on the wing, he caught sight of a fallen log, behind which 
he placed himself with a fearful leap, not forgetting to 
take with him both guns. 

Not an instant of time was to be lost. The bear was 
close at hand, and must be met by the knife or axe, though 
the more he was weakened the less he was to be feared 
in a hand-to-hand encounter. With this view, Ralph 
gave him both barrels of the fowling-piece, which, though 
it did nearly blind him, made him doubly ferocious. 
With a terrible growl, that might have chilled the 
stoutest heart, he dashed at the log, received the con- 
tents of the rifle" hastily poured forth, and then, before 
Balph could step back, he had his left arm and shoulder 
in the claws of Bruin, who used all his remaining strength 
in an effort to drag the young man to his own side of the 
log. Balph, despite the excruciating pain, dashed his 
long, sharp, glittering knife into the bear's neck, who 
though now bleeding at every pore, did not relax his 
grip ; but, growling horribly all the time, and his almost 
sightless and bloody orbs rolling spasmodically, he tried 
to snap at the knife with his teeth. The fearfully rapid 
blows which the young hunter struck, so exasperated the 
already infuriated bear, that for a moment he relaxed his 
hold, only to give a final hug, in which both rolled over 
the log, Bruin uppermost, and Balph only faintly strik- 
ing with his knife at the thick hide of the animal. 

At this moment the low croaking of a buffalo calf was 
heard ; the bear paused in its fury to listen, and Balph, 
making one mighty effort, struck home to the bleeding 
animal's heart, and then fainted. 

When he recovered, Bete, the Canadian hunter and 
trapper who had recommended to Mr. Hatfield the par- 



SUMMER WORK. 51 

ticular location on which they had settled, and whose 
imitation of a buffalo calf had so opportunely distracted 
the bear's attention, was leaning over him, dressing his 
wounds. They were superficial but weakening, and 
forced Ralph to camp another day and night on the 
Lake of the Burning Plains, during which time Pete 
hunted for him ; and finally, having restored him to 
health, he sent him home loaded, not only with venison 
and ducks, but with bear-hams. This adventure with 
the bear had never been mentioned to Ralph's mother, 
lest she might object to future expeditions; and so Ralph 
blushed when the old habitant unexpectedly visited them 
some time afterwards. 

Pete was called old, as is the fashion in America, 
though much under forty ; and if we were to judge from 
his exploits, he was deserving of the epithet. There was 
scarcely a spot of any note on the North American con- 
tinent, he had not visited — he had fished with the 
Esquimaux, dwelt a winter in their tents, had scoured 
every lake that divides Canada from the States, had 
drunk palque with Mexicans, rum with the king of 
Klalacas, had fought with Yankee redskins, hunted and 
trapped on a hundred streams, and now he had strolled 
three hundred miles through morass, forest, and over 
parched prairies, to see what progress had been made by 
a family of raw emigrants from the old country. 



CHAPTER VI. 

SUMMER WORK. 

There is no every-day life in an emigrant's career. All 
is fresh, unexpected, and varied. The work of one twelve 
hours does not indicate what will be the occupation of- 



52 THE SKOW SHIP. 

the next. But for the arrival of Batiste, the emigrants 
might have gone on labouring at log-hut building and 
chopping, Avithout much permanent advantage to them- 
selves, for, with all their good-will and devotion to work, 
nothing could compensate for want of experience. 

" Veil, my vere goot frens," said the habitant, as soon 
as he was seated at the emigrants' hospitable table, " so 
vous finde the location — hein ! — ver goot lant, ver good 
vatere, vere fine arbres, vat you call de number," and he 
held up three fingers. " Oui ! oui ! I dis remembare 
tree." And he laughed heartily. 

" I have found it all exactly as you promised me. The 
spot is magnificently chosen ; and we want but the knack 
of clearing the forest and making roads to the water-side, 
to be independent of the world." 

" Vant house, too — hein ! " continued Batiste, with a 
grin. 

" Tes, Batiste ; and I tell you what," said Mr. Hatfield, 
" if you would only stop with us, I should be very glad 
to pay you anything in reason." 

"Mafoi, de idea is not so vere bad — not at all. I 
chop for you, if you wish — so ve come to terms." 

This was not difficult, as the Canadian was honest and 
practical, while Mr. Hatfield was thoroughly aware of the 
immense advantage to be derived from the co-operation 
of a man who knew the country so intimately as Batiste. 
In the present day, the usual price for clearing land and 
fencing it, fit for sowing, is, for hard wood, from eleven 
to twelve dollars per acre ; for evergreen, such as pine, 
hemlock, cedar, and where that kind of timber predomi- 
nates, from twelve to fourteen dollars per acre, while for 
swamp there is no fixed price. 

To clear an acre of land, a thorough good chopper, 
after the land ia underbrushed, will, in eight days, on an 



SUMMER WORK. 53 

average, fell the trees, and cut tliem up into fifteen or 
sixteen-foot lengths, and pile the branches into heaps. 
As soon as the bark and tops of the trees are burned up, 
a yoke of oxen and four men will log, or roll up into 
heaps, an acre a day. 

xlt the time of which we speak, labour was cheaper 
than it is now ; and the Canadian readily agreed to do 
the work at ten dollars an acre, which delighted Mr. 
Hatfield, who had calculated on paying nearly thirty 
dollars per acre, which he must have done had he con- 
tinued to employ the Irish emigrants, who, however, 
when once seasoned to the country, make some of the 
very best and most successful settlers. 

The first job undertaken, with the assistance and under 
the supervision of Batiste, was to complete the house, 
which took some little time — chinking between the logs, 
plastering up crevices, cutting out a place for a doorway 
and window, casing them, and then making a door and 
shutters, and hanging them on wooden hinges, assisted by 
leather supports. By way of ensuring some comfort, 
they also made a rough table and some stools, which, 
though not much better fashioned than those of our old 
friend Robinson Crusoe, at all events answered the pur- 
pose f§r which they were intended. 

They then, guided by their factotum, who was already 
a great favourite with everybody, sought out and found 
four slabs of limestone, which, placed upright in one 
corner of the shanty, with clay well packed behind them, 
to keep the fire off the logs, served admirably the purpose 
of a chimney, with a rude plank flue, and a hole 
cut in the roof to carry off the smoke. 

Then some ironwood poles were cut, and from these a 
rude bedstead was manufactured, by stretching strips of 
elm bark across, which were strongly plaited together, to 



54 THE SNOW SHIP. 

support a bed of hemlock boughs. This was for the 
parents ; the younger members of the family sleeping in 
an outer room — they made two at night by means of a 
partition— until such time as they erected a larger 
house. Batiste slept in a small shanty of his own, 
erected in the woods, where Ealph often joined him 
when a hunting expedition was contemplated. 

Batiste was perfectly independent. He worked when 
he pleased, and rested when he pleased ; which suited 
the settlers admirably, for his "rests," as he called 
them, were genuine pieces of hard work. lie would 
hunt, fish, or superintend agricultural occupations. Mrs. 
Hatfield found him admirable in inventions, his in- 
genuity producing various pieces of furniture ; Mr. Hat- 
field did nothing without asking his advice, which he 
would give, seated on a stump, with his black pipe in his 
mouth. Through him, Ralph had many a glorious day's 
shooting ; Harry swore by him as an angler ; while 
little Jack believed there was not such another mail on 
earth, especially since he had made him a real bow and 
arrows, like those formerly tised by the Indians. 

The bow was made from a young hickory, strengthened 
at the back by sinews of deer glued on ; and the arrow- 
heads were made from flints picked up on the shores of 
the lake ; the feathers were plucked from the wood- 
pecker ; while a quiver of doe-skin completed the whole 
array. 

But what finally attached Jack to Batiste, was an 
adventure which happened a full month after the arrival 
of the Canadian, like a good genius, in the new settle- 
ment. 

The hunter had no sooner taken up his abode with 
the family of the Hatfields, than he inspired them all 
with his ardent love of the chase. No Nimrod cele- 



SUMMER WORK. 55 

brated in history, or immortalized in fiction, ever in- 
dulged with more ardour in every kind of sport than 
Batiste. After supper, while mending his mocassins, or 
doing some such useful household work as making 
baskets for Mrs. Hatfield, or teaching the others to do so, 
he would at intervals, when the father neither read nor 
spoke, indulge in such tales of bear-fights, deer-hunts, 
Caribou-stalking, or relate such exciting narratives, as 
fairly roused in all a passion for hunting. 

Now Mr. Hatfield had every desire to see his farm 
progress ; but, as both the Canadian and Balph were to 
visit Montreal in the autumn, he had no objection to 
his sons spending a good deal of time upon an occupation 
which was tiseful in procuring food, and profitable when 
skins were brought in. The brave Canadian, who had 
an eye to business, and was saving of powder, readily 
instructed his pupils in the art of trapping, which occu- 
pation he had followed so many years with rare success. 
Even Harry liked this, though fishing was his favourite 
sport. In the first instance, Batiste accompanied them 
to teach what was necessary, but the young men were 
sharp adepts, and at last ventured out alone one day, to 
trap and hunt a new district. 

With a wry face Jack .saw them depart. He had 
several times asked to accompany them, but his mother 
was fearful for her pet boy, at which the juvenile aspirant 
for the honours of woodcraft was vastly indignant, being 
like many others at his age, in his own opinion at all 
events, quite a man. So Master Jack took refuge in 
sulks — which of course was very wrong — and going to 
the back of the house, he sat for some time in moody 
silence. 

By dint of incessant practice he had become very 
dextrous in the use of his bow, so that he firmly believed 



56 THE SXOW SHIP. 

he could shoot a deer as well as any of them. This idea 
once in his head, like a very thoughtless boy that he was, 
he determined to make the experiment at any price. 
Not having been able to obtain permission, he resolved 
to take it — that is, to do what many a youth has sadly 
repented all his life — run away. 

Sauntering into the house, which was empty, Jack, as 
he had full permission to do, took his dinner from some 
cold deer's meat and corn cakes, provided himself with 
his bow and arrows, with a small knife and wooden cup, 
and then believing himself amply protected against all 
accidents, he entered the clearing and took his way 
towards the woods, which lay at the back of the location. 

Now, not only did Jack do a very wrong thing, in 
acting in direct violation of parental commands, but a 
very foolish thing for himself. He should have remem- 
bered that there were in the woods other animals besides 
those which supplied food — such as bears, panthers, 
wolverines or carcajous, which he would have been very 
sorry to meet, even had he been armed with more telling 
weapons than a bow and arrow. 

But Jack, though rather headstrong, was a brave boy, 
as we shall have many occasions to indicate, and thought 
no more of the savage denizens of the woods, than he 
did of the howling Indians he might have also met with. 

Be this as it may, his strolls round about the plantation 
"being common, he was not missed until night, when, to 
the surprise of father and mother, and the annoyance of 
the Canadian, all three sons were absent. At first, 
Mr. and Mrs. Hatfield thought Jack might have gone 
with his elder brothers, but Batiste shook his head, and 
said that he had seen the boy, full two hours after their 
departure, going in another direction. 

The mother's fears were at once excited, and sinking 



LOST IN THE WOODS. 57 

into a chair, she clasped her hands in speechless 
agony. 

" Me find him," said Batiste quietly, " de boy be lost 
in de voods." 

And snatching up his rifle, he hurried out of the hut, 
and taking the direction where Jack had been sauntering, 
he soon disappeared beneath the leafy arches of the forest. 



CHAPTEE VII. 

LOST IN" THE WOODS. 

Jack no more knew where to look for the deer, than 
he did to kill it when found. This was partly the fault 
of his education. Had he been born in the same station 
of life in the United States or Canada, he would, by the 
time he was eight years old, have had a light fowling- 
piece of his own, and now at twelve, he would, in all 
probability, have been a pretty good shot, from practice 
at ducks, quails, pheasants, and squirrels. But he had 
been brought up in England, where such precociousness 
is not so much encouraged. 

But Jack believed that he could easily come across some 
deer, which he thought, from the many successful expe- 
ditions of Batiste and Ralph, were to be found in every 
forest glade. "With this idea in his head, he made 
directly for the hills, and soon began ascending the 
wooded slope, and this for hours ; but not a trace of deer 
or any other game did he see, though every now and 
then he heard strange noises in the forest, which indicated 
that he was not alone. 

After some time, while in a valley, he became tired, 
and stopping beside a small stream, he ate his dinner ; 
which, after his long walk, he enjoyed very much. 
Rising from the green sward, he continued on his way, 



58 THE SHOW SHIP. 

utterly forgetful that time was passing, while his mind 
was keenly alive to the sense of mortification which 
would overcome him, if, after running away, he returned 
utterly empty-handed to the camp. This thought roused 
the lion within him, and he struggled on manfully 
beneath hugh pine and hemlock trees, through cedar 
swamps, and over ridges, until the lengthening shadows 
and the approach of darkness suddenly brought him to a 
stand-still. 

Many boys would have been frightened, but Jack was 
not. A night in the forest glades, under the greenwood 
tree, did not seem to him, as it might to stay-at-homes, 
so very dreadful, though he did feel a deep pang of 
remorse at the thought, that his disobedience would cause 
sorrow aud alarm to his parents. But at his age, the 
sunny side of the future is ever uppermost, and Jack was 
already in fancy clasped in the arms of his fond, forgiving, 
and weeping mother. We are sadly afraid, that Mamma's 
weakness of heart, has often much to answer for. 

The first thought of the lad was, to find a place to 
shelter himself from the weather, which looked threaten- 
ing, and soon his eye fell upon a dry smooth spot beneath 
some spreading cedars, whither he carried, as long as a 
glimpse of daylight lasted, such fuel as he was able to 
collect, in the form of dry brambles, fallen boughs, and 
pieces of rotting logs. He had his flint, steel, and punk — a 
substance, obtained from the sugar maple, like German 
tinder — and with these, and some dry cedar-bark, he 
soon had a genial blaze, that cheered while it warmed 
him. 

A boy's eyes are in general larger than his appetite. 
Jack, fortunately for himself, had provided twice as much 
dinner as he could eat, so that he had still a hearty 
supper left — which was more than he deserved. The 



LOST IW THE "WOODS. 59 

meat and cake were sweet indeed, while even the muddy 
water from a neighbouring swamp was not to be disdained, 
with a little of the fruit of the papaw. 

Jack's knife was again brought into requisition after 
supper, to cut a quantity of hemlock brush' for his bed, 
while with larger limbs broken from the evergreens, 
which grew in abundance on that spot, he made a wall 
on the side whence the wind came. He contrived, it will 
be seen, to be very comfortable, though, in his heart, he 
would gladly have given up all this romance, to have 
seen the mild eyes of bis mother beaming in his face. 

We have said that he was not frightened ; but still he 
was uneasy and uncomfortable.. It was quite possible 
that he might be attacked by wild beasts, while 
at home he knew how sorrowful must be all the 
faces around the supper table. These thoughts kept 
him awake some time, during which the wind increased 
to a gale, and made things very uncomfortable, while its 
howling in the woods was indeed rough music for a 
lullaby. Jack said his prayers more solemnly than ever 
he had done on any previous occasion, vowing never to 
run away any more, though at the very instant an under- 
current of thought was telling him how much he enjoyed 
the excitement. At last he slept, nor woke except for a 
minute or two now and then, when he put on fresh fuel. 

With the first upward leap of the sun he was on foot, 
and, to his great joy, the morning was bright. His 
conviction was, that he could without much trouble 
retrace bis steps, though he had heard it was easy to lose 
one's self in the wood; and so it is until you get familiar 
with the creeks and ridges. He breakfasted on a crust, 
some papaw fruit, and water that left a sediment of mud 
in his cup. By this time the sun was obscured, so that 
Jack had no guide, save his memory. But in forests, trees 



60 THE SNOW SHIP. 

are so much alike, that without compass or sun, it is all 
but impossible to find one's way, except you are an 
experienced woodman. This the Canadian afterwards 
explained fully to the boy, giving him a well-known 
direction, which, if ever you emigrate, you will do well 
not to forget. 

If lost in the woods, the great secret is to move always 
in one direction, and this you may do by observing the 
moss on the trees. If you are in a forest of deciduous 
or hard wood — the moss grows in much greater abund- 
ance on the north side of the trees. It will not avail the 
anxious traveller to examine one trunk, wdrich may 
mislead, but the general aspect of the wood. On the 
northern side they will be of a light and cheerful tint ; but 
on the southern, dark and spotted. Then again, in pine 
woods, thfe usual inclination of the timber is to the south- 
east, while ridges run mostly north-east and south-west. 

But these signs, by reading which in the open book of 
Nature the redskins become so expert, were as a sealed 
book to Master Jack, who, however, fearlessly struck 
out, as he thought, for home, despite the gloom of the 
overcast sky, and heedless of the falling rain. For some 
time he was satisfied that he was going in the right 
direction, nor was he frightened when he came to a thick 
cedar swamp, which he skirted for some time, until he 
found what he thought was a suitable passage. In 
another moment he was in a dense thicket of cedar, 
where every tree was like the last, and nothing could be 
seen in the way of a landmark. Presently, however, he 
saw the forest before him, and rejoicing at having crossed 
the swamp, he pressed forward until he met with occa- 
sional marks of his own footsteps coming from the 
opposite direction. 

He was satisfied that he had come upon his own trail 



LOST IN THE WOODS. 61 

of the previous day. His spirits revived wonderfully, 
though he was nigh fainting with hunger, not an eatable 
root or fruit that he knew of presenting itself. But soon 
he would be home, and then his sinking frame would be 
revived by proper food. Scarcely had he made this 
remark in his own mind, when above the trees rose a 
small wreath of curling smoke, and he felt that he was 
near his friends. They had doubtless been searching for 
him, and were now halting for rest and refreshment. 
On he hurried with a wildly beating heart, with a 
contrite speech ready prepared, dashing, despite his 
fatigue, over every impediment, to find himself in the 
presence of the smouldering fire which he had left in his 
camp of the night before. 

Jack sank on the ground in the agony of his spirit, for 
a moment utterly heart-broken. He had gone round in 
a circle all day, the common fate of the man or boy who 
is lost in the woods, — a circumstance explained by the 
Indians, who assert that men and animals on the prairies 
and in the woods always bear to the left. But of this at a 
future time. Hunger now pressed him to rise ; and eagerly 
searching the woods, he found some roots and beech mast, 
which he soon devoured,- and night again coming on, he 
prepared once more to pass the weary hours, but in a 
very different mood to that which sustained him on the 
previous evening. 

He was half-starved, while a vivid imagination painted 
to him the terrible suspense, the exquisite terror his 
friends must now be experiencing, and he vowed, if 
spared this time, never again to disobey his affectionate 
and loving parents, This resolution come to, he said his 
prayers, and making up a huge fire, he lay down once more 
beneath that leafy arch, to seek much-needed rest and 
slumber. It was not so easily obtained as on the night 



62 THE STTOW SHIP. 

before. His ears were sensitively sharp, and keenly alive to 
every sound, so that at one moment he heard in the far- 
off distance the howling of wolves, and even fancied he 
detected the growling of savage hears. He knew that 
his best protection was fire, so he rose and kindled a 
fresh one on the otter side of him. 

Then once more he laid himself down to rest. Close 
to his head were the bow and arrows, his pride in which, 
and his own dexterity, had first led him astray. His eyes 
now became heavy, and his head fell upon the bosom of 
Mother Earth. Despite a fancy that overcame him that 
there was danger, sleep asserted its irresistible power, 
and all the world, its trials and its sorrows, became a 
blank. 

About an hour before dawn he awoke with a sensation 
of chilliness, and rising, he found that his fires were burn- 
ing low. This want was speedily supplied, as there was 
plenty of fuel about, and soon the huge furnace-like piles 
glowed with heat, the green hemlock boughs and other 
damp wood, spitting and emitting sparks and volumes of 
smoke. 

His body in a glow, as much from exercise as from the 
warmth of the renovated piles, Jack, though very hungry 
and sad, once more stretched himself upon his leafy bed. 
Scarcely had he done so, when his quick ear caught the 
sound of something like the light cautious tread of a 
panther, or a redskin on some dry twigs higher up in 
the valley. Again it was repeated, and he knew that 
some powerful animal was stealthily approaching him. 

Then all the terrible stories which the Canadian had 
told him of bears and panthers, carcajous and catamounts, 
flashed upon his excited brain, and he felt that his last 
hour was come. With a sad and bitter thought of those 
he should never see again, the brave boy placed his knife 



LOST' ts the woods. 63 

close to his hand, and clutching his feeble weapons, he 
resolved to sell his life dearly, and to yield only when 
overcome by superior force. 

He had no time for any but a hasty prayer, for the 
cautious and stealthy footsteps sounded close at hand. 
Drawing his arrow to the very flint-head, his little manly 
heart beating with excitement more than fear, he waited. 
There was a slight dizziness about the eyes for a moment, 
caused by a rush of blood, and then, the boughs parting, 
he saw the honest face of Batiste Lanfry peering through 
the darkness ; — he had approached quietly with his 
mocassins, for fear of waking the slumbering lost one. 

With a wild cry, the arrow was launched into the air, 
and then he was clasped to the honest hunter's heart, 
whose bronzed cheeks were moist with emotion and joy. 

" Be brave boy — he shoot : he no see me — he stand 
like one hero — no 'fraid in him ! " said Batiste when 
telling the story, which he did with pride and delight 
ever afterwards. 

A glass of brandy, a biscuit, and a slice of meat, soon 
restored Jack, who at once started for home, from which 
he had never before been distant eight miles. The 
Canadian had taken a wrong direction at first, but just 
at sundown the night before, while on a distant hill, he 
had observed a column of smoke, which he knew must 
arise from the camp of the boy hunter. 

We need not add that Jack was freely forgiven by his 
delighted parents, and never again repeated his folly, 
which, however, did not keep him from undergoing many 
more startling trials afterwards. Scarcely had the 
excitement of his return subsided, when he found that 
he was not the only one who had had an adventure. 



64 THE SNOW SHIP. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE MARTEN" TEAPPEES. 

The Marten (JSfustela visoii) somewhat resembles a 
common weasel in form, though it is larger, being from 
eighteen to twenty inches from muzzle to tail ; the tail 
itself ten inches, and the whole weighing about five 
pounds. The ears are short, broad, and round : the tail 
covered with long hair ; the colour varying from a chest- 
nut or dark brown, tinged with dirty yellow. It inha- 
bits the Northern States of America and the British 
possessions, lives in the forest, and climbs trees in pursuit 
of its prey. The female has from three to six young 
ones. The flesh is eaten, but not esteemed. The fur 
is soft and valuable. In New England and other places 
it is called the Sable, while the Indians give it the name 
of Wappanaugh. 

Purs have been always assiduously collected by man, 
and both Ralph and Harry, the latter especially, enjoyed 
a sport which was likely to be as lucrative as it was 
amusing. It will be necessary, to the full comprehension 
of our narrative, to describe minutely the process of 
marten trapping, an occupation which, in those days, was 
much followed. The traps are placed on a line of about 
three or four miles of forest and bush, which is blazed, 
that no one of the hunters may lose his way ; that is to 
say, large slices are cut out of the trees on one side every 
now and then ; one being always cut before the previous 
mark is lost sight of. 

This part of the task is carried out by one man, while 
another sets the trap (which is called a dead fall) in the 
following manner: — Two lines are drawn on the ground, 
about a foot apart, into which short sticks are driven, one 



THE MAKTEN THAMEES. 65 

end only of the enclosure being left open; and this entrance 
being artistically covered by brushwood. The trapper then 
takes a piece of wood from two to three feet long, Avhich 
he beds in the ground in summer, or in the snow in win- 
ter ; on this a falling pole is supported by three pieces of 
stick+notcked together in the form of a figure 4 ; the 
centre piece being made long and sharp at the point, to 
which the bait is fastened, and projects well into the 
miniature house. The marten inserts its snout, to 
steal the bait, snatches at it, springs the trap, and the 
pole falling across its neck, the animal is killed at a 
single blow. 

This is not only a sure but inexpensive way of procur- 
ing furs, and was therefore followed with ardour by the 
new settlers. Ralph would have enjoyed a shooting ex- 
pedition better ; but he was a reasonable young man, and 
knew the value both of powder saved and of furs gained. 
Harry, whose pride made him devote some of his time to 
woodcraft, not unwillingly accompanied him on the morn- 
ing in question, to examine the traps, secure any prizes, 
or restore baits to those falls which had been disturbed. 

There was a trail leading to the spot, which Ralph knew 
well, having followed it three times; so that about eleven 
they reached the middle of the line, which was four miles 
long, and there they parted, Ralph going to the left, and 
Harry to the right, each agreeing to return the same way 
as soon as their relative tasks were completed. Harry 
was delighted. The air was serene and balmy, the sky 
above, a mottled blue, while all around were lovely prai- 
ries, with their interminable carpet of green ; or thick 
woods, through which, however, the youth made his way 
easily by means of the blazed trees. On his way he se- 
cured three martens, which he hung on trees ; and having 
reset the traps, he continued his journey. 

6 



66 THE SNOW SHIP.. 

The end of the line once reached, Harry seated himself 
with his back against a log, took out his dinner and 
sedately began eating it. When this agreeable task v?as 
completed, and the solids washed down with some spruce 
beer, he leaned his head against the fallen tree, and ad- 
miring the prospect, or thinking of something, or nothing, 
he fell fast asleep, nor did he awake for perhaps an hour, 
when in a half doze he heard a strange noise — a kind of 
vibratory sound like the distant roll of a drum. 

Now, if Harry was somewhat slow in his actions, he 
was quick in his thoughts, and at the same time curious. 
Taking tip his gun, therefore, he hurried ahead, dashed 
through a thicket, gradually decreasing his pace until he 
was creeping with due huntsman care, when he came 
upon a scene which well rewarded him for his journey. 
The drumming noise which lie had heard was from a 
covey of Canadian partridges or grouse, the male of 
which, in the season of courtship, perches himself on the 
top of a hollow log, or fallen tree, and with his wings 
makes the drumming, which, in still weather, can be 
heard in the woods at the distance of a mile. 

Determined not to be behindhand, Harry fired at the 
covey, killed three birds, and then loading, started in 
pursuit, nor took any note of time until he had secured 
six brace. Then, and only then, he began to look about 
him, with a view to returning. One glance at the coun- 
try somewhat startled him, though he entertained no fear 
about finding his way back to the line. 

He was on a summit, or ridge, and all around were 
gloomy woods, and thickets of grey pine, hemlock, and 
red cedar, while at no great distance were deep ravines, 
precipitous rocks, and one or two small lakes, which, in 
the excitement of the chase, he had not noticed. Now, 
Harry, without having Balph's experience, had all his 



THE MAETEIT TEAPPEES. 67 

confidence, so lie set out upon his return journey without 
a fear of the result, and rather proud of his achievement 
than otherwise. Twelve fat partridges were things by no 
means to be despised. Trudging along the plain, forcing 
his way through tangled ravines, climbing up steep rocks, 
Harry pushed on for some time without losing any of his 
confidence of being right ; but by degrees his elongated 
face showed the rising doubt, and when he sat down on 
the summit of the rock, under a huge white pine, towering 
more than a hundred feet into the air, the solemn convic- 
tion forced itself upon him, that he had lost his way. 

Two brothers lost on the same day ! But in Canada 
such matters are of daily occurrence ; and many a good- 
natured neighbour who has turned out in search of a 
missing one, has lost himself, while rarely does the 
wanderer stray to any great distance, being generally 
found within a radius of a few miles. 

"When Harry came to this conclusion, he at once fired 
oif both barrels, as a signal to Ralph, and waited, but no 
responsive shot coming to cheer him, he looked up into 
the sky, and keeping his eye fixed upon the sun for a 
moment, he took the bearings of another mighty pine at 
a considerable distance, and made straight for it. This 
for a few minutes was easy enough, but as he neared it 
he found that this one tree got muddled up with the 
others, and his land-mark was again lost. 

"What puzzled Harry most was, that he still kept on a 
rocky ridge which seemed strange to him ; so, after a 
moment's reflection, he resolved to try once more the 
effect of a signal. Looking keenly round, he selected a 
large, ancient, and hollow cedar that stood apart from 
any other trees, and around this and in the hollow of* it 
he piled brush and brambles and pitch-pine knots, with 
other combustibles, to which he then set fire, the whole 



63 TfiE SNOW SHI?. 

taking light with a crackling and a roar that sounded 
through the woods like a dropping fire of musketry. 

Then Harry leaned on his gun and waited. 

It was in vain. Ralph had either not seen the signal, 
or was too far off to respond to it ; so Harry in despera- 
tion began to pluck a partridge preparatory to roasting 
it. But as yet it was impossible to reach the raging pile, 
the trunk of the cedar having taken fire inside, and burn- 
ing with the loud roar of a blast-furnace, sending flames 
and sparks flying in all directions from a yawning open- 
ing about twelve feet from the ground. As the twilight 
came, and the dark mantle of night fell upon the earth, 
the blazing tree presented quite a grand appearance, and 
beside it Harry felt no alarm from the wild beasts. 
Presently the bark, after shrivelling and curling, caught 
fire, and then the whole body of the tree was in flames, 
the cedar boughs crackling and hissing with a sound that 
might have been heard many miles. 

Harry was a philosopher, and took things mighty 
easily, so, after eating a partridge and some biscuit, he 
slept soundly, and as soon as morning came he once 
more took his way through the forest in a north-westerly 
direction, as far as he could judge by the sun, leaving the 
cedar to smoulder and smoke until reduced to ashes. 

By moving very slowly, guided by the sun, and taking 
large trees as landmarks, Harry contrived to get over a 
good bit of ground; and at noon, after floundering 
about in a zigzag and winding direction, he came 
suddenly upon a blazed tree. 

Next instant he saw a fresh marten trap, and in a 
transport of joy he gave a loud shout, which was speedily 
followed by another ; and before he had time to survey 
the ground, Balph came in sight. The meeting was 
hearty indeed, though the elder brother had felt no 



THE MARTEK TRAPPERS. 69 

alarm, in his own mind believing that Harry, having 
missed him, had gone home, whereupon, it being late, he 
had resolved to camp out and visit the marten traps a 
second time. The sight of the partridges delighted him, 
and leading his brother to where he had camped, he 
heard the other's story over a substantial breakfast. 

Both laughed heartily, and, their morning's survey 
over, they returned rapidly to the settlement, their horse 
heavily laden with deer's meat, grouse, and martens ; they 
heard that their brother Jack was lost in the woods, and 
that Batiste had gone after him. We need not now pain 
our readers by a description of the suffering endured by 
the parents and elder brothers ; it suffices to say that 
the re-union was a happy one, and that the occurrences of 
the two previous days gave an additional zest to some 
stories told by the Canadian. 

He had known people die within half-a-dozen miles of 
their own door, after moving round in a circle day after 
day ; but this was generally in winter, with snow on the 
ground and on the heavily-laden trees, and falling so 
rapidly as to obliterate the trail, and render it impossible 
to recognize a road from an open glen of the forest. 
Then, if the traveller, without means to make a fire, 
yields to the terrible inclination for sleep which comes 
over him, he will never wake more, but be found frozen 
to death ; or only a few bones, picked clean by wolves, 
will remain to tell his fate. 

He knew an old woman and her grandson, who, jour- 
neying from house to house, in sight of one another, lost 
the track while the child was plucking flowers, and were 
not found for eight days, and then thirteen miles east 
from the starting point. They were alive, but had suf- 
fered much from exposure and privation. In every in- 
stance, the shrewd hunter declared that the sufferers had 



70 THE SNOW SHIP. 

turned to the left, to which men and animals " always 
bear their course." This assertion was as thoroughly 
believed in by Batiste as it was by Catlin and other 
hunters, and resulted in his giving the same advice as 
that wonderful hunter did. 

" When a deer does run," he would say, " if it is on a 
plain, don't run after him, but turn to the left, when you 
will meet him. He runs in a curve, and when he stops 
he is always watching his back track." 



CHAPTEE IX. 

SETTLING. 

In the intervals of these and many minor adventures, 
which, if narrated, would swell our book to an inordinate 
size, the farm labours were not neglected. While the 
chopping was going on, care was taken to put aside such 
logs as would, when well seasoned, serve to set up a more 
complete house the following year, settlers in this respect 
resembling the aboriginal inhabitants, who use skins, 
grass, dirt, mud, bark, and timber in the erection of their 
houses, but never stones. 

One of the most important works to be undertaken 
was to prepare for the plough as much land as possible 
previous to the frosts, as these pulverize the ground, so 
that in the spring it only requires harrowing. But be- 
fore the plough could be driven over any. large space ol 
ground, it was necessary to cl ^ar it as much as possible. 
and this was done in a variety of ways. 

It must be remembered by the home farmer, and by 
all my boy readers, that when the trees are cut down, 



SETTLING. 71 

about two or three feet from the ground — much depend- 
ing on the height of the axe-man — there remain the 
stumps and the roots, which the ruder kind of settlers 
generally, and squatters always, allow to rot away ; oak, 
ash, beech, and maple take about ten or twelve years, and 
the evergreens, such as pine, hemlock, and cedar, a much 
longer period. 

Now, nothing can be more unsightly than the presence 
of these stumps in a field, while they interfere with agri- 
cultural operations in a way that needs no explanation. 
Mr. Hatfield, who, in a permanent residence, had an eye 
to beauty as well as utility, desired that such fields as 
would be seen from his front windows, in the future, 
should be as free as possible from eye-sores ; so all set to 
work to endeavour to eradicate them. 

With this view the logging chain, to which allusion 
has already been made, was fastened round the top of the 
stumps, and then, according to the size or tenacity of the 
root, a part, or all the team of oxen and horses were fast- 
ened to it, and made to start off with a quick and sudden 
jerk, which in most instances sufficed to pull it up. 
Others, however, were much larger and more tenacious, 
being firmly fixed in the ground ; and in these instances 
a huge lever, twenty feet long and more than twelve 
inches thick, was chained at one end to the stump, and to 
the other the oxen were fastened and driven in a circular 
direction, which, in most cases, sufficed to break up the 
obstruction. But whenever the roots had not rotted at 
all, they were left for another season. 

Batiste hit upon an ingenious plan with regard to the 
cedar stumps, which afforded considerable amusement to 
the young people. The weather had been unusually hot 
so that all timber was very dry. One evening, therefore, 
Batiste proposed to clear a few acres of cedar stumps in 



72 THE SNOW SHIP. 

a novel kind of way. As they had been busy during the 
day, the operation was left until evening, when Mr. Hat- 
field usually indulged in the pleasures of a pipe before 
his log shanty, which all settlers find very grateful after 
the labours of the day have been completed. 

The Canadian and the boys had selected the ground, 
and when all care had been taken to avoid any danger, a 
large fire was lit just before sundown, which, during the 
evening meal, was reduced to embers. Then the actors 
in the scene took each a quantity of hot coals, which were 
shaken on the crown of the cedar stump, and which, after 
smouldering for some time, were fanned into flame by the 
evening breeze. Tree after tree in this way presented 
the appearance of gigantic torches blazing about two or 
three feet from the ground, until at last from two to 
three hundred, flaring in the night air, presented one of 
those grandiose and impressive spectacles which can 
scarcely be realized in the old country. 

This operation performed, and the roots being burnt 
to some little distance below the surface, the land was 
ploughed, crossed, and harrowed ; it was then rolled twice 
previous to the final ploughing and ridging, which takes 
place in August. Soon after this, fall wheat is sown ; for 
the earlier the seed is in the ground the stronger the 
plant will be, and hence better able to withstand the 
frost. All this was hard work ; and when we consider 
that over forty acres had also to be fenced in the way 
already described, we have some idea of the early labours 
of a settler. 

One very important requisite to emigrants is fodder ; 
the want of it is found by farmers to be among the 
greatest inconveniences they have to endure for the 
first three or four years after their arrival in the land of 
adoption. 



SETTLING. 73 

During the whole of this period he has to depend on 
the bush for pasturage for his cows and oxen, — at all 
events during six or seven months of the year. It must 
not be supposed that there is any want of food ; it is 
only too abundant in the woods, on the beaver meadows, 
and on the margin of lakes and streams, where, if cattle 
be turned out towards the autumn, they will become ex- 
cessively fat and in good condition. The difficulty you 
have to suffer from, is that of not being able to find them 
when you want them, which, both with cows and oxen, 
is a very serious one. Many a wearisome and anxious 
day, sometimes a week, is spent in hunting up your cat- 
tle ; and you may not only consider yourself lucky to 
find them, but esteem yourself fortunate if you do not 
lose yourself. 

Mr. Hatfield was naturally anxious to provide against 
this, and therefore hurried on as fast as possible the clear- 
ance of land suitable to be sown with timothy grass and 
clover mixed, or the former alone, which in Canada is 
considered the best for hay. Timothy is a solid grass, 
with a bulbous root. Ail worked with a will, especially 
Ealph, who was looking forward to a glorious winter 
with an impatience and ardour which, perhaps, some of 
my boy readers may understand, when I give a slight 
programme of their designs. 

The Canadian and Ealph were to start on horseback 
to Montreal, making arrangements as fthey went for the 
purchase of cows and pigs to be delivered in the spring. 
At Montreal they were to sell their furs and skins, and 
then lay in a stock of necessaries, such as coffee, tea, and 
sugar, after which they were to purchase a sleigh and re- 
turn home as rapidly as possible. 

Batiste bade them not trouble about domestics, as he 
would find efficient ones himself before the arrival of the 



74 THE SNOW SHIP. 

cattle, and before the enlarged and extended operations 
of the following year made labourers necessary. 

Mr. and Mrs. Hatfield had agreed that on their return, 
and as soon as they had taken a moderate rest, all the boys, 
Jack included, were, under the special surveillance and 
guardianship of Batiste, to start on an expedition to 
certain mountainous lakes for the purpose of caribou 
hunting. For this purpose Jack was to have a gun, 
while all the long evenings were spent by the mother in 
preparing clothes and blankets for their snow cam- 
paign. 

Prom early morning until night, the ploughs and har- 
rows were at work, after which the seed was sown broad- 
cast, at the rate of six quarts of grass-seed and two pounds 
of clover to the acre — on virgin soil, be it noted. On 
old, cleared farms double the amount would have been 
needed. This done, the thought of the hay-making next 
June intruded itself, and made them think of raising barns ; 
but this was a serious undertaking, which was deferred to 
next summer, as a cow-house, pigsties, and storehouse 
were far more pressing matters. 

These were made from logs and shingle, which is a 
word so often occurring in these and other pages as to 
need some explanation. Shingles are of pine or cedar, 
the former being preferred, as less liable to gutter and 
make an uneven roof. Nothing is more necessary to a 
backwoods-man £han to be a good shingler — that is, to 
know how to select the right tree and how to cut it. 
Many, after cutting down a four-foot diameter tree, and 
sawing a block of eighteen inches out of the centre, find 
either that it will not split fair, or that the wood eats, by 
which is meant that the grain, though straight length- 
ways, makes sharp deep curves which render it bad to 
split, and causes holes in the shingle when shaved. 



SETTLING. 75 

Now, the grain of most trees naturally inclines towards 
the sun, or the same tvay 'round the tree as the sun's course. 
It may, therefore, happen that a tree may be quite straight 
in the grain, where you chop it down, yet ten feet higher 
it winds so much as to be useless. 

The Canadian, whose knowledge of the woods was mar- 
vellous, taught them to obviate this difficulty ; and under 
his guidance they chose trees — the largest possible — 
clear of knots for sixty or more feet, with luxuriant head 
and drooping boughs ; this done, the bark was peeled off 
as high as possible, and the grain examined. If it was 
in the least inclined towards the sun, it was rejected ; 
while, if its curves were ever so slight the other way, or 
against the sun, it was further tried by cutting out a 
piece a foot long and three or four inches deep. This 
was split until it was reduced to the thickness of two 
shingles, when it was split again, and if the timber were 
fit and good, the pieces flew apart with a sudden snap, 
and were perfectly even in the grain; while, on the other 
hand, one grain would cut into the other, or run off the 
whole length without splitting clear. The blocks for use 
were cut eighteen inches long and split into quarters, and 
the sap wood tressed off. 

Then, in addition to these duties, there was laying in a 
stock of provisions for the winter. In such a plentiful, 
rich, and favoured country as Canada, they had no fear of 
a supply both of fresh pork and game, during the snows 
and frosts ; but it was necessary to provide for those days 
when the weather or other circumstances prevented hunt- 
ing and fishing. With this view, boxes and rude barrels 
were made, to hold dry and salt fish and venison, after 
which large quantities were procured. 

Salmon-fishing was the greatest sport, and this was in- 
dulged in by all the males, Mrs. Hatfield watching them 



76 THE skotv snip. 

from the bank. It necessitated the making of a canoe, 
the scow being too heavy; and this of itself was a delight- 
ful amusement to the bovs. f>ver the bow of this, an 
iron grate or jack, as Batiste called it, was suspended — 
the said grate being a small cradle composed of iron bars 
three or four inches apart. This cradle is allowed to 
swing in a frame, as it is thus kept on a level, otherwise 
the swell would pitch the pine knots out. The fire is 
made of light wood and fat pine, which throw a clear 
bright light for several yards round the bow of the canoe, 
and enable the fisherman to discern his prey many feet 
beneath the water. 

Each canoe holds two, the striker and the paddler — 
the latter seated, the former kneeling. Ralph was con- 
tent to steer and row this autumn, allowing the Canadian 
to use the spear, which he did with marvellous success, 
throwing ashore whole piles of fish, then so abundant 
that one day Harry and Jack, after driving a shoal up a 
stream, caught seventy with a pitchfork. They took also 
sturgeon, pike, mullets, eels and trout, the latter with 
worm and fly ; while Mr. Hatfield amused himself by 
trolling for muske-longe, or black bass, with an imitation 
mouse of musk-rat fur, a red and white rag, or a green 
frog. About this time they first saw passenger pigeons 
in incredible numbers, but as they had no regular 
battue until the next year, we reserve our descrip- 
tion. 

And now that pleasant harbinger of winter was upon 
them, the Indian summer, when the air is unusually mild 
and temperate, when a haze, like distant smoke, pervades 
the atmosphere, at times, however, so thick as even to 
obscure the sun, or, if it remains visible, changing it to a 
blood-red colour. Batiste knew that this was a sign not 
to be mistaken, so the departure for Montreal was bur- 



SETTLING. 77 

ried; the horses saddled, the furs packed, and for five 
weeks Batiste and Ralph were absent. 

Just as their absence began to excite uneasiness, up 
they dashed with the loveliest sleigh, as Jack thought, he 
had ever seen. 

The vehicle was what is called a family sleigh, to hold 
six, with a high seat in front for two, and room for four 
behind, or for luggage in considerable quantities. The 
horses were harnessed tandem fashion. There are many 
which hold ten persons, and others two, called cutters ; 
while now all farmers have lumber sleighs for general 
purposes — it being well known that far larger loads can 
be conveyed on runners in winter than can be drawn on 
wheels in summer, even over a good road. 

It is worth while to make a voyage to Canada, if only 
to enjoy the supreme luxury of sleighing, which, with 
skating, is the favourite amusement of both sexes during 
the winter months ; though it is some time ere the for- 
mer can be perfectly enjoyed, as it takes several falls of 
snow to fill up and level all the inequalities, when alone 
sleighing can be good. 

Then with a good whip, warm furs, with winter-shod 
horses, with bells upon the horses' necks, away you go at 
a pace which is perfectly delicious, but which makes the 
blood tingle, the heart beat, the eyes flash, and the whole 
being become pervaded by a glow of general happiness 
and excitement incomparable, which only the practised 
sleigher can understand. But our sleigh has a long and 
adventurous voyage before it — so we must defer it. 



78 THE SNOW SHIP. 

CHAPTER X. 

THE SIEIGH. 

October was the great fishing month ; and about 
November, the ice was strong enough to bear a man 
upon it ; while, by degrees, the ground became whitened 
with snow. Nothing could be more wild and yet more 
picturesque than to gaze out from the shanty upon the 
narrow expanse which, while the snow fell, remained 
within the circle of their vision, and to note the ever- 
greens changing their upper boughs for a snowy hue, 
while under this silver layer shone in dark relief the 
native colour of the tree ; to remark the heavy clods, as 
it were, of congealed water filling up holes, carried in 
drifts, and at last making one vast sheet of lovely white. 
But the falls are not continuous until Christinas, 
before which time sleighing seldom begins in earnest ; 
and it has to be left off in January during a temporary 
thaw, which, though periodical, is not every year of the 
same duration. It is often attended by strong gales of wind 
from the southward, with heavy thunder and lightning, 
which our adventurers- discovered to their cost ; but we 
must not anticipate. However, we may mention here, 
for the information of our readers and intending emi- 
grants, that February is the coldest month. A great 
authority makes the following statement : — " I have 
frequently known the thermometer range from 16 to 
20° below zero for a week together. On one winter's 
day it was as low as 35°. The coldest day was in 1833. 
The quicksilver in Fahrenheit's thermometer was frozen 
in the ball, which marks 39° below zero. The day was 
clear ; not a cloud was above the horizon. The sun 
was -o f r\ dull copper colour; and the horizon, towards the 



THE SLEIGH. 79 

north-west, was tinged with the same hue. I was only 
a quarter of an hour out, but I felt the cold severely. 
We sat round the s fire at dinner, with plates on our 
knees." 

The excessive cold is of short duration, while the snow 
and the extreme dryness of the atmosphere make the 
cold less felt than in England. It was resolved on all 
hands that the caribou expedition should commence two 
days after Christmas Day, and no time, therefore, was 
lost in making preparations for a journey which was 
not without its dangers and perils, and which certainly 
could not be completed without many trials. 

The long wished-for morning came, and there stood 
the sleigh before the door, the horses harnessed, and to 
all appearance impatient for a start. The seat in front 
was to contain the Canadian and Ealph, while Harry 
and Jack were to be perched amid a confused heap of 
guns, spears, blankets, buffalo rugs, snow-shoes, mocas- 
sins, a couple of hounds, and other necessaries — not 
forgetting a good store of coffee, sugar, and bread, with 
a small supply of meat. 

The worthy Batiste was grave and solemn, as behoved 
the leader of a party. Ealph strove to emulate his 
calmness while he stood holding the bridle of the leading 
horse. Harry never allowed excitement to overcome 
his discretion ; but little Jack was in such a state of 
excitement as is, perhaps, only known to a boy when 
about to start for the first time on such an expedition as 
that which now marked an era in his life. JSTo warrior 
going into the battle for the first time, no actor appear- 
ing on his maiden board, no speaker rising for the first 
time on a public platform, had ever felt his heart beat 
more wildly than did Jack Hatfield. 

No word-picture can do justice to the appearance of 



80 THE SJSW SHIP. 

that morning. The day, for the 27th of December, was 
magnificent. Only a few clouds, resplendent with re- 
flected light from the mass of snow which covered 
Mother Earth, floated in an ocean of the brightest blue, 
while there was a singularly novel glittering in the 
atmosphere, that appeared full of shining particles, mov- 
ing like dust atoms in a sunbeam. 

There had been rain on Christmas Day, which circum- 
stance added much to the beauty of the landscape. 
"Wherever on cedar, pine, or maple, the rain had half 
melted the snow, the sudden frost had caught and frozen 
it afresh into myriads of strange shapes ; which, whether 
coaters of ice or dependent icicles, whether projecting 
lumps or drifts in corners, displayed their silver front- 
ings under a sun that turned them to every colour of 
the rainbow. 

There was no good road to the lake, but the hunters 
had taken care, during the summer, to remove all such 
obstacles as would stand in the way of a sleigh. This 
was the more necessary as, from peculiar circumstances, 
they had to start at headlong speed. The rain, suc- 
ceeded by a sharp and sudden frost, had turned the 
snow into one solid mass of ice, over which a tandem 
sleigh must be guided with the most consummate skill, 
to prevent the leading horse finding "his head where 
his tail should be," by the mere gliding or slueing of 
the sleigh. This an experienced charioteer will prevent 
by keeping a tight rein on the side which shows a 
tendency to slue, and at the same time launching the 
steeds at full gallop, the body of the horse counteracting 
the sidelong movement of the sleigh. On such a road 
any attempt to pull up a horse will result in the sleigh 
turning round rapidly, as on a pivot, and inevitably 
throwing the animals. 



THE SLEIGH. 81 

Mr. Hatfield was rather grave, but confident in the 
Bkill and devotion of the Canadian. He felt quite 
proud of his sons ; though he was somewhat startled 
when, with a loud halloo and a sudden cracking of the 
whip, the sturdy and well-fed horses were launched 
down the road at a pace that appeared, to an unpractised 
eye, literally fearful. 

Before it was out of sight, the sleigh was going at the 
rate of at least twenty miles an hour, which compelled 
Harry and Jack to lie down, and Ralph to hold his 
breath, and glance inquiringly at Batiste to know if the 
animals had not run away. Any one passing through 
the frosty air at that fearful pace, and seeing the trees 
glide swiftly by, would have been somewhat alarmed in 
those days of slow locomotion, though much greater 
speed is often attained now. 

Over the glass-like ice, away through snow-drifts, 
now shaving a huge trunk, now jostling a charred and 
frosted stump, now rushing down hill, and then as 
suddenly up, never halting, never stopping, the horses 
sending forth volumes of smoke-like vapour from their 
nostrils ; while, ere many miles were traversed, flakes of 
foam fell upon their harness, and upon the front of the 
sledge. Batiste slashing his long whip, and holding his 
reins firm, Ralph burying his head, all but his eyes, in 
his furry robe, Harry and Jack watching with flashing 
eyes the woods and forests, that seemed to flit by, the 
hounds growling as they were loosed above, — out came 
the sleigh upon the vast lake, which was one' single 
sheet of snow, unspotted as far as the eye could reach, — a 
white and glittering plain. 

The snow being more suited to sleighing, Batiste 
gradually compelled his foaming, panting, snorting 
steeds to slacken tbeir pace, until they were whirling 

6 



82 THE SNOW SHIP. 

along at about ten miles an hour, when out sprang the 
hounds, while Harry and Jack stood up holding on fco 
the back of the driver's seat, to gaze at the scene around, 
which was still sufficiently panoramic to be exciting. 
They were rushing up the lake in a northerly direc- 
tion, and could gaze beneath the tall pines and hemlocks, 
with here and there a beech or chestnut, until all was 
dark at the extremity of the forest vista, of which only a 
glimpse was caught. 

"Ha! ha !" said Batiste, nourishing his whip, " ah, ah, 
my frens — how you like de traineau voyage— de ' slay,' as 
you say him? Fine, Jiein! monstros line." 

" Prime," replied Jack. 

" Ha ! ha ! dis is noting — noting at all — vate a beet — 
you vill see vat you shall see." 

" And what is that ?" asked Ralph, looking inquiringly 
at Batiste. 

" Something — vere fine," grinned the French Canadian. 
" A leetle v'ay up de lake — some two honree — mile you 
fine — my frend Antoine — and all de leetle Antoines, and 
den — you vill see vat you shall see." 

And despite their curiosity, the Canadian would say 
no more, but that, when they reached the head-waters of 
the lake, they would be made acquainted with an old 
trapper, who had lived for years with his family upon a 
certain spot, the centre of the finest hunting country in 
the world, abounding in bears, black and brown, in ra- 
coons, in all furry animals, as well as caribou, moose, rec; 
deer, and wapiti, and who would be the means of giving 
them rare sport. 

As mid-day came on, the faint sun of that high latitude 
was at its greatest height; the horses were gradually 
brought to a standstill, close to a steep bank, under the 
skelter of which 'a fire was made, first with fuel from the 



THE SLEIGH. 83 

sleigh, and then with boughs, cut, thawed, and dried, and 
then again with wood from a huge tree felled by the stal- 
wart Canadian. 

The horses were hoppled, and some hay, carried in 
closely-pressed parcels, was given to them ;— then some 
scanty grass from where the huge fire thawed the bank, 
was cut for them. The masters, having seen to their 
beasts, ate a hearty meal, after which the sleigh was 
again brought into requisition until an hour before sun- 
down, when the Canadian ran ashore upon a small 
plain, sheltered and isolated, which he appeared to know 
well. 

All being guided by Batiste, the youths fastened on 
their snow-shoes, and then taking the horses from the 
sleigh, they rubbed them down with extreme care, and 
put upon them a complete suit of cloths, after which 
they were placed beneath some trees, entire]y sheltered 
from the wind, while loose, easily-cut shrubs or boughs 
were so piled up around them, as not only to afford shel- 
ter from wolves, but to keep them warm. 

Then the camp of the young hunters was made, 
almost precisely as the one which they had formerly 
erected from description, but which they did now 
under the guidance of Batiste, who was out on the 
water otherwise engaged, though shouting to them 
when he thought they needed his advice. The snow 
was shovelled away, until they came to the hard 
frozen ground. Then the frame of the camp, made at 
home from poles cut the requisite length, was set up. It 
was about six feet high, and sloped off to the ground ; 
over this was placed a thick layer of fir and hemlock 
boughs, upon the top of which was shovelled as much 
snow as it could well bear, leaving only a small opening, 
in front of which the fire was placed, so as to allow none 



84 THE SNOW SHIP. 

but warm air to enter. Hemlock boughs and buffalo 
robes covered the ground. 

This done, just as the fire was completed, a shot was 
heard ; and hurrying towards Batiste, they found that he 
had been even better engaged than themselves. "With 
something shod with iron, like an Alpine climber, he had 
dug a hole in the ice, and had got up two leather pails of 
water. These were carried towards the fire, after which, 
returning to his post, the Canadian threw in some hooks 
baited with pork ; and as fish gladly rush to air-holes, he 
soon had a nice dish of various sorts. These he was 
about to take to the camp, when some ruffed grouse 
attracted his attention, and then fell at his discharge. 



CHAPTER XI. 

THE BOX SE1STTBY. 

This, the first night out, must be described with more 
minuteness than we shall often be able to give to the 
occurrences of any other ten or twelve hours. The 
Canadian was anxious to indoctrinate the boys with his 
own experience and knowledge in woodcraft. The hearty 
trapper had taken quite as much a fancy to them as they 
had to him, and it was his firm determination that his 
pupils should do him credit. 

The fire was by this time blazing so fiercely as to melt 
the snow for some space around, which was no incon- 
renience, as the tent was placed above. To keep the 
fire up the whole of the night, was absolutely necessary ; 
so, leaving the young people to cook the fish and grouse 
and make the coffee, Batiste moved aside to where some 



THE BOY SENTRY. 85 

huge-limbed trees stood erect, and using his giant 
strength, he soon laid them prostrate. They were then 
cut into suitable lengths and dragged to within a proper 
distance of the camp. 

By the time this had been accomplished, the supper 
was ready, the hunters sitting down to their meal with a 
hunger and relish which is unknown to the pale dweller 
in towns. The grouse were pronounced delicious, the 
fish was voted excellent, a damper fried with fat pork 
very good, and the coifee superb — and superb it was, for 
the cunning trapper had taught them how to make it, 
which is a secret worth knowing ; for no matter how 
good the raw material, the manufacturer can easily 
spoil it. 

It was now (by Jack's watch, without which he never 
moved) about six o'clock ; and it having been settled that, 
as a rule, eight was to be the hour for turning in, all pro- 
ceeded to undertake some employment which might, with 
laughter, songs, stories, and adventures, while away the 
time. Their guns were carefully examined and cleaned, 
mocassins overhauled, snow-shoes repaired, and many 
little things made ready which are necessary on an occa- 
sion like this. 

But Batiste it was who kept them chiefly alive. He 
had hundreds of stories at his tongue's end — stories of 
bears, stories of Indians, stories of trappers, and of ani- 
mals, which were an endless fund of amusement to the 
boys, who watched his animated face, as, with his ever- 
lasting black pipe stuck in his mouth, he gave forth his 
narratives in a language which, it is quite certain, none 
but those who had been accustomed to him for some time 
would ever have understood. 

About eight the word was " Turn in ; " upon which 
three of the party laid themselves down, wrapped in 



86 THE SIs T OW SHIP. 

blankets and buffalo-rugs, while one " turned out " to act 
as sentry, and keep the fire to a proper state, both with 
a view to warmth and as a protection against wild ani- 
mals, all of which have a great dislike to fire. Jack was 
first sentry on this occasion, and went forth into the open 
air with a pride and satisfaction that of itself warmed and 
cheered his heart, making him feel, at length, a man. 

Warmly shod, with ample clothes, the boy shouldered 
his gun, and selecting, by Batiste's directions, a shaded 
Avalk along a beaten path that took him from the fire to 
the horses, and from the horses to the fire, began his task 
with more than a due sense of its importance. The night 
was clouded and dark, but the reflection of the snow 
made it quite clear enough for hiin to see, while the fire 
he was careful to keep up made a cheery and pleasant 
blaze, which, with the crackling of the green wood, and 
the spitting, sputtering noise of the resin, was of itself 
company. 

At first the dogs, as if in duty bound, came forth to 
join him ; but Jack pitilessly drove them into the tent, 
knowing that they had quite enough to do to keep up 
Avith the sledge in the day, and anxious also to do his 
duty himself. It was the first time that he had had any 
responsibility cast upon his youthful shoulders, and he 
was anxious to fulfil it properly. 

The walk which the boy sentry tramped upon was long 
enough not to be too monotonous ; it passed under a row 
01 pines that sheltered him from the prevalent wind, and 
gave him a free view of the huge expanse of white lake 
that lay outstretched to the very shores of the United 
States of America. At first Jack met with no greater 
interruption to his meditations than the creaking of the 
huge trees, and the moaning sough of the wind ; but pre- 
sently, as the evening advanced, he heard the hounds 



THE BOX SENTRY. 87 

growl in their sleep, as there came sweeping down from 
the hills the most dismal music conceivable, when heard 
in the stillness and the dead £f night. 

It was the howling of approaching wolves, which would 
certainly have drawn forth the dogs, but Batiste swore at 
them in Trench — a very energetic proceeding — upon 
which they nestled at their master's feet, and sought no 
more to move. Jack half-cocked his gun, determined to 
pepper the assailants if they came too near, and then re- 
sumed his walk, listening all the while to the approaching 
enemy, which, avoiding the tremendous fire that now 
blazed up, were soon heard to rush past, next moment 
appearing in great force upon the lake. 

There they sat, evidently scenting men, horses, and the 
offal cast from fish and grouse, but, for the present, not 
venturing to approach. Their tactics were peculiar. The 
whole party could be seen in bold relief upon the white 
background, seated in a semicircle. One savage lanky 
brute at one end would begin barking, followed in an in- 
stant by another, until the whole ravenous and ferocious 
pack had let .loose their tongues, when the snappish 
bark turned to a howling chorus that, once heard, is 
rarely if ever forgotten — and this continued without 
ceasing. 

Jack felt his bold little heart beat wildly, though not 
with fear, as he halted and stood gazing at the gaunt, 
horrid, and hungry-mawed pack, which, if they had only 
had but courage, might have torn him to pieces ere any 
defence could have' been offered. Now this halt was 
dangerous. The Canadian had laid strict injunctions on 
Jack never to stand still, but rather to stamp and trudge 
quickly over the beaten path ; as to fall asleep in the night 
air in the snow, is fatal. But Jack was so excited by the 
presence of the wolves, that he entirely forgot this part 



88 THE SNOW SHIP. 

of the sentry's orders, and found himself standing erect 
in a statue-like attitude, watching the greedy brood. His 
chin rested on his gun, and it struck him that he should 
particularly like to have a crack at the savage brutes. 

Then they all mysteriously disappeared; a strange 
sensation came over his frame, and next instant he was 
as sound asleep as those he watched over — a sleep that 
might have proved eternal, but that, slipping from his 
grasp, the gun fell to the ground, and he went sprawl- 
ing over it. Jumping up, Jack shook himself violently, 
and looked hurriedly at the wolves, which were still 
upon the borders of the frozen inland sea. 

The boy sentry shouldered his gun, and was eagerly 
about to resume his walk, when a new and unexpected 
interruption made him bound a couple of yards, turn, 
level his gun, and speak : 

" Who goes there ? Answer, or I fire !" 

As he had risen to his feet, close to one of the tall and 
waving pines, his ears had been assailed by a frightful 
peal of such fiendish laughter as made him not only feel 
a little alarmed, but roused in him a sense of anger, that 
any one should thus treat his very slight dereliction from 
duty. 

"Who goes there?" he repeated for the second 
time. 

Again the laughter was repeated, this time with a kind 
of echo, that convinced Jack they were surrounded by 
secret foes, who, if the camp were not roused, would over- 
come them in the silent watches of the night. At the 
same moment, his sense of vision was struck, while his 
heart was nearly chilled by the sight of two glowing orbs 
that peered at him over the bough of a cypress in front. 
Without a thought of the consequences, acting only on 
the sudden influence of surprise, he took steady aim and 



THE BOY BENTBT. 89 

fired. A strange wild yell followed, and then a heavy 
body fell at his feet, as Batiste and his two brothers 
rushed forth to the rescue. 

" Eh ! mon gargon," cried Batiste, " vat is de 
mataire ?" 

Jack looked about him, unable for a moment to reply, 
and then he said, in a low tone, — 

" I thought I saw an Indian glaring from yonder 
bush." 

" An' no vondaire," shouted the Canadian, as he 
picked up something from the ground ; "it is von 
horned — vat you say ? — Mbou — howl." 

" It is a great horned owl," added Harry, laughing. 
" Bravo, Jack ! we'll take him home and stuff him as 
Jack's first game." 

Jack took the monstrous specimen in his hand, and 
looked at it with some awe. The horned owl (Stux 
Virginiand) was indeed both large and ugly enough to 
terrify a boy Its wings bad a spread of quite five 
feet. 

" Now, my boys," said Batiste, " 'fore we allons 
coucher, let's peppare dem debils on de lake. Take 
one pine torch." 

The Canadian, trailing his gun on the ground with his 
left hand, seized a brand, and approached the howling 
crew which still was drawn up on the brink of the lake 
in battle array. Then at a signal from the trapper, 
all being similarly provided, the brands were hurled 
high in the air, and falling among the wolves, sent 
them scattering over the lake, but not before some half- 
dozen were killed and wounded. 

This done, all returned to the camp, and two hours 
having passed, Balph took Jack's place, to be relieved 
by Harry at twelve, and by the hunter at two. 



90 



CHAPTEE XII. 



THE AKTOIH'ES. 



At early dawn the horses were brought out and put to, 
so that after a hearty but hasty breakfast, they were able 
once more to start the sleigh, now further loaded by the 
presence of the horned owl, which Jack was determined 
to take home in token of his first watch. He didn't say 
much about it, but it struck him that, perhaps, but for 
the sudden arrival of the huge bird, it might have been 
his last watch. The weather was still very fine, to the 
great delight of .all, who every hour more and more 
appreciated the delights of coursing along the crisp and 
lovely mantle in which the earth was wrapped. 

There were stoppages, too, when Batiste shot some 
ruffed grouse, to which, at the hoiir of the midday meal, 
he added a couple of hares. Then again the journey was 
continued, nor was any further halt declared until even- 
ing, when the camp was again constructed. The night 
passed on this occasion without any accident worthy of 
record. 

Again they are on the wing, away up the great waters, 
day after day, until at last they are skirting what the Cana- 
dian stated to be islands, thickly wooded and hilly, but 
not mountainous. They were now at no great distance 
from the spot where the boys were to be introduced into 
all the mysteries of caribou-hunting, and all became 
equally excited. The old trapper smiled grimly — not a 
sneering smile, but one of pleased remembrance of hia 
own sensations in early youth. 



the AtfTonraa. 91 

About eleven one morning, he himself began to look a 
little flushed. The country was now composed of a mix- 
ture of wooded hills, rolling prairies, and dense belts of 
forest, while in front of them was a projecting spur of 
land, round which the Canadian whirled with unusual 
rapidity and skill, drawing up his steaming horses in 
front of what was evidently a white man's settlement. 

There was a large frame-house, also stables, out-houses, 
a small block-house two stories high, ploughed fields and 
clearings with stumps, now all frosted with silvery coat- 
ing ; but what made the youths glance .at the Canadian 
with a keen and inquisitive eye, was the absence of any 
smoke curling from the chimneys, in token of welcome. 

" Yell !" said the trapper, " de ole vagbone out, he and 
all de leetle vuns — nevare mind." 

And without any further observation the Canadian 
alighted from the sleigh, and led the horses up a slight 
acclivity to the door of a large barn-like edifice, into which 
he drove, vehicle and all. The animals were then unhar- 
nessed, the goods unpacked and carried into the house, 
Avbich was well built and admirably secured against the 
weather, and in every way a most pleasant and cheering 
sight, after ten clays of outlying in woods and snow, de- 
spite the look of cold discomfort which in winter there 
always is about an empty fireplace. 

The Canadian, whose trick of opening the door showed 
his familiarity with the place, began at once to light up 
fires in the principal room, which served for both kitchen 
and parlour, all the while explaining to the delighted 
boys the history of this settler, who had selected as a re- 
sidence, a spot so utterly beyond the pale of civilization. 

Monsieur Antoine was, like our frieud Batiste, a great 
hunter. Together they had. scoured every acre of ground 
from the borders of Esquimaux to Texas ; but Antoine, 



92 THE SNOW SHIP. 

who was slightly older than our Canadian friend, married 
early in life, and married a woman who had great influence 
over him. She was better off, more refined, and more 
polished by far than the hunter, but equally fond of the 
glorious freedom of the wilds, though still sufficiently a 
woman to desire a permanent home. 

It was a matter of indifference to her where it was. 
It might be in the deep solitudes of the Andes, on the 
slopes of the Rocky Mountains, or beside the magnificent 
Amazon, but home she would have ; and M. Antoine 
found her one on the borders of that mighty inland sea, 
where no landlord owned sway, where no tax-gatherer 
ever came, and where, for their lives, and the lives of 
their children's children, there would be game enough, 
and fish enough, and land enough too, to make them, in 
all that man requires, rich as kings. 

The trapper, for the sake of his wife and children, two 
little girls of twelve and fourteen, and a boy of eight, 
had buried the hatchet with the Indians who lorded over 
that portion of the soil, and who were its genuine owners. 
It is all very well for us to argue in favour of the wants 
of advancing civilization and the requirements of over- 
population ; but the Indian is none the less to be pitied 
when dispossessed of his hunting-fields. The rich and 
civilized Roman used the same arguments to explain his 
raids and forays on the naked savages who lived in wig- 
wams on the borders of old Father Thames, and were 
the rightful owners of the soil. The change we know 
must come, but it is a pity it cannot be realized in a less 
awful way ; while to hold up the Indian to execration for 
defending his possessions, is simply wicked. 

Old Antoine had very little love for the redskins ; but 
he liked a wild life, and loved his wife and children, and 
so he thought it best to live in amity with the Indians, 



THE ANTOINES. 93 

to hunt with them, purchase their peltries, supply 
them with goods, and thus add to his own fortunes, 
while securing his scalp. In this way he remained 
unmolested, though, with the extra caution of his 
nature, he had built a block-house in case any unlucky 
accident should happen. 

, And this was the family of whose residence the young 
Hatfields had taken such unceremonious possession, and 
in whose kitchen they were making a fire, unpacking 
their goods, hunting down pots and pans, and treating 
the place just as if it had been their own. The Canadian 
bade them be of good cheer, laughing all the time, and 
encouraging them to pile on wood and warm the old 
deserted place, from which the family was evidently away 
on a great hunt, to which it was always their habit to 
take the children, leaving their home to the honesty and 
mercy of the wayfarer. 

And so by the time the shadows had fallen, and the 
fire burnt clear, the huge hearth glowed, while bacon, 
venison (taken from the stores in the pantry), fish, 
grouse, fizzed and stewed on and around the fire, near 
which, too, bubbled a large pot of coffee that sent forth 
an aromatic odour which overpowered all others. 

Everything was ready to a turn, and the Canadian, 
with a hungry expression, had bidden them all fall to, 
when a confused noise was heard outside, the hounds set 
up a fearful barking, the door burst open, and in rushed 
a motley group of two grown people, three more youth- 
ful personages, four tremendous hounds — all the human 
members of the party laughing heartily as they cast 
down heavy burdens of game. 

It was the Antoines. 



94 THE SNOW SHIP. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



THE CAETBOUS. 



The meeting was a most uproarious one for a few 
minutes, and then, after some mutual shakings of hands, 
introductions, and hearty welcomes, the whole party sat 
down to a meal which was as welcome to the new arrivals 
as it was to those who had taken their house by storm. 
For some little time, indeed, nothing was heard hut the 
clatter of pewter plates, spoons, and knives, the growling 
of dogs over the bones cast to them, and other noises in- 
cident to a heartily-enjoyed meal. 

The rage of hunger, being, however, appeased, the 
hospitable hunter brought out a jar of tobacco and a 
demijohn of whisky, which Mrs. Antoine began to brew 
into very strong punch. Teetotallers were not heard of 
then, nor were they, probably, wanted — people not, 
perhaps, abusing the good things of this earth so much 
as to make earnest, well-meaning men find no other 
remedy than a prohibition against the use of nature's 
choicest gift to man — the red rosy wine, that always 
cheers, and never should inebriate. 

The two hunters, with a delight which could be seen 
in their tanned and sunburnt faces, raised their first glass 
to each other's health, really and truly happy at once more 
meeting. Antoine then told the Canadian that he, his wife, 
and children, had been caribou-hunting for three days, and 
had that day, about an hour previously, halted some dis- 
tance off, to pass the night, when the lad saw a column 
of smoke rise from the direction of their home. From 
the huge volumes of black smoke which ascended to the 
heavens, it was clear that green wood was being used, 



THE CAEIBOTTS. 95 

without any efforts at concealment ; and partly suspecting 
what had really occurred, the family had "lifted leg," 
loaded their tarbogins, and hurried home. 

There were plenty of caribous in the hills, the hunter 
said, with grouse and hares, and if they were inclined to 
prolong their hunt, who knows, he added, but what they 
might fall in with some mooses and elks ? The Canadian 
nodded approvingly, and replied that his young friends 
were out for their first great cruise, and would not be 
particular to a day or so. His good hosts, however, 
must not consider them greenhorns, as Monsieur Ralph 
had killed his bear, and Monsieur Jacques his horned 
owl, at which they laughed, looking, however, at the 
eldest brother with great respect. 

The young people got on wonderfully. The young 
girls had not for many years had any other guests save 
the Canadian, and some red Indians, to whom the 
daughters of Antoine were bound to be civil, whilst dis- 
liking them with all the keen prejudice of the wilds. To 
them the two English youths were something so entirely 
new as to be charming, while Jack and little Pete were 
sworn friends in half-an-hour. 

The girls, whose dress was Indian — deer-skin tunics, 
leggings, mocassins, with close caps of furred skin for the 
open air— had a hundred merry stories to tell of their 
life in the woo"ds, which were charming to both Ralph 
and Harry, coming from such bright, rosy-cheeked, unso- 
phisticated children of nature. They had been accustomed 
to the wilds from their birth, and looked upon bear- 
hunting, still-shooting (deer-stalking), moose and cari- 
bou chasing, as every-day occurrences. Their narratives 
were told with a naivete which made the sons of civili- 
zation laugh heartily. 

It was ultimately arranged that the nest day should 



96 THE SNOW SHIP. 

be an off-day, during which preparations were to be made 
for a grand cruise, in which the whole party were to 
join. The elders elected to stay at the house, making 
needful preparations, but all the juveniles secretly agreed 
on a scamper round the neighbourhood, with no particu- 
lar object in view, but just to see what might 'turn up. 
This settled, preparations were made for bed. The 
sleeping accommodation of the house was unusually- 
great, three doors at one end of the kitchen opening into 
as many small rooms ; one for the husband and wife, one 
for the girls, and the other for young Pete. This was 
now to be shared by Jack, while the Canadian and his 
young friends spread their horse-blankets and buffalo- 
robes on the ground in front of the fire. 

With a "Hey chevey, high chevey!" Pete and Jack 
burst into the room as soon as a faint streak of daylight 
illumined the eastern sky, rousing the sleepers and making 
other uproarious demonstrations, until in self-defence 
they rose, cleared away all signs of bedding, went into 
the stable to wash in water taken from beside the fire, 
which they then heaped up until it roared again. By 
this time, Bertha and Lotty were afoot ; and, active and 
lively as they were pretty, simple, and artless, they busied 
themselves preparing a breakfast of hot coffee, corn 
dodgers, and venison. 

We have said that their mother was a very superior 
woman, and so she was, educating these wild young colts 
as thoroughly as if they had been brought up in a plain 
boarding-school ; so that, if they could shoot, ride, fish, 
skate, and drive a sledge, they could also sew, read, and 
remember what they read — a greatly different thing — 
from a select box of books from which the English-bred 
girl never parted. She was a good, a noble, and virtuous 
woman, and how she came to be the wife of a rude 



THE CAEIBOTJS. 97 

trapper, is a story which we hope we may yet live to 
tell. 

Breakfast being over, the arrangements of the night 
were adhered to, the elders taking their abode at home, 
while the others, armed with gun and rifle, burst forth 
upon the bright white upper crust that concealed the 
earth, supported thereon by their snow-shoes. The way 
the young guides, Bertha and Lotty, took them, was 
across the fields, by a pine thicket, up a hill, and then 
clown a slope towards a small lake, which in summer was 
celebrated for its fish, and in winter, from its sheltered 
position, was often frequented by caribou. There was a 
terrible story connected with it, said Bertha. One 
winter's night an old Indian squaw had begged for 
shelter, and at dawn of day had hurried off to overtake 
her tribe ; but two days after, Antoine, the hunter, found 
a few bones and bits of rag, a broken tomahawk, and 
three monstrous wolves, lying gaunt and stark, proving 
that the old woman had made a desperate defence before 
being devoured. 

" What is that yonder on the edge of the lake ? " said 
Ralph, in a low tone. 

" Hist — down ! " said Bertha, eagerly ; " caribou ! " 

"Without another word, the whole party ranged them- 
selves in Indian file, Bertha leading the way, Balph 
following, then Lotty, Harry, and the two boys. They 
had seen a small herd of reindeer feeding on the skirt of 
the forest, browsing on the shrubs and boughs, and hoped 
to still-hunt them, thus surprising the elders, who of 
course never thought it possible they could do so 
unassisted. 

Their way was down a declivity, beneath trees that 
wholly concealed the lake from view ; but the girls knew 
their way, and conducted the young hunters with uner- 

7 



98 THE SNOW SHIP. 

ring accuracy to where the reindeer were collected — a 
splendid buck, a doe, and two young ones. They were 
about three hundred yards off, close to the shore, their 
pretty bodies boldly relieved against the snow, and over- 
shadowed by the dark evergreens. To approach them 
from the lake was impossible, so all continued, with 
intense caution, treading one for all, steadily, cautiously, 
on the crisp, crackling snow, until Bertha declared they 
were within easy shot, and all levelling their guns, the 
caribou trotted off deliberately, their sharp hoofs cutting 
th.e ice like a winter-shod horse. 

At the same instant Bertha, who was much taller and 
slighter than Lotty, stooped, untied her snow-shoes, put 
on the skates hanging from her belt, and springing out 
upon the lake with a joyous shout, she rushed in pursuit 
of the deer at a pace which distanced the others instantly, 
though they made frantic efforts to keep up with her. 
The caribous had gone off at a hard gallop to the right, 
making a curve, however, immediately afterwards, to the 
left, as is the custom of all game ; while Bertha, as if 
aware of this fact, had launched out in a straight line. 
Away she went with railroad speed, winging her way, 
one foot in the air an instant, then the other, her rifle 
waived in triumph over her head, until she came rushing 
to meet the astonished deer at a pace that for an instant 
checked their headlong career, and gave the girl, as she 
whirled wildly past, the opportunity to take aim, when 
down went one of the deer, — the stately buck, — and 
Bertha, slackening her velocity, halted, took off her 
skates, and rushed i?o secure the prize. 

The astonished and admiring young Englishmen soon 
came rushing up, to launch out into rapturous praise of 
her lightness, dexterity, and courage, at which Bertha 
blushed and smiled, really much gratified, while Lotty, 



THE CAECAJOU. 99 

with a sly laugh, bade them remember that they did not 
know her sister yet. She could do much cleverer things 
than that. But where were Jack and Pete ? 



CHAPTEE XIV 

THE CAECAJOTT. 

Jack would have followed the deer chase, had not Master 
Pete checked him ; but the boy Pete, who was a Iruge 
chap for his age, was too much accustomed to his sister's 
freaks to take much interest in any such expedition. He 
therefore contented himself with watching the scene 
from a distance, telling Jack that it would be "jolly 
good fun " to scour the woods themselves in search of 
game. Pete was a rare hunter. Everything to him was 
fair game, from buffalo to squirrels, so that he walked 
about, a perfect armoury. Not satisfied with a gun, he 
had pistols, a knife, and round his waist a long lasso, 
with, at its other extremity, the formidable bolas. 

The lasso had one leaden ball to propel it in the desired 
direction, while the bolas had three extremities armed 
with leaden balls, which, if thrown dexterously amid the 
horns of deer, or against any animal, was sure either to 
kill or capture. Jack had his gun and a knife, and 
readily agreed to follow an old trail in search of game. 
He was bold, venturesome, and as plucky as the other 
was stout and strong, so that, unless they fell in with a 
bear, there was little danger, even wolves shunning men 
in the daytime, unless on terrible emergencies. 

Pete led the way, this not being the last, nor by any 
means the most serious adventure into which the head- 
strong boy led our gallant little Jack. The fact is, that 



100 THE SKOW SHIP. 

while Pete was in his sisters' company, he was nobody. 
Their superior dexterity, experience, and wit overwhelmed 
him ; and as Master Pete, like a good many others of his 
age and sex, didn't think much about "nonsensical girls," 
he preferred to act upon his " own book," when, if he did 
anything, he received full credit for what he did. 

The trail led them along the lake for some little while, 
to where the trees were scattered and thin, when suddenly 
Jack, with eyes like saucers, and a cry that astounded 
Pete, who was a little to his right, seized his gun and 
was about to fire, when the young Nimrod of the forest 
came up and checked him. 

"What's the row ? " he said. 

Jack pointed to a tree, and explained that the minute 
before he had seen a queer-looking animal rush from the 
bush and make for a tree, on which it was now lodged. 

"Whar?" 

"There," said Jack, pointing; "let's shoot him before 
he gets away." 

" It's a carcajou," cried Pete, with a shout of delight. 
" Don't shoot un. I tells you what, Jack — if you'll jist 
look sharp, we'll have un alive." 

"I'll do what's right," said Jack, manfully, " but I do 
not think it is possible." 

" Oh, mon ami ! " continued the excited hunter-boy, 
his face crimson, his eyes flashing, " you jist see. If the 
coward turns tail, shoot — if he don't, leave un to me." 

Pete said no more, but began casting off all superfluous 
burdens. His rifle, pouch, haversack, all were thrown 
upon the snow, until his only weapons, offensive and de- 
fensive, were his lasso and knife. But before the auda- 
cious boy attempts his dangerous task, a word on the 
animal will not be out of place. The wolverine (Ursus 
Juscus, Linn.), which is known in Canada by the name of 



THE CARCAJOU. 101 

Carcajou, and the beaver-eater, is a beast of clumsy ap- 
pearance, about a foot and a half in length, with a bushy 
tail six or seven inches long, short legs, large long paws, 
and hind feet plantigrade. It is of a brown chestnut 
colour on the upper part of the body and sides, its flanks 
marked with a band, the belly dark, the back and tail 
darker still, and the head a sallow grey. 

It was first described by Edwards among birds. Shaw 
considered it a variety of the glutton (JTrsus gulo), a 
rufous brown bear of the northern parts. The one seen 
by Linnaeus had lost an eye, and, with the true careless- 
ness of naturalists, he called it luscus from this accidental 
circumstance. It is found in all the uncultivated parts 
of the United States and Canada, where, from its thievish 
and predatory habits, it is better known than liked. It 
shows the greatest cunning and ingenuity in finding out 
the hordes of the Indians and the caches of the trappers 5 
as well as in stealing the beaver from the trap of the 
hunter. "When deer and other animals retire to the 
shade of rocks and trees, it leaps on their necks, and 
destroys them by tearing open the jugular vein. "When 
the Eedskins are abroad on their hunting parties, it will 
enter the villages, devastating and plundering their wig- 
wams. 

This fierce animal, which often commits nocturnal 
depredations in the sheepfields and yards of Canadian 
farmers, is more noxious than a fox, while its only value 
is its skin, used for ornamenting sleigh robes, each fur 
fetching from five to eight shillings. 

Now Pete knew this ; and all the proceeds of the chase 
secured by him being his own, and saved up by his 
careful mother, he was anxious to capture the wolverine 
without making any hole in his skin. He knew full well 
that the animal was dangerous, but he was more than 



102 THE SNOW SHIP. 

brave, he was fool-hardy and headstrong. Besides, he 
knew that at the worst they could resort to firearms if 
his own audacious plan did not succeed. He had often 
been told that not even a man should attack a wolverine 
except when well armed ; but he had an idea in his head, 
and carry it out he would, no matter at what peril to 
himself. 

He had taken off the ball from the lasso-end of the 
coiled rope, and substituted a slip-knot in its place. 
With this and his knife he ventured, single-handed, to 
approach and attempt the capture of the animal. The 
wolverine lay in the fork- of the tree, showing as little of 
his body as possible, though his small red eyes were 
fixed keenly on the sportsmen. There were very few 
branches below the fork, so that Pete had to put him- 
self almost within reach of the savage beast before be 
commenced his attack, which he did in a very methodical, 
cool, collected, but fool-hardy manner. 

When, after a severe trial, he clutched the lower 
branch, and then hoisted himself, out of breath, upon 
the bough, he was only seven feet from the savage 
animal, which glared, and gave forth its strange and 
startling cry in vain. Pete, though he did not take his 
eye off the carcajou, never flinched a moment, but pre- 
pared his slip-knot. He had often thrown the lasso and 
the bolas with success, so that it appeared to him the 
easiest thing in the world to noose the wolverine. 

Still watching the animal, Pete again ascended until 
he stood on a level with his enemy — thus, as he walked 
erect on the bough, commanding him. He rose, fastened 
his rope once or twice round a strong branch overhead, 
and then, collecting the extremity in his hand, he threw 
the noose right at the crouching,, cowering foe. The 
feat had seemed to him easy enough, but it had no other 



THE CARCAJOU. 103 

effect than to rouse the wolverine to fury, which- was 
shown by its again emitting its savage cry, and lashing 
the bough with its tail. 

" It'll spring," said Jack, in a tremulous voice. " Shall 
I fire ? " 

" No," replied Pete, coolly, " cut me a long hickory 
stick — look alive, old hoss." 

Jack put down his gun with alacrity, and hastened to 
cut the stick and hand it to Pete, who took it in his left 
hand behind, all the while watching the movements of 
the cruel animal, which, had ho turned his head, would 
have had him by the throat in an instant. Once the 
stick in his hand, Pete, with all the calm phlegmatic 
manner of an old hunter, put the noose on the end of 
the stick. 

The wolverine, with a singular cry, rose just as Pete 
dropped the noose over its neck. Regardless of this, 
and urged only by its own savage instinct, the beast 
gave a loud and fearful yell, leaping, as it did so, full* at 
the boy's throat. The attack was so rapid, the spring 
so unexpected, that Pete could have no chance of es- 
caping ; and Jack, not daring to fire, coiild not repress a 
wild cry of despair and horror, as he closed his eyes to 
shut out the fearful tragedy. 

A series of shrieks of a most horrible nature ronde 
him quickly unclose them, and there at one end of the 
lasso rope hung the wolverine by the neck, while at the 
other dangled Pete, kicking his heels, shouting, clapping 
his hands, and shrieking with delight, at his unexpected 
and unlooked-for victory. 

The explanation of this change was simple.. "When 
Pete threw the lasso over the boughs above, he had not 
loosened the bolas-end from his waist. The wolverine's 
attack had been so sudden, that Pete was fairly startled 



101 THE SNOW snip. 

into lotting go Ins hold, when he fell from the tree, just 
as the angry brute grazed his breast. Had the rope not 
been fastened above, or had it been longer, the savage 
beast would have grappled him ; as it was, he was 
brought up with a round jerk, that sent him flying back ; 
and there hung hunter and victim, one by the neck, the 
other by the waist. 



CHAPTEE XV. 

THE CAEIBOTT HTJH'T. 

Whek Jack saw that all danger was over, he sat down 
upon a log of wood, and burst into one of the most 
inordinate fits of laughter that had excited his merry 
nerves for many a long day. The wolverine and Pete 
were about six feet apart, hanging from different boughs, 
not more than ten feet from the ground, the first still 
quivering in the agonies of death, the latter twirling 
round, — first one way, then another, — like a teetotum, 
in a fashion that was supremely ridiculous. 

" I say, stranger," growled Pete, " when you've done 
larfin' like a horned owl, p'rapp you'll come and let a 
fellow down." 

"D— d — d — directly," said Jack, trying in vain to 
stop his laughter, " b — b — but you do look s — so 
f — funny." 

" I dar say," continued Pete, grinning in spite of 
himself, " but I've no notion to swing yar all day like a 
'possum play'n tricks. Make tracks, or them gals '11 be 
here— and I nivir shall — hear the last — " 

A shout of woman's laughter from several throats 
soon proclaimed that it was too late to conceal his 
catastrophe ; and in about ten minutes Pete was on the 



THE CARIBOU HUNT. 105 

ground, answering the eager inquiries of Ealpli, Harry, 
and the girls ; who no longer laughed, but looked very 
grave indeed, when they took down his enemy. 

"Always shoot them, Pete, dear," said Bertha, shak- 
ing her little head, " father says they are dreadful spite- 
ful, and very dangerous." 

" An' spile their skin," growled Pete, examining his 
prize with pride and admiration. 

"Better spoil the skin, Pete, you naughty boy," said 
Lotty, " than have it spoil yours. But never mind, you 
are a brave boy, and won't do it again. Bring it along 
—we're going back to dinner. Won't father be 
proud ? " 

And his father was proud, and his mother too, though 
they extracted a solemn promise from him, that he 
would never again run so terrible a risk ; which promise 
Pete gave, and kept too, or he would, in all probability, 
never have been the great world-renowned hunter he 
now is. 

The rest of the day was spent in preparing for the 
great caribou hunt, to which all looked forward with 
enthusiasm : even those who were used to such matters 
every day, taking delight in the eagerness and anxiety of 
the others, who had never seen any such chase, except in 
so far as the little incident which had happened to Bertha 
could be called so. 

It is true that Ralph was impatient for the caribou 
hunt to be over, having unwittingly overheard a slight 
passage between the two old hunters, during which they 
had spoken of some wondrous surprise to be given to the 
strangers, but which the Canadian had begged might be 
kept a profound secret until their return. Balph had 
some vague and peculiar suspicions as to what the sur- 
prise was, but he was too honourable to pump the young 



106 THE SNOW SHIP. 

people, so he restrained his impatience, even when his 
quick and subtle ear had caught the magic words — 
" Snow Ship." 

But the sun must rise and set many times ere his wish 
could be realized, so the secret rested within his own 
bosom, as he sedulously joined in the preparations for a 
long and arduous hunt. The first thing was to load the 
tarbogins with provisions, such as hard biscuit, flour, 
split peas, rice, onions, tea, coffee, brandy, and pork, also 
with buffalo robes. These tarbogins, or tabougins, as 
they are indifferently called, are small sleighs drawn by 
hand over the snow. Of these the party took three, — 
one was given in charge to Ealph, another to Harry, 
while the third was entrusted to Jack and Pete, who were 
already inseparable. Each person carried his own ammu- 
nition, so that the only other load for the sleighs was 
composed of a coffee-pot, saucepan, frying-pan, gridiron 
and tent-poles. 

The horses and the cows and pigs were supplied with 
abundant food; for though animals may over feed one 
day, they will not keep it up very long, while, if their 
stay proved longer, nothing was simpler than for one of 
the party to run home and put things to rights. This 1 
being settled, and everything being ready for a start, the 
whole party sat down to supper; after this the hunter 
brought out his fiddle, which he played well, and with 
wonderful execution and liveliness, though his stock of 
tunes was limited. It turned out that the girls were in 
the humour for a frolic. They could dance ; so that 
Ealph and Harry, whose education had not been neglected 
in this particular, were suddenly astonished to find them- 
selves dashing through country dances, reels, and French 
fours, in great style. The Canadian sat smoking his pipe 
and sipping whisky punch, which Mrs. Antoine made 



THE CAKIEOTT HUNT. 107 

for them, giving the young people as much spruce beer 
as they required, and, considering the action they went 
through, this was not a little ; but at last the French 
part of the hunter's nature overcame him, up he leaped, 
took Mrs. Antoine round the waist, and dashed into some 
whirling danse du pays, and next minute, amid a furious 
hubbub, roars of laughter, and not a little dust, the whole 
party, fiddler and all, were turning and heeling it to 
their hearts' content; nor did this really jolly evening end 
until the unconscionable hour of eleven. 

.No one was behind-hand in the morning, the young 
people especially being eager to show that the frolic had 
not unfitted them for the day's work. Everything had 
been prepared over-night, so that in an hour after rising 
all were ready. 

Fortunately the day was fine, the snow dry and crisp, 
or the journey would have been laborious indeed, as snow- 
shoes are very fatiguing oyer damp and loose snow, espe- 
cially with tarbogins to draw. The order of march was 
simple. The Canadian and the husband and wife marched 
in Indian file, stepping firmly, so as to leave a marked and 
hardened trail for the hand-sleighs, which slipped over the 
snow with ease, Ealph and Harry finding the way light- 
ened considerably by the merry talk of the girl hunters 
who hovered on the flank of their line of march. 

In this way the hill was ascended, two lakes skirted, a 
rough ridge crossed, and then there lay before them a long 
expanse of table-land, smooth, white, and silvery in its 
hue, except where here and there the Canadian pointed 
out to his allies the fresh tracks, not only of caribous, 
but moose, which had evidently passed that way 
within a few hours. But Antoine took no notice of them, 
making in a direct line for a distant dark row of tall 
pines, where a halt was declared for the mid-day repast ; 



108 xnr, ^OW SHIP. 

after which the whole troop hurried on again, this time 
down hill and through a dense forest, which brought 
them ere nightfall to a chain of lakes, said by these two 
experienced men to be the best hunting-ground in the 
whole province, and known only to themselves and a few 
Indians, who, in all probability, would join them ere 
many hours were over. 

The tent erected for the night, and which was to re- 
main in one spot during the hunt, only differed from that 
already described, in being singularly commodious, much 
larger, and supported not far from the middle by three 
uprights, on which they hung a double blanket when 
slumber was finally decided upon, By this means they 
cut off a little more than a third from the tent, and set it 
apart for the ladies, the door being towards the larger 
one occupied by the males. The fire was outside, which, 
with so many persons within the tent, made the atmo- 
sphere sufficiently warm. 

The day had been a somewhat trying one, and the 
erection of the tent — for which a considerable space of 
ground had been cleared — had so fatigued the whole 
party as to render sleep pleasant, and it was, therefore, 
at a very early hour that the fire was made up, the 
dogs placed near the door, and the silence of night 
reigned within the arched roof of this wood and snow 
wigwam. 

Only the men and boys started the next day, the 
female part of the establishment being content to remain 
in charge of the camp, preparing the meals and looking 
out for any birds or other game which might chance to 
come that way ; while the lords of creation knew what 
sport was to be obtained by much harder work. Most 
persons make unto themselves a very terrible picture of 
a Canadian winter; but experienced travellers assert, 



THE CAIMJBOU HUNT. 109 

that the chill is felt less than in England, the sharp cold 
of the colony being really invigorating ; and warm, 
thick clothing protecting the person from the effects of 
the climate, while nothing can guard the frame from the 
damp we continually breathe in England. 

This must be particularly borne in mind in every 
record of winter adventure. 

Antoine was the leader on the present occasion, the 
whole party forming in Indian file, and following in his 
footsteps. The morning was bright and cold, with 
about three inches of newly fallen snow on the ground, 
which gave the whole scene a sparkling freshness that 
was very pleasant. The young English hunters were 
becoming daily more and more accustomed to the snow- 
shoes, which have a certain awkwardness at first ; but 
now they trudged after the old guide with an alacrity 
that called forth great praise from the Canadian. 

Presently the leader halted, and the whole group, 
standing a little behind him, saw the caribou trail which 
he pointed out, and declared to be very recent. This 
made every eye sparkle, though Antoine commanded the 
most perfect silence to be observed, as with cautious 
steps he began following in the animals' tracks, which 
led along a hard wood ridge where the snow had, in a 
measure, been blown away by the wind, so that not only 
were there boughs and brush for the animal to feed on, 
but frozen grass. 

Presently they came to where the deer had lain in the 
snow all night, and where the trail struck clear and 
defined, so that they were likely to fall upon a herd at 
any moment. The Canadian whispered all to be ready, 
allowing Antoine to keep a little ahead, while every 
hunter now advanced separately, skulking behind one 
tree, and then another, as if they had been in the heart 



110 THE SNOW SHIP. 

of an enemy's country, and displaying a perfect know- 
ledge of the most approved arts of bust-fighting. 

Suddenly Antoine halted again, waved his hand to the 
hunters, and put his gun at half-cock, tightened his belt, 
took off his snow-shoes, which he cast on his back, and 
began his journey once more, treading now in the 
tracks of the caribou. Ail did the same, with the 
precision of veteran soldiers, though they found the task 
very arduous and trying, as in many instances the holes 
were quite three feet apart, which was no joke of a 
stride. Indeed, Jack and Pete gave it up, and floun- 
dered along as best they could. 

Every moment the marks grew fresher, so that in a 
few minutes the young hunters were directed to put on 
their snow-shoes again, and take up their posts behind 
trees, and wait while the old and experienced trappers 
headed the Caribou and drove them back on the trail, 
when all parties could try a shot. Each person now 
selected his hiding-place, screening himself as much as 
possible by bushes, not only from the wind, but the 
expected prey ; so that, when the guides made off with 
quick and noiseless strides, each watcher remained, to all 
appearance, alone in the heart of the wilderness, hundreds 
of miles away from civilization, and with a temperature 
below zero. 

Upon all, Ealph and Harry especially, fell that sense 
of awful loneliness which is inseparable from the stillness 
of a North American forest in winter, and which tyros, 
wholly dependant on others for guidance, feel more than 
any one. Nothing is so easily obliterated as a snow-shoe 
trail — a breath of wind, a ten minutes' fall of snow, and 
it is gone. The solitude, therefore, after a time becomes 
all but insupportable ; and the lonely one will hail with 
delight even the whispering of the chill north wind in 



THE CARIBOU HUNT. Ill 

the pine trees ,or welcome with a glad shout the loud report 
of some monarch of the forest, split by the wind, or the 
boom of the ice cracking on some neighbouring lake. 

A sharp crack, that of a rifle, put all the hunters on 
the alert, and next minute a crashing of underwood 
announced the approach of heavy animals ; and a large 
caribou, followed by several others, came ploughing 
through the snow at a tremendous pace, raising such a 
dense cloud about them as almost obscured their forms 
from view. Four sharp cracks followed, and then every 
hunter darted forward in pursuit of his wounded prey. 

" Be careful," shouted Ralph, "they are dangerous ! " 

There was no time for other words, as each hunter 
dashed eagerly in pursuit. The eldest brother had 
leaped forward as he fired, and put a ball through the 
reindeer's left shoulder, after receiving which he made a 
few plunges, and pitched heavily forward in the snow, 
never to rise again. The ball had passed clean through 
his body, and he was quite dead. Harry had not been 
quite so successful ; but the animal was in a few minutes 
brought to bay by the dogs, when a second shot settled 
his struggles. 

Then the whole party, reinforced by Antoine and the 
Canadian, rushed to a thicket whence rose wild and 
shrill cries. Not a moment was to be lost, as the 
caribou, when wounded, is very dangerous to be ap- 
proached, having a vast deal of pluck and resolution, 
making a most sturdy and resolute defence, not with his 
horns, but with his legs, with which he strikes out in 
every direction, so that all are glad to wait until loss of 
blood weakens him. One blow with his sharp hoof 
would knock a man's brains out, while if it struck a 
limb, it would surely crush the bone. Even the boldest 
hound will btand back, barking at a respectful distance. 



112 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The boys had both aimed at the same animal ; and, 
though neither was able to say which had been the 
immediate victor, both pursued the wounded beast until 
it turned at bay. There it was, with a broken hind-leg, 
and a wound in its flank, sprawling on the snow, and 
kicking violently when any one endeavoured to approach 
him. Jack was reloading his gun, while Pete had the 
bolas whirling round his head, as they came up ; and 
next instant it flew forward, and struck the animal 
round the neck, nearly strangling it. 

Quick as lightning, Jack was on its back, and one 
well-directed blow with his knife put the animal out of 
its misery. The two old trappers, who had sacrificed 
themselves to the pleasures of the youthful party, had 
only one caribou to show, so that in all there were four, 
captured by the whole band of hunters. 

The next thing was to cut them up, then to feed, and 
return to the camp. It was already late, and the trees 
cast lengthy shadows ; but, the excitement somewhat 
allayed, all were hungry and tired. Still, no rest could 
be obtained at once ; for, while the elders proceeded to 
do the butcher's work, the juveniles shovelled away the 
snow, cut down and collected wood, made a huge fire, 
and then erected a wall of brush to windward — a few 
poles being stuck in the ground, and large boughs cast 
against these. 

Then, and only then, all seated themselves between 
the wall and the fire, from which soon arose the aroma 
of coffee ; while a few minutes later all were enjoying, 
with eager and sharpened appetites, the deliciously 
tender caribou steak, than which nothing is more agree- 
able, pleasant, and satisfactory. All ate with the air of 
hungry men, the elders winding up with brandy and a 
pipe, the juveniles with coffee, after which preparations 



THE CAEIBOTT HUNT. 113 

were made for a march. All would have gladly camped 
■where they were : even the dogs, that had fed to reple- 
tion, rising with a lazy and dissatisfied mien; but to 
march was imperative, as the ladies would be seriously 
alarmed at their prolonged absence. 

The four caribous cut up, the offal thrown away, the 
bones as much as possible extracted, were still a serious 
load ; and for the purpose of carrying them, the usual 
backwood contrivance was resorted to. They were 
divided into six loads, proportioned to the strength of 
the bearers ; a rope about six or eight feet long was 
twisted out of the swamp ash, which makes admirable 
cordage ; and this being tied round the game, the whole 
load was swung over the left shoulder. 

It was now nearly night, with a long walk before 
them, so everybody provided himself with a good pine- 
torch, the old hunter, with his torch blazing on high, 
leading the van. It was a weird and strange procession 
that now walked beneath the whirring pines and hem- 
lock, six men and boys armed to the teeth, and loaded 
with game, while flaming sputtering fire branches and 
knots startled the owls and bats, disturbing even the 
squirrel from its warm nest. From a distance the scene 
must have been strange indeed ; and any Avarlike party 
of Indians would have thought them fools, as they 
watched their ignis fatuus lights. Indeed, their flick- 
ering, flaring illumination would have been the height of 
folly, had not Antoine been in amity with the Indians, 
and confident of safety, though, alas ! we shall see that 
this confidence had fatal results. 

Waving their torches, purposely provided by way of 
lightening, as well as lighting the way, the young people 
plunged through the snow, — now singing, now laughing, 
but all footsore and weary ; so much so, that when the 

8 



114 THE SNOW SHIP. 

camp was reached, they cast down their burdens, and lay- 
alongside of them for some time near the fire. This did 
not prevent them, an hour later, from eating, late, as it 
was, another and heartier meal, nor from fighting the 
battles of the day over again, bolstered up with buffalo 
rugs ; nor from winding up with some thrilling stories 
of Indian peril and fights, which the Canadian told with 
rare gusto. 

Such, at that period, was every-day winter life in the 
wilds of Canada. How do you like it, boys ? 



CHAPTEE XVI. 

THE IvlOOSE HUNT. 

The summer life of a settler is all work,— at least, for 
some years ; while, to many minds, such scenes as those 
we have passed through are all play. Now, I am often 
asked by " big boys " here at home, if I think they could 
get a living by hunting and trapping out West, on the 
outskirts of civilization, on the carpet-like prairie, or in 
the Rocky Mountains. My answer is, certainly not. 
"Where is the home-bred boy who could alone endure 
what we have already described, much more earn an 
existence, provide himself with powder and other neces- 
saries, winter and summer, contending with cold in the 
one, heat in the other, inexperience in both, to say 
nothing of Indians, whom some of my querists seem 
afraid will die out ere they can get a sight of them ? 

No. If you emigrate with a family to the very ultima 
Uiule of civilization, and meet with a good-natured hun- 
ter or trapper, you may enjoy much sport, but get your 
living, never ! until you have served a rude apprentice- 



THE MOOSE HUNT. 115 

ship, and found, before that is over, that, however 
exciting, romantic, and delightful hunting may be, to 
pursue it for a living is hard work, and nothing else. 

Next day the ladies were to be of the party, and Jack 
and Pete were to keep house. This was a matter of 
little regret to these juveniles, as their walk home the 
night before was very tiring, while both felt their feet 
sufficiently sore to be glad of a moderate rest. Another 
source of gratification was that they had ample pro- 
vender, and were required to do nothing but keep up a 
glorious fire, have coffee and caribou soup — made with 
tit-bits, marrow-bones, brains and shins, with rice and 
split peas, cooked in a cauldron suspended from three 
sticks — ready by sundown. 

They could then run, slide, make snowballs, loll in the 
hut, just as they liked ; and you may be quite sure that, 
as Jack and Pete stood near their wigwam, watching the 
others disappear, they felt themselves mighty big men 
indeed. 

The object of the day's journey undertaken by the 
adventurers, was a visit to a charming lake at some 
distance, which Bertha and Lotty declared *to be, in 
summer, the most delightful spot on the face of the 
earth, being wholly surrounded by trees, that grew in 
most places right into the water, whence rose wooded 
swells and slopes to a considerable height. The girls 
had here a boat-house and canoe, spending a portion of 
their time there during the summer heats, which they 
could easily afford to do, as their father depended for his 
living more on fishing and the chase than upon agri- 
culture. 

A moose-yard had been seen in this direction by 
Antoine, and as he was anxious to give his young friends 
a taste of this amusement, much as it resembled caribou 



116 THE SXOVV SHIP. 

hunting, he had resolved on taking them in this direc- 
tion, even if they camped all night, and sent the long- 
legged Canadian back to keep company with the boys. 
The journey was joyous in the extreme. One tarbogin 
had been taken along to carry lunch and to load with 
game ; but this was no hindrance to the movements of 
the young people, as Mrs. Antoine willingly took charge 
of it, whenever they wanted to rush forward, or scamper 
and flounder over the snow. 

The juveniles contrived to bag quite a considerable 
load of grouse and hares, also some grey squirrels, upon 
which a merciless war was made in those days. This 
animal (the ash-coloured squirrel — sciurus cinereus) is a 
native of the whole northern continent. It is an elegant 
animal, with a long feathered tail, which it often raises 
in the form of a curve, so that the tip touches the head. 
The body of the largest is about twelve inches. They 
were once so numerous in Pennsylvania, and held to 
be so destructive to the grain, that the Legislature 
offered a reward of threepence a head for their des- 
truction. In 1849 this premium amounted to eight 
thousand pounds currency, and was so exhaustive to the 
treasury that it was reduced to one-half. 

In winter they live in decayed trees, where they lay 
up a store of nuts and acorns, and bring forth their 
young. In summer they construct a nest of sticks and 
leaves, near the top of the branches. They migrate with 
the change of the seasons ; and in crossing rivers and 
streams they are said to show a most wonderful sagacity, 
by placing themselves on a piece of the bark of a tree, 
and shaping their course by means of the tail, which 
serves both for ornament and rudder. If a strong wind 
springs up, all their skill is of no avail, and many perish 
in the waters. 



THE MOOSE HUNT. 117 

It was somewhat past mid-day when the fairy lake 
was readied ; and both Ralph and Harry saw at once 
what a charming place it must be in the summer months, 
though now it was one white sheet of snow and ice, 
while every tree and shrub glistened with a frosted 
coating. The summer-house of the Antoine family was 
only a slanting roof, supported by poles ; but it would 
hare required very little to make it fit for a winter resi- 
dence. The boat-house was behind, and now wholly 
hidden by snow. 

The programme of the day's hunting was to discover 
the moose-yard ; and then, letting loose the hounds, to 
course the deer — a most exciting style of sport, and 
which gives the animals more fair play, or "law," as the 
hunter says, than is usually allowed them. Tor this 
purpose it was necessary to go round the lake until they 
hit upon their feeding-ground, when the dogs would 
drive them to the ice, and all could join in the exciting 
work. 

The moose, which many confound with the elk, is very 
different from that animal. It is a large, clumsy-shaped 
beast, in some things like the elk, it is true, but essen- 
tially different in others, particularly in the shape of the 
horns, which are palmated and spreading. It has a most 
powerful leg. There are two kinds ; — one of a black 
colour, said to grow to the height of eight or nine feet ; 
and the other greyish, which seldom exceeds the size of 
a common horse. Both have the head large, and out of 
all proportion to the body, small eyes, long ears, large 
nostrils, the upper lip furrowed, and much larger than 
the under ; the neck short, with a thick and erect mane ; 
the hinder part of the body large and broad, legs long, 
and more slender than those of the common horse ; the 
fore legs longer than the hind ones, the hoof deeply 



118 THE SNOW SHIP. 

divided. The horns, without antlers, spread out four or 
five feet from the base, so that the distance between the 
extreme branches is from five to six feet ; on the outer 
side they are armed with sharp points. 

They shed their horns in December and January, and 
they have been found to weigh forty pounds. The 
female has none. The animal weighs sometimes 1600 
pounds. It moves in a heavy trot ; and, though it lifts 
its feet high, it goes with great speed. The male is 
inoffensive and harmless, except when wounded, or when 
its sultanas are interfered with. He will then turn 
fiercely, and attack with, horns and feet. In summer 
they feed, like the elk, in families, on the pasturage of 
the plains ; in winter, on the tender branches of trees, 
particularly those of the willow and poplar ; but, iu such 
northern regions as those we speak of, with the snow 
deep, they beat it down with their hoofs until they come 
to the shoots and bark of trees. 

The animals had been at work at a large moose-yard 
upon the extremity of the lake, and towards this the 
band of hunters took their way, holding in the dogs, and 
leaving the ladies by the fire under the shelter of the 
summer-house. They used extreme caution, as these 
and all animals of the same tribe are easily alarmed ; 
and if you approach them with the wind they will dash 
off at a rate impossible to be kept up with. The lake 
was surrounded by a belt of dense foliage, while a little 
way from the skirt the trees were more sparse and 
scattered. Peering beneath the overhanging boughs, 
the youths presently saw a whole herd of moose, and 
next instant the dogs were after them at full bay, while 
the eager and panting riflemen were rushing to the 
frozen lake to head the game. 

There they went, tearing along in their ungainly way, 



THE MOOSE HUNT. 119 

scattered like scared sheep over the snow, already out of 
gun-shot, and nearly across the narrow expanse of water, 
when ping ! ping ! a crack of a gun, a wreath of smoke, 
and the heavy brutes return upon their trail, to meet a 
circle of foes who give them no rest. The enemy on the 
banks being less numerous than those advancing to meet 
them, they again reversed their flight, one huge buck 
alone moving slowly, as if severely wounded. Towards 
this one at the same instant rushes, with a joyous shout, 
Bertha, the skater, delivering a second shot as she 
neared the animal, which, furious, turns against the girl, 
and, regardless of its sufferings, rushes full tilt at her. 
But she, prepared for this, launches at her fullest speed 
along the glazed surface of the lake, describing now 
graceful curves that madden the unwieldy brute, now 
straight lines that defy even its great speed. 

Back she looks triumphant, with sparkling eyes, and 
then up go her arms in the air, a wild shriek escapes her, 
and she is seen no more. A cry of anguish and despair 
from the mother and sister, a wild shout of horror from 
men and boys, and then, dashing from him as he ran, 
gun, hatchet, and every useless incumbrance, Ralph is a 
dozen yards before the others, floundering in the snow ; 
now he is thirty, now fifty, and now he halts as he gazes 
with staring eyes at the round space of broken ice where 
Bertha had disappeared. 

But his halt was only for an instant, to loosen his 
snow-shoes ; and then, just as the whole party come up, 
shrieking and crying to the undaunted youth to stop, he 
took one header, and disappeared beneath the closing 
waters. A rush of air, a thousand bubbles, and all was still . 

" Comme gd ! " shouted the Canadian, in a voice of 
thunder, and he began wildly striking the ice in an 
unbroken place. 



120 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The air-hole where Bertha and Ralph had plunged was 
about five yards across each way, with edges that would 
never have bdWie any weight ; but, wielding his pon- 
derous axe, in less than a minute Batiste had cut out a 
piece of the hard ice, which he was about to enlarge 
with another fearful blow, when the head of the brave 
young hunter appeared suddenly above the water, and, 
all hands grasping at him, he was hauled on to the snow, 
with the insensible body of Bertha in his arms, while, as 
he sank by her side, to him also the world became as a 
blank. Bidding the younger ones go meet the frantic 
mother, and tell her and Lotty all was well, the Canadian 
laid the girl nearly on her face, with her head resting 
upon her arms, when at once the water flowed freely 
from her mouth, and a sigh clearly indicated that she 
had not reached the borders of that drear abode, from 
which many a drowning person seems to have been 
violently drawn. 

A somewhat free administration of brandy to both 
followed ; and, just as Mrs. Antoine came up, both 
Ralph and Bertha were seated on the snow, staring with 
wondering and bewildered eyes at each other. After 
the first wild congratulations were over, it turned out 
that Bertha had no account whatever to give of her 
mishap, having lost all sensation at once ; but Ralph, 
who was a splendid swimmer, had never lost conscious- 
ness. No sooner had he taken the plunge than he was 
at the bottom of the lake, where he saw Bertha, who was 
convulsively clutching some weeds that grew there. 
"With a calm self-possession which was the mainspring 
of Ralph's character, he cut away the weeds with his 
knife just in time, for Nature was asserting its rights ; 
and next instant they rose together, almost equally lost 
and helpless. 



THE MOOSE HUNT. 121 

Bertha gave her hand to Balph as she rose ; and, 
dashing away a tear, asked him to run a race to the fire, 
which they did, none following too closely upon the 
tracks of that strange pair, who had been so nearly made 
one in death. Indeed, Mrs. Antoine and Lotty them- 
selves needed the aid of their friends, though Antoine 
himself was so wild with happiness, so loud in his 
expressions of delight, so warm in his demonstrative 
gratitude, that his actions were little better than those 
of a lunatic. 

" My life, my life ! " he cried, as he shook hands with 
Balph beside the blazing fire, " whenever you asks it, 
young mister. And now let's feed and liquor, for this 
child don't hunt no more tu day." 

A regular feast it was, the moose defraying the chief 
part of the expenses ; though the backwoodsman, in his 
exuberance of animal spirits, made them all drink more 
grog than had ever fallen to the lot of the juveniles at 
any* one time during the term of their natural lives ; nor 
was he ever wearied of shaking hands with Balph, and 
swearing eternal friendship. Mrs. Antoine, though less 
demonstrative, was even more deeply grateful ; and her 
eyes wandered with a softened and motherly look to the 
handsome face of him, but for whose noble courage she 
must have lost her eldest child. 



122 THE SNOW SHIP. 



CHAPTBE XVII. 

LOST IS" THE SNOW. 

That moose-hunt was never forgotten as long as any of 
those present lived ; but no one was very anxious to 
resume the chase that day ; so, throwing aside the offal, 
the game was piled on the tarbogin, and all set forth on 
their way home. Balph and Bertha, who were now 
bound together by a tie almost stronger than that of 
brother and sister, walked in front, even their arms piled 
on the sleigh, which Antoine would have carried in his 
stalwart arms rather than they should have touched it. 

The run from the air-hole, a walk for a quarter of an 
hour round a huge fire, a very stiff glass of hot steaming 
brandy and water, had guarded against the evil effects 
which so disagreeable a ducking might have inflicted, 
but a quick walk would further prevent any danger ; so 
all hurried forward with eager steps, and, about half an 
hour after nightfall, they came in sight of the camp-fire, 
which blazed on high until it was seen far and wide in 
the forest. A loud shout announced the arrival of the 
return hunters, who pressed on eageny, expecting a 
response ; but none came, only the dismal howl of a 
drove of wolves, that sat in a circle at some distance 
from the fire, waiting patiently for it to glow less 
fiercely ere they attacked the boiling caribou soup which 
scented the circumambient air. 

"Boys, boys!" shouted Antoine, almost angrily; 
" none of this! " 

And levelling his two barrels at the wolves, which 
scoured away at the shouting and firing, he rushed to 



LOST IS THE SNOW. 128 

the camp, searched the -wigwam — but no sign of the 
boys could be seen. 

Every member of the hunt now took the alarm, though 
the women were forced to remain in camp, and the 
whole male party dispersed themselves in search of the 
truants, holloaing, shouting, and rousing everywhere the 
sleeping echoes of the forest. Torches were eagerly lit, 
and then everybody, taking the fire as centre, dispersed 
to search around with something more of adherence to 
method than had as yet been adopted. 

Everywhere in the snow could be found marks of their 
footsteps, where they had run races, where they had 
slided, where they had piled up a huge snowball, where 
they had chopped up and dragged wood to the camp, — 
but no marks seemed to serve as a guide to what had 
become of them. 

That they had not been long gone, was quite evident, 
as the fire bad been recently made up, while no one 
suspected them of having run from the wolves. The 
elders looked about with keen eyes for signs of Indians, 
but there were none. The first conclusion all had come 
to was, that the boys were hiding ; but this supposition 
was immediately discarded, after the Canadian had 
shouted forth their names irom his stentorian lungs. 

Something had happened to the boys, but what, all the 
ingenuity of the experienced woodsman failed to suggest . 
Lost they were not, as, with a view to have their beacon 
seen, it was piled to a huge height, which, from where 
they were camped, must be seen for miles. The dogs 
ran about for some time in circles, but at length came 
in ; as if giving the whole affair up as a bad job, and, 
after two hours of arduous search, the hunters were 
compelled to do the same, and leave to the morrow the 
solution of what appeared a terrible mystery. 



124 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Silent and sad the dwellers in the camp sat eating 
their caribou soup, from sheer necessity, but not enjoy- 
ing it, as all had expected to do. Everybody was 
moody ; and no sooner did all declare that he or she had 
had enough, thanAntoine abruptly announced his inten- 
tion to seek rest, upon which the buffalo robe that 
separated the sexes was rolled down, and all relapsed 
into silence. The youths, tortured in mind as they 
were, yet respected the father's sorrow too much to 
make any remark ; but, feigning sleep, in reality watched 
the two elders, who, leaning each against a corner of the 
wigwam, smoked in silence, their faces once now and 
then lit up by the glowing tobacco bowl. 

The boys saw, or fancied they saw, that each watched 
the other intently, until, at last, Antoine spoke in a 
hoarse whisper, and asked if the other was ever going to 
close his eyes, which, glaring at bim in that way, were 
by no means agreeable. 

"JYon ! mon ami" replied the Canadian, in a very low 
whisper ; " I wait — ven you ready, me ready." 

Antoine made no reply, except by a kind of grunt, and 
next minute glided from the wigwam into the open air, 
followed by the Canadian, after he had whispered to 
Ealph and Harry to talk awhile, that the anxious 
"womankind" might not suspect they had started on a 
night search. 

"When the two grave and solemn hunters stood erect 
upon the snow, they peered cautiously round, listened to 
every token of the night, examined the atmosphere, and 
then each unburdened his own private thoughts to his 
companion. Both feared the same. Bound about the 
hill upon which they were camped there were many 
deep valleys, where the snow had collected in drifts, 
in some places twenty feet deep, into which the boys 



LOST m THE SNOW. 125 

might have been tumbled by a slip, and perished 
miserably. 

It was to explore these valleys that each hunter had 
lain awake, at first intending to go alone, but mutually 
delighted with companionship. "With huge strides, An- 
toine now Jed the way towards the nearest valley, 
through which meandered a small stream, skirted on its 
upper banks by trees. 

The crest was soon reached, and then each hunter 
turned, clutched the other's hand, and looked inquiringly 
into his face. They both had evidently found some 
sign. 

But we have left Jack and Pete too long alone. Let 
us record their day's adventures. 

They were not many. They had shot a few birds, 
peered about for squirrels, made a snowball, ate a hearty 
dinner, slided on the smooth surface of the snow, col- 
lected wood, and, finally, they had seen to the supper for 
the hungry hunters. This done, they resolved to start, 
and go part of the way to meet them. To do this they 
followed the morning trail some little way, until they 
came to a spot where the snow lay white, virgin, and 
untouched, on the surface of a slope, without a tree, 
root, or projection of any kind for some hundred feet, 
where a row of trees and underbrush proclaimed the 
commencement of a thicket. 

"Ain't it ripping ? " said Pete ; " let's have a hog- 
slide." 

And, without another word, he seated himself on the 
snow, having, fortunately, leathern continuations. Jack 
did the same. The fun was, to descend the slope as 
rapidly as possible, racing one against the other, without 
overbalancing themselves or losing all command, as many 
descending a snow mountain in the Alps have had their 



126 THE SSTOW SHIP. 

clothes burnt off and their flesh carbonised, from the 
extreme velocity causing undue friction. But the hill- 
side by a Canadian lake was not Mont Blanc, and there 
was little fear of any such catastrophe here. 

Away, away! start these joyous boys, their heels in 
the air, their hands waving, as they madly glide down 
the slope, at a rate which, if not particularly dangerous, 
is sufficiently rapid to be exciting in the extreme. On, 
on! they speed, still almost side by side, giving them- 
selves an occasional push forward with their hands, 
until, half way down, where they were neck and neck, 
Pete gets foremost, wildly shouting and screaming, to 
the manifest astonishment of two squirrels that hopped 
upon the boughs of an evergreen, to see what was the 
matter. 

Jack is after him, both now rushing downward with a 
velocity which is not to be checked, though, as they near 
the trees and bushes, they would fain do so. But Pete 
has selected what he calls " a soft place to fall." It is 
under the shadow of some bending pines — the bushes are 
thick and close together, and will break the blow. 

"Come along, ole hoss!" he shouts, and disappears 
from the sight of Jack, who, next instant, finds that he 
is rushing headlong into a terrible void ! 

With a wild, despairing cry — with a shriek of such 
mortal agony as passes the lips but once in this life, he 
caught with desperate hands at the passing boughs — 
in vain ! 

Next instant he was hurled against some hard sub- 
stance, and became insensible. 

How long he lay thus he could not say; but there 
came at last a glimmering of sensation, accompanied by 
great pain, amidst which he opened his eyes bo encounter 
the most complete black darkness. Involuntarily a groan 



LOST IK THE SKOW. 127 

of excessive anguish burst from him, which found an 
echo at no great distance. 

" Are that you, Jack ? " moaned Pete ; " are yer 
alive?" 

" Tes," gasped Jack, " but every bone's broke. "Where 
are we?" 

" Don't know nothin' ; feel kinder sore everywhar, 
particular 'bout my head and the rear of my pants. I 
say, Jack!" 

" Tes." 

" Ain't this a precious pickle ? "Wonder where we 
is?" 

Jack sat up, and, feeling about, discovered that he had 
his flint and steel, with which he soon struck a light. 
"When they started to meet the hunters, they had pro- 
vided pine-torches, with which to light the way after 
dark, and one of them was soon ignited and held on high, 
when the whole horror of the scene was disclosed to 
them. They had fallen into a deep hole, of which they 
could neither see all the sides nor the top, though it was 
clearly bottle-shaped, narrow at the summit and wide 
at the bottom. 

To get out unaided was impossible, even if they had 
physical strength to cling to a few roots ; scarcely any 
animal but a bear could climb a wall that sloped out- 
wards. 

No animal but a bear ! 

Pete had used these words, and as he did so, both 
glanced eagerly and hurriedly around. 

The ground was actually strewed with bones, while in 
a corner was a human skeleton, that, doubtless, of some 
unfortunate, wretch who, like themselves, had fallen into 
the huge natural trap, many of which are to be found, of 
similar shape, on the American continent. 



128 THE SNOW SHIP. 

" Tins is a bar's den," said Pete, lighting his torch, 
and piling up the dry bones, pulling away some roots 
from the sides of the horrid cavern, and making a blaze 
and smoke that nearly choked them. 

At that instant a low moan fell on their ears, and the 
two boys, the instant before limping, and scarcely able to 
crawl about, stood upright as a dart, and, leaning shoul- 
der to shoulder, peered across the fire to where the 
cavernous hole retreated somewhat. 

There, reluctantly aroused from his winter den, was a 
black bear (Ursus Americanus) , which was sitting up on 
end, and glaring at the fire. Presently, with a slow and 
lazy movement, he again fell upon his fore-feet, and came 
sniffing and smelling around, always, however, away from 
the fire, upon which the boys, with beating hearts, piled 
up bones, sticks, and roots. They never allowed the 
bear to see them, for they moved backwards as the un- 
wieldy and sleepy brute advanced. 

Pete all the while whispered to Jack, who felt that, 
under any circumstances, their last day was come, and 
therefore it mattered little how it was ended. He ac- 
cordingly, profiting by a momentary halt of Bruin, who 
again squatted on his hind legs to peer across the fire* 
had lit another torch, which next moment, by the instruc- 
tion of the more experienced lad — he had heard his father 
and Indians tell the story — he flared right in the bear's 
face. 

The foolish chap, instead of resenting the act, when 
the torch flared in his eyes, sat bolt upright, in a most 
comical attitude, and covered his eyes with his clumsy 
paws. 

" Put it close," said Pete, in an agonized whisper, as 
he cocked his rifle, loaded with two balls. 

Jack, shaking like an aspen-leaf, did so, and saw on 



LOST IN THE SNOW. 129 

the animal's breast a spot where the hair grows in a sort 
of a round ; once put a bullet in there, and Bruin falls 
like a Pawnee tent when the props are cut away. 

Hideous was the din which followed ; and when the 
noise and smoke subsided, the boys found themselves 
close up against the wall, but, instead of being torn *o 
pieces by the bear, only sore and stiff from bruises. 
Pete, in the agony of that moment, had lived a life, and, 
knowing the perilous stake he played for, he had taken 
slow, steady, and sure aim : the bear was dead. 

The cavern was now examined for some other outlet, 
but there was none ; so the boys agreed to skin the bear, 
anoint their bruises with the fat, and, having cut a steak 
or two and supped, to sleep until they were refreshed. 
"With this view, sticks, roots, and bones were piled on, 
after which both sat astride of the warm carcass, ready to 
begin. 

" Hillo !" said a thin voice from the upper regions. 

" Hurra !" shouted the boys, jumping up. 

" Cest Ion ! " growled the well-known voice of the 
Canadian. " Ah ! waitee one leetle beet, you bad boys, 
till I only get at you ; von't I trash you nicely. It's all 
rite, Monsieur Antoine. Gtivee me the cordon. Juss 
poot dat fire out, and no chokee me." 

" It must be a good strong one," replied Jack. 

They now ceased their labours, and scattered the fire. 
Por awhile the smoke obscured everything, but when the 
embers glowed, a light appeared in the npck-like mouth 
of the bottle cavern, and the boys saw, by the pine-torch, 
the haggard, pale, and anxious faces of the two hunters. 

" Eef I leaf you all night, onlv serve you right," said 
the Canadian, growling. " Dere, tie yourselfe bofe to 
dat rope." 

A stout, thick, sturdy, and compact rope now descended. 

9 



ISO THE SNOW SHIP. 

Ppte winked wickedly at Jack, who grinned across his 
whole face, and then, without a word, the bear was fast- 
ened to the cord, and the signal given. 

"Veil!" grunted the Canadian, "I never shall belief 
as de poys vas so heavy. Pull avay, mine fren' ! Ve'll 
gif it to 'em ven ve gets 'em up. Pull avay! Grif him a 
turn rount dat tree. Grot for tarn — it is one ours " 

A shout of laughter from the boys, and then down 
came the rope. This time it was hoisted up without a 
word, so eager were the two elders to learn the boys' 
terrible story. Pull two minutes elapsed ere anybody 
could speak, and then the brave youths, half suffocated 
with embraces, grimy with smoke and blood, told the 
story of their adventure. 

"Te fire saved you, poys," said the Canadian, whose 
eyes were moist with tears. " De stupid bete, he no come 
near one torch. Veil, dis is de debble of an aventure." 

Though father and friend had scarcely yet recovered 
from the suffering of mind and fatigue of body they had 
endured, yet were they singularly anxious to be stirring. 
They thought of those who were watching in the camp. 
Still, it was resolved to return in triumph, and, with this 
view, a stout staff being cut, the bear was hoisted upon 
the shoulders of the men; the boys, elated, but sore, 
marching in front. 

We need not say that they were joyously and raptu- 
rously received, while care was taken, during the remain- 
ing period devoted to hunting, that no more such perils 
were endured, the boys being kept strictly in sight. 



0HAPTEE XVIII, 

THE XATJNCH OP THE SNOW SHIP. 

And now all are once more snugly ensconced in the hut, 
or shanty, of the old squatter, and have been for a day or 
two, during which time a heavy snow-storm has rendered 
out-door exercise impossible. But to this none object, 
for all are busy preparing for an excursion which, to the 
Hatfields, has the merit of utter novelty. They are 
about to start across the lake in a Snow Ship. 

It is time that we described the nature of this vessel, 
which is peculiar, we believe, to the Canadian lakes, 
though something similar has been used on polar jour- 
neys. As soon as snow and frost set in, all ordinary 
navigation ceases upon those vast inland seas, which thus, 
during the four winter months, are only available to 
sledges and snow-shoes. In time of war, however, they 
have sometimes been crossed by soldiers in Indian file, 
the first few thus making a hard path. 

But human ingenuity is endless, and so it came about 
that a cute Scotchman invented what are locally called 
ice-boats, but which, built as we shall presently describe, 
we have dignified by the more important name of " Snow 
Ship." They are not very common, as their management 
requires an extreme degree of skill and coolness. They 
are a sort of barge, or pinnace, cutter-rigged for the most 
part, and built of the toughest wood the colony can pro- 
duce. Under the keel there is a raised runner of polished 
iron, at its edges quite as sharp as a skate, and made for 
a similar purpose — to plough the ice or snow of the lakes. 
In all other respects these crafts are like sea-going 



132 THE SNOW SHir. 

vessels, being urged forward by sails and steered by helm. 
It is almost incredible to what speed they can attain, far 
beyond that of any vessel cleaving the water, and, to use 
the words of one who knew them well, " not much infe- 
rior to an express train." The only drawback is their 
extreme danger from breaking of the ice, upsets, and 
sudden squalls. But of this, more as we proceed. 

It was arranged that as soon as the storm, abated, ad- 
vantage should be taken of the steady breeze to try the 
experiment. The wind, probably, would not be too high, 
while it was further settled that, with a view to double 
surety, the sleigh should accompany them. All were 
to go ; Antoine and his family in the Snow Ship, the 
others in the sleigh, — the Hatfields being extremely 
anxious to witness the working of this singular craft. 

The third morning broke clear and bright. The snow 
had ceased, leaving a vast white mantle upon the earth, 
which, a severe frost having set in soon after midnight, 
was crisp and hard, while in places the wind had bared 
the ice itself. All were now on foot, suitably clothed for 
the occasion in blanket suits and robes, with fur gloves and 
flap-eared caps of racoon skin, and were endeavouring 
to keep themselves warm by that most efficacious caloric 
producer — exercise. The men took their way to the dock, 
where lay the mystic craft which had kept Ralph, Harry, 
and Jack awake half the previous night, while the women 
prepared the provisions which were to be their mainstay 
during the voyage. 

The dock was, in summer, a pleasant little cove, entirely 
shaded by trees, on the shores of which had been erected 
a boat-house, with a snow-proof roof and strong doors. 
These opened, the craft lay full in view. It was an ele- 
gantly-shaped pinnace, with a flush deck, and no bulwarks 



THE LAUNCH OF THE SNOW SHIP. 133 

save a line of plank about three inches high all round. 
In the stern was a space in which four could stand, the 
whole of the rest of the boat being cabin and hold, suffi- 
cient for eight or ten persons, when seated, as the flat 
bottom and roof were only four feet apart. An iron 
chimney with a turning top indicated the presence of that 
most essential article — a stove. 

"With hearty good- will the pinnace was now sent flying 
down the polished wooden flooring of its house, until it 
rested on the snow, when, no wind being perceptible in 
that densely-sheltered spot, all hands were in another 
moment impelling it along the crisp surface of a huge 
drift, until it lay abreast of the settlement. 

The ladies had not been idle, for the horses were har- 
nessed, the sleigh loaded and left in charge of Jack and 
Pete, who lolled in the fur-clad seat, while the small 
barrels of flour, pork, and other provisions needed for a 
journey, were brought down to be put in the hold of 
their wonderful craft. 

The mast was speedily stepped, the bowsprit run out, 
the topmast hoisted, and then the sails were bent, which 
at once presented her in such a favourable point of view 
as to elicit loud applause from the Hatfields. M. Antoine 
now went to fasten up the house, leaving his wife stand- 
ing on the bank, while the girls and the young men saw 
to the loading of the craft. 

The Misses Antoine clambered into the hold to receive 
the goods which Ralph and Harry would hand to them ; 
and Batiste got all ready for hoisting the sails, when, as 
ill luck would have it, there came a sudden puff of wind 
which sent the jib flapping violently out. The leading 
horse of the sleigh shied, stood up, and then went away 
at a headlong pace, dragging his companion, nothing loth, 
after him. 



134 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The sleigh equipage had run away. 

The Canadian made as if he would have run after them, 
but he instantly perceived the folly of any such attempt, 
as he saw the light vehicle whirled by at furious speed, 
its young charioteers tugging with might and main at the 
reins, but whether simply to guide the wild and terrified 
animals, or to endeavour to restrain them, he could not 
tell. 

" The boat ! " cried Madame Antoine, in an agonized 
tone. 

Batiste wasted no time in words ; but, signing to the 
youths what to do, he began hoisting the sails, and in 
two minutes, way was felt upon the craft, when, rushing 
to the helm, while the boys and girls trimmed the sails, ' 
he began guiding the Snow Ship upon its course. One 
glance showed him that the horses were still in sight, 
the sleigh uninjured, the boys safe, but going at a rate 
fearful to contemplate ; nothing more was needed to 
rouse him to action, the trail being marked and clear. 

As none in the Snow Ship thought more of the affair 
than as a race in which the merits of a boat against 
horses would be tried, or at most accompanied by the 
dangers of a spill on the snow, all were intent on the 
craft in which lay their hopes of gaining upon the runa- 
ways. Ralph and Harry were breathless with excite- 
ment as, feeling the full force of the wind upon topsail, 
mainsail, and jib, the pinnace whirled along, ploughing 
up the snow, and sending aloft myriads of bright and 
sparkling particles, or rushing 1 with redoubled swiftness 
over the dark surface of the ice, that looked like shining 
sheets of metal. 

They had never felt anything like it before. "Without 
the rocking and pitching of sea-going vessels, without 
the jolting of waggons, and even sleighs, without the 



THE I/ATTH'CH OP THE SNOW SHIP. 135 

swaying motion of spring carriages, it sped along so 
softly, easily, and pleasantly as to resemble nothing 
more closely than floating in the air ; nor would they 
have thought, but for the way in which trees and shore 
sped by, that they were equalling in speed the fastest 
steamers which were, in a few years, to dot those broad 
waters. 

Ralph, the first thrill of excitement over, crept along 
the deck to the mast, whence he could command a good 
view of the country in advance. The horses, probably 
from some instinct of shelter, were running close in 
shore, being thus protected by the trees from the wind ; 
while the Snow Ship, with the opposite view, was kept 
several hundred yards further out. The runaway steeds 
still kept their course, showing no sign of diminished 
speed, which was the more perplexing, as the wind soon 
indicated a tendency to be feeble and unsteady. 

Now, as a fiercer puff than ordinary swelled out their 
sails, the Snow Ship, regardless of obstacles, ploughed 
the seams of snow, or skirled over the glassy ice, and 
clearly gained upon the horses, which, in all probability, 
must soon slacken their speed, and thus be again placed 
under control. But scarcely had the pinnace got tho- 
rough way on her, when there came a lull, or stich light 
and transitory puffs as barely sufliced to keep her in 
motion. 

Before they could again move with any hope of 
success, the sleigh was a faint speck in the distance. 

" Light de fire," said Batiste, gloomily, as he looked 
round at the heavens ; " p'raps ve camp dis night." 

His advice was felt to be good ; for, despite all their 
clothes, they could scarcely prevent their blood from 
stagnating, the cold being bitter in the extreme, their 
breath freezing in icicles on their fur and woollen wrap- 



136 THJS SHOW SHIP. 

pinga. In another minute or two all hands going 
below, except Batiste, there issued from the chimney a 
thin wreath of smoke which proclaimed the welcome 
presence of a fire. 

The cabin, in all but height, was comfortable, the 
beam of the pinnace being considerable. The stove was 
a small iron one, from which radiated, when its sidea 
were hot, an unwholesomely dry heat, which was coun- 
teracted by a large bowl on the summit being kept full 
of water. This was movable, and could be replaced by 
an iron pot or kettle when meals were under weigh. 

As soon as the fire was thoroughly lighted, all crowded 
up to Batiste to request him to go in and warm himself 
while Ealph and Harry guided the boat, but the Cana- 
dian shook his head. His naturally grim face was stern 
in the extreme, his eyes gleamed with an unnatural fire, 
an expression of settled gloom was upon him, and he 
refused to leave his post. 

He explained that a new complication had arisen. 
The horses, he could tell — for he had approached the 
trail near enough to decide this — had ceased their mad 
career, and were completely under control. This was 
indicated by the steadiness of their footsteps, and the 
several occasions on which they had been carefully 
guided round various obstacles that presented them- 
selves. The boys, therefore, were running a race, which, 
as they had some provisions, they might prolong until 
night time, when the wearied steeds would halt of them- 
selves. Now came the danger. They had no means of 
making a fire ; and, as sleep was an inevitable neces- 
sity, they would seek repose in the sleigh, in which 
case the chances were they might be frozen to death. 
All this was said with a gravity which went to the heart 
of every one. Still the brave Canadian would not 



A STOBM OK THE LAKE. 137 

despair ; but all the time, putting the helm in turna in 
the hands of Ralph and Harry, he taught them how to 
manage the boat. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A STOEM ON THE IAKE. 

Night was on them ere they expected it, and with it a 
decrease of wind, though still enough remained to enable 
them to glide along the smooth and white surface with a 
ghost-like motion. Batiste now confessed to the lads 
that even his iron frame was overcome, and that he 
required sleep, if only for an hour; he had previously 
made all rest for an hour or two, so that, with many an 
earnest piece of advice, he went to rest near the opening 
into the cabin, the anxious girls burrowing, as it were, 
in the bows. 

Harry and Ralph now remained in charge of the 
singular machine, which its inventor elevated to the 
dignity of a ship, and a proud and happy moment it was 
for them, despite the impatience they felt to be up with 
the runaways . There was something inexpressibly beau- 
tiful in thus skimming over the soft surface of the snow, 
under the twinkling silvery stars, past the white phan- 
tom-like trees ? with their dark gulf-like openings. It 
was both the poetry and the sublimity of motion, 

The boys were used to it now, and guided their iron 
barque cheerily over the lake, one in turns warming 
himself by stamping on the deck near the mast. This 
continued for some time, the gusts being more or less 
fitful. They kept outward, as far from the still clear 
trail as possible, with the sails hauled close aft, taking 



138 THE SNOW SHIP. 

advantage of every puff of the feeble breeze. Suddenly 
a death-like stillness was upon them, the wind ceased 
utterly ; and the sails, pendant from their yards fixed as 
boards, proclaimed that Nature slept. 

As nothing could be done until the wind resumed its 
sway, they furled the mainsail, and crept below. The 
cabin door, for greater warmth, was made to slide 
inwards. Pushing it back as gently as possible, they 
crawled past Batiste, and proceeded to warm themselves 
and partake of a morsel of biscuit, a stale barrel of 
which was all they had on board. 

A quarter of an hour later all slept. 

It was about four in the morning when Batiste rose, 
and found the boys beside him, and the boat Motionless. 
Leaping to his feet, he pushed open the door, waking 
Balph and Harry by so doing, who followed him into 
the open air. A wondrous change had come over the 
scene. Not a breath of air was stirring, but snow had 
been falling for some time, and now whitened the air 
with its myriad flakes, as they slowly and gracefully fell 
to the ground. 

Suddenly, a low sough, a whisper, as it were, from the 
north, came moaning through the trees ; and Batiste, 
reaching forward, took in the jib, and hauled down the 
topsail. 

" Von tempete, vat you say, snow-squeak ? " said the 
Canadian. 

" Squall," replied Balph, laughing. " It is coming, I 
fancy, but it hasn't frightened the wolves." 

And he pointed to 'a dozen black spots behind the 
Canadian's back as he had been standing, which were 
crawling arduously and painfully through the snow, 
forming, as they did so, a half circle. 

" Hein ! " said the Canadian in a low whisper "bring 



A STOBM ON THE LAKE. 139 

up de fusils ; and den, boys, you shall see vat you shall 
see. Dis infant, he nevare know'd de loup crawl in the 
snow before. Tou, Ralph, shoot dat big debble close 
by, I take de tree to de lef, and den God give us de 
vind." 

All fired, with steady aim, despite the flickering of the 
snow-flakes ; and, as they did so, with a furious yell 
— the horrid sounding war-whoop — up rose twenty 
Indians, who, casting off their flimsy disguise, came 
with fearful strides towards the boat. 

But the wind sighed no longer ; with a rush and a roar 
it struck them, as by the directions of Batiste the main- 
sail and jib were hauled out, and the pinnace was once 
more set in motion, but not with its usual rapidity, so 
imbedded was it in the soft element. But in another 
minute the boat was free, the snow was swept from its 
decks, the snow-flakes wheeled past with a wild dash, 
and the graceful Bertha, as she was called, was scudding 
before the wind. 

"With hideous cries of rage and fury the savages came 
after, rushing over the snow with terrific rapidity. 

" Gib she de jeeb," said Batiste, quietly, though every 
moment the pinnace threatened to heel over and upset. 

Now began a race, such as no man in a temperate 
clime ever saw. The Canadian put the boat nearly 
before the wind, that being the safest course, and one 
which evidently suited the craft, for she sped at such a 
rate as filled the boys with amazement, realizing almost 
tbe fabled swiftness of the arrow's flight. On ! on ! 
she rushed into the blending, drifting snow, with the 
hissing gale aft, nothing visible but her own decks ; all 
else, above, below, and around, an utter void. The 
Indians were out of sight the instant the pinnace 
attained its full pace ; but boy, and man, and girl knew 



140 THE SNOW SHIP. 

that, go whither they might, they would follow, and that 
all hope of escape lay in putting a vast tract of country 
between themselves and the savages. 

But what of Jack and Pete ? 

None dared hardly think of them, though all were 
fully determined to return to the search as soon as they 
had succeeded in throwing the savages off their trail. 
This could only he done by perseverance. Ralph, with 
everything but his eyes buried in furs, despite the 
rattling pace at which they sped, stood in front of the 
mast, to which he clung, as a watch. Fortunately, as 
the wind rose, the snow gradually abated, and at length 
ceased, enabling them to gaze around over the vast 
plain. 

There, afar off, were the Indians coming on, with that 
infernal perseverance which is the characteristic of their 
race. 

But to them no heed was given. They were now out 
in a part of the inland sea, where other dangers existed 
of a very different character. The lake was deep, where 
they were now being driven ; and the ice in these places 
is seldom thick enough to bear even, a sleigh, as they 
soon discovered. As yet their pace had not been 
relaxed ; but it soon became evident that something 
must be done, for they could both feel and hear the 
danger. 

The ice groaned and bent under them, like an elastic 
plank. 

Ralph proposed that they should lie to until daylight, 
or until the heavier part of the squall was over. He 
knew that every day, every hour, every minute, in fact, 
unless the wind shifted more southerly, the ice would be 
consolidated, and therefore safer. But Batiste pointed 
out two extreme dangers. In the first place, if they 



A STOEM ON THE LAKE. 141 

took in sail, they would probably be captured by the 
enraged Indians ; while, if they happened to halt on a 
spot where the ice was seamed and cracked, and water 
came up, they would be frozen fast for the whole 
winter. 

There was nothing for it, therefore, but to advance, 
which they accordingly did, and another snow- squall 
came down upon them ere the former had left them half 
an hour. This time it was so thick and dense, as to fall 
like a heavy blanket on the deck, while it concealed 
everything for many yards before them. 

Suddenly, as a wild weird shriek of the blast seemed 
to send hundreds of demons past them in the air, the 
pinnace shivered, as if it had struck a rock, heeled over 
a moment, casting everybody to the ground; and then 
uprose on the night air, first an awful groan, then a 
hideous crashing sound, the report as of a hundred 
muskets ; and, lastly, a heavy booming, as of distant 
cannon. Clambering to his feet, and clasping his arms 
round the mast, Halph gazed wildly around, and saw 
everywhere spouts of water, open fissures, upheaving 
masses of snow-clad ice, whirling, uprising like walls, 
and then falling with a splash that sent the sparkling 
water high into the circumambient air. 

" Great God ! " cried Ralph, " where are they all ? " 

He was alone on the deck, though next instant he 
saw Harry clambering in ; while the girls, stunned by 
the shock, appeared, confused and trembling, from the 
cabin. Batiste was nowhere to be seen ; and, though 
they all shouted until they were hoarse, no answering 
sound greeted their anxious ears, and their minds were 
filled with the fearful apprehension that he had been 
pitched headlong from the stern by the concussion, 
and had fallen into the water. 



143 THE SNOW SHIP. 

But why were they perfectly stationary, while aS 
around was in motion ? 

They were hard and fast aground on dry land, ahout 
an inch or two above the ordinary level of the water. 



CHAPTEE XX. 

TEOZEN IN. 

Nothing can be conceived more dreary than the posi- 
tion of these two boys and two girls thus wrecked, in 
such weather, upon a shoal or sandbank, the hold of a 
boat their only tenement, without food, and with 
scarcely any firewood. But tbey were not of those who 
despair ; so, taking in the sails, which caused the mast 
to bend before the storm, they went below to hold 
council as to what was to be done. 

Barely enough biscuit for two meals remained, and as 
all were weary and exhausted, a mess was made with 
snow water, when a long and desultory conversation 
took place, which necessarily ended in nothing ; for 
until day revealed to them their true position, nothing 
could be done. At length, though the hearts of all were 
bursting with anxiety as to their friends, and wildly 
beating on account of the uncertainty of their own fate, 
nature asserted its magic power, and slumber was de- 
cided on. E.alph peered out, saw that the wind, which 
had veered to the south, brought sleet with the snow, 
and that, as far as the eye could reach in every direction, 
nothing was to be discovered but broken water. Satis- 
fied that for the moment all was safe, he closed the slide, 
and they prepared for slumber and repose. 

Health of body always ensures sound sleep when the 



FEOZEX IK. 143 

mind is at ease ; but so powerful is the effect of mental 
suffering that both health of body and peace of mind are 
required to give perfect repose. "Wearied as they were, 
therefore, our young people were on foot as soon as the 
sun rose over the eastern shore, and shed its benignant 
and benificent light on all nature, tropical and polar, 
giving to everyone his needful allowance. 

The shipwrecked young people now discovered the 
real state of affairs. They were on the eastern spur of a 
small island, scantily wooded, chiefly by willows and 
cotton woods, with rose and wild raspberry bushes in- 
termixed. Round this for many hundred yards the 
waters extended, turbid and swift : and there was 
evidently a strong current, as might be seen from the 
rapidity with which lumps of ice were carried past. 

Far away, at a distance not easily to be calculated, 
they could see that the ice was still firm, and unless 
some great change took place, their only hope of safety 
lay in reaching a spot where their feet could find solid 
walking ground. But as not one of them had any idea 
how this was to be done, they preferred, in the first 
instance, providing for those immediate necessities which 
would enable them to prolong life — namely, food and 
fuel. 

Leaving the girls to prepare, with the last of their 
biscuit, a scanty and insufficient meal, Ealph and Harry 
took their tomahawk-axes, and floundering to where a 
cotton wood rose on high, they began chopping and 
chipping boughs and trunk until they had collected two 
good loads. All this time their eyes were cast around 
in search of anything eatable : but in vain. Not a bird, 
not a beast, nor the track of one, could be distinguished 
anywhere. 

Loaded with wood they returned to the pinnace, 



144 THE SNOW SHIP. 

placed the larger pieces outside, taking in only enough 
for the day's use below. All now sat down to their 
scanty meal, and began revolving in their minds, — first, 
the chances of escaping at all, and then, bow to keep 
alive until either the freezing of the waters enabled 
them to fly over the lake, or till succour reached them. 

Strangely enough, not one of them ever thought for a 
moment that any fatal accident had happened to Batiste. 
They had too much faith in his talent and good fortune 
to suppose anything of the kind ; a dozen things being 
suggested, but death never being alluded to. Talking 
and devising as best they might, their tasteless breakfast 
was soon over, and then a minute examination of the 
hold was made, resulting in nothing but the discovery 
of some planks, fish-hooks, and lines. 

" If we could catch fish," said Harry, brightening up, 
" we might live." 

Ralph shook his head. 

" I have frequently caught fish under ice," replied 
Bertha. 

" But not without bait," said the young man, sadly — 
at which expression of opinion all countenances fell. 
" What are these boards and this pole for ? " he added. 

" To roof over the after-part of the pinnace," replied 
Bertha. " "When the cold sets in again it will give us 
breathing room ; we can watch, too, abroad, without 
much exposure to the air." 

Mechanically, because it gave him something to do, 
Ralph, being careful to use his mittens, drew forth the 
planks, when Harry and he, guided by the girls, soon 
erected them, thus providing a dry cabin six or seven 
feet high, which promised to add considerably to their 
comforts, could life only be prolonged. It must be 
recollected that in these cold countries food is more 



PEOZEN IN. 145 

essential by far than in warmer ones. It is required 
oftener, and in larger quantities. My excellent friend, 
and yours, Captain Mayne Eeid, speaks of Hudson Bay 
voyagers being allowed eight pounds of solid meat a-day, 
and finding it scarcely enough ; but what of that, when 
Esquimaux savages will swallow twenty pounds of 
blubber in a day, and on a heavy marcb we — the Texan 
volunteers — consumed in a warm and humid climate ten 
pounds of venison per diem, without bread or vegetables. 

In the position in which the wrecked young people 
were placed, food, and food immediately, was an im- 
perative necessity, and with this knowledge it was that 
the boys, leaving their female friends to keep up the 
fire, sallied forth to search the island. Without a hope 
of using them to any purpose, they slung their guns 
over their shoulders, and removing a board, crawled on 
to the deck, and thence to the small wooded island, 
which presented to the eye the singular aspect of trees 
and bushes growing out of snow. 

Taking the southern side on this occasion, the youths 
moved silently along, without much hope, — indeed with 
none ; for they had both come to the same conclusion, 
which was that no animal of any kind would venture out 
towards the shore, when the distant woods were there 
for them to nestle in. The truth is, both felt an earnest 
desire to converse apart from the society of their younger 
and more tender companions. 

Beaching the extreme western end of tbe island they 
halted, and cast a wary glance around. The current to 
which we have already alluded sweeping past both sides 
of the island in a westerly direction, met here, and this 
was the object of their silent studies. They both saw 
that it swept hence in one steady stream to the solid 
ice. which was about three hundred vards from where 



146 THE SNOW SHIP. 

they now stood, and that every fragment of ice drifted 
in a straight line until it struck the fixed ice. 

" A fellow might swim," said Harry. 

" He might," replied Ealph, " but he would be frozen 
to death. He could not move unless naked, and, if he 
tried, he would never live to put his clothes on. But a 
raft might be poled over in ten minutes." 

" Let us do it — the cotton tree and those planks 
would make one in half an hour." 

" How far are we from land, Harry ? " said Ealph, 
putting his arm affectionately on his brother's shoulder ; 
" and how far could those girls walk ? JNo ! one alone 
must try the experiment. I am strongest ; I must 
venture, while you guard over the dear girls." 

" It is, perhaps, best — but how shall we live until your 
return ? The island has not even a bird." 

" True ! " said Ealph, gloomily. " I fear we must all 
die together. Grod be merciful unto us ! " 

Scarcely had the words passed his lips when they 
were startled by a series of sharp cries, followed by the 
utterance of their own names in a shrill and terrified 
voice, which set them running as fast as the snow 
allowed them in the direction of the boat, nearing which 
they heard a great splashing and noise, and then saw 
Bertha and her sister holding on to a stout fishing-line, 
from the other end of which something was making 
violent attempts to escape. In an instant the young 
men had relieved them of their task, and then drew 
ashore a magnificent sturgeon, the largest fish known in 
those waters, which abound in salmon, trout, pike, 
mullets, and eels. 

Loud were the congratulatory" words of the young 
men, particularly when they found that the bait used 
was nothing but a piece of red flannel taken from stone 



TKOZEK XN". 147 

mysterious garment. The sturgeon will bite at almost 
anything, but especially at anything red or shiny, like 
the bowl of a metal spoon. All the party now confessed 
to intense hunger, and the sturgeon being cut up, a 
portion was prepared for immediate use, while the rest 
was hung up to freeze. 

This fortunate take induced Ealph to postpone his 
dangerous attempt, and so the day passed, alternately 
watching, fishing this time without success, and bringing 
in more wood, as their main comfort consisted in keep- 
ing the inside of their pinnace at a proper heat, which 
at night could only be done by closing the slide. The 
smallest hole would admit more cold air than they could 
endure. The pinnace had been carefully caulked, but 
the outer roof of planks was too thin and full of cracks 
to be bearable. 

At nightfall all wrapped themselves in their robes ; 
the two girls lying close behind the stove in the bow 
end, and the two youths in front of it, about midships, 
sought that repose which is so much needed in a cold, 
dry, and bracing climate. About midnight Ealph woke 
up with the cold, replenished the fire, and went out. A 
northerly wind was blowing, bleak and chill, over the 
lake ; the water no longer rippled, its surface was 
covered by a thin sheet of ice. Had it been strong 
enough to bear them, Ealph would have called all hands 
to launch the boat, and trusted their fortunes once more 
to the ice, but it was as brittle as glass. 

Warily examining the horizon, Ealph saw that heavy 
snow would follow this shift of the wind. He sighed 
deeply; but as anything was better than inaction, he 
tried to cheer up at the mere prospect of moving ; but 
there was a leaden weight upon his mind, which he 
could not shake off — a sense of something evil at hand, 



148 THE SNOW SHIP. 

for which the naturally cheerful young man could by no 
means account. Slowly, sadly, he returned to his place, 
piled on wood, made the fire crackle and blaze, and 
then lay down, not to sleep, but to lie awake — cold and 
shivering. 

"When morning broke, every particle of water had 
disappeared, and all but Ralph, who was seriously ill, 
proceeded to break the ice with a view to fishing. This 
being done, Bertha left Harry and her sister at work, 
and said she would stroll about the island. The real 
truth was, that the poor girl was in a regular trance of 
fear about Ralph, upon whom, since the hour that he had 
saved her life, she had fixed her affections with an ardour 
transcending even that of a sister. She knew that he 
was ill, — ill from anxiety and distress of mind, but ill 
also from want of food — fish alone being utterly incapable 
of supporting life in one accustomed to more nutritious 
food. There was, besides, a tinge of a fever which she 
well knew, and from which, her whole family had been 
" down " more than once. 

Advancing towards the western end of the island, she 
halted by the cotton trees, where the growth ceased for 
a moment, and was then renewed in the shape of a 
thicket of pines. The snow lay very superficially on the 
island, being, from its slightly raised position, swept by 
the wind, so that Bertha easily scraped it away, until 
the sparse grass of that naked and sterile spot was ex- 
posed to view. But the girl's eye sparkled with delight 
as it fell upon a leaf she knew well, the root of which 
she proceeded to dig up, until she had some dozen as a 
reward for her labour. 

At this moment a slight noise made her look up, and 
she at once saw something move on the side of the 
nearest pine. It was evidently an animal, and, with her 



PHOZEN IK. 149 

heart in her mouth, she remained perfectly still. It had 
very long fur, its body was short and thick, something 
resembling that of the beaver, while the head was like 
that of the rabbit. It was coming down the tree, very 
slowly, head downwards, its tail being, to a certain extent) 
prehensile, and preventing it from falling. Bertha 
slowly drew off her fur cape, and the moment the animal 
touched the ground she flew at it. Thus first noticing its 
hereditary enemy man, the beast uttered a shrill, sharp 
cry, and then putting its head between its forelegs, it 
thrust forth its armour of quills, about two inches long, 
prepared to defend itself, as it might have done against a 
dog or small animal. But Bertha now knew her prize 
was the Histrix dorsato, a porcupine, and casting her 
cloak over it, she rolled it dexterously in it, and then 
with one sharp blow against the tree killed it, well aware 
that the Indians esteem it as agreeable and wholesome 
food. 

Satisfied with her prize, though utterly unable to 
account for its presence, she returned to the pinnace. 
The fish, it seemed, would not bite that day, so leaving 
the line out with a float to keep it up, and making it fast 
to the boat, all went in beside the fire. Ralph was 
neither asleep nor awake, but rousing himself from a 
kind of lethargy, he asked for water. Bertha gently 
bade him wait, and scraping two of her dearly prized roots, 
she cut them into small pieces and put them into a quart 
of water, which she then boiled. In half an hour she 
had a pot of what the French call tisane, which she 
administered to her patient with all the tenderness 
of a Nightingale, and all the decision of a sister of 
charity. 

Then, while Ralph, refreshed and cool, went off into a 
doze, she proceeded to pluck and skin the hedgehog, 



150 THE SNOW SHIP. 

which, in its tarn, was soon placed upon the fire, and 
proved to these hungry souls not only palatable hut 
most delicious. 



CHAPTEE XXL 

FETEE ON EOAED, 

That night the hold of the Snow Ship presented a scene 
vvhich, if taken with spirit, would have made the fortune 
of a great painter. All seemed to sleep hut one. The 
beds of fur-skins and buffalo robes lay against the sides 
of the pinnace ; in the' centre was the stove. Behind 
that could be seen the form of young Miss Antoine, her 
face only visible, so wrapped was she in furs. On each 
side, with their heads to the foreground of the picture, 
lay the two boys, or rather young men, — Harry in a* 
stupidly heavy sleep, Ealph only kept from rising by the 
hands of Bertha. Besting on her knees, a rude lamp in 
the centre illumining her face, she, while keeping down 
the patient, cast her streaming eyes to heaven in prayer. 

Ealph, at nightfall, had become delirious ; and, while 
Bertha was busy preparing his night's tisane, he had 
tried to rise and go out. He talked wildly and inco- 
herently, of father and mother, of Jack and Pete, of his 
dear Bertha, who was slowly dying of hunger. 

" There are bears, there are wolves, there are deer — 
she shall not die, I will go forth and bunt. The winter 
is gone — I feel the summer heat. Ah ! what is this ? 
some Indian savage who holds me in chains — avaunt ! 
avaunt, I say — I will none of you." 

But, thanks to his weakness, Bertha kept him down, 
and gave him drink, — drink that soothed him, that seemed 
to conquer the fever awhile, and compel drowsiness. 



FEYEE OK BOARD. 151 

Bertha, with that devotion and forgetfulness of self which 
characterize her sex, now seated herself beside the 
sufferer, all thought of sleep banished from her mind. 
Scarcely had she done so, when a dull moan, followed by 
a deep sigh, showed her that she had another patient in 
the person of her sister. Long before morning Harry 
also was taken ill. 

What the heroic girl endured, what trials she went 
through during that terrible night, she never revealed ; 
but it made a woman, and a brave little woman of her 
before her time. Out into the air for water ; in again 
preparing the drink ; now covering up and controlling 
one patient, now another, she never hesitated a moment 
to do the duty that had devolved upon her by reason of 
her strength, for which she most earnestly thanked Grod, 
as well as for the opportune discovery she had made of 
the root, by means of which she hoped to save them all.. 

Towards daylight Bertha saw her patients still and 
slumbering heavily ; so with a thoughtful regard, more 
for them than for her own pleasure, she yielded to 
nature's power and snatched a moment's rest in the em- 
brace of sleep. When she awoke they were all three 
sitting up, having reached this position with difficulty. 

" Lie down directly, you naughty people ! " she said, 
springing up, " I can't take just a doze but you must be 
trying to get up." 

" We are very ill, Bertha, and you are an angel," said 
Balph. 

" Tou have been very ill — fever, delirium, and all that ; 
but you are all better. What will you have for break- 
fast — fish, or porcupine soup ? " 

" I could eat a bit of fish," said Ealph, while the others 
nodded; "but it's all gone." 

" Well, there's another on the hook. I heard him 



152 THE SNOW SHIP. 

splashing when I went out for water," and with a pitcher 
and axe Bertha went forth. 

The cold was now intense, every particle of water had 
disappeared, and snow clothed even the ice in its chaste 
and cold mantle. But Bertha knew that where they had 
already so often broken the ice there would be a chance, 
so she swept away the snow with her feet, and with her 
axe soon opened a hole, where the fish-line entered the 
water. She was not mistaken : a sturgeon was on the 
hook just dead. This she hauled up, filled her pitcher, 
and returned to her patients. 

"What with tisane, broiled fish, and porcupine soup, 
they got through that and the next day very well ; but, 
on the morning of the third day, from being frozen up, 
there was not a scrap of food, and the ice was, with diffi- 
culty, broken. There had in every case been several fresh 
paroxysms of fever, but now the disease appeared con- 
quered, the patients, in every instance, expressing them- 
selves weak but very hungry — and Bertha had nothing to 
give them. 

When they found the true state of things, the sufferers 
closed their eyes in silent prayer, and when they opened 
them again every countenance had upon it that heroic 
expression of submission to the will of G-od, that sublime, 
calm look of resignation which has been ever character- 
istic of the brave going to certain death. Bertha herself 
shook with suppressed agitation. She saw the agony 
they had endured, she knew the glorious resolve of their 
hearts. 

" No ! no ! there is a just Providence above," she 
whispered to herself; " they shall not die." 

And rising, she took Ralph's double-barrelled gun, as 
well as Harry's rifle, hung a glittering tomahawk by her 
side, put on her snow-shoes, and went out. These snow- 



FEVER OS" BOARD. 153 

shoes were simply two pieces of wood, like bows, the 
ends of which were made to meet, while at the centre 
they were little more than a foot apart. Across were 
laid other sticks, the bones of fish, the whole lashed 
by sinews, of which there was a plentiful supply on 
board. "With these there is no danger of sinking in the 
snow. 

" Are you about to leave us ? " said her sister, with all 
the querulousness of sickness, while Harry watched her 
wistfully. 

" Hush ! " cried Ealph, severely, " do not malign the 
angel who has saved our lives. I would, indeed, if we 
must die, that she ivould leave us." 

" Never," said the noble girl ; " I will save you, or 
come back to die." 

And, without a word or look of reproach, she went 
forth, after trimming their lamp, which was a kind of 
rude saucer with a tow wick, fed by grease from a pot 
kept always on board ; nor did she forget to place a 
pannikin of drink close to every head. 

The sick who remained were too weak for much talk- 
ing, though every now and then a few words were 
exchanged as to the desperate mission the brave girl had 
undertaken. All joined in her prayer, but not one pre- 
sent entertained the slightest hope of success. What 
game could she hope to find on that white and desolate 
plain ! 

Suddenly, borne upon the wind, there came something 
like a moan, low and indistinct, but it speedily rose 
to a howl, which all knew to be that of wolves. A thrill 
of horror passed through every bosom at the thought of 
Bertha being exposed to the fearful assaults of a raven- 
ous pack of beasts so hungry and so remorseless ; and by 
a common motion all began crawling to the outlet. 



154 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Meanwhile the young girl, her heart beating wildly, 
had gone forth determined, even if she had to walk to 
the mainland, to bring back something in the shape of 
food. With this view she had slily taken a small tarbogin, 
and, selecting a distant point as a guide, she started reso- 
lutely for the land, trusting to her trail, and to the boat's 
mast as a landmark for her return. Pocket compasses, 
so useful and interesting, were not then known. 

She had not gone a hundred yards when she, too, heard 
the cry of the wolves, at first like a moan on the frozen 
waters, then the full howl of a tremendous pack. They 
were coming directly her way, and, from her knowledge 
of woodcraft, she knew they must be in chase of a deer, 
as what else would bring them out upon that terrible 
plain ? 

Now, Bertha, who was brought up in the wilds, being 
born on the island of Manitoulin, acted in a very different 
way from what a girl of the woods would have done. It 
was quite clear to her that a deer had been driven to the 
edge of the water, when, sore pressed, and tempted by 
the smooth but treacherous expanse, it had plunged upon 
the snow, and taken to running in a tolerably straight 
direction. Wearied with the heavy trudging in the co- 
agulated water, it now steered for the wooded clump, 
with some vague hope of escape. 

Bertha, brave girl, was right. There it came, dashing, 
floundering along the snow, moving in a circular way 
that would bring it directly to the island. Now, good 
shot as Bertha was, nothing could have been easier than 
to have shot the deer from the boat ; but this would only 
have been acting the part of provider to the wolves, 
which, an instant after, would have torn the reeking beast 
to atoms, and lapped up its life-blood* 

Bertha meant to kill the deer, and to have it in spit© 



FEVER ON BOARD. 155 

of the -wolves, or perish. If she failed, hunger — the worst, 
the most agonizing of deaths — stared her in the face. 

She was about a hundred feet from the boat ; but, 
drawing the tarbogin back to within twenty feet, she 
concealed herself behind it, clutching her rifle in her 
hand, while the heavily loaded double-barrel was leaned 
against the small sleigh. Then, with such a heartfelt 
prayer for success as no hunter perhaps ever before sent 
to Heaven, she waited. 

Her heart beat wildly, but not from fear ; though the 
dismal howl of the wolves, which we have already de- 
scribed, might have sent a chill to the soul of the most 
lion-like of men : her heart throbbed with intense anxiety 
for those whose thread of life Imng upon the three shots 
that were in her gun. But her suspense was not to be 
of long duration, for here they are. 

The deer is but little in the van, not twenty yards, 
coming straight for the clump. The girl's nerves, strung 
to the highest pitch, enable her to take steady, and, it is 
to be hoped, deadly aim ; for he is bringing the wind 
with him, not fifteen paces off, when a crack is heard, 
a light curling smoke rises, the deer flounders, plunges, 
and falls dead at her feet, as much from exhaustion as 
from the bullet. 

Up ! up ! my brave, good girl ; for fifty blood-thirsty 
throats are howling ; fifty red, ragged tongues are lolling 
out ; fifty pair of awful eyes are gleaming Upon you, and 
fifty sets of pointed teeth are ready to devour you. Stand- 
ing erect, and trusting to the native dread of man which 
even her little figure may inspire, she pours two barrels 
into the midst of the astonished and amazed hordes. 
Three savage brutes fall, while several limp away. The 
" dog of the woods," as the Indians call him— -they tamed 
him to hunt before they knew of real dogs — is naturally 



156 THE SNOW SHIP. 

cowardly, but in packs he is, like many other beings more 
human in shape, vastly brave. The whole troop, fifty in 
number, halted at sight of Bertha, and when she fired 
they sneaked away, to return, however, in an instant, 
all falling upon the killed and wounded, and devouring 
them. 

Casting her guns on the tarbogin, Bertha tore at the 
quivering deer, and by superhuman exertions placed it 
beside the weapons, one of which — the double-barrelled 
— she hastily re-loaded, each barrel receiving half-a-dozen 
balls and an extra charge of powder. She then quickly- 
lashed it to the sleigh, to prevent the recoil, and began 
dragging her prize towards the boat. 

No sooner, however, did she move, than a dozen gaunt 
and furious wolves, the largest of the ferocious pack, 
dashed in her direction. Bertha watched them, and saw 
that in less than two minutes they would be upon her. 
They came up, two in front, three close behind, the rest in 
a confused heap. Kneeling down, she took aim at their 
open throats, and simultaneously, the explosion of the 
two barrels and a dozen wild and ferocious yells rose into 
the air. 

Bertha now ran for it, her feeble strength being quite 
equal to moving the sleigh at a rapid pace, and drew up 
close to the stern of the boat. But a second band of 
wolves were up to her, and two fastened on the dangling 
head of the deer. Bright is the gleam of her tomahawk 
axe, of good Sheffield steel, and with a nervous hand does 
she strike the first monster, braining him on the instant; 
fast and furious are the blows that now assail the raging 
beasts, which rush to the unequal conflict, only sparing 
her for the pasture she provided them with. 

But this cannot last ; Bertha is out of breath, and the 
hungry brutes, their voracious appetites but whetted by 



FEVER ON BOARD. 157 

the blood or reeking flesh they have devoured, press on, 
ind one powerful and gigantic animal fixes his long teeth 
in the arm that wields the axe. A cry of pain bursts 
from the lips of Bertha, as her left hand plunges into her 
belt, and a pistol is levelled at the monster, which falls 
Dack — dead. But myriads of eyes seem to gleam upon 
her ; a thousand tongues loll forth, and the whole brutal 
srew prepare for a rush at the deer and its defender, 
svhen the boards of the quarter-deck are lifted, and three 
»hast]y faces appear — faces that look more like those of 
corpses than of living beings. 

But every hand clutches a weapon, and two guns and 
3ne pair of pistols poured in among the hideous crew, 
innounce a rescue ; and the blood-thirsty gang re- 
hire to seat themselves at no great distance on their 
lams. 

" Eeload, if you can," said brave Bertha ; " the deer 
must be brought in." 

Heedless of her wound, heedless of the devouring 
naws of the Can is lupus — Bertha cuts off the head of the 
leer, which she can then just lift and cast into the interior 
)f the Snow Ship. Then she bounds in, after securing 
ier weapons, and the planks once reclosed and secured, 
;hey are safe. Bold and brave Bertha is thanked by 
"aint and feeble voices, as the invalids crawl slowly back 
;o their beds, from which they had risen, only, as it were, 
jy a miracle. 

But all her courage has vanished for a moment, and a 
lysterical flood of tears relieves her pent-up feelings. 
Wayward are the ways of woman, who, bold as the most 
mdaunted martyr in the hour of real danger, will faint 
ivhen the peril is past. 

Stretching forth her hand, Bertha opened a small 
pcker, sacred to her father, which contained small flasks 



158 THE SNOW SHIP. 

of brandy, rum, and whisky. Taking a small glass of 
the first, Bertha drankit down, with a very wry face. 

"That's my first drink of spirits," she said, with a 
smile, " and it ain't nice, but my children may have a drop 
after their hard work ; and moving to the fire, she mixed 
a little with boiling water, and handed a glass to each. 

" Now, have patience," she said, laughing, " and see if 
I don't soon bring you all round." 

With this she began to cut out very choice parts, 
which she shredded or minced into cold water, with salt, 
in this way preparing, in about ten minutes, a pint of 
broth for each of her invalids, which they drank with a 
relish and gratitude only known to those who have suf- 
fered the awful pangs of hunger — pangs which, when 
once felt, are never forgotten. I speak from doleful 
experience. 

Bidding them all lie quiet while she prepared a second 
and more substantial meal, in the shape of a broil, Bertha, 
despite the terrific chorus of howls without, like a hun- 
dred dogs snapping and snarling over one bone, told the 
Hatfields many stories of wolves : how, when taken in a 
trap, they will crouch down, awaiting their fate, and 
with no intention of resisting the trapper ; how they will 
attack sheep, small dogs, but never man. 

" I had, when eleven years old, a pet lamb," she said, 
" of which I was very fond, and which I kept in a small 
inclosure near a fountain. One day, going down to the 
well for water, with a pitcher on my head, I saw what 
seemed to me a great dog worrying my poor sheep. It 
was indeed walking off with it in its mouth. I caught 
up a stray stick, and putting down my pitcher, I struck 
the ugly beast several times, upon which it dropped my 
favourite, and turned upon me with a most wicked 
snarl. I saw at once when he faced me, by his pricked 



AN UNEXPECTED REUNION. 159 

ears, liigh cheek-bones, long bushy tail, and gaunt figure, 
that it was a wolf ; but as he seemed anxious to get at 
my pet again, it crouching close to me, I struck him seve- 
ral times over the head, beating him about the ears, and 
fairly driving him away. But what I believe frightened 
him most was my shrieking, which I kept up all the 
time, until poor Pete came and shot him." 

A dead silence followed the mention of this name. In 
their terrible hour of tribulation and danger they had 
momentarily forgotten their previous miseries. 

" Bertha, you are an angel ! " cried Ralph ; " let us 
only regain our strength' and all will be well. Pete shall 
be found." 

Aouth has one blessing — that of rapidly recovering 
from illness. The two meals and a small modicum of 
sleep enabled the invalids to sit up without much exer- 
tion, all sign of their illness having vanished, save debi- 
lity and thirst. All asked for a drink. 

" There is no water," said Bertha. 

All fell back aghast. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

AN UNEXPECTED REUNION. 

Everybody knows the fearful trials endured in tropical 
climates from thirst. Though the suffering be nothing 
like the same in temperate zones, yet everywhere, the 
wide world over, the want of water is imperatively felt. 
Not man only, but every living thing, whether animal or 
vegetable, perishes for want of that, which in abundance 
we despise. 
The whole party were for a moment appalled at the 



160 THE SNOW SHIP. 

announcement made to them in those few words, and yet 
only for a moment. 

" A lump of ice, a little snow," said Ralph, " would 
amply supply us." 

Bertha made no remark, but, seizing a tin kettle and 
an axe, she rose to go forth, as usual the provider and 
good genius of the party, when there came, clear and 
distinct to all their ears, the renewed yell of the raven- 
ous wolves, howling around the Snow Ship for their 
prey. 

" Tou must not go alone," continued Ralph ; " the 
hungry brutes would tear you to pieces. If you cau 
carry the tin, I will accompany you." 

Because of the mental sufferings he had secretly en- 
dured, Ralph, since his illness, looked ten years older 
than before ; — his mien and countenance were so aged, 
and his strength had so deserted him, that it was only by 
an amount of courage and resolution almost incredible 
that he contrived to clutch his gun and load it. 

Bertha watched him with a tender and careful interest ; 
but perceiving, after a while, that he was better able to 
move than she expected, she had recourse again to her 
father's store of spirits. 

Now, Ralph required no Dutch courage to reanimate 
him, but the fiery fluid passing through his veins, gave 
him a fictitious strength, which at the moment was 
useful. He followed Bertha from the cabin to that part 
of the boat usually left open and uncovered in fine 
weather — namely, the stern sheets. 

To their mutual amazement, the savage wolves, ren- 
dered furious by the terrible promptings of hunger, were 
endeavouring to tear down the wooden barrier which 
alone separated them from their prey. They flew at the 
frail phmks with their teeth and paws, and not without 



AH" UNEXPECTED ltEUKIOH. 161 

success. One pine board, weaker or not so well placed 
as the others, had yielded to their frantic efforts. 

A whole row of horrid jaws, thrust through the open- 
ing, met their astounded gaze. 

But Ealph was quite prepared for this. Not one by- 
one, but together, did he fire his two barrels, and, while 
the small vessel was filled with smoke, the air resounded 
with the bowlings of the infuriated animals, increased by 
the horrid cries of those which, not yet dead, were being 
torn to pieces and eaten by their fellows. 

" I do not see what is to be done," said Ealph, in a 
voice of sadness, as he proceeded once more to load his 
gun ; " they are too many." 

" Give them another broadside," cried the brave little 
heroine. 

Ealph did so, and the result was that the savage 
animals, whose appetites were beginning to be satiated 
by feeding on their own kind, withdrew to a respectful 
distance, and allowed Bertha to pull out another plank 
and leap into the open air. 

We have already said that the crew of the peculiar 
vessel we have endeavoured to describe, had collected a 
considerable amount of fuel, the portion of which not re- 
quired for immediate consumption was placed outside. 
The young people had made a heap of layers of stout 
sticks, on which they had erected a pile of pine knots 
and small wood. 

Bertha's eye fell upon this at once, and an idea sug- 
gested itself. 

" Make haste and fetch me a brand from the fire," she 
said. 

Ealph, though not exactly understanding why she 
ashed for it, went in, and soon brought out a blazing 
pitch pine torch, which he handed to the girl. It had 

11 



162 THE SNOW SHIP. 

been the peculiar idea of the fugitives to select this very- 
kind of fuel, so 'that the pile was in part composed of 
pine knots and cones, into the very midst of which 
Bertha thrust the flaming torch. 

There was a momentary struggle between the frost 
and snow and that great power which vivifies the earth, 
and then, the cold yielding, the pile blazed on high a 
perfect beacon, scaring the wolves to a respectful 
distance, where they continued their hideous chorus of 
howls. 

Bertha, meanwhile, had not been idle ; watching her 
opportunity, she had easily chopped lumps of ice from 
the vicinity of the fire, which caused the solid mass to 
split, and these she bestowed in the kettle, which was 
then handed up to Ralph, who clutched it with the little 
strength he had left. 

Just as she had succeeded in doing so, a low faint moan 
seemed to sweep across the vast waste of congealed water, 
and then a breeze came swiftly in their direction. If 
they could but hoist their sails, they might proceed upon 
their journey, especially as it was a northerly wind, 
which would render the ice secure. 

The subject was debated warmly that evening, and it 
was finally decided that, God willing, they should resume 
their journey the next morning, when the whole party 
would be somewhat invigorated by another night's re- 
pose and sleep. This matter settled, all lay down to win 
that slumber which was so necessary to their debilitated 
frames. 

Again all was silent ; again nothing was to be heard 
but the breathing of the sleepers in that small cabin ; 
but all slept not. It was not the howling of the hungry 
wolves, pawing and scraping around the cage which con- 
tawed their human prey, that prevented this desirable 



AN UNEXPECTED BEUNION. 163 

consummation. Undefined alarm, terror of she knew 
not what, anxiety of the most poignant character with 
regard to the boys, kept Bertha awake. Vainly she 
tried to think of pleasanter things — of home, of the 
happy hour when all should be again united, and when 
the perils that now environed them should be spoken of 
with a smile. 

She could not sleep. 

Desirous of trying the soporific effect of cold, Bertha 
went into the after cabin, and, despite the patient wolves, 
removing a plank, she looked out into the night. The 
sight was magnificent. The wind was high, and scattered 
far and wide the snowy flakes, until the air was laden 
with milky particles. The sky was cloudless, while a 
full moon sailed across the blue expanse of ether, flooding 
hills, distant forests, and the wide waste of ice with its 
silvery frost. 

But what comes yonder, under the moon, stalking in 
the stilly night? 

Not stalking either, but running straight in their 
direction. Bertha veils her eyes with both her hands, 
and gazes wistfully at it. But the flood of light is such 
that she cannot distinguish its form. 

Nearer and nearer, until, with a wildly beating 
heart, Bertha clutches her gun. 

It is a man, and he is clothed in the winter garb of 
the trapper. 

" Up, up ! " she cries ; " here is Batiste." 

In another moment, after a shot at the wolves ) 
the faithful old trapper was with them, while all 
were giving vent to their frantic delight at again seeing 
bim , whose absence they had felt so much. 

" Did you make von big fire to guide me ? " inquired 
Batiste at last. 



164 THE SKOW SHTP. 

" No," cried Bertha, with a smile, as she explained how 
it happened. 

" Veil, it vaa lucky and it vas unlucky — for de same 
smoke as make me know you here, tell de Indians de 
same. Ve must go." 

All were too well convinced of the hunter's logic, to 
waste time in argument. Taking a kind of harpoon from 
the cabin, the trapper went forth and began removing 
the ice from round about the runners on which the Snow 
Ship ran. The wolves, from some mysterious motive, 
had disappeared — a circumstance at the time unnoticed. 

As soon as Batiste had successfully performed his task, 
it was easy to push the boat, which lay on a slope, on to 
the level ice, when, after some difficulty, the sails were 
hoisted, and once more the strange conveyance was under 
weigh, but it proceeded at a very moderate speed, the 
wind being light and vascillating. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

A BENCONTBE. 

"When Batiste was pitched off the Snow Ship, after the 
sudden breaking of the ice, he was cast upon a loose floe, 
which, though at first agitated by the winds and waves, 
presently settled down into a tolerably safe raft. By 
this time, however, the mast of the boat was scarcely 
visible, while every moment he was being carried to the 
northward and eastward. Finding that for the present 
he must be separated from his companions, he resigned 
himself to his fate, only intent on securing himself from 
the dangers of his peculiar navigation, and from the 
Indians, who had doubtless witnessed the catastrophe. 



A KEXCONTltE. 1G5 

It was no easy matter, on a raft of' so slippery a clia- 
racter, to maintain himself without being thrown into 
the water, as every now and then, from contact with 
other lumps or iloes of ice, he was whirled round or struck 
backwards. The only satisfactory plan was to kneel and 
use the butt end of his gun as a kind of oar. 

Presently he noticed that his raft stood still, upon 
which, cautiously rising, he found that he had once more 
reached a spot where the ice was able to bear his weight. 
But nowhere on the horizon could he catch the faintest 
glimpse of the Snow Ship. 

Batiste was too experienced in everything connected 
not only with woodcraft, but also with the navigation of 
the lake, not to be fully aware that as long as the 
southern breeze lasted, the open water would cut oft' all 
communication between himself and his friends. His 
mind was, therefore, at once made up, — he would camp 
in the woods, and wait until the lake was again frozen 
over. 

"With this resolve, though his heart was rent with 
anxiety as to the fate of his young charges, the cheery 
old hunter shouldered his rifle, and struck out for the 
dark line of forest, which could be distinguished at no 
great distance. 

The spot selected by Batiste was a wooded spit of 
land, that projected about half a mile into the lake, and 
the point of which was so thickly, and even densely 
wooded, that he had to cut himself a passage with his 
short, glittering axe, ere he reached the foot of a kind of 
cliff which, rising perpendicularly, was untouched by 
snow. When we say perpendicularly, we scarcely do 
justice to the fact ; as the summit of the earthen bank 
hung very much over the base. 

This at once decided Batiste, who in twenty minutes 



166 THE SNOW SHIP. 

had rigged for himself a temporary hut of the most pri- 
mitive kind. A number of young trees and large boughs 
were cut down and placed leaning against the cliff, so as 
to leave a space of about three feet wide by five feet high. 
Against the outside of this some earth and snow were 
thrown, and the wigwam was complete. 

Not quite complete, however ; as a rude kind of hurdle 
had to be constructed, by way of a door, without which 
the cold could not have been kept out. 

The most simple and natural proceeding would have 
been to make a fire ; but the old French trapper was too 
experienced a hand to commit himself in a hurry. He 
knew that his old enemies, the Indians, who had inflicted 
many an honourable scar upon him in the late wars, were 
prowling about, and would rejoice in taking the scalp of 
one whose rifle was so dreaded. 

To light a fire would have been to bait a trap for his 
own destruction. 

At all events, Batiste exercised, on the present occa- 
sion, all the wary caution which appertains to those 
who have lived from their boyhood in the mighty woods, 
and become familiar with every art and device whereby 
to circumvent or overcome an enemy — or, if need be, to 
escape from them. 

Taking his way once more to the extreme point of the 
promontory, he looked wistfully out into the night, which 
was black and rather tempestuous. His surprise, and at 
the same time his gratification, was great, when, at less 
than half a mile distance, on a similar spit to that which 
he now occupied, he saw a large fire, and around it were 
seated about thirty Indian warriors. 

" Diable ! " muttered Batiste ; and with that charac- 
teristic ejaculation he retired to his slab hut to muse 
and sleep. 



A EENCONTEE. 167 

To muse first as to the wisdom of his own movements. 
In the first place, it was quite clear that the Eedskins 
bad camped under some huge trees, to await the same 
change in the weather which he anticipated : it was cer- 
tain, therefore, that they would not leave the neighbour- 
hood for the present. Hence a fire was out of the ques- 
tion, and still less could he indulge in a shot. How, 
then, was he to live during the hours, days, perhaps 
weeks, that he might be confined to his present shelter 
by the southern wind ? 

There was no resource for it but to trap — with which 
determination he went off into a sound and pleasant 
slumber. 

No one who has not himself known the Indian race, 
can form any conception of the patience with which 
they will carry out any favourite project. The warriors, 
who had chased the Snow Ship, had never before seen a 
canoe that would float over ice ; and their curiosity — an 
Indian feeling — was excited to the last degree. They 
were, therefore, resolved to capture it at any cost of time 
and labour. 

This Eatiste surmised when, on the following morning, 
he found the Redskin camp in exactly the same position 
which it had occupied the previous night. This was, to 
say the least of it, a very serious and awkward business ; 
for though Batiste had, in his youth, gained the reputa- 
tion of being the keenest Indian fighter on the whole of 
the Iudiau frontier, yet he was but mortal, and in a con- 
test with thirty savage warriors, armed to the teeth, he 
must expect to be defeated. 

His only plan, therefore, was to remain completely 
concealed. 

How was he to live ? He had nothing in his pouch , 
for though men of his stamp are rarely ill-provided, yet, 



168 THE SNOW SHIP. 

on the present occasion, all had been taken by surprise. 
There was abundance of game in the woods, but to fire a 
shot would be fatal. 

It is, however, not easy to defeat an old and ex- 
perienced backwoodsman. So Batiste proceeded to make 
traps both for the birds of the air and the beasts of the 
forest, with wood cut from trees within the thicket, and 
with twine which he always carried in his pocket. 

Before night he had caught a hare and two pigeons, 
which, however, proved but a sorry meal, since he was 
obliged to eat them raw. Still, this kind of food was 
nutritious and life-supporting, and Batiste was thankful 
for it. Having thus provided against ordinary contin- 
gencies, he took up his position in such a place as to 
command a view of the Indian camp, and then he quietly 
indulged in his favourite luxury — a pipe. 

Now, this was incautious on the part of the wary 
old man ; for the eyesight of Redskins is wondrously 
keen, while no one can more readily apply the proverb, 
that "where smoke is there must be fire." He, however, 
was not ready to believe that this would betray him, so 
he puffed away with the assiduity of an old Dutchman. 

Days passed ; and the trapper began to feel so fearful 
an agony of suspense with regard to his young friends, 
that he was half inclined to risk the dangerous road and 
cross the ice, though the absence of all movement on the 
part of the Indians indicated that it was not yet safe. 
This decided him to wait a little longer, in fact, until 
that very evening on which Bertha found that she was 
without water. 

The loveliness of the night made Batiste wakeful ; and 
he stood under a pine tree, taking his last pipe before 
retiring to rest. He stood on the opposite side to that 
which overlooked the camp occupied by the Indians. He 



A EEtfCONTEE. 169 

was in the deep shade cast by three dismal looking trees, 
so that he could see without being seen. 

Suddenly his quick eye detected something in motion, 
in the direction of his trap, about thirty yards distant. 

He did not move, but stood motionless as a statue. 
jNText instant he could see, shining in the moonlight, a 
pair of glaring eyeballs, followed by the head, and then 
by the whole body of an armed and painted savage, who 
was examining the trap with some curiosity. 

Batiste clutched his rifle, and was about to take aim, 
when his better nature prevailed, and he waited, in the 
hope that the Indian might depart. The miraculously 
quick vision of the savage, however, was too much for 
him. 

" Ugh ! " said he, in his deep guttural tone, and then 
added, as he advanced, "bojoo brudder! " 

"Keep back — Batiste no frere to de loping savage, 
vat vould kill his friend — go thy way, and quick, or I 
shoot." 

The Indian started. He seemed to know the voice. 
For a moment he stood erect, and star-gazing, as it were, 
at vacancy, but all the while having his eyes searchingly 
fixed upon tbe tree. 

He was, though ugly, a splendid specimen of an 
Indian — tall, erect, and sinewy ; with limbs that would 
not have disgraced an Apollo. He was quite six feet 
high, and though but a young warrior, he was no mean 
competitor to contend against. He stood with the muzzle 
end of his gun in his hand, the butt end rested on the 
ground, as if irresolute how to act. Batiste broke the 
long silence by addressing him in the native Indian 
dialect. 

" Go thy way, brave, and backward too. I know why 
you are scouting here, and, but that I was a man without 



170 THE SNOW SHIP. 

a cross, I would have shot you through the hrain like 
a dog. But I do no needless murder." 

" A great white chief gives good advice to his son — 
but why should the hatchet be dug up between the pale- 
face and his red friend ? " 

" AVhy did the crafty vulture of the Sioux attempt to 
catch my boat ? " 

Tutored as he was in the acts of the savage race to 
which he belonged, the young Sioux warrior started. 
He had, it is true, been one of those who had chased the 
Snow Ship ; but how could the solitary hunter know this 
unless he were one of the crew, and if one of the crew, 
bow was it he was there ? 

" My white brother speaks in riddles — but the hour is 
late, will not my brother come to the tents of my 
people ? " 

"JSTo," said the other, sternly, "I will not — for there 
is blood between us — go ! " 

The Indian bowed with a lofty courtesy, that well be- 
came his graceful carriage, and as if trusting wholly to 
the generosity of the paleface, he turned his back, and 
leisurely entered the forest. Not so the cunning trapper, 
who next instant whisked behind a tree, and was amply 
rewarded for his caution, by seeing a gun-barrel protrude 
from amid the clump of bushes, where the Redskin had 
disappeared. 

" Sucre traitre" muttered the old trapper, and he in- 
stantly fired a foot below the barrel pointed at him. 

The two shots were simultaneous, but while that of 
the Canadian sped with deadly aim, the other was ex- 
pended in the air — the wily and treacherous savage falling 
forward towards the lake downwards, as he fired. 

" Poor fellow ! " exclaimed the Canadian, sorrowfully, 
" but he brought it on himself. I must be off, or the 



THE SNOW SHIP DESERTED. 171 

ravenous wolves will be upon me — ah! what is that 
yonder ? " 

Suddenly he saw far out on the wide and level plain, 
a column of smoke, with a faint, lurid light at the 
bottom. 

" They are mating signals," he whispered to himself; 
" but the signals will be seen by more than one." 

The trapper knew very well that the two shots, fired 
simultaneously, would bring the whole body of Eedskins 
down upon him in less than ten minutes ; he had, there- 
fore, no time to lose ; but clutching his rifle, and turning 
his back upon the wretched Indian, he started over the 
white and glossy plain at a long loping trot, that was 
not a bad similitude of that of the Indians themselves. 

He looked not once behind, but, putting forth all his 
strength, he pushed forward over the ice, guided first by 
the dark column of smoke, and then by the thin tapering 
mast of the Snow Ship. The result we know. 



OHAPTEE XXIV. 

THE SNOW SHIP DESEETED. 

The boat was, while Batiste told his story, rushing hither 
and thither over the icy plain, something after the man- 
ner of a skater, the wind being still changeable, while the 
snow fell in those heavy flakes which betoken a long- 
continued storm. The Canadian consulted the horizon 
with a wary eye, but as yet not a sign was to be detected 
of the pursuing Indians, who, however, if at no very 
great distance, could easily follow the trail of the Snow 
fShip, some considerable fall being required to obliterate 
marks so clear and distinct. 



172 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The trapper reflected deeply. Under his charge were 
two girls and two boys, for whom he felt the affection of 
a father. Should the Indians come up, he had quite de- 
cided what course he would pursue, as a defence of the 
craft, when assailed by so many warriors, was out of the 
question. He was, however, still in hopes that he might 
be able to outwit the pursuers. All he asked for was wind. 

The breeze seemed at times to second his wishes, but 
as the snow-storm increased it became evident that a 
total lull was imminent. 

" The cold is getting terrible," said Ealph ; " we must 
make up a fresh fire." 

" No," replied Batiste, looking out upon the mighty 
plain, only a small portion of which he could now see, 
" we must leave the boat to its fate, or perish. Wrap 
yourselves up warmly, my children, clutch your weapons, 
and follow me." 

As be spoke he once more lowered the sail, and then 
the mast, his companions obeying his orders with that 
blind fidelity which, under the circumstances, was wis- 
dom. Then each one loading himself and herself with 
necessaries, they followed him on to the ice. The Cana- 
dian appeared to require no guide, striking out, as if by 
instinct, across the dreary waste. 

His design soon became evident, for they had not pro- 
ceeded for more than ten minutes, when they saw loom- 
ing in the distance a dense forest of pines, growing so 
close together, and so loaded with snow, as to present a 
most singular appearance. Under the dark arches thus 
peculiarly formed, there was but a small coating of snow. 
This, however, did not influence Batiste, who hurried his 
charges along until they reached a small lake. 

" It is one chance, and that is all," said Batiste, with a 
deep sigh. 



THE SNOW Snil 1 DESERTED. 173 

And as he spoke, he darted across the snow-clad sur- 
face of the pond— it was little more — reckless of the trail 
which he left. The direction in which he headed was a 
hill, very steep and rugged, with hrushwood and under- 
growth of every kind upon its sides. 

As soon as they had reached the foot of the mountain, 
Batiste led them behind a little thicket, and thus dis- 
closed a small hole or crevice, through which they passed 
into a cavern, one of the many secret caches known to the 
old and experienced hunter. 

Men who devote their lives to the chase never think 
of carrying with them the whole of the stock which they 
capture in a season. Their plan is to hunt one district 
well, camping in the woods for perhaps a fortnight, at 
the expiration of which they have a goodly pile, as no 
hunter remains long in a neighbourhood unless game is 
abundant. 

As soon as the trapper makes up his mind to remove 
from the scene of his labours, he proceeds to cache his 
goods, which he does generally in oneway. He selects a 
spot of ground where the green turf is smooth and even. 
This he proceeds to remove with his hunting-knife, in 
four pieces of about a foot square. Having completed this 
part of his task, the trapper places his blanket on the 
ground beside the spot, and then digs a pit, placing every 
atom of earth on the blanket, and as soon as a- load is 
ready, he carries the whole to a distance, scattering the 
contents to the four winds, or casting it into a stream, as 
circumstances allow. 

As soon as the hole is deep enough, the cautious 
hunter puts in all his spoils of the chase, scatters earth 
over them, and then replaces the turf, in general so artis- 
tically that few but experienced sportsmen are able to 
detect the handiwork of man. In some instances a fire 



174 THE SKOW SHIP. 

is made over the spot, but in general faith, is put in the 
simple plan described; and should no curious eye fall 
upon the spot for a day or two, rain or the heavy dews 
do their work, and the grass grows firmly and well- 
rooted as before. 

Hundreds of such caches exist ; some now unknown, 
even to those who made them, while many have passed 
away from memory by the death of the owners. 

In one of his summer hunts, Batiste had fallen upon 
the present cave, which, when the lake was free from ice, 
could only be approached by swimming: 

It was a natural cave, about ten feet high by as many 
wide, with a narrow entrance, and was guarded from view 
by the thicket, which grew up to within a foot of the 
opening. 

But this was no barrier now ; for if their trail were 
once discovered, the Indians would walk straight up to 
the cavern. Batiste, like most men of his class, had a 
motive in all he did. He had thrown the Snow Ship as 
a sop to wolves. He knew well that the Redskins would 
ransack this thoroughly before they continued on their 
way, and in the interval the falling snow might obliterate 
their tracks. 

Down it came, the flakes falling with provoking slow- 
ness, but still slowly and surely erasing the marks of their 
footsteps. Batiste watched the progress of the storm 
with intense interest ; for unless they put the Eedskins 
entirely off the scent, there remained to them no hope, 
save in the last appeal to arms — a mode of action which, 
as it would surely end in the massacre of the party, the 
Canadian had no intention of having recourse to. 

Down, down came the milk-white floss, loading rock, 
and bow, and tree, with its snowy mantle, but not enough 
for the impatience of Batiste, who, with knit brow and 



THE SNOW SHIP DESEKTED. 175 

clenched fists, peered through the half-naked boughs. 
His eyes were rivetted on the terrible evidence of their 
presence. 

So fixed was his gaze, and so accustomed was his eye 
to the impression of the snow-shoes, that it was some 
minutes after the trail was utterly obliterated before he 
was aware of the fact. Then it seemed providential, for, 
lifting his gaze to a higher horizon, he saw on the skirts 
of the forest the whole party of the Redskins fully ac- 
cotttred for war, and bent upon tracing their progress. 

But the powerful hand, of nature had swept it away 
for ever. 

Batiste could see the angry look of astonishment — 
could hear the savage execrations to which the baffled 
Indians gave vent, for they were not quite a hundred 
yards from the spot where the fugitives lay concealed. 

" One cough, one sneeze, one whisper louder dan mine, 
and we is lost ! " 

He had retreated into the cavern, where the young 
people were crouching up close together for warmth, to 
whisper these words. Next minute he was again at his 
post. The Indians had not yet moved, but scarcely had 
he resumed his ambuscade when he saw the enemy divide 
into three bands, one of which turned to the right, the 
other to the left, with the intention of walking round the 
pond, or lake. 

The third band, eight in number, struck across the 
lake in the direction of the cavern where the palefaces 
were concealed. Batiste, with one deep sigh, laid down 
his gun, and, standing in an attitude of submission, pre- 
pared to surrender without striking a blow. 

On came the Indians, so silently and yet so quickly, as 
to look like shadows in the gloom of the snow-storm. 
Their heads were thrown slightly forward, in an attitude 



176 



THE SNOW SHIP. 



of acute attention, their black sullen eyes constantly 
flitted from one point to the other, never resting for a 
second on any single object. All trailed their rifles in 
their left hand, while their right rested on the handle oi 
their terrible tomahawks. 

They were within twenty yards of the cavern, and the 
Canadian, anxious to prevent bloodshed, was about 
to step forward, when his purpose was suddenly 
arrested by a voice which came, almost directly, from 
above where he stood. 

" My young men waste their time on the lake : a 
skunk could not hide," said one, in the authoritative 
tones of a chief. " The palefaces are in the woods skulk- 
ing ; but the eye of Onema is keen — he will find them." 

The band of Redskins on the lake at once obeyed the 
orders of the head warrior, rushing tumultuously towards 
the shore, and disappearing beneath the gloomy and 
sombre arches of the tall pine forest. Batiste drew a 
long sigh of relief, and then retreated into the cacM to 
announce to his young charges what was comparatively 
good news. 

The Redskins were evidently utterly at fault, as they 
could hear them hallooing one to the other in the woods, 
now far, now near, until at length, after gradually reced- 
ing, their voices were lost altogether. Still, they were 
not safe, as a second and more searching examination was 
sure to follow, when the fissure might at any moment be 
discovered. 

There was, however, no help for it. They must for a 
while remain secreted, and put their faith in the very 
simplicity of the cache they had selected, as, despite the 
rapid falling of the snow, it would take some time to 
efface their trail did they seek to return to their vessel, 
«n board of which all now heartily wished themselves, 



PERILS AKD DANGERS. 193 

Jack knew him to be right, but looked forward rather 
gloomily to the idea of passing a day in that hole without 
auy prospect, and with the blast roaring through the huge 
pines, like distant echoes of the artillery of heaven. It 
was grand, it was magnificent, but it was terribly mono- 
tonous. Jack expressed his opinion to Pete, who coolly 
remarked that he was a young bear, and had all his sor- 
rows to come. 

This made Jack laugh, and in revenge he challenged 
Pete to tell him some story of bear-hunts, in which his 
father and Batiste had been concerned. This just suited 
Pete, who was enormously fond of talking, like most jolly 
fellows, and so the day passed, eating, drinking, and lying 
down, until once more they considered it time to go to rest. 

The next morning was warmer far ; the wind had more 
southing in it, and, though the snow was soft and sloppy, 
they determined to make the attempt. They carried as 
much ham in rashers as they could, and as much whisky 
as their bottles would hold, trusting to the snow for 
water. Each, moreover, had made free with a bear-skin, 
after which the cache had been filled up, everything re- 
turned, arid the earth rendered as hard and as level as 
possible. 

They ascended from the bottom of the hole, crawling ; 
and, when they reached the summit, they put on their 
clumsy snow-shoes, and began their journey along the 
crest of the hill. For some time they continued in utter 
silence, so arduous and terrible was the walking, which 
they had hardly commenced ere they were sorry. At 
every step they either glided or slipped, sometimes 
tumbling, until they were so exhausted, so done-up and 
weary, that they stood still, and felt ready to lie down 
and give way to their feelings in a good cry, as many 
boys, and brave ones, too, have often done. 

13 



194 THE SNOW SHIP,. 

" Them snow-shoes," said Pete, " is dreadful walking. 
They fairly cuts me in two. I says, give in and go 
back." 

" I'm too tired," said Jack ; " couldn't walk another 
mile at present." 

" If I tell the truth," answered Pete, " that's about the 
size here." 

And, with a dexterity worthy of a man, he slid down 
a small declivity to where a fallen trunk afforded a seat. 
Jack followed tolerably well ; and then, after panting for 
breath for a minute or two, they held counsel together. 
Both were unanimously of opinion, that while the south 
wind kept the snow in its present state it would be wise 
for them to attempt a return to the old retreat ; but this 
appeared impossible without a good rest. 

The fallen tree was one of a dense thicket with under- 
growth ; and beneath this they crept, and, wrapping 
themselves in their bearskin cloaks, they sought rest 
and sleep. 

When they awoke it was night ; and, though the south 
wind still blew, there was an evening frost, which made 
them start up and resolve to return the way they had 
come, there to abide until the weather changed, and the 
snow should become permanently solid. They were in 
deep distress about their friends ; for, though joy seldom 
kills, yet grief, with its canker-worm, often does. 

The mother, naturally, was the one spoken of with the 
deepest expressions of anxiety 

They were still stiff from the horrible journey of the 
morning ; but, by degrees, the exercise and their burdens 
warmed them, so that by the time they were half-way 
they were once more brisk enough, and finally gained 
their first asile, as the Canadians call them, in quite high 
and hearty spirits. It seemed "oinething like home 



PERILS AND DANGEBS. 195 

under the circumstances ; and, when a fire and supper 
appeared, they lay by the fire and laughed with 
pleasure. 

They were detained two whole days, when, on the 
third morning, the weather suddenly changed, and 
they were, within an hour after sunrise, assured of a 
good road. They had now but one ham left. This they 
cut up into slices, wrapped them into their bear robes, and 
then, boldly shouldering their guns, they began their 
journey anew. 

The wind was so keen and piercing on the top of the 
ridge, that they thought it wiser to descend a little to 
the southward, to be protected from the gale ; and, this 
delicate point once settled, they started, keeping their 
eyes fixed upon the crest of the hill as a guide. Pete 
knew how careful one ought to be in the woods, and 
therefore he never for a moment relaxed his vigilance, 
while Jack followed carefully in his footsteps. It was 
pleasant enough walking, as the snow now appeared dry 
and floury, so that they advanced at a rapid pace for 
hours, when a snow-storm of considerable duration com- 
pelled a retreat to some trees, which, standing almost 
wall-like in their proximity, fairly screened them. 

This lasted about an hour, at the expiration of which 
time, though the fall had ceased, the sky continued dark 
and lowering. 

" Well, I guess I'm puzzled," said Pete, with a rather 
rueful expression of coimtenance. 

" Not lost ? " said Jack, who never forgot his experi- 
ence in that line. 

" I hopes not, Jack, but I'm very much afraid we've 
missed the top of the ridge, somehow. The wind in my 
face has nearly sent me to sleep. There's nare a track 
of the way we came." 



196 the mow SHIP. 

Now, as it often happens under similar circumstances, 
when the boys began to compare their experiences and 
memories, they differed widely. One recollected a wil- 
low, the other a cotton- wood tree, until at last they were 
fully aware that they could not both be wrong, and so 
they could not be lost. 

Then began one of those tiresome tramps in the pine 
forest, which try the energies and cunning of most men. 
But the boys bore up wonderfully, and probably had 
they persevered, they might have gone right ; but they 
soon lost confidence in any one route, and tried another, 
until, when night came, they had scarcely any idea of the 
direction of the compass. 

And then they slept close to one another, with one rug 
over, and one rug under them, and with a fire on each 
side. 

They would, under the circumstances, have rather 
liked being found by the Indians. 

The next day was the same, and again the next ; until 
at last their food was all gone, and they had no hope. 
No game had come within their reach, though once they 
thought so, when they found an old Indian crone watch- 
ing their trail. They immediately ran after her, imploring 
her to lead them to her village — but she, alarmed at 
their gestures, concealed herself so cunningly, and then 
disappeared, that they soon thought she must have been 
a vision. 

And all this time no game. 

At length, one day, when, after chewing boughs, and 
trying barks, they were utterly in despair, they came 
upon a fine moose buck, scratching in the snow. Both 
stood still, and both, leaning their guns on the boughs 
of trees, took such steady and deliberate aim as men do, 
who know that life or death rests upon the shot. 



THE SNOW SHI£ AGAIN. 197 

Both hit him, and he bounded away over the snow, 
followed by the hunters. 

They knew by his pace that he was wounded, and so, 
keeping up their strength by a last drop of whisky, on 
they went ; but oh, how slowly, it was pitiable to see ! 
They could scarcely draw their snow-shoes along, and yet, 
such is the heavenly attribute of hope, they still went on. 

Several weary miles were traversed ere they sighted 
their prize, and it was down upon the ground, out of 
sight, with wolves in shoals upon him. With a cry of 
anguish the youths fired at the savage brutes, which at 
once took to their heels and fled— a rare instance of 
cowardice when they are in flocks. The reason was soon 
evident — of the moose deer there remained but the bones. 

The poor boys sank in the snow in utter despair, but 
Pete was soon up, and, with a determination and energy' 
indicative of the hunter's character, he compelled himself 
to make a fire, with the intention of broiling the bones 
for the sake of such little nutriment as they contained. 

This done, and one or two mouthfuls feebly snatched, 
the deadly sleep of such climates seized upon them, and 
they gave way. In five minutes more they would have 
perished, but, with a joyous shout, that was soon changed 
to a cry of distress, up rushed Batiste, the brothers, and 
the sisters. 



CHAPTEB XXIX. 



THE SNOW SHIP AGAIN. 



The whole party were at first under the impression that 
life was extinct, and that the two brave boys were gone 
for ever. Batiste, however, hastily kneeling down, and 
placing his hand upon their hearts, soon became con- 



198 THE SNOW SHTP. 

vinced that a certain amount of vitality remained. His 
first act was to pour a mouthful of spirits down their 
throats, and then to chafe their hands and faces, rubhing 
with snow such parts as appeared frost-bitten — the com- 
mon practice of experienced hunters. 

The lads soon opened their eyes, and gazed for a 
moment wildly at their friends, totally unable to speak, 
laKjft? expressing in their eyes the deep gratitude and affec- 
tion which they felt. 

" Now, poys," said Batiste, " we must take them to de 
camp, and fill their estomacs with something to eat. 
Can you walk ? " 

They tried to rise, but the effort was too great for 
them. The old hunter scratched his head, and then, 
lifting Jack in his arms, left Pete to be carried by the 
others. In this way they were taken more than half a 
mile to the camp, where the party had passed the night 
in a deep hollow, so over-shadowed by trees, as to admit 
of a fire being made without fear of its betraying their 
presence. 

Being careful not to put the sufferers too near the 
fire, they were comfortably disposed, and by a moderate 
admixture of brandy and food, they were soon brought 
to such a state of convalescence as to be able to tell 
their story, to which the others listened with rapt 
attention. 

Now came the question as to what they were to do. 
The weather was very severe, and the boys were as yet 
unfit to walk, so that at all events they resolved to pass 
one more night in the same spot, as it was sheltered and 
comparatively warm. The rest of the day was spent in 
mutual explanations ; but when evening set in, all were 
glad to seek that repose which their necessities and the 
excitement they had passed through, so much demanded. 



THE SJ5T0W 8m.r AW.a.IN'. 199 

It was somewhat late next morning, ere they were all 
ready to move, but when they did awake, it was with in- 
tense satisfaction that the elder brothers noted the 
improvement in Pete and Jack, who appeared quite 
renovated. The snow had now ceased falling, so that a 
short journey was practicable that day, and a short 
journey the hunter determined it should be, lest over- 
fatigue should throw the invalids back again. 

His object was to make speedily for the Snow Shi^ 
which alone could enable them to reach home. There wlB; 
however, one consideration of great importance. Should 
there be no wind, he determined to make for Manitoulin 
Island, abandoning the ark to the mercy of the Indians. 

Every precaution was taken to avoid ambuscade, as 
from necessity they were compelled to pass at no very 
great distance from the Indian village. Batiste, however, 
selected secluded dells, valleys, and wooded bottoms, 
where the Indians were least likely to be concealed. 

In this way, before night they were once more near 
the borders of the vast lake, which spread before them 
its white and placid mantle, unruffled by a breath of 
wind. The atmosphere was quite clear, so that they 
imagined that in the distance they could see the Snow 
Ship, almost wholly concea'led by the snow which had 
fallen since they abandoned it to its fate. 

A very serious consideration now arose. If they could 
see the Snow Ship, so could the Indians, if indeed they 
were on the look-out for it, instead of following on the 
trail of the fugitives. Nothing more probable might have 
occurred, than thatthe Redskins were in possession of their 
vessel, and that in its hold lay a treacherous ambush. 

As, in a perfect hole in the ground, they lit their fire, 
much speculation was indulged in on this point. They 
were all well aware both of Indian artifices, and also of 



200 £HE SNOW Sttlf. 

the untiring patience with which they will carry out any 
plan upon which they have set their hearts. 

It now became a question whether they should not 
creep along the banks, secreting themselves at night, and 
travelling by short stages in the day, instead of ventur- 
ing upon such a risk as an ambush on board the Snow 
Ship would prove. No decision had been come to when 
the hour for sleep had arrived, Batiste being fairly 
pizzled, and unable to make up his mind what to do. 

The young people were soon in a sound sleep, but 
Batiste could not close his eyes. He was racked by 
doubt and sinister pesentiments. The feud between the 
Indians and themselves was, he knew, mortal, and capture 
might result in death to the whole party. 

However, something must be done; so, suddenly rising 
and clutching his gun, the hunter strode away from the 
sleepers, determined at any risk to discover the truth 
with regard to their boat, which lay out upon the lake, 
still and motionless, but probably with very dangerous 
customers in the hold. 

Now Batiste showed his great skill as a hunter and 
bush fighter. The moment he was about to leave the 
shadow of the trees, he stooped low, well aware that if 
the boat were in possession of the enemy, his only hope 
was to keep so low as not to be easily detected by any 
watchful eye. 

The task was equally arduous and slow, but the Cana- 
dian was not a man to be easily deterred from anything 
he once undertook. He kept his eye steadily fixed on the 
beacon before him, and at last he had the satisfaction of 
seeing that he was rapidly nearing it. 

And still it remained to all appearance utterly still 
and motionless. 

He was nearly an hour making his journey, but at 



THE StfOW SHIP AGAIS. 201 

length he paused within about twenty yards of it. The 
dead silence seemed ominous, and Batiste examined the 
boat with a keen and curious eye. It appeared wholly 
abandoned to its fate, and yet, somehow, the Canadian 
had his suspicions. The deck, it was true, was covered 
with snow, but it seemed to Batiste that the entrance at 
the back was clear. This was almost a confirmation of 
his worst suspicions. 

Determined, however, to make sure, and well aware 
that the Indians would wish to take him alive, he resolved 
to advance boldly. 

Casting his rifle in the hollow of his arm, and treading 
with the lightness of a dancer, he soon was able to verify 
his suspicions. The Indians had been there, for there 
were regular steps to the stern sheets. 

But the stout oaken door to the cabin was closed. 
Batiste began to suspect the truth. A light flashed upon 
his face, as, with a bounding heart and a cautious step, he 
entered the boat and peered through a chink. He could 
see nothing, but he could distinctly hear the heavy 
breathing of several sleepers, evidently, as he suspected, 
in a state of intoxication. 

They had found old Antoine's locker, and, unable to 
withstand the temptation, they had drunk themselves 
insensible. 

Quick as thought, Batiste secured the door by a thick 
wooden bar, that completely locked it on the outside, 
and effectually prevented any chance of escape. 

This done, he returned without delay to his com- 
panions, to whom he announced his extraordinary adven- 
ture. Not a moment was lost. The whole party hurried 
to the bark, in which their hopes of safety now lay, and 
in about half an hour they were diligently at work, clear- 



202 THE SNOW SHIP. 

ing the deck of snow, after which, the breeze being 
favourable, they hoisted sail, and once more glided 
rapidly over the hardly-frozen snow. 

Not many minutes elapsed ere the motion seemed to 
wake the sleepers, who tried at once to rush forth, but 
were evidently much surprised to find themselves pri- 
soners. A deep guttural conversation followed, after 
which one of the men asked to speak with a chief. 

"J am no chief," said Batiste through the chink, " but 
I am a hunter, and the oldest of the party. Speak, if 
you have anything to say." 

" The paleface is very cunning, and his fire-water is 
hot. We have drunk too much, and have been trapped 
like beavers. It is the fortune of war. But whither 
would our brother take us ? why not rather let us go in 
peace, and let the hatchet be buried between us ? " 

" Harkee, Bedskin, if you mean treachery, let me tell 
you here are six guns, which will make pretty short work 
of you. But I am willing to treat, and if you will come 
forth one at a time, unarmed, you are free, and your arms 
shall be thrown to you when you are clear out of this 
boat, where you never ought to have been." 

The Bedskins whispered a word or two, and then again 
spoke aloud. 

" A brave has but his word. It is peace. "We will 
leave one by one," said the former spokesman. 

Batiste, now seizing a hatchet, bade the others clutch 
their rifles, while he opened one panel of the door, which 
just allowed one man to pass ; as soon as this was done, 
a plumed, grim head appeared, and one by one four 
warriors came forth, mightily crest-fallen. They each 
went to the end of the vessel, and leaped lightly upon 
the snow. 



A EIDE ON AN OX. 203 

"When the last man was out, their tomahawks were 
thrown to them, and, the wind freshening, the two 
strange parties were speedily separated. 

All were now in a fever of excitement to get home, as 
their protracted absence must have caused great misery. 
Fortunately, they kept a fair wind, and, never pausing 
day or night, they arrived on the morrow at the house of 
Mr. Antoine, where they found Mr. and Mrs. Hatfield ; 
for on the return of the horses, with broken harness and 
no sleigh, the anxious parents became so frenzied as not 
to be able to endure the suspense. 

Accordingly, they harnessed the animals to a lumber- 
sleigh, and hurried, without a moment's delay, to seek 
for tidings of their children. The meeting may be con- 
ceived. It was all tears one moment, all smiles the next ; 
but, before parting for the night, a happier circle could 
not have been found in all Canada. Past miseries made 
present comforts all the more delightful. 



OHAPTEE XXX. 

A EIDE OK AN OS. 

The rest of the winter was spent in the usual occupa- 
tions of Canadian farmers ; but when the spring came, 
all were bent upon attending to agricultural occupations, 
which, however, being similar to those of the previous 
year, need not here be described. Great improvements 
were, however, made in the house, which was enlarged 
and made more comfortable, while three cottages were 
built for some honest "Welsh labourers and their wives, 
who were hired for the season. 

Mr. Hatfield was desirous, that while his sons should 



204 THE SNOW SHIP. 

learn farming and forest life thoroughly, they should not 
neglect those studies which might enable them to take a 
part in life, when the noblest colony in the world should 
be more densely peopled, and towns and villages should 
stand where only forests now existed. This made him 
secure hired labour, which enabled the boys to divide 
their days between labour and study. 

Early in the spring, their neighbourhood received the 
welcome accession of two new settlers, one about eight, 
the other about eleven miles distant. They were both 
Scotch : able and industrious farmers. In the spirit of 
hospitality, which is almost universal in new countries, 
the Hatfields gave to each of the emigrants, on their first 
arrival, a week's help, which, considering that our heroes 
had excellent oxen, was of great value. 

It chanced that an adventure befel Jack through this, 
of which in after life he was always very proud, though 
at the time it was far from a pleasant one. The nearest 
farmer, a Mr. M'Alister, had occasion to borrow a pair of 
oxen. Having served the purpose for which they were 
taken, they were given in charge to Jack to take home. 
It was rather late when he started, but though the road 
by the river side was dreary enough in the evening hour, 
the boy, ever fearless and brave, resolved to start, and 
as he did so, he saw the deepening shades sink into night 
without experiencing any real apprehension. 

Of course he was not proceeding very rapidly, but 
there he was, trudging on stealthily, singing cheerfully, 
as he walked ; now urging the animals forward, now 
leading them, when there came a sound upon the night 
air that made the brave boy shiver, for he knew it to be 
the war-cry of the ravenous wolves. At first he hoped 
that they might be chasing some stray deer, as was their 
wont, but as the hideous and horrible uproar came 



A EIDE ON AN OX. 205 

nearer and nearer, lie knew they were after him, and 
that he must instantly adopt some means of making his 
escape. 

His road, I have said, was close to the river bank, and 
he was a ready and active swimmer ; but the night was 
very dark, and he might be carried into the rapids. To 
be dashed to pieces on the rocks was scarcely less dreadful 
than to be mangled and devoured by wolves. With a 
calmness and decision which, when he became a man, 
served him well, he sent up one brief, hurried prayer to 
God, and then made up his mind to what seemed the 
only chance of escape. 

Mounting the near ox, he began, by using his goad 
and by shouting, to excite him to his utmost speed. In 
almost every case the heavy and unwieldy horned steed 
Would have flung off his rider and left him to his fate, 
but in this instance the ox, accustomed to be made use 
of by Jack as a steed, started off with the speed of a race- 
horse, as if conscious of the young rider's peril. 

The other ox, hearing the wolves, and unwilling to 
part from his companion, followed at a brisk pace. But 
faster than either, coming closer and closer every mo- 
ment, the yelling pack came up behind, and letting Jack 
hear 

" Their long, hard gallop, which could tire 
The hound's deep hate, and hunter's fire." 

Fortunately, however, the ox heard it too, and in- 
stinctively dreading the savage brutes, he galloped along 
without any pause, but still the wolves came nearer" and 
nearer. Jack shouted loudly to keep them off, the oxen 
almost flying, and their chains rattling as they went. 

This was their salvation. 

The clanking sound, to which the hideous pack were 



206 THE SNOW SHIP. 

unaccustomed, made them hesitate when they came close 
to the oxen, whilst the latter increased their speed, till 
at length they came in sight of the farm, when every- 
body rushed out, unable to understand the frightful 
clamour, and both astonished and terrified to see Jack, 
riding a race to which that of John Gilpin was as 
nothing-. 

The true state of things was speedily seen, when all 
were too glad to congratulate Jack on his good sense 
and courage ; nor did his family ever again allow him to 
make such an excursion until the country was more clear 
and thickly peopled. 



OHAPTBE XXXI. 

THE SCHOONER VOYAGE. 

Few but those who have seen it, can realize to themselves 
the indescribable beauty of autumn in Canada ; especially 
in the woods, when the light of the rising or the setting 
sun falls upon them. Every conceivable shade of yellow 
and red, green and brown, may be found in the forest 
trees, shrubs, and creeping plants, and vines ; every 
backwoodsman's home can boast of more gorgeous colour- 
ing and richer beauties, than any park-surrounded man- 
sions in England. 

It is then that the pine, in contrast to other trees, 
puts forth a richer and fresher foliage, and frequently a 
tree, still green, will have a single branch covered with 
red or orange leaves, like a gigantic bouquet of flowers. 

It was at this season of the year that the Antoines 
paid a return visit to the Hatfield family. They came 
in a canoe, and were to stay some little time. Ealph 



THE SCHOONER VOYAGE. 207 

had contrived this visit, for he wished his mother to see 
a little more of Bertha. It must be noted as a pecu- 
liarity in America, that people marry very young — and 
very wisely too, when the world is all before them where 
to choose. It was an understood thing between the 
young people, that as soon as a hut could be built, and 
a small farm cleared, they were to be married. 

The elders were all agreeable, and a circumstance then 
suddenly occurred which promised to expedite the affair 
materially. A relative of Mrs. Hatfield, dying in England, 
left to each of the boys a thousand pounds, subject to the 
control of their father, until they reached the age of 
twenty-one. Mr. Hatfield determined that Ralph's por- 
tion should be put at his disposal at once, in order to 
expedite his farm, while Harry wished his to be reserved 
for the study of a profession, which he still preferred to 
a life in the woods. 

The money was payable at Montreal, and thither 
Ralph was to start at once to fetch it, his father having 
received a power of attorney in the letter of advice. It 
was intended that the journey should be performed on 
horseback, but, by great good fortune, before the young 
man started, a small schooner hove in sight, chartered 
by an enterprising Canadian, for the sale of stores, and 
to look up goods for purchase. The owner of this 
craft earned a large fortune by his ingenuity and his 
shrewd way of doing business. Having purchased all 
the Hatfields had to sell, the captain, one Jerome, gladly 
gave Ralph a passage, and made a further arrangement 
to bring the young man back. 

The young lovers, and all, indeed, parted cheerfully, 
for though the Huron is at times as dangerous as the 
sea, all had faith in Providence ; and Bertha, who was 



208 THE STTOW SHIP. 

to remain with the Hatfields, promised to be always on 
the look-out. 

Away, then, the boat started, with a fair wind blowing 
fresh, and reached the Thames Eiver, the end of the 
boat's journey, without any event, except that they had 
some difficulty in finding it. At length, however, they 
espied a large tree of the swamp-elm species, the only 
one in sight for miles, and this the skipper declared was 
his only landmark. 

Here Ralph took a transport boat, with which to reach 
the end of his journey, leaving the schooner to trade 
and load until his return. His journey was without 
accident, his business was transacted, his purchases were 
made, and the money, chiefly in notes, was fastened 
in a belt round his person. Away, then, for home, and 
that dear undertaking which was to lead him to happi- 
ness, as the reward of industry. 

The schooner was just ready; and, full of life and 
spirits, the whole party started on the return voyage. 
Getting under weigh, they dropped down the Eiver 
Thames, which falls into St. Clare, which they crossed, 
and anchored amongst some low islands at the mouth 
of the river. Here they were detained three days, waiting 
for a wind. Ralph's impatience knew no bounds, and 
while others went ashore duck-shooting, he leaned over 
the bulwarks watching for a wind. 

It came at last, but light and baffling, which made 
their progress very tedious. To keep out of the strong 
current they had to creep along shore, so that they were 
constantly running aground. The second day, however, 
the wind turning against them, they had to anchor again 
for twelve hours ; when suddenly the long hoped-for 
chance took place in the shape of half a gale from the 
south-west, which enabled them, aided by a tow-rope, to 



THE SCHOONER VOYAGE. 209 

pass the rapids, and once more dash out upon the broad 
bosom of the mighty Huron. 

Ralph, who was a favourite of the captain's, walked 
the quarter-deck with him for some time, well aware, 
from the increasing sea, that they must prepare for a 
rough night. No serious alarm was yet felt, for the 
gale was aft, and would land them home at daybreak. 
But as the night came on, the storm increased in force, 
so that by midnight it blew a hurricane. The howling 
of the wind, the rattling of chains, the roar of the breeze 
through the ropes was something awful. The skipper 
now persuaded Ealph to retire to rest, and being weary, 
he agreed ; and, despite the uproar, he slept until 
daylight. 

He then clambered on deck, and looked out for land. 
None was in sight ; but the schooner was scudding before 
the gale under a close-reefed foresail and jib, the sea 
running in dark, heavy masses, that threatened to poop 
their frail bark every moment. Nothing could be seen 
but mist ; while, had there been breakers ahead, they 
would not have been visible twenty feet off. 

" "Where are we ?" asked Ealph. 

" I don't know," replied the captain, in a whisper ; 
" but we must be careful, for at this rate we shall reach 
the Manitoulins before we are aware of it." 

"Why not lay-to?" 

" Impossible, in this sea, to wear. "We must keep on, 
and put our faith in Providence." 

There was no replying to this, so Ralph took a biscuit 
and a cup of cold coffee, after which he ensconced him- 
self where he could act as a look-out, and waited. By 
four o'clock in the evening the storm was at its height, 
and it certainly blew with awful and terrific violence. 
They shipped heavy seas — so heavy as to sweep the deck 

14 



210 THE SNOW SHIP. 

of several barrels of flour, and to compel all to use the 
utmost caution and discretion. 

Night came, and with it night's horrors on the sea. 
There was no moon, so that it was dark as pitch. Ralph 
thought those ten long hours would never pass. He had 
never known time hang so heavily. Every instant he 
expected to feel the shock, and hear the crash that would 
consign all to a miserable and instant death. Inwardly 
and silently he prayed ; inwardly and silently he thought 
of Bertha. 

From where he sat, he several times thought he heard 
the sound of breakers, but the pitchy darkness and the 
terrific uproar of the wind made it impossible to be 
certain. 

At length day dawned, just as they rushed in amongst 
islands two hundred miles from home! On all side3 was 
land, or piles of rocks. The skipper rushed to the helm, 
and, to the astonishment of everybody, steered directly 
for a reef of rock, upon which the sea broke with 
a thundering sound, throwing up the spray high 
into the air. All saw that to weather this reef 
was impossible, and a thrill of horror went to every 
heart. However, just as certain death appeared 
before every one, all noticed a narrow spot of smooth 
water. 

Like an arrow from a bow, the gallant schooner hurtled 
through, but so near the rocks that a biscuit could have 
been thrown upon them. Next instant they were in a 
beautiful and spacious harbour, with a smooth, sandy 
beach. 

Three tremendous cheers rewarded the captain for his 
exploit, and then all freely returned thanks to God for 
His great mercy. In this romantic bay they were wind- 
bound for several days, during which they explored a 



THE SCHOONER VOYAGE. 211 

spot never visited but by the wandering trapper and the 
prowling savage, and spent their time in shooting and 
fishing, where, ere many years, will resound the voices of 
thousands. 

The wind was light, at times quite calm, so that they 
proceeded but slowly, until at last it again headed them, 
and blew stiffly night after night, compelling them to 
lay-to. At length, a month later than they expected, 
they came in sight of the long-looked-for haven. The 
skipper now announced that until the wind changed he 
could not enter the harbour. 

At the same moment a beacon fire blazed upon the 
beach, intimating the delight -of those on shore to see 
them at last. This so roused Ralph, that he begged the 
Captain to try. He good-naturedly agreed, though point- 
ing out the spot where Avind and current would meet 
them. 

A heavy sea broke over the bar as they darted through. 
Ualph was looking out eagerly- — for whom we need not 
say — when a tremendous sea struck the schooner, de- 
luged the deck, and sent him headlong into the boiling 
waters. It was well for him that he was a powerful 
swimmer, and could buffet the waves manfully ; for the 
set of the current drove him to the southward, without 
his reaching the shore until he was at the foot of a cliff 
a hundred feet high. The first twenty feet of the base 
of this cliff was composed of stiff clay, and was qtiite per- 
pendicular, against which the waves dashed with extreme 
fury. 

Land here he must, for his strength was failing him ; 
and, by superhuman exertions, darting through the bil- 
lows, he suddenly saw the head of a birch-tree hanging 
down from the cliff, and cast down by the wind, though 



212 THE SNOW SHIP. 

firmly secured to the bank by large masses of roots and 
earth. 

A huge wave which came roaring behind, now lifted 
him at least ten feet, when, reaching out his hands, he 
clutched the branches, and was left by the receding 
water hanging in mid air. Still, he was not yet 
saved, as he could obtain no footing. Casting his eyes 
back, he saw, coming roaring on, a mountain of water, 
which must inevitably carry him back to certain de- 
struction. 

At the very last minute, and just as the remorseless 
wave touched his feet, a soft hand caught his, and he felt 
himself lifted up about a foot, when he was able to clutch 
the tree more firmly, and even to place his foot on the 
clay, in which position he remained until he felt the 
water recede, when, lifting up his eyes, he saw facing him 
the pallid countenance of Bertha. 

Next moment he lay panting in her arms, out of the 
reach of danger. 

"We will not unveil the secrets of that happy meeting, 
during which poor Bertha told him he had been mourned 
as dead, none expecting the schooner to have survived 
the late fearful gale. "When these explanations were 
over, and when both were able to move, they commenced 
the ascent of the cliff, down which Bertha had come at 
the peril of her life. By the exercise of caution, and by 
the help of young twigs and brushwood, they, however, 
were at last in safety, and in the arms of their delighted 
and admiring friends. 



213 
CHAPTER XXXII. 

A WEDDING. 

The accession of wealth which the legacy, so opportunely 
left to Mr. Hatfield, brought to the family, was, in 
Canada, very differently estimated to what it would have 
been in England. It not only enabled the father tc 
stock his own farm with such necessaries as were re- 
quired, but it enabled him to purchase a plot of land for 
Ralph, which, in England, would have cost a fortune. 
The young man, though not intended for a farmer, had, 
since his arrival in Canada, acquired sufficient knowledge 
of the business to bggin life for himself; and, being 
desirous of settling, a location was soon found, a few 
acres cleared, and a log-hut built ; and then Ealph, like 
a sensible man, determined to take unto himself a wife. 

His marriage with Bertha was, however, deferred 
until the following autumn, as the whole summer was 
required for the necessary preparations, even with the 
additional labour which they were now enabled to 
procure by means of the inheritance. Ealph selected as 
his future home, a wild and lovely spot in the neighbour- 
hood of Eice Lake, where the picturesque and the beau- 
tiful are as completely blended as in any place upon the 
face of the earth. They found a site under some high 
hills, that, while casting their huge shadows over the 
estate, also protected them from the north-west wind, 
which is probably felt as severely there as in any part 
of the world. 

It was a bright and green valley, in which the log-hut 
was built — a valley with quite a wealth of foliage, which, 
in the summer-time of the year, is of a deeper and a 
richer green than is, perhaps, to be found anywhere on 



214 THE SNOW SHIP. 

the whole continent of America. Then it was one mass 
of wood, and few could have imagined that it would ere 
long become a highly cultivated and populous State, 
"Where Ralph selected his residence, and had literally to 
hew and hack his way in the virgin forest, there are 
now waving ridges of richly-cultivated land, teeming 
with crops of buckwheat and Indian corn. 

Here, on a sunny summer day — the warm and balmy 
Indian summer day — were assembled the whole family of 
the Antoines and of the Hatfields, with Batiste, of course, 
and such few neighbours as could be collected in that 
remote district. A missionary clergyman had been 
induced to attend for the performance of the ceremony, 
so that nothing was wanting to promote the happiness 
of the two families, that were now to be united by in- 
dissoluble bonds. 

Bertha saw her future home for the first time, and, as 
Bhe looked around, she thought that had it been made 
for her, it could not have been more lovely, more enchant- 
ing. The wild rice-lahe at the mouth of the valley — sleep- 
ing in sweet repose— the magnificent trees, the lovely, 
rich, and promising soil, that only needed to be touched 
to bring forth in rich profusion ; all, too, her own — made 
the hunter's daughter feel a very queen among women. 

The ceremony was performed with all due solemnity : 
the feast, abundant and copious, as all American feasts 
are, was done justice to, and then the guests departed. 
leaving the young and happy couple in their own home, 
attended only by a Scotch girl, a recent emigrant, who, 
not having obtained employment in the towns, had 
found her way into this remote district. 

There were three labourers on the estate, one ex- 
perienced chopper, and two new hands ; but they lived in 
huts at some distance from the main habitation. 



A WEDDING. 215 

Thus was a useful citizen gained to Canada ; for Ralph, 
naturally of an ambitious turn of mind, would probably 
have selected some profession — one which would have 
necessitated a journey to Europe, but for this early 
settlement in life. The almost universal prevalence of 
this system in our colonies is, indeed, the great source of 
their prosperity and rapid progress. 

The Hatfields naturally felt the separation very much, 
as Ralph had always been the most active member of the 
family, and latterly his father and mother were in the 
habit of turning to him for advice. Harry, however, 
having honestly made up his mind to remain in the 
country, even if he did learn a profession, at once took 
his elder brother's place as far as he could. The healthy 
life he led, the regular and sober habits of the emigrant, 
had strengthened his frame, and given him a taste for 
those sports which, at an earlier stage of their establish- 
ment in Canada, had been somewhat distasteful to his 
rather indolent habits. 

With increased muscular vigour he soon combined 
great accuracy of aim, so that, ere a month passed over — 
dating from the marriage — he was the hunter of the 
estate, and kept the whole family amply supplied with 
game. 

At first, when he went out shooting, he took his young- 
brother with him, as Jack's tastes were decidedly those 
of a hunter and trapper ; but on some occasions he went 
alone, and at last, simply giving a hint that he might be 
detained all night, he started on an expedition which he 
was determined should outshine anything he had pre- 
viously accomplished. 

His secret design was to shoot a fine deer, and take 
the choice parts, as a surprise and present to the young- 
couple. 



216 

CHAPTEE XXXIII. 

teee'd by wolyes. 

It was early in the day, when Harry, with his rifle on 
his shoulder, and his haversack slung behind him, turned 
his back on the old homestead, and disappeared from 
view beneath the dark arches of the forest. 

There is a solemnity in a vast forest, which is singularly 
impressive to the mind, and Harry, who was of a con- 
templative character, felt its influence greatly. It was 
almost his first ramble alone, for a whole day, far from 
all habitations, and solely dependent on his own resources 
to find his way, and to protect himself from the dangers 
and difficulties, which it is so often the fate of the hunter 
and trapper to encounter. 

For nearly the whole day — now very short as winter 
approached — Harry took his path through such dense 
forest, with brake and thicket intervening, that he made 
very little progress. As evening drew in, he was scarcely 
ten miles on his road, and had not seen any other game 
than a strong gobbler or two, which he did not think 
worthy of a shot. 

About half an hour before sun-down, however, he 
reached one of those small lakes, or ponds, which lie 
sleeping in their green basins among the hills, with a 
small hill-stream plunging over a dark rock. Such a 
spot, Harry knew, would be likely to be frequented by 
deer, as they are apt to visit them at regular intervals to 
drink. 

Nor was he disappointed, for when he crept up to 
within some twenty yards of the spot, he saw a stately 



tbee'd by AVOLVES. 217 

buck stooping to the water's edge. To cock his gun and 
to fire was the work of little more than a second ; the 
deer leaping high in the air, and starting rapidly up a 
pine-clad acclivity on the other side of the pond-like 
lake. 

Harry reloaded while in pursuit, keeping his eyes fixed 
all the time on the wounded beast, which, however, had 
only strength to run about a hundred yards, when it fell, 
and was almost dead ere the young hunter's knife put an 
end to its sufferings. It was a magnificent animal, and 
promised Harry the satisfaction of taking a really hand- 
some present to his brother. 

The spot where the deer had fallen was a pine grove, 
and here the young hunter at once determined to pass 
the night, as he could better cut up the animal in the 
light of day. The night was cold in the extreme, and a 
fire was absolutely necessary. This, however, was an 
easy task, as the ground was strewn with pine cones and 
broken boughs, while every now and then some fallen 
monarchs of the forest permitted logs to be cut from 
them. 

The buck had fallen at the foot of a stunted pine, the 
lower branches of which were not above six or seven feet 
from the ground. These branches were rather naked ; 
but, some little way above them, however, they were 
leafy and outspreading, forming quite a canopy which, in 
case of rain, would be useful. 

At the foot of this tree Harry lighted a fire, and re- 
solved to sleep. Having made a frugal meal, tired and 
wearied with his day's work, he sought refuge in slumber ; 
but, as often happens when we most desire to have rest 
and repose, he could not sleep. Some odd feeling for 
which he could not account came over him, and at length, 



218 THE SNOW SHir. 

by a kind of sudden impulse, he rose to his feet, and 
began walking up and down in front of the fire. 

Hoarse and terrible there came upon his ear the Avell- 
known cry of wolves in the distance. 

Harry was brave enough — of that calm and steady 
bravery, which is so generally characteristic of English- 
men ; but he knew that with these savage beasts, bravery 
would avail nothing. 

What, then, was to be done ? 

He looked around for some means of defence. For 
several minutes he could see no hope of being able to 
resist the savage forest-hounds, which were full cry upon 
his track. At length, however, he cast his eyes upon the 
branches above his head, and by a kind of inspiration, 
he saw that his only chance of safety was there. 

Prom the top of his haversack he took his lasso — with- 
out which he never stirred — and fastening his gun and 
other traps to one end of it, he rolled the other round 
his arm, and commenced climbing. In another minute 
he was seated on a stout branch, with his gun and 
knapsack upon a fir-tree bough above him. 

And still the horrid cry was coming up the slope 
towards him, while the keen and piercing wind almost 
penetrated to the very marrow of his bones. It was quite 
clear, he knew, that a change of weather, was imminent, 
and ere he had been in the tree ten minutes, his fears 
were realized. One of those sudden and blinding snow- 
storms, which so often usher in a Canadian winter, burst 
upon the forest, whitening the ground, and loading the 
branches in less time than it takes to describe it. 

The fire was extinguished in five minutes, while the 
deer was out of sight in leas time. 

But this mattered little. Not even the snow-storm 



teee'd by wolves. 219 

threw the ferocious wolves off the scent. "With a pro- 
longed howl, fearful to hear, and which, once it has fallen 
on the ear, is never forgotten, they dashed up the tree, 
and dragging the carcase from beneath its frail covering, 
they began tearing it to pieces, with a ravenous haste, 
which clearly indicated a state of semi-starvation. 

For some little time the monstrous beasts — they are 
larger than the largest dog — took no notice of the 
presence of Harry ; but no sooner had they torn every 
scrap of flesh off the deer's bones, than they look^Q 
upwards, and saw the young hunter. With loud and 
reiterated yells, the whole band began at once leaping up 
at the young man, and so fierce and long were they, that 
one or two very nearly succeeded in biting his legs. 

Harry saw that he must do something. To shoot them 
one after another, would, perhaps, have been possible ; 
but in his haste to ascend the tree, he had left his pow- 
der-horn and shot-pouch on the ground, so that he had 
only one shot available, and this he resolved not to 
throw away until the very last minute. 

Still, something must be done, else the wolves would 
certainly tear him from his post in the tree. He could 
not climb higher, as the other boughs were not capable of 
bearing his weight. 

And the snow, steadily falling, would soon put the 
panting beasts upon higher ground, whence to leap. 

He had his hunting-knife in his belt, and with this he 
might for a time ward off the attacks of his enemies, but 
only for a time, as every minute they became more 
daring and frantic in their efforts to get at him. Harry 
was forced to kneel on the bough, that his feet might not 
be within reach of the wolves. In this posture ho 
suddenly noticed his lasso, and a strange thought came 
into his head. 



220 THE SNOW SHIP. 

The end of the rope was easily fastened to a bough 
above, and then firmly clutching hold of the bough with 
one hand, with the other Harry easily slipped a noose 
round the neck of the largest and most ferocious of the 
wolves, which next minute was swinging in the air — 
nearly dead from suffocation. 

With one blow of his knife Harry then put the 
creature out of its misery, after which, as a kind of 
trophy of victory, he laid the carcase across a bough. 
Wie wolves, however, nothing daunted at the fate of 
their companion, still flew at him, except that for one 
moment they rushed at the dripping blood, which they 
lapped up with a relish that was horrible to see. 

A second time did the daring young hunter noose one 
of the animals — a huge old wolf, which, as he kneeled 
with one foot lower than the other, flew at it, and actually 
touched his shoe with its long and yellow fangs. 

The carcase was disposed of in the same way as the 
previous one. 

The animals had double reason for attacking him. 
Their fierce appetites were worked up to a pitch of frenzy 
at the sight of the carcases, which the dripping blood 
made them mad to get at. But Harry persevered. A 
third wolf was noosed and killed, the lasso performing 
the task with ease, when drawn over the bough. 

And still the snow whitened the ground, and enabled 
the wolves to leap nearer and nearer to him. 

At this juncture, a warning crack sent a chill, as of 
death, through the veins of the brave young hunter. 

The bough on which he was kneeling, and on which 
the wolves were laid, was evidently giving way. With 
one thrust Harry cast the carcases off, and then clutching 
a bough above him, he examined the fracture. It was 
not very large, but there was every likelihood that 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 221 

should lie attempt to remain much longer in his present 
position, he would be cast among the wolves and torn to 
pieces. 

However, he was not disheartened. The carcases of 
the wolves which the survivors were busily devouring, 
had obtained for him a few minutes' respite. This he 
made use of, to shift himself on to another bough, which, 
though not quite so commodious, was a little higher 
up, and more out of reach of the furious animals. 



CHAPTEE XXXIV 

AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 

And now a fresh and fearful danger threatened to render 
all his courage and devotion useless. The fearful sleep 
from which there is no waking, a sleep engendered by 
cold, was beginning to hold him in its clutches ; a dull 
irresistible desire to doze, made him close his eyelids, but 
hitherto, without his going right off. The howling and 
yelling of the baffled wolves served to rouse him, while 
his own consciousness of the extreme danger there was 
in yielding, made him resist the intense desire he felt to 
sleep. 

Fortunately, he had his brandy-flask, and a sip from 
tbis now and then served to warm his body, and keep up 
his strength. 

He had taken no note of time, and could scarcely tell 
whether the contest had lasted one hour or six. 

At all events, it was still dark, and the snow, which 
came in fitful showers, made the darkness greater. 

Clambering on his feet, and seizing the trunk of the 
tree in his arms, Harry tried to warm himself, and arouse 



222 



THE SNOW SUlt. 



his energies by climbing. But he had overrated his 
strength. He wanted rest, and food, and sleep ; yet none 
of them were to be obtained. 

He began to think that there was only one chance for 
him, and this was to shoot one of the wolves, which when 
its companions should begin to devour, he would leap 
from the tree, seize his powder-horn and shot-pouch, and 
do battle for his life. 

He looked down. The savage monsters were still 
watching him, but, probably tired of their continued 
efforts to reach him, they were seated on the snow. 
Harry clutched his gun, and took aim at the largest of 
the pack. He knew the value of that bullet, and took 
cautious aim. His life was, probably, dependent upon 
that one shot. He fired, and the huge beast rolled over, 
in the agonies of death, to some little distance from the 
tree. 

In an instant the whole pack were upon it, while Harry 
leaped to the ground, snatched up his ammunition, loaded 
hastily, ramming half a dozen bullets into the gun, which, 
next minute, he discharged amid the howling group. 

Then he took to his heels and rushed up the slope, 
trusting to find some place of concealment better suited 
to his wants than the one he had left. Up, toiling 
through the freshly-fallen snow, sinking to his knees at 
every step, and making but slow progress, the brave 
youth still pressed on, though almost overcome by the 
dread heaviness which precedes a snow-sleep, — up, up 
he struggles, until the summit of the hill is reached. 
Still nothing but bare pines meet his view. 

With a heavy sigh Harry began descending the hill, 
though, such was his weariness, that he felt strongly in- 
clined to throw away his gun— a somewhat heavy rifle. 
Still, knowing how much might depend on it, he clung to 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 223 

his weapon, until the howling of the wolves, again upon 
his track, showed him how necessary it was for his 
defence. 

But by this time, life was much less dear to him than 
it had been ; a reckless kind of despair was upon him. 
He felt as if it were hardly worth while enduring so 
much to save it ; and then, so inconsistent is the human 
heart, next minute he placed his back against a tree, pre- 
pared to defend himself to the last gasp. 

As he did so, the grey light of dawn fell upon all 
nature, and he was enabled to take steady aim at a long 
distance. This gave' him time to load ere the ravenous 
beasts came up. 

But imagine his delight, surprise, and astonishment 
when, close to him, he heard a cheerful voice addressing 
him. 

" Hein ! who is that shoot by mine door ? ah ! ah ! de 
loups. Come in, stranger, to mine maison — mon Dieu, it 
is Monsieur Henri ! " 

Next instant Harry was clasped to Batiste's heart, 
and a door was slammed in the face of the hungry 
pack. 

Batiste, ever since the ^ventures in the Snow Ship, 
had felt such an affection for the two families, that he 
had determined to locate near them. With a view, how- 
ever, to enjoy his own ways and habits, which at times 
were solitary, he had kept the place of his residence a 
secret from all. It was a small log hut of the rudest and 
most homely character, but it was warm and comfortable, 
and ten minutes after his entrance within its hospitable 
walls, Harry was sound asleep. 

His fatigue and exhaustion were too great to allow him 
to care for anything but slumber. 

The old hunter, who, rising invariably at the first 



224 



jl.ii.ej qx^vjsv onirt 



glimpse of day, had, as usual, thrown open his window, 
was indeed astonished to see, close to his door, a man 
pursued by wolves ; but his surprise was doubly great to 
find that it was one of his favourite boys. He saw at 
once how wearied and exhausted Harry was, and there- 
fore he asked no questions, but allowed the youth to 
seek repose on his own warm couch of skins. He then 
quietly and gravely seated himself by his fire, and pro- 
ceeded to make the young man a pair of snow-shoes, 
without which it is almost impossible to travel in 
Canada during the winter. 

Then there were weapons to clean, wood to fetch and 
chop, so that the hours passed rapidly away, and still 
Harry slept. At length, however, he awoke, a very 
different man from what he had been when, nearly dead, 
with bleeding feet, and a heart sinking within him, he 
had tottered into the trapper's hut. 

" Ah, Batiste ! " he cried, " you seem to be my pro- 
vidence — the providence of all. How shall we ever 
repay you ? " 

" Say no more — not von vord ; but just get up and 
have some dejeuner. Tou vant it, I am sure — den you 
tell me how de tefil I find ypu at my porte at daylight, 
with de big loups after you." 

Harry smiled. 

" My adventures have been so extraordinary, that I an* 
almost ashamed to tell them." 

"I vonder at nothing — nothing; ve have so many 
adventure in our family. Eat and drink, and den you 
vill tell me all about it." 

Harry did eat and drink, and did tell all about it ; and 
Batiste, though he felt much for the young man, could 
not refrain from laughing at his ludicrous device for 
hanging the wolves. 



AN UNEXPECTED MEETING. 225 

"And now," said Harry, "how far is it to Kalph's 
house ? " 

" G-ood bit vay — but too late go there to-night. Eest 
yourself, and to-morrow at day-dawn ve start on our 
vay. Besides, mine young friend, ve must take a teer 
with us." 

Harry's feet were so sore that he readily acquiesced in 
the hunter's wishes ; and this decision come to, Batiste 
left him to his own devices, while he started for a part of 
the wood where he knew the deer always collected at the 
commencement of winter, and whence he returned two 
hours after sundown, loaded with as much as he could 
carry of the carcase of a deer. 

This important affair settled, Batiste determined to 
enjoy a jolly evening ; so, after supper, he brewed some 
grog, lit his pipe, and sat down to converse with his 
young friend. Batiste, though moderate, was talkative 
in his cups, and his fund of stories was great. Harry 
was enlivened and amused for hours. He declared that 
never at one sitting had he heard so many thrilling 
stories, such wonderful hairbreadth escapes, as well as 
hunting adventures. 

At a reasonable hour both retired to rest ; and at early 
dawn, with a brisk breeze, the snow lightly frozen, the 
air clear and exhilarating, they started on their journey 
in the direction of Balph's home. 

The way was pleasant enough ; but Harry, at ah out 
mid-day, was delighted to see the smoke of his brother's 
chimney, and to receive, a few minutes later, a hearty 
and enthusiastic welcome from himself and his wife. 
The sight of their happy faces and pleasant home, drove, 
just then, even the thought of his sufferings from his 
head ; but when alone at night, it was a long time ere he 
forgot his fearful encounter with the wolves. 

15 



226 THE SNOW SHIP. 

CKAPTEE XXXV- 

A CANADIAN LAKE HUNT. 

It has often been said, and cannot be too often repeated, 
that Canada is the country for the labourer, — not for a 
gentleman ; that is, as far as the backwoods and farming, 
as a speculation, are concerned. Even Ealph, with his 
capital, large for a new country, found this, and found it, 
too, at most inconvenient moments ; the great drawback 
being the want of labour. Lucky was it for himself and 
his wife, that they had not been accustomed to be waited 
on by servants ; for of all difficulties that exist in Canada, 
the greatest is that of keeping your domestics about you. 
Eew ever remain more than six months ; while, if it suits 
them, they will go at a moment's notice. Some of the 
richer colonists in the more settled districts have been 
known to lose their cook, about an hour before a large 
party was expected to dinner. 

Ealph was anxious, for many reasons, that his young 
wife should have assistance in the house ; while he him- 
self, though offering good wages, could never secure the 
services of competent farm-labourers for any length of 
time. Truly, Canada is the paradise of maidservants, 
mechanics, labourers, and especially of boys and girls 
from twelve to seventeen, who are willing to work. 

But the young colonist was not to be defeated, so 
he determined to leave his farm in early spring, go down 
to the coast, and engage, from the emigrant ships them- 
selves, domestics and labourers, who would sign a bond 
for at least a year ; when, if faithful and true, he would 
set them up in the world as neighbours, soon in all 
particulars to be his equals. Such is the universal con. 



A CANADIAN LAKE HUNT. 227 

sequence of free trade in land, the monopoly of which 
alone keeps up oligarchical institutions. 

Batiste and Harry had agreed to keep house for Ralph, 
during his absence, with Ralph's sister-in-law in addition ; 
so that everything was settled in a comfortable and 
satisfactory manner, except that neither the husband nor 
the wife liked the parting, which was consented to only 
as a stern duty to themselves, and to the posterity which 
might rise around them. 

The thaw was just over, when Ralph, aided by his 
companions, began to busy himself on his farm, previous 
to his journey to the towns. He seemed glad of an 
excuse to linger, so that ere he was ready, great and 
rapid changes in the weather had taken place ; first the 
soft airs of spring stole, balmy and sweet, over the valley ; 
then came the warm and invigorating sun, to stimulate 
the dormant powers of the vegetable world, though every 
now and then, a gusty squall from the north would inter- 
vene, to check the progress of the fine weather. But 
the snow had long since disappeared, and everywhere on 
the clearings could be seen the green wheat-fields, 
spotted, as usual, with dark and charred stumps, which 
the year before had supported some of the finest trees 
of the district, and which Ralpk had not, as yet, been 
able to eradicate. 

"We need not describe the early spring occupations of 
a Canadian settler; they have already been fully de- 
tailed. 

One welcome change, however, took place. It was now 
doubtful which of the three, Batiste, Ralph, or Harry, 
cared most for gunning. It was, therefore, with consider- 
able satisfaction, that all saw large flocks of geese passing 
over the country, hovering now and then as if in search 
of water, and then flying away in the direction of Rice 



228 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Lake. Hasty travellers, tourists who run through this 
favoured land upon a beaten track, complain that game 
is scarce, because it is not jammed up in narrow pre- 
serves, as in England ; but for those who know where to 
seek it, splendid shooting may be had in Canada. 

Ducks abound, and so do woodcocks ; of the former, 
the black duck and wood duck being the most common. 
The latter is found upon the wooded banks of rivers, and 
sometimes alights upon trees, where it also builds its 
nest, though its feet are webbed, almost like those of 
other water-fowl. There is only one slight difference — 
no web is attached to the hinder claw. The only birds 
which remain all the winter, are partridges and suoav- 
birds, and in the west a few turkeys. The partridge is 
very like a hen-pheasant in size and plumage. When 
sprung, he flies invariably to a tree, from Avhence it is 
impossible to dislodge him ; so, if you can see him, which 
is difficult, you can shoot him sitting. Wild turkeys are 
tracked in the snow, and stalked, like deer, with rifles. 
They show excellent sport, but are rare. All other game 
disappears during the winter. There are hares, like rab- 
bits, and moose, and deer, and bears ; but these are 
rare. 

With these few words on the hunting capacities of 
the colonies, we shall now continue our narrative. 

Ralph could not but reflect that, for some time he 
would be deprived of his favourite amusement, and 
therefore he offered but feeble opposition to an excur- 
sion to the small lake for a day or two's shooting. This 
settled, the whole party started on horseback. Bertha 
was to be left at the home farm, no other means of tran- 
sit being possible. No one, not cm fait to new colonies, 
can form an idea of the roads at this time of the year. 
There are mud-holes and sand tracks. JYow, a mud-hoh? 



A CANADIAN LAKE HUNT. 229 

is a serious thing, a thing to be contemplated and con- 
sulted about, measured aud sounded, before the final, and 
often fatal plunge is taken ; while a sand track, honoured 
by the name of road, after a thaw or rain, is something 
truly fearful to travel upon — a mass of shifting slough 
and liquid dirt. 

The journey's end was safely reached, and the elders 
duly visited, when, to the astonishment of all the party, 
they learned that a neighbour had come near them in 
the shape of a squatter, whom, however, none of the 
family had ever yet visited. Batiste growled somewhat 
at this invasion of their territory, which, he said, would 
soon be too thickly populated for him. As all the others 
were of a different opinion, the trapper suppressed his 
indignation, and, in half an hour he was the first to laugh 
at his own prejudices. 

Now, it behove the early lords of the soil to be civil to 
their neighbours ; so Batiste, Harry, and Jack being 
ready, Balph supplied himself from his mother's stores, 
with some tea, sugar, candles, and soap, after which they 
all started through the forest in the direction of the lake, 
which, reaching before evening, they found tenanted by 
the new arrival, a sturdy old woodman of about sixty, 
his wife, three stout goodnatured sons, two daughters, 
and any number of dogs. 

They had built a rough wooden house, and were busy 
clearing a small portion of the forest. 

The strangers received them shyly at first, but when 
they learned their business and received their presents, 
all was well, especially when Balph privately communi- 
cated to the father, that if he wished permanently to 
settle, Mr. Hatfield, who desired neighbours, would 
gladly lend him money to purchase his lot. The old man 
stared, laughed, wrung the youth's hand, accepted the 



230 THE SNOW SHIP. 

offer, and they were fast friends. Help one another is 
the law of the wilderness. 

Some fish from the lake, some duck's and deer's- 
nieat, with tea, were most acceptable ; and then to roost, 
with a determination to rise early. To roost, but, alas ! 
not to sleep much. The night was a night of horror. 
Perched on the margin of the lake, and being too close 
to the ricefields, the house swarmed with every creeping, 
crawling, flying insect that can be conceived ; so that the 
chief part of the time for sleep was spent in itching and 
scratching. Ralph, above all, was sleepless, obtaining 
only an occasional doze. Most wistfully did he look out 
for daylight, and when at length a faint glimpse of dawn 
was to be seen, before the sun rose, he rushed out of the 
house into the lake, where, damp and cold as was the 
atmosphere, he absolutely luxuriated in the idea of 
ridding himself of his tormentors. Soon after this, the 
morning was lovely in the extreme, and after a hasty 
breakfast all started, vowing that that day a stag should 
fall. 

It was now a lovely morn ; so clear, so bright, so cool, 
so fresh. The trees every day wore a brighter and 
greener mantle, the little forest flowers a richer hue, the 
birds appeared every morn to sing more joyously, and it 
seemed as if the deep voice of the frog had an extra gay 
note. The lake itself was perfectly calm, scarcely a 
ripple disturbed its pellucid waters, save where here and 
there a trout leaped at a frolicsome fly. The sun now 
gilded with his beams all the higher ground and trees, 
while under the forest arches, twilight seemed yet to 
linger. 

The young men had two canoes, and, being anxious to 
do honour to their visitors, they gave them up to them, 
while they themselves coasted the lake. Batiste and 



A CANADIAN LAKE HUNT. 231 

Jack took one, and the two elder brothers the other. 
The Canadian was too wary to seek for game near the 
squatter's house, but pushed to the other end of the 
lake, which the strangers, as yet busy with their location, 
had not before visited. He took the waters near the 
shore, and, rounding a bend, he was soon out of sight of 
all sign of human progress. The scene was wild enough 
now, nothing being heard but the voice of the forest 
birds, the song of the brooks that fell here and there 
into the lake, and the sighing of the wind amid the 
trees. 

They paddled leisurely along, regardless of the wild 
ducks and waterfowl, upon which they were afraid to jire, 
for fear of disturbing the deer ; examining all the beauti- 
ful bays, and peering into their leafy grottoes, and yet not 
getting in sight of game. The only thing which the ex- 
perienced eye of Batiste detected, was the trace of bears, 
which had been climbing the trees, and had indented the 
bark with their claws. There were snipe, too, and black 
squirrels, and pigeons — of which more presently — but 
the main object was deer, so that all else was considered 
a lure and a snare. 

At last, Ralph, who was sweeping the lake with his 
telescope, informed Batiste, that at some distance he saw 
several deer in the water, while one was swimming across 
to the opposite shore, near which they were. The Cana- 
dian at once decided to creep across and drive the animal 
in their direction, requesting the boys to conceal them- 
selves in a little bay, that shot round, and being hid, as 
it were, by a rocky point, was so completely secluded, 
that hundreds might have coasted the lake without dis- 
covering them. 

As the stalking of the deer would take some time, 
Harry went ashore and began fishing for trout, while 



232 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Ralph, in the boat, posted himself behind a rock at the 
mouth of the bay, to watch the progress of the deer. 

Shooting in America and shooting in England are two 
very different things. With us the love of field-sports 
is a. mixed feeling, consisting partly in a remnant of the 
original savage, wild beast destroying instinct, and partly 
in the pride of skill ; neither is sufficient alone, for it 
gives us no pleasure, either to throw up a stone and fire 
at it, or to kill a bird sitting. 

On the other hand, the Americans and Canadians will 
paddle in a little punt, suited to one person, through the 
grass and reeds, and perhaps, after waiting half a day, 
they get a shot at a flock sitting, and kill a dozen or 
more. They never shoot flying, and hardly ever at a 
single bird, so that nothing can be more different .than 
their idea of sport and ours. They are pot-hunters, and 
despise our " honour and glory " practice, as much as 
we do their going in for results. An American once 
said to an English sportsman, " I should like to enter 
into partnership with you, I should ! you should kill, 
and I would eat." 

The deer-hunt in which Ralph was now engaged, was 
very much on the same principle as pot-shooting. It is 
the common plan in the colonies, for men to be posted in 
boats some distance apart, to watch the deer, in case they 
should take to the water, when roused by the dogs ; a 
lame and " cocktail " style of sporting, which we con- 
sider shabby in the extreme. Eor some time, Ralph, 
who, like everyone else, was becoming used to the cus- 
toms of the country, waited in silence ; admiring the 
beauty of the scenery, and feeling the excitement of ex- 
pectation, until, the wind veering to the southward, he 
was attacked by a whole plague of musquitos, the pest of 
all uncleared and watery localities. 



A CANADIAN IAKE HUNT. 233 

Having a great horror of them, Ealph fastened the 
boat to a rush, and undressed; having done which he 
jumped out of the boat and enjoyed the luxury of a 
swim. The way ha selected was through some reeds, 
towards a cool and sheltered place, where he could see 
numerous broods of wild ducks sporting in the water, 
now diving, and again skimming to the surface, in play- 
ful gyrations round the careful mother. Ralph, as he 
neared them, became so interested as to pause in his 
course, and look at them from amid the reeds. "While he 
was watching one of these broods, in a little bay about 
twenty or thirty yards from him, he saw them, at a signal 
which he distinctly heard the mother give, dart suddenly 
from sight amid the flags and rushes, while she hastened 
to conceal herself. 

At first the young hunter thought that he had startled 
them, and was about to continue on his way, when cast- 
ing his eye upward, he saw at a great height a bald eagle, 
soaring majestically over the lake. This king amid the 
birds is the great destroyer of waterfowl, and here in the 
wilderness, until the approach of man, he was the only 
enemy they had to encoimter. They were, however, 
fully aware of the danger they incurred from him, and 
that the price of their security was nothing but un- 
ceasing vigilance. Did the mothers allow one of their 
brood to leave the shelter of the rushes, their instinct 
told them how little would be the chance of their 
return. 

Presently the robber bird, perched on a tall tree, evi- 
dently saw Ealph, who was about to continue his swim, 
when he heard a loud cry. 

" Qveek, Qveek, mine boy ! De teer is close upon 
you." 

With a splash and a dash, that showed how deeply he 



234 THE SNOW SHIP. 

was interested, Balph struck out for the canoe, got into 
it from the rock, on which were his clothes, and seeing 
that the deer, slightly alarmed, was deviating from its 
course, he pushed after the animal in the costume of 
his great ancestor, i\.da"m. Luckily he did not forget 
his gun, placing which in the bows, he seized the paddle, 
and darted in pursuit. The deer now clearly saw him, 
and taking no notice of Batiste, who was coming up 
behind, it turned back to recross the lake. 

The race was a splendid one; the buck swimming 
very fast, and having a long start, which it made use of 
to head for where the females of the flock were feeding 
afar off. But Balph gained upon him every moment, 
and soon saw that he might risk a shot. Dropping the 
paddle, he seized his gun and fired, after quick but 
steady aim. The animal bounded from the water, and 
then was still a moment, when, with feebler limbs, it 
started for the shore nearest to it. To do this it had to 
pass close to Balpb, who gave it a second shot, which 
enabled him to go close up to it, and end its misery with 
the hunter's knife. 

Balph was delighted, and as, luckily, the animal was 
in shoal water, he easily lifted it into the canoe ; after 
which he prepared for shore. Up to this moment, the 
excitement of the chase had prevented him from noticing 
that he was naked ; but he was soon brought to his 
senses by finding that he was a prey to every sort of 
venomous and torturing insect ; and, exposed to a broiling 
sun, he had the prospect of a long pull back to the rock 
wh«re he had left his clothes, before he could get any 
covering. Fortunately, however, a little breeze sprung 
up from the northward, which soon dispersed his 
enemies. .. 

This did not enable him, however, to escape the quizz- 



A CANADIAN LAKE HUNT. 235 

ing of his companions, which he was too good-tempered 
to care about. 

A general halt was now declared in the little bay, to 
prepare dinner, which consisted of a joint from a deer 
that Batiste had shot farther down the lake, and some 
delicious broiled trout, of which any quantity could be 
caught in a few minutes. Forest appetites are not to be 
judged by town ones, and as it may interest the reader 
to know how they managed, let us describe this forest 
meal. 

The deer shot by Batiste was a small two-year old, 
both fat and tender, from which, with great artistic skill, 
he cut the sirloin. Meanwhile, a clear fire had been 
made. Two crotch ed sticks were then set up before the 
fire, and at a proper distance from it, and from each other ; 
on the forks of these, and at about the height of six 
feet, was laid another stick. The venison was then 
suspended by a string from this cross-bar, close enough 
to the fire to roast, and was kept continually turning, so 
that all sides got an equal portion of the heat. They 
used a pint basin for a dripping pan, from which, ever 
and anon, they basted it with the rich gravy that dripped 
from it while roasting. 

In the interim, some broiled fish and a broiled duck 
served to stay their appetites, and when the venison was 
done, birch bark, just peeled from the trees, served as 
platters and dish for a meal, which no art of Eren.h, 
cookery could have made so palatable. 

And this within ten days' sail of crowded England ! 



236 THE SNOW SHIP. 



CHAPTEE XXXVI. 

jack's cats. 

As soon after a hearty meal, as men in general like to 
move, the young hunters and their leader resolved to 
start for the squatter's shanty, the day being more than 
half spent, and no one caring for further sport just then. 
They were not in a hurry, so they moved slowly, 
looking around at the wondrous beauties of nature to be 
seen on all sides in the densely-wooded forest, which 
so soon was to give way before human industry — too 
often before human recklessness and confidence — for 
when the trees are all gone, who will replant them ? 

As they advanced they reached a shallow expanse of 
some acres, where the pond-lilies grew in rich profusion, 
covering the surface of the lake with their broad round 
leaves, in the midst of which there sparkled, like silver, 
a thousand beautiful white flowers. These lily patches 
are the pasture-grounds of the deer, and all noticed 
paths leading into the forest, which were trampled, like 
those leading to a sheepfold. 

" "Where's your hurry, brothers ? " said Jack, in a low 
voice ; " a couple of deer will be welcome to the squat- 
ters. "We want one for home — the other will be clean 
ate up to-night." 

"Eight, mon gargon" said Batiste. 

The lassitude which usually follows a hearty meal was 
in part wearing off. 

The brothers exchanged looks. 

" Well, Harry, what say you ? " said Ealph, laughing 
in the low noiseless way which is learned by intuition in 
the woods. 

" I don't care," lazily chimed in Harry. 



jack's cats. 237 

This settled the matter, and the canoes were dropped 
down the lake, Ealph and Harry selecting an island 
about one hundred and fifty feet from the shore, where 
they commanded the lily-pond, Batiste and Jack steering 
in towards a small bay, where, when night approached, 
they could cache under the overhanging bushes on the 
bank. 

The evening was fast approaching, and all seated 
themselves calmly at their posts, awaiting the moment 
when the deer should come down to the water to feed. 

About ten or twelve yards from Batiste and Jack, 
there was a tall boulder, about as large as a moderate- 
sized haystack. It stood about half a dozen feet from 
the forest, while between it and the water's edge there 
was a clean expanse of sand, covered by water at the 
time of early thaws and freshets. 

Batiste and his companion were watching the lily 
patches and the deer paths, taking no notice of this quiet 
spot. 

Suddenly Jack heard something move, which made him 
look sharply round, when he saw two little black animals 
of the size of tom-cats, frisking and playing about on the 
sandy shore. 

" Eh, Batiste ! " he whispered in a low hushed tone, 
" where do those cats come from, eh ? " 

The trapper turned carelessly round, though his eyes 
were somewhat distended with wonder. 

" Ghats ! " he replied, in an equally low tone, " dat is 
vat a' you call ours — you know de leetle bar ! " 

" Oh ! " cried Jack, with glistening eyes, " shouldn't I 
like to catch 'em, that's all." 

" Veil, my sonny," laughed Batiste ; " eef you vill keep 
yourself tranquille in ze bote — I vill try — ven I makes de 
grab, jist you kim up — and you shall see vot you will see." 



238 THE SNOW SHIP. 

In an instant Batiste was in the water, which came up 
to about his waist, and waded directly towards the 
bears which were frisking about on the sand, " as black 
as de debbil — Jack's vera fine tom-cat," as he afterwards 
remarked. 

Now Batiste knew well that the mother was not far 
off, and would by no means take it kind of him for 
meddling with her babies, but he had made up his mind 
to have the young bears, and have them he was de- 
termined he would. 

The little animals soon saw Batiste, but did not seem 
in the least afraid, sitting up on their haunches, swaying 
to and fro, and looking up at him as he stepped ashore, 
as coolly and impudently as if they had been his own 
children. Next instant, with a dexterity worthy of his 
reputation, he made a grab at them, caught one in each 
hand, and, turning round, found Jack close to him with 
the canoe. 

Tossing them in, Batiste followed, giving the boat a 
good shove out ere he put his second foot on board. 

Jack had caught the two little creatures by the neck, 
when, for such tiny wild beasts, they set up a terrible 
cry. 

Batiste carefully examined his rifle, ere he spoke a 
word. 

" Pinch dere ears, Jack, pinch dere ears, and make hini 
sqyeke," he then said ; " make a' 'em cry hout." 

Jack laughingly complied, catching hold of the poor 
animals by the ears, and pinching them, when their cries 
and contortions became so ludicrous, that the boy himself 
laughed outright. 

" Hush, mine garcon, dis is dangerous vork ; is your 
little double gun loaded — ah ? " asked Batiste, in a 
cautious tone of inquiry. 



JACK'S CATS. 239 

" Yes," was Jack's quiet reply, the struggling bears 
taking up his attention. 

" Dat is right — is de paddle close to you ? " continued 
the trapper. 

"Yes." 

" You no speak — do as I bid you, and we shall have 
some fun." 

At this moment there was a dire crashing and crack- 
ling among the bushes, a loud puffing and growling, 
which betokened that the old she-bear was coming at 
last. 

The canoe was about thirty yards from the shore, when 
she came in sight, sniffing the ground, and calling to her 
young in her peculiar way. 

" Pinch him again," said the hunter, never taking his 
eye off the shore. 

Jack not only pinched one of the bears, but held him 
up to view; when, attracted by the cry, the bear not 
only saw her black little baby, but the human enemies 
that had carried it off. 

"With a fearful roar, that portended no good, she " put 
into the water," to swim to the rescue, impelled by that 
maternal affection which is so strong and enduring, while 
the young are helpless and require a mother's care, devo- 
tion, and attention. 

" Kip de debbils from jumping in de water," whispered 
Batiste, who took up his paddle, knelt, laid the rifle 
handy, and sent the canoe right into deep water, where 
the bear would be at a disadvantage. 

Then, when the bear was not more than twenty feet 
from him, he took aim, and — 
The powder flashed in the pan. 

"Mine G-ott! " said the angry and bewildered trapper, 
." I never load my gun. Batiste is mad ! " 



240 THE SNOW SHIP. 

On came the bear, so swiftly that it seemed as if she 
would, in another moment, reach and capsize the canoe — 
an easy task for one of her great size and strength. 

"With a mortified air (the trapper never remembered 
to have done such a thing before) Batiste snatched up 
Jack's gun, examined the priming — he had loaded it him- 
self, he recollected, and took aim. 

The great she-bear, puffing and growling, was within 
a yard of the boat. The Canadian, with all the coolness 
of a practised veteran in sport, fired both barrels directly 
at her head, and then, clutching the paddle, gave way 
with all his strength. 

The bear, though the water, which was tinged with 
blood, revealed what the ball and charge of duck-shot 
had done, still followed with awful cries, re-echoed by 
the little ones, which struggled furiously in the grasp of 
the youth. 

" Shall I shoot ? " whispered the voice of Ealph, close 
at hand. 

" No ! I, and my poy, vill settle de moser of Jack's 
tom-cats. Don't speak a vord." 

And, with his eye fixed on the bear, the hunter pro- 
ceeded to load his rifle with studious care, examining the 
priming and flint with extreme minuteness. 

Still, as they paddled away, poor Bruin, being furious 
at the loss of her cubs, and at the cruel wound inflicted 
by the double-barrelled gun, swam rapidly after them ; 
and the Canadian knew that if he were now to miss, 
things would look serious, as no animal is more danger- 
ous than a she-bear under such circumstances. 

Batiste gradually slackened his pace, threw down the 
paddle, and clutched his rifle, determined this time not 
to be behind his reputation. 

The ball struck the animal in the skull, entered thqi 



Jack's cats. 241 

brain, and, without a struggle, she turned over in the 
water, dead. 

A loud hurra proclaimed the victory, and in a few 
minutes the whole party were on the little island with 
their trophies ; the cubs were secured by means of silk 
handkerchiefs, which our young Englishmen always 
carried ; while the old bear was skinned, and cut up ; 
the inhabitants of Canada having no prejudices against 
the animal, such as influenced old Arctic discoverers. 
Indeed, bear hams in America are esteemed a general 
delicacy, and paid for highly. 

"Dat makes one vere fine day's hunting," observed 
Batiste, while engaged in his task — none of the others 
cared about butchering the bear — "ve kill von — two 
deer — ve kill von she-bear, and ve catch de leetle tom- 
cats, as black as de deeble ! — ha ! ha ! " 

" Yes," said Ralph, " but what is the use of them ? " 
" Vat is de use of Jack's tom-cats ! " cried Batiste, 
laughing ; " vy much, begose eef Jack he no keep 'em, 
vy you sell 'em in Montreal, for thirty dollar each him 
tom-cat." 

" If they are mine," said Jack, gravely, " I shall keep 
them." 

" Keep two bears," replied Ealph ; " why who is to 
take care of such great beasts ? They will want a cage 
as big as a wigwam." 

" No, mine frent — de leetle bear is as gentle and play- 
ful as von kittens— eef you feed him veil— and gif him 
no raw meat ; dat is no meat vid de blood — he quite 
tame." 

" "W e shall see what mother says," observed Harry, 
with a grim smile. 

" Oh, if that's all, I'm right," said Jack, with a mean- 
ing laugh. 

16 



242 THE SNOW SHIP. 

" An' now my frents, I vish to know, vile ve is about 
it, vy ve should not kill de old torn bear ; dese animaux 
is not good ; dey kill de cochon, dey eat de corn, dey play 
de Ole Scratch." 

All were agreeable, while they were about it, to uproot 
the whole brood ; upon which decision being come to, 
preparations were at once made for that purpose. The 
whole of their plunder was removed to the other side of 
the island ; and then all four, having loaded their rifles, 
entered the canoes, as before, and made for land. 

Each canoe had a cub, as a decoy. 

It was now night — dark night — yet at a moderate 
distance, objects could be easily detected and recognized. 

The boats made slowly for the small cove, where the 
autre, or den of the animals appeared to be. "When they 
were both within thirty feet, the canoes were checked, 
find the little unfortunates, which had fallen asleep, were 
roused from their slumbers, in order to make them 
squall ; which, being hungry and savage, they did with a 
vengeance, " crying out to their dad that he was wanted," 
as Jack facetiously observed. 

This manoeuvre had to be repeated once or twice, when 
a distant roar was heard, a dashing through the woods, 
and, guided by the shrill cries and growls, the old 
bear was soon upon the shore, angry, and evidently as 
full of fight as a mad dog. _ First, he sniffed at the autre 
behind the boulder, and not finding the female, he stood 
still and roared again, a wailing, half-angry, half-revenge- 
ful kind of roar. The remorseless sportsmen once more 
pulled the ears of the little cubs vigorously, upon which 
the old fellow plunged into the water, when he received 
a volley from three rifles and one double-barrelled gun. 

"With such an awful yell as the Eedskins of old might 
have set up in that mighty forest, the powerful beast 



THE BALD EAGLE. 243 

again sought the shore, to toss, and leap, and tear, and 
bite himself, as the loss of blood from his many wounds 
ended his life. 

" G'est un brave," observed Batiste, and the animal's 
requiem was said briefly but truly. 

It was now determined to camp where they were, and 
no better shelter prgsenting itself than the very autre, or 
nest, of the bears themselves, it was strewed with fern 
and grass ; the game fetched, a glorious supper enjoyed ; 
and then, after sundry stories of "bars," and other 
animals, the whole party turned in for the night, leaving 
a huge fire outside. The two "tom-cats" slept cosily, 
nestling up to Jack, who found them tame enough ; and 
above them the trees stretching out their long arms, 
formed an arch, through the vacant spaces of which the 
stars peered down ; while before them were the bright 
waters, on which the moonbeams played, as the night 
breeze sent the mimic waves rippling in long billows. 

The surprise and pleasure of the squatters at the 
destruction of the bear was great, while their gratitude 
for a timely supply of food was almost greater, as they 
were very short of powder. 



CHAPTER XXXYIL 

THE BALD EA&LE. 

The next morning was clear and bright. A. pleasant 
wind from the northward and westward had driven away 
the musquitoes, though not the other vermin ; so that a 
breakfast before sunrise, and a bath in the clear waters 
of the lake, were very pleasant and agreeable. This day, 



244 THE SNOW SHIP. 

Josiah, the younger son of the squatter, was to join them, 
in a dug-out of his own construction. It was simply a 
hollowed pine log, and was a capital craft for duck 
shooting, drawing but little water, and being noiselessly 
worked. Besides, as the paddler sits facing the bow, lie 
can look before him, drop his paddle, and take to his gun 
in a moment, when he gets within shot. They are, 
however, desperately fatiguing to those not accustomed 
to them, for the paddles are worked entirely by muscle, 
and not as with oars, by weight in a great measure. 

It was agreed that each man should on this occasion, 
to use the local phrase, start on his own hook. Ralph, 
therefore, who had his secret views, pursuaded Josiah to 
accompany Harry, and to lend him his dug-out, that he 
might try his fortune alone. Josiah, to whom he had 
given an ample supply of powder and shot, was only too 
glad to oblige him ; and, just as the sun rose, the hunters 
started, Ralph taking the shore as yet unvisited by them, 
and the others following in the track of the previous nay. 

Now Ralph, who was not only of an ambitious turn of 
mind in the way of sports, and somewhat chivalrous 
withal, had fixed his eye on game of rather a lofty 
character, and was privately determined not to return 
home until success had crowned his efforts. 

It was The Bald JEagle. 

Ralph had given a slight inkling of his intention to 
Batiste, who merely smiled. Our young hero, however, 
had provided against the necessity of a night or two in 
the woods, by procuring a bear-skin cloak, and taking a 
supply of sea-biscuit, some pepper and salt, and a little 
tea. AVith these luxuries, venison, and trout, it would 
be hard if he could not bivouac for a week. 

Though Ralph had not said a single" word about it, he 
had carefully, on the previous day, watched the eagle, 



THE BALD EAGLE. 245 

and hence he started for the opposite side of the lake, 
towards the hills. His progress was slow, his course 
being as close to the shore as possible. His rifle rested 
on his knee, and though hour after hour, various game 
presented themselves to his notice, nothing could induce 
him to disturb the stillness of that mighty solitude, by 
the echoes of his gun. At last he reached a spot, whence 
he observed a vast field of grasses, lilies, and water weeds, 
and where he could plainly see the wild ducks disporting 
themselves. 

He now drew his canoe beneath a large, widespread- 
ing tree that overhung the water, and waited, amusing 
himself, however, with a view to his evening meal, by 
snaring the speckled trout of that richly fertile lake. 
As usual, there were small ones near the shore, while 
the larger ones kept out in the open and deeper water. 
A small but noisy brook fell into the lake, just above 
where Ralph was posted, which literally swarmed with 
the favourite fish of that region. 

Ralph had soon caught enough to satisfy himself, and 
was about to indulge in a pipe, to break the monotony 
of his watch, when a shrill cry resounded through the 
forest, something like the laugh of a mad creature, or of 
a certain class of hygena. It has been said that these cries 
are hideous enough to frighten any one who is not used 
to them ; but Ralph was not alarmed, for he had heard 
them on more than one occasion. 

He was not much of a naturalist, but he knew enough 
about the bird he was in pursuit of, to wish to procure 
one, even stuffed . The Canadians and other hunters are 
strongly prejudiced against this animal, denying, in the 
most emphatic manner, that it is a noble and magnanimous 
bird — accusing it of being simply an audacious thief and 
robber, as well as a slayer of all things smaller and 



246 THE SNOW SHIP. 

weaker than itself. " He is," says a true hunter of the 
prairies, " altogether a mean, selfish critter, that takes 
no pleasure in being sociable and friendly like ; he's 
always a huntin' for suthin' to devour, and when he gets 
a holt on a poor duck or a rabbit, he flies to some all- 
fired out-of-the-way place, and eats it all to hisself. He 
never invites nobody to dinner, not he, and is sure to 
pick a quarrel with every bird he meets." 

Ralph had been too much in the society of Batiste and 
Antoine, not to be somewhat influenced by their prejudices, 
and now that he had the opportunity, he. was anxious to 
watch the bird and judge for himself. Batiste went so 
far as to declare, that he never knew it to live even with 
its mate without quarrelling ; but this appeared so 
thoroughly against all nature, that Balph would scarcely 
believe it. But the Canadian, who had been frequenting 
that lake for upwards of a dozen years, insisted that he 
had never seen two together on more than two or three 
occasions, and that then they were always quarrelling 
and fighting. 

Again the cry was repeated, but now in another 
direction, and Balph, who saw the wild ducks huddling 
together in the water-grass, crept behind a grape-vine 
that fell over the trunk of one of the trees, carefully 
primed his rifle, and then peered out. At the distance 
of about three hundred yards, a spit of land projected into 
the lake, covered by the rich verdure of the forest, and 
at the extreme end of this was the dead branch of an 
ancient hemlock, that overlooked the lake. 

On this branch was perched the great Bald Eagle, 
peering down upon the waters in search of suitable prey. 
These birds, Avhen not particularly disturbed by a desire 
for food, will sit for hours motionless, or pluming 
themselves. 



THE BALD EAGLE. 247 

Again there was a wild scream and maniac laugh, that 
made Ealph almost incautiously expose himself, when, 
suddenly, a dark shadow glanced on the water, and gazing 
upwards, he beheld another Eagle, sweeping down 
furiously at the one that sat motionless on the hemlock 
bough. He missed his aim, however, but the attempt 
was quite sufficient to rouse the ire of his indignant 
fellow eagle, who dashed at him Avith the utmost fury. 
Up and up they went, round and round, kicking, striking 
out at, and biting one another with the most intense 
ferocity, screaming all the while like huge owls. At one 
moment they seemed to close like wrestlers, when the 
feathers flew on all sides, descending to the lake like 
scattered snow-flakes. Hotter and hotter, madder and 
madder they went on, then higher and higher, one, the 
attacker, which was the weaker of the two, clearly 
endeavouring to get away, This the other would not 
allow. Again, after the futile, attempt to end the fight 5 
they closed, this time with such determined fury, that 
their wings became useless, and with one great flop, like 
that of a broken parachute, they pounced into the deepest 
part of the lake, as if to rise no more. 

But scarcely had the water circles extended a hundred 
yards, when up they came, a precious distance one from 
the other, the weaker one entirely cooled of his fighting 
humour, and soaring away, until, quite like a speck in 
the air, Ealph saw him alighting in the forest on the 
opposite bank. The graver and more powerful eagle 
went quietly back to his perch, though Ealph, with his 
glass, could s^e by the blood on his white feathers, that 
he was wounded. 

Another actor now came upon the scene, and one that 
made the eagle instantly ruffle his plumes and prepare, 
as it were, for action. A fish-hawk, during the combat 



248 THE SHOW SHIP. 

had been soaring aloft, waiting for the fight to be over, 
and now, as if persuaded that the coast was clear for a 
while, it came soaring with circular gyrations towards the 
water, descending gradually as he did so. Presently he 
made a dive for a trout, and came up with it in his 
mouth. The fish could not, by its size, have weighed 
less than two pounds, and the falcon had hard work to 
rise with it from the water. The bird, however, seemed 
to think the prize worth trying for, for he did rise with 
it, and, what appeared curious to Ealph, he seemed bent 
on rising to an enormous height. 

A glance explained this. The Bald Eagle had never 
taken his eyes off the fish-hawk, and now that his pur- 
veyor was successful, and had captured a trout worthy 
of his royal appetite, he prepared to do battle for it. 
Meanwhile, the falcon kept on struggling upwards, 
screaming all the time, in a kind of silly and frantic way, 
until he could not have been less than six hundred feet 
from the ground. 

The eagle despite his wound, now soared from his perch, 
with a power of wing and rapidity that the hawk could 
not hope to contend with. On he came, not hurrying 
himself, uttering no cry, but ascending higher. and higher 
towards the poor falcon, within fifty feet of which it soon 
was. Then would Ealph gladly have been near enough 
to use his rifle, for now he began to think, with a good 
many others, that the eagle was both a thief and a 
murderer. He fully expected to see the honest bird torn 
to pieces. But the falcon had too much sense to await 
the conflct with his foe — no sooner did he see that flight 
was out of the question, than he dropped the trout, and 
soared quietly away, aware that that was all his merciless 
persecutor required from him. 

As the fish fell, the eagle closed his wings, and 



THE BALD EAtfLE. 249 

dropped almost like a stone ; then making a sudden dash, 
out came his vast pinions, and in his claws was the trout, 
with which he flew away to his old perch, and proceeded 
quietly to devour his ill-gotten gains. 

This scene satisfied Ralph, who uow had no compunc- 
tion whatever about shooting a bird, for which he had 
hitherto had some reverence. He saw that for the 
present the bird was fully occupied ; so, fastening his 
canoe, Ralph clambered cautiously and quietly up the 
bank, with the intention of creeping near enough to him 
to knock him safely off his lofty perch. Fortunately for 
Ralph, the ground on the banks of the lake materially 
assisted him ; there being almost all round that water, a 
beaten path made by the vast herds of deer which 
frequented its neighbourhood, until civilization either 
destroyed them, or sent them to pastures new. 

Ralph now felt like one of the solitary warriors, who, 
with noiseless mocassins, had so often trod that, and 
other parts of the vast American wilds. He stole along 
with the utmost caution, avoiding dead branches, keeping 
a tree between himself and the bird, and never halting 
until he was within clear point blank shot of it. Then 
he once more examined his priming, so anxious was he 
to succeed in his self-imposed duty. Never, perhaps, had 
Ralph felt the true instincts of the wild hunter of the 
prairies until then, as, leaning against a tree, he sighted 
his rifle and fired. 

Open mouthed, with rifle-butt on the ground, with the 
barrel clutched convulsively, Ralph watched the result. 

A moment sufficed. The ball had struck the outer 
joint of his wing, and down fell the Bald Eagle into the 
lake, flapping and turning over until he struck the water. 

Clutching his rifle, Ralph darted back to his cano6, 
which, in two minutes more, he pushed out into the lake 



250 the snow ship. 

As he approached, he saw that, at all events, in outward 
appearance, it was a noble bird, though old — his head, 
and the feathers of his neck and tail were white, wlhle 
the rest of his plumage was of a dark brown, approaching 
to black, 

No one who has seen in a common menagerie, a 
drooping, dingy, rough, and unwashed thing, called an 
eagle, can have any idea of him in his native element, 
where, like Bob Roy on his green heather, he is truly in 
appearance a king. As Ralph neared him, he tried to fly, 
despite his broken pinion, but finding flight useless, he 
turned at bay. His look was defiant, almost cruel ; his 
eye burned with an intense fierceness, that showed both 
his courage and his rapacity, and it was only a severe 
blow with the paddle, that ended his sufferings. 

As Ralph drew his noble prey into his canoe, he asked 
himself, if he had done right, and the only consolatory 
feeling that came over his mind, was when he saw the 
wild ducks once more swimming about calmly round the 
field of lilies. Half an hour later, Ralph pulled to rejoin 
his friends, who were uproarious at his victory. 

*JJ. M. M. M. 

"7P It" -Jf W 

We have forborne, in the course of this narrative, to 
allude to the extraordinary and almost incredible quantity 
of pigeons which live in and about Canada. We might 
have told of vast districts white with their guano; but 
we have waited until the opportunity occurred, fitly to 
introduce them. 

Ralph was, with becoming pride, showing his capture 
to his father and mother, the latter of whom, under the 
guidance of Batiste, was to stuff and erect it — when Jack 
came bounding in to announce the long-expected visit of 
the pigeons, in their transit from one part of the country 
to the other — a phenomenon remarked in some European 



THE BALD EAGLE. 251 

countries, though not to the same extent which charac- 
terizes America. 

Every one had heard of the astounding numbers of 
these congregating birds, but though nearly all Canadian 
travellers have vied with one another, in endeavouring to 
define and describe their multiplicity ; yet how far was 
any preconceived idea from the truth. 

Batiste had long foreseen the day, when these useful 
adjuncts to the economy of a Canadian housewife's 
treasury would be forthcoming, and had prepared Mrs. 
Hatfield accordingly. All the hunters were at once 
ready, and at the call of young Jack they sallied "forth 
into the open air, each clutching whatever weapon 
particularly belonged to him. 

It was true that the pigeon-roosts of the south had 
broken up, and that the wild, untamed hordes were 
coming down in millions to the borders of Lake Huron. 
The heavens were alive with them, as they flew onwards, 
near to the ground, in clouds that seemed to threaten to 
weigh down the earth. Could they have been captured, 
there would have been a meal for every soul upon the 
American continent, and to spare. On they came, in 
one serried mass, following their steady course with a 
quickness of flight, which was not less wonderful than 
their incredible and countless numbers. 

The birds, during this time of transit, are not easily 
scared, so that, as they fly low, many persons are able to 
knock them over in great numbers with long poles ; just 
as in Switzerland they are captured in droves, by means 
of nets placed across the mouth of valleys which they 
most frequent. One would have thought, to look up at 
that huge convoy of birds— at those masses, which no 
one would have pretended to calculate — that some 
sudden convulsion of nature had driven/the entire feathered 



252 tLlji oinow ship. 

creation to unite and coalesce, in order to seek socio 
remote region where they should be unmolested. 

Our sportsmen, however, were not troubled with many 
speculative ideas ; simply regarding this strange and 
singular phenomenon, as a means of procuring pleasant 
and wholesome food, so that in a few minutes every 
member of the party was busy discharging murderous 
volleys, not from rifles, but from fowling-pieces, muskets, 
and a couple of duck guns which did wonderful execution. 
At every discharge the pigeons appeared to fly faster, 
.though their numbers were undiminished, and the prairie 
was covered with dead and wounded birds. 

The amazed lookers-on now first saw, that what they 
had imagined to be the main body, was but the vanguard ; 
for there now pressed forward, a flock such as surprised 
even Batiste. It extended as far as they could see on 
either side, one blue, solid mass — an army — fifty armies 
of wild pigeons. 

" Mon Dieu ! " cried Batiste, " dere is von pigeon pie 
for de hole vorld. Veil, ve vill have a leetle bit." 

And, without any of those sentimental compunctions of 
conscience, which a great master of narrative has ascribed 
to one of his favourite characters, he continued blazing 
away, imitated by his companions, as long as one of the 
flight remained within reach of small arms. Then, and only 
then, did lie pause, to throw away the gun, and begin to 
collect in rough baskets, the plunder, which made a 
wondrous pile. 

But there was no waste, for Batiste had, as we have 
said, prepared Mrs. Hatfield. Every bread-barrel, >pork, 
and other cask, had been carefully cleansed and scoured. 
The pigeons were accordingly plucked, large and nu- 
merous fires were made, and for the rest of the day the 
whole of the household turned cooks. About thirty or 



THE CONCLUSIOH". 253 

forty pigeons were hung to a hoop, and kept constantly 
turning round before a clear charcoal fire. At the 
proper moment, that is when half roasted, they were 
turned. Then, when sufficiently cooked, into the barrel 
they went, a little salt being put over every layer. On 
the top was poured a certain quantity of melted salt 
butter, then the barrels were headed up, rolled into an 
underground storehouse, and a wondrous provision was 
thus made for the winter, when the live pigeons were 
thousands of miles away. 



CHAPTER XXXYIII. 

THE CONCLUSION. 

Leaving Harry and Batiste to convoy Bertha and her 
younger sister Lotty to his home, Ralph started the next 
day on his way to Quebec, where alone he could obtain 
the assistance he required. "We have no desire to record 
the details of this journey, which, however, would not be 
without their interest to the emigrant ; let it suffice that 
the young settler reached the great seaport town of 
Canada, without adventure worth recording. He was 
much struck by its beauty, coming, as he did, from the 
wild forest country. Along the banks of the river, ten 
miles above the town, he saw one continued street of 
houses, from which the farms ran backwards in long 
narrow strips, divided by zigzag fences of unhewn logs, 
and were about three hundred yards in width, and from 
one to four miles in length. Behind these, at a distance 
of twelve miles, you may commence a journey straight to 
the north pole, without meeting a human habitation. 

Ralph hired labourers both for himself and his father, 
for a term of two years, at the end of which time they 



254 THE SNOW SHIP. 

were to receive a grant of partially cleared land. Having 
met with a young man named Dance, an engineer and 
theoretical farmer, -who was desirous of trying his fortunes 
in the woods, Ralph with his engaged men, all of whom 
had families, started at once_ for Montreal, being 
eager not to loose a moment of the year that was 
coming. From Montreal he sent forward his emi- 
grant families under charge of his old friend the 
schooner-captain, while he and his companion took 
another conveyance, with a view to visit the falls, 
first taking a run up the Ottawa — now to be the seat of 
the new capital — a river without much scenery, but 
celebrated, because of Moore's oft quoted line, — 

" Ottawa's tide, the trembling moon," &c. 

Another reason for diverging was that Ealph bad 
heard much of the timber trade, and was inclined, if be 
saw his way clear, to engage in it. People said it was 
profitable, and led not only to certain fortune, but to the 
effective clearing of a new district. At Bytown he saw 
the practical working of the machinery. On the Ottawa 
there is a fine fall, called the Chaudiere, on one side of 
which there is an inclined plane, constructed for the 
descent of timber rafts ; and while they were there they 
saw several go down with great rapidity. It seemed 
pleasant and safe, but they heard that lives were often 
lost by the breaking of the rafts. But here they alsG 
heard, that not only was the timber trade overdone, but 
that it was always a risky speculation, except to the 
timber men, who being generally Canadians, half-breeds, 
and Irish of the lowest description, bad actually been in 
the habit of receiving eighteen or twenty dollars a month, 
besides their keep at the shanty. These wages were 
paid to them all at once, at the end of six or eight months 



the conclusion. 255 

of work, when the timber was disposed of; and the 
money was spent in the towns, in the most reckless and 
profuse manner, without any benefit to the hard- worked 
man. 

"Adieu to lumbering," thought Ralph ; who, without 
delay, dashed forward — and he 'reached Niagara Falls, 
which certainly astounded him, but which, he halted not 
long to see ; then, as fast as he could, he rushed off to 
bis old home, where he found his father and mother 
alone. Leaving his friend to locate on the old farm for 
a day or two, on, on he hurried to the dear valley 
where she dwelt, who to him was brighter than all else. 
He arrived there late in the evening, and as he entered 
his own door, he was hailed by the wailing cry of a 
healthy child. 

Ralph was a father. 

# * # # # 

A few days after this, when all had settled 'down, and 
the new labourers, who had been divided between himself 
and his father, began to understand the ways of the 
country, Ralph was seated by his fireside reading a news- 
paper, Bertha was rocking the babe in a cradle at her 
feet, while working at some article of dress. At a 
distance, near an open window, were Harry and Lotty, 
gazing out upon the pleasant and agreeable prospect. 
Outside could be heard the hum of voices, as the 
labourers dispersed to their several homes for the night. 

"I tell you what it is, Bertha," said the young 
husband, with a little swagger in his manner, " I think 
I've managed this matter very well." 

" What matter, my dear ? " asked Bertha, looking up 
pleasantly into his face. 

" Why, I've found first-class, honest, and industrious 
labourers, too glad to learn their business, and enter 



256 THE StfOW SBXP. 

fairly on land of their own, with capital and experience, 
which is much better," began Ralph the sedate. 

" You are quite right there, though I must go about a 
little more, to be able to judge." 

" That is just it. But you must not go about until 
you are quite strong enough, and that won't be for a little 
while yet. Harry seems inclined to help me — and Lotty 
will stay with her sister all the winter," he continued. 

" I don't know that," said Bertha, with a smile ; " do 
you know, my own dear husband, that I half fancy they 
are going to be as foolish as — us." 

"As foolish as — us," he cried, with open mouth; 
" what do you mean ? " 

" AYhy, going to be married to be sure ! " she replied, 
with a bright laugh. 

Ralph looked annoyed, then pleased, and finally he 
ran to the window, and fairly turned the young couple 
round, until he could see their faces. 

" Do you mean to tell me," he said, with profound 
gravity, " that you two children are thinking of keeping 
house already ? " 

They looked conscious, blushed, and then put a bold 
front upon it. 

" We have quite made up our minds," replied Harry ; 
" you see, Ralph, I began to fancy — all your fault— that 
there is something so real and true in domestic happiness, 
that I mean to try it. I shall still study — and if people 
come round us, in time I may get clients." 

"And when is it to come off?" asked Ralph, still 
quite gravely. 

" As soon as we have a house ready," continued the 
young lawyer. 

" Hang it if it shan't be to-morrow ! " cried Ralph, 
clasping both his hands. 



THE COTTCLUSIOlir. 257 

" No," said Harry, quietly ; " you see Bertha will want 
Lotty for quite a month. During that time I can choose 
a location, not ten miles away you know, — just a good 
sleigh distance in winter, and a stout walk in summer. 
I've half an idea where it shall be — perhaps nearer." 

Ralph shook him heartily by the hand, and never was 
a quartette more happy than they were that evening, in 
the full indulgence of their innocent joy. 

The next day Harry, Ralph, and Batiste, plunged into 
the wilderness, in a westerly direction, which course would 
place him between his father's house and that of his 
brother. Their way lay under lofty arches of leaves, 
hanging from straight trunks, which rose sixty, eighty, 
and some of them a hundred feet without a branch. 
Many of the pines were really majestic, some being a 
hundred and fifty feet in height, and a few two hundred. 

At length they came to a small open space, from which 
a faint glimpse of the great lake could be seen, and there 
Harry threw down his staff, declaring that in that spot 
he would establish his home. 

" A wise and happy choice," said Ralph. " When the 
country is cleared you will have a fine commanding view, 
while the little stream we have just crossed will surely 
bring a village, or other population, near to you." 

" And vat de debble vant ye vith de village ? " said 
Batiste, in a half sulky tone. 

" My dear Batiste," replied Ralph, " the woods and 
forests, and uninhabited regions, will last beyond your 
life ; but the day is not far distant, when this will be a 
populous and fertile district of that great empire, upon 
which, in its might and glory, the sun never sets, while 
the roll of its evening drum makes a belt around the 
world. Such magnificent trees, such a productive soil, 
such valuable lakes and means of water communication, 

17 



258 THE SNOW SHIP. 

were never intended solely for a few savages, whose trade 
is war, who are too idle to toil, and too ignorant to avail 
themselves of the riches which lie around them. Ere 
twenty years are past we shall be surrounded by neigh- 
bours ; the anvil, the forge, the mill, the hammer, and 
the saw will be heard around ; and last, though not least, 
the tinkle of that church bell, which we take with us 
wherever we go, and which is, at the same time, the 
memento and the cause of our wondrous and unexampled 
success as colonists." 

" Amen," said Harry. 

" Yere fine," whispered Batiste, " but I no comprenez!" 

And thus it was that Harry Hatfield chose his 
location. In due time, land was cleared, a house was 
built by the aid of all, and then another young couple 
were added to those who had made their home in the 
wilderness. Though not exempt from labour and care, 
they there found a happiness which is denied to too 
many in the crowded abodes of old corporations. 

Having thus brought our principal characters to a 
point when they can have nothing to desire, we leave 
them for the present. "We hope however, some day to 
have further record of their proceedings, especially of 
oiir pet Jack, and his friend Pete, who subsequently 
became one of the most expert and celebrated of the 
Rocky Mountain Trappers. 



MNIS. 



THE MERCHANT OE YAKOUTSK. 



CHAPTEE I. 

THE TOTING WIDOW. 

Yakotttsk is one of the principal cities of Siberia, a 
country, the name of which excites exaggerated ideas of 
stertility and desolation. Watered by rivers, which in 
every direction do the work of railways, with richly- 
wooded mountains and valleys, with green s]opes, culti- 
vated fields, soft meadows, gardens, and grassy islands in 
the great streams, with all the common vegetables in 
pretty fair abundance, with an endless source of commerce 
in furs and ivory, Siberia, except in its extreme northern 
provinces, presents, like most other lands, a very con- 
siderable amount of compensations for considerable rigour 
of climate. Takoutsk is a completely northern town on 
the great river Lena, with wide streets and miserable 
huts, all of wood, in many of which ice is still used in 
winter for panes of glass. A very eminent traveller tells 
us, that when he visited it there were 4000 people living 
in 500 houses ; with three stone churches, two wooden 
ones, and a convent. It had once an antiquity to show — 
the ancient Ostrog or fortress, built in 1647 by the 
Cossacks ; but more and more every day it threatened to 
become a ruin, being not of stone, but of wood ; and at 
last it disappeared. Even here progress is observable, 



260 THE MEECHANT OP YAKOTJTSK. 

and wretched cabins give way gradually to houses, some 
of which are even elegantly arranged in the interior. It 
is a great commercial centre : from the Anubra to Bear- 
ing's Straits, from the banks of the Frozen Sea to Mount 
Aldana, from Okhotsk and even Kamtchatka, goods are 
brought hither, consisting chiefly of furs, seals' teeth, 
and mammoths' tusks, which afford excellent ivory, all of 
which are sold in the summer to itinerant traders, who 
give in return powerfully-flavoured tobacco, corn and 
flour, tea, sugar, strong drinks, Chinese silks and cottons, 
cloth, iron and copper utensils, and glass. 

The inhabitants of the town are chiefly traders, who 
buy from the Takouta hunters their furs at a cheap rate, 
and then sell them in a mysterious kind of fashion to the 
agents who come from Russia in search of them. During 
the annual fair they stow up their goods in private 
rooms ; and here the Irkoutsk men must come and find 
them. These traders are the Russian inhabitants, the 
native Yakoutas being the only artizans. In this distant 
colony of the human race, the new-born child of a 
Russian is given to a Yakouta woman to nurse, and 
when old enough, he learns to read and write ; after 
which he is brought up to the fur trade, and then his 
education is finished. 

Ivan Ivanovitch was a young man born and bred at 
Yakoutsk. His parents had given him the usual amount 
of tuition, and then allowed him for a time to follow the 
bent of his inclination. Ivan took to the chase. Passion- 
ately fond of this amusement, he had at an early age 
started with the Yakouta trappers, and became learned 
in the search for sables, ermines, and lynxes ; he could 
pursue the reindeer and elk on skates, and had even 
gone to the north in quest o£. seals. Thus, at the age of 
twenty, he knew the whole active part of his trade, and 



TIIE YOUNG WIDOW. 261 

was aware of all the good hunting-grounds on which the 
Siberians founded their prosperity. But when he was 
called on to follow the more quiet and sedentary part of 
his occupation, he was not one-half so quick. His 
rough and rude life made town existence distasteful to 
him, and he evinced all that superb contempt for shop- 
keeping, which characterizes the nomadic man, whether 
Eed Indian, Arab, Tartar, or Siberian. 

But Ivan was told he must make his way in the world. 
His parents, who died before he attained to manhood, 
left him a small fortune in rubles and furs, which, if he 
chose to be industrious and persevering, might pave the 
way to the highest position in his native town. Acting 
on the pressing advice of his friends, he gave up his 
wanderings, and went to reside in the house of his fathers, 
piled up his skins and ivory, bought new ones, and pre- 
pared for the annual fair. The merchants from Irkoutsk, 
the capital, came, and Ivan, who was sharp and clever, 
did a good trade. But when his furs and teeth were 
changed into tea, tobacco, brandy, cloth, &c, he did not 
feel a whit happier. Ivan longed for the arid hills, and 
lofty mountains, and pellucid lakes — for the exciting 
hunt and the night bivouac, when grey-headed Takoutas 
would, with their ganzis — the Irish dudeen — in their 
mouths, tell terrible and wonderful stories of ancient 
days. "When eating town fare, his stomach yearned after 
frozen Takouta butter, cut up -;vith axes, and for strouga- 
nina, or frozen fish, with reindeer brains, and other 
northern delicacies. And then his kind friends told him 
that he wanted a wife — a possession without which, they 
assured him, life was dull ; adding that in her society he 
would cease to long for communication with bears and 
savages. 



262 THE Jk^BCHANJ "J? TAKOtTOK. 

Ivan believed them, and, following their advice, he 
launched into society— that is, he went more than usual 
to the noisy festivities of the town, which form the occu- 
pation of the dull season. The good people of Yakoutsk — 
like all peoples approaching to a savage state, sentimen- 
tally called a state of nature, especially in northern climes 
— considered eating the great business of life. Fabulous 
legends are told of their enormous capacity for food, 
approaching to that of the Esquimaux ; but however this 
Jnay be, certain it is that a Yakoutsk festival was always 
commenced by several hours of laborious eating and 
drinking of fat and oily food and strong brandy. When 
the utmost limits of repletion were reached, the patriarchs 
usually took to pipes, cards, and punch ; while the ladies 
prepared tea, and ate roasted nuts, probably to facilitate 
digestion. The young men conversed with them, or 
roasted their nuts for them, while, perhaps, a daudy 
would perform a Siberian dance to the music of the violin 
or gousli, a kind of guitar. Ivan joined heartily in all 
this dissipation ; he smoked with the old men ; he drank 
their punch ; he roasted nuts for the ladies, and told 
them wonderful stories, which were always readily lis- 
tened to, except when some new fashion — which several 
years before had been forgotten in Paris — found its way 
via St. Petersburg, Moscow, and Irkoutsk, to the deserts 
of Siberia. Then he was silent ; ft r the ladies had ample 
subject of discourse, not forgetting the great tea-table 
topic — scandal ; causing the old men to shake their 
heads, and declare such things were not when they were 
young. Ivan, however, had one unfailing subject of 
popularity with the ladies. Like most Russians who 
have had occasion to travel much in cold places, he 
relished a cup of tea, even better than the punch, for he 



THE YOP.NU- VVlUl/W. 263 

had learned by experience that there was more genuine 
warmth in the pot than in the bowl. Most Russian 
officers are known to share his opinion. 

Ivan had several times had his attention directed to 
Maria Vorotinska, a young and rich widow, who was the 
admiration of all Yakoutsk. Her husband had left her 
a fortune in knowledge of the fur trade and in rubles, 
with a comfortable house nicely furnished — in Siberia 
the very height of human felicity. It was commonly 
reported that Maria, young as she was, was the best bar- 
gainer in the land. She got her skins for less than any- 
body else, and sold them for a higher price. "With these 
qualifications, she must, it was said, prove a jewel to 
Ivan, who was not a close buyer nor a hard seller. But 
Ivan for some time remained perfectly insensible both to 
these social advantages and to the great beauty of the 
lady. He met her often, and even roasted more nuts for her 
than anyone else, which was a strong case of preference ; 
but he did not seem caught in the fair one's toils. He 
neither ate, nor slept, nor amused himself one whit the 
less than when he first knew her. One evening, how- 
ever, as Maria handed him his tea, with a hot cake, Ivan, 
whether owing to some peculiar smile on her face, or to 
the domestic idea which the act suggested, seemed cer- 
tainly very much struck, and next day he formally pro- 
posed. Maria laughed, and tossed her head, and spoke 
a few good-natured words; and then, without either 
accepting or rejecting him, she hinted something about 
his youth, his want of devotion to business, and his want 
of fortune. Ivan, a little warmly, declared himself the 
best hunter in Yakoutsk, and hence the most practically 
experienced of any in the trade, and then gave the sum 
total of his possessions. 



264 THE Miin;HA;<T UJt' XAJlUUTSK. 

" Just one quarter of what good old Vorotinska left 
me ! " replied the prudent Maria. 

" But if I liked," replied Ivan, " I could be the richest 
merchant in Siberia." 

" How ? " asked Maria, a little curiously, for the mere 
mention of wealth was to her like the smell of powder to 
the war-horse. 

" Being almost the only Russian who has lived among 
the Takoutas, I know the secret of getting furs cheaper 
and easier than anyone else. Besides, if I chose to take 
a long journey, I could find ivory in vast heaps. A tra- 
dition is current of an ivory-mine in the north, which an 
old Takouta told me to be truth." 

"Very likely," said Maria, to whom the existence of 
the fossil ivory of the mammoth in large masses was well 
known ; " but the promich leniclcs — trading companies — 
have long since stripped them." 

" Not this," cried Ivan : " it is a virgin mine. It is 
away, away in the Frozen Sea, and requires courage and 
enduring energy to find it. Two Takoutas once dis- 
covered it. One was killed by the natives ; the other 
escaped, and is now an old man." 

" If you could find that," said Maria, " you would be 
the first man in Siberia, and the Czar himself would 
honour you." 

" And you ? " asked Ivan, humbly. 

" Ivan Ivanoviteh," replied Maria, calmly, " I like you 
better than any man in Yakoutsk, but I should adore 
the great ivory merchant." 

Ivan was delighted. He was a little puzzled by the 
character of the lady, who, after marrying an old man for 
his fortune, seemed equally desirous of reconciling her 
interest and her affections in a second marriage. But 



THE TAKOUTA HUNTEB. 265 

very nice ideas are not those of the half-civilized, for we 
owe every refinement, both of mind and body, to civiliza- 
tion, which makes of the raw material man — full of un- 
developed elements — what cooking makes of the potato- 
root. Civilization is the hot water and fire which carry 
off the crudities, and bring forth the good qualities. 

However this may be, Ivan nursed his idea. Apart 
from the sudden passion which had invaded him, he had 
long allowed this fancy to ferment in his brain. During 
his wandering evenings, a noted hunter named Sakalar, 
claiming descent from the supposed Tartar founder of 
the Yakoutas, had often narrated his perilous journey on 
sledges across the Frozen Sea, his discovery of an ivory- 
mine — that is, of a vast deposit of mammoths' tusks, 
generally found at considerable depth in the earth, but 
here open to the grasp of all. He spoke of the thing 
as a folly of his youth, which had cost the life of his 
dearest friend, and never hinted at a renewed visit. But 
Ivan was resolved to undertake the perilous adventure, 
and even to have Sakalar for his guide. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE TAKOUTA HUNTEB. 

Ivan slumbered not over his project. Only a few days 
passed before he was ready to start. He purchased the 
horses required, and packed up all the varied articles 
necessary for his journey, and likely to please his Takouta 
friend, consisting of tea, rum, brandy, tobacco, gun- 
powder, and other things of less moment. For himself 
he took a couple of guns, a pair of pistols, some strong 
and warm clothes, an iron pot for cooking, a kettle for 



266 THE MEECHANT OE TAKOUTSK. 

his tea, with many minor articles, absolutely indispensable 
in the cold region he was about to visit. All travellers 
in the north have found that ample food, and such drinks 
as tea, are the most effectual protection against the cli- 
mate ; while oily and fat meat is also an excellent pre- 
servative against cold. But Ivan had no need to provide 
against this contingency. His Yakouta friend knew the 
value of train-oil and grease, which are alike the staple 
luxuries of Siberians, Kamtchatkans, and Esquimaux. 

The first part of Ivan's journey was necessarily to the 
yourte, or wigwam of Sakalar, without whom all hope of 
reaching the goal of his wishes was vain. He had 
sufficient confidence in himself to venture without a 
guide towards the plain of Mioure, where his Takouta 
friend dwelt. He started at early dawn, without giving 
warning of his departure to any one save Maria, and 
entered courageously on the frozen plain which reaches 
from Takoutsk to the Polar Sea. The country is here 
composed of marshes, vast downs, huge forests, and hills 
covered with snow in the month of September, the time 
when he began his journey. He had five horses, each 
tied to the tail of the one before him, while Ivan himself 
was mounted on the first. He was compelled to ride 
slowly, casting his eyes every now and then behind, to 
see that all was right. At night he stretched a bearskin 
under a bush, lit a huge fire, cooked a savoury mess, and 
piling clothes over himself, he slept. At dawn he rose, 
crammed his kettle full of clean snow, put it over the 
embers, and made himself tea. With this warm beverage 
to rouse him, he again arranged his little caravan, and 
proceeded on his way. Nothing more painful than this 
journey can be conceived. There are scarcely any marks 
to denote the road, while lakes, formed by recent inun- 
dations, arrest the traveller every half-hour, compelling 



THE YAKOTJTA HTJNTEK. 267 

him to take prodigious rounds, which are equally annoy- 
ing and perplexing. 

On the morning of the third day Ivan felt a little 
puzzled about the road. He knew the general direction 
from the distant mountains, and he wished to avoid a 
vast morass. Before him was a frozen stream, and on 
the other side a hillock. Leaving the others to feed as 
well as they could, he mounted his best horse and rode 
across. The ice bent under him as he went, and he 
accordingly rode gently ; but just as he reached the 
middle, it cracked violently right across, and sank visibly 
under him. Ivan looked hurriedly around. The ice was 
everywhere split, and the next minufe his horse, plunging 
violently, fell through. Instead, however, of falling into 
a stream of cold water, Ivan found himself in a vast and 
chilly vault, with a "small trickling stream in the middle, 
and at once recollected a not unfrequent phenomenon. 
The river had been frozen over when high with floods, 
but afterwards, the water sinking to its ordinary level, 
the upper crust of ice alone remained. But Ivan had no 
desire to admire the gloomy, half-lit vault, extending up 
and down out of sight ; accordingly, standing on his 
horse's back, he clambered upon the surface as best he 
could, leaving the poor animal below. This done, he ran 
to the shore, and used the well-remembered Yakouta 
device for extracting his steed ; he broke a hole in the 
ice near the bank, towards which the sagacious brute at 
once hurried, and was drawn forth. Having thus fortu- 
nately escaped a serious peril, he resumed his search on 
foot, and about mid-day pursued his journey. 

A few hours brought him to the curious plain of the 
Mioure, where he expected to find the camp of his friend 
Sakalar. Leaving an almost desert plain, he suddenly 
stood on the edge of a hollow, circular in form, and six 



268 THE MEECHA3ST OF TAKOTJTSK. 

miles across, fertile in the extreme, and dotted with 
numerous well stocked fish-ponds. The whole, as may 
plainly be seen, was once a lake. Scattered over the soil 
were the yourtes of the Yakoutas, while cattle and horses 
crowded together in vast flocks. Ivan, who knew the 
place well, rode straight to a yourte or cabin apart from 
the rest, where usually dwelt Sakalar. It was larger and 
cleaner than most of them, thanks to the tuition of Ivan, 
and the subsequent care of a daughter, who, brought up 
by Ivan's mother, while the young man wandered, had 
acquired manners a little superior to those of her tribe. 

This was really needful, for the Takoutas, a pastoral 
people of Tartar origin, are singularly dirty, and even 
somewhat coarse and unintellectual — like all savage 
nations, in fact, when judged by any one but the poet or 
the poetic philosopher, who, on examination, will find 
that ignorance, poverty, misery, and want of civilization, 
produce similar results in the prairies of America and the 
wilds of Siberia, in an Irish cabin, and in the wynds and 
closes of our populous cities. But the chief defect of the 
Takouta is dirt. Otherwise he is rather a favourable 
specimen of a savage. Since his assiduous connection 
with the Eussians, he has become even rich, having flocks 
and herds, and at home plenty of koumise to drink, and 
horse's flesh to eat. He has great endurance, and can 
bear tremendous cold. He travels in the snow without 
tent or pelisse ; on reaching the camp, he lies down on 
the snow, with his saddle for a pillow, his horsecloth for 
a bed, his cloak for a covering, and so he sleeps. His power 
of fasting is prodigious ; and his eyesight is so keen, that 
a Takouta one day told an eminent Eussian traveller 
that he had seen a great blue star eat a number of little 
stars, and then cast them up. The man had seen the 
eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. Like the Bed Indian, he 



THE YAKOUTA HTJNTEK. 269 

recollects every bush, every stone, every hillock, every 
pond necessary to find his way, and never loses himself, 
however great the distance he may have to travel. 

His food is boiled beef and horse's flesh, cows' and 
mares' milk. But his chief delicacy is raw and melted 
fat, while quantity is always the chief merit of a repast. 
He mixes, likewise, a mess of fish, flour, milk, fat, and a 
kind of bark, the latter to augment the volume. Both 
men and women smoke inordinately, swallowing the 
vapour, as do many dwellers in civilized lands — a most 
pernicious and terrible habit. Brandy is their most 
precious drink, their own koumise having not sufficient 
strength to satisfy them. In summer they wander about 
in tents, collecting hay; in winter they dwell in the 
yourte or hut, which is a wooden frame, of beehive shape, 
covered with grass, turf, and clay, with windows of clear 
ice. The very poor dig three feet below the soil ; the 
rich have a wooden floor level with the adjacent ground, 
while rude benches all round serve as beds, divided one 
from the other by partitions. The fireplace is in the 
middle, inclined towards the door. A pipe carries away 
the smoke. 

It was almost dark when Ivan halted before the yourte 
of Sakalar. It was larger and cleaner than any of those 
around. It had also numerous outhouses, full of cows, 
and one or two men who tended these animals were 
smoking their pipes at the door. Ivan gave his horses 
to one of them, who knew him, and entered the hut. 
Sakalar, a tall, thin, hardy man of about fifty, was just 
about to commence his evening meal. A huge mass of 
boiled meat, stewed fish, and a sort of soup, were ready ; 
and a young girl about eighteen, neatly dressed, clean 
and pretty — all owing to her Yakoutsk education — was 
serving the hunter. 



270 THE MERCHANT OE YAKOTTTSK. 

" Spirit of the woods protect me ! " shrieked the girl, 
spilling half of the soup on the floor. 

" What wild horse have you seen, Kolina ? " cried the 
hunter, who had been a little scalded ; and then seeing 
Ivan, he added, " A Takouta welcome to you, my son ! 
My old heart is glad, and I am warm enough to melt an 
iceberg at the sight of you, Ivan ! Kolina, quick ! another 
platter, a fresh mug, the best bottle of brandy, and my 
red pipe from Moscow ! " 

No need was there for the hunter to speak. Kolina, 
alert as a reindeer, had sprung up from the low bench, 
and quickly brought forth their holiday ware, and even 
began to prepare a cake — such as Ivan himself had 
taught her to make — knowing that he liked some sort of 
bread with his meals. 

" And where are you going ? " cried Sakalar, when the 
young man had somewhat appeased his hunger. 

" To the North Sea, in search of the great ivory mine !" 
said Ivan, abruptly. 

Kolina started back in terror and surprise, while 
Sakalar fixed his keen eyes on the youth, with sorrow 
and curiosity, and almost unequivocally testified his be- 
lief that his favourite pupil in the chase was mad. But 
Ivan rose and bade the serving-men of the rich Takouta 
bring in his boxes. He then opened up his store of trea- 
sures : — there was tea for Kolina ; and for Sakalar rum, 
brandy, powder, guns, tobacco, knives— all that could 
tempt a Takouta. The father and daughter examined 
them with pleasure for some time, but presently Kolina 
shook her head. 

" Ivan," said Sakalar, " all this is to tempt the poor 
Takouta to cross the wilderness of ice. It is much 
riches, but not enough to make Sakalar mad. The mine 



THE YAKOUTA HTJNTEK. 271 

is guarded by evil beings : but speak, lad, why would 
you go there ? " 

" Let Kolina give me a pipe, and I will tell my story," 
said Ivan ; and filling his glass, the young fur-trader told 
the story of his love, and his bargain with the prudent 
widow. 

"And this cold-hearted woman," exclaimed Kolina, 
with emotion, " has sent you to risk your life on the hor- 
rible Frozen Sea. A Takouta girl would have been less 
selfish. She would have said, ' Stay at home — let me 
have Ivan ; the mammoth teeth may lie for ever on the 
Frozen Sea ! ' " 

" But the lad will go, and he will be drowned like a 
dog," said Sakalar, more slowly, after this ebullition of 
feminine indignation. 

" Tou must go with him, father," continued Kolina, 
with a compassionate look at Ivan ; " and as your child 
cannot remain alone, Kolina will go too ! " 

" "We will start when the horses have had five days' 
hay," said Sakalar, gravely — the animals alluded to being 
only fed when about to go a journey — " and Kolina shall 
go too, for Ivan will be two years on his way." 

Ivan listened in amazement : in the first place, at the 
sudden decision and warmth of his attached friends, with 
whom he had dwelt twelve years ; then at the time 
required to perform the journey. He felt considerable 
doubts as to the widow remaining unmarried such a 
time, but the explanation of Sakalar satisfied him that 
it was impossible to perform the journey even in two 
years. The hunter told him that they must first join the 
tribes dwelling round Nijnei-Kolimsk (New-Kolimsk) 
where alone he could get dogs and sledges for his journey 
across the Frozen Sea. This, with the arrangements, 
would consume the winter. In the summer nothing 



272 THE MERCHANT OE TAKOUTSK. 

could be done. "When the winter returned, he must 
start towards the north pole — a month's journey at 
least ; and if he hit upon the place, he must encamp 
there for the rest of the winter. That summer would 
be spent in getting out the ivory, fattening up the dogs, 
and packing. The third winter would be occupied by 
the journey home. On hearing this Ivan hesitated ; but 
in describing the journey, the spirit of the old hunter 
got roused, and before night, he was warm in his desire 
to see once more the scene of his youthful perils. 
Kolina solemnly declared she must be of the party ; and 
thus these experienced savages, used to sudden and 
daring resolves, in one night decided on a journey which, 
elsewhere, would perhaps have been talked of for half a 
century before it was undertaken. 

Kolina slept little that night. In a compartment 
near her there was one who had, since her childhood, 
been the ideal of her future. She had loved Ivan as a 
playmate — she loved him as a man .; and here, he whom 
she had longed for all the winter, and he whom she had 
hoped to see once more the next summer, had suddenly 
come, starting on a perilous journey of years, to win the 
hand of an avaricious, but young and beautiful widow. 
Kolina saw all her fairest dreams thus vanish, and the idol 
of her heart crumble into dust. And yet she felt no ill-will 
to Ivan, and never changed her resolve to be the faithful 
companion and attendant of her father and his friend, 
in their wild journey to the supposed islands in the 
Frozen Sea. 



273 



CHAPTEE III. 

KI JNEI-KOLIMSK. 

The five days fixed by Sakalar for preparing for the 
journey, were wholly devoted to the necessary arrange- 
ments. There was much to be done, and much to be 
talked of. They had to travel a long way before they 
reached even the real starting-point of their adventurous 
voyage. Sakalar, duly to impress Ivan with the clangers 
and perils of the search, narrated once more in minute 
detail all his former sufferings. But nothing daunted 
the young trader. He was one of those men who, under 
more favourable circumstances, would have been a Cook, 
a Parry, or a Pranklin, perilling everything to make 
further discovery in the science of geography. 

The five horses of Ivan were exchanged for others 
more inured to the kind of journey they were about to 
undertake. There was one for each of the adventurers, 
and four to carry the luggage, consisting chiefly of 
articles with which to pay for the hire of dogs and 
sledges. All were dressed alike — Kolina adopting for 
the time the habits and appearance of the man. Over 
their usual clothes they put a jacket of foxes' skins and 
a fur breast-cover ; their legs being covered by hare-skin 
wrappers. Over these were stockings of soft reindeer 
leather, and high strong boots of the same material. 
The knees were protected by knee-caps of fur ; and then, 
over all, was a coat with loose sleeves and a hood of 
double deer-skin. This was not all. After the chin, 
nose, ears, and mouth had been guarded by appropriate 
pieces, forming together a mask, they had received the 
additional weight of a pointed fur cap. Our three 
travellers, when they took their departure, looked 
precisely like three animated bundles of old clothes. 

18 



274 THE MEECHAKT OE YAKOTTTSK. 

All were well armed with, gun, pistol, hatchet, and 
hunting-knife, while the girdle further supported a pipe 
and tobacco-pouch. They had not explained whither 
they were going, but the whole village knew that they 
must be about to undertake some perilous journey, and 
accordingly turned out to cheer them as they went, while 
several ardent admirers of Kolina were loud in their 
murmurs at her accompanying the expedition. But the 
wanderers soon left the plain of Mioure behind them, 
and entered on the delectable roads leading to the Frozen 
Sea. Half-frozen marshes and quagmires met them at 
every step ; but Sakalar rode first, and the others followed 
one by one ; thus the experienced old hunter, by advancing 
steadily and without hurry, avoided these dangers. They 
soon reached a vast plain, three hundred miles across, 
and utterly deserted by the human race ; a desert, composed 
half of barren rock and half of swampy quagmire, soft 
above, but at a foot deep it was solid and perpetual ice. 
Fortunately it now froze hard, and the surface was fit to 
bear the horses. But for this, the party must have 
halted, and waited for a severer frost. The rivers were 
not frozen when large in volume ; and the Aldana had 
to be crossed in the usual flat-bottomed boat kept for 
travellers. At night they halted, and with a bush and 
some deer-skins they made a tent. Kolina cooked the 
supper, and the men searched for some fields of stunted 
half-frozen grass upon which to let the horses graze. 
This was the last place where even this kind of food 
would be found, and for some days their steeds would 
have to live on a stinted portion of hay. 

On they went over the arid plain, which, however, 
affords nourishment for some trees — now fording rivers, 
floundering through marshes, and still meeting some 
wretched apology for grass; when, on the third day, 



NIJNEI-KOLIMSK. 275 

down came the snow in a pelting cloud, and in an instant 
the whole desert changed to white from sombre grey. 
The real winter was come. Now all Sakalar's intelligence 
was reguired. Almost every obvious sign by which to 
find his way, had disappeared, and he traversed the plain, 
wholly guided by distant hills, and by observing the stars 
at night. This Sakalar did assiduously ; and when he 
had once started under the guidance of the twinkling 
lights of the heavens, rarely was he many yards out at 
the next halt ; to camp he always chose the side of a 
hillock, where there was a tree or two, and some half- 
rotten trunks with bushes to make a huge fire. 

It was nearly dawn on the fifth morning after entering 
the plain, and Ivan and Kolina yet slept. But Sakalar 
slept not. They had nearly reached the extremity of the 
horrible desert, but a new danger occupied the thoughts 
of the hunter. They were now in the track of the wild 
and savage Tchouktchas, and their fire might have 
betrayed them. Had Sakalar been alone, he would have 
slept in the snow without a fire ; for he knew the peril 
of an encounter with the independent Tchouktchas, who 
have only recently been even nominally brought into 
subjection to Russia. 

The heavy fall of snow of the two previous days 
rendered the danger greater. Sakalar sat gravely upon 
a fallen tree — a pipe in his mouth, and his eye fixed on 
the distant horizon. For some time nothing remarkable 
caught his gaze ; but at last he saw a number of dark 
objects on the snow, galloping directly towards the camp. 
Sakalar at once recognized a number of reindeer. It 
was the Tchouktchas on their sledges, bounding with 
lightning speed along the frozen surface ! 

" Up !" cried the hunter ; and when his companions 
were on their feet, he added, " Quick with your guns ! 



276 THE HEECHANT OF TAKOTJTSE. 

The enemy are upon us ! Bat show a bold front, and 
let them feel the weight of lead." 

Ivan and Kolina quietly took up their post, and 
awaited the orders of Sakalar. No time was lost, and 
fortunately, for the savages were already near, and next 
minute were alighting from their sledges : hand in hand 
they .advanced along the snow, to the number of a dozen. 
A simultaneous discharge of the heavy-metalled guns of 
the camp — one of which, that of Sakalar, wounded the 
foremost man — checked their career, and they fell back 
to hold a conference. It became evident at once that 
they had no firearms, which removed almost all idea of 
danger. Ivan and Kolina now proceeded to load the 
horses, and when all were ready, the whole party mounted 
and rode off, followed at a respectful distance by the 
Siberian Arabs. 

The travellers, however, received no further annoyance 
from them, and camped the next night on the borders of 
the Toukoulane, at the foot of the mountains of Verkho- 
Yansk. After the usual repose, they began the severest 
part of the journey. Hugged rocks, deep ravines, 
avalanches, snow, and ice, all were in their way. Now 
they rode along the edge of frightful precipices, on a 
path so narrow that one false step was death -, now they 
forced their way through gulleys full of snow, where 
their horses were buried to their girths, and they had to 
drag them out by main force. Fortunately, the Siberian 
horse, though small, is sturdy and indefatigable, and can 
live, during a three months' journey, on faded grass and 
half-frozen, half-rotten herbage. That evening they 
camped on the loftiest part of the road, where it winds 
through still elevated rocks. 

The middle of the next day brought them to another 
plain, not much superior to that through which they 



NIJKEI-K01IMSK. 277 

had passed, but yet less miserable-looking, and with the 
additional advantage of having youtes here and there, to 
shelter the traveller. The cold was now intense ; and 
glad indeed was Ivan of the comforts of his Siberian 
dress, which at first had appeared so heavy. The odd 
figures which Kolina and Sakalar presented under it, 
made him smile at the notion which Maria Vorotinska 
would have formed of her lover under a garb that 
doubled his natural size. Several halts took place, and 
caused great delay, from the slippery state of the ice 
on the rivers. The unshod horses could not stand. A 
fire had to be lit ; and when sufficient ashes were 
procured, they had to be spread across in a narrow 
pathway, and the nags led carefully along this track — 
one of the many artifices required to combat the rigorous 
character of the climate. And thus, suffering cold and 
short commons, and making their way for days through 
frosty plains, over ice and snow, amid deep ravines and 
over lofty hills, they at length reached JSTijnei-Kolimsk, 
though not without being almost wholly knocked up, 
especially Kolina, who was quite unused to such fatigues. 
They had now almost reached the borders of the great 
Frozen Sea. The village is situated about eighteen 
degrees farther north than London, and is nearly as far 
north as Boothia Felix, the scene of Captain Ross's four 
years' sojourn in the ice. It was founded two hundred 
years ago by a wandering Cossack ; though what could 
have induced people to sebtle in a place which the sun 
lights, but never warms, is a mystery ; where there is a 
day that lasts fifty-two English days, and a night that 
lasts- thirty-eight ; where there is no spring and no 
autumn, but a faint semblance of summer for three 
months, and then winter ; where a few dwarf willows 
and stunted grass form all the vegetation ; and where, at 



278 THE MERCHANT OF TAffoTTTSK. 

a certain distance below, the surface, there is frost as old 
as the " current epoch" of the geologist. But by way 
of compensation, reindeer and elks, brown and black 
bears, foxes and squirrels, .abound ; there are also wolves, 
and the isatis or polar fox ; there are swans, and geese, 
and ducks, partridges and snipes, and in the rivers 
abundance of fish. And yet, though the population be 
now so scanty, and the date of the peopling of Eolimsk 
is known, there was once a numerous race in these 
regions, the ruins of whose forts and villages are yet 
found. The population is about 5000, including the 
whole district, of whom about 300 are Russians, the 
descendants of Siberian exiles. They dwell in houses 
made of wood — thrown up on the shore and collected by 
years of patience — and of moss and clay. In winter 
the panes of the windows are of ice, six inches thick; 
in summer, of skins. The better class of the inhabitants 
are neatly and even tastefully dressed ; and they are 
clean, too, which is the very highest praise that can be 
given to half-civilized, as well as to civilized people. 

They are a bold, energetic, and industrious race. 
Every hour of weather fit for out-door work, is spent in 
fishing and hunting, and preparing food for the winter. 
In the light sledge, or on skates, with nets and spears, 
they are labouring at each of these employments in its 
season. Towards the end of the long winter, just as 
famine and starvation threaten the whole population, a 
perfect cloud of swans, and geese, and ducks, and snipes 
pour in ; and man and woman, boy and girl, rush forth 
to the hunt. The fish come in next, as the ice breaks . 
and presently the time for the reindeer hunt comes 
round. Every minute of the summer season is consumed 
in laying in a stock of all these aliments, for a long and 
dreary season, when nothing can be caught. The women 



THE FEOZEN SEA. 279 

collect herbs and roots. As the summer is just about to 
end, the herrings appear in shoals, and a new source of 
subsistence is opened up. Later still, they fish by 
opening holes in the newly-formed ice. Nor is Kolimsk 
without its trade. The chief traffic of the region is at 
the fair of Ostrovnoye, but Nijnei-Koliinsk has its 
share. The merchants who come to collect the furs 
which the adventurous Tchouktchas have acquired, even 
on the opposite side of Behring's Straits, from the North 
American Indians, halt here, and sell tea, tobacco, brandy, 
and other articles. 

The long night had set in when Ivan and his com- 
panions entered Kolimsk. Well it was that they had 
reached it, for the cold was becoming frightful in its 
intensity, and the people of the village were much 
surprised at the arrival of travellers ; but they found 
ready accommodation, a Cossack widower giving them 
half his house. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE EEOZEN SEA. 

Ivan soon found himself received into the best society 
"of the place. All were glad to welcome the adventurous 
trader from Takoutsk ; and when he had intimated that 
his boxes of treasure, his brandy and tea, and rum and 
tobacco, were to be laid out in the hire of dogs and 
sledges, he found ample applicants, though, from the 
very first, all refused to accompany his party as guardians 
of the dogs. Sakalar, however, who had expected this, 
was nothing daunted, but, bidding Ivan amuse ^himself 
as best he could, he undertook all the preparations. 
Ivan, however, found as much pleasure in teaching to 



280 THE MERCHANT OF YAKOUTSK. 

Kolina what little lie knew, as in frequenting the fashion- 
able circles of Kolimsk. But he could not reject the 
numerous polite invitations to evening parties and dances 
which poured upon him. I have said evening parties, 
for though there was no day, yet still the division of the 
hours was regularly kept, and parties began at five p.m., 
to end at ten. There was singing and dancing, and 
gossip and tea, of which each individual would consume 
ten or twelve large cups ; in fact, despite the primitive 
state of the inhabitants, and the vicinity to the Polar 
Sea, these assemblies very much resembled in style those 
of Paris and London. The costumes, the saloons, and 
the hours, were diiferent, while the manners were less 
refined ; but the facts were the same. 

When the carnival came round, Ivan, who was a little 
vexed at the exclusion of Kolina from the fashionable 
Russian society, took care to let her have the usual 
amusement of sliding down a mountain of ice, which she 
did to her great satisfaction. He contrived, too, at all 
times to devote to her his days, while Sakalar wandered 
about from youte to youte, in search of hints and 
information for the next winter's journey. Sakalar hired 
the requisite nartas, or sledges, and the thirty-nine dogs 
which were to draw them — thirteen to each. Then he 
bargained for a large stock of frozen and dry fish for the 
dogs, and other provisions for themselves. But the 
people were most puzzled by his assiduous efforts to get 
a man to go with them, who would harness twenty dogs 
to an extra sledge. To the astonishment of everybody, 
three young men at last volunteered, and three extra 
sledges were then procured. 

The summer soon came round, and then Ivan and his 
friends started out at once with the hunters, and did 
their utmost to be useful. As the natives of Kolimsk 



THE EBOZEN SEA. 281 

went during the chase a long distance towards Cape 
Sviatoi, the spot where the adventurers were to quit the 
land and venture on the Frozen Sea, they took care, at 
the furthest extremity of their hunting trip, to leave a 
deposit of provisions. They erected a small platform, 
which they covered with drift wood, and on this they 
placed the dried fish. Above were laid heavy •» stones, 
and every precaution used to ward off the isatis and the 
glutton. Ivan during the summer added much to his 
stock of hunting knowledge. 

At length the winter came round once more, and the 
hour so long desired at last arrived. The sledges were 
ready — six in number — and loaded as heavily as they 
could bear. But for so many dogs, and for so many days, 
it was quite certain that they must economize most 
strictly ; while it was equally certain that if no bears 
fell in their way on the journey, they must starve, if they 
did not perish otherwise on the terrible Frozen Sea. 
Each narta, loaded with eight hundredweight of provi- 
sions and its driver, was drawn by six pairs of dogs and a 
leader. They took no wood, trusting implicitly to 
Providence for this most essential article. They purposed 
following the shores of the Frozen Sea to Cape Sviatoi, 
because on the edge of the sea they hoped to find, as 
usual, plenty of wood, floated to the shore during the 
brief period when the ice was broken and the vast ocean 
in part free. One of the sledges was less loaded with 
provisions than the rest, because it bore a tent, an iron 
plate for fire on the ice, a lamp, and the few cooking 
utensils of the party. 

Early one morning in the month of November — the 
long night still lasting — the six sledges took their 
departure. The adventurers had every day exercised them- 
selves with the dogs for some hours, and were tolerably 



282 THE MERCHANT OE YAKOUTSK. 

proficient. Sakalar drove the first team, Kolina the 
second, and Ivan the third. The Kolimsk men came 
afterwards. They took theii-way along the snow towards 
the mouth of the Tchouktcha river. The first day's 
journey brought them to the extreme limits of vegetation, 
after which they entered on a vast and interminable 
plain of snow, along which the nartas moved rapidly. 
But the second day, in the afternoon, a storm came on. 
The snow fell in clouds, the wind blew with a bitterness 
of cold, as searching to the form of man as the hot blast 
of the desert, and the dogs appeared inclined to halt. 
But Sakalar kept on his way towards a hillock in the 
distance, where the guides spoke of a hut of refuge. 
But before a dozen yards more could be crossed, the 
sledge of Kolina was overturned, and a halt became 
necessary. 

Ivan was the first to raise his fair companion from the 
ground; and then with much difficulty — their hands, 
despite all the clothes, being half-frozen — they again put 
the nartas in condition to proceed. Sakalar had not 
stopped, but was seen in the distance unharnessing his 
sledge, and then poking about in a huge heap of snow. 
He was searching for the hut, which had been completely 
buried in the drift. In a few minutes the whole six were 
at work, despite the blast, while the dogs were scratching 
notes for themselves in the soft snow, within which they 
soon lay snug, with only their noses out of the hole, 
while over this the sagacious brutes put the tip of their 
long bushy tails. 

At the end of an hour well employed, the hut was 
freed inside from snow, and a fire of stunted bushes with 
a few logs was lit in the middle of it. Here the whole 
party cowered, almost choked with the thick smoke, 
which, however, was less painful than the blast from the 



THE EEOZEN SEA. 283 

icy sea. The smoke escaped with difficulty, because the 
roof was still covered with firm snow, and the door was 
merely a hole to crawl through. At last, however, they 
got the fire to the state of red embers, and succeeded in 
obtaining a plentiful supply of tea and food ; after which, 
their limbs being less stiff,_ they fed the dogs. 

"While they were attending to the dogs, the storm 
abated, and was followed immediately by a magnificent 
aurora borealis. It rose in the north, a sort of semi-arch 
of light ; and then across the heavens, in almost every 
direction, darted columns of a luminous character. The 
light was as bright as that of the moon in its full. There 
were jets of lurid red light in some places, which disap- 
peared and came agajn ; while, there being a dead calm 
after the storm, the adventurers heard a kind of rustling 
sound in the distance, faint and almost imperceptible, 
and yet believed to be the rush of the air in the sphere 
of the phenomenon. A few minutes more, and all had 
disappeared. 

After a hearty meal, the wanderers launched into the 
usual topics of conversation in those regions. Sakalar 
was not a boaster, but the young men from Nijnei- 
Kolimsk were possessed of the usual characteristics of 
hunters and fishermen. They told, with considerable 
vigour and effect, long stories of their adventures, mostly 
exaggerated — and when not impossible, most improbaWe 
— of bears killed in hand to hand combat, of hundreds of 
deer slain in the crossing of a river, and of multitudinous 
heaps of fish drawn in one cast of a seine; and then, 
wrapped in their thick clothes, and every one's feet to 
the fire, the whole party soon slept. Ivan and Kolina, 
however, held whispered converse together for a little 
while ; but fatigue soon overcame even them. 

The next day they advanced still farther towards the 



284 THE MERCHANT OE YAKOUTSK. 

pole, and on the evening of the third, they camped within 
a few yards of the great Frozen Sea. There it lay before 
them, scarcely distinguishable from the land ; and as 
they looked upon it from a lofty eminence, it was hard 
to believe that it was a sea. There was snow on the 
sea and snow on the land ; there were mountains on 
both, and huge drifts, and here and there vast polinas — 
a space of *soft, watery ice, which resembled the lakes of 
Siberia. All was bitter cold, sterile, bleak, and chilling 
to the eye, which vainly sought a relief. The prospect 
of a journey over this desolate plain, intersected in every 
direction by ridges of mountain icebergs, full of crevices, 
with soft and salt ice here and there, was dolorous in- 
deed ; and yet the heart of Ivan quaked not. He had 
now what he sought in view ; he knew there was land 
beyond, and riches, and fame. 

A rude tent was erected, with snow piled round the 
edge to keep it firm. It needed to be strongly pitched, 
for in these regions the blast is more quick and sudden 
than in any place perhaps in the known world, pouring 
down along the fields of ice with terrible force, direct 
from the unknown caverns of the northern pole. Within 
the tent, which was of double reindeer skin, a fire was 
lit ; while behind a huge rock, and under cover of the 
sledges, lay the dogs. As usual, after a hearty meal, 
ana hot tea — drunk perfectly scalding — the party retired 
to rest. About midnight, all were awoke by a sense of 
oppression and stifling heat. Sakalar rose, and, by the 
light of the remaining embers, scrambled to the door. 
It was choked up by snow. The hunter immediately 
began to shovel it from the narrow hole through which 
they entered or left the hut, and then groped his way 
out. The snow was falling so thick and fast, that the 
travelling yourte was completely buried ; and the wind 



THE EBOZEN SEA. 285 

being directly opposite to the door, the snow had drifted 
round and concealed the aperture. 

The dogs now began to howl fearfully," This was too 
serious a warning to be disdained. They smelled the 
savage bear of the icy seas, which, in turn, had been 
attracted to them by its sense of smell. Scarcely had 
the sagacious animals given tongue, when Sakalar, 
through the thick-falling snow, and amid the gloom, saw 
a dull, heavy mass rolling directly towards the tent. He 
levelled his gun, and fired, after which he seized a heavy 
steel wood axe, and stood ready. The animal had at 
first halted, but next minute he came on growling furi- 
ously. Ivan and Kolina now both fired, when the animal 
turned and ran. But the dogs were now round him, and 
Sakalar behind them. One tremendous blow of his axe 
finished the huge beast, and there he lay in the snow. 
The dogs then abandoned him, refusing to eat fresh 
bear's meat, though, when frozen, they gladly enough 
accepted it. 

The party again sought rest, after lighting an oil lamp 
with a thick wick, which, in default of the fire, diffused 
a tolerable amount of warmth in a small place occupied 
by six people. But they did not sleep ; for though one 
of the bears was killed, the second of the almost invari- 
able couple was probably near, and the idea of its being 
in the vicinity was anything but agreeable. These huge 
quadrupeds have been often known to enter a hut and 
stifle all its inhabitants. The night was therefore far 
from refreshing, and at an earlier hour than usual all 
were on foot. Every morning the same routine was fol- 
lowed : — Hot tea, without sugar or milk, was swallowed 
to warm the body ; then a meal, which took the place of 
dinner, was cooked, and devoured ; then the dogs were 
fed ; and then the sledges, which had been inclined on 



286 THE MEBCHAtfT OP YAKOTTTSK. 

one side, were placed horizontally. This was always 
done, to water their keel — to use a nautical phrase ; for 
this water freezing they glided along all the faster. A 
portion of the now hard-frozen bear was given to the 
dogs, and the rest placed on the sledges, after the shin 
had been secured towards making a new covering at 
night. 

This day's journey was half on the land, half on the 
sea, according as the path served. It was generally very 
rough, and the sledges made but slow progress. The 
dogs, too, had coverings put on their feet, and on every 
other delicate place, which made them less agile. In 
ordinary cases, on a smooth surface, it is not very diffi- 
cult to guide a team of dogs, when the leader is a first- 
rate animal. But this is an essential point, otherwise it 
is impossible to get along. Every time the dogs hit on 
the track of a bear, or fox, or other animal, their hunting 
instincts are developed ; away they dart like mad, leaving 
the line of march, and, in spite of all the efforts of the 
driver, they begin the chase. But if the front dog be 
well trained, he dashes on one side in a totally opposite 
direction, smelling and barking as if he had a new track. 
If his artifice succeeds, the whole team dart away after 
him, and, speedily losing the scent, proceed on their 
journey. 

Sakalar, who still kept ahead of the party, when making 
a wide circuit out at sea about mid- day, at the foot of a 
steep hill of rather rough ice, found his dogs suddenly 
increasing their speed, but in the -right direction. To 
this he had no objection, though it was very doubtful 
what was beyond. However, the dogs darted ahead with 
terrific rapidity, until they reached the summit of the 
hill. The ice was here very rough and salt, which im- 
peded the advance of the sledge ; but off are the dog8, 



THE FROZEN SEA. 287 

down a very steep descent, furiously tugging at the 
sledge halter, till away they fly like lightning. The har- 
ness had broken off, and Salakar remained alone on the 
crest of the hill. He leaped off the nartas, and stood 
looking at it with the air of a man stunned. The journey 
seemed checked violently. Next instant, his gun in hand, 
he followed the dogs right down the hill, dashing away 
like a madman, in his long hunting skates. But the 
dogs were out of sight, and Sakalar soon found himself 
opposed by a huge wall of ice. He looked back ; he was ■ 
wholly out of view of his companions. To reconnoitre, ' 
he ascended the wall as best be could, and then looked 
down into a sort of circular hollow of some extent, where 
the ice was smooth, and even watery. 

He was about to turn away, when his sharp eye de- 
tected something moving ; and all his love of the chase 
was at once aroused. He recognized the. snow-cave of a 
huge bear. It was a kind of cavern, caused by the fall- 
ing together of two pieces of ice, with double issue. 
Both apertures the bear had succeeded in stopping up, 
after breaking a hole in the thin ice of the sheltered 
polina, or sheet of soft ice. Here the cunning animal 
lay in wait. How long he had been lying it was impos- 
sible to say ; but almost as Sakalar crouched down to 
watch, a seal came to the surface, and lay against the 
den of its enemy, to breatbe. A heavy. paw was passed 
through the hole, and the sea-cow was killed in an in- 
stant. A naturalist would have admired the wit of the 
ponderous bear, and passed on ; but the Siberian hunter 
knows no such thought, and as the animal issued forth 
to seize his prey, a heavy ball, launched with unerring 
aim, laid him low. 



288 THE MERCHANT OE YAKC-tlTSE. 

CITAPTEE V 

ON THE ICE. 

Saeaeab now turned away in search of his companions, 
whose aid was required to secure a most useful addition 
to their store of food ; and as he did so he heard a distant 
and plaintive howl. He hastened in the direction, and 
in a quarter of an hour came to the mouth of a narrow 
gut between two icebergs. The stick of the harness had 
caught in the fissure, and checked the dogs, who were 
barking with rage. Sakalar caught the bridle, which 
had been jerked out of his hand, and turned the dogs 
round. The animals followed his guidance ; and he 
succeeded, after some difficulty, in bringing them to 
where lay his game. He then secured the bear and 
seal, both dead and frozen even in this short time, and 
joined his companions. 

For several days the same kind of difficulties had to 
be overcome, and then they reached the sayba, where the 
provisions had been placed in the summer. It was a 
large rude box, erected on piles, and the whole stock was 
found safe. As there was plenty of wood in this place, 
they halted to rest the dogs and to repack the sledges. 
The tent was pitched, and they all thought of repose. 
They were now about wholly to quit the land, and to 
venture in a north-westerly direction upon the Frozen 
Sea. 

Despite the fire made on the iron plate in the middle 
of the tent, our adventurers found the cold at this point 
of their journey most poignant. It was about Christmas ; 
but the exact time of year had little to do with the 
matter. The wind was northerly and keen ; and at 
night they often had to rise and promote circulation by 



osr the ice. 289 

a good run on the snow. But early on the third day all 
was ready for a start. The sun was seen that morning 
on the edge of the horizon for a short while, and 
promised soon to give them days. Before them were a 
line of icehergs, seemingly an impenetrable wall ; but it 
was necessary to brave them. The dogs, refreshed by 
two days of rest, started vigorously, and a plain hill of 
ice being selected, they succeeded in reaching its summit. 
Then before them lay a vast and seemingly interminable 
plain. Along this the sledges ran with great speed ; and 
that day they advanced nearly thirty miles from the 
land, and camped on the sea in a valley of ice. 

It was a singular spot. Vast sugar-loaf hills of ice, 
as old perhaps as the world, threw their lofty cones to 
the skies on all sides, while they rested doubtless on the 
bottom of the ocean. Every fantastic form was there . 
there seemed in the distance, cities and palaces as white 
as chalk ; pillars and reversed cones, pyramids and 
mounds of every shape, valleys and lakes ; and under 
the influence of the optical illusions of the locality, 
green fields and meadows, and tossing seas. Here the 
whole party rested soundly, and pushed on hard the next 
day in search of land. 

Several tracks of foxes and bears were now seen, but 
no animals were discovered. The route, however, was 
changed. Every now and then newly-formed fields of 
ice were met, which a little while back had been floating. 
Lumps stuck up in every direction, and made the path 
difficult. Then they reached a vast polina, where the 
humid state of the surface told that it was thin, and of 
recent formation. A stick thrust into it went through. 
But the adventurers took the only course left to them. 
The dogs were placed abreast, and then, at a signal, they 
were launched upon the dangerous surface. They flew 

19 



290 THE MEKCHANT OP TAKOTTTSK. 

rather thanran. It was necessary, for as they went the 
ice cracked in every direction, but always under the 
weight of the nartas, which were off before they could 
be caught by the bubbling waters. As soon as the solid 
ice was again reached, the whole party halted — deep 
gratitude to Heaven in their hearts — and camped_for the 
night. 

But the weather had changed. What is here called 
"the warm wind," had blown all day, and at night a 
hurricane came on. As the adventurers sat smoking 
after supper, the ice beneath their feet trembled, shook, 
and then fearful reports ' bursting on their ears, told 
them that the sea was cracking in every direction. They 
had camped on an elevated iceberg of vast dimensions, 
and were for the moment safe. But around them 
they heard the rush of waters. The vast Erozen Sea 
was in one of its moments of fury. In the deeper seas 
to the north it never freezes firmly — in fact, there is 
always an open sea, with floating bergs. "When a 
hurricane blows, these clear spaces become terribly 
agitated. Their tossing waves and mountains of ice act 
on the solid plains, and break them up at times. This 
was evidently the case now. About midnight our 
travellers, whose anguish of mind was terrible, felt the 
great iceberg afloat. Its oscillations were fearful. 
Sakalar alone preserved his coolness. The men of 
Nijnei-Kolimsk raved and tore their hair, crying that 
they had been brought wilfully to destruction ; Kolirra 
kneeled, crossed herself, and prayed ; while Ivan deeply 
reproached himself as the cause of so many human beings 
encountering such awful peril. The rockings of their 
icy raft were terrible. It was impelled hither and thither 
by even huger masses. Now it remained ou its first 
level, then its surface presented an angle of nearly forty- 



OTS THE ICE. 291 

five degrees, and it seemed about to turn bottom up. 
All commended themselves to God, and awaited their 
fate. Suddenly tbey were rocked more violently than 
ever, and were thrown down by the shock. Then, all 
was still. 

The hurricane lulled, the wind shifted, snow began to 
fall, and the prodigious plain of loose ice again lay 
quiescent. The bitter frost soon cemented its parts once 
more, and the danger was over. The men of Mjnei- 
Kolimsk now- insisted on an instant return ; but Sakalar 
was firm, and, though their halt had given them little 
rest, they again started as the sun was seen above the 
horizon. The road was fearfully bad. All was rough, 
disjointed, and almost impassable. But the sledges had 
good whalebone keels, and were made with great care, to 
resist such difficulties. The dogs were kept moving all 
day, but when night came they had made little progress. 
Nevertheless they rested in peace. Nature was calm, 
and morning found them still asleep. But Sakalar was 
indefatigable, and as soon as he had boiled a potful of 
snow, he made tea, and awoke his people. 

They were now about to enter a labyrinth of toroses 
or icebergs. There was no plain ground within sight ; 
but no impediment could be attended to. Bears made 
these their habitual resorts, while the wolf skulked every 
night round the camp, awaiting their scanty leavings. 
Every eye was stretched in search of game. But the 
road itself required immense, care, to prevent the sledges 
from overturning. Towards the afternoon they entered 
a narrow valley of ice, full of drifted snow, into which 
the dogs sank, and could scarcely move. At this instant 
two enormous white bears presented themselves.' The 
dogs sprang forward ; but the ground was too heavy for 
them. The hunters, however, were ready. The bears 



292 THE MERCHANT OE TAKOETSK. 

marched boldly on, as if savage from long fasting. No 
time was to be lost. Sakalar and Ivan, each singled out 
his animal. Their heavy ounce balls struct both. The 
opponent of Sakalar turned and fled, but that of Ivan 
advanced furiously towards him. Ivan stood his ground, 
axe in hand, and struck the animal a terrible blow on the 
muzzle. But as he did so, he stumbled, and the bear 
was upon him. Kolina shrieked ; Sakalar was away 
after his prize ; but the Kolimsk men rushed in. Two 
fired ; the third struck the animal with a spear. The 
bear abandoned Ivan, and faced his new antagonists. 
The contest was now unequal, and before half an hour 
was over the stock of provisions was again augmented, 
as well as the means of warmth. They had very little 
wood, and what they had was used sparingly. Once or 
twice a tree fixed in the ice, gave them additional fuel ; 
but they were obliged to depend cniefly on oil. A small 
fire was made at night to cook by, but it was allowed to 
go out. The tent was carefully closed, and the caloric of 
six people, together with a huge lamp with three wicks, 
served for the rest of the night. 

About the sixth day they struck land. It was a small 
island, in a bay of which they found plenty of drift wood. 
Sakalar was delighted. He was on the right track. A 
joyous halt took place, a splendid fire was made, and the 
whole party indulged themselves in a glass of rum — a 
liquor very rarely touched, from its own tendency to 
increase rather than to diminish cold. A hole was next 
broken in the ice, and an attempt made to catch some 
seals. Only one, however, rewarded their efforts; but 
this, with a supply of wood, filled the empty space made 
in the sledges by the daily consumption of the dogs. 
The island, however, was soon found to be infested with 
bears : no fewer than five, with eleven foxes, were killed • 



ON THE ICE. 293 

and then huge fires had to he kept up at night to drive 
their survivors away. 

Their provender thus notably increased, the party 
started in high spirits ; hut though they were advancing 
towards the pole, they were also advancing towards the 
Deep Sea, and the ice presented innumerable dangers. 
Deep fissures, lakes, chasms, mountains, all lay in their 
way ; and no game presented itself to their anxious 
search. Day after day they pushed on — here making 
long circuits, there driven back, and losing sometimes in 
one day all they had made in the previous twelve hours. 
Some fissures were crossed on bridges of ice, which took 
hours to make, while every day the cold seemed to 
become more intense. The sun was now visible for 
hours, and, as usual in these parts, the cold was more 
severe since his arrival. 

At last, after more than twenty days of terrible 
fatigue, there was seen'looming in the distance what was, 
no doubt, the promised land. The sledges were hurried 
forward — for they were drawing towards the end of their 
provisions — and the whole party was at length collected 
on the summit of a lofty mountain of ice. Before them 
were the hills of JNew Siberia ; to their right was a 
prodigious open sea ; and at their feet, as far as the eye 
could reach, there ran a narrow channel of rapid water, 
through which huge lumps of ice rushed so furiously as 
to have no time to cement into a solid mass. 

The adventurers stood aghast. But Sakalar led the 
way to the very brink of the channel, and moved quietly 
along its course, until he found what he was in search of. 
This was a sheet or floe of ice, large enough to bear the 
whole party, and yet almost detached from the general 
field. The sledges were put upon it, and then, 
by breaking with their axes the narrow tongue which 



20i THE MERCHANT OE YAKOETSK. 

held it, it swayed away into the tempestuous sea. It 
almost turned round as it started. The sledges and dogs 
were placed in the middle, while the five men stood at 
the very edge, to guide it, as well as possible, with their 
hunting spears. 

In a "few minutes it was impelled along by the rapid 
current, but received every now and then a check, when 
it came in contact with heavier and deeper masses. The 
Kolimsk men stood transfixed with terror, as they saw 
themselves borne out towards that vast deep sea which 
eternally tosses and rages round the Artie Pole ; but 
Sakalar, in a peremptory tone, bade them use their 
spears. They pushed away heartily ; and their strange 
raft, though not always keeping its equilibrium, was 
edged away both across and down the stream. At last 
it began to move more slowly, and Sakalar found himself 
under the shelter of a huge iceberg, and then impelled 
up-stream by a backwater current. In a few minutes 
the much-wish ed-for shore was reached. 

The route was rude and rugged as they approached the 
land ; but all saw before them the end of their labours 
l'i ir the winter, and every one proceeded vigorously. The 
dogs seemed to smell the land, or at all events, some 
trades of game, for they hurried on Avith spirit. About 
an hour before the usual time of camping, they were 
under a vast precipice, turning which, they found them- 
selves in a deep and sheltered valley, with a river at the 
bottom, frozen between its lofty banks, and covered by 
deep snow. 

" The ivory-mine !" said Sakalar, in a low tone, to Ivan, 
who thanked him by an expressive look. 



295 



CHAPTER VI. 

ENCOUNTER WITH TCHOUKTCHAS. 

The end of so perilous and novel a journey, which must 
necessarily, under the most favourable circumstances, 
have produced more honour than profit, was attained ; 
and yet the success of the adventure was doubtful. The 
season was still too cold for any search for fossil ivory, 
and the first serious duty was the erection of a winter 
residence. Fortunately there was an ample supply of 
logs of wood, some half rotten, some green, lying under 
the snow on the shores of the bay into which the river 
poured, and which had been deposited there by the 
currents and waves. A regular pile, too, was found, 
which had been laid up by some of the provident natives 
of New Siberia, who, like the Esquimaux, live in the 
snow. Under this was a large supply of frozen fish, 
which was taken without ceremony, the party being near 
starvation. Of course Sakalar and- Ivan intended 
to replace the hoard, if possible, in the short summer. 

Wood was made the groundwork of the winter hut 
which was to be erected, but snow and ice formed by 
far the larger portion of the building materials. So hard 
and compact did the whole mass become, when finished 
and lined with bear-skins and other furs, that a huge 
lamp sufficed for warmth during the day and night, and 
the cooking was done in a small shed by the side. The 
dogs Avere now set to shift for themselves as to cover, 
and were soon buried in the snow. They were placed 
on short allowance, now that they had no work to do ; 
for no one yet knew what were the resources of this 
wild place. 

As soon as the more immediate duties connected with 



296 THE MEjn.ja.AJNT OJF TAKOXJTSK. 

a camp had been completed, tlie whole party occupied 
themselves with preparing traps for foxes, and in other 
hunting details. A hole was broken in the ice in the 
bay ; and this the Kolimsk men watched with assiduity 
for seals. One or two rewarded their efforts, but no fish 
were taken. Sakalar and Ivan, after a day or two of 
repose, started with some carefully-selected dogs in 
search of game, and soon found that the great white 
bear took up his quarters even in that northern latitude. 
They succeeded in killing several, which the dogs dragged 
home. 

About ten days after their arrival in the great island, 
Sakalar, who was always the first to be moving, roused 
his comrades around him, just as a party of a dozen 
strange men appeared in the distance. They were short, 
stout fellows, with long lances in their hands, and, by 
their dress, very much resembled the Esquimaux. Their 
attitude was menacing in the extreme, and by the advice 
of Sakalar, a general volley was fired over their heads. 
The invaders halted, looked confusedly around, and then 
ran away. Firearms retained, therefore, all their pris- 
tine qualities with these savages. 

"They will return," said Sakalar, moodily; "they did 
the same when I was here before, and then came back 
and killed my friend at night. Sakalar escaped." 

Counsel was now held, and it was determined, after 
due deliberation, that strict watch should be kept at all 
hours, while much was necessarily trusted to the dogs. 
All day one of the party was on the look-out, while at 
night the hut had its entrance well barred. Several 
days, however, were thus passed without molestation, 
and then Sakalar took the Kolimsk men out to hunt, 
and left Ivan and Kolina together. The young man had 
learned the value of his half-savage Mend; her devotion 



ENCOUNTER WITII TCIIOUKTCIIAS. 297 

to her father and the party generally, was unbounded. 
She murmured neither at privations nor at suffering's, 
and kept up the courage of Ivan, by painting in glowing 
terms all his brilliant future. She seemed to have laid 
aside her personal feelings, and to look on him only as 
one doing battle with fortune, in the hope of earning the 
hand of the rich widow of Takoutsk. But Ivan was 
much disposed to gloomy fits ; he supposed himself for- 
gotten and slighted, and looked on the time of his proba- 
tion as interminable. "While in this mood, one day, he 
was roused from his fit, by a challenge from Kolina. to 
go and see if the seals had come up to breathe at the 
hole which every morning was freshly broken in the 
ice. Ivan assented, and away they went gaily down to 
the bay. No seals were there, and after a short stay 
they returned towards the hut, recalled by the distant 
howling of the dogs. But as they came near, they could 
see no sign of men or animals, though the sensible brutes 
still whined under the shelter of their snow heaps. Ivan, 
much surprised, raised the curtain of the door, his gun 
in hand, expecting to find that some animal was inside. 
The lamp was out, and the hut in total darkness. Before 
Ivan could recover his upright position, four men leaped 
upon him, and he was a prisoner. 

Kolina drew back, and cocked her gun ; but the 
natives, satisfied with their present prey, formed round 
Ivan in a compact body, tied his hands, and bade him 
walk. Their looks were sufficiently wild and menacing 
to make him move, especially as he recognized them as 
belonging to the warlike party of the Tchouktchas — a 
tribe of Siberians, who wander about the Polar Seas in 
search of game ; who cross Behring's Straits in skin- 
boats, and are probably the only persons who, by their 
temporary sojourn in New Siberia, have caused some to 



298 THE MERCHANT OE TAKOUTSK. 

suppose that it is inhabited. Kolina stood uncertain 
what to do, hut in a few minutes she roused four of the 
dogs, and followed. Ivan bawled to her to go hack ; but 
the girl paid no attention to his request, determined, as 
it seemed, to know his fate. 

The savages hurried Ivan along as rapidly as they 
could, and soon entered a deep and narrow ravine, which, 
about the middle, parted into two. The narrowest path 
was selected, and the dwelling of the natives was soon 
reached. It was a, cavern, the narrow entrance of which 
they crawled through; Ivan followed the leader, and 
soon found himself in a large and wonderful cave. It 
was by nature divided into several compartments, and 
contained a party of twenty men, as many or more 
women, and numerous children. It was warmed in two 
ways — by wood fires and grease lamps, and by a bubbling 
semi-sulphurous spring, that rushed up through a narrow 
hole, and then fell away into a deep well, that carried its 
warm waters to mingle with the icy sea. The acrid 
smoke escaped by holes in the roof. Ivan, his arms and 
legs bound, was thrust into a separate compartment, 
filled with furs, and formed by a projection of the rock 
and the skin-boats, which this primitive race employed 
to cross the most stormy seas. He was almost stunned : 
lie lay for a while without thought or motion. Gradually 
he recovered, and gazed around: all was night, save 
above, where, by a narrow orifice, he saw the smoke, 
which hung in clouds around the roof, escaping. He 
expected death. He knew the savage race he was among, 
who hated interference with their hunting-grounds, and 
whose fish he and his party had taken. "What, therefore, 
was his surprise when, from the summit of the roof, he 
heard a gentle voice whispering his own name in soft 
accents. His ears must, he thought, deceive him. The 



ENCOUNTER WITH TCHOTJKTCHAS. 299 

hubbub close at hand was terrible. A dispute was going 
on. Men, women, and children, all joined, and yet he 
had heard the word "Ivan." "Kolina," he replied, in 
equally low but clear tones. As he spoke, a knife rolled 
near him ; but he could not touch it. Then a dark form 
filled the orifice about a dozen feet above his head, and 
something moved down among projecting stones, and 
then Kolina stood by him. In an instant Ivan was free, 
and an axe in his hand. The exit was before them. 
Steps were cut in the rock, to ascend to the upper 
entrance, near which Ivan had been placed without fear, 
because tied. But a rush was heard, and the friends 
had only time to throw themselves deeper into the cave, 
when four men rushed in, knife in hand, to immolate the 
victim. Such had been the decision come to, after the 
debate. 

Their lamps revealed the escape of the fugitive. A 
wild cry drew all the men together, and then up they 
scampered along the rugged projections, and the barking 
of the dogs as they fled, showed that the savages were in 
hot and eager chase. Ivan and Kolina lost no time. 
They advanced boldly, knife and hatchet in hand, sprang 
amid the terrified women, darted across their horrid 
cavern, and before one of them had recovered from her 
fright, they were in the open air. On they ran in the 
gloom for some distance, when they suddenly heard 
voices muttering. Down they sank behind the first 
large stone, concealing themselves in the snow as well 
as they could. The party moved slowly on towards 
them. 

" I can trace their tracks still," said Sakalar, in a low, 
deep tone. " On while they are alive, or at least for 
vengeance ! " 

" Friends ! " cried Ivan. 



300 THE HEKCHAITT OE YAECOETSK. 

" Father ! " said Kolina, and in an instant the whole 
party were united. Five words were enough to deter- 
mine Sakalar. They all rushed bach in a body, entered 
the cavern, and found themselves masters of it without a 
struggle : the women and children, attempted no resist- 
ance. As soon as they were placed in a corner, under 
the guard of the Kolimsk men, a council was held. 
Sakalar, as the most experienced, decided what was to 
be done. He knew the value of threats : one of the 
women was released, and bade go tell the men what had 
occurred. She was to add the offer of a treaty of peace, 
to which, if both parties agreed, the women were to be 
given up on the one side, and the hut and its contents 
on the other. But the victors announced their intention 
of taking four of the best-looking boys as hostages, to 
be returned whenever they were convinced of the good 
faith of the Tchouktchas. The envoy soon returned, 
agreeing to everything. Sakalar had not gone near the 
hut, fearing an ambuscade. The four boys were at once 
selected, and the belligerents separated. 

Sakalar made the little fellows run before, and thus 
the hut was regained. An inner cabin was at once 
erected for the prisoners, and the dogs were placed over 
them as spies. But as the boys understood Sakalar to 
mean that the dogs were to eat them if they stirred, 
they remained still enough, and made no attempt to run 
away. 

A hasty meal was now cooked, and after its conclusion, 
Ivan related the events of the day, warmly dilating on 
the devotion and courage of Kolina, who, with the keen- 
ness of a Takouta, had found out his prison by the 
smoke, and had seen him on the ground, despite the 
gloom. Sakalar then explained how, on his return, he 
had been terribly alarmed, and had followed the trail on 



THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN". 301 

the snow. After mutual congratulations, the whole 
party went to sleep. 

Early the next morning, the mothers came humbly 
with provisions for their children. They received some 
trifling presents, and were sent away in delight. Aboiit 
mid-day the whole tribe presented" themselves un- 
armed, within a short distance of the hut, and offered to 
traffic. They brought a great quantity of fish, which 
they wanted to exchange for tobacco. .Sakalar, who 
spoke their language freely, first gave them a roll, letting 
them understand it was in payment of the fish taken 
without leave. This at once dissipated all feelings of 
hostility, and solid peace was insured. So satisfied was 
Sakalar of their sincerity, that he at once released the 
captives. 

From that day the two parties were one, and all 
thoughts of war were completely at an end. A vast, 
deal of bloodshed had been prevented by a few conces- 
sions on both sides. The same result might, indeed, 
have been come to, by killing half of each little tribe ; 
but it is doubtful if the peace would afterwards have 
been as satisfactory to the survivors. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN. 

Occupied with the chase, with bartering, and with con- 
versing with their new friends, the summer gradually 
came round. The snow melted, the hills became a series 
of cascades, and in every direction water poured towards 
the sea. But the hut remained solid and firm, a- little 



302 THE MERCHANT OF YAKOUTSK. 

earth only being cast over the snow. Flocks of ducks 
and geese soon appeared, a slight vegetation was visible, 
and the sea was in motion. But one object now prin- 
cipally attracted all eyes. Vast heaps of fossil ivory 
Avere exposed to view on the banks of the stream, and 
were laid bare more and more every year by the torrents 
of spring. A few days sufficed to collect a heap greater 
than they could take away on the sledges in a dozen 
journeys. Ivan gazed at his treasure in mute despair. 
Were it all at Takoutsk, he would be the richest mer- 
chant in Siberia ; but to take it thither seemed impos- 
sible. However, in stepped the adventurous Tchouktchas. 
They offered, for a stipulated sum in tobacco and other 
valuables, to land a large portion of the ivory at a cer- 
tain spot on the shores of Siberia, by means of their 
boats. Ivan, though again surprised at the daring of 
these wild men, accepted their proposal, and engaged to 
give them his whole stock. The matter was thus settled, 
and our adventurers and their new friends dispersed to 
their summer avocatious. 

These consisted in fishing and hunting, and repairing 
boats and sledges. The canoes of the Tchouktchas were 
wholly made of skins and whalebone, and bits of wood; 
but they were large, and capable of sustaining great 
weight. Their owners proposed to start as soon as the 
ice was wholly broken up, and to brave all the dangers 
of so fearful a navigation. They were used to impel 
themselves along in every open space, and to take shelter 
on icebergs from danger. When one of these icy moun- 
tains went in the right direction, they stuck to it ; but 
at other times they paddled away amid dangers, of which 
they seemed wholly unconscious. 

A month was taken up in fishing, in drying the fish, 
or in putting it into holes where there Avas eternal frost. 



THE SUMMER AND ATTTUMN. 303 

An immense stock of seals' flesh, of oil and fat, was laid 
in ; and then one morning, with a warm wind behind, 
the Tchouktchas took their departure, and the small 
party of adventurers remained alone. Their hut was 
now broken up, the sledges put in order, the tent erected, 
and all made ready for their second journey. The sledges 
were not only repaired, but enlarged, to bear the heaviest 
possible load at starting. Overloading for a few clays 
was not minded, as the provisions would soon decrease. 
Still, not half so much could be taken as they wished, 
and yet Ivan had nearly a ton of ivory, and thirty tons 
was the greatest produce of any one year, in all Siberia. 

But the sledges were ready long before the sea was 
frozen. The interval was spent in continued bunting, ta 
prevent any consumption of the travelling store. Long- 
before it was over, all were heartily tired of a day 
nearly as long as two English months, and hailed with 
pleasure the sight of the first white fox. Soon ducks 
and geese began to disappear, the fish sank away, and 
were rare, the bears came roaring round the camp, and 
then the scanty vegetation and the arid rocks were 
covered with a thin coat of snow. The winter at once 
set in with intense rigour ; the sea ceased to toss and 
heave ; the icebergs and fields of ice moved more and 
more slowly ; and at last ocean and land were blended 
into one — the night of a month was come, and the sun 
was seen no more. 

The dogs were now roused up, having been well fed 
during the summer; the sledges were harnessed, and 
the instant the sea was firm enough to sustain them, 
the party started. Sakalar's intention was to try forced 
marches in a straight line. Eortune favoured them. The 
frost was unusually severe, and the ice thicker and more 
solid than it had been the previous year. Not a single 



304 THE MERCHANT OE YAKOTJTSK. 

accident occurred to tkein for some days. At first they did 
not move exactly in the same direction as that in which 
they had come, making more towards the east ; but they 
soon found traces of their previous winter's journev, 
proving that a whole plain of ice had been forced away 
at least fifty miles during the thaw. This was Sakalar's 
explanation, but the men of Kolimsk persisted in stating 
that they were going wrong. A dispute ensued, which 
threatened to break up the party. But Ivan declared 
that he would pay no one who abandoned the guidance 
of Sakalar ; so the three men obeyed. 

The road was now again rugged and difficult ; firing 
was getting scarce, the dogs were devouring the fish 
with rapidity, and only half the ocean journey was over. 
On they pushed, however, with desperate energy ; every 
eye once more keenly on the look-out for game. But 
this time a stray fox alone rewarded their exertions. No 
man spoke. Every one drove his team in sullen silence, 
for all were on short allowance, and all were hungry. 
They sat upon what was to them more valuable than 
gold, and yet they had not what was necessary for sub- 
sistence. The dogs were urged every day to the utmost 
of their strength. But so much space had been taken 
up by the ivory, that at last there remained neither food 
nor fuel. None knew at what distance they were from 
the shore, and their position seemed desperate. There 
were even whispers of killing some of the dogs ; and 
Sakalar and Ivan were loudly upbraided for their avarice, 
which had brought the party to such straits. 

" See ! " said the old hunter suddenly, and with a 
delighted smile, pointing towards the south. 

The whole party looked eagerly. A thick column of 
smoke rose in the air, at no very considerable distance, 
curling up in dark Avreaths, and then dispersing in light 



fcHE SUMMER AND AtTtUHN. SOS 

Vapour. Tins signal was agreed Upon with the Tchoukt- 
chas, who were to camp where there was plenty of wood, 
and thus guide them in the right direction by a continued 
beacon. 

Every hand was raised to urge on the dogs towards 
this point. The hungry and weary animals pulled, but 
unwillingly. They were impelled forward, however, by 
every art ; and at last, from the summit of a hill of ice> 
they saw the shore and the blaze of the fire. The wind 
was towards them, and the atmosphere was heavy. The 
dogs smelled the distant camp, and darted forward almost 
recklessly. The adventurers kept themselves in readi- 
ness to leap, in case of being overturned. But the will 
of the animals was greater than their power, and they 
sank near the Tchouktcha huts, panting and exhausted. 

Their allies of the spring were true to their plighted 
faith, and gave them food, of which both man and beast 
stood in the most pressing need. Dogs and men ate 
greedily, and then all sought repose. The Tchouktchas 
had performed their journey with wonderful success and 
rapidity, and had found time to lay in a pretty fair stock 
of fish. This they freely shared with Ivan and his party, 
and were delighted when he abandoned to them his whole 
stock of tobacco and rum, and part of his tea. Two days 
were spent in the mutual interchange of good offices, in 
repose, and in letting the dogs recover from their pros- 
tration. But no more time could be spared. There 
were many days' journey yet before them, and certainly 
there were not provisions enough for the time. 

The Tchouktchas, too, had been absent four years in 
their wanderings, and were eager to get home once more 
to the land of the reindeer, and to their friends. They 
were, perhaps, the greatest travellers of a tribe noted for 
its faculty of locomotion. And so, with warm expressions 

20 



306 THE MERCHANT OE YAKOUTSK. 

of esteem and friendship on both sides, the two parties 
separated — the men of the east making their way on foot 
towards the Straits of Behring. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE VOYAGE HOME. 

Usher considerable disadvantages did Sakalar, Ivan, and 
their friends prepare for the conclusion of their journey, 
their provisions were very scanty, and their only hope 
of replenishing their stores, was on the banks of the 
Vchivaya Eiver, which being in some places pretty rapid, 
might not be frozen over. Sakalar and his friends deter- 
mined to strike out in a straight line. Part of the ivory 
had to be concealed and abandoned, to be fetched another 
time ; but as their stock of provisions was so small, they 
were able to take the principal portion. After some 
debate, it had been resolved to make in a direct line for the 
Vchivaya Eiver, and thence to JSTijnei-Kolimsk. The 
road was of a most difficult, and, in parts, unknown 
character ; but it was imperative to move in as straight 
a direction as possible. Time was the great enemy they 
had to contend with, because their provisions were 
sufficient for only a limited period. 

The country was at first level enough, and the dogs, 
after their rest, made very satisfactory progress. At 
night they had reached the commencement of a hilly 
region, while in the distance could already be seen rather 
lofty mountains. 

According to a plan decided upon from the first, the 
human members of the party were at once placed on 
Bhort allowance, while the dogs received as much food aa 



THE YOYACffi HOME. 307 

could reasonably be given. At early dawn the tent was 
struck, and the dogs were impelled along the banks of a 
small river completely frozen. Indeed, after a short 
distance, it was taken as the smoothest path. But at 
the end of a dozen miles they found themselves in a 
narrow gorge between two hills, and at the foot of a 
once foaming cataract, now hard frozen. It was necessary 
to retreat some miles, and gain the land once more. The 
only path which was now found practicable was along 
the bottom of some pretty steep rocks. But the track 
got narrower and narrower, until the dogs were drawing 
• them along the edge of a terrific precipice, with not four 
feet of holding. All alighted, and led the dogs, for a 
false step was death. Fortunately the pathway became 
no narrower, and in one place it widened out, and made 
a sort of hollow. Here a bitter blast, almost strong 
enough to cast them from their feet, checked further 
progress ; and on that naked spot, under a projecting mass 
of stone, and without fire, the whole party halted. Men 
and dogs huddled together for warmth, and all dined on 
raw and frozen fish. A few hours of sleep, however, 
were snatched ; and then, as the storm abated, they again 
advanced. The descent was soon reached, and led into 
a vast plain without tree or bush. A range of snow- 
clad hills lay before them, and the only practicable 
pathway was through a narrow gully between two 
mountains. But all h earts were gladdened by the welcome 
sight of some argali, or Siberian sheep, on the slope of 
a hill. These animals are the only winter game, bears 
and wolves excepted. Kolina was left with the dogs, 
and the rest started after the animals, which were pawing 
in the thin snow for some moss or half-frozen herbs. 
Every caution was used to approach them against the 



308 THE MEBCHANT OF lAKOUTSK. 

wind, and a general volley soon sent them scampering 
away to the monntain-tops, leaving three behind. 

But Ivan saw that he had wounded another, and away 
he went in chase of it. The animal ascended a hill, and 
then halted. But-seeing a man coming quickly in pursuit 
it turned and fled down the opposite side. Ivan was 
instantly after him. The descent was steep, but the 
hunter only saw the argali, and darted down. He slided 
rather than ran with fearful rapidity, and passed the sheep 
by not checking himself soon enough. A tremendous gulf 
was before him, and his eye caught an instant glimpse 
of a deep distant valley. Then he saw no more until be 
found himself lying still. On the very brink of the 
precipice he had sunk into a deep snow-bank formed by 
some projecting rock, and had only thus been saved from 
instant death. Deeply grateful, Ivan crept cautiously up 
the hill-side, though not without his prize, and rejoined 
his companions. 

The road now offered innumerable difficulties. It was 
rough and uneven — now hard, now soft. They made 
but slow progress for the next three days, while their 
provisions began to draw to an end. They had still at 
least a dozen days' journey before them. All agreed 
that they were now in the very worst plight in which they 
had yet been. On the evening when they dined on their 
last meal of mutton and fish, they were at the foot of a 
lofty hill, which they determined to ascend while strength 
was left. The dogs were urged up the steep ascent, and 
after two hours' toil they reached the summit. It was 
a table-land, bleak and miserable, and the wind was too 
severe to permit camping. On tbey pushed, therefore, 
and camped a little way down its side. 

The next morning the dogs had no food, while tbe 



THE YOYAGE HOME. 309 

men had nothing but large draughts of warm tea ; but 
it was impossible to stop. Away they hurried, after 
deciding that, if nothing turned up by the next morning, 
two or three of the dogs must be killed to save the rest 
of the party. Little was the ground they got over with 
hungry beasts and starving men, and all were glad to 
halt near a few dried larches. Men and dogs eyed each 
other suspiciously. The animals, sixty-four in number, 
had they not been educated to fear man, would soon have 
settled the matter. But there they lay, panting and 
faint — to start up suddenly with a fearful howl. A bear 
was on them. Sakalar fired, and then in rushed the dogs 
savage and fierce. It was worse than useless ; it was 
dangerous for the human beings of the party to seek to 
share this windfall. It was enough that the dogs had 
found something to appease their hunger. 

Sakalar, however, knewthat his faint and weary com- 
panions could not move the next day, if tea alone were 
their sustenance that night. He accordingly put in 
practice one of the devices of his woodcraft. The 
youngest of the larches was cut down, and the coarse out- 
side bark taken off. Then every atom of the soft bark 
was peeled off the tree, and being broken into small 
pieces, was cast into the iron pot, already full of boiling 
Avater. The quantity was great, and made a thick 
substance. Hound this the whole party collected, eager 
for the moment when they could fall to. But Sakalar 
was cool and methodical even in that terrible hour. He 
took a spoon, and quietly skimmed the pot, to take away 
the resin that rose to the surface. Then gradually the 
bark melted away, and presently the pot was filled with 
a thick paste, that looked not unlike glue. All gladly 
ate, and found it nutritive, pleasant, and warm. They 
felt satisfied when the meal was over, and were glad to 



310 THE MEECHANT OE YAKOUTSK. 

observe that the dogs returned to the camp, completely 
satisfied also, which, under the circumstances, was matter 
for great congratulation. 

In the morning, after another mess of larch-bark soup, 
and after a little tea, the adventurers again continued 
their journey. They were now in an arid, bleak, and 
terrible plain of vast extent. Not a tree, not a shrub, 
not an elevation was to be seen. Starvation was again 
staring them in the face, and no man knew when this 
dreadful plain would end. That night the whole party 
cowered in their tent, without fire, content to chew a 
few tea-leaves preserved from the last meal. Serious 
thoughts were now entertained of abandoning their 
wealth in that wild region. But as no one pressed the 
matter, the sledges were harnessed again next morning, 
and the dogs driven on. But man and beast were at the 
last gasp, and not ten miles were traversed that day, 
when they came to a large river, on the borders of which 
were some trees. Being wild and rapid, the river was 
not frozen, and there was still hope. The seine was 
drawn from a sledge, and taken into the water. It was 
fastened from one side to another of a narrow gut, and 
there left. It was of no avail examining it until morning, 
for the fish only came out at night. 

There was not a m&n of the party who had his exact 
senses about him ; while the poor dogs lay panting on the 
snow, their tongues hanging out, and their eyes glaring 
with almost savage fury. The trees round the bank 
were large and dry, and not one had an atom of soft 
bark upon it. The only resource they had was to drink 
huge draughts of tea, and then seek sleep. Sakalar set 
the example, and the Kolimsk men, to whom such scenes 
were not new, followed his advice ; but Ivan walked up 
and down before the tent. A huge fire had been made, 



TH1 votst&b home. 311 

which was amply fed by the wood of the river bank, and 
it blazed on high, showing in bold relief the features of 
the scene. Ivan gazed vacantly at everything ; but he 
saw not the dark and glancing river — he saw not the 
bleak plain of snow — his eyes looked not on the romantic 
picture of the tent and its bivouac-fire : his thoughts 
were on one thing alone. He it was who had brought 
them to that pass, and on his head rested all the misery 
endured by man and beast, and, worst of all, by the good 
and devoted Kolina. 

There she sat, too, on the ground, wrapped in her 
warm clothes, her eyes fixed on the crackling logs. Of 
what was she thinking ? Whatever occupied her mind, 
it was soon chased away by the sudden speech of Ivan. 
"Kolina," said he, in a tone which borrowed a little of 
intensity from the state of mind in which hunger had 
placed all of them, " canst thou ever forgive me?" 

" What ?" replied the young girl, softly. 

" My having brought you here to die, far away from 
your native hills ?" 

" Kolina cares little for herself," said the Takouta 
maiden, rising and speaking perhaps a little wildly ; 
" let her father escape, and she is willing to lie near the 
tombs of the old people on the borders of the icy sea." 

" But Ivan had hoped to see for Kolina many bright 
happy days ; for Ivan would have made her father rich, 
and Kolina would have been the richest unmarried girl 
in the plain of Mioure ! " 

" And would riches make Kolina happy ?" she said, 
sadly. 

"Young girl of the Takouta, hearken to me! Let 
Ivan live or die this* hour : Ivan is a fool. He left home 
and comfort, to cross the icy seas in search of wealth, 
and to gain happiness; but if he had only had eyes he would 



312 THE HEBeiUTST OP T ULSV7<tfk. 

have stopped at Mioure\ There he saw a girl, lively as the 
heaven- fire in the north, good, generous, kind ; and she 
was an old friend, and might haye loved Ivan ; but the 
man of Takoutsk was blind, and told her of his passion 
for a selfish widow, and the Takouta maiden never thought 
of Ivan but as a brother !" 

" "What means Ivan ? " asked Kolina, trembling with 
emotion. 

" Ivan has long meant, when he should come to the 
yourte of Sakalar, to lay his wealth at his feet, and beg of 
his old friend to give him his child ; but Ivan now fears 
that he may die, and wishes to know what would have 
been the answer of Kolina ?" 

" But Maria Vorotinska ?" urged the girl, who seemed 
dreaming. 

" Has long been forgotten. How could I not love my 
old playmate and friend ! Kolina — Kolina, listen to 
Ivan ! Forget his love for the widow of Takoutsk, and 
Ivan will stay in the plain of Vchivaya, and die." 

"Kolina is very proud," whispered the girl, sitting 
down on a log near the fire, and speaking in a low tone ; 
" and Kolina thinks yet that the friend of her father has 
forgotten himself. But if he be not wild, if the sufferings 
of the journey have not made him say that which is not, 
Kolina would be very happy." 

" Be plain, girl of Mioure — maiden of the Takouta 
tribe ! and play not with the heart of a man. Can 
Kolina take Ivan as her husband ? " 

A frank and happy reply gave the Takoutsk merchant 
all the satisfaction he could wish ; and then followed 
several hours of those sweet and delightful explanations, 
which never end between young lovers, when first they 
have acknowledged their mutual affection. They had 
hitherto concealed so much, that there was much to tell \ 



— -U--1J tv-i.ji.vrja 



HOME. 813 



and Ivan and Kolina, who for nearly three years had 
lived together, with a bar between their deep but con- 
cealed affection, seemed to have no end of words. Ivan 
had begun to find his feelings change, from the very 
bmir when Sakalar's daughter volunteered to accompany 
him, but it was only in the cave of New Siberia that his 
heart had been completely won. 

So short, and quiet, and sweet were the hours, that 
the time of rest passed by without thought of sleep. 
Suddenly, however, they were roused to a sense of their 
situation, and leaving their wearied and exhausted com- 
panions still asleep, they moved with doubt and dread to 
the water's side. Life was now doubly dear to both, and 
their fancy painted the coming forth of an empty net as 
the termination of all hope. But the net came heavily 
and slowly to land. It was full of fish. They were on 
the well-stocked Vchivaya. More than three hundred 
fish, small and great, were drawn on shore ; and then 
they recast the net. 

" Up, man and beast !" thundered Ivan, as, after 
selecting two dozen of the finest, he abandoned the rest 
to the dogs. 

The animals, faint and weary, greedily seized on the 
food given them, while Sakalar and the Kolimsk men 
could scarcely believe their senses. The hot coals were 
at once brought into requisition, and the party were soon 
regaling themselves on a splendid meal of tea and broiled 
fish. I should alarm my readers did I record the 
quantities eaten. An hour later, every individual was a 
changed being, but most of all, the lovers. Despite their 
want of rest, they looked fresher than any of the party. 
It was determined to camp at least twenty-four hours 
more in that spot ; and the Kolimsk men declared that 
as the river must be the Ychivaya, they could draw the 



314 THE MEKCHANT OE YAKOTJTSK. 

seine all day, for the river was deep, its waters warmer 
than others, and its abundance of fish such as to border 
on the fabulous. They went accordingly down to the 
side of the stream, and then the happy Kolina gave free 
vent to her joy. She burst out into a song of her native 
land, and gave way to some demonstrations of delight, 
the result of ber earlier education, which astonished 
Sakalar. But when he heard that during that dreadful 
night he had found a son, Sakalar himself well nigh lost 
his reason. The old man loved Ivan almost as much as 
his own child, and when he saw the youth in his yourte, 
on his hunting trips, he had formed some project of the 
kind now brought about ; but the confessions of Ivan 
on his last visit to Mioure, had driven all such thoughts 
away. 

" Art in earnest, Ivan ?" said he, after a pause of some 
duration. 

" In earnest !" exclaimed Ivan, laughing ; " why I fancy 
the young men of Mioure will find me so, if they seek to 
question my right to Kolina." 

Kolina smiled and looked happy ; and the old hunter 
heartily blessed his children, adding, that the proudest, 
dearest hope of his heart was now within probable reali- 
zation. 

The predictions of the Kolimsk men were realized. 
The river gave them as much fish as they needed for their 
journey home ; and as Sakalar now knew his way, there 
was little fear for the future. An ample stock was piled 
on the sledges, the dogs had unlimited feeding for two 
days, and then away they sped towards an upper part of 
the river, which, being broad and shallow, was no doubt 
frozen on the surface. They found it as they expected, 
and even discovered that the river was gradually freezing 
all the way down. But caring little for this now, on 



THE VOYAGE HOME. 315 

they went, and after considerable fatigue, and some 
delay, they arrived at Kolimsk, to the utter astonishment 
of all the inhabitants, who had long given them up for 
lost. 

Great rejoicings took place. The friends of the three 
Kolimsk men gave a grand festival, wherein the rum, 
tobacco, and tea, which had been left at the place as 
payment for their journey, played a conspicuous part. 
Then, as it was necessary to remain here^Some time, while 
the ivory was brought from the deposit near the sea, 
Ivan and Kolina were married. Neither of them seemed 
to credit the circumstance, even when fast tied by the 
Russian Church. It had come so suddenly, so unex- 
pectedly on both, that their heads could not quite make 
the affair out. But they were married in down right 
earnest, and Kolina was a proud and happy woman. 
The enormous mass of ivory brought to Kolimsk excited 
the attention of a distinguished exile, who drew up a 
statement in Ivan's name, and prepared it for trans- 
mission to the White Czar, as the emperor is called in 
these parts. 

When summer came, the young couple, with Sakalar 
and a caravan of merchants, started for Takoutsk, Ivan 
being by far the richest and most important member of 
the party. After a single day's halt at Mioure, on they 
went to the town, and made their triumphal entry in 
September. Ivan found Maria Vorotinska a wife and 
mother, and his vanity was not much wounded by the 
falsehood. The ci-devant widow was a little astonished 
at Ivan's return, and particularly at his treasure of ivory ; 
but she received his wife with politeness, a little tempered 
by her sense of her own superiority to a savage, as she 
designated Kolina to her friends in a whisper. But 
Kolina was so gentle, so pretty, so good, so cheerful, so 



316 THE MERCHANT OE TAKOTJTSK. 

happy, that she found her party at once, and the two 
ladies became rival leaders of the fashion. 

This lasted until the next year, when a messenger from 
the capital brought a letter to Ivan from the emperor 
himself, thanking him for his narrative, sending him a 
rich present, his warm approval, and the office of first 
civil magistrate in the city of Takoutsk. This turned 
the scales wholly on one side, and Maria bowed low to 
Kolina. But Kolina had no feelings of the parvenu, and 
she was always a general favourite. Ivan accepted with 
pride his sovereign's favour, and by dint of assiduity, 
soon learned to be a useful magistrate. He always 
remained a good husband, a good father, and a good son, 
for he made the heart of old Sakalar glad. He never 
regretted his journey ; he always declared that to it he 
owed wealth and happiness, a high position in society, and 
an admirable wife. Great rej oicings took place many years 
after, in Takoutsk, at the marriage of the son of Maria, 
united to the daughter of Ivan, and from the first until 
the last, none of the parties concerned ever had reason 
to mourn over the perilous journey in search of the Ivory- 
Mine. 



For the information of the non-scientific, it may be 
necessary to mention, that the ivory alluded to in the 
preceding tale, is derived from the tusks of the mammoth, 
or fossil elephant of the geologist. The remains of this 
gigantic quadruped are found all over the northern hemi- 
sphere, from the 40th to the 75th degree of latitude ; but 
most abundantly in the region which lies between the 
mountains of Central Asia and the shores and islands of 
the Frozen Sea. So profusely do they exist in this region 
that the tusks have ; for more than a century, constituted 



THE MAMMOTH. 317 

an important article of traffic — furnishing a large pro- 
portion of the ivory required by the carver and turner. 
The remains lie embedded in the upper tertiary clays 
and gravels ; and these, by exposure to river-currents, to 
the waves of the sea, and other erosive agencies, are fre- 
quently swept away during the thaws of summer, leaving 
tusks and bones, in masses, and, occasionally, even entire 
skeletons, in a wonderful state of preservation. The 
most perfect specimen yet obtained, and from the study 
of which the zoologist has been enabled to arrive at an 
accurate knowledge of the structure arid habits of the 
mammoth, is that discovered by a Tungusian fisherman 
near the mouth of the river Lena, in the summer of 1799. 
Being in the habit of collecting tusks among the debris 
of the gravel cliffs (for it is generally at a considerable 
elevation in the cliffs and river banks that the remains 
occur), he observed a strange, shapeless mass projecting 
from an ice-bank, some fifty or sixty feet above the river ; 
during next summer's thaw he saw the same object rather 
more disengaged from amongst the ice ; in 1801 he could 
distinctly perceive the tusk and flank of an immense 
animal ; and in 1803, in consequence of an earlier and 
more powerful thaw, the huge carcase became entirely 
disengaged, and fell on the sand-bank beneath. In the 
spring of the following year the fisherman cut off the 
tusks, which he sold for 50 roubles (£7 10s.) ; and two 
years afterwards, our countryman, Mr. Adams, visited 
the spot, and gives the following account of this extra- 
ordinary phenomenon : — " At this time I found the mam- 
moth still in the same place, but altogether mutilated. 
The discoverer was content with his profit for the tusks 
and the Takoutski of the neighbourhood had cut off the 
flesh, with which they fed their dogs ; during the scarcity, 
and beasts, such as white bears, wolves, wolverines, and 



318 THE MEECHANT OE YAKOTXTSK. 

foxes, also fed upon it, and the traces of their footsteps 
were seen around. The skeleton, almost entirely cleared 
of its flesh, remained whole, with the exception of a fore- 
leg. The head was covered with a dry skin ; one of the 
ears, well preserved, was furnished with a tuft of hair. 
All these parts have necessarily been injured in trans- 
porting them a distance of 7330 miles (to the imperial 
museum of St. Petersburgh), but the eyes have been pre- 
served, and the pupil of one can still be distinguished. 
The mammoth was a male, with a long mane on the neck. 
The tail and proboscis were not preserved. The skin, of 
which I possess three-fourths, is of a dark grey-colour, 
covered with reddish wool and black hairs ; but the 
dampness of the spot where it had lain so long, had in 
some degree destroyed the hair. The entire carcase, of 
which I collected the bones on the spot, was nine feet 
four inches high, and sixteen feet four inches long, with- 
out including the tusks, which measured nine feet six 
inches along the curve. The distance from the base or 
root of the tusk to the point is three feet seven inches. 
The two tusks together weighed three hundred and sixty 
pounds, English weight, and the head alone four hundred 
and fourteen pounds. The skin was of. such weight, that 
it required ten persons to transport it to the shore ; and 
after having cleared the ground, upwards of thirty-six 
pounds of hair were collected, which the white bears had 
trodden while devouring the flesh." 

Since then, other carcases of elephants have been dis- 
covered in a greater or less degree of preservation ; as 
also the remains of rhinoceroses, mastodons, and allied 
pachyderms — the mammoth, more abundantly, in the old 
world, the mastodon in the new. In every case these 
animals differ from existing species ; are of more gigantic 
dimensions ; and, judging from their natural coverings 



THE MAMMOTH. 319 

of thick-set curly-crisped wool and strong hair, upwards of 
a foot in length, they were fitted to live, if not in a boreal, 
at least in a coldly-temperate region. Indeed, there is 
proof positive of the then milder climate of these regions, 
in the discovery of pine and birch-trunks, where no vege- 
tation now flourishes ; and further, in the fact that frag- 
ments of pine leaves, birch twigs, and other northern 
plants, have been detected between the grinders, and 
Avithin the stomachs of these animals. We have thus 
evidence that, at the close of the tertiary, and shortly 
after the commencement of the current epoch, the 
northern hemisphere enjoyed a much milder climate. 
That it was the abode of huge pachyderms now extinct ; 
that a different distribution of sea and land prevailed ; 
and that, on a new distribution of sea and land, accom- 
panied, also, by a different relative level, these animals 
died away, leaving their remains to be embedded in the 
clays, gravels, and other alluvial deposits ; where, under 
the antiseptic influence of an almost eternal frost, many 
of them have been preserved as entire as at the fatal 
moment when they sanK under the rigours of external 
conditions, no longer fitted for their existence. It has 
been attempted by some to prove the adaptability of 
these animals to the present conditions of the northern 
hemisphere ; but so untenable in every phase is this 
opinion, that it would be sheer waste of time and space 
to attempt its refutation. That they may have migrated 
northward and southward with the seasons, is more than 
probable, though it has been stated that the remain? 
diminish in size the farther north they are found ; but 
that numerous herds of such huge animals should have 
existed in these regions at all, and that for thousands of 
years, pre-supposes an exuberant arboreal vegetation, 
and the necessary degree of climate for its growth and 



320 THE MERCHANT OS 'yAKOTTTSK. 

development. It has been mentioned that the mastodon 
and mammoth seem to have attained their meridian 
towards the close of the tertiary epoch, and that a few 
may have lived even into the current era ; but it is 
more probable that the commencement of existing con- 
ditions was the proximate cause of their extinction, and 
that not a solitary specimen ever lived to be the cotem- 
porary of man. 

P. B. St. J, 



THIS END. 

