THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 



CHAPTER I. 

NED DRAKE AND DIRTRICK. 

Were we to dive into the secret history of English boys^ 
hearts, we should find that, while few had not at one time 
wished themselves Robinson Crusoe, scarce one had ever 
wished himself a pirate ! The very word is abhorrent to 
the natural instincts, and only the utterly lost, no matter 
what may have been their social scale, have so disgraced 
the bravery and honour of this great maritime power. 
But the natural tastes of islanders have always directed us 
towards enterprise by sea, and hence the fascination with 
which we regard the adventures of privateers in pursuit of 
our enemies, or the somewhat doubtful exploits of bold 
buccaneers, like heroic William Dampier. 

In the present instance we have to introduce one less 
known to fame, but scarcely less worthy of being followed 
in his wild and chequered career. 

At a time when the police of the seas was somewhat 
more carelessly kept than it is now ; when, despite the 
men-of-war which kept watch and ward near every shore ; 
despite the revenue cutters that haunted every port — 
smugglers did a rare trade, and the business of slavers was 
at a premium — the coast of England afforded facilities for 
the fitting out of lawless cruisers, which, since the intro- 
duction of steam, can never occur again. 

'No more can a taut schooner he hidden in some creek, 
or swash, or gut, awaiting such a wind as shall enable it, 
by means of its light draught, to choose its own time, and 



« THE BPJGANT.TNE. 

run forth while its royal enemy is bearing up to •windward J 
no more dare the crews of such craft to use violence with 
coast-guard men, or tars who are sent to board her— the 
romance of smu^ling is at an end. 

DO o 

But at the time of which we speak, it was very different. 
Then, under a mistaken system of policy, as injurious to 
ourselves as to our neighbours, the temptation to smug- 
gling was so great, the facilities so wonderful, and the 
sympathies of the masses so universal, that though everj 
point — north, south, east, and west — had its contraband 
cove, bay, cavern, or ruin, scarcely ever were they betrayed ; 
while some, though their haunts were known, defied the 
most earnest researches of the minions of the law for 
centimes. 

The officers and owners of the brigs and schooners en- 
gaged in thus violating the laws, fitted out, rigged, supplied 
their vessels in the most frequented harbours, perfectly 
certain there they had nothing to fear, the shore sharks, as 
they were popularly designated, preferring to secure a 
cargo to running the idle risk of capturing a perhaps inno- 
cent, and certainly empty, boat. 

It would be difficult to point out, at this distance of 
time, any one spot more notorious than another for these 
illegal practices, but there was no more active smuggling 
carried on than at the mouth of the Thames, whether on 
the coast of Kent or the opposite shores of marshy low 
Essex ; an assertion which was, moreover, true within a 
very, very few years ago. "With what is done now, it is 
not our province to treat. 

Somewhere near where the Kbre Light rides, a guardian 
angel on the waters, whispering notes of happiness and 
home to the homeward-bound mariner, and speaking, 
trumpet-tongued, the solicitude of a paternal Government 
for its hardy, salt-water sons — lay at anchor, on a certain 
night, a taut, smart, and well-looking brigantine, that any 
sea tyro could have told by daylight, had reefed all its stud- 
ding-sail gear, crossed its royal yards, put on its chasing 
gear, probably put its powder on board — in a word, was 
ready to take its departure at any moment. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 3 

"What it waited for was a mystery, as the wind was fair. 

But it is not given to all to solve the secrets of other 
men ; and had the captain or skipper of the Ocean Girl 
been asked his reasons, the questioner would most probably 
have received somewhat of a stern answer, especially if the 
officer had much in his appearance as warlike as the brigan- 
tine, which carried twelve carronades and a swivel. 

It was eleven o'clock, and the quiescent ocean to the 
eastward seemed, in the murky light, something like a vast 
prairie, except that there was more sound upon the waters 
than would, perhaps, at night have disturbed the vast 
plains of the extensive West. On board the brigantine they 
seemed to keep but a harbour watch, no one being visible 
on deck until the hour we have spoken, when three indivi- 
duals might have been seen moving along the deck. Next 
instant a boat that towed astern was hauled up, and all 
entered it. 

The bow of the vessel was seaward, denoting that the 
tide was running up, which was of advantage to the light 
skiff, its way being in that direction. The crew that 
entered it appeared to consist of two men and a boy, the 
latter seating himself in the stern sheets, while the former 
rowed in the direction of the Kentish shore, or rather that 
portion of it which belongs to the Isle of Sheppey. 

The youth, who steered, was wrapped in a boat-cloak, 
and appeared to assume to himself all the incipient airs 
which belong to midshipmen, when those young gentle- 
men, instead of being educated lads, taking wine after din- 
ner, with a handsome mess service and wax tapers, Avere 
wont to gnaw hard salt junk, mouldy biscuits, washed 
down by rum and bilge water, the whole scene illumined 
by a greasy dip, that dropped upon a table-cloth of no par- 
ticular colour. 

The boy was, perhaps, thoughtful. Well he might be ! 
He was an orphan, utterly ignorant of his own history, 
nurtured in a nest of smugglers, by a singular accident 
well-educated, accustomed, ever since he could walk, to 
things contraband and illegal, and now, something told 
him, about to enter on some enterprise more desperate 

B 2 



4 EDWARD DRAKE. 

more venturesome and illegal, than any yet which it had 
been his fate to see. 

Edward Drake — such was his name — had been brought 
up from his earliest infancy by a woman known as " Old 
Meg,'' from whose hands he had passed into those of 
Joseph Gantling, the smuggler, captain of the Ocean Girl. 
At seven they n:ade him useful ; at nine he fractured his 
legs, by a fall in the hold, so badly that the coarse seaman 
was glad to leave him ashore for some time. Three months 
was the time agreed on, but it was extended to three years, 
f com the fortunate accident, to Edward, of the smuggler being 
unable, during that interval, to show himself in England. 

The lord of the manor, Sir Stephen Eawdon, had him 
taken in hand ; and what with the baronet, himself a sailor, 
his daughter Loo, and the mild curate, Edward had a fine 
time of it. All saw his natural parts and talents, and 
were determined to come in aid of them. During the 
years that intervened between nine and twelve, Edward 
received the education of a gentleman. 

Then came Joseph Gantling, his uncle, a blunt, burly 
sailor fellow, who claimed him, rather authoritatively Sir 
Stephen thought, and the boy returned to his vessel. But 
as the skipper never treated him cruelly — on the contrary, 
with tenderness, respect, and even forbearance — the sailor- 
lad had little to complain of. It is true that during his 
three years of schooling his free-and-easy notions had been 
somewhat staggered, but two years now of free-trading had 
again someAvhat blunted his sensibilities, while awakening 
in him that adventurous spirit which is so glorious a main- 
stay of our royal and mercantile navy. 

With these preliminary remarks and explanations we have 
sought to pass the time while pulling from the brigantine 
to the heavy and sombre cliffs, to the foot of which Edward 
was steering his frail and fragile bark. The bay he had 
selected appeared a most unpropitious spot, being land- 
locked on every side but that by which they had entered, 
and from which they could see nothing but that vast ex- 
panse of waters that stretched in that direction to the 
shores of the Continent. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 5 

The boy, having c ui led the boat into a small creek, cast 
aside the cloak by which he was guarded against the night 
breeze, loosened his dirk, examined his pistols, and then 
leaped lightly ashore. 

" Smoke your pipes, my hearties. If any long-legged 
chaps come near, give 'em a wide berth," said the youth ; 
and then walked away with the pride and authority of an 
admiral. 

" Ay, ay, sir ! " replied the gruff sailors, who, lawless 
and rough as they were, loved, almost as much as they 
admired, the daring boy who had been their leader and 
associate in many a perilous adventure and hair- breadth 
escape. 

The young sailor — or, as we may at once call him, the 
Young Buccaneer — though very slight, was tall for his age, 
and, if not entitled to any privileges of manhood, appeared, 
at all events, to claim them ; for, now that his cloak was 
removed, he could have been seen in the careless undress 
of a naval officer, with a red sash round his waist, in which 
were stuck, in addition to his dirk, a brace of somewhat 
large pistols. 

He seemed thoroughly aware of the path, which lay up 
the cliff, and was so steep and rugged that no one but a 
person utterly reckless of his safety would have followed 
it, unless confident of himself. To any one else, in that 
dark night, the danger would have been appalling, what 
with the darkness, the perpendicular nature of the preci- 
pice, added to which was the sullen roar of the sea dashing 
against the rocks below. 

About half-way up, the youth halted as if to recon- 
noitre ; nor did he do so a moment too soon, as might bt 
discovered by the angry way in which he was addressed. 

"What lubber's brat is that?" asked a gruff voice. 
" Is it egg-stealing you are there, at this time of night ? 
Advance, and if you can open your jaw-tackle — let us 
have the word." 

" What will three oar-blades of a row and a pistol-shot 
bring 1 ?" asked the boy, in laughing tones. 

" A broadside, you powder-monkey. But where's your 



6 DIRTRICK. 

three oar-blades of a row in a cockle boat like yours?" eon- 
tinusd the irate sailor. 

" The officer having left it," said Edward Drake, with 
dignity, " there are but two men ; but if you don't let me 
p xss, Dirtrick, I must give you a rap on the head to teach 
you manners." 

"Xed, by Gom!" cried the other, laughing. ''Law, 
how these boys do grow, and how cheeky they get ! " 

" Dirty Dick ! " 

" Sir ! " said the other, respectfully. 

•' Do not talk in that way to your superior officer." 

"I won't, sir — -beg pardon, sir." 

" That'll do, Dirtrick," continued Edward, giving his 
hind to the sailor with the air of a prince. " Is the skip- 
per within 1 " 

" He is, Master !S T ed." 

" I will go in, then. If there's time, I'll come and 
have a yarn." 

And speaking thus, the young buccaneer turned a dark 
corner of the rock, and disappeared. 

The sentry reseated himself, took an extra bite of 
"baccy," and looked out once more upon the channel of 
the great river. His was a history which, from sympathy, 
connected itself much with that of Edward. The man — 
a stout, under-built, awkward sailor oi forty, did not even 
know his country. His face had something Dutch in it, 
with a Spanish complexion. He spoke little but English, 
Avhile he was an excellent and admirable sailor. His name 
was Dick — from his complexion called Dirty Dick by his 
enemies, Dirtrick by his friends. This appellation, having 
rather a foreign sound and look, satisfied the foundling, 
who to many good qualities united one characteristic not 
very useful in his profession, that of sterling honesty and 
sound simplicity. 

But if his moral qualities made the sentry somewhat of 
a butt on the part of his companions, his great physical 
powers, on the other hand, necessarily made him respected, 
especially as they were never brought into play except in 
dire solf- defence, or to protect the weak and oppressed. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. I 

CHAPTEE II. 

THE CAVERN CABIN. 

The young officer of the Ocean Girl had entered one of 
those many resorts of smugglers, and often of worse cha- 
racters, which then were to be found, not only upon the 
coast, but in forests and deserted quarries. The dealers in 
contraband availed themselves gladly oi everything like a 
safe retreat — the subterranean passages of old castles and 
ruins, the vaults ot a church, an empty house, the stabla 
or the vicarage, were all one to them, so that they wera 
out of the way. Hut caverns were preferred, as in most 
cases the knowledge of them was confined to the smug« 
glers, who handed it down traditionally from father ta 
son. 

The one to which we now introduce our readers could 
many a tale have unfolded had those bare black walls 
been capable of speech ; not more, perhaps, than many a 
ruined tower that once held its head on high to the world, 
like some tall bully, but more of a peculiar character. It 
was a secret to every soul on the island except the smug- 
glers and their associates. Originally it had been natural, 
but art had improved it. It exists no longer : big ships 
now riding at anchor where it stood. So rapid, in certain 
parts, are the encroachments of the sea. 

The yawning mouth ot the cavern gave, however, no 
idea of its vastness, for as you went farther in it became 
higher and more arched. On the pathway were huge 
masses of flint, lumps of stone, scattered about as if by 
accident, but, in truth, acting as indications for the ini- 
tiated. The youth walked steadily forward, as if familiar 
with the place, until he was in total darkness. 

He then baited, and gave a shrill whistle. 

Scarcely had the echoes died away Avithin the vault, 
when a rough door opened, a man appeared holding a 
torch, and the lad passed through to descend six or seven 



THE CAVERN. 

tilde steps into a large apartment provided with a fire, 
tables, chairs, and tenanted by half-a-dozen rude sailors, 
in Guernsey frocks, red caps, and high "boots, whose coun- 
tenances were certainly not recommendatory of their 
chara iters. 

At one end was a small, well-made door, while to his 
lift could be seen a hollow, containing the commencement 
of a spiral staircase that led upwards to the summit of the 
clifl. Such was the renowned smugglers' cave of Sheppey 
Island, which for centuries was the retreat of contraband 
dealers, spies, and political outcasts, and which, within 
the present century, the remorseless waves have utterly 
destroyed. 

Nodding familiarly to the rough assembly around him, 
Edward/ Drake passed through the public room, and 
knocked at the small door on the opposite side. 

" Come in !" said a deep, commanding voice. 

Edward entered, and pulled the door behind him. 
Any one who had not been accustomed to the place, might 
well have rubbed his eyes, and asked himself if indeed he 
were not dreaming, so startling was the change from the 
rough cavern to the apartment in which he now stood. 
It was the perfect facsimile of a ship's cabin in shape and 
furniture, and of a ship's cabin, too, of the superior order, 
its equipments bearing every mark of wealth and luxury. 

The lamp that swung from the ceiling was of silver, 
and of a suspiciously sacerdotal shape, while around were 
cut glass, mirrors, plates, and even hangings, which but 
half concealed the two standing bed places. 

But despite the ornamentation of this fantastic abode, 
few would have looked long at it, while tenanted by one 
every way so striking as its sole inhabitant. He was 
about five feet eight in height, tall enough for symmetry, 
the very standard for strength and agility. His face, 
which was rather Tegular than handsome, was marked by 
bold and haughty characteristics. The love of power 
could be traced in every line, a firm and determined 
nature in the compressed mouth and well-formed chin, 
while the grey and wicked eyes told of one who, whether 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 9 

for ill or whether for good, having once formed a purpose, 
rarely was turned from it. 

From good he sometimes was, from evil never. 

His costume was that of a naval officer, of no particular 
navy — it might have been borrowed from a theatrical pro- 
perty man, or it might have been made by a fancy tailor. 
However this might be, it become Joseph Gantling well, 
showing off his firm and well-proportioned figure to ad- 
vantage. 

Before him on the table were a chart, a pair of com- 
passes, a bottle, some glasses, and a pipe, like a true 
sailor, the buccaneering smuggler being fond of his to- 
bacco, of which, on shore and on board, lie had tho 
choicest that could be found from York Paver to Spanish 
Main, from the Mediterranean to Latakia. 

The young officer stood still, waiting his captain's 
pleasure. 

"'By the pricking of my thumbs, something wicked 
this way comes,' " he said, lifting his head, with a light 
laugh. " Hit down, Ned ; T want a long and quiet talk 
with you. There's the grog, and there's the water ; 
there's a pipe, and there's tobacco." 

" Thank you, sir," he cried ; " I will wet my lips with 
nantz, but no tobacco. I'm a counter-blaster." 

"Ay, ay, boy!" said the skipper; "just as you will. 
But now to business. The night is far gone, and we may 
have to sail early. I want you to take in every word I 
say ; listen, and remember. But, Ned, as you and I may 
differ, I want one promise — agree or not to my proposals, 
and 'tis the same between us — but, ay or nay, on your 
solemn word, under no circumstances will you reveal what 
I shall say." 

"On my solemn word, all that passes shall be a pro- 
found secret," replied Edward. 

" 'Tis well — spoken like a man. Now hearken. I am 
a rough sailor. I have, when my blood has been up, 
closed my ears to the voice of mercy, and seen blood shed 
without blanching. I have defied, and ever shall defy, 
the laws which forbid me from exchanging my tea, spirits, 



10 THE ISLAND HOME. 

silks, and laces for other people's money. Men fear me, 
the mother hugs her child -with awe at mention of my 
name. I am to the world a smuggler, a pirate, a corsair — ■ 
what have I been to you?" 

This was said hoarsely, and with deep emotion. 

" A kind and good father," said the boy, warmly. 

" No ! no !" exclaimed Gantling, with a slight shudder; 
" not a father, but a friend and protector." 

" Well, sir, a generous protector." 
• " Even so let it be. You have seen me rough, brutal, 
and violent ; making my very crew shiver with fear. 
Did you ever fear me 1 " 

" Never." 

" I like your frankness, Edward. Well, forty and odd 
years make a great change in a man. Much as I love my 
sea-boat, that sits the waters like a swan, and cuts them 
like an arrow, I am weary of this life, and would end it." 

" Sir !" 

" Think not I am going to sell my brigantine, buy me 
a lust-hause, like a Dutch Meinherr, and settle down into 
a beer-swilling, tobacco-smoking old fogie. Not I ! I 
dream of something better. What say, boy, to one niorp 
cruise that shall bring us more grist to the mill than any 
we have ever tried, and then away to some island of the 
sunny south, known to me, and known as yet to none 
besides ; where Nature asks not even for our labour, but 
gives in rich abundance to all who will take ? There, my 
boy, with this vessel and a chosen crew, we should be 
kings, sea-kings, with thousands to obey our will, from 
greybeards to girls dusky as night, but night with all her 
stars, their sunburnt blood mantling such clear nut-broTv;i 
skins as — well, never mind. You shall see my coral 
beauties, I call them mine, as, wrecked there once, I have 
left a memory or two behind." 

"Where is this island?" asked the youth, half fasci- 
nated. 

" Under the burning sun, my lad, many months from 
here. That I consider settled. Never did I see such a 
land, never so gentle and amiable a people — naked, they 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 11 

used me well ; but with a ship at my back and wealth to 
give them, all they set store by in the land is our own, 
Ned. I will be king, you shall be my heir." 

Edward laughed, but at the sains time the gleaming of 
his eyes showed that he liked the idea. 

" I was once," continued Joseph Gantling, speaking 
now between his set teeth, " I was once in the service of 
my country. "Why or wherefore I left it, it boots not to 
tell. I left it, and though still I am an Englishman, and 
love my native land, I loathe and abhor her tyrant rulers, 
who — no matter what they did. "When I think of it my 
blood boils, my cheek is coral red, and I feel that I must 
go mad, or be avenged." 

" Avenged !" said Ned Drake ; " how can you be more 
avenged than you have been? If depriving them of 
revenue is any satisfaction, you have done that to a pretty 
tune." 

" The theft of a hen-roost or a brood of lubberly tur- 
Keys affects them as much," continued Captain Gantling 
bitterly ; " hut I have them now ; I can now make the 
hearts of some in high places bleed ; I can — I can — " he 
gasped, " revel in their gold ; I can hold in my hand lives 
dear to my very enemies themselves ; I can have such 
vengeance as shall make all England rue the day she 
raised her hand against one who — no matter — no matter 
— will this restless tongue never wag like other men's 1 
Now comes the question — "Wilt aid me, boy?" 

" I must know more," said Edward, quietly. 

"Ejiow more!" cried the skipper, while a blood-red 
spot burnt upon his cheek. " How dare — " 

"I dare do anything but obey orders blindfold !" ex- 
claimed Ned. 

"True! true!" muttered Gantling. "Chip of the old 
block. I must wholly trust him, or not at alL" 

" The best plan." 

" I will To-morrow or the day arter, or when it suits 
our noble rulers, a vessel, a large East Indiaman, sails 
past here on her way to distant parts. She is richly 
freighted, boy ; she carries out treasure untold ; she takes 



12 THE PROPOSAL 

men of mark and rank and name, and noble women, and 
joyous, light-hearted girls — and, and — mine enemy." 
"Well, sir?" 

"Well, sir," repeated Joseph Gantling, with an oath, 
"you would weary a saint. That ship, cargo, crew, and 
passengers will he mine. I mean to have them all." 
" What to do with '?" asked Ned, quietly. 
" To do with — the ship to burn, the treasure to keep, 
the crew may do as they please, the passengers to sell, 
mine enemy to slay," cried the captain, wildly. 
"And the young women, sir?" 

" We shall want wives in our new kingdom, as perhapB 
all may not care for dark skins and dewy eyes." 

" Then, sir," said Edward, coldly, rising, " seek some 
other accomplice ; for not only will I not be yours, but ere you 
start on tins fell enterprise, I shall leave the brigantine." 

A lioness shorn of her cubs looked not more fierce or 
remorseless than Gantling at this word. 

"You young whelp!" he cried hoarsely; "leave the 
brigantine?" 

" Yes, sir. But listen. I have been brought up by 
you. I have, with every fresh hour of my life, learned to 
love and admire the life of a free rover of the seas. But, 
while ready to aid you in winning this ship, in gaining 
this treasure, the fight once over, I must have your solemn 
pledge that no human life shall suffer, and that passengers 
and crew shall go where they list unharmed, even if you 
put them on a desert and abandoned island." 

The corsair thought deeply as the other spoke. He was 
not all bad. Real or imaginary ills had driven him to a 
course of life which usually blunts every noble sympathy, 
and gives full swing to hate, ambition, guile, aiming a 
man's soul against himself as much as against the great 
mass of mankind. Those who were aware of his early 
history, said that what he might have been few could say; 
and yet Ms early exploits were such as to give promise not 
only of greatness but much nobility of character, ere he 
knew himself a villain— guilt's worst instrument, driven 
forth to war against mankind. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 13 

"You have spoken of your bolder deeds," exclaimed 
the lad; "you have, I know, fought many a king's ship 
and conquered — but what of that 1 — no life taken in cold 
blood rests upon your soul." 

" "Who said it did ] " replied the captain, in a hollow, 
hoarse tone; "who dares say it?" he added, rising and 
pacing the cabin, with hurried tread, upcast eye, clenched 
fist, and flushed cheek ; "but with you, Edward," he con- 
tinued, " I will not quarrel. There is a spell about you 
which makes mo do your will, when another, if lie had all 
hell to back him, would not make me move. What ask 
you of me 1 " 

" Life for crew and passengers." 

" And mine enemy 1 " 

" Let me judge between you." 

" You ! " cried Captain Joseph Gantling, retreating to 
the doorway with surprise and evident alarm ; " no — my 
enemy is my own. You spoke of some desert island. It 
may not be convenient to dispose of them any other way 
— but you shall have your will, Ned ; mine the ship and 
treasure, yours the passengers and crew." 

" On your oath as a man ] " 

" On my oath as a man." 

"That is sufficient," said Edward Drake, who now freely 
helped himself to a glass of grog. " What is to be my duty 1 " 

" You see, my lad," observed the skipper, lighting his 
pipe eagerly, as if to change the current of his thoughts ; 
" I've already six friends on board ; but now they've signed 
articles, I almost wish I hadn't sent them. It's Jabez 
G-runn and his lot." 

"I thought you had started that ruffian for good," said 
Ned, with a flushed cheek. 

"A smuggler is not quite his own master," observed 
Captain Joseph ; " these lads were dangerous ashore, so I 
contrived to get them on board the Duke of Kent. Still, 
I know, I cannot trust them ; but you I can, Ned, so you 
must join the ship." 

" I see — how can that be— as cabin boy 1 " 

" As passenger if needs be," replied Gantling ; "but of 



14 THE STERN CHASE. 

that wo will devise as we go along. Now it is time to 
roost. I have a watch set." 

"But the skiff?" 

" Was sent away as soon as you entered." 

No more was said on either side ; the skipper, slight! J 
heavy with grog, turning in to sleep ; Edward Drake to 
doze and think of the wild, adventurous, and hazardous 
undertaking on which he had embarked. 

It must have been noted that we speak of days long 
past, when, in the opinion of most persons, the unlawful 
trader was a kind of hero, and reprobation lavished only 
on the merciless and sanguinary pirate. This distinction 
had double weight with one who, like Edward, loved the 
sea, and had been educated in the A r ery hold of a smuggling 
vessel. 

When he dreamed, it was of rich Spanish galleons, hard 
fighting on decks slippery with blood, and then of dusky 
maids, with coral lips, fanning him after unwonted exer- 
tions. 



CHAPTEE III. 

THE STERN CHASE. 

TnE early morn was pregnant with life, the sweet and 
balmy air, and the gay sunshine, made the faint greenery 
of the trees look cheerful and pleasant, while the merry 
birds sang on every wooded slope and broke the solitude 
of covert and thicket. A balmy breeze came kindly over 
the waters from the northward. 

Captain Gantling and his young officer were now on the 
summit of the cliff, to which they had ascended by means 
of the spiral staircase already alluded to, and which ter- 
minated in a hut of clay and shingle, which was erected 
against the broad back of an ancient look-out tower, and 
which answered the purpose of an ale-house, though sel- 
dom visited except by the smugglers and their friends. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER 15 

Captain Gantling stood at the very edge of the cliff looking 
down upon his vessel which lay at anchor at some distance, 
and yet not so far but that any one might have been struck 
with the order and symmetry with which the tall spars 
rose towards the heavens, from the black mass of the hull, 
and with the rigging that hung in the air, one dark line 
crossing another, until all design seemed confounded in 
the confusion and intricacy of the studied ma;:e. 

"Isn't she lovely 1 ?" said Captain Cantling, who on ell 
matters connected with his ship was warmly enthusiastic. 

" She is," replied Edward, whose looks, hoAvever, were 
directed up the Thames, watching, with interest, the many 
vessels, small craft, and sail-boats that dotted the water, 
there white sails floating in the distance, like sea-gulls' 
wings, now dark and gloomy looking, jusfc as the flashing 
sun shone on them or not. 

" Yonder, in a line with Crowstone," continued Edward, 
"is a tall brig, which mothinks carries his Majesty's pen- 
nant." 

"Whore away?" cried the smuggler, in an eager, anxious 
voice. 

" Between the Crowstone and Leigh heights." 

The captain took a long and careful survey, after which 
he closed his .e'escope with a crash. 

" 'Tis the man-of-war sloop, Thunder," said he, hotly ; 
" 'tis time we were under weigh. I want to lose no spars in 
the work we bave in hand. Eoliow as quickly as you may." 

In another moment, skipper and youth were within the 
hut, from which they descended the spiral staircase, bade 
every man in the cavern accompany him, and then 
scrambled down the lofty cliff towards a creek, where lay 
a boat able to contain all. Eight men were soon at their 
oars ; Ned steering, and the captain keeping a jealous eye 
upon the distant royal cruiser, which though, perhaps, only 
out for an ordinary sail might be in chase of their own 
vessel, which, disguised as it was, might still by some 
keen and meddling eyes, have been recognized as the dar- 
ing brigantine Ocean Girl, the dread of every one, the oft 
chased and never captured buccaneer. 



16 THE "OCEAN GIKL.* 

"With a will ! " said the captain, as the men bent to 
their oars, "the fellow shows long arms and. plenty of 
teeth, as I can make out old King George's pennant on 
her topmast head He is altering her course too, though 
he cannot see us : pull ! pull for your lives ! " 

As he thus spoke, the eight-oared cutter had darted 
through the mouth of the retired creek where she had 
been lying, to find her passage almost cut off by what 
neither of them had noticed — two heavily-armed boats 
that darted round a point screened by trees, and the 
officers and men of which at once began cheering. 

" There has been rank treachery here," mused Captain 
Gantling ; " some of the asses on the island whom I have 
offended — or can Sir Stephen have suspected] — impossible ! 
Pull, all those who would not be in irons in an hour." 

Not a word was spoken more. The chase was a stern 
one, and had. circumstances allowed, might have been 
a long one, but this the proximity of the ship prevented, 
as in twenty minutes, if not captured, they would be un- 
der her guns. But another danger had to be avoided, 
While the royal cruiser was coming up with wind and 
tide, the Ocean Girl was lying at her anchors, without 
the smallest proof that man existed within the mass of 
black and inanimate hull. 

" Is Darden asleep or drunk 1 " said the skipper, hotly. 
" I must waken him up — or we shall have to fight, willy- 
nilly." 

The distance between the cutter and the man-of-war 
boats, which had crept down so cunningly towards the 
suspected vessel, was slightly lessening every moment. 
The royal boats were admirably manned, and few over 
the surface of the water with a speed which showed their 
numerical strength and their alacrity. 

They meant to capture the buccaneer, which had been 
betrayed to them in a way that Captain Gantling and 
Edward Drake little suspected 

" Surrender ! ". suddenly shouted an irate officer of, 
marines, who commanded one of the boats ; " surrender, 
or I fire!" 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 17 

" Fire !" responded Gantling, aiming a musket at the 
speaker. 

This brought a volley from the boats, while at the same 
moment a column of white smoke was seen issuing from 
the bows of the cutter, and then almost before the report 
was wafted to their ears, they saw the shot skipping from 
wave to wave, tossing the water in spray, and flying to a 
considerable distance beyond them. 

The smugglers smiled grimly at the passing ball, while 
the captain kept his eyes on the brigantine, still so myste- 
riously silent. So quiet and motionless was she, that any 
one who knew nothing of the matter, might have thought 
her a fixture in the sea, or some marine monster rising 
from the ocean, where such beings are popularly believed 
to exist, darkened by the fogs and tempests of ages. 

But soon Captain Gantling gave a cry of pleasure. 

They were not asleep on board. He clearly saw all her 
boats out of the water, while the cable, instead of stretch- 
ing in a long declining bine towards the water, was nearly 
lip and down, ready for tripping at a moment's notice, 
every sail and yard was in its place, not a single rope was 
wanting ; in a word, the Ocean Girl was equally ready for 
fight or repose, while for action she was quite ready ; her 
Doarding nettings were braced to the rigging. 

The man-of-war boats still made superhuman efforts; but 
those in the cutter were equally alive, and in five minutes 
more the whole party were on board ; the boat hoisted up 
with incredible activity, and the captain and his men greeted 
With shouts and cheers that rang across the waters, and 
reached the pursuing sloop, which now had a serious cause 
of delay, in taking in all her boats. 

" Make sail, Darden," said Captain Gantling. 

"With these words he descended into his cabin, followed 
by Edward, who alone shared it with him. It was in some 
things similar to that in the cave, though the presence of 
four dark cannons detracted from the other appearances of 
luxury and wealth. There pistols, too, and sabres, half- 
pikes and boarding axes, stands of muskets round th? 
masts, which showed that even in the very mouth of the 

C 



18 Treachery. 

Thames, and in daily proximity to royal cruisers, he had 
thrown off the mask, and stood revealed for what he was, 
a ruthless buccaneer. 

The very audacity of the act had hitherto been his 
safety, as merchant vessels had taken him for a govern- 
ment ship, while he had so truly answered the signals of 
one or two men-of-war as they went by, as utterly to 
disarm all suspicion. 

He soon found out how it was his true character Lad 
been betrayed. A cockney sailor named Moss, had two 
days before asked leave to visit his wife and children ; and 
on being refused, had sullenly demanded his discharge, 
which had been sternly denied, until they came to a more 
secluded part, when it was faithfully promised him. The 
man made no remark, but appeared to have swum off to 
some ship, which taking him up to London, he had, out 
of revenge for his detention, and the loss of his share of 
prize money, betrayed his comrades. 

When the captain and his young ally, having armed 
themselves, went on deck, the vessel was under a cloud of 
canvas, running to the eastward along the warp, with the 
royal cruiser not three miles behind, with every sail she 
would draw out. The Ocean Girl, a few minutes ago all 
bustle and activity, was now tolerably quiet, as in an 
incredibly short space of time she had been loaded with 
canvas that made her masts bend again like whips. The 
wind was steady, without puffs or fitful gusts, and when 
they had made a good offing to the eastward, would be fair. 

" This is very annoying," said Gantling, in a whisper to 
Edward ; " I must either fight this fellow, give him the 
slip, or lose all chance of the treasure ship." 

"King George will hardly forgive man or boy who 
should dare to tight one of his cruisers at the mouth of 
the Thames," said Edward Drake, pointedly. 

"It would be all the greater glory. Nothing would 
give me more delight than to let the spectators on yonder 
shores see me tear down yonder flaunting flag, and re- 
place it by my own," sdd the captain, with a hot and 
fiery flush. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 19 

" I thought you were an Englishman." 

"Hush! hush!" exclaimed Captain Gantling, in a low 
husky tone ; " talk not to me thus ; a pirate has no 
country." 

And he turned away, leaving Edward, accustomed as he 
was to the chiefs manner and abruptness, somewhat asto- 
nished at a sentence which went to his very heart ; he 
Avho adored his native land, and would gladly have served 
it, had he not thought himself excluded for ever from all 
pardon, by reason of his bringing up. 

The cruiser had evidently been selected for its swiftness ; 
the Ocean Girl was a splendid sailer, but for once it had met 
its match. 

"We shall have to fight," said the commander, in a 
low tone. 

" I hope not, sir," replied Edward ; " for then adieu to 
treasure sbip, to our bonnie cruiser, and the dusky girls 
with the coral lips." 

Wow Drake was but a boy, but the education he had 
received had made him more advanced than his age would 
warrant. He knew Captain Grantling well, and therefore 
urged no prudential motives to make him careful, bu 
rather laid before him the very baits the power of whie 
he had earned to himself. 

" That's what I'm thinking about, Ned ; but see ho 
he hugs the wind, and keeps to windward ; the fellow 
will fetch the Blacktail beacon — then I expect he'll let 
go her hold, keep a good full — let the vessel go through 
the water." 

" It is a beautiful sloop," cried Ned, who was by nature 
an admirer of all that is lovely, animate or inanimate. 

" Yes, carries a precious press of canvas ; if she goes on 
like this, we must knock a few cloths out of her bolt 
ropes, when we may gain on her. I believe she goes 
quicker than we do." 

"I am sure of it," said Ned. 

"Curses light on her ! what is the meaning of if?" cried 
Gantling. " We must give him the long swivel, Ned. 
Tell the men to get it ready; let them at sails and masts." 

C 2 



20 THE 

"Ay, ay, sir." 

In a very few minutes the outer gun was ready, and the 
crack shot of the Ocean Girl, of all others, Dirtrick, was 
taking aim. Then an immense hody of smoke belched 
from the muzzle of the cannon, followed hy a sheet of 
vivid fire, and Edward, leaping on the hindermost gun, 
saw the chips fly, and one sail fly from its bolt ropes. 
Then the foretopmast bent, and fell steadily over the side. 

At the same moment the drum of the royal cruiser was 
heard rattling across the water, beating to quarters, but the 
buccaneer made no response, cracking on all sail, until his 
tall spars and cloud of canvas were lost in a dense fog, 
that came rolling and spreading like a cloud over the 
German Ocean. 



CHAPTEE IV. 



We must now momentarily leave our hero and his vessel, 
to introduce those upon whom Captain Joseph Gantling 
intended to carry out his designs, the nefariousness of 
which Edward Drake scarcely understood. However 
manly his feelings and emotions, he was but a boy, and 
hardly ahle to realize the abominable intentions of the 
buccaneer towards the crew and passengers of the Duke of 
Kent. 

This was a splendid vessel, built for the Indian trade, 
and about to be sent out partly on special service — that is, 
with an amount of valuable treasure on board, which, as 
far as people in general knew, might have been a cargo of 
black diamonds from Newcastle, and partly to convey to 
India certain important passengers and public functionaries, 
who objected to the delays and wearisome life attendant on 
a convoyed fleet, when good sailers are compelled to wait 
for the merest crawling butter tub. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 21 

The DuJce of Kent was a large vessel, well armed, power- 
fully manned, and in every way fitted out with a view to 
the comfort of its passengers, as well as their defence. It 
was war time; but a large and well-provided Indiaman 
considered itself good enough for most French frigates, so 
that on this point little emotion was felt. 

What, then, had such a vessel to fear from a brigantine 
which, however rapid a sailer, however well equipped a 
buccaneer, must succumb to the mere weight of metal of 
so large an opponent 1 But the Government, in despatch- 
ing a. royal cruiser in search of the Ocean Girl, did not 
even think of the Indiaman. Captain Gantling was never 
very verbose, but to his crew he was always silent. The 
deserter knew nothing, then, of the buccaneer's intentions, 
and could only report his presence in the estuary of the 
Thames. 

As for the six men who had been so treacherously sent 
on board the Duke of Kent, they were all able seamen, 
discharged, as appeared by the buccaneer, at their own 
wish, after serving several years. None on board the 
Ocean Girl expected that their fellows had been detached, 
at double wages, upon a desperate enterprise. 

It was the day aiter the slight encounter between his 
Majesty's sloop Thunder and the Ocean Girl that the 
Indiaman prepared to take her departure. The sailing of 
a large ship was not then such an every-day matter as it is 
now, so that the wharves were crowded with boys and 
other idlers to watch its progress, while the vessel was not- 
itself free from incumbrances, such as friends and relatives 
of passengers are always thought when they are in the way 
of captain or crew. Even the seamen themselves ran in 
every possible direction but the right one, until at last, 
when the huge fabric was hauled out into the stream, there 
were clear decks and an orderly ship's company. 

The wind was fair, and as even the most delicate could 
not be supposed to feel the hideous mal de mer before 
Gravesend, the poop and quarter-deck were crowded by 
passengers, chiefly military, naval, and civil officers, their 
wives, and, in some instances, their children ; while about 



A PRETTY GIRL. 

a dozen cadets and as many young ladies stood, the former 
in listless conversation, the latter collected round their 
chaperones, or, as Jack said, "the chickens crept close up 
to the old hens, as if there had been hawks aboard." 

In this way the voyage commenced, the ship being now 
wholly tinder the command of the pilot, though the worthy 
skipper, Captain Fred. Dunbar, never kept his eye off her 
head, the navigation of so large a vessel in a crowded and 
tortuous river being matter of serious consideration. 

In this way, having started easily, they got to Graves- 
end in one tide, and then anchored until the turn, when 
they proceeded by moonlight, and finally took up a position 
right in the mouth of the Thames, about a mile to the 
N.E. of where the daring buccaneer had lain. 

The next day, at early dawn, the Indiaman took her 
final departure, running to the eastward until clear of all 
the banks and dangers which surround the mouth of old 
Father Thames. The wind by this time was light and un- 
certain, with occasional puffs, so that good watch was kept, 
the more that two hours in the aiternoon watch it became 
overcast and foggy. The huge vessel now forged slowly 
ahead, the captain by no means desiring to commence a 
voyage by a collision, or to allow an enemy's vessel to creep 
upon him unawares. 

The passengers still kept the deck, as during the day the 
sea had every moment been getting smoother, and the wind 
less and less. 

In an elevated position, that enabled her to command a 
view of a circumscribed circle, stood a young lady, who 
might have been twelve, or who might have been fourteen, 
but who, no matter what was her age, was excessively 
pretty, wore charming golden curls, a Leghorn straw hat, 
and never seemed happier than when prattling to a stout, 
florid, handsome man of nearly sixty, whom she addressed 
by the name of "pa," and who, from his dress, bluff 
manner, and, above all, honest and fearless countenance, 
any man of penetration would have taken for a British 
sailor, which he was, being no less a personage than the 
admiral sent out to relieve one invalided home. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 22 

"Is this the way we are going to travel, pa?" she said, 
we verily believe for the twentieth time, which, consider- 
ing she was the only child of a widower, brought her no 
rebuke, but a patient answer. 

" You know, my dear, that we cannot command the 
weather," replied the admiral, mildly. "To-morrow, per- 
haps, we may go quicker than you could wish." 

''leather !" suddenly exclaimed the girl, "what light ia 
that yonder, nearly in front of us?" 

"Eh — what !" cried the officer, rising. 

The girl pointed to where a light Avas rucking on the 
water, in a somewhat unnatural and rapid manner. 

" Some coble or other at anchor. Captain !" 

" Admiral !" replied the skipper, stepping forward, and 
looking in the direction of the light. 

"Why, what on earth can the fellow be doing there?" 
said the captain, who gave at the same time a whispered 
order to the man at the wheel. " lie can't be at anchor, 
nor docs it appear a vessel lying-to." 

They were now within about fifty feet of the light, at 
which everybody was now looking with some anxiety and 
curiosity. There was scarcely a breath of wind ; the huge 
Indiaman surged but slowly forward, and not a word was 
spoken. 

" Ship ahoy !" said a feeble voice. 

In an instant, at a sign from the captain, the helm was 
put down, and the vessel hove aback. A boat was then 
put out with all the precision and rapidity of a man-of- 
war. Six men rowed, while one of the mates steered. 
The huge vessel now stood still, except a slight sidling 
motion, and the boat disappeared in the gloom. 

•» * •::• * ■;;- * 

Nothing could have been more opportune for the cap- 
tain of the Ocean Girl than the fog, which kept silently 
rolling down upon him, to turn day as it were into night, 
and to render the sea upon which he sailed one of the most 
dangerous in the world. Usually, nothing is more abhor- 
rent to the feelings of a sailor, especially on a dangerous 
coast, than one of those remorseless clouds of vapour, which 



24 CAUGHT AGAIN. 

wrap him round in darkness, hiding from him rocks, light- 
houses, cliffs, and even the companion ship, that may be 
sailing within twenty yards in fancied security. 

But now the event was all-important, and the buccaneer, 
without even reducing sail, which, under the circum- 
stances, would have been the act of a prudent man, kept 
on his course for several hours, until he thought he might 
safely change his course, which he did, boldly heading for 
the Thames once more. The tack was changed, and 
scarcely was the sheeting home, when, sharp upon a wind, 
the Ocean Girl cut through the head sea, as with a knife. 
She was a beautiful sight always ; but now she was like 
a bird that was frightened, and had spread her wings in 
flight. 

Towards evening, the fog still continuing, and the coast 
of England being in almost dangerous proximity, Captain 
Ganthng determined to lie to. This was done, and most 
rigid watch kept. For some time there was, despite the 
wind, a heavier fog than ever, cold, damp, and yellow; 
but soon after the sun had set blood-red or angry, the 
vapour lifted. 

The night was very dark, but with their glasses the cap- 
tain and his chief officer swept the horizon from the deck, 
while Edward ran aloft, and did the same there. 

"Be-low!" 

"What is it?" 

"Here she comes with the wind," roared Edward, and 
came down by the run. 

In an instant all hands were making sail, even royals 
and sky-sails fore and aft, and before twenty minutes, the 
studding sails were set ; but still the royal cruiser, which 
had been at anchor on the tail of the sands, came down 
upon them head over head. 

Captain Gantling swore a round oath, and then gave 
orders to his lieutenant, who at once bade the men pass 
the buckets up to one watch aloft to wet the sails. The 
buckets were whipped up to the mast head, and this 
manoeuvre was continued until a drizzling rain came on 
and rendered it unnecessary. It was pitch dark, without 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 25 

a moon ; every light was put out, even the binnacle lamp, 
and a star being chosen as a guide, the schooner was steered 
by it. Before dawn the cruiser was hull down, and the fog 
as often happens, an hour after became as thick as over. 

The buccaneer now headed once more for the coast of 
England, as near as he co\ild in the direction of Deal or 
Dover, and kept on at a slow and steady pace, reefed top- 
sails and bare yards aloft, until a dip of the lead told him 
he was nearly on the track of outward-bound vesels. The 
fog now was, as the sailors say, fit to be cut with a knife, 
and it was necessary to be wary. The brig was put head 
to wind, Avith the foresail aback, after which Edward 
Drake and Captain Gantling held a conference, which, 
however, referring to matters already decided upon, did not 
take up much time. 

The long-boat was put out, and in it was placed a couple 
of stout, air-tight water casks, some planks and a pole, 
with two large ship lanterns. As they advanced, the 
barrels were lashed together, the planks nailed on top, and 
when about two hundred feet from the brig, was cast 
adrift, with an anchor attached, which soon brought up 
this singular bxxoj with a round turn. The pole with the 
lighted lanterns was then erected firmly, and the trick was 
ready to be played. 

Edward, in the jacket and trousers of a ship boy, now 
clambered on the singular craft, and was there left, his 
arms round the pole, looking very far from the miserable 
being he ought to have been under the peculiar and pain- 
ful circumstances of the case. He had a knife, a stone jar 
of beer, and some bread and meat, upon which, as the 
long-boat moved away, he commenced an attack. 

" I hope now," said Gantling, with a grin, " you are 
well armed at all points. But whatever you do, don't take 
in too great a reef of drink ; you'll be rather too heavy a 
sailer. Drop anchor, and keep watch." 

"Ay, ay!" 

And thus these two parted, never to meet again, until 
— but we must not divulge the secrets of the prison-house 
until our narrative requires it 



JJ6 THE BAFT. 

Edward ate his bread and beef, drank bis beer, and then 
crouched upon the tossing raft, rather impatient to be 
removed, as the berth was neither comfortable nor safe. 
Had there been a heavy sea on, lie must at once have been 
washed overboard, but as it was, the vessel rose and iell 
with the motion of the billows. 

Hark ! 

What sound is that 1 

There is no other like it, and Edward knows it ; it is 
the swash of the salt sea waves under the bows of a vessel 
coming down upon him ; there she looms in the fog — full 
sail upon the deceptive light upon the treacherous buoy. 

"Ship ahoy!" 

"What ship is that ?" roared a hoarse voice. "Answer, 
or I'll blow you to the devil. Answer, I say !" 

2s r ed saw the bows, saw them sheer round, as when a 
ship prepares a broadside. 

Utterly bewildered at this singular turn in his fortunesf 
he rose to his feet, gave one despairing cry, and plunged 
into the boiling waters, just as the roar of the cannonade 
was thundering through the air. 



CHAPTER V. 

: COME ON BOARD, SIF.' 



» 



When ISTed Drake plunged headlong into the water, just 
as the sAvash of the sloop was heard through the fog, it was 
with a perfect conviction that there was no other way of 
saving his life. His reasoning faculties had been suffi- 
ciently sharpened by his peculiar and somewhat dangerous 
course of life, to make him aware that the trick they would 
have played upon the Indiaman had recoiled on themselves, 
and that the enemy they so much dreaded, had discovered 
the whereabouts of the smuggler, instead of their enticing 
the Indiaman into their clutches. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 27 

But for the moment every other consideration vanished, 
before that of escaping scot free. Edward was, as every 
English youth, no matter what his occupation, should he, 
an excellent swimmer. He revelled in water like a dog, 
and never was more happy than when floundering about, 
or practising all those efforts of the art which are to he 
acquired only by practice. In the present instance, the 
young officer of the buccaneer craft dived, coming up only 
to the surface when imperiously called to it from want of 
air, of which having breathed sufficient for his purpose, he 
went down again. 

At length, however, feeling exhausted, he ventured to 
remain on the surface, and look around in search both of 
the raft to which ho had clung, and the sloop which had 
fired a broadside at it. But not a trace of either was to bo 
seen. Edward Drake was alone on the water, with 
nothing but his physical powers to promise him immunity 
from death. 

But the youth, without once giving way to despair, 
knew Avell enough, that however long and protracted 
the struggle might be, the end must be the same — 
an ocean grave. The distance from land was beyond 
the means of any ordinary swimmer, as, though savages, 
born and bred, as it were, on the water, have been 
known to struggle on for days, no such hope could 
he entertain. Besides, he neither knew which way was 
the shore, nor which way was the open sea, to which 
it might be wiser to make than the land, in the hope 
of being picked up by homeward or outward bound 
vessels. 

Under any circumstances, however, the chances were 
formidably against him, and it required a stouter heart 
than is possessed by many boys of Iris age to enable him 
to struggle at all, when by merely raising his arms in the 
act of clasping them, he might have sunk to rise no more. 
Ned Drake, however, calmly took every precaution, kept 
his arms down in the water, and, without losing his pre- 
sence of mind, began to reflect as to the wisest course to be 
adopted. 



28 axons. 

He looked about for the son, but that luminary was 
•wholly concealed by the yellow, dense, and drizzling fog 
which enTeloped all nature. 

Bat hark ! is not that the sea washing against some 
solid substance close at hand? Certainly, and there it 
looms high and black. It is the sloop once more under 
easy sail, returning on its way to discover the mystery of 
its broadside against a vessel, which, ere the echoes had 
died away, had vanished into thin air. As the sails could 
be made out in the fog, Drake saw that she was lying-to, 
and drifting with the tide. 

" It's very strange," said a voice, so near that Edward 
quite started, "how she got away. Surely, she could not 
have sunk bodily." 

" I hope not, for there's an end of the prize-money. If 
we could only pick up a bit of the wreck, or save a 
sailor, we might learn something ; but, egad, it was like 
a scene in a pantomime. Well, we must wait till this 
cursed fog clears up, when the matter may be cleared up 
too. Haul aft the main sheet" 

At this critical moment, when the sloop was about to 
get under way again, !Ned had clutched a rope which hung 
from the gangway, and by which officers held when 
ascending to the deck, and by means of this was about 
to climb up, when his quick eye caught sight of some- 
tljing a little astern, which awakened in his bosom both a 
sense of hope and thoughts of the mission he had under- 
taken. Without an instant's hesitation he dropped into 
the water, and, striking out, was a moment later clamber- 
ing on to his raft, the cause of so much bewilderment to 
his Majesty's dutiful servants. 

The raft however, was in somewhat of a pitiable state. 
The wooden bucket, in which his provisions had been 
placed, was upset ; his grog was spilt, the lashings were 
loose — so that, in case of the slightest squall, all must go 
to pieces, and he be once more cast into the sea at the 
mercy of wind and waves. 

There was another misfortune. His lamps appeared to 
have suffered severely irom the collision, having been put 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER 29 

out, and, in all probability, the oil spilt. "Without these 
could be relighted, all hope of being taken off by either 
buccaneer or Indiaman was at an end. 

With a trembling and anxious heart, !Ned Drake 
lowered the lantern by means of a pulley and rope, and 
putting them on his tiny deck, examined them carefully. 
They were not much damaged, the lights having been 
extinguished rather by the violence of what the French 
call roulis than by any actual contact with the enemy's 
vessel, which, indeed, though passing almost over the 
decoy— by which means it remained unseen — had not 
been struck. 

Ned Drake would not have been an English sailor boy 
if, in the ample pockets of his trousers, there had not 
been a knife, tinder box, and matches, by means of which, 
in a very few minutes, he had trimmed and relighted his 
signal-lamps, which were then hoisted to the mast-nead of 
the peculiar little craft, which now supported the fortunes 
and the hopes of our young hero. 

Gladly would he, after his swim, have renovated his 
body by means of some of those creature comforts which 
had originally been provided him, but this was impossible ; 
his bread and meat were, no doubt, within the all-devour- 
ing maw of some monster of the deep, while his beei and 
rum were so commingled with the briny ocean, that not 
the ablest chemist that ever taught an admiring audience 
could have traced its presence. 

There was nothing then left for him but to bend to cir- 
cumstances, and wait upon that precarious tub-supported 
deck for such fortune as awaited him — capture by the 
sloop of war, safety from the buccaneer, or success and 
good luck on board the Indiaman and treasure ship. 
These reflections made the young sailor think somewhat 
seriously of other things ; and it seemed to strike him, 
in that hour of peril and doubt, that perhaps the enter- 
prise upon which he had started was not either the most 
honourable or the most proper upon which a youth might 
be engaged. 

But then, said sophistry, what has society, or govern- 



30 SUTFERINO. 

ment, or the good people done to me that I should, 
having fallen, into the hands of a contraband dealer, 
think much of what I am about to do to themf He 
fancied that there could he no life more delightful to a 
youth of high spirit and mighty resolves than that of a 
buccaneer, a skimmer of the ocean, who only differed from 
the legalized privateers that swarmed on every sea, in 
wanting a commission from the king, a formality which, 
while dispensing them from control, left them to roam 
where they would, and act as beseemed them best. 

Visions, too, of that island, rich with hopeful fruits, 
where eternal summer reigned, and where they were to 
rule as monarchs, with an indistinct notion of the import- 
ance of cherry lips and flashing eyes to the sum total 
of human happiness, passed through his mind, it is true, 
in an odd, dream-like way, but still sufficiently to influ- 
ence one to whom the ideal of happiness was hitherto 
action, plenty of fighting, and plunder, with something of 
physical gratification in the end. 

Thinking thus deeply, there fell a greater gloom upon 
the scene, and to the thick darkness of the fog was super- 
added the cloak of night Ned Drake began to shiver, 
and to fancy too that he had entered upon a lane which 
had no turning. Luckily, as yet there was no sea on, 
though there was a bit of a breeze which, with the tide, 
made *the raft bob up and down with an uneasy but by 
no means dangerous motion. Which way the water was 
Tunning it was impossible to say, though that it was moving 
fast could be made out by the constant wash of the water. 

Trifle as it may appear to those on shore, who, unless 
utterly without means, have something always at hand 
to eat, Ned was getting hungry and faint, so that he knew 
the moment the sea rose, he should be powerless to hold 
on. This was terrible, especially as the Tndiaman and all 
other vessels appeared to have resolved themselves into 
phantoms. Even the buccaneer had deserted him, though 
he had believed Captain Gantling would make a push to 
find out what had been his fate. 

It was in reality a fearful position, and Edward began 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 31 

to feel Ms head getting dizzy, and his senses gradually 
leaving him, when a sound familiar, and not more familiar 
than welcome, reached his ears. It was his last chance, 
however, for he felt keenly that if this failed him, he 
mast yield to the terrible impulse to sleep which was 
coming upon him, and then die. 

The noise was that of a heavy body — a large vessel, as 
a matter of course — forcing its way slowly through the 
water against the tide. 

It was at no great distance, and if any proper look-out 
were kept, as a natural consequence his bobbing lights 
would be seen. Still he would not wholly trust to that, 
so, raising his voice, he hailed the passing sound For 
some minutes no reply came, and then it was wafted on 
the breeze, through a ship's trumpet, indistinct and muffled 
— Who calls? 

"Ship ahoy — boy adrift !" he replied. 

Some hoarse answer was made, and then he heard the 
well-known and welcome sound of a boat being hoisted 
and lowered Next minute it was in sight, dashing right at 
him, with the huge bulk of the Indiaman looming up behind 

" Where away?" says one. 

" This way, ma,tes," replied Ned, who was now roused 
by hope. 

But the men now saw the lights, and bore down upon 
him. Very few minutes elapsed ere he was hauled on board 

" My eye," said one of the men, "if it ain't some out- 
landish reefer, Where do you hail from, eh 1" 

"British Channel, just now," replied Ned, "faint, tired, 
and hungry ; so pull away, and don't talk" 

" Cuss my eyes, Bob," remarked one, " when this young 
bear comes forard, with an old blue shirt on and a Scotch 
cap, we shall make him pay his footin' for his imperence." 

With these words they reached the side, where the men 
ascended Ned, from force of habit, remaining last, as 
claiming the highest rank. He then clambered on deck, 
to the crowd who were surveying him with eager eyes, 
caught sight of a naval uniform, and spoke. 

" Come on board, sir," he said, and fainted 



33 SIR BTEPHEXl 



CHAPTEK VI. 

A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 

Now, if Ned Drake had been the most artful boy in all 
creation, this way of speaking, just as if he had been on 
duty, and had returned to report himself, following the 
said dramatic tableau by a second, that of fainting, he 
could not have insured for himself a better reception. 
All inquiries were thus stopped, and all idea of sending 
him ashore before they left the channel was adjourned, 
until the skipper was able to judge if he could bear it. 

When !Ned came too, he was far better off than lie 
deserved to be, for he was lying on a couch in the ship's 
best cabin, with a pretty girl bathing his forehead with 
aromatic vinegar, and a stout, portly gentleman, in undress 
naval uniform, looking on. A servant was preparing tea 
very quietly. 

Ned looked round with a dreamy stare, and then pointed 
to a water-bottle, as if he was Aint, but the little girl 
handed him a glass of wine, which he drank hurriedly. 

" And now, my lad," said the stout gentleman, cheerily, 
" have some tea, and then, perhaps, you will tell us what 
you were doing off the Goodwin Sands on a couple of 
old water casks." 

"Sir Stephen! Loo!" he cried, and then fell back, mut- 
tering to himselt, " The Lord have mercy on my wicked 
soul" 

The little girl clapped her hands, laughed, and then 
gave him her hand to rise. 

"Didn't I say it was Edward Drake?" she continued, 
as, pale, ghastly, and scarcely able to stand, the young 
buccaneer allowed himself to be placed at the table, where, 
glad to avoid questioning, he appeared to devote himself 
wholly to the business of the moment. 

The plot of Captain Gantling, his evil intentions to 
the ship, his allusion to an enemy — and he was aware the 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 33 

pirate disliked, if he did not hate, Sir Stephen Eawdon — 
flashed through his mind with lightning-like rapidity; 
but there came staring him in the face, at the same moment, 
certain fatal words. 

" On your solemn word, under no circumstances, will 
you reveal idhat I shall say?" 

" I thought Loo must be mistaken," said Sir Eawdon, 
kindly, when he saw that our hero was mending a little, 
" but now I begin to know my old pupil again. Egad, sir, 
it was a queer way to come on board. ' 

" It was, sir," replied Ned, sadly ; " and the best thing 
you can do is to throw me overboard again." 

"Why?" said Sir Stephen, while Loo opened her great 
eyes and stared. 

" Because you know the character of the craft to which 
I belong — to which I belonged," he added, with heartfelt 
emotion, "and which, if Providence offers me but a coal 
barge in place of it, I will leave." 

" Is not Captain Gantling your father ? " 

" I hope not, sir," said Xed, " though he has been very 
kind to me ; but something tells me he is not my father. 
But I was going to say, I was put there to serve one 
of his purposes, and I have given a promise not to 
explain." 

" Well — well — my good lad, you need say no more. I 
am going out to take the command of the Indian fleet, and 
if you really desire to abandon the unlawful course you 
have hitherto followed, why I will take you as a midship- 
man myself — so say nothing about the smuggler on board. 
Leave all explanations to me." 

" You are very kind, sir." 

"Isot at all. Loo, here, always liked you — you are her 
pet ; so, as you have need of rest, stay with her. I will 
speak to the captain. AYhen you are tired, there is a berth 
there ready for you." 

Ked Drake remained with Loo, quite bewildered, for 
though at any other time he would have delighted in the 
prattle of his old friend and favourite, Louisa Eawdon, yet 
now his thoughts were far away; and, pleading fatigue and 

v> 



34 SKD PrZZLEDw 

exhaustion, lie was soon glad to avail himself of the offer 
of the admiral, and retire to a state-room, there to give free 
scope to his pent-up feelings. 

All his desires for an adventurous life — all his drcaina 
for avenging his supposed father s wrongs — all his fantastic 
visions of a lovely island, covered by exquisite verdure, 
and peopled hy dusky angels, with a royalty in perspective, 
had vanished hefore the kindness shown him, not so much 
by Sir Stephen as that manifested by little Loo, his play- 
fellow and companion for three happy years. 

A dozen trifling circumstances now darted across the 
tablet of his memory, one of which, in particular, was a 
revelation. When Captain Gantliflg found that his adopted 
son — he never claimed liim as more — had been kindly 
treated, housed, and educated by the temporarily retired 
admiral, his rage at first knew no bounds. As soon as he 
got his youthful charge away, and discovered how he had 
been used, he at first, while cursing Sir Stephen, heartily 
added — "Well, he had but the right to, any way : but 
I've a rod in pickle for the old curmudgeon he little sus- 
pects. But I must wait — I must wait.' 

But now Xed Drake was a man in feeling, and deter- 
mined, whatever happened, to be no mere tool in the hands 
even of one of whom he personally had no complaint to 
make, and whom, therefore, he would not betray. At the 
same time he was resolved, unless the buccaneer showed 
some legal right to detain him, to leave him, but to leave 
him openly, and in a way that became a sailor. How this 
was to be done he could not say, though he shrewdly sus- 
pected the Ocean Girl would not be long in giving hini the 
opportunity. 

He would then tell him his determination to defend Loo 
at the peril of his life, and if he would not abandon his 
designs, consider himself absolved from the fearful oath 
which hung now with such a leaden weight on his spirits. 
It was difficult for him to explain the sudden revulsion of 
feeling which the sight of the playfellow of his happy 
youth had brought about, but the feet was patent to his 
heart 



THE YOUNG UUUCANEEIS. 35 

Even Captain Gantling had educated his protege to tell 
the truth, and his three years' residence under a clergy- 
man's tuition had fixed this one great cardinal virtue on his 
mind. He could not, therefore, reveal that which he was 
pledged not to tell, but he was resolved to foil whatever 
anight bo the evil intentions of the buccaneer towards Sir 
Stephen and Loo, for ho was now certain that this was the 
man of whom he spoke as mine enemy to slmj. 

As to the treasure the ship contained, that he cared 
nothing about. His education had taught him to consider 
it a matter of cleverness to outwit the Government, nor 
was he likely in those days on Sheppey Island to learn any 
very different notions. ' He would confine himself, there- 
fore, to saving human life, and let everything else take 
its course, though how he was to act in any case, with- 
out putting his new friends on their guard, he could not 
tell. 

But no matter what he risked, were it his body oi 
his soul, he would not have the father of little Loo in- 
jured. 

With this resolution firm in his head, he went to sleep, 
to dream uneasily, but at length to awake refreshed and 
resolute. He found when he rose some clean things, 
which the admiral had provided, and which his purse had 
easily commanded from the cadets, midshipmen, and mer- 
chant reefers on board. When, therefore, he appeared at 
breakfast, it was in a span new blue jacket and anchor 
buttons, a cap with a gold band, and white duck trousers, 
which nondescript uniform became him well. 

Very little allusion was made to the events which had 
brought our hero on board, but the conversation turned 
very much on the lad's early life, of which, however, tho 
young buccaneer knew very little. The smuggler chief had 
often asserted that ISTed was not his son, even alluding 
Avith much earnestness to the fact, though he would often 
say he was all the more bound to protect him. 

Except those parts he had visited in the free-trader — in 
war times less looked down upon than now — he knew no 
land but Sheppey. 

D 2 



36 THE SUSPICION. 

" I feel as if there I had taken root and grown," ho said, 
with a smile. "Even old Meg of the Eed Cow, who 
brought me up to seven years, is in my mind but a part of 
the island." 

" You never had an inkling of your origin, your parents, 
whence you came, or anything of that kind 1 ?" asked Sir 
Stephen. 

"Never," replied Ned, and then he faltered, "except 
once, a strange and unaccountable assertion." 

" Speak it, boy. You have strangely come under my 
care, and I will do everything in my power to serve 
you." 

Ned Drake then related that on board tho smuggler was 
one Dirtrick, a sailor who had always been a favourite of 
his, and who returned the liking. When he was younger, 
this man was often fond of telling long-winded yarns to 
the youth, which often turned upon persons unlawfully 
deprived of their position and fortune. 

" All, Ned," he would say, " there's many folk in this 
world as sails under false colours. I know some as might 
have to haul down their flag if you had your rights ; but 
all in good time ; he knows — he knows" — and he would 
point to the skipper — " but don't say a word as I said so, 
or, Master Ned, he'll cut my throat." 

"Master Edward Drake," said Sir Stephen Eawdon, 
with much feeling, as he shook his head, " we must find 
this Dirtrick, and we'll make him tell what he means. 
"We'll find a father for you, and in the meantime, why I'll 
be a father to you, so come on deck, and show yourself 
with Loo." 

And this was the man the young buccaneer had leagued 
himself with pirates to capture and destroy. 



87 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE CONFEDERATES MEET. 

The morning was line, and the wind being fair, there was 
a very large proportion of the passengers on deck to whom 
Nod had formally to be introduced, as an old acquaintance 
of the admiral's, who had unaccountably been found float- 
ing about the Downs on a couple of water-tight casks. 
This was enough for all present, and old and young, ladies 
fat, ladies thin, young and pretty, cadets, mids, all were 
glad to consider Ned one of them, though, as he murmured 
to himself, if they knew he was a pirate, they would have 
gladly headed him up in one of those very casks, and pitched 
him back again into the sea. 

Soon the breeze was pretty strong from the north-east, 
a perfectly fair wind, which made the three topsails lift and 
swell, while the passengers looked white and blue, and all 
manner of colours. Still, they knew not how to mend it, 
until at last, the wind freshening and the huge hull rolling 
before it, they gradually got below, or into the poop cabin, 
leaving the deck to the admiral, Ned, and Loo, who was a 
capital sailor. 

A little later the wind freshened more, so that royals had 
to be clewed up and furled, upon which Ned ran up the 
mizen shrouds, stored the mizen royal, and made fast the 
gaskets. "While aloft, he cast a wary eye around, and there, 
dead to windward, several points ahead, however, was the 
Ocean Girl. He knew her well — a sailor soon recognizes 
his ship ; and coming down, sadly enough returned to the 
quarter-deck, where he walked like the officer of the watch, 
every now and then easting a weather-look aloft. 

The admiral was reading ; Loo was with, her governess, 
a lady-like person, Ned was told, who had not yet appeared 
ill the cabin or on deck ; the captain was giving orders to 
the steward, the first officer was stirring about to see the 



38 JAKEZ OBUNN. 

men clear the deck of all lumber, so that the yojrng bucca- 
neer appeared in command. He was, however, scarcely 
conscious of the look of things around, being so bent on 
his own thoughts as scarcely to take note of time or any- 
thing else. 

He, however, from sheer habit — a habit acquired on 
board the Ocean Girl, where he was often in reality officer 
of the watch, when Captain Gantling and others were 
carousing — looked up every now and then at the sails, 
which once or twice he noticed shivering. 

"Mind your helm," he said sharply, without turning 
round, " steady so — steady — port." 

.And then he walked on. 

" Keally you must be removed from the helm," continued 
Ned ; " this will not do. See how the vessel is yawing 
about — port — steady so." 

" Like old times, this," said a deep voice. The young 
buccaneer turned. 

With a flushed cheek and a startled gaze, he saw at the 
helm a stout, tallish, ill-looking sailor, with great bushy 
whiskers, penthouse-like eyebrows, and a shock head of 
hair. He looked at Ned with a half-knowing, habspuzzled 
air. 

" Jabez Grunn," faltered the young man, with a dark 
frown, but speaking in a low tone of voice. 

" The same, your honour." 

" Then never speak to me again, or look at me again," 
said Ned Drake, hurriedly, " or Til tell all I know about 
you, and have you under hatches," and with these words 
he walked away to meet Loo, who was coming out of the 
poop-cabin. 

The steersman glanced at the young midshipman with 
an angry, but at the same time puzzled glance, taking 
care, however, to make no further mistake about the helm, 
which, had it been noticed, might have sent him off the 
precincts of the quarter-deck for the voyage, a consum- 
mation by no means wished by one who desired above all 
things to have a knowledge of many things which are picked 
up by a keen ear in such a position. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 39 

And such was the first meeting of the confederates on 
board the Duke of Kent East Indiaman. 

That day and several others having passed without 
any further glimpse of the brigantine, they began to feal 
soma little ease of mind. The crew of the ship wag 
large, and apparently well selected ; the armament unu- 
sually strong, the ammunition in abundance, and plenty of 
persons able and willing to use weapons. Drake, there- 
fore, had little fear of an open attack. It was treachery 
he desired to guard against, and hence his desire to be on 
deck in the night time, especially in light baffling winds 
and calms, when the six vagabonds who had been sent on 
board in charge of Jabez Grunn might take it into their 
heads to play some of their tricks. 

That the half-dozen pirates were there he knew, having 
picked them out once when they were all mustered to tea 
in the dog-watch, and when, as if in boyish curiosity, ho 
stole a glimpse at them under the foot-mat of the fore 
course ; but they took no notice of him, advised by Jabez 
Grunn, who could not make out Avhether the young reefer 
had retained his old dislike of himself, or was playing a 
deep game. 

The young buccaneer understood fully why they were 
neither attacked crossing the Bay of Biscay, or even while 
running along the first part of the coast of Africa. There 
were too many Engbsh cruisers about, bull-dogs that barked 
too sharply not to be awakened by the guns of an Indiaman 
and pirate brigantine. 

Still, as something might happen at any moment, he ever 
kept a keen and sharp look-out. 

Every evening, as the yellow setting sun was to be seen 
on the edge of the water, with the wind out Avest as yet, 
he would gaze round first to windward, then to leeward, to 
all appearance in examination of the weather, but in reality 
on the look-out for that vessel. 

On the track they were following, the direct road to 
India, there were naturally many came in sight, but J^ed 
Drake regarded them not. He could have picked out 
that brigantine from a thousand others, and almost every 



40 YOUNG LOVE. 

evening had good reason to believe lie saw it, far off to 
the nor'-west, a white speck against the grey sky, with, 
on many occasions, a land cloud aloft, in which, every 
now and then, it was completely lost. 

It was like sailing in company with the Flying Dutch- 
man, now that the young buccaneer began to understand 
his feelings. What with the Ocean Girl ever in sight, and 
the six ruffians among the crew, the position was trying in- 
deed, as indeed ii deserved to be, all of us having sufficient 
natural sense to restrain us from entering upon an enter- 
prise such as that of Ned Drake — a kind of wild cruise 
into No Man's Land, as it were. 

Every day the young buccaneer became a greater favour- 
ite with the passengers, while to Sir Stephen Eawdon he 
was clearly a matter of deep and anxious interest. Loo 
looked up to and worshipped him as if he had been some- 
thing superior to the rest of mankind. Under ordinary 
circumstances, this would have delighted Ned Drake ; but 
placed as he was, every act of kindness was a dagger planted 
in his heart. His health suffered, and though the breezy 
ocean and the fast warming sun kept him brown and rosy, 
he was thin, and evidently eaten away by the canker-worm 
of care. 

Young as he was, with such a heavy responsibility on 
his mind, the effect was depressing indeed. He was not 
old enough to call sophistry to his aid. He had given 
a solemn promise, and without warning Captain Gant- 
ling, he felt bound to observe his oath. Honour among 
thieves is an absurd and ridiculous saying, as there is none, 
petty larceny pilferers and others of their kidney always 
betraying one another when they can get anything by it 
Here were, however, no mean thieves in question, but men 
who, at the peril of their lives, filled their purses, chiefly 
from their national enemies, but on a pinch, not much re- 
garding what flag flew at the gaff. 

It was particularly of an evening, when Sir Stephen and 
the elders were smoking their cheroots and fighting their 
battles over again, -that Edward and Louisa were alone, 
when the mates were walking the weather quarter-deck in 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 41 

shipshape style, six steps and a look to windward, that the 
boy and girl — they were scarcely anything more — would 
move aft to the lee quarter, and leaning over, watch the 
waves, talking all the time in the low tone of voice which 
seems to become the hour and the scene. As yet no heavy 
weather had roused them from a sense of complete security. 

The Duke of Kent, one of the finest Indiamen afloat, 
though well loaded, was lighter than the fat homeward- 
bounders, laden with spoil of Araby and Ind, and as under 
everything she could draAv, she heeled over to port, they 
looked down into the watery deep, and, roused by the 
thoughts which come over us naturally Avhen away from 
land, spoke dreamily of the lovely country they were going 
to, and of the mysterious life that awaited them. 

" I could live ever thus," would Loo say, in her laugh- 
ing, merry way ; " it is really so nice." 

"Wouldn't you like just a bit of land, to grow violets 
and roses?" replied Ned, Avith a smile. 

" "Well, I might, you knoAV. Have you ever read ' Paul 
and Virginia?' " 

" Never." 

" I must lend it to you. It is a charming book. They 
are on an island — not on a desert island — but that I should 
like. Why, fancy you and I and papa shipwrecked — 
wouldn't it be jolly?" 

Now, whether Ned Drake thought the word somewhat 
out of place in a young lady's mouth, or from Avhat reason 
we will not say, but he did not reply, and as he clutched 
the bulwarks with his ten fingers, his teeth chattered, and 
his face was ghastly pale. 

A desert island ! — shipwrecked ! Who had suggested 
this ? 

" You are ill," suggested Loo, anxiously ; " You look 
like that night in the Channel, you knoAV, when you came 
on board." 

" A spasm — 'tis over. I will walk forward," said Ned, 
moodily, and left the girl alone without another Avord. 

The next day was very fine, and any 'one could see with 
half an eye they Avere advancing towards the tropics, Avhere, 



42 CHANGE OF WEATHER. 

what with the heat and other reasons, too long to give in 
detail, calms are so common. This was theiiour the young 
huccaneer dreaded If while old ocean slept, and the crew 
of the Duke of Kent kept a kind of anchor-watch, with 
their heads on their pillow, or, what was worse, a watch of 
treachery and death, the huccaneers crept on the doomed 
ship, and mastered it, what would be his position 1 

A cold, dreadful shiver passed over his whole frame, 
as, with his heart in his mouth, he walked the deck. 

There had been rain in the night, and the sea looked 
hot ; the breeze, though still in the same quarter, was 
lighter, the water bluer, but certain signs in the clouds, 
known only to the initiated, plainly indicated that there 
was more wind coming. This, however, was no consolation^ 
as a brigantine like the Ocean Girl, woidd always outsail 
an Indiaman, though, if she carried on too long, she might 
tun the risk of being capsized. 

A thrill passed through the bosom of the young bucca- 
neer at this thought, and yet, though it would end all his 
difficulties, he could not say he wished it. The man Gant- 
ling he owed a deep debt of gratitude to, even though he 
was a pirate, for personally he had been kind, though loom- 
ing in the distance, from this same No Man's Land of the 
future, he began to foresee reasons for disliking him, per- 
haps of a darker nature than he had yet imagined. Then 
there was Dirtrick, whose fidelity to his person was unim- 
peachable. 

Alter breakfast the weather began to change. The 
clouds banked dark to leeward, the sea was blacker, while 
some stray birds, an albatross, a stinkard or two, with some 
lazy gulls, began to waken up, as if they snuffed the storm. 
A regular school of porpoises tumbled and rolled about. 

Ned Drake strolled forward to the heel of the bowsprit, 
carelessly to all appearance, but in truth to have a glance 
round in search of the vessel which haunted his waking 
thoughts, his night dreams, and floated before him at times, 
not on the blue waves, but in a red sea of blood. He cast 
a wary look around, but detecting nothing, resumed his 
careless mien, looked through the head-boards into the pile 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 43 

of white foam that frothed up as she plunged, and then 
was about to move aft when he heard words which made 
him pause. 

" That ere cussed young reefer," said Jabez Grunn, with 
a fearful oath in addition to his nautical epithet, " gets over 
me. What is he here for 1 Is he a spy on us, or has he 
cut and run V 

" Cut and run, most like ; he's hand and glove with that 
blessed old tyrant of an admiral what guv Gantling such 
a lift once." 

" Very like. "We'll have a puff from east'ud afore long. 
This wind's nigh dead, and if that spindle-shanks goes aloft 

anywhere near me, me if I don't pitch him right 

overboard. Eight or wrong, he'll be out of the way." 

" Eeef topsails," shouted one of the mates. 

At the same moment everything fluttered. 

" Mind your helm, Jones," called out the first officer; and 
then, seeing that she would not lie her course, and that the 
forward sails were aback, the men were set to work trim- 
ming sails ; and while the wind was freshening, and the 
topsails flapping, and the booms heading, Ned Drake walked 
aft with a pale stern face, that boded no good to the pirate 
crew. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE WEATHER EARING. 

It woidd be impossible to conceive any position more 
difficult or trying than that in which Ned Drake was 
placed. Bound by every tie of gratitude and affection to 
Sir Stephen Eawdon and Louisa, who twice had contri- 
buted to save his life, the youth had also to remember one 
who, whether father or uncle, had been uniformly kind 
ar.d affectionate. "Whatever the motive might be which 
actuated him, there had been a strange tenderness about 



44 LIFE ON BOARD. 

this man's manner, as if he were a holy relic of the past, 
or a tender remembrance of one he had once loved or 
injured. 

But duty was paramount ; and Ned's duty, he felt, was 
to defend those who not only had been instrumental in 
saving his life, but had opened up a pleasant prospect of 
existence. The midshipman was at an age when, in 
healthy temperaments, love is in the mythic state ; and 
yet so mysteriously are all our sentiments linked, thst no 
doubt something of the more energetic feeling he was to 
experience as a man, already made his young heart beat. 

At all events he felt that, no matter what the con- 
sequence, Loo was to be shielded from harm. 

How was it to be done ?. In all probability Captain- 
Gantling's scheme for taking possession of the East India- 
man was connected with a surprise, in which the six 
biggest ruffians of the vessel were no doubt implicated. 
It was manifestly impossible to remain always on deck, 
while the only other course which remained, that of 
betraying his oath, he resolved to defer until human life 
was at stake. 

All this, however, did not tend to the promotion of his 
health. The sickly complexion which his narrow escape 
from starvation and drowning had left upon his coun- 
tenance, did not pass away ; and he who usually trod the 
deck with double zest under a tropical sky, was sullen and 
apathetic. 

Though the extreme liking he had for the society of 
Loo made him unwilling to change his costume, he often 
felt inclined to go forward and help the men in their 
varied occupations, for no life is less idle than that of 
a sailor. A landsman fancies after he has been a few days 
on board, that the vessel will get in sea trim, and then the 
tars will have little to do but walk about with their hands 
in their pockets. A circumnavigation of the globe Avould 
soon undeceive them ; on the last day the crew would be 
as busy as on the first. 

The business of the clay commences with the tnrning-to 
of the morning watch at daybreak, washing down, scrub- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 45 

bing and swabbing the decks, filling the scuttle butt with 
fresh water, coiling up the rigging, then breakfast, after 
which the studding-sail gear is to be rove, or the running 
rigging to be examined, or the standing rigging to be over- 
hauled, or chafing gear to be made, while, when everything 
else fails, the men are set to scrape the rust from the chain 
cables, as the song has it : — 

" Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thou art able ; 

* And on the seventh, holystone the decks and scrape the cable." 

But Edward Drake had no occupation, and though he 
began to be fond of reading, yet in his present state of 
mind he coidd scarcely be said to fix his attention on any 
book. Loo was a good part of the day with her gover- 
ness, and Sir Stephen, the young reefer was at times rather 
shy of There remained, therefore, few amusements, and 
one of these was to clamber up the rigging, ascend to the 
top -gallant mast, and thence survey the horizon on the 
look-out for the Ocean Girl. 

The wind continuing light, they made very little pro- 
gress ; and each day, so alike is the sea in fine weather, 
one day with another, that they seemed scarcely to make 
any progress, but to be floating about on the same spot 
eternally, like the Flying Dutchman trying to weather the 
Cape. 

They were in the trade winds, running pretty free, when 
one afternoon, while at tea, there came an alarm that a 
slaver sail was in sight, giving chase. All went on deck. 
2fed himself had a face as pale as marble, and it was only 
by lingering behind to take a glass of wine that he 
restored his equilibrium, and joined his friends without 
exciting suspicion. 

It was a clipper-built brigantine, with a black hull, 
which was heading directly for them. If Xed had not 
known who commanded her, and what she was, a trium- 
phant twinkle in Jabez Grunn's eye would have told him 
as he stood listlessly steering. There could be no mistake 
in the character of the vessel. It was a privateer, pirate, 
or slaver, the last to be most feared of all, as the*- practi- 
tioners in the trade of human flesh, which certain polit:- 



46 THE PKIVATEER. 

cians in this country now ignore, in order to excuse their 
eulpablo sympathy with slaveowners, were the worst 
ruffians on the seas. 

Everybody was looking out ; and as everybody — the six 
ruffians excepted — was equally anxious to get away, while 
the officers and passengers were discussing the merits of 
the pursuing vessel, the men were busy throwing Water on 
the sails. There was no doubt that, whatever she was, she 
was an ugly customer. 

By directions of the skipper, the East Indiaman was 
kept dead before the wind, the best point for a large square 
ship, while she, a clipper, was surfleet on a wind. The 
pursued vessel carried royals and skysails fore and aft, 
with ten studding sails, the brigantine having only a gaff 
trysail aft. 

"What do you make her out?" said the Admiral, 
quietly. 

" Armed — full of men — shows no colours.". 

"Hem!" replied Sir Stephen; "a pirate, I suppose ; a, 
French privateer, which is all the same. Of course, 
Dunbar, we can beat her off." 

"No doubt; but with my responsibilities I do not 
choose to lose a rope or spar. I shall crack on as long as 
she does not overhaul us too close, and escape if I can. 
If not, we must fight, when there can be no doubt wo 
shall give a good account of ourselves." 

At this moment, every eye being on the pursuing vessel, 
Ned approached the man at the wheel. 

"Beware!" he said, earnestly. " The moment there is 
danger, I shall betray the character of yourself and your 
associates. So no trickery." 

And before Jabez Grunn could reply, he was beside the 
Admiral. It was quite evident that the privateer was 
gaining ground, though very slowly ; so that without any 
unnecessary parade, the gentlemen began to get their arms 
ready, Avhile the word was passed forward to do the same. 
Fortunate indeed it proved that there was no moon, and 
that the night was unusually dark for that region. As 
soon as evening came, orders were given to have no 



THU YOUJSU BUCCANEER. 47 

lights of any kind, the mates steering alternately by the 
stars. 

As a natural consequence, the course was altered, and 
next morning not a sign of the vessel was to be made out. 
This, however, did not raise the spirits of the young mid- 
shipman, who, well aware of a permanent conspiracy on 
board, could obtain no peace of mind. A couple of boat- 
loads of privateers, seconded by the mutineers, would 
suffice to capture the Indiaman any dark night. 

And now the days got hotter and hotter, and the sea 
bluer and bluer, and the night came sooner and sooner, 
until there was no twilight, which indicated an approach 
to the tropical belt of the earth, and there was a slack, 
slimy mill-pond. This was what Ned both dreaded and 
expected. The surface of the water was as dead as a mill- 
pond, save that there was the ever-pleasant heave or ocean 
sign, which came from the horizon to the vessel in one 
lazy coil, with the ship steering round little by little. The 
sails hung napping on the yards, and the heat was so grea* 
that occupation was out of the question. 

Ned, however, kept a keen look-out, expecting every 
noAV and then to see the buccaneer come slowly but surely 
along by the aid of her long sweeps. He felt sure she 
was always in sight, and that, though they were like babes 
lost in a wood or a. fog, she ever hovered about. Edward 
Drake remembered some previous captures in these waters, 
and shuddered. 

One night, after several days of calm, and a very sultry 
twelve hours, the vessel rolled excessively on the black 
heave of the swell, and Ned, who was standing on a car- 
ronade, turned sharply round to the Admiral. 

" We're going to have some wind, sir, with a shift," ho 
said. 

" Why, you young powder-monkey," laughed the Admi- 
ral, " what do you mean 1" 

" I'm only a boy, sir," continued Ned, pointing to where 
a smooth, round-backed swell came out of a dirty thick 
jumble of a sky ; " but I've seen that wild look before in 
these latitudes," 



48 THE REEF. 

"And then, Master Edward V said Sir Stephen, raoro 
seriously. 

" There came a storm, as there comes now." 

As he spoke, there fell a heavy drop or two of rain, 
there was heard a long-drawn sigh hi the canvas aloit, 
then came a clapper of two or three carronades, as the sails 
hit against the yards, and then the rain fell in whole 
sheets and bucketfuls. 

"You are indeed a sailor, Master Xed," said the Admiral. 
" You must look alive, Dunbar." 

" Away there, furl royals, and close reef topgallant- 
sails !" cried Dunbar, addressing the first officer. 

" Ay, ay ! sir." 

And Edward, though he had made up his mind to 
interfere no more in the working of the ship, by a kind of 
instinct which seems part and parcel of the nature of an 
English sailor boy, ran up the rigging, while the rain 
poured faster and faster, until the scupper holes could not 
let the water out. It was now so dark that no r/,-:ra could 
see his hand, and, while the heavens sent down their 
deluge, Boreas began to stir ; and before a man was out 
on the yards it blew strongly. Still, it was nothing 
serious, and man after man was at work at reef points and 
garbets. 

Beefing, be it known, is by far the most exciting part of 
a seaman's duty. Once the halyards are let go, there can 
be no skulking. It must be done. If one is slow, another 
climbs over him. The first aloft goes to the weather 
earing — the second to the lee. 

Edward had run along the foot rope until he reached 
the extreme point of the yard-arm ; where, as in old times, 
when he was officer of the buccaneer, he began to sing out 
to the men in true seaman fashion. The position cannot 
be better illustrated than by a very simple explanation. 
Every boy, who has not had the opportunity of going to a 
seaport town, knows that the yard is a cross beam, thicker 
in the middle than at the ends, which supports the sail. 
Well, in order to furl or reef, it is necessary for two men 
to sit astride on the narrow end, with no support but the 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 49 

frail wood, and a foot-rope, on which the reefers stand. 
There, forty or fifty feet above the raging sea, they sit, 
see-sawing like boys at play, now one up, now the other 
down, just as the rolling waves dash them. 

Just as Ned began to haul, the rain ceased as suddenly 
as it began — a common event in the tropics — and it 
became lighter, — light enough, in fact, to make out the 
horizon. 

"Yoe-oh!" said Ned. 

" Yoe-oh !" responded a hoarse voice from the lee earing. 
The lad knew it ; it was that of Jabez Grunn. 

Now Ned was brave enough ; but many a brave officer 
and general, who would meet any enemies in the field, has 
shuddered with horror at the idea of being shot in the 
back by his own men ; and Edward, who would hava 
headed a party of bandits with enthusiasm, had no idea 01 
being murdered by a ruffian seaman pushing him off into 
the dark and seething waves. 

The question now arose, whether the Yankee Dutchman 
had recognized him or not. His voice was rather shrill, 
and this, of itself, was enough to betray him. At all 
events, he determined to act in self-defence. The mates 
below kept roaring to the men to clew up and furl ; which, 
with the wind and the hubbub of the vessel, rendered any 
calm or collected action impossible. 

All was done, and the men began running down the 
rigging, to be in readiness to perform any other manoeuvre 
necessary to the snugness of the ship. 

But, skulking flat against the rigging, Ned distinctly saw 
Grunn, his glittering eyes fixed upon him, like those of a 
cat upon a mouse. Now, to hail the deck in that clamour 
was impossible. In fact, he could not have been heard. 
His thin treble would have sounded scarcely so loud as 
the cry of a sea-mew. Safety, then, depended wholly on 
himself, as in the stormy life to which he had devoted 
himself it generally does ; hence the fearless self-reliance 
of the noble profession, which turns timid boys (apt 
to allow others to think for them), into active men. 

He moved slowly along the yard, with his feet on the 

E 



150 THE REEF. 

foot rope, as if intending to reach the spot in the rigging 
where it was connected with the mast. Jabez Grunn 
descended a little way, evidently intending to waylay Ned 
on the maintop ; but, the instant the brave boy saw him 
move, he fell, as if accidentally, his feet only remaining 
fast, to all appearance caught in the sail, but in reality 
lightly clinging to the cordage on which he had just been 
resting. 

In this way he swung, head downwards. 

The astounded seaman began to believe that he was 
about to be saved from the commission of a crime, and 
uttered a gleeful oath. 

Ned heard him. 

" Not yet, Grunn !" said Ned ; and, as the vessel lurched, 
he caught at the rigging with both hands, clung with the 
tenacity of a cat, let go with his feet, and, despite a heavy 
jerk, secured his position, and was on deck before Grunn 
had recovered from his astonishment. 

Then Ned, aware that everybody was too busy to 
notice him, walked aft, reserving to himself the pleasure 
of an explanation with the ruffian sailor at a later 
period. 

Indeed, the elements were now too active for men to 
think of anything else. The gust was upon them, rushing 
on with a vanguard of foam ; the ship bounded like a raee- 
horse under the whip ; the topsails flashed full, and soon 
away she went over the huge waves like a frightened 
steed, the white foam rising on every hand, and two men 
grinning and tugging at the wheel, and yet scarcely able to 
grind it down. 

Ned forgot everything else in the excitement of the 
moment, for now he was happy. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 51 



CHAPTER IX. 
"the ocean girl." 



It was not long before top-gallant sails had to be furled, 
and the yards lowered on the caps, so stiff was the tropical 
squall, — less dangerous since captains study the glass, but 
then, unhappily, often fatal, through carrying on to the 
last moment. All, save those on duty, had left the deck, 
including the Admiral. But Ned, scarcely yet recovered 
from the excitement of the attempted murder by Grunn, 
and, scenting the storm as the war-horse does the battle, 
kept in an obscure position on the quarter-deck, holding on 
to a larboard backstay. 

He was never tired of watching the different phases of 
power exhibited by Nature. On the present occasion, 
collision, even on the wide ocean, was added to the other 
dangers of the deep ; for a huge mist, capped with black 
clouds, came driving towards them, hiding the heavens, 
and completely obscuring the stars. 

It was followed by a blast, to which the first gust 
seemed but child's play. 

At this moment the door of the round-house opened, 
and the voice of the Admiral was heard, addressing 
Captain Dunbar. 

" Has anyone seen the juvenile 1 Egad, he has got a 
quick eye ; we should have been all snug before the gale, 
if I had taken his word." 

"Here I am, sir !" said Ned, coming forward. 

"Why, where have you been?" 

" Aloft, on the main topsail yard. Took the weather 
earing," laughed Ned. 

" Born to be a sailor!" replied the Admiral. "Dirty 
night, Dunbar ! come in, and have a glass." 

And with these words, skipper and reefer entered the 
"-abin, where Edward was then highly complimented on hisi 

E 2 



52 THE "ocean girl." 

perspicuity and devotion. Captain Dunbar declared that 
he had seldom seen so severe a gale in those latitudes. 

" But," said he, " to-morrow we shall he in the doldrums 
again, and very likely, even before an hour, we shall be 
bowling along under easy sail. 

" I hope so," replied the Admiral, laughing, " if it is 
only for the sake of my crockery." 

Captain Dunbar laughed, finished his glass, and went 
out. The other, trusting to him like unto a second Pro- 
vidence, went to bed, nor rose till morn, when the gale 
had subsided into little puffs of air and light squalls ; 
which, in their turn, were followed by another dead calm. 
All the new, or, as they have it, green passengers, were 
now for bathing ; and even the ladies thought the sea 
looked beautiful. It was tempting, hot as it was on deck, 
to look down upon that blue and smooth surface, in which 
you could see your face. 

"Where's the objection?" asked a pompous soldier 
officer ; " I can't see it." 

" I can," said Xed, laughing. 

"Where, sir?" replied the infantry captain, with a 
strong emphasis on the word sir. 

" There, captain," continued the young reefer, pointing 
to a little black horn, above a huge green body, which 
sailed about with a kind of patent screw behind. " That 
fellow, I firmly believe is the same who ate poor Ikey 
Jones, an old shipmate of mine. 

Upon which, without noticing the laugh, Edward 
walked forward, having, at the same instant, discovered 
that there was a sail in sight, at no great distance. The 
young midshipman's eyes were good, and, at a glance, he 
had recognized the brigantine ; but at the same time 
he fancied that he detected flags signalling. 

It must be recollected that in these utter calms the ship, 
losing all way, ceases to obey her rudder, and keeps moving 
round and round, at the mercy of the waves, like a cat 
settling herself in .her bed. The haze was so great, that 
no one whose senses had not been almost preternaturally 
worked upon, would ever have detected the presence of a 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 53 

strange vessel. The heat was intenser every moment, and 
all hands were idle. 

Ned had a small pistol in the right-hand pocket of his 
trousers, which he had asked as a loan from Loo. "With 
this he felt the strength of a giant, and walked forward 
coolly in defiance of the whole six ruffians who were 
herded against him. 

The general crew were below, or asleep. One man at 
the wheel, and a look-out or two, seemed quite sufficient 
watch in such weather; but five of the six buccaneers 
were collected together in a group at the foot of the 
mainmast. 

Where was Grunn ] 

Ned coidd not see him, but he had a very good guess 
as to how he was employed. As soon as he was near 
enough, he leaped into the mizen-chains, and looked up. 
There in the fore-top was the huge Dutchman, busy with 
some red, blue, and green handkerchiefs, signalling as hard 
as he could to the brigantine. 

"Come down out of that," said Ned, quietly; "come 
down out of that, Jabez Grunn." 

The huge mass of bloated flesh and matted hair that 
answered to this appellation, looked eagerly down, with a 
white and scared look, and seeing who it was, he muttered 
some fearful curse, put the handkerchiefs in his pocket, 
and slid rapidly down the rigging to within a few yards of 
where the daring young reefer was ostentatiously playing 
with a cocked pistoL 

"Jabez Grunn." 

"Sir!" 

" The first time I again see a glimpse of treachery, I 
shall no longer be able to keep silent, so beware." 

" Ay, ay, sir." 

"And, Jabez Grunn, allow me to give you a very serious 
piece of advice." 

" What is that, sir?" 

" Never threaten to murder a reefer, when he is sitting 
on the hammock-rail, listening to you. I have now some 
orders to give." 



54- THE "OCEAN girl.' 

"Yes, sir." 

" I am going on board the Ocean Girl. Do not attempt 
to come with me yourself, nor venture to allow any of your 
gang to enter my boat. When I return I will bring you 
orders from Captain Gantling." 

" Thank ye, sir," said Jabez, who was bursting with rag<) 
and fury. 

Xed said no more, but, like the island monarch he was 
destined to become, walked away as unconcerned-looking 
as if he was without care or trouble; though certainly his 
trouble just then was greater than ever he had known before. 
More and more the complications of his fearful trade struck 
him with dismay, and he asked himself over and over again, 
why he ever should have fallen into the clutches of one so 
cruel and vindictive. 

The Admiral was expecting him to lunch, and, not sorry 
to escape the presence of the great body of passengers, Avho 
appeared to him a constant source of remorse, he entered 
the cabin, and sat down in company with Loo and the 
governess, a most lady-like and efficient person. 

All were so used to what they called the old-fashioned 
style of the young reefer, that his gravity scarcely excited 
a remark ; and when Mrs. Watson and Loo retired, Sir 
Stephen was not particularly surprised when Edward 
demanded the honour of a brief and private inter- 
view. 

" Sir Stephen," he began, " I am but a boy in years, but 
during my brief career I have had to endure that which 
has made me almost a man." 

" Your foresight about the storm quite proves that." 

"But, sir, sadder and more terrible experiences have 
done much to age me. Therefore, my generous preserver, 
when I ask something of your forbearance, believe I have 
a reason." 

" I will." 

" Will you honour me by looking from this stern-port — 
there, where my finger points 1 You see it. Sir Stephen 
Eawdon, that is the brigantine of Captain Gantling, the 
buccaneer, of whose crew I am one." 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 55 

" Gad, boy, I see — the same that chased us. But this 
has a long, pale sort of hull, with a broad streak of red, 
without ports, and is log-rigged." 

"Admiral, the chameleon has many colours." 

" I understand you, boy. What is it you wish V 

" I would die to serve you and Loo — I beg pardon, Miss 
Rawdon — but I ask you, without demanding any explana- 
tion, to allow me to go on board that vessel. When I re- 
turn, perhaps my lips may not be so firmly closed. On my 
honour as a gentleman, and my faith as a Christian, my in- 
tentions are good" 

" I believe you," said the Admiral, gravely, taking up a 
glass and examining the pirate craft ; " a wonderfully light 
sparred vessel. Have I not seen her lately, lying oft 
Sheppeyl" 

" You have, sir." 

" There seems to me some memory in connection with 
this Gantling. Knew you him ever by any other name 1 
Nay, answer not if 'tis displeasing. Poor lad, you have had 
sad trials on board that vessel, and 'tis a great wonder you 
did not leave your truthfulness behind You shall go on 
board, and when you return I will tell you a story which 
may assist your recollection." 

With these words he put down his glass and went 
on deck, where he mentioned that Ned was anxious to 
leave the Indiaman for an hour, and have a row in the 
dingy to the brigantine, at which everybody was now look- 
ing, s 

Captain Dunbar laughed, and declared that he did not 
know where, on such a hot day, Master Edward would get 
his erew, but the dingy was at his service, and he had no 
doubt two of the boys would volunteer. 

Edward thanked them, and while the boat was getting 
ready, he retired to his cabin, and wrote a few bines, which 
he hastily placed in Loo's work-basket. 

" If the boat returns without me, I am a prisoner, never 
an ingrate." 

Then having secured both pistols, he started upon his 
bold and daring adventure, actuated by as pure motives and 



56 THE 

as noble a conception of duty as any hero whose name has 
come down to us. 

The boys were in the boat, quite hearty for the trip, it 
being a change to them from ordinary duties. The sun 
was very hot, and the pull a long one, though whether it 
was a light air, or the effect of the haze, could hardly be 
made out. Still, with their loose white trousers, blue 
shirts, bare arms, and natty caps, they looked quite equal 
to the work. 

Ned let himself down the side by a rope, and jumping 
into the stern sheets, took hold of the yoke lines, and was 
about to shove off, when the chorus of a well-known voice 
arrested him. 

" Good-bye, Edward ; don't be long. Only your boat's 
Buch a cockle-shell, I'd come too." 

" Not for worlds," thought Ned ; and then he added 
aloud, "You are better off on board" 

He was right ; for as the dingy was urged forward by the 
oars, and went slowly and rippling over the water, it was 
so close to the waves, so stifiingly hot and sultry, they could 
scarcely breathe. There was, however, a long glassy swell 
over the whole hot, hazy, sullen-looking sweep of water, 
but as yet not a breath of air, whatever gale might be stir- 
ring up the waves at a distance. 

The boys were willing and strong, and bent to it with a 
will, but it soon became hard work to make head against 
the waves. Ned sat pale, taciturn, and thoughtful. He 
could not look to his interview with Captain Gantling 
without emotion. He had always liked — almost loved the 
man, and it pained him to thwart him, even when his de- 
sign was so evil. He knew that his whole heart and soul 
was set upon this enterprise, as leading to that other Arca- 
dian dream, connected with coral lips and scant drapery, 
about which Ned somehow didn't seem to dream quite so 
much. 

Personal fear for himself he had none ; and even had he 
apprehended violence, it would not have made him pause. 
There was before the eyes of the boy buccaneer a vision of 
right, which even his ill-directed education taught him was 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 57 

paramount. Before it, and his deep regard for his kind 
patron and playmate, all considerations of the peril — all 
ideas of wild and lawless glory — vanished. 

And now as he neared the vessel, and saw her on the 
rising swell, rolling as helpless as a cask, now one gunwale, 
now the other, dipping into the heavy waves, and saw that 
nothing hut the wave anchor- watch was kept, he wondered 
what Gantling was doing, and where he awaited his 
coining. 

There was, however, not much time for thought, as in a 
few minutes more the hoatman had dropped his oar, and 
pinned his hoatdiook into the rudder chains. Then a line 
was dropped, and the boat hauled up to the side. 

Eve he knew what he was about, he was once more on 
the deck of the Ocean Girl. 

"Glad to see you, sir," said Dirtrick, touching his cap, 
" the skipper awaits you below." 

" All right, Dirtrick," replied the young midshipman ; 
and then he added in a lower tone, " if there is any row, 
let those two boys go — and stand by." 

" Ay, ay, sir," said Dirtrick, with a queer, rollicking, fishy 
sort of glance. 

And Edward Drake, with an erect and haughty mien, 
strode towards that cabin, which contained the present 
arbiter of his destiny. 



CHAPTER X. 

A STORMY INTERVIEW. 

Ned knew the way too well to require any guide, and in 
another moment he was at the foot of the companion-way, 
knocking at the bulkhead in which the door was cut. 

" Come in," said the deep commanding voice of Gant- 
ling. 



68 A STORMY INTERVIEW. 

Ned obeyed, and as lie turned the handle, a flood of 
light fell upon him. The cabin was no longer so peaceful- 
looking as before. The disguise which, in case of disagree- 
able visits, had been affected off Sheppey, was thrown off 
here ; and though the apartment was much like most cabins, 
its mixture of the luxurious and the martial was, to say the 
least, singular. There were two dark cannon in the room, 
which, by the judicious removal of all unnecessary gear, 
could be changed, in a very few minutes, into a well- 
appointed battery. 

The walls literally bristled with muskets, pistols, sabres 
half-pikes, boarding axes, and all the manifold implements 
of marine warfare, and in the midst of all this Captain 
Gantling sat with his bottle, glass, and pipe, smiling grimly 
at the scene around, as if proud to be monarch of all he 
surveyed. 

" Ah, JSTed, so it was you. And pray to Avhat do I owe 
this unexpected pleasure V he said, in rather a thick voice. 

" It remains to be proved, sir, whether it be a pleasure or 
not." 

" Ah ! what have we here, my Lord High Admiral ? 
Speak out, I am ready to answer," laughed Gantling, 
grimly. 

" As my object is to ask questions, I am glad to find you 
in the humour. Is the Duke of Kent the vessel you in- 
tended me to board 1" 

" It is, and very cleverly you have done it." 

" Is Sir Stephen Eawdon, who, with my old friend, Loo, 
his daughter, is on board, the man whom you call mine 
enemy?" 

" He is," replied Gantling, now with a truly savage 
gleam in his cruel grey eyes. 

" Then I beg to say he is my friend, and that I will 
defend him at the peril of my life, and in defiance of the 
wicked oath which you compelled me to take," said Edward 
with calm-spoken words, but a heaving breast, and flashing 
eye, indicative of his deep emotion. 

" Boy," cried Gantling, whose passions were aroused, and 
whose face indicated the tempest within, " but for that man 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 59 

I had no need to have been a buccaneer. Instead of dream- 
ing of sovereignty in the sunny isles of the south, ■where 
dusky beauties welcome you with open arms, and perpetual 
summer creates a paradise on earth, I should have lived 
honoured and respected in my own land. But it was not 
to be. I had to leave my profession, dishonoured. I was 
broke — and by them. Erom that hour I have vowed 
eternal enmity to both — one still lives." 

"And the other?" gasped Ned. 

" Look not at me so," said Gantling, with a shudder ; 
" none can say that innocent blood rests on my hands, lie 
had the same chance as I had, and shot at me. He missed 
— I did not — and he died." 

"Of whom do you speak?" 

" 'Tis past now, boy, and not worth mentioning. Even 
this duel was turned against me. They said he would 
never have met me on an equality ; that I had waylaid and 
murdered him, and that after death I had discharged his 
pistol. So they hunted me down as an assassin, drove 
me away, an outlaw, from my native shores, to return 
a scourge and a terror. Yes, I had my revenge to the 
fulL" 

" You have been tried, doubtless," said Ned, in a colder 
tone than he usually adopted to his old officer ; " but these 
details just now can be of no interest to me." 

"No interest to you!" laughed Gantling, savagely; 
" who knows 1 If you were less obstinate, they might 
be." 

" Captain Gantling," continued Edward Drake firmly, 
" even if these details personally concern myself, they must 
be adjourned" 

" Must, sir — and why?" asked Gantling, with a menacing 
look. 

" Because unless I have your solemn word, and that x 
think I can trust to, that nothing more shall be attempted 
against Sir Stephen Rawdon and his daughter, immediately 
on my return I will have Jabez Grunn and his lot put in 
irons, and the guns double-shotted, to give you a warm 
reception." 



60 THE "OCEAN GIRL." 

"Mad! mad! stark, staring mad!" said Gantling, 
wildly, as he strode the cabin, with fierce and angry steps. 
" Put Jabez in irons ! double shot the guns !" 

"I am not mad." 

" And you talk thus to me ! Will you allow me to ask 
you who you may be?" 

" Naval Cadet Edward Drake, of the Admiral's flag-ship 
Bellerophon." 

Gantling stood back aghast. A livid pallor spread over 
his face, his lips quivered, his eyes seemed ready to start 
from his head, while his fingers mechanically felt for Lis 
pistols. Edward faced him, also pale, but firm and re- 
solved. There was not one atom of fear in that manly atti- 
tude. Like Nelson, he knew not fear. 

" And pray, sir, is there any other remark his Majesty's 
navel cadet wishes to make to Joseph Gantling," he 
asked. 

" Yes ! I have to complain that Jabez Grunn has once 
already attempted murder on my person, and I have every 
reason to belieA^e he will put a pistol-ball through my head, 
the first chance he gets." 

" Indeed ! As that is a pleasure I reserve to myself, and 
intend to enjoy shortly, I will trounce the fellow for daring 
to forestall me." 

" Captain Gantling," said Ned, " a truce to idle threats. 
Have you no memory of our old friendship ? Cannot you 
give up this one scheme, and repair many evil deeds of the 
past by this one generous action 1 The world is all before 
you where to choose. Your island kingdom, with its 
flowery harvests and hopeful delights, awaits you. Why 
go there red-handed?" 

" Will you go with me 1 " hoarsely cried Gantling. 

" No. My association Avith Sir Stephen has re-awakened 
the slumbering echoes of conscience, and I will, cabin-boy 
or captain, follow my career honestly." 

" And begin by betraying the one who has brought you 
up from childhood," pursued the buccaneer. 

" Hainan life is sacred, and my duty plain. But why not 
release me from my wicked oath, instead of forcing me to 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 61 

break it ; -which, having warned you once, I shall do as soon 
as I go on board." 

" Which you never shall, spawn of Satan ! whelp of a 
vile brood !" cried Gantling, beside himself with passion. 

At the same moment he drew a pistol, cocked it, and 
levelled it full at the boy's heart. 

" On your knees, beg my pardon, and renew your oath !" 
he screamed vehemently. 

" Never ! Dye your hand in blood, if you will ; but 
death before dishonour ! " 

" Die then ! " bawled Gantling. 

He pulled the trigger, the cabin was filled with smoke, 
but when it cleared away, .Ned stood white, but undaunted, 
in the same position, his lips muttering a prayer in- 
audibly. 

" Nein ! nein! none of that — donner and blitzen — none 
of that — hagel and wetter, you forget who is — nein I nein /" 
cried Dirtrick, who had struck up the pistol ; he whispered 
in the captain's ear, " not father and son." 

" Devil ! out of the way — how dare you come here 1" 

" Blitzen and donner — you called loud enough. But 
what is the matter 1 " 

" Ask Captain Gantling," said Ned, coldly. 

" Yaw ! yaw ! I see — quarrel — both hasty, make it up, 
smoke a pipe in the lust haus." 

" Never. No more connection for me with Captain 
Joseph Gantling. Open the door ; the wind is rising, and 
I must go." 

" That I did not kill you," said the buccaneer, with a 
fearful oath, I am glad, for many reasons. But, by heavens, 
you must think me a fool to let you go. No, you are on 
the ship's papers, and no flimsy commission of King George 
avails with me. Here you have come of your own accord, 
and here, my young bantling, you will remain, to crow as 
much as you like ; but you do not thwart my plans." 

And pushing Dirtrick before him, he went on deck. 

Ned was confounded, but ever ready at expedients, he 
rushed to a narrow open port. 

" Are you there, boys V 



62 THE "OCEAN GIRL." 

"Ay, ay, sir." 

" One moment." 

With a pencil he wrote these words on a stiff sheet 
of paper — 

" Grunn and the men who shipped with him are pirates. 
I am a prisoner. Avoid St. Helena, and sail to the icest- 
tcard. Make Juan Fernandez in preference." 

"Here, boys, give this to the Admiral." 

" Now, then, cut off that boat," cried, the stern voice of 
Captain Gantling ; " the young reefer who had. the impu- 
dence to come here, is a runaway cabin-boy of mine, and I 
mean to keep him." 

The boys made no reply, but pulled away with a will, 
Ned Drake watching them with a dreamy sort of inter- 
est, which seemed- wholly centred, in others, and not at all 
in himself. He could hear the lazy swash of the water, 
and. could see the Indiaman not more than three-quarters 
of a mile off; her black bows dipping, as she rose out of the 
swell, and through the vapoury haze he could make out the 
signal to return. 

There were evidently signs of wind ; and as a vessel like 
the brigantine would soon feel it, she was not long before 
she began to move. Then Edward made out the boat 
being lifted up quickly by a whip from a boom end, and 
then a great confusion reigned on the Indiaman's decks. 

Men ran aloft, sails Were let fall, and every preparation 
made, he fancied, for a chase. 

Two minutes later there was a flash, then a report, and 
a ball came whizzing along the surface of the water. Then 
came a furious tramping overhead, and Ned heard the buc- 
caneer giving his orders for flight. The Indiaman, pre- 
pared with heavy guns, crowded with sailors and soldiers, 
over a hundred of whom had embarked at Gravesend, was 
not to be lightly faced by the brigantine. 

As soon as the changing position of the vessels hid the 
Duke of Kent from the sight of Ned, he closed the port, 
and lay down on a couch, the apartment being amply 
lighted by means of a massive silver lamp, that doubtless 
came from some Eoman Catholic cathedral. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. ()3 

Scarcely had he done so when Captain Gantling re- 
turned. His face was more calm and serene. All trace of 
passion had fled, and he was the same collected seaman his 
people always found him whenever there was any danger. 

" So, sir, the Admiral wants to fight for his new officer," 
he said, with a gay laugh. ; 

" Sir Stephen is strangely attached to me." 

" Indeed !" half sneered Grantling ; "but harkee, Ned, 
you and I are now on different tacks, but we need not be 
savage enemies. Hear me out. I shall try and carry out 
my plans in spite of you ; my making you a prisoner re- 
leases you from all engagements. Do what you can to 
serve your friends — so will I to serve my designs; but hang 
it, don't let us altogether forget we are messmates and ship- 
mates." 

" Captain Gantling, while a prisoner here, I presume you 
will treat me like a gentleman, and I will behave the same. 
But of our differences, not a word. Your mind is made up ; 
so is mine. Let us speak of other things." 

"That's it." 

And the buccaneer struck a slight blow on a Chinese 
gong, which, with many other similar nicknacks, was sus- 
pended from one of the beams of the upper deck, within 
reach of his hand 

A cabin boy appeared. 

" Let us have supper — quick. The wind is freshening, 
and I shall be wanted on deck soon." 

The serving youth retired, and soon returned with one 
of those dainty suppers which the man of the world knew 
so well how to order and enjoy ; being in this like to most 
men of genius, who dine when other men eat. The two 
things, gastronomically considered, are as different as a 
China teacup and a pig's trough. The buccaneer had 
inoculated ISTed somewhat with his taste, and the lad 
knew therefore the pleasures of a good dinner. 

But Gantling did not press him now. He merely put 
before him delicacies that might have tempted a saint on a 
fast day ; also exquisite wines, not your fiery ports and 
sherries, but delicate and seductive juice of the grape, 



64 THE "ocean girl." 

that steals softly over a man's senses, and lifts him gently 
into elysium, without the slightest vestige of intoxication. 

And when by slow and insidious degrees he had led 
him to take a glass or two, when his pale cheek glowed, 
and his eyes flashed, and his breath was quick, the bucca- 
neer began one of his most entrancing stories of adven- 
ture. They were told so well, that they had a charm of 
freshness and excitement about them, the power of which 
he well knew over one at Edward's age. It was the 
better side of piracy, admirably painted by a skilful hand, 
that had won the boy's former adhesion to the bold career 
of a free trader, and the captain saw no reason why 
the same influence should not be successfully brought 
to bear again. 

When he had worked him up to the required pitch, he 
stopped. 

" And now, my hearty — though you are not one of my 
creed — come on deck : we shall have a dirty night." 

They went, and to judge from appearances, they were 
about to have a dirty night. 

The sun had dipped into the sea, the shades of night 
had gathered over the vast surface of the illimitable 
waste — nothing could be seen but the chill and gloomy 
element. 

It was more than half dark, with heaps of clouds 
lengthening out blacker every moment. W.^ere the sun 
had been, high aloft in the heavens, was a small orange- 
coloured lurid speck, which seemed to look down upon the 
deepening gloom. 

" 'Tis an ox eye," said 'Ned ; " we shall have a regular 
tornado." 

" We shall, my boy," replied Captain Gantling, sadly ; 
" and such a pupil as you have been, to desert me ! What 
a thing it would be, if you were to change your mind. By 
heaven ! I would resign my command to help you, and 
obey my bold boy buccaneer." 

" It's very tempting, certainly." 

" Ship ahoy ! ship ahoy !" said a hoarse voice at some 
little distance. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 65 

" Here we are ; what ship is that V 
" No ship, but a very long boat : and Jabez Grunn 
came on board to wring the neck of th$t cursed young 

reefer." 



CHAPTER XL 

JABEZ GRUNN. 

Jabez Grunn had seen Edward Drake's departure for the 
Ocean Girl, with undisguised apprehension and alarm. 
He could by no means unravel the mystery, which made 
the youth, who had been the pet and favourite of the 
captain, all at once their enemy. That he was about to 
oppose their piratical expedition, he felt certain, though 
his motive was beyond his ken. 

The ugly foretopman watched the boat go away, from 
his usual berth in the rigging, when not employed else- 
where. He distinctly saw the small craft return without 
the midshipman, and he reasoned, that in all probability 
the buccaneer and the youth had had an explanation. He 
hastily summoned his comrades, and in order to be pre- 
pared for the worst, they all armed themselves, and while 
the lads were making their report in the cabin, they hauled 
up the boat right into the bows. Though the chain slings 
were all ready to hook into the rings, no one had thought 
fit to hoist until the report was made. 

Each man then took his kit, and dropped it down into 
the clinker jolly, after which he himself followed. 

Creeping up the bowsprit, and lowering himself to 
where the martingale guy alone stood between him and the 
Water, Jabez Grunn bided his time. 

He had not long to wait. He saw the first mate come 
forward, while the captain, Sir Stephen, and others, stood 
together on the quarterdeck. 

" Send all the men aft," said the first officer to the 
Becond. 

r 



66 JABEZ GBUNN. 

"Ay, ay, sir." 

And in five minutes more, the "whole crew that could be 
found, -were mustered around the mainmast. 

"How many are missing 1 ?" asked the skipper, looking 
round the astonished group. 

" Seven, I think, sir. Jabez Grunn and the fellows 
who shipped with him," replied the second mate, 

" Find them, sir. Take ten men you can depend upon, 
and put these rascals in irons. They are pirates, and have 
come on board to rob and murder us all." 

"Boat ahoy !" roared a look-out in the maintop. 

" Where away V cried the skipper, rushing to the side. 

" Stealing away to windward," replied the look-out. 

" Come back, or I will fire," continued the skipper. 
" Out with the guns. The villains have stolen my boat." 

All was hurry and confusion for a moment, and muskets 
were rapidly found, but by the time they were able to 
take aim, the boat was a dark speck on the ocean, the 
night having fallen suddenly upon the great deep. 

The anger of the captain could only be equalled by the 
sorrow of the Admiral, who saw the career of his young 
and hopeful protege thus cut short. He had some sus- 
picions of the reasons which actuated Drake, having an 
intuitive belief that the boy himself was honest and 
sincere. His coming on board appeared part of a great 
scheme to secure the Indiaman. It was clear, too, that 
Edward had sacrificed himself on the altar of duty, and had 
left his friends in order to be of service to them. Poor 
Loo quite cried, especially when she found the note which 
Ned had written to her. 

A sharp look-out was kept for the pirate, as the crew 
and officers of the Duke of Kent had no fear of her 
now. That, with accomplices on board, and by a clever 
surprise, they might have been overpowered, was quite 
possible; but armed and manned as she was, they had now 
no fear for the result. 

The Admiral's object was to wait until morning, chase 
the buccaneer, disable her if possible, and then propose a 
ransom for the lad. Had the vessel been a man-of- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 67 

war, duty and inclination both, would have made Sir 
Stephen fight ; but the Indiaman was better qualified to 
defend herself than to assume the offensive. 

Meanwhile the pirate runaways had reached out of 
range, and, in fact, could not be seen. Half-an-hour after 
their departure it was quite dark, with the heat excessive 
and uncomfortable. There was not the faintest breath of 
wind in the heavens above, or on the waters below. The 
sky was, however, cloudless, while the stars Avere obscured 
by a thin mist. The elements seemed temporarily stagnated. 

As soon as they were out of reach of the Indiaman's 
menaces, Jabez Grunn peered about to catch a glimpse of 
the buccaneer, which could not be far off. The men 
meanwhile, who had provided themselves with both rum 
and brandy, took a heavy pull. 

"Avast heaving !" cried Jabez : "none of your mutiny 
here. If we gets drunk, no more brigantine for us. 
Heave and pall ; hand over the wicker this way, old 
moony-face," addressing a German vagabond. 

And having received the wicker-bound bottle, he took a 
heavy drink, after which he popped the whole under the 
stern sheets, and bade the men row. 

The cool impudence with which he made himself 
captain seemed to amaze the men, who, however, pulled 
off their jackets, and began to bend to their work with a 
will. But though they made considerable progress in the 
desired direction, the brigantine could not yet be seen. 

All, therefore, with one accord desisted from rowing, 
vowing they'd have a dra'.a, and go to sleep. The atmo- 
sphere had by this time b jcome more opaque, and the dark- 
ness more intense and horrible. 

" Well, just as you likes, you know, my hearties," cried 
Jabez Grunn ; " but if we're took we shall hang, instead 
of hanging that there cursed young reefer as has blowed 
upon us." 

" You knows as we can't see nothing," replied one, " and 
it ain't no good a-rowing. So hand over the beaker, and 
we'll keep a nigger's watch till morning — take in sail, and 
go below." 

f 2 



68 JABEZ GRUNN. 

" I believe it's all you're good for," growled Jabez, as he 
plunged his nose into the bottle, and after a heavy draught, 
resigned it to his companions ; " but you see the devil 
won't have none of you, for there's the brigantine. We're 
close on board" 

And then it was that they were hailed as before related. 

"Well, sir," said the buccaneer captain, "what has 
made you return?" 

" I think I have pretty well explained," said his subor- 
dinate gruffly ; " where's that young thief 1 I mean to 
wring his neck afore I turns in." 

" Sir, I am captain of this ship. Gro forward to your 
berth. If you have any complaint to make about any of 
your, shipmates, let it be done in a proper way; I will then 
take notice of it." 

With something more like a grunt than is generally 
heard from the lips of a man, Jabez took his way to the 
forecastle, where the men were about to take supper. As 
the Ocean Girl was not intended to carry any cargo, 
except such pretty trifles as silks, ivory, gold dust, and the 
like, the space afforded to the men was very large. They 
were in all respects quite as well lodged as the crew of a 
man-of-war. 

Down the centre of the lower deck there was a long deal 
table, with benches, and this was loaded with provisions. 
Though, in the interests of all, good discipline was ordered 
and enforced, there were no restrictions as to food or 
drink, except that certain petty officers were bound to 
report any instances of actual drunkenness. As, on board 
the Indiaman, grog, unless stolen, was a rare commodity, 
her runaway crew joined in the festivities with great 
delight, eating, drinking, and then singing to their hearts' 
content. 

But Jabez Grunn, though he put a whole bottle of 
whisky before him, did not thence become very talkative. 
He was brooding — brooding, first, over the public affront 
put upon bim by the captain ; secondly, over the means 
of avenging himself. 

Now the sea-lawyer, as he was often called by Ins com- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER 69 

panions, had long nourished one ambition, and that was, 
to take Captain Gantling's place. Hitherto, however, he 
had never any chance of carrying out his views ; the 
skipper was popular, and a good scholarly sailor. Grunn 
was a hog ; but, by dint of talking, of grumbling, and by 
the assistance of his own intense self-conceit, he had made 
for himself a party in the ship. 

Now there was an opportunity not to be thrown away. 
They must all know that Ned was a traitor. 

"Well!" he suddenly cried, "What about this here 
young spy 1 Ain't he agoing to be hung?" 

"What spy?" 

" This here young Ned Drake." 

"But he is the captain's friend." 

" But he ain't. The young varmint has been and 

peached. If we hadn't corned away quite premiscuous- 
like, we should have had the darbies on us afore now. 
I say as the law of our craft must be put into operation. 
The young devil shall swing." 

"Tell us all about it !" cried one. 

Jabez Grunn asked no better ; and rising, with a full 
command of that rough eloquence which is so persuasive 
with sailors, he told all he knew, and a great deal more, 
about Edward's arrival on board the Duke of Kent, about 
his reception in the cabin, about his open enmity to all 
belonging to the buccaneer. He wound up by demanding 
that he should be put upon his trial as a traitor and 
a spy. 

General approbation followed, and it was determined 
that an instant demand should be made to that effect, upon 
the captain. A dozen were balloted for, and, led by Jabez 
Grunn, who agreed to be speaker, they marched aft 



70 

CHAPTER XIL 

UNDER HATCHES. 

The night was now rather misty than dark. A full and 
bright moon had arisen, but it pursued its way through 
the heavens behind a dense body of dusky clouds, which 
only now and then allowed the borrowed light to pene- 
trate. From the deck of the Ocean Girl the Indiaman 
was still clearly -visible, all her sails set, and forging slowly 
ahead, before a wind so light as to be scarcely perceptible. 

There was one figure only on the quarterdeck. It was 
that of the buccaneer. 

He stood with folded arms, leaning on his sword, which, 
as usual in the times of which we speak, was a heavy 
cavalry one. He had a brace of pistols in his belt, and 
others lying openly on the capstan. 

From Dirtrick he had just received a report relative to 
what was going on ; so that he was fully prepared, except 
that he knew not how far the mutiny had extended. 

Dirtrick had retired to leeward, where also Ned Drake 
sat, very indifferent as to what was going on aboard His 
thoughts were far away on board the East Indiaman, with 
his companion and friend, little Loo, whose society to him 
was charming. 

The men came huddling up behind Grunn, very much 
like a flock of sheep. The dense mass of the ship's crew 
could be distinguished forward From habitual respect to 
the quarterdeck, a kind of instinct with the profession, 
the ugly sailor took off his hat. 

The buccaneer stood as if perfectly unconscious of his 
presence. 

" Ahem ! a word with you, if you please, sir." 

"Well," said Gantling, coldly. 

" Me and my mates we've been talking over this affair 
of Ned Drake's, and we've come to the conclusion " 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEBB. 71 

" You mean to say that, like the reckless vagabond you 
are, you have been inciting the men to mutiny. I've a 
great mind to put a bullet through your head." 

" There ain't been no talk of mutiny, sir ; but this young 
shaver, on duty connected with the ship, has blown upon 
his messmates, and so we calls upon you to put him on his 
trial." 

"And if not?" 

" Why then we means for to make short work of it ; and 
if, sir, while we are settling his hash, we has to imprison 
you " 

" Go forward, sir ; you are drunk." 

" No, sir, I ain't drunk ; but I speaks the meaning of all 
the crew." 

A loud shout from the deputation, followed by a cheer 
from the remnant of the men, indicated that Grunn was 
right, and that caution was essential on the captain's part. 

"The youth shall be put upon his trial," he continued. 

" Thank you, sir ; that is quite fair. May I ask 
when?" 

" To-morrow, if we lose sight of the Indiaman ; which, 
I am sorry to say, we must give up for the present." 

" That we all suppose," cried Grunn, " and all his doing. 
Is the lubber below ? " 

" He shall be put into the dark hole in irons, but the first 
man who strikes or illuses him, dies by my hand." 

Ned Drake, who had heard all, now rose and confronted 
the crew. His mien was proud and haughty. 

" What have I done ? " 

" I'll teach you, you young whelp," cried Grunn ; 

" to the black hole with him !" 

" Avast there, ye lubbers ! " cried Dirtrick, who was 
leaning on a heavy capstan bar, " if so be as the skipper is 
going to shove this youngster into the hole, why just keep 
your ugly paws off, that's all." 

And with a mysterious sign to Ned to make no resistance, 
he led him away, followed by the watchful eyes of one or 
two of the conspirators, who insisted on seeing the orders 
of the captain fully carried out. They escorted both Ned 



72 UNDER HATCHES. 

and Dirtrick down the ladder to the berth deck, where, 
having seen the former handcuffed, and his feet inserted 
into heavy anklets of iron, running along a great bar 
bolted down to the deck, they left him, locking the door of 
the partition which divided the prison from the part of the 
lower deck inhabited by the sailors. 

The whole thing was done so quickly, that Ned scarcely 
had time to reflect on his true position, ere he was a pri- 
soner, ironed, and in the dark. The situation was horrible 
enough, he knew, for it was clear the captain had lost a 
good bit of his authority over his men, especially since 
the return of Grunn, who would hurry matters to a 
climax. 

There was, however, one thought which sustained him. 
It was the sense of duty. That he had stuck to, even 
at the peril of his life. 

He had not been long in the confined hold before he 
began to feel a strange nausea. In those days the proper- 
ties of air were little understood, and it never would have 
struck Ned, or any one else, that what he wanted was ven- 
tilation. It cannot be too generally known that air from 
the lungs of animals, when inhaled a second time, acts as 
a poison, which is more or less deadly as the oxygen is 
more or less vitiated. A man consumes twenty-six cubic 
feet of oxygen daily, and generates nearly a cubic foot of 
carbonic acid hourly. 

Now carbonic acid gas extinguishes light, and produces 
suffocation. Being heavier than air, it remains at the 
bottom of wells and mines, causing smoke damp. It is 
produced in quantities, during the act of respiration ; and 
yet a stiff-necked generation, old women, especially, will try 
experiments on our chokable powers, by stuffing up chim- 
neys, listing doors, and all other contrivances to keep out 
cold air. 

It is to be hoped the rising generation will be 
a little better educated, and learn that a draught is 
better than no ventilation, without which health is impos- 
sible. 

In a small square box, with no air except what crept in 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 73 

through chinks, Ned Drake soon felt the absence of the 
healthy, and the presence of the deleterious air. His head 
ached, his temples throbbed, and he surely must have fallen 
into a heavy slumber, from which he might never have 
awakened, had not a sound aloft attracted his attention. 
He listened with all his power. 

It was somebody at work at the hatchway tarpaulin. 

This, of itself, was a relief, and when at last the tarpau- 
lin was heard to give, and a slide in the hatchway was re- 
moved sufficiently to give air, the sense of relief was 
wondrous. 

"All square below?" whispered Dirtrick. 

" No, my friend ; very sick and ill." 

" Well, my hearty, it's quite clear to me you'll be sicker 
if you don't get out of here. Them varmint is dead on to 
you ; so you see, Mister Ned — what says you, will you go 
adrift, or will you stop, and chance a trial 1" 

"What says Captain Gantlingf 

" If so be as the skipper takes your part, he'll go by the 
board," said Dirtrick, quietly. 

" Then do with me as you please," replied Edward, 
" anything rather than this den." 

" If you listen to me, then, it may be as we may not 
speak agin. That ere cursed Grunn, he's getting the men's 
back up ; they've spliced the mainbrace pretty well, and 
when they're drunk there'll be a lark. It's dead calm, but 
a breeze is sure to spring up soon. It's my idea that are 
Injirman ain't far off; I see'd a light just now afore the 
futtock rigging." 

" Look again." 

Dirtrick rose and went to the side. 

" She's there. Now, I'll just heave over two empty 
butts. They're water tight, and such things as is handy. 
I'll fasten them with a booling-knot to the main shrouds. 
You watch your opportunity, my lad, and then cut and 
run." 

" But how am I to get free 1" 

"All in good time," whispered Dirtrick, handing down 
a basket of provisions, and then pushing the slide, but 



74 UNDER HATCHES. 

not quite so close as to make the -wretched prison suffocat- 
ing. 

Again was Ned alone. It cannot be said that to him 
the position was much improved. The Ocean Girl was 
practically without a head, and in the hands of the many, 
which, though a most sensible government where civiliza- 
tion has sway, is quite out of the question on board ship, 
where, with wild and unruly men to command, a captain 
must be a real despot. 

Even if he escaped, death only faced him in another 
form, for out upon that sea alone, cast about at the will of 
winds and waves, what chance was there of his finding — not 
the Indiaman, that was a forlorn hope — but any vessel 
whatever. Still, hope dies last of all, when everything 
else is gone, and JSed preferred the chance of life to the 
certainty of a cruel death. 

While these ideas were passing through his brain, he 
heard a sudden rush, a clamour of loud voices, and then, 
the door opening, a rush of light illumined the dungeon. 

" Come out of there, you young whelp 1" said Grunn, in 
a husky, menacing voice. 

" I wish I could," replied Ned, so drily as to set some of 
the men laughing. " I wish I could" 

Dirtrick coolly entered with a light, and proceeded to 
remove the lad's irons ; upon which he rose and walked to 
the door, where the drunken ex-boatswain of the Ocean 
Girl clutched him by the arm. 

" Move on, you ," grunted the ruffian, using a foul 

epithet, and iifting his hand to strike. 

" I say," cried Dirtrick, " none of that ; a bargain's a 
bargain ; he's to be tried for'ard — I sticks to my word." 

" Well, heave ahead ; a mighty fuss about a young 
varmint as is only fit for a powder-monkey," growled 
Crruim. 



75 

CHAPTER XIII. 

THE TRIAL. 

In well-appointed ships of the present day, the lower 
deck, occupied by the crew, is comfortable and clean ; on 
board men-of-war the earliest attention of the officers is 
given to the berthing of the men, without which no orderly 
discipline can be established. Cleanliness, room, and ven 
tilation are ssen to, the lower-deck guns being run in and 
housed, while care is taken that the guard and quarter- 
masters are disposed of in the wings, or anywhere out of 
the gangways, so that the deck may be cleared easily, and 
the men who have night-watches may not be disturbed. 

On board the buccaneer no order of the kind prevailed. 
The officers were content to see to their own comfort and 
security, leaving the men entirely to themselves, so that 
they were berthed just as their own fancy suggested. 
Some had hammocks, some standing bunks, some lay on 
the floor. 

In the present instance, all except an anchor- watch w T ere 
below, so that the forecastle was crowded to excess. 
Candles were stuck about, and whether the men reclined 
on the ground, or sat by tables, or near sea-chests, they 
were all drinking and smoking. 

A rude chair was provided for Ned. It was on the top 
of a large cask, so that, when seated on it, be was in full 
view of the whole crew, who were about to decide his 
fate. 

Grunn, who by force of impudence and swagger had got 
into the position of president, took his seat at a long table, 
round which were the oldest tars, men without much heart 
or conscience, their souls seared by the life of rapine, lust, 
and plunder they had so long led. All had rum in abun- 
dance. 

" "What's the report from deck V said Grunn, to a pale- 
faced young sailor, near at hand. 



?b THE TRIAL. 

"Officers battened down," replied the man, " and a guard 
over the gangway." 

" Any resistance 1 " 

" They're kicking up a blessed row," continued the re- 
porter from the deck. 

" Let 'em kick. Mind they don't kick a hole in her 
garboard strakes, and go to the bottom." 

"What, with all hands, messmate?" asked a gruff old 
salt. 

" Xo, but I'm thinking the ship 'ud be lighter for the 
room of them officers," grinned Grunn. 

"There's a little wind, sir," said a man, peering down 
the forecastle. 

" Keep her sou' -west, and look out for the Injirman. 
The court is opened." 

And striking his fist heavily on the table, the ugly sea- 
man called for silence, and then in a speech, the coarseness 
and blasphemy of which prevents it from soiling our pages, 
he recorded his opinion of the conduct of Ned, which he 
painted in the vilest and most hideous colours. 
, " So now, you see, this here young scoundrel's robbed 
us of that 'ere ship's treasure ; so I says, in the fust place, 
he's been mutinous, so we'll cut him to ribbons with the 
cat ; then, as he's stole our plunder, it shall be the thief's 
cat, with three knots in each tail " 

"One word, you cold-blooded ruffian!" cried Ned, 
hotly. 

" Silence in the court ! Then it's my idea he should be 
keel-hauled afore he hangs." 

A roar of laughter from some of the crew showed how 
much the three phases of punishment were enjoyed in anti- 
cipation. Hanging and flogging need no description from 
us, but keel-hauling may not be understood so readily. A 
long rope is passed under the ship, from a block fastened 
to the end of the mainyard. About the centre of the rope 
the body of the victim is fastened, and several men 
pulling on one side, the sufferer is drawn right under 
the bottom, where, if not suffocated, he receives such cuts 
and injuries as probably maimed him for life. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 77 

It is a cruel punishment, but is varied in small fore 
and aft vessels, by sending the navigator on a voyage of 
discovery under the bottom of the vessel, lowering him 
down over the bows, and with ropes retaining him exactly 
in his position under the keelson, while he is drawn aft by 
a hauling line until he makes his appearance at the rudder 
chains. 

The punishment is of Dutch invention, but was often 
used by our old brutal captains and admirals — a coarse, 
drinking, ignorant set of fellows, without an atom of mercy 
in their composition. 

" Does you all think this young varmint guilty ? " con- 
tinued Jabez Grunn. 

" I ask to be heard," exclaimed Ned. 

"Silence, you mutinous rascal!" cried Jabez, "or I'll 
have you put in irons again." 

" Anywhere, rather than in your company. English- 
men — for some of you, at least, bear that honoured name — 
is it your intention to allow me to be judged by a beer- 
swilling Dutchman, whose sole object is to get rid of his 
humane and able officers ; that, drunkard as he is, he 
may have the satisfaction of sending you all to perdition in 
the first gale of wind 1 " 

" Silence, you swab !" roared Grunn. 

" No, no ! — hear him ! — he's a brave boy !" shouted the 
English party. 

" That's fair," cried Dirtrick. 

" Silence, you mutinous hogs ! — you scarecrows ! " 
shrieked Grunn, who knew that his adherents were in the 
majority ; "is this the respect you owe to the court ]" 

" Court be jiggered !" observed Dirtrick ; " it's my 
opinion there ain't no court ; but if so be there is, why, 
I say, hear the prisoner at the bar." 

" You bargou-swilling son of a sea-cook !" yelled the 
infuriated boatswain, "sit down, or I'll make you." 

"Boo !" said Dirtrick, casting off his jacket, and ap- 
pearing in another moment with his sleeves tucked up ; 
" come and do it. I say he shall be heard, that's sartin j 
you say he shan't — let's fight for it." 



78 THE TBIAL. 

" A ring ! a ring !" cried the delighted sailors, jumping 
up one and all, and clapping their hands. 

" It ain't usual," blustered Jabez Grunn, " for the court 
to fight a sea-lawyer." 

" The court's afraid," muttered one or two of the English 
part of the crew. 

Grunn' s eyes were always red and bloodshot from passion 
and drink, but now they were hideous. His sallow com- 
plexion was of a whitey-brown hue, and though really not 
afraid, he looked sufficiently alarmed to arouse the mur- 
murs of many of the crew. 

" No white-livered cur for captain," said one. 

"Who spoke?" cried Grunn, turning round with a 
savage glare upon his face. 

There was dead silence. The look of the Dutch ruffian 
was very ominous, and none cared, just then, to confront his 
anger. With a grim smile, he began divesting himself of 
his coat, and as he did so, he showed a power of muscle such 
as is seldom surpassed in the human frame. He held up 
his arm and tapped the thick part of it with satis- 
faction. 

" A clear ring, and no favour," said an Englishman, who 
was used to the whole affair, and who, as a matter of 
course, was appointed general umpire. 

His injunctions were obeyed, and soon an eager crowd 
of men were moved back in eveiy direction, to stand with 
glaring eyes and hopeful countenances, over tbe delightful 
prospect offered to them. A fair stand-up fight between 
two grown men was not an every-day occurrence on board 
ship. 

It is not for us here to record such a combat. Poetry, 
prose, and the nondescript literature of the ring, have ex- 
hausted the topic ; suffice it to say that they fought like 
men ; that height and weight were in favour of Grunn, to 
say nothing of practice, his face being seamed from similar 
encounters ; that thrice Dirtrick fell prostrate to the 
ground, and thrice rose from his "mother earth as a 
giant refreshed ; " in the fourth round the smaller man 
was more wary, and finally struck his antagonist such a 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 79 

heavy blow between the eyes as to incapacitate him from 
moving for some minutes. 

On this, "time" was called, and Dirtrick adjudged the 
victor. 

" Well," said Grunn, with a malignant scowl, as soon 
as he was able to resume his seat as judge, "we will hear 
the prisoner ; it won't save him from keel-hauling, the 
6C0undrel." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha !" laughed Dirtrick, who had seen Ned 
escape twenty minutes before — the fight had lasted over 
half an hour — "first catch your fish." 

"Thunder and blazes," yelled the discomfited Grunn, 
" this is some infernal treachery of yours." 

" I've saved the brave boy " 

" To h — with the traitor," shrieked Grunn, rising. 

Eub-a-dub! dub! 

The ship's drum beat to quarters. Mechanically the 
men tumbled up, to find the officers, marines, and several 
of the loyal portion of the crew, armed to the teeth, with a 
heavy swivel gun pointed at the mutineers. 

" Down with your arms !" shouted the loud ringing 
metallic voice of the skipper ; " Put that man Grunn in 
irons at once — at the third word, I fire. Once, twice " 

Grunn was seized, some of his own friends being the 
first to lay hands upon him, and committed, heavily ironed, 
to the dark and gloomy den to which he had consigned 
Ned. 

" Bring Ned aft," said Gantling, addressing Dirtrick. 

" Can't, sir," — and, with no other apology, he at once 
explained what had occurred ; adding that Ned must have 
unbattened the officers. 

" He's best away," mused Gantling, and, walking away, 
he looked over the taffrail into the deep blue water, on 
which sparkled the reflection of a few stars. " That was 
his voice — I knew it" 



80 
CHAPTEE XIV. 

ALONE ON THE WATERS. 

Ned had watched the progress of the quarrel between 
Dirtrick and Grunn with intense interest. At first, it 
appeared to him a mere accidental quarrel ; but one glance 
from his faithful and attached follower sufficed to let him 
see what was meant. It was a got-up affair, to enable him 
to escape. Now, Ned knew those by whom he was sur- 
rounded too well, not to be aware that the majority would 
hail the cry of all hands to punishment with grim delight ; 
and, as his imagination conveyed to him a very vivid idea 
of what keel-hauling was, he resolved to make a dash for 
his life. 

For a moment, all thought of the prisoner, who was 
being tried for his life, was absent from the minds of those 
to whom the brutal spectacle of a fight was supreme de- 
light. Ned saw this, and slowly and cautiously let himself 
down off the barrel on to the ground. His task was then 
comparatively done ; as to glide along the side of the ship, 
where shadowy darkness played, was to him easy; the 
ladder, quite in gloom, so that he ascended it, giving one 
last glance at the scene, just as the two adversaries were 
striking their first blows. 

Such was the excitement caused by the fight, that, the 
wind being very light and steady, the man at the wheel had 
lashed the helm amidships, and gone below. The deck was 
entirely abandoned. The marines, who were all faithful to 
a man, were secured in the after-hold. 

Ned at once determined to release Gantling ; and, 
without making any more noise than he could help, he 
unfastened the battens that confined the companion-way, 
and in a hollow voice spoke down the ladder. 

" Mutiny and murder going on ; creep on deck, and be 
cautious." 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEEK. 81 

Then with a hound he reached the hammock rail, clam- 
bered over the side, loosening the knot of his rope, and 
hid in the main chains. He distinctly heard Captain 
Gantling and his officers come on deck, and then with a 
brave heart he lowered himself to his raft ; and, parting away 
from the ship's side, which, heaving and rising slowly to 
the wind, passed ahead of him, he launched into darkness. 

"Weary and exhausted, it was sufficient for Ned that he 
was free ; and, with one short, untaught prayer to the 
Giver of all Good, he lay down and slept soundly. 

A chilly sensation awoke him. It was some rain falling, 
as it often does just before break of day. Ned now 
examined his raft. It was composed of two butts and 
four half-hogsheads, water-tight, empty, but well bunged ; 
the whole lashed together by means of a copious and 
judicious use of strands, spun yarn, and sennit. Not a 
nail had been used, and yet three planks formed the deck. 
A twelve-gallon cask of water, not half full, a pannikin, 
and a small tub of bread, were all in the provision way ; 
but there were two pistols, a cutlass, a spar suitable for a 
mast, and the means of stepping it, together with a boat's 
ensign reversed. 

Having examined thus far, Ned Drake looked around 
him ; the sea, under the influence of a gentle breeze, was 
smooth, though the water was broken, and a slight morn- 
ing haze obscured the atmosphere. In the distance he 
clearly saw the white sails of two vessels, and, strangely 
enough, both were coming towards him. Now, our 
young hero's eyes were keen enough for him to know 
them both. To the eastward was the buccaneer, under a 
heavy press of sail ; while, to the westward, was the 
Indiaman. 

They were both heading northward. 

A moment's reflection explained this seeming anomaly. 
They were looking for him. Captain Gantling, knowing 
the time that Ned Drake went adrift, was returning on his 
way, steering exactly the opposite tack, whilst the India- 
man was either closing up to fight, or was imitating the 
manoeuvre of the other. 

G 



fe2 ALONE ON THE WATERS. 

Ned Drake at once proceeded to hoist his small sail at 
the mast-head ; with the union-jack reversed ; Dirtrick 
having taken the precaution to lash a slight pole for the 
purpose. 

The raft, slight as was the motion given to it by the 
sail, took the desired direction, heading for the Indiaman. 
The brigantine at once altered her course, and hoisted a 
signal, which, even at that distance, Ned clearly made out ; 
it was to recall boats. This showed him that one or two 
were out in search of him. 

The Indiaman made no sign, but kept steadliy on her 
course. 

As Ned was going south, with a wind aft, the vessels 
could only approach him on opposite tacks ; so that it 
became a mere question of time as to which should pick 
him up. A raft is not easily steered a point from the 
wind ; but Ned, as far as he could, kept it inclined to the 
westward. 

It was quite clear, however, that the brigantine had the 
advantage, and that, close upon a wind, she sailed better 
than the three-masted vessel. Still, on reflection, it ap- 
peared hardly possible for the rival ships to avoid a colli- 
sion — which Ned felt convinced both would risk for his 
sake — Gantling, from many mixed motives ; Sir Stephen 
Eawdon, from pure affection. 

However this might be, and whatever the possible 
result, Ned could do nothing ; he was completely in the 
hands of an over-ruling Providence. Seated with his 
feet paddling in the water, and resting on a lower deck of 
spars, which Dirtrick had passed under the half-hogsheads, 
as a protection against sharks, Ned took a biscuit or two 
and some water, for breakfast, watching, now the brigan- 
tine, and now the ship. 

The two were perhaps a mile distant, when Ned nearly 
leaped into the sea from sudden terror. 

" You young whelp, I've got you !" roared the 

voice of Grunn, close to his ear ; and turning wildly round, 
Ned saw him — yes, saw him standing upright in the sea, his 
body, from the waist up, being out of the water. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEBB. 83 

"Keep off!" cried Ned, recovering himself. 

"Not I, you imp of Satan!" bellowed the ruffian; 

" they've cast me adrift, a sight worse off nor you — 

in a beef-cask, damn 'em !" 

Ned could not help a scream of laughter, as he saw that 
the assertion of the ex-boatswain was true. A large beef- 
cask had been, by means of weights at bottom, and cross- 
spars at top, made to float upright, and into this Jabez 
Grunn had been thrust, as Ned afterwards discovered, to 
look out for himself, with strict injunctions not to come on 
board without the reefer. 

" I'll make your jaw-tackle winch on the other side," 
cried Jabez, who was paddling close up to Ned, " that I 
will. I've got a few yards of hawser-laid rope here, and 
I'll par-buckle you up in this old tub ; see if I don't." 

" Keep off !" or if you come one stroke nearer, you shall 
have two ounces of lead," said the young midshipman, 
presenting both pistols. 

The face of the boatswain became livid. Since he had 
been cast adrift, he had sobered himself by a drink of salt 
water ; now he was both hungry and thirsty ; and food 
and drink, and revenge — sweetest of all — were within his 
reach. 

" Well, you needn't be so hard upon a fellow," said he, 
with a disconsolate face ; " if you were as hungry and as 
thirsty as I am, you'd be glad to rob a church." 

" Keep off, I say," continued Ned, " and I'll see what I 
can do." 

The man had mysteriously advanced nearer to Ned, but 
now as unaccountably he went to leeward. "While con- 
versing with Ned, he had, unperceived, caught hold of the 
long painter of the raft, which, unnoticed by the young 
buccaneer, was floating on the surface. In his fright he 
had let it go, and in a few minutes he was left behind, 
cursing, yelling, and threatening, with ferocious impotency. 
Meanwhile, the two vessels had come within gun-shot, 
and Ned saw a rapid exchange of signals taking place. 

Then both vessels threw their foresails aback, and lay 
to, at the distance of half a mile. 

a 2 



84 ALONE ON THE WATERS. 

Ned watched thern with intense interest, for he saw 
that each was putting out a boat ; the brigantine with 
extraordinary rapidity ; the Indiaman with more of so- 
briety and slowness. 

Ned now lowered his sail, keeping his flag up, towards 
which he saw that both boats were making. 

The whole was inexplicable tc him, noi could he make 
out what were the intentions of either party. Even, 
however, in this, his hour of anxiety and distress, he 
thought of Grunn. and how to give him up his raft. 
Luckily he did so, for there, close to him again, was the 
ugly seaman, foaming with rage, and swearing that Ned 
should not be saved, if he were not. 

Again the young midshipman presented his pistol, 
calling out, as he did so, " Boat ahoy !" 

"Hurrah!" came from a dozen throats; and in two 
minutes more he was on board the pinnace of the India- 
man, Sir Stephen Eawdon himself acting as coxswain. 

At the same moment — the other boat being in the act 
of picking up Grunn — a splash was heard, and a seaman 
swam wildly towards the pinnace. 

"Comeback, or I fire!" shouted one of the piratical 
officers. 

"Hold !" cried Sir Stephen, while the sailors held up 
their muskets, "fire at your peril !" 

"I will !" screamed Grunn, snatching a musket from a 
marine, and taking deliberate aim at Ned. 

Next instant Grunn went back — felled like an ox — into 
the bottom of the boat ; while Dirtrick was hauled into 
the pinnace, which at once returned towards the India- 
man, without further communication with the crew of 
the pirate. 



85 



CHAPTER XV. 

EEVELATIONS. 

For a while, Ned Drake was so overwhelmed with excite- 
ment, that it was not easy for him to give anything like a 
succinct account of his adventures ; and when he recovered, 
Sir Stephen and Loo insisted on his taking a night's rest, 
ere he conversed much. Sir Stephen then explained that 
the pirate, or buccaneer, (being in possession of the signals 
appertaining to the East India Service) had signalled that 
a mutiny had taken place on board his ship, adding that, 
under the circumstances, they wished the Indiaman to 
retain Ned, while they would land Grunn and his fellows 
at the Cape, as runaways, where Sir Stephen Rawdon 
could reclaim them. 

I When Ned went on deck, preparatory to seeking his 
berth, it was midnight ; and the clouds had risen where 
light had been just before ; a long ragged strip to the 
westward was opened up, and a clear glaring flame of the 
sky, as pale as death, shot through it on the horizon. 
Into this Ned peered anxiously, expecting to discover the 
buccaneer, despite the gloom. But, though once he saw 
something like the white wings of a bird on the distant 
horizon, he could not be sure ; at length he retired ; and, 
thanks to youth and health, he slept, under circumstances 
which might have kept an older person awake. 
1 Excitement is the enemy of sleep. Those of calm 
nerves and serene minds rarely complain of any difficulty 
in wooing slumber. Those only with whom eA^erything is 
going wrong — who have dark clouds hanging over their 
horizon, or Avhose present is irritating and perturbed — 
court Morpheus in vain. 

Next day, the morning was fine, and promised to be 
hot ; the ship had a fair side wind from near south-west, 



86 REVELATIONS. 

which it -was easy to see had slackened since midnight. 
It had rained heavily, the sails were all wet, and coats hung 
to dry in the fore rigging. She had about five or six 
knots of headway. 

There -was a great change in the weather ; the water 
was bluer than ever it had been, lifting in long waves — 
scarcely a speck of foam, except about the ship ; but, 
instead of having fled before the sun, or sunk below the 
level, the long white clouds had risen high to leeward, 
and were wandering away at the top, a sign of more work 
to come. 

But for the present all was well, and the Indiaman was 
alive from stem to stern ; the decks were drying as clean 
as a table. 

The re-united party — Ned and Loo quite delighted to 
be together again — seated themselves to breakfast, and in 
a very brief space of time Ned had told his story, to the 
surprise and admiration of his hearers. 

Some little time having elapsed, comments and observa- 
tions filling up the interval, the baronet seemed thoughtful. 
" What manner of man is this Joseph Gantling 1 " said 
the Admiral, in a musing way. 
Ned described him accurately. 

" Ah, well !" 'tis strange I did not see his face the night 
he fetched you." 

" He was disguised," said Ned. 

" I thought so. How far back does your recollection 
carry you 1 " continued Sir Stephen. 

" I must have been very little ; but my earliest recol- 
lections are of a cottage, near a lawn, with oaks in front, 
and a park where I played, and Avhich once or twice I 
crossed, to a big house, where a gentleman would kiss me, 
and give me sweets ; then he would suddenly cry, and 
send me away." 

" Then " 

" Came darkness, gloom, and night. A wretched hovel 
succeeded to the cottage, a huge cavern to the great house." 
" Well, well. Let us not dwell so much on the past. 
To change the subject, I will tell you a story." 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 87 

"Capital!" said Ned, while Loo laughed and clapped 
her hands. 

The baronet smiled, and adding that it was nothing 
very wonderful, only a local narrative, told it briefly, 
clearly, and with much animation and some emotion. 

It was the regular orthodox " once upon a time," but as 

we have no space for his amplifications or descriptions, it 

must here appear in our language. 

* ■:;- * •::■ * 

Many years before, a gentleman of fair estate, strictly 
entailed, though at the same time it was in his power to 
control very large sums of money, was left a widower 
with three sons, the elder of whom was destined for the 
army, while the second and third were to become sailors. 
Dwelling on the magnificent estuary of the Thames, then, 
as now, one of the most mighty highways of commerce, 
they were passionately fond of the water, and zealously 
desirous of serving their country. 

Rich, and both able and willing to gratify their whims, 
the father presented them with a yacht, which was manned 
wholly by lads, among whom was chiefly conspicuous one 
Harry Greames, the son of a steward of the house, and a 
great favourite of the family. He was a bright-eyed hand- 
some lad, jovial, full of animal spirits, and much petted 
and spoiled by both father and sons. 

Well, time passed, the young gentlemen were entered as 
midshipmen on board the same vessel, while Harry joined 
as a boy ; though it was understood, if he showed capacity, 
he was to be advanced as petty officer, in those days a 
matter more contingent on patronage than merit. 

Three years had elapsed ; the second son was twenty, 
the third nineteen, while Harry Greames was the same age. 

Now it is necessary to explain a very interesting part of 
our narrative. Close to the park and residence of the 
father was the rectory. Good Doctor Luscombe was a 
widower with only one child, a girl of fourteen at the 
time of the departure of the young men. As children, all 
four, including the steward's son, had been intimate, play- 
ing, nutting, and boating together. Now it happened that, 



88 KEVELAflONS. 

■while the baronet's two naval sons were very boyish for 
their age ; hearty, honest lads, willing to be boys as long as 
possible, Harry Greames was far more manly. 

Harry made love to Lucy Luscombe, who, a girl full of 
romance and vivacity, encouraged him, without any thought 
or deference to difference of station. A youthful attach- 
ment arose, and as Harry, under the influence of love, 
could, he said, do anything, it was settled that his whole 
energies were to be devoted to rising in rank, and that as 
soon as ever he was In a position to do so, they were to be 
married. 

So the boys came home, and delighted the father's heart 
by their manly appearance and manner. 

In honour of their return, a ball was given, to which 
Harry, for old acquaintance sake, was invited. The 
brothers had passed, and he was now rated as a midship- 
man, so that he was, at all events, an officer and a gentle- 
man. 

The ball was attended by all the beauty and fashion of 
the country round, who assembled gladly to do honour to 
the two nautical youths ; the belles of Sheppey, when a 
pleasant day was offered to them, not stopping to inquire 
if the said nauticals were younger sons, or heirs to vast 
estates. 

The second son — number one was present in full uni- 
form — was standing in the embrasure of a window, watch- 
ing the company, when suddenly a lovely creature, all in 
white, with brown hair, a pale complexion, blue eyes — 
blue as the ocean near the line — and with pearls in her 
hair, attracted his attention. Attracted ! riveted ; and 
hastily advancing, he contrived to be introduced, and to 
dance with her. ». 

"You don't remember me?" she said shyly, as they 
walked away alter the dance. 

" Remember ! " 

" I am Lucy Luscombe." 

"Oh!" was the monosyllabic reply. 

Nothing further passed at the moment ; but shortly after 
he induced her to glide with him into the garden, and 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 89 

there, after an hour's converse, was laid the foundation of 
a love which lasted their lives. 

Youth is ever hopeful, and they separated at early dawn 
completely fascinated, and, as far as such young people 
could be, engaged. There was, however, no great disparity 
between a younger son and the rector's daughter, while 
the baronet himself, who was sincerely attached to the 
clergyman, would be more than likely to favour the 
match. 

So both thought. 

Next day the young man, wishing to be alone, went out 
into the park. It is true that he expected to meet Miss 
Luscombe, but at a later hour. But young lovers take no 
note of time, and he, unable to conceal his secret from 
prying eyes, resolved to bury himself in one of the thickets 
near the path where she must pass on her Avay to the 
hall. 

A dreamy reverie, full of rosy colours and bright hopes, 
followed, from which he was awakened by the sound of 
voices. Lifting his eyes, he saw Miss Luscombe standing 
in the path, confronted by Harry Grcames. 

" So," said the steward's son, " this is your truth and 
fidelity 1 One evening has undone the work of years." 

" Mr. Greames," replied the rector's daughter, in a calm 
and dignihed way, " when I was a silly girl, my vanity and 
folly made me glad of a lover in name. I was too young 
to know my own mind, and I had hoped you had forgotten, 
as I wish to do, an unfortunate episode." 

"Episode!" he cried fiercely; "I have your written 
promise of marriage." 

" The promise of a child. You will not be so unmanly 
as to detain it." 

" Retain "it 1 Yes ! My wife you have promised to 
be, and my wife you shall be, and no other man shall claim 
you. I would wade through blood rather than he should 
win your smiles." 

" Let me pass, sir ! Your language is insolent. You 
forget yourself." 

" Forget myself," he said, clutching her by the wrist, " I 



90 REVELATIONS. 

wish I could — memory it is that kills me. But beware 
how you rouse me to madness." 

" Unhand her !" cried the voice of the young lover, who, 
with pale face, dilated nostrils, and clenched hands, stood 
before them. 

" You'd better make me ; two of you could not," said the 
infuriated Harry. 

One blow decided the question, and next minute Harry 
Greames lay stunned on the sward, while the lieutenant 
drew Lucy hastily away. Before night, their betrothment 
received the sanction of both fathers. 

Harry Greames came no more to the hall, and measures 
were taken to have him removed from the ship, as contact 
with him would now be unpleasant. The baronet under- 
took to forward his views, but declined all further personal 
connection with the young fellow. 

The two nautical sons now made the most of their leave 
of absence, being, as a rule, the body-guard of Lucy in her 
walks through the park. Xow that all secrecy and reserve 
were over, the lovers enjoyed the company of the younger 
son. 

One day they reached the borders of the dark firs. The 
lovers walked first. The youngest brother came behind 
with a favourite spaniel, playing with him as he went 
along. Suddenly a pistol-shot was fired, and with a loud 
shriek, Lucy fell. 

"The assassin ! the assassin !" roared the lover, and the 
youngest brother, understanding his meaning, bounded into 
the copse, and, guided by the dog, soon came up with the 
murderer, whom, after a desperate struggle, he captured. 
It was Harry Greames. 

The pistol had been fired at the young officer, but by a 
sudden movement of Lucy, the ball struck her shoulder. 
She had thrown herself forward to shield the man she 
loved, from the villain's attempt. 

As the wound was slight, an Admiralty order was easily 
obtained, disrating Harry Greames, and reducing him as a 
common sailor, and before the mast for five \ e irs, without 
permission to go ashore, or communicate with the land. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER 91 

The lovers were married, and at the end of the honey- 
moon they were about to part, when the eldest brother of 
Lucy's husband died ; and, as a midshipman with twelve 
thousand a year was incompatible with the rules of the 
service and articles of war, the young lieutenant resigned. 
Iso doubt the young wife supplied the more cogent argu- 
ments ; but at all events, before a year was out, the hus- 
band of Lucy Luscombe was a father and a baronet, the 
fine old gentleman soon following his eldest son. 

The youthful heir was two years of age, when, sad to 
say, his mother died, leaving the ex-lieutenant a broken- 
hearted man, even to the extent of refusing to see his child, 
which was put out to reside with a favourite nurse. 

When the child was three years of age, the younger 
brother was at home, trying by his society to cheer the 
head of the house. He was, however, very gloomy, and 
moped about as one who cared not for existence. 

Then came a mysterious letter from Greames, full of 
expressions of repentance, and asking the baronet, for the 
sake of old times and one they had both loved, to do 
something for him. He had deserted from his ship, and 
wished to escape to America. As his presence was known 
in the island, he begged his old patron would meet him at 
the Craig's Head, after dusk. 

The younger brother wished him not to go, or at all 
events not to go alone. But he was a wilful man, and 
would have his way. 

The younger brother, who loved and esteemed him 
much, resolved to follow him, and to be near in case assist- 
ance was needed. He armed himself and went out. Far 
down in the west, he had beheld the sun sink behind a bank 
of black clouds, the upper edge of which it stained with 
blood, as it descended — here flushing into red fringe, there 
extending into patches of sullen crimson, till the vapour 
engulfed the last rays, and left nothing visible but the 
dusky earth and the star-lit heavens. 

After leaving the park, the way was rucked, and the 
moor over which they walked was broken into chasms and 
precipices, which put their heads in jeopardy every moment. 



92 REVELATIONS. 

The wind, too, over these bleak heights swept piercingly 
cold, and once or twice the younger brother felt the biting 
points of fine snow piercing his skin ; but it could not be, 
for the stars still twinkled above, though their lustre had 
become dimmer. 

He could scarcely see before him, he but felt his way down 
a ravine, where the ground was rough and broken, so that 
showers of stones slid before him at every step. 

At that instant there came the flash of a pistol right in 
his path, and not a dozen yards before him he saw the 
gaunt figures of two men on the summit of a cliff. Then, 
with a loud wailing cry, one fell, and the younger, starting 
forward, had only time to see the baronet whirled down a 
cliff. 

He followed, although the angle was sharp, and descend- 
ing, grasped fiercely at the stones, which gave way and slid 
from him ; he, however, sought to pass his fingers through 
them, and dig them into the earth, but it was a task of im- 
mense and painful difficult}'. Still, at length he reached 
the ledge of rock where his brother lay dying. 

By superhuman exertions he clambered with the body up 
a sloping path to the summit of the cliff, where a cottage 
gave shelter to the master of all the country round — master 
for only a few hours. 

He lived long enough to exculpate his brother, at once 
suspected from venal motives of having compassed his 
death, and to accuse Harry Greames, who, however, fled 
the country, and was no more heard of. Unfortunately, he 
stole the child of Lucy, so that his vengeance was com- 
plete. The younger brother succeeded to the baronetcy, 
married, and had one child ; but he held the title and 
estates only in trust, in case the stolen boy, not having 

been murdered, should re-appear to claim his own. 
* * * * -;:- * 

" And now, my dear Edward," said the Admiral, " I need 
scarcely say that you are the stolen child, your father the 
murdered man, I your uncle, and the assassin and thief 
Joseph Gantling, alias Harry Greames." 

The youth gasped with surprise, and when the first emo- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 93 

tions were over, he embraced his uncle with tears in his 
eyes. 

" And now, my dear boy, we must find this fellow, and 
by force tear from him the proof of your birth, when I 
shall be proud to call you Sir Edward liawdon, and to re- 
sign estate and title into youi hands." 

" No, sir ; worthily have you administered them. I will 
only take them as your heir ; and if you will promise to 
give me Loo into the bargain, I shall be the gainer." 

" But suppose Loo does not mean to be handed over in 
this summary way?" gravely began the young girl. 

" My children," said the Admiral, with deep emotion, 
" you are worthy of one another. It shall be as Edward 
says. I will keep the estate, and he shall have Loo until 
the hour when all shall belong to him." 

" But the murderer of my father V cried Ned, with 

a dark and gloomy brow. 

" Shall have his reward." 



CHAPTER XVL 

ON SHORE. 

Now that all reserve was over, and the boy and girl were 
in the light of cousins one to the other, their happiness was 
complete. It is true their love was as yet purely that of near 
relatives and friends, yet it was pleasant to converse and 
talk of the future, without our hero looking forward to a 
doubtful and uncertain career. 

But one thought in his lonely hours, in sleepless watches 
of the night, when alone on deck, after others slept, ab- 
sorbed the thoughts of Edward. 

It was the hope of avenging his father's murder. 

All gratitude, all thought of what the buccaneer had 
done for him, faded from his view, and naught remained 
but the burning desire for vengeance. 



94 ON SHORE. 

That they would, some time or other, come up with the 
vindictive pirate who had stored his hatred against the 
Rawdon family for years, he was certain ; the exploit was 
deferred, not abandoned. Even if he were compelled to 
cruise about for years, he would not give up what to him 
was now the purpose of his life. 

As they advanced over the trackless and fathomless 
abyss, the young man burned to be at the end of his 
journey. He had resolved to win his spurs, or rather his 
epaulettes, before he settled down into an English country 
gentleman, which, when he married, he fully intended to 
do. 

This impatience it was that kept him so much on deck. 
About a week after the disclosures made to him by the 
Admiral, there were none above but the watch. The night 
was misty, rather than dark. A full and bright moon was 
up, but it pursued its way through the heavens behind a 
body of dusky clouds, that was much too dense for any 
borrowed rays to penetrate. Here and there, however, a 
straggling gleam made its way through a covering of 
vapour less dense than the rest, and trickled along the 
water. 

The wind was fresh and easterly, and altogether some- 
what threatening. 

Edward, who distrusted these dark nights, went aloft, 
and peered round the whole horizon, as, unless a very strict 
watch were kept, the pirate boats might steal upon them 
in the gloom. His glance went slowly to every point 
of the compass, until it settled on a streak of misty 
light, into which the waves were tossing themselves, like 
little sandhills before a whirlwind. 

It is true, scarce anything could be seen but a faint 
tracery against the sky, like a spider's web. Yet did the 
boy know it at a glance. 

It was the buccaneer, going the same course as them- 
selves, and probably trusting to the chapter of accidents 
for a catastrophe. 

Slowly and thoughtfully Ned came down the rigging, 
and seeing a light in the Admiral's cabin, he went in. He 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 95 

was preparing for bed, but hastily resumed his apparel when 
the boy gave him the information relative to the vessel in 
sight. 

Taking a powerful night glass, he went out and carefully 
examined the horizon. 

Sure enough, there it was, clear and distinct against the 
sky, just where the heavens and the water met. 

As soon as Sir Stephen had assured himself of the fact, 
he told the officer of the watch to keep a good look-out, 
and then summoned the captain to an earnest conference, 
which ended in a decision to put into Eio Janeiro, where 
a swift cruiser would, in all probability, be found to put 
upon the track of the buccaneer. 

This decided on, and the night wind keeping pretty 
steady, all retired, Edward himself feeling a kind of savage 
satisfaction at the prospect of the career of Gantling being 
put an end to. 

Soon after daybreak Sdward was up, and there, far away 
to the eastward, still could be seen the light tracery of the 
brigantine, which doubtless kept as far off as it was pos- 
sible without losing sight of the chase. 

But they cared little now. They knew its character, and 
were quite prepared for him, except that in a contest of 
mere swiftness they would have been outdone. 

They were now looking out for land, the decision to get 
into Eio Janeiro being come to when very nearly in the 
latitude of that celebrated port. It was confirmed by the 
state of the weather. A tremendous storm was evidently 
brewing, if they were to judge by the well-known and 
sinister omens. Heavy masses of black clouds began to 
collect on the eastern horizon, until vast volumes of the 
vapour were piled upon the water, blending the two ele- 
ments into one. 

Everything which experience could dictate, was done to 
make the vessel snug ; but it was with no small satisfaction 
that officers, crew, and passengers saw land, and sailed that 
evening into the magnificent harbovir. As they expected, 
there were two fast English cruisers in the bay, with whom 
the Admiral at once communicated. 



96 ON SHORE. 

Their captains were only too glad of a chance of prize 
money and promotion ; and though it was considered wise 
to let the severe storm blow over ere they sailed, every 
preparation was made to start at a moment's notice. 

Edward accompanied the Admiral on his visit to the men- 
of-war, and Avas introduced to one or two midshipmen, who 
volunteered to show him the sights of the place. Edward, 
Avho had seen very little of the world, and to whom every- 
thing of this sort was new, readily agreed, and two young 
gentlemen from the Rattlesnalte accompanied him. 

He easily obtained permission for himself and Dirtrick, 
who acted as his servant, to pass the night at an hotel, the 
more readily that Sir Stephen himself was to dine and 
sleep at the British consul's. 

The youths, of course, made rapid acquaintance. It is 
the habit of boys so to do, when they are genial and light- 
hearted, and not setting themselves up for men too early — a 
great error of the present day. Of course the first thing to 
be done was to dine. Fortunately, all had money, Ned 
being treated already as the Admiral's nephew, quite as 
much as if his status had been proved in a court of law. 

This important matter settled, the young middies frankly 
asked Xed whether he would go to one of the balls fre- 
quented by the better class of citizens, or whether he 
would go to something like a genuine fandango, the latter 
being the place for real fun. 

Boy-like, IMed naturally preferred the latter, and to it 
they went. There are few who have read anything, who 
are not aware that a fandango is a dance, and that all of 
Spanish and Portuguese origin — whether scattered over 
America, or collected in a public-house in Eatcliff Highway 
— are passionately devoted to this amusement. The one 
to Avhich the young officers Avere taking Ned, Avas outside 
the town, and, with them, had the recommendation that 
it AA'as not likely to be visited by any of their superior 
officers. 

Ned was, however, rather surprised to find that a large 
portion of the supporters of the establishment Avere com- 
mon sailors — many English — while scarcely a reputable 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 97 

person was to be seen even among the dancers. Our hero 
was a little angry at first ; but his companions, laughing 
heartily, and bursting at once, despite the heat, into a 
lively dance, he seated himself in a corner, and looked 
on. 

It was a large room, with small narrow tables to support 
the wine, which was the chief drink in the establishment. 
It was lighted by oil lamps that left the corners of the room 
in deep gloom. Not caring about the dance, Ned called 
for a bottle and three glasses, to be ready for his com- 
panions, when their exertions should incline them for 
refreshment. 

He watched with dreamy eye the whirling damsels, 
scarcely, however, aware of a figure that passed, for his 
thoughts were far away ; but the entrance of a noisy party 
of sailors soon roused him, and next minute n ..do him 
shrink into the deepest gloom of his corner. 

He heard the voice, and he saAV the form of Jabez 
Grunn, accompanied by several of the pirate crew. 

His heart beat wildly. If they weie ashore, the vessel 
must be in the same harbour as themselves, and might be 
captured without a struggle. Thoughts of his father, and 
his untimely fate, made Ned pitiless. The man whom his 
parent accused as his murderer, doubtless had some sinister 
motive for what he had done. 

Gantling regarded Sir Stephen as his enemy, and 
very likely meant to make him the supposed instrument 
of revenge upon him. 

The ruffians of the pirate crew seated themselves at a 
large table near the door, and ordered rum and tobacco, 
and were speedily immersed in the enjoyment of these 
creature comforts, always the delight of sailors of most 
nations and climes. Edward chose this moment to sum- 
mon his friends to his side, and to explain the presence of 
his enemies. 

" Could we not fetch the police V he said. 

" No," replied one of the midshipmen. " Better seize 
the vessel at daybreak. Once in the clutches of the algu- 
azils here, you will see little of them. If you explained 

H 



£)8 ON SHOKE. 

matters to the police, they would give them a hint for a 
trifle. "Wait until you see the Admiral." 

Though K~ed candidly believed they said this, because 
they did not wish to abandon the pleasures of the fan- 
dango, he gave way, as probably their advice was correct, 
but lie qualified it by an engagement to leave early. The 
difficulty was to do so without being seen by Grunn, who 
might be on shore for some sinister object. 

When, however, the two middies appeared a little tired 
of their dancing, and Ned suggested supper at the hotel 
at his expense, the volatile but good-hearted young scape- 
graces at once agreed, and showed him how to leave the 
osteria without passing near the pirate crew. 

There was a side door through a yard, and this tljey 
crossed, reaching the gloomy and narrow street, or rather 
lane, in which the inn was situated. The night was far 
advanced, and the sky, the flying of the scud, the lurid 
light of the heavens, with the howl of the wind, showed 
them what a storm they had escaped. Buttoning their 
jackets tightly, they hurried along, for rain seemed inevi- 
table, and rain at night, in Eio Janeiro, is both drenching 
and unwholesome. 

Had the youths not known their way well, they could 
never have reached the hotel. 

Another danger, however, stood in their waj\ As they 
advanced, now arm-in-arm, now one by one, looking up 
at the houses to reconnoitre, they discern a figure coming 
along in the gloom of midnight, screened by the dark, by 
the clamour, and the shadow of the houses 1 

It is a man in sailor's garb, who is dogging their foot- 
steps, and who, as they go on, creeps nearer and nearer. 

It is Grunn, with a gleaming knife in his hand. 

They are in the lighted streets ; they near their hotel : 
they hear the great cathedral bell strike two, and the man 
is within two paces of them — his knife upraised — when 
a cry from the hotel window is heard, a cry of warning ; 
folloAved instantly by a flash and a report — that of a pistol. 

Edward turned just in time to see Grunn, with a furious 
yell, rush down a narrow street, while Dirtrick, who had 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 99 

been sitting up for him, rushed forth from the hotel, 
whence he had fired. 

A search ensued, but in vain. Not a trace of the villain 
was to be found. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

DARK CLOUDS. 

Next day, on the requisition of the British Admiral and 
Consul, the port, bay, and offing, were searched ; but not 
a trace of the Ocean Girl was discovered. Doubtless the 
audacious pirate had run into some creek, and landed his 
men, who by means of a small boat had reached Rio 
Janeiro, and made the atrocious attempt upon Edward. 

He, however, was far from believing that Captain 
Gantling had authorized the attack upon him. There 
was something in the man's manner towards himself 
personally, which forbade this hypothesis from obtaining 
credit with him, while of the intense personal hatred of 
Grunn he was well aware. 

As the storm had blown over during the night, both the 
Indiaman and the cruisers were ready, the former to 
pursue its journey, the latter to search' the whole coast. 

To remain together was useless. A rendezvous was 
therefore fixed at the cafe, when all could report pro- 
gress. 

Edward would gladly have volunteered with one of the 
cruisers, but the wishes of Sir Stephen and Loo prevailed ; 
and he agreed to defer formally entering the service until 
they had reached their destination. 

They parted then, all in high spirits, and hopeful of the 
capture of the pirate, which could not be expected to 
escape their joint activity. 

We may here remark that the Indiaman, though to all 
appearance a first-class ship, and fitted out as a man-of- 

h2 



100 DARK CLOUDS. 

war for the occasion, was, what with passengers and sol- 
diers, more like a slave ship than anything else, being 
laden with all sorts of careening gear, military and other 
stores, and what is more, crowded with bale goods, and 
encumbered with merchandise. 

A ship of this quality and condition could not be ex- 
pected to work with that readiness and ease, which were 
necessary for her security and preservation in those heavy 
seas which she had to encounter. 

After separating from the cruisers, they ran down the 
coast, until they had nearly gained the southernmost mouth 
of Straits La Maire, when, by a sudden shifting of the 
wind to the southward, and the turn of the tide, they 
were very near being wrecked upon a rocky bcund coast, 
to which they had approached toe near. 

For a moment all was wild confusion, and then disci- 
pline obtained the upper hand, and by the exercise of 
those manoeuvres which display human ingenuity and 
energy in the highest degree, the vessel was hauled off the 
shore, and was proceeding on its voyage, when, by a great 
roll of a hollow sea, they carried away theii mizenmast, 
all the chain plates to windward being broken. 

This was followed by hard gales at west, coming on 
with a prodigious swell, which caused a heavy sea to break 
upon the ship, that stove in the boats, and half filled the 
ship with water. The carpenter soon supplied the loss of 
the mizenmast by a lower studding-sail boom, but this 
expedient, together with the patching up of the rigging, 
was a poor temporary relief. They were soon obliged to 
cut away their bower anchor to ease the foremast, the 
shrouds and chain plates of which were all broken, and 
the ship in all parts in a most crazy condition. 

All began to regard their position as serious, the Ad- 
miral most of all, though he said nothing to discourage 
the brave men about him, or to unnecessarily alarm the 
women. But when, thus shattered and disabled, they had 
the additional mortification of finding themselves on a lee 
shore, from the weather being unfavourable for observa- 
tions, he called a council. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 101 

There was but one opinion, and that was to sail to the 
eastward on the track of outward and homeward bound 
ships, when they might meet with succour or aid ; or to 
enter some port, and refit and lighten the ship. The 
latter counsel would have prevailed if they had known 
anything of their whereabouts. They were aware of their 
proximity to land, from such tokens as weeds and birds; 
but what land V 

An occasional glimpse of what appeared high mountains, 
however, settled the matter, and showed the nearness of 
the danger. But it was too late to avoid it, for at the 
same moment the straps of the fore-gear blocks breaking, 
the fore-yard came down, and the greater part of the 
men being disabled through fatigue and sickness, it was 
some time before it could be got up again. 

But now the land was clearly visible, the ship driving 
bodily on to it. Every effort was now made to sway the 
fore-yard up, and set the foresail, which done, they wore the 
ship with her head to the southward, and endeavoured to 
crowd her off from the land ; but the weather, from being 
very tempestuous before, now blew a perfect hurricane, 
and right in upon the shore, which appeared to render all 
their efforts fruitless. 

And now the night came on, dreadful beyond all descrip- 
tion ; and when attempting to throw out their topsails to 
■clear off the shore, they were at once blown from their 
yards. 

All this time everybody remained up and dressed. The 
Admiral and the officers, were busy aiding and advising 
the men, so that Loo remained wholly in the hands of 
Edward. 



102 
CHAPTEE XVIIL 

A NOVEL EMETIC. 

She clung to him with feverish energy, saying nothing, 
however, but cowering under the bulwarks, where he had 
taken her for shelter. The night was fearfully, horribly 
dark, and it was almost impossible to discover anything 
beyond the ship. 

At last, at four in the morning, the ship seemed to 
strike. Still, though the shock Avas great, very great in- 
deed — being not unlike the blow of a heavy sea, such as 
during several preceding days they had often experienced, 
it was taken for the same ; but the whole of the passen- 
gers and crew were speedily undeceived by her striking 
again more violently than before, which laid her on her 
beam ends, the sea making a fair breach over her. 

It required no warning voice to bring every one upon the 
quarter-deck ; indeed, many appeared, who had not shown 
their faces upon deck for more than two months ; one or 
two unfortunates, who were ill with scurvy, and could not 
crawl from their hammocks, were instantly drowned. 

Edward clung to a belaying-pin with one hand, while 
with the other he clutched Loo. He had little hope, for 
the vessel lay in the same dreadful position for some 
minutes, all on board believing it to be their last mo- 
ment; no glimpse of anything could be caught but of 
breakers all around. Next minute, however, a moun- 
tainous sea hove the vessel off, though she soon struck 
again and broke her tiller. 

This was a disaster apparently so fatal, that many 
seemed inclined to give up all hope, and at the sight of 
the foaming breakers around, felt inclined to cast them- 
selves over in utter despair. 

The Admiral sternly addressed them, asking them if 
they had never seen breakers before, nor heard of men 
escaping from the most fearful dangers. He then ordered 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 103 

them to seize the sheets and braces, and thus command 
the ship. 

As he spoke, the Indiaman ran in between an opening 
of the breakers, steering by the sheets and brakes, when, 
by great good fortune, they stuck fast between two great 
rocks ; that to windward sheltering them from the vio- 
lence of the sea to a certain extent. 

They immediately cut away the main and fore masts, 
but still the ship kept heeling in such a manner that few 
imagined she could hold together for many minutes. 

The day now broke, and the weather, which had been 
extremely thick, cleared away for a few minutes, and gave 
them a glimpse of the land. This set everybody thinking 
of saving their lives. To get out the boats, now that the 
masts were gone, was a work of some time, which, when 
accomplished, many were ready to jump into them head- 
long, without regard to women, children, or sick. 

The admiral, captain, officers, and some of the best of 
the men, however, armed with cutlasses, interfered, and 
those whose sex or age entitled them to the preference, 
were first helped in. The men, upon this, grew very 
riotous, broke open every chest and box that was at hand, 
stove in the heads of casks of brandy and wine, and got so 
rapidly intoxicated that several were drowned on board, 
and lay floating about the decks for days afterwards. 

Edward stood by Loo until she had been lifted into the 
boat, when he went down to his chest, which was at the 
bulkhead of the ward-room, in order to save some little 
matters, if possible. But while he was there the ship 
bumped with some violence, and the water came in so 
fast, that he was again forced to get upon the quarter- 
deck, without saving a single rag but what was upon his 
back. 

The boatswain and some of the people would not leave 
the ship as long as any liquor was to be got at ; upon see- 
ing which, Sir Stephen and the captain, with the rest of 
the officers, went ashore, without more ado. 

When a shipwreck occurs, the first thing that is thought 
of is the getting to land ; it is the natural and highest 



104 A NOVEL EMETIC. 

•wish to be attained, but in the present instance the change 
was very little for the better. 

On every side a scene of horror — on one side the wreck 
(on which was all they had in the world to support them- 
selves), together with a boisterous sea, presented the most 
dreary prospect ; on the other hand, the land scarcely 
presented a more favourable appearance. It was desolate 
and barren, without a sign of culture, so that they could 
hope to receive little other benefit from it than the pre- 
servation it afforded them from the sea. 

Of course all who were possessed of manly feeling, 
confessed it was a great and merciful deliverance from im- 
mediate destruction ; but there they were, all wet and cold 
and hungry, the elements to struggle with, and no visible 
remedy against any of these evils. 

Edward, as soon as he saw the head of land they had 
chanced on, though faint, benumbed, and almost helpless, 
'exerted himself to find some covert, however wretched, 
against the extreme inclemency of the weather. He was 
fortunate enough to find an Indian hut not far from the 
beach, within a wood, and here all the ladies, without dis- 
tinction, crouched for that night, which was most tempes- 
tuous and rainy. 

None of those who were saved from the wreck ever re- 
membered such another night. 

Even if the weather had not excluded all idea of rest 
and refreshment, other ideas would have interfered, as 
they were not without alarm and apprehensions of being 
attacked by the Indians, for they had made a discovery of 
lances and arms in another hut. 

In this miserable hoveL where he had been admitted 
that night because of his illness, died a lieutenant ; and 
of those who went for shelter under a great tree, which 
stood them in very little stead, two more perished by the 
severity of that cold and rainy night. 

In the morning, the calls of hunger, which had been 
hitherto suppressed by their attention to more immediate 
dangers and difficulties, became too importunate to be re- 
sisted. Most of them had fasted eight-and-fortv hours — 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 105 

some more. It was time, therefore, to make inquiry as to 
what sort of sustenance had been brought from the wreck 
by the providence of some, and what could be procured on 
the island by the industry of others. 

The whole amount of food saved from the ship was 
three pounds of biscuit dust, reserved in a bag. 

Several, however, ventured abroad, the weather being 
still exceedingly bad ; but they killed only one sea-gull, 
and picked some wild celery. 

The whole of this was put into a pot, with the addition 
of a large quantity of water, and made into a kind of soup, 
which was then divided amongst them all as far as it 
would go. But no sooner had they partaken of it, than 
they were all seized with the most painful sickness, vio- 
lent retchings, swooning s, and other symptoms of being 
poisoned. 

This misfortune was imputed to various causes, but 
chiefly to the herbs they had made use of ; in the nature 
and quality of which they fancied themselves mistaken. 
A little further inquiry, however, made them aware of the 
real occasion of it. 

The biscuit dust was nothing but the sweepings of the 
bread room ; and the bag in which it had been put had 
been a tobacco bag — the contents of which not having 
been entirely taken out, what remained got mixed with 
the biscuit dust, and proved a strong emetic. 



CHAPTEK XIX. 

ON SHORE. 

The weather abating somewhat, it was ascertained that 
about one hundred and forty had got ashore. A few, 
however, still remained on board, giving way to drunken- 
ness, and pillaging the wreck. The leader of these was 
the boatswain. 



106 ON SHOEE. 

The Admiral sent out officers in the yawl, with orders to 
endeavour to prevail upon them to join the rest, but they 
proved to be in the greatest disorder, and disposed to 
mutiny, so that the officers were obliged to desist from 
their purpose, and come away without them. 

Everybody was very desirous to take some survey of 
the land they were upon ; but the general opinion being, 
that the savages had merely retired to a small distance 
from them, and only waited to see them divided, no ex- 
cursions were made from the hut. All the land seen, 
however, was morassy and unpromising. 

They were in a little bay, formed by hilly prominences, 
some so steep as to be inaccessible. 

Nothing was obtained that day but shell fish and wild 
celery, and that in very insufficient quantities. 

The night was exceedingly tempestuous, and the sea, 
running extremely high, threatened those on board with, 
immediate destruction by the parting of the wreck. They 
were, therefore, now as solicitous to come ashore, as they 
had before been obstinate in refusing assistance. 

But the captain could not acquiesce with their wishes, 
it being impossible to send off the boat in such a sea. 
The drunken and silly fools then fired one of the quarter 
guns at the hut, the ball of which passed just over the 
covering of it. 

Another attempt was made to bring the madmen to 
land, which, however, from the violence of the sea, and 
other impediments occasioned by the mast that lay along- 
side, proved ineffectual. 

Upon this delay occurring, the people on board be- 
came outrageous, and began to beat everything to pieces 
that fell in their way. At last, so great was their intem- 
perate excess, that they broke open chests and cabins for 
plunder that could be of no use to them. So far in ear- 
nest were they in this mere wantonness of theft, that when 
they were brought off, it was found that one man had 
evidently been murdered on account of some quarrel over 
the division of the spoil. 

But the chief object of the mutineers was to provide 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 107 

themselves with arms and ammunition, so that they might 
be able to carry out their mutinous designs. 

They asserted that the authority of the officers ceased 
with the loss of the ship. 

They soon afterwards came ashore in one boat, all 
crowded together. 

The sea still ran very high. 

The Admiral and officers held a consultation, and as the 
mutineers approached the shore, all the good and tried 
men of the shore party ran into the water, as if to help 
them, but in reality to rush upon them and disarm them, 
which in their maudlin state was done without difficulty. 

The men were half sobered, and, though still insolent, 
they all appeared inclined to acquiesce in their defeat, ex- 
cept for the boatswain. 

It was ludicrous to see them, with the officers' best 
suits, which they had rifled from chests and cabins, put 
over their greasy trousers and dirty checked shirts. 

The boatswain was the most marked, being all in laced 
clothes, and also most insolent ; but the captain knocked 
him down with his cane, and ordered both him and his 
companions to be stripped of their finery. 

As it appeared quite clear that some time must elapse 
ere anything could be done towards leaving this desolate 
region ; and, taking into consideration the incessant rains, 
and the exceedingly cold weather, everybody felt it impos- 
sible to subsist without shelter. 

The hut was scarcely enough for the women, so the 
gunner, the carpenter, and some more, turned the keel of 
the boat upwards, and thus made a tolerable habita- 
tion. 

This kind of settlement having been made, with the 
addition of rude stone walls all around, they made their 
researches with greater accuracy than before. 

They were well aware that even the most desolate 
shores are seldom unfurnished with supplies of some kind. 

They therefore soon found some sea fowl, limpets', mus- 
sels, and shell fish, in tolerable abundance. 

Still no provision proportionate to the number of 



108 ON SHORE. 

months to be fed, could, by their utmost industry, be 
acquired from the part of the island they had yet seen. 

Therefore it soon became necessary to visit the wreck, 
and from that to take such supplies as could be got out of 
her. 

This, however, was a very precarious fund, and could 
not last long ; and as no man could rightly say how long 
they might be detained on the island, the stores and pro- 
visions they were so fortunate as to release, were not only 
to be dealt out with the most frugal economy, but a suffi- 
cient quantity laid by, to fit them out as soon as they 
agreed on any mode of transporting themselves from that 
dismal spot. 

This led to an examination of the boats, which were all 
more or less injured, so that they would carry scarcely 
half the number. It became necessary at once, therefore, 
to resolve on a raft, which might be towed by the boats, 
and by their means either to reach a more hospitable 
clime, or to cross the track of other vessels, which might 
thus save them. 

All this time no signs of the Indians were seen, and 
Edward, who was of no use in any other way, strolled 
about with a gun, making Loo his companion. 

Prom the stores of the ship she had been rigged out as 
a boy, as being more convenient ; and it was her delight 
to follow her favourite and friend. 

The long boat was still on board the wreck ; and as 
soon as the weather abated, a large number of hands were 
sent to cut the gunwale of the ship, in order to get her 
out, all planks and beams being saved for the raft 

While the men were engaged on this business, there 
appeared three canoes of Indians paddling towards them. 

Motions were made, and after some time they ap- 
proached, and proved to be people of small stature, very 
• swarthy, with long, black, coarse hair hanging over their 
faces. Despite the cold, they had no clothing but a bit 
of beast's skin about their waists. 

They could not make themselves understood, but in 
return ibr a looking-glass and some other trifles, they 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 109 

brought in three sheep, which made the people fancy 
their troubles were nearly at an end, and that food would 
be plentiful. 

Many wanted to make a feast accordingly, out of what 
had been taken from the ship. But the officers were 
obdurate. They had erected a storehouse near their own 
huts, from Avhich nothing was to be dealt out, but in 
measure and proportion as agreed on by the superiors. 

The men seeing this, and finding that the Indians did 
not return, set to work with a will, modelling the long 
boat, to make it carry as many as possible, and tow the 
raft also. 



CHAPTEE XX. 

THE PERIAGUA. 

One day the sun seemed to shine more brightly than 
ordinary, the wind was lulled, the weather appeared 
cheerful and serene, so that Edward and Loo took a stroll 
farther than usual, in search of wild fowl and limpets. 
He had a gun, a pistol, a knife, and a horn of powder, 
while she only carried a basket, in which to collect shell 
fish. 

The pressing calls of hunger had made some of the men 
very ingenious, driving them to their wits' ends, and 
proving that necessity is the mother of invention. 

Among some of the more ingenious was one Phipps, a 
boatswain's mate, who, having got a water puncheon 
scuttled, then lashed two logs, one on each side of it, and 
set out in quest of adventures on this original and extra- 
ordinary craft. By this means he would very often, when 
all the rest were starving, provide himself with wild 
fowl, and it was very bad weather indeed which could 
deter him from putting out to sea when his necessities re- 
quired it. 

On occasions, he would venture far out into the offing, 



110 THE PERIAGUA. 

and be absent the whole day. At last it was his misfor- 
tune, at a great distance from the shore, to be overset by 
a heavy sea ; but being near a rock, though no swimmer, 
he managed so as to scramble to it, and with gr»t diffi- 
culty ascended it. There he remained two days with very 
little hope of any relief, for he was too far off to be seen 
from shore. 

Fortunately, however, a boat having put off and gone 
in quest of wild fowl that way, discovered him making 
such signals as he was able, and brought him back to the 
island. This accident nowise discouraged him, for soon 
after he procured an ox's hide, used on board for sifting 
powder, and called a " gunner's hide." By the assistance of 
some hoops, he formed something like a canoe, in which 
he made several successful voyages. 

Now Edward was extremely anxious to be instrumental 
in procuring a useful supply of food, before they took 
their departure from this inhospitable climate, where, 
from the thick rainy atmosphere, they were not only 
deprived of the sun, but were also visited by frequent 
tempests. He had the canoe, or boat ; but on several 
occasions he had remarked that whole flocks of wild fowl 
flew in a certain direction across the island. 

Towards this he now made his way. 

They climbed a very steep hill, descended to the other 
side, and found themselves in a valley, which was rather 
greener and more fertile than the other. 

This appeared tempting, and the young people soon 
found themselves in a region very superior to any they 
had as yet witnessed. Here they shot several painted 
geese, whose plumage is variegated by the most lively 
colours ; also a bird much larger than a goose, which the 
men called Racehorse, from the velocity with which it 
moved on the surface of the water, in a sort of half-flying, 
half running motion. 

There were also some woodcocks, some humming birds, 
a large number of robin redbreasts, and a small bird with 
two very long feathers to his tail. There were also car- 
rion crows. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. Ill 

Having collected a large number of limpets, and made 
a pretty good bag of game, they continued on their way, 
until across a rapid channel they saw an island covered 
with wild fowl,"' which they could neither shoot nor 
reach. 

About a couple of miles up, under cover of the hills, 
vere some Indian huts, and on the beach three canoes, 
one of which was sufficiently large to have a mast. As 
they were on good terms with the Indians, Edward 
resolved to borrow this one, with which to carry back the 
game he was already in possession of, and, if possible, a 
good supply more. 

The boat was launched, its tiny sail set, and the adven- 
turers—better pleased than they had been for some time 
— started. The wind was light, and the waves small, but 
the canoe walked over them truly like a thing of life. 

A cry of joy escaped the lips of Loo, as they rose and 
fell on the waters. 

Suddenly Edward half rose, making the boat rock and 
vacillate greatly, as he seized a paddle, and lowering the 
sail, tried to make for the shore. 

" What is the matter 1 " said Loo. 

" Heaven help me ! we are in the suck of a current, and 
are being carried out to sea." 

" Oh, my poor father ! " 

" Be still ; I will do everything I can to regain the 
shore. Be calm, dearest." 

And without speaking, he used his paddle with all the 
energy of which his arms were capable. But it was of nc 
avail. The remorseless stream carried them on until they 
were swept upwards along the coast, a long way from 
where the wreck lay. 

This was a fearful calamity ; but, if they could only 
save their own lives, might be productive of good. 
Should they fall in with a vessel, its crew might be 
induced to ran down to the place where the wreck of the 
Indiaman lay. 

But it was useless to form any illusions. The boat 
they were in, though built purposely for fishing and tra- 



]2 THE PERIAGUA. 

veiling in bad weather and breaking seas, could not be 
expected to take them far. 

They had provisions, but no water, save a small leather 
bottle-full each. 

Loo, in the first burst of grief, sobbed herself to sleep. 
When she aroused herself, she was calm. They were 
running along the coast with great rapidity, the sail being 
set to keep the boat steady. 

" "What is to become of us ] " said she, in a low, trem- 
bling voice. 

" We have no hope, save in Providence ; " replied the 
young lad, quietly. 

" Shall we ever get back 1 " 

"Not in this boat: we cannot breast the waves, nor 
beat against a steady wind with this cockle shell. We 
can only move along at the will of wind and waves." 

" You are pale and ill," said Loo. 

" I am sleepy." 

" Let me steer ; I will wake you at the slightest event," 
Bhe said, eagerly. 

Edward resigned the light paddle into her hand, and 
lying down, fell into a heavy sleep, which lasted many 
hours. 

Now began the usual horrors of such a voyage. The 
want of water, raw birds, and exposure, soon made them 
so faint and exhausted, that it was with difficulty they 
could eat, drink, or steer. Loo became lightheaded, sang 
snatches of songs, and, if her strength had allowed, would 
have cast herself overboard Edward scarcely knew what 
he was about, except that he gnawed at the birds, and 
drained his water bottle, and let the boat go as it liked 
over the wide waste of waters. 

Then came a heavy shower of rain, which both roused 
and refreshed them, abating the fever, though both were 
still too weak to move. 

They were dying of starvation ; but in one of the lucid 
intervals of the madness which preceded the final struggle 
both gazed around in amazement. They were gliding 
along a soft, pellucid, lake-like sea, and at no great dis- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 113 

tance from an island, with bare cliffs of a fine bold appear- 
ance. 

The wind was shorewise, and Edward feebly adjusted 
his sail. 

Slowly, with a soft breeze, they advanced ; the rugged 
peats showed their clothing of timber and verdure ; and, 
unpromising as was the distant view, a nearer approach 
revealed many beauties. 

Between the high cliffs there were verdant valleys 
stretching up into the island, each with its rill of clear 
sparkling water. 

Edward felt, if he could but reach one of these, he might 
be able to save Loo. 

His arms were too feeble to row, but, sitting like a 
statue of death, he directed the course of the stout canoe, 
which had carried them so many miles. 

He saw that the water was deep to the very shore, and 
he easily found a creek, up which to drive his boat. 

He allowed it to ascend as far as it would, until he was 
stopped by a small waterfall. Here he crawled out, drank 
from the sparkling stream, and then, reinvigorated for an 
instant, he dragged Loo ashore. 

She was in the last stage of exhaustion. But water 
had its effect upon her also. 

Ned looked around ; there were cabbage palms in 
abundance ; but these were not to be reached. Close at 
hand were some fine fat ripe cherries ; a handful of these 
being picked, they were gently forced into the girl's mouth. 
The effect was really wonderful, as they were taken into 
the system. Anything will support nature awhile, how- 
ever little nutritious as a whole. 

Finding that a faint colour returned to her cheeks, and 
that she seemed inclined for repose, Edward himself 
eagerly devoured some fruit, and, casting his gun on his 
shoulder, he began with slow and uncertain steps to ex- 
plore the place. 

It had large trees, myrtles that attained the size of 
forest trees, but without scent; and it had peach trees and 
strawberries also. 

I 



114 THE PERIAGUA. 

But what amazed Edward most, was to come across fields 
of wild oats, and even radishes. He looked about for 
horses and inhabitants, but not a sign of any was to be 
seen. 

There were figs and poplars, too, and wild rhubarb, and 
thyme and mint. 

Then he started, as a flock- of twenty goats rushed by. 
It was an opportunity not to be lost, and having seen 
carefully to the priming, he fired, and two fell before his 
shot. 

This was a triumph, and, shouldering one of them, he 
returned to where he had left Loo, and found her in a 
calm sleep. Quietly, without noise, he made a fire, and 
broiled some of the most tender parts of the kid. 

Suddenly the girl awoke, and looked at him, without 
speaking. She had no idea where she was. 

"Better, Loo?" 

" Are we alive ?" she asked, in a faint whisper, 

" Yes ! and safe on a beautiful island," he replied, hand- 
ing her some broiled goat flesh. 

She took it, not eagerly, not anxiously, but as if to 
oblige him, and, unable to eat, sucked it. Many persons, 
half dead with starvation, have been saved thus. 

Edward himself soon ate heartily, as strength and appe- 
tite gradually returned. 

At the end of half an hour, Loo could sit up and listen 
to details of their voyage. She heard of them with horror 
and trepidation. 

" Oh my poor father ! and where are we now ? " 

" I do not know, but I suspect," said Edward Drake, 
earnestly ; " more than suspect." 

" What 1 » 

"That we are in a place as romantic as dangerous," he 
added, thoughtfully. 

" And where may that be 1 " 

" On the island where once lived Bobinson Crusoe, and 
which is now used by Gantling to refit. I have heard him 
speak of it often." 

" Would he harm us 1 surely not ! " 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 115 

" Heaven only knows. But I hope never again to be in 
the power of my father's assassin." 

" Father ! father ! what of my father 1 " continued 
Loo. 

" Calm yourself, dearest ; we are two ; we are brave, 
and some plan must be devised to escape. The island is 
often visited now, by whalers and others. I am not at all 
fearful." 

Loo shook her head, while Edward rose to make a hut, 
in which to pass their first night on the romantic shores 
of the island where Kobinson Crusoe vegetated nineteen 
years. 



CHAPTEE XXL 

ALONE. 

Edward was at that pleasurable age of boyhood, when to 
be the servant and slave of a sister or cousin was in itself 
happiness. Forgetting all else but his anxious desire to 
be subservient to her comforts, he began erecting a small 
hut of such boughs and leaves as were nearest at hand. 

The task was not a difficult one, as, by means of his 
knife, he had only to cut such branches as served his pur- 
pose, and, sticking them into the ground, they very soon 
formed a shelter quite sufficient for an island in such a 
climate, until the rainy season set in. 

This done, he led the poor suffering girl to her repose, 
and making a large fire to scare away wild animals, he lay 
down with his gun close to his hand, to seek that rest of 
which he stood so much in need. But though ,wearied to 
the last degree, he awoke several times to replenish the 
fire, and each time listened eagerly, to know if his precious 

i 2 



116 ALONE. 

charge slept. And every time, his anxious solicitude 
was rewarded by the discovery that she lay in a sound 
slumber. 

At early dawn he awoke, and, going to a sparkling rill, 
he filled up the gourds with water ; then, cooking some 
more goat's flesh, he returned to arouse the sleeper. 

She was nowhere to be seen. 

Alarmed lest some misadventure might have occurred, 
Ned was about to call her name loudly, when she emerged 
from behind a rock, fresh and blooming. She had found 
a secluded nook where she could perform her ablutions, and 
she was now, comparatively, as well as ever she had been in 
her life. 

A long and interesting conversation now ensued. To 
make any further attempt at a voyage, in their case, was 
out of the question, while it was equally painful to con- 
template remaining on that island all their lives. Adam 
and Eve in Paradise would probably have wearied of it, if 
no society had turned up. 

The island had plenty of food. There were goats in abun- 
dance, there was fuel, and the crews of the different 
vessels which visited it as a victualling place, had planted 
numerous English pot-herbs and vegetables, which were 
used as preservatives against the scurvy. 

There were also several caves in the rocks, which, dur- 
ing the short time it had been a convict establishment, had 
served as prisons for the unfortunate exiles. There were, 
also, some ruined huts, and the fallen frame of the gover- 
nor's house, all of which would afford materials useful for 
their purposes. 

The island was sure to be visited, as it was the common 
watering-place of whalers and buccaneers, who also often 
resorted there for weeks at a time, to give their sick time 
to recover. 

But for their anxiety about the Admiral and their 
friends, wrecked on the miserable Patagonian shore, they 
might have been tolerably happy, as at their age there is a 
youthful buoyancy, a romantic courage, which sustains 
young people against almost all difficulties, and which has 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 117 

so often made a boy-middy do deeds of heroism worthy of 
a man. 

The first thing to be done -was to select a home, and, 
after due consideration, it was resolved to repair the kind 
of log-hut in which the former Spanish governor had 
resided. It was two storied, with one room aloft, and 
two below. The one above was small, and, as it only 
wanted repairing in the roof, it was assigned to Loo, while 
one of those on the ground-floor was to be the joint 
apartment and kitchen, reserving a kind of cupboard for 
Edward. 

The difficulty was to repair it without tools ; but 
necessity is really the mother of invention, so by means 
of a knife some bark was cut, and placed over the holes 
which time had made in the ruin, the bark being kept in 
its place by stones and staves from the other huts. 

Then came the question of beds. But in such a climate, 
during that season, some sweet straw served every 
purpose. 

There remained then, the question of food. They had a 
few charges of powder, but that could only serve them 
once or twice. Vegetables existed in plenty, as did 
cocoa-nuts and palm-cabbages ; but, whatever philosophers 
may say in their closets, such a diet is neither pleasant nor 
satisfactory. 

It was resolved, therefore, to look to the capture of 
goats as their mainstay : but how was this to be done 1 

Few hearts but would have been moved to compassion, 
mingled with admiration, to see this young couple, so 
ignorant of the world's ways, devising and planning the 
means of existence. It is true they did not contemplate a 
lengthened residence on the island. 

After a long discussion, an ingenious idea came into 
Loo's head. She knew both how to knit and how to net, 
and she believed too, that by means of an admixture of 
goat's hair and cocoa-nut fibre, she might make a snare 
sufficiently strong, to place across one of the narrow 
passes leading to the hills, and into which it would be 
easy to drive their coveted prey. 



118 ALOXB. 

Edward at once set to work to shape two long wooden 
knitting-needles, as well as all else that she required, and 
with which she at once began her labours. 

Behold them now at work for their living, in a few 
days after. 

They have arisen to breakfast, and have taken their 
frugal meal. They have collected wood with which to 
keep up a fire all day, so that passing vessels may know 
that some unfortunates are on the island. 

Loo then seats herself near enough to the fire to re- 
plenish it, while Edward wanders in search of limpets, 
oysters, and anything else which may vary their stock of 
food. He looks, too, to the supply of cocoa-nut fibre, 
which can only be obtained from the nut in a certain 
state of its growth. He sees also to the vegetable gardens, 
where the fences have been broken by the goats. These 
animals, however, since his arrival, have not ventured 
from their mountain fastnesses. Had they, their capture 
would have been easy and certain. 

The principal vegetables which the captains of merchant- 
vessels had succeeded in raising, were scurvy-grass, parsley, 
carrots, and onions, all of which are wholesome and 
anti-scorbutic. 

The difficulty was to cook them, and at best the process 
was extremely slow. They were compelled to put them 
into cocoa-nut shells, to heat small stones red-hot in the 
fire, and clearing them of ashes, to cast them into the 
water : by which means, after a time, the requisite heat 
was gained. As, however, they had no great abundance 
of occupation, this was perhaps an amusement, and helped 
to pass the day, which otherwise would have been idly 
enough occupied. 

Meanwhile, however, Loo advanced slowly but surely 
with her masterpiece. It was not a handsome work : the 
knots were many and ugly ; but it promised to serve the 
purpose, and both were extremely anxious to try its 
merits. 

Their stock of meal was soon run out, and they desired 
to renew it. This consideration, however, weighed less 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 119 

with them, than the love of adventure inherent in human 
nature, and which is as common in girls as in boys, until 
the hour comes when nature, speaking with its mighty- 
power, drives them into the shade, modest and shy. 

A supper of limpets and oysters, somewhat coarse and 
insipid, made them long for better fare, and it was mutu- 
ally resolved, that the net was long enough for the purpose 
for which it had been so laboriously constructed. 

It was accordingly agreed to start at daybreak, and try 
their fortunes in the interior of the island. 



CHAPTER XXIL 

THE HUNT IN THE VALLEY. 

The morning was bright, the song of birds was pleasant, 
as hand in hand the juvenile Adam and Eve took their 
solitary way. Edward carried the gun and the net, some- 
what heavy, wrapped up like a haversack, while Loo 
carried their small supply of food. 

They had taken up their station near the shore, close 
to some woods, through which they now walked, surprised 
at the abundance and variety of the foliage, no less than 
by the beauty of the flowers. 

Some of the palm-trees rose to a height that amazed the 
young girl, though to Edward they were tolerably familiar, 
his cruises under Gantling having taken him both to the 
West Indies and to the coast of Africa. What, however, 
brought a smile to the countenance of the young girl was 
the loquacity and number, as well as the impudence of the 
monkeys. They did not appear very fearful of the strangers, 
but made grimaces, chattered, and laughed in a most ludi- 
crous manner. 



120 THE HUNT IN THE VALLEY. 

"If the worst comes to the worst," said Edward, " we 
can make these brutes our purveyors, ugly as they are ! " 

" How ? " replied Loo, with a pretty little shudder — 
" nasty creatures ! " 

"I will show you," said Edward, merrily; "wait a 
moment ! " 

The monkeys were grinning, and, to all appearance, 
talking overhead, very high out of reach. Edward, how- 
ever, laid down his gun and parcel, and picking up stones, 
began throwing them at the animals with all his strength, 
and as rapidly as he could. 

The imitative brutes, with infinite chatter and fury, after 
holding a sort of consultation, began plucking the cocoa- 
nuts, and throwing them down so rapidly, that had Ned 
and Loo not concealed themselves, they might have been 
seriously hurt. As it was, they only laughed heartily, and, 
opening the nuts, took a cool drink and a refreshing 
meal. 

Edward took occasion to tell Loo how, in Java, the 
monkeys meet together in bands, led by some old chief, 
and, descending at night on the native villages, pillage 
their poor huts, and even carry off children and young 
girls. 

"There is no place like England," sighed poor Loo ; "I 
wonder if we shall see it again ! " 

" Of course, and laugh as we tell our children of our 
strange adventures ! " 

Now, Loo was a little girl ; but little girls are very fond 
of being thought of as sweethearts and wives, so she looked 
down, blushed, and made no answer. 

They rose, soon after, and continued their journey until 
they reached the foot of the hills, when they began care- 
fully to look about for a place to commence operations. 
The hills were not very high, but they were rough and 
steep, so that they advanced but slowly on their way. At 
length, by dint of great exertion, they found a valley 
where goats were feeding, and, peering down so as not to 
be seen, they examined the place carefully in search of a 
situation for a trap 



* ' THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 121 

It was soon found. 

At the further end of the valley, to the left, was a nar- 
row gap, almost closed by trees, and admirably suited for 
their purpose. 

Telling Loo to remain at the other end, and to appear if 
necessary, he, bending low, crept to the spot, and succeeded 
in reaching it without being discovered by these timid and 
shy animals. 

He fastened the net securely, and then made a wide 
detour, in order to rejoin Loo, who awaited him impa- 
tiently. 

The flock, about twenty, were huddled together, sniffing 
the air, as if they suspected an enemy. 

Both, however, crept slowly on, until they cut off the 
retreat of the flock, when they appeared suddenly, and 
rushed at the goats, which went off at a rapid pace in the 
direction of the trap. 

Their hearts now beat wildly, for the whole flock would 
soon have carried their frail net before them. 
( Much to their mutual relief, nothing of the kind oc- 
curred. 

Two kids and a large she-goat were sent to the ground, 
secured by thongs, their horns and feet being taken out of 
the net. 

The rest of the flock passed round, evidently making 
for the other end. 

It was, however, only for an instant, for, as the kids 
and goat sent up a plaintive cry, the buck, the patriarch 
and guardian of the flock, turned, and with fury flash- 
ing from his eyes, he darted at the foe. 

Loo was nearest, and at her he rushed. She, uttering a 
shrill cry, ran away. 

Edward, who had placed his gun on the ground, 
snatched up the first thing at hand, a heavy fallen bough, 
and met the animal face to face. It was a hand to horn 
encounter, in which great dexterity was required. 

Leaping aside with a bound, such as few but young 
sailors can appreciate, he dealt the infuriated brute a 
severe blow across the back. It shook itself, and seemed 



122 THE HUNT IN THE VALLEY. 

disinclined to renew the contest, when again the kids and 
mother gave their pitiful cry. 

The goat reared, and then bending his head low, ho 
rushed forward. Once more the leap and the stick 
sufficed to check his advance, and then with something of 
the dexterity of a bull-fighter, Edward jdunged his knife 
into the animal, and finished him by a second blow. 

" Are you hurt 1 " cried poor Loo. 

" ISTot a bit," laughed Edward ; " but what a fury ! " 

Loo made no remark; but she thought that- in all 
probability it was quite natural that the male should 
defend the weaker. 

It was now resolved to skin the dead beast, and take 
the others home alive — no very easy task, but still it was 
one worthy of trial. 

Edward performed the butchering part, while Loo 
looked about for flowers, or culled grass for the she-goat, 
which, however, the poor animal strenuously refused to 
eat. 

As their load was so heavy, they wrapped a good portion 
of the goat-flesh in the skin, and hid it in a tree. Then 
they determined to pass the heat of the day under shelter, 
and return to their hut in the dusk. This necessitated a 
meal ; but Loo could not as yet reconcile herself to eat of 
the animal, so they were satisfied with cocoa-nut. 

So inviting was the cool retreat they selected, so languor- 
inspiring the outside air, which came balmy and flower- 
laden, that it was not long ere both were fast asleep. 

When they awoke, it was quite dark, and, therefore, in 
a country they knew not, it was impossible to travel. 

A camp in the woods was at once* decided upon. 

" "We can fancy ourselves gypsies," said Loo, laughing. 

" Or robbers," said the boy. " I have often wished to 
see a camp of Italian banditti. It must be fine ! " 

" Eomantic," observed Loo, thoughtfully ; " I don't 
like banditti They remind me of pirates or buccaneers." 

"Like me," said Edward, in a tone of semi-pique. 

" If all were like you," began Loo, and then she hesi- 
tated. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 123 



" Well- 



" Well, I should like them," cried Loo ; and jumping up, 
she began collecting fuel for a fire, which, almost in any 
latitude, is pleasant at night, but is always required to 
keep off wild animals and noxious vermin. 

As the trees were thick, a much less complicated hut, 
than where the trees were thinner and more open, was all 
that was needed to keep off the dew. It consisted only of 
a roof composed of branches and leaves ; under this, after 
some serious talk about their situation, these innocent 
children slept, like the babes in the wood, until morning 
came. 

They were awakened by the bleating of the two kids 
and the mother, now much tamer from the unusual de- 
privation of food. 

Loo rushed to pluck grass and delicate shrubs for the 
she-goat ; and Edward, taking advantage of the animal's 
secure position, milked a small quantity into a cocoa-nut 
shell, and handed it with pride to his companion, when 
she returned. 

Loo clapped her hands with delight. 

" We will keep her, and have milk every morning," 
she said, enthusiastically. 

Edward proceeded, with a smile, to loosen the goat, 
that she might rise to her feet, and giving her food, she 
ate it heartily. As for the kids, there was no necessity 
to tie them, as, once loosened, they rushed to their mother, 
and would not leave her. This little event seemed to 
elate both Ked and Loo, and to make them forget the 
dangers they had already passed through, or to feel 
anxious about those which might yet be in store for 
them. 

They took tip their march early, leading the goat, and 
walking slowly across the hills. 

At the same instant both halted, as if struck with sud- 
den fear, or, at all events, with some all-powerful sensa- 
tion. 

Each, at the same time, had heard a gun at sea ! 



124 
CHAPTEE XXIII. 

A NAVAL ENGAGEMENT. 

A gun at sea ! 

What did this portend? — assistance from friends, or 
danger from enemies ! At all events, it was useless to 
speculate on the matter ; so both, with one accord, has- 
tened towards the summit of a rock, on which stood a 
solitary palm, and gazed out. 

But for some minutes they could neither hear nor see 
anything. 

There was a red haze under the rising sun, which pre- 
vented them from seeing very distinctly, though they 
strained their eyes as much as possible for the purpose. 
It was early, too, and the sun itself was low upon the 
waters. 

Suddenly a red flash illumined the sky, and a distant 
boom followed rapidly. It was a vessel at some distance. 
Both now, breathless and overcome by mingled fear and 
hope, seated themselves. They did not speak for some 
time, so absorbed were they in their feelings. 

" I can see her sails," suddenly exclaimed Edward, 
" just under the sun yonder, like a huge sea-bird's wings." 

" I cannot," whispered Loo, as if afraid of the sound of 
her own voice. 

" There, too, is a second in chase, and the one in front 
is making directly this way," he added. 

Loo, this time, was just able to distinguish the vessels 
as they rose rapidly, both having every available sail set. 
The atmosphere became clearer, too ; and as the sun lifted 
itself above the waves, the character of the contending 
ships became quite clear. 

" 'Tis the Ocean Girl flying before a larger vessel !" cried 
Edward ; " and yet I understand it not. The pursuer is 
not a man-of-war ; and I never knew Captain Gantling 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 125 

fly before a merchantman. At all events this may enable 
us to escape. "We must make a beacon fire, and possibly 
the larger vessel may send a boat." 

They rose ; and, with eager and trembling hands, began 
collecting wood, bushes, leaves, and grass, which they piled 
round the solitary tree on the summit of the rock. 

This operation occupied some considerable time ; and 
when they looked out seaward again, the state of affairi 
had considerably changed. The brigantine was not more 
than a mile off shore, going, with all sail set, much slower 
than the larger vessel, which was swiftly overhauling the 
buccaneer. 

The pursuing vessel was evidently one of those armed 
Indiamen which often beat off the largest French corsairs, 
and four of which, by advancing fearlessly in line of bat- 
tle, caused five men-of-war, commanded by Surcoeuf, to 

fly- 

But now a change took place. Edward was narrowly 
watching the stern of the Ocean Girl ; a strange ripple be- 
hind, puzzled him. 

" I see it ! I see it !" he cried. "It is a trick. The 
buccaneer has a spar trailing behind, to retard her speed 
and draw the pursuer within reach of his guns. That 
man is the genius of evil ! " 

His supposition was correct : for, while a heavy spar 
trailing behind, was hauled in, all unnecessary sails were 
also taken in, and the vessel stripped to her fighting- 
order. 

Then the sound of the drum beating to quarters was 
heard ; and, changing her course, the pirate fired a gun at 
the advancing vessel, which sailed on majestically, with- 
out making any reply for some minutes, when she also 
began to strip for the combat. 

They were now very nearly within effective distance, on 
different tacks, neither showing any colours. 

Next minute, however, the broad flag of England ap- 
peared at the peak of the large vessel, while a pennant 
waved from the masthead. 

The brigantine showed no response, but next instant 



126 A NAVAL ENGAGEMENT. 

a crashing report — that of two broadsides — indicated the 
commencement of the combat. Round with marvellous 
rapidity went the Ocean Girl — so much more rapidly than 
the square-rigged vessel, as to give the first fire — a rating 
one — which appeared to cause some confusion on board of 
the enemy. 

After this, for some time all was confusion and smoke ; 
the two vessels approaching until they were wrapped in 
one_ cloud, the detonations of artillery, and lurid flashes, 
alone indicating their position. 

" And this is war," whispered Loo, shuddering ; " this 
the way in which Heaven's beautiful ocean is desecrated 
by selfish man." 

" War is a fatal necessity ; but this is not war. Here 
a pirate, after attacking a merchant vessel, has pretended 
to fly, and has met with his match. Victory to the trader 
is life to us." 

At this instant the vast canopy of vapour moved slowly 
to the northward, carried away by the light breeze to 
which the wind had been reduced by the fierce and con- 
tinuous cannonade. 

The two vessels were locked together, and the pirates 
were rushing like a hive of bees on board of the India- 
man. From where they sat, no just idea of the carnage 
could be obtained, but they knew that it must be fearful. 
All they could make out was the flash of swords, the 
crack of pistols, and the hoarse shouting of the men. 

" The pirate has met his doom," cried Edward, in a low 
tone. 

The Seagull had evidently caught a Tartar. For, as 
the young man spoke, the whole piratical crew were 
hurled back upon their own deck, followed by the vic- 
torious enemy. 

But the brigantine slipped from the grapplings and 
sheered off, lifting sail after sail with marvellous rapidity. 

The other did the same, and soon, once more they saw 
the buccaneer in full flight before the victorious Com- 
pany's vessel. 

At once they proceeded to light their beacon, which in 



THE TOUNG BUCCANEER. 127 

a moment sent up a dense column of smoke, followed by 
a burst of flame. 

They then watched with bated breath for some signal 
from the victor, — a single shot in reply. 

But none came. Both vessels, cracking on all sail, con- 
tinued on their way, until they were lost once more on the 
blue expanse of ocean, fading away like phantasmagoric 
shadows of the night. 

"Gone! all lost!" whispered Loo; "cruel, cruel ves- 
sel ! " 

" Yes, but though the trader may not return, the buc- 
caneer will," said Edward, sadly ; " we must keep a good 
look-out." 

And so, slowly and sadly, they descended to their littlo 
island home, all their visions of beatitude quite departed 
from both their minds. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

NEW ARRIVALS. 

For some days they led a monotonous existence. The 
goat was tethered in some rich grass ground, and after the 
second day, the kids, which were quite big enough, were 
taken from her and placed in the paddock-like enclosure 
where grew the carrots, the tops of which they were ex- 
tremely fond of; in this way they obtained a goodly 
supply of milk. Edward went to the mountains to fetch 
the goat-flesh which they had left behind, and then quite 
listlessly they continued their labours for some time. 

Though at first they had looked upon a short residence 
as no great hardship, the sea-fight, having aroused sud- 
den hope in their breasts, had left them terribly dis- 
heartened. 

It seemed to have snapped the last link between them 
and society. When would such another chance present 



128 NEW ARRIVALS.- 

itself 1 However, youth is fortunately hopeful, and in- 
clined to view the rosy side of questions ; and by a 
natural law of humanity, they were soon once more, to a 
certain extent, reconciled to their fate. 

Much time was spent in improving the character of 
their residence, so as to guard against the rainy season, 
which is very severe. The roof and sides were strength- 
ened, not only with bark and staves, but by removing 
creeping plants to the walls, which, growing with marvel- 
lous rapidity, soon made one bower of verdure of it, while 
the tendrils, entering into every chink, served the purpose 
of securing their work. 

Though no signs of dangerous animals had yet been 
seen, the nightly fire was kept up ; and Edward never 
forgot to replenish it. 

One night it had burned low, and he came forth to cast 
on fresh fuel. It was very dark, but still, as if wind had 
never blown. He took up a large faggot of boughs and 
vine sticks, which he cast on. 

As he did so, he was startled by the sound of human 
voices. Looking seaward, he at once saw a light dancing 
on the waters, and the faint tracery of a vessel against the 
back-ground of the sky. 

It was unmistakably the tracery of the brigantine. 

The sound he had heard proceeded from a boat's crew, 
who were cautiously coming up the creek — he could teli 
this by the slow motion of the oars. 

He ascended the ladder which led to Loo's room, and 
whispered her name. 

" Who is there 1 " she replied, starting up. " Edward 
—help!" 

" Hush, in Heaven's name, Loo. Come down. There 
is danger nigh at hand. Speak not until I tell you — but 
come ! " 

He was obeyed ; and next minute they were leaving 
their hut, with no other part of their earthly riches but 
the gun. With this in one hand, and leading Loo by the 
other, he gained a dense thicket, to which they only 
obtained access by crawling on their hands and knees— 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 129 

and there they halted. Fortunate was it for Loo she had 
taken to stout male habiliments ; she would otherwise 
have had her clothes torn off her back. 

Scarcely had they taken shelter, when there was a rush 
of human feet towards the hut, a waving high of torches, 
and then a hearty volley of curses. 

" There is the nest, but the birds have flown," said 
one. 

It was the voice of Jabez Grunn. 

" We must put our trust in Providence, for from man 
there is no hope," whispered Edward ; "our island is in- 
vaded by the pirate crew." 

Loo shuddered, but made no reply. 

The buccaneers dispersed themselves around, beating 
the bushes, and venting the most awful imprecations on 
the fugitives, whoever they might be ; but, finding this 
vain, they returned to the hut, and, making up a roaring 
fire, they proceeded to enjoy themselves. 

Edward and Loo, retreating still farther into the 
thicket, lay down under the heavy foliage, and were soon 
fast asleep, despite the awful danger in which they were 
placed ; nor did they wake until it was quite light. Not 
a moment was to be lost. The pirates were quite still, 
probably sleeping off the effects of their debauch. 

Edward, in his journeys, knew of a rugged hill-side 
where there was a small rude cavern, and to this he 
intended making his way, there to conceal themselves 
until they found out the further intentions of the bucca- 
neers. To reach this spot, they had to pass the station of 
the goats. These animals they secured, and drove before 
them, for they were now so tame as to make this quite 
easy. 

But, though to the goats the hill-side afforded no diffi- 
culty, to the fugitives it was a most rude and arduous 
ascent. Danger, however, was behind ; and, after much, 
labour and many stumbles, they reached the desired 
spot. 

It was a rude ledge, with some stones about, and in 
the rear there was a small but gloomy cavern. 

K 



130 HEW ABBIYAI& 

Nothing grew near it but cacti, which, however, the 
goats eagerly devoured. When we say goats, we must 
premise only two, for one fell a victim to the ravenous 
appetite of the wolves. 

A fire of very dry sticks in the cavern was not only not 
dangerous, hut quite pleasant. It gave out scarcely any 
smoke, and that was lost in the crevices of the rocks. 
The two goats were secured in a natural pen by the 
removal of some rocks ; and thus they were prepared for 
a siege. 

As soon as the rage of hunger had been appeased, both 
crept out to a spot where they commanded a good view 
of the sea, and at once discovered that Edward's suspicions 
were correct. The pirates were about to refit after their 
late engagement All their stores were being brought 
ashore, while the carpenters were busy at work at the 
roasts and spars. 

This was a fearful blow. 

Had they been drawn ashore only from curiosity, to 
find who occupied the solitary island, they might, after a 
superficial search, have departed. But as they would now 
have ample leisure to search the island, it was scarcely 
possible that Loo and he could escape discovery. 

Edward, however, resolved to use every endeavour to 
eutwit them, as he had no desire to return to the hideous 
slavery which must in future ever be his lot on board the 
buccaneer Ocean Girl. 

. The fact that Jabez Grunn retained the least influence, 
was enough for Xed ; besides, how could he trust himself 
to the hands of the murderer of his father 1 

The pirates began their search of the island at once, 
and Ned could both see and hear them scattered over the 
island — shrieking, hallooing, and threatening, in the most 
obscene language, death and destruction to the intruders, 
if they did not at once surrender. After two or three 
days, however, this ceased, and all seemed to relapse into 
quiet, except that all hands were put to work. 

Then Loo began to feel ill. The confinement, the 
want of exercise, and change, and food, told fearfully 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 131 

upon her. Her eyes became unnaturally large, her cheeks 
pale and wan, and her whole frame shadowy and weak. 

Edward saw that something must be done, and that 
quickly. 

The fourth night, after having with great difficulty 
pursuaded her to remain alone, he saw carefully to the 
loading of his gun, and began his descent towards the 
camp of the enemy. His design was to obtain some 
vegetables, and anything else that fell in his way. 

Great caution, however, was necessary, as the pirates 
would be on the look-out. His only course Avas to pass 
through the thicket, and thus reach his own hut, now 
doubtless used by the chief. 

It was close to the thicket. 

After a long and tedious journey — but devotion will 
overcome every difficulty — he reached the desired spot. 

The bandits slept at their camp-fires without one 
sentry. There was a light in the hut, but no sound of 
voices. 

There was a small window at the back, for light and 
air, and this the boy buccaneer approached with intense 
caution. 

He peered through. 

On a rude bench sat Captain Gantling — haggard, 
worn, pale, his eyes sunk in his head, his - cheek-bones 
protruding, and his whole look being that of one devoured 
with remorse. 

He half dozed, his eyes fixed on vacancy, while 
-muttered words escaped his thin and livid lips. 

Before him, on the table manufactured by Edward and 
Loo, was a small roast leg of pork, some biscuit, and an 
untouched bottle of wine. These Ned Drake unhesitat- 
ingly transferred to the wallet he carried — in this com- 
mitting a small act of piracy, under the circumstances, 
quite venial. 

The captain put his hand mechanically forward to 
reach a horn cup of brandy, and as he did so his eyes 
fell upon the pale and menacing countenance of Edward, 
one instant seen — then away. 

K 2 



132 THE PIRATE CAMP. 

" More tortures : is he, too, dead 1 — and comes he to 
reproach me with my crime 1 Will this never cease V 

His eyes fall on the table — he misses the supper, and 
at once the truth flashes across his mind. 

"It is himself. "What mystery can there be 1— how 
came he here 1 " 

And he stepped out, just as the figure of the boy disap- 
peared in the thicket. 

"Ned Drake," he said, "come back ; you are safe with 
me, on my word." 

"Give me back my father," cried the boy, bitterly, 
as he darted away under cover of the gloom. 

" Great Heaven 1 " gasped the pirate chief ; " how can 
he have learned — who could have told him 1 ? Mine enemy 
who has escaped me 1" 

And he re-entered the hut, to drink more heavily still 
of the brandy, which was now his only solace. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE PIRATE CAMP. 

Ned Drake felt a stern and savage dislike of the man 
supposed by the Admiral to have killed his father ; and, 
much as he desired to leave the island, he preferred an 
eternal exile, to trusting himself within his grasp. He 
knew the lawless character of the men he had to deal 
with, and instinctively he hesitated to put one so gentle 
and so much loved as Loo, in their power. 

The moment he disappeared in the dark and gloomy 
thicket behind the pirate encampment, he walked hurriedly 
away. He had leit the young girl in a state of mind and 
body quite sufficient to excite alarm and anxiety, and 
he was fearful that she might be desirous to follow him. 

It was nearly dawn when he was once again in sight of 



THK YOUNG BUCCANEER. 133 

the cavern, and there, as he expected, he found Loo, her 
face haggard and wan, watching for him with intense 
anxiety. She could hardly believe that he really had 
returned, after trusting himself near those dreadful men, 
who excited in her bosom the most intense fear and 
dislike. 

"You surely have not been in the camp ! " she cried, 
when the brave young lad showed his plunder. " What 
a fearful risk ! " 

" You would have died, Loo, had I failed " — and, 
without another word, he pressed refreshment on her, 
after which the imperious necessities of fatigue induced 
him to seek repose. 

Late in the afternoon they awoke, and had a long con- 
versation. Loo was anxious that they should remain 
concealed closely until the departure of the pirates took 
place, when they would be able to return to their home, 
and wait the arrival of some other vessel of a more res- 
pectable character. Edward reasoned differently. He was 
particularly anxious to know the intentions of the pirate 
chief. There was something in his manner that closely 
resembled remorse, and it might be useful to him to know 
whatever he could pick up by overhearing the captain's 
conversation with his men. 

He resolved, therefore, to start early, and to conceal 
himself within hearing of the buccaneers, and, if possible, 
thus to learn their future intentions. 

They must know that the island was inhabited, and by 
this time the captain must suspect by whom. 

Would he depart without making an effort to find the 
fugitive, whose presence must have particularly puzzled 
him? 

" Let me go with you," said Loo, earnestly ; " it is so 
lonely." ' 

"You will only ensure my capture," he replied, gravely: 
" alone, if discovered, I might escape : but together, it 
would be impossible." 

Loo pouted, and sat down. She was a young lady not 
in the habit of being contradicted, but at the same time 



134 THE PIRATE CAMP. 

very sensible. She made no further remark, however, but 
making up a fresh fire, she prepared anxiously to await 
his return. 

Ned only paused for the dusk to fall, and then boldly 
and fearlessly, he started on his journey. 

The way was more familiar to him now, and he reached 
the spot about an hour after sundown. Creeping through 
the thicket, he again peered forth. 

A very picturesque scene presented itself to his view. 
The whole crew were at their meals, seated round the 
little camp fire which had served to cook their repast. 
They were chiefly smoking ; and, as their fierce and be- 
grimed faces were lit up by the nickering light, they did 
indeed look a lawless gang. 

Most naval countries were represented. There were 
Englishmen, Scotchmen, Dutch, Bretons, and Italians, 
with here and there a face which bespoke genuine African 
origin. These negroes — originally victims — become the 
most atrocious of villains when once corrupted— just as, 
in gambling-houses, the softest pigeon often becomes the 
cruellest rook. 

TJiey were talking in small groups, but only one excited 
the attention of Edward Drake. 

Close to him, and within reach of his gun-barrel, sat 
the Captain and Jabez Grunn. 

The former had been drinking, but not much ; the 
latter had been drinking freely, but without much im- 
pression being made upon his great head. 

Close by him there was a third individual, whose face 
was unfamiliar to Ned : he had been shipped, most 
probably, at Rio de Janeiro. 

He was an undersized, bullet-headed, beetle-browed 
savage, with hair black and curled like a negro. His lips 
were thick, his eyes small and restless ; his form was that 
of a stunted Hercules. 

" Grunn," said the captain, in a low confidential 
whisper, " do you believe the dead ever come back to 
meet us 1 " 

" Dormer und blitzen ! " cried the other ; " they say so. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 135 

But I don't know, and don't care. I'm more afraid of a 
good rope, or a volley of musketry, than of anything from 
the other world." 

" I fear nothing in this world. But last night, wide 
awake as I am now, I saw and spoke with young Xed 
Drake, whose vessel must have heen wrecked and all 
hands drowned." 

" I wonder you did hot see the ghost of all hands," re- 
plied Jahez Grunn. 

" Do not joke," said Captain Gantling, wearily, : ' it was 
as I state. I wish the boy had never come aboard on this 
voyage." 

" So do a good many," observed Grunn, drily. "The 
Jonah — he has spoiled our voyage." 

That has to be seen. "\Mien our vessel is once refitted, 
and again we sail under the true flag, it shall go hard but 
I get you all ample prize money. It is not that I fear — I 
had my private reasons for securing that vesseL It is now 
too late, they have surely gone to the bottom." 

" It's my candid opinion that the youngster is skulking 
about ; and if you will spare me and Jacobs here, see if I 
don't find the young rascal before we go. The crew owes 
him a grudge." 

" Should Edward Drake be on this island alive, he is 
my prisoner, and no harm shall be done to him. Leave 
him to me," said the captain ; "but it is impossible. This 
hut must be the habitation of some runaway sailor. I 
Bhall turn in." 

And he strolled away within the hut, the entrance of 
which he closed. 

The two inferior pirates remained alone. These man 
were united by the bond of intense mutual ruffianism. 
They had, in days gone by, when on board another vessel, 
committed crimes which would have made any other men 
pass sleepless and miserable nights ; but in these true 
limbs of Satan, conscience slumbered. 

" Who is this, and why does the captain feel so hurt 
about him 1 " 

" A young whelp whom the captain brought up from 



136 THE PIRATE CAMP. 

childhood, and who has turned spy. IVe missed him 
twice ; but if so be he's on this here island, I'll be upsides 
with him this time. What say you, Jacobs — will you join 
in the haul 1 " 

" That will I. Pity I haven't got one of my dogs. The 
thing would be done," said the newly enrolled pirate. 
" Ah ! them dogs is a fine institution. People talk about 
sporting, but b 1 me if there's anything like a good man- 
hunt." 

" We'll be our own dogs to-morrow. I know this island 
pretty tidy, and he's an artful chap if he keeps out of my 
way. Now, if we find him, I shouldn't wonder but he'll 
leave his bones on the place. I ain't particularly fond of 
his company on board." 

" What will the captain say 1 " asked Jacobs. 

" I don't care a fig ; he's getting half spooney," laughed 
Grunn. 

" He ain't like old Eoberts," said Jacobs — a produce of 
Ratcliffe Highway — his father a Portuguese, his mother a 
blackwoman — " those were the times. He was like a free- 
booter. In his days many a rich bark was plundered, and 
yet no tongue betrayed the secret, for sunken ships and 
murdered seamen followed each deed of rapine, and that 
they never reached a port, was falsely ascribed to 
storm or some maritime calamity ; but he fooled us after 
all." 

"That was some time after I left," observed the bigger 
ruffian. 

" Yes : it seems that crime and cruelty palled upon 
him ; that some strange fancy for home crossed his brain, 
so that he secretly determined to abandon a rover's life. 
We had rich booty in gold, plate, and jewels, which he 
resolved to appropriate to himself, deserting the ship and 
crew." 

" A pretty scoundrel ! " muttered Jabez between his 
teett. 

" He and a confederate packed the whole in parcels of 
conve nient size, and going into Cuba to refit, they con- 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 137 

trived, before the hour of distribution came, to carry all 
ashore and sail for England." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! " laughed Jabez, " it was cleverly done, 
and saved the men many a splitting headache and murder- 
ous quarrel. Fill, and drink to the success of our man- 
hunt to morrow." 

The other, nothing loth, willingly consented, and tha 
orgie continued. 



CHAPTEE XXVL 

THE HUNT. 

It was with a deadly and sickly sensation at the heart, 
that Edward Drake listened to the words of these ruffians. 
Had he been alone, he would not have cared so much ; 
but that Loo should run the risk of falling into the hands 
of such monstrous caricatures of humanity, excited in his 
mind the liveliest feelings of disgust and fear. 

To him she was a sacred charge, and should her father 
never survive the sufferings he endured on that inhos- 
pitable coast, he would be only too glad to devote his 
whole existence to her, in any situation in life in which he 
might be placed. Even if condemned to remain all their 
lives on that island, he would not murmur, considering, as 
he did, the terrible dangers and sufferings from which 
they had escaped. 

What was to be done ? 

It was quite certain that, with two such cunning and 
resolute ruffians at their heels, they could not expect to 
remain concealed in the small cavern in the rocks, as they 
would be indefatigable in their search. A move must be 
made at once. 



138 THE HUNT. 

While these thoughts were slowly passing throuph his 
head, he did not attempt to move. He was listening all 
the time to the conversation of the pair of buccaneers, in 
the hope that something they might say would aid him in 
his plans to escape. He was disappointed, however. Their 
talk was of their misdeeds and crimes, of which they 
boasted with that gusto and glee which appertains only to 
utterly lost humanity. Ordinary criminals, when overcome 
by drink, or in moments of excitement, may boast of their 
own wickedness ; but in the calm still hours, when con- 
science pricks, they know themselves to be the rogues 
and fools they really are. 

Fools, because a life of dishonesty is the hardest and 
most perilous that any man can follow. 

By degrees the bandits lay down, and, ere the hour of 
midnight, they slept as men do who have indulged in 
potent doses of spirituous liquors. 

Ned Drake now rose, and stole into the camp. Had he 
been older and less generous, his two ferocious persecutors 
would have been at his mercy. One blow of a knife would 
have settled the question. But, excusable as the act might 
have been, such a thought never entered the head of our 
young hero. 

His intentions were very different. 

Beside a tall tree that overshadowed a portion of the 
camp, he had noticed that the arms were piled, numerous 
large powder horns being also hung from the branches. 
Stepping lightly and cautiously between the sleepers, he 
soon reached the spot, and, without the slightest hesitation, 
he appropriated one gun, two large powder horns, and a 
bag of bullets. 

Having made sure of these, he would not risk recrossing 
the camp. He determined to make a round : especially 
as, being loaded, he could not, if discovered, have been 
active enough in his movements. 

As he stepped from under the trees, he noticed a slight 
movement on the other side. 

It was Captain Gantling, who, being unable to sleep, 
had come out into the open air to smoke. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 139 

Ned Drake stood, inadvertently, in the full light of a 
bright and glorious moon, which, motionless as he was, 
gave him, if not a ghostly, at least a statuesque appearance. 
As the captain's face was turned full towards him, he 
was afraid to move. Hoping the other would soon turn 
away, he moved not a muscle. 

" Away, offspring of the fiend ! " suddenly exclaimed 
the pirate. "Why haunt me thus? Thou canst not say 
I slew thee. Away, accursed spirit — away ! " and as he 
spoke, he advanced menacingly. 

Several of the buccaneers leapt to their feet, and 
crowded round their chief. Among them were Grunn and 
Jacobs, who eagerly inquired what had happened. 

" I saw him — there, standing still in the moonlight, 
motionless as a statue, and now he is gone ! " 

"Tis the fever, sir," said the big buccaneer, who hardly 
believed that Ned would enter their camp willingly ; 
"you are not quite yourself." 

"Perhaps so," he replied, more calmly. "'Tis true I 
have been ill ; and illness breeds strange fancies. Go, rest ; 
I will watch awhile." 

And he did ; but no further interruption taking place, 
he at last retired to seek that rest which is soothing to the 
body as well as to the mind. 

When, however, the discovery was made, that a gun 
and two powder horns and shot pouches had been 
abstracted, all doubt was at an end, and Gantling himself 
was forced to assent to the astounding belief of Ned 
Drake being on the island. This discovery did more to 
restore him to an ordinary frame of mind, than all the 
reasoning of his comrades and all the medicine he had 
been trying. 

Meanwhile, Ned Drake had made the best of his way 
back to the cavern, which, however, promised no further 
security, now that his presence was known. Such men 
as Grunn and Jacobs have all the instincts of the hound, 
whilst, the island being small, it could by perseverance be 
Beached in a very moderate space of time. 

There was, however, no immediate danger. Ned Drake 



140 THE HUNT. 

had examined the neighbourhood pretty accurately, and 
had secured a path by which to retreat, at the first alarm. 
It led down a narrow ravine to a mangrove swamp, dark, 
damp, and infested by water snakes — a hideous class of 
reptile, but preferable to those who were on their track. 

They reposed until after daybreak ; and then, letting 
loose the goats with reluctance, they peered out upon the 
stony track by which their enemies were likely to come. 

But though they heard occasional shots in distant parts 
of the island, no one came their way during that day. 

This was, they knew, only a respite. Fortunately, the 
goats, which were very tame, would not leave them ; so 
that they had their usual supply of milk, which, in the 
absence of water, was essential to their existence. 

Long and weary were the hours of that watch. Both, 
usually so talkative and ready to amuse each other, were 
now moody and silent. They looked with horror to the 
probability of their capture by the ruffian crew, who, 
though on ordinary occasions obedient to their commander, 
took occasional lawless fits into their heads, and then 
mischief was sure to ensue. 

All day they sat, retreating to their cavern only when 
night fell. They made up a small fire and resumed their 
seats. Neither had any consolation to give — why, then, 
talk? 

Presently a sudden bleating of the goats was heard, 
and iSTed crept slowly out, satisfied that they had been 
Btartled. 

The night was dark. The moon had not yet risen, but 
there was that baffling light which is so common in the 
tropics, by which he clearly saw two figures at no great 
distance, on the summit of a ridge, looking about them 

They were Grunn and Jacobs, who were now on the 
track, and had succeeded in finding some sign by which to 
trace the fugitives. 

They appeared to be making straight for the cavern. 
No time was to be lost. Putting his finger on her lips, 
he took Loo by the hand, and crept up the side of the 
rock, satisfied that the smell of fire would betray the 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 141 

secret of the cavern. The way they had chosen was rude 
and difficult, but anything was better then falling into 
the hands of these atrocious miscreants. 

In the eyes of Ned Drake, life was too sacred to be 
taken unnecessarily, but he resolved to use his firearms, 
rather than be captured. "With this determination he 
loaded the guns carefully. 

They were now on the edge of a swamp, quite a quarter 
of a mile from the cavern. 

A loud shout proclaimed that the ruffians had found 
their late place of concealment, and .Ned Drake shuddered 
as he reflected on the position they would now have been 
in, if they had trusted to the cavern. But no time was 
to be lost. 

The swamp was filled with mangrove trees, which 
grew out of the murkey fen in all sorts of shapes, the 
roots invariably above the Avater. However, there was 
no choice but to clamber through them. The buccaneers 
were already scouring the rocky way by which they had 
come, but had not succeeded in discovering them. 

The trees were so close together that their journey was 
performed with ' comparative ease, though the fatigue was 
great. At length they reached a small mound, where 
Ned Drake halted with the intention of passing the 
night. 

Under the deep shadows of the trees, in the gloom of 
that strange spot, the young people seated themselves, 
with an earnest prayer to Heaven for protection and 
succour. 

Then, in the earnest hope that they were safe, both 
slept ; for youth cannot easily resist the imperious claims 
of nature. 

It was morning when they awoke, though no sun pene- 
trated to that secluded nook. 

Hark ! what sound is that 1 It is the cautious- 
whispered tones of the two pirates. They were close to 
them, and there was no choice but to make an open run 
for it. Whispering to Loo to come, the agile boy leaped 
from root to root, helping her as he did so. 



142 DEPARTURE. 

"With a volley of fierce oaths and exclamations, the 
bandits ordered them to stop. The pirates, however, 
were not so lithe and youthful, so that the fugitives were 
able to keep ahead of them, without much difficulty. Still, 
concealment was now idle, and some other course of action 
had to be adopted. 

IS!ed Drake, in this fearful emergency, had to decide at 
once. 



CHAPTER XXVIL 



DEPARTURE. 



The work of refitting continued rapidly. The buccaneers, 
despite their fondness for revels, were too fond of money 
and the society of the dashing beauties of the isles, to 
waste much time. Every hour of daylight was therefore 
taken advantage of. 

Captain Gantling interfered but little. He was really 
ill, and the fever that heated his blood, filled his brain 
with many and strange hallucinations. He believed him- 
self haunted by the spirit of the boy, and he regarded the 
hunt by Grunn and Jacobs as an idle act of folly. 

How could a boy whom he had left safe on board an 
East Indiaman, be on that desert island, where none but 
whalers and buccaneers were in the habit of calling 1 

It was thousands of miles out of the track of the 
transport. 

He was thinking deeply over the matter as he walked 
up and down before his hut. All the rest were busy, and 
the sound of hammers was heard, mingled with the son^s 
of the light-hearted workers. 

Sailors are the most careless of human beings, and 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 143 

go to work as readily as to fight, dance, or spend 
money 

Suddenly a loud commotion was heard in the thicket, 
and then two shots from a distance. 

All ceased working : while Captain Gantling turned 
round, and gazed wildly at the thicket, from which, next 
instant, two boys issued, one of whom he at once recog- 
nized to be Ned Drake. 

" Am I awake, or is this some vision come to haunt 
me?" 

" Captain Gantling, I have reasons to fear you, perhaps 
to hate you ; but I prefer trusting to your clemency, 
rather than be murdered by that ruffian Grunn." 

' " It is the boy," gasped the buccaneer. " In the foul 
fiend's name, how came you here 1 And who is this 
lad?" 

" We are, I fear, all that remains of the Indiaman," 
replied the youth, evasively. 

"Ah, has my enemy indeed perished ! How happened 
it ? " 

" I will tell you presently, captain. Here comes the 
bloodhound." 

" Fear nothing ; go inside the hut. So, Grunn, you've 
hunted them up ? " said the captain. 

" Yes ; and now I mean to do for the young whelp ! 
Come out of that ! " 

" The boy is mine ; and shall never be hurt while I 
remain in authority ! " replied the captain, coldly. 

" This is madness — folly ! The men won't stand it ! " 
cried Grunn, in a furious voice. 

" They will have to stand it ! " continued Gantling, 
as he caught np a musket, "this is my remedy for 
mutiny !" and he pointed the gun directly at the heart of 
the tall bully. 

Grunn muttered some indistinct threat, and turned 
away to foment, in secret, the mutinous band which he 
headed, and which were now in a considerable minority. 

From that moment no allusion was made by Ned Drake 
or Gantling to any cause of enmity between them. The 



144 DEPARTURE. 

young buccaneer knew how frail was his term of life, and 
how, for Loo's sake, he must keep friends with his old 
captain. He alone could save them from the villanous 
crew. 

The captain himself dreaded an explanation. His old 
liking for the boy was very far from being extinguished. 
It was the more necessary to him, too, because in all that 
band he had no real friend or companion. 

Gladly would he have resumed his confidential inter- 
course with iS T ed, but there was an impassable barrier 
between them now. 

At last the vessel was ready for sea ; and as no idlers 
were allowed on board, both the youths received rating as 
midshipmen. The crew were generally rough, and the 
captain feared for their safety, if they were allowed to mix 
with them ; each, therefore, enjoyed the privilege of a 
state room in the officers' department. 

Loo was thus isolated, and able to preserve the secret 
of her sex. 

The vessel was now headed for the China seas, there to 
intercept some of the richly laden vessels, which were the 
chief prey of pirates and buccaneers. There was no part 
of the world better calculated for the purpose, there being 
so many islands, channels, and secret bays, where they 
could defy detection. 

Several attempts had been made by Gantling to win 
something of the confidence of Ned, but, though the latter 
was scrupulously polite, and even deferential, there was 
no farther advance towards cordiality. 

Gantling was much changed. He was moody and 
thoughtful. None of his old cheerfulness remained. He 
indulged in no more pleasant visions of isles of beauty, but 
seemed to think that Death had marked him for his own. 

He spent much time in writing in his cabin. 

About^ten days passed; and, though the look-outs never 
left the mast-head, no vessel had come in sight. The 
crew began to murmur, and at last the skipper agreed to 
lie-to, with all sails furled, as the best means of falling in 
with some unfortunate trader. ° 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 145 

Gahtling was again confined to his room, and Jabez 
Grunn ruled the quarter-deck. 

It was a calm, dark night, and the brigantine danced 
lightly on the waters. 

It was the watch of the two lads, who always kept 
together — Ned, in every possible way, easing Loo of all 
trouble. 

At last the darkness began to yield to day. Morning 
dawned gloomily, and a dense mist hung over the ocean, 
and shrouded the ship in vapour. 

The thickness of the weather made Grunn anxious. 
"Go up aloft, you lubber," he said to Loo, " and look 
if you can see a hole in yon blanket. 
Ned turned on him. 

" My friend is not a sailor, and cannot go aloft : I 
will go." 

" Stop there, you powder-monkey ! I'll let you see 
who is master." 

" I will try," said Loo, in a faint voice, at the same 
time advancing towards the rigging. 

"You shall not," cried Ned Drake, firmly; "the 
captain said so." 

"Captain or no captain," roared Grunn, now in a 
furious passion, " if you don't stand aside, and let that 
little whelp obey me, I'll flay you ! " 

"Coward and bully!" said Ned Drake; "you dare 
not." 

" Trice him up ! " screamed the infuriated ruffian. 
In a moment Ned Drake was caught by two powerful 
men, and tied up to the rigging. 

" Spare him ! " gasped Loo, falling on her knees. 
"Hold your tongue, or I'll flay you afterwards." 
" Ask no favour of the brute," said Ned, with a warning 
glance. 

"A round dozen," said Grunn, addressing the boat- 
swain, who stood ready with his cat. 

At that instant, faint sounds, like strokes on a ship 
bell when a watch is changed, came stealing over the 
water. L 



148 DEPASTURE. 

"Beat to quarters!" cried the voice of the captain, who, 
pale and shivering, stood on the quarter-deck. "What 
means this impudent interference with my privileges i 

Grunn muttered something about the boy being inso- 
lent, and then untied him. 

" It was only to frighten him." 

The haze began to disperse, the sun shone out, the 
morning breeze freshened ; for a mile around, the sea was 
clear, the vapour in huge fleeces rolling off before the 
wind. t 

The captain swept the horizon with his glass, and, 
within a cloud bank to the southward, he fancied he dis- 
covered something darker than the mist. 

Then another portion of the fog rolled off, and there, 
not more than two miles distant, and dead to windward, 
he saw a brig under easy saiL Her low black hull, and 
raking masts, told that she was anything but a trader. 

Every man flew to his post, and sail was rapidly made ; 
but their helm was scarcely up, when the stranger changed 
her course, and bore down upon them, and the rapidity 
with which canvas was crowded on her to the trucks, told 
that her crew was numerous. 

No mist now remained, the sun poured, a glorious flood 
of light over sea and sky ; not a sail was on the ocean far as 
sight could range, except the stranger and the buccaneer. 

The breeze freshened, and the brig overhauled the pirate 
i-apidly. 

Then the meteor flag of England was flying at her 
aast-head, and a gun was fired across the bows of the 
ouccaneer. 



147 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THE MUTINY. 

We left the Admiral, and such of his crew as had survived 
the wreck on the unhospitable coast, preparing to attempt 
an escape by means of a raft. It was their only hope, as 
doubtless no vessels ever willingly visited that rocky 
shore. To dwell there for any length of time would have 
been impossible, for not only were provisions very scarce, 
but the climate was fearfully inclement. 

They must all have certainly perished during the winter 
months. 

At the same time, the voyage projected was a terrible 
one to contemplate. Anything, however, was better than 
to die miserably in that desolate region. 

The ship had gradually broken up, and the carpenter 
occupied himself in repairing the larger boat ; while, from 
the wood of the Indiaman a stout raft was made, capable 
of supporting not only the crew, but the provisions, on 
which life mainly depended. 

Since the disappearance of Edward and Louisa, the 
Admiral had fallen ill, and much fear was felt that he 
would never again lift up his head. The surgeon, however, 
did all in his power to raise his spirits and to restore his 
health. Bodily, he in part succeeded, but the blow was 
dreadful ; and Sir Stephen brooded over his sorrows, in a 
way that strangely affected his mental faculties. 

A strong sense of duty alone prevented him from utter 
prostration. He supported the captain, therefore, by his 
example ; and every day, for a certain number of hours, 
he superintended the works. 

The longboat was the first finished, and supplied with a 
mast, sail, compass, and as much in the way of provisions 
as its lockers would hold. The main store was to be 
placed on the raft itself. 
1 L2 



148 THH MUTINY. 

This had a mast as well, with two large oars by way of 
a rudder. 

Every possible exertion was made to have all in readi- 
ness ere the winter set in, and that season was surely and 
rapidly approaching. 

The longboat was to carry the officers, ladies, and twenty 
of the crew ; the raft had to support nearly a hundred 
seamen, besides provisions. It was, however, very large, 
and buoyed up by all the barrels that could be spared. 
Still, when all its freight was upon it, it was level with the 
water. This was of little moment with hardy men, while 
the sea was calm ; but should the wind rise, it would be 
painfully disagreeable. 

The day was bright, chilly, and sparkling ; the sky was 
almost cloudless, seaward, as the longboat towing the raft, 
sailed with a light breeze out of the harbour. 

As in one hour the boat would have run out of sight of 
the raft unless they were attached, this precaution had 
been taken, the officers having no desire to abandon the 
men ; on the contrary, they were determined to abide by 
whatever good or evil future was to befall them, together. 

The raft had three masts crosswise, to support the main- 
sail, close reefed, and this being a very large sail, they 
moved tolerably fast for so unweildy a conveyance. 

The Admiral and captain had determined to steer as 
much as possible to the northward and eastward, as they 
might thus fall in with vessels homeward or outward 
bound. It was, however, soon seen that their probation 
would be long. It was the evening of the second day 
before they lost sight of the shore. With a light winr 1 , 
and an unweildy craft, they did not make a knot an hour. 

When properly under discipline, on board a comfortable 
ship, and with regular rations, sailors are not the most 
contented people in the world ; but under circumstances 
such as those we now describe, they are inveterate grum- 
blers. Fortunate if, under the influence of black sheep 
they are not something more. 

The crew on the raft had no amusement, save conversa- 
ion and smoking, the whole store of tobacco having been 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 149 

distributed — a very wise precaution, as nothing pleases a 
seaman more. 

They were divided into gangs or watches, under the 
command of petty officers. The boatswain headed one, 
and the gunner the other, each having selected his own 
party. 

That of the boatswain consisted of the black sheep, — 
the late mutineers, the discontented in the late wreck. 

There were about thirty of them who were quite ripe 
for any mischief. 

Four days passed, and the wind rose slightly, becoming 
also rather unfavourable. The monotony was, however, 
still dreadful. 

" Slow work this," muttered the boatswain to one of his 
cronies ; " a blind sort of navigation. I don't think it 
bodes any good." 

" But what is to be done 1 " asked the other in a dole- 
ful tone. 

" Humph ! — if thirty of the boys were of my mind, I'd 
soon see." 

" What would you do 1 " continued the other, peering 
into his face. 

" Well, you know, I'd have that precious boat to our- 
selves, and leave them as stuck to the raft to their fate — 
that's what I'd do." 

"But how?" 

" Humph ! — if they'd come quietly here, well and good. 
If not, force must be used." 

"I'm agreeable. This here funeral dodge don't suit 
me." 

" Speak, then, to our best men. ISTot more than thirty 
must be in the secret. With that number the longboat 
will be in good trim." 

"It's agreed. When shall we do the deed 1 " 

"The sooner the better. I'll give the signal directly 
after dark. Let each man drop into the water, and dash 
for the boat. All who surrender can try their chance on 
the raft ; all who do not — overboard to the fishes." 

With this fierce and sanguinary resolution, the men 



150 THE MUTINY. 

appeared satisfied ; the lieutenant going away and whisper- 
ing to his colleagues what was expected of them. 

In a couple of hours, the thirty had agreed to do the 
deed ; possessing themselves of the jolly boat, they might 
escape with some hope. 

The boatswain remained with his back leaning against 
the mast, smoking, and occasionally moistening his lips 
with brandy and wafer, which was given out once a day. 

He already chuckled over the probable success of his 
plot. 

It was not his intention to be picked up by any large 
vessel, or man-of-war. They would all be guilty of mu- 
nity, and punishable accordingly. It was, therefore, his 
resolve to piratically seize some small vessel, and enter 
boldly on a lawless career, too common at the time of which 
we speak. 

The police of the high seas was carelessly kept, and the 
existence of many secret bays and coats, now well known, 
but then secret and retired, gave every facility to the law- 
less and reckless. 

The great majority of the crew slept. To them this 
was by far the most agreeable way of passing the time. 

Two men sufficed to steer the raft. 

The boat was ahead about fifty feet, attached by a long 
rope, which lashed the water tolerably taut, but really 
doing very little service. The little vessel seemed to tug 
on, impatient of restraint, as if eager for liberty. 

The boatswain was impatient of delay, but to face the 
officers in daylight would have been dangerous, had he 
attacked them openly. 

It was about an hour before sundown, and the sea was 
agitated. Long billows lifting the raft, and making the 
men cling as it ascended and descended the slope, indicated 
that the vast ocean had at no great distance been much 
disturbed. 

The sun appeared to go down angrily in a bank of 
clouds ; and darkness lay on the face of the deep. 

Then a man slipped gently into the water, and, guided 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. ]5l 

by the towing-rope, took his way in the direction of the 
longboat. 

Any one used to his figure, would at once have recog- 
nized Dirtrick, 



CHAPTEE XXIX. 

THE ATTACK ON THE LONGBOAT. 

An hour passed : the sailors ate their frugal suppers, and 
then, after a careless look around, they lay down again to 
slumber, or sat in groups conversing, chiefly as to the state 
of the weather. 

There was, however, one group, more numerous and care- 
ful, which by common consent had separated itself from 
the others. 

It will easily be supposed that this was the band of the 
boatswain. 

They were all armed with knives or handspikes, — the 
officers in the longboat having secured all the fire-arms. 

But as they were about to attempt a surprise, this 
mattered not. 

Most likely those in the longboat slept heavily. 

At last the signal was given, and stealthily the whole 
body glided in the water, thanks to the darkness, without 
discovery. 

But there was a marked difference in the trim of the 
raft, which was for a moment somewhat lop-sided. 

It was so dark that nothing could be seen but the dis- 
tant sail. of the longboat. 

This the men took for a guide, and every now and then 
they lifted their eyes, to see that they were going in the 
right direction. 



152 THE ATTACK ON THE LONGBOAT. 

The boatswain, a powerful swimmer, kept ahead, sup- 
ported by one of his fellows, the man who had collected 
the gang. 

" I say, Thompson," said the boatswain, suddenly, 
" where is the boat 1 " 

" I don't see it," hurriedly replied the other, " what's 
up?" 

"There she is," cried the boatswain — " by heaven she 
?3 making off ! She has slacked off the rope. We are 
tricked." 

But at this moment the boat went round, and came dash- 
ing in their direction. 

" Now then, all at once ! " cried the boatswain ; " spare 
them not." 

The longboat, with all sail set, was now coming up closo 
to them, and as it dashed in to their midst, every hand was 
stretched out to seize the gunwale. 

Then came a sudden volley, and with a wild shriek 
the mutineers sank into the water, wounded, dying, or 
terrified. 

The boatswain succeeded in grasping the prow of 
the boat, and in hitching himself half in, as yet un- 
wounded. 

" No, you don't," said Dirtrick, raising a handspike : 
" you're not wanted." 

" 'Tis you betrayed us," gasped the boatswain ; and, 
dexterously avoiding the blow, he dragged the faithful 
sailor into the water. 

They sank together — for one moment only, when they 
again appeared on the surface, clutching one another in a 
desperate death grip. 

Both had knives, and both swam admirably ; but they 
were compelled to let go their hold, for fear of sinking. 

Then striking at one another with one hand, while 
supporting themselves with the other, they each sought a 
vital part. 

" Take care, Dirtrick," said one of the sailors in the 
boat; "I'll shoot him." 

The boatswain turned involuntarily, and seizin^ his 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 153 

opportunity, the faithful follower of Ned Drake struck him 
a blow which effectually closed the struggle. He sank to 
rise no more. 

The survivors of the rebels now turned towards the 
raft. 

The longboat pursued its way until it was close to 
the raft, upon which the wildest confusion prevailed. 

"What means this dastardly outrage'?" cried the 
menacing voice of the captain. 

" We don't know, sir," said the gunner respectfully, 
"no more than you." 

" It was the boatswain's gang. He meant to leave you 
all, after murdering us," continued the captain ; " be 
careful, as I must leave you." 

" Don't leave us ! " cried a dozen voices ; " we will 
watch them." 

"My men," said the captain, "I have made up my 
mind that, as a British sailor, I am bound to stick by you, 
and mean to do so, — that is, if you continue worthy of 
it. There must, however, be no more mutiny, no more 
attempts at violence. We have a fearful and dangerous 
journey before us. If once the raft were abandoned, your 
fate would be dreadful — therefore I say, be careful. If 
there are traitors amongst you, denounce them. I shall 
know what to do." 

The sail, which had been lowered during this conference, 
was again hoisted, and in a few minutes the rope was 
again attached to the boat. All resumed their old 
positions, except that seven or eight men were missing. 

The sharks doubtless could have given an account of 
them. 

For some days things went on very quietly, but the 
weather began to change gradually. It became intensely 
cold ; and, on the third day, they were visited by a 
severe snowstorm. 

Fast and heavy it fell in huge feathery flakes upon 
the crouching figures of the men, who began to give 
way to utter desolation of heart. It hid the boat from 
the raft, and the rait from the boat; it muffled all sound, 



154 THE ATTACK ON THE LONGBOAT. 

it mantled the sails with a white cloak of a pure unsullied 
colour, and accumulated in mounds and ridges over the 
cowering bodies. 

The wind was light, but it was fair. 

It was quite certain that they had drifted too far to 
the southward, and must now make all the northing they 
could, to reach a warmer climate. 

It must be remembered that they were on the other 
side of the Line, and that the further they went to the 
southward the colder it became. 

Nothing but the regular allowance of rum and brandy 
sustained them. 

Hitherto no effort had been made to exceed tha 
rations, the stern threat of the captain ringing in their 
ears. 

Now, however, the men began to murmur and to 
demand double rations. The officers peremptorily re- 
fused. 

Low murmurs arose on all sides, and men were heard 
muttering the most fearful and sanguinary threats against 
their superiors. 

The petty officers grew alarmed, and quietly seated 
themselves, hauling on the rope until the boat loomed 
huge and ghastly close to them. 

" What is the matter? " said a muffled voice from the 
boat. 

"The men insist on having double rations of rum," 
replied the gunner. "They can stand the cold no 
longer." 

" Give them double rations," coldly replied the old 
captain. 

The men gave a loud cheer, and stood up in the cold, 
while the petty officers distributed the fiery liquid in tin 
pannikins. 

There being eleven petty officers, the distribution was 
soon finished. 

" Are they satisfied ? " continued the stern voice of the 
captain. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 155 

" Quite satisfied, your honour," was the reply; "only 
the tubs are empty." 

" Exactly ! " sarcastically observed the captain, " and 
will remain so while mutiny is rife. There -will be no 
grog to-morrow." 

There was at this a great cry, but it availed nothing, 
as the boat once more headed them. 

All that night the men huddled together under the 
large spare sails which had been provided, and thus they 
were tolerably warm, especially as the snow lay thickly 
over all. 

At daybreak the fall ceased, and a warmer breeze 
restored hope somewhat to them. They had providentially 
escaped any severe storm. 

But provisions and water began to fail them, Avhile the 
distribution of rum, brandy, and wine was necessarily 
small. 

They were, however, evidently getting into a warmer 
latitude. 

But salt meat, little water, and a small allowance of 
bread, began to tell upon them ; scurvy broke out sud- 
denly and violently, carrying off no less than a dozen on 
the first day. 

" It's all up with us," said one of the principal 
malcontents, as the bodies were heaved into the sea. 

" Why 1 " exclaimed several voices. 

" Don't you see them gentlemen yonder," replied he, 
pointing to some horn-like points that rose from the water 
on all sides. 

" What are they 1 " 

" Sharks ! We shall all be food for them soon." 

" Better make them food, for us," said the boy, laugh- 
ing. 

Without another word, he sought out and found a 
large hook, to which he fastened a good-sized piece of 
pork. The cord to which the hook was attached was 
then hitched on to one of the masts, and the bait cast 
into the sea. 

The sharks, however, swam at a respectful distance 



15b LAND HO! 

in a regular lins of battle, as if quite sure of their 
prey. 

About an hour later, however, a great splash was heard 
in the water, the cord was taut, and the raft shook all 
over. 

" Heave away, my hearties ! here is a prize ! " cried the 
delighted boy ; and in ten minutes more a huge shark was 
tossing and kicking on the raft, with such violence as to 
drive off all from its neighbourhood. 

There is no animal more tenacious of life than this huge 
fish, and it was only by a dexterous motion that its tail 
was cut off, and then it lay quiet and bled to death. 

A fire was soon made on the centre of the raft, on some 
iron plates belonging to the old galley ; and the shark, 
broiled and roasted, was by no means a disagreeable 
supper. All who where ill from scurvy enjoyed a slight 
respite. 



CHAPTEK XXX. 

LAND HO ! 

But again all was gloom. 

They advanced with the slowness of a funeral procession ; 
getting into pleasanter and warmer latitudes, it is true, but 
utterly unable to make out their whereabouts. 

Water was out. 

Even in the longboat there was scarcely a drop for the 
ladies. 

Symptoms of insanity began to show themselves amid 
the crew, who eyed one another in a strange and ominous 
manner. It was quite certain that should starvation reach 
its' acme, the last fearful resource of poor humanity would 
be adopted. 

There was cannibalism in their eyes. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 157 

On hoard the longboat things were little better. The 
officers had certainly, by means of their steward, received 
on board some few of their own private stores, which 
proved salutary and pleasant, but already one lady and a 
midshipman had perished. 

All were sad and gloomy. The horizon was swept 
every five minutes, in vain. No friendly sail came in 
eight. 

They had been twenty-seven days at sea, and the hearts 
of all began to sink within them. They were now in a 
warm region, and the want of water was all the more 
severely felt by every one. 

The women were merely the skeletons of their former 
selves ; their faces were pale, haggard, and wan. Few 
complained. The hour for noisy ejaculation had not yet 
come — in a word, they were not yet mad ! 

It has been well said, that, in a civilized country, 
"hunger any man can conceive, but thirst none." With 
every convenience for assuaging the most natural of all 
human sensations, we cannot realize to ourselves the 
torturing agony which arises from the want of water. 

Here they were doubly tried, for in the words of the 
homely poet it was — 

" Water, water everywhere, 
But not a drop to drink." 

Agonized glances were cast at the sky ; hopeless look- 
outs stood clasping the mast, and yet no hope. 

Including the mutineers shot during the attempt to 
capture the longboat, forty-seven men had been cast into 
the deep. 

"What remained for the others but to lie down and 
die! 

" Land ho ! " 

This cry, from one of the midshipmen who had clambered 
to the foot of the spritsail, caused everybody to spring to 
their feet. 

A low dark line on the horizon became clearly visible. 



168 1AND HO ! 

What hope again rose in the bosoms of all, who can 
toll? 

It was just as a reprieve under the very gallows tree. 

The longboat was at once cast off from the raft, and 
all set sail in the direction of, to them, the ocean El 
Dorado. 

Those on the raft uttered curses both loud and deep ; 
but they availed not. The longboat was scudding, like 
some hugh bird of the ocean, over the surface of the 
waters, in the direction of what was doubtless some island 
in the midst of deep waters. 

The mirage in the desert, when thirsty travellers, dying 
from want, behold a kind of lake, and rush forward to 
find it but a mist, nevpr excited more hope than did this 
little plot of land. 

It was only four miles off, and yet did it seem a 
hundred, such was the impatience of the voyagers. 

The longboat was soon lost to view, except when some- 
thing white, like the wings of a sea-gull, fluttered on the 
ocean. 

.Slowly and sadly the raft was impelled by sail and 
oar. 

Swiftly and gaily sped the longboat. Soon did its hope- 
ful denizens behold welcome trees upon the land ; trees 
that spoke loud-tongued of moisture — of water ! 

There was loud rejoicing on board the longboat ; every- 
body was again hopeful — even the women forgot their 
sufferings. 

The land was so low, that they were upon it almost 
before they were aware of it, the striking of the bows 
first warning them of its unexpected proximity. 

"A coral reef, by the Lord!" said the experienced 
captain. 

Those who were only tyros in navigation, knew the full 
extent of this exclamation. 

A coral reef, and therefore an island without water. 

And yet many of these extraordinary islands are inha- 
bited by a small population, who make it their perpetual 
residence. -^ ; 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 159 

How this happens, we may shortly explain ; that is, in 
another narrative. 

" But the cocoa nuts ! " said a sailor. 

No more was said. Everybody strong enough leaped on 
shore, and with axe and cutlass began to slash at the 
trees, half a dozen of which soon lay upon the ground. 

The nuts were wildly plucked from the trees, and 
opened. Everybody had one for him and herself. 

Here was botli meat and drink ! 

Those on the raft were not forgotten. As soon as the 
first rage of hunger was appeased, four sailors, with an 
ample supply of the kindly fruit, one of nature's choicest 
blessings, were sent to the raft, the occupants of which 
received the boon with deep gratitude at first, and then 
with joyous shouts. 

Two hours later they were all ashore on the reef. 

It was a little more. 

One of those extraordinary mountains which rise so 
miraculously from the unknown depths of the sea, had 
rescued them from death. 

Eut it was only a temporary boon. 

The whole of the vegetation of the island would not 
keep them a week. 

But that was quite sufficient to cure all of the scurvy, 
which was decimating them : a disease now only known on 
board a few Scotch ships of inferior quality. 

The captain, however, now knew where he was, and 
publicly announced to the men that in five days more they 
would be on habitable ground 

This of itself was enough to cheer and rouse the spirits 
of men who, like all British sailors, were much more 
easily moved to mirth and merriment, than to sadness. 

It was, however, differently fated ; for man proposes, 
but Providence disposes. 

At the end of a week, and just when about to set sail 
at break of day, a ship startled them by appearing in the 
offing, not four miles distant. 

The recumbent cocoa trees were soon brought into use, 
and a huge bonfire was made. 



160 LAND HO ! 

Five minutes after, a gun responded to the signal, and 
the tall ship, a three-master, hove to. 

The longboat was at once manned, and Sir Stephen, 
with his officers and a small crew, set out for the 
ship. 

As they approached, they at once saw that it was a 
man-of-war, and, thank heavens ! an English man-of- 
war. 

Sir Stephen Rawdon smiled grimly. He could not 
help thinking that, however humane and courteous the 
captain might be, he would rather have rescued anybody 
else than an Admiral. 

He determined, therefore, to be very reserved in his 
communications. 

A midshipman who steered, and across whose mind 
some similar ideas had floated, completely spoiled his good 
intentions. 

" Boat ahoy ! " 

" Aye, aye ! " replied the midshipman. 
"What boat?" 
" Flag ! " continued the middy. 

Sir Stephen bit his lip ; the other officers stifled a 
laugh. 

" Now my joker," said a petty lieutenant, astonished at 
so big an announcement from the longboat of a wreck, 
"no skylarking. Make a proper answer. What boat is 
that?" 

" Flag ! " again said the boy, grinning. " Sir Stephen 
Rawdon, Admiral of the China seas ! " 

In five minutes more the miraculously saved officer was 
on the deck, and in command. 

His flag was hoisted at the main, amid the loud cheers 
of the men, and the sincere congratulations of the officer 
whose authority was thus superseded. 

As a rule, there is no more generous or unselfish being 
than the British sailor. The loss of the Indiaman with all 
on board had been reported at the Cape, but no promotions 
had been made in consequence. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 161 

CHAPTEE XXXI. 

THE BUCCANEER'S EXPLANATION. 

Happiness is relative. The Admiral felt deeply grateful 
for his escape with his crew and the passengers ; but 
scarcely had his feeling been indulged in, when other senti- 
ments assumed sway over him. 

The loss of his daughter seemed— now that he had 
leisure to think of himself — to paralyze his energies. 

While there had been something to do, he had held up. 
But now that he had a cabin to retire to, and could be, as 
it were, alone with his God, he gave way fully to his deep 
and overwhelming grief. 

The vessel was bound for India — was, indeed, a frigate 
sent out to reinforce that very fleet of which he was once 
again the Commander. 

A week brought them to the China seas. 

They had had fair weather for a while, but now an 
almost dead calm prevailed. 

At daybreak, the sun fell upon flapping sails. 

Xo seaman required to be told that they were near land. 
The colour of the ocean showed him quite plainly that the 
water had shoaled, and that it was necessary to keep a 
sharp lookout —all the more that a thick hazy fog pre- 
vailed. 

There was not an atom of wind, and the ocean had 
assumed the placid character of a sleeping lake. 

The sails flapped, it is true ; but it was only from 
what the sailors picturesquely call the breathings of the 
morn. 

All was soft, mild, and placid. 

The Admiral and all the officers of the ship were on the 
deck, looking around them and conversing quietly, after 
their morning meal, principally, it must be allowed, about 
the wind. 

M 



162 THE BUCCANEEB'S EXPLANATION. 

A hundred stout and stalwart sailors were hanging on 
different parts of the rigging, laughing, joking, and speak- 
ing to their messmates helow, in that low and respectful 
tone always assumed in the presence of officers. 

There was little to do ; but the discipline of a vessel 
is not consonant with idleness. Officers must find the 
men something to do, or there would be no commanding 
them. 

The duties of this morning were, however, trivial. 

The Admiral, after some few words of course with his 
officers, stood apart, wrapt in deep thought. One might 
have fancied him anxious abont the weather, from the way 
in which his quick eye roved from the deck to the light 
fleecy clouds that floated in the blue vacuum above. 

" I think the wind is coming," said the captain, after 
some hours had passed. 

At the same time an officer began to take the altitude 
of the sun. Having carefully, as far as the haze would 
allow him, settled this important matter, he announced 
that it was twelve o'clock. 

" Then make it twelve o'clock," replied the captain in 
nautical phraseology. 

The bell sounded at once. 

Then the haze began to disperse, the sun shone out, 
and the morning breeze freshened ; for a mile around the 
sea was clear, and the vapour in huge fleeces rolled off 
before the wind. 

"A sail !" cried a dozen voices. 

The Admiral turned slowly round, expecting to see a 
merchantman lazily making its way under their lee. 

He started and turned pale. 

" By heavens ! it is the pirate ; " he cried ; " beat to 
quarters." 

The order was instantly obeyed, and almost ere the 
tap of the drum was heard, the men were at their stations. 

The officers then advanced, and reported that their 
several divisions were quite ready to engage the enemy : 
the topmen and sail trimmers were examined and found 
ready; the shot flags and stoppers were seen to, the 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 163 

magazines were opened, the arm-chests emptied ; while 
down in the hold, the surgeon began laying out his case 
of terrible instruments. 

" All hands clear ship far astern ! " was the next 
order given, and cheerfully obeyed, though little remained 
to be done. 

The frigate now yielded to the breeze, and increased 
her velocity ; the water gathered under her bows in 
a little rolling wave of foam, and the chase commenced. 

Meanwhile, on board the pirate all was confusion. 

Captain Gantling, after instructing his officers to make 
sail as rapidly as possible, ordered Ned, and his sup- 
posed boy companion Loo, into his own cabin. 

The buccaneer was pale, but resolute ; his very illness 
geemed to have disappeared. 

" Boy," he said, " 'tis likely this may be our last fight ; 
I wish that we may be friends." 

"How can I be friends with the murderer of my 
father?" 

"I tell thee, boy, 'Lis false." 

"The Admiral asserts it." 

"The Admiral lies!" 

" My father — never ! " said Loo in an indignant tone. 

The pirate turned upon the supposed boy, while 
Edward drew the trembling girl to his side. 

" So ! " laughed the buccaneer, " this is the daughter of 
mine enemy." 

" She is my ward, and I will defend her with my life !" 
cried ISTed. 

" Silence, boy — I will not harm her. But listen to me 
calmly. You assert that I am the murderer of your 
father. I will tell you the truth, and you shall judge 
between us." 

He waved them to a seat. The way in which the 
flooring bent from its level, showed how the breeze was 
increasing. 

" I was midshipman on board the same vessel as the 
Admiral and your father " 

" But who was my father ? " 

m2 



164 THE BUCCANEER'S EXPLANATION. 

"He was Sir Edward Eawdon, the Admiral's elder 
brother." 

« Then I " 

"You are Sir Edward Eawdon. But of that anon. 
Your father was a strict disciplinarian, and I, a somewhc.t 
light-hearted and merry boy, was fond of shore and of the 
many amusements it affords. After I had been in the 
service one year, I obtained a fortnight's leave of absence, 
during which I went home. I had many friends, and in 
their company I forgot my duties. That is, I stayed eight 
days after my time ; and when I rejoined my ship, I 
found that I was dismissed the service. On my knees, 
I implored your father to reinstate me, promising that the 
devotion of a life should repay the favour." 

The buccaneer turned away to hide deep emotion. 

" But I have heard a very different story," said Ned. 

" "Wait ! I was spurned, but after a while I was taken, 
into favour again. The rest you know." 

" I know that my father had reason for disliking you." 

" He may. But why should he have persecuted me ? 
That matters not. I had to join a desperate set of men; 
I became a smuggler. One night, when on a desperate 
enterprise, I met your father. He was walking in his 
own park, which I crossed to avoid the highway. "We 
came face to face in the moonlight." 

" Scoundrel ! what do you here 1 " he said boldly. 

" My blood was up. 

" Tyrant and slave ! ' I replied ; 'now is my time for 
vengeance.' 

" My pistol was cocked ; but, as he stood calmly and 
firmly, my heart misgave me. I could not murder him in 
cold blood. 

" T could slay you as you stand,' I said ; 'but I will 
not. You remember I was an officer and a gentleman 
once. Take this pistol, and let luck decide between us." 

" He took my pistol without a word ; and we retired 
to a distance in the pale moonlight. When about twelve 
yards apart we halted, facing one another with looks of 
deadly hatred. 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 165 

" 'Art ready, ruffian 1 ' he said. ' At your answer, I 
fire.' 

"'Keady!' I cried. 

" ' Hate nerved my arm, for the next instant he lay 
dead at my feet. The ball had been merciful, for it pene- 
trated the brain. No sooner was the deed done, than my 
soul was more in arms against him than ever. Self- 
preservation, however, was imperious ; and, at its dictates, 
I hurried away. In my hurry, I passed near the house, 
where, waiting for the baronet, there was a nurse, with a 
boy about two years of age. 

" She was looking out to call the baronet to supper. 
" Stealthily I crept behind her, and clapping my hands 
on your mouth, I hastened away with you, without being 
discovered. 

" Then came rewards for my apprehension ; and for 
two years was I hunted over England by Sir Stephen — 
as if he were not glad to be a baronet and heir to a fine 
estate." 

" He is not glad," said Loo ; "and will give up all to 
dear Edward here." 
" Is this possible 1 " 

" I am certain he would do anything that was noble 
and generous," said Edward ; " but while he lives he 
shall enjoy that which he has thought his own." 

" There is little time to lose, boy. I have been ill; and 
during my illness, strange fancies have come over me — 
sorrow for my misspent life, and deep regrets for the 
past. In this packet you will find my full confession, 
and the proofs of your birth. If Sir Stephen means 
honestly, they will satisfy him. Ned, through all these 
years I have loved you, and hoped to have died with you 
near me as a son. It was not to be. All I now ask is 
your forgiveness, since I cannot have your friendship." 

" ' Tis given ; and now what will you do 1 You must 
remember that Sir Stephen Eawdon is probably a prisoner 
on those bleak shores whence we escaped." 
" The king's ship will seek him.' ' 
" Bo you, then, mean to surrender 1 " 



166 THE BUCCANEER'S EXPLANATION. 

" No : but I will restore you to the cruiser. If we 
escape, well and good : if not, we must fight." 

He then led the way on deck. The wind was now 
strong and steady : the frigate was coming up with great 
rapidity. 

" Out with the jolly boat ! " said the captain sternly. 

The officers stared ; but the chief was himself again, 
and they were in presence of a powerful enemy. 

"You will descend into the boat," he continued, "which 
has a small mast. The sea is smooth. In half an hour you 
will be safe. They must halt to take you on board ; that 
time may save us. See you yonder mounds of earth 1 " 

Ned looked, and made out the points of two rocks. 

" We can pass between them, but yonder frigate would 
strike. If we can reach them, we are safe,. Farewell 
for ever ! " 

They were lowered into the boat, which was at once 
cast adrift. One glance — he was standing, with pale face 
and earnest mien, gazing at them — and they were gone. 



CHAPTER XXXIL 

CONCLUSION. 

"What is the vagabond up to ? " said the Admiral to the 
nearest officer. 

" He has put out a boat, which is making our way," 
replied the officer. 

"What on earth can he mean? He has clapped on 
every wing, and yet would treat with us ! " exclaimed Sir 
Stephen. " What is to be done 1 " 

" There are only two hands in the boat," observed one 
who had a powerful glass ; " and were it not impossible, 
I should say one was Ned Drake." 

" In the name of the most merciful Creator," gasped the 
A dmiral, " who is the other 1 " 



THE YOUNG BUCCANEER. 167 

" A slighter smaller boy," said the officer. " I do not 
like to be sure, Sir Stephen ; but I think it is Miss Loo." 

A loud shout from the officers and passengers of the 
late Indiaman arose. 

" Heave to ! " said the Admiral, in a husky voice. 

The order -was obeyed, and three minutes later the 
nephew and daughter were in the arms of the enraptured 
Admiral. 

" But the pirate 1 " said his captain, touching his hat. 

"D the pirate!" was the hasty reply. "I beg 

pardon : set all sail in chase." 

"May I speak to you in private, Admiral?" asked Ned. 

" Come this way, my dear boy," replied the other ; and 
he led him into his state cabin. 

Ned told him all that passed between himself and 
Captain Gantling. 

"Hum — not so bad as I thought. Well, duty must 
be done ; as I must hang him if I catch him, perhaps 
it will be better if he escapes. Come out, my dear boy." 

They went on to the deck, and watched the scene. The 
buccaneer was now close on a wind, making for a cluster 
of low islands. 

The Admiral's face brightened. 

"Captain Howard," he said to the flag officer, "we 
must take soundings. Yonder fellow has a shallow 
draught, and can run where we should strike." 

The necessary orders were given, and an officer stood by 
the leadsman to report. 

"By the mark, seven" — that is, seven fathoms — was the 
first cry, which marked ample water. 

Five minutes elapsed. 
" By the mark, five." 

This was also quite sufficient. The next report was 
looked for with great interest, especially by the crew, to 
whom the prospect of a fight was particularly pleasing. 

"By the mark, four; by the mark, three!" rapidly 
followed. 

" Beady about," cried the Admiral, quick ! Forward I 



168 CONCLUSION. 

All hands 'bout ship — hands by the topgallant clew 
lines." 

In a few minutes the ship had turned away from that 
dangerous coast, and was running free to go round the 
islands. 

By this time the pirate was in a narrow channel, and an 
hour later, it was but a speck of white upon the ocean. 

Xor was she ever seen by any of our friends more, 
though they heard such a craft had been sold to one of tho 
native princes of that strange and picturesque region. 
What became of Gantling, never could be ascertained. 

Sir Stephen would not keep the title, thougb people 
persisted in calling him by it. Edward served with dis- 
tinction in the war ; and when his uncle was invalided, 
he went home, took up his residence in Kent, and- <*— 

Well — married Loo, of course. 

" Who else would have me," she said, when he asked 
her the question, " after running about like a distressed 
damsel with her knight errant ? " 

" I had some notion of that," smiled Edward, " when I 
asked you." 

For which remark he received a gentle box on the ear, 
which he did not return — at all events, not exactly in the 
same way. 



THE BNUi 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 

BY PERCY B. ST. JOHN. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 



CHAPTER I. 



IN WHICH OUE HERO APPEARS UNDER VERY EXTRAORDINARY 
AUSPICES. 

During one of those really gorgeous and superb days which 
the traveller meets with at times in the Gulf of Mexico, a 
small hut well-rigged schooner lay becalmed upon its ever- 
vexed waters, which spread on all sides without sign of 
land to break the monotony of the scene. 

It was towards the latter end of the summer of 1835, 
or in what is so expressively called the fall of the year — a 
period at which calms are of rare occurrence, and in gene- 
ral preceding bad weather. The sky was for the time, 
however, of that intense blue which is peculiar to the 
tropics, and it was unshadowed by a single cloud, the sun 
shining with all its dazzling brightness upon the smooth 
but slightly heaving billows, that appeared to bask in a 
flood of heat. 

It was, we have said, calm ; indeed, not a breath of air 
was stirring, and but for the long swell, remnant of wind 
past or sign of wind to come, one would have thought that 
upon that spot the cold northern, or hot and suffocating 
south-easter, had never blown. 

The captain, a passenger, and the crew, which was com- 
posed of four men, were standing aft, smoking, and were 
conversing and speculating on the probable result of all 
this delay 

" Rather discouraging, Monsieur Grignon," exclaimed 
the passenger, "three weeks out from New Orleans, a 



172 INTRODUCTION OP OUR HERO. 

dead calm, very little provender, and at least a hundred 
miles from Matagorda." 

" Develeesh provok — ing," replied the Frenchman, 
shrugging his shoulders ; " put tish tarn culf is never vid 
hout de sacre calm. Mais ! vat is dat on de vatere 1 Von 
tortue-de-mer, as I am lif." 

Instantly bustle and activity were the order of the day ; 
the boat was lowered from astern and brought alongside, 
and the captain and crew jumped in, despite the remon- 
strances of the passenger, who warned them that the wind 
was about to rise. 

" Bah ! bah ! Monsieur Blake ; dere is no vind can 
come so quick I not see him," exclaimed the laughing and 
li^ht-hearted Gaul, as he sat himself in the stern-sheets of 
his boat, " but you keep a look hout hall the vhile." 

" Never fear, Monsieur Grignon," answered the passen- 
ger ; "I see mischief brewing in the south-east, and shall 
be on the alert." 

Four vigorous arms soon bore the dingy to a distance 
in chase of the turtle, which, about half a mile off, lay 
asleep on the face of the water — the captain and his men 
pursuing their object with all the vivacity and thought- 
lessness of French sailors, who on sea and land, in all parts 
of the world, keep up the character of their country. 

The young man who remained on the schooner's deck 
rose with a dissatisfied air, scanned the horizon in every 
direction, lit an elegant German pipe, and then seizing the 
tiller, stood ready for any emergency which might happen, 
well satisfied that his energies would shortly be called into 
action, though, in reality, he expected nothing save a stiff 
breeze, which made him attempt no alteration in the craft's 
canvas. 

Edward Blake, such was his name, was habited in the 
jacket, cap, and well- fitting pantaloons of a midshipman in 
the English navy, a costume which peculiarly became liis 
stature and form. He was about the middle height, rather 
more slight than corpulent, though so nicely did he 
balance between the tv, o a.i to be sometimes called stout. 
With a profusion of daik curls, a straight nose, a peculiarly 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 173 

Well-shaped mouth, while an incipient moustache of great 
promise garnishing his upper lip, completed the outline of 
his personal appearance. His mental qualities it is our 
province in these pages to develope. 

Edward Blake had entered on board an English man-of- 
war at the usual age. The son of a respectable private 
gentleman of moderate fortune, he possessed no friends 
powerful enough to ensure his promotion, a fact which 
had not come home to him with full force until a few 
years of naval experience had rendered him more thought- 
ful than before. The idea having once struck him, how- 
ever, his temperament being quick and hasty, lie became 
convinced that advancement was hopeless in his native 
country. 

"While under the influence of these feelings, he received 
a communication from a friend who had emigrated to 
America a short time before, and who informed him that 
an immediate outbreak was contemplated between Texas 
and Mexico, a navy was in active preparation, and finally, 
that if he felt disposed to register himself on the books of 
the young republic, a commission would be given him, with 
good pay, and the prospect of rapid promotion. 

Xo more was wanted to inflame the hopes and desires 
of an ardent and sanguine mind like that of Blake, and at 
the age of nineteen he quitted his native land on a very 
brief notice, sailed from Liverpool to ISTew Orleans, Avhere, 
finding the Dame Blanche, Captain Grignon, about to 
start for Matagorda, he had taken passage, furnished with 
credentials and letters of introduction from friends in the 
United States to several of the leading men who had 
brought about the Texan declaration of independence. 

Meeting with contrary winds, and numerous calms ensu- 
ing, they had been already three weeks out, and were at 
the moment we speak of, in lat. 27 deg. 50m. K, long. 95 
deg. 30m. W., and consequently about a hundred miles 
from their destination. The calm to which we have 
alluded, had already been of considerable duration, ttie 
■wind having died away on the previous evening, and w 
being now about mid-day. 



174 INTRODUCTION OP OUR HERO. 

Nothing can be conceived more vexatious and annoying 
than a calm at sea, excepting it be a storm of such a 
eerious nature as to place life in jeopardy ; otherwise I 
would prefer half a gale of wind to no wind at all. 

Whether Edward Blake felt all this I know not, but 
he sat quietly on the companion, his hand resting on the 
tiller, now watching the motions of his associates, and 
now the various signs of a coming breeze, which showed 
themselves in the heavens and upon the waters. At a 
considerable distance, the long billows appeared slightly 
agitated, a bank rose, the smooth shining and silvery 
appearance of the slumbering ocean was darkened — it was 
a south-east wind moving rapidly over the face of the 
deep. In a few minutes a slight air fanned the cheek of 
the young sailor, the lazy sails swelled, and the craft was 
gently in motion before the breeze. 

Blake now naturally turned his eyes in search of the 
crew. At the distance of about three quarters of a mile 
ahead, they were seen pulling smartly for the schooner ; 
and Blake, therefore,- using every caution, steered the 
vessel towards them, the breeze increasing every instant, 
until it became a matter of certainty that a storm was 
about to follow the treacherous calm. The wind, indeed, 
already blew in powerful gusts, dense clouds began to pass 
over the face of the heavens, and it was not without great 
anxiety that Blake neared his comrades, who appeared 
ready to seize a rope which towed astern, resting mean- 
while on their oars in the course of the craft. 

Five minutes elapsed, and it blew a strong gale of wind, 
the schooner labouring heavily, every rag being set, and 
Blake being obliged to remain at the helm; for to have left 
it and let go the halyards would have been to have given 
the Dame Blanche to the mercy of the wind and 
waves. Bising and sinking, and rising and sinking again 
on the furious and boiling billows, the schooner under her 
heavy press of canvas may have been said to have flown 
rather than to have sailed. 

Presently a blast more heavy and impetuous than any 
preceding one, sent her bows under, the masts bending 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 175 

and quivering like a whip handle, and the vessel appear- 
ing to plunge into a deep and awful chasm, to rise no 
more. However, as Blake felt the blast diminish in force, 
and could see through the dense volume of spray which 
played around him, he gazed abroad, and found himself 
alone on the face of the deep — not a sign, not a vestige 
remained of the boat or of one of his companions. 

Suddenly an object caught his eye, which, for a short 
time, divided his attention, though he did not cease to 
watch the helm with the greatest care and assiduity. A 
barque, her royal yards sent down, her top-gallant sails 
furled, her courses up, her spencer, gaff-topsails, jib, and 
flying jib snugly stowed, was seen standing towards him, 
close on a wind, under treble-reefed topsails, storm stay- 
stail and spanker. 

She neared him rapidly, evidently striving to get as 
much to windward as possible in order to speak the 
schooner ; the captain stood erect on the companion, 
holding on with one hand to the cabin, which was built 
above deck, and with the other grasping his speaking- 
trumpet. 

" What is that craft 1 " roared he, making himself heard 
above the howling of the tempest, as Blake shot under 
his stern. 

" ' La Dame Blanche,' of ISTew Orleans. All hands 
drowned ! " shrieked Edward Blake ; but his voice was 
borne uselessly on the blast — it never reached its destin- 
ation. 

In another instant the barque was before the wind, her 
spanker and staysail in, standing after the smaller craft. 
The intention of the captain was, evidently, to make an 
effort to save Blake ; but to the daring and undaunted 
young midshipman it appeared that to get alongside the 
ship was a useless risk, though with the addition of his 
square mainsail, his comrade on the ocean was keeping up 
with him. 

" Can I help you 1 " bellowed the jolly-looking English 
sailor in command, having once more resort to his speaking- 
trumpet 



176 INTRODUCTION OF OUR HERO. 

Blake rose, holding fast the tiller, giving his vessel now 
and then a dig into some hollow wave to lessen the 
rapidity of his own motion, and waving his cap in the 
air, he pointed, with a shake of the head, to the boiling 
waves between them, and then resumed his former 
position. A loud and prolonged cheer burst from the 
British barque, marking their admiration of his courage. 
The friendly vessel had only kept up with Blake by his 
manoeuvring, and he no longer attempting to remain 
beside his larger companion, they parted, and our hero 
was once more alone on the face of the deep. 

Hour after hour passed by, when, presently, by the 
sudden increase of the gloom, our hero considered that 
night must be coming on. Deep darkness covered the 
face of the waters, and alone in this raging wilderness 
of waves the schooner pursued its way. 

The howling of the wind appeared more terrible, the 
clamour of the waves more furious, when, suddenly, a 
bright flash of lightning poured its brilliant and meteoric 
light upon the waters, showing the outline of every rope, 
and the whole features of a wild and terrible scene — a 
scene which is rarely gazed upon by mortal eyes ; when 
once gazed upon, however, never to be forgotten. 

For Blake there was but one point of attraction, and 
that was a low jagged black line ahead, which, as 
flash succeeded flash, became at each instant of time 
more distinct. 

"And now," said he fervently, as he grasped the 
obedient tiller still more energetically than ever, " I have 
overcome the raging tempest thus much, but by far the 
greatest danger is at hand. He alone, who has till now 
saved me, can bear me harmless through it," and casting 
a somewhat stern look on high, he gradually allowed his 
features to relax into calmness and placidity. 

The young sailor sent up an inward prayer. What a 
time, what a place ! Could it be unheard ? " So soon ! " 
muttered he, as dashing amid a species of whirlpool of 
breakers, a huge crested wave swept the deck, sufficiently 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 177 

betokening his proximity to land $ " so soon — now for it, 
then." 

A tremendous peal of thunder, preceded by a brilliant 
flash, lit up the heavens, the sea, and the low outline of 
the coast, which our hero appeared rapidly to near. With 
a quick and keen eye, he had caught sight of one spot 
more low and flat than the rest, and for this he determined 
to make. 

"When darkness once more overspread the scene, a fire 
showed itself on the land, a species of safety beacon to 
the weary traveller. It was faint and indistinct, now it 
vanished entirely, and then it rose more vivid than ever. 
Presently the air was illumined by an extraordinary blaze ; 
a column of fire shot up towards the sky, burnt brightly 
for a few minutes, showing plainly the outline of various 
forest trees, and then it fell, leaving only the smaller light 
which had at first attracted Blake's attention. He drew 
nearer and nearer, until at length, when apparently not 
more than a couple of hundred yards from the fire, which 
was now to his left, a violent concussion took place; the 
schooner grated harshly, and then struck with tremendous 
force, hurling him to the deck. His head having 
struck against the bunk as he fell, he became insen- 
sible. 



178 
CHAPTER II 

BLAKE MEETS WITH A CELEBRATED CHARACTER. 

About an hour previous to the accident -with which our 
first chapter concluded, a very different scene presented 
itself at no great distance from the spot at which the 
gallant schooner had happened to arrive, guided by the 
mad wind, which, having done its worst upon the waters, 
swept by to scourge the prairie and the forest, to drive 
man closely within doors, and the wild beasts to their 
most sheltered haunts. 

An extensive grove of trees, somewhat scattered over 
the surface of the ground, stretched to within a few yards 
of the water's edge. To the right, ahout a mile off', was 
the Sahine river : to the left, the wide and apparently 
interminahle prairie, now screened by the huge and 
sombre canopy of night. In the centre of the grove was 
a small hollow, surrounded on all sides by trees, but itself 
untenanted by any. It was about three yards long and 
three or four broad, and not more than six feet deep in 
tne lowest portion. 

At the nothern end was an opening, whence ran what- 
ever moisture at times poured into it, and to this spot 
there was a slope from all parts of the hollow. Across it, 
from the eastern side, leaned a stunted and aged tree, 
almost touching a solitary and majestic pine which stood 
directly opposite to it, while dark masses of similar growth 
rose plentifully in the background. The pine here par- 
ticularized, had been made to serve the purpose of a back 
to a blazing pile of wood which spread a lurid glare upon 
the surrounding grove. 

Opposite the fire was a man, sheltering himself from 
the blast, behind the stunted tree above-mentioned, which 
had been made the central point of a species of rude tent - 
in the open entrance of which the individual in question 
sat, quie% and contentedly gazing upon a ramrod that 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 179 

was thrust into the ground before the fire, and on which 
were spitted various long slices of venison, cut from a 
freshly-killed deer that hung to the topmost branch of the 
gnarled tree above his head. Within reach of his right 
hand was a long, old American rifle, which had apparently- 
seen better days. 

Its owner had certainly been younger than he now was, 
for though there was fire in his eye, and much strength 
yet visible in his long and sinewy limbs, he was, in reality, 
fourteen years over fourscore. His garb was half military, 
half senatorial — buckskin forming by far the most pro- 
minent material of his various articles of clothing. If we 
except a red flannel shirt, which he wore next his dark 
red skin, his whole dress was of deer's hide. 

Close to the old man's feet was a little heap of hot 
ashes, which the hunter kept constantly renewing, until 
at length he ceased, as if satisfied with the result of his 
labours. He then spoke for the first time. 

" Cap'n Harry," said he, turning towards the interior of 
the little tent, and shaking a form which had up to the 
present time been shaded by his own erect person — " Cap'n 
Harry, I conclude you've had snooze enough for any 
moderate man ; open your peepers and chaw. Supper 
waits ; and I reckon if I were one-eyed enough to jerk it 
into me, without callin' on you to foller my example, 
you'd call me the meanest thing on airth — an old 'coon dog 
barking at the wrong tree." 

" Oh, I know you're death onto a deer, Colonel Crockett, 
but I sagacitate as how it 'ud take two like you to walk 
into the whull of that buck." 

" I'm the yaller flower of the forest, and no mistake," 
replied the famous hunter of Tennessee, "but it 'ud go 
beyond the power of my internals to swaller that brute. 
But git up, cap'n, git up; a volunteer out west should be 
as smart as a streak o' lightning, whin a fight, a gal, or a 
supper is in question. When I was out wi' G-en'rl 
Jackson in old times at Pensacola, Talladago, and Jallisa- 
hatchee, I know it were a caution if I said no to ere a 
one." 

N 2 



180 BLAKE MEETS A CELEBRATED CHARACTER. 

"All, colonel," continued the individual addressed aa 
captain, rising from his position in the tent, and seating 
himself alongside his companion, " we all calculate what 
you were sixty years ago ; he must he etarnally deaf who 
arn't heard tell of the hay filly. That was like a man 
who warn't afraid of the gals." 

" That I guess warn't so smart as it might ha' heen, seeing 
that wur whin I was arter my first wife, Cap'n Harry," 
said the old man, laughing, though not without a certain 
saddened expression ; " but thin have you got the right 
eend of that story ? I conclude not. So just scrapet him 
sweet potatoes out of the hole, hand here the ramrod, and 
while you're digging your teeth into the deer meat, mayhe 
I'll tell you the rights of that anecdote." 

" Eight as a trivet," replied Captain Harry, " here's the 
praties, here's the meat, and now, venerable steamboat, go 
ahead." 

" Go ahead I will, friend Harry, in a brace of shakes; 
but as to saying it 'ull be like a steamboat, I can't promise, 
3ince thims an invention I knows little of, and likes less. 
But do you see, whin I was quite a boy, I reckon not 
more than three-and-twenty, I fell over head and yars in 
love. This wur quite nat'ral like." 

"Well you know, Cap'n Harry, I reckon, that it wur all 
a frolic; the girl wur pretty," continued the veteran, 
sadly, " very pretty, and I concluded to have her and she 
me. So we agreed I should ride over to her mother and 
ask her consent. I wur a mighty long time thinking of 
it, but one day I plucked up smart, mounted one of my 
master's horses, and rode over to whar I heard she wur 
on a visit to a friend's house. Well, whin I kim in sight 
of the log, I began to feel mighty cool about the heels, and 
hot about the head and shoulders, but it warn't to be 
thought I was a going to go back, so I rides up the yard, 
whar wur standing a power of boys and gals, and, says I, 
to mask my love scrape, ' Has any one seen a stray bay 
filly of my master's ? ' Well, they all roared, for it 
seems they all knowed I wur coming, and one told me I 
should hear inside." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 181 

" My heart in my mouth, I went in, and thai' war my 
gal. So I asked her plump if she wur going back to her 
mother's, 'cause if she wur, I would take her up behind 
me. She said, yes, directly, and after a drink of milk and 
a bite of cake, we started, I a-straddle, and she behind 
me." 

"As I went out of the yard, feeling a little bearish 
about the knuckles, a fellow calls out, ' H ave you found 
your bay filly now 1 ' I wish I may be shot if I know 
how I felt ; all I know is, I felt all over-ish." 

The captain laughed, as he handed a fine large brown 
potato to his aged associate, which the latter accepted ; 
and his bowie-knife being brought into use, huge lumps 
of deer were speedily disappearing, proving incontestibly 
that age diminished few, if any, of his faculties. 

Captain Harry Coulter, as Crockett, in the true spirit 
of American politeness, called him, but as he was oftene.r 
denominated Mr. Henry Coulter, and oftener still plain 
Harry, was a man some six-and-twenty years of age, under 
the middle size, of stout athletic make, but with a thin 
haggard face, sunken red eyes, a bitter sneering lip, a 
complexion naturally fair, but on which climate, dissipa- 
tion, and, latterly, exposure, had done their work. A 
brace of pistols and a huge bowie-knife were seen beneath 
an ample blue cloak, which covered habiliments much 
less elegant than his outward garb might have led an eye- 
witness to expect. 

His trade, profession, mode of life, and character, are 
summed up in a word — he was a New Orleans gambler ; 
one of that numerous class of individuals whose baggage 
consists of a shirt, a pack of cards, and a bowie-knife. 
For some reason, which he did not choose to explain, he 
had taken it into his head to visit Texas, and had fallen 
in accidentally with the celebrated Colonel David Crockett, 
who had himself travelled from New York, chiefly on 
foot, though sometimes a wagoner could induce him, by 
dint of great persuasion, to take a lift. 

" Going — going,", said the gambler ; " it's a tall tree 



182 BLAKE MEETS A CELEBRATED CHARACTER. 

that, and casts a glare that might lead, an Indian war- 
party further than would be pleasant." 

" If there was any Ingin varmint in these parts," 
replied the other, without pausing in his meal, " I reckon 
you wouldn't find David Crockett outlying even sich a 
night as this, with a fire by his side large enough to roast 
an ox : he'd burrow in a hollow tree, man, and never 
mind the cold. But see, Cap'n Harry, that old pine is 
raaly going." 

Of a truth, the sturdy old tree had seen itb last days. 
The fire had eaten half through its expansive trunk, had 
then mounted aloft, caught the dry boughs, and was 
blazing in the keen blast, like some huge beacon in time of 
war. Every now and then the flame heightened afresh, 
and sent forth myriads of sparks amid the darkness around. 
Presently a loud crash was heard, the tree bent slowly, 
and then fell heavily to the ground, the flames being ex- 
tinguished by the violence of the concussion. 

" Bravely," cried Crockett, laughing ; " that was smartly 
done, cap'n ; that ere log, if pulled up to its proper place, 
will make a rare good back to our fire for the night, and 
will burn a firsf-rate time." 

" It's broken in two ; snapped like a bow of pine- 
wood," responded Coulter, "and here's boughs enough to 
last a week. Bear a hand here, colonel, and we'll settle 
the matter in less time than one 'ud take to drink a quart 
of whisky." 

" And that's two 'coon-skins," said the colonel, rising 
and assisting his companion to place the log in the desired 
position ; after which he once more seated himself before 
the fire, and surveyed the handiwork of his friend and 
companion, with evident satisfaction. 

"What's that V cried the captain, starting to his feet, 
as a loud and heavy crash was heard on their right, at the 
same time seizing a rifle which lay beneath the tent, and 
rushing out of the hollow in the direction of the sound. 

The colonel followed slowly, and when about half way, 
his companion shouted to him to return and bring a 
torch. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 183 

Crockett wheeled round, and once more approaching 
the fire, he selected from the heap of wood at its side a 
pine knot, which was soon ignited at the flames, and then 
Borne aloft, serving excellently well the purpose of a torch. 
With this in one hand, and old Bet in the other, the great 
bear-hunter hastened forward in the direction to which his 
friend's voice led him. 

Captain Harry Coulter, on leaving the cover, had ob- 
served a dark mass at two hundred yards distance. Close 
to the grove above alluded to was a narrow gut, leading 
into one of the lagoons, which communicated with the 
Sabine lake. On the edge of this bay lay a large two- 
masted schooner, with her mainmast and foresail set, her 
bow embedded in the bank, her larboard gunwale under 
water, her starboard side high above. 

The gambler advanced to the water's edge, wrapping his 
cloak closely about him, and concealing his rifle beneath, 
for when out of the shelter of the trees, he found the wind 
furious and cutting in the extreme. Two minutes brought 
him close upon the devoted craft, over which the mad 
waves broke furiously. 

By the dim light which prevailed, he saw something 
lying, as it were, in a heap upon the deck, which he judged 
rightly to be a human being ; laying his rifle a short dis- 
tance from the beach, he clambered upon the planks, and 
raising up young Blake, he supported him in a sitting 
posture, until Crockett stood over them both, and threw 
the glare of his torch on the pallid but gory features of 
the young sailor. Both the hunter and his companion 
looked on for a few minutes, curiously and in silence. 

" A smart youth, as sure as ever I slayed a 'possum or a 
bear," remarked Crockett. " But how came he here 1 I 
wish I may be shot if I can tell." 

" Nor I ; but one thing's sure, he's a Britisher. This 
here jacket is that of a midshipman in the English navy ;" 
remarked Coulter, examining the article of dress with 
attention. 

"Well, I conclude you're right, since you say so, cap'n; 
but I can't say myself, seeing that service is a trifle beyant 



184 BLAKE MEETS A CELEBRATED CHARACTER. 

me. The youth's only stunned and will soon revive, I 
reckon. But it's a huckleberry above my persimmon to 
cipher out how he got here alone." 

" Look in the cabin," said the New Orleans blackleg, 
hastily, as if a sudden thought had struck him ; and 
fastening the look of a basilisk on the breast of Edward 
Blake. Crockett assented, and, turning round, moved 
towards the place pointed out, with some anxiety, as if 
expecting that the interior would explain the secret of the 
vessel's presence on that barren strand. 

Quick as thought Coulter leaned the young man against 
the inclined plane formed by the deck, drew forth his 
bowie-knife, seized upon something which encircled the 
youth's waist, next his skin, and cut it in twain. Thrusting 
it into his own breast, he replaced the poniard in its usual 
position. 

" Not so much as a rat to be noosed out hereabouts," 
exclaimed David, returning from his fruitless search. 
" This youngster is flower of the forest here. Does he 
revive?" 

" He breathes audibly," replied Coulter, a little con- 
fusedly ; " suppose you take hold of his legs, and we'll 
carry him to the camp. The fire 'ull warm his blood and 
pull him up smart." 

" Nay, cap'n ; I'll carry thy rifle, the torch, and my own 
Bet, a load I take it, for one of my years. I reckon you'll 
carry the lad yourself. 

* Humph ! " replied Coulter, contemptuously, " I con- 
clude he ain't an elephant, nor an ox neither. Lead the 
way — I follow." 

Crockett shouldered the two rifles, raised the torch— the 
blaze of which scarcely gave any light, so great was the 
fury with which it was blown about by the wind — and 
stepping on shore, he led the way towards the shelter of 
the welcome hollow. Coulter, tottering under his burden, 
followed, and a few minutes brought them once more back 
to their camp. 

" I'll be catawampously chawed up by a Florida alb> a - 
tor," observed the gambler, depositing his burden upon tho 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 185 

ground, " but though he ain't so very big ; he's heavy as 
lead." 

" Why, you see a dead man and a stunned man is much 
of a muchness — awk'ard to carry, and still awk' aider to 
bring too ; howsomever, we'll do our best, tho' he be a 
Britisher, and we raal true-born Yankees." 

Without noticing Coulter's sarcastic smile, Crockett 
proceeded to fulfil his humane intentions. Placing Blake 
in as easy a position as possible, the old hunter took down 
a gourd from the inside of the tent, and having first washed 
the bleeding temple of the young man with water, he 
bound it up with some rags, carried for patching riile balls, 
and then poured down his throat a small quantity of 
brandy. 

Our young friend, who had been severely stunned and 
slightly wounded, opened his eyes feebly, stared at the fire, 
and at his companions. Consciousness gradually return- 
ing, he sat up and gazed for some minutes in silence on 
the scene around him. Mutual explanations ensued, and 
ere half an hour had elapsed, the excellent constitution of 
the young English sailor gained the ascendancy, and he sat 
before the fire, eagerly devouring venison and sweet pota- 
toes. Exhaustion from want of food had, more than 
anything else, retarded his recovery. 

"By the way," observed he, suddenly, "in a small 
locker of the cabin there is a liquor-case, in which are 
sundry bottles of excellent Irish whisky, which, being my 
private property, I freely offer you, my kind and hos- 
pitable friends." 

" Irish whisky ! " replied Coulter, with a bright flash of 
the eye, and, as a nicely critical ear might have it, the 
smallest trifle of a true Hibernian accent. " Irish whisky 
is first-rate, and by your good leave, Mr. Blake, I will 
conclude to light the pine-torch, and make a v'ge to the 
schooner." 

" Darn my grandmother, but it's a smart youth," said 
Crockett, approvingly. 

" Thanks, my good sir," continued Blake, addressing 
Coulter ; " and perhaps while you are about it, you will 



186 BLAKE MEETS A CELEBRATED CHARACTER. 

just put your hand into the lower locker and fist the 
bread-bag 1 " 

" Consarn your young skin," again cried Crockett, 'but 
yoUre raal juicy. Bread's a rarity in these parts, and I 
reckon I could scarify another pound of deer's meat, if I 
had a biscuit or so to crackle with it." 

Coulter hurried to execute a right welcome commission, 
and soon returned with three or four bottles of whisky, a 
bag of bread, two or three lemons, and a canister of lump 
sugar, not forgetting three tin mugs. 

" Cap'n Harry arn't lived in New Orleans not to larn 
something," said Crockett, chuckling ; " he knows a hare 
skin from a 'coon-skin, and whisky punch from the raw 
extract." 

" I reckon so, Colonel Crockett. But, Mr. Blake, your 
late friend, Cap'n Grignon, knew what livin was, I can 
see." 

" Colonel Crockett ! " exclaimed Blake, in his surprise, 
not noticing the levity of Coulter's remark ; " you don't 
■mean to say I am in company with that famous hunter 
and politician, whose name is as well known in England 
as is the king's 1 " 

" As to that I can't say, Master Edward," replied the 
gratified hunter ; " but Colonel David Crockett I am, and 
that's the short and the long of it." 

Edward Blake did not reply, but gazed silently and with 
undisguised interest upon the man who, above all Ameri- 
can celebrities, he had been desirous of knowing, that is 
to say, historical celebrities ; for while the English 
language endures, Cooper's fictitious Hawk-eye must 
ever remain the most deeply imprinted continental 
portrait ever presented to the imagination. 

Coulter, meanwhile, was engaged in the manufacturing 
of punch, in which he showed that he was no mean 
adept, and proved himself quite ingenious in the Avay in 
which he overcame the obstacles presented to him ; so 
that a supply of hot punch was soon ready for imbibing. 

" Baal spicy," cried Coulter, with an American oath, 
with which he continually interlarded his discourse, but 
which elegant universal expletive we spare our readers, 



THE YOUNG MID3HIPMAN. 187 

since none can say swearing is now an English gentleman's 
accomplishment. " Raal spicy. I'm bound to get drunk 
to-night." 

Blake looked up, startled at the blasphemous expressions 
of the reckless gambler. Crockett, however, laid a veto 
upon drinking as yet. 

" Jist take a squint at thim horses, and shift their lari- 
ettes to new ground. I'll lay they've chawed up all the 
grass within reach. Business afore pleasure, and as you 
couclude to get drunk, it's a caution if I arn't ditto ; and 
then the horses' ud be a case." 



CHAPTER III. 

EDWARD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER. 

At the expiration of a twelvemonth after the occurrences 
of the events narrated in our previous chapters, which 
must be considered introductory, night fell upon the 
skirts of a long strip of forest, as two travellers cantered 
up and halted upon its extreme edge. The one, in dress 
and appearance, was clearly a white man ; the other was 
no less certainly an Indian. Both were clothed with 
extreme plainness. 

The aboriginal wore a red hunting-shirt, and leggings 
of mountain goat-skin, with buck mocassins, while a rifle 
and a small axe were his only arms. The tinge of his 
countenance and his peculiar features, alone gave token 
of his being a native of the wilds, which his accoutrements 
in no wise demonstrated to be the case. 

The garb of the white man was similar, while his 
naturally fair skin, tanned by constant exposure, was not 
much lighter than that of his companion. In the stout 
bearded hunter, of marked features and sturdy frame, few 



188 EDWARD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER. 

would have recognised the stripling who, under the name 
of Edward Blake, has already been introduced to our 
readers. 

Disappointed in his expectations of a commission — the 
navy not being as yet formed — he had started to pass the 
time on a long journey into the interior, during the course 
of Avhich we take up our narrative. 

Both seemed truly weary from the effects of their 
day's journey across the wilderness, and drew rein with 
every appearance of extreme satisfaction, such as is seldom 
more warmly experienced than when, after hard riding 
for some ten hours, one prepares to stretch the weary 
limbs, and, in the very changing action of walking, to 
find relief. 

Behind them was a vast prairie — a very ocean of high 
grass — one of those picturesque and deep clad rolling 
meadows of Upper Texas, stretching away as far as the 
eye could reach, and over which they had travelled since 
the morning. Before them lay a narrow opening in the 
belt of trees — a slight gap or break, leading to some forest 
path or woodland glade. At no great distance, on their 
right, and somewhat in their rear, an island of timber 
contributed to the scenic effect of the whole. 

" Well, red skin," exclaimed our hero, " I really cannot 
advance any further, I am dead beat, thoroughly worn 
out, and must rest." 

" Good ! " replied the Indian ; " here camp." 

"I am glad of it," continued Blake; "and if you 
would only converse a little more, friend Chinchea, we 
might pass another very tolerable evening in the woods. 
Tobacco is plenty, venison in abundance, and I have no 
doubt you will find water. Three things which, however 
incongruous to other minds, to one who has seen the 
elephant, they are of very serious moment." 

Chinchea replied not, which, seeing that he scarcely 
comprehended what Blake said, was less to be won- 
dered at ; but leading the way, and entering within the 
arches of the forest, they soon found themselves in the 
centre of a green glade, surrounded on all sides by a 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 189 

dense mass of wood. Not more than a dozen yards across, 
with tall trees, pea vines and thick undergrowth compassing 
it about, with a huge half- burnt log as a foundation for a 
fire, with a very mountain of dry wood piled up in one 
corner (it being a favourite hunting camp of the Waccos), 
it wanted but the presence of a rippling stream to render 
it the very beau ideal of a forest encampment. 

" Good camp," said the Indian, with that sententious 
gravity for which his race are famed, leaping from his 
steed at the same time, an act in which he was speedily 
imitated by Blake ; " white man light fire — Indian stake 
mustangs." 

" Agreed," replied the young man, speedily disburdening 
his weary animal of all trappings save his lariette ; and 
drawing forth a flint, steel, and a supply of spunk, a 
species of fungus which admirably serves the purpose of 
tinder (so provident is nature for those whose necessities 
call for aid), he proceeded to light a fire. 

Blake in another moment was alone in the dark soli- 
tude of that gloomy little forest cove, on the very verge 
of the wild Indian country, with nought to depend on for 
liberty or life, save the sagacity and" honour of his Indian 
guide. 

Disappointed in his hope, of obtaining an immediate 
berth in the Texan navy, Blake, ever venturous and fond 
of excitement, had started on an expedition to visit the 
tribe of aborigines to which his companion belonged. 
Blake was now a tolerable backwoodsman ; sanguine and 
enthusiastic, he entered into every feature of his new life 
with a spirit and animation that betokened the zest with 
which he enjoyed it. 

From the huge trunk of an aged sycamore near at hand, 
whose boughs spread in leafy grandeur far and wide, he 
speedily drew a handful of dry Spanish moss, which, with 
dead grass and leaves, formed the foundation of his fire. 
Twigs, thin boughs, small bits of stray sticks, which cum- 
bered the turf all around, served for the second layer, over 
which logs were heaped. A spark waved Ulckwards and 
forwards in the air, and soon produced a cheerful and 



190 EDWARD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER. 

welcome blaze. This placed below the pile, and gently 
fanned, speedily kindled the whole mass. 

Blake was too intent upon his occupation to notice 
the return of Chinchea, who glided to his side, and 
drawing forth several slices of venison, the whole stock 
of provisions they now owned, proceeded to broil them 
over the smoky fire. Blake, seated on part of the log 
against which the fire rested, looked on admiringly. His 
journey had been long, and without rest or refreshment the 
whole of that day, which made him regard the Indian's 
proceedings with a complacency which would have sur- 
prised our young Englishman at no very distant period of 
past time. 

"While, however, his eyes were thus pleasingly occu- 
pied, his active mind dwelt upon the singular features of 
his position. 

Suddenly a cry so unearthly and horrible as to make 
Blake start with horror to his feet, came full upon their 
ears. 

" What infernal whoop is that ? is the forest alive with 
devils 1 " cried Blake. 

"White wolf," said Chinchea, calmly, turning the 
unbroiled side of his venison to the fire, and examining it 
with an appearance of much gusto. 

The restless neighing of the affrighted horses prevented 
the immediate reply of Edward Blake, who stood still, 
bewildered by the sudden nature of the surprise. Nothing 
can be conceived more wildly lugubrious, more unearthly 
or more horrible, than the howl of the prairie wolf at 
eventide. It booms across the plains, first in a low how ! 
how ! how ! and gradually rising, it becomes at length 
fearfully horrible. 

" You are right, friend Chinchea," said the young man, 
after a pause ; " but they do howl most frightfully. If 
the Comanche war-whoop be more horrible than that, I am 
in no hurry to hear it." 

Chinchea replied not, though a grim smile played round 
his mouth ; and handing the meat to Blake to finish, he 
took up a large pumpkin gourd, and went out. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 191 

During his absence, Blake, speculating on the relative 
horrors of an Indian war-whoop and the howling of prairie 
wolves — very similar in nature to the jackal — finished 
the cooking of their meal, haying during his wanderings 
become a perfect wild Soyer. 

Chinchea returned in less time than Blake had expected, 
and as he laid his finger in a warning manner upon his 
lips, Blake instantly knew that something in the forest 
was of more than common interest, thus to disturb the 
calm serenity of the Indian. 

"Come," said Chinchea, pointing to his arms; "bad 
man in forest, close by." 

With these words, he beckoned Blake to follow him, 
and silently led the way to the wood pile, whence he, and 
in imitation of him our hero, took an armful of heavy 
logs and bushes, which they hastened to heap upon the 
fire, in such a manner as for the time completely to 
deaden its brightness. Over this they cast leaves and 
earth ; which done, loading themselves with every article 
of their baggage, not forgetting the venison, they crept 
with noiseless footsteps towards the horses. Not a word 
passed ; the white man knew too well the exigencies of 
the case to waste time in idle questions. 

Breathless with excitement, his blood tingling with 
delight at the novelty of danger, Blake followed the 
movement of the Indian with his eyes, rapidly imitating 
him in his every act. Chinchea, as soon as they had laden 
their horses, again dived within the forest, passing the fire, 
and entering on what, to the young man's surprise, 
presented all the features of a beaten bridle path. 

" Look ! " said the Indian, in a breathless whisper, as, 
after ascending the side of a somewhat steep acclivity, 
they suddenly halted. As he spoke, Chinchea caught the 
young Englishman's arm in his grasp, and pointed through 
the trees. Blake at once understood the reason of their 
change of camp. 

A small fire in the depth of a hollow revealed a party 
of no less than thirty men, some Indians, some whites, 
sleeping or watching. In every variety of costume. 



li>2 EDWARD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER. 

scarcely any two Indians were of the same tribe. While 
some were rolled in blankets, others less fortunate lay on 
the bare ground uncovered ; a few stood leaning against 
the trunks of trees, while one who, by his costume, some- 
what more military looking than any of the others, 
appeared to be the chief, was supporting himself with his 
arms crossed on the muzzle of his rifle. The lurid glare of 
the fire, in that dark and gloomy dell, fell upon the bronzed 
countenances of the men with singular effect. 

It was with little surprise that Blake heard from 
Chinchea that they were a dreaded gang, commanded by a 
white man, who roamed about Texas, pillaging, and enact- 
ing scenes more bloody, ruthless, and horrible, than any 
of which the Indians were ever guilty. 

" Blackhawk," said Chinchea, gravely pointing to the 
figure we have mentioned as leaning on the muzzle of his 
gun. 

Blake made no reply, save by a slight nod ; he was 
busily engaged in scanning the features of this very man. 
They were familiar to him, or, at all events, lived in his 
remembrance ; that he had seen him before he felt certain, 
but at so distant a period it seemed to have been, as to 
leave the impression of its having occurred previous to his 
departure from England. 

" Hist ! " whispered Chinchea, drawing the attention of 
Blake to other matters. 

At the moment that the Wacco spoke, the blaze of the 
fire 1 hey had left burst forth at the termination of a low 
and dark vista of the forest, discovering itsjlf, however, 
not to them alone. It was no faint mass of flames — they 
rose manfully and merrily, the more so from having been 
previously pent up. 

"A camp!" cried one of the party overlooked by 
Edward and his Indian guide. 

" I see ! " exclaimed the chief, raising his head calmly, 
and then as soon as he had spoken, relapsing gloomily 
into his thoughtful mood ; " slip through the trees, and 
bring word who and what they are." 

" It is time to be moving," whispered Blake, turning 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 193 

towards the place where the Indian had stood, hut which 
was now occupied by his horse only. In the close obser- 
vation of the movements of the knot below, Edward had 
not noticed his departure. 

Blake, however, was surprised, but not alarmed or 
distrustful of his guide ; and satisfied that his absence was 
connected with some matter necessary to their safety, he 
turned his eyes again upon those who had caused so serious 
a change in their movements. 

For soma brief space of time, no alteration was manifest 
in the disposition of the extraordinary gang — their camp 
remained in its pristine quiet. Suddenly a rush, a sound 
like the heavy but disorderly charge of cavalry, was heard, 
and every man started to his feet. The tramp was at 
that moment plainly upon the eastern side of their camp. 

" The horses are loose ! " cried the chief, with a fearful 
imprecation. 

" Indians ! " exclaimed another. 

" A stampede ! " put in a third. 

A rush then took place towards the coral which con- 
tained the horses, some few remaining on the outskirts of 
the camp. 

In a few minutes after carrying out this daring ma- 
noeuvre, Chinchea returned, and taking the halter of his 
steed in hand, fell into a cautious trot, in which he was 
imitated by Blake. In about ten minutes they once more 
emerged upon the prairie. 

" Well, Chinchea," said Blake, " you have stampeded 
these rascals' nags, and how much farther do you intend 
going 1 " 

" Camp in wood," said he; "Blackhawk no follow — too 
busy find horses." 

"The sooner the better," exclaimed Blake, for that 
disappointment about the venison was a serious thing to a 
hungry man. " Proceed — I follow." 

And he listened with intense anxiety for the sound of 
pursuit, and watched with scarcely less eagerness for the 
shortening of the distance, which was to be the termination 
of their journey. 

O 



EDWAKD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER. 

At length, pushing away through the bushes and trees 
for some two hundred yards, another open space presented 
itself ; and before the two men, at the distance of about a 
quarter of a mile, rose the clear outline of a hill stretching 
to the right and to the left as far as the eye could reach, 
rising gradually both on its right and left wings. 

Edward felt surprised, and his astonishment was in no 
degree lessened when, advancing up this acclivity, the 
Indian guided him towards the very summit of the height. 
He followed, however, in silence, until at length Chinchea 
halted on the verge of a deep chasm, of very moderate 
width, not perhaps more than eight or nine feet. 

The wind swept by, cold and chilling at that height 
above the plain, growling and moaning as it flew to bury 
itself in the deep gloom of the forest ; and Edward was 
about to ask an explanation of his guide choosing this 
inclement spot for a camp, when the voice of the Indian 
made itself heard, in a series of cries, or rather howls, of a 
most peculiar and startling description. 

"Why, Chinchea " 

The young man's speech was cut short by an event 
which added not a little to his astonishment. Chincheas 
cries at first brought no answer, but, after a few moments, 
they were successful. 

"Who calls at this hour]" exclaimed a voice on the 
other side of the chasm, in good and plain English, spoken 
with a purity which surprised the young sailor. 

" Chinchea," replied the Indian ; " Blackhawk in tbe 
woods." 

"Heaven defend you, then," replied the voice ; "I will 
lower the bridge, and then you pass quickly." 

A creaking noise like the turning of a wheel, followed ; 
and a huge black mass, which before had all the appearance 
of a portion of the face of the rock, came slowly down, aDd 
in a few moments orfered a passage to the fugitives. 

Edward Blake, between astonishment and weariness, 
was totally unable to speak ; and following Chinchea 
across the drawbridge which had so unexpectedly presented 
itself, and passing quite silently, in imitation of his guide, 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 195 

two figures whom he met, he was in a few minutes 
dazzled and confounded by the blaze of a huge fire. 

The log-house into which they had entered wa3 of 
tolerably large dimensions, and composed, apparently, of 
one room. 

To the right of the door was the fireplace, a deep hollow, 
piled up with heavy hissing logs of wood, which emitted 
a heat most welcome to the wearied Englishman, and creat- 
ing a grateful glow in pleasant contrast to the cold he 
had so recently experienced, while the fragrant odour of 
the wood was most agreeable to the senses. 

Chinchea had led away the horses, and ushered Edward 
Blake, alone, into this welcome shelter. 

"Hush!" said the Indian, gliding in next moment 
loaded with the bedding, " master house — good man — but 
no talk of great country over water — bad done him there, 
he never forgive." 

Chinchea then slipped away, without giving time for 
any questions, leaving our young adventurer still more 
puzzled than ever. 

" My position is certainly a very odd one," thought he ; 
but the buoyant nature of youth came next moment to his 
rescue ; " I have, however, a warm fire, a roof over my 
head, a supper in prospect ; let chance provide the rest." 

Two individuals at this moment entered the room, whom 
we must pause to describe, though Blake did not discover 
all the minute features of the stranger until the 
morrow. 

The one, of middle height, stout, and of singularly 
muscular frame, at once attaoted our hero's attention. He 
was a man of about forty-five years of age, in the full 
enjoyment of the muscular vigour that is incident to 
his time of life. His face was thin and long, not even 
the intervention of a moustache serving to break the very 
glaring character of this defect. His eyes were small, 
grey, and suspicious in their glances ; his nose slightly 
aquiline ; his mouth wearing, on almost all occasions, a 
bitter and saturnine expression ; while the chin, somewhat 
full and round, gave a look of sensuality to a countenance 

o 2 



iyb EDWARD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER 

which, in its main characteristics, was intellectual. His 
forehead was the most remarkable feature about him, 
being so high, as fairly to occupy much more than a third 
of the whole length of his face. This gave him an im- 
posing and majestic air, despite the rudeness of his 
garments. His hair was thin and grey, a circumstance 
which Edward Blake noted with much curiosity. 

A green hunting frock of coarse materials, a common 
cotton handkerchief round the throat, pantaloons of deer- 
skin, with mocassins, and a wampum belt, were his attire. 
A brace of huge pistols, a short cutlass, and a heavy 
double-barrelled rifle, were his visible arms. 

Behind this remarkable figure, and reaching no higher 
than his waist, stood a man of some fifty years of age, 
whose appearance was startling in the extreme. "Without 
any deformity of shape, his extreme littleness was in 
itself a defect. Only four feet ten in height, with sandy 
whiskers and moustache, as well as hair, with little hands 
and feet, like those of a woman, his costume was exactly 
similar to that of his companion ; his rifle, however, being 
of slight and elegant workmanship, and single barrelled. 
The expression of his countenance was far from agreeable ; 
his eye appearing to penetrate your inmost thoughts. 

" You have been in danger of the woods, stranger," said 
the master of the house, somewhat gruffly, laying by his 
arms, and advancing towards our hero, who was seated by 
the fire. 

" There you go, Philip," said the little man, in a shrill 
voice : " alwaj's the same. You never saw this man in 
your life before — I beg the stranger's pardon — but caution 
is the first requisite in life — and you lay by your arms, 
while he's studded like an Italian with pistols, knives, 
and guns." 

Edward rose, his e3'es glancing fiercely at the dAvarf, 
while at the same time he disburdened himself of his 
defensive Aveapons, Avhich, from habit, he had retained 

" Jones, you are mad," said the man addressed as Philip, 
turning round Avith a glance no less fierce than that of 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 197 

our young Englishman ; " you seem to take every man 
for a cut-throat." 

" I do, until I know the contrary," said Jones calmly. 

" Sir, you are welcome," said Philip, turning contemp- 
tuously from the dwarf ; " I trust you will excuse the 
eccentricities of my friend, Mr. Jones." 

" Yes, sir, his friend," repeated the dwarf, somewhat 
testily ; " and the first duty of friendship is caution for 
those we feel an affection for." 

" Sir," replied our hero, with a smile, " I am a stranger, 
in peril of my life ; and as the Scripture hath it, you have 
taken me in ; I know too well the gratitude due to your 
hospitality, to feel for one moment hurt at the jokes of 
your companion. In fact, I am rather partial to humour 
and eccentricity, and am persuaded, Mr. Jones and I will, 
ere long, be very good friends." 

" I never joke," said the dwarf, laying aside his arms as 
soon as he saw that Blake had left himself without a 
weapon, "Never." There was an ugly grimness about his 
tone which very strongly supported this statement. 

" I rather differ from you there, Mr. Jones, and must 
say I think you excessively facetious. The idea, now, of 
taking me for an Italian bandit was rather comic — I, a 
true-born Englishman." 

" There ! there !" muttered Jones, with a look of strange 
meaning, intended for Mr. Philip ; " you hear what he 
says — a true-born Englishman. Well, I never ! who 
would have thought any of the real islanders would have 
ventured up here 1 " 

" I was but following a very worthy example," said 
Edward Blake, with a smile. 

" How 1 " said Philip, somewhat sternly. 

" "Why," continued Blake, carelessly, " where two of my 
countrymen are so snugly located, a third should scarcely 
have any fear to venture." 

" Humph ! " said Philip, interrupting the dwarf some- 
what fiercely ; "how learned you we were Englishmen 1 " 

" The fact is — excuse my ignorance," replied Edward, 
bowing, " I never heard of you at all until about twenty 



198 EDWABD BLAKE SMELLS POWDER 

minutes since. From Chinchea, however, I gathered that 
you were my countrymen." 

"Our renown is not very extensive," remarked him 
called Philip, quietly ; " few white men penetrate so far 
as the Eagle's Nest, save trappers and hunters, whom we 
always welcome. But come, here is Chinchea, and I 
suppose supper will be no unwelcome break in the con- 
versation." 

This concluded, Blake entered fully into every detail in 
connexion with Blackhawk — the position he occupied, and 
the number and nature of his forces ; while Chinchea also 
added to the stock of information, addressing the master 
of the house in his own Wacco dialect, which the other 
appeared to speak fluently. 

" His design is certainly upon this place," said Philip, 
after he had heard both stories, " there being no other 
location within fifty miles. However, he shall have a 
warm reception ; we are two dead shots — Chinchea is 
another ; while you, sir," addressing Edward, " will, X 
suppose, lend the aid of your arms ? " 

" With pleasure," replied young man, who now began 
to believe himself in reality in the thick of an adventure. 
" I do not boast much of my shooting acquirements, but a 
year's experience in Texas will always go for something." 

" You may chance before sundown to-morrow to gather 
further experience," replied the other ; " a skrimmage like 
this we have before us, is no trifle in a man's existence." 

"I shall summon you before dawn," said Philip, "and 
would therefore advise your taking rest. Yonder hammock 
will, with the aid of your blankets, be very comfortabla" 

" Many thanks," replied Blake, "but do I deprive you 
of—" 

"By no means," said the other. "Jones and I never 
sleep in this house. We live here and give accommodation 
to strangers at times. On the morrow, however, you will 
find this but a small part of our residence." 

With these words, the two men took their arms and 
went out, leaving Blake and the Indian alone. 

The latter was soon fast asleep before the fire, and 



THE YOU MIDSHIPMAN 19!* 

Edward, though little inclined for slumber, climbed into 
the hammock, wrapping his blankets round him, having 
the universal accompaniment of every Texan traveller in 
his mouth — a pipe of real Virginia — he passed in review 
the events of one of the most remarkable d?ys of his 
existence. 

This rencontre with Blackhawk, his flight and escape, 
his arrival in the mysterious Eagle's Nest, the strange 
character of its inmates, were all matters which croAvded 
at once upon his brain. The manner of the two men 
puzzled him most of all. He could comprehend neither. 
It was clear they were anxious not to be too extensively 
known— above all to Englishmen. Their object it was not 
so easy to define. Doubts, even fears, crossed the mind 
of our young hero — but the reflection that he had nothing 
with him to lose, calmed all suspicion with regard to 
himself. Still, surmises of the most varied and strange 
nature entered into his head, to be chased away and 
followed by others only new, strange, and even absurd. 

In the midst of all he fell asleep, and his heated imagi- 
nation once set to work, with the face of Blackhawk (so 
familiar to him) and those of Philip and Jones, he dreamed 
a dream. The dream was — but, it being a record of the past 
event, which the reader must not learn at present, we are 
compelled to omit it. 



200 
CHAPTEE IV. 

A SURPRISE. 

The situation of the Eagle's Nest was singularly and 
strikingly picturesque. 

An isolated and bare rock, rose in the chops, as it were, 
of a narrow valley, and was separated from the sloping 
hill which fell perpendicular from its crest on the side 
facing the rock, by a deep chasm, through which rushed a 
stream, in its depth not unlike a thread of silver — it was 
so jagged and precipitous on all its four faces, as seemingly 
to be impregnable. The surface was uneven in the extreme, 
here a point jutting up, and there a deep hole sinking, and 
to no one would it have offered any features attractive as 
a residence, save to one whose principal object was 
security. 

On each side were lofty hills, the branches of a common 
chain broken by the valley, the mouth of which the rock 
above alluded to almost closed. Covered by a deep 
panoply of forest of sombre and dark fir, they were too 
far distant to render their height of any advantage to a 
besieger, while the hill, the summit of which approached 
within eight feet, was so commanded as to be completely 
useless also to any foe, however daring and bold. 

From the skirt of the wood on this side unto the 
Eagle's Nest, over the glassy plain which swept in a 
gentle slope upwards to the rock, the distance was about 
half a mile, its monotony broken only by a grove of fir, 
not more than fifty yards distant from the habitation, and 
which presented all the marxs of having once reached to 
the very crest of the hill — the intervening space having 
been cleared in order to provide logs for building, and also 
for firewood. 

The rock itself was surrounded on all sides by a wall 
of stone, rude and unplastered, while exactly opposite the 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 201 

spot on which Chinchea and young Blake had stood on 
the night of their arrival, was the drawbridge, which, 
when up, served the purpose of a gate to defend the 
narrow aperture left for the purpose of entry. Behind 
this, leaving first a small courtyard, was the log-hut occu- 
pied by the travellers, while on each side, reaching from it 
to the stone rampart, were outhouses. Behind this, and 
perched on the summit of a small table rock, was another 
edifice. 

Like the first, it was formed of huge unsquared logs, 
without windows, though several loops served for that 
purpose; its roof was of treble shingle, and was surmounted 
by a bare pole, that had all the air of a flagstaff, even to 
the halyards destined to haul up whatever colours the 
owner of the retreat had a mind to unfurl. 

The remainder of the surface of the rock, in all about 
an acre and a half, was composed of corah for the cattle, 
both horned and other, which owned the sway of the 
strange beings who dwelt in this sequestered spot. 

Young Blake, at an early hour, stood surveying the 
features of the scene with a zest and interest which 
increased rather than diminished, as his eye took in all 
the varied beauties of the landscape, illumined as it was 
by the rising sun, that over all shed its crimson glories, 
as it crept, slowly upward in the eastern sky. 

"WIrile his thoughts were busy with the past, and his 
eyes glancing over the superb landscape which lay at his 
feet, a slight rustling at his elbow caused him to ton, It 
was Chinchea. 

"Good camp," said the Indian, "better place — woods 
bad — scalp gone 'fore morning." 

" A very undesirable consummation, certainly," said 
Blake, gravely ; " though whether this be a good camp 
is a question I have yet to solve." 

The Indian grunted, but made no answer ; it was clear 
he did not understand the meaning of the young English- 
man's words. 

Blake made no attempt to enlighten him, but scanned 
him with a scrutinising air. 



S02 A SURPRISE. 

" Cliincliea," said he, " you are my friend." 

" Ugh ! ' replied the Indian, assuming an air of grate- 
ful remembrance — the origin of their connexion being 
Blake's assiduity in attending him during a severe illness 
at Houston. 

" Chinchea remembers the day when his white brother 
gave him physic in the great village 1 " 

The Indian assented. 

" "What is my name 1 " asked the young man. 

" Blake," replied the Wacco, pronouncing the word 
with a strong emphasis on the a, and nearly omitting the 
e, making it almost Blacke. 

" It is," said the other ; and laying his hand on the 
Indian's arm, he added, " I have a strange fancy, I know 
not why, that my name should remain a secret with these 
people." 

" Xo business of Indian to know white man's name ; 
Chinchea got no long tongue like squaw." 

" But I must have a name. It would be impolite to 
decline giving one," mused Blake. 

'■ Call himself Little Bear," grunted the red skin. 

"A very fine appellation, no doubt," said the young 
man, with a smile, " but under the circumstances I think 
I shall adopt Brown." 

"Brown — good," said the Wacco, whose long inter- 
course with the whites had made him an adept in their 
tongues, " when tired call Brown — speak, and Indian call 
him other name." 

This was said with a quaint gravity that fairly over- 
came the Englishman ; he laughed outright with a hearti- 
ness which searched out the echoes, and brought them 
playing back about his ears in merry guise. 

" Well, I do not think I shall adopt many more aliases," 
said he ; " but Brown is a good travelling namo, it leaves 
no great mark behind" 

While the young man yet spoke, the voice of his 
host of the preceding night hailed him from the door of 
the hut. 

" Good morning, sir," exclaimed he, advancing as he 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 203 

spoke, "what think you now of our Eagle's Nest, Mi. 
" he paused. 

" Brown — Edward Brown," said our hero, with a slight 
tremor ; " your position is certainly well chosen, and 
might be defended against vast odds." 

" You think so," said the other, with glistening eyes. 
" I am glad of it, and as I fancy we shall soon try the 
experiment — hope your words may come true." 

" I hope so too, Mr. ," our hero hesitated, imitating 

the other's manner to the life. 

" Philip Stevens," said he, drily, and yet with a smile 
at Blake's manner. 

" There ! there ! " muttered a voice at his elbow, " what 
occasion is there for you a bawling out your name in that 
way. There is no occasion for everybody to know your 
name, Philip." 

"And if they do, no great harm is done," said Philip, 
fiercely ; " my name is not one that I care much to hide. 
And if I did, in this country we are pretty much our 
own masters." 

"There! there! you are so impatient," said Jones, 
advancing. " I did not mean anything, and only spoke 
for your good. Breakfast is ready." 

" Mr. Brown," said Philip Stevens, turning to our 
hero, " the keen air of this lofty rock hag doubtless 
whetted your appetite." 

" I am already sufficiently of a Texan never to refuse 
a good offer," replied Blake, following his host, who led 
the way towards the log hut. 

The Indian all this time had leant motionless against 
the stone wall, his eyes apparently fixed on vacancy, but 
in reality watching the countenance of our hero with 
jealous care. He had divested himself of every sign of 
civilized garb, and stood ghastly in his war paint. 

When the young Englishman set his foot upon the 
threshold of the log hut, his surprise knew no bounds, 
though he did his utmost to conceal so very great an 
evidence of inexperience. 

At the head of the table sat a young girl, while four 



204 a SUBPRISR. 

men, besides his host and Jones, simultaneously took their 
seats. A vacant place was pointed out beside the first, 
near Philip. 

Behind, occupied in laying the various articles of food 
upon the table, was a glossy, sprightly, laughing-eyed 
negro lass, whose healthy appearance spoke volumes for 
the treatment she received. 

" My daughter, Mr. Brown ; Captain Cephas Doyle, 
Mr. Brown ; my hunters," said Stevens, with a glance of 
peculiar meaning at the girl. 

Edward muttered some incoherent reply, and then 
the whole party fell to upon the viands, Blake imitating 
them as much to conceal his surprise as to satisfy his 
appetite. 

Dressed plainly, but in a lady -like manner, of marked 
beauty, there was a delicacy and grace about this young 
creature, which astonished and bewildered the Englishman, 
as by stolen glances he drank every feature of her lovely 
countenance. 

]S T ot more than eighteen, there was a sadness, a gloom 
about the expression of her face which added not a little 
to our hero's curiosity. She did the honours of the table 
with quiet grace, and seemed by no means inclined to 
open her lips, while apparently from being so used to 
strangers, she paid little attention to the new arrival. 

For some time Blake spoke not at all, the others snatch- 
ing an occasional moment to discuss the probabilities of a 
contest with Blackhawk and his gang. 

Captain Cephas Doyle appeared somewhat anxious that 
the contest should take place, and his warm antipathy to 
everything in the shape of an Indian, not even restrained 
by the presence of Chincnea, who calmly and silently 
glided into a seat beside Blake — caused our hero to survey 
him a little curiously. 

About five-and-twenty, his face was rather broader than 
is commonly the case with your true Yankee. His eyes 
were small, grey, and keen ; his nose broad and straight ; 
his mouth large, with thick lips, while his chin was some- 
what overburdened with fat ; he wore neither moustache 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 205 

nor whiskers, appendages which are rarely to be seen upon 
Americans at home, whatever may be the case abroad, 
where Jonathan, we know not for what reason, is gene- 
rally anxious to be taken for anything save what he 
really is. His costume was much the same as our hero. 

"What is your opinion, Miss Stevens?" said young 
Blake, addressing the daughter of his host. 

" Well, I conclude no female has much of an idea in 
them partiklers," interrupted Captain Cephas Doyle, 
hastily ; " I reckon they are about ignorant on that 
pint," 

" My opinion, Mr. Brown," said the young lady appealed 
to, without noticing the captain's interruption, "is, that 
God made all his creatures in his image, and that while 
he has given one colour to one, and to another a different 
hue, he has granted a soul unto all. In my opinion, a 
man is to be judged by his acts, not by the colour of his 
skin." 

The captain appeared not to relish this view of the 
matter, and continued his argument with the more willing 
auditors, or, at all events, with auditors who showed less 
distaste for his views. 

Edward Blake and Alice Stevens, the ice being once 
broken, opened a tete-d-tete conversation, which was 
speedily carried on with animation on both sides. Edward 
was delighted with his companion, whose elegant tastes, 
refined language, and sound knowledge, surprised him. 
All the accomplishments of her sex appeared familiar to 
her, while the rich stores of English, French, and Italian 
literature were equally well known. As soon as the 
young girl found that her neighbour was one who could 
converse like a gentleman ; who spoke without using the 
backwood slang ; whose education had been that of a 
scholar ; who had travelled much, and observed men and 
manners — then all her reserve vanished. So animated 
did their talk become, indeed, that they scarcely noticed 
the departure of the greater number of their guests from 
the table. 

"Well, Mr. Brown," said Philip Stevens, a smile 



2Uti A SUEPBISE. 

playing upon his generally solemn features, "you and my 
daughter appear such good friends, that I shall leave you 
to make better acquaintance, ■while I and the rest see to 
Buch preparations as are necessary." 

The two new friends started, nay, even blushed, while 
Edward replied, as he rose — "Nay, Mr. Stevens, though 
not a soldier, I am a sailor, and will not be absent when 
duty calls." 

"I am sure of it," replied the other, with another 
smile, " and will summon you when needed. Meanwhile, 
my daughter and you can become, as I have said, better 
acquainted. It is seldom Alice happens upon a traveller 
who can converse with her — never, indeed, has she seen 
one who engaged her attention so completely." 

This was said with some degree of playful malice in 
his manner, that forced a reply from Alice. 

"Sir," said she, with a slight shudder, and relapsing 
almost wholly into her former gloom, "it is not often 
that an educated gentleman finds his way into these parts. 
Mr. Brown has unconsciously recalled to my recollection 
so much of my early associations, as to be a most wel- 
come companion." 

Edward Blake, alias Mr. Brown, bowed all due gallantry, 
while Philip Stevens, with a slight frown, called Alice 
aside for a moment, and having held a brief conversation in 
whispered tones, he left the hut, and these two new friends, 
who had met before, remained alone, utterly ignorant of 
the wild and mysterious tie which had ever bound their 
fates together. 



207 
CHAPTER V. 

PIETRO, THE SOOUT. 

About three miles to the west of the Eagle's Nest, is a 
spot very different in its characteristics from that which Ave 
have just described ; the hills and the wood in this in- 
stance heing in close contact, the former even nestling 
over the latter, in an overhanging cliff some fifty feet high. 
Beside this rise the fir, the sycamore, the cedar, and the 
oak, their tall heads waiving over the summit of the 
precipice. 

Between the skirt of the wood and the lower part of the 
rocky height was left a small space, which, heing favour- 
able for all purposes of concealment, and being protected 
from the weather, had oiten been the retreat of travellers. 

On the morning of which we have already spoken, it was 
occupied by a tent, formed by a few poles leant against the 
rock, and over which a large cloth had been cast. In 
front of this was a fire, round which several packs formed 
commodious and comfortable seats. On them were seated 
three men, of whom one was evidently a man of superior 
rank, while the others were as clearly his menials. 

About sixty years of age, with swarthy complexion, hair 
as black as jet, eyes large, piercing, and fiery, his costume 
was that of a Mexican caballero of the first rank. His 
lofty steeple hat of white felt was ornamented with much 
bullion ; his jacket was striped with various colours, his 
pantaloons were covered with embroidery, while over ali 
was cast a splendid ponchc — a Mexican blanket. 

"I wish Pietro would return," said the master — speaking 
in that mixed Spanish and Indian dialect which has, in 
the present day, been dignified by the name of the Mexi- 
can language — " for if he be right in supposing that men 
of evil disposition are in the forest, the sooner we reach 
shelter the better." 



208 PIETRO, IMS SCOUT. 

" Pietro is a clever lad, Don Juan," replied the elder of 
the two domestics, " and I warrant me he was not mis-' 
taken." 

" And yet a distant vapour may have been taken for 
smoke," observed Don Juan de Chagres." 

" Pietro is too used to the woods," said the old servant, 
shaking his head ; " he has been amongst these wild Tex- 
ans since he was a child." 

" True — true ! " said their master, " and the more reason, 
therefore, for our taking a meal. Here comes the signora, 
and we will breakfast." 

The domestics rose, while their master quietly drew forth 
a cigarette, and lighting it, puffed away, as if he fancied it 
a necessary preliminary to the coming meal. 

The tent opened as he spoke, and there issued therefrom 
a young woman, in the full pride of her beauty, not a little 
heightened by the fresh air which came murmuring through 
the trees. 

About two-and-twenty, a brunette, with large, speaking 
eyes ; a mouth delicate, small, and rosy ; hair glossy, and 
jet as the raven's wing ; her person had all the fulness 
and rounded grace of womanhood, with the light airy step 
of a girl. The chief defect, perhaps the only one, in her 
beautiful features, was the lowness of the forehead. 

Her costume was the usual graceful walking dress of 
Mexican ladies, who, though their darkness be like the 
embrowning of fruit that tells of the richness within, yet 
want the charming skins and rosy complexions of our fair 
countrywomen. The principal feature in her costume was 
the reboso, or mantilla, which, flung gracefully over the 
left shoulder, and passed across the mouth, left nothing 
but the eyes visible. This is all the more necessary, be- 
cause Mexican female costume is but little without it ; one 
garment only, besides the petticoat, being worn, braced 
with a sash round the waist. 

Taking her seat upon a pack opposite the old man, the 
young woman signified her readiness to partake of the 
meal which had been prepared, and which, despite the 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 209 

rudeness of the spot, would have been despised by no 
traveller in any part of the world. 

" Where is Pietro 1 " said the lady, addressing the elder 
domestic, as she sipped her chocolate. 

" Pietro is in the woods, signora," replied the servant, 
" the lad thinks he has seen enemies within the gloom of 
the forest." 

"Santa Maria f" exclaimed the signora, with a start, 
"then why sit we here so calmly 1 " 

" It would be unwise to move, until we arc certain in 
which direction our enemies lie. There might be such a 
thing as falling into their very jaws." 

" This comes of these wild journeys," replied the signora, 
with a sneer ; " were we quietly at home in Santa ¥6, 
there would be no such fears." 

" There would be worse," continued Don Juan de 
Chagres ; " your own countrymen, when enemies, are 
more dangerous than even the Texans." 

" Santa Maria, madre de Dios ! " cried the young 
woman, as a rustling was heard in the bushes, " what 
noise is that 1 " 

"Pietro!" 

As the elder domestic spoke, a young man, half Indian, 
half Mexican, in the many-coloured garb of the latter 
country, and armed with a heavy short rifle, large pistols, 
and a small axe, stepped forth from the cover of the 
woods. 

" What news, Pietro," cried the signora. 

" Blackhawk is in the woods," replied the young man, 
with a slight shudder. 

At the period we speak of, the gang of marauders com- 
manded by Blackhawk had, by a series of atrocities of a 
most frightful character, gained a very widely extended 
reputation. Now appearing on the border settlements of 
Texas, now on those of Mexico, this gang defied retaliation 
by the swiftness of its movements. Indians, Mexicans, and 
Texans alike, were bent on its destruction, it being composed 
of outcasts from the three races, who treated all they met 
with as enemies. 



210 METRO, THE SCOUT. 

" Blackhawk ! " exclaimed the old man, rising. 

" Blackhawk ! " almost shrieked the young -woman. 

" Blackhawk ! " repeated the servants, in a kind of 
chorus. 

"Bring up the mules/' cried the master, "we will re- 
turn upon our steps." 

" To advance would be better, Signor Don Juan," said 
Pietro, who was satisfying his hunger ; " there is a white 
settlement not three miles ahead." 

" A settlement," said the signora. 

Pietro assented, and in a few words described the posi- 
tion of the Eagle's Xest 

" Doubtless, the post of these thieves," said the terrified 
signora. 

" By no means," exclaimed the signor ; " I know the 
owner. It is Signor Filipo Stephano, a brave English- 
man." 

"Then," said the signora, rising, "let us hence." 

The mules, eight in number, with five horses, were now 
brought up and hastily loaded. In less than a quarter of 
an hour, the whole party, with the exception of Pietro, 
were en route. Having given ample directions to the 
others, he remained behind, intending once more to creep 
within sight of the terrible gang, whose chief had given to 
it so unenviable a reputation. 

Pietro stood in the skirt of the wood, watching the dis- 
appearance of his companions, and was about to turn to 
seek the shelter ' of the forest, when some sudden and 
inexplicable impulse induced him to glide beneath the 
shelter of the rock, and by standing motionless against its 
blackened and cracked surface, his body seemed to blend 
Avith its shadow. 

Next moment the face of an Indian peered through the 
trees in the direction of the retreating party, whose forms 
were not yet quite concealed in the distance, and then, 
after a rapid survey of the late encampment, he stepped 
forth into the open space. 

About six feet high, hideous as paint and ugliness could 
make him, naked, save round the middle, and armed with. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 211 

musket, cutlass, and knife, Pietro at once recognised him 
as an Apache, a tribe to which he, in common with most 
of his countrymen, bore the most deadly and unextinguish- 
able hatred. 

" Waugh ! " said the Indian, with much satisfaction, 
shaking his fist in the direction in which the fugitives had 
just disappeared ; and with this one word he advanced 
into the centre of the open space, and presently strode up 
towards the rock, where he stood beside the dying embers of 
the fire. 

He was now but eight feet distant from Pietro, who lay 
hid behind a projection of the rock to the Indian's left. 
The young Mexican, however, was too experienced a 
woodsman not to know that, in the present instance, con- 
tinued concealment was hopeless ; and accordingly he deter- 
mined to have the advantage of a surprise, before the Indian 
could retreat a step, rushed forward, and gaining a position 
beside the enemy, in one bound, he grappled with the huge 
Apache. 

Pietro's hands were encumbered with his rifle, as were 
those of the Indian with his musket, and in the hurry 
exhibited by each to gain a hold upon the other, their 
weapons met, crossed, and were blended into one, each 
clutching his own and that of his enemy with terrific 
force. 

The Indian gave vent to his never-failing " ugh ! " and 
tnen the combatants paused, face to face, gazing intently 
one at the other. 

Pietro was shorter than his foe, but he was muscular, 
and full of strength ; still, had not the other been ener- 
vated by drink, there would have been little doubt as to 
the superiority of the man of the woods. 

Neither spoke, each striving to wrest the murderous 
weapon from his opponent's grasp. 

They writhed, they jerked, they seemed about to tear 
their very arms from their sockets ; now Pietro cast the 
Indian half to the ground, and now the Apache would 
dash the Mexican from his feet. 

Again they struggled, their hands hurrying themselves, 

P2 



212 PIETRO, THE SCOUT. 

in appearance, in the iron barrels, until at length they 
slipped together, and came tumbling headlong to the ground, 
both guns exploding at the same moment. 

The Indian sprang to his feet, and waving his heavy 
cutlass, rushed upon the Mexican ; but Pietro, coolly cock- 
ing a heavy horseman's pistol, shot him through the heart, 
and he fell dead, with a yell that waked the dying echoes 
both of the forest and the rocks. 

Seizing his own arms and those of his enemy, the young 
and victorious Mexican plunged at once on the trail of his 
master and mistress, whom he speedily overtook. 

"Pietro, much fatigued, indeed completely worn out 
with his struggle and subsequent pursuit of his friends, 
mounted his horse, and having regained his breath, related 
what had passed. 

" Those reports will bring the whole party to the camp," 
exclaimed Don Juan, " and our trail will be the next ob- 
ject of pursuit." 

" We are much ahead of the ruffians," said Pietro, " and 
will gain the shelter, I hope, before they can catch us. 
See ! yonder is the settlement ! " 



213 

CHAPTER VL 

THE ATTACK. 

When Edward and Alice were left alone, a momentary 
embarrassment ensued. Alice seemed subdued and mourn- 
ful, while the young sailor, much struck by the gentleness, 
beauty, and seemingly graceful mind of his companion, 
began to feel somewhat doubtful as to the precise nature 
of the feelings which were, even at that early stage of their 
acquaintance, rising in his bosom with regard to the guar- 
dian bud of the Eagle's Nest. 

" Do you intend remaining long in Texas, Mr. Brown 1 " 
said Alice, first breaking the brief silence which followed 
the departure of Philip Stevens. 

" I left England, and came to Texas with the intention 
of remaining altogether," replied Edward. 

And do you still adhere to so rash a determination ? 
said Miss Stevens, with the faintest shadow of a smile. 

" At home I have no friends," observed Blake, some- 
what sadly. " I have lost all — parents, friends, and by 
some strange chance, fortune itself. I am now a species 
of adventurer, a soldier, or rather a sailor of fortune, and, 
therefore, where my subsistence is to be obtained, there is 
my country 1 " 

" But do you not regret England, your real home ? " 

This was said curiously, and with some degree of 
anxiety. 

" Every Englishman does, who is worthy of the name," 
answered Edward. "Circumstances may render his native 
land an undesirable residence ; he may find an easier living 
elsewhere ; but no matter what his foreign success, hv will 
ever find a moment to give to memory, and it will be of 
home that memory will be busy." 

"Ah, Mr. Brown," said Alice, warmly, "I that know 
little of my country, that was a mere child when I left it, 



214 THE ATtACK. 

still yearn for England — for that land that my imagination 
paints as little short of a paradise. I see the beauty of 
this -wild and romantic position ; I enjoy to the full the 
luxury of its pure air, its delightful scenery, its glorious 
mornings, and. alas, as in life, its still more glorious even- 
ings. Its sunrises and sunsets charm and delight me, 
hut I ever feel some secret want here, which, I fear me, 
never will be supplied." 

"And this want " said Edward, despite himself, 

eagerly. 

" Is companionship ; I know not why. I that live and 
have my being among hunters, trappers, and wild Indians, 
should by rights assimilate myself unto them, but I cannot 
do so. Their ideas and mine do not harmonise ; their 
conversation is distasteful to me ; their thoughts and feel- 
ings are foreign to my nature, and I feel alone." 

"I comprehend you fully, Miss Stevens," replied Edward, 
after a pause ; "and can only ascribe your sensations to an 
innate appreciation of female dignity ; and to the fact that 
neither birth nor education originally fitted you for the 
wilds." 

Edward Blake kept his eyes fixed keenly on the counte- 
nance of the young girl as he spoke, with a view to gather 
from its expression if his ideas were correct or not. Alice 
changed colour rapidly, and for a moment made no reply. 
Some chord had been touched, which vibrated to the heart 
of the listener . 

" We are very new friends, Mr. Brown," said she, at 
length, with some little more of distance in her manner, 
" to be thus cross-examining one another's feelings. Sup- 
posing that, instead of thus speculating, I were to show 
you the secrets of the Eagle's Nest." 

"With pleasure," replied Edward, not, however, 
without some slight evidence of pique in his manner, 
and rising at the same time ; " this romantically named 
habitation should have many curious features. But, believe 
me not impertinent if I have cross-examined you ; it has 
been because I have taken an interest in one whom I see 
removed from all fitting society." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 215 

" Impertinent ! oh, no ! " said Alice, turning, and giving 
her hand to the young Eailor ; " but I am peculiarly cir- 
cumstanced, and you must not always ask me to explain 
either my acts or my words." 

" In me, then, find a friend in whom to trust," said Ed- 
ward, warmly. 

Alice replied not, but turned again towards the door, 
and led the way into the courtyard. On a little rising 
mound that reached nearly to the summit of the stone 
battlements of the Nest, stood the whole party connected 
with that locality, gazing out upon the vast prospect that 
lay in front. Of these Miss Stevens took not the slightest 
notice, though Philip glanced with an approving smile 
towards the young couple, but opening a little wicket to 
the left, another courtyard, or rather division of the surface 
of the rock, was gained. 

It was about ten yards square, and had been covered 
with a thin layer of mould, divided into beds by paths of 
shingle and pebbles, and was dignified by the name of 
Alice's garden. 

The prominent building alluded to above, and which 
appeared the keep of the castle, formed one side of the 
young girl's garden, and towards this Alice led the way 
into the lower room. It was a small apartment, and, for 
the locality, well furnished with many a little feminine 
luxury. To the surprise and great gratification of Edward 
Blake, several books and a guitar lay prominently on a 
table. 

" You have many things here, Miss Stevens, to which 
in the wilds one is usually a stranger," said the young 
Englishman. 

" They are remnants of the past, of which some day you 
may know more," replied Alice. " The books are at your 
service, and, if you play, so is the guitar." 

" I do play a little," said Edward ; " but would, if you 
object not, converse of this wild spot." 

The young sailor unconsciously took up a book, and it 
opened at the flyleaf. 

A name had been in it, and more, an engraved one, eur- 



216 THE ATTACK. 

mounted by a coronet ; but much pains had been taken to 
erase and efface all sign of what had once existed. Struck 
■with surprise, Edward, forgetting that the girl's eyes were 
upon him, fixed his glance curiously upon it, and en- 
deavoured to decipher the name which had been blazoned 
on the page. 

Blake thought he could faintly trace the arms and words, 
and as he did so he turned faint, while a deadly pallor 
overspread his face. 

" You are unwell," said Alice, who had been a strangely 
interested spectator of this little scene. 

"It is nothing," replied Edward, recovering himself, 
and laying down the book ; " but methinks, I hear a 
bustle without ; my assistance may be wanted." 

" You will be summoned fast enough," said Alice, " but 
that you may see all that is going on, let us ascend to the 
roof of this block." 

The sailor, whose ideas were in a complete whirl, obeyed, 
and preceded the young lady, knowing that all over the 
word that it is etiquette in going up a ladder. 

It was a level esplanade, with four guns, one com- 
manding each side of the Eagle's Nest. To mask their 
presence the port-holes Avere closed. Each taking one as a 
seat, the new friends sat down. Neither appeared much 
inclined for conversation. Edward was pondering on a 
long forgotten subject, brought forcibly and painfully to 
his mind, he knew not why, while Alice was dwelling on 
the somewhat strange manner of her countryman. 

Blake was leaning over the parapet — his eye wandering 
carelessly down the slope towards the forest — when the 
Mexican party burst from the woods, making hastily for 
the Eagle's Nest. Both Alice and he rose with some 
anxiety, as the manner of the fugitives sufficiently explained 
the reason of their hurry. 

" Look out, Mr. Brown," said Philip Stevens, turning 
towards the block, " warm work is commencing." 

" Shall I join you ? " replied Edward. 

"Nay; you can work one of those carronades, I 
ixpect." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 217 

" With pleasure," cried Blake, all his energy and love 
of adventure at once effacing any other impression from 
his mind ; " give the word, and I will serve them with a 
vengeance." 

" Bravely spoken," replied the master of the Eagle's 
Nest, who seemed much struck with Edward's spirit ; 
" and you, Alice, give the rogues a bit of bunting. We 
will fight for our lives under good colours." 

Alice quietly turned to a huge ammunition-box, and 
taking therefrom a large bundle, proceeded to attach the 
colours to the halyards. Blake was so intently engaged 
in watching the progress of the fugitives, as they hurried 
towards the refuge which appeared to offer them protection, 
that he hardly noticed the young girl's proceedings. 
Presently, however, a rustling and fluttering over his 
head made him look up, and there on a red field waved 
the arms of England. 

A slight tremor of pleasure came to his heart, such as 
we feel ever, when, in a strange land, a memorial of that 
country which gave us birth is brought before our eyes. 

" You see, Mr. Brown," said the daughter of the out- 
law, for such Philip Stevens appeared, " that we have not 
lost all memory of home." 

" Indeed I do, Miss Stevens," he replied, warmly ; 
" and if anything could add to my willingness to meet so 
foul a foe as that we have to contend with, it is the sight 
of that gallant, proud, and time-honoured flag." 

At this moment, the fugitives being half across the 
prairie, the band of pursuers came whooping, yelling, and 
rushing from half-a-dozen different points of the forest ; 
and from the quickness of their movements, compared 
with the slow progress of the heavily laden mules, they 
appeared certain to overtake them. Blake's heart leaped 
within him, for he saw that a woman was amongst the 
flying party, and the native gallantly of his character 
tempted him to risk all, to save her from the gang in 
pursuit. The Mexicans were evidently urging their beasts 
to the very utmost, but Blackhawk and his party were 
coming up apace. 



U18 THE ATTACK. 

" Stand by to lower the gangway," said Philip, in a 
voice which rang through the Eagle's Nest, and bespoke 
that now he was in his element ; " get ready your gun, 
Mr. Brown; and when the Mexicans turn into the 
narrow path, give it to the rogues behind." 

" Pray, Miss Stevens, go below," said Edward. 

"Nay, Mr. Brown, while one of my own sex is in 
danger, I will remain. Ah ! they are close upon them. 
Heaven preserve the poor lady." 

As she spoke, Don Juan de Chagres and his party had 
reached a narrow beaten trail, which led directly to the 
entrance of the Eagle's Nest, and to enter which, they left 
what had formerly been the track of a ball from the gun 
which Blake had levelled at the pursuers. Next instant 
a loud report and a flash drew all eyes to the summit of 
the block, and a ball went ploughing up the earth in the 
very centre of the wild and ferocious band of the renowned 
Blackhawk. The whole party halted, and next moment 
the Mexicans were under cover of the rifles of Philip 
Stevens- and his men. 

" Served like a true man," cried the outlaw, approvingly ; 
" that ball killed no man, but it saved one or two lives. 
They will now think twice before they attack us, so e'en 
come down and aid me to receive our new guests." 

Alice had thrown a shawl round her shoulders, and 
assumed a straw hat, having added which slight features 
to her costume, she accompanied Blake towards the portion 
of the Eagle's Nest through which the Mexicans were, no 
doubt with heartfelt satisfaction, hurrying. Hearty con- 
gratulations were passed ; and while Alice led the young 
Mexican away to her private chamber, there to seek quiet, 
and to recover from the severe fright which she, in 
common with the whole party, had undergone, a conference 
of the men Avas held, and various numbers were suggested 
as being the numerical force of Blackhawk. As, however, 
Pietro and Chinchea, who alone had seen them, agreed 
pretty well in calling them fifty or thereabouts, this was 
received as that against which they would probably have 
to contend; while twelve, including Don Juan and 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 219 

Chinchea, comprised the utmost force of the woodland 
garrison. As the Eagle's Nest was well protected, and 
supplied in abundance with food and ammunition, while 
water could always be drawn up in buckets, the numbers 
would not have been so very disproportionate, had it not 
been for the desperate and reckless character of the men 
■who composed the beleaguering force. 



CHAPTER VIL 

THE LIVE OAK CREST. 

Repulsed once, the gang, which lay in the woods seeking 
the destruction of the Eagle's Nest, was little likely to 
attempt a renewal of the attack, until favoured by the 
dark canopy of night ; and the garrison of the stronghold 
having, as stated in the previous chapter, taken every im- 
portant precautionary measure, occupied themselves in the 
minor details of backwood warfare — casting bullets, pre- 
paring patching, filling powder-horns, &c. As Edward 
had none of these duties to perform, and was, moreover, 
anxious to continue his acquaintance with Alice, he strolled 
towards the little garden, and stood at the gate. 

Edward paused when about to raise the latch, as he 
heard voices, but recognizing them as those of the fair 
Mexican fugitive, whose dazzling beauty had not escaped 
his notice, he hesitated no longer, but pushed the gate 
open, and entered. 

As he caught sight of them, Edward hardly knew which 
to admire most — the gentle, fair, and lovely Alice, all re- 
tirement, modesty, and blushing beauty ; or the proudly 
handsome and womanly Mexican, who moved with 
majesty, which, on paper, is usually given to queens, but 
which belongs, without regard to station, to peculiar form, 
figure, and feeling. They were conversing in Spanish, a 



220 TEB LIVI C&R CREST. 

language which, in its corrupted form, is familiar to every 
good Texan. 

" I hope, signora, I dc net intrude 1 " said Edward, 
approaching. 

" Say rathei that you feel you are doing lis a favour, in 
deigning to throw away your time upon two forlorn 
damsels," said Margaretta — such was the Mexican's name 
— in a gay and open manner, such as an Englishwoman 
would scarcely have assumed after seven years' intimate 
acquaintance. 

'Mr. Brown is a visitor like yourself," interrupted 
Alice, quietly, at the same time making way for him upon 
the seat, " and hospitality requires that we make him free 
of our castle ; the favour, however," she added, with a 
smile, " is on our side, as this garden is rarely open tc 
visitors." 

'•Perhaps I am intruding now," exclaimed Edward] 
rising, with a slight crimson flush on his face. 

" Nay, you are quite Avelcome ; indeed I am very glad 
you have come," replied Alice, laughing ; " for we were 
just talking of the strange chance which had made the 
silent Eagle's Nest suddenly become so gay and hustling.' 

" Gay, I should hardly say, since we are in a state ol 
siege, which I can scarcely see the end of." 

" Indeed," said the Mexican, somewhat eagerly, "shal 
we then be kept here so long 1 Do these terrible outlaws 
seem so determined ? " 

" Were we beleagured a week, ay, a month, it woulc 
little surprise me," replied Edward. 

" Nay, perhaps, three months," exclaimed Alice, " fo 
though the gang may not be in sight all the time, thei 
may prowl about until the depth of the winter drives then 
to the lower settlements." 

Margaretta took no notice of these replies, and it wa 
impossible to tell whether she was pleased or not at th 
prospect of being shut up for so long a period in this wil< 
and sequestered spot. 

" But," said she, after a pause, desirous to change th 
conversation, " what of my party, where is Don Juan ? " 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 221 

"The old gentleman, your worthy father," replied 
Edward, "was taken very unwell just now. He has, 
apparently, over-exerted himself." 

"Then, show me where he is, I will go to him," said 
Margaretta, rising. 

" Nay, he sleeps, and 'twould be a pity to disturb him. 
Let us rather discuss how we are going to employ our- 
selves. I suppose, if not fighting all the time, we may 
manage to have one or two dances, and as you ladies sing, 
and there is a guitar, a little concert may be expected. I, 
faith, do not think we shall do so very badly. We poor 
sailors are exposed to much more hardships than that." 

" You are naval, then 1 " said Margaretta. 

" I hold a commission in the navy of the young repub- 
lic, for which I was foolish enough to give up one in the 
British service." 

" A — a — an officer, of course 1 " remarked the Mexican, 
hesitatingly. 

" Of course," replied Edward, rather glad, in his some- 
what rough costume, to be able to explain his rank. " I 
have the honour to be an officer, and a gentleman, though 
but a poor one." 

" In Texas, that is the case of too many, to be any draw- 
back," observed Alice ; " and as long as you can sport, 
hunt, and fish, for your own existence, you rank equal 
with the president himself." 

" But we are wandering from the question," said 
Edward, gaily, " I was planning amusement for you, and 
you run off to discuss the economy of Texan life." 

" Allow me to run a little farther," added the Mexican. 
" I wish to understand the probabilities of our sojourn, 
and, in the first place, would ask who is Blackhawk?" 

" Ah ! who, indeed," said Edward, gravely. 

" I can give little explanation," answered Alice, who 
saw that she was appealed to, " save that less than a year 
ago, a band, composed of the refuse of the white and 
Indian population, appeared on the frontiers of the 
country, doing deeds of robbery and murder. This chief, 



222 THE LIVE OAK CREST. 

whose name is Blackhawk, is said to be a terrible fellow, 
without heart or conscience." 

" Have you ever seen him 1 " asked Edward. 

"iSTay, heaven forbid," exclaimed Alice. 

"I have twice," added Edward, sadly. 

" Where ? " cried Margaretta. 

" Once a year ago, and again last night On the first 
occasion, as Captain Harry Coulter, he robbed me of all I 
had, while insensible, and in the felon chief I recognized 
the same personage." 

" Captain Harry Coulter ! " said Alice, in a faltering 
voice. I hare heard him spoken of. When we were in 
ISTew Orleans, Mr. Stevens, that is, my father, had some 
connexion with him ; but they quarrelled, for he tried to 
rob my father. I never saw him, however. 

'■ Strange fatality," exclaimed Edward ; but that man's 
face is as familiar to me as a youthful dream. I know not 
why it is, but I often catch myself dwelling on his face, 
in your presence more than at any other time." 

" Surely I am not like the monster % " said Alice, with 
a laugh. 

" Mr. Brown is very gallant," added Margaretta, 
merrily, to say that the presence of a lady reminds him of 
a bandit." 

" Mr. Brown," exclaimed the full rich voice of Philip 
Stevens, " dinner is ready ; if the ladies be at hand, tell 
them as much." 

The summons was obeyed, and the whole party were 
speedily congregate! together, with the exception of Don 
Juan ; but Cephas Doyle and Jones stood apart as Blake 
entered, eyeing him with a scowl which showed how 
little favour he had found in their sight. He heeded them 
not, however, being fully occupied in seating his fair com- 
panions. The dinner was profuse and excellent, as usual 
in the backwoods — indeed it was more so than seemed wise 
with a siege before them. 

" I think, Mr. Stevens," remarked Edward, " that con- 
sidering we are likely to be confined here some time, it 
would have been better, had this ample store been some- 
what husbanded." 



THB YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 223 

" Nay, you -would not have me stint my guests," re- 
joined the other, gaily, " especially with such a store as I 
have to back me. Think not that I have been taken 
unawares ; I have foreseen some such contingency, and 
have provided for it." 

"There ! there !" cried Jones, with a scared countenance, 
"what business have the gentlemen to know that you 
expected anything of the kind 1 " 

"Don't talk at random," replied Philip, with ill-disguised 
irritation ; " mind your dinner, and leave us to converse as 
we please. You must excuse him, Mr. Brown, but in his 
youth he had a fright which he has never recovered. It 
has rendered him timid ever since." 

Alice turned pale at these words, which were said with 
a calm and bitter sarcasm, before which Jones quailed. 

"To the walls!" shouted a sentry from without, at this 
point of the meal, which cry being followed up by a dis- 
charge of gunshot from half-a-dozen commanding points, 
the whole garrison rushed to defend the works, leaving 
the women sole tenants of the apartment. 

On reaching the open air, Blackhawk and his gang 
were found to have occupied every available position 
round the Eagle's Nest. Behind the smouldering trees — 
on rocks around, seemingly inaccessible, it was clear they 
had crept; for though, after the first discharge, not a living 
being could be seen, yet the body of a sentry riddled with 
musket shot, showed how near and how numerous must 
have been the volley. 

Blake gazed with horror on the bleeding corpse. It 
was his first sight of blood, and his impression was of a 
character which at once raised his feelings to a pitch of 
wild excitement that he had never known before. 

" Keep close every man," said Philip, sternly ; " this 
bloody work is begun in good earnest, and with the ex- 
termination of one party, it will alone end." 

" You, Jones and Doyle, keep the block," he added, 
after a pause, "and let not a head be seen without firing. 
They must be met warmly, or we shall have them charging 
to our very gates. You, William," addressing a tall youth. 



224 THE LIVE OAK CREST. 

with a huge rifle, " take the Mexicans, and scatter them at 
the loops around the gate. The rest of you, except Mr. 
Brown and Chinchea, post yourselves as best you may. 
First, however, remove the body where the women may 
not see it — we will bury it to-night." 

" With others, perchance," said Brown, in a low, but 
firm voice. 

" Perchance not one may remain to do it," answered 
Philip, with emotion ; but come, I will take you to my 
council-chamber ; and there, while we guard that side, we 
can discuss our plans of defence." 

Creeping cautiously along the wall of the Nest, Philip 
Stevens, followed by Edward and Chinchea, passed the 
door of the room where they had been dining, and entering 
a passage, they soon found themselves in a rude bed- 
chamber — that in which Don Juan slept. 

It had two doors, while as many had been passed in the 
passage. One to the left led into the garden, and could 
be seen from the common room, while the other, which 
opened into a small apartment, was entered by the party, 
and Blake now found that he had reached the very edge 
of the cliff on that side, and that a small and narrow 
window looked out upon a singular and striking scene. 

" Here we are, Mr. Brown, on the summit of the Eagle's 
Nest," said Stevens ; " look out and you will gaze upon a 
view rarely surpassed in this part of the world." 

And at the first glance Edward grew dizzy. Sheer 
perpendicular down, almost two hundred feet, went the 
rock, with a piece shelving outwards, about a dozen yards 
below ; while a gushing stream came tumbling from the 
opposite side, and fell in white mist into the depths 
beneath, running round the Nest in two branches, like a 
ditch. 

About a hundred yards across, but towering fifty feet 
above the little fort, was the summit of the opposite rock, 
crowned by a covert of live oak and pine, that waved 
majestically in the breeze. 

Scarcely had Edward put his head outside the loop, and 
taken a hasty view, than Stevens called him away. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 225 

"A rifle carries far and true," said Philip, "and if the 
vermin are not already on yonder rock, they soon will be." 

" A lovely scene, truly," mused Edward ; "pity that it 
should be marred by crime and the struggles of man 
against man." 

"Blackhawk on rock," said Chinchea; "him gun point 
at Nest." 

" Say you so !" exclaimed Stevens, and running to the 
side, he threw open a window overlooking the garden. 
"Jones," he cried, "stoop low and keep so. The vermin 
are on the Live Oak Crest — make it too hot to hold 
them." 

" I see you are fully prepared for every contingency," 
observed Edward; "but, seriously, the contest grows 
warm, and to be candid, are we strong enough to keep 
this place against so many ? " 

" We are not," replied Stevens, coldly. 

" Then you expect defeat 1 " 

"Were we all men, I would defy the rascals. We 
would fight to the last gasp, and then blow up the Nest, 
and escape by the stream below. But there are women 
here." 

"Then what propose you?" asked Blake, eagerly. 

" I propose to gain assistance We can hold out some 
days. Camp Comanche is within thirty miles, and if 
they but knew our position, we should next day be free." 

" But how is it to be done 1 " 

" Chinchea will go," said the Indian quietly. 

" Of course," replied Philip, still addressing Brown, 
"the Indian alone could be of use. This, however, must 
be a secret with us. At nightfall Chinchea will depart, 
and on the third day we shall see him return backed by 
a hundred warriors." 

" But how can he escape ? " 

"By this window. Until black night he would be 
discovered. At an hour after dark we will be here to aid 
him, until then he will remain here alone." 

A loud report, a second, then a third, now proved that 
ilie carronades were at work, Avhile the crashing of boughs 

Q 



226 A NIGHT WITH DEATH. 

and the falling of stones, dirt, and fragments of wood, proved 
that the halls struck the summit of the Live Oak Crest. 
As fast as they could load, Jones and Doyle kept up their 
volley, making the echoes rise from every nook and cranny 
round, ahout. They ceased, and all was still as night, and 
not a sound or trace of the enemy could be heard or seen. 



CHAPTEE VIIL 

A NIGHT WITH DEATH. 

It was two hours after sundo-wn, and Philip, accompanied 
by Edward and Chinchea, stood again in the chamber 
described in our previous chapter, preparatory to the 
departure of the latter, who was stripped, and stood 
erect in his hideous -war-paint, while a short knife and 
tomahawk were suspended from his waist. In his hand 
was a short and light fusil. 

His demeanour was calm and passionless ; not a motion, 
not the faintest contraction of a muscle, betrayed his 
sense of the perilous enterprise in which he was engaged. 
In that dim light he was rather the motionless statue of 
au artist's hand, than a human being. 

!Near him stood Philip Stevens, holding a dark lantern, 
with the light so directed as to stream upon the ground, 
without showing any sign to those without, while Edward 
Blake knelt at his feet, knotting firmly together the ends 
of two coils of rope. 

" You are an apt hand, Mr. Brown, I perceive," said 
Philip, with a smile. 

" I should be, having been a British sailor," replied the 
other. 

" And you are sure it will bear his weight 1 " 

"It will bear many times as much ; and did you not 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 227 

want me here, I would gladly make the trial by descending 
with him." 

"No," said the Indian, bluntly, "pale face like bear in 
the dark — no use." 

"I knew you would rather not have me, continued 
Blake, with a laugh ; " but I would gladly share your 
peril. Believe me, Indian, I shall have a load oft' my 
mind when I see you return in safety." 

The Indian made no reply, but holding out his hand, 
he took that of the young man, and clutched it with a 
gripe like that of the animal he had just compared 
him to. 

" Now to see that the coast is clear," said Stevens, as 
Blake followed him to the window. 

The night \v as dark and tempestuous. The wind whistled 
round the building, as if about to commence opcrat ions 
for the evening ; the fitful gusts which bowed the trees 
on the crest of the opposite rock were frequent and 
violent, while the whole sky formed one huge canopy of 
black vapour. 

About twenty feet beneath the Live Oak Crest, how- 
ever, there was one evidence of cheerfulness and animation. 
A faint tracery of light arose from behind a ridge of rock, 
betraying the presence of a fire. It looked like the mouth 
of a witch's cauldron ; though not a flame was to be seen. 
Now and then a shadow passed before it ; some one was 
slowly walking up and down. 

" This is unpleasant," said Philip Stevens ; " the Indian 
must pass yonder by that fire, and how he is to do so 
unobserved, I cannot tell. 

" Cinchea will go — he is ready," said the Indian. 

Without remark, Edward and Stevens proceeded to 
attach the rope by a loop to the Indian's waist ; who, 
as soon as this operation was performed, quietly walked to 
the window, and commenced his perilous descent. His 
fate was not trusted to one rope alone, for Blake and 
Stevens each held one, which they gradually lowered. 

The rock shelved slightly inwards at the summit, and 
the young warrior, therefore, swung wholly in the air, 

Q 2 



U28 A NIGHT WITH DEATH. 

oscillating fearfully, and performing gyrations which would 
have turned the head of many a less-nerved man. Those 
above were carefully to lower him as slowly as possible ; 
but presently Stevens, who was looking out to catch a 
glimpse, nearly overbalanced himself, and for a moment 
Blake felt the rope running through his hands with fearful 
rapidity. 

" Pull back," cried Stevens, " or he will be dashed to 
pieces. Curse the rope ; if he had trusted to me alone, 
he would have required no Blackhawk to finish his 
career." 

Both now proceeded with the utmost caution ; and 
after the lapse of about ten minutes, they came to the 
end of the two ropes ; but the weight was as great as 
ever. The Indian had not reached the shelving rock before 
mentioned. 

" He must be drawn up again," said Stevens moodily ; 
" we can never let him hang there while I find another 
cord." 

" I will look and endeavour to see how far off he is from 
his journey's end," replied Blake. 

The night was still dark, though a few breaks in the 
dismal wreaths of cloud permitted a faint ray of light to 
pass ; and, straining Ms eyes to the utmost, Blake could 
nearly discover the Indian's position. 

" His feet are about a yard from the shelf, and were it 
wider, we might trust to his fall." 

" Not there," cried Stevens, "the shelf slopes downwards, 
and he would fall a hundred and fifty feet into the black 
abyss." 

" Merciful God," exclaimed Blake, as the rope hung 
loose in their hands, "he is off." 

Both thrust their heads through the narrow aperture, 
listening, with blood that iced in their veins, for the sound 
which should bear tidings of the Indian's destruction. No 
sound came ; but a second glance showed him standing erect 
and motionless on the very edge of the terrific precipice. 
Next instant he disappeared. 

Drawing a hard breath, like men who had witnessed 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 229 

a providential escape, they drew up the ropes, and found 
the ends cut by the Indian's knife. 

" I have seen many an act of Indian courage and saga- 
city," cried Stevens, with earnestness, " but never did I 
see that surpassed. On the brink of a fearful gulf, he pre- 
ferred risking all, to delay." 

"He is a bold fellow, truly," replied Blake, " and this 
beginning augurs well for the result." 

For about an ho.ur they kept their now silent watch, 
listening with keen and practised ear for any sound which 
might guide them as to their envoy's progress, but in vain. 
Not the faintest footfall could be detected. At length, 
after straining their eyes and ears to the utmost, they 
caught sight of a dark form, which for an instant showed 
itself near the fire on the opposite rock, and then, high on 
the night air, rose an awful sound, to which nothing human 
could be compared. It was a shriek, and yet so mingled 
with the howling of a panther as to be scarcely distin- 
guishable. They listened again. But all was still. 

The two men then retired from the window; but, anxious 
to know the fate of Chinchea, we prefer following in his 
footsteps. 

"We take up our narrative at the moment when, by 
those above ceasing to pay out any more rope, he dis- 
covered that by that means he could descend no lower. 
Casting his eye down, the Indian saw that the shelf of 
rock below him sloped downwards, and that though its 
surface was uneven, and afforded purchase to the foot, yet 
that a fall would almost of a certainty precipitate him 
into the gulf beneath. 

The smooth face of the hill against which he swung was, 
however, broken in one or two places, and jagged. A 
rapid glance showed him a hole within reach, at which 
he grasped with his left hand, and, quick as lightning, 
severing the cords round his waist with the knife which 
he held in his right, he stood securely upon the shelf; 
for though the rock he grasped crumbled and gave way, 
it still sufficiently broke his fall to enable him to rest his 
feet in security. 



230 A NIGHT WITH DEATH. 

A natural path, narrow, sometimes almost imperceptible, 
sometimes a mere shelf of shingle, now led downwards ; 
this path the Indian slowly and calmly followed, taking 
every precaution against any false step. The descent was 
laborious and fatiguing, but it was at length accom- 
plished, and Chinchea was at the foot of the diminutive 
Niagara which formed the stream running round the 
Nest. 

Without a pause, except to drink a draught of water, 
he commenced an ascent as painful and full of danger as 
the descent, but which, continuing with that indomitable 
perseverance so native to his character, he completed, so 
as to stand within a few yards of the fire beneath Live 
Oak Crest, in less than an hour after his departure from 
the window. Dangers, however, appeared to multiply 
rather than decrease. 

The fire was built on a platform near the mouth of a 
cavern, with a screen of rock protecting it from the gaze 
of the Nest. It was composed of small branches of the 
live oak, which emitted a crackling sound, with much 
smoke, thus aiding the Indian in his stealthy progress 
towards the solitary man who now occupied a seat near 
at hand. His occupation was somewhat singular for one 
alone in the wilds. He was busily engaged in cooking, 
not such a meal as one man could reasonably be expected 
to consume, but a supper for a whole platoon. 

Half-a-dozen ducks upon a ramrod, a huge earthen pot, 
from which something sent forth a most savoury odour, 
a pile of sweet potatoes cooking in the embers, with a 
vast turkey turning upon a rude spit, formed the ground- 
work of the repast. 

The cook, whose face was plainly visible to Chinchea, was 
an Indian of his own tribe, and in whose utter absorption 
in his task, in his vacant eye, luxurious chuckle, and 
heavy air, the half idiot was plainly to be traced. His 
nostrils snuffed the steam, which owed its origin to his 
own gastronomic ability, with intense satisfaction, while 
his large eyes glistened with an almost irresistible longing 
to fall to. Prudence or fear seemed, however, to res- 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 231 

train him, and he pursued his task with patience and 
gravity. 

Suddenly Chinchea was upon him, with a howl like 
that of a famished panther ; the other, in his terror, emit- 
ting a shriek which filled the air, and, though smothered 
by the wind to any one above, it was plainly heard at the 
Eagle's Nest. Chinchea had wound his arms round the 
startled cook, and cast him to the ground, ere he was 
scarcely aware of his enemy's presence, and in a moment 
stood over him, with waving tomahawk, and a mien which 
froze the very heart of his victim. 

"The Leaping Panther," said the other, who was not 
so great a fool as he was cowardly and gluttonous — quali- 
ties which had caused his expulsion from his tribe — ■ 
"is very brave ; he will not take the blood of a slave." 

" Ugh ! " said the other, with ineffable disgust, " Chin- 
chea wants not his blood, he would not stain his axe 
with so muddy a stream ; the Leaping Panther is a man, 
and takes the life of men. But Anton must be dead 
until morning." 

He then explained to the trembling cook that he must 
enter the cavern, where, gagged and bound, he was to 
pass the night ; while he, the Leaping Panther, assuming 
his costume and mien, took upon himself also his duties 
and office. Anton, or Antonio, as the other had been 
called, finding that his life was to be spared, freely acqui- 
esced, and after greedily devouring some food, he entered 
the cavern, at the very mouth of which he lay, gagged 
and bound, Chinchea having given him plainly to under- 
stand that, on the slightest sign from him of mere exis- 
tence, though he himself perished, he would first meet 
his reward. 

This clone, the Wacco proceeded to conceal his arms, 
and so to disguise himself, as by that light to deceive 
those for whose eating the sumptuous woodland supper 
had been prepared. On seating himself, he assumed even 
the very look and expression of the unfortunate cook. 
Scarcely had he done so, ere several footsteps were heard 
descending from above, by the rude path which led to the 



232 A NIGHT WITH DEATH. 

summit of the Live Oak Crest. Chinchea gave a guttural 
hiss, to remind Anton to exercise prudence ; and then 
busied himself in laying the well-cooked viands upon the 
rude dishes. 

"Well, Anton," said the foremost of the party, the re- 
nowned Blackhawk himself, "are you quite ready, for I am? 
This besieging is hungry work." 

" Eeady," replied Chinchea. 

"Be seated, gentlemen," said Blackhawk, addressing 
two white men and a young Indian chief. 

" I do think, Pedro," remarked the chief, " that after 
the busy cares of the day, nothing is more delightful than 
to retire from one's position as a chief, and, with a 
few friends around, to enjoy the sociality of the supper 
table." 

"Si! sil!" replied the Mexican bandit, with a grin : 
" supper is a very pleasant meaL It has one great merit; 
that as there is no exertion required after it, one can eat 
one's fill, without fear of its incommoding him." 

" Ma foi J" said the third, a Frenchman, " quality, not 
quantity, for me — though I must say I have never had 
better fare than in Texas." 

" Because, Carcassin, in Texas one lives in the open air, 
one takes ample exercise, and, thunder ! — why one can eat 
anything, from prickly pears to a wild mustang." 

" Horse very good," said the young Indian chief. 

Chinchea quivered in every muscle. 

" Why, that is as men think, Long Arm ; for myself, 
I never could try it, though you savages are partial to the 
animal." 

In conversation such as this, about an hour was con- 
sumed, during which the greater part of the fare provided, 
followed the example of time — Chinchea contriving to 
come in for his share, despite his wonder and anxiety at 
the presence of the young Wacco chief, Long Arm. At 
length, however, even Pedro the Mexican seemed satis- 
fied. 

" Now, Anton, the whisky, and we will initiate OUT 
friend, Long Arm, into the mysteries of punch." 



T HE TOUNw MIDSHIPMAN. 233 

This was a puzzler, as Chinchea was quite ignorant of 
the place where the liquid fire was kept. He acted, 
however, with his usual decision, and clutching his knife, 
with which he never parted, he advanced to the mouth 
of the cavern. 

" Where 1 " said he, in a low moaning whisper. 

" Inside," replied Anton. 

Chinchea groped his way along, and following a passage 
some twenty yards long, he suddenly came upon a kind 
of room dimly lighted by an oil lamp, and in which were 
deposited several jars of various sizes, stolen from neigh- 
bouring planters and settlers. 

But why pauses Chinchea ! Why does his gaze become 
fixed, impassioned, stern? Why does he clutch his knife, 
and grind his teeth 1 

On a rude pallet, having cried herself to sleep, lay 
a young, beautiful, and exquisitely formed Indian girl. 
The tears were yet standing on her cheek, while her 
swollen features showed how violent had been her sobs 
and grief. 

Chinchea took one glance, and snatching up a jar, he 
hurried back towards the festive party. 



234 



CHAPTEE IX. 

AFTER SUPPEB. 

When the Indian regained the fire, the company had 
armed themselves with, the usual after-supper pipe, and 
were apparently quite ready to enjoy the bacchanalian 
hours. Indeed, Chinchea received a polite intimation 
that if he did not make haste, he should go more rapidly 
down hill, and alight in a warmer region than he had >any 
taste for ; threats and menaces wore, however, alike to the 
Indian, who rapidly prepared the required beverage, and 
handed mugs all round, taking care that very little water 
entered into the composition. 

"That's a regular stinger," said Blackhawk, having 
drained his goblet ; " but go on, Long Arm, don't be 
afraid of it, it will do you a wonderful deal of good." 

" Ugh ! " replied the young chief, who appeared to 
entertain considerable doubts on that point, having caught 
a violent fit of coughing, the consequence of his_ inex- 
perience. Determined, however, to be nowise behind the 
other, he forced himself, though with an ill grace, to 
swallow the fiery decoction." 

"ISTow, Long Arm," said Blackhawk, with an almost 
imperceptible wink at his companions, "about this love 
affair of yours — are we to hear the story 1 " 

" Ugh," grunted the Indian, savagely, " you have heard. 
The Rose of Day is the fairest girl in all the wigwams of 
the "VVaccos, and Long Arm loved — he would have given 
his life for her. He said in her ear, that he would hunt 
the bear to bring her furs, the deer to supply her with 
venison and mocassins, the mountain sheep for cloaks — 
but all in vain. She was betrothed, and the face of him , 
she was to marry was ever before her." 

" And who was this fellow J " 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 235 

"The Leaping Panther, a great warrior.'' 

" A braggart whom I long to punish, for filling the 
world so much with his impertinent name." 

" He is a brave," replied the Indian, with a smile of 
pride, which he could not forbear, though speaking of a 
rival. 

"Well, and where is he 1 " 

" He is gone to see the land of the pale-face ; his 
mother died on the field of battle, and he found friends in 
the whites," 

At this point in the conversation Chinchea, having re- 
plenished the mugs out of which the party Avcre drinking, 
rose and left the plfftform, making his Avay along the path 
by Avhich he had arrived. On his upward journey he had 
seen the bright shining leaves of a plant, the stalk of 
which Avas invaluable to him now, and he was determined 
to seek it. 

In ten minutes he returned, and passing the merry 
party — none of whom, wrapped in their calumets and 
drink, noticed his proceedings — he moved on one side 
Avith the whisky jar. He had stripped the stalk of its 
leaves, and bore the plant, like a cane, in his hand. 
Taking his knife he made several incisions in the side of 
the Aveed, and gently pressing it, a light frothy liquid 
poured in a little stream into the spirit. 

It was a deadly poison, but, mixed with the alcohol, it 
became merely a powerful and rapidly-acting narcotic. 

This done, Chinchea rose, and as he did so he met the 
cold grey eye of his rival fixed upon him. 

The recognition was mutual, but by no outward sign 
did Long Arm betray his discovery, though it Avas clear 
that he was much the worse for the quantity of drink he 
ad imbibed. 

"More drink, Anton, my boy," cried BlackhaAvk, "more 
drink. Fill high. Long Head — Arm, I mean— pull 
away, the liquor is immense. It is nectar, ambrosia " — 

" Never heard of those names before, signor ; what are 
they 1 " asked the Mexican. 

"They are Greek for gin and whisky," replied BlackhaAvk 



23 G AFTER SUPPER. 

in a rich Hibernian accent, though he could assume Indian 
and Yankee at will. 

" Now Pedro and Carcassin, and you, Long Arm, ready 
with your bumpers, while I give a toast. You, Anton, 
blow your cloud a little further off." 

Chinchea had lit a pipe, and was calmly smoking, 
and gazing on the scene with certainty as to the result. 

"Fill, I say, and I'll conclude to give a toast, which 
you're all bound to drink." 

" Its diablement fort," said Carcassin, who had sipped. 

" So much the better, the subject is a strong one." 

" Ready ! " cried Blackhawk. 

" Ready," replied Pedro. 

"Bon" said Carcassin, making a desperate plunge 
forward, and in the act of picking himself up, half spilling 
his glass. 

" Ugh," observed the Indian. 

" Here's to The Eose of Day, and he who wins her." 

" Hurrah ! " cried the two whites, and the toast was 
drunk with bumpers. 

Chinchea ground his teeth, and swallowed a pint of 
tobacco smoke. 

"Ugh," growled Long Arm, exhibiting sundry signs of 
drunkenness, which were not far from precipitating him 
into the arms of the god. 

"It works," whispered Blackhawk. 

" Good," thought Chinchea, 

Long Arm rolled backwards, gave a huge sigh, and was 
fast asleep. 

" He. is got rid of," muttered Blackhawk. " Did the 
fool think to bring that sweet girl among us and keep her 
to himself? Pshaw!" 

" Certainly not," growled the Mexican, who could 
scarcely keep his eyes open." 

" Parbleu non!" muttered the Frenchman. 

" Carcassin, you are drunk ! " said Blackhawk, who was 
unsuccessfully endeavouring to insert the end of his pipe 
into his own mouth. 

" Et vous ? " asked Carcassin, slily. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 237 

" Oh, me, I am all right, by St. Patrick, mavourneeu," 
said Blackhawk, whose eyes were half shut. 

" And what is the meaning of mavourneen ? " asked 
Carcassin. 

" It's Latin for my dear," replied the outlaw, raising 
himself, ' ' and that puts me in mind of my little dear 
that's waiting for me in the cavern yonder. Tell me 
Carcassin, why it is that when, hardened as we may be, 
we are about to commit a great crime, we feel a physical 
pain here — a dilation of the heart, a swelling of the 
muscles of the throat !" 

" It is the working of conscience," said the Frenchman 
drily. 

" Of what ? " inquired Blackhawk, as if he had never 
heard of any such appurtenance. 

" Of conscience," replied Carcassin, who had been 
educated for a priest; "which never departs from even 
such men as you and me, Blackhawk." 

" You think, then," continued the outlaw, moodily, 
" that our acts are of such a black die 1 Why so ? "We 
are free men ; we roam the world, and take what chance 
gives us ; what more 1 " 

" But chance neither gives us the lives of others, nor 
woman's honour," said Carcassin, sarcastically ; " and we 
take both." 

" You are growing moral," sneered the other. 

"Not I ; it is the whisky," replied the Frenchman; 
" it opens the heart, and wrings truth from the bottom of 
the well." 

" Hear the philosopher, Pedro, what think you of 
him?" 

The Mexican was fast asleep. 

"The drink works potently to-night," mused the out- 
law : " it stupefies Pedro and the Indian ; it weighs on 
my spirits, makes me sad and gloomy, and takes all heart 
away ; the Frenchman it sets philosophizing. Egad, 
there's something in it, after all." 

" So there is," muttered Anton. 



238 AFTER SUPPBB. 

" Who spoke ? " said Blackhawk, looking towards the 
entrance of the cavern. 

"I," replied Chinchea, waving his hand menacingly at 
Anton. _ 

" I say, Carcassin," continued the chief, " will you have 
another glass 1 Gone, too ! " 

Carcassin lay beside Pedro, both seemingly vying with 
each other in their attempts at nasal music. 

"Well, sleep your fill. One more glass, and I go;" 
and Blackhawk, despite himself, shuddered. 

" You have had enough," said Chinchea, gruffly. 

" Speak for yourself, Anton — by the way, does the Eose 
still weep and deplore her fate 1 Does she still refuse the 
honour of mating with the Wolf of the Prairies 1 " 

"She sleeps," said Chinchea. 

" Thank St. Patrick," replied Blackhawk, drawing a 
long breath ; "and now, Anton, fill high another bumper, 
and mind you what I said about Long Arm — pitch him 
over the rocks ; everybody will believe he stumbled in a 
drunken fit. I say, Anton, I feel as if I were at home ; 
my eyes shut of themselves. It's very dark ; ah ! " 

The outlaw had fallen beside his companions. 

Up rose Chinchea, his arms in his hands, and a stern 
purpose in his eye. He clutched his knife, and approached 
the robber. He knelt and gazed on his sleeping counte- 
nance. 

" Bad paleface," he muttered ; " the Manitou has given 
me your life ; but Chinchea scorns to take it away from a 
sleeping man," and he took in his hands a long tress of the 
robber's hair, cut it, and laid it on his breast." 

" Chinchea," hissed a voice in his ear. 

The warrior turned slowly round. 

The Long Arm stood before him, pouring out upon the 
ground the drugged liquid which his rival had given 
him. 

" Chinchea is a great brave," said the young warrior, 
sadly, " and Long Arm is a boy, a squaw. The Rose of 
Day loves the Leaping Panther — the Leaping Panther has 
s ived her ; let him keep the life which is his." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 239 

" And Long Arm 1 " 

""Will Chinchoa call him friend?" continued the youth, 
thoroughly humiliated at the risk which his inconsiderate 
conduct had caused the woman he loved to endure, simply 
because she could not return his affection. 

The hands of the two warriors were at once clasped in 
amity, and they entered the cave, from which, in ten 
minutes, they again emerged, leading forth the bewildered 
and half- sleeping Indian girl, whose joy and delight on 
being reunited to him she loved, was plainly visible in her 
whole demeanour. 

With a parting warning to Anton, Chinchea turned 
into a narrow way which led round the bottom of the 
Live Oak Crest ; and about two hundred yards distant, he 
lay down with his companions, to snatch a few hours' rest, 
in a thick and almost impassable grove of trees, where a 
bubbling spring burst forth, which by many a winding way 
— some secret, some open — went to swell the cataract 
below. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE CONFERENCE. 

On the evening of the escape of Chinchea the storm con- 
tinued its violence for some hours, and yet Edward, from 
causes which will hereafter be explained, preferred the 
open air in the little garden to which Alice had intro- 
duced him, to the comforts of the parlour of the Eagle's 
Nest, where Jones, Philip, Cephas Doyle, and the other 
tenants of the locality, solaced themselves for some hours 
in conversation over the usual Texan evening amuse- 
ments. 

At length, the Mexicans and the usual inhabitants cf 



210 THE CONFBBENCB. 

the Nest, wearied with the excitement and fatigues of the 
day, retired to rest, leaving Stevens and Jones alone in 
the chamber. They, however, moved not ; but after 
closing the doors, they drew near the huge and cheering 
fire, refilled their glasses, loaded a fresh pipe, and made 
every preparation for a private carouse. 

" For some time neither spoke. Their thoughts were 
evidently busy on some subject which was deeply interesting 
to their minds ; and there they sat drinking and smokino- 
but holding no communion. At length, after about half- 
an-hour had elapsed, Stevens spoke rather in an audible 
whisper, addressed to himself, than with a view to be 
heard by his companion. 

" It must be ours." 

"At any price," added Jones, with an approving 
nod. 

"What?" said Philip, raising his head, and gazing 
fiercely at the dwarf. 

" Of course you know. If men will tempt their fellows, 
why they must pay the penalty." 

" Who is tempting, and who is tempted ? " 

" Don Juan de Chagres comes here for shelter ; nobody 
asked him to. His servants let out that he has a mine of 
wealth with him ; nobody asked them to." 

"Well?" 

" Why, of course, he having brought this money here, 
here it must stay." 

"Jones, I shall blow your brains out one of these 
days." 

" No you won't," replied the dwarf, sneeringlv. 

"Why?" 

" Because you are afraid." 

" I afraid ?" 

" Afraid of ill-using a friend who speaks for your good. 
The fact is, Philip, I am tired of this wild life. It doesn't 
suit me at all, and I would have you think with me. 
Break up the Nest, realize all we have, and with as much 
as we can make, retire into the centre of Mexico, and there 
live among our fellows." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 241 

"I, too, am weary of this life. It is too lonely — it 
leaves too much time for thought — too many memories 
are stirring in the stillness of the night. Yes ! could 
I see Alice but mated, I would gladly leave here for 
ever." 

"As to Alice," said Jones, with his usual hesitating 
manner, " I have often told you." 

" Then tell it not again. You ! by whose hand 



" "Well, what 1 " said the other, fixing his little grey 
eyes on the speaker. 

"Nothing — but you are the last man who should dare 
to have such a thought. This young sailor, now " 

"You think so," replied Jones, savagely. "I hate 
the fellow, from his very face, and this would be another 
reason." 

" I know not why," half mused Stevens, " but I feel 
an irresistible longing towards that youth. His faco 
softens me as I look upon it." 

" He is the very image of " 

"Jones," thundered Stevens, rising and grasping the 
other by the throat, " breathe but that name, and I 
cast you dead at my feet." 

" Fool that you are," cried the dwarf, who was half 
choking. " I will drop the subject." 

"Jones," continued Stevens, loosening his hold, "I 
have warned you before ; let me not have to warn you 
again." 

" Enough. Let us speak of the Mexican's gold." 

" Go on," said Stevens. 

"Well," said Jones, speaking slowly, firmly, and 
distinctly, " this money must be ours. We take it ; 
there is at once an outcry ; Don Juan insists on search- 
ing the premises ; his followers join him ; Cephas Doyle 
and your young English friend join him, and so will our 
own people." 

" Perfectly true," replied the other ; and by your own 
showing, it is best left alone." 

"Not at all," continued Jones, coldly. 

E 



242 THE CONFERENCE. 

"What then?" said Philip Stevens, his face half 
livid with emotion, while avarice glistened in his very 
"»,yes, as he spoke. 

" If Don Juan were dead, no outcry would take place 
against us. He is near the outer window, he leans out> 
he overbalances himself, and is killed." 

" Speak plain," sneered the other. 

" Then I say, he must die," said the dwarf. 

"Who is to kill him?" 

" We must." 

" We ! why not you 1 " insinuated Stevens. 

" Because, my friend, it is necessary that in all matters 
of this kind we should both be fully equal." 

"Idiot," said Stevens, "why should I betray you ? " 

"Why not?" replied the dwarf; "the reward is 
tempting." 

"Jones, this man shall not die. He has claimed my 
protection, and he shall have it. 

"You grow moral," said Jones, sullenly. 

" No ! " cried the other ; " but enough blood has been 
shed. Sleeping or waking, the gory flood is before me. 
When I rise at morn, and gaze out upon the sky, I 
see blood in the very tints of dawn ; the setting sun 
crimsons all nature with gore. I sleep, and I swim in 
oceans of the accursed — " 

"I never dream," drawled the dwarf. 

"'Tis well for you— but I do, and voices, as of the 
past, come peeling to my ears ; and he cries, ' Give me 
back my life.' " 

"He is very troublesome to you, Philip." 
"'Tis twelve years ago, and I have seen and endured 
much since that day, but not one moment, one second, 
has he been from my side. At meals, he sits by my side; 
walking, he walks behind ; hunting, he runs to the death ; 
fighting, he shields me from harm, that r my torture may 
be longer. Jones, if I could recal that day, if I could be 
what I was up to that hour — though then not innocent 
— I would gladly suffer every misery of poverty, of star- 
vation, of woe." 



THE TOTING midshipman: 243 

"Regrets are useless. All we can do is to try and make 
life as pleasant as possible while it lasts." 

" How 1 — by repentance and restitution 1 " 

" I have no wish for a trial and halter," replied the 
dwarf, with a contemptuous scowl. 

"Then how?" 

"By adding to our means of enjoyment." 

"And what means are there left us?" 

"Gold," said Jones, calmly; "gold, that buys every 
enjoyment." 

" We have enough." 

" Enough for here, but not enough to hold our heads 
high in towns among our fellow-men. Come, Philip, be 
advised ; listen to an old friend." 

"I have listened too often." 

" We have sunk ourselves deep enough in guilt ; we 
can go no deeper. Blood is on both our hands ; but we 
have been scarcely repaid for the trouble. A mine is now 
within our reach ; should we not be fools to refuse ac- 
ceptance 1 Besides, recollect how we were compelled to 
leave New Orleans for want of money. There we were 
happy, joined in every amusement, and held our heads 
high. But money failed, and we were compelled to 

fly" 

" We were, and I hope yet to be revenged on those who 
shunned us when our poverty became apparent." 

" You can at once. Possessed of this Mexican's gold 
and jewels, we return to New Orleans, no longer with a 
mere paltry pittance, but with a fortune. What pride to 
overtop those who turned us from the hazard table, who 
shunned us in the streets, and called us adventurers and 
poor devils." 

" Curse them. Remind me not of those days ; I would 
give years of my life to punish those scoundrels." 

" Money will do it," said the dwarf. 

" It will." 

" And money alone." 

"This Mexican is rich ? " enquired Stevens. 

"Very rich," replied Jones. 

R 2 



244 THE CONFERENCE. 

"He is old." 

" But a few years, perhaps months, to live.'* 

" He will be missed by nobody," added Stevens. 

" ]So man that dies is. A nine days' grief is all the 
best of us get from widow, children, mother. " 

Too true, in part. We grieve for the absent, but not 
for the dead. "We do for a short time, for a few months, 
perhaps a year ; and then one who was perhaps the living 
joy of a vast circle, the cherished soul of near and dear 
ties, is forgotten, is unremembered, unchronicled, except 
upon a cold stone. Death effaces memory. His place is 
empty, and his name is known no more. Perhaps in a 
mother's heart a corner, ever-during, everlasting, may be 
found for a departed child, but nowhere else. The 
sorrowing widow, choking with grief — the grieving brother 
— the pitying friend — alike, in this busy world, forget, 
forget, forget. 

But he who has taken life remembers for ever. 

For an hour the conference was continued, and after 
almost giving way to the insidious persuasions of his 
friend, Philip suddenly exclaimed, "I will decide nothing 
to-night. All shall depend on this young Englishman. 
If he shows any signs of paying earnest attentions to 
Alice, and there be a prospect of their union, my fate is 
decided. We part. I go to live in peace — where they 
dwell, for heaven will have taken pity on me, and Alice 
will " 

"Never consent," added Jones. 

"We shall see," and with these words they parted. 



245 

CHAPTEE XL 

EMVARD AND MARGARETTA. 

Two hours previous to the interview recorded between 
Jones and Philip, Edward Blake, according to agreement, 
wandered into the garden of the Eagle's Nest, to spend a 
quiet hour with Alice and Margaretta. The young sailor 
■was actuated by various and strange emotions ; he knew 
not why, but his mind foreboded ill. In reality, he was 
in that state of tincertainty and doubt which, of all sen- 
sations, is most disagreeable. 

He had hitherto never loved ; he had heard and read 
of this passion, of which it has been truly said, that " it 
breathed the breath of life into poetry, and elicited 
music and voice from the coldest human clay," but he 
had never experienced either its joys or its sorrows. 

Young, sensitive, full of the quick passion and tender- 
ness that seem inseparable from the educated and high- 
minded sailor, Blake was now placed in a strange position. 
Beside him were two women, both attractive, both lovely, 
both possessed of every charm which could soul-entrance 
him, and yet he hesitated. 

On one side, the gentle charms of the fair Alice sub- 
dued his heart, and filled him with quiet and radiant hope; 
on the other, the fiery beauty, the energy, and command- 
ing mien of the Mexican involuntarily filled his thoughts, 
and he entered the garden prepared to drink deep the 
intoxicating draught, but as yet ignorant which would 
gain the day. 

He found Margaretta alone. 

Now, had the blind god selected any means of entrap- 
ping the susceptible hero of this narrative, he could not 
have chosen a time or place more favourable to the triumph 
of her who first presented herself to Edward's notice. It 
is true, he was already much disposed in Alice's favour, 



246 EDWARD AND ilARGARETTA. 

but hers was one of those natures which grow upon oui 
affections by degrees, hut which, once rooted, are not to 
he cast aside ; while the Mexican was of a beauty and 
character likely to strike the eye, to induce an immediate 
surrender — as likely, however, to be followed by a speedy 
rebellion. 

The moon was faintly glimmering in the sky, as 
Edward approached the seat on which Margaretta, in a 
pensive mood, sat smiling, as the young man came 
near. 

" Good evening, cavalier," said she, gaily. 

" Good evening, signora," replied Edward ; " but where 
is our hostess ] " 

" Alice is with Don Juan," she said ; " he has been 
unwell, and she has taken him some refreshment. I sat 
with him awhile, but the room was close, and I came 
out here." Then, as if anxious to change the subject, 
she said — 

" Have you such evenings in your country 1 " 

" Rarely," he said, " but as I am not of those who find 
only faultiness in their own land, I will say, that I have 
seen as beautiful a night there as in any other part of the 
world." 

" I should like to see your country, signor," she con- 
tinued, gravely ; " I have heard much of its power, and 
would fain know the truth." 

Blake's heart beat quickly. 

"It is a great country," he replied, "and though less 
grand than some of its compeers, it can yet show front with 
the most picturesque." 

" There is enough of native beauty here," said the 
Mexican ; " it is not that I seek. I would find a land 
where my soul was free, where a woman is not a 
slave, to be given away at will ; where parents, or proud 
relatives, have not the power to make a heart miserable 
for life." 

"Can they do it anywhere?" said Edward sur- 
prised. 

" Can they 1 " replied the Mexican, with an hysteric 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 247 

laugh. " They can, and do it in my wretched country. 
There a woman, ere she be married, is a mere puppet 
without will, a thing to be tossed about with so many 
wretched dollars, as a make-weight ; a peg to hang a 
scheme upon. 

" Two families are united in the bonds of friendship Or 
interest, and this friendship or interest she is made the 
mere instrument for consolidating. If her partner be 
hateful, aged, a fool, it is no matter — she has no voice, 
no will. Tell me, signor, of a country where such things 
are not, and there is my home." 

This was said with terrible vehemence, and Edward 
Blake let into his heart a powerful ingredient of love — 
pity. 
1 " Signora, you speak warmly," he said, in tender tones. 

"Because I feel," she exclaimed. "I am" a Mexican, 
but I am a woman, and I know the day might have come 
when I might have loved, when I might have felt the 
affection which should bind me undyingly to a fellow 
creature ; and I know, too, that by the fearful power of 
custom, because I own a fortune, that I am doomed, and 
it cannot be." 

Edward Blake scarcely knew what to reply — his mind 
was so filled with varied and tumultuous thoughts. 
Could it be that, affianced to some hated one whom 
policy and family arrangements bound her to, she now, on 
seeing him, had allowed tender thoughts to arise, and in 
the dawn of her love for him, cursed the cruel fate Avhich 
had promised her to another. 

Blake, young, inexperienced in the world's ways, knew 
not woman's heart, and that though she might love him, 
yet too, all this while, be but conjuring up imaginary ills 
to excite his pity, and thus command his tender in- 
terest. 

" Doomed ! " he exclaimed, with an effort at gaiety, 
"you, so young, so beautiful, talk of being doomed 

" So young, so beautiful, you say," she replied, with a 
transient gleam of satisfaction, which she effectually pre 



2^8 EDWARD AND MARGARETTA. 

vented him from seeing ; " here lies the evil. Were I 
not young, this ill might s<5on pass ; were I ugly, I might 
less repine." 

" Madam," said Edward gravely, " I do not pretend to 
know your secret history, but I surely cannot tell why one, 
■with native charms like yours, with many and happy years 
"before you, with wealth and fortune, should repine. Were 
I, a poor devil, to do so, I should scarcely think it out of 
place." 

"And are you poor?" inquired Margaretta, fixing her 
large eyes pityingly upon him. 

Poor Edward, his heart was escaping him every minute. 

" I am poor, madam, very poor ; but I have my sword 
and my honour, and I fear nothing." 

" No ! you may look around and choose where you 
will. You are poor ; well, success waits for the brave, 
and then a rich and lovely wife may repair what fortune 
had before churlishly denied." 

" A rich wife, if I could love her," said the young man, 
his face crimson with emotion, " would be a good gift of 
fortune ; but if, when I choose, I love truly, I shall not 
ask her wealth." 

" You would love her for herself alone ? " said Mar- 
garetta. 

" I would." 

" Happy woman !" muttered the Mexican, in faint tones, 
which, if not meant for his ear, reached it, and made his 
heart leap. 

" Why happy woman V he timidly inquired, fixing his 
eyes anxiously on the young woman's face, beside whom 
he was now seated. 

" Did you hear me ? " said the other, with a sigh ; 
"because a woman who is loved for herself, whose fortune 
never tempted, whose lover cares but for her, is happier 
than a queen." 

" Doubtless you may be as happy," remarked the young 
sailor. 

"Never!" 

"Why?" 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 249 

" It is impossible," said Margaretta. 

" Lady, you speak in enigmas." 

" I speak the truth. But this is idle talk. I know 
not why I have indulged in it." 

" It may not be so idle," replied Edward, with a swel- 
ling heart. 

" How so 1 " 

" Forgive me, lady," he said ; I am as yet a stranger to 
you ; we have been cast together by accident ; we may in 
time know one another better " 

" What mean you, signor ] " exclaimed the young Mexi- 
can, starting back in affright. 

" I mean," said Edward, trembling with anxiety, " that 
I know not what to say — I would fain hope " 

"Hope what?" 

" Madam," he exclaimed, " I will not say I love you, 
because I know you not enough ; but this I cannot refrain 
from uttering, that I know I shall." 

"Sooner love hell itself," cried the girl, starting from 
her seat, pale with anguish, for heaven knows whether 
she responded to his feelings or not ; " sooner go and cast 
yourself headlong from the top of yonder block — sooner 
do any mad and terrible thing, than let your heart say you 
love me." 

" Why, lady 1 " 

" Signor, I felt wretched to-night, and I spoke freely, 
more freely than I should to you, a stranger ; had I known 
that there was the bare chance of such an ending to our 
speech, I had not said one word. Young man, this is the 
last time we speak together. It might rob you, it would 
rob me for ever of peace." 

" Gracious heavens, lady ! why this terror 1 " 

"You speak, signor, to the wife of Don Juan de 
Chagres. Yes ! it was my own wretched fate, being 
bound by force, to suit the will of a rich family, to wed a 
man nearly fifty years older than myself, that I foolishly 
complained of to you." 

Edward Blake, pale, trembling, horror-struck, leaned 
against the wall for support. 



260 EDWARD AND MAEGAEETTA. 

"The wife " 



" Yes," said Margaretta, with assumed gaiety, " you 
Bee before you the wife of the man you took so gallantly 
to be my father. This should I have said before, but own 
1 am ever ashamed to say. So come, signor, your pre- 
tended passion, for surely itmust be pretended, will have 
no excuse now. Had I been a maiden, you might have 
feigned a sudden fit of love, and have kept up the joke ; 
but as it is, excuse me if I remind you that, in our country, 
such jokes sometimes end seriously. Jealousy is the pas- 
sion of old men." 

It would be difficult to tell if Margaretta felt or not 
as she spoke. But Blake was as yet unable even to hear 
what she said. 

" The wife of Don Juan de Chagres 1 " he muttered, half 
incoherently. 

" Good God ! " mused the Mexican ; " and does he love 
me, then? Is it come to this so soon? Oh, wretched 
fate is mine. But though his forced bride, though dragged 
by violence to the altar, though I spat upon the ring, and 
called God to witness I was not his wife, yet in the world's 
eyes I am Donna Juanna de Chagres," 

This was said with a proud and swelling mien, as if she 
remembered herself. 

" Madam, I thank you for reminding me," said the 
young man. "I had hoped differently, when I thought 
you free. But," he added solemnly, taking her hand in 
his, "fear me not, madam. I now am armed against 
myself. So quickly born, this love will as quickly die. 
With me, I feel there must be hope for love to feed upon. 
There is none here, and I shall think of this evening as a 
dream." 

In truth, so simple, and yet so right-minded, was the 
character of the young sailor, that with him the discovery 
he had made, as a matter of course, at once erased even 
the shadow of love from his heart, though it left that 
heart sorely vacant. 

" Here comes Alice," said Edward. 

" Welcome, our hostess," said Margaretta, half gloomily. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 251 

"I am sorry not to have met you here before," said 
Alice, addressing Edward ; " tut as madame wished me 
to remain awhile with her husband, while he dozed to 
sleep, I thought it a duty to comply." 

Margaretta bit her lip. Why, it was difficult to tell. 

" At length, however, you are come," said Edward, 
endeavouring to rouse himself ; and as ' tis said better 
late than never,' I think I have a promise to perform." 

" I think you have," replied Alice ; but as it is 
growing late, and Korah yonder points to tea — which 
remnant of civilization I indulge in — let us into the house, 
and then I will hear you with pleasure." 

Edward Blake willingly acquiesced, though ho observed 
as he came into the light, how Alice gazed curiously at 
his pallid countenance. Determined that she should 
have no cause for suspecting his untoward feelings, he at 
once roused himself, and began the narrative of his ship- 
wreck, which he had promised to detail. 

There is always eloquence in truth ; and when, there- 
fore, a man tells of things which have happened to him- 
self, he possesses a power of description, an animation, of 
which he is before scarcely cognisant. Thus was it with 
Edward ; for, rising with the occasion, his language 
became rich and glowing, his eyes beamed with light, 
his colour came and went, and forgetting all but the 
event he was narrating, he swept on in a perfect hurri- 
cane of scenic power. His listeners heard him with rapt 
attention, and, as he ceased, from actual want of breath, 
they sat silent and anxious for the termination. So 
minute, however, was the young man in his details, that 
it was midnight ere the party broke up. 



252 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE ESCAPE, 

Fair and sunny was the morn, when Chinchea and hia 
party prepared to brave the perils which surrounded them 
on their departure towards Camp Comanche, whither it 
was now doubly necessary he should arive, both to bring 
the promised succour, and to place the Rose of Day in the 
safe keeping of her parents, until he was prepared to unite 
her fortunes to his for ever. 

Chinchea led the way, erect, proud, in all the prelude of 
savage dignity. Long Arm, humbled by his own act, that 
of the forced abduction of the bride of another, walked 
behind, while the lovely Indian girl, all roses like the 
dawn, which she greeted merrily — more merrily than for 
many past days — came meekly in the rear. 

At any other time, even the Indian might have been dis- 
posed to revel in the beauty of nature, but now all his 
energies Avere devoted to the task of extricating himself 
from the difficult position in which he was placed Clutch- 
ing his rifle, and treading with almost noiseless footsteps, 
he skirted the thicket which had served to shelter him 
and his friends for the night, and brought himself thus 
facing the Eagle's Xest. He listened now with eager 
attention for any note of preparation on the part of the 
besiegers, within a few yards of whose position on the 
summit of the Eagle's Nest, he was about to climb, 
that being the only route by which he could hope to gain 
the plain. 

" The pale faces sleep," said Long Arm, with an uneasy 
contraction of the face, as if the memory of the past night 
were unpleasant to him ; " the fire water has filled their 
heads with dreams." 

" Good, "-muttered Chinchea; "but they are snakes; 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 253 

they hide themselves in the grass, and may bite and not 
he seen." 

"Ugh!" 

" Let Long Arm go," said the chief, pointing to the path 
which led upward to the camp of the banditti, " and see 
what the white men do above. He will be safe ; the 
chief of the pale faces sleeps yet in the cavern mouth." 

" Ugh !" replied the other, and lossening his tomahawk, 
he obeyed. 

"With this monosyllable, Long Arm, concealing under a 
careless mien his anxious feelings, moved slowly up the 
rugged path which led to the summit of the Live Oak 
Crest, in an opposite direction to that by which Blackhawk 
had descended to his woodland supper. 

" The Eose will wait yonder/' continued the chief, ten- 
derly, pointing to a huge sycamore, which could, behind 
its vast umbrageous head, shelter and conceal her. 

"The Eose will wait," said the girl, with a smile — a 
smile which went manna-like to the heart of the warrior. 

" Good." 

This was all he said, and then treading softly, so as not 
to be heard, he moved towards the scene of the previous 
night's debauch, in order to discovery if any movement, 
dangerous to his own plans, had as yet taken place in that 
quarter. 

As he neared the spot, silence brooded over all. !Nor 
voice, nor sound of life was heard, and when reaching a 
spot whence, without being seen, he could overlook all, the 
whole party presented the same aspect as when he had left 
them on the previous night. Blackhawk lay near the ex- 
tinguished fire, his head thrown back, his arms stretched 
as if in a deep and heavy sleep, while Pedro and Carcassin 
were near at hand in a similar state. 

Presently, however, the chief of the outlaws moved 
uneasily ; the chill morning air seemed slightly to affect 
him, and he gradually gained a sitting posture. His eyes 
opened slowly and with difficulty, and he gazed around as 
one who believed himself in a dream. After a ■while, the 
senses gained their sway, and he discovered the severed 



254 THS HSOAW. 

lock upon his breast, and Anton sitting upright at the en- 
trance of the cave, his arms and legs bound, but the gag 
*emoved from his mouth. 

"Anton," said the outlaw, "what means this!" 
" Ugh ! " grunted the Indian. 

"Why, methought I went to sleep in the cave, and 
here, at cock-crow, I wake and find myself on the stony 
platform." 
"Ugh!" 

" Where is Long Arm ? " 
"Gone." 

" And the Eose of Day ? " 
"Gone." 

"Thunder !" said the outlaw, springing up, and rushing 
at the throat of the unfortunate cook, " gone ! how — 
when — where ? " 

« Chin " 

" Chin me no chin ! " exclaimed the bandit, striking 
the crouching Indian furiously as he spoke, "where are 
they?" 

" Gone with Chin " 

" Dolt ! idiot ! knave ! " cried the Blackhawk, mora 
furiously^ " who told you this ? " 

"Chin " 

" Fool ! who waited on me last night 1 " 
"Chinchea!" 
"WhoisChinchea?" 
" The Leaping Panther." 

" The Leaping Panther ! " thundered the outlaw ; " ho 
here last night ! Bearding me in my very den. But he 
and Long Arm are enemies ! " 
" They have buried the hatchet." 
" And the Eose of Day ] ' ' 

" Is with her own warrior — the flower of the Coman-* 
ches." 

"And am I to be tricked thus with impunity by a 
brutish red skin ? My very soul thickens at the thought. 
How they wiH laugh and jibe." 

" Ugh !" said the sullen savage, scowling at the bandit, 



THE YotjNG MIDSHIPMAN. 255 

his soul writhing beneath the blow which the other had 
most unwisely inflicted. 

Blackhawk had roused a lion which he would have some 
difficulty in putting down. 

"But this is all idle," cried the chief; "action, not 
talk, will serve our turn. Pedro, Carcassin, awake." 

" Buenos noches," muttered the Mexican, " caramba I 

nuestra demonia ; who calls ? " 
u j » 

" Who's II" said the sleepy lieutenant, opening his 
eyes. 

" Blackhawk," thundered the outlaw. 

" Oh ! what's the matter, that one cannot sleep ? " 

" Matter ! hell is the matter. Wake that brute Car- 
cassin." 

" Carcassin, my boy ! " said Pedro. 

" Plait-il garcon," replied the Frenchman, "an omelet 
and a bottle of Burgundy." 

" Why, what does the fool say % " 

" Oh, I was dreaming, mon dieu, that I was in the Cafe 
Royal, supping with the devil." 

" You were not far wrong," said Blackhawk. 

" I think not," said Pedro, slily. 

" No jokes," continued the chief, furiously ; " that devil 
Chinchea, the Leaping Panther, was here last night, bound 
our cook in the cave, took his place, drugged our liquor, 
laughed at us in his sleeve, and stole away with Long 
Arm and the Indian Girl." 

" The Eose of Day," said Pedro, drily. 

"I say, Blackhawk," asked Carcassin, maliciously, 
" what was that toast of yours 1 " 

" What toast 1 " 

" 'Here's to the Eose of Day, and he who wins her.'" 

" This is no time for folly such as this, thundered the 
outlaw. Away above, alarm the, camp, let the whole 
country be scoured, but they must be found." 

" Bon ! " said the Frenchman ; " here's some warm 
work." 

" I like it," said Pedro. 



256 ' THB BSCAFB. 

" Which way went they ? " asked the chief, addressiiig 
Anton. 

" Ugh ? " answered the sullen Indian, inquiringly. 

" I say, idiot, dost hear, which way went they ] " 

" Down ! " replied the irate Comanche, pointing in the 
direction whence the Leaping Panther had ascended on 
the previous night 

" Go," said Blackhawk, " hring down the whole hand ; 
if they be there, the foxes are caught in their own trap." 

The two lieutenants sped upwards on their errand, 
eecretly delighted, as had men ever are, at the annoyance 
which one of their own party was subject to. 

" Good," muttered Chinchea, " now is my time." 

"With these words he turned to go ; when glancing at 
the platform, a movement on the part of Anton at once 
riveted his attention. 

Blackhawk was leaning on his gun, his back turned 
from the cave, near the mouth of which stood Anton. The 
bandit chief was musing on what had passed, and by the 
expression of his countenance, he was planning revenge 
upon those who had baffled his criminal designs. 

Anton had in his hand a tomahawk, a huge, heavy thing, 
with which an ox could have been brained. 

A scowl was upon the Indian's face ; the rankling of 
the blows that he had received was still at his heart 

"Blackhawk is gone," thought Chinchea; "Anton will 
take his life." 

The outlaw remained motionless where he stood, gazing 
vacantly upon the Eagle's Xest. 

Stealthily, with serpent tread, on sped the Indian. 
Murder was in his eyes, revenge flashed from their glare. 

" Good," said Chinchea, breathing heavily; "the bad 
man of the pale faces will lose his scalp." 

Still the Indian advanced, and still the chief remained 
motionless. 

" Pale face," whispered Chinchea, solemnly, " the happy 
hunting-ground now awaits you. The Manitou has stayed 
his course." 

Still the Indian advanced, and now stood within a 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 257 

couple of yards of the outlaw, while in his right hand the 
avenging weapon was held, prepared for the blow. 

"Take that, fool," exclaimed the white, who had 
seen all. 

"W ith these words he wheeled round ; a sheet of flame, 
a report, and Anton was dead, falling without cry or 
groan. 

" Idiot," muttered the bandit, turning again, and re- 
suming his former position ; " it was of your own seek- 
ing." 

" Ugh," said Chinchea, letting his short rifle fall into 
the hollow of his hand, and taking aim at the cool and 
reckless ruffian. But at that moment the picture of the 
young Eose of Day presented itself, and prudence whispered 
that the fate of his party would certainly be death, if he 
avenged the slaughter of his countryman. 

With a heavy heart, but a light and cautious step, he 
turned away to rejoin the Eose of Day, with whom he 
found Long Arm, who reported the path difficult but 
practicable. Chinchea at once led the way in the direction 
of the summit, taking the Indian girl by the hand, and 
aiding her in her ascent of the rough ground. A few mo- 
ments brought them upon the camp of the enemy. 

To their right was a dense growth of brushwood, thick, 
black, and impenetrable ; in front, the sloping hill, leading 
to the vast illimitable prairies ; to their left, the position 
of the outlaws, who had just been alarmed by the arrival 
of Pedro and Carcassin. 

At a short distance, tethered and hoppled, grazed the 
horses of the bandits. 

" Now, my lads, follow," cried Pedro ; " the dogs are 
not far distant. We shall have rare sport." 

" Turtle hunting," suggested Carcassin. 

" And if we catch them 1 " said Pedro. 

" A deep tragedy," answered Carcassin. 

And all the banditti-laughed in chorus. 

"But the captain," said Pedro; "oh! oh! it was too 
good. He had smuggled the lass so nicely into the cavern ; 



258 THE ESCAPE. 

he had got Long Arm so gloriously drunk, and then, ah ! 
ah ! ha ! he — got — drunk — himself." 

" A perfect vaudeville," said Carcassin, 

" Good as a play," laughed Pedro. 

Again the robbers roared in chorus. 

" And this morning, when he woke us," added Pedro, 
" if you had seen his face, black as night ; and his rage, 
perfectly sublime." 

"Ah," said the Frenchman, "he was like poor Eobert 
Macaire, when he would have robbed the mayor; he tried, 
but he could not." 

" He's a capital captain," said Pedro, seriously ; "but I 
am afraid he is no philosopher." 

" Never Tead Voltaire or Kousseau," said the French- 
man, with infinite pity. 

And again the robbers laughed, for though they did not 
understand the joke, they knew a hard hit was meant at 
somebody. 

" But I say, the captain all this while. Santa Maria, 
just now he was in a devil's hurry ; T heard him blaze 
away a signal with his gun. 

" Let us go," answered Carcassin. 

" Let us go," repeated the whole body of thieves. 

" And yonder pass," suggested Pedro. 

" Well, I conclude I'll just guard this fixin," said Ben 
Smith, a huge Yankee. 

" Do so, and keep with you your company," replied the 
lieutenant. " Now away, boys." 

Without further parley, the robbers then vanished from 
the camp, pouring down the narrow path which led to the 
platform and the cave. 

Behind remained Ben Smith and three Comar.c'ie In- 
dians, young men, who had accompanied Long Arm in 
his ill-advised flight from the camp of his people. As 
soon as the rest were out of sight, Ben Smith, placing his 
arms near at hand, drew forth a pipe, and loading it, in- 
vited the Indians to follow his example. They, nothing 
loth, readily complied, and in a few moments were deeply 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 259 

immersed in discussing the mysteries of the exhilarating 
Aveed. 

"Well, I conclude," observed Ben Smith, in a serious 
tone, '"this are better nor a wild goose chase, I guess." 

" Ugh," grunted the Indians. 

" Now, Ingins, don't ; you cut a huckleberry above me : 
I don't reckon on grunting ; that's a style of* conversation 
suited to hogs and them like. There ain't no sociality 
about yer." 

" Ugh," repeated the Indians, as if they did not under- 
stand him. 

" Now, Ingins, if you grunt at that rate, I'll fancy myself 
in an Alabama piggery, and I'll bust. 'Cause hogs don't 
generally smoke, I expect, and I do think I see three 
swine now with pipes." 

"Ugh," said the Indians, with a broad v grin of genuine 
astonishment. 

" Now, red skins," exclaimed the Yankee, laughing, 
"that Ooo ! will be the death of me. I'm bound to bust, 
I reckon. Now, do jist for variety, say something. I'm 
the yaller flower of this forest, ain't I now 1 " 

" Ugh," said the Indians, all in one breath. 

" Ingins, do you never talk in your part of the world 1 
don't you larn any lingo 1 " 

" Red skin talk when him understand," replied one of 
the group. 

"Ah! there it jisuis; it's all along o' that Tower of Babel, 
I'm concluding. Well, if I was a king, I'd just make a 
law agin any lingo but what I could clearly understand. 

" Indian talk good for Indian, white talk good for 
white," replied another. 

" There now," said big Ben, with a chuckle, " I know'd 
you could if you "would. That's sociable, I reckon ; I 
wish I may be shot, if I ain't larnt something in these 
diggins." 

" What has the big white man learnt 1 " 

"Larnt to know that there is some locrum in an 
Ingin." 

" And what is locrum 1 " said the Indians. 

S 2 



260 THE ESOAPB. 

" Wake snakes and -walk yer chalks," said Ben Smith, 
starting ; and in his eagerness he nearly swallowed his 
short reed pipe ; " what's that 1 A bar, I'm thinking." 

" At the same time an angry growl was heard to emanate 
from the adjoining thicket. 

" It's a bar," continued Smith, sententiously, laying his 
hand on his gun at the same time. 

The Indians never moved, but continued smoking with 
even greater energy than ever. 

"Well, that's cool, anyhow you fix it," observed the 
Yankee, annoyed at being outdone in calm courage, and 
laying down his gun ; " but it's a bar, I'll swar." 

A still more angry growl, much nearer to the group, 
aroused Smith's ire to the utmost. 

" Well, I'm bound to say them Ingins is right away 
cool , but I'm not a-gwine to be made a meal for monsters. 
So here goes at the bar, slick ! " 

" My brother is wrong," said one of the Indians, calmly ; 
" it is not a bear." 

" Kot a bar ; well, I conclude you're cool ; darn my 
old grandmother, tell Ben Smith he don't know a bar 
from " 

" A panther ! " 

" A painter 1 " cried Ben, moving uneasily ; " no, it ain't 
a painter, is it 1 " 

"The Leaping Panther," replied the Indians, rising 
simultaneously, and disarming and casting the American 
to the ground, almost ere he knew he was assaulted. 

The keen ears of the Comanches had recognised the 
favourite signal of their beloved war chief, and had, at his 
call, at once returned to their allegiance, and owned the 
power and tie which, in all parts of the world, is connected 
with the words " my country." 

Ben Smith was so astounded at the assault which had 
been operated upon him by his three companions, that he 
suffered himself to be thoroughly overpowered without 
resistance. At length, however, as the Leaping Panther 
and his two companions emerged from the thicket, his 
tongue became loosened. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 261 

" Well, if you can't talk, Ingins, you can cheat above a 
bit, I reckon, I do ; may I be etarnally sucked up into a 
waterspout, and come down again in a frog shower, if ever 
I believe a Ingin agin. If I do " 

The remainder of his speech was too thoroughly in the 
backwood style, to bear being recorded. 

" Away, brothers," said Chinchea, calmly, " pick the six 
best horses belonging to the white men. They can lend 
them to an Indian whose feet are sore." 

Away darted the warriors, obedient to the command of 
their leader, and eager to cover their former bad conduct 
by assiduity on the present occasion. 

" And you're a-gwine to take them horses, are you 1 " 
said Ben Smith, with nonchalance ; " you're quite welcome, 
for they ain't mine, I conclude." 

Chinchea made no reply, waiting in a dignified, but 
keenly attentive attitude, for the horses to be brought up. 

" Tell Blackhawk," said the chief, as six of the choicest 
horses — selected with keen and practised eyes — were 
brought up, " tell him he is a coward and a knave. The 
Leaping Panther says so, and the Leaping Panther never 
lies. Tell him that when he killed the poor fool Anton, 
the eye of the Manitou was upon him, and that the Leap- 
ing Panther will avenge him." 

" Oh my," cried Ben, with no little astonishment, and 
at the same time with infinite disgust. " He ain't killed 
Anton, I reckon." 

" The Blackhawk stoops low ; he beats a poor Indian 
without a soul, and then kills him because he feels the 
blows. Go ! he is a coward." 

" He is," thundered Ben, in genuine disgust, " and if 
ever I foller a fellow as ain't more of a man any longer, I'll 
turn nigger, and that's about the last thing any Christian 
man 'ud Avish to be." 

"Good!" said Chinchea, " the pale face speaks like a 
man." 

"A man too without a cross," replied Ben, "who ain't 
agwine to stand by and see a dark Indian murdered. 
Jumping Panther, I'm one of your'n, I swar." 



262 THE ESCAPE. 

" Let the pale face loose," said Chinchea. 

" Well, that's kind," cried big Ben, stretching his huge 
limbs with infinite satisfaction ; " and I'm bound to say- 
that I'm a deal more light-hearted than when I owned the 
bloody-minded Blackhawk for a leader." 

The party were all rapidly mounted, and then giving 
loose reins to the fresh and champing steeds, they coursed 
o'er the prairie in the direction of Camp Comanche. 



CHAPTEE XIIL 

A NIGHT ATTACK. 

Aboot an hour before midnight, on the evening after the 
interview between Margaretta and Edward Blake, Alice 
sat alone in her chamber, ruminating on the passing scene. 
The young sailor had that evening been unusually gay and 
lively, had told merry tales of his adventures at home and 
abroad, and had made himself, in fact, exceedingly agree- 
able. He had, however, retired early, and his example 
was followed by the Mexican. Alice had been left alone, 
or at all events with the quiet, silent, and unpretending 
negro girl seated on a chair at some distance from her 
side. 

It was a lovely night — calm, sweet, and serene. She 
lingered on the past, she dwelt upon the present, and then 
came the future, dim and undefined to all, and to none 
more than to herself. Where would she be, when another 
cycle of the sun came gently round 1 In this dreary 
solitude, surrounded by beings so little akin to her nature; 
or far away in the land of civilization with ? 

With whom 1 

Alice blushed rosy red, as she askedherself this question; 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 263 

and then, she knew not why, came to her mind the 
thought that she liked not the Mexican. Why did she 
not like her 1 why did she shrink from her presence, and 
wish that she were not there*? Why had she found them 
so solid and so stern on the previous evening in the garden, 
and why had Edward so suddenly brightened up 1 

These were perplexing thoughts, and yet did Alice, in 
her simplicity of heart, wonder why they occupied her 
mind, for she had yet to learn how the events of these 
few days were bound up in her destiny. What was 
Edward, or Margaretta to her 1 And yet she could not 
refrain from thinking that the young sailor who had so 
strangely come into the solitude of the Eagle's Nest, must 
be that perfection of mankind which girls are apt to con- 
sider to exist, and a feeling of real regret came upon her as 
she remembered how short was likely to be his stay. 

" Come, Nbrah," said she, rising, as if anxious to drive 
away unwelcome and annoying thoughts, " let us out 
upon the block ; it is a shame to be indoors on such a 
lovely night." 

" Him berry cold, him 'spect," replied the negro girl. 
"Cold," responded Alice. 

" Him always cold arter dark," continued Norah, who 
was just then not romantically inclined. 

""Well, if it be cold, we will not remain out long." 
" Berry bell, Miss Als, him Norah quite ready." 
With merely a deer-skin cloak thrown over their 
shoulders, and a broad-brimmed and loosely flapping straw 
hat, they then went out into the garden ; and ascending 
the ladder which led to the summit of the block, they 
seated themselves upon the carronades, and relapsed into 
silence. 

Presently Alice sighed deeply. 

"Alas!" she cried; "such typifies my fate. Across 
my path, sad, dark, and weary, has come a momentary 
gleam, to fade away as sadly, as wholly, as yon truant 
meteor that has just fallen to earth. Why is it so ? 
Yesterday I was at peace with myself, my hopes were 
bounded by the fate which so strongly seemed to be 



264 A NIGHT ATTACK. 

mine, and I crushed within myself those aspirations which 

my birth, my family, my name but that is gone ; and 

now he has come here to show me brighter things, as the 
picture in a mirror, to fade and die." 

Again was Alice silent. 

" But," she continued, at length, " this is idle. I must 
school my foolish heart to think of him as I would of a 
stranger ; I must laugh at his tales ; and remember not 
the gentle voice, the impassioned gesture, of his being ; I 
must remember that never — no, never — can I mate my 
fate to any — never ! " 

" You call, miss ? " said Norah, starting from a slumber 
in which she was already indulging. 

"No." 

" Den sartin, me dream you call Norah !" 

" Hush!" whispered Alice. "I see a movement on the 
cliff facing the portcullis. Stoop low, girL the robbers 
will make a night attack, and we have no power of 
moving." 

" Oh my ! " 

" Stoop low, girL I say ; if we be seen, we shall be 
picked off by these bold and bad men. 

" Dem debbles," muttered Norah, trembling. 

" Would I could alarm the Rest ; but to descend the 
ladder were fatal." 

" Him be killed, sure as I'm a nigger." 

" But see ! they have a plank to throw across the narrow 
cha.«m ; they will enter the courtyard, and we shall have 
dreadful work here, anon." 

" Him Norah faint." 

" Faint, child, when 'tis over," said Alice, whose firm, 
but feminine souL forgetting self, grew bold and courageous, 
in the cause of the sleeping dwellers of the Nest ; " they 
must be alarmed. Would I could fire one of these cai- 
ronades." , 

" Dat berry easy," said Norah. 

" How girl 1 " 

" Him ole rope burn all night," replied the negres% 
pointing to a thick old rope, well tarred, which hung 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 265 

smouldering, in readiness for any emergency, and which 
would last many hours. 

" Use it, girl," said Alice, turning away. 

"Him nebber could, Miss Als," half shrieked the 
negress. 

" Then give it me," replied the young girl, who, however, 
trembled as she took it ; "it must be done. Good heavens ! 
they are placing the plank across, and will enter the 
courtyard in a moment. How can I do it ! — but I must." 

"Oh, Miss Als." 

" Bemove the cover from the gun," cried Alice. 

Norah removed it. 

" Now, stand away girl," exclaimed Alice, with an hys- 
teric laugh ; and turning her head on one side, she applied 
the match, and fell, half fainting, on the block, while 
Norah gave a shrill scream. 

A dozen rifles, aimed at the summit of the block, an- 
swered the report. 

" Bravely done, Alice," cried the thundering voice ol 
Philip Stevens ; " awake, my lads, and drive back this 
hungry crew ; give them their own again." The Nest 
was soon alive with its garrison, and the assailant* at once 
withdrew, leaving their bridge as a trophy of their defeat. 

" Come down, girl," said Stevens, as soon as the uproar 
was over ; " your courage saved us." 

" Good heavens, Miss Stevens," said Edward, assisting 
her to descend, " How came you on the block ? " 

"Why, I was sleepless, and somewhat contemplative, 
and so went up to gaze upon the night." 

" When I left you, Miss Stevens," said Edward, " me- 
thought you were weary, and going to rest." 

"Would ycu have a woman of the same mind for two 
minutes together 1 " replied Alice ; "fie, you would have 
us reasonable ! " 

" Indeed would I," continued the sailor, " especially in 
regard to ascending blocks within the reach of an enemy's 
rifle." 

This was said so naturally, and in so friendly a tone, 
that nothing could have been thence construed ; but to 



286 A NIGHT ATTACK. 

Alice, unused to sueh care, the young man's evincemeiil of 
thoughtfjilness was pleasing, and she was silent. 

" I must really suppose," said Blake, after a brief pause, 
"that my rambling adventures must have set your 
thoughts roaming. I must be more chary of my tales of 
travels, or 'that I did steal away this old man's daughter,' 
in as far as her sedate habits are concerned, will be as 
true of me as of Othello." 

Alice remembered that Othello stole away the old man's 
daughter's heart, and smiled. 

" You smile," said Edward, who had taken her arm, and 
was walking up and down the garden, while a faint streak 
of dawn illumined the sky ; "but you may not find it a 
smiling matter. I have known more than one stay-at- 
home lass made crazy for foreign travel, by the ' yarns,' aa 
we call them, of a travelled sailor." 

" My mind led me to wish for travel only to my native 
land, and I do not think you will alter that wish, Mr. 
Brown." 

" But your native land is England." 

" It is." 

"Near what part?" 

"Mr. Brown," replied Alice, "I have told you before^ 
that I have secrets — and that is one of them." 

When they sat down to breakfast Edward met Margaretta, 
who observed (with a smile full of meaning, and at the 
same time with a shade of sadness on her brow), that the 
young sailor was almost exclusive in his assiduous atten- 
tions to the fair daughter of their host, whose gratification, 
though silent and subdued, was however, apparent. 

"A pleasant night you have had of it," said the 
Mexican, with sufficient emphasis on the word to make it 
to all but Edward seem a gibe. 

Edward grew grave, and scarcely answered. 

" Pleasanter than you would think," said Alice, inno- 
cently enough ; " for after the attack was over, the hours 
until morning sped swiftly along." 

" Indeed ! " exclaimed Philip .Stevens ; is our friend's 
converse so very gay and pleasant V 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 267 

Alice blushed, and then laughed to hide her blush, and 
looked so pretty in her sweet and innocent confusion, that 
Edward thought her far more lovely than ever. 

" Miss Stevens is complimentary," he said ; " though 
knowing the fright she had received, I did my utmost to 
amuse her." 

Philip, seeing that Alice was annoyed, here interposed, 
and adroitly drew attention another way. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

HOW BIG GRIDDLE VISITED THE NEST. 

Until the arrival of the looked-for succour to be brought 
by Chinchea, there was little hope of the attack diminishing 
in violence. The whole garrison, therefore, remained on 
the alert, and even Alice and her negro attendant, accom- 
panied by Margaretta, kept a constant look-out. During 
the remainder of the day there was no further sign of the 
presence of an enemy. It wanted s.ome two hours of sun- 
down, and the whole party were collected on the raised 
terrace which commanded the drawbridge. 

" Your promised visit to the Comanche Indian village 
will be delayed, I fear," said Alice, '-'if not prevented." 

" I hope not," said Blake ; " for I have a great wish to 
see tin's famous tribe, of which I have heard such great 
things. You have seen much of them." 

"Nay, not much," continued Alice. "Chinchea often 
wanders hither on a hunt, and the Nest people go and stay 
weeks beyond the Canon de Uvaldi ; but I have never 
seen more of them." 

" Let us, then, form a party," said Blake eagerly ; "and 
when these robbers have been repelled, we can make an 
excursion to the camp Comanche, and witness its wonders." 



268 HOW BIG GRIDDLE VISITED THE NEST. 

" Am I to be one of the guests'?" enquired Margaretta, 

" Of course," replied Edward quietly. 

" Well, I reckon that are a queer start," suddenly ex- 
claimed Cephas Doyle. 

What 1 " said Edward, turning round half fiercely, as if 
he thought the Yankee were commenting on his plans. 

" Darn my old granny," continued Doyle, " if there 
ain't hig Griddle , the New-town pedlar I " 

" What mean you 1" said Philip, while the whole party 
gazed eagerly out upon the pirarie. 

" I do say, that yonder's big Griddle ; if it ain't, I'm 
hound to he a liar, that's all." 

Mounted on a tall horse of more bone than flesh, and 
which wheezed perseveringly as it came along, sat a man 
who, in his whole attire, presented a strange and anomalous 
appearance. His steed seemed fitted to the rider, and the 
rider to the horse. The master wore a tall, steeple-crowned, 
white felt, bedizened with tags and tatters. On the rider's 
shoulders was a variegated mantle, that had saved all the 
stray patches, which otherwise had been undoubted rags ; 
while his steed had a saddle-cloth of multifarious hues. 
The rider's boots were quite six inches above his knee, 
and had seen many a year of service — in this the horse's 
legs resembled their master, being encased in a thick 
coating of mud, of much similar colour to his rider's 
splatter-dashes. On they came, so glued one to the other, 
so compact, or completely one, so Centaur-like, that all 
who looked on, without knowing the man, were amazed 
and puzzled- 
Whiz went bullets from the nearest cover. But the 
horse increased not his pace one jot, appearing to treat the 
hostile missiles with philosophic contempt. 

" Who in the name of wonder," said Blake, " is this 
stranger, who appears so anxious to gain shelter here 1 " 

" Which he shall have, and welcome ; down with the 
drawbridge," said Philip. 

"Are you quite sure he is no enemy?" said Jones, 
with much caution. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 269 

" Faugh ! " replied Philip ; " an he were, why fear a 
Bolitary man ? a dozen might alarm you." 

" A dozen?" said Jones, slightly pale ; " heaven forbid. 
I would not have a dozen- " 

"No, not a dozen rats," interrupted Philip; "they 
would fright you more than a dozen men would me." 

Jones replied not, but turned sullenly away. 

" And you ain't hearn tell o' Joe Griddle, Big Griddle, 
Griddle the pedlar?" said Cephas Doyle, answering 
Edward's question ; " why he's a nataral born carakter. 
He is the best hand at a yarn in all the west country, and 
will whip more cats, tell more lies, and eat more pork, 
than any fellow in Texas." 

" He must be a curiosity," observed Edward, with a 
smile, in which he was joined by Alice and Margaretta. 

" Ain't he jist, though 1 " continued Cephas ; " why, 
he'll swar he can smell a hog a mile off ; he's rare — jist 
the chap, and no mistake. He's seen the elephant, I 
imagine — and a little more nor twice, I expect." 

By this time the object of this lucid description had 
reached the Nest, and was in the act of crossing the narrow 
bridge, without dismounting. 

"Boast pig in the larder, good people," said he ; "just 
what I smelt, inviting me to dine, as I came through the 
wood. It's a fact, but I swear them thieving vagabones 
have sucked bacon for their breakfast, and T had — nothing 
for mine." 

" There is plenty here," replied Philip, helping him to 
dismount, and bidding a man take his horse to the coral, 
where the cattle had almost consumed every article of food ; 
while Jones eagerly looked to the closing up of the en- 
trance. 

"Well, I reckon you're above a bit soft," said big 
Griddle, whose saturnine visage somewhat belied the 
merry, hearty tone of his voice, " to tell me there are 
plenty. Bnt as you don't disguise it, just hand it out yar, 
for I jist want to enjoy the open air, a rare sauce for appe- 
tite, good people." 

" Why, big Griddle, my boy, are you been in the wars, 



270 HOW BIG GRIDDLE VISITED THE NEST. 

that you look so black, or are you catched a cold, that 
your voice is so almighty soft 1 " inquired Cephas Doyle, 
looking curiously at him, and bent it seemed, on drawing 
him out. 

" What brute speaketh 1 " replied the pedlar, irately, 
and even impatiently. Big Griddle ain't in the habit of 
wars ; no, nor of catching cold, neither. He would like 
to see a cold catch him, that's all; he'd be like a dirty, sneak- 
ing pig- faced Yankee I know, and pretty glad to let go." 
A roar of laughter greeted the pedlar's repty. 
" "Who are you speaking to ? " asked Cephas Doyle, 
somewhat angrily. 

" To you, my sharp-eyed, butter-eared friend." 
" Do you know who I am, or have you forgotten me 1 " 
" What ! big Griddle forget the bandy-legged tailor of 
Houston ; who made him a waistcoat out of seventeen 
pieces, each big enough for a coat 1 " 

" Tailor!" thundered Cephas Doyle, amid another volley 
of mirth ; " I, Cephas Doyle, a tailor ! Big Griddle, I am 
a free-born American, I am ; and I ain't no tailor." 

" Many free-born Yankees is, I expect. I do conclude, 

hoAvsomever, that if all tailors were like you " 

" Big Griddle, you're drunk," said Cephas Doyle. 
" You're another," replied the pedlar, nodding at the 
same time to jNbrah, who had placed before him a wooden 
tray, covered with eatables and drinkables — roast pork and 
spruce-beer forming the principal ingredients. 
"Big Griddle!" 
" Yes." 

"You are a. liar !" 

" Don't be alarmed, I've got a job for you," said the 
pedlar with a laugh ; " and you shall do it, as sure as my 
name's Griddle." 

" But it ain't," said Cephas Doyle, in a cold sardonic 
tone, which drew the whole party, including Edward and 
the two women, hitherto standing aloof, round the tonguy 
combatants. 

"What are the fool arter now?" replied the pedlar, 
still eating his meal, but casting a wary eye around. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 271 

" I tell you," said the Yankee, with, a gleam of horrible 
satisfaction, "you may have robbed, most likely have- 
murdered big Griddle, but yon ain't him, though you are 
in his clothes, and do about a bit make him up." 

" Then, who am I," said the other insolently. 

" One, I expect, everbody will be very glad to see," ex- 
claimed Cephas Doyle, tearing, at one grasp, wig, beard 
and hat from the false pedlar. 

" The bloody Blackhawk ! " said one or two of those 
around. 

" Harry ! " cried Philip. 

" Murder ! " cried Jones, turning quite livid. 

" Captain Coulter ! " said Edward Blake, coldly. 

" Heaven have mercy on him!" faintly exclaimed Alice, 
who nearly fainted and fell to the ground, while the 
bandit chief fixed a look of peculiar meaning and sneering 
familiarity upon her. 

" So I am found out," said the bandit, Avith a cold sneer; 
" I must say I thought myself a better actor. That blun- 
dering fool Doyle must betray me, too. Well, it cannot, 
I suppose, be helped. Glad to see you, Philip ; and you, 
Jones ; and you, Alice, dear ; ah, my little water spaniel, 
whom I picked up on Lake Sabine, Mr. B B " 

" Brown," said our hero, biting his lip. 

" Brown, was it 1 " replied the bandit ; "I thought not. 
But of course you know best." 

Philip and Jones had retired slightly from the group, 
while this colloquy took place, and for the first time for 
days they spoke together with anything like confidence. 
They appeared, by the glances they cast at Blackhawk, to 
be discussing the prospects of some proposed measure with 
regard to the bandit. The face of Philip was stern and 
pallid with passion ; that of Jones white with fear, and 
scowling with hate. 

" Harry Markham," said Philip, advancing, '■' alias 
Coulter, alias Blackhawk, for it appears you are that blood- 
thirsty hound, who has been thirsting these days past for 
our blood; you are now in our power." 

" I rather think I am," said the other. 



JJ715 HOW BIG GRIDDLE VISITED THE NE8T. 

'•' And as surely as yon are in our power, so surely must 
you pay the forfeit of your folly." 

" Why, what the deuce are you prating about 1 " 

" In New Orleans I owed you a grudge ; there you 
robbed me at the hazard-table " 

" Fair play — fair play, by Jove," said the bandit. 

"Here you have, though I knew it not, stolen rny 
cattle and horses, and killed one of my men," continued 
Philip Stevens, sternly ; "ami to let you live 1 " 

"You won't kill me," replied the other, quietly. 

" Nay, take not the law into your own hands," said 
Edward Blake. 

"There is no law here, young man," exclaimed Philip, 
" but the law of self-preservation. It is he or I. If he 
lives, be will take my life ; to prevent that, I must take 
his." 

" Yes, his," repeated Jones ; " he's a raging wolf ; kill 
him." And the arrant coward crept , behind Cephas 
Doyle, as he uttered these menacing words. 

" He's a bloody varmint, he is," put in Cephas Doyle, 
withasolemnnessof manner which was strongly in contrast 
with his usual levity ; " for if he ain't murdered big 
Griddle, and stole his fixins, my name ain't Cephas, I'm 
bound to swar." 

" You'd swear a man's life away mighty cool," replied 
the robber, quietly. Big Griddle's better off this minute 
than I am. I tell you, Yankee, I never kill unless to 
serve a purpose, and then it's in fair fight. The pedlar 
will ride on his way as soon as he finds his horse and 
trappings, which, it seems, I have been foolish enough to 
borrow." 

" Well, if big Griddle ain't dead," said Cephas, much 
mollified, " and how so you'll send him up yar, why I 
don't care if I swap you agin him, which ain't quite fair 
neither, seein' he'd make three of you." 

" But I have nay to say to this, Cephas Doyle," ex- 
claimed Philip ; " for the present, he stays with us. 
Yonder wood-hole will be his prison, until better men than 
he decide his fate." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 273 

" Thanks ! " said Edward, who, in this middle course 
saw a submission to his influence ; let him at least have a 
fair trial." 

" He shall have a fair trial before all here," replied 
Stevens, solemnly ; " here, on this spot, in an hour hence, 
I, Philip Stevens, will arraign him as a thief, and a mur- 
derer." 

"Murderer!" repeated Blackhawk, fixing his now 
cold and impassive glance on the other's face. 

" If not," said Philip, cowering before his glance, " at 
least one who has killed many." 

"None in cold blood, Philip Stevens, save one who 
would have brained me yester morn," replied Blackhawk, 
quietly. 

" Cease this parleying ; away with him to his cage," 
cried Stevens, hoarsely. 

"Yes, away with him," said Jones in a shrill voice, the 
voice of fearful but terrible passion. 

Cephas Doyle and the rest seized the bandit, and 
dragged him to the small block-built out-house which was 
to serve for his prison, into which having thrust him they 
left him to his meditations. 

Pale, with eyes resting fearfully upon the daring out- 
law, with bosom heaving, and hands clenched convulsively, 
Alice had remained a spectator of the above scene. To a 
casual and unobserving looker-on, her emotion would have 
appeared nothing more than the natural terror of a maiden, 
brought suddenly into contact with so notorious and 
daring an outlaw. But a careful observer (and on the 
present occasion Edward Blake was one of these) might 
have noted something of more painful interest in her 
manner. There was terror at the man, but still greater 
terror was manifested at the idea of his punishment — an 
inexplicable look of sympathy, which the young sailor 
vainly endeavoured to explain to himself. 

" Thank heaven ; " she muttered, as she lost sight of 
him, when he entered the cell. 

"Now," said Stevens, "we have work fit only fo 



HOW BIG GBIDDLE VISITED THE NEST. 

men. Alice, take your guest to your chamber ; this is no 
place for women." 

Edward Blake was standing with his back to the 
speaker, and he noted a scornful smile on Alice's lip as she 
advanced to obey the mandate. To reach the garden, she 
had to pass between our hero and his host, and the young 
sailor, expecting a word of salutation, had turned to receive 
it. What was his surprise to see gentle Alice standing, 
with sparkling eyes and menacing mien, before her father. 

" Philip Stevens," said she in whispered tones — tones 
clear and distinct, which, however, reached the ears of 
one more than they were intended for — " lay one finger on 
him at your peril. I, Alice 

" Hush, not that name, girl ! " replied Philip, who was 
ghastly pale. 

But she had said it, and Edward Blake, who alone had 
heard it — for Stevens turned away too abruptly to catch 
the words — stood, as if rooted to the spot, chained, as it 
were, by some mysterious fascination. All was now clear 
to him as noonday sun, and the blood ran cold and 
chill in his veins, as he walked to the walls to hide his 
deep and awful emotion. 

The blood-made orphan, the fortune-robbed child, stood 
in the presence of the secret of his life ; to fathom which, 
he felt that considerable coolness, courage, and even dis- 
simulation, were. necessary ; and, though one week before 
he might not have been equal to the task, yet now he 
felt he could perform it. 't he undefined dreams of his first 
night in the Eagle's Nest, the strange visions of his sleep- 
less couch, now took body and shape, and Edward Blake 
vowed in his inmost heart to detect and unravel the 
mystery. 

Alice, meanwhile, had left the terrace, and had betaken 
herself, with Margaretta, to the solitude of her own 
chamber. 

Philip Stevens then sternly addressing the whole party, 
summoned a council of war, or rather of death. 



THE YOUNG MfDSHttMAlT. 275 

CHAPTER XV. 

THE PRISONER. 

" Blaokhawk is now in our power," observed Philip 
Stevens, as soon as the whole party, Edward Blake ex- 
cepted, had congregated round him ; " and it is for us to 
consider how we may best rid ourselves of one who is the 
scourge of the frontier ; who steals our cattle without 
mercy, and who makes the woods not only unsafe for the 
women, but for the hunter in search of game. Jones, 
what say you 1 " 

" Dead men trouble not the living," replied the coward, 
who believed in no safety from an enemy but death; "let 
him die. We may never have another chance." 

" I thought as much," said Philip, with a sneer ; " and 
you, my hearties 1 " addressing the men. 

" Kill him ! kill him ! " was the unanimous answer. 

" Cephas Doyle, what advice give you 1 " 

" Why seein' he ain't an Ingin nor a nigger, I ain't for 
cuttin' him off in this 'yar cool style, if so be as he ain't 
killed big Griddle. If he have, I'm bound to strangle 
him, I say. Only think of the varmint, with his roast 
pork; but he was out. He warn't a gwine to take in 
Cephas Doyle, not by no manner of chalks." 

" Then you are not for his death 1 ? " said Philip. 

" Sartin not." 

" Nor am I," said Philip, emphatically. 

Edward Blake turned full round, and gazed in surprise 
on his host, near to whom he advanced. 

"You look astonished, Mr. Brown." 

"Not at all. I heard what she said." 

"Who 1 ?" whispered Stevens, hurriedly; "my daughter?" 

"Miss Alice," said Edward, with emphasis. 

«' What mean you ? " 

"Nothing. My words are very clear," replied Edward, 

x 2 



278 THE PBISONER. 

■with a cold shudder as he spoke ; for he could, that 
instant, ■willingly have raised his hand, and struck dead 
to the earth, the man whom he addressed. 

" Well, whatever it means, we can discuss it anon ; — in 
the meantime Cephas Doyle, how purpose you finding if big 
Griddle be dead or not ? " 

" I'm bound to go and see," replied Cephas. 

" What, venture out among the vermin 1 " 

" I tell you, Capt'n Stevens, if so be Blackhawk have 
killed big Griddle, I'm bound to kill him ; and -when I 
say6 it, I reckon I mean it. You know as how I don't 
poke fun in these locrums." 

" I do know." 

" Well, it ain't in natur' to believe on his own word, 
that he ain't killed big Griddle, seein' his word ain't above 
a bit good. So I say, Cephas Doyle will go and spy for 
his-self." 

" Be careful, Doyle," replied Philip ; "once in the hands 
of these knaves, it may be hard to get out." 

" It will soon be dark, I guess ; and I'm sartin the 
varmint will be on the look-out for signals. Blackhawk 
ain't slipped his head into this noose for nothin, I expect. 
Well, I leave these diggens, and I go to the wood ; and 
if I don't ferrit out big Griddle, if he are alive, he never 
smelt roast pork, that's all." 

" A wilful man will have his way, Cephas," replied 
Philip ; " and since you will, you will. Meantime, do 
you, Jones, see that Blackhawk is safe ; and if he have 
killed this pedlar in cold blood, he shall die, though he 

were twice her " This was said in a low, muttered 

tone, of which Edward alone caught the import. 

" Her what 1 " said Edward, hastily. 

" You seem deeply interested in the girl, and watch 
with marvellous care all she says and does," continued 
Philip Stevens, with a smile, as they moved apart. 

" I do," replied Edward, deeply gratified to find the 
other on the wrong tack, when his own indiscreet words 
might have led him on the right. 

" You are frank, at all events, Mr. Brown," said Philip, 



THE young m:dshipman. 277 

with a quiet smile ; " and Alice may well be proud of 
such a suitor." 

" I said not that I was her suitor ; I could not be, 
while so much of mystery hangs about herself and you." 

" Mystery, Mr. Brown % " 

" Mystery." 

" In what way 1 " 

" She is not your daughter, tho' she passes as such." 

"Not my daughter, sir?" 

" She said as much just now," replied Blake, firmly. 

" True ! true ! poor thing, she never knew a parent's 
care," said Philip, mournfully ; " but if she be not my 
child, can you blame me for taking a parent's place 1 " 

" Certainly not," replied Edward, with a choking sensa- 
tion in his throat, a tingling of the eyes, and a stern 
dilation of the nostrils ; " but why call her Miss Stevens, 
when her name is " 

" What 1 " asked Philip, in a low, hushed, sad voice, 
while his face for a moment borrowed the fearful and 
terror-stricken expression of Jones. 

" Blalce," replied the young man, in as careless a tone 
as he could assume, and pretending to light his pipe in 
order to conceal his intense emotion. 

"Blake!" said Philip, in hushed whisper, glancing 
fearfully around into the nooks and corners of the build- 
ing, " how came you to know that 1 " 

" Said she not so 1 " replied Edward, calmly ; though 
what was hid beneath his calm, he alone could tell. 

" Ah ! did she say so 1 But, young man why these 
questions 1 " asked Philip sternly, almost menacingly. 

" Said you not I was her suitor, sir 1 If so, excuse my 
questions ; they have a meaning." 

" Mr. Brown, I know little of you, save that you carry a 
letter of good recommendation in your face, which, I know 
not why, excited, at the first glance, my sympathy." 

Blake shuddered fearfully, and, only by a violent effort, 
curbed his tongue. 

" You appear to like my ward ; — I dote on her. Yes, 
sir, though, as you may one day learn, she be no relative 



278 THE PRISONER, 

of mine, and though from reasons between her, myself, 
and our God " 

" And me," thought Edward to himself. 

" She likes me not, I fain would see her happy. It is 
my one hope — and to bring that about I would peril my 
life and fortune. She has, perhaps, to blame me for much 
suffering, mental and bodily. No sacrifice, therefore, that 
I can make shall be too great to atone to her for whatever 
fault she has had to find in me." 

Edward gazed in surprise on the owner of the Eagle's 
Nest ; and a glance of pity stole upon his face, followed, 
however, on the instant, by a look of scorn and undying 
hate, which Philip Stevens, wrapped in gloomy thought, 
saw not. 

,: Did she love you, and you her, you should know the 
history of my fortunes — you should be my confessor, and 
in your hands should be the means of reparation." 

" There is, then, guilt V said Edward, sternly. 

" Are we not all guilty, Mr. Brown, in this world 1 " 

" Aye, but some much more than others." 

" Of these," said Philip Stevens, speaking more to him- 
self than to the other, " I have been ; and yet 'twas he 
that urged and did the deed. But Mr. Brown -" 

" Mr. Blake ! " said, or rather hissed, the young sailor, 
in his ear. " I, Edward Blake, or rather, Sir Edward, son 
of Sir Hugh, who by your hand " 

"God of heaven!" cried Philip — pale, white, trembling 
— "have mercy on my guilty soul." 

" You said just now 'twas he that did the deed. If so, 
there is yet pardon. But, mark me, Philip Stevens, this 
secret is between you and me. I have reasons for con- 
cealing my real name for some time longer. You have yet 
time to think of what to do. If you be not wholly guilty 
— if the accursed deed were not yours — you can clear 
yourself." 

" How 1 " asked Stevens, horror-stricken. 

" Let me, as a stranger, win her confidence ; let me 
hear from her lips the story of that night." 

" That night ! Oh, God of mercy." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 279 

" And if, from mere confidence in one she loves, she 
tells me all, and you are exculpated, the guilt falls on other 
heads." 

" Sir Edward, you shall hear it from her lips— she best 
of all can clear me — not of guilt, but of the damned, ac- 
cursed deed." 

" Until she does, I must look upon you as guilty." 

" So be it," groaned the other, whose resolution had 
wholly forsaken him. 

" Then let us be as before. I, Mr. Brown, to you and 
all. You my host." 

"As you will." 

" Here comes Cephas, bound on his wild expedition. 
My brain is on fire, action is needed, and I will accom- 
pany him," said Blake. 

" Just as you will." 

"Captain Cephas," said Blake, "I am curious to see this 
pedlar, who must be quite a character." 

"Eayther, I calculate," replied Cephas; "spry and ac- 
tive as a painter, and cute as a Albany needle." 

" When start you 1 " 

" In about ten minutes. Lord, Lord, won't I and Grid- 
dle have a talk, I expect, when we two gits together. 
Darn my old skin, but it will be no mistake." 

"Have you known him long," said, Edward Blake, 
while Philip Stevens walked away towards the room where 
the party usually congregated at night. 

" I reckon he seed me first ; for I warn't above a fut 
high, and he wur the doctor as assisted me into this uni- 
varse, I'm bound to say, seein' my old grandmother has 
told me so ever so many times." 

" Doctor ! " said Blake, endeavouring to be amused, in 
order to draw his mind from the wild and startling 
thoughts that filled his soul ; " why, he has many pro- 
fessions." 

" As many, I reckon, as there are hairs in a bull's tail," 
raplied Cephas ; " an' considering all things, that's a deal, 
I reckon." 

" What is he, besides a doctor 1 " 



280 THE PRISONER. 

" Well, I guess he'll tell more fortunes In a day, nor a 
Spanish pedlar would in a month." 

" What else 1 " 

" Why, thin, he's a mighty tall clockmaker ; most as 
good as Sam Slick, as you Britishers has bin poking fun 
about." 

" So Sam Slick is a real character 1 " 

" Eeal ! ain't he jist 1 Why, he's in a book." 

" That is no proof ; many men invent characters." 

" Well, I hearn tell of that afore ; but I ain't availed it 
can be true. There are so many busters of raal characters 
— riglar good uns — as ud kill a crocodile with laughing, 
that I can't account it true any man ud be such a Rhode 
island jackass as to invent one." 

" Certainly, if there were many big Griddles," said Ed- 
ward, smiling in spite of himself, "I expect romancists 
would require little invention. They would only have to 
copy nature. 

" As I see'd a born fool doin down east. He showed me 
a daub of paint jist like a broom, and swar it was a tree. 
Lord, I could see with half an eye lie was poking fun. I 
reckon nobody ever seed a tree sick a size. Why, my 
hand was bigger." 

" Much amused with Doyle, and perceiving that there 
was stuff in the man worth bringing out, Blake, whose 
mind was of that elastic character that could accommo- 
date itself to circumstances, went to his room ; and, arming 
himself, he prepared to accompany the Yankee in search 
of big Griddle, from whose acquaintance he promised him- 
self much satisfaction. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 281 

CHAPTER XVI. 

BIG GRIDDLE, THE PEDLAR 

In the very heart of the forest, facing the Eagle's Nest, 
and near to a purling and pellucid stream, where at night- 
fall the sandhill crane or stork came to water ; and where 
tasteful deer, wandering through the woods, during noon- 
tide heat, would slake their thirst ; and where all travellers, 
who wended their way through the neighbourhood at 
night, were wont to camp, there was an aged tree — a syca- 
more — whose huge branches made pleasant shade in sunny 
weather. Its roots, gnarled stumps, peeped forth above 
ground, as if scorning to be buried beneath the green sward. 
Some even, more disdainful of mother earth than common, 
peaked their points a foot higher than others ; and to one 
of these, tied with stout cords, — the tether of his own horse, 
— was attached -a man of somewhat colossal dimensions. 

Six feet high, thin, gaunt, and yellow as any guinea, or 
as his own leathern breeches — his only garment save and 
except his boots and red flannel shirt — he sat up in the 
twilight, the very ghost of the tree against which he 
leaned. 

Near his right hand was a bottle, whence escaped at the 
same time a faint odour of recent brandy — and a secret 
worth knowing. To that huge vegetable excrescence — for 
it was a gourd that had served its turn as brandy case — 
the delinquent owed, in the first place, that he went to 
sleep in a strange place, without keeping one eye awake ; 
secondly, that being thus asleep, he suffered the loss of his 
hat, coat, waistcoat, and cloak, to say nothing of his jargon, 
which men could only borrow, and that further loss which 
was common to himself in Upper Texas, and to Sancho 
Panza in the Sierra Morena — the stealing away of his 
beloved "dapple." 

Big Griddle — for it was this renowned pedlar — had, 



282 BIG GRIDDLE, THE PEDLAR, 

during his tour out west, heard tell, sometimes as a thing 
doubtful, that the Eagle's Nest was inhabited by a bold 
squatter, and a numerous family. Now, as men and women 
were, in big Griddle's eyes, but so many animated hedges 
whereon to hang peddling ware, or big eyes to look at his 
clocks, or as persons who might want his attendance — for 
he regarded all mankind medicinally, as mere viaducts for 
the conveyance of his medicines — he determined that the 
in-dwellers of the habitation that bordered on the Cross 
Timbers, should no longer suffer from the want of his 
visit. 

Strapping upon the back of his faithful animal, an extra 
bale — taken from some well-contrived cache, known only 
to his beast and himself — doctor, alias pedlar, alias big 
Griddle, started accordingly in the direction of the region 
which he supposed likely to turn out a good investment. 

As he went, his bale became lighter and his purse 
heavier, for no corner, no nook, nor cranny, where house 
or hut could perch, or sit hen-like, and hatch melancholy 
in the shade, was too remote for him. 

His nose was as acute for a customer, as it was sharp for 
roast pork — sharp enough, as he would often playfully and 
facetiously remark, for vinegar sauce to his favourite dish, 
a pig at nurse — or rather unnaturally deprived, of its 
lacteal nourishment. 

Months, therefore, ensued between Griddle's coming to 
the decision, and his being able to carry it into effect — 
months which rendered necessary three distinct voyages to 
replenish his bale. He had reached the very verge of the 
prairie in which was situated the spot it was his ambition 
to gain ; when, fatigued with his journey, and having 
mercy on his beast, towards which he entertained a per- 
fectly pyladian friendship, he halted at the spring to drink, 
and perchance to discuss his morning meal, when his nose 
and eyes Avere at the same time irresistibly assailed, and 
the double garrison of sight and smell were carried by 
storm. 

" By my father's old huckleberry stump, sweet pork 
by 3 a remnant, a fag-end, a sample, the leavings of 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN'. 283 

Bome dainty mortal, more nice than wise, though I say it 
that shouldn't, who am Benefited by it ; but still roast 
pork, by the head of the immortal Van Buren, General 
Jackson, and the army of the U — ni — tid States," con- 
tinued he, using his favourite oath — or expletive, as the 
moderns have it — and dismounting, he opened a carefully 
corked gourd, accidently left by one of the banditti ; 
"brandy, by ." 

This was a nasal asseveration, in a double sense, because- 
he judged by the odour, and spoke through the nose ; but 
before he proceeded to make assurance doubly sure, by the 
employment of any other faculty thereupon, he acted in 
some particulars with his accustomed circumspection. 

Tying the bridle of his horse to a long rope, and having 
removed saddle and bale from its back, he allowed it the 
range of the lasso. The bale and purse were hoisted, by a 
leathern thong thrown over a branch into the very thick 
of the boughs of the tree, which thong was then concealed 
behind the parastical plants that crept up the huge trunk 
of the sycamore. 

" ISTow I reckon I can eat," said big Griddle, with a 
frightful grin, quite ogrian in its intensity. "Gen'ral 
Jackson and the army of the U — ni — tid States, but this 
pork is good. By my mother's distaff — poor Mrs. Griddle 
—but it is not long enough, though — talking of old Mrs. 
Griddle, puts me in mind of my Mrs. Griddle, she did 
used to fry a pork chop spry. Darn my old horse's sack- 
cloth, but I should like to know how she gets on in the 
north. She must have increased the population of New 
Jersey since I left ; — ■ — and I not there. I suppose they 
sent that for darned old Whiffles, the quack — Ugh ! the 
brute. There's a state of things ; one's own family support- 
ing the opposition ! But these women are so obstinate. 
I told her I'd be home on purpose, if she'd wait until next 
Christmas." 

" Oh, my ! that brandy is first chop ; French, I con — 
elude. Well, I do think that ere tree's winking at me. 
Gen'ral Jackson and the army of the U — ni — tid States." 

In this mumbling, incoherent manner, the old pedlar 



284 BIG GRIDDLE, THE PEDLAB. 

went on until he had consumed the whole of the animal 
portion of his supper, undiversified by any of the vege- 
table. He then applied himself to the brandy bottle, and 
to that universal weed, which King James hath counter- 
blasted with such determination and vigour. Speedily he 
found himself in that delightful state, when a man begins to 
have an acute perception of his being first cousin to royalty. 

In this agreeable state was big Griddle found by the 
rambling Blackhawk, when scouring the woods in search 
of Chinchea and the other fugitives ; and knowing the 
pedlar well — having cheated him more than once — he 
resolved to purloin his clothes and horse, and thus to 
obtain an entrance into the Nest. As he felt convinced 
the pedlar had money and goods near at hand, he bound 
him fast to the tree ; determined, as soon as the capture of 
the Eagle's Nest was effected, to return and force from 
the unfortunate huckster the confession of where his pack 
was concealed. 

Big Griddle, when introduced to the reader — as evening 
was drawing in — had just awoke ; the somniferous and 
stupifying effects of the quart and more of brandy he had 
imbibed, having hitherto bound him in heavy durance. 
Uttering a volley of oaths — Griddle was, if a Christian 
at all, a cast-iron one — he struggled violently to get loose. 

" Darn that old horse," he cried — at first half inclined 
to laugh at his mishap — "he's bound to have walked round 
me until he's fixed me to the tree ; I'll swar this brute 
was brought up in a mill, I du. Joe, you varmint, won't 
you walk back agin ? Gen'ral Jackson and the army of 
the CAni-tid States, but thar knots, I'll go baiL Oh! 
old hickory, I'm cotched. What coon's in the woods, too 
deep for old Joe Griddle 1 

Darn that brandy, as my poor old father used to say — 
oh, his old huckleberry stump — its the fertile river 
whence many sources of evil spring. But whar's my 
horse ] Oh, Billy Power, where are ye 1 Joe, Joe 1 
namesake, whew ! And my pack, oh, by the head of 
Martin Van Buren — and considering all things that's a 
big oath — that's safe, anyhow* 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 285 

But Joe Griddle, my boy, this sarves you right, for drink- 
ing that catankerous brandy. Darn it's old stockin. 
Well, I'd give the best clock out of Maine — though that 
ain't offerin' much — to git loose from this here state of 
moral petrifaction, I would. And my coat, hid ! there's 
all the pieces I've carried about as samples for this twenty 
years in that old coat ; and the hat, my go-to-meetin' 
hat, though go-to-meetrn's neither here nor there. And 
old Joe, my poor horse, here's a fixin. I only wish I had 
the varmint, the unchristened coon, I'd make him suck 
his fingers without molasses. Talking o' 'lasses puts me 
in mind of pork. Pork and 'lasses is a rare drink. I 
smell pork ; ah, it's only the odour." 

" You're right, Griddle, my boy ; I knew I was bound 
to find you. Well, I never did expect to see you taking 
it cool arter this fashion." 

" Jist look out. I'm savage. If you've bin poking fun 
at me, you're bound to pay for it," said Griddle. 

"I," cried Ceyhas Doyle ; "why, you're drunk." 

" No," said the pedlar, " I ave bin, but I ain't jist now. 
But I smell a rat about these diggins ; you're Captain 
Cephas Doyle as was at Saba." 

" I am." 

" Thin jist operate." 

Cephas Doyle, assisted by Edward Blake, who could 
not repress a smile, now quickly loosed the knots that 
bound the pedlar, during which operation they gave an 
account of the way in which the Nest had been imposed 
upon. Cephas Doyle, who loved a joke dearly, made the 
most of the scene, and Joseph Griddle was wondrous irate 
at the use made of his person. 

" Gen'ral Jackson and the army of the ?7-ni-tid States, 
but I'll pound his jacket, I will. To ask for roast pig 
too ; why, he might have deceived poor Mrs. Griddle her- 
self," and the pedlar's hair actually stood on end at the 
bare thought of such an enormity. 

" But I think we had better regain the Nest," observed 
Edward, quietly. 

" Young man, I expect you're right ;" and, whisking his 



286 BIG GRIDDLE, THE PEDLAR. 

pack upon his shoulders, having removed it from its ele- 
vated position, the gaunt pedlar, walking side by side with 
Edward and Cephas Doyle, went on his way rejoicing, 
towards the Eagle's Nest, to reach which spot had cost him 
so adventurous a three months. 

"Walking along, the eccentric huckster excited the risible 
faculties of Cephas to the utmost, by the droll account of 
all his wanderings, which he narrated with infinite relish 
and humour. 

" That Blackhawk's a rare brute, I expect ; I should 
like to have his portrait taken, and send it to Mrs. Grid- 
dle, I do think." 

"Perhaps she would fall in love with it, Joe 1 ? " 

" Eall in what ? Martin Van Bur en squeeze me into 
etarnal atomy, but you're poking fun at an almighty big 
rate, Mr. Cephas." 

" Women are mortal," said Cephas, drily, " and there's 
no accountin' for taste." 

'■ Gen'ral Jackson and the army of the ?7-ni-tid States, 
you're about right, I guess," replied big Griddle, with a 
huge grin, " or else you'd never git a wife." 

" What, you're at that game, are you ? " said Doyle. 

" What game 1 " replied Griddle. 

" Why, a makin' an almighty big donkey of your own 
private self," responded Cephas. 

" Captain Cephas Doyle," said big Griddle, solemnly, 
"du you reckon who I am ? " 

" I conclude, big Griddle ; Griddle the pedlar." 

" You do ? I'm glad to hear it ; because pedlars ain't 
generally called donkeys without speaking their mind." 

" But we were calculatin' about that fellow, Blackhawk," 
said Cephas, who saw that Griddle was a slight degree 
offended. 

" Oh, he'd smell roast pork, he would," replied Griddle. 
" I expect you'll hang that chap." 

"JSTo!" said Doyle. 

" Not hang him ? " exclaimed Griddle. 

" Sartin not." 

" Then, Cephas, you're a brute. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 287 

*' A brute !" shouted Cephas. 

*" Yes ; ain't that plain ? You want something stronger, 
I expect." 

" No ! " said Cephas. 

" Then perhaps you'll jist explain the reason why you 
don't want to hang that varmint." 

Cephas Doyle accordingly, with many a hearty laugh, 
gave an account of the trial ; during the progress of which 
narration the whole party reached the Eagle's Nest, and 
the true and false Griddle were brought into familiar 
proximity. 



CHAPTER XVIL 

THE WAR CRY. 

The Leaping Panther and his six companions were 
unable to perform the whole extent of the journey they 
had expected to complete during the day, on account of 
the inferior character of their horses, and the many tangled 
thickets and muddy streams which intervened. It was 
dark night even, when they reached the proposed camping 
ground which was made the goal of their wishes for that 
day, instead of the picturesque and romantic village of the 
Comanche Indians. 

About an hour after sunset, the Leaping Panther, who 
rode at the head of the party, drew rein, and halted by 
the edge of a pine grove that offered both fuel and 
shelter, 

" Camp here," said Chinchea, addressing himself to the 
white man, the loquacious Benjamin Smith, who was 
introduced so unceremoniously to our readers. 

" First — chop," replied Ben, with a huge grin ; " it 
'ave got jist all four wants — wood, water, sky, and airth, 



288 THE WAR CRT. 

Only lug out somethin' a feller can jist dig his teeth 
into, and I'll swar it immense." 

" Look," continued the Indian, pointing with his out- 
stretched arm to the other side of the diminutive lake, 
where a black mass of rocK rose perpendicularly ; " good 
camp, no eyes see fire." 

This was true. 

The trees formed a crescent round a little bay, com- 
pletly shutting out all observation of the camp, except 
exactly on the opposite side, and there, by the light of 
the pallid moon, could be discovered a perpendicular 
rock, rising from the water. 

The Indian knew it well, and had selected the position 
because least likely to attract the wandering Towachani 
on so cold a night. 

Every necessaiy disposition was rapidly made, much 
to the satisfaction of Ben Smith, who appeared once more 
in his element; for camping out was as natural to him, 
as sleeping in a bed of down is to the luxurious dweller in 
towns, who knows not the pleasure and delight which 
are experienced by the woodland fire, with no roof save the 
heavens, no walls save the surrounding trees, no bed 
save mother earth, and the green sward above her. 

The fire was lit, the supper was being prepared by the 
hands of the lovely Eose of Day, and all proceeded 
eminently to the satisfaction of the whole party. 

"This are pleasanter than outlying with the bloody 
Blackhawk," remarked Smith ; " he's a varmint I don't 
half like." 

" Then why did the white man join him V said Chin- 
chea, drily. 

"Don't rile me," replied Ben warmly, "for I can't 
jist say. I'm a real fevert boy, I am, and no mistake ; 
and, somehow or another, I fell in with thim fellows — 
but I have found 'em out in time." 

" Ugh ! " said Chinchea, laying his finger on his lips. 

All was still as death in an instant. Ben listened 
with all his ears, but could catch no sound. 

"What is it 1 !" he whispered, in cautious tones. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 289 

The Indian made no reply, but pointed to the lake 
with his raised finger. 

" I can see nothing," said Ben. 

" Did my brother ever see two moons 1 " asked Chin- 
chea, after another brief silence. 

" Never," replied Ben, indignantly, " nor no other 
man. " 

"But he will see two lights streaming on the lake." 

Ben now clearly perceived the reason of the Indian's 
caution. The halo cast by some blazing fire, spread its 
influence on the lake, and seemed to cross the rays of the 
moon, which poured its light towards the party. 

"It moves," said Ben, after some minutes of careful 
observation. " It's thim Towachanies fire-fishing." 

" Good," observed the Indian, approvingly. 

"Thin, we may expect raal warm work," said Ben 

" Ugh !" replied the Comanche, sententiously. 

The whole party now moved silently away from the fire, 
and concealed themselves within a few yards of its glare. 

Chinchea and Ben skirted the edge of the little bay, 
and discovered the exact position of the cause of alarm. 

" Raal jam," whispered Ben. 

"Towachanies!" said Chinchea, after a moment of 
quiet examination. About two hundred yards distant, on 
the pellucid waters of the lake, there were some dozen 
bark canoes, filled with Indians engaged in fishing. 

" What is to be done, Injine 1 " said Ben. 

" Hist ! " replied Chinchea ; " they come this way." 

At the same moment, the tiny fleet was impelled for- 
ward to within less than half their former distance. 

A low and angry growl — that of the panther — again 
startled Ben, but a moment's reflection made him aware 
of whence it proceeded. 

One by one, cautiously and stealthily, the whole party 
collected round Chinchea. 

" Must we fight 1 " said Ben, calmly, at the same time 
cocking his long Tennessee rifle. 
" Ugh ! " replied Chinchea. 
" Jist pass the word, then," said Ben. 

U 



290 THE ESCAPE OF BLACKHAWK. 

" Hist ! " again said Chinchea, with a low laugh ; 
"Chinchea has lost his eyes — he cannot see." 

And he said a few words to his companions. 

A combined yell, fearful and horrible beyond all hope 
of description, rent the air. It was the awful Comanche 
war whoop. The effect was magical. 

Again did the party on shore raise their voices, but 
it was in song ; the cadence they sang was the war-cry of 
the Leaping Panther. Up rose the Indians all ; cheerily 
burned the lights ; on came the canoes, for the combined 
party of Comanche and Towachanie fishers recognised the 
presence of the favourite warrior of the former tribe ! 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 

THE ESCAPE OP BLACKHAWK. 

A deep and heavy silence had for hours hung over the 
whole of the Eagle's Nest ; trusting to the Avatch-dogs, not 
even a sentinel had been placed upon the walls. 

About an hour after midnight the door of Alice's room 
opened, and she herself came forth, followed by the ever- 
faithful Korah. In her hand was a small lantern, the 
light of which she shaded as much as possible, anxious, it 
seemed, not to attract observation. 

A few steps brought them to the door of the wood-house, 
where Blackhawk was imprisoned. 

" Hold the light," said Alice, "while I unbar the door." 

" Berry well, miss, berry well," replied ISTorah. 

" Hold it up high," continued the fearless girfc 

" Oh ! " sighed aSTorah, as she saw Alice gradually remove 
the barrier between her and Blackhawk. 

''Now <?'ive me the light, and follow," said Alice, as 
gently pushing open the gate, she entered the wood-house. 
"Speak not a word, lest you wake him suddenly." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 291 

" Oh ! " groaned. XN~orah aloud, in the full conviction 
that her last hour was come, and that she was about to 
become a martyr to her domestic devotion. 

"He sleeps," said Alice ; "wretched man! with such a 
fate before him, and such crimes upon his head. Can he 
know the reality of his position 1 " 

"Him just say," whispered No rah, "him desp'rite coon, 
and him massa say him look a right down bad un. Him 
not so berry ugly do; ''most ansum as one color geiil'mau." 

" Silence, Norah ; bring the light, and hold it over his 
face. Let me see, and know that it is he." 

On a pile of Indian corn husks, and wrapped in an old 
Mexican poncho, lay Blackhawk. 

" Harry," said Alice, in a low but distinct whisper. 

"Dedebil!" 

" Hush, Norah," exclaimed her mistress, sternly. 

" Good ; " and Nbrah, with a sigh, retreated into a corner. 

"Harry," repeated Alice — this time laying her hand 
heavily upon the unconscious man. 

Still no answer — no motion on the part of the sleeper. 

" Strange," said Alice, musingly ; " innocence itself 
could hardly sleep more soundly. 

She shook him again. 

" Him wake dis time," said Xorah, retreating in con- 
siderable alarm ; "him wake, and den lud hab mussy !" 

" Silence ! " said Alice, raising her finger menacingly. 
" I tell you, girl, I will have no word spoken." 

" Hist ! hist ! " said the waking man, "where am 1 1" 

"Not a word above your breath, if you value your life;" 
said Alice laying her finger on her lips. 

"Alice!" 

"Yes, Alice ; Harry Markham, Alice is here for once." 

" For what 1 — why are you come 1 " exclaimed the 
bandit, rising. 

" To save you from a death, I fear, richly deserved." 

" To save 1 " cried the robber. " Good, kind, generous 
Alice ; ever the same." 

" Much changed," said the girl, quietly ; " but not so 
changed as you." 

v 2 



292 THE ESCAPE OF BLAOKHAWK. 

" Changed in what 1 " said Markham. 

" Changed in heart/' cried she ; " changed from a little 
prattling child, as you knew me once in the old country, 
to a stern and resolute woman." 

" You are not twenty, Alice," said he, with a smile. 

" Young in years, but old in heart," replied she, sadly. 
" The few summers which have passed over my head have 
been bleak and stormy — time and trouble have laid a 
heavy hand upon me." 

" Not worse than upon myself," said Markham. 

" Ah ! but your ills have been of your own seeking, 
Harry ; and to you, chiefly, I owe the troublesome scenes 
which have chilled and blighted my bright hopes — hopes, 
perhaps, by far too bright to be realised." 

"Then why seek to save me?" said he, with a sneer. 

" Because I do not wholly forget what once you were to 
me, and to all those who knew you." 

"But you no longer look upon me, then, as little 

Harry, who once called you his " and the robber gave 

a meaning smile. 

" One word of that," said Alice, sternly — though a rich 
blush mantled on her cheek — and to your fate I commit 
you. It is not womanly weakness that brings me here ; 
but I told him he should not slay you, and slay you he 
shall not." 

" No matter why I am saved, Alice, if saved I am to 
be," exclaimed Markham, with levity. 

" Now, then, to the block," said the girl, sadly. " You 
must escape through my room ; it is your only chance." 

" As you will." 

"Lead the way, Norah," exclaimed her mistress. 

" Eess, mess," replied the astonished negress. 

"Philip Stevens has well chosen his lair," said the 
bandit, looking rcmnd the Nest as he proceeded, "although 
it must be but a dull place for you, Alice." 

" There is a bright day coming for us all, replied the 
girl, in tones that somewhat belied her words. 

" From whence V 
I know not," replied Alice. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 293 

" Perhaps mine may come too — who knows 1 " 

"When you will." 

" How 1 " exclaimed Markham. 

" Seek repentance, and with repentance will soon come 
peace," said Alice, gently. 

" Folly ! " cried he ; " 'tis too late, I fear, for me." 

"Tis never too late," whispered the young girl, as 
she turned and faced her companion. 

" There is hut one thing that could tempt me to repent- 
ance and a change," said Blackhawk. 

"And that is ?" 

"You ! " said Blackhawk. 

" Me ? " shrieked Alice. 

"Yes, Alice, you; " and the robber spoke in sad and 
solemn tones. 

" Harry Markham, when I was a mere child, some nine 
years ago, you called me wife. I laugked at you then. 
Were you now as innocent as in those days, I should 
laugh at you still ; but, as you are " 

" Say no more," exclaimed the man, moodily ; " it is 
but justice. Let us part." 

" To meet no more, I hope," replied Alice. 

" That depends on fate. But how am I to escape ? " 

Alice, at once led the way, and the bandit soon succeeded 
in effecting his escape. 

Alice then returned to her chamber, to meditate on the 
consequences of what she had done. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A WELCOME ARRIVAL. 



It was somewhat late on the morning after the escape 
of Blackhawk, ere the garrison was on foot ; and as the 
young sailor happened to be one of those who overslept 
themselves, he found that Alice, Margaretta. and he had 



294 A WELCOME ARRIVAL. 

to breakfast alone. Alice was pale ; while her eyes 
showed signs, either of much weeping, or of a long and 
sleepless vigil. Blake, who, for many reasons, now watched 
Alice with more attention than formerly, remarked the 
circumstance. 

" You seem unwell," he said, .tenderly. 

Margaretta looked fixedly at him, while her colour came 
and went. 

Alice, without noticing this, smiled languidly. 

"Truly this unhappy state of things presses on my 
spirits. I was not formed for war and bloodshed." 

" No," interposed the Mexican ; "but this bold, bad man 
they have taken, — will not his death put an end to the 
struggle 1" 

" They will not take his life," replied Alice sadly; "they 
dare not, and they cannot." 

" Why ? " asked Edward, curiously. 

" He is far beyond their reach, Mr. Brown. I told Mr. 
Stevens — that is my father — that it must not be ; and in 
the night I opened his prison-door." 

"You have acted more boldly than wisely, I think, 
Miss Alice," said Blake ; " but may I ask, why such 
interest in this robber ruffian ? " 

" I take little interest, Mr. Brown, in the bandit. He 
deserves death, I fear ; but not at their hands. But 
excuse me if I am not confidential. I own I have othei 
reasons. They will be spoken — they must — but not yet." 

A loud cry from without now caused the trio to rise 
from the table. 

" Catankerously cleared out, I 'snore," cried, above all, 
the voice of Big Griddle. "A riglar coon, I conceive. 
Sloped like a Kentucky John — behind a pretty consider- 
able sleek set of keepers ; he has, I expect, played 'em 
possum, and no mistake. Never waited for papers, I'l] 
be bound ; but cleared out like a corsair, I calculate, and 
no mistake. "Won't there be doins down in the lowei 
parts ! I pity the pigs, I do. Ha ! ha ! roast pork in the 
wind, by thunder." 

"Treason," squeaked the shrill voice of Jones • "treacb? 



T'lB YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 295 

ery ! Find it out, and hang the traitor ! No mercy, I say ; 
no mercy ! " 

The whole party were standing round the open door of 
the robber's prison. On the threshold was Stevens — his 
eyes flashing with passion, his face colourless, his thin 
lips quivering with emotion. His hand clutched his gun, 
and he was wrapped in thought. 

" Gone ! " said he, without paying attention to the 
exclamations of Jones. 

Before this man Alice paused, and turning to him with 
a firm, but stern and menacing brow, she touched him 
lightly on the shoulder. 

"Well?" said Jones. 

"Would you hang me as well as kill my ? " 

" Hush, in the name of God ! " cried Jones, reeling, 
and nearly falling ; " who would hang you 1 " 

" I gave freedom to Harry Markham ; and I, therefore, 
am the traitor." 

" You, girl 1 " cried Stevens, on whom Blake fixed his 
eye Avith warning. 

" Well, I am steel-strapped, chawed up, and ain't got a 
leg to stand on," said Big Griddle, "if you ain't the very 
spirit of Mrs. G. — By Jove, if I only wanted pig for break- 
fast, I had it for supper. It's jist the way of the gals. 
You'd have made a corpse of Blackhawk, darn his skin, 
but the gal saved his bacon. Ha ! ha ! good idea that. 
Ha! ha! jist kick me, or I'm bound to bust alarfin. Well, 
that is pokin fun and no mistake." 

" Well," said Stevens, who had caught the expression 
of Blake's eye, " perhaps 'tis all for the best. This man's 
blood, at all events, will not be on our hands." 

" So ho, there ! " cried a look-out from the summit of 
the block. 

" What news 1 " replied Stevens. 

" Injins," continued the look-out. 

The whole party rushed towards the terrace, which 
overlooked the prairie, and there, on the edge of the 
forest, in the rich panoply of war-paint, and mounted on 
their small but sturdy nags, came a hundred warriors of 
the Comanche tribe, with Chinchea in advance. 



296 A WELCOME ARRIVAL 

" Give them welcome," shouted Stevens ; " quick to the 
block, and up with the red flag of England ; and you, 
Jones, hoist out the white one here ; open the gates and 
lower the bridge." 

The whole garrison received their welcome deliverers 
with alacrity. 

The greeting between Blake and Chinchea was sincere 
and hearty, and the Indian related his many adventures 
on the road towards the camp of his friends. 

" And what has happened to my white brother 1 " 

" Many things, Chinchea ; more than I can tell you 
now. But I shall soon want the advice of a brave " 

" Chinchea is ready," said the Indian. 

"His brother knows it," continued Blake, "and will 
tell him all when the time comes." 

" Good," said Chinchea, " My brother likes not this 
place. Will he go to the wigwams of his red friend 1 " 

Now Blake knew that Chinchea was trying to fin^ an 
excuse to return to the side of his dusky love, to celebrate 
the wedding he so long desired. 

" Chinchea is right. I like not this place. To me, the 
air is close and unwholesome ; it smells of the charnel- 
house," replied Blake, gradually growing excited. " For 
days, doubts and fears have filled my mind ; now there is 
no doubt ; I must, therefore, stay and find out the secret 
of innocent blood being foully shed, and most base wrong 
being done. Chinchea, the secret of my life is here. 

"Who has taken the scalp of a friend of my white 
brother 1 " said Chinchea j " the tomahawk of the Coman- 
che shall take his in return." 

" No, no, Chinchea, I will not have his life taken. In 
the hands of those who have a right to judge, will I place 
him, if my suspicions prove just." 

Philip Stevens approached. 

" Well, Mr. Brown, are you for a sally ? We propose 
scouring the woods in search of the enemy, who will now 
doubtless beat a retreat." 

" I am ready at a word," replied Blake. 

"The white man is hasty," said Chinchea "let the 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 297 

scouts move first, and see that the enemy be not hid in the 
grass, to fly up and bite like snakes." 

"You are quite right, Eedskin," said Stevens, "Whom 
will you dispatch 1 " 

"None yet. Chinchea will wait until the night is 
come, and then he will go himself." 

" Will you take a white man with you?" asked Stevens. 

" Yes, him," said the Indian. 

"I am quite agreeable," responded Blake — the person 
selected ; " but let us go at once. Your cavalry can 
easily pour down to our rescue at the least alarm." 

" Good — my white brother is very wise, and Chinchea 
will go." 

The party was now arranged in proper order. The 
whole body of Indian horse were drawn up close to the 
Nest, while the whites were dispersed amongst them ; 
leaving Big Griddle, Pietro, and the Mexicans with the 
women, to guard the cattle in the fort. The next re- 
quisite was for the two spies to gain the wood, without 
being detected by any of those who might be watching 
their movements from the edge of the forest. 

Chinchea at once devised a plan, and having given full 
directions to Blake, he proceeded to put it into execution. 
Selecting a dozen of the very fleetest horsemen, and those 
most gaily caparisoned, Blake and he, having stripped 
themselves of every unnecessary article of clothing, 
mounted behind two of the horsemen in the rear of the 
troop, and placed themselves so as to be unseen. These 
men, properly instructed, then swept madly down the slope, 
taking various directions, and skirted the wood, as if in 
search of enemies. The two who bore outlyers behind 
them, constantly darted in and out of the thick brush- 
wood, as if suspecting proximity to those they sought, but 
presently the whole gang, at a given signal, darted back 
and rejoined their companions. 



298 
CHAPTEK XX. 

MASSACRE OF THE BLACKFEET. 

Making a sign to Edward to follow him, Chinchea entered 
a stream, whose pellucid water, however, but slowly hid 
their trail as it swept over their footsteps in the sand. 
In this way they advanced some hundred yards, when 
Chinchea halted. 

" Ugh," he said. " Good— they are found" 

" What is it ? " said Blake. 

" Blackfeet," said Chinchea ; " the squaws of the hills 
have joined the white thieves. A foot comes ; we must 
hide." 

Quick as thought the two friends disappeared behind a 
bush, just in time to avoid being seen by three Indians, 
who were returning to the boat with a fat buck on their 
shoulders. Two were full-grown warriors — the third a lad 
of some twelve years. Ere the Blackfeet could throw 
down their load, their enemies were upon them, cutlass 
and tomahawk in hand — to avoid the discharge of fire-arms. 
Taken thus by stirprise, the struggle lasted not a minute. 
The warriors fell lifeless ; the lad was a, prisoner. 

Blake and Chinchea leaped into the boat. 

The chief stood up in the stem of the frail craft, while 
Blake and the youth propelled it. The warrior's eye sur- 
veyed every point. No discovery, however, for some 
time rewarded his diligence, and at length, entering a 
small but deep basin, where the water lay in a natural 
cavity of rock, with a small island in the midst, they 
halted. 

" My white brother will stay here until night," said the 
Indian; "we shall then find the enemy. "We will burrow 
like prairie owls." 

The island was a mere tufted stone of large dimensions, 
on which a little stray earth sufficed to support a few 
thick bushes, which sufficiently served the purpose of con- 
cealment. Several huge pieces of Tock, piled up in rough 



THE TOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 299 

confusion, made, on one side, a kind of rampart ; and a 
small inlet, a few feet in width, between these and the 
main stone, served to draw the boat out of sight. Blake re- 
mained in the canoe as sentinel over the lad, whose arms, 
as a further precaution, were bound behind him, in case of 
an attack, when their attention might be drawn oif. 

About an hour before sunset, a trampling sound was 
heard below the diminutive lake, proclaiming the presence 
of both horse and foot. Blake and the Indian raised 
their heads. They saw at once the mistake they had made 
in selecting camping place. The enemy they sought were 
about to camp within twenty yards of their position. 

" It's all over with us this time, Chinchea," said Blake, 
sinking beside his friend in the canoe. 

" We will escape," replied Chinchea," calmly. "The 
Blackfeet are squaws ; they will smell a warrior, and 
think it but the resin from the pine-trees." 

" We shall have a heavy storm, said Blake. 

" Thunder," was the calm reply. 

A splash in the water made them both start. Their 
captive, though bound, had, while they had been examin- 
ing the signs of the night, rolled himself out of the canoe, 
and was making for the shore. The Indian, with a stern 
brow, at once seized his rifle, and prepared for the deadly 
struggle which he saw must now ensue ; Blake did the 
same. 

A sudden idea seemed to strike the Indian; for, seizing 
his tomahawk, he drew up the bark canoe on the rock, and, 
to the great astonishment of his companion, began hacking 
it to pieces. Placing these where a blaze of light would 
not fall upon themselves and betray their position, 
Chinchea added some dry bushes, and the paddle broken 
into bits. Beneath all he placed a little loose powder, 
and dry moss torn from the rock, as well as a small piece 
of paper. 

Scarcely had these preparations been concluded, when 
a sudden bustle in the two camps proclaimed that the news 
was spreading ; and lying low upon the rock, the two 
friends saw dense masses collecting on the nearest shore, 



300 MASSACRE OP THE BLACKFEET. 

which, was about eighty yards distant, while the other was 
two hundred ; but the water was too deep there, to permit 
the chance of the enemy wading. 

" My white brother will shoot after me," said Chinchea, 
quietly, " then the Indian will load. Watch the water ; 
they will swim if they dare." 

" I will," said Blake, who covld not forbear a bitter 
smile at the idea of their combating two hundred men. 

But the Indian himself was not more determined. At 
this instant a very low and irregular sound came from the 
opposite shore. Chinchea started, and raising himself, he 
gave, as lowly, the well-known growl of the panther. 

Four dark figures at once plunged into the water, while 
the Indian, quietly turning the other way, discharged his 
rifle at the crowd who stood in council on the strand. 
A shrill cry and a dozen balls flying over their heads, 
showed that the shot had told, and several of the enemy, 
pushing out a canoe, made furiously towards the rock. The 
night was clear enough to distinguish ten men in this boat, 
besides the lad who had betrayed them. 

"Shoot one of the rowers," said Chinchea, quietly, 
"and then load." 

Edward Blake did as directed, and the canoe, the 
oarsman being wounded, whirled half round. 

Ere they could again start fair, the four dark figures 
stood in the narrow gap, beside the Indian and Blake. It 
was Smith, Cephas Doyle, and two Comanche warriors, 
who, having left the Eagle's Nest at nightfall, had pene- 
trated to the enemy's camp, and overheard their discovery 
of the fugitives, whom they immediately determined to 
join. This reinforcement gave renewed courage; and 
Chinchea resolved to avail himself to the full of the 
advantage thus gained. 

Every gun was levelled at the boat, but ere they were 
discharged, the Comanche fired the train leading to the 
fire-beacon, and then the united volley was poured upon 
the canoe. Petrified at the unexpected force on the rock, 
and the greater part wounded — two being killed — the boat's 
crew fled, and landed amid furious outcries at the deceit 



THB YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 301 

which they accused the Jad of having practised upon them. 
He protested that he had told the truth; but he was 
not credited, but was killed by his revengeful country- 
men, after lingering tortures. 

Meanwhile the bark tire sparkled high, and the blaze, 
unimpeded by the wind, rose curling and wreathing, as if 
about to follow the upward Hying smoke ; so that the little 
band knew it must be seen at the Eagle's Nest. 

To distract, therefore, the attention of their enemies, 
they kept up a constant and running fire of three, which 
was answered as steadily, the artillery of heaven soon 
joining in the action. 

After a short conference, the besiegers divided themselves 
into six columns; and seeking various spots where there 
were fords, they entered, and advanced steadily — in ail cases 
headed by white men. Stern and steady was the fire of 
the little band of the besieged, as they crouched upon the 
sand, back to back, and side to side. 

They were calm, though their fate seemed sealed ; and 
they awaited the approach of their enemies in sullen silence. 
But they came slowly. Six times they reached the centre 
of the stream, and six times they fell back before the steady 
and coolly delivered fire of its defenders. 
Suddenly this ceased, and all was still. 
Believing that the powder of their enemy was exhausted, 
on came the whole gang ; gaining, unopposed, the much 
wished-for goal, barely in time to see the figures of the 
retreating garrison rising from the water-way by which 
they had fled. 

" Back, every man of you !" shrieked Blackhawk, plung- 
ing, with an almost superhuman leap, into the depths of 
the lake — " back, or ye are dead men." 

All obeyed, or sought to do so : but at that instant, the 
match, burning nearly at a level with the water, and de- 
pendant from a hastily closed up cavity which had alarmed 
the outlaw chief, took effect— and the contents of six large 
horns of powder sent the rock in ten thousand fragments 
into the air, with a terrific and awful report. 

Shrieks and yells arose upon the night air, and then 



302 MASSACRE OF THE BLACKFEET. 

all was still as death. Hastily surveying the damage done, 
it was found that more than twenty men had been killed, 
while as many more were wounded. Meanwhile the bold 
knot who had thus terribly punished their enemies, were 
too far off to make attempt at capture of any avail. 

" Stand to your arms, lads," cried Blackhawk, "and come 
round me quick." His gang congregated close. 

" Listen, and act. In five minutes the Comanche hawks 
will he upon us. Let the Blackfeet bear the brunt. You 
disperse secretly, as if gaining your camp, and meet me at 
the blasted cedar, on Skull Creek." 

In another instant the survivors of the robber gang were, 
apparently, dissolved into thin air. Not one was to be 
seen. Scarcely had this base desertion of their allies been 
effected, when, bursting like the black riders of some 
demon clouds, down came the Comanche band upon the 
devoted Blackfeet. 

Betraating slowly, the thinned band of Indian warriors 
reached the edge of the lake, fighting all the way, and 
leaving many a mark of their redoubtable valour. 

But the God of battles was against them, and over- 
powering forces broke every hope of escape. 

Blake was the first white man to withdraw from what 
was becoming a massacre, and his example soon led his 
countoymen away. But the redskins had no such feelings ; 
their glory was not so much in victory as in the extermi- 
nation of their enemies, and not one Blackfoot escaped to 
tell the tale, except one or two prisoners saved by the inter- 
ference of the whites. This interference had, however, an 
object in view. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 303 

CHAPTEE XXI. 

EDWARD BLAKE AND ALICE. 

By a low and carefully concealed fire, sat the gang of 
Blackhawk, which, by desertion and death, was now reduced 
to twenty men ; but the leader was not among them. For 
hours had they awaited his arrival, yet he came not ; at 
length, as they began to fear that some misfortune had 
befallen him, he made his appearance. 

" Where have you been, captain," said Carcassin. 

" At the Eagle's Nest," replied the bandit, moodily. 

"Ha ! and have you made a prize?" cried Pedro. 

" I came as I went — empty-handed," continued Black- 
hawk ; " but come, let us to council. Something must be 
done. These wild Comanches are raging through the 
forest for our blood, and are in too great numbers to be 
defeated. They have slain every man of the Blackfeet." 

" Every man ! the sanglant varmint." 

" Santa Maria," cried Pedro, " but they are pagans." 

"True, they are not such Christians as we are," said 
Blackhawk, with an involuntary shudder. 

The ex-priest laughed, but made no reply, and the 
bandit council continued. 

Next morning, not a trace of Blackhawk or his gang- 
was to be seen in or near the Nest. 

The mission of the Comanche warriors ended with the 
defeat and slaughter of the Blackfeet, and the dispersion 
of the gang of Blackhawk ; therefore after receiving a 
suitable reward, they returned to Spanish Peak. 

Two days afterwards, Philip Stevens called a council of 
his companions. 

" My friends," he said, after a short pause, " I have not 
called you idly together, but to learn what you will do to 
render me some assistance in an important matter. I am 
about to abandon the Eagle's Nest for ever." 

A murmur of surprise arose, in which all joined, save 
the Indian and Jones. 



304 EDWARD BLAKE AND AUCH. 

" Yes, I cannot any longer hope to remain here in peace ; 
many of you are shortly about to depart, and, once tha 
garrison is weakened, the relentless Blackhawk will attack 
the fort, and not only rob us, but put everyone to the 
sword. 1 have, therefore, determined to pack up all my 
traps, and, turning my back upon the wilderness, to seek 
once more the settlements. It will be far more suitable 
to one no longer young, besides, I must think something of 
Alice." 

" What I assemble you for," continued Stevens, " is to 
learn who amongst you are willing to accompany me. The 
Brazos river is within ten miles, and on that I have a 
skow well enough concealed to make sure of our finding it 
still. In this matter how will you act, Mr. Blake 1 " 

Our hero started at hearing his real name thus inad- 
vertently mentioned, while Jones looked scared and 
horror-struck. Alice, too, was agitated at the mention of 
that name. . "I for one," said Blake, coldly, "am ready to 
accompany you." 

" Thanks," replied Stevens ; then, turning to the others, 
he received answers equally encouraging ; so that in half- 
an-hour the departure was fully arranged. 

Edward had in five minutes concluded all that he 
had to attend to ; and, wandering out upon the terrace, 
he was about to give himself up to dreams of the past, 
when a graceful form glided to his side, and, looking up, 
he beheld Alice. 

" You, too," he said, " feel sorry to quit this place 1 " 
" Ah no ! " replied Alice, shaking her head j " but I 
wish to speak to you for a moment." 
" On what wish you'to speak, Alice 1 " 
"I scarcely know why; but a few simple acts oi yours — 
your stnvMng so strangely once when you saw certain 
armorial bearings in a book of mine, and your coldness to- 
wards Jones and Mr. Stevens, combined with your having 
been addressed by him as Mr. Blake, have determined me to 
confide to you the mystery and secret of my history. I have 
powerful reasons for what I do, and no second opportunity 
may occur. In justice to one criminal, not so guilty as 
others, I must be explicit. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 305 

" I was born, I believe, in a remote part of tbe north of 
Ireland. My father owned much property ; but, having 
lost his wife in early days, he retired to his country seat, 
and, dismissing nearly all his servants, he lived on the 
tenth part of his income. 

" The house in which we lived was situated in a lonely 
corner of open land, at no great distance from some hills, 
over which came, occasionally, riding on his shaggy pony, 
a little cousin, a lad of about ten, while I was about eight; 
he was my constant playmata Son of my father's only 
brother, who was a poor country parson, my father," — here 
Alice blushed violently — " always encouraged the prospect 
of an union between us, and often spoke of it, though we 
were mere children. 

" Suddenly, however, he fell ill ; and so severe was the 
sickness, that it in some degree impaired the powers of a 
naturally strong mind. Taking advantage of this, some 
distant relatives of my father contrived to gain his 
favour, and they even ventured to relate to him reports 
injurious to my mother. So vile were their arts, that they 
succeeded in getting him to make a will entirely disinherit- 
ing me, and constituting them his heirs. 

" Gradually, however, his health and strength returned, 
and with it his soundness of mind, and that love and con- 
fidence in her he had espoused, which made him dismiss 
the calumniators, and revoke the will by another, which 
Juade me his sole inheritress. Unfortunately he still kept 
the extorted will in his possession, quite cou.ent with the 
existence of the one of later date which revoked it 

" A year passed away, and my father's malady returned 
more violently than ever, and the physicians pronounced 
that he had not more than twenty-four hours to live. I 
slept in a room close to him, and about nine o'clock, after 
I had been in bed an hour, I rose to go and look at my 
dying parent. I crept softly near his bed, and hiding 
behind the curtains, near the wall, between which and the 
bod I squeezed myself, I gazed with awful and agonising 
interest, child as I was, on the ebbing life that was to leave 
me an orphan. 



306 Alice's histoby. 

"Suddenly, in the moonlight, I saw a shadow fall on the 
floor, and then another, as if two men were entering by 
the window. 

" I held my breath, and perceived that two men — armed 
with knives and pistols, and their faces covered with crape 
— had taken advantage of the unfastened window, to ascend 
into the apartment. One of the men was much taller than 
the other, who was short even to dwarfishness. Dreadfully 
alarmed, I would have shrieked out, but my tongue refused 
its office, and I saw the two men approach the bed. 

" 'Is that you, dear Hugh 1 ' said my father, in a faint 
voice — he thought it was his brother — ' You will soon be 
Sir Hugh, I fear ! ' I forgot to mention that my father was 
a baronet. 

" ' No/ growled the dwarf ; ' it is not Hugh.' 

" ' Who is it then 1 ' said my father, rousing himself. 

" 'Harkee ! ' hissed the dwarf, standing close by the bed, 
while the other gagged and blindfolded the sleeping nurse ; 
' our business is short. You have in your possession two 
wills. Where are they 1 ' 

" ' What want you with them 1 ' said my father. ' Ah, 
I see ; you come from those vile Parkers, who hope to rob 
my child yet !' 

"'Now, Sir William, no palaver/ said the dwarf, 
savagely, and holding his pistol cocked. ' We have come 
here to earn a thousand pounds. We risk our lives — but 
the bait is tempting — the wills or death.' 

" ' Pshaw/ replied my father, faintly, ' I am dying ; 
you can but send me an hour sooner before the judgment 
seat of God.' 

" ' Pool/ said the dwarf, in a bitter and sardonic tone, 
' do not tempt us. — Ah, Stevens, see what is behind there !' 
and the dwarf trembled like a leaf. 

" The tall man darted to the end of the bed, and dragged 
me forth, placing his hand coarsely on my mouth to pre- 
vent my shrieking. Despite my struggles, I was securely 
g agged and brought to my father's bed-side. 

" ' Sir William/ said the dwarf, with a grin, drawing me 
within my dear father's sight, ' the wills in five minutes, or 
I put this child to death before your eyes.' 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 307 

" My father looked inquiringly at the man, and in his 
cold, savage, and brutal, but cowardly face, he saw that he 
covld murder an innocent child. 

" ' Letter let her be robbed,' he groaned, 'than deprived 
thus of life so young ; besides, Hugh will protect her.' He 
then directed them to a drawer in a room near at hand, 
whore the wills were deposited. 

" ' Go, Stevens, I will keep guard,' said the dwarf. 

"The tall man, who was all along silent, and seemed 
little to relish the affair, moved slowly away. 

" The dwarf sat by the bed-side, with me closely clutched, 
while his eye wandered round the room in search of 
plunder. Suddenly his glance fell on a mirror opposite, 
where plainly could be seen my father's hand rising to the 
bell which hung by the bedside, and which communicated 
with the servants' hall. 

" Like a tiger he turned upon his prey, and rage and 
fury, I suppose, acting on his ferocious nature, he sprang 
at Sir William's throat, and the wretched daughter saw 
her father murdered before her eyes." 

" At this moment the taller man entered ; and, discovering 
what had been done, a scene of violent altercation ensued. 
The tall man declared that he washed his hands of the deed. 

" ' I joined in this foul business at your temptation, 
fiend ! to gain a rich reward. But I engaged only to 
frighten an old man, while you have shed his blood.' 

" 'He would have alarmed the house, idiot!' said the 
dwarf; ' but have you the will 1 ' 

" ' Yes ; but I will have no more of this.' 

" ' Stevens,' muttered the dwarf, ' if you retreat and 
betray me, you will betray yourself. The old man is 
dead, and Harry Markham is outside, who, if I but say the 
word, can prove that you alone entered.' 

" Harry Markham ! " said Edward ; " the son of Mary 
Markham, who nourished you at her bosom — your foster- 
"brother 1 " 

'• Yes," continued Alice, whose pale and agonised face 
denoted her self-inflicted suffering ; " it was of him they 
spoke. But let me conclude. 
1 x 2 



30S ALICE'S HISTORY 

" The taller man seemed to think of this, and a confer- 
ence was held. I discovered by this, that they were toj 
receive one hundred pounds, on condition that the will of 
Sir William, in favour of his vile relations, was alone found ; 
and two hundred pounds a year as long as they lived — 
they keeping the will in my favour as security for the pay- 
ment. The murder having been accomplished, their plans 
were much changed, and they at once determined to take 
me with them. 

" They accordingly lifted me up, half insensible, and 
lowered me into the arms of Harry Markham. His meet- 
ing with them was curious. Lurking about on one of his 
lawless expeditions, he saw them attempting to enter the 
house, and cried ' shares of the plunder.' They at once 
agreed, and he kept careful watch, smiling at his own 
good fortune. 

" Leaving behind them the will in favour of my enemies, 
they brought with them that which secured me, besides 
carrying off much money and jewellery. 

" One night, about ten days after the awful event, they 
took me by the hand, and, after warning me, at the peril 
of my life, not to breathe a word, they led me down to- 
wards the beach. A boat waited for them. I was placed 
in it ; then the taller man entered, and Jones was about to 
follow, when a dark figure sprang forward and seized him 
by the throat. 

" I hold you — murderer — assassin ! ' cried the stranger 
— It was my uncle. 

" ' Let go,' said Jones, trembling in every limb. 

" ' Never,' shouted my uncle. 

" Then take it, since you will,' said Jones, and his 
murderous knife pierced the bosom of my uncle. 

" For — oh — for a long, long time, I had no sense of 
what had happened. When I recovered consciousness, wo 
were in a French emigrant vessel, bound from Havre to 
Texas. I bad been a whole month delirious. I would 
have exposed the villains, but no one spoke a word of 
English, and even the tall man threatened my life, if I 
dared to betray them. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 309 

" We arrived in Texas, and at once proceeded here. 
Their money enahled them to have great assistance, and 
they erected this fort. The- tall man, after my solemn 
pledge to reveal nothing until he gave me leave, always 
treated me kindly ; he bought me books, music, a slave ; and 
when we visited .New Orleans, he did everything in his 
power to compensate for his fearful wrongs. But the 
assassin was ever before me. 

" At iSTew Orleans, where the two hundred pounds was 
regularly sent, they quarrelled with Harry Markham, who, 
not being in the secret of this remittance, cared not much 
for their company. For two years he has — having passed 
through every stage of crime — exercised the trade of an 
open robber, associating with the vilest of the vile, the 
refuse even of Texas. — You know the rest." 

" And Jones it was who killed my father." 

" Yes, Sir Edward," said Stevens, who now discovered 
himself; for, unseen and unnoticed, he had heard all, so 
wrapped were both speaker and listener. " It was Jones 
who killed your father. My hands are free from blood. 
May I dare to hope for pardon 1 " 

"Edward, was I then right?" exclaimed Alice. 

"Mr. Stevens," said Sir Edward Blake, "you shall be 
forgiven — nay, rewarded ; and you may, in penitence, ask 
pardon of God for your own sins, on one condition" 

"And that is V 

" The blood of my father must be avenged ; the mur- 
derer of my uncle and my parent must die by the law, and 
you must be the witness." 

"I?" 

" Yes ! — But you need have no apprehension. Arrange- 
ments can be made for your pardon, on your turning king's 
evidence." 

" It shall be done ! " exclaimed Stevens ; " and this 
wretch who tempted my poverty to crime, and who made 
me the part accomplice of his fouler deeds, shall receive 
no mercy at my hands." 

" And the will of my uncle ? " 

"Is safe." 



310 auoe's history. 

" You must appear against these still viler fiends, who, 
to accomplish their foul ends, paid for murder." 

" Any atonement, I am ready for," said Stevens. 

The young baronet advanced rapidly towards the large 
party, which was only waiting for a signal to mount, and 
selecting Jones at once, he seized him by the collar, while 
Stevens dexterously disarmed him. 

" What means this violence 1 " said the ruffian. 

" I, Sir Edward Blake, son of Sir Hugh, and nephew of 
Sir "William, arrest you for the murder of my father and 
my uncle. Struggle not — it is vain." 

Jones, trembling, horror struck, his whole coward soul 
revealed, made no answer for a minute, and even suffered 
himself to be bound before he spoke. During this interval 
Stevens rapidly narrated the crimes of which he had been 
guilty. 

" Citizens !" exclaimed Jones, glaring with tiger hate at 
the young baronet, " I am in a free country, and I appeal 
to you all to release me from this maniac." 

" Well, I do expect it are about the freest diggens I 
know of/' said Captain Cephas Doyle ; "but still it ain't 
free enough for a varmint like you. I do convene to a 
fair stand-up fight, and ginrally carry the documents to do 
it, I du ; but a cowardly sneak as kills a dying man m 
his bed ain't no better nor a catamount. So, do you see, 
Sir Edward, if you're agreeable, the first oak we come 
to we'll string this crittur up." 

" By the immortal smash," cried Big Griddle, " I do 
think I'm about as active a friend to liberty as any man, 
and always vote the Locofoco ticket, I du ; but thar's no 
liberty in taking two old men's lives in cold blood, so I'm 
ready to lend a hand, as Captain Doyle has it." 

" Thanks, my worth friends," said Sir Edward, warmly ; 
" but this man must have a fair trial in his own land." • 

Jones at these words bowed his head. He saw that his 
hour was come. 

All arrangements being now complete, the long stream 
of horses and mules left the Nest on their journey. 
Philip Stevens, did not start till fully five minutes after 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 311 

the rest of the party. Just as he joined them, Blake, 
turning round, saw by the smoke which curled along the 
side of the block, that Stevens had set fire to the place. 

" Sir Edward," said Philip, " I have so arranged wood 
and straw, that in half an hour the whole of the ISTest will 
be in flames. I was determined it should never serve as 
a retreat for Blackhawk and his gang." 



CHAPTEE XXIL 

CONCLUSION. 

About sunset the retreating children of the wilderness 
found themselves within 100 yards of the Brazos river. 
Some at once began to prepare the evening meal, during 
which interval Stevens took the rest down to the water's 
edge, and after loosening a padlock that bound a chain to 
a tree, the skow was drawn forth upon the muddy waters 
of the long-flowing Brazos. 

It was a long and wide, flat bottomed boat, drawing but 
little water, and a hundred men could have found place 
and shelter in it. 

As soon as supper was concluded, the Mexicans and 
the men hired by Stevens, began loading the boat, while 
Jones was placed beneath a small deck in the very bows 
of the vessel. 

Every care was now taken to avoid a surprise; the men 
lay round the fire, at a sufficient distance to avoid being 
seen, and the women retired to their cabin. Doyle mounted 
guard on deck, concealed by the unshipped mast and sails, 
while Chinchea, calling Blake to his side, entered the small 
bark canoe which belonged to the skow, and departed on 
a scouting expedition. It was a still, dark night, and every- 
thing was wrapped in the thickest gloom. 



312 CONCLUSION. 

The course of the two friends was up the river. For 
about a mile their progress was unrewarded by any dis- 
covery, and Chinchea determined to sweep downwards, 
when the crackling of some dry sticks on the bank — the 
bank occupied by Stevens' party — made the Indian gently 
urge the canoe into the deep shadow of some overhanging 
boughs. 

" I could swear I heard a paddle," exclaimed, in a low 
tone, a voice on the other side of the river. 

" A fowl, a canard," replied Carcassin, for it was he. 

" I suppose it must have been," said Blackhawk ; " but 
as caution is necessary, I shall keep along the bank, as we 
descend, while you continue to lead the party." 

As soon as they saw that Blackhawk and his party were 
moving down the river towards the skow, Chinchea and 
Blake at once started to return, and soon reached their 
own encampment. 

Presently their eyes, fixed on the movements of the 
enemy, discovered Blackhawk and his gang collected with- 
in pistol shot of the encampment, Avhich lay in the stillness 
of death. At this instant the low and angry growl of the 
panther was heard ; and next moment, a head — that of 
Doyle — was slowly raised from the skow, and a hasty sign 
was instantly exchanged with the Indian. 

" Now," said Chinchea, taking aim. 

The rifles of Blake, Doyle, and the Indian, spoke simul- 
taneously, and a yell from the robbers told the fatal effect 
of the discharge. Ifovenge, however, seemed the upper- 
most feeling ; for, darting forward, they were about to 
advance to a hand-to-hand conflict, when a heavy discharge 
from the bank, near the skow, damped their impetuosity, 
and drove them to cover. 

"We shall have a hot night of it," said Stevens ; "though 
I fancy they will scarcely dare to charge us here, Still, 
unless destroyed or weakened thoroughly, the wretches 
will lay us all along the river, and cut off some of our best 
men, from some close ambush. I am, therefore, for attack, 
not defence." 

" Good," replied the Indian ; " let us go." 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 313 

"I must stay to guard the women and my prey," said 
Sir Edward. 

" I am glad you keep the castle," said Philip ; " I will 
leave the Mexicans and two whites. With those you can 
keep the ruffians at bay." 

Without another word, Chinchea, Stevens, Doyle, Smith, 
Big Griddle, and four other white men, dropped over the 
side of the boat next to the river, and gained the forest 
in the opposite direction to the enemy. 

With his rifle firmly clutched, Blake stood leaning 
against the cabin which contained Alice. 

" Dear Edward," said Alice, " is that you 1 " 

Ere Blake could answer, he received a blow upon the 
head, which made him reel ; and a second, would have 
followed, when close behind the young man was poured 
forth the hot flame, and the intruder fell headlong into 
the river. Blake, whose fall was only momentary, crying 
to Alice to close the cabin door, levelled his gun and fired, 
just as a crowd of ruffians ascended the deck, and prepared 
to inundate the vessel. They were more than thirty in 
number, and came tumbling furiously down the steps 
which led from the short upper, to the lower deck. Blake, 
however, was now surrounded by his five dauntless com- 
rades, three of whose guns were loaded, and sent forth 
their murderous discharge from behind a rampart of 
bales. 

A dozen muskets and double-barrelled guns were at 
their feet, all loaded, and next minute the whole party 
fired, amid yells of fury from the assailants, who imme- 
diately sprang to the summit of the cabin, as if about 
to fly. 

Fresh arms were seized by Blake and his men, only one 
of whom was wounded, and again the air rang with the 
awful volley, this time followed by a discharge as terrible 
from the land. Taken between two fires, the bandits turned ; 
but blood had been shed, and even Blake rushed forward 
to cut off their retreat. Every rifle was again loaded, and 
the contents poured upon the fugitives, not three oi whom 
escaped from what now became a massacre. 



314 COXCLtTSIOS. 

The victors then sternly turned to examine the results. 
■while Chinchea glided about like the Spirit of Evil, 
proudly collecting the awful trophies of success. Eighteen 
dead men were found, and seven so severely wounded as 
to leave no hope. Among these were Blackhawk and 
Carcassin — the Mexican had perished. Not one of the 
other party had escaped without a wound ; and so dreadful 
had been the power of superior arms, and the attack on 
the robbers in the rear, while Blake and his men were hid 
behind a breastwork, that the victory had been earned 
without one death on the part of the defenders, though 
Big Griddle vowed that he was maimed for life. 

The dead bodies were tumbled into the river, and 
when the vessel had been hastily washed of the bloody 
stains, only three men remained alive of the wounded ; 
the other four had died in the brief interval. 

" Where is Alice 1 " said Harry Markham feebly, " if 
indeed she will speak to him whom, as Blackhawk, she 
has so much dreaded." 

" You are dying, wretched man," replied Alice, stepping 
forth from the cabin ; "and death is too awful not to 
make us forget even crime." 

"Mine has indeed been a sad career," groaned Markham, 

" You are, I think, fully avenged, Sir Edward," mut- 
tered Stevens ; " there is but my death wanted to have 
all the three destroyers of your early hopes crushed." 

" Who speaks of Sir Edward ? " said Markham. 

" I am Sir Edward Blake, nephew of him you aided to 
rob and murder," replied the young man. 

" Ah ! " cried the other, gazing with terror upon him by 
the light of the glaring pine torches, " something whis- 
pered to me you were no stranger. But murder — no, I 
had no hand in it ; that was all Jones' doing." 

" It was all me — all me," shrieked Jones, in a thick 
voice. "But heTe I am, dying; give me water." 

Blake, accompanied by several others, rushed to the 
end of the boat ; and there, lying on the floor, lay the* 
dwarf, bleeding to death from wounds received from the- 
rifles of the bandits. On examination it was, however,. 



THE YOUNG MIDSHIPMAN. 315 

found that no one wound was mortal, and Blake sternly 
insisted on their being bound up. 

In another half hour not one of the bandits remained 
alive, and at the earnest request of Alice, a grave was dug, 
in which her foster-brother was placed, far away from the 
land which gave him birth, without stick or stone to mark 
the lonely and desolate spot. 

This solemn duty discharged, the whole party, wearied, 
fatigued, and exhausted, lay down to snatch that repose 
which they so much needed. 

A sentinel was of course placed, but no sound again 
disturbed the stillness of the night. 

At dawn of day, ere the morning meal was taken, the 
skow moved from the scene of so much carnage. Jones 
had received such a shock that it was evident he could not 
long survive. 

The wretched man seemed aware of his awful state, and 
volunteered a full confession, which was carefully taken 
down in writing, all witnessing it. He lived, however, to 
reach Galveston, where the document was read to him in 
the presence of the several consuls; and, having been 
acquiesced in by the murderer, the officials affixed their 
signatures. At the end of a month Alice and Sir 
Edward sailed for England, accompanied by Philip Ste- 
vens, and every document necessary to eject the unjust 
and unprincipled family who bad robbed the orphan 
of her inheritance. 

The parting of Blake and Chinchea was hearty and 
sincere. 

The voyage of the cousins, though long, was not weari- 
some, and in nine weeks they were in London. 

The next day, Sir Edward Blake visited a lawyer, and 
within ten days a letter, fully explaining all, with copies 
of all documents, was deposited with the utterly astounded 
family, who had defrauded Alice, and caused the murder 
of her father. 

Sir Edward was stern. His terms were awfully severe, 
for he wished to punish them as well as to right Alice. 
The terms were : the restoration of the property, one half 



316 CONCLUSION. 

of the annual revenue for eleven years, in a lump, and 
a public confession, in the public press, of their fraud and 
crimes. 

They resisted. But the alternative of a trial was too 
much, and they at length consented to all; leaving the 
country for ever, under assumed names, almost ere the 
terrible advertisements, which, far and wide, proclaimed 
their shame and the mercy of the injured, appeared. 

Stevens, who had atoned for his guilt, as far as in his 
power, and whose penitence was sincere, still lives. 

Alice and Edward were then united; and, taught in the 
great and trying school of adversity, their union was 
happy indeed. 



CHS £NDk 

