WALTER GORING. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE COUSINS. 



They were the children of twin sisters . ^the lovely 
hostess and her handsome gaest . and they had been 
brought up together as brother and sister, which fact 
must be accepted in extenuation of any peculiar in- 
terest either may display for the other in the course 
of iJiis story. 

Moreover, in addition to having been brought up 
together on terms of fraternal intimacy, they had, 
when arrived at years of discretion, sunk the fra- 
ternity for a time, and fallen in love with one 
another. Their passion had not prospered ; that is 
to say, the lady had taken fright at matrimony on 
nothing a year, and had released her cousin-lover 
with a great deal of affected magnanimity and real 
affection* 

VOL. I. B 



2 WALTEB GORING. 

She had been Horatia Leslie in the days of this 
exhibition of feminine devotion, and shortly after it 
she had married a Mr. Walsh, an elderly gentleman, 
who was a merchant by profession and an artist by 
taste. His perfect cxiltiYation of the latter quality 
had induced him to select Horatia Leslie for his 
wife, and the selection did him credit. 

She was a grand looking woman . ^fair and large, 
but not tall. A woman with a wealth of golden hair 
and a pair of haughty blue eyes, and a manner that 
absorbed a great deal of attention, and seemed to 
expect it. Withal, a woman with a good head and 
a sound heart, and a never- flagging interest in my 
hero, the boy who had been brought up with her . 
the lover whom she had rejected . ^the man whose 
good she most ardently desired . ^Walter Goring, my 
hero. 

He, Walter Goring, had never reviled her, or be- 
wailed himself, in consequence of that rejection. He 
had seen that she had done wisely in pausing on the 
brink, and availing herself of the best match that 
offered. Laughingly in his sentimental boyhood he 
had been wont to call her " his goddess ; " earnestly 
in manhood he continued to apply the title to her, 
^0 confide in her as his sister, and to make her 



THE COUSINS. 3 

house his home as often as it seemed convenient to 
him. 

He had commenced life with being disappointed 
about going into the arm}'. Then he had gone into 
a militia regiment. Then he had gone into debt 
and difficulties, and, to pay the former had taken to 
writing novels that overflowed with vitality . ^well- 
bred horses, well-bred women, and well-stored wine 
. and that were very successful from the commercial 
point of view. He had varied the amusements by 
fighting for Italian liberty, and getting ever so 
slightly wounded, and by publishing pretty little 
square volumes of poems, plagiarised from the Ger- 
man of Heine and others. 

Though his cousin, Mrs. Walsh, had not chosen 
to marry him herself, she was far from being indif- 
ferent as to his future. She knew his best and 
his worst; his recklessness and remorsefulness ; 
and, above all things, she did ardently desire that 
he should marry money, not having any of his own. 
As a captain in a militia regiment his expenses far 
exceeded his receipts, consequently he was com- 
pelled to write as a task occasionally, and so do 
himself sparse justice as a literary man. 

And it was as this latter that the grand blonde 

2 



4 WALTER GORING. 

valued him. She wanted him to cut that spurious 
soldiering, and get into regular harness in the army 
of literature; and to enable him to do this she 
knew that he must marry a wife with some fortune 
besides her face. 

This night of her introduction to the reader she 
had assembled a goodly number of well-dowered 
ones for Walter's sake, down in her well propor- 
tioned rooms in her house at Boehampton. She 
gave a ball to celebrate something in connection 
with her consin, either his birthday or his " return" 
from some place or other, and she had secured an 
heiress from Bengal for him for the first waltz. 

But after that first waltz Mr. Goring . or Captain 
Goring, as people who imagined him proud of 
being a militiaman called him . had behaved very 
badly in the eyes of all i^rudent people. He had 
danced all the round dances, and retired to seques- 
tered nooks, in the big conservatory, between the 
same, with a Miss St. John, who was notoriously 
penniless, and who seemed to incline very favour- 
ably towards the young man who wrote and danced 
with equal vigour and ease. 

Twice the pair under consideration . Charlie St. 
John and her partner . ^had done the " back steps " 



THE COUSINS. 5 

down between the flowers to a shady spot at the end 
where no chaperones did dwell, and twice Mr. Walsh 
had come upon them, offering to find them fresh 
partners and strawberry ices, and twice they had 
thanked him with suavity, and then revolved away 
from his immediate notice to the strains of au in- 
spiring waltz, played by a military band. They 
stepped together well in fact, and. so defied censure, 
after the manner of pig-headed people. 

At last Mrs. Walsh got very angry with her 
cousin Walter. Wallflowers, with the perspicuity 
of their order, thought that the [extra compression 
of the hostess's lips, as she at last sent a peremp- 
tory summons to " Mr. Goring " (she abominated the 
militia, and never called him "Captain"), was due 
to her annoyance at his defalcation from her side ; 
but they were wrong, after the manner of their kind. 
She saw that the heiress from Bengal was huffed 
with humanity because Walter Goring preferred 
Miss St. John's style of dancing and Miss St. John^s 
style of talking to her own. And Mrs. Walsh knew 
that poor Walter could no more afford to offend 
heiresses than he could to marry Charlie St. Johns ; 
so at last Mrs. Walsh made a clever move, and sent 
Mr. Prescott . Charlie St. John's brother-in-law . 



6 WALTER GORING. 

to stop the gyrations of the pair, and then divide 
them. 

There were always a lot of military men at Mrs. 
Walsh's parties. Though her husband was an artist, 
and a clever one too, she never sought to draw 
recruits from the ranks of the army of literature and 
art ; but nearly the whole of the British army had 
at various times circulated through her saloons. 
The home of the merchant prince at Eoehampton 
ranked with the girls they left behind them in the 
regretful memories of many scores of men when 
ordered on foreign service. 

The supper was splendidly done on this special 
occasion. Lovely, fair, foolish Mrs. Prescott . 
Charlie's sister . ^looked about eagerly for Miss St. 
John, in order to express her admiration of it when 
it was served ; but Charlie had vanished, therefore 
Ellen Prescott fell upon her hostess instead. 

" Mr. Prescott is telegraphing for me to go, and I 
ean't find my sister," she said, smilingly. 

" I saw her waltzing down a lot of plants just 
now, with Mr. Goring," Mrs. Walsh replied, coolly ; 
she rarely, if ever, called him " My cousin " or 
** Walter" to a third person; consequently an 
amiable majority ignored the relationship, and 



THE COUSINS. 7 

affected to be scandalized at Mrs. Walsh's great 
intimacy with that young man. 

" I hardly like to take her away; but Mr. Prescott 
says the distance is great, and so it is, you see/' 
Mrs. Prescott replied dubiously; and then being 
silly, Mrs. Prescott hazarded a feeble smile of 
partial intelligence at Mrs. Walsh, who detested 
her, and so immediately resented it. 

" Mr. Goring is a flirt, and won't scruple to retain 
your sister as long as she suffers herself to be 
retained by him,^* Mrs. Walsh said coldly, and her 
words were iced by the sight of the Bengal heiress 
bowing her gracious adieus. She felt very angry with 
her cousin, and very angry with the girl whose 
twinkling feet had been going in unison with his all 
the night. It was not for this end that she had 
given this ball. Balph and herself had rather sought 
the heiress, who was blessed with an ungainly form, 
an awkward temper, and fifty thousand pounds. 
And when Mrs. Walsh went out of her way to make 
plans, she did not like to see them fail. 

Moreover she knew that her husband would be 
very much annoyed. Ealph Walsh was good-nature 
and brotherly-kindness itself to Walter Goring; but 
Ealph Walsh had no strong sympathy with Walter's 



8 WALTER GORING. 

semi-military philandering propensities, and none 
whatsoever with Walter's habit of asking him to 
back bills. " If he only worked steadily, he might 
make a glorious income and marry whom he pleased," 
he would say to his wife. But then, unfortunately, 
Walter would not work steadily ; he would only work 
by fits and starts; in fact, despite those squarely 
bound poems of " Love and Life,'* he had been more 
oppressed with the duns than the bays heretofore ; 
and the Walshes knew that it was so, and desired to 
see him free and imfettered as money alone enables 
a man to be. 

They rather over-rated the danger he was in on 
this occasion. Miss St. John was not a beauty ; she 
was only good-looking and rather clever; neither of 
which facts were very patent to a man bent on 
whirling round double time to a brilliantly-played 
waltz tune. Even when they had taken a turn 
round the conservatory to the detriment of the 
plants and gold fishes and plaster casts, and had 
finally rested, on a couch at the end; the con- 
versation had scarcely been of a sentimental 
order. 

** Mrs. Walsh's parties are the best I know,'' Miss 
St. John had said. 



THE COUSINS. 9 

" Bather too many artillery fellows, I think," he 
replied. 

" I don't think there can be too many/' the girl 
rejoined ; " ciyilians do very well for every-day life ; 
but a ball is fairy land, and they're out of place 
in it." 

" That's pleasant for me to hear." 

"But you are not a civilian, are you? Mrs. 
Walsh called you Captain Goring." 

" I hardly like to tell you what I am after your 
former speech.'' 

" Well, I fancied that you were two of the things 
that I'd most desire to be were I a man." 

"And they are?" 

" Soldier and writer." 

" You can be the latter as a woman, surely. Tm 
only in the militia, and that I mean to cut." 

" I should think so,'' she said, contemptuously ; 
a^d then they got up and took another turn round 
the room. As they were pausing to breathe, Mr. 
Frescott came up to them, and said somewhat 
abruptly, 

" Your sister wants you, Charlotte, are you ready 
to go ? " 

" Of course I am, Bobert," she replied, promptly. 



10 WALTER GORING. 

"Just one turn more," Walter Goring whispered, 
putting his arm round her as he spoke, and the 
clanging band brought out the stirring Stiirm March 
Galop in a way that utterly disabled her resolution 
to attend to her brother-in-law's request. " I wonder 
if they've any dancing in heaven ? " he said, as they 
came to a forced conclusion in consequence of the 
band stopping. 

"Don't be airing your unorthodox sentiments 
here, please, Walter," Mrs. Walsh exclaimed, coming 
up to them at the moment. " I wanted you just 
now ; why didnH you come to me when I sent for 
you?" 

" I did go to your high place among the elect up 
at the other end. I went three times running ; not 
so much running as in rapid succession ; but you 
didnH seem to want me ; you were not looking out 
for me." 

" Conceited boy,'' she whispered, as she passed 
along. 

" Now I must find my sister," Charlie St. John 
said, rather dejectedly. 

" At any rate sit down and rest yourself a little first, 
Miss St. John," he said, steering her as he spoke 
away once more across the tesselated pavement, and 



THE COUSINS. 11 

amongst the flowers to a sort of divan at the end 
of the conservatory. When they were seated, she 
began speaking of the dreariness that invariably set 
in after any pleasure, more especially for women who 
had nothing important to distract their attention. 

" But it's as easy for women to have their own 
stand-point, as it is for men, isn't it? " he replied. 

" For some women, I suppose ; for women who 
can write or paint, or do anything that has a life in 
itself." 

" I shall see you coming out with a three-volume 
novel before long, I'm convinced," he said, laughing. 

"As if I could." 

"As if you couldn't." 

" I should be so bitterly ashamed of myself if it 
were said to be bad." 

" Oh, I see, you're ambitious ; you want to mark 
an epoch in literature with your first work." 

" No, I don't ; but I feel disgusted that I canH do 
anything, save bore myself and others." 

" The fact is, you're discontented at not having 
made a success before you have tried for it,^' he 
replied. And then they had a long talk on the 
subject, and forgot that Mrs. Prescott was waiting 
for her sister. 



13 WALTER GORING. 

When at last they remembered this fact, they 
came out from amidst the flowers into the full 
blaze of the ball-room unconcernedly enough. 
A heavy cannonade from a full battery of eyes 
was brought to bear on them at once, on the 
girl indeed a trifle more severely than on the 
man. But Charlie St. John was fully equal to the 
position. She did not attempt to give back shot for 
shot, glance for glance, as she slowly threaded her 
way through the throng to her sister's side, but she 
showed herself to be utterly unmoved by them. 
Mrs. Prescott greeted her with a reproachful face, 
and the querulous question, 

" Oh, Charlie, why did you dance so much with 
that Captain Goring? . and why did you go into 
that conservatory when Mr. Prescott wanted you ? ** 

" I went there to please myself, Ellen ; I stayed 
to talk to Captain Goring." 

As she answered this, her brother-in-law came up 
to them to say their carriage was just called, with an 
expression on his face that made Charlie feel that 
she had offended him bitterly in something, which 
she might expect to hear of later. 



CHAPTEE 11. 



MHS. WALSH. 



. As soon as the last carriageful of guests had 
rolled away from the door, and before Walter Goring 
could come back to the ball-room, after speeding his 
cousin's latest guests, Mr. Walsh said to his wife, 

" Miss Haflen " (Miss Haflen was the appendage 
to the fifty thousand pounds) " didn't make the 
impression desired, it appeared to me." 

" Walter's foolish to the last degree," Mrs. Walsh 
replied crossly; then she added laughingly, "I 
might just as well have married him myself, mightn't 
I, Ealph, as far as he's concerned ? " 

" As far as I'm concerned, I prefer things as they 
are,'' he replied. 

** Well, but he does go on in such a foolish way ; 
he's a dear fellow, of course, but I am getting out of 
patience with him ; he told me this morning that he 



14 WALTER GORING. 

couldn't work here, and that he must have chambers 
in town. If he goes to town hell do nothing, you 
know." 

As she spoke, Walter Goring came back into the 
room. " Whom are you back-biting now, my god- 
dess ? '* he asked, carelessly. 

" You, naturally ; and be careful how you call me 
that before people." 

" Too late, too late ; you should have broken me 
into discretion before, shouldn't she, Ralph ? " 

" I wish she'd go to bed now, and let us have a 
cigar," Mr. Walsh replied. 

But Mrs. Walsh did not feel at all inclined to go 
to bed. " You'll stay up all night if I leave you, 
Ealph, and then to-morrow I shall suffer for it, for 
you will both be too lazy and tired to go out with 
me, and I must go to town." 

"I must stay at home and work to-morrow," 
Walter said, commencing a march up and down the 
room. 

" The desire for * work ' curiously enough, always 
seizes you when I want you," Mrs. Walsh said, 
coldly. Then she rose, saying " Good-night," and 
was about to pass out of the room, when Walter 
stopped her. 



MRS. WALSH. 15 

" You're not annoyed with me in reality ? You 
don't mean it seriously ? '* he asked affectionately. 

She had been so much to him all her life that he 
could not bear the slightest cloud between them. 
" Come/' he added, raising her hand to his lips, 
"PU do anything you like, save make up to Miss 
Haflen ; she looks to me like a nigger with a rush 
of blood to the head. You having been my boy- 
hood's dream, can't expect me to come down to the 
Haflen in my maturity." 

" Very well," she said, laughingly. " I'll forgive 
you for having slighted my friend, if you, on your 
part, will promise not to flirt with Miss St. John. 
You know you neither of you have a penny, and you 
couldn't marry her until you are both well-stricken, 
which isn't a desirable prospect to start with." 

" Let Miss St. John alone, if you please, and I'll 
promise anything." 

" That's right. Good night." 

" Good night. Pass on my queen forgiven," 

he said, bowing down almost to the ground before 
her ; while Mr. Walsh made a mental sketch of the 
scene, and resolved to paint it in a series he con- 
templated from " Idylls of the King." 

'* It would be a shame to wish him to sacrifice 



16 WALTER GORING. 

himself to that odious Miss Haflen," Mrs. Walsh 
thought as she wended her way upstairs ; " yet what 
is to become of him if he won't work more than he 
has hitherto. That old Mr. Goring will never die ; 
and even when he does it may happen that poor 
Walter has built his hopes on sand. At any rate^ 
whether or not, he shall not get entangled with Miss 
St. John. I can't bear her." 

The two men did not stay smoking very long after 
Horatia left them; but when Ralph went to bed 
Walter Goring sauntered away to the study, and sat 
down to read. Very soon the book dropped from 
his hand, and he began to think instead. 

Then passed before his mind visions of the old 
days when he was quite a boy, before he had even 
began to think about a career, when his widowed 
aunt and his little cousin Horatia first came to live 
in his father's house. He remembered how he had 
immediately put his neck under the yoke of the 
imperial little beauty ; how he had worn her chains 
for years, always rattling them in a way that re- 
dounded to her honour and glory, when others were 
by to hear them chink. He recalled his first burst 
of genuine jealousy, which had arisen from such 
slight cause as a curate who insisted on many inter- 



MBS. WALSH. 17 

yiews previous to Miss Leslie's confirmation, and 
which had resulted in Walter making an offer 
which was accepted by his gracious goddess. His 
love's young dream had been very golden while it 
lasted. No brighter beauty than his betrothed bride 
had ever woven a chain for any man's heart. But it 
broke at last^ this chain, or rather it melted away. 
His father, loving the girl as his own daughter, 
still could not wish to see her his son's wife. As for 
the twin sisters, they wept in each other's arms, 
till Horatia took them to task somewhat sharply 
about it. 

" You don't think either Walter or I are going to 
be idiotic enough to die over it, do you ? And as for 
you, mamma, you needn't be afraid that I shall be 
an old maid on your hands." 

She kept her promise, and married Ealpb Walsh, 
as has been seen ; and Walter buried his dead, and 
resumed his old adoring manner to her, with her 
husband's cordial permission, and flirted freely with 
other women. But for all that, he had not met the 
woman yet who had the power to banish the image 
of his dearest friend . ^his beautiful "goddess" . 
jErom his heart. 

To-night, though he had been seeming to improve 

VOL. X. 



18 WALTEB GOBINa. 

the shining hours very much to his own satisfaction, 
Walter Goring was feeling something very near akin 
to jealousy, yet it was not that either. Mrs. Walsh 
was far too pure a woman, far too proud a matron, 
far too dear and precious a thing in his eyes for him 
even to own to himself that another man than her 
husband might perchance experience a pang about 
her. But sometimes it seemed to him that she was 
a little too gracious to other people, " and these cads 
don't know where to draw the line," he thought. 
She gave her smiles and a good deal of her best 
manner to a good many men, " even to beasts in 
the line," he told himself. Not that she came off 
her pedestal, but she suffered adoring legions to 
come up to the foot of it, and worship in the light of 
day. The moon is unassailable in her beauty, 
purity, and dazzling tenderness ; still misguided 
brooks make mistakes, and think the shining is done 
expressly for them, individually. Mrs. W^lsh was 

as the moon, and Well, there are some things 

hard to understand; and Walter Goring lived in 
dread of the majority of her acquaintances mis- 
understanding them. 

Mrs. Walsh was as the moon, and " by Jove ! " 
he said, springing to his feet, " the moonlight is 



MRS. WALSH. 19 

dying in the grey dawn. What a row the goddess 
will make to-morrow if she finds I have heen up all 
the time soliloquising, or, as she will have it, smok- 
ing. She's right about me never working, or doing 
any other good in life. Well, perhaps if she had 
stuck by me I should have done something better 
than write rattling novels.'* Then he went off to 
bed at last, with a growl on his lips at her defalca- 
tion, the first he had ever uttered. 

, She meanwhile was thinking more sadly than she 
had ever thought before of Walter Goring. It is 
always agreeable to a woman to imagine that a man 
has not entirely got over any tender feeling he may 
at one time liave had for her. She may not wish 
him to be actually regretful about her, but assuredly 
if he ever lets her know of the liking, she will take 
X^leasure in the thought that a little of it lives still. 

Now Horatia had been entirely conversant with 
every phase of feeling through which Walter Goring 
had passed on her account. He had been as bois- 
terous a young bear as most boys are when that 
before -mentioned confirmation together with the 
curate brought his passion to a crisis. She had 
seen him in the smilingly semi-idiotic state of 

serene satisfaction in his wooing and probable 

o2 



20 WALTER GORING. 

chances of winning. She had seen him hopelessly 
despondent when his papa began to scowl and 
say prudent bat unreasonably unpleasant things. 
Above all, she had seen him sob like a child, 
or rather like the loving man he had become 
suddenly, when she told him that she herself had 
put an end to the struggle for supremacy between 
love and duty, by accepting Ralph Walsh. Walter 
had never reviled her ; nevertheless her marriage 
with the amiable elderly merchant had been a 
bitter draught to swallow. At first Ralph Walsh 
treated his wife's cousin and former lover with 
a good-natured show of tolerance that was aggrava- 
ting to the object of it to the last degree. But after 
a time, as Walter merged into more complete man- 
hood, and satisfaction with things as they were, Mr. 
Walsh began to take a different and more exalted 
view of him. It was never actually said between 
the husband and wife that they felt themselves to 
have been instrumental in unsettling Walter, and 
making him a trifle more careless as to his lot in 
life than it is well for a man to be. But whenever 
Walter was unsettled and careless, each knew what 
the other's sentiments were on the subject. Mr. 
Walsh did not carry his love and regard for the 



MRS. W^LSH. 21 

generally bright clever young fellow to the point of 
wishing himself dead, in order that the bright clever 
young fellow might marry his widow ; but he sin- 
cerely wished to see Walter happy with some one 
else. '' It's a great pity that he thinks Miss Haflen 
like a nigger with a rush of blood to the head/' 
Balph said dreamily to his wife that night, before 
he fell asleep ; " 60,000L is no joke. He'll never 
get much from his uncle, I'm afraid." 

" Then he'll be driven to work," the lady replied ; 
** and I'd rather see him work well than married to 
an heiress, when it comes to the point." 

"I suppose you'll take care to keep Miss St. 
John away from your next ball, my dear ? " 

" Of course I shall," Mrs. Walsh replied promptly. 
" Dancing the whole night with one man is bad 
taste, and I won't have that displayed in my room ; 
besides, if she flatters Walter about his books, as 
she does you about your pictures, he will make the 
mistake of thinking her peculiarly interested in him. 
Men are such conceited boobies ! " 

" I don't fancy she flatters me about my paint- 
ing. 

** Oh, you take all that glib nonsense for gospel 
truth always. She is a humbug, I tell you, Kalpli : 



22 WALTER GORING. 

and I'm not prejudiced. I don't dislike her; in 
fact, she doesn't exist for me. It's impossible to 
dislike any one of whom one never thinks." 

After uttering this, Mrs. Walsh refused to say 
any more. She was an essentially moderate woman 
usually in the matter of expressing her opinion ; but 
to-night, for some cause or other, she felt incapable 
of expressing herself moderately about Walter. 

In truth, she was rather agitated by a thought 
that had occurred to her . a thought which she 
could neither crush nor check, do what she would. 

According to her wont, she had circulated very 
freely and very fast with many of her military 
guests to waltz and galop strains, and she feared 
that Walter, whose hatred of these men was patent 
to her, was about to develop jealousy on the sub- 
ject. Her cheeks flushed as she thought it. 

" He surely can't nurse such a feeling in relation 
to me, after all the frank love I've shown him," she 
said to herself; and yet would it have been so very 
unnatural that he should have done so, after all that 
had gone before ? " If he is going to make a fool 
of himself, he must be taught to remember that I 
am a married woman," she went on. But how to 
teach him ? That was the thing ! 



CHAPTER III. 



A PAIR OF ADYISEBS. 



The Walshes' house was down at Boehampton : 
the Prescotts lived in one of the dark, solemn 
Bayswater squares. Charlie therefore had good 
and reasonable grounds for hoping that any annoy- 
ance her brother-in-law and sole guardian might be 
feeling with her would die out during the drive 
home. That something in her manner had annoyed 
him she felt very sure, from the sharp, quick step 
with which he had come upon her in the Walshes' 
conservatory, and the cold tone in which he 
had cut into her conversation with Walter Goring 
with the words . " Your sister wants you directly, 
Charlie." She was sure from this^ that he was 
displeased with her. But she was in utter darkness 
as to the cause. 

Mr. Prescott's wrath was perhaps the hardest 



24 WALTER GORING. 

cross Charlie St. John had to bear, and this not 
because she feared, but because she despised it. 
Eight years before the opening of my story, her 
father, a naval officer, after having lived like a grand 
seigneur all his life, died insolvent, leaving one son 
and two daughters to the guardianship of Mr. 
Prescott the lawyer, who had been trying to intro- 
duce something like order into Captain St. John's 
affairs for the last few years. A bachelor of forty, 
without a female relative whom he could place at 
the head of his establishment, Mr. Prescott found 
himself in a position of extreme delicacy through 
the undesirable confidence displayed in him by 
his old friend and client. Frank, the son, was the 
lesser evil of the three, for he was a lieutenant in 
the navy, away on the West Coast of Africa, an 
atom in the cause of the suppression of the slave- 
trade ; but the girls were oppressive to the last 
degree. 

At last, about six months after Captain St. John's 
death, Mr. Prescott put the case plainly and 
honestly before the elder girl, who was then about 
twenty. He told Ellen St. John that she and her 
sister were alone in the world, and penniless . ^that 
he was to all appearance their only friend . that she 



. PAIB OP ADVISERS. 25 

especially was ill-fitted to battle with the world, and 
therefore that she had better enable him to befriend 
and protect little Charlie and herself by marrying 
him. It was a hard, prosaic, galling courtship ; at 
least it would have appeared so to many women, 
but Ellen St. John was satisfied with it. He had 
been very kind to her at a time when other friends 
had stood aloof. He offered her peace and plenty^ 
and both were essential to her well-being. He 
was " very old,*' she told herself, and rather round- 
backed, and his clothes did not sit upon him as did 
the clothes of the men who had been about her in 
the bright old days in her father's house. However, 
they had forgotten her, it seemed, since her father*s 
death, and he, the man with the round back and the 
ill-fitting clothes, had remembered her. So she 
accepted the fate he offered smilingly and grate** 
fully ; and he took her home to his dull house in 
the Bayswater square, and sent Charlie, who was 
just fourteen, to school for four years. 

At the expiration of those four years, Charlie 
was added to the establishment as a permanent 
member. She found Ellen as fresh, as fair and 
lovely, as utterly and entirely unruffled as of old, 
when all things had been different with them; and 



26 WALTER OOBING. 

remembering some of the old scenes and one of the 
actors in them vividly, she did marvel greatly at 
Ellen's blessed calm. She marvelled even more 
when she discovered that -this calm happiness was 
no mere cloak, but that Ellen was in reality as 
satisfied as she seemed. Mrs. Frescott had, in truth, 
married her husband for the simple and excellent 
reason that he had asked her to do so. But having 
married him, she never gave a thought to anyone 
else ; she was, in fact, devoted to him, to the decent 
ordering of his house and to her children. He had 
done a good thing in obeying the dictates of that 
generosity which first impelled him to offer the 
fatherless, friendless girls a home on the only 
terms on which they could accept it. He had done 
very well, very wisely; never in his life had he 
been so cared for, so considered ; in the satisfaction 
of his heart at the admirable manner in which virtue 
had been rewarded in his case, he frequently told 
himself that he had done wisely and well. He 
spoke thus during the first four years of his 
married life, while he had had to do with the elder 
sister alone. 

Then Charlie came home and his troubles began. 
She was vivacious, high-spirited, and not at all 



A PAIB OF ADVISERS. 27 

disposed to accept his dicta on all subjects under 
Heaven and on earth unquestioningly. She had 
seen little or nothing of the Prescotts during the 
four years that had elapsed since her father's 
death. Her holidays had been spent with some old 
friends of her father's who remembered her when 
they found that nothing was expected of them. 
She had seen little or nothing of them, and Ellen's 
letters had told her little or nothing. Mrs. Pres- 
cott's letters for the first year of her married life 
had been mere catalogues of dresses and bonnets. 
After that they became mere bulletins of baby's 
health and progress. Occasionally the young aunt 
felt her sister's babies to be little bores, and wished 
that Ellen would find something else to write about. 
But that was only because she had never seen them ; 
and maternal pride insisted on detailing the same 
thrilling experiences about number three as had 
been given at great length about number one. 

Being generous-natured and grateful-hearted, 
she went back to the home her brother-in-law 
offered her, thoroughly disposed to fulfil every 
clfidm he had upon her affection and gratitude. He 
had been very good to her, she knew. What educa- 
tion she had had been his gift, secured by his care. 



28 WALTER GOBING. 

paid for with his money. True she had not been a 
free agent in the matter, it had all been arranged 
for her while she was too much of a child to think 
about it. But now she was no longer a child, and 
she did think about it, and was yery grateful and 
well inclined towards her guardian brother-in-law. 

Unfortunately the four years which had passed 
between the day of her coming home and the date 
of her introduction to the reader, had seen these 
feelings weaken, flag, wither, and then utterly 
crumble away. That there was fault on both sides 
there can be no manner of doubt. He had no 
forbearance, and she gave much provocation ; had 
he only remembered in* another spirit that all 
the might and power was on his side, she possibly 
would have bowed under it a little more gracefully 
than she did. 

For four years a woman had sat at his fireside 
without having, to the best of his knowledge, a wish 
or a thought in opposition to wish or thought of his. 
She had yielded him an implicit obedience from 
the first moment of their union. A soft, sweet, 
smiling obedience, that strengthened his faith in his 
own infallibility. Clearly she never found him 
exacting or masterful, whatever his decrees. There- 



A PAIR OF ADYISEfiS. 29 

fore when another woman . one, too, who had no 
such claim on his forbearance as his wife possessed 
. came, and not alone had, but expressed wishes 
and thoughts that were antagonistic to his own, 
Mr. Prescott was fairly staggered. 

The history pf those four years need not be 
written. The weariness of them may be well 
imagined, but the recapitulation of the incidents 
that deepened the weariness would not forward the 
action of the story. Suffice it to say that Mr. 
Prescott, though not absolutely unkind to her, had 
so worn out the slender original stock of patience 
possessed by his ward . had so chafed her by 
exercising authority about trifles, that now she not 
only disliked, but heartily despised him. 

When they came into the light of the hall that 
night, she gave a hasty glance at Mr. Prescott's 
face, and there was the expression upon it which 
was most odious to her. Mr. Prescott's upper 
lip was of undue length at all times, but whenever 
he felt himself called upon to cavil at Charlie, it 
elongated itself portentously, it. went down and 
folded itself severely over the under one in a way 
that caused him to look mean and unmerciful to an 
extraordinary degree. His back too always looked 



80 WALTER GORING. 

rounder, his coat hung about him more loosely, and 
indeed his whole appearance was more irritating 
than imposing on such occasions. Charlie glanced 
at him, and saw clearly that there was a lecture in 
store for her ; and he glanced at her and saw that 
the lecture would not be taken well. 

Hers was a face that altered with every gust of 
feeling that swept over her soul. A dark, impas- 
sioned face, as has been said ; a face which could 
soften to a rare degree when the chord of tender- 
ness was touched, but that could also flash and 
flame in a way that cautioned many a man not to 
learn to love it and deem it necessary to the adorn- 
ment of his home. A face whose ever-varying 
expression told plainly the rapid way in which the 
spuits of its owner travelled from the seventh 
heaven to the nethermost hell. You could read in 
that face that she had a marvellous capacity for 
feeling either pleasure or pain, that she had a great 
love of so much of her kind as were congenial to 
her, and a deep-rooted detestation of being regu- 
lated and controlled in minor matters. In fact, 
it was a face that told too much for safety. The 
few weak weapons with which she had to fight the 
battle of life were clearly visible to all beholders. 



A PAIB OF ADVISERS. 31 

Pretty Mrs. Prescott had just the same soft pink 
tint on her round cheek when she came back to her 
home that night, as had been on it when she de- 
parted six hours previously. She was one of those 
women who never take anything out of themselves 
by getting in the least degree excited. She took all 
the little pleasures that came in her way willingly 
and quietly. Nothing ever carried her out of her- 
self, as it were; and verily she had her reward: 
there was no reaction . ^no nethermost hell for her. 

But with Charlie it was very different. Poor 
Charlie ! Her nerves were too close to the surface 
for her place in the world. A word, a look, a some- 
thing more intangible than either, a feeling that 
there had been an expression or a thought on ano- 
ther's face, or in another's heart, to which she and 
she alone of those present had been sympathetic, . 
any one of these things would steep her in a pas- 
sionate pleasure that would have been delirium had 
her intellect not been more active at such moments 
than at any other. But those periods were so very 
brief, and the intervals between them so very long, 
and she invariably found all things so darkly dreary, 
and herself so thoroughly exhausted after one of 
them! 



33 WALTER GORINO. 

It was clear, or it would have been clear to any- 
one capable of reading her face, that she had tasted 
some such pleasurable excitement to-night, and that 
its influence was upon her still ; reaction had not 
set in yet. There was a deep clearly-marked line 
across her brow . ^a line that was only visible when 
the girl had been strongly wrought upon . and her 
eyes gleamed like stars. But her face was very 
pale, and there came a slight quiver over her lips 
as she held out her hand to her brother-in-law and 
said, . 

" Good night, Kobert. I can come in and help 
you when I've taken off my dress, if you like, 
Ellen." 

Mrs. Prescott kissed her sister on the cheek. 
" I shall not want you, dear . good night. Green 
is waiting up for me." 

" I want to speak to you before you go to bed, 
Charlotte," Mr. Prescott said, and he marched a^ 
he spoke into the dining-room, which was dimly 
lighted by one gas-burner. He only called her 
Charlotte when he was very much displeased with 
her ; she detested her name, and calling her by it 
was the surest means of upsetting her self-posses- 
sion which he had yet discovered. 



A PAIB OF ADVISERS. 33 

She had taken a step or two forward, bat she 
paused on the mat in the doorway, and drew her 
cloak more closely around her. 

** I'm tired and cold, Robert; won't to-morrow do 
as well?" 

She spoke in a cool quiet tone; and when he 
looked at her to say, " Cold in July . nonsense ! " 
there was a smile on her face. 

" Are you coming in, Charlie ? " he asked angrily. 

She walked in and sat down by the table, neither 
facing him nor turning away from him : as she 
seated herself he said, . 

** I think you must know how you're situated ? " 
He paused, and she made no reply*. " I say, you 
must be aware of your position ? " 

** Vm perfectly aware of it," she said, without 
looking at him. " Did you call me in here at 
this hour of the night solely to remind me of it, 
Robert?" 

" I called you in to tell you once more what I 
have told you frequently before, that I am not 
pleased with the manner you choose to adopt when 
you are in society ; there is an aflfectation of singu- 
larity, and a disregard of conventionality about it 
that I do not approve of at all." 



34 WALTEB OOBINO. 

Once more he paused, and when he did so, she 
heaved a small sigh, so small a one that it might 
have been only a breath of relief at his speech 
having come to a conclusion. Then she settled her 
head more comfortably against the high oak-backed 
chair, and looked steadily at the farther end of the 
room. 

" Do you hear me, Charlie ? " 

** Yes, I hear you," she replied, just letting her 
eyes light upon him for an instant, and then hastily 
averting them, . ^the sight of that elongated lip was 
not to be endured. 

" And you say nothing ? " 

" What can I say ? '* 

" You openly disregard my wishes and advice.^' 

"I do neither, excuse me," she replied rather 
more warmly; "I answered while there was any- 
thing to answer ; I spoke while I had anything to 
say. You asked me if I knew what my position 
was, and I told you I did perfectly, . so I do, God 
help me ! " 

She started to her feet as she said this, and all 
trace of the composure which had been offensive to 
him had vanished, as she stood with her clenched 
trembling hand resting on the table, and her head 



A PAIB OF ADVISERS. ^5 

bent down in a proud abasement that might have 
touched any man's heart to tenderness. 

" Don't take the Lord's name in vain about it,*' 
he said sanctimoniously; and when he said that 
the intensity fled from her face, and a smile came 
out of her eyes as she lifted them to his face, and 
her lips parted, and transformed in one moment 
the passionately ^earnest woman into a merry deri- 
sive girL 

"It's nothing to laugh about,'' he said testily, 
*^ impious talk is another of the things in which I 
can see no fun and no pleasure; however it's no 
use speaking kindly to you." 

" You've never tried it, Robert." 

Before the words were out of her mouth she 
bitterly repented having been betrayed into using 
them, for he had been very kind in act though not 
in word to her. However, the words were uttered, 
and they bore fruit instantaneously. 

" I will not trouble you with any more of my 
remarks ; in future I shall not presume to interfere 
with your conduct whatever it may be," he said 
coldly ; then he added, " good night," without oflfer- 
ing her his hand, and went away out of the room. 



D 2 



CHAPTER IV. 

CHABLIE THINKS THINGS OVER. 

Charlie St. John's impulse when her brother- 
in-law left the room in the manner recorded at the 
end of the last chapter, was to rush after him, and 
say some word expressive of penitence for that 
speech into which she had been goaded . of peni- 
tence, and a desire to be forgiven. But she did 
not obey her impulse. By this time she knew her 
man too well. The word would have fallen on ears 
rendered deaf by wounded self-love, and a deter- 
mination to make her drink the cup of remorse, for 
her brief ingratitude, to the dregs. He was not a 
high-minded or generous-spirited man himself, but 
he had some faint notions of what those who are 
feel when they have been stung into the exhibition 
of some feeling less noble than themselves. He 
was resolved upon making her suffer to the full 



CHABUE THINKS THINGS OVEB. 87 

extent of his power, partly because she had told 
him the truth in telling him that he had never tried 
speaking kindly to her, and partly because she had 
done a thing in the course of the evening of which 
he exceedingly disapproved. She had so deported 
herself with a man as to have been remarked ; she, 
a girl whose only chance in life, whose only chance 
of eventually removing the burden of herself from 
off him, lay in marriage. And the man with whom 
she had so deported herself was a man whom Mr. 
Frescott rather disliked than otherwise, and who 
was spoken of by his own friends as " a fearful 
flirt, and utterly unscrupulous." He told himself, 
and he told his wife, that Charlie could not be 
made to feel her sin too severely. '^I shall not 
say a word more to her myself, but you had better 
speak to her to-morrow, Ellen. If she gets spoken 
of with that fellow Goring, the only prospect I see 
for her is destroyed." 

" But if they did come to like each other, and 
he was to marry her, Bobert, would you mind 
then?" 

** Marry ! He 's not a man to do anything of 
that kind," Mr. Frescott replied; and in this he 
judged Walter Goring very rightly. As far as that 



38 WALTER GORING. 

gentleman knew himself, he was not likely to marry 
for a good many years to come. Eternal smiles 
from a wife might grow to be monotonous, he had 
always felt. But there was never-ending variety in 
the smiles accorded him by the wives of his friends. 
There was a chance of some of the brilliancy* 
vanishing from them, he knew, did he marry ; so, 
in all honour he determined to retain them unal- 
tered while he could. Unquestionably, Mr. Pres- 
cott was right. Walter Goring was not the man, 
of all others, whom an anxious guardian desirous 
of seeing his ward married, would wish to see that 
ward's companion in the soft, seductive atmo- 
sphere of a half-lighted conservatory on a summer 
night 

It never occurred to this prosaic middle-aged 
moral man . to this irreproachable husband and 
father . to this astute lawyer, who had ever been 
too earnest in his profession to look soft things at 
a lady till he looked them at Ellen after she became 
Mrs. Prescott . ^it never occurred to him that the 
handsome young novelist with the witching tongue 
could be for an hour alone with a pretty woman 
who interested him, without making love to her. 
Had Mr. Prescott but known what they had been 



CHABUE THINKS THINGS OYER. 89 

conversing about, and how they had been con« 
Tersing about it during that terrible time in the 
conservatory, all his anger would have been as- 
suaged, and all his fears would have died a sudden 
death. 

A portion of this conversation has been already 
reported. She had avowed that she was discon* 
tented, and he, nearly a stranger, had reproved her 
for such discontent in a way that, truth to tell, had 
not made her like him at all the better for it. 
After that they had talked a little about art, and a 
little about literature, and she had learnt that there 
were mines out of which even she, weak as she was, 
might draw something had she but patience and 
perseverance. The scene, the soft light, the fra* 
grant atmosphere of the flowers, were one and all 
affecting her in their different wajrs. But he sought 
no aid from one of them. He talked to her as he 
would have done to a sister, or (better still, when 
she came to think about it) a brother ; and while 
Mrs. Walsh was accusing her of playing dexterously 
for a great stake out in that dim light, she was only 
^feeling through the whole of her sensitive being 
that it was not more dim than that light which had 
been shed upon her mind, and that he must see it 



40 WALTER GORING, 



and know it to be so, and yet . ^yet . why did he 
stay there, and talk to her ? 

The last words she said to him . ^that were 
addressed to him alone that night . were uttered 
when she heard Mr. Frescott's voice summoning 
her to return to her sister's side and her normal 
life. 

" Here comes what I was wishing for just now . 
the announcement that it 's time to go/ 

" Don't you wish it now ? " he asked. 

" No, of course I do not. You have been causing 
me to feel ignorant and foolish to the last degree, 
but I thank you for it,'* . she paused, and her head 
went up, and a firank, true woman's smile broke 
over her face as she added, " and like you for it. 
Now, good-bye," 

She put her hand out, and he took it and shook 
it heartily . as he would have shaken a man's . ^not 
at all as those wlio only saw one side of Walter 
Goring imagined he would have shaken the hand of 
a girl to whose side he had been chained in the 
moonlight for half-an-hour. 

** Good bye ! You 11 do something worth doing 
yet, if you try," he said ; to which she replied, 

** I wiU try." 



CHABUE THINKS THINOS OVER. 4l 

And they were the last words he ever heard in 
private from Charlie St. John. 

When Charlie St. John reached her room that 
night, she threw off her clothes and got herself 
into bed as rapidly as she could, in order to be able 
to think. It was absolutely essential to this young 
lady to be physically at ease before she could be 
mentally active. She could not think coherently, 
much less clearly, while in a position of bodily 
discomfort. 

She was well aware of this peculiarity ; therefore 
to-night, being desirous of bringing all the powers 
of her mind to bear upon a certain subject, she 
made haste to secure the first condition of success 
by lying down and being at rest. She wanted to 
think out an idea which had been put into her head 
by a speech of Mr. Goring's, made in answer to one 
of hers : " It is easy for you to recommend me to 
find content knd satisfaction in action, since I can't 
find it, like a caterpillar in a cabbage, in passively 
existing. You are* a man, and can help yourself; 

you can read and write, and travel " she was 

running on, when he stopped her to say, 

'* And what on earth is there to prevent your 
reading and writing, and travelling, too ? If you 



43 WALTER GORING. 

have a good, honest desire to do these things, 
you 11 do them sooner or later, take my word for 
it. One need not be a man in order to read the 
best things that have ever been written, or to write 
what may be worth reading. As for travelling! 
that will come." 

"Yes, I may read lofty things with a limited 
comprehension, and write out of the barrenness of 
an uncultivated mind : Never 1 " 

" It rests with yourself to enlarge both, surely ! " 
he had said, persuasively ; then he had added, very 
kindly, " Other women have done very great things, 
Miss St. John ; name a novelist of this age who 
has done nobler work than George Sand, or the 
author of * Adam Bede,' or . since this seems to be 
a consideration with you . the value of whose work 
has been more fully and completely acknowledged 
by the world." 

" You tell me to touch a' star, and I have no 
wings. I m utterly uneducated, as, of course, you 
perceive." 

** Make wings for, by educating, yourself." 

" I catCt^^ she cried, passionately ; " that *s just 
it. I can't; I haven't the patience and persever- 
ance. Above all, I haven't the incentive 1 " 



CHARLIE THINKS THINGS OVER. 43 

" What incentive do you lack ? " 

"Every inspiring one. Supposing that I did 
work, and plod, and learn something? It would 
be to this end . that I might teach it again." 

"It's the aim which animates the majority of 
those men whom you envy. We all hope to teach 
it again, whatever it may be." 

** Ah ! but I meant that it would only be to 
deal it out by the yard . ^by the long, weary, weak 
yard . as it has been dealt out to me. But 
you don't understand me. It would be that I 
might go out as a governess; and I'd rather be 
a cook." 

" You 're not fit for either place," he said, laugh- 
ing; "you would spoil the best food and the best 
children. If I were the father of a family, I should 
decline you in either capacity. But other women 
have made other paths for themselves ; why should 
not you, since you*re tbed of the one you're 
treading ? '' 

She looked at him, with her lips parted, and her 
eyes flashing. 

" Tell me ; would there be anything but the 
wildest, weakest folly in my making the attempt ? " 

" In what direction ? " 



44 WALTER GORING. 

" I don't know yet ; in any of the paths you 
indicate/' 

" Unquestionahly not, if you will work. Don't 
send a picture to the Academy before you can 
paint, or hope to storm Fame by the first story you 
get into a magazine; for^ if I'm not much mis- 
taken, it will be upon one or other of those paths 
that you'll adventure. You have an artist's soul, 
though you don't know it yet." 

It was this portion of their conversation . this 
last sentence of his especially . on which Charlie 
St. John wanted to ponder. He had indicated the 
paths plainly enough which a clever woman, capable 
of working, and earnestly desirous of pursuing 
honourablj, might pursue with success. He had 
indicated the paths, and he had appeared to accredit 
her with the possession of an artist's soul ! Had he 
flattered her in this ? or had he been mistaken, 
perchance ? While striving to solve this question, 
she fell fast asleep, and forgot for a few hours the 
drearinesses of the life that was past, and the aspi- 
rations that were to gild the life that was to come. 

At about four in the morning, the nursemaid 
came hastily into the room, and woke her suddenly, 
by asking, . 



CHABLIE THINKS THINGS OVEB. 45 

" Will you come and look at Ella, Miss Charlie ?" 

Ella was the eldest child . a seven-years' old 
golden-haired epitome of all that is most charming 
and unintelligible in her sex. She was Charlie's 
favourite . ^the only one who was never unwelcome 
in Miss St. John's room, and imable to wear out 
Miss St. John's patience. 

" Let me jcome out on your lap, Aunt Charlie," 
the child asked, as soon as Charlie reached her bed- 
side, and little Ella's face was so flushed, and her 
eyes so bright and pleading, that Charlie could not 
refuse the request she craved. 

So a blanket was put over the child, and Charlie 
seated herself on a nursery chair with Ella in her 
lap ; and the night wore away, and the morning 
light crept slowly into the room, and still she sat 
there almost motionless, but with no weariness in 
her manner, and no lack of tenderness in her face. 
At eight o'clock, wheif Mr. and Mrs. Prescott came 
into the room to see what was the matter, there was 
no trace in the eager eyes that were lifted to greet 
them of the defiant contempt which had dared cen- 
sure in the Walsh's drawing-room, or the cold 
reproach which had given force to the words, " You 
have never tried it," There was no trace of either 



46 WALTER GORING. 

feeling in the eager, sympathetic, mobile face that 
was lifted to greet them, or in the whispered words, 
" She's asleep now for the first time since four . 
I'm afraid it's fever, Ellen." But Mr. Prescott was 
not too apt to forget ; therefore he only said coldly 
in reply, " If it is fever, you have been very foolish 
to keep her on your lap in this way. It can do the 
child no good, and may be the means of your laying 
yourself up, and then there will be two to nurse." 

When he said that, she rose quickly but gently, 
very gently still, and went and put little Ella en the 
bed. Then she went away hurriedly to her own 
room, and when she reached it, the angry tears 
poured from her eyes, and she almost sobbed aloud, 
. " Anything, anything to get away." 



CHAPTER V. 

WAS SHE HIS FBIEND? 

When Mrs. Walsh came down to breakfast on the 
morning after her dinner-partj, she foand Walter 
Goring standing at the open window with the 
** Times " in his hand. Evidently he was reading 
vigorously. He gave it a sharp crack now and 
again, in the way in which people are apt to crack 
that stiff and bulky organ when they are anxious to 
get at its contents. Moreover, he did not mark his 
hostess's entrance . a certain proof that he was 
very much absorbed. She shut the cover of the 
tea-caddy sharply, but still he did not heed her. 
She went a little nearer, and glanced over his 
shoulder, and saw to her surprise that it was only 
the advertisement sheet, after all, which he was in- 
tently perusing. Then she went and rang the bell 
energetically, and spoke . 



48 WALTER aORING. 

"Have you lost a pug dog, or is anybody im- 
ploring you to write and all shall be forgiven, that 
you can't tear yourself away from the second column 
this morning, Mr. Goring ? " 

He had turned the instant she began to speak, 
and now he stood with her hand in his, bowing over 
it deferentially. 

" Neither ; forgive me for having been an uncon- 
scious monster for a few moments, and then congra- 
tulate me ! " 

" I do . what on ? I thought by the rapt regard 
you were bestowing on the ' Times,' that one of your 
books had got what you all sigh for . a line of judi- 
ciously-mingled praise and blame, that would look 
well in the advertisement ! " 

" I'm even more fortunate. My uncle is dead ! " ^ 

" And you are his heir ? " 

" In the order of things, whatever he had to leave 
comes to me." 

She turned away to the table, and busied herself 
with the cups, and he followed her, and seated him- 
self close by her side, with his folded arms before 
him on the table. 

" Is it such a much smaller piece of fortune 
in your eyes than the 'line of mingled praise 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND? 49 

and blame,' to which you alluded would have 
been?" 

She looked down upon him, and smiled that same 
grand sweet smile with which no husband could 
have quarrelled, even had he seen it bestowed on 
a hundred men. How it might have been had Mrs. 
Walsh reserved it entirely for the one, may not be 
known ; but Mrs. "Walsh did not reserve it for the 
one, though the one thought that she did. She was 
very liberal with it. 

** You will be so seldom in London,'' she said. 
There was a touch of what a stranger might have 
been forgiven for mistaking for complaint in her 
tone. 

*^ Why so ? I shall be in London quite as often 
as you care to see me^*' he replied, raising his eyes 
to her face. 

" Nonsense ; ungrateful nonsense, too, when we 
are always so glad to see you ; but now you will 
always want to be away, at that place in those 
wilds." 

*' You must come and stay there often, and then 
it will cease to be a wild ; by Jove ! I haven't 
been there since I was a boy myself; my recollection 
of it is that it is a glorious old place." 

VOL. I. w 



50 WALTEA GOBINO. 

She handed him his tea, and said, as she did 
so . 

" You know that I'm truly delighted at any good 
fortune befalling you. You know that, don't you ? 
but I do wish your uncle had lived a little longer ; 
you'll go away and bury yourself, and be married 
before you know what you are about." 

'* Oh, no, I won't." 

" Oh, yes, you will ; some day when you are 
feeling dull, when you can't shoot or hunt, and are 
tired of your own society, you will fall a prey to one 
of the dairymaid-faced daughters of the land, who 
will be lurking about seeking to devour you.'' 

" You're a trifle severe upon the daughters of the 
land, and a trifle mistaken about them too; the 
Norfolk women are some of the prettiest in England ; 
besides, I'm never tired of my own society." 

"Is the place in Norfolk?" 

"Yes." 

" Fearful distance from town," she sighed. " We 
went to Yarmouth last year, and I nearly went mad 
on the journey." 

" Your sanity stood the test of the even longer 
journey we all took together the year before." 

Once more she glanced down at him and smiled. 



WAS SHE HIS FBIBND? 61 

She did not say, *' You were with us then;" but, 
somehow, he remembered that he had been, and felt 
that she remembered it too. 

'* What is the name of your plnce ? " 

" Goring Place. Don't you think it odd that I 
haven't heard of my uncle's death in another way ?'' 

" You mean from his lawyer ?" 

.*Ye8." 

How is he to know where you are ? '* 

" He knows my Club ; he might write there." 

"Perhaps he has," she said, laughing; "for if 
you remember, you have not been up to town for 
the last five days." 

He laughed and rose, pushing his cup away as he 
did so. 

" You are only kind to remind me of it,'' he 
said, looking down on her upturned face. " Boe- 
bampton must not exercise this fascination over me 
any longer, though ; I must * be up and doing' . that 
is to say, I must go up to town to-day." 

'' You had better go up in the carriage with 
Horatia then," Mr. Walsh said, entering at the 
moment ; and Mrs. Walsh replied : " Well, we will 
arrange it so, shall we, Mr. Goring?'' and, on 
his giving his assent, proceeded to pour into her 

E 2 



52 WALTER GORING. 

husband's friendly ear the tale of "Walter Goring's 
wonderful good fortune. 

" Your wife has promised that you and she will 
be my earliest guests/' the fortunate man said, 
when the tale had been told. 

" Of course we will, won't we, Ralph ? We will 
take care to go to Goring Place before he has a wife 
to teach him to be cold and altered to us," the lady 
said, as she rose and walked towards the open 
French window. When she reached it, she paused, 
and asked . 

" Will some one get me my gardening gloves ? I 
must go and cut oflf those dead roses." 

Some one got her the gardening gloves. Some 
one carried them out into the garden for her 
even. 

" I won't keep you from Ralph," she said in 
a charmingly ingenuous tone, as she took them 
from him. 

" You may keep me from whom you please." 

" I shall never want to keep you from any one 
with whom it would be good for you to be." 

" Don't you think I know it, my goddess ? " 

" It only vexes me to see you wasting your time 
in frivolous ti'ifling; what could have induced you 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND? 58 

to devote yourself in the way you did to that girl 
last night?" 

" Oh, I don't know ; here, let me cut that rose 
for you, you'll hurt your fingers." 

So he cut the rose for her, and made his peace. 
At least he was certainly justified in supposing 
that he had done so, for no more was said to him 
on the subject of " that girl.'' 

When she was tired of cutting off the dead roses 
she signified her intention of going in« 

"And what am I to do all the morning?" he 
asked. 

" What an idle question ! " 

" Indeed it is not. Walsh is painting, and you 
never have a book down here that is worth look- 
ing at." 

.* And you don't want to write ?" 

" I can't write here." 

" Then come and read me what you have been 
writing lately, will you ? and through it I will try 
to trace whose has been the latest influence over 
you before you reached Boehampton." 

"Very well, I'll do that," he said. Then they 
went in together, and he got his MS. and read to 
her; and as she recognised herself considerably 



54 WALTER GOBING. 

idealized in it, she found it interesting and delight- 
ful to an extraordinary degree. While he, in 
reading it to her, and in listening to her well- 
modulated praises of it, forgot all about the girl 
whose ambition he had sought to fire in the con- 
servatory the night before. 

At two o'clock he went up to town with Mrs. 
Walsh, and found a letter at the Junior Carltpn 
awaiting him from his uncle's lawyer. He learnt 
that it was all as he expected; he was the old 
man's heir and the master of Goring Place. He 
learnt also that the property was hampered in a 
way which he would find fully explained in a 
sealed letter . ^a secret note only to be delivered 
into his hands by the lawyer. Moreover, he learnt 
for the first time that he had a cousin, a girl of 
seventeen, to whom he was to be guardian. 

When be rejoined Mrs. Walsh after reading his 
letter, she said anxiously . 

** Something has gone wrong ; what is it, 
Walter?" 

She had never called him Walter before, and it 
touched him that she should do so now in this 
his first trouble. 

"Nothing wrong; only it's the very deuce to 



WAS SHE HIS FBIEND? 55 

find myself at my age the guardian of a girl of 
seventeen." 

"Is that the worst?" 

" Can anything be worse ?" he replied evasively. 

"A daughter of your uncle's, I suppose? Oh, 
. you'll soon be quit of your charge. I was afraid 
that the property might be hampered," she said 
interrogatively. 

To this he only replied by asking her to advise 
him as to what he should do with bis charge. 
" It's certain that she can't remain at Goring 
Place, if I am ever to go there." 

" Of course she can't," Mrs. Walsh answered 
decisively; "but you must see what she*s like 
first, and then write and tell me, and then I'll 
advise you. Bemain at Goring Place ! I should 
think not." 

" For all I know, she may not choose to budge 
from there," he said moodily. 

"But if you are her guardian you can make 
her." 

" I think you know me well enough to know 
that I'm not the man to turn a girl out of a house 
that has been hers for seventeen years, if she 
wishes to stay in it; but it's time enough to talk 



66 WALTER GORING. 

about these things. Where is he going? didn't 
you say Marshall & Snelgrove's ? " 

" Yes ; Ealph has drawn me a design for the 
border of a dress, and I am going to have it in 
silver on white silk ; it is late in the season for 
such extravagance ; but there will be a few more 
parties worth dressing for, and you must have the 
* set ' down at Goring Place in the autumn and 
entertain the county." 

"I wish I had never heard of Goring Place," 
he said, almost savagely ; but Mrs. Walsh took no 
notice of his remarks, for the carriage stopped at 
the moment at the door of the shop where the 
design in silver on white was to be carried out. 

He assisted Mrs. Walsh out of the carriage, and 
saw her safely into the shop, and then he stepped 
into the little silken-lined brougham and sat down 
to wait for her. He was a man on whom Nature 
had smiled at his birth, on whom women had 
smiled from his boyhood, and on whom now For- 
tune had smiled magnificently, unless report had 
largely exaggerated the possessions of the man 
whose heir he had this day heard himself declared 
to be. Only the night before, when he had be- 
lieved himself to be entirely dependent on his own. 



WAS SHE HIS FBIEND? 57 

efforts, he had talked a very bright philosophy, 
and believed in it. Now that wealth was assured 
to him whether his future efforts were successful 
or not, he looked during these few minutes in 
which he dared to look what he felt. a bitterly 
# disappointed man. 

Nature had smiled upon him in so far as she 
had given him a face and a manner that pre- 
possessed both men and women in his favour. 
She had smiled upon him, but she had not given 
him that god-like beauty which she bestows upon 
the heroes of most novels. His warmest admirers 
could only say of him that he was **a fine good- 
looking fellow." Not even enthusiastic girlhood, 
looking upon him in the halo cast around him by 
the success of his very successful books, had ever 
been heard to declare him an Apollo. He had a 
fine brow, broad, open, and grandly intellectual, 
and back from it there swept a richly curling mass 
of bonny brown locks. His small delicately pointed 
beard and moustache were of a lighter brown, they 
were almost golden in fact, and they were so 
arranged as not to conceal the fine lines of his 
mouth and chin. For the rest there was little 
beauty in his face save in his eyes, which were 



5d WALTER OOBINO. 

dark, deep-set, and as expressive as any other 
man's spoken words; they were in perfect unison 
with his voice, which was soft, deep, rich, suave 
and sonorous as a poet's ever is . or should be. 
It was a face, in short, that you liked well at first 
and better at last . a face that won upon you . a . 
face that no one on whom it had ever been bent 
kindly could see averted with indi£Eerence. 

The lawyer's letter had informed him that his 
uncle's funeral was to take place on Friday the 
27th of July, and this was Wednesday. " I shall 
leave Shoreditch by the 2.40 train to-morrow. If 
you receive this in time, I hope you will be able 
to be there to go down to Goring Place with me 
to pay the last respect that can be shown to your 
uncle, and to receive, after the reading of the will, 
the sealed letter as soon as possible." 

" Without doubt I shall go," he said to himself, 
and he said the same to Mrs. Walsh when they 
were driving back to Boehampton. 

"What for? so soon?" 

** In common decency I must attend the funeral 
of the man who has left me everything he had to 
leave." 

'' Including his daughter. I fancied that he was - 



WAS SHE HIS FBIEND ? 59 

buried already. Of course you must go to the 
funeral since you are able to do so; when will 
you come back again ? " 

"God knows!" 

" But I want to know also. Beally, Mr. Goring^ 
I never saw a man so dejected by good fortune 
before. Won't you tell me what distresses you ? . 
if Balph and I are not amongst your oldest, we're 
amongst your warmest friends." 

She put her hand on his arm as she spoke, and 
bent forward to give force to her words. His eyes 
met hers gratefully, and he lifted the kind gentle 
hand to his lips, but he did not call her "his 
goddess/' as he had done on a previous occasion. 

" Both Balph and you are dear good friends to 
me, I know that very welL'' 

" Treat me as such . ^tell me what distresses you ; 
it can't be that you regret a man for whom you had 
no special regard, and whose death places you in 
your proper and fitting position ; it can't be that." 

" It is not that. I make no such pretence ; I'm 
thrown out of gear, that is all." 

" And how long will you be away," she asked with 
true feminine pertinacity, going back to the point 
that was most immediately interesting to herself. 



CO WALTER GORING. 

** Probably not a week . certainly not more," 

" How very awkwardly you are placed about this 
unexpected cousin," she said meditatively. 

" Awkwardly, rather ; to have a girl cropping up 
in this way in that quarter is enough to put any 
fellow out." 

" I wonder if her mother is alive, or if it was a 
secret marriage, or what the mystery has been," 
Mrs. Walsh said quickly ; " had you any idea that 
there was any old romance of the sort in your 
uncle's life ? " 

" Not the slightest . and I rather fear that it will 
turn out to be a very shady sort of romance at best ; 
probably some village amour repented of when the 
child grew up." 

" In that case I shall be but a poor coadjutor, for 
I have a slight prejudice in favour of gentlepeople. 
We won't talk about her any more. I see she will 
be a bore to you ; how I wish that she had never 
been born." 

How Walter Goring wished it too ; but wishing 
was of no avail. He agreed that it would be just as 
well, perhaps, not to talk about her any more, until 
they knew something more definite concerning her. 
" It was the merest speculation on my part, re- 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND ? 61 

member," he said; "the mother may have been 
wedded wife or injured maiden . a peeress or a pea- 
sant ; it*s all one to me as far as the confounded 
nuisance of the daughter is concerned/' 

But Mrs. Walsh did not think it "all one'' in 
the innermost recesses of her heart. Indeed she 
rather hoped that the " village amour " speculation 
would turn out to be a correct one. " He thinks 
too much of blue blood to go and make a fool of 
himself in that case/' she said to herself. Mrs. 
Walsh had some vague ideas about finding a nice 
wife for Walter Goring at some future time. But 
she had a strong feeling against Walter Goring 
finding a nice wife for himself. She had got so 
into the habit of saying " Oh ! he ought not to 
marry yet," that she quite believed in the truth and 
justice of her statement* 

The last evening at Boehampton which Walter 
Goring spent before taking upon himself the cares 
of a man of property was a very pleasant one. Mrs. 
Walsh had the art of making her house very like a 
home to him, and it seemed more homelike than ever 
this night. In the drawing-room he had his " own 
little table and reading-lamp," very near to hers; 
quite near enough for her occasionally to re-adjust 



'62 WALTER GORING. 

the shade for him, and for them to give out little 
passages from their respective books for each other's 
delectation, without disturbing Ealph, who, over- 
powered by his arduous pursuit of art during the 
day, was accustomed to slumber in space somewhere 
at the other end of the room from nine till twelve 
o'clock. 

There was profound pleasure to the man of letters 
in this intellectual interchange. Not but that he 
had met in the course of his varied experiences 
with cleverer women, but he had rarely met with a 
woman who seemed to think him so clever. The 
incense she offered him was far more delicate than 
any unmarried woman's could have been in his esti- 
mation. Mrs. Walsh had nothing to gain from him 
save the simple pleasure of his society. Whereas, 
after the manner of men, he believed that a name 
and ring are a sufficiently glorious recompense in 
the eyes of most girls to account for any amount of 
strivings to please. Without being a vain man, he 
was fully conscious of the fact of his being regarded 
as a man worth winning. On the whole, it certainly 
would not have been the fault of the married wo- 
men of his acquaintance had he remained in igno- 
rance of it. 



WAS SHE HIS FBIEKD? 68 

It was a very pleasant evening. The French 
windows were open that led out into the gardens, 
and through them they could see the beds of scarlet 
geraniums looking black in the light of the stars. 
The sky was one sheet of deep intense blue spangled 
with gold, not a breath stirred the silent sweetness 
of the atmosphere. They rose up and went out and 
stood on the borders of the lawn, and. 

" To-morrow night I shall be looking at it alone," 
Mrs. Walsh said, after a pause. 

" Unless you wake Balph, and bring him out to 
pick up a new idea as to the cold light of stars.'' 

She smiled. 

" He wouldn't thank me for doing so, . ^he has an 
inveterate dislike both to new ideas, and to being 
woke up/' 

" In that case pray don't do it at my instigation ; 
but just compare your position to-morrow night 
with mine. You'll not be minus one of the things 
that give you pleasure now" (single-minded and 
little vain as he was, it gave him a sensation of 
pleasure to see the reproachful look she gave him 
when he said this), *' while I shall be down in a 
house of death encountering all sorts of difficulties, 
such as contumacious wards." 



64 WALTER GORING. 

" She is not likely to be contumacious to you ; . 
and how can you say that I shall not be minus a 
single pleasure that I have to-night. Have we 
treated you so badly that you are justified in de- 
claring your society to be no pleasure to us ? " 

" You speak like a queen or a publisher," he said. 

" I speak like a married woman . but answer my 
question, have we ? " 

" Have you what ? " 

" Treated you so badly ? " 

"Better than I deserve; . so well that I feel 
myself injured when I'm out of reach of the treat- 
ment, my goddess ! ** 

" Perhaps we may as well go into tea now," Mrs. 
Walsh said, coolly ; and perhaps it was as well that 
they did. 

During the remainder of the evening there was 
little talk of anything save Goring Place, and what 
he would do with it. ** I anticipate finding every- 
thing in a state of decay ; the furniture was awfully 
old and rotten when I was there as a boy." 

" Then you will have to refurnish ; . delightful 
task." 

" Unfortunately I have no mother or sisters to 
direct my tastes." 



I 

L 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND? 65 

*' As if yoa needed any one to direct your taste : 
bat you forget, you will have la belle cousin . who 
will probably want eyerthing to be pink, and tied up 
with ribbon." 

** You must give me the benefit of your assistance 
in the matter. I will give up the reception-rooms 
to you, to do as you think proper with. Will you 
honour me so far ? *' 

** Indeed I will not," she replied, laughing, " for 
your wife, when you have one, to find fault with 
everything 'that' Mrs. Walsh selected. I know what 
women are." 

" My wife, if ever I have one, will never allude in 
such a way to Mrs. Walsh." 

" How do you know that ? " 

'' Simply because I shall never permit her to 
do so." 

" As if you could stop a woman's tongue." 

" You seem determined to endow a person who 
doesn't exist with a marvellous amount of animus 
against yourself." 

" There will be nothing marvellous in the animus. 
Sisters, and friends who are almost like sisters, are 
generally hated with a holy hatred by young wives." 

" The projected young wife shall receive the 



asked ; and her husband shook his head, and 
laughed, as he replied, 

" * Lovely * is not the epithet we usually apply to 
Norfolk, my dear." 

" It has the beauty of superb cultivation," Walter 
Goring said ; " a trifle flat, but capital colour, and 



66 WALTEB GORINO. 

fullest assurance of your not being at all like a sister 
to me," he said, laughing. 

Soon after this Mr. Walsh Woke up, and began to 
take an interest, which he had been too sleepy to 
feel or feign earlier in the evening, in Walter's 
prospects. "Will it interfere with your going 
abroad with us this year ? " he asked. 

" When are you thinking of starting ? " 

" About the middle of August.*' 

" Yes, that's rather late ; if there's plenty of game 
I shall want to be at the Place in September." 

" Why must we go abroad at all this year ? " Mrs. 
Walsh asked. 

" Why, indeed," Goring said. " Can't you put up 
with English country scenery for one autumn, 
Ralph? Come to Goring Place in the middle of || 

August, and stay till the middle of next year if 
you can." 

' It 's a lovely countty, isn't it ? " Mrs. Walsh I 



i 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND ? 67 

about Qoring Place very well wooded. You wrong 
Norfolk if you imagine that you can find nothing 
worthy of painting in it." 

" If you can induce my wife to give up Rome> 
where she has been bothering me to take her for 
the last six months, I'll agree to the change 
gladly." 

"And I know the goddess will be gracious . 
won't she ? " Walter Qoring said humbly, half 
kneeling before her, and lifting her hand to his 
lips. 

It was a sight which some husbands would not 
have liked to see ; but Mr, Walsh was a remarkably 
sensible man. He knew . ^none better . that there 
was nothing in it . ^that it meant no harm. There- 
fore, he looked at tiie scene from the artistic point 
of view entirely, and admired it exceedingly. " Just 
keep as you are for a minute," he said, quickly 
taking out his note-book and pencil, " the situation 
is exactly what I wanted." When he had made a 
rapid sketch, he told them " that would do," and 
they both got up to look at the result of their 
posing. 

" What is it, Ralph ? " Walter asked. 

" Mary Stuart and Chastelar." 

V 2 



68 WALTER GORING. 

" But I 'm not a bit like Mary Stuart, Ralph." 

" According to the estimate I have formed of her, 
she would have looked as you did then under the 
circumstances/' 

" What circumstances ? '* 

" The circumstances under which Chastelar 
always knelt at her feet . after he had *put her 
out,* as you women call it . as a queen, and flat- 
tered her as a woman." 

" Had I the look of being put out with Mr. 
Goring ? " she asked, with a laugh. " I was only 
thinking whether Miss St. John would have looked 
AS impertinently pleased as she did last night, if 
she could have seen him kneeling to me even in 
fiin.'' 

" Bother Miss St. John ! I was in hopes I had 
heard the last of her I" Walter Goring said, shrug- 
ging his shoulders. And Mr. Walsh told him 
Horatia was determined that he shouldn't fall a 
victim for want of being put on his guard. 

" Now, Balph, I never paid him so poor a com- 
pliment as to fancy he would fall a victim to such a 
girl ; why, her look of satisfaction last night was 
enough to provoke a saint.'* Mrs. Walsh said this 
with an air of putting it to them impartially. It 



WAS SHE HIS FRIEND ? 69 

certainly was not a speech at all calculated to 
enhance the charm that might otherwise have been 
cast around the absent one. Walter Goring felt 
immediately that in truth there had been no fear 
of his falling a victim to such a girl. ** But for all 
that," he thought, " I don't see why she shouldn't 
have shown satisfaction if she felt it; and she's 
too clever a girl to feel satisfaction in any fellow's 
attentions." 

He was going to leave Boehampton for town 
early in the morning ; so early that he could not in 
reason expect to see his hostess before he started, 
therefore he made his adieux when he was saying 
" good-night '* to her. 

** Good-bye, and God bless you ! " she said, 
heartily. " Forget that foolish speech I made to- 
day, and remember this, that if I can serve you by 
befriending your uncle's daughter, 1 11 do it, what- 
ever she may be. Will you remember this ? and 
believe it ? " 

"Yes . ^thanks. You don't know what a weight 
you have lifted from my mind by the words. You 
are the only woman in the world who can help me. 
Good-bye, my goddess ! " 

" Good-bye, my foolish worshipper ! " she said, 



70 WALTER GORING. 

as she linked her arm within her husband's. '' We 
would both do more than that for him, wouldn't we, 
Kalph?'' 

What do you say, reader ? Was she his friend ? 



CHAPTER VI. 

FEVERISH ! 

The fever . the first signs of which had shown 
themselves on the night of the Walsh's dinner- 
party . ^turned out to be typhus of the worst sort. 
Poor little Ella was soon a mere crimson, tossing, 
moaning mass of pain and insensibility. The 
doctor shook his head, and looked graver than Mrs. 
Prescott had ever seen him look before, and recom- 
mended that the other children should be sent away 
somewhere; and straw was laid down outside the 
house, and the door-knocker was tied up, and a 
great air of hush settled over the whole establish- 
ment. 

Womanly woman, tender mother, as Mrs. Pres- 
cott was, she was not gifted with the nursing 
power. She sickened at sickness with an utterly 
uncontrollable sickening, against which it was use- 



72 WALTER OOBING. 

less to struggle. The sight of the feverish little 
cheeks, dearly as she loved them, brought an 
equally feverish hue of impatient dread into her 
own; and the heavy atmosphere of the darkened 
room^ incapable as she was of keeping out of it, 
oppressed and caused her sensations of nausea. 
Accordingly, the task of tending upon the little 
child who was sick nearly unto death, devolved 
chiefly upon Charlie ; and righteously Charlie ful- 
filled every atom of the task which was assigned to 
her by fate, and lightened by love. 

Day and night were scarcely distinguishable from 
one another in that room ; for the doctor belonged 
to that section of the old school, one of the articles 
of whose faith it is that disease flees before dark- 
ness. So thick green blinds were lowered before 
the open windows, and heavy curtains drawn across, 
and the balmy July air had the greatest difficulty in 
getting in at all to the room which was surcharged 
with heat and suffering. 

The child's golden locks had been sacrificed as 
soon as the fever developed itself, and she looked 
.' like a blushing convict," Charlie thought, as she 
was bending over the pillow, and striving to put 
the aching little head into a more comfortable posi- 



FEVERISH ! 73 

tion one night. Suddenly, her hands faltered . 
failed in their task . and a great qualm seized her, 
and something began to beat at the back of her 
eyes. Tremblingly she seated herself on a chair by 
the bed-side, and strove to shake it off. She told 
herself that it was mere fatigue . mere giddiness, 
from bending so much, and for want of sleep . ^that 
she was as well as she had ever been in her life. 
She told herself all these things, pressing her hands 
against her face the while, as though she would 
have pressed the fever flush out of her cheeks, and 
the beating pain from behind her eye-balls. But it 
was no use. Presently, her hands fell down feebly 
into her lap ; her head restlessly sought a resting- 
place, and found it on the pillow by the side of little 
Ella's, and with a moaning sob over the misery of 
being ill in Robert Frescott's house, she passed into 
that state of half-slumber, half-delirium which marks 
the first stage of a fever. 

Ella was tottering about . a transparent, wistful- 
looking thing . on very attenuated legs, before 
Charlie St. John came out of the unconsciousness 
into which she had lapsed with a moan that night. 
When she did so return, she heard, among other 
agreeable things, that all her hair had been cut off. 



T4 WALTER GORING. 

"Master wanted to have your head shaved, Miss; 
but Mr. Frank wouldn't agree to it. But there ! I 
wasn't to tell you." 

" Mr. Frank . ^is he ? " She stopped, with 

her heart beating fiercely. Her brother. the brother 
whom she scarcely knew. -was home; he would 
take her out of this house, which she hated; he 
would redeem her from this ignominious bondage 
and slavery; she was no longer friendless and 
alone. Her heart beat fiercely, but it was with 
hope and love and joy. Suddenly it sank again. 

" Having made the slip of the tongue I may as 
well tell you all. Miss. I wasn't to speak of Mr. 
Frank having been home while you was at the 
worst, because he had to go again." 

Charlie threw her arms up over her face, and the 
tears streamed from her eyes. She was not a crying 
woman ; but it was so hard to have this cup of joy 
dashed from her Ups. Presently she composed 
herself sufficiently to ask . 

" Gone 1 where ? Gone for how long ? " 

" Only to the coast of Ireland, Miss ; at any rate 
it's to one of the Channel Fleet that he's appointed, 
though I don't rightly know which. You'll see 
him again soon, Miss,'* the girl continued, sympa- 



FB7ERISH ! 75 

thetically. '* Such a handsome young gentleman he 
isj and he did take on so about leaving you when 
you were so bad." 

To which comforting assurance Charlie, while 
overpowered, as she was, with joy and weakness and 
surprise, could only reply by sobbing, "My brother ! 
my brother ! " He was the one rock on which she 
had to rely, you see !. this brother, whom she had 
not seen for so many years, and who had come 
back, and, like a good angel, saved her head from 
being shaved while she was insensible I 

When her first emotion had subsided a little, 
curiosity and vanity resumed their sway. She 
asked for her sister . and a looking-glass. It is 
difficult to decide which was the greatest shock to 
her . ^the tidings that Mrs. Prescott, together with 
her husband and children, were away at Brighton, 
or the first sight of herself with her hair cropped 
like a boy's. 

" What an ugly little wretch I am I " she said, as 
the nurse .came and took the glass away ; and she 
heaved a sigh that was not unnatural under the 
circumstances. Her hair had been a great glory to 
her, and she had been seen shorn of it by the only 
Qne in whose eyes she desired to look well just at 



76 WALTER GORINa. 

present . ^her brother. It was useless the nurse 
telling her that by-and-by, when she got well, she 
would look as " nicely as possible with it frizzed in 
a crop." 

** I know that I shall look like a nigger with it . 
frizzed in a crop." 

In course of time, as she grew stronger, and so 
able to listen to them, she heard some of the family 
arrangements, as detailed in letters from Ellen, 
which were to be opened and read by the nurse . an 
injunction the nurse religiously obeyed, and Charlie 
as irreligiously swore at in her heart. It irritated 
her through every fibre of her being to be read 
aloud to by any one at any time, and nurse's treat- 
ment of Ellen's sentences was an awful thing to 
endure. They were long letters too, tliat the affec* 
tionate sister wrote to the invalid ; for the evenings 
at Brighton were dull, and pretty Mrs. Prescott had 
nothing to do but write them when her husband 
would not let her walk on the pier. She told 
Charlie what each one did, and said, and ate ; and 
the nurse read it all with a plodding unction that 
frequently made Charlie long to smother her. A 
client of Robert's . a Mr. Fellowes . was staying at 
Brighton with them, and he had his horses and trap 



FEVERISH I 77 

there, and constanUy took them for long drives. 
According to Mrs. Prescott's account, driving about 
Brighton was a proceeding that bordered on mad- 
ness. After each drive she described the horses as 
" nearly " having done something rash, not to say 
terrible. Cliffs and precipices, which they only 
just escaped, were scattered with profusion over her 
letters. "I don*t know Mr. Fellowes, and I do 
know Ellen, so I ^ give him the benefit of a doubt : 
anyone who didn't know her might distrust his 
Jehuship,'' Charlie thought to herself. 

At last Charlie was well enough to read the 
letters for herself . then to answer them. Shortly 
after, the doctor wrote such a fair account of her to 
Brighton, that Mr. Prescott came up to see her, 
and to graciously announce his intention of taking 
her down to join her sister. Charlie ** thought she 
would rather remain where she was;'* but the 
doctor declared change of air to be the only thing 
needed to complete her recovery. Accordingly, in 
September she was borne off to Brighton, and 
introduced to Mr. Fellowes. 

They were introduced about two hours after her 
arrival. He came into the Prescotts' drawing-room 
in the evening, to ask if Mrs. Prescott would go 



78 WALTER GORING. 

down and walk on the pier. Mrs. Prescott was not 
in the room when he entered ; but a young lady, 
with a quantity of short curling hair, was lying on a 
sofa near the window, and little Ella was kneeling 
by her side. He was about to withdraw, with an 
abrupt apology, when the child ran after him and 
stopped him. 

" Come in, and speak to my Aunt Charlie." 

He came up to the sofa tiien, the child still 
clinging about him. They were evidently good 
friends. 

" May I be supposed to know you, Miss St. John, 
on this young lady's introduction ? " 

** Certainly," she said, holding out her hand to 
him. " My pet, don't be troublesome to Mr. Fel- 
lowes." 

" You know my name, too ? " 

"Yes; and your horses have played such an 
important part in Ellen's letters that I shall not 
require an introduction to them either.'' 

"But I hope you will know them for yourself 
before we separate. Your sister is good enough to 
allow me to drive her out occasionally. You will 
be equally good, will you not ? " 

Before Charlie could reply, Mrs. Prescott came 



FEVEHISH ! 79 

into the room. " How d ye do, Mr. Fellowes ? 
doesn't she look a poor wan thing ? " 

" The sea air will soon set her up." 

" Yes ; and if you'll transfer the offer you made 
me of a riding-horse to her, you don't know how 
much obliged I shall be to you." 

" Ellen ! " Charlie cried, reproachfully and quickly. 

"Well, you ought to ride. The doctor says 
you're to ride, and Eobert won't let you mount a 
Brighton hack." 

" When she sees what a steady-going old fellow 
the Major is, she'll alter her mind, Mrs. Prescott," 
Mr. Fellowes said, rather patronisingly Charlie 
fancied. She thought " that great big man thinks 
Vm afraid ; I'd like to show him the difference." 

In time to come . ^long after she had forgotten 
this idle thought of hers . she did show him the 
difference with a vengeance, poor man. 

The husband and wife and their friend went out 
for a stroll shortly after this, and Charlie watched 
them from her position in the bay window until 
they were lost in the crowd on the pier. Even 
then she could frequently trace their progress by 
reason of Mr. Fellowes being at least a head taller 
than the majority of men. " What brings that big 



80 WALTEB GORING. 

robust man to Brighton, I wonder?" she thought, 
and presently she said aloud. 

" Ella, pet, is Mr. Fellowes often here ?" 

"Yes; and he gives me such lots of fruit. I 
daresay he'll give you some now ; but he'll give me 
most, because he loves me best." 

" You'll give me some of yours, that will be the 
best way, eh?" 

The child shook her head and pondered. The 
fruit question was a delicate one. In the pride of 
her heart little Ella had made a vaunt, and the 
vaunt was not based on sober fact. She had 
spoken of " lots of fruit," whereas in truth it was 
never more than she could eat with keen relish. 
She was not greedy, and she was very fond of 
Charlie. But she was only human. So now she 
shook her head and pondered. 

" Perhaps he'll love you too and give you some, 
and then we shall both have enough,'' Ella sug- 
gested presently; then she added eagerly, "Pa 
wants him to like you, because I heard him say 
so. Look here. Aunt Charlie : he said, * If Charlie 
only '" 

" Hush, you dear little child," Charlie cried, 
laughing and stopping the child's mouth with a 



feyebish! 6L 

kiss ; " you pet monkey, you must never repeat 
things that you hear papa or anybody else say; 
we'll all have fruit enough, and like each other of 
course ; and now, childie, here comes nurse to take 
you to bed/' 

But though she had checked the child, she had 
heard enough to make her feel sore and indignant. 
For the last day or two she had been feeling more 
kindly towards her brother-in-law; she had been 
remembering more vividly that she did in truth 
owe him a very heavy debt of gratitude. He had 
been tender and considerate to her all the way 
down from town. He had expressed much pleasure 
at the prospect of having her at Brighton with 
them, and he had heartily congratulated her on 
the fever not having destroyed an atom of such 
good looks as had been hers previously to her 
illness. ** Upon my word, I think you look very 
well indeed with your hair short in this way, 
Charlie," he had said to her; '^ though to be sure 
you look better with it long, in the old way ; but 
it will soon grow agaiji." This, and one or other 
things he had said to her, putting her in better 
conceit with her personal appearance than she had 
ever felt after speech of his before. Altogether 



82 WALTER GOBING. 

she had been feeling more kindly towards him, 
and now all such feeling was destroyed and broken 
up by the reflection that she had been had down 
to captivate the client who drove his horses nearly 
over the cliffs or into some other equally perilous 
position every day. As it grew dark, and she 
could get no further distraction by watching the 
gay crowds on the parade and pier, she became 
each moment more and more embittered. " Of 
course he doesnH care how he gets rid of me, or 
to whom," she muttered savagely. " Why should 
he ? I shouldn't, were I in his place ; only I never 
asked him to take me and provide for me. He 
wouldn't have done it if he hadn't wanted to get 
Ellen. And why should he ? No man likes to 
marry a whole family. Oh dear ! I wish I had 
died at my birth, or in the fever ! . any fate, any 
life, any curse must be better than this life of 
mine, that I carit escape from, and that I can't 
blame any one for its being the unendurable 
thing it is!" 



CHAPTER VII. 

TEMPORAKY OBLIVION. 

It will be seen that Charlie St. John had utterly 
forgotten the means of altering her life, or of 
making for herself an object in it, which Walter 
Goring had indicated to her. Whatever the cause, 
the fact remains. Whether it was that the fever 
had burnt the feelings which had so immediately 
preceded it out of her memory, or whether those 
feelings had been merely affected for the sake of 
making talk, cannot be decided yet. At any rate, 
they and the conversation which had grown out of 
them, and the hopes and ambitions which had been 
evolved by that conversation, had all faded away. 
Charlie St. John, lying there on the sofa in the 
bay window looking out over the dark sea which 
stretched before her, in September, was as hope- 
less of better things, as despairing as to her own 

2 



84 WALTER GORING. 

chances of eyer getting out of the loathesome 
groove in which she was running, as oblivious of 
the fact of other women having battled against and 
surmounted worse difficulties than beset her path, 
as she had been in the Walshes' conservatory on 
that fair July evening. She had utterly forgot- 
ten that a voice which seemed to have a pro- 
phetic tone in it had said to her, "You will do 
something yet, if you try," and that she had re- 
plied, **I will try." The very memory of these 
things had passed from her. Whether they had 
died out never to spring up again remains to be 
seen. 

By and by, she lying there wearily . so nearly 
asleep that it was not worth while to wake up and 
pretend to be glad to see them . heard them come 
in. They said "Hush!" at first; at least Ellen 
said, " Hush ! Charlie's asleep," and forthwith fell 
to talking rather louder than either of the others* 
Then she heard the question of claret-cup raised, 
and there was a brief dispute as to the best manner 
of making it, which was finally settled by their, 
" agreeing to leave it to the waiter." After that 
they discussed the important question of what they 
should do the following day. " Take your sister 



TEMPORAEY OBLIVION. 85 

up and show her the Devil's Dyke/' Mr. Fellowes 
suggested. 

"Yes, if she's well enough to ride she can go 
up on horseback," Mr. Prescott replied ; ** Charlie's 
a capital horse-woman." 

Charliej half asleep as she was, heard this, and 
winced and smarted. Her brother-in-law seemed 
to be throwing her at this man's head. She had 
an almost unconquerable desire to rise up and say 
to them, "I hear everjiliing, and I know every- 
thing, and I won't forward your game ; do what 
you please with me." But reason told her some 
hard truths, and saved her from making such a 
futile exhibition of herself. 

After a while they roused her, and Mr. Prescott 
came and busied himself about her sofa cushions 
and the shawl that was spread over her. He said 
one or two kind little things to her and of her, 
things of which she couldn't take hold, but which 
she felt were intended to put her in the best light 
before the guest, and the guest regarded her with 
eyes that told her that she stood in a very pleasant 
light for him. already. Attention from Bobert 
Prescott! Attempts to enhance her value from 
Bobert Prescott! It was all too ridiculous, too 



86 WALTER OOBINO. 

mean and small and paltry. She could not play 
" such a wretched part in such a wretched farce." 
Thinking this, she rose impatiently, saying, *'I 
shall go to hed, Ellen;" but even as she spoke 
she faltered, tottered, and fell back upon the couch. 
They all crowded round her, as people do when 
they belieye a person to be faint, effectually pre* 
eluding all chance of the poor wretch's speedy 
recovery, and determinately keeping out every re- 
viving breath of air. However, Charlie was not 
faint ; she was only weak and exhausted, so it did 
not so much matter. 

" 1*11 carry you up to your room, my dear," Mr. 
Prescott said, and Charlie, exhausted and angry as 
she was, burst out laughing. Mr. Prescott's little 
rounded back, and Mr. Prescott's altogether in- 
significant form, looked so very unlike " carrying " 
with anything like Safety, much less comfort to the 
carried. 

" No, thank you, Robert, I would rather walk ; 
I shall be all right directly. I suppose it's the 
sea air that has taken me off my legs in this way,"* 
she said, as soon as she could check her laughter. 

Mr. Fellowes had been standing at the head of 
the' sofa with a bottle of cruelly strong smelling 



TEMPORARY OBLIVION, 87 

salts in his hand. He now came round to the 
side, and before she knew what he was going to 
do, he had bent down and lifted her up in his 
arms. Feeling rather small and very helpless, 
there she remained perfectly quiescent ; and when 
he said, " If you'll show me her room, Mrs. Pres- 
cott, I will carry her to it," she uttered no word 
of protest. So he carried her to her room and 
deposited her there, and bade her good night 
briefly before she could thank him. When he was 
gone, Mrs. Prescott commenced eagerly-^ 
" What do you think of him, Charlie ?" 
" I think he's a big brute," Charlie replied. 
''How can you say so, after he has been so 
kind?" 

" My dear Ellen, I could have walked." 
''You didn't seem to manage the walking very 
well,'' Mrs. Prescott remarked with somiB truth. 
" I should have done better next time." 
"He looked so handsome as he brought you 
up the stairs; it was quite like a scene in a 

Charlie laughed. "From my point of view he 
looked like a curled and oiled Assyrian bull. I 
never saw anything so regular and crispy and tight 



88 WALTER GORING. 

in my life out of the British Museum as those 
curls of his are. Where did Robert and you pick 
him up?" 

" He's a gentleman of large property in Norfolk ; 
he's not to be picked up by any one, I assure you, 
Charlie,*' Ellen replied rather tartly ; " and oh ! 
dear Charlie, if you should come to like him, it 
would be such a match for you." 

" Good night, dear," Charlie said abruptly, turn- 
ing round and burying her face out of her sister's 
sight on the pillow ; and Mrs. Prescott, fearing 
that she had done more harm than good by her 
little suggestion, went away out of the room meekly 
and dejectedly. 

The record of the days as they passed at Brighton 
during that September is scarcely worth telling. 
Charlie St. John gradually gained strength, and 
gradually gained something else too,. a hearty grate-* 
ful liking for the honest-hearted gentleman whom 
she had dubbed ** a big brute" on the night of her 
arrival. He was one of those men who are always 
gentle and tender to anything that is physically 
weak. He pitied Miss St. John so much for having 
been ill. He strove so very earnestly to think of 
little*jaunts into the country that might amuse her, 



TEMPORARY OBLIVION. 89 

and he was so careful to avoid rucks and other 
causes of jolting in driving, that she could but be 
grateful to him. Nevertheless, she laughed at him 
to her sister. **He either thinks me utterly 
decayed and dreads seeing me crumble to pieces 
at the first shock, or the females of his own house 
must be perfect grenadiers," she would say to 
Ellen; and Ellen would with difficulty obey her 
husband's injunction "not to interfere" at such 
moments, and hold her tongue sorely against her 
will. But though Charlie laughed at him, she was 
always glad to see him ; and he marked her glad- 
ness, and drew favourable deductions from it, not 
knowing that he owed the favour, such as it was, to 
that dangerous love of novelty which was at once 
her charm and her curse. 

However, he was ignorant of this, and in his 
ignorance he experienced very blissful feelings. 
The wealthy country gentleman had led a very 
hum-drum life. He had seen very little of women 
out of his own rather narrow circle ; he had been 
very little out of the neighbourhood where his 
fathers had been born, and married, and buried. 
Charlie came upon him like a revelation. She 
interested him ; he did not understand her, and 



I 



90 . WALTBB GORING. 

after the manner of bis kind, he liked a thing in 
exact proportion as it appeared incomprehensible to 
him. He liked to watch her and telegraph bis 
" wonder " to Mrs. Prescott, as to " what she would f 

be at next ; " and Charlie observed this and ridi- i 

' j 

culed him to herself and to her sister, who was i 

still obedient to her lord's command, that there 
should be no interference in the matter. 

" He looks as if he expected me to stand on my 
head," Charlie would say, and Ellen would humbly 
urge in extenuation of these looks of his, " perhaps 
he admires you, Charlie." 

" No, no I it's not admiration, its the hope of 
seeing me do something odd ; perhaps he thinks I 
have been mad, as my hair is cut short. If I thought 
it was really that, Vd dtmce at him, and pretend I 
was going to bite him." 

But though she said this often to her sister, 
always freshly inciting the gentle Ellen's terrors 
that she would in truth carry her threat into execu- 
tion, she never did it, and moreover, never intended 
to do it. The watching was an odious thing, and a 
hard one to bear, and it was rendered harder by 
being watched in turn by the Prescotts. But she 
had no wish to put a stop to it in such a way as 



TEMPOBABY OBUVION. 91 

should cause Mr. Fellowes to cease from the watch 
for ever. 

One evening, when Charlie had been at 
Brighton about three weeks, Mr. Fellowes came 
in to ask her if she would go " for a last ride with 
him.'' 

" Are you going away ? " Charlie asked, opening 
her eyes wide with surprise. The man had become 
very necessary to her . he and his good old brown 
horse the ' Major.' She did not like the idea of 
being left entirely to herself and the Prescotts 
again. 

He looked down at her very gently, and asked . 
" Are you sorry that I am going ? " 

** Uncommonly ! " Charlie replied, in a tone that 
robbed both question and answer of anything like 
sentiment. Mr. Fellowes had fallen into an un- 
pleasant habit of making similar speeches to the 
one just recorded aloud before the Prescotts, and 
the keen look which they invariably called into 
being in Mr. Prescptt's eyes, goaded Miss St. John 
almost to madness. ''Uncommonly sorry to lose 
the old horse too, Mr. Fellowes; at all events I 
will have as much as I can of him to-night, so I'll 
go and put on my habit at once.'' 



92 WALTER GORING. 

When she was gone out of the room, Mrs. 
Prescott asked, " Must you really go to-morrow ? " 

"Yes, I think I had better," he replied. "Tm 
wanted at home, and I'm doing no good here/' j 

" You may be wanted at home, but I'm sure you I 

are wrong about doing no good here ; how poor 
Charlie will miss you," Mrs. Prescott said with a 
little sigh. The poor woman, meek and long- 
suffering and lymphatic as she was, did suffer many 
things about Charlie, of which Charlie had no con- 
ception. The list of Charlie's sins and offences 
against order and discretion and conventionality 
was a long one as made out by Mr. Prescott, and he 
was constantly unrolling it before his wife's eyes, 
and delivering a running commentary upon it. She 
had been hoping fervently for the last week that it 
was complete, or rather that Charlie was going to 
obliterate this scroll of shame by marrying Mr. 
Fellowes. Now it appeared as if Mr. Fellowes was 
not going to give her the chance. However it i 

might be about his loving, it was clear according 
to his own statement, that he was going to ride 
away. No wonder that she sighed as she thought 
of how her husband would growl, and said " How 
poor Charlie will miss you," 



TEMPORARY OBLIVION. 93 

"Do you mean that?'' he asked eagerly. He 
was a man of nine and twenty or thirty, but his fiace 
flushed like a bo/s, and his big frame trembled with 
agitation as he asked it* 

"Yes," Mrs. Prescott said hesitatingly. She 
was awfully afraid of Mr. Prescott declaring this 
speech of hers to come under the head of that 
interference which he had prohibited, and though 
he was not there to hear her, she knew herself too 
well to doubt but that she should repeat every word 
to him when he came in. So she said her " Yes " 
so hesitatingly, that Mr. Fellowes thought she did 
not mean it. 

" Now look here, Mrs. Prescott," he began, and 
Mrs. Prescott could have taken her oath that his 
round honest blue eyes were suffused with tears as 
he spoke. "It's a great deal to me whether you 
mean what you say or not. I never saw a girl on 
whose truth I*d sooner stake my life, or what's 
more, my honour, than on hers ; she seems to like 
me, but I may be mistaken, and if I am I shall 
carry the marks of it longer than most men perhaps ; 
did you mean all your words implied, coming as 
they did from her sister, when you said * Poor 
Charlie will miss you? ' " 



94 WALTER GOBINQ. 

He spoke very seriously, and Mrs. Prescott was 
too much agitated to answer him at once ; it arose 
principally from feeling that she was in for it now, 
and that it was hopeless to endeavour to extricate 
herself. She was in for that interference against 
which her husband had cautioned her with some- 
thing like a snarl; there was no escape for 
her. 

Happily for her, before she could speak, and so 
convict herself still further, Charlie came back robed 
for her ride. Mrs. Prescott said a little thanks- 
giving on the spot. Providence had befriended her, 
and made Charlie's habit to button easily that 
evening. 

They went out together. Miss St. John and Mr. 
Fellowes, and Mrs. Prescott watched them from the 
window, and saw him lift her to the saddle the 
instant her foot touched his hand. " Oh dear," 
Ellen thought, I hope they will be engaged when 
they come back ; there's no reason why she shouldn't 
marry him. I don't believe she cares for anybody 
else, and he is so tall and nice." 

Meanwhile the pair she was thinking about were 
cantering along the road to Hove, and Charlie was 
glancing askance now and again at her unusually 



TEMPORABT OBIJTION. 95 

silent cavalier, and feeling very sure of something 
being said that would in some way materially alter 
their relations to one another before they cantered 
home again. 

Her woman's wit told her that it would be well to 
defer the inevitable something that was to come, 
until their ride was nearly over; then perhaps it 
would be just as well to hear it. She told herself 
that she was very glad, and proud and happy that it 
should have come to this . that he should have got 
to like her so well in such a short time, as to be 
now brimming over with impatience to tell her of 
it. Nevertheless, as she looked at him, when they 
pulled up to walk their horses down a hill on the 
Shoreham road-^when she looked at him and saw 
clearly how the liking in his eyes was deepening 
into love that would not remain long unspoken, she 
felt a qualm at her heart, and a tightening in her 
throat. She had never felt so before in any of 
those innocent flirtations for which she had been so 
reviled by Eobert Prescott. All the gaiety fled 
from her brow and eyes, all the lightness from the 
hand that had been playing so delicately with the 
curb, all the warmth seemed to her to die out of 
the bright September aii' as she thought, "This 



06 WALTER GORING. 

is going to be a very different . a very serious thing : 
shall I be able to stand it ? " She had not much 
time to reflect on the question she had asked her* 
self; when they reached the level he drew his 
horse a little nearer to hers, and laying his hand on 
the pommel, he commenced at once. 

" I asked you last night, when we were on the 
pier, if you would let me call you Charlie, and you 
said ' Yes ' ; do you know all that concession meant 
tome?" 

She was nervous enough in reality, but it was 
part of her character to strive to seem most blythe 
and careless when in titith she was most wrought 
upon. So now she said . 

" It meant two shillings. I said * Yes, if you'll 
give the German band something, and make them 
play my pet waltzes ' ; and you gave them two 
shillings, for I saw you." 

" It meant more than that, Charlie." 

She laughed. " So it did ; it meant that we are 
such capital friends, that you might call me any- 
thing-^anything that is not Charlotte ; calling me 
Charlotte is Mr. Prescott's pet punishment for me 
when my sins and offences have been too heavy for 
him to bear." 



TEMPORARY OBLIVION. 97 

He moved his hand from the pummel now, and 
laid it upon her wrist. 

" It meant either that you were making a play- 
thing of me Charlie, or that I might go on loving 
you as I do . as I have, my darling, almost from the 
first day of my seeing you.*' 

Her lips parted, and she looked irom side to side 
with the startled gaze of a hunted animal. She was 
in the toils ; and she could not decide whether she 
should escape from them while there was yet time, 
or not ? 



CHAPTER VIII. 

DAISY ! 

Walter Goring found his late uncle's lawyer, 
Mr. Clarke, a loquacious, big, black-whiskered, 
effusive-mannered man, instead of the cut-and-dried 
epitome of reticence and quiet keen-sightedness 
which he -had anticipated. The young litt6rateur 
had had little to do with law and lawyers heretofore. 
True he had once or twice made threatening mention 
of "my solicitor" in letters to refractory publishers 
who were very naturally trying to make out of him 
precisely what he was trying to make out of them, 
namely, the most that might be made. But in the 
flesh, all the knowledge he had of the gentlemen of 
the long robe had been gained at the various wine 
parties he had attended in the " Temple," festivities 
which were given by men who had limited their 
exertions at the Bar to eating the dinners. 



BAISY ! 09 

Mr. Clarke was no bad travelling companion for 
a man who had just come into possession of a pro- 
perty of which he knew nothing. From the moment 
they stepped into the carriage at Shoreditch, till 
they stepped out of it again at the Goring Place 
platform, the lawyer poured out one fluent con- 
tinuous stream of valuable information connected 
with the estate and affairs of the late Gilbert 
Goring, Esq. There was only one subject on which 
he held his tongue ; and that was the sealed letter, 
the secret trust confided to his care by the deceased, 
to be delivered by him (Mr. Clarke) into the hands 
of the new master of Goring Place immediately 
after the reading of the will of the old one. 

Walter Goring had tasted blood now. Two days 
before, and he had been as indifferent about Fortune 
as a man tolerably sure of being able to win her for 
himself Alone can be. He had the certain conviction 
that he had it in him to make himself *' famous by his 
pen," and he had been careless of any extraneous aid. 
From "his boyhood he had known that, in the order 
of things, when his uncle died, he would inherit a 
large property ; but he never suffered himself to 
count upon it. He had always remembered three 
things- firstly, that the property was not entailed, 

H 2 



100 WALTER GORING. 

and could therefore be left to any one who seemed 
more desernng of it in his nncle's eyes than he him- 
self. Secondly, that Gilbert Goring might many 
and haye a son of his own ; and thirdly, that the 
country gentleman, who came of a long-lived line, 
and who had never taken it ont of himself, either 
mentally or physically, as Walter felt that he had, 
might last the longer of the two. These considera- 
tions had kept him from giving much thought to 
the Norfolk property which might or might not be 
his in time to come. But as is often the case, his 
philosophy of indifference broke down when most 
it was needed. He read the first portion of the 
lawyer's letter and tasted blood, that is to say, he 
suffered himself to feel that he was a landed pro- 
prietor and a county man. 

He read the after portion, and learnt that there 
was an after-thought of his uncle's still to he made 
known to him . a sealed letter still to be read, 
containing Gilbert Goring's latest intentions . con- 
taining, perchance, some fell blow to his "being 
either of the things which, as he was but human, 
his heart had proudly swelled with the conscious- 
ness of being for a few brief seconds. 

He had tasted blood and he could not go back to 



daisy! 101 

the old indiflference, but after one solitary attempt, 
which Mr. Clarke baffled, Walter sought to gain no 
clue as to what the contents of that letter might be. 
At the first mention of it which the young master 
of Goring Place made, the lawyer lapsed into a 
taciturnity which contrasted curiously with his 
previously almost jovial manner. His sallow pale 
face hardened, and his big black whiskers stiffened 
themselves portentously, and he was almost offen- 
sively business-like, as he said, 

'' Professional matters must take their course, Mr. 
Goring. I can make every allowance for your im- 
patience, but I cannot gratify it." 

Walter did not like the way Mr. Clarke said it, 
or the way in which Mr. Clarke pressed his lips 
together after saying it ; moreover, it was offensive 
to his taste that he should have been reproved for 
impatience by a man whom in his heart he denomi- 
nated ''a howling cad" the instant he saw him. He 
took no notice of the rebuke, however, but looked 
out of the window, and whistled a few bars of a 
waltz in which he was rather fond of revolving with 
Horatia Walsh . his grand " goddess," who danced 
as well as she did most other things that specially 
called for stateliness and grace. 



102 WALTER GORING. 

His whistling was soon interrupted. Mr. Clarke 
had as little inclination to hold his tongue, 
apparently, as he had to be unprofessional. The 
lawyer only intended to talk about safe things, but 
evidently he intended to talk a great deal 'about 
them. He began by extolling the admirable 
manner in which the tenants on the Goring Place 
Estate farmed the land. " Greyling's lease expires 
at Michaelmas/' he continued, ^'but if I were in 
your place, I should renew it for him.'' 

" Who is Greyling ? and what does he hire ? " 
" The home farm . ^about six hundred acres." 
'' If I settle down at the place, I shall keep the 
home farm in my own hands, in order to have 
something to do," Walter replied. Mr. Clarke's 
advocacy of Greyling was not made at a propitious 
moment. 

The lawyer shrugged his shoulders. 
" Have you ever learnt farming ? '' he asked. 
"No." 

" Then in that case you will find yourself rather 
behind the Norfolk men, Mr. Goring ; all the land 
is most excellently let at present, let to men who 
are steadily increasing the value of your property. 
I can conceive nothing more injudicious than your 



DAISY ! 103 

trying your hand at amateur farming ; of course I 
only speak as a man of business." 

" It's more than probable that I shall not settle 
there ; but in the event of my doing so, I shall want 
some occupation. How about the society in the 
neighbourhood ? " 

Mr. Clarke assumed a judicial air : the truth was, 
that he knew nothing of the society in the neigh- 
bourhood. The late Gilbert G-oring had kept his 
man of business strictly in his place as a man of 
business. There had always been a bed-room and 
a horse at Mr. Clarke's disposal at Goring Place. 
But Mr. Goring assumed that his county neigh- 
hours were no more desirous of meeting his lawyer 
<m terms of equality, than he was of meeting theirs. 
Accordingly he never asked them, and so it came to 
pass that Mr. Clarke's knowledge of the neigh- 
bourhood was but limited. However, he had no 
intention of making this fact too patent to his new 
client. So, in answer to the latter's question, " How 
about society in the neighbourhood?" he looked 
judicial, and then, replied, 

" Oh ! very good . good, you know ; but dull, 
excepting just in the hunting season." 

'*I have not been there since I was a boy. 



104 WALTEB GORING. 

Whose are the places immediately around Goring 
Place?'' 

This was safe ground. Mr. Clarke knew well by 
whom each inch of soil for many miles around 
Goring Place was owned and occupied ; he answered 
briskly : 

" Lord Harrocoat's estate lies to the north of 
Goring Place. Tremendous property, that!. tre- 
mendous ! some of the finest farms in the county ! 
I assure you his tenants go to pay their rent in 
carriages that would take the shine out of many a 
one that we see in the drive in the season: there is 
a tradition that one of them used to drive a four-in- 
hand of the best bred and matched bays in the 
county ; but Lady Harrocoat had hysterics about it, 
so he has an attack of ague now every audit-day, 
and sends the rent by his bailiff.*' 

'* I have a faint recollection of the gable of a red 
house that I used to see through the trees when I 
was standing at one of the drawing-room windows ! " 

" I suppose that was the south lodge." 

** Oh ! no ; it was beyond the grounds . ^far 
beyond, I should say ! " 

" Ah ! to be sure, Fellowes's place, ' The Hurst :' 
it*s a small estate that belongs to a man of the 



DAISY ! 105 

name of Fellowes, and it does lie to the south of 
Goring Place. The lands meet, and there was an 
awful row some years ago, between your uncle and 
old Fellowes, the father of this man, about a right 
of way. There was a sort of private road, that led 
from The Hurst to the church at Deneham, and it 
cut across a piece of your land; suddenly your 
uncle blocked it up and made no end of ill feeling 
about it/' 

"What did he do it for?*' 

" Oh ! some magisterial quarrel. Old Fellowes 
and he were both on the bench, and they disagreed 
about some poaching business. I forget what it 
was, but at any rate your uncle got worsted in the 
matter, so he went and set about annoying Fellowes 
in return in the only way that seemed open to him, 
by blocking-up the lane where it ran into his land ; 
foolish thing to do." 

" Very," Walter replied. Then he went on to ask, 
" Have you ever seen my his daughter ?'' 

Mr. Clarke broke into a laugh : " I have been 
waiting for you to ask me that question before; 
seen her ! I have, indeed ; and I am not likely to 
forget the interview !" 

" Why so ?" Walter Goring asked. 



106 WALTER GORING. 

" It was a foolish business, that too," Mr. Clarke 
said, rapidly, without answering Walter's question ; 
" a very foolishly mistaken chivalric piece of busi- 
ness as ever I heard of; I went, at your late uncle's 
request, before the girl had got accustomed to her 
home or her father, and I never heard a young lady 
pour out home truths with more vicious emphasis 
in my life." 

" What about ? what did she say ? " 

" Her words rattled out like hailstones ; and as I 
moved in the dark, being utterly ignorant of what 
had gone before, I could not connect them ; but she 
actually cowed her father with her reproaches 
about her own birth and her mother, as I under- 
stood her." 

" When was this ? " Walter asked, hoping that it 
was long ago, and that time had tamed her. 

" When she first came to Goring Place, six 
months since ; she's a peculiar-looking girl . a great 
deal of suppressed power in her face, and a won- 
derful way of appearing to cool down suddenly after 
a burst of excitement. I believe it's only in appear- 
ance, and that she's a deceitful little devil." 

"Pleasant prospect for me, as I am her guardian." 

"Worse for the man who may possibly be her 



DAISY ! 107 

husband," the lawyer replied, laughing. "Your's is 
the lesser evil, and the pleasanter position of the 
two." 

"What is her name?" 

" Miss Goring, of course, now." 

"Her other name . her Christian name . what's 
that?" 

"Daisy, your uncle called her; her name is 
Marguerite." 

"Doesn't sound very appropriate; you say she 
isn't pretty?" 

"Not at all. not at all!" Mr. Clarke replied, 
decisively. " Yet, as I tell you, there is a look in 
her face that you don't forget in a hurry; she 
makes you think about her, whether you admire her 
or not." 

" And her manners . her education ? . where and 
how has she been brought up ? " 

" There's a mystery about it ; I tried to find out, 
both from your uncle, and from her: your uncle 
just put the question aside, and she flared up at me 
in a way that was a caution to me not to trouble 
her with too many of my remarks during the 
remainder of my visit. What her education may 
be I cannot tell, for she has those manners which 



108 WALTER GORING. 

leave you in doubt as to whether she knows nothing 
and thinks of nothing, or whether she knows a great 
deal and thinks more. She has one charm . a 
voice like a bird. I'm not judge enough of music 
to know whether it's cultivated or not; but it's 
fresh and sweet to an extraordinary degree." 

" She'll be rather an interesting charge, even if 
she is a perplexing one/* Walter Goring said, in 
rather more hopeful tones than he had used about 
her before. 

"I hope you may find her so," his lawyer replied, 
drily ; and then the talk about Daisy dropped, and 
they began to speak about how well the game had 
been preserved on the Goring Place estate, and 
other topics of the like sort which are naturally 
dear to the heart of a possessor. 

It was past twenty minutes to eight when the 
train stopped for the two gentlemen to get out at 
the Goring Place platform. Bound the comer of 
the station a groom was waiting with a horse and 
dog-cart ; a groom who looked very sheepish, and 
wished from the bottom of his heart that he had 
dressed himself more tidily when Mr. Clarke said 
to him . "This is Mr. Goring, your new master, 
John.*' Then he turned to Walter, and said half- 



DAISY ! 109 

apologetically . "You must not mind in what sort of 
state you find things at Goring Place, Mr. Goring ; 
the fact is, I didn't telegraph your intention of 
coming down to the poor confused creatures ; we'll 
soon have things in better order after the funeral.*' 

" A dinner and a bed is all I shall care to have 
to-night," Walter replied. 

"Youll have an interview with la beUe cousin, 
will you not ? " 

" Yes, certainly, if she will permit it/' 
" You are her guardian, remember ; her permis- 
sion will be a thing of course." 

Walter laughed. "I have never been in com- 
mand before ; but if I know myself, I am not likely 
to try it on any woman, much less on this poor 
girl." 

The Goring Place railway platform was situated 
close to one of the entrances into the little park, 
in the centre of which the house stood. A rapid 
drive along an avenue of elms brought them into 
the chief approach to the house, which with its 
darkened windows fronted them mournfully in the 
clear bright light of the July evening. 

"You are a fine old place," Walter said ad- 
miringly. 



110 WALTEB GORING. 

" Yes ; a man would do many things rather than 
forfeit it, Mr. Goring ? " 

" Yes," Walter replied, abstractedly. 

It was a fine old place. It stood facing the south 
against a background of abruptly rising, well-wooded 
hill. A long, grey-stone mansion, lofty too, though 
only two stories high. An old mansion, with a 
grand Gothic arched entrance porch, and a row of 
ecclesiastical-looking windows on either side, that 
caused one to feel oneself in church at the first 
glimpse, but to which one got accustomed, and felt 
grand about after a while. The Gothic arch was 
a bit of the original building ; but the groined 
ceilings, and the mullioned windows had been added 
by the father of the late Gilbert Goring, and anti- 
quarians averred that they were not in " keeping " 
with other " bits " of the house. However that 
might be, they were quite in keeping with beauty. 

Down in a hollow at the left of the house a lake 
shimmered beautifully bright through the foliage 
that intervened; and two or three swans floated 
tranquilly upon it, and two or three little islets, 
covered with rhododendrons in full bloom, broke its 
silver purity with their gorgeous colours. To the 
right the view was interrupted by a mass of high 



daisy! Ill 

flowering shrubs, by cypresses and the arbutos, and 
the evergreen oak, and the Spanish laurel, and the 
other trees which are usually employed to shut off 
all the stables and the kitchen gardens from the 
front of a house. 

They went through the genuine old arch into the 
hall, where a lot of armour and antlers were hanging 
about, and the news that the new master had come 
spread like wildfire. Before Walter could get into 
the dining-room the housekeeper was at his heels 
offering him dinner and apologies, and interesting 
little details of his uncle's last words and illness, in 
a breath. The other servants, with the exception 
of the butler, who commenced laying a most elabo- 
rate cloth, kept out in the hall^ and peered at Mr. 
Goring through the key-hole and the crevices by 
the hinges. Each individual in the house caoie 
forward to look at the new master of it, save she 
who was left to his guardianship . his young cousin, 
Daisy. 

" While I am at dinner you will let Miss Goring 
know that I should like to see her in the course of 
the evening, if you please, Mrs. Mason." Then he 
feared that this sounded too authoritative, and he 
added, *' that is if it is agreeable to her to see me." 



112 WALTER GORING. 

The housekeeper smiled meaningly. 

" I will tell her what you say, sir," she replied. 
Then she went away out of the room, leaving the 
two men to the undisturbed enjoyment of that 
repast which had been provided for Mr. Clarke 
alone. 

** Queer feeling it gives a fellow being in the 
house with a dead body," Walter said after a little 
time; "perhaps it is because I have never been 
brought so close to death before; but I own to 
having a sort of weight upon me that isn't regret 
for my uncle. I should be a hypocrite to aiOfect 
that, for I knew nothing of him." 

" I wonder what feeling kept Miss Goring 
secluded when she heard of your arrival?'* Mr. 
Clarke replied. 

"What feeling! why, decent feeling, of course; 
I should not have thought the better of her if she 
had come tearing forward to spy at a stranger while 
her father's corpse was lying unburied in the house. 
I am not sure that I have done right in asking to 
see her to night at all." 

The lawyer laughed. "My dear sir," he said 
presently, " don't go to a meeting with Miss Goring 
with any of these notions." 



daisy! 113 

** Why not ?" Walter asked, somewhat angrily. 
" Why not ! because the way in which she may 
fall short of them may disgust you with her ; we are 
all too apt to be indignant when unconscious ones 
fall short of the ideal we have formed of them." 

" On my soul it's not your fault if the ideal I 
have formed of my cousin is the reverse of exalted," 
Walter replied; to which Mr. Clarke hastily an- 
swered, " Banish any impression I may have given 
you unwittingly; banish it, and judge her for your- 
self." 

The dinner had been long cleared away, the 
dessert had been placed on the tables, the wine had 
decreased in the bottles, and lamp-light had suc- 
ceeded twilight, and still there came no word of 
recognition from Miss Goring. Finally Walter rang 
the bell, abd re-summoned Mrs. Mason. When she 
came, he asked her . 

" Does Miss Goring know Tm here ? " 

" Yes, sir." 

" Did she send any message to me ? " 

"No, sir/' 

"Didn't she say anything?" he urged. 

" She said, * I suppose he'll do as he likes,' when 
I told her what you said." 



114 WALTEB GOBING. 

'' Then I shall like to see her at once/' he said 
haughtily, as he saw Mr. Clarke straggling to sup* 
press a smile; perhaps you'll he good enough to 
take me to her, Mrs. Mason.** And Mrs. Mason 
said, '* Certainly, sir,^' and led the way across the 
hall, and up the old winding oak staircase to the 
door of a room at the end of a corridor which was 
thickly hung with dead and gone Gorings. At this 
door the housekeeper paused to knock, and Walter 
arrested her intention. A clear, sweet, powerful 
soprano voice was exercising itself in apparently 
unrestrained joyousness in the "Shadow Song'' 
from " Dinorah." 

" God in Heaven," he muttered, " what can this 
girl be made of to be singing in this way, while her 
father lies unburied in the house ! '' And the house- 
keeper shook her head, and whispered in reply . 

** The young lady's very hard to judge, sir,. very 
haid to judge." 

As soon as the song ceased he knocked a loud 
determined knock, and got for answer, " Come in, 
do I " sharply uttered. Opening the door, he looked 
into a small sitting-room, at the far end of which, at 
a grand piano, a girl was sitting with her back to 
him. In the moment that he had to look at her, 



daisy! 115 

he saw only a slight graceful girlish back and 
shoulders, clothed in well-fitting black silk, and a 
small head, with yellow hair braided closely about it. 
The next moment she had risen, and was advancing 
towards him, saying with most wonderful self- 
possession . 

" Mr. Goring, I presume ? won't you be seated ? * 
then she looked round at the housekeeper, and 
added, " and you can go, Mrs. Mason, and shut the 
door behind you/* 

The housekeeper turned out of the room, and 
banged the door as bidden ; and Miss Goring seated 
herself on a low chair, leaving her cousin still 
standing looking down upon her. 

The face upon which he looked down had been 
rightly described by Mr. Clarke as one that was 
"full of suppressed power." It was a fair-com- 
plexioned, rather freckled face. The jaw was a 
trifle squarer than we are accustomed to find well 
in a woman ; and though the chin could not have 
been called either heavy or prominent, it was very 
far from retreating, or lacking firmness. The 
mouth was rather wide, and the fuU, well-formed 
lips were intensely sensitive . ^he saw them quivering 
now as he looked at her for all the self-possession 

I 2 



116 WALTER GORING. 

she was displaying. Her brow was wide and low, 
and over its delicate surface the blue veins could be 
distinctly traced. Her eyes were cobalt blue, and 
her little straight nose had an upward- tendency; 
and both eyes and nose were strongly marked with 
about the most impertinent expression it had ever 
been his lot to witness 'in any woman's face. Withal 
it was not a pretty face, but it was a very remark- 
able one. 

" This won't do, you know ! " Walter Goring ex- 
claimed, after a few moment's pause, going nearer 
to her, and putting out his hand. 

She slid her own into his, and was going to slide 
it out again, when he pressed and retained it. 

"Are you annoyed with me for wanting to see 
you to-night ? " he asked, seriously. 

"Not a bit! why, to-night more than any other 
night?" she replied, indifferently. She made no 
further effort to release her hand, but it lay in his, 
cold and chilly, like a little snake. 

" I thought perhaps that it might be unpleasant 
to you to see strangers just yet ; but I reflected that 
we mustn't be strangers, that we're almost like 
brother and sister, and therefore I came." 

Other women had found this man's smile very 



daisy! 117 

sweet, and he gave her his sweetest smile now, as 
he stood holding her hand and looking down upon 
her. But she remained absolutely unmoved by it. 

"Why shouldn't I have liked to see strangers 
yet?'' 

" I hardly know." He was getting discomfited. 

"Why didn't you hardly know?" she asked, 
laughing. 

" I fancied that perhaps it was too soon after 
your father's death for you to care to see one whom 
you didn't know yet." 

She wrung her hand out of his suddenly. 

" Too soon after Mr. Goring''s death ! don't begin 
canting to me. I had a dose of that from Mr. 
Travers the clergyman, and then from old Mason. 
I know that I'm left to you to feed, and clothe, and 
109k after, for Mr. Goring told me so ; but I'm not 
going to pretend to please you by saying now that 
I'm sorry for the death of a man I never loved 
while he was alive." 

He drew a chair close up in front of hers, and 
sat down upon it. He thought that she was treat- 
ing him to a little bit of foolish, girlish acting ; and 
who can tell whether he was right or not in his 
judgment? At any rate he had had enough of 



118 WALTER GOKIXQ. 

it. So he commenced somewhat sternly and sud- 
denly : 

"Now look here, Daisy, you and I had better 
understand one another at once. I don't expect 
you to try to please me . ^yet . ^nor do^I desire you 
to feign what you don't feel; but I am your 
guardian ; and for your own credit's sake, child, I 
insist upon this, that you make respectful mention 
of your father, or that you do not mention him at 
all." 

She looked him straight in the face while he 

was speaking; the little fair face, and the simply 

arranged yellow hair looked irresistibly young and 

innocent. The eyes, too, were not so impertinent 

as they had been a minute before. Altogether he 

felt sorry for having spoken so crossly, not that, 

but so sternly to this little creature, who was so 

entirely in his power. 

"Do you hear me, and heed me, Daisy?" he 

asked, softly ; and then she threw her head back, 

and laughed her pealing laugh for a moment or two, 

and then sang. 

'^ In all eke I will obey, 
But in tliis I must be free.'* 

And he rose up and turned away from her more 



daisy/ 119 

disgusted and surprised than he had ever been at a 
woman's conduct before. 

" For God's sake," he exclaimed, " remember 
that he was your father.*' 

"He forgot the fact for seventeen years," she 
replied, quickly. 

" How do you know that he forgot it ? " 

" How do I know it ! " the girl repeated mock- 
ingly; "how do I know that my mother . my 
darling mother . was borne down by her shame, 
and her fear, and her anger at it/* 

" Is your mother alive still ? " he interrupted 
hastily. 

'* Do you know anything about her ? ** the girl cried. 

" Nothing, nothing." 

" Then you will not hear anything from me,'* 
she said with a sudden reassumption of coolness. 
.*Yes, you shall hear this much. I've seen my 
mother nearly mad with remorse, and I have heard 
myself twitted, and taunted, and reviled with what 
was quite as much that man's sin as my mother's 
. the pretty creature. I hated him for it, and I 
never forgave him for it while he was alive, and I 
don't see that I'm called upon to do it now he is 
dead. Mr. Travers came and talked to me about 



120 WALTER GORING. 

his 'being the author of my being' the day he 
died, hoping to make this unregenerate sinner 
weep ; bnt I couldn't do it, and so I didn't do it ; 
and because I told the truth about it, old Travers, 
like a truly Christian pastor, was much shocked ; 
but you^ll be friends with me, won't you ? " she con- 
tinued, suddenly going up to him and placing he^ 
hand on his as it rested on the back of the chair he 
had formerly occupied. 

"Yes, I will; and you in turn will oblige me, 
perhaps^ in one thing ? " 

"What is it?" 

" Keep quiet for a few days. I judged you very 
hardly when I came to the door just now, and you 
oiBfended my taste by breaking out in the way you 
did when I was talking to you." 

" You don't like my singing ? " 

"Your singing is glorious . only just now it's 
unseemly." 

" Perhaps it won't oflfend your taste if I tell you 
that if you were to die now I shouldn't feel inclined 
to outrage decorum by singing. Won't you sit 
down and talk to me ? " 

"Not to-night; Mr. Clarke is down below, and 
I must go and talk to him.'' 



daisy! 121 

'' I talked to him once/' she said with a laugh. 

He remembered Clarke's words, and asked, 
"What did you say?'' 

" I believe I reminded him that the rest of the 
servants held their tongues when their master and 
mistress were talking. He was in a fearful rage, 
and " (her face blanched, and sparks of fire flashed 
from her eyes) "reminded me of what I was. I 
went and told Mr. Goring, and Mr. Goring didn't 
hound him from the house, or break his neck. 
What would you have done ? " 

" I hardly know . ^which," he replied ; and as he 
said it the girl exclaimed warmly, . 

" I'll keep quiet for a few days, cousin Walter, 
and you'll come and see me again to-morrow, won't 
you?" 

He promised her that he would do so, and then 
left her, thinking as he walked along the corridor 
and down the stairs to rejoin Clarke, " This Daisy 
of mine will keep my hands employed. I wonder 
how she will hit it off with Mrs. Walsh; she's 
rather a£fected and rather designing, at the same 
time she is neither ill-mannered nor ill-minded; 
whatever her experiences of life, they have not been 
gained amongst vulgar or illiterate people. I won't 



122 WALT^B GORING. 

force her confidence, but I think in time that she 
will tell me where and with whom her life has been 
passed ; it will be essential to her happiness that I 
should know, in order that I may guard her from 
contact with what will pain her; and essential to 
my own, too, for I fancy that I shall get to be as 
fond of her as a sister. I hope my goddess wonH 
be high and mighty, after her ordinary dear im- 
perial manner with the poor loveable child/' 

Then he joined Clarke, and they went out together 
and walked about on the lawn, and smoked their 
cigars. Ever and anon Walter's eyes fell upon the 
grand old mass of building in the foreground, and 
he experienced pleasurable sensations of owner- 
ship. Through his pen he had won for himself a 
name that sounded already. But he had never had 
a *' local habitation " before ; and now he had such 
a fair one I Small wonder that his bosom's lord sat 
lightly on his throne, despite that uncertainty still 
existing about the sealed letter containing old 
Gilbert Goring's latest desires. 



CHAPTER IX. 

A WAYWABD WABD. 

The funeral was over. Decently and in order . 
or rather pompously and ceremoniously as became 
his position in the county . had Gilbert Goring, 
Esq., of Goring Place, been laid with his fathers. 
The neighbouring gentlemen sent their carriages 
with the windows closed, and one or two of them 
even attended in person. For " Old Goring " had 
been much respected, as the phrase is ; though one 
or two, whose own sins had not found them out yet, 
did shake their heads about the daughter who 
came to their knowledge grown up, and without an 
apparent or mentionable mother. 

But riches, like charity, cover a multitude of 
sins. It was only those, after all, who were not 
asked, who had of late not dined at Goring Place ; 
and now it was only those who had remained igno- 



124 WALTEB GORING. 

rant of the day who stayed away from the funeral, 
or omitted to pay some mark of respect to the old 
man on his road to his long home. In all that 
county side there was only one who thought about 
old Gilbert Goring at all who did not wish " peace 
to his soul/' and that one was his daughter. 

She attended to her cousin's injunctions, and 
kept very quiet through the whole of the day. In 
common with the rest of the household, she had 
been present when the will was read in the pre- 
sence of the heir and a few neighbours, to whom 
were left trifling legacies, such as rings, racing 
cups, &c. She had listened coldly and composedly, 
and had betrayed neither surprise nor annoyance 
when she found that the whole property was left to 
her cousin, Walter Goring. But her cheeks flushed 
a little when it was added that a sum of three 
thousand pounds was bequeathed by the testator to 
his beloved and only child. Marguerite. 

This was Gilbert Goring's last will and testa- 
ment ; this was his final disposition of his property. 
But the lawyer explained that there was still some- 
thing else which he had to deliver up to the heir . 
namely, " a letter containing the expression of 
wishes, heartfelt wishes, which his late esteemed 



A WAYWABD WARD. 125 

friend and client had not desired to make public, as 
they would have been had they been mentioned in 
a will, and which therefore he had contented him- 
self with enjoining in the most sacred manner on 
his nephew and heir in a letter, the decrees of 
which, though they would not hold good in a court 
of law, would, he was convinced, be respected by a 
man of such well-known probity and honour as his 
nephew, Walter Goring." 

Immediately after this, Daisy went back to her 
room, the company dispersed, and the owner of the 
house and his lawyer were alone together. The 
latter at once gave into the hands of the former a 
square, sealed packet, and for at least a couple of 
hours Walter Goring was employed in reading a 
portion of the story of his uncle's life, and the 
statement of his last earnest, heart-felt wishes. 
What these were may not be told yet. When 
Walter Goring brought his reading to a conclusion 
he raised his eyes, and found the round, black orbs 
of the lawyer fixed upon him. 

" You know the contents of this ? " he asked. 

" Only the latter portion which is drawn up on 
parchment. I wrote that, for your uncle was un- 
decided whether or not to make its conditions 



126 WALTER GORING. 

imperative on you by having it signed by, and 
signing it in the presence of witnesses. What he 
might have done eventually I cannot tell ; but you 
see, as it is, he died relying on yowr honour" 

" And his reliance on what no man ever doubted 
yet shall be justified. One or other of his condi- 
tions shall be fulfilled ; so help me Qod." 

** Which do you at present incline towards ful- 
filling ? " the lawyer asked. 

" I don't * incline towards fulfilling ' either, to tell 
the truth; but inclination is not to be mentioned 
in a case like this. Come, what shall we do, 
Clarke, to get rid of the time till half-past seven ? 
Are there any horses in the stables besides that 
fat brown brute that brought us over yesterday ? '^ 

" Only a pair of fatter black brutes that go in the 
carriage.^' 

" By Jove, I'll see to mending matters then, very 
soon. I'll go up to Town next week and get a 
stud together. After all, I shall quarter myself 
here, and get a lot of my friends about me . the 
place is too fine to be deserted.^* 

" And how about la belle cousin ? " 

" Ah ! what am I to do with her ? She talked 
to me beautifully for an hour to-day, but I didnH 



A WAYWARD WABD, 127 

dare to venture to suggest that she must go ; and 
where to send her I don't know. I can't send her 
to school ; and she can't stay here if I do ? '' 

"It would be pleasant, but not proper," the 
lawyer laughed. 

" I daresay I shall think of something soon," 
Walter said, lightly; "meanwhile let us go and 
have a look at the stable accommodation. I shall 
have plenty to do for some months in getting the 
place as I shall like to see it." 

" The drawing-rooms are rather in a state of 
decay : have you looked at them yet ? " Mr. 
Clarke asked. 

"No; the only rooms I've seen besides the 
dining-room are the study and a sweet sort of little 
boudoir where my cousin was sitting. CanH we get 
in through one of these windows ? they're open, and 
they're low enough." 

They walked as he spoke towards one of the 
windows to the left of the entrance door; it was 
open, and the faded, heavy silken curtains were 
drawn back. He put his hand on the sill and 
vaulted lightly into the room, calling out . " Come 
along, Clarke ! '^ and the next instant he wished 
that he had not shouted to Clarke to come along, 



128 WALTER GORING. 

for there, kneeling before a cabinet, the glass of 
which was freshly broken, he saw Daisy. 

She started to her feet as he entered, and gave a 
little cry of anger . ^not of fear. 

" What do you come in in that way for ? '' she 
asked ; and he replied . 

" What are you doing here ? " 

" Looking for something that belongs to me, Mr. 
Goring," she replied haughtily. 

" Excuse me, Daisy, dear, but you shouldn't have 
done it in this way," he said, good-humouredly. He 
was intensely relieved to find that Clarke had not 
followed him. 

" Excuse me, but I should, since I'd no other 
way ; this room is yours and I'd no right in it . and 
the cabinet is yours and I ought not to have broken 
it . but the picture is mine, and I will have it ! " 

"What picture, Daisy?" 

" My mother's . my own darling mother's," the 
girl said, sullenly. " I wanted to get it away before 
you saw it . ^he showed it to me once, and showed 
me where he kept it, and pretended that it was his 
love for her had made him keep it . his love for 
her ! I determined that I'd take it away as soon as 
I could ; and you'll let me have it, won't you ? 



A WATWABD WARD. 129 

won't you ? " she continued, in a voice of passionate 
entreaty. ** It will be nothing to you, and iVs so 
much to me/' 

He went over and tried the door ; it was fast 
locked. ''We won't risk cutting our hands by 
putting them through this broken glass; besides, 
young lady, we should have to destroy that fine 
fluted silk before we could get at what you want : 
let us go and look for the key, about a thousand 
were put on the study table labelled this morn- 
ing." 

She put both her hands round his arm. 
" How good you are," she said, coaxingly. 
" I can't return the compliment, Daisy," he said, 
kindly; "instead of making a small scene about 
getting your picture, why didn't you come, or send, 
and ask me for it properly ? ^ 

Then they found the key, and went back to the 
dilapidated drab silk drawing-room. 

" You'll know the picture directly," she began, 
excitedly; "it's in an oval frame^ with my name, 
Marguerite, traced at the bottom . and she's some- 
thing like me, only her hair is golden, and her face 
pretty." 

Her own face looked pretty enough as she spoke, 

TOL. I. K 



130 WALTER . GORING. 

watching him with parted lips, and cheeks into 
which a hright blush had mounted. When he 
found the picture he handed it to her without giving 
the face so much as a glance, and when she had 
clasped it caressingly to her bosom, she held it out, 
saying . 

" Won't you look at her . my mother ? " 

" You have forgotten," he said, gently, " that only 
last night you didn't wish me to know anything 
about her, Daisy ; T won't take advantage of this to 
force your confidence." 

" Thank you," she said, quietly, withdrawing tier 
picture again and turning to leave the room. 

He watched her as she walked along. She 
moved beautifully; not with a mere natural grace 
and ease, but with a certain studied elegance that 
had evidently been taught her. Then for the first 
time he noticed the rare symmetry of her figure. 

" She's built something like the girl I met at 
Walsh's the other night," he thought; "^d she's 
not unlike her in other respects, though the other's 
so dark." 

Thinking this, he went back into the garden to 
Mr. Clarke, and told that gentleman that the drab 
drawing-room was in a state of decay and no 



A WAYWABD WARD. 131 

mistake, whatever the others might be. ^'I've 
managed to smash the glass of one of the cabinets 
akeady/' he said ; but he added no word relative to 
Daisy. 

It was arranged that the two gentlemen should 
return to town together on the following day 
(Saturday), and that in the course of the evening 
Walter should communicate this arrangement to his 
ward, and at the same time sound her as to her own 
wishes about her future manner of life. " Not that 
she's likely to suggest anjrthing feasible, but still I 
may as well hear what she has to say about it.^^ He 
had determined to obviate any immediate awkward- 
ness by not coming back himself to Goring Place 
until he could induce the Walshes to come with 
him. " Then she'll make it all straight/' he said 
to himself with a lively remembrance of his friend's 
fertility of resource in all social difficulties. 

Nevertheless, though he felt thus secure in the 
thought| of Mrs. Walsh's future partisanship, his 
heart rather misgave him, when he found himself 
in the presence of his ward. She was seated on a 
low stogl near an open window, in a cloud of crape, 
and she had been crying. On the whole she looked 
very fragile, and gentle, and pretty. 

K 2 



132 WALTEE GORING. 

" Pm very glad you have come," she said, lifting 
up her head and holding out her hand to him cor- 
dially. Coming out as it did from the cloud of 
crape he could see that it was a very beautiful 
hand and arm which was thus extended to him ; it 
was not only a hand that an artist would have 
admired, but it was an artistic hand ; a hand that 
expressed a very strong feeling for the beautiful. 
" I'm very glad you have come, and I shall fee 
very glad when that man goes away, for then I shall 
see more of you, I hope.'' 

" I am going away with him to-morrow, but when 
I come back " 

"Going away to-morrow," she said; "are you 
really?" 

"Yes, really." 

"What for?" 

"To go up and settle some business, and see 
some people, and get horses and friends to come 
down here and cheer us up a bit." 

" I shall be glad enough to see the horses, but I 
hope the friends won't come yet ; if they do, I shall 
see nothing of you." 

"You will see nothing of me till they do 
come." 



A WAYWARD WARD. 133 

"Why not?" 

*' Because I shall not return until Mr. and Mrs. 
Walsh^ very old friends of mine, can come with 
me/' 

" Why not ? " she persisted. 

He laughed, "If you will have it, then, be- 
cause I won't have it said that my ward is in a 
bachelor's house when there are no married ladies 
there." 

" Uncalled-for precautions," she said, sadly ; " as 
far as I'm concerned, my name can't be called in 
question." 

" It is now my turn to ask ' Why not, Daisy ? ' " 

"Because I have none/' she answered, almost 
fiercely ; then she added more softly, " it's rather 
hard, Mr. Goring, that I should feel this, isn't it ? 
That's my inheritance, to know it, and to feel it from 
the bottom of my heart." 

She crossed her white arms over on her knees, 
letting the cloudy crape float back from off them as 
she did so, and then she bent forward till her little 
head rested on them. The attitude was a wonder- 
fully willowy, graceful one ; the girl was like a cat, 
in that, do what she would, she never did anything 
awkwardly. He watched her admiringly for a few 



134 WALTER OOBINO. 

minutes, and thought and wondered what Mrs. 
Walsh would think of her ? Then he felt uncom- 
fortahle ; he fancied she was crying. 

" Daisy, Daisy ! " he said, imploringly, " believe 
that all I do is for your good, and to ensure your 
happiness.'' Then he tried to raise the bowed head 
from the folded arms, and, when he had succeeded, 
she looked at him reproachfully, and the tears fell 
down heavily in big drops. 

*' Daisy, don't cry . I can't stand it. What can I 
do?" he cried. 

** Promise me that you won't send me away to 
live with some old harridan of a woman, or have one 
here to live with me," she sobbed. 

"I promise. Yes . yes; do not cry, my dear 
child. Come and sing me something." 

When he said that, Daisy cleared up in a 
moment, and bounded to the piano, and the next 
moment she was singing, at the full Daisy-power, 
that wonderfully joyous, silly little song, which has 
for refrain the words. 

** And I cannot choose but sing how delightful is the day, 
And the little birds that sing bow very fair I '* 

and Walter hung enraptured over her. 



A WAYWARD WARD. 135 

" Artist \ ftinend yoar craft! with shields nor spears, 
Sealptnre yoar Venus Yictrix, bat. in tearB," 

writes Alfred Austin, the brilliant satirist, who has 
said many things that we do not like of us . ^but 
more that we do. 

He could not reprove her any longer for singing 
** under the sad circumstances.** He was not hypo- 
critical enough to desire her to check what appeared 
to be the natural expression of her feelings. Her 
voice was remarkably pure, powerful, and well- 
cultivated. But its most remarkable quality was 
the quality Walter Goring most admired in it . 
joyousness. Never a lark had carolled at heaven's 
gate more exultantly, apparently, than did this girl. 
She was great in the pathetic passages, and forcible 
and telling in the powerful ones; but it was in 
the joyous ones that she was unequalled. 

As I write of her I think of one whose life path 
ran parallel with mine for a while, whose will was 
as wayward, whose heart was as true, whose defiant 
cobalt blue eyes were as sweetly impertinent, whose 
antecedents were little less sad, though in a widely 
different way, and whose voice was as bright a 
strain of music, as joy-expressing, joy-inspiring a 



136 WALTEB GORING. 

thing, as were those of this Daisy of mine. And I 
pause for a moment to write " a blessing on the 
bright, young, yellow head " that always played the 
part of a sunbeam to me, and feel that I can write 
no more to-night. 



CHAPTER X. 

A GOOD INPLUENCE. 

A FEW days after this Walter was down at Roe* 
hampton, and Daisy was alone at Goring Place, 
practising her singing scales morning, noon and 
night, in order to pleasure him with apparently un- 
premeditated bursts of melody that should never be 
half a note untrue or flat when he returned. The 
one dread she had about her vocalisation was, that 
she might not *' come back " from some high-pitched 
shivering fit on the upper notes with apparent ease. 
So now that he, the man whom she wanted to please, 
was away, she strengthened her voice by all the 
means of which she had ever heard, and exercised 
it until its flexibility became a matter of marvel 
even unto herself. The rumour of the wonderful 
beauty of it reached the village, and Mrs. Travers, 
who thumped the harmonium and led the praises of 



138 WALTEB GOBING. 

the Lord in a howl hebdomadally, began to wish to 
get Daisy to join the choir. But Daisy declined the 
honour when it was proffered her, in a way that 
made Mrs. Travers remember "the girl's origin" 
at once. 

While Daisy was making the walls of old Goring 
Place ring again with bursts of scientifically-man- 
aged glee, Walter was at Boehampton seeking to 
interest Mrs. Walsh about his ward, and for the 
first time finding Mrs. Walsh utterly unsympathetic. 
He had gone down there to luncheon, and he had 
found Mrs. Walsh alone; and then he had made 
the mistake of introducing the subject of his cousin 
at once, as if it were of paramount importance to 
him. 

" What would you suggest my doing with her ? *' 
he asked, earnestly. 

** Send her to school." 

" She's past that . in every way." 

" From what you told me, I judged her to be a 
flippant little cub, and thought a year or two's 
schooling would do her an immense deal of good. 
I can suggest nothing else." 

" She's past schooling in every way, and you did 
promise to help me about her if I found myself in 



A GOOD IKFLUENOE. 189 

a difficulty. I'm in a difficulty now. I mean to 
live at Goring Place, so she can't, that's clear. 
Where had I better send her/' 

'* Send her back to her own people/* Mrs. Walsh 
said, scornfully. 

He shook his head impatiently. 

" You won't help me, then ? '' 

"I can't; I am not prepossessed by what you 
have told me about her.'' 

** I have tried to give you my own impressions of 
her, and I certainly am prepossessed. I was very 
much in hopes that you would have liked her, in 
which case I should have placed her with some 
duenna near you, in order that you might have seen 
a good deal of her." 

" I have no vocation that way,'' Mrs. Walsh said, 
coldly. ** From what you have told me about her, I 
think she must be a pert, underbred, flirting girl." 

" Flirting ! Good Heavens ! Poor child, that 
was far enough from her thoughts." 

" Oh, nonsense ! Don't make her into a heroine 
brimming over with fine feelings. She tried a few 
Clapham school-girl tricks on you, and even she 
must have been amused to see how wonderfully 
they told. Is she pretty ? " 



140 WALT£B GORING. 

" Hardly . ^yes, rather ; in figure she's something 
like that Miss St. John." 

" Miss St. John has the typhus fever, and is not 
expected to recover." 

He started as if he had been shot. The girl had 
interested him very much, though other things had 
put her out of his head. He had not been wrought 
upon to the falling in love point, but he had been 
very much interested in her* So now when Mrs, 
Walsh said " she is not likely to recover," he started 
as if he had been shot, and exclaimed . 

" Good God ! you don't say so. . Poor girl ! " 

Now that Miss St. John was down nearly unto 
death, Mrs. Walsh could be very just, if not 
generous, to her. 

" Yes, she is,'' she replied ; " she caught it nurs- 
ing one of her sister's children. Mrs. Prescott is 
only a selfish, lovely idiot, you know, although all 
you men make siich an absurd fuss about her, 
because she smiles at all your platitudes ; so directly 
th^ eldest child was taken ill she rushed and 
ensconced herself in a far comer of the house with 
the well ones, and left the nursing to her sister." 

"My idea of Mrs. Prescott was that the only 
mind she had was the maternal." 



A GOOD INFLUENCE. 141 

" It's only one of the many mistakes you make 
about women." 

** I made no mistake about her sister. I thought 
her what she has proved herself . a brave, kind* 
hearted girl." 

"You had such a good opportunity of judging 
while she was in the conservatory with you, of 
course. Shall we go for a drive this after- 
noon?" 

"Yes,** he agreed to the proposition. So they 
had her own pony -carriage out, and went for a long 
drive, and while they were out they discussed what 
style of phaeton and trap it would be best to send 
down to Goring Place, and she was interested as to 
the colour of his horses, and altogether talked to 
him so bewitchingly, that he forgot both Charlie 
St. John and his cousin Daisy. Moreover, it was 
decided while they were out, that she should persuade 
Halph to take her down to Goring Place as soon as 
Walter could get a few horses and some other things 
together that were needed at once. " And* till you 
go, you'll stay with us, won't you ? '' she asked ; " if 
you don't, I shall think you've grown too big a 
man." 

So until he went back with the Walshes' as his 



142 WALTER GORINO. 

guests to Goring Place^ he stayed at Boehampton, 
and though the time seemed very short to him, 
Daisy had more than a fortnight's clear practice of 
those upper notes with which she wanted to astonish 
him on his return. He meanwhile thought very 
little of Daisy, only wondered at intervals *' how 
she would hit it oflF" with Mrs. Walsh. 

He tried very hard, he made frequent anil earnest 
efforts to get into the same grooves in which he 
had run so easily before he was a man of pro- 
perty. " I shall have cause to curse Goring Place 
if it makes me an idle hound/' he said one morning 
to Mrs. Walsh. " I never do anything like work 
now; IVe forgotten where I left all my young 
people. I shall never get them into position.*' 

Then she urged him to try, begging him to read 
up bits of it to her, and to think out some scenes 
that they had often talked over together, and to 
work on at his novel generally, in fact. 

"I shall be sorry that you ever heard of 
Goring Tlace, too, if it makes you lax about 
literature." 

"Do you think more of my fame than my for- 
tune ? " he asked. 

"Yes," she answered, warmly, like a true woman; 



A GOOD INFLTJENCE. 143 

and he rose at once to get the long neglected MS., 
and as he passed ont of the room he paused hy her 
side for a moment to say . 

" Thanks for that, my goddess." 

And she replied, kindly. 

"Ralph and I have always hoped such bright 
things for yoti." 

She was a woman whose little airs, and graces, 
and caprices, all shown out of regard for him, were 
worth enduring, after all. 

It is far from a pleasant thing to read one's own 
MS. works aloud, as a rule. The majority of people 
are utterly incapable of following the interest, unless 
each connecting link is laid before them ; the ma- 
jority also are addicted to the asking of awkward 
questions about " what you mean to do with so and 
so ? " and " how such and such an incident is to be 
worked " into the general pattern without looking 
patchy ? As one is usually quite as much in the 
dark as one's interrogator as to the ultimate end of 
the means used, and as one has at the same time 
lied to the venial extent of asserting that the 
'' whole plan is clearly sketched out," the position 
must be admitted to be an awkward, not to say a 
humiliating one. 



144 WALTER GORING. 

But surely there can be no man . or woman either 
. so cursed by fate, none so utterly desolate, but 
that at some period or other of his literary career he 
has met with an entirely appreciative listener. Met 
with one who follows him, and understands almost 
before he does himself . on whom no point is thrown 
away, no epigram wasted . one whom the pathos 
touches to no feigned tenderness, and from whom 
the humour wrings no falsely gleeful smiles. A 
sympathetic auditor in fact, who above all things, 
abstains from the disgusting habit of charging the 
writer with having made lame sketches of self or 
friends in any of the characters. Such a listener is 
a crown of glory . a superb joy to the one who is 
listened to: and such a listener was Horatia 
Walsh. 

I say that this woman was his friend, and a very 
good, true friend to him too, for distracting as were 
the circumstances through which he had but just 
passed, he got into harness again under her influ- 
ence, and began to do some very useful work at her 
feet. Many of her female friends, could they have 
witnessed the scene of this morning . ^the beautiful 
woman sitting there on a low couch in a corner of 
the shaded room, and the young attractive man 



A GOOD INFLUENCE. 145 

reading page after page of his own impassioned 
words to her . many of her female friends, had they 
witnessed this, would have bridled their blameless 
heads, and believed hard things of them both. Yet 
in reality she was only urging him by the mute 
influence of an interest and a trust in him, that was 
felt rather than expressed, to touch a noble aim. 
He knew that she believed in his best. He knew 
that she had reliance on his belief in this confidence 
of hers ; and she was his friend, for he desired to 
justify her faith in him. In just the same way 
would she stand and see the best, and feel the best, 
in the pictures her husband was painting. But 
many people declared that the interest she took in 
these latter was but cold and artificial, and that the 
interest she took in Walter Goring's works was the 
genuine thing. She knew well that this was said, 
and she smiled her proud smile about it, knowing 
that they wronged her. that was all. 

The reading of his story to Mrs. Walsh brought 
up Walter Goring's own interest in it again to the 
working point ; and so starting fresh as he did, he 
made great progress in it during the remainder of 
the time he spent at Eoehampton. " I shall take it 
down and polish it off in time to get it out by the 



146 WALTER GORING. 

end of September," he said. "I shall devote the 
winter to the sports and pastimes of my country, 
and go in for the collecting new ideas concerning 
country life; after this is finished, I don't write 
another line till the spring." 

'* And then you'll break out into a novel all over 
horses and men in pink; your hero will 'ride 
straight' through the book, and your heroine do 
marvellous things in the way of * gentling * refirac- 
tory colts and teaching setter-dogs to * down- 
charge;' that is always the result of an author 
going down into the country to write a novel 
quietly.'* 

He laughed : " Feminine influence shall inter- 
vene, and strike out whatever may appear too 
animal in the sense you mean.'* 

" Whose influence ? Your cousin's ?" 

" Yours, of course, if you'll honour me by exer*- 
cising it still." 

" I promise I will^ even if you make a heroine of 
Daisy." 

"Or of Miss St John?" he asked, laugh- 
ing. 

" No : in that case I couldn't. I should feel no 
.interest in a book in which such a very uninte- 



A GOOD INFLUENCaS. 147 

resting character had a prominent place ; it may be 
bad taste on my part, but to me Miss Charlie St 
John is the type of mediocrity in manner^ appear* 
ance, and mind; and" (Mrs. Walsh reserved her 
heaviest shot for the last) '' the worst of it is, that 
she is too old to improve." 

He langhed good-humouredly ; on the whole he 
did not dislike this display of animus ; it was not 
at all uncomplimentary to himself. 

"I think you would like her better in a book 
than out of it.*' 

" Yes," she replied, coolly ; ** because I could 
put her down when I chose." 

This conversation took place the day before they 
left Roehampton for Goring Place. The following 
morning they started, and the stud Walter Goring 
had got together met them in charge of three 
grooms at the Shoreditch station. There were six 
horses in all . a couple of carriage-horses, a couple 
of hunters, and a splendid pair of roadsters, one 
of which, a chestnut, beautiful as a star, was 
" warranted to carry a lady." In the midst of his 
London business and literary bliss, Walter Goring 
had remembered the delight which had expressed 
itself in Daisy's face at the mention of the horses 

L 2 



148 WALTER GORING.. 

that were coming down^ and he promised himself 
the pleasure of teaching her to ride, and watching 
the graceful lines of her perfect figure, in at once 
the most trying and the most becoming position in 
which it could be seen. 



CHAPTEE XI. 

GLOVES ! 

At 11 first, a cursory glance at the great subject 
of gloves, one may imagine it easily to be divided 
into the two classes of gloves (kid or otherwise) 
that fit and those that don't. But this is, to say 
the least of it, a very superficial view to take of 
a matter of such colossal interest to that vast 
section of humanity which consents to render itself 
partially incapable, through the agency of, and for 
the sake of supporting, the glover and trader in the 
skins of the pretty little baby goats. 

Will anyone of the countless thousands who will 
doubtless peruse this be kind enough to recall a 
vision of the first pair of gloves into which he or 
she was inducted? They will shrink from the 
wraith of those lamb's-wool disfigurements, pro- 
bably ? Well, I will do it for them even at the 



150 WALTER GORING. 

risk of wringing some fair soul to anguish. They 
were guileless of finger divisions, those first hand- 
coverings of yours and mine. They were of thick 
texture, and undistinguishable outline. The only 
art that was attended to in their construction was 
the art of keeping baby's hands warm. They were 
of all colours, blue and pink predominating. And 
they were generally tied round the wrist, to the 
detriment of our circulation, with a ribbon of the 
same colour, but a different shade. What pride our 
mothers and aunts and grandmothers, and the rest 
of the minbtering spirits of our childhood, had in 
muffling us in these knitted abominations! How 
regardless they were of the fact that we immediately 
gave our hands a vapour bath, a thing that might 
have had an extremely injurious effect upon our 
immature organisation, by thrusting them a long 
way down our throat, and then waving them wildly 
abroad over so much ,of the world as came under 
them conveniently ! How we made scientific expe- 
riments on colour, by extracting with our lips as 
much as we could from the confining ribbon ! How 
surely within ten minutes of their being put upon 
us, was one lost, and the other mislaid, with so much 
baby-tact that it was never found again ! What a 



OLOYES! 151 

refreshing and improving spectacle one of those 
gloves would be to as now ! How small oar hands 
were ! and how innocent ! and how entirely devoted 
to onr own pleasares ! which last consisted mainly 
in conveying everything that was nice, and mach 
that was not, to oar months ! 

Our next step in the glove world was not nice. 
We went from warm, soft, ingratiating hunb's-wool, 
which, if not pretty was at least pleasant, into Lisle 
thread, or spun silk. The former of these nseful 
manafactures was a loathsome one. We suffered 
them because we were anxious that the dignity of 
gloves should be ours at any cost . any cost of pain 
to ourselves, that is. Our parents were not equally 
magnificent in giving us the dignity at any cost of 
money. But these Lisle-thread gloves were an 
awful suffering ! They grated harshly on our skin 
every time we drew them on, in a way that sent us 
'' abroad in the meadows to see the young lambs,'' 
and in quest of other genial Sanford and Merton 
sights, with our teeth on edge and our tempers 
ruffled! But we were then in obedience to some 
imbecile imaginary law of gentility, against which 
we were taught to think that we should offend if we 
stripped them off and gave our hapless paws the 



152 WALTEB GORING. 

fair play which was not denied to Neptune and 
Trim and the rest of our canine playfellows. We 
are ready now, of course, as grown-up sensible 
people, to suffer a little for beauty's sake. But I 
think we must all regret the suffering that odious 
thread of Lisle imposed upon our youth, and which 
we bore, not for beauty's, but mythical gentility's 



Spun silk was a milder form of agony . that is to 
say, it did not " hurt," it simply stuck to us like a 
caterpillar, a bad name, an undesirable acquaint^ 
ance, and other things of that sort. When we 
drew off gloves in those days we always left a light 
hairy trimming on the backs of our hands from the 
silk of which the coverings were composed. 

The next was an honourable and glorious step in 
the days when I was young . we went into our first 
kids! It is nothing now, when infants of six 
months, or their mammas for them, are fastidious 
about the cut of the thumb, and object to the 
triangular gusset because it makes them crease in 
the back. But in olden times, the first time we in* 
serted our hands into kids was a white-stone day . 
a day to be remembered and talked about with 
pride, tempered with awe, amongst our compeers. 



GLOVES ! 15S 

They were not always a brilliant success. Mine, 
for instance, were a decided failure. I loved them 
dearly for half-an-hour, at the end of that time I 
was prone to confess to myself that they bored me. 
I could not take a firm hold of anything in life by 
reason of the liberality with which kid had been 
expended on the fingers. The buttoning them cost 
me a small piece of flesh, for I could not accomplish 
it for myself, and the kind Mend who assisted in 
installing me into these new honours could not 
achieve it until a small piece of me had been sacri- 
ficed between the button and her determined nail. 
Looking back upon them now, I must confess, too, 
that their hue was unpleasant. They were of an 
olive green; they would recklessly crease them- 
selves to a degree that brought me wrath; the 
price of them was mentioned, too, with severity, and 
I was bidden to remember that kid gloves did not 
grow upon trees, for which, all things considered, I 
was devoutly thankful. Unmixed bliss not being in 
the wearing them, I was very glad when they left 
me, which they did shortly in a darkly mysterious 
manner, which brought me more wrath. I have 
since had reason to suppose that they afforded first 
recreation and then indigestion to a lethargic pet 



154 WALTER GORING. 

King Charles spaniel, who was in the habit of 
trying to eat everything, from the foundation of the 
house, at which in his frequent hours of leisure he 
would dig furiously, to his master's boot-laces, and 
failing, poor dog, in consequence of having left his 
teeth behind him in a trap that he endeavoured to 
swallow early in life. 

Gloves have been treated at length because they 
were the first rock on which Daisy split after 
meeting with Mrs. Walsh. 

Walter Goring and his guests had reached Goring 
Place in time to dress comfortably for a seven 
o'clock dinner on Saturday night. On their arrival, 
Mrs. Walsh had been straightway conducted to the 
rooms that had been set apart for her. Mr. Walsh 
had foundered in the corridor with the Lelys and 
Yandycks, and Walter had gone at once to look for 
his cousin. He found her, as he expected, in her 
own sitting-room. It was the only room which had 
been refurnished for the last seventy or eighty 
years, and it had been made as bright and pretty as 
brilliant chintz, and polished wood, and gold mould- 
ings, and the pale green watered paper could make 
it. Poor Gilbert Goring had tried to touch his 
daughter's heart through its adornments, and failed. 



GLOVES ! 156 

The girl was a bom actress. She knew intui- 
tively the situation and the scenes in which she 
showed to the best advantage. It was more with a 
desire of throwing a halo of grace, and sweetness, 
and refinement around herself, than from any love 
of the flowersy that she had laid a heavy tribute on 
the gardens this day, and bedecked her room plenti- 
fully with the fairest blooms she could find. She 
wanted Walter to come in, and be struck at once 
with sweet odours and sweet sounds. Young as she 
was, she had a great notion of getting at men's 
hearts through their senses. So she grouped roses 
about everywhere, in tall vases and flat baskets, and 
wore a pale buff queen of flowers in her bosom, and, 
as the hour approached for him to come in, she 
seated herself at the piano and flooded the air with 
melody. The offspring of passion, she was instinct 
with it almost unconsciously. 

He opened the door quietly, and watched her and 
listened admiringly to her for a minute or two 
before she became conscious of his presence. He 
wished that he had brought Mrs. Walsh to see and 
hear her, and be charmed as he was with the air of 
sweet unpremeditation and unconsciousness. He 
little knew that Mrs. Walsh would have seen 



156 WALTEB GORING. 

through it all, and despised her for one of the little 
tricks of the trade with which she herself was not 
wholly unacquainted. Women see through these 
artless artifices much more clearly than men ; they 
are on the track remorselessly in an instant, and 
rarely leave it until they have run down the motive 
and held it up to scorn. 

At last that electric power which passes from the 
liked to the liker thrilled her, and she knew, with- 
out hearing a sound of him, without catching a 
glimpse of him, without giving a sign that she knew 
it, that he was there and that he was looking at her. 
Very carefully and very brilliantly she finished her 
song, and then very leisurely bent down and selected 
from the music-rack that song which we all laugh 
at and all like from some reason or other, and then 
treated Walter to a burst of the melodious con- 
viction . 

" He will return,! know liim well, 
He will not leave me here to die.*' 

What man could have stood it ? 

**I should rather think he wouldn't leave you 
* here ' or anywhere else to die ! " he exclaimed, 
going up to her quickly ; and she started up, putting 
one hand out to greet him, and the other down on 



GLOVES ! 167 

the music stool to steady it, making her figure take 
a gracefial curve as she moved, that was not lost 
upon that lover of the beautiful, Mr. Walter Goring. 

" When did you come in ? " she asked. 

" Two minutes ago." 

" And I meant to have been down to meet you ! 
How dreadfully provoking. Has Mrs. Walsh come ? " 

" Yes ; " he replied. " She's gone to dress, and 
I must do the same, but I thought I would just look 
you up first." Then he added, " I want you to come 
down with me presently and be ready to receive her. 
You must play hostess, you know, Daisy." 

" I'll play anything you like, I'm so glad to have 
you back again, Mr. Goring." 

" I don't call you * Miss Goring.' " 

Her brow crimsoned. 

" You don't do it, partly because I'm your ward ; 
and partly because it's not my name, I suppose. 
But what should I call you if I didn't call you ' Mr. 
Goring?'" 

He didn't like to say, " Call me Walter; " there 
is a sort of sentimentalism about such a request 
from which the bravest man may shrink without 
reproach after one-and-twenty. The Christian 
name should always rise to the lips spontaneously ; 



168 WALTER GORING. 

there is something inharmonious about asking and 
being asked to utter it. Nevertheless, he wished 
her to call him " Walter," in a cousinly sort of way, 
at the outset before Mrs. Walsh, so he said . 

"Oh! call me anything, or nothing; not *Mr. 
Goring ' . I can't stand that ! " 

To which she replied as simply as possible, 
" Very well, Walter." 

** It 's a quarter to seven now, and we dine at 
seven . I must be off and dress: how well you 
look, Daisy." 

She glanced over her shoulder at the effect of 
the black dress she wore, then a purely femi- 
nine difficulty which had been much oppressing 
her, came to the surface and would be spoken 
about. 

" O Walter," she began rather piteously, " I have 
been in such trouble ; the dressmaker at Deneham 
is a beast." 

" Is she, indeed ? " he said, laughing. 

" You wouldn't laugh if you had to wear what 
she had made. And that Mrs. Walsh will have 
come .down with all her London Paris-modelled 
things!" 

" 'That Mrs. Walsh' won't judge you by your 



GLOVES ! 169 

dress, Daisy," he said, gravely ; " besides, dear, you 
couldn't look better than you do/' 
. " couldn't I indeed," the girl cried out heartily ; 
" you give me plenty of rope in a French milliner's, 
and see whether I wouldn't come out . ^looking a 
trifle better. And as to Mrs. Walsh * not judging 
me by my dress,* I don't care one bit for her judg- 
ment. I only want to look as well as she does.'' 

He was on the point of answering . "you do that," 
but he remembered just in time that he did not 
think so ; and that moreover, his goddess would n6t 
like him to think so. Therefore he checked the 
utterance, and said instead, that he would go and 
dress, and return for Daisy in ten minutes. 

When he was gone Daisy rushed to her bed- 
room, and ascertained through the agency of a 
cheval and hand-glass exactly how the skirt of her 
dress looked. Then she thought a thanksgiving 
for that Mrs. Walsh had no cheval in her room, . 
put her yellow hair into more perfect order, and 
then returned to her boudoir, to look as composed 
as she could, and await Walter's coming to lead her 
down to receive the guests. 

If it be thought that he made rather too much 
of this young girl, let it be remembered that she 



160 WALTER GORING. 

was left in his power as it were ; that she had no 
other friend in the world ; and that he was a very 
chivalrous man. 

Presently he came, and she went down with him 
into the big drab drawing-room . ^the same room in 
which he had found her kneeling before the broken 
cabinet. The stifiF old furniture . the absence of 
flowers. the look of disuse altogether which was 
over the apartment, struck Walter forcibly, coming 
as he did from Daisy's room above. 

^*^ I told Mrs. Marsh to n^e the place look as 
well as she could with the old things; but she 
doesn't seem to have effected much ; however, it 
does not much matter," he continued, " Mrs. Walsh 
understands that she is to see Goring Place in the 
rough; . you might have had some flowers here 
though, Daisy." 

" I *11 get some after dinner, if you will come out 
and help me to gather them,'^ she replied. 

" We will see about that," he answered. And 
then the door opened slowly, and Mrs. Walsh came 
into the room. 

He took Daisy's hand, and led her towards Mrs. 
Walsh as he would have led a child. He forgot 
entirely the speech he had made up-stairs, relative 



gloves! 161 

to Daisy playing the hostess ; and Daisy, mortified 
at this forgetfuhiess of his, and feeling resentfully 
that he was thinking more of her youth and help- 
lessness than of anything else at this moment, im- 
parted as unchildlike a rigidity to her bearing as 
she could, as he said . 

"This is the young lady about whom I have 
talked to you so much, . my ward and cousin, Daisy 
Goring/* 

Mrs. Walsh smiled, and held out her hand to the 
girl with a grand graciousness that was beautiful 
to behold from the impartial spectator s point of 
view, and Daisy held out her hand with an ab- 
sence of all cordiality in the movement, and an 
absence of all graciousness in her face. She was 
put in the position of the patronised, and her pride 
rebelled against it. 

Honestly in her heart of hearts the girl was pre- 
possessed by the woman. Daisy had chosen to 
picture Mrs. Walsh as a pretty, lively, domestic- 
mannered woman, who would be wanting her 
(Daisy) to sit and work with her of a morning, and 
otherwise interfere aggressively during the term 
of their sojourn together at Goring Place. But 
from this stately superb beauty no interference of 



163 WALTER GORING. 

a petty or aggrayating nature could be dreaded. 
Besides, her taste was gladdened by the sight of 
the grace and beauty and calm in which Mrs, Walsh 
was steeped, so to say. Daisy had a keen appre- 
ciation of that order of loveliness which may be 
seen from any side, and which is always lovely ; 
and of that passive grace which takes up what the 
sternest critic can but feel to be the most exquisite 
of attitudes, and retains it for half an hour. Mrs. 
Walsh was an adept in this patrician art of keeping 
quiet. Her stillness was not the stillness of stu- 
pidity. During her longest periods of inaction, 
she never looked inane. Even when she sat and 
looked long-past the person who was addressing her, 
as she did occasionally, it was with the far-ofif look 
of the sibyl, not with the vacant eye of the non- 
understanding. This composed grace, this grand 
loveliness, was precisely the thing that would appeal 
to a fluctuating, restless nature, such as Daisy's. 
She liked the contrast to herself. Mrs. Walsh was 
to her, like a mountain, or an oratorio, . a thing to 
be marvelled at and admired. 

But the lady was not prepossessed by the girl. 
Daisy's good looks and Daisy's grace were of that 
order which depend much on the circumstances 



GLOVES ! 1&3 

surrounding and the temper of the possessor. Miss 
Goring had looked very pretty up in her own room 
ten minutes before. She had thrown herself into 
the spirit of her songs with a certain dramatic 
power that is always attractive. She had been 
flushed and excited with gratified vanity, the 
sound of her own voice had thrilled her ; and the 
feeling that a man was standing and admiring her 
very much, had thrilled her still more. Let it not 
be supposed for a moment that Daisy had a single 
warm feeling towards her cousin Walter. She had 
not ; but she was very open to admiration, and 
very eager for it, and not at all unwilling to flatter 
any man forward on the path of offering it to her. 
These things combined to give a sort of nervous 
grace to her face and bearing, when she felt . as she 
had felt upstairs . ^that such charm as she had was 
patent to a man. But here, before Mrs. Walsh, 
she fell flat . not from embarrassment, she never 
was embarrassed . but from a conviction that even 
at her best Mrs. Walsh would not admire her ; and 
that even if Mrs. Walsh had done so, she would 
not have cared for another woman's admiration. In 
fact, she had no liking for her own sex . no appre- 
ciation of it . no desire to staad well with it . no 

X 2 



164 WALTER GORING. 

sense of the value of its sympathy. Its compa- 
nionship offered her no excitement, and excitement 
was a thing she craved with an unhealthy craving 
that made her yearn for it in any form. All this 
Mrs. Walsh read in her at their first meeting : and, 
consequently, Mrs. Walsh was not prepossessed in 
Daisy^s favour, foreseeing, as she did, that his 
ward would give her friend Walter Goring some 
trouble before he had done with her. Mrs. Walsh 
little thought of the trouble he was in about 
Daisy already^a trouble he did not like to confide 
to any one . a trouble he could not share with any 
one . a trouble that made him, even in these early 
days of his proprietorship, regret that he had ever 
heard of Goring Place. 

After dinner they went over a portion of the 
house, and still Daisy felt at a disadvantage, and so 
was at one. Walter consulted Mr. and Mrs. Walsh 
about the colours to be employed on the walls, and 
the carpets to be put upon the floors; and Mrs. 
Walsh came off her pedestal, and condescended to 
give sound advice on the subject of upholstery ; and 
Daisy walked in sulky silence by Mr. Walsh's side, 
and disapproved with her eyes and mute lips of 
every little design he sketched, either in his note- 



gloves! 165 

book or in words, for the ornamentation or arrange- 
ment of anything. But at last twilight fell, and 
then her turn came. Walter proposed that they 
should all go into " Daisy's sitting-room and have 
tea while she sang to them;'' and Mrs. Walsh 
acceded to the proposition with one of her grand 
indifferent smiles; then Daisy felt her hour of 
triumph was coming, and thanked the Lord for 
having given her patience to practice as she had 
been doing of late* 

They went into Daisy's sitting-room, and as soon 
as they entered Mrs. Walsh read a little more of 
Miss Goring's character. Mrs. Walsh was a votary 
of that creed which worships the happy perfect 
medium, and which holds that it is very possible to 
have too much of a good thing. She objected to 
lavish profusion ; she was as classical in her taste 
as in her person. 

But Daisy revelled in luxuriousness. She liked 
an atmosphere to be heavy with fragrance and 
warm with colour ; she liked the air to throb with 
sweet, soft sounds ; she liked a subdued, artificial 
light to be shed over things. For all her fair^ 
freckled face, her yellow hair, and her blue eyes, 
there was a strong touch of the oriental about this 



166 WALTER GORING. 

girl. The excitement she craved was that of the 
senses, not of the intellect. 

She was herself again now as she went to the 
piano, her graceful, undulating self. Mrs. Walsh 
lounged on a couch, and looked at the flowers, at 
the pictures, at the ceiling . at anything but Daisy ; 
and Daisy marked and determined that Mrs. Walsh 
should look at her before long . aye, and marvel at 
her too. She asked Mrs. Walsh " What songs she 
liked," and Mrs. Walsh "Didn't care;" and then 
Daisy turned carelessly to Walter, and Walter went 
up and turned over her songs irresolutely, and 
finally left the selection to herself. 

She sang ! What she sang is of little conse- 
quence ; suffice it to say, that she sang song after 
song (always pausing indifferently between them, 
and waiting to be asked to " go on '* by one or other 
of the gentlemen), until Mrs. Walsh lounged no 
longer, but sat and listened, as Daisy had vowed to 
herself Mrs. Walsh should sit and listen. She sang 
as though she had been Queen Titania's darling 
Puck, endowed with the voice of Adelina Patti . as 
though she had felt the full meaning of every word 
she uttered, which she did not Her bell-like notes 
rang pseans of triumph ; she threw her head back, 



gloves! 167 

and warbled like a nightingale, and had about as 
much feeling in the matter as a nightingale may be 
supposed to have. The motive which inspired her 
was the thought that two men were listening to her 
enraptured now, and that it was good practice for 
enrapturing others in the days to come. The true 
artist feeling of striving to excel in it for its own 
sake she had not ; but she possessed to the full the 
wonderful dramatic power of seeming to have it. 

Perhaps, could she have heard a brief conversa- 
tion which took place between Walter and the 
Walshes, she would have left off rather sooner than 
she did. Mr. Walsh was struck with that same 
expression of restraint . of all not being given out 
. which Mr. Clarke had described as " suppressed 
power." He was much struck with it She had 
precisely the expression, and almost the face and 
head, which he had been in search of for some time, 

in order to introduce a few touches of truth into a 

ft 
picture he was painting from Marmion of Constance 

de Beverley. The passage he had selected was 

that one in which the girl threatens her murderers 

with a variety of unpleasant things when Marmion's 

late remorse should wake ; but he had not been 

able to work out his idea in consequence of failing 



168 WALTER GORING. 

to convey the mingled expression of innocence, 
determination, and bitter feeling for a heavy wrong 
wrought, which he had conceived for Constance. 
Daisy had the look he wanted; therefore he 
watched her with interest, and while she was 
singing he whispered to Walter, . 

" Wonderfully she throws herself into the spirit 
of what she*s singing for an amateur ? " 

" Yes,*' Walter replied ; " a little training and she 
would feign with the first on the boards now." 

" She shows intense feeling." 

"And does not feel a bit, I'm half afraid," 
Walter answered, rather seriously ; " if she did she 
wouldn't indicate it in the admirable manner she 
does. My own belief, you know, is that great 
mental power and great musical (executive) power 
never do go together: she has the latter unques- 
tionably, and I much doubt her having the former.'* 

Mrs. Walsh had listened to what passed between 
the two men, and now she spoke,. 

" I think I know what you mean, and I agree 
with you, Mr. Goring ; it*s very extraordinary, but 
I'm sure that it is so . hers is a face that ex- 
presses clearly and decidedly much more than she 
feels." 



GLOVES ! 169 

" I am afraid of it myself; and yet she^s very 
interesting, isn^t she ? " Walter replied. Then he 
rose, and carried a cup of tea to Daisy, and thanked 
her for her singing; and Daisy was very happy, 
not knowing what he had just been saying and 
hearing of her. On the whole it must be admitted 
that there was more than a touch of truth in Mrs. 
Walsh's estimate of the girl, about whom there were 
few things more genuine than her artificiality. 

The next day was Sunday, and it had been 
decreed that it would only be right and proper for 
Walter Goring, Esq., and his guests to go to church 
in the morning, as it became those on whom the 
eyes of Deneham were fixed. 

" It's impossible to walk . ^it*s more than a mile. 
How shall we go over ? *' Walter had said at 
breakfast. 

** Not in a close carriage, please," Mrs. Walsh 
answered ; " I have quite enough of that in 
town.'' 

" We'll go in the trap, then . no, we can't all go in 
the trap. I will drive you, if you'll allow me, and 
Ealph and Daisy must go in something else. I'll 
go and see about it." 

Daisy followed him out into the hall, and he saw 



170 WALTEB GORING. 

when she caught his arm and leant upon it, and 
looked up in his face, that there was something 
wrong. 

" What's the matter, Daisy ? " he asked. 

" If I canH go in the trap with you, I'll stay at 
home," she replied. 

"You can't go in the trap with me, Daisy, 
because I have offered to drive Mrs. Walsh, and I 
can't put you up behind with John." 

" Very well, then TU stay at home," she replied. 

He laughed. 

" In such matters, of course, you'll please your- 
self. Miss Goring; but I could have wished you 
to go.'* 

" Why should I be boxed up in the close carriage 
with Mr. Walsh more than his wife ? " 

"For the simple reason that he can't drive; 
therefore it would be no use putting you in the 
phaeton with him. However, make up your mind ; 
will you go or not ? If you don't go, Mr. Walsh 
can go on the back of the trap with us." 

" If you wish me to go, Walter, Til go." 

" I'm glad of it. I want you to be a great deal 
with Mrs. Walsh for many reasons." 

He was not quite sure what these many reasons 



GLOVES ! 171 

were himself; therefore it was hard on him when 
Daisy asked, coaxingly, . 

" Tell me some of them, Walter." 

" I should like yon to grow as like her as possi- 
ble,*' he replied, rather lamely. It must be con- 
fessed this was not the best way to recommend his 
£riend to his ward. 

^* ni do my best to grow tall and Juno-like ; if 
I don't succeed you won't attribute the failure to 
obstinacy, will you, Walter ? and now I'll go and 
get ready to sit and be improved by her mere pre- 
sence in the pew for an hour or two. Oh! you 
haven't heard him yet, but old Travers is so 
prosy." 

Then she went up to dress for church, and 
Walter went out to his stables to settle about which 
horses should be employed for the service. 

Daisy's bed-room commanded the drive and the 
lawn in front of the house. Presently, while she 
was putting on her bonnet, she saw Mrs. Walsh 
walking up and down with her host, ready dressed, 
and waiting for the trap to come round. 

There was a flow about Mrs. Walsh's long silver- 
grey silk robe which the Deneham dressmaker had 
fiailed to give Daisy's; but this Daisy could have 



172 WALTER GORING. 

borne. The thing she could not bear . the thing 
against which she girded fiercely in her soul . was 
the contrast between Mrs. Walsh's glovfed hands 
and her own. Mrs. Walsh's looked as if they were 
chiselled out of silver-grey marble ; the proportions 
of her own far more beautiful hands were spoilt, 
utterly spoilt, by the ill-fitting, baggy, black ones, 
which were the best Deneham could supply. They 
would not button at the wrist ; they would stretch 
themselves to an uncalled for width over the backs 
of her hands ; they would leave loose ends to them- 
selves at the tips of her fingers. Altogether, they 
contrasted odiously with the gloves of the woman 
who was promenading beneath her window; and so 
Daisy went to church, and sat through the two 
hours' service, vigorously hating Mrs. Walsh ; and 
she no more succeeded in hiding the hatred than 
she did the hands from that lady. 

Poor Daisy 1 It was such a trifle, such an un- 
worthy crumple in her rose-leaf, that it cannot be 
hoped that sympathy will be felt for her by the 
reader. Yet, why not? Has not every woman 
at some period or other of her career been utterly 
thrown out of gear, and put at a disadvantage by some 
such trifle as this ? Moreover, ill-fitting gloves are 



GLOVES 1 173 

no trifle ; they impede that free action of the hands» 
deprived of which the active -handed ones of this 
worid are reduced to the first stage of imbecility. 
She looked at Mrs. Walsh's hands, and saw, as I 
said before, that they looked as though they were 
chiselled out of silver-grey marble. She looked at 
her own, and lo ! and behold they looked, crumpled, 
lax, and feeble. Then she, thinking that Walter 
marked the contrast more clearly than he did, gave 
birth to and nursed carefully a dislike and distrust 
of Mrs. Walsh, which effectually precluded her even 
desiring to seem well and do well in that lady's eyes. 
** She wants to make Walter think as little as 
possible of my looks beside her own," Daisy thought; 
and the thought kept her silent, and prevented her 
raising her glorious voice in the singing, as Mrs. 
Travers had fondly hoped she would do when she 
came in. 



CHAPTER XII. 

GETTING IN ORDEE AT GORING PLACE. 

They lived a very busy life at Goring Place for 
the next three weeks. For fair friendship's sake 
Mrs. Walsh submitted to the discomforts of the 
perfume of paint, and the tapping of hammers. 
Walter had the ceilings freshly grained, and the 
walls newly coloured, and an army of upholsterers 
came and took possession, and made that fearful 
preliminary mess and confusion for which months 
of after comfort cannot compensate. Under judi- 
cious modern treatment the old entrance hall came 
out with a more mediaeval aspect than it had ever laid 
a claim to in medieval days. Old oak carvings were 
matched from the Swiss shop in Begent Street. 
The periods of each portion of the building were 
studied carefully, and furniture to befit them re- 
spectively was procured. More light was let in 



GETTING IN ORDER AT GORING PLACE, 176 

upon the Lelys and Vandykes, under Mr. Walsh's 
auspices; a croquet ground was laid down on the 
lawn, under the auspices of his wife. A French 
window, slightly out of keeping perhaps, with the 
rest of the house, was broken out at the end of what 
had been called a saloon, and it was turned into a 
billiard-room. From the drawing-room, the rickety 
old cabinets, with straddling unsteady legs, full of 
cracked, hideous china, were banished, and mo- 
dem aid was invoked in the matter of inlaying and 
marqueterie. Mrs. Walsh came off her pedestal for 
the whole of the time, and put her own hand to the 
wheel. She superintended the installation of the 
new things as only women can . seeing "what" 
should " go where " at a glance, and giving, by a few 
dexterous touches, a homelike occupied air to the 
newly-bedecked rooms at once. She it was who, 
walking about from room to room, gave that subtle 
adjustment to the curtains which professional hands 
had failed in giving, and which caused them to look 
like the draperies they were intended to be, instead 
of the mere so many yards of damask or silk they 
had appeared before. She it was who put the 
couches and easy chairs and tables into position. 
She it was who ordained and insisted upon the right 



176 WALTER GORING. 

tone of colouring being preserved in each room. 
She it was who decreed and enforced the decree, 
that there should be no over-crowding even of things 
of beauty. " When outline was lost, beauty was 
lost," she argued; so, thanks to her taste and 
firmness, everything had its outline, and was in due 
and proper proportion to everything else in Walter 
Goring's reception rooms. In short, in less than a 
month, through the agency of those two irresistible 
powers . woman and wealth . Goring Place was in 
the most perfect order. But Daisy had stood aloof, 
and had pointedly forborne . much to her cousin*s 
annoyance . to take a share in the discussions or an 
interest in the ordering. Mrs. Walsh's taste and 
Daisy's had clashed at first, and Daisy had with- 
drawn all interest, or, at any rate, withheld all ex- 
pression of it, with a promptitude that was almost 
insolent. Mrs. Walsh inclined to the cold and 
classical and perfectly pure . her own beauty could 
stand such tests! Daisy on the other hand, in- 
clined to the warm, the luxurious, the lavish . the 
sensuous, in fact. So it came to pass that there was 
little intercourse and less sympathy between the 
two ladies. 

They generally sat together of a morning in 



GETTING IK ORDEB AT GORING PLACE. 177 

Daisj*s sitting-room, principally because that was 
the only room which was not liable to raids from 
painters and grainers, and others of that ilk. Here 
they would sit: beautiful Mrs. Walsh with some 
graceful sort of work in her hands, or some book 
before her, always apparently at her grand ease, 
never desirous of anything further, so far as Daisy 
could see, happy and at peace in her own stateliness ; 
while Daisy, when she was not singing, would be 
in one lithe fidget . unable to read^ unwilling to 
work, unhappy in being these things; wishing for 
any sort of break in the monotony of this com- 
panionship with a woman to whose beauty she had 
grown accustomed, and more bored than ever when ' 
the break would come in the shape of Walter 
coming in to read some portion of his novel to them. 
For then, though for the sake of seeming pleasant 
in the eyes of the only man present, she would 
assume a little air and look of interest, poor Daisy 
could not follow him through sheer inability. In 
truth, it must be acknowledged that it was not 
intellectual, but purely animal excitement, which 
this poor carelessly-grown Daisy craved. The mis- 
fortune was, that blinded by the expression of her 
face, thrown off the track as it were by her intense 

ToL. I. » 



178 WALTER GORIN<J. 

dramatic power, Walter Goring accredited her with 
more sense and more sensibility than she possessed. 
But even Walter Goring felt, despite that well- 
sustained look of interest on his cousin Daisy's 
face, that the honours of these literary mornings 
were with Mrs. Walsh. 

However, on some other mornings they were with 
Daisy, for the master of Goring Place did not suffer 
his intention of teaching his ward to ride, to sleep. 
For the first time or two he took her out on a 
steady-going old pony, that had belonged to her 
father; but Daisy's equestrian powers throve so 
well under his management, that he speedily pro- 
moted Jier to the chestnut. It occurred to him at 
length that the skill she displayed was a singular 
thing indeed, if this was her first experience of 
riding, so he asked her one morning . 

" Had you ever been on horseback before I took 
you out on the old pony the other day, Daisy ? " 
and she answered . 

" Never at Goring Place." 

" I asked if you had ever been on horseback ?*' 

" Yes," she replied ; " back in the life I want to 
forget, if you will let me, I used to ride." 

This was one of the speeches that taken in coii- 



GETTING IN ORDER AT GORING PLACE. 179 

junction with that look of suppressed power and 
restrained feeling in her face, led him into the error 
of sometimes believing her to be a far cleverer girl 
than she was in reality. He fancied that it be- 
tokened a fixed determination to live down some 
black memories; whereas, in all probability it 
meant nothing more than a childish, pettish aversion 
to being reminded of what had been less agreeable 
and flattering to her vanity than the present* 
Moreover, she had discovered that this reticence 
of hers interested and puzzled him. Therefore she 
maintained it. 

During these long rides he tried hard to draw 
her into conversation, and find out what she had 
in her, and she baffled him. She had a knack of 
saying bright pert things, of so wording an allusion 
to some personal peculiarity, or some habit of ex- 
pression in another, that it might almost pass for 
wit. In fact, she had the art of so phrasing her 
little superficial observations, that it was not until 
afterwards that it dawned upon the hearer how very 
superficial they were in reality. But whenever 
Walter left off talking about persons or events, and 
tried to lead the conversation up a step or two, 
Daisy lapsed into silence. True, she listened 

N 2 



180 WALTER GORING. 

beautifully, but she said never a word ; and at last 
he came to wish heartily, either that . she were 
younger, or he himself older and more patient, in 
order that he might, without outraging propriety, 
keep this strange girl with him, and educate her 
himself. 

But this he knew he could not do; and, as he 
said to Mrs. Walsh, she '' was past being sent to 
school in every way.'* Still he knew very well that 
in a few years it was ordained that she should 
occupy a prominent position in society, and he felt 
that the onus was on him, her guardian, of fitting 
her to sustain it gracefully. She had been through 
the usual wretched boarding-school routine, but of 
everything beyond it she was hopelessly ignorant. 
Even the lighter literature of her own country, on 
which the majority of young girls feed with voracity, 
was a sealed book to her. On the whole, Walter 
did not so much regret this latter fact; he said 
something to himself about her mind being " like a 
sheet of unsullied paper, fitted to receive any im- 
pression," and he set himself seriously to consider 
the best means of causing it to take only good 
ones. 

Mrs. Walsh was not a particularly useful coad- 



GETTING IN ORDER AT GORING PLACE. 181 

jntor at this juncture. When he asked her to make 
him out a list of hooks that it would be well to get 
Daisy to glance at, even if she couldn't be per- 
suaded to read them thoroughly, Mrs. Walsh could 
only shake her head and look handsome. 

" What a shame of you, a clever man like you, to 
come to me to devise an educational code! If I 
were you, I should send her to one of those highly 
respectable ladies, who are always advertising their 
willingness to undertake the education of neglected 
adults,'* she suggested. 

" That won't do at all," he replied ; " where in 
the world she can have been to have had such first- 
rate musical instruction, and to have remained in 
such profound ignorance of all other things, I can't 
imagine." 

" With professionals, perhaps ? " 

"Perhaps so; certainly the training her voice 
has had is excellent ; but I doubt her ever having 
read a line beyond the songs she sings." 

"And I doubt her reading even them with under- 
standing, for all she sings them so faultlessly/' 
Mrs. Walsh replied. 

Shortly after this, one morning when Walter 
Goring and his charge were out riding together. 



182 WALTER GORING. 

he saw, or thought he saw, a good opportunity of 
stating some of his intentions. They had heen 
haying a brisk gallop over the turf, through a 
bewildering glade, and Walter, being only a man, 
was feeling rather more interested in her than 
usual, for . 

'* As she fled fast thro* snn and sbade 
The happy winds about her play'd, 
Blowing the ringlet from the braid. 
She look'd so lovely as she sway'd 

The rein with dainty finger tips, 
A man had given all other bliss, 
And all his worldly worth for this, 
To waste his whole heart in one kiss 

Upon her jwrfeot lips." 

At least if a man had not, being willing to do so, 
he might have been forgiven the willingness ; and 
so Walter may be forgiven for feeling a little more 
warmly than was usual with him about the fair 
young girl galloping along at his side, seeming so 
very fresh and fair, and fond of him. Suddenly he 
exclaimed . 

" Daisy, will you give up an hour every morning 
to reading with me, while we're at Goring Place 
together?" 

"Will Mrs. Walsh sit and listen to us?" she 
asked. 



GETTING IN OBDEB AT GOBING PLACE. 183 

" No, I think not I want to brush up my own 
reading a bit, and I want to speak to you about my 
favourite books ; the best way of managing this is 
for us to read them together, isn't it ? " 

She looked keenly at him for an instant or two, 
and then replied . 

" I told you once I woAld do whatever you liked, 
Walter." 

" Then you'U do this?" 

She blushed a little. 

"Yes, if you think I had better." 

** Daisy, dear, don^t you care to do it ? *' 

" Yes, if it pleases you." 

"But apart from that?" 

"Not a bit," she replied, quietly. 

** But, my dear child," he began, trying very hard 
to be paternal, " you wouldn't like to feel yourself 
behind the conversation, . ^you wouldn't like to feel 
left out, as it were, when you're in society? I 
don't want you to go into the world with the notion 
in your head, that women have only to look pretty 
and graceful in order to pass muster." 

" Does Mrs. Walsh do much more ? " she asked, 
quietly. 

" She does a great deal more ; she appreciates 



184 -WALTER GORING. 

mental worth in others," he replied, somewhat con- 
ceitedly ; ** and in order to appreciate mental worth, 
you must have some knowledge of the various ways 
in which it has been made manifest to the world at 
divers periods : do you follow me ?" 

Sh^ nodded her head. 

" And in order to gain this knowledge, you must 
read and think, Daisy ; the art of appreciating then^ 
in some degree, however slight, is the art men most 
prize in women ; you cannot arrive at this without 
making some effort *to understand : will you make 
the effort ? " 

He touched the right chord there . her vanity. 

"Yes,'' she repUed, "Til try; but look here, 
Walter. Don't you think that if other ladies leave 
me behind when they're talking, that I shall leave 
most of them behind when I sing ?" 

" You won't be able to sing all your life, Daisy,** 
he said, laughing. 

"No; nor to talk about your wearisome books all 
my life either ; I don't want to be a blue." 

" Don't alarm yourself, Daisy, dear ; you're not 
likely to be that." Then he remembered the barely 
indicated aspirations of the girl he had met some 
weeks since at a dinner at Mrs. Walsh's, and asked, 



GETTING IN OBDEB AT GOBING PLACE. 185 

** Supposing you were very clever in one thing, 
Daisy, and could make a name for yourself, or 
might hope to do so in time, would you try ? ** 

" Yes ; on the stage." 

*' Only on the stage ? " 

" Oh, yes ; in any other way, if I could be famous 
at once ; but on the stag^ I would work. Do you 
know, Walter, I think it's the only thing worth 
living for almost, to have your name called till your 
ears ring with it; and then to come forward before 
the lights, and get all the applause and praise to 
your face. I should love my voice," she continued, 
with almost a coo, "if I thought that it would 
ever bring me that." 

It was not at all the sort of ambition which, 
according to Walter Ooring's idea, should have 
animated the breast of a would-be artist. It 
lacked all the true artist-feeling in fact, regarding 
as it did the gift merely as a means of attaining an 
end. Consequently he said, rather coldly . 

'' It shall never bring you that with my consent, 
Daisy ; come, let us canter now, here's a good bit 
of turf, and we'll have a talk about these readings 
which I propose some other day!" 

Daisy's outward answer was a smile and a nod ; 



186 WALTER GORING. 

her inward one was, "I hope to gracious not." 
Better the idle, dull mornings in her own room 
with Mrs. Walsh, than a couple of hours over some 
book, on which she felt sure beforehand she should 
not be able to concentrate her attention, with a man 
who never made the slightest approach to love to 
her. 

But Walter Goring had not the least intention 
of giving up his idea ; he was only uncertain as to 
the best manner of carrying it out. To take a girl 
of nearly eighteen, and begin at the very beginning, 
was not at all according to the dictates of his taste ; 
and yet, if he did not begin at the very beginning, it 
would be merely giving her a thin coat of varnish, 
liable to crack at any moment. Nothing would 
have been more congenial to his present feelings 
than to have taught this charge of his Latin, and 
made her read " Horace " with him. But this 
would have been requiring her to run before she 
could walk, since she was absolutely unacquainted 
with even the names of our English classics. 

He went into the library and walked round it, 
looking at the backs of the books, in vague expecta- 
tion of the title of one suggesting, if not the 
perusal of itself, at least the perusal of some other, 



GETTING IN ORDER AT GORING PLACE. 187 

on which the Daisy's mind might hegin to expand 
with something like advantage. His object was to 
get something that would at the same time amuse 
her and refer her to something else; something 
good in itself, but fraught with allusions to still 
better things. This being his object, it may be 
doubted whether he could have done better than to 
put into Miss Daisy's hands Byron's "Bards and 
Reviewers," . or a series of leading articles from 
the "Daily Telegraph." 

Walter passed by that portion of the shelf on 
which "History" stood in stolid stoutness. Gibbon 
was too grandiose and Hume too heavy for the pur- 
pose. " I wonder how she would take to Macaulay 
and Carlyle ? " he thought, and he sent up to town 
at once for their works complete. When the books 
came, Daisy took charmingly to Macaulay's "Lays," 
but to Carlyle not at all. 

Day after day the young man, who could have 
been amusing himself ever so much better, induced 
the girl for whose future he was accountable to go 
into his study, and sit and read with him, and hear 
him speak about what they had been reading. 
Sometimes he fondly hoped that they really were 
making a little headway ; that Daisy comprehended 



188 WALTER GORING. 

and was interested, not alone in the matter, but in 
the manner in which the matter was put forth. He 
endeavoured to make her feel the beauty of style as 
he did, and as Daisy had a marvellous ear, she did 
experience a certain sense of pleasure in reading 
sentences that rose and fell harmoniously, and 
whose rhythm was perfect. He was as rigorous 
in putting only such works before her as though he 
had been training her to become a writer herself; 
and sometimes, when all his efforts fell flat, . when 
she sighed over Sterne, grew sleepy over Swift, and 
allowed herself to appear intensely bored over 
Addison and others of that matchless band of 
essayists who made the eighteenth century golden 
. sometimes, when these things were, he did wish 
within himself that since Fate had made him re- 
sponsible for a young woman's well-being, it had 
been for such a one as Charlie St. John. '^ Galled 
to this work by dulness, Jove, and Fate," he pur- 
sued it steadily for a time, till at last it dawned 
upon him that Daisy knew no more of a book when 
she had finished it than when she began, and 
this not from stupidity, but from careless indif- 
ference to everything that did not offer her the 
physical excitement which she craved. When this 



GETTING IN ORDER AT GORING PLACE. 189 

fact did dawn upon him, he gave up his self-imposed 
task, and told Mrs. Walsh that he believed a 
woman's hand would be more efiSicacious in direct- 
ing Daisy's studies; and commissioned his friend 
to look out for some place where Daisy could be 
put under the charge of some unimpeachable 
people, who would look after and carefully improve 
her. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

A BEAUTY MAN. 

Meanwhile other guests had arrived at Goring 
Place : a Mrs. Leyinge and her two daughters, old 
friends of Walters, who had been kind to him in 
Borne long before he was a man of property and 
could suspect them of having designs upon him. 
Not that he was addicted to this form of conceit 
even now that he was a man of property, but then he 
had married lady friends without daughters who were. 
Mrs. Walsh endured the Levinges gracefully, but she 
did not particularly like them. The elder of the two 
daughters, Mary^ had worked laboriously, and with 
some not utterly unimportant results, in a sculptor's 
studio for the last ten years. She adored her art, 
and thought that there was nothing of any worth in 
comparison with it ; constant association with men, 
^'ho saw in her the artist more than the woman. 



.»5 



A BEAUTT MAN. 191 

had rendered her a little more free and outspoken, 
and gentlemanly altogether, than Mrs. Walsh found 
good. Not that Mary Levinge was what is called 
a fast girl, or woman rather, for girlhood was 
past with. her; but she was a frank, independent- 
minded and mannered woman ; a little too concen- 
trated on her art to give time or thought to the 
cultivation and display of the more purely feminine 
characteristics. Yet withal not a hard woman ; only 
a bold-hearted, earnest, clear-thinking one, who had 
found in work a panacea for an early woe . a 
quickly dispelled illusion . which had been so 
deeply felt and mourned at the time that it had 
left her incapable of ever so feeling and mourning 
again. Love was over for her, in fact, but life was 
not; and so she heartily enjoyed the latter, and 
her art, and the warm friendship of many men, after 
a bonny bright fashion that Mrs. Walsh declared 
" was not at all feminine." 

The second daughter was endured by the majo- 
rity of people for the sake of the gentle mother and 
the "thorough" elder sister. Truth to tell. Miss 
Sybil Levinge was held to be " a great humbug '* 
generally. She, too, " had her line," and she 
pursued it eagerly. She was a "woman's rights 



192 WALTER GOEINO. 

woman," . ^a correspondent of all the "Social 
Science" journals, . and a terrible person altogether. 
She regarded her sister as a waster of good marble 
and time ; she preached a crusade against the love 
of beauty, avowing it to be an enfeebling, enervating 
thing ; and parted her hair on one side, and wore a 
jacket and stand-up collar like a man's, in order 
to avoid all risk of enfeebling and enervating so 
much of the world as looked upon her. Some 
people averred that the precaution was an utterly 
unnecessary one ; but this may have been dictated 
by mere spleen. However this may be, Sybil Le- 
vinge was not popular, either with men or women. 
To Mrs. Walsh she was simply repulsive ; while to 
Daisy she was a being before whom it was nice, for 
the sake of effects of contrast, to be very gentle and 
feminine, and delicately graceful in all her move- 
ments. As for Walter, he regarded her as the one 
drawback to Mary's society, . that was all. 

There was a brother of the Levinges somewhere 
in the background. A man of whom his own family 
apparently knew very little. Walter Goring had 
seen him once in the old days in Home, when he 
(the brother) had come to his mother's house ; and 
all the inhabitants thereof had knelt down and 



A BEAUTY MAN. 193 

worshipped him. All at least but Mary, who had 
laughed good-humouredly at the grand airs he gave 
himself, and declared him to be "a good fellow 
enough, but incorrigibly lazy.*' ** His handsome 
face . and a commission in the army which he was 
promised, and never got, poor boy, has been his 
bane,'* she had said once to Walter ; " he always 
declares his career was spoilt, . and so won't do 
anything : as if a man had any chance of a ' ca- 
reer * in the army in these piping times of peace," 
she had continued, contemptuously. 

In the days in which she had said this to him, 
Walter Goring had sometimes found it a difficult 
matter to live like a gentleman ; therefore the ques- 
tion had risen naturally to his lips : . 

** What does he do, then ; . how does he manage ? 
Baying against a blight in one's career doesn't 
feed and clothe a man in these days." 

" I don't know how he manages sometimes," she 
replied gravely ; " very hardly . ^very badly, I'm 
afraid. He has about three hundred a year, and 
with that he contrives to quiet his creditors. It's 
very sad to think about, Walter ; for my brother 
Laurence had the elements of something widely 
different to what he is, in him." 

VOL. L 



104 WALTEB 60BING. 

From the day of this conyersation with the light- 
hearted, honest, out-spoken woman, who found 
'' enough in life " in chipping out her own hxr ideas in 
marble, to the date of the Levinges coming to yisit 
him at Goring Place, Walter had never given a 
thought to this brother. But when he saw the 
mother and her daughters there, he remembered 
the missing link ; and asked Mrs. Levinge ** Where 
her son was ; and if she thought he would join 
them?" 

" He's at Baden-Baden, now . he's rather out of 
health," the mother replied. 

" He will come fast enough, if you ask him ; but 
perhaps it will be better to leave him at Baden- 
Baden, in order that his health may be thoroughly 
re-established," Mary said, significantly. 

Then Mrs. Levinge sighed. 

" We have not seen each other for a long time." 

And that sigh decided Walter. 

** I'll write and invite him at once," he said ; and 
the smiles of the old lady, who had been like a mo- 
ther to him in Bome, blinded him to the expression 
of regret on the face of the daughter. 

Those were very pleasant days at Goring Place. 
September was upon them by the time things were 



A BEAUTY MAN. 195 

tolerably in order; and September in dear old 
Norfolk is passing fair* The master of Goring 
Place was a man of mark in that county-side, let 
him be what he might indiyidaally. Bat Walter 
had the elements of popularity, more than that of 
being well liked and highly thought of in his own 
person and character; and so he was a man of 
great mark, indeed ; and the county distinguished 
him greatly, and sought him much. He brought a 
breath of new life amongst them ; for he was a man 
who had won a name, and created for himself inte- 
rests in a vastly different sphere. His house pro- 
mised to be the resort of more amusing people than 
ever the majority of his brother county magnates 
had witnessed gathered together in the country be- 
fore. Moreover he was young, sufficiently hand- 
some, wealthy, and in a capital position. No won- 
der the county thought kind things of him, for in 
that land were many daughters. 

When September set in, and with it shooting- 
parties, the day life of some of the lady-guests at 
Goring Place was a trifle duller than before. Wal- 
ter was an enthusiastic sportsman, and the game 
had been well preserved ; so that he was about in 
the stubble and turnip fields of the home-farm and 

2 



196 WALTER GOBIK6. 

Lmd adjoining for many hours ereiy day. During 
these hours, Daisy practised singing assiduously, 
away from all the rest, in h^ own sitting-room ; 
and Mrs. Walsh and Mary Leyinge drove about in 
a little pony-chaise, and were dull. 

But the evenings made up for the corajwurativc 
barrenness of the days. The gardens had always 
been kept up well ; and now, under the new rule, 
they seemed to be in fuller perfection than before. 
The croquet* ground was a marvellous croquet- 
ground, considering how new it was; and they 
always found two or three good players amongst the 
men who came home to dine at Goring Place, after 
shooting with its owner all day. When darkness 
fell, tod croquet could be no longer played, it was 
always agreeable to two or three of the party at 
least to wander about in the gardens ; and for the 
rest, who preferred the lounges in the drawing- 
room, there was Daisy's voice. 

It was even more agreeable when Laurence &e- 
vinge came. He had not at all the air of a man 
addicted to reviling his fate, or indeed of thinking 
it anything save a particularly enviable and agree- 
able one. He came straight away from Baden- 
Baden, immediately on receipt of Walter's letter, in 



A BEAUTY MAN. 197 

a most accommodating way; and they were all . 
save perhaps his sister Mary . uncommonly glad 
that he did so, for he infused new life and interest 
into the gathering. 

He was as handsome as a star. Wonderfully 
handsome, with wavy golden hair, dark-grey eyes 
fringed with long black lashes, and a face that 
might have been cut in a cameo, it was so classically 
correct. A marvellous face, in its tender grace and 
perfect beauty : a face that expressed such worlds of 
feeling, eyes that spoke such volumes of passion, even 
when their owner was but asking for a cup of tea. 
' He was an idle, but withal an accomplished, young 
Apollo. He despised his sisters, and his sisters' 
work . gracefully deriding the elder one for not 
having demolished Miss Hosmer, and the younger one 
for not having distinguished herself as much as Miss 
Faithful. He had no sympathy with women who 
tried to " do anything save look pretty and dress 
tastefully, and sing,*' he said ; and Daisy heard him 
say it^ and Daisy liked him for the speech. 

He had a voice, and a guitar, . the former is fre- 
quently a curse to a man, and the latter to his 
friends. But neither was considered in the light of 
other than a boon at Goring Place. Daisy and he 



198 WALTEE GOBINO. 

sang together constantly, and the evenings were 
pleasanter than ever for all parties; for the in- 
cidentals improved their minds with the two 
Levinges, and Walter's hands not being so full, 
he had more time at his disposal and that of his 
sympathetic-souled goddess. Altogether the even- 
ings were pleasanter even than those which they had 
passed before Laurence Levinge left Baden-Baden. 

Soon a change was wrought in the morning's pro- 
gramme. Mr. Levinge paid great court to the 
grand beauty, and told her it was a great mistake, 
and worthy of awkward-souled Englishmen, to 
remove themselves from female influence, and go 
after the partridges, as they did for hours alone 
daily. 

" If you can propose a remedy we will try it,'* she 
replied, graciously; *^but bear one thing in mind, 
it must not be at the cost of giving up your sport. 
Men in the house all day are a bore. " 

"But couldn't you come and reward our feats 
of prowess and skill by bringing us our luncheor^ ? 
I'll arrange it. Mary and you shall drive down to 
some sylvan glade, near to the scene of our last 
shots, before one o'clock each day ; by that means 
we shall combine pic-nic and partridge-shooting,. 



A BBAUTT MAN, 199 

the 8oIe outdoor amusements that are indigenous to 
the land of my birth." 

" I agree to it, Mr. Levinge ; and you shall sing 
to us under green trees, if you will." 

But he had an aversion to making himself ridi^ 
culous ; so, feeling that a guitar and a shooting- 
jacket did not go well together, he declined plea- 
suring her in this one particular. Then she said-^^ 

" You have provided for Miss Levinge and my- 
self; how about your sister Sybil and Miss Goring?" 

" My sister SybU is out of place in any fresh or 
natural situation ; let her sit at home and pour out 
her desires for her sex making itself odious at five 
shillings a column. As for Miss Daisy, can't she 
come with you on horseback, if she mustn^t be left 
behind?" 

" You know she never is left behind," Mrs. Walsh 
replied, coldly; "Mr. Goring makes his ward of 
due account" 

" Or undue account ! Well, it's his whim to do 
so ; therefore I suppose we may take it for granted 
that the Daisy must not be left out in any of our 
small schemes. At any rate you'll help me to bear 
the burden and heat of the days that are to come in 
the turnip-fields, won't you ? "/ 



200 WALTER GORING. 

" If Mr. Goring finds the plan good I shall see no' 
ohjection to it; I have nothing else to do all the 
mornings," she replied. She meant to make tiie 
concession, to grant the favour he asked of her; 
but she did not want to make it too flattering to 
him. He was agreeable enough, and had a great air 
of devotion. But she knew that Walter Goring was 
worth a hundred of Laurence Levinge. 

For awhile, . ^it was late one afternoon when this 
conversation took place, . ^he lounged on a rug at 
the feet of his sister Mary and Mrs. Walsh. He 
reclined with his hands clasped under his head and 
his face upturned towards them. It was a won- 
derful face ! His sister felt the wonderful beauty 
of it, and took mental notes concerning it . notes 
which she resolved to turn to account when she got 
back to the dear old studio in Borne. And Mrs. 
Walsh looked down into it also, and thought that, 
even were she free, that was not the face which she 
should care to see bowing before her shrine ! But 
she sat in a very easy chair, and he misunderstood 
her. When he rose, it was to saunter into the con- 
servatory and get a pale buff rose, which Miss 
Goring wore at dinner. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

A STOBM AT GOBING PLACE. 

All this time there had been no communication 
worth mentioning between the inhabitants of The 
Hurst and Goring Place. About a fortnight after 
Walter had come (Jown with the Walshes a gentle- 
man had ridden up, and, hearing that ** Master was 
out," had left a stalwart card bearing the name of 
"Mr. H. Omry Fellowes ; " and three days after 
this, Walter had ridden over to The Hurst and left 
his card. But there intercourse had ended. 

Mr. H. Omry Fellowes*s visit proved one thing, 
and that was, that the right-of-way question, which 
had been a vexed one with the last generation, was 
not going to stand in the way of his friendship with 
the new-comer. Mr. Goring was very glad of this, 
when he thought of it at all ; for all men's tongues 
wagged in praise of ** Fellowes of The Hurst." 
" He was a thoroughly good fellow,*' everybody 



802 WALTER GORING. 

said ; " it was only a pity that he didn't marry, and 
send things along a bit faster at The Hurst than 
he could do under the supervision of his mother 
and maiden sister;" boih of whom were sternly 
set against innovation of every sort, and were 
consequently not reputed lively. At last Walter 
Goring wrote and asked his neighbour at The 
Hurst to give them the pleasure of his company 
at a battue they were going to have in a certain 
famous cover on the Goring Place estate. For 
answer he received a message from Miss Fellowes 
to the effect that ''her brother was staying at 
Brighton." 

Walter's efforts to educate and improve Daisy 
had ceased utterly. For his own part he would 
have been well content to take her as she was 
socially . he found her very charming ; but he felt 
strongly that something must be done for her, or 
his conscience would not acquit him of having, in 
a measure, been false to the important trust which 
his uncle had reposed in him. In fact, he made 
up his mind that, when this party broke up, Daisy 
must be sent somewhere to be guarded safe and 
sure for four years. Then ! God only knew what 
would become of her and him. 



A STORM AT GORINil PLACE. 208 

The guest, Laurence Levinge, was but a very 
little way behind the host in popular opinion. For 
all his delicate beauty, and, at first sight, rathler 
slight and effeminate appearance, he was a keen 
sportsman . a splendid shot . a daring rider . a 
first-rate cricketer. At first, when the country 
gentlemen met him in Walter Goring's drawing- 
room ; when they saw him lounging about on big 
rugs like a lazy boy of the south, and heard him 
singing impassioned songs in a language they could 
not understand to the tinkling of a guitar : when 
they saw and heard these things, at first they were 
tempted to despise him. But when they saw the 
manner in which he brought his birds down; 
when they marked that no number of turnip-fields 
fatigued him ; above all, when they saw the way in 
which he handled a refractory colt, to the purchase 
of which Walter had committed himself, they 
altered their opinion of Laurence Levinge. Alto- 
gether, what with his singing and his shooting, and 
his style in general, as exhibited both to men and 
women, Mr. Levinge was in excellent repute in and 
around Goring Place. 

At last one morning, when Walter was in the 
gun-room, with his. belt on his shoulder and his 



204 WALTER GORING. 

pointers at his feet, waiting for Laurence to come 
and pick up his piece and go out with him, Mary 
L^vinge came into the room. 

" Where's Laurence ? " she asked. 

" I don't know ; I'm waiting for him." 

"Walter," she began quietly, "you and I have 
always talked to one another as two human beings, 
unhampered by the reflection that they are of 
opposite sexes, may talk. I hardly know why I have 
hesitated to say to you before that I'm sorry you 
asked my brother here, but I have hesitated ; he's 
an unscrupulous man (I fear) about women." 

" What makes you say this to me, now ? " he 
asked, hurriedly. 

" This . he sings too often and too sweetly to 

your ward, and " she paused, and her frank 

face was flooded with colour as she went on, " and 
he would never marry her under any circumstances, 
therefore his songs are bad fgr her." 

" But, Mary, she sees nothing of him save when 
Mrs. Walsh and you are with her; and as to 
his songs," he proceeded, with a little twinge of 
jealousy, " they're principally directed to Mrs. 
Walsh." 

Miss Levinge shook her head. 



A STORM AT GORING PLAGE. 205 

"In reality, I do observe these things so very 
little/* she said, earnestly; "but t had a feeling 
against Laurence coming here from the first. 'It 
seems a bad thing to say, for his presence always 
gives my poor mother the purest pleasure. Young 
girls are not given to over caution, remember ; and 
Laurence is not one to be tender to carelessness. 
My brother has a very winning exterior, and a very 
cold heart; don't test Daisy too hard. Here he 
comes." 

Almost as she spoke, Laurence sauntered into 
the gun-room. He smiled with his eyes a little 
superciliously when he saw his sister, and asked, . 

" What, Mary I has your stay at Goring Place 
revived your old taste for fire-arms ? " 

She looked at him steadily, not scornfully at all ; 
but down upon him, as though he were something 
infinitely weaker than herself. 

" Had I ever the taste ? I'd forgotten it." 

" What brought you here, then ? Goring, you 
don't seem to have a corner in the house that's 
sacred from the women . at least, from those who 
have emancipated themselves. Mrs. Walsh and 
your cousin do know when we have had enough of 
them." 



I 



206 WALTER GORINa. 

" Scarcely civil to your sister," Mary said, laugh- 
ing. Then she left them, and went in search of 
Mrs. Walsh, whom she found alone in the drawing- 
room. 

" Has Laurence been here, Mrs. Walsh ? " she 
asked ; and Mrs. Walsh replied, . 

" No ; I think he has been out all the morning 
with Mr. Goring :" and Mary Levinge was strength- 
ened in her conviction. 

That night Walter broached the subject to Mrs. 
Walsh. 

" Have you observed anything with Daisy and 
Levinge ? " 

"With Daisy and Levinge?*' she repeated after 
him, in unfeigned surprise. " No." 

"Mary was speaking to me about them this 
morning." 

" Eather premature and uncalled-for interference 
on her part, I think,*' Mrs. Walsh remarked. 
"What did she say?" 

" Oh ! she only fancied that he was rather atten- 
tive to Daisy. I hardly know what she said, but 
the drift of her observations was, that I had been 
injudicious in bringing them together.'* 

Mrs. Walsh laughed ; it did seem very absurd to 



A STORM AT GOKENG PLAGE. 207 

her that Mr. Levinge should be accused of breathing 
or meaning soft nothings to Daisy Goring. 

" He never pays her the slightest attention,*' she 
said, decidedly ; and Walter whispered, 

" He makes up for it then by paying plenty of it 
to you; doesn't he now, confess?" and in his 
anxiety to get a confession from Mrs. Walsh, he 
forgot Daisy for a time. 

The usual arrangement when they went out for 
long drives was, that Mrs. Walsh was seated in 
front with Walter, and Daisy and Laurence Levinge 
were perched on behind, together. But it was a 
very luxurious kind of trap . a phaeton dog-cart in 
fact . and Laurence was accustomed to lounge in it 
with much ease and grace; with rather too much 
ease Walter thought, sometimes, for Mr. Levinge 
made it convenient to lean over and monopolise a 
larger share of Mrs. Walshes attention than belonged 
to him by right. On these occasions, however, it 
was satisfactory to observe that Daisy was very 
blithe and self-possessed, quite as much so as when 
her cavalier returned to his allegiance. On the 
whole, Walter felt that dear honest Mary had been 
mistaken. 

They made themselves tolerably well acquainted 



208 WALTER GORING. 

with the county in this way, driving long distances 
in the afternoon, dining, and returning in the cool 
of the evening. Occasionally the dinners that they 
got under these circumstances were terrible mis- 
takes, . country inns, as might be expected, falling 
very far short of the Goring Place cuisine. But 
the drives home in the cool evenings more 
than compensated for this ; they one and all 
agreed that "there was no mistake about the 
drives." 

It was a lazy, beautiful time. The women and 
the weather were both so fair, that no wonder 
Walter declared that after each return he felt as if 
he had finished another canto of a poem. How Mr. 
Walsh and the Levinges felt was not mentioned. 
Equally satisfied, perhaps, for they had, as Lau- 
rence said, "a great pull on the others in the 
matter of dinners." It was a happy, lazy, beautiful 
time ; quite an operatic air was thrown over it 
frequently, by Daisy's and Mr. Levinge's voices, as 
they drove rapidly along at night through some of 
those solitary, unfrequented Norfolk roads. Visitors 
in country houses, that stood a little way back from 
the road, and were unseen in the darkness, often 
rubbed their eyes and fancied they must be dream- 



A STOBM AT GORING PLAGE. 

ihg, when bits of Famt came floating upon their 
ears, sung in a style that was a staggering surprise 
down there. Daisy gloried in the "jewel song;" 
to tell the truth, she was much given to singing it 
before her glass, and going through all the business 
in a way that closely resembled Adelina Patti*s. 
Mr* Levinge told her that no Faust . not even 
Mephistopheles himself . ^would have left her, had 
she been the Marguerite ; and Daisy listened to the 
flattery and sang the song over again more joyously 
than before. 

At last Mary Levinge told Walter that she had 
heard of a lady at Brighton, the widow of a clergy- 
man, who would be glad to take charge of Daisy. 
The lady was a Mrs. Osborne, and she had a 
daughter about Daisy's age, who would share Daisy's 
studies. They were people of assured respectability, 
and. Miss Levinge added, " from what I gather from 
the friend who writes to me about it, Daisy won't be 
dull there, and will be safe." 

" It's all very delightful, and you're a dear good 
creature, Mary," Walter replied; "the only draw- 
back to it is the telling her that she's to go." 

" She knows very well that she can't stay here 
when Mrs. Walsh and the rest of us leave; there- 

VOL. I. p 



210 WALTER GORING. 

fore, the sooner she knows when she's to go and 
where she's to go, the better," Mary urged. 

" No doubt . all the same, the telling her won't be 
pleasant," Walter replied, and he was right; the 
telling her was far from pleasant. 

He deferred the evil day until there was a talk 
one morning of the Walshes being compelled to 
. return to town for a short time ; then he took the 
plunge. He followed Daisy straight away from the 
breakfast-table to her own sitting-room, and when 
she looked up at him in surprise at his presence 
there at that hour, he commenced at once. 

"Daisy, can you be ready to start with Mrs. 
Walsh if she goes the day after to-morrow, do you 
think ? I want to take you to Brighton for a time, 
and it will be better for us to go up as far as Lon- 
don with the Walshes." 

" Yes. I can be ready ; but ^you don't mean 

to leave me at Brighton by myself, do you ? " 

** Certainly not. You'll be with some very nice 
people . ^the Osbomes . and I shall see you often." 

She heaved a great sigh, and sat half round on 
her chair, clasping her arms over the back of it, and 
leaning her face down upon them. 

" Daisy, you're not crying ? " 



A STOBM AT GOBlNGt PLACE. 211 

There was no answer, but he knew that she was 
crying ; and a malefactor's sensations are agreeable 
in comparison with his, as, he felt himself the cause 
of those tears. 

** You must see, dear, that this must be," he said, 
tenderly. In spite of his clear-sightedness as to 
her follies and shortcomings, he was getting very 
fond of this girl* Of what nature the fondness was 
he could not determine yet ; but he was conscious 
that it was an increasing fondness and a genuine 
one. 

" I don't see that it must be at all," she sobbed ; 
*^here at my age to be sent away from my only home 
and my only friend to some old harridan of a woman, 
who'll drive me mad. I thought wards always lived 
with their guardians. I thought guardians were 
the proper people to look after their wards." 

"If I were older " he began, but she inter- 
rupted him to say, 

" Oh, stuff and nonsense, Walter. If you were 
older very likely I shouldn't care to stay. As it is, 
if you are to be like a brother to me, as you once 
said you would be, there can be no place so proper 
for me as Goring Place. If I'm ever to feel that 
you're my brother and best friend and guardian, 

p 2 



212 WALTER GORING. 

you mustn't try to teach me that there can be any 
harm in my staying here with you alone," 

" That*s not the point, you little casuist. There 
would be no harm in it, Heaven knows; but I can*t 
have it questioned even. Don't think all the pain 
of parting will be on your side. I shall miss you, 
Daisy.'* 

He spoke very tenderly, but she only gnawed 
abstractedly at the back of her hand, as it rested 
upon the chair, and gazed steadfastly at the floor. 
He repeated the last part of his sentence, ' 

** Don't you think I shall miss you, Daisy ? " 

" Oh, yes ! I dare say . I mean yes, dear Walter ;* 
but you won't hurry me off, just because Mrs. Walsh 
is going. Let me wait till the party breaks up.'' 

" The Levinges are going soon. No, no, it will 
be better for you to travel up with Mrs. Walsh." 

" I feel as if you were turning me out. I never 
wanted to be brought here : it's too hard that I 
should be turned out." 

" Now you talk like a child," he said, gravely. 

" Walter," she lifted her head and spoke very 
rapidly, "if there are only two or three dull women 
at this place where you re going to put me, I shall 
go mad." 



A STORM AT GORING PLACE. 213 

" Nonsense ! You shall have the chestnut, Daisy. 
When you feel the blue devils coming on, try a 
gallop on the downs." 

" But in the house . in the house with dull 
women, after having been so happy here. Walter, 
how ean you do it ? ^' 

She began to sob aloud now^ raining her tears 
down in big clear drops, as a child does. Once 
more he was oppressed with the malefactor's sensa- 
tions. 

" Daisy, you distress me cruelly, and I know the 
whole time that I'm almost as childish as yourself 
to be distressed by such folly." 

" It's your Mrs. Walsh has made you do this. I 
know it ; she hates me." 

" You know very well that Mrs. Walsh has nothing 
whatever to do with it," he said, angrily. He began 
to feel that as a guardian he was in a very undigni- 
fied position ; his ward was putting him on his 
defence in a most extraordinary way. 

" Then it's his sister." 

"Whose sister?'* . 

" It's that Miss Levinge : she hates me too.'' 

" Feeling that they all hate you, I wonder that 
you care to stay with them any longer." . 



214 WALTER 60BIXG. 

Daisy cleared up and laughed. 

" I rather like it, for I know the reason why," shfe 
said simply. " Mrs. Walsh isn't so anxious to see 
me safely out of this house from pure love of me ; 
there, dear cousin "Walter . don*t be angry with me . 
I'm only vexed with her because I'm afraid you 
like her better thiem you do me.'' 

She got up and clasped her hands over his 
shoulder, and bent her head down till it rested on 
his breast: and it would have been diflScult to de- 
cide whether it was pure friendship, or brotherly 
love, or something else, which made him press her 
closely to him for an instant, touch her forehead 
with his lips, and then put her away from him 
hastily, as he answered . 

" If I didn^t like you so well, my darling, perhaps 
I shouldn't be so anxious to send you away from 
me-" 

Whatever the feeling which had actuated the 
speech and gesture, certain it is that his heart had 
throbbed violently while making them; that he 
had been unable to suppress, but every other sign 
of emotion he had sedulously hidden from her. 

When he left her, he took two or three turns 
by himself> in the corridor^ before he rejoined his 



A STORM AT GORING PLACE. 215 

friends below. He needed a little time to himself, 
in order to take a careful survey of the dangers 
against which it most behoved him to be on guard, 
should another storm arise. For, though Daisy had 
not been so tempestuous as he had anticipated she 
would have been, he was conscious that there had 
been a storm at Goring Place. 

" By Jove, I mustn't get fond of the girl ; yet," 
he muttered td himself^ ''for her own sake and 
mine too, I shall be glad when she's gone, for she 
has a fascination, though my goddess can't see it. 
Mary must have been mistaken about her brother : 
the Daisy could never play a double part." 

The Daisy meanwhile was crouching on her sofa, 
sobbing and crying as if her heart would break. 
The poor, fair, little girl's grief was genuine enough, 
whatever the cause of it. There seemed to be no 
light in heaven or earth for her. She was going 
away from all the joy of her life to Brighton and 
black misery. 

" Just a little longer . ^if Walter would only let 
me stay a little longer, it would be all right," she 
moaned aloud. ''It's that Mrs. Walsh, I know. 
Won't I make her smart going up." 



CHAPTEB XV. 

A TURNING POINT IN THE ROAd! 

There was no reprieve for Daisy. The Walshes 
were obliged to go up to town two days after Walter 
had mooted the Brighton plan to his cousin. They 
were obliged to go up, but they intended returning 
shortly ; which fact no one thought worth mention- 
ing to Miss Goring. 

Those two last days were very miserable ones. 
Daisy adopted an air of injured rectitude and re- 
signation to wrong that shook Walter's faith in the 
wisdom of his own design several times. " Cursed . 

be the social forms that err from honest Nature's L 

rule !*' There was a lack of broad human justice, 
he half believed, in his banishing this young girl 
from what she had herself piteously declared to be 
her only home and her only friend. 

The morning came, and the hour for starting 



A TUKNING POINT IN THE ROAD ! 217 

arrived. They had sat longer than usual at the 
breakfast-table, because it was not worth while to 
rise up and seek for something fresh to do before 
the carriage came round. So they were still seated 
at the wrecks of the morning feast when the crunch- 
ing of wheels in front of the house announced that 
the hour was come. 

Mrs. Walsh got up and handed one light travelling 
cloak to her husband, and a black Bussian-leather 
bag to Walter, and then proceeded to take leave. 
She shook hands with Mrs. and the Misses Levinge 
as the majority of women do shake hands with the 
majority of their own sex ; and then she turned and 
extended her hand to Laurence Levinge as a boon or 
a blessing, and he took it and bent over it as a 
devotee over a relic, a mother over her child, or any- 
one over anything that is most loved and valued. 
If this woman was a flirt at all, she was a Queen of 
Flirts, and she never came off her throne for any 
man save her husband . and my hero. 

It was Daisy's turn next* She looked like a 
white rabbit with her pale face and her red eyes, as 
she went the round rapidly, just saying " Good-bye," 
and hastily extending a slim hand to each, which, as 
;$oon as it was touched, she even more hastily with- 



218 WALTER GOHllra. 

drew. At least she strove to make this the whole 
of her farewells; but some maternal instinct ani- 
mated Mrs. Levinge, and she drew the sorrowful, 
angry, pale face down, and kissed it with a " God 
bless you, my child ! " 

While his mother had been doing this, Mr. 
Levinge moved into the doorway; so it was in 
passing out into the hall that Daisy took her leave 
of him, and no one saw it. Then he went out and 
helped both ladies into the carriage, and spoke a 
few words to Walter about using the horses while 
the latter was away ;' but his eyes never met Daisy's 
once, and Daisy looked both sad and savage. 

When the carriage drove off, Laurence Levinge 
returned to the dining-room, and joined his mother 
and sisters at the window. Suddenly, as the turn 
in the drive concealed the ones who were going 
from their view, he laid his hand on Mary's arm and 
whispered to her alone. 

" It's much better that she should go. I don't 
know what I might have been let in for if she had 
stayed." 

"Do you mean that? Are you speaking the 
truth ? " she replied. 
' " Yes, on my honour I am," he answered ; and he 



A TUKNING POINT IN THE ROAD ! 219 

was at the time. Despite his long grey eyes, his 
idleness, and his exceeding beauty, it was not the 
business of his life to look about seeking whom he 
might devour. When he wrought evil, he wrought 
it as most men do in real life . ^unpremeditat- 
ingly: in fact, "'twas want of thought" . ^the old 
story ! 

The fresh morning air, combined with the utter 
inability youth has of being very miserable for long 
about anything, told on Daisy before they had been 
an hour in the train ; and then she began to put her 
plan of making Mrs. Walsh femart into execution. 
They had the carriage to themselves, which circum- 
stance favoured her considerably. First, she com- 
menced a light fire of allusions to what Walter had 
said to her " the other day, you know, when you 
came and sat with me in the morning." Now Mrs. 
Walsh had not heard of this visit to Daisy^s special 
domain which Walter had paid; therefore at the 
first mention of it, she did prick up her ears. 
This Daisy observed, and, fired by her success, she 
jDoade some bolder strokes. "Dear Walter, when 
did you say you'd come to Brighton ?'* 

" I don't think I fixed any time," Walter replied. 
He could ot remember having said anything about 



220 WALTER GORING. 

it ; but Daisy seemed to think he had> and to find 
pleasure in the thought. 

" Oh ! you did, Walter ; Mrs. Walsh, isn't it a 
shame that those Miss Levinges should have more 
of him than you and I ? '* She put her beautiful, 
flexible, intelligent-looking hand on his arm as she 
spoke ; and Walter, though he knew Mrs. Walsh 
would strongly disapprove of it all, could not do 
other than take the hand in his, and press it kindly. 
In answer to Daisy's remark, Mrs. Walsh merely 
moved her head round slowly one half inch, in order 
to look more fully at her audacious interrogator. 
Daisy was feeling almost happy by this time ; she 
put her head back a little, and met Mrs. Walsh's 
bright cold eyes defiantly with her own impertinent 
ones of cobalt blue. 

" Shall we keep him between us, Mrs. Walsh . 
keep him constantly at Boehampton and Brighton ? 
Let me see, how much of him shall I graciously give 
up to you ? *' 

"You silly child," Walter muttered . and yet, 
though he called her " silly," he was not ill pleased. 

" No, I'm not," Daisy replied ; ** you're to be every- 
thing to me, you know. Remember our compact." 

When she said that, she had the felicity of seeing 



A TUBNING POINT IN THE BOAD ! 221 

Mrs. Walsh give Walter a reproachful, almost an 
indignant^ look. Daisy did not know how this might 
act upon him, so she determined to retire gracefully 
from the contest while there could be no doubt as 
to her being victor. Accordingly she took her hand 
away from his, and turned round to look for a land- 
mark in the country they were passing thi'ough, so 
that when she came back she might know every now 
and then exactly how far she was from dear old 
Goring Place. 

They parted at the Shoreditch Station : the 
Walshes were bound for home, Walter and his 
charge for Brighton. 

** You'll stay at Brighton to-night, I suppose ? " 
Mrs. Walsh said to him when he was shaking hands 
with her. 

'' Probably.'' 

" But you'll be up to-morrow ? " 

" Yes, most assuredly .'' 

" Then come to us, won't you ? " 

" I will, and I hope to find that Ealph will be free 
to go back to Goring Place at once.'' 

She bent her head forward a little. 

'* You know how truly I am your friend. Are you 
in love with your cousin, or not ?*' 



222 WALTER GORING. 

" No . ^I dont know/* he said, laughing. " Time 
enough to think of that." 

'* There's not time enough ; she hasn't a particle 
of real feeling ; she will love one man as soon as 
another. In fact, she'll never care for any one hut 
herself; hut she'll make you think she cares for 
you in a very short time. Now do he careful, sir/' 
and she held up a warning finger to him, partly in 
sport, hut a great deal more in earnest. 

" She's generally right, and she's always the 
dearest creature in the world," Walter thought when 
they had separated and he was alone with his 
cousin; " hut I think she's wrong ahout the Daisy." 

The Daisy and he had not at all a bad time of it 
going down to Brighton. She was very sisterly and 
very sweet ; she gave way to no expressions of pet- 
tishness or wilfulness. She promised to " make the 
best of things at the Osbornes*." She adored him 
.verbally . for having given her the chestnut. She 
took a most astounding turn, and declared Mrs. 
Walsh to be " as nice as she was beautiful." She 
spoke of her dead father in an altered strain that 
touched Walter immensely. ** I've been so much 
better about him. I've thought so much more 
kindly of him since I knew you, Walter/' she "said. 



A TURNING POINT IN THE ROAD ! 223 

" I was a little fiend that night you came to me 
first. But then I had no one to love, and no one to 
love me. I have found some one since/' she added, 
in almost a whisper. Finally, as they were nearing 
Brighton, she startled him by asking suddenly, 
" And what is to become of me when I can't stay at 
these Osbomes' any longer? It isn't to be my 
home for life, I suppose ? Where am I to go 
next?" 

" I can't teU you yet, Daisy* I must not tell you 
yet. Your home for life ? No, no!" 

" For how many years, then ? Oh ! do tell 
me. 

" Perhaps for two or three . perhaps for a little 
longer. I can't tell you, dear ; don't ask me." 

"For two or three years ?*' she cried ; " I shall 
never stand it." And then she lapsed into tears 
and declarations of perfect indifference as to what 
became of her, if she was to be left with " odious 
women for two or three years." 

It was in vain that Walter placed before her the 
possibility of their not being odious; equally in 
vain was it to point out to her the admiration ex- 
cited by " her own horse," when the chestnut was 
taken out at the station. Daisy wept herself into 



224 WALTEB GORING. 

the semblance of a white rabbit, and refused to be 
comforted. 

Mrs. Osborne lived in a detached villa just out of 
the town . a pretty house, with clematis, and jasmine, 
and rose-bushes, and ear-wigs climbing all over it. 
She and her daughter received Daisy warmly and 
kindly ; and Daisy eyed them resentfully and some- 
what scornfully, as became their respective posi- 
tions. The elder lady satisfied Walter thoroughly 
as to her entire fitness for the task she had taken 
upon herself; and he satisfied her thoroughly as to 
the manner in which he would recompense her for 
her trouble. And while the elders were arranging 
matters, the daughter of the house strove to ingra- 
tiate herself with Daisy, and failed ignominiously in 
doing so. 

When Walter Goring was going away, Daisy made 
her last request. 

" You'll come and see me to-morrow, Walter ? " 

" Yes, for half-an-hour, dear. I must be in town 
by two o'clock." 

" Oh, Walter ! no, don't ; if you'll only stay and 
ride with me to-morrow^ evening, I will settle beauti- 
fully; but I won't else?" 

She felt convinced that Mrs. Walsh had asked 



i 



i 



A TURNING POINT IN THE ROAD ! 225 

him to go back, and she did sigh to show Mrs. 
Walsh that she too had a little iniluenee. 

"Daisy, dear, I want to see my publisher to- 
morrow ; I can't stay till the evening. Go for your 
ride ; you'll enjoy it just as much without me." 

She clasped her hands over his shoulders as she 
had done the other morning at Goring Place. He 
did not press her to his heart this time, because 
Mrs. and Miss Osborne were in the room . trying 
not to look at them . ^but he felt strongly inclined to 
do so. 

" It's only one day I ask you to give me, Walter ; 
do, do, do." 

She bent her head down for one moment, and let 
it touch his shoulder as she made her plea. He 
could have made no other answer than he did. 

" I will, my darling." 

Then he said good-bye, and walked away hastily, 
thinking to himself as he walked, " The little witch 
nearly sends my resolutions to the devil when she 
seems so fond of me ; if she is really . and remains 
so . ^it will be all right in the end : I have only to 
see a little more of her to settle my business." 

The next morning he spent partly in the villa 
garden with Daisy, and partly in Mrs. Osborne's 

VOL. I. Q 



226 WALTER GORING. 

drawing-room, where Daisy sang to him ; and in the 
evening he got the best horse a livery-stable could 
supply, and went for a ride, with his cousin. They 
started about half an hour before Mr. Fello^ves 
and Charlie St. John went out for that ride in the 
middle of which we left them several chapters 
back. 

It will be remembered that when we p^ed from 
them, Mr. fellowes had just taken the dangerous 
leap which all men must take sooner or later, how- 
ever averse they may be to it. He had asked a girl 
to be his wife; and the girl was on the point of 
giving her answer. Perhaps, though, exception will 
be taken to this statement. The hypercritical may 
aver that he had not asked her to be his wife; that 
he had, in fact, only asked her to give him permis- 
sion to indulge in the sketchy pleasure of loving her 
all his life. But this with him meant everything, 
and she knew it. To all intents and purposes he 
had asked her to marry him. But she paused, 
being doubtful . not of him or of his meaning . ^but 
of herself; and he, thinking that he had not made 
himself sufficiently clear, went on. 

" Don't you think I should make you happy, 
Charlie ? Before Heaven, if you only take me, Pll 



A TXTRNINO POINT IN THE ROAD ! 227 

try ftll my life with all my heart ; I may not have 
shown the love I have for you as many men would ; 
but no man could love you better, my pet" 

His hand was on her wrist still ; strong and stal- 
wart as he was, his touch was tender as a woman's : 
it must have been a very good love that so softened 
him. She felt that it must be this ; she remem- 
bered the arid life that was before her if she refused 
. ^the hopeless prospect ; she remembered his con- 
stant care of her . his kindness. There was the 
genuine ring of the metal about his pleading now. 
All these things flashed through her mind in a 
moment, and she said . 

" If you think I shall make you happy . ^I'll try." 

" God bless you, my darling ! " he whispered, but 
he did not seal the compact after the manner of 
lovers who take the leap in a drawing-room when 
no one is near ; and she thanked the kind star of 
her destiny that he did not do so, for before his 
whispered thanks were well uttered they turned into 
a lovely little bit of road, and there she saw . 
What! 

Such a picture . such a scene. She never forgot 
it. Its beauty, its painfulness, its mystery, its 
poetry, were all stamped in indelible colours on 

q2 



228 WALTEB GOBING. 

her mind in the first moment in which she looked 
upon it. That nndefinable sensation of having seen 
all this and felt all this before, either in a dream or 
in a pre-existent state, came over her, as Mr. Fel- 
lowes moved his hand from her wrist, and thej 
rode on and looked upon this scene. 

High overhead the trees met in a grand natural 
arch, shutting out nearly all view of the sky for a 
considerable length of road, . all view of the sky, 
but not of the sun. To the west the trees were 
flooded as it were with light; each leaf seemed 
tipped with radiance, and golden fragments fell 
down shimmering on the ground with every move- 
ment of the branches overhead. While towards 
them . from the other end of this nave of nature, 
over the rich yellow loamy road on which the frag- 
ments of gold fell shimmering in the fullest light 
that the setting sun could throw upon them . there 
came another pair of riders : and the one was a fair 
yellow-haired girl on a splendid chestnut horse, 
whose every movement brought out some graceful 
curve in her figure ; and the man was the same who 
some weeks before had told Charlie St. John, that 
even for women there were paths to be trodden and 
goals to be gained that were well worth treading 



A TUBNING POINT IN THE ROAD ! 229 

and gaining. And her heart sank down with a dull 
thud, as she bent her head in acknowledgment of 
Walter Goring's bow, and remembered fully and 
clearly, and for the first time since her fever, all 
Walter Goring's suggestions and advice. There 
had been another life for her, had she sought it. 
There had been a means of escape from the mean 
monotony which so sorely weighted her. But she 
had been oblivious of them ; and now ! . now it was 
too late ! 



CHAPTER XVI. 



. PBOUD CAPTIVE. 



" Do you know that man ? Who is he ? " Mr. Fel- 
lowes asked, as soon as they were past. 

" I just know him ; it's Mr. Walter Goring, the 
author of .'' 

" Is it ? " he interrupted eagerly. " Why, he's just 
come into a fine property down close to my place. 
I never saw him before " . and Mr. Fellowes turned 
round and leant his hand on his horse's haunch in 
order the better to have another look at his unknown 
neighbour. 

" Good-looking fellow?" he observed, interroga- 
tively, when he came round again; and Charlie 
replied dreamily . 

"Is he?" 

He looked at her anxiously. They were out of 
the shade of the trees by this time ; and in the light 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 231 

he saw that her face was very pale, and that a shade 
had come over her eyes. 

"What is it, Charlie?" he asked pathetically. 

"You don't regret " he stopped, and gave a 

gulp. It was very much to this man that the girl 
to whom he had told his love should love him in 
return. 

" No, no ; please donH say that to me again,*' she 
said, quickly turning her face towards him. " I'll 
tell you what it was, though it's almost too intan- 
gible to tell at all," she went on in a low voice, 
half to herself. 

" Do tell me, Charlie ; you must tell me every- 
thing that troubles you now, my pet." 

She looked kindly and gratefully at him. At the 
same time she rather doubted her own capability of 
doing this. He was not the type of man to whom a 
woman can carry every trouble. However, she said 
now . 

" It is nothing that trouble^ me ; it only set me 
thinking. I'm sure that I have been through that 
bit of roadj and seen the same people, and heard 
the same words, and spoken the same before." 

" I hope not," he said seriously. He could not 
help thinking that it would be rather awkward for 



233 WALTER GORING. 

him if she had done so. .An accepted rival, and 
that rival a duplicate of himself, might prove dis- 
agreeable. 

She laughed. " Oh, it must have been in a 
dream, or in some other life," she said ; " it gives 
you a very queer feeling when it comes over you . 
you donH know what is and what is not." 

"It's the fever has left you weak," he said, en- 
couragingly. He was very matter-of-fact. Without 
having precisely what Mr. Sala calls " beef on the 
brain,'' he had too much solidity there for there to 
be any room for metaphysical speculations. He 
meant most kindly towards Charlie by this sugges- 
tion of his. Kindly ? . he meant it most fondly 
and lovingly: but at the moment she would have 
preferred a silent S3anpathy, . anything, anything, 
rather than this sort of solution of her dreamy 
difficulty. However, she said . 

" I suppose it is that I am very weak indeed ; so 
weak that I really don't think I can stand Bobert 
and Ellen's speeches to-night; will you mind not 
saying anything about it till to-morrow ? " 

But, unlike the majority of men, he did mind 
deferring the annunciation of the bliss that had 
befallen him till the morrow. He did mind it very 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 233 

much indeed. He wanted to make his full rights 
apparent at once, in order that he might claim them 
without fear and without reproach. So he said that 
he thought that it would he more honourable to 
make Mr. Prescott acquainted with what had passed 
without any unnecessary delay. To which Charlie 
assented with a certain feeling that was not exactly 
soreness, but that certainly was not pleasure, that 
she belonged rather less to herself than she had 
done an hour before. 

Unquestionably it was not the courtship . possibly 
it would not be the marriage . of which the girl had 
dreamed. We all do dream about our futures ; and 
if they fall very far short of our dreamings, we can- 
not help coming down to their level with a pang. 
Young womanhood, too, often inclines to the dan- . 
gerous and dubious, rather than to the man who 
proposes an alliance through all time to her after 
knowing her for three weeks, and leaves her not a 
single doubt as to the honourableness of his inten- 
tions. The creature in the clouds . never too cer- 
tain of himself . holds her against the man who 
comes to the fore, and tells her in language about 
which there can be no mistake, that he wants . 
her to be his wife and the manager of his 



284 WALTER GORINQ. 

household, and the legal recipient of alJl his ill 
humours. 

During the ride home, Mr. Fellowes made minute 
jokes against himself; and that feeling of being no 
longer her own "goods and chattels'' came over 
Charlie more strongly than before. She felt herself 
constrained to smile at what he said, whether cause 
for smiling were patent to her or not. She also felt 
that he was watching her, as she before now had 
watched a kitten or a puppy. Further: she re- 
minded herself that henceforth all chance of any- 
thing diflferent to that which she now had was over 
for her. That this man's life and interests and her 
own were one and indivisible through all time from 
this hour. That in future to sigh for novelty would 
be half a crime, and more than half a folly. That 
she was " engaged *' to fulfil every atom of a woman's 
self-abnegating part. That she had shut herself off 
from all chance of change, and so had better . make 
the best of it. 

She came back from her reverie . a reverie in 
which she had heard without heeding many of his 
speeches . just as they were about to re-enter the 
town. She felt that he deserved something different 
from the inattention of the last fifteen minutes 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 236 

before he went in and told her brother-in-law that 
he desired the great boon of herself. 

" Look here,*' she said, reining her horse a little 
closer to his, "as a matter of form, I suppose 
you will tell Robert Prescott what you have told 
me; but I want you to understand that all the 
Robert Prescotts in the world couldn't alter my 
decision." 

If he could but have feigned to accept the 
womanly graciousness of the avowal ? But he could 
not feign ; the graceful gift of doing so was not his. 
He opened his honest blue eyes at her, and said . 

" Why, my dear Charlie, he wishes you to marry 
me. I know that very well.'* 

Then she took the "Major" sharply on the 
curb, with a miserable feeling that he (Mr. Fel- 
lowes, not the " Major ") never would understand 
her. 

Mr. Fellowes carried himself bravely even through 
that awful ordeal . a first evening in the bosom of 
the family of his betrothed. One cannot repress 
a feeling of reverential admiration for the wild gal- 
lantry which carries any man along to this point. 
The preliminary passages are pleasant enough ; all 
things are made so easy to him by the family while 



3»S6 WALTER GORING. 

he is only looking much and saying nothing that 
can be taken hold of. But from the moment that 
he has shown that he knows how to offer his 
paw, he is expected to perform perpetually, and if 
one of the long roll of an engaged man's tricks is 
got through tamely, he is commented upon in no 
very tender spirit by the watchful band of anxious 
friends. A woman's part of the business is not 
fraught with too much bliss ; but a man's must be 
maddening. 

The Prescotts were very kind . odiously kind. 
They averted their eyes whenever he went near her, 
and (Ellen especially) could not restrain their looks 
of disappointment when he failed to avail himself in 
any marked manner of the opportunity thus given. 
Mrs. Prescott told her children to call him " Uncle 
Henry " from the moment the announcement was 
made. So that when Charlie came down after 
taking off her habit, she found him domesticated in 
a manner that was disgusting to her. Moreover, 
Mr. Fellowes looked too rosy under his happiness, 
and smiled too much for good taste. That he 
should have been hungry at supper-time was all 
right enough, and quite in accordance with her own 
sentiments. But he made a merit of his appetite. 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 237 

as if it were something surprising under tHe circum- 
stances . a sort of thing worthy of remark. He 
grew communicative about a spoilt marriage scheme 
of his sister's ; he made jokes about the proverb he 
had become for being "very hard to hit" down 
in his own county. He gave himself little airs of 
ownership with respect to Charlie, telling her what 
she " should " do on the following day, instead of 
asking her what she " would " do. Finally, he ad- 
verted to that fact of having met Walter Goring out 
riding, which has been already chronicled. " And 
he had a remarkably pretty girl with him," he said, 
magnanimously. " I dare say we shall soon have 
her for a neighbour at Goring Place, Charlie ! " 
There is no doubt about it, that when love makes a 
man hilarious, he should be shut up for a time in 
the dark. The risk he runs of making himself 
ridiculous in the light of lamps and love is too great. 
As soon as he was gone that night, Charlie said 
good-night hurriedly, and rushed up to her room. 
She wanted to think about what she had done before 
the remarks of any third person had put the deed 
before her in an evil light. She wanted to think 
about, what she had done. She sadly wanted to get 
some assurance from herself that she had done well. 



238 WALTER OOBING. 

She hoped that she had ; she prayed that she had ; 
she thought that she had ; but she did not know. 

From the commercial point of view, she knew that 
it would be a very good marriage for her. She 
knew very well that man (or woman, for that matter) 
does not live by bread alone, in the station of life to 
which she had been bom. She knew very well that 
she should be a better, a brighter, and more con- 
tented wife to a man who had the wherewithal to 
keep all sordid cares from her than she should 
be to one who had to struggle and strive to do it, 
and who must even then fail. She had no romantic 
notions about love in a cottage, and a platter of 
potato peelings being all-sufficient, if partaken 
of in company with the husband of her heart. 
She knew very well that this was a style of 
thing which would shortly have sapped the founda- . 
tions of any love she might ever have felt. But 
at the same time that she knew all this, she did 
wonder whether "The Hurst" and a plentiful 
supply of the good things of this life would be 
all-sufficient for her through the long years that, in 
the order of things, were yet to be passed by her in 
Henry Fellowes's company. Would these be enough 
for her if Henry Fellowes never got nearer to her 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 

heart thiii he had yet succeeded in doing ? " But 
he's so good and kind, he must" she said to herself ; 
and then she thought " What a life Mr. Goring's 
wife will have ? " for she fell into the error of fancy- 
ing that this man was more in his books than he 
was, and his books never palled upon her. 

Just then a voice asked from the outside of her 
door . 

" May I come in for two minutes, Charlie ? " 

" Yes, for just two minutes ; " and then the door 
was thrown open impatiently, and Miss Charlie 
stood before her gentle, fair, placid sister, with 
streaming damp hair, and a troubled expression of 
countenance. 

" I thought I would just come and speak to you 
before I went to bed." Mrs. Prescott said, com- 
posedly walking on into the room without giving so 
much as a glance at the troubled face of the girl 
who had admitted her. 

" What have you to say at this hour of the night, 
Ellen ? You, who generally crush all my conversa- 
tional efforts after ten o'clock . and it's past mid- 
night now." 

" Robert and I have been talking about you." 

"Naturally," the girl interrupted, pettishly; 



240 WALTER GORING. 

"but put off the recapitulation of what you've 
said till to-morrow . do, please." She paused for 
a moment or two, and then she went on. . " If you 
only knew how tired I am to-night, and how my 
head bums " 

" Does it ? La !" her sister said, pityingly. 

" Does it ? " the girl cried, leaning her arms and 
face down upon the toilet-table, and upsetting a 
scent-bottle as she did so ; " does it ? it does ; and 
my heart and soul are burning too. Now, don't say 
anything, or you'll make me worse." 

Mrs. Prescott gazed for a moment or two at this 
unruly member of her household ; then she glanced 
up at the gas ; the latter was flaring extravagantly, 
so she paused to turn it down before she said, 

" What have you been doing to make your hair 
in such a state ?" 

" Dipping my head in water," her sister replied, 
jumping to her feet as she spoke. " Come, Ellen, 
time's up ; you said for two minutes." 

'* But, Charlie, do listen ; you know how sincerely 
Eobert and I have your good at heart ; he says you 
have been a great flirt, you know, but that now he 
hopes you will alter, and . and . give Mr. Fellowes 
no reason to repent his very hasty offer." 



A PROUD CAPTIVE. 241 

Charlie gave an impatient movement of the 
shoulders. 

" Yes, I have heen what's called a flirt, I sup- 
pose; that is to say there, donH talk to me 

to-night. don't, Ellen, don't." 

She put her arms round her sister's neck as she 
pleaded thus ; she pressed her hot crimson cheek 
agaiijst the fair, round, cool one which was never 
defaced by angry passions. She was very much in 
earnest in her appeal ; but what chance does im- 
passioned earnestness ever stand against dogged 
determination? Mrs. Prescott was one of those 
sweetly-amiable women who invariably contrive to 
have the last word. 

" That is to say. what, Charlie ? " 

" Why, you and Robert have both applied the term 
to me, and you're always right ; but do drop the past 
now. What is the use of making me feel myself a 
miserable sinner? Mr. Fellowes is so good and 
kind . and . all that . to me, that of course I shall 
be the same to him." 

" I hope so, Charlie," the married sister replied ; 
" but you'll have to alter in many things, dear." 

"I'm too old a dog to learn new tricks," 
Charlie said, laughing wearily. " Come, dear, go 

VOL. I. B 



I 

' 24d WALTER GORING. 



now, or Bobert will be sending to know why we 
couldn't say what we had to say to each other down 
in the dining-room ; and on this occasion I echo 
his sentiments." 



CHAPTER XYIL 
SIX o'clock. 

Women's demands almost invariably grow in 
proportion to the concessions made to them. 
Daisy having succeeded in keeping her cousin 
one day longer at Brighton than he had intended 
remaining, now felt . or feigned . that life would be 
dark to her if he did not come up and '^ sit for an 
hour or two in the garden with her the following 
morning.** 

"But, Daisy, you forget my guests at Goring 
Place. I must get back to them.** 

" You're not going back there, straight ? You'll 
stay in London?** 

'* Only to see my publishers.** 

" You'll go to Roehampton ; now, won't you ? *' 

" Well; just to see the Walshes ; yes.** 

" Now, a few hours can't make any difference, 

b2 



244 WALTER GORING. 

Walter ; think how long it will be before I see you 
again perhaps^ and do come and sit for an hoar or 
two under that weeping elm to-morrow morning ; it 
will make me like the place better. I shall go 
there and think of you whenever I feel too tired to 
stand the Osbomes/' 

"Well; I suppose I must stay; but mind 
Daisy! I shall be obliged to leave by the two 
o'clock train." 

" Then come to me at eleven. How can you 
think so much about your book now ? You needn't 
write now . ^you don't want the money. I can't 
imagine how you can care to bother yourself." 

He laughed. "You sordid-minded Daisy; per- 
haps you're right after all ; it may be that the game 
isn't worth the candle. Well, 111 come at eleven. 
Good-night, young lady." 

Before he went to her the following morning he 
strolled down on to the pier, and stood at the 
extreme end, looking out over the sea for a time. 
There was that dark slaty-blue tint over it which 
it frequently has in September, especially just 
before a thunderstorm. "Not that we are likely 
to have one now," he thought, looking up at the 
clear cloudless sky. But though the sky was 



SIX o'clock. 245 

bright and cloudless, there was a something op- 
pressively sultry in the air. "Soda-water and 
sherry will be pleasant under that weeping elm," 
he thought. "I wonder if the old lady will be 
shocked if I suggest it." 

He turned round now, and leaned his back 
against the wood-work, and looked round lazily 
over the numerous groups of girls who were 
scattered about on the benches. They were of all 
orders of British beauty ; and the majority of them 
were immersed in literature, and had their long 
damp hair unbound and hanging loosely over their 
shoulders, in order that it might derive the fullest 
benefit from the sea air, and be seen in all the 
bravery of its luxuriance by any chance beholder. 
But pretty, or at least, pleasing-looking as the 
most of them undoubtedly were, there was not one 
so attractive in his eyes as either of those two girls 
who had met on horseback the night before in the 
shaded road near Portslade. 

It is a useful lesson to a novelist to go and 
stand on the pier at Brighton during the season. 
He or she is almost sure to come away sadder and 
humbler, if not wiser, for the experiment. In some 
&ir hand or other you are sure to see one of 



246 WALTER OORING. 

your own works . ^perhaps your cherished one. the 
one at which you laboured the hardest . the one 
into which you put your best . ^the one in which 
you flattered yourself that the various shades of 
character were delineated delicately and sharply . 
the one that, in the exquisite phraseology of re- 
viewers, you felt persuaded must be perused with 
unabated interest from the first page to the last. 
Go to Brighton pier, deluded one, and give your 
pride a fall. Mark the lassitude with which the 
pages are turned; observe the colossal skipping 
that goes on ; see and shiver at the supine indif- 
ference with which the first volume is laid down, 
and the second never taken up. Constrain your- 
self to listen to a few of the verbal ingenuous 
criticisms that are passed upon your offspring by 
a brace of pretty girls. It may do you good to 
hear that your "last was dull enough, but this is 
ever-so-much worse" . ^it may do you good even- 
tually; but if it does not give you creepy sen- 
sations at the moment, you are not made of the 
ordinary fiction-writer's flesh. You may come out 
of it purified and refined ; but there is no question 
about its being a very fiery furnace of an ordeal. 
But the great law of compensation works even 



SIX o'clock. 247 

under these humiliating circumstances. You can 
always analyse your most inglorious sensations, and 
get something good, or at least useful, out of them. 
At least, men may do this ; women, unfortunately, 
are rarely gifted with the analytical mind. 

At any rate, Walter Goring redeemed the time 
this morning, hy thinking out an essay on the 
subject of the numberless little rifts which make all 
music mute in the heart of man very often. No 
matter how noble, exalted, heaven-born^ the motive 
of the music may be, there comes a moment when 
some fragment of the earth earthy strikes upon 
the life lute, and produces discord surely . ^perhaps 
silence. * 

As he stood there thinking something to the 
effect of the foregoing passage, he saw advancing 
towards him that pair whom Daisy and himself 
had met the night before. Charlie at the same 
moment caught sight of him, and her face 
brightened visibly, and he, marking the pleasure 
that she showed so freely, went forward to meet 
her. 

Even in the few seconds that were employed in 
gaining them, Walter Goring had time to see 
clearly " how things were." There was an unmis- 



248 WALTER GOBING. 

takable air of being engaged about the tall, hand- 
some, healihly-Iooking gentleman who walked by 
Miss St. John's side, glancing down upon her with 
unfeigned pride and pleasure, and unmistakable 
proprietorship. Charlie had a yachting dress on, 
and her hands were in the pockets thereof, and she 
kept her face set steadily straight before her. But 
the man by her side kept on bending his head, and 
looking down into her eyes in a way that left no 
room for doubt. 

Miss St. John was one who, if she desired to 
speak to a man, never hesitated an instant about 
doing so. Therefore, when she saw Walter Goring 
coming to meet her, she quickened her pace a little, 
took her hand out of her pocket, and held it out 
to him with a hearty . 

** Mr. Goring, I am so glad to see you again." 

"And I'm delighted to see you . better; I heard 
of your illness from Mrs. Walsh." 

.* Yes ; I've had a fever, but I'm not infectious at 
all, now." Then she turned a little towards Mr. 
Fellowes, and added^ " Allow me to introduce you 
and Mr. Fellowes to each other." . 

"We ought to have known something of each 
other before,*' Mr. Fellowes said, cordially holding 



SIX o'clock. 249 

out his hand, and Walter Goring took it as cor- 
dially, saying, 

"My Norfolk neighbour then, I presume; we 
have been unfortunate in finding each other out, 
Mr. Fellowes." 

" Yes, very ; my sister for\^arded me your note 
about the battue only yesterday, or I should have 
replied to it. How do you find the game on your 
land this year ? '* 

Then the two men got talking the usual sporting 
talk, and Charlie stood by and listened. 

After a while they strolled up and down. The 
mere fact of their lands adjoining gave these men 
much in common at their first meeting even, more 
especially as one was desirous of giving all the 
local information in his power, and the other of 
receiving it. 

** You were not much at Goring Place in your 
uncle's lifetime ? '* 

"Very rarely . ^never since I was a boy; we 
were very good friends, you know, but he never 
asked me, so I never went ; did you see much of 
him?" 

" Why no ; the fact is, there had been some sort 
of dispute about a right of way between my father 



260 WALTER GORING . 

and him, and Mr. Goring couldn't forget it ; I dare 
say you've heard the story." 

'' Clarke told me something about it ; we must 
open up the lane again, for it's a short cut from The 
Hurst to Goring Place, '* Walter said, looking at 
Charlie. 

"Is Goring Place so near The Hurst?'' she 
asked. 

"Yes, Miss St. John." 

" She'll see for herself soon how near it is, I 
hope," Mr. Fellowes put in buoyantly; and then 
Charlie saw that Mr. Goring looked at her steadily 
again, and she could not keep down a blush. 

" I'm delighted to hear it," he was beginning, 
when she stopped him. 

" When are you going to write another novel, Mr. 
Goring ? " 

" I have just finished one . ^it will soon be out, 
and I shall have the honour of presenting it to you." 

"You won't have much time for writing now," 
Mr. Fellowes remarked. 

" Shall I not ? It seems to me that if I stay at 
Goring Place I shall have little to do save write." 

" The hounds meet three times a week, close to 
us ; you'll join the Hunt of course ? " 



SIX o'clock. 251 

" Undoubtedly." 

" I often thought it a pity that your uncle didn't 
keep up the kennels ; you know your grandfather 
hunted a pack of foxhounds for years. I wish you'd 
start them again ! " 

" Don't do it, Mr. Goring, if it will take up all 
your time," Charlie said, shaking her head and 
half laughing. 

" I submit to your decree ; I shall not do it,'' he 
said, lifting his hat as he spoke ; '* and now I must 
say good-by, I fear. I have an appointment with 
my cousin. Miss Goring, to whom I trust I may 
shortly have the honour of introducing you, Miss 
St. John." 

*'Ah! your uncle. left a daughter, didn't he?" 
Mr. Fellowes asked. 

" Yes ! " Walter answered ; " the lady I was riding 
with last night ; I am left her guardian, so you see 
I have plenty to do without starting a pack of fox- 
hounds." 

" I shall like to know her very much," Charlie 
said, looking away out over the sea, half abstractedly; 
" it was like a poem last night, I thought, and she 
was the sweetest rhyme in it." 

Walter made no answer ; he understood her 



262 WALTER GORING. 

fully, though her sentence had not been too co- 
herently worded. Mr. Fellowes looked perplexed, 
then it appeared to strike him that it was his part 
to explain away anything that seemed strange in 
Charlie. 

" Miss St. John has got it into her head that we 
had all met in that road, in that way before, either 
in a dream, or . or before the Deluge, I think she 
says ; I tell her it's the eflfects of the fever." 

" I think so too,'* Walter replied, and his answer 
might have been an agreement to either propo- 
sition. Mr. Fellowes held that it was complete 
coincidence with his fever theory, and was satisfied ; 
but Charlie met his eyes, and was satisfied too. 
Then once more they said * good-by * and parted. 

" He seems to be a splendid fellow," Mr. Fellowes 
remarked enthusiastically, as soon as Walter was 
out of ear-shot. " I'm very glad that we shall have 
him for our neigbour." 

This identification of her with himself was imme- 
diate perhaps, considering that he had only proposed 
to her the previous night. But Charlie did not 
object to it at all. She did not notice it, in fact, 
for she had thrown herself into the future, and was 
employed in wondering what her life would be like 



SIX o'clock. 253 

down in that place of which the two men had been 
speaking so familiarly^ the place of which she was 
to be the mistress. 

Meanwhile Walter was slowly walking up to keep 
his appointment with Daisy. It has been said that 
he saw *' how it was ** at the first glance he gave to 
Mr. Fellowes and Charlie. And during their inter- 
view his first impression had received confirmation 
strong. " Evidently she*s going to marry him/' he 
thought ; " he seems a capital fellow, but scarcely 
the sort of husband for her I should fancy.'' Then 
he went on pondering over the consistent incon- 
sistency which nearly every woman displays. He 
recalled to his mind her little brief bursts of 
ambitious enthusiasm, that night he had met her at 
the Walshes'. He remembered those strong though 
vague aspirations, those mental hungerings and 
thirstings after more satisfying sustenance than had 
yet fallen to her share, to which she had given 
vent. He reminded himself of the promise she had 
given, half to him and half to herself, about fixing 
upon an aim, and making an object for herself in 
life. All these things he remembered, as he walked 
along, and he laughed almost bitterly as he thought 
'' And it has all ended in this . that she is going to 



254 WALTEB GORING. 

marry the first fellow who has asked her ! Well, 
she'll be a good friend for Daisy, when Daisy comes 
to Goring Place." 

He could not help speculating a good deal about 
Miss St. John. He found himself marvelling how 
she would stand life, day after day, all the year 
round, at that red house which he could see from his 
drawing-room windows. There was something to 
him absolutely incongruous in this girl settling 
down in such a way ; he wondered what she would 
do with herself. He never thought of the possi- 
bility of her employing herself in household 
matters. She was an essentially feminine-looking 
woman, small and delicately made, and eminently 
graceful in gait and figure ; but he could not 
imagine her subsiding into the purely domestic 
animal. "Women are fearfully and wonderfully 
constituted, and no mistake," he thought to him- 
self; "to think that a girl like that should go and 
voluntarily vow to remain with a good fellow enough, 
but one who palpably hasn't an idea in common 
with herself, for the whole term of her natural life ; 
it's almost monstrous, that because this ghastly 
incongruous sacrifice is made under the name of 
marriage, girls should make it without reproach." 



SIX o'clock. 255 

He could not restrain his thoughts from running 
a-head about her. For a few years she would be a 
young and very interesting Mrs. Fellowes, despite 
that " As the husband is, the wife is " creed in 
which he had belief. But how about her as a 
middle-aged Mrs. Fellowes ? Would that curious 
something which there was about her, and which 
made her a more interesting and exciting study 
than the mass of girls, though of little beauty . 
would this something gradually ebb away and leave 
her a mere sonsy matron, with sharp words on her 
tongue for rebellious children, and a keen eye for 
the peccadilloes of her maids ? Would she in time 
come to dress with delight for a dull dinner-party 
down there, a dinner-party wanting in even those 
elements of amusements and interest which she had 
found insufficient at the Walshes' ? Would she tone 
down into a tame Lady Bountiful? Would she 
come to look upon art and literature with the hazy 
gaze those do bestow upon them who know them- 
selves to be a long way off, and have no desire to 
come any nearer ? Above all, would she ever learn 
to train her looks, and guard them, and not seem to 
give them gladly and freely to a man . even a 
stranger . who could read them aright? ''I am 



S56 WALTER GORING. 

glad The Hurst is so near to Goring Place, for I 
shall like to see how she goes on '' he thought, as 
he turned into the garden where Daisy, gracefully 
posed under the elm, sat awaiting him. Psycho- 
logically then, these two girls were almost of equal 
interest to him ; but he read what Charlie's life 
had been through her acts and words, more clearly 
than he read Daisy's. Naturally, therefore, Daisy 
at present commanded more of his thoughts, and 
had a larger portion of his speculative interest. 

Daisy presented herself, this morning, under a 
different aspect to any in which he had hitherto seen 
her. In the first place, she " took him more for 
granted," in a way that he could not have defined, 
but that he felt keenly. On former occasions, when 
she had made appeals to his fraternal affection and 
complaisance, she had done it in such a way that he 
could but remember that he was not her brother, 
and feel that she remembered it too. But this 
morning, some fine, almost imperceptible, but most 
telling change had come over her. She was very 
nice, very graceful and girlish, and amiable. But 
she did not make herself lithe and willowy at him ; 
she did not appeal to him; she was in fact an 
utterly different Daisy from the one who had laid 



SIX o'clock. 257 

her hand on his shoulder and her head on his 
breast but the other day. She called him Walter, 
without the slightest attempt at a plaintive intona- 
tion. She volunteered a promise to stay and make 
the best of things at Brighton for as long a time as 
he liked. She told him that she was quite alive to 
the impossibility of her living at Goring Place 
until he was married. " And I do hope you will 
marry soon, Walter; it will be so much better for 
me in every way when you are married . if your 
wife will only like me.*' On the whole, desjJite the 
amiability of this speech, Walter would rather that 
she had not made it. 

Then she went on to tell him why she had been 
so desirous of seeing him this morning. It had 
been with no romantic notion of having a few 
soothing "last moments" with him . that was 
clear. 

" There are two or three points that you had 
better settle with her," she nodded towards the 
house, indicating thus that she was alluding to 
Mrs. Osborne, " before you go . for of course, you 
won't come to Brighton again for a long time . 
there's really nothing to bring you.'* 

** To see you, Daisy ; but what are the points ?" 



258 WALTER GORINO. 

" Oh ! as to seeing me, that's understood. We 
shall always be glad to see each other, that's of 
coarse. What I want you to tell her is, that I am 
not to be expected to ride out with her daughter ; 
Miss Osborne goes out with a troop and a riding- 
master, and I won't do it." 

"I should think not; I'll see about a steady 
groom being at your disposal before I leave. I 
meant to do it, even if you hadn't spoken : don't 
think me regardless of your comfort, Daisy ? " 

He spoke almost tenderly; it was not exactly 
pleasant to him to be put off from his former 
position in this way. But she would not respond 
to the tenderness at all. She only said, . 

" That's so good of you, Walter ; and I'm to go 
out when I please ? " 

" My dear girl ; you're not in a prison." 
" I know that very well ; but it had better be 
understood that I do as I like in this matter. To- 
day, when I was coming out here, she began, ' Oh ! 
Miss Goring, you'll find it too hot in the garden, I 
think.' I told her that was my look out, and she 
didi?t seem to like it ; now if she doesn't want me 
to speak to her in that way, she had better not 
interfere with me." 



SIX o'clock. 259 

" Well, Daisy, I will try to meet your views," he 
said; and Daisy put her yellow head against the 
back of the garden-bench and thanked him, and 
apparently had nothing further to say. 

Before he left, he told her about meeting Miss 
St. John on the pier, and of the almost certainty he 
felt that Miss St. John would be their neighbour 
eventually. 

"Your neighbour, you mean. I should be 
wretched if I thought Goring Place was to be my 
home for ever and ever." 

He was disgusted with himself for suffering him- 
self to be mortified by the expression of this girl's 
fickleness and indifference. Nevertheless, he was 
mortified. He sat in silence, waiting for her to 
speak ; when she did so at last, it was only to say, . 
" When am I to have the three thousand pounds 
that my father left me ? " 

" You may have it when you like. What do you 
want with it?" 

"I want nothing, but I fancy a dozen things. 
Let me have five hundred of it . ^may I ? or a 
thousand . may I ? " 

" My dear child ; for what ? " 
*'Why, to spend to be sure," she replied quickly; 

B 2 



260 WALTER GORING. 

" to spend in any way I please, and not to hare to 
give an account of it ; for that I won't do.*' 

"You shall have it, if you will," he answered. 
The thought struck him that she might want it for 
some of those people with whom she had been 
brought up. Perhaps even for her Mother ! But 
he would not question her. 

" You shall have it, Daisy," he repeated. Then 
he stood up and hid her " good by ; " and she gave 
him her hand in farewell, coolly and collectedly, 
and was no more like the Daisy who had warmed 
him with her touch, and melted him by her tears 
the other day, than snow is like fire. He went 
away, feeling very sorry for this change in her . this 
chwige, of which he had really no right to complain. 
He went away, feeling very sorry, but more puzzled. 
" What can have come over the girl," he thought ; 
'* she can't be such a false-hearted little cat as to 
dislike me after her manner even yesterday." He 
thought about her a good deal . till the train stopped 
at the Victoria station in fact. Then he got out, and 
hailed a cab, and began to think about what terms 
he sKould ask for his book as he was driven to his 
publisher's. His heart was very much set on this 
work making a conspicuous success, for his last 



SIX o'clock. 261 

had been reviled by more than one of the literary 
journals ; and he had smarted and been very sore 
. as the stoutest are wont to be when their tender 
spots are lashed, however vigorously they may 
deny the soft impeachment. He had smarted and 
been very sore, and had striven earnestly to amend. 
Now he wanted to see the fruits of the castigations 
and the consideration he had given them made 
public. So, now that it had come to the point of 
transacting the immediate preliminary business, 
previous to publication, his mind was very much 
engaged upon his book to the exclusion of all other 
eonsiderations. 

The interview was agreeable, not to say exhilara- 
ting. No matter, whether a man be a large landed 
proprietor, and in possession of a good yearly 
income or not, the satisfaction of knowing that the 
work of his brain is of sufficiently well-known and 
recognised merit to command a good price, is 
intense. '' Mr. Goring's last book had not been a 
success ; " of that his publisher mildly, but firmly 
reminded him. But this one, which it was pro- 
posed should come out at a more auspicious season 
. and which, no doubt, was free from the trifling 
defects of style which . more than the adverse criti- 



262 WALTER GORING. 

cism . had oyer-ridden the last, might be safely 
prophesied to ''go.*' The end of it was, that the 
book was to be announced immediately, as '^ ready 
on the 2nd of November/' and the copyright for 
three years was made over to the firm for the sum 
of 800Z. It is well to reward authors liberally . ^at 
least in fiction. 

'' Now for Boehampton/* he said to himself when 
he came out of the publishing office ; '' how glad 
thejT^ll be to find it all done. I believe if she hadn't 
urged me on, I should never have made the re- 
quisite effort to finish it, after finding myself master 
of Goring Place ; as for old Balph ! he^U be better 
pleased than if all his own pictures get well hung 
next year.*' 

There was great pleasure to the young man in 
this assured feeling which he had, of receiving a 
warm welcome from them at Boehampton. He had 
a good many friends, for he was well liked by 
most men and women ; but there was the bond of 
many years' good fellowship (if such an expression 
may be permitted, where there is a lady concernedX 
between the Walshes and himself. He recalled now, 
as he drove down to their houise, the frantic zeal 
which Balph had displayed when his (Walter's) 



SIX O^CLOCK. 263 

first book had come out, and stormed fame. He 
remembered well the chagrin the kind-hearted 
fellow had been unable to conceal when the last had 
been reviled ! While, as for her ; few men, he felt 
persuaded, had such a friend as he had in ''his 
goddess/* 

The day was very bright when he leapt out of the 
«ab at the door of the Boehampton house. The 
garden was gorgeous with those glories of the 
autumn, the gladiolus and dahlia. Bich beds of 
bloom lay scattered about, breaking the expanse of 
deep green turf every here and there ; and the 
light came down from the setting sun, and relieved 
the intensity of colour . of those masses of crimson 
and of scarlet which would otherwise have made 
the eyes throb to look upon them. The dying 
day was very fair; . bright as a child's smile . 
a dialogue by Shirley Brooks . or Walter Goring's 
own prospects, as they were known to the 
world. 

There was a great air of hush and quiet over the 
house when he turned to it, after surveying this 
brightness for a few moments. The hall door stood 
open, as was usual in that hospitable mansion in 
the summer, but all the blinds were drawn dowui 



264 WALTER GORING. 

and there was no sound of voices and laughter from 
the drawing-room, where voices and laughter were 
to be heard at most times, " I hope the3^re not 
gone out," he thought; ** she's quite capable of 
getting enraged with me for not being here before, 
and going for a drive; the goddess is only a 
woman." Then he went into the hall, and was 
about to shout out, " Ealph ! " when a servant 
came upon him suddenly from the back regions . a 
girl, with a face all blurred with tears and blanched 
with fear, and said to him before he could ask her 
" What's the matter ? " 

" Oh ! sir ; poor master is dead ! *' 

It was like a blow on the chest to him. His 
heart bounded with a sudden spasm of pain, to 
recover which he had to gasp for breath . almost as a 
woman might have done. He was utterly unnerved 
by the tidings . ^by the thought of this good, valued, 
old friend, called with such ghastly celerity to his 
last account. No homily, however eloquent, from 
the lips of the grandest elocutionist comes home to 
the heart with the terrible force of the one the 
heart reads to itself in the first moment of hearing 
of that, from which we all pray to be delivered . 
sudden death. 



SIX o'clock. 265 

m 

His first question was, " Where is she . your 
mistress, I mean ? Let her know I'm here/' 

" Master's hrother's wife is here, sir," she an- 
swered, and as she said this, a lady came out from 
one of the rooms with an arranged look of grief on 
her face, and a good deal of handkerchief in her 
hand. He introduced himself hurriedly. 

" I am Mr. Goring, an old friend of ," he 

could not say "Ealph's," the tears in his throat 
would not let him utter it ; so he paused, and made 
an effort to swallow his emotion. 

The lady made some remark, to the effect of its 
heing an awful calamity, and what we all must 
prepare for and submit to ; her remarks were not 
original. He cut them short. 

" I have sent to tell Mrs. Walsh that I am here," 
he said. The British matron bridled without delay. 

" It is impossible that my sister-in-law can see 
you,'* she said, " utterly impossible ; but of course 
you are aware of that " 

"She will see me," Walter interrupted; "whom 
should she see ? Of course, I shall go to her as I 
should have gone to Balph, had she died and left 
him ; I have lost too valued a friend not to go at 
once to the other one who loved him best." 



266 WALTER GORING. 

He passed her as he spoke, and made his way 
upstairs ; on the landing he was met by the servant 
whom he had sent to tell her mistress that he had 
come, and he stopped to ask " how and when it 
happened?" ''He died last night about six 
o'clock," the girl told him; "he had a terrible 
shock in town in the morning; he went up in the 
carriage, and one of the horses took fright and ran 
right into an omnibus-pole, and was staked in the 
chest and killed. Master didn't say much at the 
time, but it gave him a shock, and the doctors' say 
it was heart complaint." 

" Six o'clock," he thought, as he went on to 
the room in which he was told he would find her. 
" Six o'clock ! just the hour when I met that 
girl and her lover under ihe trees ; it was all 
brightness and beauty and peace about me, and she 
was in such sorrow, poor thing ! " then he opened 
the door and found himself in the presence of the 
widow. 

She was leaning back in an easy chair. There 
were no tears in her eyes, and there was no white 
emblem of woe in her hand. She looked calm and 
composed as usual, but her face was very pale. He 
went up and took her hand, and as soon as she 



SIX o'clock. 267 

felt his clasp, her tears and words flowed together. 
It was a thoroughly womanly plaint that she made. 

" If you had been up in town with him, perhaps 
it wouldn't have happened/' And he answered, . 

" God knows ! but I shall never forgive myself 
for being away from you last night/' 



CHAPTEE XVIII. 



THE WEDDING TOUR. 



The autumnal tints were fading fast. Warmth 
and colour were waning from off the earth. There 
were storm-clouds in the sky. Fogs and fires had 
set in. There were more leaves dead and rotting 
on the ground than there were on the trees. In 
short, it was dreary dark November when the 
threads of the story are taken up again. 

Miss St. John was no more ; she was merged in 
Mrs. Fellowes, and she was coming home to The 
Hurst, her husband's house, to-night. 

They had been married about the middle of 
October. Mr. Fellowes was no friend to imneces- 
sary delay, and Charlie not finding the engagement 
ideally pleasant, was glad enough to shorten it. 
She was impatient, in truth, to see how she and 
the life she had promised to live agreed with one 



THE WEDDING TOUR. 269 

another. Therefore, there had been no hesitation 
on either side in the matter, and they were married 
in October. 

There had been little said about any member of 
his family coming to his wedding, and not one 
of them had come. He had only a mother and 
a sister, and the one was too averse to railway 
travelling, and the other too averse to festivities 
of any sort to come up to London to a wedding, 
he had told them. Their non-appearance was 
taken quite as a matter of course by Charlie ; she 
had not regarded it as a sign of any special anta- 
gonism to herself. 

Immediately after their marriage they had gone 
to Paris, and had not enjoyed themselves at all. 
The bridegroom knew nothing of either the plea- 
sures or pit- falls of that city, consequently he 
moved as one in the dark, and Charlie grew im- 
patient. When they had been to the Opera and 
two or three of the theatres, he recommended quiet 
strenuously, not knowing where the ice was thin on 
that glittering surface which stretched before him. 
But Charlie had not married Mr. Fellowes and 
come to Paris to be quiet. She could have gone 
on being that in the dull Bayswater square. 



370 WALTER OORINa. 

Therefore she urged him to " find out, if he didn't 
know, about places," and he found out many things^ 
and wished himself back at The Hurst. On the 
whole, it was unfortunate that he should have 
taken her at first to a place where he could not 
move freely, and as one who was sure of himself. 
He looked happy enough always, but she fancied 
that there was the expression on his face of being 
very much obliged to any one who would put him 
right. Altogether the wedding tour was a mistake. 
Charlie had dreamt of Paris . ^had longed for it 
with the feverish longing one has for it and the 
East, after hearing much about them. When she 
gained it at last, there was little for her to do, save 

to sit down and weep over illusion the th 

dispelled. 

He was very kind and gentle to her, very patient 
and forbearing, no matter how her spirits ran down. 
He was always heaping presents upon her^ and 
wanting her to eat. His care of her was pro- 
digious, not to say oppressive. She had the feeling 
of being liable to break upon her, whenever she 
went out with him. On the whole, she would 
willingly have bartered away a considerable portion 
of this care and attention in exchange for the man 



THE WEDDING TOUB. 271 

she had married being able to impart one single 
idea that she couldn't get out of Bradshaw re- 
lating to the place to which he had brought her. 
Whether this was an idle longing or not, it cer- 
tainly was not gratified. She was not sorry when 
he said, as he did when they had been there three 
weeks, " After all, Charlie, this place isn't half as 
gay as they say. What do you think about going 
home ?'' 

" I think it would be the best thing we can do," 
she replied, and she did not add that she thought 
perhaps other people set about finding Paris plea- 
sant in another way. 

However, they did not go straight back to The 
Hurst from Paris. They branched off to the Isle 
of Wight, and spent a fortnight there, during which 
fortnight they were very happy, and explored the 
island thoroughly, Charlie on a rough pony and 
Mr. Fellowes on foot. Mrs. Fellowes had never 
experienced such happiness in her life as she felt 
the whole of this fortnight. It was very patent to 
her that she was as the apple of his eye to this 
man . that she was precious to him beyond price. 
He showed his devotion to, and appreciation of, 
her in a way that was clear without being cloying. 



272 WALTER GORING. 

His wishes always marched with hers ; whither she 
went he was only too happy to follow, not in blind 
submission, but with a frank air of finding that 
which she thought good, the best, most beautiful, 
and politic path. A strong feeling of friendship 
sprang up between them in addition to the warm 
passion he felt for her, and the genuine though 
weaker love she had for him. They learnt to know 
each other well, so she believed ; to know and to 
have such reliance on each other that " no future 
small discrepancies in the conduct of either would 
have the power to shake the foundation of that trust 
which was being laid between them in these days." 
This she told herself, and grew glad and grateful. 
Her woman's heart and pride were both entirely 
carried by the devotion he displayed. Literally, he 
was always at her side ; metaphorically, he was very 
much at her feet ; and she who had never been the 
recipient of such unswerving open attentions before, 
was a rarely gracious sovereign to this her loving 
vassal. She seemed to be re-juvenated and to 
grow prettier daily . his tenderness for her youth 
and admiration for the good looks she possessed 
were so evident and inspiring. In short, he was 
so proud of his wife that she grew fondly proud of 



THE WEDDING TOUR. 273 

him, and showed that she was so openly, in a way 
that frequently brought a flash of pleasure to his 
face, and something like tears in his eyes, as he 
looked down upon her riding along on the little 
pony by his side. The handsome manly bride- 
groom and the graceful intellectual bride were very 
pleasant to behold altogether. At last they put an 
end to the joyous period, and went home to The 
Hurst, reaching it about six o'clock one damp, 
dismal November evening. 

Mrs. Fellowes was very eager to see her future 
home as soon as she found herself fairly on her 
road to it. Very eager to see it, and very curious 
on the subject of it. Hitherto she had asked but 
very few questions respecting either it or his friends 
and relations ; and he, for the same reason as she 
had refrained from asking, had refrained from tell- 
ing anything . namely, he had not thought of doing 
so. But when, at about ten minutes to six on the 
evening of their return, he looked out of the rail- 
way carriage window into the drizzle, and said . 

"Charlie, dear, if it wasn't for this mist you'd 
see The Hurst down there between those trees; 
we shall be there directly," she exclaimed . 

" Vm so impatient to see it. I'm longing to be 

VOL. I. T 



274 WALTER GOBXSG. 

the mistress of your house, Harry ; I will be such 
a nice one, and such a nice wife, darling. Oh ? when 
shall I see your mother and sister ? I'd " 

She was going to say she " had forgotten them," 
but it occurred to her that it would be perhaps 
just as well that she should not go into residence 
in the palace of truth in this way, therefore she 
checked herself on the brink of the speech. 

" You will see them to-night. A * nice wife ! ' I 
know you will be that, my pet. 'NiceT you'll be 
the dearest and sweetest in the world." 

*^ They live near us, then ? Is their house in 
the village?" 

She really did not care where their house was, 
or where they lived, but she wanted to please her 
husband by appearing interested about his re- 
latives, although they had abstained from any 
ardent expression of interest about her. She was 
the triumphant one, the reigning star of his affec- 
tions, the pivot on which each one of his thoughts 
turned ; she could afford to be generous. 

" Near us ! Why, they live at The Hurst; didn't 
you know that ? " he answered ; and the train 
stopping at the moment, she had no time to say 
vQore than . 



THIS WEDDING TOUR. S75 

" Know it ; how should I, when you have never 
told me, Harry?'' 

There was no time to say more about them, or 
to think more about them, from that moment until 
they reached The Hurst. Then they were brought 
before her prominently, and she could not avoid 
giving them due consideration. 

Perhaps they were right. Maybe they had some 
sort of reason and justice on their side. It is very 
hard to say whether they were or not ; it is always 
in fact hard, nay more, impossible, to judge justly 
of the acts of another, so many motives sway them 
of which we are ignorant; they are influenced by 
so many reasons of which we never so much as 
heard ; they have their own thoughts about things 
evolved by Heaven knows what ; they are so much 
more to themselves, and consequently so much 
more alive to all that concerns themselves, than 
they are to us. All these causes, and a dozen 
others, combine to render it a hard matter indeed 
for anyone to judge anyone else with perfect equity 
and justice. 

Therefore it is a difficult matter to say whether 
or not old Mrs. Fellowes and her daughter were 
right, in regarding the wife of their son and brother 

T 2 



276 WALTER GORlNa. 

as an interloper from the first. That they fid so 
regard her there can be no manner of doubt ; but 
whether or not they were wholly wrong in doing so, 
remains an open question. 

Henry Fellowes had brought the infliction of this 
aggrieved ill-will upon himself, or rather upon his 
wife, by his own injudicious conduct from his 
earliest manhood. The yoke of his mother had 
never been easy, and the burden of his sister had 
never been light ; but he had fitted his neck to the 
one, and adjusted the latter to his back for a great 
many years, as if he had rather liked them than 
not. Now he was to reap his reward. 

With a quiet persistence that had been almost a 
beautiful thing in itself from its unvarying uni- 
formity, Mrs. Fellowes had detected flaws and 
blemishes in every girl who had come under her 
son's notice, from the time of his becoming a mar- 
riageable man up to the present moment. The 
boldest laid down their arms before her, and said to 
the ambition which might have been theirs for a 
brief period to become mistress of The Hurst, 
** Avaunt, foul fiend ! " The clear-sighted manner 
in which she saw whatever was not perfect in them, 
and the admirably lucid way in which she pointed 



THE WEDDING TOUR. 277 

out their imperfections to her son, had hecome a 
proverb in their part of the county. She was charm- 
ingly consistent in seeing nought hut guile in any 
young woman who might possibly succeed her at 
The Hurst. She always remembered how some 
one with just such a personal attribute or mental 
quality as Henry chanced to find pleasing or good 
in any girl, had gone wrong, or nearly gone wrong, 
or was said to have been quite ready "to go wrong, 
by some veracious chroniclers. If a girl seemed 
kind to him, then his mother -shook her head in 
sorrow and anger, and quoted a sweet distich, to the 
effect of a pear that would drop without shaking 
the tree, being too mellow for her, or an honourable 
man. Did young ladyhood seem cool and self-pos- 
sessed, and not at all conscious of the claims of 
Mr. Fellowes of The Hurst, then Mrs. Fellowes 
was sorry to see it, and sorry to say it ; but that 
prudish manner was the very last she should desire 
to see in the wife of a son of hers. In fact, she 
hedged him in and about with doubt, distrust, and 
dread, with such full effect, that he passed through 
that garden of beauty and never gave so much as a 
thought after he was twenty-two to plucking one of 
the blooms for himself. Norfolk is a rare place for 



278 WALTER 60BIN0. 

pretty women, . ^its witches will not even yield the 
palm to those of Lancashire ; bnt Mr. Henry Fel- 
lowes passed nnscathed through their ranks, because 
his mother bid him do so. 

Norfolk is a rare place for pretty women. What 
a fair sisterhood that was from which I gained my 
first childish impressions of loveliness and grace. 
What a pleasant light that loveliness threw over the 
tiny sea-side village in which they, the far-famed 
beauties of West Norfolk, dwelt. Some of them 
have pretty daughters of their own now ; and are as 
charming perhaps in their brilliant matronhood as 
they were in their fresh blooming girlhood. That 
past prettiness deserves to be commemorated though 
.it was so marvellously bright a thing. 

Whatever the cause, the result is this : that the 
purely-bred Norfolk women combine form and 
colour in their greatest perfection, in an almost 
exceptional manner. The women of the Western 
counties are fedr and luxuriant, but they are 
wanting in that symmetry of limb which is a dis- 
tinguishing characteristic of their Norfolk sisters, 
whose small well-shaped feet and hands add to 
their look of race. Whether or not there was a 
strong' Southern dash in their Scandinavian pro-> 



THE WEDDINa TOUR. 379 

genitors, I am not sufficiently well up in the history 
of my favourite county to determine ; but this 
much is certain, that they possess, in addition to 
the skin of the North, the subtle charm of shape 
which belongs of right to the South. Nevertheless, 
maternal instincts had guided Henry Fellowes safe 
and sure through the ranks of the daughters of the 
land for many years, and now all her precautions 
were proved idler than a dream, for he had gone 
out and married a stranger without a penny. 
Charlie little knew what she was going to face when 
she passed quickly under the portals of The Hurst 
by her husband's side. There was not the slightest 
doubt in her heart as she raised her eyes to his 
face, and smiled brightly in response to his 
hearty . 

"God bless you, my darling, and make you 
happy here ! " 

He led her straight through the hall into a large, 
sombre, insufficiently lighted room, which they dis- 
covered to be void of all human furniture imme* 
diately on entering it. Charlie made for the fire at 
once, and as she stood over it warming her hands, 
and looking round her half-curiously, half-doubt- 
fully (the room and all in it were so uncompromis- 



280 WALTER GORING. 

ingly square), Mr. Fellowes turned to the servant 
who had followed them, and said . 

" Go and let your mistress . my mother . ^kno^w 
that Mrs. Fellowes and I are here." 

" My mistress and Miss Dinah are in the dining- 
room, sir," the man replied ; and Henry Fellowes 
was beginning to mutter something in an annoyed 
tone, when Charlie turned to him with a brighter 
flash on her face than the fire would have had the 
power to fling. 

" Shall we go to them, Harry ? Yes, come.*' 



CHAPTEE XIX. 



A CHILLING RECEPTION. 



They went out of the square drawing-room across 
the hall, and into another room where crimson 
curtains and a blazing fire and plenty of glass and 
gleaming silver on a well-arranged dining-table, 
gave them a pleasant sense of warmth and comfort. 
In an arm-chair on one side of the fire-place an old 
lady, with a face rendered still paler than was 
natural to it by the severe contrast of a dead-black 
front, and a little half- square shawl pinned with 
severe exactitude over her shoulders, sat rigidly 
awaiting them. Opposite to her, in the other arm- 
chair, was a middle-aged woman, tall and large, and 
as square, Charlie thought, at the first glance, as 
the drawing-room from whence they had just come. 

The newly-married pair came on into the room, 
and as they did so Miss Dinah rose, but the old 



282 WALTER GORINa. 

lady kept her seat. Almost unconsciously Charlie 
came to a stand-still ; she could not go on to them ; 
there was no welcome from either of those women 
for her. 

Henry Fellowes went over and kissed his mother, 
then turned and held one hand out to his sister 
the other to his wife. "Well, mother, I have 
brought you home a new daughter at last, you see," 
he said, with a poor attempt at a laugh ; and she 
replied . 

" I see you have, Henry ; " and then rose up for 
an instant and held out a straight hand with rigid 
fingers to Charlie, and added . 

" I*m afraid you have had a wet journey, Mrs. 
Henry ; your train was a little late ; I am afraid the 
dinner wonH be the better for waiting." 

Charlie took the rigid fingers and did not know 
what to do with them. It was impossible to get up 
spurious enthusiasm, and make the least attempt to 
press the hand of an old woman who evidently 
would not have ofiered it at all if she could have 
avoided doing so. Therefore Charlie took it for an 
instant,' and then let it go, saying with a brighter 
light in her eyes than Henry Fellowes had ever 
seen there before . 



A CHILLING BECEPTION. 28& 

"Perhaps I had better go and get ready for 
dinner, Harry, and not keep it waiting any longer/' 

" Perhaps you had, dear; here, Til come up with 
you, when Dinah's spoken to you.*' 

He put his hands on his wife's shoulders, and 
made her face round immediately in front of his tall, 
gaunt sister. " I hope you'll find everything com- 
fortable in your room, Mrs. Henry," the latter said 
hurriedly. The laughing face that was brought 
under Miss Dinah^s notice looked so thoroughly 
cognisant of her dislike, and so defiant of it in a 
way, that Miss Fellowes lost her self possession. 

When Charlie reached her own room she could 
not conscientiously say that she did find everything 
comfortable in it. There was no fire, and no hot 
water, and no sofa, and no easy chair. There were 
abundant signs of wealth in handsome carved ma* 
hogany bed-posts, and wardrobes, and dressing- 
tables, but there was neither comfort, according 
to the modem luxurious acceptation of the word, 
or beauty. In fact, it was not at all the sort of 
room to meet the views of a bride with sesthetic 
proclivities. 

"Never mind, I'll freeze to-night," she said 
laughingly, when her husband looked blank at the 



284 WALTER GORING. 

empty stove and the cold water. " You go down, or 
to your dressing-room, and I'll astonish them hj 
being ready so quickly Harry." Then, when she 
had banished him, she knelt down before one of her 
trunks and took out some of her toilet paraphernalia, 
and wondered whether they were going to have the 
grac.e to send anyone to assist her in case she 
needed assistance. 

Not that in reality she needed any, but she was 
the mistress of the house, and as such it ought to 
have been at her command she felt. However, 
modern costume has done away with a great deal of 
female incapacity ; if need were, Charlie could have 
dressed for a ball unaided and alone. So now, when 
she had brushed out her short bright brown hair, 
and put on fresh cuffs and a collar, she was ready; 
and as soon as she was ready, she went to look for 
her husband. 

She had said to him . " go down, or into your 
dressing-room,^' and she now looked for a dressing- 
room in which to findiiim. In her own room were 
numerous big heavy doors, but they all led into 
large commodious dark closets ; there was no egress 
to any smaller room, and with a most natural scoff 
at the awkwardness of old-fashioned arrangements, 



A CHILLING Ri;CEPTION. 285 

she resolved to go down and face them by herself, 
since she could not find her husband. 

He meanwhile had run down into the dining- 
room again^ to do what a man should never do with 
women, temporise. He had known all along, that 
marry when or whom he would, his mother and his 
sister would be antagonistic to his wife. But after 
meeting and falling in love with Charlie St. John, 
he had put all thoughts of maternal wrath away 
from him, imtil now that it was brought vividly 
before him, and unpleasantly before Charlie. 

When he went back alone, leaving Charlie 
kneeling before her black trunk, he began at once 
eagerly to his mother. 

"Don't you think I have done well, mother? 
She'll make things as pleasant as possible, if you'll 
only meet her half way; you know she couldn't 
help the train being late, and now she's hurrying 
herself tremendously, in order not to keep you 
waiting ; but I say, Dinah, things should have been 
. arranged a little better in our room, I think ! " 

" I have had the best room prepared for your 
wife, Henry,'' Miss Dinah replied, in tones that 
would have led a stranger to suppose that The Hurst 
was hers, and not her brother's. 



286 WALTER GORING. 

" And from what you had said, we did not expect 
a fine lady/' his mother chimed in. 

" Mother, she isn't that," he said deprecatingly. 
He was such a big boy, and such a big booby, in his 
honest affection for the three women to whom he 
Was nearest and dearest. He wanted all things to 
be so pleasant, without having the faintest idea how 
to make them so. Then he went over to his mother 
and leant upon the back of her chair, and asked very 
fondly, but almost too humbly . 

'' Do seem a little glad to see her when she comes 
down ? She is the dearest girl . much too good for 
such a rough as I am; don't let her think you 
didn't want her here/' 

Mrs. Fellowes senior commenced working her 
lips and blinking her eyes. She loved her son, 
loved him dearly. But it was with a narrow-minded, 
grasping, jealous, suspicious love, that would have 
denied him any other all his life. Whatever wife 
he had won to himself, his mother would not have 
loved her. But a wife without money his mother 
could not even seem to like. So now she said, in 
measured tones that came out from between lips of 
iron . 

" What I like or what I don't like is of little con- 



A CHILLINO RECEPTION. 287 

sequence, I am weU aware. Tm an incumbrance 
and old, and not worth consulting; I know all that; 
but still I do own to feeling hurt that my son should 
have gone away and married a stranger, without 
even giving his mother the opportunity of cautioning 
him ; of course I know Vyb no right to speak ; you 
always would do as you liked ; but it would have 
been better for us all, perhaps, if you had let me see 
this young lady before you brought her here as 
your wife." 

" How could I have let you see her ? " he asked 
gently; " after telling her howl loved her I couldn't 
have asked her to come and show herself to you, 
and see whether you liked her for my wife or not/' 
He laughed as he said this, and moved away from 
his mother's chair in order to lean upon the mantel- 
piece. Mrs. Fellowes saw that he glanced impa- 
tiently towards the door also, as though he was 
anxious for the appearance of this bone of conten- 
tion, altogether he was more independent about 
the matter than seemed good to her. There was a 
world of reproach for he did not know what, in the 
way in which she replied . 

"I know I am getting old, but we are told by 
Him to honour our parents ; however, I say no 



288 WALTER GOMNa. 

more; I only hope" . ^here Mrs. Fellowes paused 
and shook her head, and Dinah kindly put in . 

"Henry might make some allowance for our 
natural feelings to-night ; but he makes none ; none 
at all." 

" Natural feelings ! " he asked impatiently, " have 
you any for her, Dinah ? do remember that she 
isn*t here on suflFerance ! ** 

No sooner had he said it than he would hare 
given much of his worldly wealth to have been able 
to recall and obliterate the memory of his words. 
His mother put herself into a bolt upright position 
in her chair, as though she knew that even comfort 
was grudged her in that house; and Miss Dinah 
bridled and shook her head, and began to weep. 

" For mercy's sake, don't cry, old girl," he said 
affectionately ; " what is the matter now ? " 

" Oh nothing, nothing ; we shall have to learn to 
bear it," Mrs. Fellowes replied, solemnly shaking 
her head. 

" To bear what, mother ? '* 

" To bear that we are here on sufferance,'* and 
then mother and daughter both howled> until the 
harassed master of the house spoke more sharply. 

" If you don't want my wife to hate her home and 



A CHILLXNG RECEPTION. 289 

her husband, do make an end of this. If my happi- 
ness is anything to you, mother, don't try to wreck 
it, as you will if you go on in this way.^' Saying 
this, he walked away out of the room, and met 
Charlie descending the stairs. 

''Haven't I been quick?" she asked, and his 
eyes brightened and his brow smoothed as she 
leant her arms over his shoulders, as he stood a 
step or two below her. 

"Are you not exactly what you ought to be 
always?" he replied fondly. "Come back with 
me, pet; dinner isn't on the table yet." 

" Yes, I will," she said, turning and running up 
before him. "Nice old house it seems^ Harry; 
we'll soon have it lovely ; this lobby with a Persian 
rag or two, and some divans covered with that 
Oriental patterned stuff, will be perfection ; may I 
have it so ? " 

" You may do what you like." 

" Well, I won't do much till Ellen comes to stay 
with me; we work capitally together, for she's 
more practical than I am. I know exactly what I 
want, and she knows how to set about achieving it. 
What a shame that there is no dressing-room to 
this room, Harry." 

VOL. I. V 



290 WALTER GORING. 

"Awful, isn't it?" 

"No, but awkward; we will alter that, won't 
we? Do you know, my boy, I mean to have 
my house cited for. being both well-ordered and 
elegant? There's a bell; that's dinner. Shall 
I do? 

Sh« got up and stood before her husband for 
inspection . the brightest, most beautiful thing in 
his eyes that had ever illumined the old Hurst 
since he had known it. "Do!" he answered, 
taking her in his arms, and kissing her forehead. 
" By Jove, Charlie, I'm so proud of you, my darling, 
that I only wonder what I had to live for before I 
married you." Then they went down to dinner 
together, and when they were half across the 
hall, he whispered, " Don t mind the old lady 
much, she's rather cranky to-night; but when she 

knows you " He did not add what might be 

expected to occur then, but he left Charlie free to 
infer that it would be something more agreeable on 
the whole than had transpired yet. 

The young mistress of The Hurst .found, on 
entering the dining-room, that the soup was on the 
table, and that Mrs. Fellowes, senior, was at the 
head of the same. There was a place for Charhe 



A CHELLINO BECEPTION. 291 

at the side opposite to Miss Dinah. Perhaps, in 
reality, it was an unimportant thing, not worthy 
a second thought. But Charlie gave a second 
thought to it as she took the place assigned to her, 
and wondered whether her husband saw that she 
was as nothing at his table. 

However, she would not suffer herself to feel 
aggrieved or look depressed, so she strove to 
accomplish that most thankless of tasks, to amuse 
a couple of women who were not disposed to be 
amused by her. She talked to the mother and 
sister merrily of the days she had spent in the 
Isle of Wight; she laughed and was glad, appa- 
rently to such a degree, that waves of triumph at 
the brightness of this wife whom he had won, 
surged up into her husband's throat, and checked 
both his appetite and utterance, even . though he 
saw that his mother was groaning in spirit, and 
his sister unmoved by the glee. 

Old Mrs. Fellowes was thinking all the time that 
Charlie was striving to please and render herself 
agreeable. "The money he must have spent in 
gadding about in such a way, and she without a 
penny of her own ! without a penny I . and to travel 
in that dress ! " 



292 WALTEB GORIKG. 

Dinner was over at last, and they went away 
into the square drawing-room. " I hope you don't 
find it at all damp, Mrs. Henry?" Dinah asked, 
with something of an injured look, when Charlie 
could not repress a shiver. 

" Oh, no, thank you," Charlie replied. 

" We don't often use this room," Mrs. Fellowes 
condescended to explain. *'We generally prefer 
remaining in the dining-room ; furniture so soon 
gets spoilt if it is in constant use." 

Charlie said nothing in reply to this speech, but 
she looked about her. The furniture was covered 
with a large-patterned flaring chintz, on which 
roses the size of cauliflowers bloomed in vulgar 
luxuriance. What was under this she did not 
know; but she felt that she could not long suffer 
that chintz. Presently her husband came in, and 
said to her, 

"Ifs too late to show you the house to-night, 
Charlie ; but what do you think of this room ? 
Can you make anything of it, eh ? " 

"Oh, yes!'* Charlie replied, cheerfully; and 
Mrs. Fellowes struck in, " Make anything of it ; in 
what way, Henry ?'* 

" Oh ! with new furniture and fittings-up, I sup- 



A CHILLING BECEPTIOK. . 298 

pose, mother. Now that Charlie is in it, I see how 
shabby it all looks.'' 

^' I shall consider it the most shameful and foolish 
extravagance if you do have new furniture/' Mrs. 
Fellowes replied with severity; "but, there . ^I'm 
old, and not worth considting, I know that" 

Poor Charlie ! 



END OP VOL. I. 
WALTER GORING. 



CHAPTER I. 

VERY strange! 



Young Mrs. Fellowes had a very tender con- 
science. Hard as it may be for those immaculate 
ones who never go wrong through impulse to 
believe it, the impulsive sinners get a goodly 
portion of their hell upon earth. Bemorse is very 
apt to set in with them even before that for which 
they feel remorseful is fairly accomplished. Con- 
sequently they have not so much pleasure even as 
an undivided interest in their current fault or folly 
might give them. 

Charlie was no exception to this hapless general 
rule. Her first evening's experience of The Hurst 
was a bitter one. It was made as miserable to 
her as a brace of captious, jealous, narrow-minded 
women, who yet have a certain amount of right on 



2 WALTER GORING. 

their side, alone can make it. They meant her to 
feel sundry things, and she felt them forthwith as 
fully as they could desire. They intended her to 
remember that she had gained much, and given 
nothing in this marriage. That she had brought 
no grist to the mill. That they had been happy 
before she came, and were not happy now that 
she was there. That they had the first right to 
the allegiance of their son and brother ! All these 
things Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah thought it 
well that Charlie should feel at once ; and all these 
things she felt without 'the smallest hesitation 
under their efficient treatment. 

Her first night in her new home was as hopeless, 
sleepless, miserable a one as she ever remembered 
to have passed. Her nerves and her conscience 
had it all their own way with her. She raked up 
all the meaner motives by which she had been 
actuated in this marriage, and reviewed them 
sternly, and wept in her soul, owning that Nemesis 
had overtaken her justly. She knew that she had 
accepted this man's love because it had opened to 
her a means of escape from a weary, tedious, 
joyless home. She knew that it was the desire to 
have an establishment and a stand-point of her 



VERY STBANGe! S 

own which had led her to say " Yes," when Henry 
Fellowes offered her his honest unselfish love. He 
had put his whole capital into the firm, and she had 
<;ome forward with a false promissory note^ knowing 
that it was just a toss-up whether or not it would 
be eventually dishonoured. She had thought of the 
home she would have. -of the position she would 
fill . of the taste she would be firee to exercise as 
the idolised wife of a rich man. Now Nemesis had 
overtaken her. She was distrusted and disliked 
by his nearest relatives, and she owned to herself 
that had they known the truth concerning her 
motives in marrying him, their dislike and distrust 
^ould have been founded on good grounds. She 
vras made to feel herself a mere cipher in the house 
where she had meant to rule a little queen. She 
was doomed to uncongenial companionship, from 
which she had not the smallest prospect of escap- 
ing; and she knew that she deserved it all, and 
acknowledged, that though hard, these things were 
but just ; for she had come to like her husband 
now, and so understood the nature of the sin she 
had sinned against him in marrying him merely for 
the furtherance of her own social aims. 

She resolved. sensibly enough . ^that he should 

B 2 



4 WALTEB GOBIKG. 

remain in ignorance of the lax regard she had 
had for him in those first days when he had been 
brimming over with love for her. The knowledge 
of it could do him no good . might possibly do him 
harm, in that it might render him a prey to sus- 
picions of her all his life. Praiseworthy as it is to 
cry mea culpa, it is perhaps just as well to say it 
in a still small voice to oneself alone. To utter it 
aloud is noble, but rash. He should remain in 
ignorance of that early lax regard, and for the 
future his happiness and his honour should be all 
in all to her. She would concentrate all her 
energies in furthering the former and redounding 
to the latter. She would bear and forbear for his 
sake . bow the neck gracefully to his mother, and 
suflfer his sister with meek smiles. She would 
be as nothing in The Hurst . The Hurst ! . ^to be 
mistress of which she had married him. So, 
eventually, Nemesis might be appeased, and the 
mercenary motive of her marriage forgiven her. 

It was easy to come to these resolutions, and 
to feel humble, not to say abject, in the night, 
when she was worn out with remorse, sleeplessness, 
and disappointment. But Charlie was a high- 
spirited girl, full of vitality and impatient of con- 



VERY strange! 5 

ti'o], stupidity^ injustice, and other wearisome 
things. She knew herself, though she did make 
these resolutions, and vow to adhere to them, that 
she would be subjected to a thousand temptations 
to break or fling them aside ; and she could not go 
to her husband to strengthen and aid her! For 
she knew that a recital of the resolutions might 
possibly lead to conjectures as to the reason for 
fonning them. High-spirited as Charlie was, she 
did shrink from placing the fact before her hus- 
band that when she married him he was little more 
to her than a necessary but uncoveted appendage 
to The Hurst. The heart of a man is delicate 
ground to travel over. He might not find all- 
sufficient compensation for this fact in the one 
that now she had grown to regard and estimate 
him properly. 

It was easy to come to these resolutions in the 
night; but uncommonly hard to hold to them in 
the daytime. Henry Fellowes left his wife very 
much to her own devices the day after his return 
home. He farmed his own land, and he had been 
away from it for some time, therefore he was 
naturally desirous of seeing how things had gone 
upon it as soon as possible. Consequently directly 



6 WAIiTER GORING. 

after breakfast he went out, and Charlie was left to* 
herself. 

She had asked him before he left, " If he would 
show her the house ?" and he had replied, " Oh, yes ! 
or Dinah will, won't you, Dinah ?'* which was not 
at all the same kind of thing. However, when her 
brother was fairly off, Miss Dinah bore down upon 
her sister-in-law with a big basket of keys in her 
hand, and told Mrs. Fellowes, junior, that if she 
wanted to see The Hurst she must do so at once ? 

" Perhaps I could find my way about by myself, "^ 
Charlie answered, unwarily, "I don^t want to 
trouble you.*' To which Miss Dinah replied, that 
"they didn't like to have people running in and 
out of the rooms, and therefore they kept them 
locked/' Hearing this, Charlie subsided into 
silence, and followed the gaunt creature, feeling 
very sorry for herself. 

It was a dreary progress that they made. The 
majority of the bedrooms were locked, and when 
they were opened they smelt and looked like 
sepulchres. They had all been furnished solemnly, 
and their shutters were all closed. In addition to 
this lively treatment, they were, one and all, the 
shrine for huge funereal urns, in which the corpses. 



VERY STBANGE ! 7 

of roses and other flowers, that had once been sweet 
and fair, were buried with bits of bay salt. Charlie 
could not help lowering her voice in these rooms^ 
and feeling more of a miserable sinner than ever. 
Anything more subduing than the spectacle of the 
bed and window curtains, all done up in pale 
holland shrouds, it is difficult to imagine. 

"Are they never used?" Charlie asked, when 
ihey came out of the fourth deserted room. 

" Never ; but they are swept every week,'* Miss 
Dinah replied. "We are very particular about 
that ; and as I always keep the doors locked, no one 
can go in, so the furniture keeps beautifully. If 
one isn't very careful, things soon go to rack and 
ruin in housekeeping." 

Charlie tried to look wise on the subject. 

" So my sister found," she said. " Ellen has 
been married eight years, and she has furnished her 
drawing-room twice.'* 

" Bather extravagant, unless her husband got a 
fortune with her, I think," Miss Dinah replied, 
fixing Charlie severely with her maiden eye. 
" Well, you have seen all the up-stairs rooms now, 
with the exception of my mother's and mine. I 
suppose you don't want to see them ? " 



« WALTER GORING. 

" No, thank you," Charlie replied hurriedly, " I'll 
go down into the drawing-room. I'm so much 
obliged to you for having shown me the house." 

" Won't you find it cold in the drawing-room ? " 
Miss Dinah asked. She had been on the point of 
walking away, but she turned round and looked at 
Charlie as she asked this. 

" Oh, no ! I '11 have a good fire made up, thank 
you.^' 

"We never have a fire in the drawing-room in 
the morning," Miss Dinah said> decidedly. " The 
dining-room is well warmed and much more com- 
fortable, we think ; besides, my brother Henry is 
accustomed to find us there when he comes in at 
eleven, and he won't like any change made.'' She 
.walked off when she had said this, and Charlie 
stood gazing after her in a half-bewildered way. 
"I don't like to ask him . he will think me so 
inquisitive, as he has never told me ; but the place 
must belong as much to them as it does to my 
husband. Why on earth did he bring me here to 
be nothing ! " 

For about an hour Charlie went and sat in her 
dull, ugly bedroom. " It might be made so pretty ! " 
she thought as she looked at the big bay window. 



VERT STRANGE I 9 

which it had in common with many another room 
in The Hurst . " it might be made so pretty ! And 
then in the summer I should have some place in 
which I could sit, without feeling uncomfortable. 
I wonder if there 's a library ! '* She started up as 
she thought this, and ran down-stairs. In the hall 
she saw a servant on her knees, sweeping up dust 
that was not there. "Where's the library, or 
study ? . there is one ? " she asked ; and the girl 
replied, 

" That ^s the door down at the end of that 
passage, M'm; shall I get the key from Miss 
Dinah?" 

" Oh, no ! " Charlie answered. She felt intui- 
tively that the library would not be worth the key ; 
besides, she was chilled and dispirited by her long 
sojourn upstairs. So she walked into the dining- 
room, and seated herself in a chair by the fire, and 
tried not to see Mrs. Fellowes' irritating expression 
of being hard at work mending stockings. 

The old lady had taken no notice of her 
daughter-in-law on her entrance. She had gone on 
darning the stockings without even so much as 
looking up; but Charlie had seen the ungracious 
look deepen on her face, and once more my heroine's 



10 WALTER GORING. 

tender conscience smote her keenly. " Supposing 
some instinct should have taught her that I married 
Harry without caring a bit for him ? '* she thought. 
" No wonder she hates me . I hate myself.*' Then 
she sat and watched Mrs. Fellowes* grim face till 
its intense unpleasantness goaded her into speech. 

"Are you not feeling well this morning?" she 
asked as gently as she could. 

" Quite as well as I ever can expect to feel, 
thank you," Mrs. Fellowes answered tartly. " I 
have not much in this world to make me feel well, 
or look well," she added, as though she rather 
expected to be rewarded by looking robust when 
she was disembodied. The reply not being framed 
in such a way as to make a continuance of that 
subject pleasant, Charlie tried another. 

" I like the house very much . ^what I have seen 
of it." 

"Do you?" 

" Yes, very much. When my husband comes in, 
I shall make him take me into the library, and 
round to the stables and gardens. I want to know 
all about my home as soon as I can. I wish he 
would make haste in ! '* 

" Don't you think it would be better if you 



. VERY STRANGE I H 

employed yourself with something useful, Mrs» 
Henry, instead of idling about, as you have been,, 
all the morning ? When your husband comes in,, 
he will be better pleased to see you with some 
work in your hands, than to have you wanting to 
run about in the damp." 

" He won't see me with any work in my hands," 
Charlie replied, laughing. ^'Needles are things I 
never interfere with by any chance." 

"I'm only glad," Mrs. Fellowes rejoined, with 
snappish emphasis, " that you have always been sa 
well able to afford to pay people to do your work 
for you ; in this family we 're obliged to do many 
things that we don't quite like." 

Charlie rose quickly, and got herself away out 
of the room. " I can't stand it another morning ! "^ 
she thought, as she ran up for her hat and shawL 
"I would rather get frost-bitten than sit in the 
room with that horrid grim old woman. How shall 
I live through it, if my husband means always to 
be out of the house ? " Then she went out, and 
walked about in the damp November air, because 
there was no comer in her husband's home where 
she could be at peace. There was no unkind feeling 
towards the man she had married, in her heart; 



Ifi WALTEB GORING. 

nevertheless, she did think within herself, " It 
would have been better for me to have tried the 
other path . the path that Walter Goring pointed 
out. I shall get blighted here-i-Ood help me ! " 

Her sensations were rather curious than agree- 
able as she walked along over the land of which 
her husband was lord . walked along it for the first 
time. There was none of the usual womanly ela- 
tion of heart at being the wife of a man who had a 
stake in the country. On the contrary, there was 
considerable depression. The sense of her own 
insignificance came over her strongly as she saun- 
tered slowly over the soil, and felt, " All this is 
his ! . and I can't have a fire when I want it ! . 
and am told by an old woman whom I never saw 
till yesterday, that I ought to be ashamed of myself 
because I 'm not fond of darning stockings ! I 
know it would be better for us all in the end if I 
only stood up, and asserted myself; but " 

"But" conscience makes cowards of us all. 
She could not stand up and assert herself to the 
mother of the man, whom she had used as a ladder 
. a thing by means of which she had hoped to 
climb out of obscurity. Perhaps a better woman 
than Charlie St. John would never have done this ; 



VEBY stbangb! 13 

but, unquestionably^ no woman» however good in 
deed, could have more bitterly . ^more humbly- 
repented herself of the error. She was far too sen- 
sitive to be a successful sinner. She suffered too 
surely and too sharply to make the game worth the 
candle. 

Perhaps no bride has ever felt more aggrieved 
than did this girl as she walked about The Hurst 
grounds the day after that ** coming home/* which 
is usually a bright era in a woman's life. Had she 
been left uninterruptedly to herself, she would have 
beguiled the period of her husband*s absence by 
bright thoughts of his coming back . in making 
herself at home> and manifest in the house, as it 
were. But she was not left to herself. She was 
left to a couple of hard, honest, narrow-minded 
women, who were perfectly justified, from their 
rigorous point of view, in being unpleasant to her. 
All her hopes had been dashed in a sudden and 
unexpected way, that was in itself subversive of 
many of her best intentions. She could not carry 
her grievance to her husband, for reasons that have 
been given before, and she knew that none other 
than her husband could help her in this strait. 
Altogether, she felt very miserable, and very much 



14 WALTER GORING. 

as if she were left to herself to perish, as she 
walked along under the trees through which the 
wind came moaning on that November morning, 

To have come to this pass at her age. She 
could not help it; loving wife as she was now, or 
would have been had she been let, she had a feeling 
of having done so poorly with her life. To have 
brought her wonderful capacity for both pain and 
pleasure into such a commonplace market as this 
promised to be! To have put herself, with her 
capabilities, into a position where she would be 
liable to such very little things in the way of 
troubles and annoyances. She pictured herself 
growing middle-aged in this companionship which 
she knew would grow more and more loathsome 
to her daily. Middle-aged under the auspices of 
the grim ,wpman with the three-cornered shawl! 
Old under the eyes of the sister who carried the 
keys of every room into which she (Charlie) desired 
to go, and who, went by the name of Dinah ! To 
be helpless before them; to have nothing beyond 
them; to have to trim her sails to the wind that 
suited them; to learn to tolerate the life they 
liked! She felt that she had wrapped up her 
talent in a napkin with a vengeance, as she thought 



VERY STBAMGE 



! . 15 



over these things, and knew them to be partly 
deserved, for had she not married solely and wholly 
for the sake of being free, imfettered, well-placed, 
and well-established? The future of nothingness 
that had loomed before her in Robert Prescott's 
house had not been so dark a thing as this; for 
this was clearly a judgment on the lightness with 
which she had suffered herself to be wooed and won 
without an atom of love on her part. 

After a time she reached the entrance to a little 
grass-grown lane, guarded by a little wicket-gate. 
She turned into it, and walked on scarcely heeding 
where she was going, till she came to a wall that 
was built across the road and into the meadows on 
either side. Suddenly she remembered the right 
of way question between old Mr. Goring and old 
Mr. Fellowes, of which her husband had told her, 
and she knew that she must be on the border of 
the Goring Place estate. 

The thought brought back very pleasant memo- 
ries of the man who now owned it, of the man who 
had once on a time . ah ! how long ago it seemed 
now I . fired her ambition in that drawing-room at 
Boehampton, and since then had said a few frank 
friendly words to her in a soft tone on the pier at 



16 .WALTER GORING. 

Brighton. Their intercourse had been but a brief 
thing, but somehow or other it was very deeply 
graven on her mind. It had been but a brief slight 
thing, but she felt that it had been one of the 
sweetest, most graceful experiences of her life, and 
so she was grateful to the man who had given it to 
her. Is it a fact, that " women's hearts are made 
for minstrels' hands alone," and that they do lack 
half their tone when played by other fingers ? 
Certain it is that we, none of us, think that lady 
ill-endowed to whom nature " gave sense, good 
humour, and a poet," and the latter does not rank 
as the lesser good. 

Thinking of him, and thinking of him kindly, 
the forlorn young bride who was so left to herself 
was seized with a great desire to see a bit of 
Goring Place. For a few minutes she seriously 
thought of trying to scale the wall ; but she gave 
up that idea quickly, for the wall was slippery with 
November damp. Then she leant' against the par- 
tition that had been made in ill temper, and went 
into a day-dream, wherein she saw herself altered 
and aged, and still a mere nothing at The Hurst ; 
and that yellow-haired girl whom she had met in 
the road near Portslade on the night of her own 



VERY STRANGE ! 17 

engagement . the mistress of Walter Goring*s home 
and heart. ''And there will be no mother and 
sister to keep her out of either/' she thought with 
a sore feeling ; " and if there were, no mother or 
sister could choke the way to Walter Ooring's 
heart." Then she pulled her hat a little lower 
over her eyes, and drew her shawl more closely 
around her, and set off back through the drift that 
was worse than rain, in that there was more want 
of purpose about it, to regain The Hurst, and, she 
hoped, have some luncheon. 

Meanwhile Henry Fellowes had come in, well 
pleased with the way in which aU things had gone 
during his absence, and anxious to communicate 
his good pleasure to his wife. 

"Where's Charlie?" he asked, the instant he 
opened the door of the dining-room, where his 
mother still sat darning stockings in a way that 
was enough to make a man curse the loom in 
which they were made. 

"Mrs. Henry is gone out most imprudently," 
the old lady replied, looking up at her son over 
her spectacles. 

"Gone out walking?" 

" Yes ; I told her that you would be more pleased 

YOL. n. 



18 WALTEB GORING. 

to find her in with some work in her hands whenr 
you came back; bat Mrs. Henry does not like 
work, and does, I am sorry to see, like to have her 
own way." 

" Well, mother, and why not ? I can't have her 
walking about in this weather after that illness of 
hers, though," he continued, going to the window,, 
and looking for his wife on the grass plot. " Why 
do you call her 'Mrs. Henry ' always, mother?" 

" It is difl&cult to know what to call her, Henry,"' 
his mother replied ; " her head is like a boy's, and 
she has a boy's name, by which I cannot bring 
myself to address her. If you wish it, and she 
wishes it, I do not mind calling her Charlotte^ 
which is what her godfathers and godmothers- 
meant to be her name, if she ever had any." 

Mrs. Fellowes had commenced her speech with 
much calm deliberation, but she wound it up 
with a degree of vicious haste and excitement 
that was bad for her needle. That implement 
broke . snapt off short . and Mrs. Fellowes sought 
for its fellow with tears in her eyes, and a 
trembling throughout her frame caused by righteous 
resentment. 

" Don't call her Charlotte y she doesn't like it," 



T£BT STRANGE I 19 

he said carelessly^ as he walked towards the door. 
He was exceedingly unobsenrant of feminine tem- 
pers and tremblings and troubles. '^I'll go and 
look for her. I have some news that will please 
her, I think ; and, mother, see that luncheon is on 
the table by half-past one, will you ? " 

The old lady sighed assent. 

" You wish to dine late then, Henry ?" 

*' Yes ; at six or half-past, I don't care." Then 
he went into the haU and found an old cap, and 
went out into the garden to search for his wife. 

"When he was gone his mother summoned the 
cook, and that functionary agreed with her to her 
heart's content as to the shamefulness of altering 
hours that had been held to be the only good and 
proper ones at which to feed in that house for more 
years than could be easily counted. "However, 
we'll dine at half-past six for the future, cook ; and 
when I'm dead, perhaps Mr. Henry will remember 
that years ago Doctor Oldiield said, ' My dear lady, 
I won^t answer for your life if you don't dine 
punctually at two o'clock constantly.' Those were 
his words, cook . ^not that I should wish Mr. Henry 
to think of them for a moment; of course I'm 
nothing." 

2 



20 WALTER GORING. 

" I've no patience with such ways," the symr 
pathetic cook rejoined. 

"Ah!" Mrs. Fellowes resumed, bitterly, "young 
people are very different now, very different indeed, 
to what they were fifty years ago; then we dined 
when it suited our fathers and mothers." 

"Well, there, ma'am, don't take on; Mr. Henry 
will know better some day." 

"I sincerely , hope he never may know, cook. 
I'm only an old woman hastening to my grave. 
I don't want my son's conscience to be burdened 
with the thought that his folly made his mother's 
last days miserable. Yes ; harricot beans and 
Jerusalem artichokes and celery will be vegetables 
enough, I think ; but there, I can hardly think at 
all to-day." 

" Ah, ma'am, master would find the difference if 
he hadn't you to think for him. The young lady 
seems, by what they tell me, to be very nice spoken 
and likely, but no more head than nothing for 
housekeeping, I should say." 

In reply to which Mrs. Fellowes gave a fierce 
little "Ah!" and then a lachrymose groan, and 
then dropped a few tears in amongst the darning 
cotton. As she uttered no words, however, Cook 



VERT STRANGE 1 21 

was obliged to feel herself dismissed ; bat she had 
a pretty little tale to carry back to the kitchen. 

In about five minutes from the moment of Henry 
Fellowes leaving the house he met his wife, and 
the way in which she sprang to meet him caused 
him straightway to forget any small annoyance his 
mother might have caused him. In fact, this loyal- 
hearted honest gentleman was just as much to 
blame as all the rest. Being gifted with a certain 
thickness of skin, he did regard things that were 
dagger-blows and spear-thrusts to another as mere 
pin-pricks. He was not readily annoyed, and he 
was very quick to forget annoyances. He could 
always walk out into the fresh air and forget any 
number of feminine frowns. He had been used to 
his mother being disagreeable, and his sister un- 
sympathetic, for so many years, that he regarded 
their being so as quite in the order of nature. He 
did not heed them; they were powerless to ruffle 
him, and he forgot how sorely his sensitive young 
wife must suffer through them. 

"I am so glad to see you, Harry; I have had 
such a wretched morning," she cried ; and had lie 
responded in any way the whole story, despite her 
resolutions, would have come out then. But he 



22 WALTEB GOBINa. 

did not respond ; he only tacked her hand into his 
arm, and replied . 

'' Yes ; you shouldn't have come out in the rain, 
my darling. I shall be having you laid up. I 
find everything has gone on capitally on the farm, 
Charlie. My bailiff is a brick." 

" I wish you had taken me over the farm with 
you. I have been down to the end of a lane trying 
to peer over at Goring Place." 

" By-the-way, I have some news for you, Charlie. 
I met Goring out riding, and he wants me to let a 
house . ^a very pretty cottage I have in the village . 
to a friend of his, a widow lady, who wishes to 
come and live here ; another neighbour for you." 

" Mrs. Walsh ? " Charlie cried, interrogatively. 

" Yes ; that's the name. t>o you know her ? " 

" Slightly . ^yes ; it was at her house that I first 
met Walter Goring. She's a widow, I know, now ; 
and so she wants to come and live here ? how very, 
very strange." 



CHAPTER n. 

THE BBIDE AT HOME. 

The neighbourhood about Deneham was gene* 
Tally spoken of by its inhabitants as a remarkably 
lively and sociable one. It was not too thickly 
studded with county magnates. Walter Goring 
was the sole large landed proprietor . ^with the 
exception of Lord Harrocoats . ^in the vicinity; 
^and Lord Harrocoats cannot be said to count, since 
lie was rarely visible to the eyes of the profane in 
that part of the world. Society in those regions 
was composed chiefly of the families of men who 
had " places," and farmed their own land, but who 
had no land beyond that which they kept in their 
own hands ; and of gentlemen-farmers who rented 
so many acres that they were of more power, 
parochially and locally, than the men of small 
estates. 



24 WALTER GORING. 

Henry Fellowes was one of the latter class. The 
Hurst was a mansion, and the land surrounding it 
was his own. But he farmed the whole of it 
himself, having no superfluous acres to let, and 
soar by these means into the dignity of a landed 
gentleman, with gentlemen-tenants under him. In 
fact, he was a yeoman . not a county magnate, and 
he was one of many about Deneham. 

There was rather a clanish atmosphere about the 
neighbourhood. For the last two- or three genera- 
tions, it appeared as if every one within a radius of 
fifty miles of Deneham, had had large families with 
tender feelings towards each other. They had in 
truth so married and intermarried, that it behoved 
the stranger in the land to be very careful how he 
spoke well, or ill, or at all about one to the other. 
It was a neighbourhood that lunched, and dined, 
and took tea incessantly with, and was liable to raids 
from any other portion of itself at any moment, in 
fact. On the whole, a very social, charming neigh- 
bourhood. A trifle too much given to conversing 
about its own affairs with wild interest for the 
aforesaid stranger to feel at ease at all times . but 
very social and charming, and intimate never- 
theless. 



THE BRIDE AT HOBIE. 25 

It accorded Mrs. Fellowes, the bride, a week to 
get into place before it came to call upon her. It 
was very impatient to see her, but it curbed its 
impatience, and took it out in calling frantically 
about upon itself, and reporting all that had oozed 
out respecting her. This was very little, but it 
ivas appetising. It disapproved of the way in which 
she had entrapped Mr. Fellowes, but would say 
nothing more about that, since he had married her ; 
but it ''must say, that it was a pity that she should 
wear her hair short . so masculine." It forbore to 
add, that it was reputed becoming, and that a fever 
had forced her into the reprehended fashion. 

When the week expired, she was " at home " in 
the square drawing-room, and the ceremony set in 
with severity. Old Mrs. Fellowes undertook the 
organisation of it, and assisted at it in a new three- 
cornered shawl. She insisted on her son's staying 
in for long hours during several dreary days, to 
hear people congratulate and sip sherry, and eat 
cake at him. 

The old lady grew gracious to her daughter-in- 
law during those days. Playing a prominent part in 
it herself, she tolerated Charlie as an essential 
portion of the pageant. She liked to hear her son*s 



20 WALTER GORING. 

wife reminded by old family friends, that she 
(Charlie) possessed in inestimable blessing and 
privilege in having a mother-in-law and sister who 
would doubtless save her all housekeeping trouble 
and responsibility. They patronised the young 
wife in a semi-playful way, as a thing to be gra- 
dually ripened and improved, and rendered fit for 
Deneham and its environs. Mrs. Fellowes, senior, 
enjoyed this manner of theirs. She enjoyed their 
parting whispers also. Many of them kindly stated 
theii* belief, that " in time she will do very well . 
oh ! very well indeed ; youll be here to correct any 
little folly you see ; at present she does give herself 
airs; ah ! it is hard, no doubt, when you think of 
how your son might have married." The last 
clause of the sentence was generally called forth by 
some few brief words from Mrs. Fellowes, to the 
effect that Charlie "hadn't a penny . ^and was as 
helpless as an infant.^' The statement that Charlie 
"gave herself airs," was simply a fiction, which 
;grew out of the fact that she did not appear to be 
impressed with the airs of those who came to see 
her. 

On one occasion she came to the front, and did 
battle valiantly for a woman whom she did not like. 



THE BBIDE AT HOME. 27 

Mr. Goring had come in and stayed for ten minutes, 
and during those ten mintftes he had talked ex- 
clusively to Henry Fellowes and Charlie, and so had 
aggrieved the rest. As soon as he left, Mrs. Travers 
said sketchily, that '' it could have been wished that 
things were different at Goring Place," and Charlie, 
on whom the rectoress was beaming for the first 
time, looked an eager '' why and how," though she 
said nothing. 

"Ah!" Mrs. Fellowes struck in, "it's in the 
blood ; I always said so." She did not say what 
was in the blood, or what she had always said. But 
mystery invariably makes its mark. Mrs. Travers, 
a tall, thin lady, with a high sharp nose ; only shook 
her head by way of replying to this, and assumed 
that air of sorrow for the sins of one's neighbours, 
which is one of the easiest, most agreeable, and 
effective forms of Christianity. 

"What is in the blood ?. talent ? " CharUe 
asked. 

Old Mrs. Fellowes shook her .head. In all sin- 
cerity she did believe that talent and genius were 
only more uncommon forms of depravity and reck- 
lessness. Her chief ideas on the subject were 
gleaned from stray readings of the memoirs of 



28 WALTER 60BING. 

Byron, Beau Brummel, and others, who had dis- 
tinguished themselves ^either in cantos or cravats. 
Therefore, when Charlie asked, if " it was talent 
in the blood ? '' she shook her head, and moralised 
in her heart on the decay of "dread of evil *' in the 
modem day. 

"It was a pity, a great pity," Mrs. Travers 
resumed, " that Mr. Goring should have kept open 
house and plunged into gaiety immediately after his 
uncle's death ; it does not do for young people to 
disregard the world ; we called, and I wanted Mr. 
Travers to speak to him ; but there it is," turning 
to Mrs. Fellowes, senior, " Mr. Travers never will.'' 
Mrs. Travers stopped, shook her head, and looked 
sorry for Mr. Travers and the world in general. 

"What did you want Mr. Travers to speak 
about ? " Charlie asked, laughingly. She was not 
suflSciently impressed with these people and their 
power . she dared to look glad when they looked 
glum. 

"It was enough to make one^s hair stand on end, 
to hear of their goings on," old Mrs. Fellowes said, 
sharply. 

" Oh ! it was the worst taste," Mrs. Travers 
replied, with a bland delight in the badness of it 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 29 

that was most refreshing to witness. " I was willing 
to countenance the girl, pitying her, poor thing! 
and feeling, that grossly as her parents have sinned, 
we are not called upon to judge ; but~oh, no; she 
preferred the laxity of manners at Goring Place, 
and so kept away from me." 

** Ah ! it's in the blood," Mrs. Fellowes said, 
savagely. 

" She's a pretty girl, that cousin of his," Henry 
Fellowes put in hurriedly, hoping to avert the storm 
of feminine invective against feminine evil-doing, 
which he saw was ready to break ; ** she was riding 
with Goring that night we met him, if you re- 
member, Charlie ? " 

Did she not remember it? Aye, and every 
shade of the light, and every flicker of the 
leaves, under which they met! Some things get 
burnt into the memory, and, till the end comes, who 
can tell whether they are burnt in for a purpose 
or not. 

** She's a very impertinent, under-bred girl," 
Mrs. Travers said, severely; "I assure you, the 
way she talked to Mr. Travers made his blood 
run cold . cold." 

" Well, well,^* Henry Fellowes said, persuasively, 



80 WALTER GORING. 

" we can't hold young Goring accountable for her, 
you know; he's done the best thing he can do 
about her, I think, sent her to live with a clergy- 
man's widow, near Brighton ; he couldn't help her 
being there when he came." 

"But he might have helped having the extra- 
ordinary people he had down there, so indecorously 
soon after his uncle's death ; it was outrageous, I 
assure you, Mr. Fellowes . positively outrageous." 

" What did they do ? " Charlie asked sharply. 
She saw her husband looking at her imploringly, 
but she had lost all desire to keep the peace. 

"Oh! tearing all over the county . they were 
professionals, you know . all professionals; there 
was a man who painted, I believe, and another man 
who sang, and their wives and sisters ; very respect- 
able people in their way, but not the sort of people 
we are accustomed to receive." 

" No ; I should think not," Charlie replied. With 
a mind given, as hers was, to the glorification of 
intellect and cultivation, this sort of talk was 
absolutely painful to her. She ached as she sat 
and listened to it ; she would far rather have been 
subjected for hours to the cruder observations of 
her cook. Mrs. Travers, however, mistook the 



THE BBIDE AT HOME. 81 

feeling which dictated Charlie's speech, and said in 
answer to it, . 

'^ Mr. Goring may have been obliged to associate 
with such people while he was writing for hia 
living . as I really understand he did! . ^but now 
that he occupies such a very different position, he 
ought not to make so much of his Walshes and 
Levinges; he might be friendly with them . ^but 
he should be careful how he brings them here." 

" He should indeed,^' Charlie said, looking 
steadily at her guest, "for Mrs. Walsh is one of 
the most fastidious women in London.*' 

" A set of atheists . ^if that's what you call talent, 
and genius, and fastidiousness,*' Mrs. Fellowes said 
sharply; "they never could go to church in the 
morning, any of them. Oh! no, it was too hot; 
but they could sit out on the lawn and read their 
trashy books, and drink their trashy claret from 
morning till night. I call it loose . hose, that's 
what I call it." 

"Well; we will hope the best,*' Mrs. Travers 
said, energetically . so energetically, that all who 
heard her, immediately thought the very blackest 
things that were possible of the master of Goring 
Place and his late guests. Then she rose up, and 



S2 WALTER GOBING. 

prepared to take her leave; and Henry Fellowes 
made her departure pleasant by saying to her, . 

" We are all likely to know more of Mrs. Walsh . 
she is coming to be my tenant/' 

"Your tenant! where?" 

"Brook Green Cottage; she has taken it for 
three years ! " 

" She's a person who will be no acquisition to the 
village," Mrs. Travers said, severely ; and Charlie 
answered, maliciously, . 

"Oh! I hope she may be induced not to hold 
herself entirely aloof from us ! " 

" Aloof from us ! . aloof from us, indeed I " Mrs. 
Travers retorted ; but she would not trust herself 
to say more just then ; and in the midst of her dis- 
comfiture there was this balm . ^namely, that the 
bride would be made to pay a severe penalty for 
her audacity as soon as she should be left alone in 
the bosom of her husband's family. 

Women can make one another miserable in such 
infinitesimally small ways, that a man can rarely 
be brought to comprehend how the business is 
managed. A sentence, uttered in all suavity, acts 
frequently like a blister on the ears feminine on 
which it falls, while the contemporaneous male 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 83 

auditor thinks it merely foolish or friendly, as the 
case may be* Yoong Mrs. Fellowes had made a 
foe of the wife of her spiritual pastor and master 
by the way she uttered, what sounded to Henry 
Fellowes merely a natural, kind speech, expressive 
of a desire for future intercourse . with Mrs. Walsh. 
He merely saw in it a further illustration of that 
insanity which prompts women to pant to see more 
of a sight which rarely gives them pleasure . each 
other, namely. Mrs. Travers saw in it an insult 
to herself. *'Her manner of vindicating the goings 
on at Goring Place, was disgusting/' Mrs. Travers 
told her husband, when she got back to him, after 
her visit to the bride, *'no religious principles 
evidently, and a very, very lax idea of what is due 
to the world. I suppose we must ask them to 
dinner ? What day shall it be ? " 

" Well ; we had better give them long notice . 
say Tuesday week; we must ask Goring to meet 
them." 

" Yes, of course ; I hope nothing will prevent his 
coming/' Mrs. Travers replied, earnestly. Despite 
the irreligious tendencies she had discovered in 
these people, she was very anxious that they should 
meet, and be amused under her roof. In the 
yoL. lu » 



3^ WALTEB GORING. 

intervals between her dinner-parties, she was, as 
became a Christian, ready enough to consign the 
denizens of Goring Place and The Hurst to per- 
dition ; but when she did invest fabulous sums in 
venison and melons, she was desirous, as became 
a good housewife, that the ^best people" in the 
neighbourhood should refresh themselves at her 
table. 



CHAPTER nL 

UBS. FEIXOWES, SEiaOB, OX PBOPBIETr. 

Vf ALTER GoBiKG hid oulj stayed a few minates 
when he came to make the hiidal call at The HursL 
He disliked being tat npon a chair in the society of 
old Mrs. Fellowes and her daughter, and expected 
to talk polite conyersation all ronncL He had 
nothing to say to them, and they had nothing to 
say to him that he cared to hear, and their atmo- 
sphere was a depressing one to him. Henry 
Fellowes, too, was unlike himself at this period. 
No man can be expected to be at his best when all 
his friends are sipping wine and eating cake, that 
will assuredly disagree with them, towards his long 
life and conjugal happiness.. Walter Goring felt 
hiraseK to be guilty of a piece of society-sham on 
liis first visit to The Hurst ; therefore he made the 
call as short as possible, and promised himself that 

j> 2 



86 WALTER GORING. 

he would soon come again and see them under more 
natural and auspicious circumstances. 

Accordingly, about ten days after his first call, 
he made another at The Hurst. He rode over 
iELbout twelve o'clock, meaning to go in, in the 
orthodox country neighbour fashion, and have a 
talk with Fellowes and his wife, and stay to lun- 
cheon with them. He liked both Charlie and her 
husband ; she interested him still, though she had 
in a measure disappointed him. He recognised the 
latent power, and liked it, though it might never 
come forward now ; still, it was there, he knew, and 
he liked and sympathised with it. Above all, he 
liked her for that most human of all reasons.^ 
because he saw that she liked him. 

His book was out, and he carried a copy of it 
over with him, in order to present it, according to 
the promise given on the Brighton pier to Mrs. 
Fellowes. As he rode along, he rather looked 
forward to a pleasant morning's gossip with her 
about the novel, and with her husband about the 
next ''meet,'* and what was doing on their land, 
and various other subjects of mutual interest to 
them. It was disappointing, therefore^ when he 
arrived, to be shown into the room where old 



MRS. FELLOWESy SENIOB, ON PB0PBIET7. ^7 

Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah were sitting wiUi 
Charlie. 

** I didn't bargain for this," he thought, when the 

first silence fell-^as it was inevitable it should fall-"-- 

almost immediately after his entrance^ He had 

really nothing to say to Charlie that he could not» 

with the most perfect credit and propriety, have 

cried aloud in the market-place. But he could not 

say it glibly and comfortably before these two 

women. Again, the feeling of being sat upon a 

chair, and expected to say right things respecting 

the weather and the world in general^ came over 

him. His yoi^ng hostess, too, was not at her 

ease . that was plainly visible to him, A good deal 

of her brightness was gone; a good deal of her 

quick appreciation of his brightness was gone. He 

had the feeling that it was horribly ill-bred to 

exclude the two elder ladies from the conversation, 

^d horribly unpleasant, to say nothing of its being 

piorally impossible, to include them in it. He was 

weighted with the conviction that they would not 

follow what he said, unless he added explanatory 

notes. In short, he was thoroughly bored and put 

out by their presence, by their silence, by their 

speaking. by everything about them. 



38 WALTER GORIN©. 

He made one or two futile attempts to be as he 
had been before. Handing his yolmnes to Charlie^ 
he began, 

"I have kept my promise, you see. I have- 
brought you * The Cost of a Cure.' You really 
have a right to it, for I was stuck in the middle of 
the seeond volume,, when I met you first, for want 
of a character to enact certain parts . ^you suggested 
one to me/' 

" Did I, really ? '* Charlie replied, hastily, taking 
the books from his hand. As she did so, he saw 
her glance quickly at Mrs. Fellowes, who was 
looking at her with that sagacious look over the 
spectacles which is sufficient in itself to drive the 
one on whom it is brought to bear, into gibbering 
idiotcy. His allusion recalled to Charlie's mind 
the way in whieh she had girded at her fate on that 
night; the glance towards Mrs. Fellowes was die*, 
tated by another prick of conscience . it was dislike 
to facing that fate she knew, which had led her on 
to marry that lady's son. This was the true inter* 
pretation of her shy, deprecfating glance ; but Mrs* 
Fellowes gave it another meaning. " So they \e 
been talking some of the sickly twaddle that 's put 
isx books, have they ? " she thought ; " and after it 



Has. FELLOWESy SENXOB, ON FBOPBIETY. 89 

she had the face to go and cajole my poor infatuated 
son!'' . 

" Will you be a true critic, and tell me what you 
think of it . ^point out some of its faults to me when 
you have read it ? " he asked, presently. 

*'I will try; but I'm not hkely to fix upon any. 
I tell you honestly beforehand/' 

" Why not ?. there are plenty." 

"Probably; but I '' She stopped. The 

sagacious glance was being levelled at her again. 

"The opinion of young ladies about a work 
that's worth anything is not of much yalue, I 
should imagine," Miss Dinah said, with severity. 
" For my own part, I do not pretend to be a judge. 
I do not approve of novels ; and I have found that, 
if I did my duty, I have never had the time to waste 
in reading them." 

Walter Goring was leaning forward, tracing the 
carpet pattern with the lash of his whip while Miss 
Dinah spoke. He just lifted his eyes to Charlie's 
when the speech was concluded, and smiled in a 
way that dispersed Charlie's quickly accumulating 
wrath. " I have no doubt that you are right,'' he 
replied gravely, with perfect politeness; then he 
went on, addressing Charlie alone : 



40 WALTEB OOBIKa. 

"You have not given me your reason yet, 
Mrs. Fellowes . why will you not be able to fix 
npon my faults . the faults of this book, at 
Jeast?" 

** Because . I have not been tested, certainly, 
before . but I think I should lose judgment in the 
case of a person I liked." He looked rather flat* 
tered, and she added, quickly, '* And I shall be sure 
to over-rate your novel, because you're the only 
novelist I know." 

** And if that 's the way she talks to them, I hope 
she may never know another ! '^ was her mother-in- 
law's inward comment on Charlie's rash declara- 
tion. 

" Then aid and. improve me by criticising. Poor 
Walsh and his wife used to be invaluable to. me. in 
that way, as in many another. Were you not sorry 
to hear of his death ? " he asked, heartily. 

" Very sorry. My husband is gone to the village 
this morning, to see how the repairs are going on at 
Brook-green Cottage." 

" Which didn't want repairing," old Mrs. Fellowes 
Tj^marked. 

, *[ Do. you know that he died that night I met you 
out riding near Brighton ? " Walter asked, ignoring 



HBS. YEUXyWESt SEHIOB, OH PBOPBIETT. 41 

Mrs. FeUowes' opinions as to the repairs of the 
Brook-green Cottage. 

" I didn't know that it was that night ; I knew 
that it was about that time. What a pretty girl 
your cousin is, Mr, Goring. When is she coming 
back to Goring Place ? " 

*' I want to have a talk to you about her one day/' 
be replied, meditatively. ** I don't know when she 
will be at Goring Place . when I can get some 
matrons to honour my bachelor abode with their 
presence, I suppose. I shall try to get Mr. Fel- 
lowes and you to favour me with a visit soon, Mrs. 
Fellowes. I want you to see the place." 

"I shall hke to see it. I haven't " she 

checked herself . she was going to add, ** I haven't 
seen anything I like since I have been down here ; " 
but she changed her sentence, and said, " I haven't 
asked you if you dine at the Rectory to-morrow ? '* 

"Yes. do you?" 

'* Yes," she said. And then he rose up, and said 
he would go down and look for Mr. Fellowes at the 
Cottage, and was gone before he had said half he 
had to say to Charlie, or had heard half she had to 
say to him. Amongst other things she had much 
wished to ask him what was going to bring the 



42 WALT£B GOBING. 

beautiful widow down to dull Deneham ? but she 
iiever got a good opening for the question* 

** Why, in the world, does she sit with the tribe ?" 
he thought to himself as he rode away. " There 's 
an end to my calling at The Hurst, if I am always 
to be had in with those women, who neither talk nor 
look well. If she doesn't take care, she will get 
even as they are ; it 's telling on her already ; she 's 
a shade less graceful, through constraint, than when 
I met her at poor Ralph's." 

He found Mr. Fellowe^ down superintending the 
workmen at the Cottage ; in other words, standing 
about, and being very much in their way. " My 
wife is coming down to-morrow morning, to select 
papers and to decide on the colouring for the 
walls," Henry Fellowes explained, when Walter 
made some remark to the effect of how well the 
house would look when finished. " She has excel- 
lent taste, and she is taking a great interest in 
having it all as trim as possible for Mrs. Walsh." 

" That 's really very kind of her," Walter replied. 
He was rather touched by the unobtrusive kindness 
and forethought so displayed by Mrs. Fellowes for 
liis friend. She was doing all she could to make 
things pleasant, and she had refrained from vaunt*- 



MBS. FELL0WE8, SENIOR, ON PBOPBIETY. 4$ 

jng her exertions before him. " That's really very 
kind of her," he repeated. " May I look in here 
to-morrow morning, and assist in the selection ? " 

On Mr. Fellowes saying .' Certainly/* with effu- 
sion, Walter made another request, "And thea 
couldn't you and Mrs. Fellowes come on and lunch 
with me?" 

" Yes, thank you ; a capital arrangement ; it will 
strengthen us for old Travers' party in the evening : 
we'll come with pleasure." And though nothing 
more was said, each man knew that the other waa 
very glad that the impromptu nature of the invita^ 
tion did away with the necessity for including old 
Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah in it. 

" That audacious ptippy has been here," were the 
first words Henry Fellowes heard from his mother,, 
when he saw her alone. 

''Which?" 

" Why, that young man from Goring Place." 

" Oh . ah ! so he told me," he replied, carelessly^ 

" Did you know he was such a very old and inti- 
mate friend of your wife's, Henry ? " 

« No . ^is he ? " the happy-hearted gentleman 
replied, jovially. 

" So it appears ; ah-a-a ! better he 'd stay at home: 



44 WALTEB GOBING. 

and employ himself usefully on his own land than 
come here talking his nonsense. He sat here this 
morning till Dinah and I were quite tired of hearing 
his folly . not but that he was much too great a 
man to talk tq us." 

" Why, mother, he 's one of the best fellows we 
ever had down here," Hemy Fellowes remonstrated. 
He was getting tired . ^long-suffering as he was . of 
every man or woman whom he liked being ruth- 
lessly pulled to pieces, and pronounced wanting 
in this way. Then he went upstairs, and found 
Charlie sitting in her own room, reading. 

"My darling pet, why do you come up in tlie 
cold ? " he asked, affectionately . so affectionately 
that she could not bear to wound him by telling 
^m that it was because his mother and sister made 
the warm room intolerable to her. They had 
picked up the second and third volumes of the 
" Cost of a Cure," and made little sounds expres- 
sive of shock, with their lips, before the author was 
well out of the house ; and they had fervently 
requested her even if she " would persist in reading 
such things herself, to keep them under lock and 
key, as they held themselves not entirely free from 
all responsibility in the matter of the virtue and 



MRS. FELLOWES, SENIOB| OX PROPBIETT. 45 

morality of their servants." Altogether, they jarred 
hev nerves, so she fled from them. But she would 
utter no complaint on the subject to the husband 
who was so good to her» 



CHAPTER IV. 



MASTER AND PUPIL. 



" I WILL drive you down to the Cottage in the 
irap, Charlie," Mr. Fellowes said to his wife the 
following morning, before he left the dining-room 
after breakfast ; " twelve o'clock will be time enough 
for you, eh ? " 

She told him, " Yes,'* she would be ready to go 
by twelve. Even this little break in the daily 
monotony of life at The Hurst was hailed raptu- 
rously by her. Since their return home her husband 
had been so absorbed in various business matters 
that he had never even so much as offered to take 
her for a drive. She was his first, his only thought 
when he was in the house ; but when he was out of 
doors he almost forgot her. He fell back into his 
old habits of riding vigorously about from one end 
of his land to the other, and of actively superin- 



XASCER ASD PCFIU 47 

tendmg iriuderer woiks might be in progress. He 
imagined tliat he had no time for mere pleaanrd 
drires and walks during the daj, and the NoYember 
erenings were not calcidated to show the eonntiy off 
to adyantage. 

So he had soffiered day after day to go by withont 
ever thirilring of taking her beyond The Hurst 
garden : that garden, which was not kept up suffi- 
ciently well to make it ** a thing of beauty " and a 
*'joy for ever/* 

Now, when she agreed to go out with him in the 
trap at twelve o'clock, he reminded himself of this 
habit he had of always being desperately busy 
as soon as he got upon his £ftrm. "I may be 
detained a little ; but, I tell you what, Charlie, if 
I'm not in by twelve, have Moore drive you down' to 
the Cottage, and I will either join you there, or 
meet you at Goring Place at half-past one." 

"Very well," she replied; but she felt disap- 
pointed. She would much rather that her tall, 
handsome husband had driven her through Dene- 
ham in bis dashing trap, than that his groom should 
do so. The bloom was off the plum at once as he 
made the proviso. 
\ **Are you going to Goring Place? I heard 



48 WALTER GOBING; 

noihing of that ? " Mrs. Fellowes senior asked of 
Charlie when they were alone. 

''Yes* Mr. Goring has asked us there to lun- 
cheon this morning." 

" Has he had the civility to include my daughter 
in the invitation ? " 

*' He didn't send any message by me ; if he has 
invited her he has Written to her, I suppose," 
Charlie answered, with a smile at the improbability 
of Walter Goring bringing Dinah upon himself in 
any such way. 

Mrs. Fellowes drew her little shawl more primly 
over her shoulders, and then drawing the work- 
stand, with the eternal stockings upon it, nearer to 
her, she said . 

" If Henry does not join you at the Cottage, of 
course you will not think of going up to Goring 
Place alone?'' 

*' Why, Mrs. Fellowes ? You heard my husband 
tell me to go." Charlie was desperately indignant 
at the suggestion, and desperately afraid that she 
might be driven to act upon it^ and so be deprived 
of this hour or two in Walter Goring's house to 
which she had looked forward. 

** Of course he takes it for granted that his sister 



MASTER AND PUFIL. H 

xAH accompany you," Mrs. Fellowes said, coldly; 
" no one but you would have thought, for an instant, 
of going up there alone. ^setting the world at de- 
fiance ; Dinah will go with you/' 

Charlie almost groaned. Not only was the bloom 
brushed off, but all sweetness was extracted from 
the plum by this unlooked-for arrangement. It 
made her very sick at heart as she contrasted what 
this episode in her existence would be now, with 
what it might have been. 

. It is not too much to say that Charlie cordially 
hated Miss Dinah when even the half-past twelve 
bell rang and her husband did not appear, but in 
his place there came his angular sister. She cor- 
dially hated Miss Dinah, and she did hope, heartily, 
that Miss Dinah would drink of the waters of bit- 
terness, and be much bored. Her sister-in-law's 
appearance was an outrage to her in every way. 
Miss Fellowes was one of those women who array 
themselves in garments of price on state occasions 
only, and then look rather more awkward and out 
of place than they do in their ordinary habiliments. 
She was a woman who would have her dresses made 
what she called a ''nice walking length," short 
enough in fact to offer a free view of feet and ankles 

VOL. II. B 



50^ WALT£B eOBINO. | 

that were not pretty. Her skirts and her whole I 

drapery had a square e£Eect, there was not a curve i 

or a graceful line about her. Charlie hated her as^ ] 

she clambered up, wrong foot foremost, to the back 
of the trap, and felt that the harmony would be 
marred by the presence of this duenna whom she 
was taking. 

They found Walter Goring at the Cottage, and 
there was comfort to Charlie in the way his face 
fell when he saw Miss Dinah. " What did you bring i 

her for, Mrs. FeUowes?" he asked, dolefully; 
for Miss Dinah commenced leaping about among 
the repairs and repairers at once, in a way that left 
her companions unfettered. i 

" What did I bring her for ? " Charlie answered^ 
hastily. " Don't pretend to think that I brought 
her; my husband couldn't join me here, but he is 
going to meet us at your place . that arrangement 
didn't please them, however ; so, as soon as Harry 
was gone put, they altered it^ and Miss FeUowes 
took possession of me.^' She laughed, as she spoke, 
but in a way that showed him she was very nearly 
crying. 

" What an impertinence to your husband, and 
what a bore for us all," he said, quietly. " Of 



MASTER Ala> PUPIL. 51 

course I should be delighted to receive Miss Fel- 
lowes whenever she deigned to honour me with her 
presence, but just to-day she is superfluous. I had 
so much to say to you that I can't say under her 
auspices." 

"I felt stultified by them yesterday, and so did 
you/' Charlie replied, quickly. 

'* "Why do you receive your guests in full family 
conclave in that way, then ? " 

" Oh ! I can't help myself; if I gave orders that 
every one who asked for me should be shown into 
the drawing-room, Mrs. and Miss Fellowes would 
march in with me, or before me, and sit and look 
stiff, and do nothing/' 

" What a strange girl you are . ^I beg your pardon, 
Mrs, Fellowes, really, but it was only the other day 
that I knew you as Miss St. John^ you see ! " 

** In what way am I strange ? Quick ! here she 
comes." 

** Why, you are affecting now to think that you 
will bear this mute inglorious slavery for so long as 
they may please to make it last. You won't, you 
know ! You can't, in fact, if you're ever goiog to do 
anything." 

" What should I do, now . there's nothing " 

. 2 



62 WALTER GOBING. : 

*'I have heard all that before/' he Inteirapted, 
laughing. " Yoa're going to tell me that you * lack 
incentive' again; now I will give you one . it will 
give you an unassailable position in your home." 

"Whenever my husband is out of the house I 
feel so powerless/' she said, in a low tone. Then 
she remembered that this man wa& nearly a stranger 
to her, for all that sympathy which existed between 
them, and once more her conscience goaded h^r for 
having been led on to make so much of a confidence 
as she had made to him, and she crimsoned, and 
lowered her head a little. 

"I understand you so well, Mrs. » Fellowes/' he 
said, softly. " I don't think that you are one to be 
ever bored by your own society; but you will get very 
weary and worn out if it's compulsory upon you to 
be constantly in the society of others. Ensconce 
yourself in the library at The Hurst, and have- it 
understood from the first that it is your sanctuary ; 
then you will be free to read, and think, and write 
during those hours of your husband's absence which 
now hang so heavily. Forgive me for speaking in 
this way to you ; forget that I have not known you 
long . and remember only that we know each other 
well." 



liASTEB AND PUPIL. 6B 

She looked up at him gratefully. (All this time 
these two had been standiog in the cottage garden/ 
they had suffered Miss Dinah's impatience to see 
the full extent of her brother's extravagance in the^ 
matter of repairing this house to carry her away 
from them.) Charlie looked up at her companion 
gratefully, and her face seemed brighter and younger 
than it had been a few minutes before. 

** If I do that, will you sometimes come and see 
me, and help me ? " she asked. 

.* I will come as often as you will admit me." 

** Because if I haven't some one to urge me on, 
and encourage me, I shall break down." 

" Well, we will encourage each other to work ; is 
this to be a compact ?" 

He took her hand as he asked it, and she, not 
linswering, but looking away restlessly into the 
distance, suffered it to remain in his clasp. She 
was thinking that probably her husband would not 
care one atom whether she worked or was idle, 
failed or succeeded. Her ambition-^the ambition 
to do something with the power she had . ^would 
make no appeal to him. ' She knew this, and the 
knowledge was dispiriting. Nevertheless, the old 
yearning to do and be a something more- thaii she 



54 WALTEB GOBINO. 

waSy to make for herself a motive for living, to have 
an interest beyond those domestic ones, which were 
insufficient to fill her nature, ran along her veins 
like fire. As she stood there thinking thus, still 
with her hand in his. Miss Dinah came out, and 
bore down upon them. 

" You're a long time taking leave of Mr. Goring, 
Mrs. Henry ; you commenced shaking hands with 
him when I was at that bedroom window.'^ 

" Did I ? " Charlie replied, with the utmost com- 
posure. ^'YeS, Mr. Goring, this ia to be a com- 
pact." Then she withdrew her hand after giving 
his the promissory clasp, and they went in to 
choose the papers. 

*^ Of all the bare-faced flirtations I ever saw, this 
is the worst ! " Miss Dinah said to herself as she 
followed them closely; ** their hand-shaking, and 
their compacts, and their goings-on altogether ; Vwe 
no patience with it ! " 

Deneham did not distinguish itself as far as the 
papers were concerned. They were flaring, large- 
patterned, coarse in colour. Mrs. Fellowes found 
them all wanting, and made out a list of others 
to be sent for. She revelled in being able to 
eserciise her taste, more especially as she was 



L 



MASTER AND PUPIL* 55 

powerless to do it in her own home. "I want 
Mrs. Walsh to find that I haven't forgotten some 
of her likes and dislikes/' Charlie said animatedly 
to Walter; "let us order one sitting-room to be 
hung with white-watered paper, with the tiniest of 
gilt mouldings, and that bit of a room with pale 
green . ^pictures hang so well on it.'* 

" Do you like Mrs. Walsh ? *. he asked. 

" I am not quite surje that I do. I don^t think 
she likes me, does she ?" 

" You wiU probably get very intimate when she 
comes down here," he replied, evasively. 

She shook her head. " What brings her here ? "* 
she asked, and then she saw that Walter Goring 
looked rather embarrassed. 

** Oh ! couldn't keep up the Boehampton House, 
and . and . liked this neighbourhood when she was 
staying down here with me. Very likely she won't 
stay here long : I fancy she will travel." 

'' What a glorious beauty she is ! " Charlie cried, 
irrelevantly ; " if I were a man, how I should adore 
her." 

" You see men are wiser," he replied. 

"I dont know, I can't judge. I have seen em 
few with "her.". 



5G . WALTER GORING. 

** You have seen me with her, for instance." 
"At a party, where your adoration would have 
been compromising," she said, laughing. 

** That would have been her look out. I cer» 
tainly should have expressed the adoration if I had 
felt it; it would have been altogether her aflFair 
whether she accepted it or not," He forgot, as he 
spoke, that he had been in the habit of calling her 
^'his goddess;*' honestly he only thought of her as a 
dear old friend. There was a very warm feeling in 
his heart' for each one of these three women whom 
Fate had thrown in his way, and made congenial in 
some respect to him. But he was not in love with 
either of them yet ; and the one who had the most 
in her, the one who possessed the subtlest charm 
for him, though he scarcely knew it yet, was a ii^ife 
. the wife of a man who left her to find out that a 
new name and a ring on the third finger are not suf« 
ficiently absorbing and interesting things in them« 
selves to keep the thoughts at home. *^ Fellowes is 
a thoroughly good fellow,'^ Walter Goring thought, 
as he watched the brilliant, but far from beautiful, 
face of Fellowes' wife; "but I wish that girl 
.hadn't married him ; there^s too much fire in that 
face for a man who is not its master not to be its 



MASTER AND VXJPTU 67 

4Blaye. How the Daisy and she will hat^ each oihert 
Apparently they resemble one another in one or two 
things, but in reality it is in those very things that 
they most differ, I imagine." Then she lifted her 
eyes and found that he was watching her, and she 
turned away impatiently, when she saw that Miss 
Dinah observed it too. *' I don't like to tell him 
not to stare at me/' she thought, ** or he will think 
that I think a great deal more than I do about it ; 
but I'm sure that Dinah's thoughts on the subject 
are not the purest that might be recorded/' She 
was right in this : Dinah's thoughts on the subject 
interfered with her balance, and nearly caused her 
to tumble off the back of the trap as they droye 
oyer to Ooring Place, where they found luncheoi^ 
and Henry Fellowes awaiting them. 

Henry Fellowes^ imdisguised astonishment, and 
his admirably disguised pleasure at seeing his 
sister, did not restore that lady to equanimity, ** I 
haye come unasked," she said to him in a low tone ; 
*' I know that yery well, and not wanted either ; but 
I could not let your wife come here alone, Henry/' 

^* All right, all right, Dinah ; your coming makes 
it all the better: the,more the merrier, you know.". 

f* No, Henry ; I am aware that I shall not add to 



^8 . WALTER GORING. 

the merrimetit ; merriment and I parted company 
a long time ago, as I think you might remember; 
t)ut your wife is frivolous and young, and I feel it 
to be my duty to keep her right while I can, even 
if she does regard me as a restraint and an encum- 
brance." 

Henry Fellowes laughed, and then proceeded to 
look penitent for having done so. He, too, had 
intended being very happy at Goring Place this 
.day, and his sister's presence interfered with his 
scheme. He could bear them at home, this mother 
:and sister of his, but he really could hardly bear 
them away from home. They were as part of The 
Hurst to him ; it never occurred to him to think 
that The Hurst would be a much more agreeable 
residence without them. He was used to them, 
and accepted them as ''facts" (almost after the 
manner of a woman) while they remained in their 
own sphere. But even he recognised the existence 
-of something beyond and above them as soon as 
they drifted out of it. Henry Fellowes felt strongly 
this morning at Goring Place that his sister was a 
"restraint and an encumbrance," and that they 
would have got on ever so .much better without her. 
He was sorry to feel this about his own, for he was 



KASTEB AND PUPIL. 50 

a man who had correct notions^ and believed iu 
natural affection to the vexy verge of belief. but he 
did feel it, and he saw that Charlie felt it too. 
Miss Dinah had been over-zealous in the good cause 
of keeping watch and ward over her brother's wife ; 
she was liable to be checkmated at any moment 
from the time he perceived that his cherished, 
trusted, loved, young wife felt her to be what she 
had called herself, "a restraint and an encum- 
brance." He told himself angrily that Dinah had 
had no right to come for the avowed purpose of 
mounting guard over his wife; the doing so was an 
offence to him and to Charlie . especially to him. 
It was calling in question his capability for looking 
after his own honour, it was a slur on his judgment 
of the woman whom he had thought fit to entrust 
with that and his name ; it was casting a doubt on 
his having inspired the girl he loved with a 
guarding warm love for him in return ! It was 
everything that was most offensive and irritating to 
a man, in fact, and Henry Fellowes felt offended 
and irritated about it. *^ What if Charlie had 
known and liked Walter Goring before she married 
him?" he asked himself, as he sat at Walter 
Goring's table that morning; ''it had been but a 



60 WALTER GORING. * 

girlish preference; or if it had been more, it was- 
now as though it had never been to his honest- 
hearted Charlie." 

He longed to show them both how trustful and 
magnanimous he was. Almost unconsciously to' 
himself the seeds of doubt were sown in his breast, 
but he would not let them grow. Of ** doubt," did 
I say ? Scarcely that. He would not doubt or 
fear, or regret, the " something " that he still could 
not prevent himself from feeling might have been 
between them. "Fd trust her with him or any- 
other man through the world while she seemed to 
love me," he thought, with a swelling heart. ** The 
poor pet ! perhaps it was want of money that came 
between them ; but she had got over it before she 
took me.'^ He little knew that her heart had never 
given Gne throb for Walter Goring . that she had 
never had a feeling to ** get over " concerning him . ' 
that he was, or had been, to her only the author of 
certain pages which had strung her up and given 
her new ideas . that he was, in fact, but a little lower 
than the angels and Dickens and Bulwer to her. 
Hero-worship (more especially if the worshipper 
and worshipped be not both well-stricken in years) 
is apt to mislead beholders: some of its salient 



M1STE& AND PUPIL* 61 

points bear a strong resemblance to love* There is 
the same blind belief and wild anxiety, and tender- 
ness to the shortcomings of the object . ^the same 
pleasure in the mere fact of its presence . the same 
jealousy of the grand creature coming off its pedes* 
tal for another. the same humble, foolish, futile^ 
identification of oneself with its triumphs and 
failures, its hopes and despairs and aspirations and 
defeats. Above all, there is the same sufficiency, 
for the time it lasts, about it. Nothing else is 
sought, nothing else is needed. The true devotee 
kiLeels with his back to the world, and sees and 
.cares for . only the shrine. 

As a rule, the hero-worshipper who would keep 
the faith should flee from the possibility of personal 
intercourse with the man or woman he has come to 
love in type. The aesthetic poet comes before you 
.in the flesh a rubicund, rotund, flabby man, loose in 
attire, looser in address, and all his music is mute 
in your soul when you see him, and you marvel how 
honest nature can be guilty of such gross mistakes 
. such fearful misfittings of matter to mind« 

Or, in the course of the march of life, you come 
suddenly upon one of your favourite novelists, and 
find that all his wit and all his good manners and 



62 WALTER GORING. 

geniality are reserved for his writings. Or you ^nd 
her who pours out pathos by the page . ^pathos so 
terribly true that you are plunged into low spirits 
for a week after reading it . ^you find her a brawny, 
badly-dressed, badly-bred woman, void of all those 
tender tricks, those furtive fascinations, with which 
ishe endows her heroines. The man who has made 
refinement a religion to you, strikes at the founda* 
tion of that religion by showing how coarse he, its 
high priest, can be. The lady whose language 
almost leaps, it has such spirit, rush, and freshness 
about it, is of the earth, earthy . ^broadly material, 
in a way that makes you wish, with Sydney Smith, 
that you had the power of " reading the riot-act and 
dispersing her." Heavy in step, heavy in style, the 
memory of her comes upon you as a nightmare ever 
after as you read her stories, and you sigh for your 
hours of belief in, and hero-worship for, the unseen. 
But when the real comes up to the ideal, then it is 
all up with the possibility of proving a renegade to 
a faith at once so soothing and exciting. A religion 
more of the soul than the heart, and more of the 
head than either, its trammels are not to be thrown 
off lightly, and the vacuum that is felt, should the 
emptiness of it be proved, may not easily be filled 



VASTER AND PUPUm 6> 

Up. Was I right in saying just now, that some 
of the salient points of hero-worship bore so strong 
a resemblance to love as to be Hable to mislead 
beholders ? 

They went over the house after luncheon, and 
then into the study, and despite Miss Dinah's square 
presence, it was a very pleasant time. Charlie 
lounging along through the corridor on her hus- 
band's arm, had felt equal to the nervous task of 
telling him that she wanted to have the library at 
The Hurst to herself, that she was going to write. 

"Yes dear," he had replied, with prompt acqui- 
escence. " What do you want to write about ?'' 

This had been staggering, not to say crushing 
" I hardly know yet," Charlie had replied ; " but I 
really wish to try, Harry. I have heaps of stories 
in my head, if I can only find the language to tell 
them in." Then, they had gone on to Walter 
Goring's study, the walls of which were lined with 
books. The bindings gave all the tone and colour 
to the room, and it was not lacking. 

** I believe that even I could write here," Charlie 
said, in a discontented tone, going up to his writing* 
table. " Why, you can't look to the right or left 
without having a thousand ideas put into your head. 



.4 WAUTEB GGBXS^ 

.nd haTing had a classical ediicatioii» it would be a 
ahame if yoa couldn't express them* There's a 
Tiew ! " and she pointed to the window. ^^T^iat a 
lot that Tiew ought to do for yon, Mr. Goring! 
Ton can plant your hero and heroine in half-a- 
dozen capital scenes in that one Tiew.** 

** Ton hare the same firom the other end* Lodk» 
there is The Hnrst,** he replied. 

*' It would neyer look the same to me firom The 
Hnrst," she said, almost angrily. 

** Then come here and work,"* he said laoghing. 
''Fellowes, what do you say to coming here and 
staying nntil Mrs. Fellowes has exhausted the Tiew. 
Seriously though, my library is at your serrice. 
You will find many books of reference here that 
may be useful to you." 

" Thank you." This was uttered gratefully and 
gladly. Then her &ce fell and her eyes clouded 
over as she added, '' What is the use of it, though, 
to me ; I don't know enough about any one thing 
to refer about it to anything else." She went OTer 
and took a book from the shelf as she spoke, and 
seated herself in a low chair by the fire. 

" If you are going to talk literature, Dinah and I 
will go and look at the gardens," Heniy Fellowes 



MASTER AND PUFIL. 65 

said, cheerfully. The opportunity for showing 
Dinah what '' he thought about it" had come, and 
he seized upon it with avidity. His sister was 
obliged to follow him since no one asked her to stay 
where she was ; but she followed, reviling his blind- 
ness in her heart. Not that even she doubted the 
perfect integrity of her brother's wife and her 
brother's friend, but it was antagonistic to all her 
notions that a penniless woman should come into a 
family and enjoy herself in any but a severe, sober 
way. As soon- as Miss Dinah's shadow vanished, 
the two whom she had left behind breathed more 
freely. Then Charlie, still holding the book in her 
hand, looked up and said, half laughing and half 
sadly : 

" I told my husband of my vague intentions just 
now, and he sent me down again by asking me 
* what I was going to write about ? ' " 

" I was on the point of asking you the very same 
question, Mrs. Fellowes." 

"Well, I will tell you what I told him . I have 
heaps of stories in my head.* 

** Then think one out, and write it out, and let m« 
be your first reviewer. I won't be so kind as you 
were to me yesterday. I will not promise not to see 

TOL. n. w 



86 WALTER GORING. 

any faults in what you do. You'll take my criticism 
«s kindly as it will be offered, won't you ?" 

^' Yes, that shall be in the compact too," she re- 
plied; and then he came over and looked at the 
book she was holding. 

" Ah, read that," he said, handing it back to her ; 
^ and then read it again, and then read its brethren 
till you know them all by heart, if you can. I got 
my little wayward cousin to wade half through this 
essay of Addison's. By the way, she was the last 
young lady who was in this study." 

" She read with you, I suppose ? " 

*'I tried to make her read with me." 

" How nice for her." 

" She thought it quite the reverse of nice, I assure 
you, Mrs. Fellowes. She has first-rate musical 
ability, but very little mental power I imagine; 
that is to say, she is bright and sharp and quick- 
witted, but she is incapable of continued or earnest 
thought. I shall send over a batch of those " Spec- 
tators " and " Tatlers " for you, and come over and 
see what is wanting in The Hurst library. You'll 
aUow me to lend you books ?. " 

" Oh ! Mr. Goring, it will be so good of you. Send 
me a lot of poetry.'* 



MA8TEB AND PUPIL. 67 

^' I will send you Keats and Shelley, and so gra- 
dually lead yon back, or rather forward, to Chaucer 
and Spenser." 

^* I don't think I dhall care for their ' quaint 
conceits;' let me have that big Byron up there, 
and '' 

" Scotfs rhymes, I suppose. No, no; all they 
have said is well enough, in their verse ; but you 
would be sure to be struck by the magnitude and 
prodigious originality of their ideas, and to fancy 
they would stand reproducing in prose. No, no ; 
.don't read such poetry as theirs, Mrs. Fellowes. 
Do you know anything of Keats, the man * who 
was cradled into poetry by wrong . who learnt in 
suffering what he taught in song ?' '' 

He took down a small volume, as he asked 
it, and commenced turning over the leaves, with 
the touch of one who knew and loved them 
well. 

"All I kno^ of Keats is Shelley's * Adonais.'" 

*'And Shelley's *Adonais' did not make you 
seek to know more of Keats ? Well, I wonder at 
that. Before you read his poems, though, you 
must know a little about him. Shall I tell you ? 
Bo I bore you?" 

V 2 



68 WALTER OOBING. 

She looked up at him, and smiled ; and . he 
knew that he was not boring her. 

Nevertheless, it is possible that his sketch, brief 
as he made it, of that psychological wonder . the 
young surgeon-poet . might bore the reader. 
Therefore, it shall only be said here, that he did 
tell her of Keats' dismal life, and desperate love 
for the woman who " had the beauty of a leo- 
pardess ;" . the woman who " kept him awake one 
night as a tune of Mozart's might do ;'' . the wo- 
man whose '' name was ever on his lip, but never 
on his tongue ;" . and for whom, in short, his life 
ebbed itself away in mere passionate feeling. He 
talked to her till her cheeks flushed with pity for 
the young genius who died so soon, and so sadly ; 
and who, humbled by his bitter conflict with des- 
tiny, asked only that the words . " Here lies one 
whose name was writ in water," should be placed 
over his grave. He read her a few lines . the 
few last plaintive lines of " The Pot of Basil,'' 
and some portions of that " Stretched Metre of an 
Antique Song," which is inscribed to his hapless 
parallel, Chatterton . the god-gifted boy, who was 
even more tired of life than Keats himself. And 
when he had finished, she heaved a sigh that was 



MASTER AND PUPIL. 69 

neither one of pleasure nor of pain, but that was 
rather one of intense satisfaction at hearing things 
that were so delicately attuned to her own sympa- 
thies, spoken of in a manner that was the same. 

** He was a poet, and a lover too. Ah ! Mr. 
Goring, I feel now that it is sheer reckless pre- 
sumption which made me think for a while that I 
could ever hops to do more than appreciate from 
below." 



CHAPTER V. 

. LITTLE CLOUD. 

Walter Goring's visitors stayed with him until 
it was time to go home and dress for the Travers*^ 
dinner-party. The walk in the gardens which Mr* 
Fellowes had proposed to his sister had not been a 
Yery long one, for Miss Fellowes proved a morose 
and dreary companion on the occasion; therefore 
her brother suffered himself to stray back into the 
library sooner than he otherwise would have done» 
Then they looked through some volumes of rare 
old line engravings ; and Walter inoculated Mrs. 
Fellowes with some crude bibliomanial notions re- 
specting quaint and curious bindings ; and the 
two gentlemen effected some new combinations of 
the lighter moveable furniture, under Charlie's 
auspices. Altogether, the three chief dramatis 
jpersona were very happy, and Miss Dinah thought 



A LITTLE CLOUD- 71 

it^ all as imbecile a wasting of time as she 
had ever heard of^ much less witnessed. Ai 
last somebody found out that it was past &ve 
o'clock ; and then they hurried away to the melody 
of Miss Dinah's declaration, that they had no time 
to lose, for the Traverses dined at seven, and were 
punctuality itself. 

"> As they were driving home, Charlie mooted that 
plan which Walter Goring had proposed about The 
Hurst library, to her husband. 

" I want it to be held sacred,*' she said ; *' no 
one must come in without knocking ; perfect peace 
is essential while one is in the agonies of composi- 
tion, Mr. Goring says.'* 

" May I not come in 1" 

" O yes, you Harry ; but no one else. Do take 
me there to-morrow morning, and iustal me/' 

"Are you speaking of the library?" Miss Fel- 
lowes croaked from behind. 

'* Yes," Charlie replied, looking affably over her 
shoulder at her sister-in-law. She was much more 
tolerant to Miss Dinah's presence than she had 
been while going to Goring Place ; for the day had 
not been spoilt. 

" My mother has never liked to have that room 



72 WALTEB GOBINa. 

used in common since my poor dear fsither died ; 
you know that, Henry ? " 

Charlie's head came round swiftly. Her hus- 
hand stole an imploring look at her face ; he could 
only see her profile, but she was biting her under- 
lip. 

" My mother won't mind your using the room, 
darling!" he whispered. ^ 

But his wife did not respond. She was bitterly 
o£fended at the perpetual placing of small stumb- 
ling-blocks in her path ; and bitterly wounded 
that her husband did not sweep them away with a 
strong hand at once . as would become a man. So 
she made no response to his conciliatory whispers ; 
and looked neither to the right nor left until they 
drew up at the door of The Hurst. Then she 
jumped down from the trap before he could get 
round to assist her, and ran up at once to her own 
bed-room, declaring to herself that she could " not 
bear it any longer." *^ He sees me snubbed, and 
treated as a nobody," she thought angrily ; " his 
love for me is of the lowest . ^the very lowest . kind ; 
he has no pride for me, . no consideration for me, . 
his mother, and his sisters, and their senseless pre- 
judices and fancies, are more to him tlian his wife." 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 78 

Her feelings rushed like a torrent from one ex- 
treme to the other. Up to the present juncture 
she had kept down all douht of his devotion to her 
in fact, however tamely he suffered small disagree- 
ables to assail her in seeming. But now she forgot 
all those manifestations of affection of his, by the 
thought of which she had heretofore strengthened 
herself to bear and forbear; she forgot all these, 
and declared to herself that his love wa$ not such 
a love as a woman may glory and trust in. 

He, meanwhile, was going to work his own way 
to make things smooth for them all. It was not a 
determined, masterly way ; but it was manly enough 
after all, and very kind. He went in and sat down 
by his mother's chair, and began giving her little 
details of the day, till she relaxed a little from the 
austerity she had assumed, immediately she heard 
of their arrival. "I think your wife might have 
had the civility to come in and speak to me after 
having been away all these hours; I did expect 
that certainly, otherwise I should have sent these 
letters that have come for her up to her bedroom." 

" She hasn't much time to dress, you know ? I'll 
take the letters ; where are they ? oh ! here. She 
will come and show herself to you in her finery 



74 WALTEB GOBING. 

presently, mother," he continued, bending over the 
old lady and kissing her. Then he added, '^ I want 
the library well aired and put in order, mother 
dear ; will you give orders about it to-morrow ? " 

"It is always in good order, Henry," she said, 
gravely. 

" Too damp to sit in, isn't it ? " 
" What do you want to sit in it for ? " 
"Well, mother dear, this for one reason. You 
have not been accustomed to have young people 
with you constantly, and I think it would be plea- 
santer if my wife and you were not always together, 
perhaps; the library shall be our room, and then 
when we come either here, or to the drawing-room 
in the evening, it will be a change for her, and you 
will be glad to see her ; it must be so tiresome to 
women to be together all day. Will you give orders 
about it to-morrow, mother dear ? " 

"Yes,'' she replied at once; and she said no 
word regarding her disinclination to seeing the 
hallowed spot invaded. Then he took his wife's 
correspondence, and walked up to her room. 

She was sitting down already dressed, and still 
feeling and looking wrathful. When he came in, 
looking smiling and light-hearted, fuel was cast on 



A LITTLB CLOUD. 75 

the fire of her indignation at the indifference and 
injustice that was displayed towards her, and she 
turned her head away and gave him no glance of 
welcome. 

"What! ready, my darling ! Now you look charm- 
ing. I have promised my mother that you will go 
down and show yourself in your finery to her ; here 
are a lot of letters for you." 

She took the letters from his hand, with a cold 
" Thank you." 

" What is it, Charlie ? " he asked fondly, putting 
his hand on the hack of her chair and leaning over 
her. She moved her shoulder away from him.^ 
His tenderness was repugnant to her at the mo- 
ment. She told herself that it never caused him 
to stave off any annoyance from her. 

" There's nothing the matter. Let me get up> 
please ; I want to read my letters." 

He stood upright, and let her get up and pass 
him. Then he followed her, and put his arm round 
her waist, and she wriggled herself free from him. 

" Charlie ! you're not angry still about what 
Dinah said ?" 

" Angry ; no, not a bit." 

" I have been talking to my mother, and she's 



76 WALTER GORING. 

going to have the library put all right to-morrow 
morning ; and you'll let me come in and smoke my 
cigar there in the morning, won't you, dear." 

" Let ! as if I had a word to say about anything 
in this house. You had better go and dress, Harr)', 
if we are going to this dinner-party." 

He obeyed her, and walked rather sadly away to 
his own dressing-room, thinking what a pity it was 
that all women were so touchy. ** I suppose she 
wanted me to make a row about it," he thought; 
" women never will see that it's just as well to take 
things quietly." 

Presently, before he was quite ready, he heard 
the bedroom door open, and a rushing as of silk 
draperies towards his door. Then there was a 
knock, and Charlie, looking flushed and tearful, 
burst into the room with an open letter in her 
hand. " My brother . Frank," she began, and then 
she stopped, panting with anger and sorrow; and 
when he asked, eagerly, " What is it, my darling ? " 
she buried her face in her hands, and sobbed out . 

" Dismissed the service . ^for . nothing.'* 

It was useless entreating her not to cry, or 
attempting to get a coherent statement from her. 

The news was contained in a windy effusion from 



A UTTLE CLOUD. 77 

Ellen, to whose husband it had been communicated 

in what Ellen characterised as ''a shamefully 

thoughtless letter/' from Frank himself. His 

delinquencies were not of a very black dye. He 

had gone on shore in opposition to his captain's 

orders, and he had remained on shore, making 

sketches of scenery that pleased him much, long 

enough for the whole of his boat's crew to get 

intoxicated, and for one to desert. This was the 

head and front of his o£fending, but it had been 

sufficient to procure his dismissal and consequent 

disgrace. Mr. Prescott was evidently very hard 

upon him. "His sketches were intended for a 

work he has been writing," Ellen added. " * Serving 

off some place or other,' he calls it; and he had 

the coolness to say he would come and stay with us 

till he can get it published. Robert won't see him." 

("Ask him here," Henry Fellowes interrupted, 

when Charlie read that portion of her sister's letter 

to him ; " I want to know your brother, Charlie, 

and this will be a good opportunity; ask him here, 

of course, dear.") Then Charlie brightened up 

and beamed again, and hung about her husband's 

neck, reproaching herself in very hard terms for 

"having been cold to him just now," according to 



78 WALTEB GORING. 

her nature. Bat though she brightened up, and 
though she went down and displayed herself with 
much amiability to her mother-in-law, her heart 
was heavy about this blight that had come upon 
her brother. She had been imbued in her child- 
hood with many of the traditions of the navy ; she 
had been taught to regard it with a mixture of awe 
and affection . as a great institution; the men of 
her family had been steeped in salt water, so to say, 
for three generations. Altogether, though she 
brightened up at the prospect of seeing her brother 
immediately . of welcoming him to her husband's 
house, and though she was affable to old Mrs. 
Fellowes, and sufficiently agreeable at the Traverses 
to enlist the rector under her banner at once and 
for ever . though all these things were . ^her heart 
was filled with sad retrospective memories. 

She had not seen her brother Frank for years . 
never since she had been grown up; but she 
remembered him as such a gallant-looking boy. 

She recalled his first going to sea. It was fifteen 
or sixteen years ago, and yet how vividly she remem- 
bered the scene. It was a fair July morning, and 
the sun was shining with a brilliancy which she had 
never seen equalled siuce. There was flash from a 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 79 

sword, and dazzle from mucli gold lace; and a 
cerulean blae over all things, reflected this last from 
the new naval uniform of the boy who was going 
away that day to join his ship at Sheemess. *going 
away in the first flush of his pride at being a cadet 
in Her Majesty^s service . agoing away under the 
escort of his father, a veteran who had drawn his 
sword (the same sword whose flashing had been so 
glorious a thing in her eyes) in twenty causes, and 
gained nought save evanescent glory and lasting 
wounds in any of them. 

It came back to her vividly as she sat and ate 
Mr. Travers' venison . that^ scene and hour in 
which pride and pain were so strangely mingled. 
The tears and prayers and cautions of the mother, 
who was seeing her eldest . the boy of boys . the 
flower of the flock, depart that day into the world of 
temptations and dangers, never again to be a home- 
bird . ^never again to kneel at her feet and pour out 
his prayers and tell his boyish sins and sorrows . 
never again to be entirely her own, in fact, from 
this moment of his first flight from the home of 
which he had been the star. 

What a hero the handsome bold-faced boy was 
that day ! How his little sister worshipped him ; at 



80 WALTER OOBIKO. 

first from afar, but gradually as she grew accus- 
tomed to the bright dirk and blue jacket from the 
summit of his knee, whither she had climbed to pat 
his cheek with admiring love, and touch his dirk 
with tremulous pride ! What a hero he was ! Not 
that he had done anything yet beyond looking 
defiant and frank and fearless ; but these qualities 
were no bad foundation on which to build up a fair 
fabric of bright hopes and expectations respecting 
his future career ! How her father had alternated 
between nervous cautions, as to the demeanour it 
would behove the boy to observe, and exultant 
prognostications of the success, the early promotion^ 
that assuredly awaited him, provided only that he 
did his duty, and never forgot the respect due to 
others, and himself ! How the servants ran about 
deliriously, wiping their eyes with their aprons, and 
murmuring to each other, "Don't Master Frank 
look beautiful . quite the man ? " How the dogs 
leapt about their old playfellow, regardless of his 
newly donned splendour, chorusing each other's 
entreaties that he would take them once more to a 
certain stack where rats did dwell ! How fast the 
last hour slipped away ! How well she remembered 
all these things, will be realised by any one who has 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 81 

witnessed the first start in* life of a boy who is held 
dear! 

Her thoughts travelled on. The home scene was 
over, and the mother was left to pray away her 
bitter sense of barrenness, if she could . ^to bear it 
if she must. But then had come the triumphal 
progress through the Tillage ! There were eight or 
nine old men-of-war's-men, belonging to the coast- 
guard station, and these came to wish him God- 
speed* and good-bye, and to hope, as they gripped 
his delicate young hand, that he would be " as fine 
an ofiGicer as his father." Bough old sailors, some 
of them, but they had tears in their eyes as the boy 
whom they had carried on their shoulders many a 
time, and taught to detect a sail in the offing, and 
the difference of rig between a schooner and a 
barque, went out to face the dangers of that ocean 
which they had lauded to him. 

Then there had been Mends and neighbours 
standing about at window and gate to see the last 
of him. Kisses on the brow from matrons whose 
sons had been his schoolfellows . gentle reminders 
from pretty little girls, his sisters' allies, as to 
monkey-skins and elephants' tusks which he had 
promised to bring them home. Hearty hand- 

YOL. II. Q 



82 WALTER OOBIXa. 

shakings from the men who recognised his recently- 
established claim to manhood by refraining from 
patting him on the head. And then it was all over, 
and he was driven away to the railway station ; and 
oat of his mind nearly with elation at hearing him- 
self included in a porter's obsequious mention of 
"two naval oflScers." 

What gala-days those were on which his letters 
used to arrive ! How eagerly they were read . ^how 
religiously they were listened to . ^how liberally 
lavished upon all inquiring friends ! He was the 
grand topic for at least a week in the neighbour- 
hood, after the receipt of one of those transparent 
efifusions which always commenced . " My Dear 
Parents,'' and wound up with a gratuitous assurance 
of his naval instructor's complete satisfaction with 
the progress he was making in navigation and the 
art of seamanship. The fact of a letter having been 
received from Master Fnank had a habit of spreading 
like wildfire. The dawning of the days on which 
they were due always saw his mother's cheek very 
pale, and his father's manner very restless. They 
knew the trials and temptations to which young 
blood is subjected, and they dreaded "the boy 
forgetting to write." But for years the gala-days 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 83 

came rery regularly ; Charlie remembered the 
dread was unfulfilled in the life-time of either 
parent. 

Then again she remembered a date when their 
section ot the world had reeled, and caressed its 
own judgment in having thought very high things 
of him. Frank's name was on the '' list; " he was 
mated; he had been giyen the command of a slaTer, 
and had quelled something small in mutinies, and 
been reported to " the Board " as " a highly deserv 
ing young officer." When the glorious news came 
home it made such a heaven there, that surely it 
was placed to his account and remembered, though 
dark days had fallen on him now ! 

How they had all delighted in him, and rejoiced 
in opportunities of talking about him! He had 
shown himself to be the two best things a man can 
be . ^gallant and determined; and, in addition to 
these, he was so successful! The bright young 
fellow was positively adored in the home circle! 
Fortune seemed to smile upon him ! The glow of 
pride had not cooled upon the cheeks of those who 
loved him, after the receipt of the first good news, 
when other and even better tidings were heard. At 
the risk of his own he had saved a brother officer's 

o 2 



84 WALTER OOBINO. 

life by jumping overboard . he had led on a boat 
attack on a slaver . ^he was mentioned specially in 
the captain's report, and he was to have his lieu- 
tenancy. 

What pffians of pride they sang when that news 
reached them! Early success is always so much 
more glorious a thing than that which is long waited 
for and hardly won. He, the young lieutenant of 
nineteen, was very successful . was a star, in fact. 
and he was prized accordingly. He had been in 
the first flush of this fame when their father died, 
and since that time they had known little of each 
other. To Charlie, especially, he lived only as the 
bright-faced bold lad, who had left them in blue- 
and-gold one July morning ; for she had been down 
in the fever when he came home to show himself 
last. It was very, very hard for her to think of him 
as under a cloud now, as these reminiscences 
flooded her mind. She felt that she should be 
shy and abashed before him if he did accept 
her husband's invitation and come to The Hurst, 
depressed and as one who came on sufferance. 
There is something horribly crushing to a woman 
in the thought that the head of a man who is dear 
to her may be down at ever so slight an angle. 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 85 

There was a deficiency^ too, of the power of 
diversion at the Travers'. The dinner was quite 
correct, and so were the people who were bidden to 
eat it . correct, but not at all exhilarating. The 
majority of the guests were clergymen and their 
help-mates . men who were clergymen because rich 
livings had been in the gift of their fathers or 
uncles . ^men of family, in fact, who served God in 
good style, and who were as mighty lords temporal 
in their respective neighbourhoods, as they were 
lords spiritual . men, who, from being absolute 
monarchs of all they surveyed in their several 
spheres, had a correct estimate of the social status 
and importance of their fellows, and a slightly 
erroneous one of the social status and importance 
of all such as were not sons of the Church, or 
masters of many square acres of the soil . men of 
classical attainments, of good breeding, and of 
profound propriety ; but concentred on them- 
selves in a way that rendered them wearisome 
to the stranger within their gates, who had a 
smaller interest, and consequently faith, in con- 
servatism than they themselves. 

The taUc during dinner had all been about " their 
schools," and ** their poor." It had been of an un- 



86 WALTER OOBING. 

exciting nature, that was sot calculated to interfere 
with the more serious operation for which they had 
assembled in fact. But after dinner, when the 
ladies had drifted away into the drawing-room, tlie 
men drew their chairs closer together, and a sub- 
ject that was of solemn interest to several of them 
was mooted by a gentle-looking, grey-haired old 
man, . a patriarch amoug the priests of East 
Anglia. 

" I heard a report to-day from one of my church- 
wardens, that Brett's affairs are not in quite such 
perfect order as we could desire." 

He mentioned one of the most important and 
oldest of the local banks ; and there was a slight, 
quickly-subdued sensation amongst those who heard 
him. Walter Goring was the first to speak. 

** I am nearly a stranger among you as yet," 
he said. *' I trust, however, that this news does 
not concern any of those here present more than it 
does myself. I heard the report to-day from Mr. 
Wilfred, one of the Goring Place tenants. He is a 
depositor ; safe enough therefore, I presume. Is it 
limited Uability?" 

" No . ^unlimited,'* Henry Fellowes said. 

And then the pent-up stream of feeling broke 



A UTTLB CLOUD. ^"f 

forth. They talked the Babject over long and ear- 
nestly . even angrily; for the majority of those 
present were large shareholders : and in the mo- 
ment of the first panic they felt as though they 
stood on shifting sands. 

** Let us pray to Heaven that it may be only a 
temporary tightness, and that the rumour of it 
von*t get whispered amongst the depositors," Henry 
Fellowes said at last *' I hope my wife won*t 
hear a word of it, poor girl/' he added to Walter 
Ooring, as they crossed the hall together. 

And when Goring asked him . ** Why not?'* 

He replied . '' Because if she began questioning 
me as to how far I was interested in its tiding over 
this difficulty, or breaking completely, I should tell 
her everything . I couldn't help myself. And I 
want her to be happy while she can. God knows 
where the demands on us may stop. It^s a company 
<;oncem, you know. Brett's name was kept on as a 
tower of strength ; but it has been in the hands of 
a company for years.'' 

Henry Fellowes spoke nervously and hurriedly ; 
and, judging from this what great interests his 
friend had at stake, Walter Goring had not the 
heart to say what he had heard from Wilfred, . 



88 WALTER GOBINa. 

namely, that there would be a tremendous run on 
Brett's the following day, when any business con- 
duct on the part of directors or secretary that was 
not absolutely above suspicion would be exploded. 
The alarm had been sounded in truth; and the 
luckless shareholders were walking over mined 
ground. No wonder that the Travers' social gather- 
ing lacked the elements of diversion for one who 
knew nought of these fears and doubts. 

" If that's a specimen of a country dinner-party, 
I shall never wish to go to another, Harry," Charlie 
said to her husband, as soon as she was out of the 
Travers' garden, and fairly on her way home that 
night. And he, remembering only that she might 
soon drift away out of the sphere of such things and 
then regret them, forgave the pettishness . or rather 
gave no thought to it, and clasped her warmly to 
the heart that was doing a grievous penance of 
dread, for the love which had prompted him to bring 
such a woman to such a pass. 

The next day a letter was despatched to Frank, 
inviting him to The Hurst : and scarcely had she 
written it, before fresh doubt and anxiety assailed 
Charlie's mind. In a fit of temporary aberration 
of intellect, on her own wedding-day, she had en- 



A LITTLE CLOXTD. 89 

thusiasiically and unwisely bestowed a pressing 
inyitation on Robert Prescott and his wife to come 
and stay with her at The Hurst as soon as they 
could, and as long as they could. It was only meet 
and right, and her bounden duty, considering all ' 

the circumstances by which she and they were 
united, that she should do this. But she acknow- 
ledged to herself that she had been unwary in so 
doing, after a brief sojourn in the Fellowes' tent. 
*' There will not be open war," she said to herself, 
*' but there will be worse. Miss Dinah will make 
Ellen, wretched ; and Robert will offend old Mrs. ^ 

Fellowes at every turn; and they will unite in 
hating him.'* She had thought that, after having 
been half an hour in their society : but still, with 
her sex's aversion to taking any decided step, she 
had refrained from saying aught to the Prescotts 
that could hinder their coming. Now that the 
missive was posted to Frank, she remembered that 
Robert and Ellen were likely to come to them in a 
short time. " If they fight among themselves, it 
will be awful," she thought, dejectedly; "and I 
know what Ellen is, . she will be constantly ask- 
ing me for explanations of things that don't con- 
cern her, and that make me miserable, . and that I 



.90 WALTER GORING. 

won't have Ellen or any one else speaking to me 
About, for all that/' 

The more she* felt oppressed by the shadow of 
.coming discomfort from her own people, the more 
she felt inclined to conciliate Mrs. Fellowes, senior. 
She wished that she had not asked for tlie library 
«t this special juncture. She was conscious of 
having made rather a parade about the necessity, 
of having a room entirely to herself. She had 
demanded it for a specially signified purpose, and 
now that the room was hers to have and to use as 
she saw fit, she did begin to entertain grave 'doubts 
as to her capability of ever carrying that purpose 
-out. She walked about till her feet ached, arrang- 
ing and re -arranging the room and the writing-table, 
putting books, which she had hazy notions she 
might " want to refer to," within easy distance of 
the chair she intended to occupy, and rather losing 
sight, to tell the truth, of the end she had had in 
view, and towards which she had obtained possession 
of this room, peace, and a quantity of paper and pens. 
About one o'clock the appearance of her hardly- 
gained territory satisfied her, and she sat down to 
rest from her labours and to wonder where her hus- 
band could be. It was the first day since he had 



A LITTLE CLOUD. 91 

bronght his bride to The Hurst that he had not 
come in at twelve. ''I wish he would come/' 
Charlie thought. " I shall not be able to settle to 
anything while I know I am liable to his coming in 
at any moment and disturbing me.'' Then she 
altered the position of several things once more, and 
then she made a beginning. That is to say, she 
wrote, " Chapter the First. Page 1," on the first 
page of a quii'e of most wonderful cream-laid letter 
paper, and then stopped to admire the faultless 
commencement, and wonder whether she should 
make her first effort in three volumes or one. 
Having at length decided in favour of the latter, 
she went a step further, and inserted the words, " A 
Tale," at the top of Chapter the First. " A Tale '' 
appeared to her a modest designation, at which 
none could possibly cavil. On further considera- 
tion, she felt, however, that this might be deemed 
vague, and be held also to evince a want of purpose 
in its composition, which she was certain of being 
very far from feeling " when once she was fairly 
started.*' There was a slight difficulty about the 
starting, though ; so she gave up literary labour for 
that day, and read a ** Spectator " paper instead. 



CHAPTER VI. 

fbank! 

November was drawing to a close. Frank, whom 
Charlie only remembered as the bold, bright, 
gaUant-looking boy, all blue-and-gold, had come 
down to The Hurst, and dawned upon his delighted 
sister a bolder, brighter, more gallant-looking man. 
In the intense pleasure young Mrs. Fellowes had in 
Frank's society . a pleasure that was composed 
partly of natural affection and partly of the great 
liking she had for novelty, . Henry Fellowes's 
gradually deepening and ill-concealed anxiety 
passed unobserved by his wife. The rumour as to 
Brett's was but too well founded. Dull sickening 
dread reigned at present, but there was shortly to 
be a call made upon the shareholders, and to many 
of them it would be a call to ruin. 

Charlie was in blissful ignorance of the dire evil 



frank! 08 

that was coming . ^that had come upon this land in 
which her tent had been so recently pitched. In 
consideration of her being a stranger amongst them, 
and a little becanse she was so young a wife, no one 
made mention of Brett's before her. At the few 
dinner parties which people still had the heart to 
give while they were awaiting the crash, pity for 
Charlie induced silence, and the all-absorbing topic, 
though ** eyer on men's lips, was never on their 
tongues." Therefore, as she never read the local 
papers, she remained in ignorance of the colossal 
local wrong that had but just culminated. 

Henry Fellowes blessed his brother-in-law for 
coming to them at this time. It seemed to him 
impossible that he could have kept the sorrowful 
secret from Charlie, had Charlie been unemployed 
and unamused. As it was, Frank was a breath of 
new life to her, in the which she rejoiced exceed- 
ingly ; and she loved him all the better for his not 
being one whit cast down by what she had deemed 
to be a misfortune when she first heard of it. He 
was facing his difiSiculties like a light-hearted lion, 
she thought, or rather like a man, bearing them 
blithely, and yet with no bravado. 

In truth he was not the kind of man to be cast 



94 WALTER GOBINa. 

down by any such misfortunes as had befallen him. 
The sum total of human happiness and honours 
were not contained in H.M. Boyal Navy for him. 
He had not done anything of which he was ashamed, 
therefore he neither looked nor felt cast down. 
Consequently, Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah, who 
regarded him in the light of a burglar, a poacher, 
or other |^ breaker of the law, declared him to be 
hardened. Nevertheless, though they felt him to be 
this, they went with the rest of the world in liking 
and admiring and believing him to be a superior 
creature. 

Surely there never lived a man more fitted to 
inspire and retain that warm, blind regard which 
makes one shut one's eyes to all the faults and follies 
of the object, and see only its brightness and 
bravery. He was the type of a Saxon gentleman . 
tall, stalwart, blue-eyed, with fair hair, soft and fine 
as a woman's ; and he had a marvellous wealth of 
vitality, and a debonnaire bearing that could yet be 
wondrously deferential to women. He was frank 
too, as his name, and was altogether such a brother 
as a sister might reasonably be very proud of 
possessing. 

He had not been in the house two days before 



7BA19KI 0& 

Henry Fellowes confided the coming crash to him* 
Frank was the most agreeable of confidants in such 
a case as this . ^want of money in the fatnre was a 
thing he could not and did not attempt to realise, 
so long as he had money enough in the present* 
" I dare say you will find it all come right in the 
end, Fellowes/' he said, when Fellowes had finished 
the doleful story. "Don't move for a moment,, 
there's a good fellow." He was engaged in making 
a caricature likeness of his brother-in-law, which 
he presently handed over to that gentleman in the 
most honest manner possible. 

'' You don't quite see the business, Frank," Mr. 
Fellowes said dolefully. 

" Perhaps not . do you ? " Frank replied, taking 
the sketch back and carefully adding a few finishing 
touches. In reality he was far from being indiffe* 
rent as to the ultimate comfort and welfare of his 
sister and her husband; but it was not in his 
nature to go into preliminary pain and anxiety on 
account of any human being . ^himself not excepted. 
His brightness was contagious in this instance. 
Mr. Fellowes immediately expressed himself to the 
effect of feeling that " though the first pull on him 
would be a heavy one, keeping things close at The 



96 WALTER GORING. 

Hurst for a year or two would set him all straight 
again, and there might be no further calls ; at any 
rate, it was no use thinking of it yet ; would Frank 
ride round the farm with him ? " 

They rode round the farm together, and came 
home by the Brook Green Cottage. A huge van 
stood at the door, and Mr. Goring sat on his horse 
at a short distance, superintending the removal of 
furniture from the same into the house. He rode 
up to the two men as soon as they appeared, and 
when he had been introduced to Frank, he said in 
rather an annoyed tone to Mr. Fellowes : 

" I have had a note from your new tenant, Mrs. 
Walsh, this morning, Fellowes ; she says that she 
sent off her furniture yesterday, and 'will I see 
that some one puts it in place in the house, as she 
means to be down to-night.* I sent over a troop 
of my servants, but they don't seem to get on ; she 
can't go into the house to-night, you know ; all the 
furniture they have come across yet is drawing- 
room furniture and kettles." 

" And they won't make her comfortable to-night, 
clearly," Henry Fellowes replied, with ready 
sympathy. "FU speak to my wife about it; she 
shall come and see Avhat can be done ; or perhaps 



FRANK I 97 

she liad better send a note here, asking Mrs. Walsh 
to stay with ns at The Hurst until her own house is 
ready. They are old firiends, I belieye ? '* 

Walter Goring's mouth twitched as he answered : 

V They know each other yexy well, and it would 
be doing me a great kindness as well as Mrs* Walsh. 
She has thrown the whole responsibility upon me, 
forgetting that I am a bachelor. I would place 
Goring Place at her absolute disposal, but she 
wouldn't come there." 

** Come up and put the case to my sister yourself,'* 
Frank suggested. ''I left her copying out some 
manuscript, and she will be glad of the interrup- 
tion.'^ 

" Mrs. Fellowes has really got so far as to have 
something to copy out ? that's well," Walter Goring 
said, as he turned his horse's head and rode along 
by Frank's side. 

"Got so far in what?" 

" In a charming story^ I have no doubt.'* 

Frank laughed. 

" It's a work of mine that Charlie is copying out 
from the rough scraps of paper on which I wrote it 
first I have never had the courage to tackle the' 
task myself, but my sister seems to like it*" 

VOL. II. H 



98 WALTER GORING. 

^'It's a bad plan writing on anything that 
necessitates copying out again," Walter Goring 
said, sagaciously; "going over it a second time 
shows you the weak places so clearly, that the end 
of it is generally to be torn up. I read and revise 
as thoroughly as I cauj but to sit down and copy out 
in cold blood is beyond me/' 

Then the fact of the established authorship of 
the one being alluded to, and the incipient author-* 
ship of the other made manifest, the two men went 
on with that talk of the craft which is pleasant 
enough to those engaged in it^ when successful, but 
rather tedious to the outsider. Frank asked Goring 
to recommend him a publisher, and Goring, with 
beautiful impartiality, recommended six on the spot, 
carefully refraining from all mention of his own for 
obvious reasons. Frank's views were rather large, 
but really looking at him as he rode along . ^the cold 
November sun gleaming on his fair bright hair, 
and his handsome haughty pale face uplifted, he 
seemed to be justified in entertaining the largest, 
Walter Goring thought. " There's a look of power 
about that fellow," the master of Goring Place 
said to himself; "he will probably do anything 
he tries to do. The worst of it is he will try too 



FRANK I 99 

many things for a time." Even as he thought it, 
Frank said: 

" I don't expect my first work to bring me mach. 
I have illustrated it very fully, and it will cost a 
good deal to get it out; therefore I shall agree to 
publish on that wretched half-profit plan; but I 
have got the plot of a long serial story, which I 
shall also illustrate myself, in my head, and I ought 
to do a good deal with that . don't you think so f " 
" We have known the experiment fail . " 
'* Simply because he couldn't draw," Frank in- 
terrupted. '^ My own belief is, that the educated 
draughtsman has the power of expressing his ideas 
in more or less picturesque language ; and that the 
imaginative, and at the same time careful and cor- 
rect writer, could draw if he tried. In doing both 
he may never attain to that eminence in one which 
he might have attained had he left the other un- 
touched ; but that the artistic feeling, which is the 
germ of either fruit, can be made to bear more than 
one kind, there can be no manner of doubt." 

*' I have an idea that the result will be greater if 
that artistic power be concentrated." 

" Possibly it may be more paying, but I was not 
looking at it from that point of view," Frank replied, 

H 2 



100 WALTER GORING. 

standing stoutly to his theory. " I believe that w6 
hold a certain amount of intellectual imaginative 
power in the hollow of our hands> and that it rests 
with ourselves in what du*ection, or in how many 
directions, we make it work/' 

'* Well, I don't agree with you at present," Walter 
Goring said, as they rode up to The Hurst ; " but 
I have no doubt but that you will practically 
illustrate your own views in a short time, and 
confound me." 

Then they went in and found Charlie, very much 
flushed as to the face and inked as to the fingers, 
still hard at work copying, from leaves of note-books^ 
backs of envelopes, and other " rough scraps," her 
brother's MS. work. 

She rose up laughing, and pushing her hair back 
as the men came in, said ^'I am serving my ap* 
prenticeship, you see, Mr. Goring. Frank, I have 
nearly done half of it, I think." 

..You will write original matter with all the 
greater zest after this labour, Mrs. Fellowes*" 

''I am afraid not, after Frank's; my own sen* 
tencefs seem to flounder about so loosely after 
reading his. Now, in the opening chapters of my 
story I have been trying to get a man oat of a roomi 



FBANK ! 101 

gracefully; it seems a little thing to do» but I 
couldn't * speed the parting guest/ " 

** Cultivate that vein, and you'll end by being 
epigrammatic/' Frank laughed. 

" Perhaps you liked him too well, Mrs. Fellowes. 
I know I often cling on to companionship with one 
of my characters, partly out of liking for them, 
and.'' 

" Partly because you are not certain which string 
it will be wise to pull next," Frank interrupted. 
" Take my advice, Charlie, and whenever you find 
yourself in a similar dilemma toss up for it ; if your 
young man makes an untoward appearance by the 
means, or your young lady seems to lavish herself 
rather too freely on your readers, they will still 
comfort themselves under the circumstances by de- 
claring that you have much surprised them, or that 
your design has marched with their anticipations." 

" I'm sure if I were in Charlie's place, I wouldn't 
bother myself about anything of the sort/' Henry 
Fellowes struck in, rather sadly. It did seem to 
him a matter of very small importance, indeed, 
whether or not an ideal creature could be conceived 
and carried out of the room. Everthing seemed to 
him of small importance, poor fellow ! . save broken 



102 WALTER GORING. 

banks, and blighted homes, and blasted honours^ 
His remark was natural enough under the circum- 
stances, but Charlie knew nothing of the circum- 
stances, therefore she, quite naturally too, resented 
the remark as being of the wet-blanket order. 

"It would bother me if I thought I shouldn't 
succeed in time, Harry ; if real hard work would da 
it, I would work like a galley slave, . ^but it's a 
game in which something else must be staked 
besides honest toil." 

" Bravo, little woman ! " Frank said, rising up 
and kissing his sister as she stood . ^her momentary 
enthusiasm over . with bent head and downcast 
eyes, looking very much ashamed of herself. 

" You have the right sort of coin, I think," Mr.. 
Goring added. " But to cease from shop, I have 
come to ask you a favour." 

"Which I shall grant, of course, ^no! stop- 
though, on this condition, write my name in the 
book you gave me the other day." She handed 
the first volume of his novel to him, and he wrote^ 
in it. 

" Mrs. H. Omry Fellowes, 

" With the kindest regards of her fellow-laboureri. 

" The Author.*' 



FRANK ! lOS 

She took it back end read it . ^her eyes flashing 
as she did so. "Her fellow-labourer." In this 
way he plainly indicated his recognition of her as 
one of them ; as one at least who might be of them 
. of that great band before whom she bent the 
knees of her heart ! The phrase strung her up ; it 
nerved her to bear much in order that she might 
deserve it. She never forgot it. In doubt, in 
disappointment, in the hours of toil and the hours 
of triumphj she always saw that golden legend, 
and was grateful and hopefuL God bless the men 
who give the aspirants for a canter on Pegasus a 
hand up ! 

"And now for your favour?" she asked, putting 
down the book ; and her eyes and the tone of her 
voice thanked him more than any words could have 
done for that which he had written. 

" Teach me to introduce comfort into chaos. 
Mrs. Walsh comes to-night, and must recline upon 
walnut-wood cabinets and fire-irons, unless you 
help me." 

" I suggest that you ask her here until the cot- 
tage is ready, Charlie dear," her husband remarked, 
" and." 
. " How can I without your mother's leave ? " she 



|04 WALTER 60BING. 

answered; "get that for me, and I will be the 
medium of invitation with pleasure." 

But though she said this, Walter Goring could 
not avoid seeing that there was small pleasure to 
'Mrs. Fellowes in the thought of welcoming Mrs. 
Walsh. 



CHAPTER VIL 



AGAINST THE GRAIN. 



Of course that was an awkward speech which 
Charlie had made, relative to old Mrs. Fellowes' 
leave as a necessary preliminary to the invitation. 
It was an awkward speech, and no one felt the full 
awkwardness of it so keenly as Charlie herself did 
the instant she had made it. It was another example 
of her nerves being too close to her skin. The 
instant she felt aggrieved, in ever so slight a degree, 
she showed herself to be aggrieved after her unwise 
nature. Her husband's remark had irritated her, 
in that it appeared to underrate her current great 
object. And she had not been given time to notice 
the jarred chords before Mrs. Walsh was mentioned 
to her as one to whom she ought to show careful 
consideration and attention^ The thing seemed to 
,be expected of her by her husband and Walter 



106 WALTER GORING. 

Goring, "who ought to have known better," she 
said angrily to herself; though why he should haye 
known better she would have found it hard to 
decide, had she been called upon to do so. She 
was ready and willing to go down and heap coals of 
fire on the head of the beautiful widow. But she 
did not quite like it, that Walter Goring should 
seem to think it only in the order of things that she 
should put herself out in minor domestic matters, 
for a woman whom she had only known as the 
inagnificent goddess of a bright metropolitan circle. 
Young Mrs. Fellowes foamed in her inner self with 
indignation against the woman who was so "un* 
blushingly following him up;" and was for the 
moment most irrationally enraged against the 
supine satisfaction of the man so followed. " He 
ought to be disgusted with her," she thought ; " and 
her husband only died the other day. I was in 
hopes that he would have fallen in love with that 
pretty girl I met him with that night." Poor 
Charlie ! She was only deceiving herself. She 
would have found flaws in the motives of even that 
pretty girl, it is to be feared. 

" I will answer for Mrs. Fellowes being de- 
lighted," Frank put in, good temperedly. " I'll go 



AGAINST THE GRAIN* 107 

and ask her/' he added, getting himself ont of the 
room as fast as he could. Accustomed as he waa 
to the ever changing deep, troublous domestic 
waters were odious to him. He was very fond of 
his sister Charlie ; she amused and interested and 
touched him greatly, by her admiring love for him- 
self; but " she shouldn't have flung out in that way, 
because it does no good,'' he said to himself, with a 
man's practical clearsightedness in such matters, 
as he made his way over to Mrs. Fellowes, senior's, 
domain. 

Her own son would have been a far less efficient 
envoy on this delicate mission. Mrs. Fellowes 
always looked with lenient eyes upon any request 
made to her by the brother of the daughter-in-law 
whom she disliked. Frank had a wonderful way 
with women ; young and old, they succumbed to it 
and liked it« He had the knack of coming down 
and being very gentle to them, not as though they 
needed his gentleness by reason of their own weak-^ 
ness, but he showed that he knew they could claim 
it from him, as a queen might claim it from a 
churl. 

Old Mrs. Fellowes was knitting away for dear 
life when he made his appearance before her thi& 



108 WALTER GORING, 

morning. She knew of the dark cloud that was 
hanging over her son and her son's house» and 
though she was safe herself, . her own little annual 
income being invested in something surer than 
Bretts' bank, . her heart was very sore. She was 
of that order of womankind which grows harder 
and grimmer under a sorrow, Frank could not 
help regarding her as a very unpleasant piece of 
granite as he entered, and she glued her lips more 
tightly together by way of noticing the fact. 

" I have been round the farm with Fellowes, and 
we have brought Mr. Goring back with us/' he 
commenced, gaily. He always would take it for 
granted that people were interested in what he 
had been doing, and what ho was going to do. It 
was very hard to remain indifferent to aught that 
concerned him in his presence. 

"Mr. Goring is no friend of mine," Mrs. Fel- 
lowes replied, rigidly. She could not forget, and 
she could not forgive, the way in which he had 
come down, and dared to enjoy himself with his 
own set, before the county had taken him up, 
"Mr. Goring is no friend of mine. I suppose 
it's he is keeping my son away from me now, 
when I am naturally anxious to know if he 



AGAINST THE GBAIn. 109 

has heard anything fresh about this dreadful 
business ?^' 

Frank shook his head. *' I can tell you that he 
has heard nothing to-day ; it's an awful time for you 
all/' he continued, kindly. " I hope, however, that 
things will turn out to be better than they seem." 

.*You must perceive, Mr. St. John, that my 
son's principal anxiety . indeed, hard as it is for 
his mother to say it, his only anxiety . is about 
your sister. I really believe," she continued, with 
tears of vexation in her eyes, "that if he had not 
just brought home a wife, he would bear this 
terrible trial much better than he does." 

"I have no doubt he would," Frank replied, 
calmly ; " any fellow would feel the same. Naturally 
a man would rather cut his throat than get a girl 
into such a scrape." 

" And your sister is not the one to make the best 
of privations. She can't put her hand to a single 

thing " 

"Oh! can't she?" Frank interrupted. "You 
don't know her, my dear madam. I fancy she 
would behave beautifully in rough water. By the 
way, do you know that Fellowes' new tenant comes 
down to-night ?*' . 



110 WALTER GORING. 

"To Goring Place, I suppose?" Mrs, Fellowes 
ftsked, with a severe sneer. 

"Not a bit of it; to an empty house, or worse, 
' unless you can induce Charlie to do what she 
.doesn't seem at all inclined to do, . ^invite her here. 
Let me be the bearer of your commands to Charlie, 
that the right thing be done. This lady must not 
be made to feel that her comfort is of no account 
among you all at the outset." 

" My commands ! Ah! Mr. St. John! My com- 
mands would be the very last your sister would 
listen to ; if she does not see for herself, that this 
civility is no more than she, as the wife of the 
landlord, ought to pay to an incoming tenant. 
a widow, too ! . my opinion will weigh but little 
with her. I suppose the truth is,'' she continued 
severely, "that she is afraid Mr. Goring will not 
be able to devote so much of his time and atten- 
tion and tomfoolery to her now his old friend is 
coming ? " 

" I don't know about that," Frank replied, care- 
lessly ; " but I shall just go and tell Charlie that 
you say it is to be done, and leave her no further 
excuse for not doing it." Then he retuined to 
the library, and threw up his cap as he entered, 



AGAIN8T TH£ GSAIN. HI 

exclaiming, /* The mother-in-law greeting! Mrs. 
Walsh is to be implored not to ^repose upon the 
frying-pans, but to honour the poor abode of The 
Hurst with her presence till such time as the 
cottage can be made comfortable." And Walter 
Goring, as he saw Mrs. Fellowes sit down to write 
her note, had the uncomfortable feeling of one who 
fears that a great fuss has been made about the 
obtaining of a boon, which the one to be benefited 
may, perchance, refuse when it is offered. ^' She 
may resent it as impertinent interference on Mrs. 
Fellowes' part, and blow me up to the sky about 
it/' he thought: ''women are such rum animals, 
addicted so invariably to being fierce in the wrong 
place." However, the deed was done now ; so he 
only thanked Charlie with great politeness for her 
*' prompt partizanship with himself," When the 
letter was written and sent off to the station to 
meet Mrs. Walsh whenever it should please that 
fiery brand to arrive. 

''And now," Charlie said, with the air of one 
who was midway through a disagreeable task, and 
required refreshment, "we'll go in to luncheon, if 
you please.*' They went in accordingly-, carrying 
Mr. Goring along with them, which extravagance 



112 WALTER GORING. 

caused Mrs. Fellowes to refuse butter with her 
cheese, and prefer beer to wine. " She must ask 
all the neighbourhood to stay with her and to 
luncheon, and her husband on the very brink of 
ruin," the old lady cried piteously to her daughter 
that afternoon. *'Tm sure it makes my blood run 
cold to hear her laughing and going on, and Henry 
won't have a word said to her. Oh, no ! she's too 
precious to hear the truth." 

" She'll hear it soon enough," Miss Dinah said, 
with a certain air of sublime satisfaction in poetical 
justice. 

^* Soon enough ! Yes, when he can't keep it from 
her any longer. His folly about her is past all 
bounds, and exceeds belief. Mrs. Travers said to 
me only yesterday, * it exceeds belief, Mrs. Fellowes, 
I assure you . that it does.' " 

There was something absolutely beautiful in 
Mrs. Fellowes' profound reliance on Mrs. Travers* 
assurance that the folly of the master of The Hurst 
in this matter ** exceeded all belief." The thing 
had been said, therefore it must be. The word of 
her neighbour ranked next in order of indisputa- 
blenesa and infallibility to the Word of God with 
Mrs. JFellowes. 



AGAINST THE GBAIK. l\S 

r: "If I could only see her sit down with her 
needle, or take to doing something, no matter how 
little, about the house, I should be better satisfied 
as to what will become of her,'* Mrs. Fellowes 
resumed solemnly. She was of that order of mind 
which would have advised keeping the bed of the 
Atlantic nice and dry by means of a bucket. 

"Ah!" Miss Dinah replied sententiously, "it 
must be a good needle to mend Bretts' business ; 
if it comes to the worst she will have to do a little 
more than she bargained for when she married my 
poor brother." 

" The worst day's work he ever did," his mother 
struck in pathetically. A stranger might have been 
forgiven for imagining that Charlie had wrought all 
the evil . ^they upbraided her so for having been 
brought into it. 

" I shouldn't at all wonder if she wants to go 
back to her own people, if they will have her," Miss 
Dinah remarked. 

**Nor should I, if they'll have her; but her 
brother-in-law has a family, and cannot be expected 
to maintain other men's wives. Ah ! if Henry had 
married as I wished him to marry, there would 
have been ready money enough to satisfy all de- 

T0L.1L t 



114 WALTER GOBING. 

mands. There was Miss Hughes worshipped the 
ground he trod upon, and Miss Walker would have 
jumped at him . ^yes, jumped at him." 

"You know you never let Henry look at either 
of them twice, mother," Miss Dinah said, bluntly. 

" Only because I didn't want him to marry with- 
out due consideration ; you see what the result of 
his going off and relying on his own judgment 
entirely is ? " Mrs Fellowes replied triumphantly. 

"She didn't break the bank anyway," Miss 
iDinah replied, stolidly. She was a good, hearty 
hater; she would dislike . and show her dislike- 
without the shadow of a cause. But she would not 
condescend to the meanness of getting up a false 
cause of hatred. When her daughter said that^ 
Mrs. Fellowes declared "that she knew herself to be 
only an old woman, who had no business to speaks 
and that in future she would never open her lips 
about anything " after the manner of ill-tempered, 
illogical old wonien who find themselves conver- 
sationally worsted. 

Meanwhile Charlie and her brother and Mr. 
Goring had gone out for a walk, and the subject 
which the two men had been discussing in the morn- 
ing was once more broached. Charlie said, rather 



AGAINST THE 6BAIN. 11$ 

deprecatbgly« that she must either be the excep- 
tion to Frank's rule, or that she had no artistic 
feeling. "I can write . ^I have ideas to express, 
and words at command to express them . ^but I 
can't draw a line/' she said, pathetically. 

"Don't regret it, Mrs. Fellowes; your brother 
and you will work all the better for it. Bring all 
the talent of the family to bear upon one work; 
yon do the letterpress, and let him illustrate it." 

" A sort of * Week on the Waters,' or * Month on 
the Mountains,' or * Days in the Dales ' business ?" 
Frank asked. 

"Heaven forbid! No, we have had enough 
gentlemanly guide books for this generation. No ; 
a serial story illustrated ought to sell well, now 
that none of the giants are in the field with one. 
Is the tale you have commenced sufficiently elastic 
for the purpose, Mrs. Fellowes ? " 

" I am afraid not. It's the story of a childish 
love which grows with their growth, and at last 
ripens into an engagement.'' 

"Of course; but lengthen it^by making him 
jilt her, or her jilt him . ^its immaterial which, so 
long as one does it." 

" She couldn't, with her character," Charlie re- 

i2 



116 . WALTER GORINa. 

plied sincerely; "but he does jilt her^ and the^ 
. when Nemesis overtakes him the story is over." 

" Is it indeed ? The majority of jilted young ladies 
would hardly thank you for taking that for granted, 
I'm thinking. Well, hold Nemesis in with a tight 
hand for a time ; reward your hero for the evil he 
has done very gradually; violent poetical justice 
rarely does overtake people in real life, you know." 

" Would it not be almost truer to nature ta let 
them ga unpunished, as they do in real life very 
often?" she asked. 

" It might be good nature, but carried too far it 
would be crude art. In real life we don^t see the 
Nemesis that overtakes our fellow sinners ; but in 
a work of fiction the hell that a man has made for 
himself should be painted; *if the sinner goes on 
smiling and seeming serene through nine hundred 
pages ** 

" One naturally imbibes the idea that in the eyes 
of the writer it's rather a fine thing to be a sinner, 
and it won't do for you to give colour to that idea, 
young lady; that is what Mr. Goring means, I 
think* At any rate I do," Frank said, taking his 
sister's hand and drawing it through his arm; 
"however, we will start the story the first spare 



.GAINST THE QBAIN. 117 

day we have, and I shall revise you thoroughly as 
you go along." 

" I will be a more impartial critic ; let me under- 
take that part of the nSair" Walter Goring asked. 
So the three were united in the work of the future. 



CHAPTER VIIL 



. PAINFUL MEETING. 



If it were stated that Daisy got on well with the 
OsbomeSy the statement would not stand investiga- 
tion. She stayed with them ; she slept under the 
same roof with them, and partook of viands with 
them, and sat in the same pew on Sundays with 
them. But for all this similarity of pursuit she 
did not get on well with them. 

She was too old and too perverse for the place. 
Mrs. Osborne would have been angelically good 
and kind to her had she accepted the goodness and 
kindness in a feeling spirit; but this she could not 
do. Mrs. Osborne wanted to order her outgoings 
and incomings . or at least to appear to order them 
. and even against so much exercise of the autho- 
rity which Walter had vested in the lady of the 
house Daisy girded. " It isn't that I suspect you 



A PAINFUL MEETING, 119 

o{ going anywhere, or seeing anyone where you 
shouldn't go and whom you shouldn't see/' the 
duenna would urge ; to which Daisy would reply . 

*' And it is not that I want to go anywhere or 
see anyone in particular, but I hate to be bus* 
pected. My guardian said I wasnH a prisoner, and 
I won't be treated as though I were one.'* 

She was in truth a wajrward young lady, an awful 
charge, an odious responsibility. Mrs. Osborne 
would have suffered much to be well and decently 
rid of her. Miss Daisy was the heaviest cross a 
limited income had yet laid upon that estimable 
woman* *' When Miss Goring had been under my 
roof for a whole month, I knew no more about her 
than I did the day she came," the matron lady 
would say to inquiring friends in after-days, when 
Daisy Goring was of the past. Not that Daisy 
maintained a cold or even an apparently reserved 
demeanour with Mrs. Osborne. On the contrary, 
the young lady, for the first eight weeks of her 
residence in the detached villa, was remarkably 
loquacious and lively. It is true, however, that 
her loquacity and liveliness never led her on to say 
a word which Mrs. Osborne could use as evidence 
of her charge's antecedents, and family history* 



120 WALTER GORING, ' 

H6r education did not progress very rapidl}'', 
nof did the desire to emulate Miss Osborue posses^ 
her in the slightest degree. It was in vain that the 
fond mother strove to make maternal yanity serve 
a good end by perpetually citing Alice's achieve* 
ments to Daisy. Daisy would listen to the well^ 
meant vaunts with careless civility, and graciously 
observe when they were concluded, that ** Alice cer- 
tainly had a wonderful power of plodding.'* So far, 
however, from being excited to parallel plodding 
herself, she refused the singing lessons which Mrs. 
Osborne put in her path, saying, that the lady 
whom they used as an instrument *^had a bad 
method." **A bad method! when she gives the 
first lessons in the neighbourhood," Mrs. Osborne 
said in indignant comment; *' such a self-sufficient 
young lady as Miss Goring it has never been my 
fate to meet.*' 

Nor was there much sympathy between Daisy 
and her companion Alice Osborne. The latter had 
suffered herself to be dazzled, and, as it were, put 
in an inferior position from the very first Daisy's 
gift of seeming had imposed upon the substantial 
mind that believed honestly that to do anything 
well one must understand it thoroughly.' Alice 



. PAINFUL UEKTlUa. 121 

Osborne was good and sound and true herself; 
therefore when Daisy talked bright nonsenae, she 
dazzled the girl, who had yet to learn that the: 
language of exaggeration covereth a multitude of 
ignorances very often. 

Having lived a simple, solitary life with her 
mother from her infancy, Alice was rather inclined 
to sentimentalism . sentimentalism of the safer sort, 
be it understood, of the Helen and Hermia order. 
But when she proposed this alliance to Daisy, 
Daisy derided the idea. **How delightful it will 
be for us to read and work together in the garden,*' 
Alice said. ** Mamma has given me * Wordsworth * 
for my birthday this year, and last year she gave 
me ^Cowper;' we'll go through them together." 

*' Isn't Gowper the man who hopped about his 
room with hares ? " Daisy asked. 

** Oh, lovely lines he wrote to them." 

**I daresay he did; but I don't care to read 
them, you see," Daisy replied frankly, and Alice 
felt herself rebuflTed. 

Day after day, as Miss Goring's own riding-horse 
and groom came round to the villa, did Mrs. 
Osborne persistently remark, "It's a pity Alice 
isn't going with you, . so much pleasanter for you 



122 WALTER GORING. 

than going alone; but it's too late to send for a 
liorse for her to-day ;'' and Daisy as persistently 
replied, '* I assure you I don't at all mind riding 
alone." It had been an understood thing before 
Walter left that companionship in her rides was 
never to be forced upon Miss Goring; but Mrs* 
Osborne was determined that her charge should be 
given every chance of coming round gracefully into 
^ proper state of mind on the matter. 

Judging from the time she stayed out, Miss 
<joring must have ridden long distances ; she 
always brought her horse home in a lather too; 
it was certain, therefore, that the time had not 
been spent in quiet riding. The trusty groom, 
when questioned on this subject, as he was some- 
times by the housemaid while he was waiting for 
his young mistress at the door, was frank and dis- 
arming to a degree. " Where ? Why, all over them 
downs, at a splitting pace. I never saw a young 
lady so fond of hard riding in my life." 

" And always alone too ? " the housemaid would 
say suggestively, to which proposition the trusty 
groom would give a prompt and intelligent assent. 
" Yes, always alone ; it's my belief she couldn't 
hold that chestnut in if any one rode with her." 



X PAINFUL MEETINO. 123 

It was evident, on indisputable authority, that 
Daisy was justified in preferring to take her eager 
steed out by herself. 

The lOOOZ, which she had asked her cousin 
Walter to let her have, and not to question her 
about, had been placed to her account at a Brighton 
bank. The day after it had been paid in, she drew 
out 400Z. of it, made the notes up into a square 
packet on which she wrote, " With Daisy's love," 
and directed them to. 

" Mrs. FrrzGiBBON, 
" Clare Cottage, 

" Brompton Lane, W." 

This packet she registered and posted herself, 
and that night she awoke from a dream of a fan*, 
sad-looking woman, like herself, but much older and 
prettier, kissing and blessing her. She awoke from 
this dream, sobbing and crying, " Mother, Mother ! " 
There was no sign, save the post-mark, given of 
Daisy's, own place of abode on that packet of wealth, 
consequently, Mrs. Fitzgibbon, of Clare Cottage, 
never acknowledged the receipt of it. 
. She wrote to, and heard from her guardian re- 
gularly about once a fortnight, and as she did not 



124 WALTER OOBINa. 

hold a flaent pen, this was the most serious occapa- 
tioQ of her life. The false starts she made were a 
caation to Mrs. Osborne not to leave too many 
quires of note-paper about, as Daisy had a habit of 
commencing ''Dear Cousin Walter/' on eight or 
nine sheets before she could determine within her** 
self what to say next. These sheets Mrs. Osborne 
had more than once taken up, and written state 
effusions on the fair portion of them to the finest of 
her friends, oblivious of the fact of Miss Daisy^s^ 
failure on the other side. Letter-writing was clearly 
not a speciality of Miss Goring, or else she ima- 
gined that Walter would be far more critical about 
her performances than he was in reality. Utter 
prostration of spirit was sure to be her portion 
when the day came round for her Goring Place 
letter, and she would gnash the teeth of her soul at 
Mrs. Osborne, when that lady kindly reminded her 
of the fact, as she rarely failed to do at breakfast. The 
sole comfort she had under the infliction was, that 
Walter wrote her such short letters that he couldn*t 
possibly expect long ones from her in return. 

One day she was surprised. it almost appeared, 
indeed, as if she was horribly startled . ^by a 
visit from Mary Levinge. She was up in het 



. PAINFUL MEETING. 125 

jDwn room when the lady's name was announced to 
her, and in her first excitement she condescended 
to seek aid from the gentle and systematically 
repulsed Alice. " Tell Miss Osborne I want her/' 
^he said to the servant who had told her of Miss 
Levinge's arrival. Then she followed the servant 
out on to the landing, and corrected herself meekly: 
.'* Ask Miss Osborne, if she will be kind enough to 
come to me, I mean." 

Alice went to her at once, and found her with 
her yellow hair hanging loosely over her shoulders ; 
her face was flushed, and her eyes sparkling, and 
she altogether looking very pretty. " Isn't it un- 
fortunate," she began quickly, as Alice came intp 
the room, ** the first time. a visitor comea for me, 
I'm not ready to see her. Will you go down . tod 
. and do the pretty and polite to her, and then let 
me know what she wants ? " 

Alice was amiable, accommodating and meek, 
but she was also conscientious; she was in the 
middle of an Italian lesson, and she felt that neither 
her master's time nor her mother's money might 
be wasted. Her future was chalked out for her. 
She was being *' educated for a governess." 

'*! can't, dean I am only half through my 



126 WALTER GORING. 

lesson, and Mr. Gatti must go in ten minutes ; you 
can always do your hair in half a minute, you 
know ! " 

"Very well; don't trouble yourself and waste 
your time in giving me advice/' Daisy replied^ 
sharply. Then as Alice left the room, Daisy sat 
down before the glass, and put her yellow locks up 
with trembling fingers. The tears rushed up into 
her eyes too, and her lips quivered visibly. " What 
a fool I am," she cried angrily, at last, struggling 
to compose herself, but she did not succeed very 
well. Her face was piteous to behold, from its 
mingled expression of nervousness and anxiety^ 
when she finally presented herself before Miss 
Levinge. 

That lady's back was towards the door when 
Daisy entered. Miss Levinge was standing before 
a Parian cast of Ariadne on her panther^ surveying 
it critically. She turned round, pmiling heartily 
when she heard the door open, and greeted Daisy 
with outstretched hand, and the words,. 

" Are you very much astonished to see me? " 

The smile had completely reassured Daisy ; in a 
moment she regained her self-possession ; the old 
look of almost impertinent indifference overspread 



A PAINFUL MEETtNa, If^ 

her face, and banished the anxious expression of an 
instant before, as she answered,-^ 

*' Yes ; rather. I thought you were in Rome." 

" No ; we were prevented going when we had 
intended in October, so now we mean to wait till 
after Christmas. My mother and I return alone; and 
I tell you what, Daisy " . she rose, and placed her 
arm on Daisy's arm as she spoke . " I wish you 
would go there with us for a time : it would be a 
new life for you ; you would like it." 

Daisy drew a deep breath. 

** Go to Rome with you ! . why ? "* 

"Why; because I think you would be happy 
with us; and the change would do you good."^ 
Mary Levinge slightly tightened her clasp on 
Daisy's arm as she spoke, and Daisy blushed a 
little; then she laughed her bird-like laugh and 
shook her head. 

" I don't know what my guardian would day to 
this plan; and I don't want to be done good to. 
But you are very kind . ^very kind indeed. to have 
thought of me.'* 

She got up as she spoke, and put her arms 
suddenly round Miss Levinge's neck, and her lips 
bn Miss Levinge's cheek. It was a sudden impulse 



128 . ..WALTER GORING. 

% 

mth her, and when she had done it she drew back 
half abashed. 

"We often think of you, dear Daisy," Mary 
Letinge said, heartily ; " are you sure that a change 
wouldn't be good for you . are you quite sure that 
you are well and happy ? ** 

.. She asked the question in a peculiarly impressive 
tone; and once more Daisy blushed as she re- 
plied,. 

" Yes ; quite sure/' 

" As to what your guardian would say to the 
plan I propose/' Mary Levinge went on, "I am 
quite sure that Walter Goring would consent to it, 
^nd think it a good one. I have not said anything 
to him yet, because I wanted to know if you would 
like it yourself, I wish you would like it, Daisy ? " 

Daisy moved restlessly in her chair. 

" I think it so kind of you," she said earnestly . 
" you don't know how kind I think it of you ; it 
.seems ungrateful to say that I shouldn't like it, but 
I don't think I should, really. What should I do 
there?'' 

- '' Do ?. do the same and better things there than 
you do here, Daisy; for example, get more correct 
notipnsf as to beauty and art than you will gaia 



A. PAINFUL MEETINa. l29 

from that rabbish, for instance/' and she nodded 
her head as she spoke towards Ariadne. 

" They would be no use to me if I got them. 
How's your sister ? " 

" She is very well, she is going to be married; 
that is the reason we stayed in England so loing> 
and that my mother and I go home alone. She's 
going to be' married to a young clergyman . just 
fancy it I You don't inquire for Laurence ? " 

" How is he ? I was going to ask," Daisy said, 
^hurriedly. 

" He's as well as an idle man with little to live 
upon can be," Mary Levinge replied slowly ; " and 
he's as happy as a man whose great aim in life is 
heiress-hunting deserves to be. Thank God, child, 
that he is not your brother, and that you need not 
have anything to do with him." 
. It was not a sisterly speech, Mary Levinge 
must have had strong reasons indeed for uttering it. 
.The girl she addressed thought her hard, cruel, 
.hatefully unjust ; but she was none of these things. 
She only strove to save. 

^ ' *' Are you going to Goring Place again before you 
leave England?" Daisy asked, abruptly turning 
.the conversation. 

VOL. II. K 



13to WALTER GOMNG. 

'* I am afraid that we shall have no time ; the 
fact is, Sybil js so absorbed in her love's young 
dreiam, that she leaves all the arrangements for her 
marriage entirely in our hands; you know that 
Mrs. Walsh has gone to live in Deneham ? " 

" Gone down to marry Walter, I believe." 
Daisy laughed ; then she added warmly, ** Well, he 
is a darling fellow, and he deserves the best and 
most beautiful wife in the world." 

While she was saying this, Mrs. Osborne sailed 
in, and asked Miss Goring's guest to stay to 
luncheon. Mary Levinge remained for an hour or 
two longer, but though she put the Boman plan as 
pleasantly as she could before Daisy several times, 
Daisy persisted in utterly negativing it, and Mary 
Levigne departed at last, baffled in her good intent. 
" I warned Walter, and I have tried to put him on 
his guard las well as I could," she thought with a 
sigh, as she drove away to the station; *'but while 
1 have nothing but vague suspicions, and my 
knowliBdge of Laurence to act upon, I can do 
nothing." 

During the next /ew weeks after Miss Levinge's 
Visit, Daisy was unprecedentedly acquiescent in all 
the Osborne arrangements. She took gentle exer- 



A PAINFUL MEETING. 131 

9 

.cise on the pier with the mother and daughter 
from twelve till one daily. She wearied her brainft 
imder Mr. Gatti's auspices. She herself made 
honourable mention of a certain little black mare 
named * Ada ' which was reported to carry a lady 
ladmirably, and which the chestnut had fraternised 
with to such a degree in the stable, that Daisy 
thought Miss Osborne might accompany her in her 
rides with safety, not to say pleasure. She made 
herself agreeable according to her lights in fact, and 
seemed to be trying to forget something and live in 
the passing hours alone. 

But this sunny period was not destined to last. 
One chill clear morning the horses and the Italian 
master were simultaneously announced. Alice 
could not go out with Daisy^ so Daisy went out 
alone. 

She seemed to be tired of exploring the Sussex 
-downs and lanes. She rode for a couple of miles or 
so inland this morning, and then she came back 
and cantered slowly up and down the parade for a 
time. Cantered up and down in an obviously 
purposeless way. There was no pleasure to her in 
riding^ in this place, and she knew none of the 
people. 



132 . WALTER ooRma. 

Presently she broaght the mare up sharply, and 
seemed to the observant eyes of the trusty groom to 
Teel in her saddle. The garish nature-forsaken 
landscape, and the glaring sea-view seemed to 
quiver and rock before her eyes as sh6 drew rein for 
an instant in tender hope, and slackened it the next 
in terrible humiliation. 

At about the distance of five yards from her a 
little group were pausing to listen to the strains of 
a German band. The group consisted of a sickly, 
sad, pretty looking woman in a bath chair, a middle- 
aged gentleman, and a young girl of fourteen. The 
lady when Daisy caught sight of her first, was 
leaning her pretty wasted cheek on her hand, and 
looking . away into vacancy ; the gentleman was 
bending over the side of her chair, speaking to her 
apparently as though he desired to arouse her 
interest 

Presently the invalid looked up and saw the 
young girl on the chestnut horse on the outside of 
the railings. Daisy was leaning slightly forward, 
with a wofully piteous, wildly loving look in her 
eyes. She had drawn her reins tightly by this time, 
and the fine-mouthed horse was settling back on its 
haunches in a way that would have done no discredit 



A PAINFUL MEETIKa. 188 

(o. the steed of a circus-queen, afid his rider was 
leaning forward, looking, with all her heart in her 
eyes, at the little group I have described. 

Instantly the gentleman looked round, following 
the direction that the invalid lady's eyes took, and 
his glance fell on the young equestrian. He looked 
coldly at her, past her, through her, as it seemed .to 
her, and she heard him say to the chair-man. '^ Go 
home at once.*' Then the chair was pushed on ; 
the little group was gone, and Daisy was left alone 
to quiet the horse whose mouth she had so sorely 
worried for nothing. 

There was no word spoken by any member 
of that little group until they reached their 
hotel. Then when the lady had been sedulously 
helped up to her own room by her husband^ he 
began . 

** Was this the reason of your anxiety to come to 
Brighton, Marguerite ? '' 

" Don't be so hard, when you see how ill I am," 
she answered piteously. She looked such a frail, 
delicate woman as she sat there trembling in a chair 
at the foot of the bed, against which she seemed 
iM^riying to steady herself. 
. " Why try to put yourself in the way of meeting 



134 WALTEB GOBIKG. 

ier when you know my resolution? Why painp 
yourself and insult me ? " 

He was not the style of man whose appearance 
would command respect for any resolution he might 
issue. A flahhy loose-looking man, with watery 
heavy blue eyes, he was one whom the superficial 
observer might imagine could lie moulded easily. 
But his wife was no superficial observer ; she knew 
his inflexibility of purpose only too well. 

*'You took the money she sent, my poor 

girl ! " she said, shivering as she spoke. *^ I 
thought after that if I did chance to meet her alon& 
you would have let me." 

She stopped and began to sob, covering her face 
with her hands, like the poor broken creature she- 
was. 

Her husband gave vent to an impatient exclama- 
tion, and commenced walking up and down the 
room ; suddenly he paused right in front of her. 

** The money was taken for your comfort. Mar- 
guerite; be just to me; remember that never a 
penny of it have I spent on myself'! " 

She moved her hand towards him deprecatingly^ 
and her sob almost swelled into a wail as he went on. 

" I forgave the deception you practised on me for 



A PAINFUL WSETWa. 165 

fifteen years in calling your daughter your niece; 
when the ghastly truth came out^ I asked you to 
choose between our poor little children and myself, 
and that child of sin and sham o - * * 

" Don't ! " she gasped feebly. 

"What?" 

"Don't say any more now/' It had been her bane 
and weakness through all her lifethat she would 
put things off. She shrank from saying or hearing 
hard truths, the poor irresolute unhappy creature. 
Respited for an hour, he would take a full pleasure 
in life, and almost forget. So now she pleaded 
with lip and eye, and imploring gesture of the hand^ 
that he would say '* nothing more just now.'* 

She had been such a pretty woman, this poor 
mother of Daisy's. Even now her little delicate^ 
featured face and soft blue eyes, and pale brown 
hair, were almost lovely when she was not frightened, 
in spite of those years of secret suffering and remorse, 
and the last few months of open shame. 

She was the first to speak after she had asked 
him to give her quarter ; he had ceased from his 
reproaches with a little grunt, for he knew well that 
if he continued' them she would speedily bring her 
heart complaint to bear uppn him, and then some 



ISU 'WALTER 60RIN6. 

strange doctor would be called in, and the eternal 
ca;atiou9 " My dear sir, you must take care that Mrs* ' 
Fitzgibbon is not agitated/' would be poured into- 
his ears. So when he saw the preliminary signs, he - 
ceased from his reproaches with an ill-used grunt. 
Presently she resumed. 

"An das for forgiving, you're always telling me 
of it" : 

'' Perhaps we had better not go into the subject 
again, Marguerite,'' he said, temperately. She 
thought she had gained a slight vantage, and that 
it would be well to pursue it, 
. ** And it's scarcely manly of you, considering that 
I threw myself upon your mercy, and . " 

He cut the sentence short by going out and 
slamming the door, and when her nerves recovered 
the shock, she languidly put off her bonnet and 
shawl, and knelt down crjdng wearily, and praying 
wildly for Daisy and . ^for death. 

At the same hour Daisy, locked in her own room 
at Mrs. Osborne's, was packing up a few of her 
clothes and trinkets, labouring away at her task 
with hands that were too tremulous to do very 
efficient work. She scarcely saw the things that 
were before her, her eyes were burning so fiercely 



. PAIKFUL MEETING, 137 

with the hot tears which she would not let fall as 
she recalled every line of the face and figure, worn 
thin by suffering long and harsh, which she had 
seen on the parade. And her heart meanwhile 
ached horribly with pity for the mother whom she 
loved the more for their mutual wrong. 



CHAPTER IX. 

HOSTESS AND GUEST. 

The new tenant of the Brook-green Cottage had 
Arrived. At first when she read Mrs. Fellowes* 
note of invitation, which was awaiting her at the 
station, she said, " Very civil of her ; but I shall 
prefer going to my own house at once." But pre- 
sently she grew more acquiescent to the scheme, for 
Mr. Goring . ^who had been careful to meet her 
also . ^backed Charlie's note very judiciously. 

" I wouldn't say a word in favour of your going 
there or anywhere else where you didn't care to 
go," he said ; " but just now there's a cloud over 
The Hurst." Then he told her what the cloud was, 
and described the state of the cottage; and she 
looked and felt very sorry. Like a true woman, 
however, she would not even give Charlie full credit 
for all the misery that might possibly come upon 



H0S17ESS AND GUEST. 139 

Ixer. The same feeling which prompted Cleopati'a 
to ask of Antony, " Can Fulvia die ? " made Mrs^ 
Walsh say, 

** Her brother-in-law . ^that odious man with the 
mile of upper lip . is a clever lawyer enough* Pro- 
bably he looked after her settlements." Then she 
took Walter's arm, and walked away to the carriage^ 
which he had waiting for her. 

*'It all goes, I fear . ^he had settled so many 
shares upon her," he answered, as he handed her 
in. Then he took off his hat, and she found that 
he was not going to accompany her. She leant 
forward hastily, as he closed the door, 

" Walter ! you are coming with me ? " 

" To-night-. after your journey ! " (it was about 
eight o'clock). " You will be too tired to care for 
more than the family circle. By the way, collect 
your impressions of old Mrs. Fellowes and Miss 
Dinah, and give them to me to-morrow." 

" A resident mother and sister-in-law too ! Poor 
girl ! how very uncomfortable she must have been 
as Miss St. John it makes one think ! Well, if you 
won't come, Mr. Goring, tell him to take me to this 
.place, wherever it may be." Then she drew back 
her face encircled with the widow's bonnet-cap, and 



14Q WALTRB GOBIKG. 

Walter gaye the word for her to he diiren to The 
Borst 

The whole fiunily, with the exeeption of Frank, 
were drawn np in the drawing-room to receive her. 
Frank had declined to jnake one of them on the 
occasion. ''I wonld rather first dawn npon her 
dazzled vision at the hreakfast-table in my £nesh 
bloom," he said, in reply to his sister's request that 
he *' wonld he there and make himself agreeable.** 
The fact is, Frank had no very dear notions re- 
specting Mrs. Walsh. He knew that this meeting 
wonld he the first that had taken place between 
Mrs. Walsh and Charlie since the death of the 
former's husband. It occurred to him, as beit^g 
within the bounds of possibility, that Mrs. Walsh 
might cry, or, at least, look bereft. Therefore he 
determined on keeping out of the way mitil the 
earlier emotion had subsided. 

Moreover, he was engaged upon a very pleasant 
and congenial task, and he had just got into the 
fling of it, as it were. This was none other than a 
poem in heroic measure, enlivened by comic draw- 
ings, illustrative of the respective careers of Mrs. 
FeUowes and Miss Dinah. He had just arrived at 
that part of it where Mrs. FeUowes first discovered 



HOSTESS AND GUEST* 141 

herself to be the mother of a marriageable soil. 
The stem rectitude expressed in her little shawl, 
and the maternal solicitude in her face, as the 
daughters of the land approached him immediately 
after the discovery, " deserved careful study, and 
an evening's uninterrupted work," he declared. 
Accordingly, he had retired to the library, where 
he sat happily, smoking and drawing, and occasion- 
ally singing short scraps of song, or whistling 
favourite melodies, leaving Charlie to face her guest 
aIone« 

For Charlie was terribly alone when left with the 

Felloweses . every one of them . ^in these days. Her 

!husband, oppressed with anxiety for her principally, 

was more gloomy and depressed when with hefr 

alone than he was with anyone else. He lived in 

constant dread of her questioning him as to the 

' cause of this change, and yet he could not, for the 

' life of him, be as he had been of yore. Truth to 

tell, Charlie gave very little thought to the matter. 

. She felt that there was a change in her husband, 

but she had no desire to analyse the cause of it, 

and no particular sorrow in its continuance. That 

feeling of having made a terrible bungle of the 

^threads of her life was still her paramount one"; 



.142 WALTER <K>BINa. 

fmd she lacked the heart . and the motive . ^to strive 
to unravel those threads just yet. 

Begularly at intervals of about ten minutes from 
the moment the clock struck seven this evening, 
poor Charlie had to listen to ejaculations of surprise 
from either Mrs. Fellowes or Miss Dinah as to the 
non-appearance of the guest. It was useless re- 
minding them that there would not be another down 
train till eight. They chose to believe that Mrs. 
Walsh had arrived at some earlier hour, and was 
walking about in the wet, or sitting on the railway 
platform, for the sake of keeping them expectant. 

"Ah! it's always the way," the old lady ob- 
served : " you go and interfere in what doesn't 
<5oncem you, and this is the return you get ! *' 

"It does show one the folly of running after 
strangers ! " Miss Dinah said, decisively. 

"Especially strangers who have shown before- 
hand that they don t at all regard the usages of 
society." 

" I call it using the house as if it were an hoteji. 
It's like saying, ' I shall come in when I like, and I 
-don't care whether you sit up for me, or not.' " 

" Such impertinence ! 'tis exactly like it ! I 
shouldn't wonder when she does come, if she brings 



HOSTESS AND OUEST. 143 

her Mr. Goring with her, and the two sit tip and 
carouse ! " 

Charlie had merely marked her observance of 
this conversation by moving from a chair to a sofa, 
lying down upon the latter resUessly for a minute, 
and then getting up again, and resuming her chain 
But when Mrs. Fellowes culminated in the last 
remark, Charlie laughed. She checked herself 
almost immediately, saying, as they both looked 
angrily at her, 

f* I really beg your pardon, Mrs. Fellowes. But 
there was something so funny in the notion that 

I couldn't help '* She stopped, and laughed 

again, as she thought how Frank would enjoy it 
when she told him. 

" Funny ! " Mrs. Fellowes ejaculated, in holy 
horror . " something so funny in a widow, whose 
poor dear husband is hardly cold in his grave, 
putting a whole household out in this way, and 
making herself town-talk with a young man ! " 

"She hasn't done it yet, remember, mother !'' 
Miss Dinah put in; *^ and Mrs. Henry only meant 
that your idea was funny . ^not that Mrs. Walsh's 
doing it would be so." 

*^ I wish to Heaven she had not been asked, if 



144 WALTSB OORINa. 

there is going to be all this fuss about it/' Henry 
Fellowes exclaimed, suddenly. Those about him 
had imagined that he had been giving no heed to 
the conversation . that he had not been listening; 
but he had» and loathing it all as men do loathe 
.the puerile in presence of a painful reality. 

Charlie went over, and knelt down, leaning on 
the arm of her husband's chair, when he brought 
himself into the conversation, in this way. She 
bent her head towards him . ^it was not nearly so 
much like a boy's as when he had married her . 
and said, 

" I wish it> too, dear ; but let us make the best of 
things, Harry." 

He put one hand down upon her wavy curls, and 
with the other turned her face up towards him. 
He looked at her long and earnestly, and it seemed 
to him that there was so much in her face to which 
he had no clue. Her bright fitful glances, the ever- 
varying expression of her mouth, the shade on her 
forehead, which deepened or decreased each mo- 
ment . all these were so many sealed books to himj 
and half unconsciously he recognised them to be 
so. An undefined jealous dread of some one read- 
ing them and understanding them \yhile he -still 



HOSTESS AND GUEST. 145 

iltayed in the dark, seized hiin> and he released his 
hold of her with an abruptness that almost seemed 
to tell her to stand off. 

"What is it, Harry," she asked, anxiously, clasping 
her arms over his knees, and leaning upon him with 
an air of reliance that was the offspring of the mute 
appeal against his dawning doubt ; . and he replied : 

*' I don't know ; get up ; don't be foolish, Charlie ; 
get up ; I hear wheels." 

She sprang to her feet on the instant, and she 
vowed, while doing so, that never in that way would 
she be foolish again. 

Mrs. Walsh was announced almost immediately. 
She came in stately and collected as usual, but with 
an uncomfortable feeling in her inner self, composed 
of the half suspicion she had that Charlie did not 
like her, and the half certainty that she did not like 
Charlie. The knowledge that evil days were coming 
upon young Mrs. Fellowes was the salvation of that 
meeting between the two ladies. Had it not been 
for that, and the womanly pity it engendered in her 
heart, Mrs* Walsh would have been uncommonly 
disagreable in her frigid beauty. As it was, she 
almost thawed to Charlie, and so caused that im- 
pressionable being to feel very much ashamed of 

TOL. It L 



14tf WALTER OOBINa. 

herself for that she had not been better inclined 
towards her guest. 

Mrs. Walsh spared Charlie all trouble in the 
matter of introduction. After shaking hands with 
her young hostess, who was striving hard to say 
something civil, and failing by reason of some old 
memories surging up, Mrs. Walsh held out her 
hand to Mr. Fellowes with the words : 

** We will dispense with any formal introduction^ 
will we not ? " And there was a cordial tone about 
these words, and such a gracious smile accompanied 
them, that Henry Fellowes thought : " Call that 
woman stupid or cold! she's the most charming 
creature I ever met.*' There was a nameless some- 
thing in her manner that made him feel that she 
had heard . and that she believed all manner of 
good things . of him ; and his was such a thorough 
honest, kindly nature, that it gloried and rejoiced 
exceedingly in being thought well of by every one . 
not from vanity this, be it understood, but because 
it was his nature to like and think well of every one,, 
and he craved some small return in kind. 

*^Mrs. and Miss Fellowes I know by sight 
already," Mrs. Walsh continued, shaking hands with 
Ihem in rapid succession almost as she named them. 



HOSTESS AND GUEST. 147 

" I used to see you at Deneham Church when I 
was staying at Goring Place." 

"Yes, I believe you were there once/' Miss 
Dinah said, looking steadily at the guest. 

** And that was when I saw you," Mrs. Walsh 
replied affably. Then she turned to Charlie and 
said . 

" How more than good of you to take me in, Mrs. 
Fellowes. Mr. Goring tells me that there is not a 
decent hotel in the place ; what should I have done 
to-night had it not been for your consideration ? for 
they, have been shan^efully lazy at the cottage . 
there's nothing in order." 

" So she has seen him already," Charlie thought. 
" He never said a word about going to meet her 
to-night." 

Old Mrs. Fellowes replied aloud to Mrs. Walsh's 
remark. " There are two most respectable inns in 
Deneham . hotels I believe are not often found in 
small country places, but the Eed Lion is kept by 
an old servant of my own, who's so honest that you 
might leave untold gold about and he'd never touch 
it, and so clean that you might eat off his floors." 

" Being neither a Crcesus nor a pig," Mrs. Walsh 
w&s about to say; but she checked herself, and 

L 2 



14$ 



WALTER &ORIKa. 



Charlie asked h^r if she " wouldn't like to go to het 
own room ? " When they were gone away together,' 
Mrs. Fellowes, senior, commenced. , 

" I wonder whether she wears widow's caps with 
decent close horders, or only one of those fly-awky 
things with a point on the forehead ? .* 

"I wonder whether she wears one at all, in the 
house," Miss Dinah replied. " I have my douhts ; 
did you see that she had a seal-skin jacket on,^ 
mother?"! 

Mrs. Fellowes smiled and elevated her eyebrows. 
.* I saw," she said ; " that's what men who go and 
many fine ladies may expect." 

"Why, she was all in black, mother," Henry 
Fellowes interposed; "uncommonly fine woman she 
is, to be sure." 

" Oh ! uncommonly fine, and she knows it/* 
Mrs. Fellowes replied with solemn emphasis, as 
though there were something dark and dangerous 
in such knowledge, . " pretty manners, too ! ** 

"Her manners are much like Mrs. Henry's, I 
think," Dinah said; and there was a wealth of- 
sisterly kindness in the saying, considering what 
had gone before, 

" Very like indeed," Mrs. Fellowes replied. ' 



UQSTESS AND GUEST. (140 

.*'What is the day of the month,. the 20th, isnft 
it?" ^ . ; 

" Yes, the 20th of December," Henry Fellowes 
said cheerfully ; on the whole he was glad thai the 
tone of the conversation was about to be changied as 
he thought. 

"Yes. 20th of December," Mrs. Fellowes re- 
sumed; '^and take my word for it, that before' the 
20th of May she will have married that young man 
at Goring Place ; she'll never be content with a 
poor dear husband in his grave, not she ; she hasnl 
the look nor the manners to be it." 

Meanwhile Charlie had accompanied her visitor 
to the state, that is, the most sepulchral, chamber, 
and while they were waiting for Mrs. Walsh's maid 
to make her appearance, the two ladies interchanged 
a few detective civilities. 

'' It's rather a dismal old house this, isn't it ? " 
Charlie began. " I think you will find it rather a 
dismal neighbourhood too, unless you have some 
very intimate friends near here." 

Mrs. Walsh removed her bonnet, and raised a 
pair of candles aloft, in order to see her hair the 
better before she answered. 

" It's the want of gas makes it seem dark to us. 



150 WALTER GOBIKG. 

Intimate friends ? No. only Mr. Goring. Do yoU 
see much of him ? *^ 

*' Yes . ^no . that is, not half so much as I could 
wish/' Charlie replied; "if there was a lady at 
Goring Place . ^if he only does marry his pretty 
cousin, we should be something like neighbours I 
thinf 

'' For your sake then, I can only hope that that 

remarkably auspicious event may come off," Mrs. 

Walsh replied, calmly completing her survey of her 

hair, and not disfiguring it according as old Mrs. 

Fellowes had hoped. Then she turned and looked 

at Charlie, thinking, " It is evident that she knows 

nothing of this banking business, poor thing, or she 

could hot speak about what may occur in that way." 

As she stood looking down at Charlie, the latter 

suddenly glanced up and met her eyes. 

"What were you thinking just then, Mrs. Walsh?" 
she asked abruptly. 

"Of you." 

" And I of you, or at least of that evening when 
we met last." 

.''That evening when you first met Mr. Goring, 
do you mean ? '' Mrs. Walsh interrupted. 

" Yes,*' Charlie answered ; and then she thought 



HOSTESS AND GU^ST. 151 

io herself, ''Mrs. Walsh will imagine that fact is 
rather too strongly impressed upon me unless I tell 
her my reasons for thinking about it/' so she added: 
" I always recall that evening pleasantly, because an 
idea was put into my head then which I hope to 
turn to good account in the future. I have always 
wished to write, and Mr. Goring says it won't be 
very idiotic of me to try." 

" That's immensely encouraging on Mr. Goring's 
part,'' Mrs. Walsh replied, laughing. " Well, I can 
only say that I have been thrown in the way of 
hearing a good deal about literary life, and there- 
fore I tell you as a friend, that a woman had better 
avoid it. If you succeed, you have a dangerous 
pre-eminence ; if you fail, so many are mortified for 
you and through you, . mortified as one never can 
be about a man." 

Charlie winced by way of reply, and Mrs.. Walsh 
went on : 

"I see you don't quite like and don't quite 
believe what I am saying; in direct contradiction 
to Mr. Goring's advice, too, how can I hope that 
mine will be taken? But I know that I am right in 
saying to a woman, Eschew that path if you would 
not drink of the waters of bitterness ; and when 



15S ^ . WALTER GORING. 

once you have smarted under the lash- of publid 
criticism you will know that I am right. Walter 
Goring is no friend to you in urging you on to this, 
and I shall tell him so.'* Mrs. Walsh spoke quite 
warmly for Mrs. Walsh, She had no intention of 
suflfering Mrs. Fellowes to come nearer to Walter 
Goring through that strange sympathy which 
fellow-craftship engenders, than she herself stood. 

Charlie laughed. ** Vm ashamed to say that I'm 
wafted about with every wind of doctrine. a proof 
that my heart is not in anything I undertake, I 
suppose ; you have quite crushed the dawning 
ambition; now, will you come down and have some 
supper ? " 

That night, before she went to bed, Mrs. Fellowes 
with the stealthy step of a thief, made her way into 
the library and tore her first story into very minute 
scraps. She did it with many a sigh and many a 
pang, for indeed she had thought the very best things 
that could have been thought of that, her earliest 
literary labour. But she supported and strengthened 
herself by the thought, " She shall never have the 
satisfaction of laughing at me with him, and of 
saying, * I told you so.* " 

She felt very much as if she had been cutting the 



HOSTESS AND GUEST. 153 

throats of some near relatives or dear friends, as 
she crept up to bed. When she reached her room, 
this giving up of her aim seemed to her like the 
abnegation of the only interest in life which could 
enable her to support through long years the eternal 
presence of Mrs. Fellowes, the little shawl, and 
Miss Dinah. By the time she was ready to lay her 
head on the pillow, she had determined that in 
future she would not make much ado about nothing, 
but that she would write and publish imder a 
feigned name, and win much money and more fame, 
and . ^here her ideas became confused by the ap- 
proach of slumber. 



CHAPTER X. 

A WALK TO THE COTTAGE. 

Walter Goring was over at the Hurst the 
following morning before the Fellowes's had finished 
breakfast. Mrs. Walsh had not made her appear- 
ance yet, and for once Charlie's opinion coincided 
with the opinions of her mother-in-law and Miss 
Dinah. that is to say, she felt glad that Mr. 
Goring should be disappointed^ and considered his 
haste to see his beautiful widow fiiend almost 
indecent, and decidedly absurd. " I came over 
-early,'' he explained, looking almost foolish as he 
offered the explanation, *' because I thought that 
perhaps Mrs. Walsh and you would walk or drive 
^ut, or something of the sort, this morning, and I 
was afraid I should miss you." 

" I don't know what Mrs. Walsh will want to do 
jet," Charlie replied ; " if she's going to the cottage^ 



A WALK TO THE COTTAGE* 156 

I think I shall leave her in your charge, Mr* 
Goring; I'm not very fond of standing ahout in 
damp unfurnished houses." 

" You didn't seem to mind it the first time you 
went to the 'cottage/' Miss Dinah remarked, con- 
siderately. 

" It was a hard frost that day," Henry Fellowes 
said, rather touchily ; " of course she didn't mind 
the damp when there was no damp to mind» 
Dinah?" 

" Charlie embodies the idea of progress, to my 
mind," Frank put in, partly for the sake of sooth- 
ing Miss Dinah, who was palpably ruffled by her 
brother's rebuke, and partly for the sake of doing 
away with the personal nature of the conversation 
by introducing an abstract proposition,^-" she is 
always ready to let go an old liking, or old belief, or 
an old opinion for a new and a better one ; are you 
not, Charlie ? " 

"Am I really? I didn't know I was so en- 
lightened ; but, as brothers are not generally ad- 
dicted to flattering their sisters fiilsomely, I will 
think you mean it, Frank." 

" Well," old Mrs. Fellowes interposed, " in my 
young days we should not have thought it a compli- 



156 WALTER OOBINa. A 

jnent to be told that we were alwiays ready to let g6 
our old likings and old beliefs." 

"Probably you all started with better ones," 
Frank replied. ** I'm sure you did, f6r instance." 
. "I only know that things are done and defended 
now that we should have shuddered at when I was 
young; but then I'm old, and had better hold my 
tongue. Mrs, Travers was* saying only yesterday, 
^Gall this a high state of civilisation/ talk of thU 
as an enlightened and advanced age ; it would be 
well, Vm sure, for one's* morals if we could go back 
a few centuries.' " 

" I would skip the Commonwealth, and pull up 
in the second Charles's time, if I had the manage- 
ment of the retrograde movement,*' Frank said; 
" and then I would be a courtier, and partake of 
those pure delights which Mrs. Travers so much 
regrets." 

" I think I would go farther back, and be one of 
the Queen's Maries, before Dfumley made things 
disagreeable," Charlie added. 

** One of the Queen's Maries ? Surely, under the 
delightful circumstances of freedom of choice which 
we are imagining, you would be the Queen herself, 
.Mrs. Fellowes ? " Walter Goring said, rising from 



A WALS TO THE COTTAGE. 157 

his chair as he spoke, and seating himself on a low 
ottoman that was near tb Charlie. 

** Of course she would, with the absolute com- 
mand over the music and melodies of both Bizzio 
and Chastelard,'' Frank was saying, when the door 
opened^ and Mrs. Walsh came in, and marked the 
scene, and remembered clearly a day when Walter 
Goring had so bowed over her hand as to suggest 
a scene from Scottish History . ^the sweetest and 
most sentimental portion of it . to her husband, 
when she had been sketched for Mary Stuart, and 
Walter Goring for Chastelard. 
' " I am glad you have come down, Mrs. 
Walsh,'^ Mr. Fellowes said, when they had all 
greeted her ; " they are talking the greatest non- 
sense.'* 

Mrs. Walsh looked at them indifferently. " They 
must return to sense then, now that I have come, 
for I want some very practical information. Which 
is the last train that I can return to town by to- 
day?'* 

" Return to town ! " they all exclaimed.. "Yes," 
she said, coolly ; " I have only come down to store 
my household goods and settle my two old servant? 
in the cottage* I must have some place for them, . 



158 WALTEB OOBINO, 

poor things ; but for my own part, I shall not settle 
anywhere for a year or two." 

" Isn't this rather a sadden resolution ? " Walter 
Goring asked; and for the life of him he could 
not help infusing a shade of reproach into his tone. 
He wanted Mrs. Walsh to believe that this an- 
nouncement of a change in what he had thought to 
be her fixed intention was a disappointing thing to 
him . as disappointing as those Dead-Sea fruits 
which tempt the eye and turn to ashes on the lips. 

"No," she replied, quietly; "why should you 
think it so ? I always avoid explaining my inten- 
tions far ahead . ^it makes so much talk, and gives 
so much trouble.'* 

She spoke with a great air of veracity ; in a cool 
sort of matter-of-course way that deceived every one 
of them . save Charlie. But Charlie read the riddle 
aright, and knew as well as Mrs. Walsh did that 
the resolution to go away at once was bom in that 
moment of opening the door and coming upon the 
scene which has been described. Charlie had 
marked a momentary shade of trouble on the 
proud, beautiful face of her guest, and she thought 
" She's fearful of getting fond of him too soon . or 
she's annoyed with herself to find that she's fond 



A WAIiE TO THE OOTTAGE. 16^ 

of him already ; one doesn't get touchy about one'a 
mere friends." 

About an hour after breakfast the party of four 
set off to walk to the cottage, Charlie having 
suddenly and obligingly waived all objection to- 
damp and unfurnished houses. In fact, Mrs. Fel* 
lowes was feeling almost warmly disposed towards^ 
Mrs. Walsh by this time ; she thought it very good 
taste on the part of the widow to beat a timely 
retreat. 

Until they were clear of the Hurst-grounds, the 
whole party kept together, but a small pool of 
water, and some such trifle as a cart-wheel ruck, at 
which the ladies paused, divided them when they 
reached the road. ** This lane is like a morass for 
some little distance," Walter Goring said, turning 
to Mrs. Walsh ; " take my hand, and then you can 
walk along that strip of footpath by the hedge 
without slipping." Then she took his hand as he 
desired, and thus they were separated from the 
brother and sister. Frank marked his appreciation 
of Mr. Goring's manner of turning the position 
to account by a laugh, and the words " that was 
neatly done." 

"What was neatly done ? " Charlie asked, rather 



160r . WALTEJl GORING. 

crossly. There was no beauty in the mandeuvre in. 
her eyes ; she was left to struggle along the strip of 
footpath and get her boots splashed without the 
slightest assistance, therefore the admirable nature 
of the precautions that were taken towards another 
w6man*s easy progress did not impress her favour- 
ably. 

" Why, that last movement of Goring's," Frank 
replied, slackening his pace. " What a magnificent 
woman she is," he continued, in a low tone.; " an 
abbreviated, revised, and improved Cleopatra." 

" Good gracious, Frank, what are your ideas of 
Cleopatra ? She is as cold as ice ; she wouldn't let 
anything alter the expression of her face for the 
world when she has once arranged it for the day.'' 

" I suppose you're rather put out because she is 
not going to remain and lighten our darkness? " 

" I really care very little about it, Frank." 

*'Well, I don't think that Goring emulates 
your indifference . he's very hard hit." 

**I don't believe it; I think she likes him im- 
mensely^ and that flatters him. But I don't believe 
she is at all the sort of woman he would fall in love 
with ; she's so statuesque, and he's so sympathetic." 

"Your theory is faultless . nevertheless his prac^ 



A WALK TO THE COTTAGE. 161 

tice gives the lie to it/' Frank said, laughing* 
" Come, Charlie, cheer up ; your little yellow-haired 
friend stands no chance whatever against this one." 

" Friend ! she's no friend of mine, Frank ; I only 
saw her that once out riding. I have told you about 
it, haven't I?'' 

" Fifteen times exactly," Frank replied. 

'^ Well, perhaps I have, for she made a great 
impression upon me," Charlie replied, flushing; 
" at any rate she is not years and years older thain 
Mr. Goring." 

"But Mrs. Walsh is one of those whom 'age 
cannot wither or custom tame,' I should think." 

" Age doesn't wither any one in these days, you 
kdow, Frank,'' Charlie said ; and she tried to say it 
sarcastically. 

" Go it, gentle woman ; you would like me to look 
out for cracks in Mrs. Walsh's veneering." 

" I never said she painted now, because I know 
she doesn't; but I do say, that if an old woman 
does not look withered, that she must varnish 
herself; now, Frank, don't laugh at me ; if I am a 
little spiteful about Mrs. Walsh, it's because she 
disheartened me last night;" and Charlie really 
believed herself that this was the sole reason. 

VOL. IL u 



162 WALTER ©OMNG. 

"How did she dishearten you?" her brother 
asked; and then Charlie told him about her de- 
stroyed hopes and MS.> and he listened, and was 
sympathetic, and cheered her on to fresh attempts, 
until her fainting spirits rose and she felt ready to 
spoil any number of reams of paper without delay. 

In the meantime, the pair in advance had not been 
conversing so freely and easily by any means. Walter 
Goring wa-s not at all certain how he stood with* 
the widow. More than this, he was not at aU cer- 
tain how he desired to stand with her. He had 
been accustomed for sa many years to regard her as 
something set apart and utterly unattainable ; and 
now, by a violent throe o£ nature, her position was^ 
altered, and he did not know how to reconcile him- 
self to it,, even in his own heart, much less to adapt 
himself to it outwardly. For years there had 
existed between these two people a cordiality and 
regard so open, warm, and (on his part) demonstra- 
tive, that any cessation from it must of necessity be 
very painful. But, on the other hand, a continu- 
ance of it might be prejudicial to her, and to him 
also. The union had been shared in and sanctioned 
by her husband; it had all been fair and above- 
board; in the blameless sense of the phrase, she 



A WALK TO THE COTTAGE. 16^ 

had been more than kind to him, though less than 
kin. He was bound to her by a hundred associa- 
tions . ^bound to her especially by that not-to-be- 
broken chain of feeling, that she liked him better, 
perhaps, than she did any one else. But he was far 
from feeling sure that he was in love with her, and 
equaDy far from imagining her to be in love with 
him. His sensations about her were of precisely 
the same nature as they had been when Balph 
Walsh was alive. Whether hers had developed 
into anything more tender may not be known yet. 

" What makes you rush away to-day ? " he began 
as soon as the party divided in the manner indicated 
above ; " it was like a blow in the chest to me when 
you said you were going." 

*' I shall come back again sometime or other, I 
suppose," she answered, " but at present I feel too 
restless to make a settled home anywhere; you 
didn't imagine that I was going to put myself down 
at Deneham at once, did you ? '' 

"I did, indeed . and now I'm plunged in cold 
water ; don't expect me to applaud your resolve 
after having indulged myself with such different 
anticipations for some time." 

He spoke almost complainingly. It did seem to 

X 2 



104 WALTER GORING. 

him rather heartless of her to go away before he 
had come to any determination respecting what his 
feelings were or might be about her. 

'* It is better that I should go," she said, in a 
low tone. 

" Of course it is, if it seems good to you." Al- 
most involuntarily he was taking an aggrieved 
tone. 

*' It is far better that I should go," she repeated, 
resolutely; "so many things that seemed firmly 
fixed have been thrown into new forms by Ilalph*s 
death, that I had better not attempt to settle down 
and take up my old life again until I have had time 
to think about things as they are, and to get accus- 
tomed to them." 

" What single thing is thrown into new form ? " 
he asked. 

" 0, several things ! " 

" Name one," he persisted. 

"Well, my relations with people," she said, 
hesitatingly. 

"It's your own fault if you suffer them to be 
altered," he replied, putting his hands in his pocket, 
and looking straight away at the landscape in front 
of them. 



. WALK TO THE COTTAOB. 16.9 

" It is inevitable that they should be altered." 

" Why," he looked down at her now as she walked 
along by his side. ** Why, if you . " the sight of 
her deep mourning checked him in whatever he had 
been going to say, and he added after a moment's 
pause: '* Perhaps you are right; you always are 
right . my goddess." He had never called her 
that since her husband's death, and the tone in 
which he said it now made her tremble for a mo- 
ment. Then the old phrase seemed to put her 
more on her old terms with him, for she looked at 
him very kindly, and said : 

''Will you promise not to make a shadow of 
mistake about something I am going to say to 
you?" 

" Could I ever be so blind or besotted as to make 
mistakes about you ? " 

" I don't know. I hope not, I heartily hope not ; 
I think our friendship is founded on a rock ; but 
this is a point on which you might resent inter- 
ference from your nearest and dearest relatives 
even ; I want to speak to you about that daughter 
of your uncle's, and Mrs. Fellowes ? " 

" My cousin Daisy, and Mrs. Fellowes ! What 
of them? '* 



166 WALTEB GOBINa. 

** Don't call her yonr cousin, Walter. I cannot 
bear to think of her as nearly connected with you 
in any way. I have heard a mmonr of your being 
sufficiently attracted by her to think of making her 
your wife ; this cannot be true." 

" Certainly not," he replied, laughing ; " but for 
all that, you must not underrate the Daisy; she 
will be a person of consequence." 

"How?'' 

** I can only tell you a portion of the case, and 
you must respect my confidence religiously; she 
will be the mistress of Goring Place in her own 
right, if a certain condition, which I shall not 
confide to you, remains unfulfilled when she is 
twenty-one." 

" And that condition," . ^Mrs. Walsh had grown 
very pale, and she seemed to have a slight difficulty 
in speaking, her voice was so very faint and low, 
. " and that condition is . that you marry her»" 

" I have told you all I can tell you," he replied, 
gently; and she thought she had never seen him 
look so handsome, so manly, so capable of bearing 
the utmost reverses, as he did now, when speaking 
of his probable resignation of the great estate into 
which he had so recently come. " And what about 



A WALK TO THE COTTAG&. 167 

Mrs. Fellowes ? " he asked; " you had something to 
^ay to me about her too.** 

" It is this. She is surrounded by Argus eyes, 
^nd she is very frank and unguarded. You fiee I 
do her all justice ; do not let that appear in your 
manner to her which may possibly mislead people 
and get her lightly spoken of.'' 

'' Am I likely to behave like such a scoundrel ? *' 
he asked, coldly. 

"Walter, I begged you not to misunderstand 
me. 

" Nor will I. forgive me,'' he said, imploringly. 
He was farther than ever from knowing which of 
ihese three women he regarded the most warmly, 
but unquestionably Mrs. Walsh's watchful interest 
was far from unpleasant to him just now. 

" Your manner is softer, more devotional and 
Mattering than she has ever been accustomed to ; it 
is entirely for her sake that I speak. I am not 
.afraid for you." 

" That's very good of you,^' he said, half 
laughing. 

" But those semi-facetious, semi-sentimental eon* 
versations . imagining yourselves to be all sorts of 
odious bygone people, and things of that sort.* 



16S WALTER GOBIKG. 

are impradent and foolish; she was always a dread- 
fol flirt, too, as Miss St John ; th^e is no particuUir 
eredit in fanning the smouldering embers of a sort 
of romance which she has brought to bear on manj 
men before she knew yon." 

** Believe me, I have no desire to do anything of 
the sort, or to read any passages from the back 
numbers of her life,** he said, indifferently ; but he 
thought ** how hardly women handle each other, to 
be sure . when there is nothing to be gained by it 
either." 

Mrs. Walsh was inexorable in her resolve to go 
back to Town this same day ; therefore when they 
had looked at the cottage, and the new mistress had 
settled with some village dame of decent repute to 
remain in charge of it until the two old servants of 
whom she had made mention should arrive, . when 
these things had been done it was time to go back 
to the Hurst and prepare for the start. They 
formed an unbroken company aU the way home, so 
there was no further confidential converse between 
Walter and Mrs. Walsh. But when he was putting 
her into the carriage that was to take her away to 
the station, he bent forward under pretence of 
adjusting some of her wraps and travelling-bags, 



A WALK TO THE COTTAGE. J69 

und as he did so he touched her hand with his 
lips. She did not withdraw it; on the contrary, it 
seemed to him that his pressure was returned. He 
looked up at her suddenly, and his eyes glowed 
with an admiration which he could not subdue as 
he whispered, "I shall see you soon . good-bye 
for a short time though." 

She did not speak, but she held her hand out to 
him and smiled her own smile . the smile that said 
so much more than her lips ever did . ^upon him. 
Then he drew back, and the carriage drove off, 
and she looking through the window saw him 
standing bare-headed watching her. " I am quite 
right to leave," she said to herself, ** for several 
reasons . ^he might come to a conclusion too soon if 
I stayed, or he might never come to one at all if he 
saw much of me.'' Then she took herself to task 
for suffering such thoughts to grow so soon after 
her husband's death : and then forgave herself on 
the plea that she ''had known Walter's value so 
long and thorou^y.'* 

He meanwhile had gone back in to the library to 
smoke a cigar with Frank. Charlie had received 
a pressing invitation from her brother to retire to 
that haunt with them, and save them from bo 



170 WALTEB GOBIKG. 

beclouding their faculties at that early honr, but 
she had excused herself. Why, she scarcely 
knew. 

Young Mrs. Fellowes was in truth feeling put 
out in a vague, unsatisfactory sort of way. Her day 
was broken in upon and destroyed through the 
untoward departure of her guest ; but perhaps she 
might have been resigned to that, had an incident 
of that departure not been recounted to her by Miss 
Dinah. " I was up at the staircase window," that 
ruthless virgin said to her composedly, " when 
Mr. Goring handed Mrs. Walsh into the carriage ; 
I m sure . ^heartless as it may seem . I hope he is 
engaged to her, for the way he kissed her hand . 
and she never saying a word against it. was un- 
blushing, if he isn't." 

"I really can't pretend to care whether Mr. 
Ooring kissed her hand or not," Charlie replied. 

"No, my dear. You needn't ' pretend,' '' old 
Mrs. Fellowes struck in with the level look over the 
spectacles. " Well : all I say is, give me old times 
and old manners ; in my young day a modest woman 
behaved herself as such." 

"Please remember that I didn't stand sponsor 
for Mrs. Walsh," Charlie cried ; she was sorry, and 



A WALK TO THE COTTAGE. 171 

sick, and tired of it all ; a sudden and unaccount- 
able accession of weariness had set in; every- 
body's future looked so much brighter than her 
own. 



CHAPTER XI. 

FRESH RESOLUTIONS* 

When Walter Goring went into the library 
after seeing Mrs. Walsh off, he found Frank St. 
John leaning on his sister's writing-table making a 
hasty sketch. " Look here," he exclaimed, " how's 
that ? '^ and Walter looked and saw a rough but bold 
and perfect likeness of Mrs. Walsh. 

" It's very good, . it's admirable, in fact." 

Frank sat down and gave it a few more touches. 

" m make something of it, if I can only come 
across another face that I want ; I got an idea from 
an attitude and expression of Mrs. Walsh's this 
morning, that if I can only carry it out will be . " 
he stopped, and did not say what it would be, but 
began to whistle softly in a well-pleased manner as 
he sketched in another figure. Mr. Goring leant 
over his chair watching his work. 



FRESH RESOLUTIONS. 173 

** You donH mean that you will give us another 
version of the bowl-and-dagger business if you can 
only find a face fair enough for Bosamond's, do you? 
Poor Ealph took her for his model of Eleanor only 
two years ago/' 

"Nothing so hackneyed; no. how about this 
study though ? I wish she had stayed another day ; 
I would have made another of her.*' 

"I tell you I think it admirable/' Walter 
Goring replied. " But how do you propose turning 
it to account? " he added, lounging over to a couch, 
and from thence lazily watching Frank through the 
smoke of his cigar. 

" I'll paint that scene from Elaine where Guine- 
vere plays the imperial vixen about the diamonds ; 
don*t you remember ? " 

Goring nodded : 

** * . ^hera, not mine . 
Nay, by the mother of our Lord himself, 
Or hers or mine, mine now to work my will . 
She shall not hare them.* 

Do you mean those lines ? " 

"Yes; and I'll paint Mrs. Walsh in the act of 
pitching the diamonds into the river as Elaine floats 
past dead. I'm in earnest about this ; I can make 
something of a picture of it : she's inspired me/' 



174 WALTER aOBESG. 

** Vm deJi^ited to hear it ; she's inspired a good 
many men/' Walter Goring said; then he added, 
laughing, ** yon wouldn't make a bad Lancelot yonr- 
self, St. John, if yon did yoorself justice." 

'^I wonH rely upon myself; 111 be off to town 
to-morrow, and look out for a Lancelot and an 
Elaine in the ranks of the regular models. By 
JoTe ! I'm very glad I am out of the service. I 
shall take up painting as a profession, and work 
at it/' He went on drawing vigorously the whole 
time he was speaking. 

** But you can't get the whole thing in effectively 
in one picture," Walter Goring urged; "divide 
your canvas, and have one view of the barge with 
the dead body of the 'Lily Maid^ upon it, and 
another of the balcony with the queen and the 
knight?" 

" Not a bit of it. See," and Frank rose up and 
went over to show his companion the sketch he had 
made. " I shall have a strong light falling across 
Guinevere's face down on to the upturned one of 
the girl; Lancelot is a minor consideration in 
this scene. he plays rather a pitiful part; all 
the passion and interest is with the women." 

There was a vigour, a grace, and a suggestiveness 



FRESH BESOLUnONS. 175 

about this first rough, hurried study which fully 
justified Frank's expectations of "making some- 
thing fine of it." Walter Goring felt that there 
was this, and he said cordially, as he handed the- 
paper back to the artist, . 

" If you really mean work, and are going back 
to town, I shall be glad to introduce you to a 
number of men who will be happy to help you if 
they can." 

" Mean work ? I mean it, and no mistake,'^ 
Frank replied, " and I shall be much obliged ta 
you for the introductions." 

" You will not easily get a face fair enough and 
strong enough for Elaine; your sister, Mrs. Fel* 
lowes, has the expression of mingled softness and 
strength which we suppose to have been the charac- 
teristics of the girl who died of love, but '^ 

" She hasn't the fair beauty," Frank interrupted ; 
" no, to match the Guinevere will be my difficulty."^ 

" And I doubt your matching her among the 
regular models ; it's a certatn condition of being a 
regular model that a something which Elaine must 
possess should have vanished." 

" If I fail in finding an Elaine, my whole picture 
will go to smash," Frank said, rather dejectedly. 



176 WALTER OOBINa. 

** My dear fellow ! couldn't you, in that case, 
turn that study you have made of Mrs. Walsh to 
account in some other way ? Anna Boleyn dashing 
the portrait of Henry to pieces when she finds Jane 
Seymour looking at it, or Cassandra asking of the 
heavens where Tro/s hope. Hector, is ? or some- 
thing of that sort." 

" No," Frank said, holding his sketch away from 
him, in order to judge of the effect afresh : " if I 
canH carry this out for years for want of that 
special face, I will not destroy the idea by dis- 
torting it ; if Charlie had the colouring, she would 
do ; but she has only the expression, and I want a 
touch of truth in each detail." 

" Shall you get to work on this before you bring 
out your book ?" Walter Goring asked. 

" Yes ; I'll leave Charlie to put that in order, and 
ni send the proofs to her ; she likes doing anything 
for me, and it will be good practice for her. I shall 
not suffer anything to interfere with this if I can 

only find " Again he paused, and began 

whistling thoughtfully, and Walter Goring sug- 
gested, . 

" An Elaine and a Lancelot ? " 

" Yes," he replied ; " by Jove ! if I can do that, 



FBESH BESOLUTIONS. 177 

I'll make my name with this picture ; it paints itself 
as I think about it.'' 

"Don't be oflf before Christmas, at any rate," 
Walter Goring urged. 

" Christmas won't be a remarkably hilarious 
season in this house, I'm afraid," Frank replied, 
shaking his head; "poor Fellowes's affairs are in 
an awful mess . of that there's no doubt; he even 
spoke to me to-day about letting The Hurst and the 
land, and getting * something to do ' himself, poor 
fellow. I wish he would have the pluck to tell my 
sister; but he won't, and I have no right to 
interfere." 

" That marriage was a bitter bad business," 
Walter Goring exclaimed, starting up as he 
spoke^ and commencing to walk up and down the 
room. 

" As it has turned out," Frank replied, quietly, 
going over to the fireplace and lighting his 
cigar. 

*^ In any event, there is something incongruous 
in it, according to my idea." 

"I don't agree with you," Frank said; "at any 
rate, now that he's under a cloud, isn*t exactly the 
time I should select for finding out all that is not 

VOL. II, IJ 



178 WALTER OOEING. 

most auspicious in the affair. Fellowes is worth a 
hundred of the white-livered hound who married 
my other sister. I only wish I could get him to 
believe that he feels the business more acutely than 
Charlie will ; he fears that she's going to be ' alien- 
ated/ and all sorts of extraordinary things; she's 
much too good a girl." 

'' In fact, good fellow as he is, his wife is beyond 
him; beyond him! she's as far above him as the 
stars in heaven," Walter Goring said; and for 
this panegyric on his pet sister Frank had no words 
of reproof. Cordially as he liked, and heartily as 
he sympathised with his brother-in-law, he yet felt 
that there was much truth in Walter Goring's 
estimate of Hie relative altitudes of husband and 
wife. 

In the meantime Charlie was being tested. After 
Mrs. Walsh's departure, she had, as has been seen, 
been seized upon by Miss Dinah, and compelled to 
listen to the tale of how tenderly Mr. Goring had 
taken leave of the widow. Then old Mrs. Fellowes 
had delivered a short homily on the subject, and 
Charlie had resented the idea of being interested in, 
or responsible for, Mrs. Walsh's divergence from 
the path of propriety. Then she had sought for 



FRESH RESOLUTIONS. 179 

lier husband, and entreated him to take her out 
for a ride. 

'' It will be dark soon/' he said. 

" Never mind ; let us go out till it is dark ; Fm 
(unsettled to-day, and I should like a canter on old 
Major.*' 

So old Major was had round, and she went out 
-with her husband on horseback for the first time 
Bince their marriage. 

Now it may be remembered that at Brighton she 
had been contented with the old brown horse, and 
beautifully resigned to riding him, since nothing 
better was to be had. But now circumstances were 
much altered. Then she had been Miss St. John : 
now she was, as she thought, the wife of a rich man, 
who could give her a better horse if he chose* 
She found many faults with old Major before she 
had been on his back ten minutes. 

" How he pokes his head forward," she began. 
^' Just hold him up a bit ; take him more on the 
curb, so." 

" Then he flags, if he doesn't stop outright, 
Harry." 

" Frank took it out of him yesterday,'' Mr. 
Fellowes explained. 

« N 2 



180 WALTER GOBING. 

" Frank rode him round the farm, didn't he ? '* 

** Yes, and put him at everything he could/^ 

** High-couraged horse to be tried with that. 
Well, Harry, is he going to sleep under me or 
not?'' 

" Touch him up ; you used to find he took you 
along all right at Brighton.*' 

" That is to say, as he never did anything but 
carry me, he managed to get up a canter on the 
downs ; he is sweet-tempered, though ; I never knew 
a horse take the whip so kindly ; look here.'' She 
illustrated her remark by cutting the Major over 
the near shoulder, an attention which he acknow- 
ledged by whisking his tail, and breaking into a 
calm canter. 

" He's going very well now," Mr. Fellowes 
remarked. 

" It's just a pace I hate," Charlie replied, frown- 
ing a little ; " he's so dull." 

" He's been a first-rate horse in his time." 

''His time must be long past, that's all I can 
say, Harry. I do wish you would get me a young 
horse, dear . one that I could ride with pleasure ; 
will you?" 

He almost gulped as he answered^ 



FRESH BESOLUTIONS. 181 

" I cannot at present, my darling." He felt that 
it was a sore task to refuse her this . ^the first favour 
$he had asked of him since their marriage, more 
especially as a new riding-horse had been amongst 
the many things he had promised her in the days 
of their engagement. 

She pulled up and put her hand to her side. 
" This old beast bores forward so, that I seem to be 
going over his head every minute, Harry ; I must 
make up my mind, I suppose, to give my habit up 
to the moths, for if I can't have anything better, I 
will never ride the Major again." 

She, too, remembered that this was the first 
favour she had asked at her husband's hands. The 
first . and he refused it. Her words stung him 
terribly. He thought that he would give her a 
hint . just a little hint . that he was well off then 
when he married her. But we all know how diffi- 
cult it is to pause on the warning brink of either a 
painful or pleasant communication. 

" My darling, I would give you anything in the 
world, if I only had it to give ; I didn't mean to 
tell you yet, Charlie. I hoped . that is, I thought 
. well, the long and the short of it is, that I'm a 
ruined man through . ^through " 



182 TTALTEB 60BING. 

"No fault of your own, Vm sure/' she cried^ 
drawing her horse nearer to his now, as he had 
done the day he asked her to be his wife ; " ruined^ 
my dear husband, and you have kept it all from 
me . ^you wouldn't even let me share your sorrow,, 
while I have been selfish as usual . bothering about 
my own pleasures/* 

She bent over and laid her hand on his, and he 
felt his burden lightened at once. He had so- 
dreaded the effects of this communication upon her. 
He had so writhed under the fear that when it was 
made she might drift away even further from him. 
In fact, he had so misunderstood her, that the 
relief he felt at this moment was indescribable. 

"God bless you, Charlie, God bless you, my 
pet,^ he said, hoarsely, as she pressed her hand into 
his. There was a wealth of promise in her touch,, 
it seemed to assure him of her capability of standing 
so much, and never finding it hard; she looked 
such a bright, brave woman as she leant towards- 
him, and seemed to pledge herself anew to partizau- 
ship with him in everything. "I am so much 
happier than I have been for weeks,'* he added, 
presently, as he regained command over his voice. 

" I'm in such a rage with myself for having been 



FRESH BESOLUnONS. 183 

SO blind for weeks/' she cried. *' What was the use 
of me when I didn't find out your trouble ? but you 
are not going to be beaten down by it ? no ; are ' 
you, Harry ? " 

" My trouble is more for you than myself," he 
said, with a sob in his voice and a knot in his 
throat . *' to have brought you into it . ^to have 
brought you from a good home." 

" Where I was simply wretched," she interrupted ; 
*^ but don't you think I feel that I am the bitterest 
drop in your cup, whatever it may be ; don't you 
think that I don't know that you would never have 
let trouble or care or annoyance of any sort come 
near me if you could have helped it ? 1 do know 
it. Show me that you believe I know it, by letting 
me see that you will be happier in having me with 
you whatever is coming, than you would have been 
alone.'* 

She spoke very earnestly, but without strain, or 
tears, or other token of suppressed feeling. With 
all her faults she was not a lachrymose woman; 
when she sought to cheer a man she neither sighed 
nor sobbed at him; she spoke out cheerily and 
heartily, as if she knew that she was speaking of a 
very solemn thing, but not at all as if she thought 



IB4 WALTER GORING, 

it the saddest thing that could have befallen her. 
Her husband nearly worshipped her as he rode 
along by her side. Her bright sympathy, her loving 
sincerity, were incomprehensible things to him, 
coming as they did immediately after the display of 
pettish dissatisfaction with the Major. 

"You donH know all the misery it may entail 
upon us yet, my darling," he said, seriously. Then 
he told her the whole story as they rode on and the 
day darkened. But there was more light on his 
face and in his soul than there had been for many 
a day, when he had poured the whole story out and 
made his wife his confidante. 

" I can feel for your sorrow at leaving The Hurst, 
if we are obliged to leave it, dear,'* she said, when 
he had finished ; and even as she spoke her heart 
gave a little glad bound at the idea of being by this 
means entirely free from the atmosphere of his 
mother and sister ; " but still, think how much 
pleasanter it will be for you to go away with me 
than if you had been obliged to go alone." 

" Charlie . my pet . I hardly know whether Vm 
justified in feeling the happiness I do in having 
married you and got you into this scrape.*' 

"I should rather think that you were justified,'* 



FBESH RESOLXmONS, 185 

she replied, laughing; then she added more se- 
riously, " Come, Harry, I know it's a great blow . 
a bad blow . don't think me stupid and incapable 
of appreciating the full extent of your misfortune, 
dear; but I can't pretend to feel crushed by it; 
surely between us we can keep the wolf from the 
door, and the striving to do so will give us plenty to 
do and think about. Now let us have a good sharp 
gallop to settle our emotions and give us an appetite 
for dinner. Does Frank know of all this ? '' 

"Yes, Charlie." 

''And he has never hinted a word of it to me; 
well, you all thought me a more cowardly woman 
than I am^ that is all I can say. Life's quite as 
bright to me as it was an hour ago, and I flatter 
myself that it is a little brighter to you, sir. Poor 
boy ; it must be awful for a man to fear that his 
wife will break down and be a burdensome nuisance 
just as he needs her to be the helpmate he took her 
for.'' 

About half an hour after this they reached The 
Hurst, and young Mrs. Fellowes on being lifted 
from her horse by her once more beaming husband, 
ran into the house and into the library to look for 
her brother. '' Look here, Charlie," he commenced 



186 WALTER GORING. 

as soon as he saw her, " I have made a study for a 
picture I'm going to astonish the world with in 
May," and he showed his sketch and told her its 
subject. "I'm off to Town to-morrow to work at 
it while my interest is young and vigorous," he 
continued, laughing ; " besides, I want to find an 
Elaine." 

" Stay over Ghristmas-day." 

" Temptress, avaunt ! no, I will sit upon the 
yellow sands and eat lotos no longer; men must 
work." 

" I won't tempt you to idleness, trust me ; but 
I wanted your help for a few days; women must 
work too. Harry has told me all about this 
abominable banking business. I want to sketch 
out a novel and give it to you to strengthen 
weak places in the framework; will you help 
me?'' 

"My dearest Charlie, with all my heart, but 
I fancy you would do this whole thing better by 
yourself; there's something patchy, according to 
my ideas, about the sort of thing you suggest." 

The fact was, well inclined as Frank was to help 
his sister, he was very anxious to get to work at 
once on his own picture. Nevertheless, weak as 



FRESH BES0LX7TI0NS. 187 

the main-spring of it might have been, the advice 
in itself was good. 

" Well. I shall try without you then, Frank/' 

" Yes, do . and if you need help get Goring to- 
help you ; he's a clever fellow ; he says there is. 
more spirit in that composition of mine than in 
anything he has come across for a long time." 

"He must be a clever fellow, indeed," she re- 
plied, laughing, and holding up her face to kiss her 
brother at the same time. " I'm delighted now that 
Mrs. Walsh, with her * imperial moulded form and 
beauty such as never woman wore,' did come down 
. ^the sight of her has set you going. Now I must 
get ready for dinner, or my esteemed mother-in-law 
will either rate me directly, or reproach me by not 
eating anything herself." 

Then she went up-stairs, and told her husband 
about Frank's picture, forcing Henry Fellowes to- 
feel that there were many things in life still in 
which his wife took a bright interest, and expected 
him to take one also. This evidence of " her 
pluck," as he called it, appealed to him more 
strongly than any amount pf tearful tenderness 
could have done. He felt that she would be as- 
trusty a comrade as any man could have been in 



188 . WALTER GORING. 

fighting the battle of life, and he no longer regretted 
the words he had spoken under the trees through 
which the sunbeams fell . on the night when they 
had met Walter and Daisy Goring. 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE PRESCOTTS AS GUESTS AT THE HURST. 

Frank St. John carried his design of going away 
the following day into execution. His sister was 
very sorry to lose him . to miss his bright com- 
panionship, and that sense of having some one near 
her who was sure to be set in the same key as 
herself, which she had had while he remained. 
Nevertheless she was not sorry to be entirely free 
from all temptation to idleness; she wanted to 
work . and she no longer lacked the incentive. 

Almost immediately after Frank's departure, the 
Prescotts announced themselves as likely to come 
to The Hurst on or before New Year's Day. " We 
will give them the best welcome we can^ but I had 
hoped to have had them down here in very different 
style," Henry Fellowes said rather moodily as he 



192 WALTER 60EINO. 

checked all outward display of it, and answered him 
without a trace of trembling in her tone. 

** I donH think that I shall be easily put down, 
Harry, whatsoever comes. I am rather like a cork ;'* 
then she laughed and added, ** I haven't been tried 
yet, but I believe I am what you call * game ;' like 
Frank. Look at Frank, doesn't he bear his mis- 
fortunes nobly ? " she added, enthusiastically, quite 
forgetting that the gentleman thus honourably 
mentioned did not regard what had lately befallen 
him in the light of a misfortune at all. 

But though she discussed their anticipated ad- 
vent thus brightly and carelessly with her husband, 
the Prescotts hung over her like a cloud. It made 
her head ache to think of how Robert Prescott's 
lip would lengthen when he had screwed some of 
the details out of poor dejected Henry Fellowes. 
"He*ll drop six-and-eightpenny sentiments as if 
they were pearls ; and then I shall be insolent,^' she 
thought. " Oh, dear ! Lord deliver me from much 
of Robert Prescott; and Ellen . don't I know exactly 
the sort of limp lunatic I shall feel after Ellen has 
let fall a dozen of her Robert Prescottisms upon 
me?" 

I think that we must all be acquainted with some 



THE PRESCOTTS AT THE HURST. 193 

woman whose mission on earth it is to be her hus- 
'-band's wife . only this and nothing more. From 
a purely intellectual, or purely social point of view, 
the continuance of the species is not to be desired: 
but from the purely moral point of view this type 
of woman is unassailable. Her husband's people 
are her people, and his God is her God . ^whether 
she adores the man himself from the bottom of her 
soul is an open question. Indeed, the women who 
go into blind abject allegiance in this way, seldom 
have any souls from the bottom of which they can 
adore. They are capable of carrying their packs-^ 
and of seeming to adjust them gracefully . and 
what more can men who require so much care 
f or ? . 

Mrs. Prescott was one of these women. She had 
the characteristic of her order strongly marked; 
her husband was her sole book of reference, and 
she quoted him hugely. This she did, not in the 
manner of one who seeks to strengthen the estimate 
of her own propounded opinions and ideas by ad- , j 

ducing corroborative sentiments from an outsider in 
any disputed case; but she pushed her husband's I 

axioms on all subjects to the front, and then took j 

up a stolid position behind them as it were. Ndt i 

VOL. II. o 



194 WALTER GORING, 

enlarging upon them in any way . she was too 
unimaginative to alter the text of this holy gospel ; 
but just reiterating them until the soundest of 
them became abominations in the ears of her 
hearers. 

The rumour of the mesh of miserable difficulties 
in which Mr. Fellowes was entangled had reached 
Mr. Prescott, iihough it had not been officially 
communicated to him by the unlucky gentleman. 
The prosperous lawyer had been on the look-out 
for a country-house with good grounds for some 
time> and it occurred to him now that it would be 
a profitable investment of his time to go down and 
see The Hurst. Should the need for the sale of it 
be as great as he believed, why, he asked himself, 
should he not purchase the place, and perchance 
drive a good bargain, as well as a stranger ? So the 
Prescotts announced themselves for New Year's 
Day, as has been said, and all the inhabitants of 
The Hurst were excited by the announcement, 
according to their respective degrees. 

The whole family came, as Mrs. Prescott was a 
fond mother after that pattern which always desires 
to have her children within hail should a sudden 
wish to see one of them arise. She never took any 



THE ]?BESCOTTS AT THE HUBST. 195 

trouble about them ; in fact, she never took any 
trouble about anything save the fit of her dresses, 
and this, not because she was a specially vain or a 
specially well-dressed woman, but because she had 
been imbued with the notion that *' they ought to 
fit " at school. Consequently she held fast to that 
notion just as she kept the commandmentSi and did 
her duty in that house in Bayswater whither Provi- 
dence, together with Mr. Prescott, had called her. 
But though she never took any trouble about her 
-children, she made a point of telling people, ** I like 
to have them with me everywhere. a mother should, 
I think, don't you ? " And the speech was spotless, 
nad won Mrs. Prescott a seat in a high place in the 
matron-imagined maternal Paradise, 

Mr. Fellowes had received them very cordially. 
It was the nature of the man to be hospitable, and 
happy to see every one who came to his house. 
Moreover, he thought high things of the Prescotts, 
partly because Bobert Prescott was what he called 
** a hard-headed man," and partly because he was 
the husband of Charlie's sister. " Why, I owe you 
to him, don't I?" the good-natured grateful fellow said 
to Charlie, snatching a moment from his exuberant 
welcome of his guests to tell her so. To which 

Pi 



196 WALTER GORING, 

Charlie replied, " Of course it's a tremendous debt, 
dear ; but don't pay it by letting Eobert Prescott 
badger you about your own business . She'll try it on, 
I feel convinced." The old antagonistic spirit, 
exorcised apparently by her intense sympathy 
with her husband, rose up at sight of the man who 
had the galling art of saying the most truthful 
things in such a way that she could but cavil at 
them. Besides, he had greeted her with the words, 
"Eeally, Charlotte, you look surprisingly welL" 
What wonder that she was very much on her de- 
fence against any possible interference with herself 
or her husband. 

The morning after their arrival, Mr. Fellowes and 
Mr. Prescott went out for a ride round the farm. 
The round-backed lawyer was not a very finished 
equestrian. While he was in the saddle he felt a 
lesser man than if ellowes. The uncertainty of life 
wa^ very much before him as he rode along on an old 
hunter, " who," his host assured him, " would make 
nothing of popping over that hurdle or that hedge," 
pointing out those objects as he spoke to Mr. 
Prescott, who felt dubious as to what the result 
would be should the horse "pop over," as it was 
upon the cards he might do, without consulting his 



i 



THE PRESCOTTS AT THE HURST. 197 

rider's wishes. Unwillingly, he took a military seat, 
and his teeth chattered, not so much with fear as 
with the jolting, whenever they got out of a walk. 
He knew, too, that his hat had settled farther back 
upon his head than was becoming, and that there 
was a goodly portion of both his legs visible to the 
eyes of the vulgar, who made ribald jokes to one 
another on the subject as he passed along. Nor 
could he remedy these defects, uncomfortably con- 
scious as he was of them. For the old hunter had 
a habit of pulling, and Mr. Prescott had a dark 
foreboding. Did he relax his fervent hold with both 
hands on the reins for a single instant, he felt he 
would be borne with velocity over the very hedgy 
and ditchy landscape, to the downfall of his dignity 
and the detriment of his person, ''He doesn't 
seem to be carrying you well . ^you don't ride easy, 
do you ? " Henry Fellowes asked at last, becoming 
suddenly conscious of Mr. Prescott's face being of 
a purple hue from over-exertion. 

" He has nearly twitched my arms out of their 
sockets," that unhappy gentleman answered. 

*' Ah ! give him his head a bit,*' the other one said, 
cheerfully ; and Mr. Prescott thought, " give a brute 
like this his head, indeed . not if I can help it." 



198 WALTER GORING. 

" YouTl get used to his way after a time or two,*" 
the master of the horse went on. 

"Never!" Mr. Frescott thought, emphatically; 
and just then they rode through a gate into a wide 
expanse of meadow, and the old hunter gave a small 
bound expressive of satisfaction at finding himself 
on spring elastic turf. One of Mr. Prescott's feet 
came out of the stirrup, and the lawyer had to 
scramble wildly about in his steed's mane before he 
could steady himself and get his foot in again. " I 
never saw such an extraordinary horse in my life,'* 
he said, touchily. " What did he do, then ? " "I 
really fancy . I may be mistaken . but I can't help 
thinking, FelloweSj that he has got the meagrims^ 
don't you caU it?" 

Fellowes laughed. "You needn't be afraid of 
that at this time of year: look here, if you 
have no objection, we will just go over to Goring 
Place. I want to ask Goring to come and dine 
with us.'' 

" Thank Heaven I '^ Mr. Prescott thought, as he 
gave a blindly eager assent. He thought that 
Goring Place must be nearer to them now than The 
Hurst, and that he would thus sooner gain a tem- 
porary relief. 



THE PBESCOTTS AT THE HUBST. 199 

** Then well just cut across here, and over the 
ditch at the bottom; that takes us on to Goring's 
land . ^it's a short cut," Henry Fellowes said, point- 
ing down the meadow as he spoke; and suiting the 
action to the word, he went off at a sharp canteti 
before his companion could utter a word of remon- 
strance. It never occurred to him that Mr. Prescott 
was in difficulty, far less that he was in mortal 
terror. It was apparent enough that he was not 
handling the horse well, but that was between his 
conscience and the old brown himter; and Mr. 
Fellowes knew the old brown hunter too well to 
dread his taking a mean advantage. 

Mr. Prescott had no time to utter a word of 
remonstrance, for the instant the brown horse saw 
his fellow start, he started too, at a steady stride 
that took away Mr. Prescott's breath, and brought 
him, he felt, with hideous speed along to that 
yawning ditch at the bottom which Mr. Fellowes 
had indicated so ruthlessly. His legs flapped feebly 
against the saddle . ^he was bitterly bumped . h^ 
would have given a year's income to feel sure that 
if he threw himself off he wouldn't hurt himself. 
But the old horse saved him the trouble of coming 
to a decision on this point, by taking the ditch like 



200 WALTER GORING. 

a bird, and dropping Mr. Prescott in the middle 
i)f it, 

" 'WTiy, what did he do ? " Henry Fellowes asked, 
when he had dragged Mr. Prescott out of the ditch, 
and assisted that gentleman in removing a little of 
the black mud and green slime from his hair and 
whisTsers. 

" Do ! " the other replied, with a snarl, " why, he 
\ did ' something with his back and legs at the same 
moment that gave me a most fearful twist ; he's the 
most diabolical horse I was ever on in my life/' 

*' What's to be done ?. you can't walk home in 
this stat^.*' 

"m not trust myself upon that brown brute 
again* I'm the father of a family, and shouldn't be 
justified in doing it ; married men have no right to 
jeopardise their lives or fortunes.'* Now that he 
was safe on the ground again^ he could no longer 
resist administering a veiled rebuke to the man by 
whose side he had felt so helpless a thing for the 
last hour. 

. "Well, what's to be done?" Henry Fellowes 
repeated. " I'd change horses, but this bay mare, 
though she's gentle as a lamb, might lark off with 
you ; come, get on, try the old horse again." 



THE FRESCOTTS AT THE HUBST. 201 

" No," Mr. Prescott replied. " I might take 
cold, you see ; VU walk home, if you'll point out 
the way ; but you'll excuse my leading the hoijfe . ^I 
don't like his eye." 

"Very well,'' Henry Fellowes said, laughing; 
" all right, old fellow. Go out through that gate 
on the left, and then keep along the lane; you'll 
soon see The Hurst. I'll just go on to Goring 
and ask him to dinner." 

" He'll go over and laugh at the mischief his 
brute of a horse has done, with that young idiot 
who is always foisting his immoral twaddle on the 
public," Mr. Prescott thought, as he walked away 
with faltering, uncertain steps. He was not broken, 
but he was most sorely bruised, and all the tendons 
of his legs were strained in consequence of his 
having tried to keep his feet down in stirrups which 
he had insisted on haying left much too long for 
him. Moreover, he was not quite certain as to his 
nearest path to The Hurst, and he was quite certain 
that Charlie would laugh when she saw him. 
" She'll be sending an account of it to that puppy, 
her brother, and he will be making a caricature 
of it," he thought, angrily, as he walked along, 
dripping. 



520d WALTER GOBING. 

The sisters meanwhile had been getting on 
pleasantly enough. They had not met since 
Charlie's wedding-day, and Ellen had much to 
ask relative to the way in which divers dresses 
had worn. " There's that velvet/' she had said, 
" have you ever had it on ? '' 

*'No,*" Charlie replied; "the dinner-parties I 
have been to as yet haven't been up to that mark ; 
I've been out in simplicity and silks. I reserve 
that velvet to come down upon them with a crusher 
just as they think my wedding outfit is exhausted.*' 

" Eobert says you won't want that velvet now." 

" How wonderfully good of Robert." 

" And I would take it off your hands, Charlie." 

" How wonderfully good of you, dear ; but, on 
the whole, I prefer keeping it on my hands." 

" Bobert says that, under these sad circum- 
stances, people would talk if you dressed too 
richly; he said he was sure you wouldn't wish 
to do it, and I said, oh ! no." 

"How nicely Ella's hair grows; there is quite 
a ruddy tinge in it now. it's ever so much 
richer in colour than it was before," Charlie said, 
carelessly. 

" Yes, it is . but about that dress, dear Charlie ? 



THE PRESCOTTS AT THB HUBST. 203* 

I canH bear to think of your being burdened with 
it ; do you know, too, that Bobert is quite willing 
to take The Hurst off your hands ? " 

<* What ? " Charlie asked, sharply. 

*^Well, he says that as he has long wanted a 
country-house, he may as well take this as any 
other, if " 

''He can get it," Charlie interrupted, hastily;. 
*'let us leave business topics to the men, at any 
rate, Ellen/' 

"Yes, of course. What do you think of doing 
when you leave The Hurst ? " 

"I havenH given my mind to the subject yet/' 

" But Bobert says that you ought to think . that 
it's quite time for you to think ; you're m%u:h worse 
off than if you had never married, Charlie/' Ellen 
grew quite impressive as she said this . " supposing 
you should have a family ? '' 

*' I won't trouble you as to their maintenance, at 
any rate/' Charlie said, quickly ; " but let us speak 
of pleasanter possibilities, please. You know what 
a good draftsman Frank is . he is going to do 
something with his talent that will make us all very 
proud of him." Then she told Ellen about the- 
picture for which an Elaine was wanted, and Ellen 



204 WALTEB GORING. 

asked " if be couldn't make an Elaine out of his 
own head, as he was so clever ? " and thought rather 
poorly of him when she heard that he distrusted 
his own power of doing so. 



i 



CHAPTER XIII. 



TWO OFFERS. 



When Henry Fellowes reached home that day 
after inviting Mr. Goring to come over and dine 
with him, he had the important eager look on his 
face of one who is the hearer of exciting intelligence. 
"Goring's coming, Charlie/' he said, hurriedly 
entering the room where he learnt that his wife 
would be found, " but he's quite thrown out of gear 
by a letter he has had." 

" About what ? " Charlie asked ; then, before he 
could answer, she went on laughingly, " and so is 
Bobert Prescott thrown out of gear. He came home 
about half-an-hour ago looking a more wretched 
object than usual; he says you would go steeple- 
chasing over land he didn't know ! that's a story, of 
course ; but what did you do, Harry ? " 



;206 . WALTER GORING. 

" Tried to take Hm across the little ditch on to 
Goring's land, that's all," Henry Fellowes replied 
-contemptuously. " I never saw such a fellow in my 
life: he came out of the saddle for nothing, and then 
lie nearly cried," 

" Poor discomfited, found-out humbug. I knew 
all along that he didn't know a horse's head from 
its tail ; but you should have heard him talk, Harry, 
io understand the bliss I feel in knowing he has 
had an ignominious tumble. What about Mr. Goring, 
though?" 

" Why, he has had a letter from the governess or 
duenna or whatever she is at Brighton ; his cousin 
has cut/* 

" What has she cut ? " Charlie asked, wonder* 

ingly. 

"Her home . her school . ^whatever it waS ; she's 
gone oflf ; the old lady she was with, thought she was 
. gone to Goring Place, but Goring's heard nothing 
of her, and he's in an awful way." 
. "I suppose he is very fond of her," Charlie said, 
gravely. ^ 

" Whether he is fond of her or not, he's respon* 
«ible for her in a measure. I never saw a man so 
cut up as he is about it. He has telegraphed to 



TWO OFFBBS. 207 

Clark, his lawyer, and sent him off to Brighton to 
get a clue if possible to her whereabouts."* 

" How can she cause him such trouble ? what a 
little brute she must be,** Charlie exclaimed, vehe* 
mently. ** I hope he won't put himself out any more 
about her." 

" My dear Charlie, don't say that to him." 
" Oh, he is coming here, then, to-night ? " 
" Yes, he's coming," Henry Fellowes replied; and 
his wife immediately said to herself, *'then Mr* 
Walter Goring cant be so very much distressed 
about this missing young lady." Women are 
always so quick to discover, so prompt to feel, the 
slights that are offered to, and the indifference that 
is felt for their fellow women. 

The Hurst could scarcely be described as a hall 
of harmony at this period. The little Prescotts 
had the art of scattering and diffusing themselves 
too freely to suit the views of the regular residents. 
The gift of omnipresence which these children 
possessed was prodigious, but not pleasant. " Baby 
fingers . ^waxen touches" were to be traced upon 
everything. The bump of veneration was unde- 
veloped in every one of them as yet, so they lavished 
their little marks of interest as liberally upon the 



208 WALTER GOBIXG. 

sacred deposits of patch-work, knitting and darning 
in old Mrs. Fellowes's basket as thej did npon 
aught else. They insulted Miss Dinah by qnes- 
tioning her cnrionslj as to why she had no ** babies, 
like mamma, and no husband, like Aunt Charlie ? '* 
From being inqaisitive thej grew reflectiye on these, 
points, and ** s'posed," in the most public manner 
possible, ** that she hadn't been able to get one." 
The baby Prescott . aged eleven months . ^made The 
Hnrst hideous with his howls at intervals of five 
minutes. There was a harmless but unrefreshing 
perfume of tepid pap pervading ever^'thing, the 
voices of the children resounded in every direction, 
the pretty London nursemaid leaving them much 
to their own devices while she improved the shining 
hours with a couple of impressionable grooms and 
one heartless deceiver in the guise of a footman. In 
a fit of emotion on her wedding-day, Charlie had to 
soothe their feelings at parting with her . ^promised 
them that they should always do as they liked in 
her house, and come to see her often ; so now that 
they had come to see her they showed the tenacity 
of their memories, and were ruthless in their rule. 
They were what the offspring of youth and age 
together frequently are . weird children. They 



TWO OFFEBS. 209 

sorely discomposed old Mrs. Fellowes, causing her 
to hate them for being there, and their parents for 
bringing them, and Charlie for bringing the parents^ 
Altogether, things were out of joint at The Hurst, 
Walter Goring could not help feeling when he 
walked into the drawing-room two minutes before 
dinner that day. 

The effects of the fall were still visible in Mr. 
Prescott's temper, though not oa his person. *' I'm 
sorry you couldn't manage to get across to my place 
to-day," Mr. Goring said, when he was shaking 
hands with the man in whose honour he had been 
invited to dinner; and Mr. Prescott deemed that 
the remark had a double meaning, and glared at the 
maker of it vengefuUy. 

But there had been no double meaning in Walter 
Goring's remark^nor was he conscious of the glaring 
consequent upon it. He was sorely distraught about 
his cousin, his ward, the wilful Daisy, in fact; and 
though there was not actual darkness iil his soul on 
her account, there was anythihg but sunshine and 
a desire to make small jokes. He felt sure that 
she had gone off to some of her mother's people, 
and he was far from feeling sure that her mother's 
people's influence over her would be for good 

VOL. II. ? 



210 WAI/TEB GOBING. 

That he would be able to trace her eyentnaUy he- 
did not doubt, but this habit of hers of giving re- 
cognised authorities the slip would be a sorry one 
to combat should she grow dear . or rather continue 
dear to him. 

**How does Frank get on?" Walter Goring 
asked his young hostess when they were seated at 
.the table, and he could speak to her without all the 
rest overhearing him. Frank was one of those men: 
who are quickly called by their christian names . 
by men they like. 

''He has made lots of studies, and sent them 
down for us to see and to show you ; and he has- 
found an Elaine and a Lancelot," she answered; 
"don't speak of him before Mr. Prescott, please,, 
because Mr. Prescott is unsympathetic on the sub- 
ject of Franks and I can't stand the way he talks of 
my brother." 

" I will not ; your husband has told you about 
my cousin ? " 

"Yes," she replied, and then she paused and 
crumbled her bread. She felt embarrassed and 
uncertain as to what answer it would h6 at once- 
kind and politic to make. If she expressed more^ 
horror than sorrow at the enormity of the lost 



TWO OFFERS. 211 

young lady's conduct, Mr. Goring might deem her 
more just than merciful. If, on the other hand, she 
expressed more sorrow than horror, he might think 
her more merciful than just. In her heart she did 
think very hard things of Daisy's defection, and 
could not bring herself to look upon calls of family 
affection which might have been made, as extenu*' 
ating circumstances. But she fancied, and fancied 
rightly, that Walter Goring was judging the offender 
leniently already, before even he knew the facts of 
the case. The conversation was changed then, and 
not resumed until late in the evening, when Walter 
Goring got a quiet corner in the drawing-room with 
Charlie. 

"It seems," he then said, "that she went five 
days ago . fancy' that ! and the stupid old woman 
she was with has only let me hear of it to-day." 

" How's that ? " Charlie asked. 

"Oh, she was huffed, I suppose; she says she 
was *much hurt at the manner of Miss Goring's 
departure, and is more hurt at my not having com- 
municated with her since ;' the fact is. Miss Daisy 
told Mrs. Osborne that she was coming to Goring 
Place, and the old lady thinks that I have been 
showing want of respect for her all these days in 

p 2 



212 WALTER GORING. 

Bot haying notified xaj ward's arriyal and my con- 
sequent displeasure with her." 

" Then she told Mrs. Osborne a story ? " 

" A grey lie, evidently ; she has a deep-rooted, 
passionate love for her mother, and I imagine that 
she has gone off to that mother, whoever and 
wherever she may be. Forgive me for boring you 
about it, but I can think of nothing else. I ought 
not to have come to-night, but I could not resist 
the pleasure of seeking your sympathy.'' 

Charlie flushed a little. There was absolutely 
nothing in his words . ^nothing to which anyone 
might not have given utterance ; but he had a way 
of saying things a little more impressively than 
other people. 

. " I am so sorry," she said . " so sorry for you. 

Of course I'm sorry that she should be " 

Again she stopped. She was going to say she 
was sorry that Daisy should be so "wickedly 
indiscreet," but on the whole it occurred to her 
that she might as well leave the sentence un- 
finished. 

"You don't know her; if you did, you would 
be very much interested in her, I'm persuaded; 
she resembles you in many things." 



-H 



TWO OFFERS. 2 IS 

" I should scarcely think that/* Charlie replied, 
decidedly. 

"Nevertheless^ she does, I assure you; not in 
person or in mind, but in a certain sort of acquired 
impatience, and love of novelty." 

" Am I to understand that you mean I have an 
acquired love of novelty as well as acquired im- 
patience?'' The tone in which she asked him 
this showed that she was vexed. 

"Yes . are you angiy with me?. I did mean 
it; I have it myself, in a lesser degree than 
you, now ; at one time I had it to a much stronger 
one.'* 

" And you think it a bad thing ? " 

" Not at all . ^if it be kept within bounds." 

" Well, mine has been kept within bounds pretty 
well all my life, so far as my never being able to 
indulge it goes ; and whatever you may think, Mr. 
Goring, I should never have let it develope in the 
way your cousin has done . though you say that is 
what she resembles me in.*' 

"No . you are much less rash than Daisy; you 
would never throw everything to the winds for the 
sake of gratifying any strong passion ; you would 
conquer it, or change it." 



i2l4 WALTER ooBma. 

''Don't analyse me any more, Mr. Goring. I 
like to think well of myself." 

*^ Know yourself, then,^ he replied, in a low tone ; 
and when he said that Charlie forgave him for 
likening her to Daisy ; then he went on, *' But how 
about Frank and his ' Elaine ' ; did he find one at 
that studio I recommended him to try ? *' 

" No . ^be only goes there for costumes ; he came 
upon an * Elaine' by accident in the street, I 
believe. Oh, no, it wasu*t in the street, though, for 
he says he was rewarded for encouraging native 
talent by seeing a face that will do for * Elaine ' as 
he was coming out of the English Opera the night 
before last . and another windfall . ^he has 
found a publisher, and his book is to come out 
as soon as it can be printed." 

" That is well. What does he get for it ? " 

"Half.profits." 

" That is not well; he may chronicle the fact, if 
he ever sees a penny, as the most remarkable 
occurrence and curious fact of the age." 

"He's very sanguine about seeing a good deal 
more than a penny," Charlie said, laughing. 

" So was I once," Walter Goring repKed. " I 
was young at the time, and the publisher who 



TWO OFFERS* 215 

.:=? ushered my first book into the world iassured me 

that fabulous sums would be the result of publish- 
.f;^ ing on that system. I kept a hopeful silence for a 

Ij:: year, and then, when I suggested that a modest 

ini' instalment would be encouraging, he overwhelmed 

rf. me with shame and remorse by making frightful 

calculations on the spot, by which he proved that he 
^::- was out of pocket some £300 by the transaction/' 

I ; At this juncture, Mr. Preseott, who had been 

f : reading the " Times " all the evening, came over 

;« and joined them. 

ij. " Can that brother of yours keep accounts ? ** he 

asked; and his manner of mentioning Frank was 
so offensive that Charlie kept her head set steadily 
towards Mr. Goring, and ignored the question. 
But Mr. Preseott was not to be silenced. 

" I say, Mrs. Fellowes," he repeated, " can that 
brother of yours write a decent hand, and has he a 
tolerable head for figures ? " 

''He says 'no' himself. I think his figures are 
full of life, but he thinks himself that he hasnH a 
sufficient knowledge of anatomy; so he has gone to 
South Kensington to study it," Charlie replied, 
wilfully misunderstanding her brother-in-law. 
'' I wasn't asking about his daubing,*' Mr. Pres- 



216 WALTER GORINa. 

cott said, letting his upper lip down portentously. 
** I meant, is he fit for a clerk's place ? because I 
see a house I know in the city is advertising for a 
clerk, and I wouldnH mind backing his application." 

" Do you mean that I am to write and tell him 
this, Robert?" 

"Yes," he replied. 

'* Then why couldn't you have said so," she 
retorted, " instead of standing off from the subject 
as if it were a disgraceful one ? " 

" You don't consider him a particularly creditable 
one, I hope ? " 

She rose up impatiently. " Pray donH speak to 
me about my brother at all, Robert." Then she 
struggled with herself, and tried to be discreet, and 
to think that at any rate Mr. Prescott meant well. 
"Your offer is very kind. I will write and tell 
Frank of it." 

" There is one condition you'll please to make," 
Mr. Prescott began, and when Charlie asked " what 
is that ? " Walter Goring walked away from them, 
foreseeing a storm. 

"Why, that he gives up his scribbling and 
daubing; ]ie has dragged his name through the ifiire 
enough already. Til not countenance any more of 



TWO OFFERS. 217 

it, by trying to put him in a respectable position, 
unless he promises to give up wasting his time and 
spoiling canvas and paper." 

" You may make that condition yourself. I 
won't." 

** How do you expect he is to live ? Now when 
I am willing to give him a helping hand, you throw 
cold water on my intentions." 

" I do nothing of the kind. I simply refuse to 
throw cold water on his intentions." 

" If he lets any absurdity of the sort stand in the 
way of this, I'll never do anything more for him. 
I promise you that. I'm willing to do this and give 
him a chance, and you may tell him so ; I will back 
him up, and my recommendation will be taken . 
but I won't see him." 

" I assure you he has not the faintest desire to 
see you," the injudicious partisan said, indig- 
nantly. 

** I should think not, if he has any shame left." 

" He hasn't a bit . what has he to be ashamed of, 
indeed ? I'll have nothing to do with your offer or 
conditions ; make them to him yourself, if you are 
nof afraid." 

Then she got away from him and took refuge by 



1518 WALTER OORIKa. 

Ellen's side. Mrs. Prescott was lying down on a 
sofa just opposite to a wood fire, feeling very idle, 
and happy, and sleepy, in blest unconsciousness of 
the wrath that was sinunering in old Mrs. Fellowes's 
heart at this fresh evidence of the supine indulgence 
of young women of the modem day. Charlie bent 
over her pretty sister, smoothing the fair silky hair; 
;as she did so, she whispered, 

"Did you hear me quarrelling with your hus- 
band; Ellen ? " 

"I never listen when you disagree, you know," 
Ellen replied, promptly. "I'm always so afraid 
ihat one of you should ask me to say something ; 
.so when you begin, I don't listen. How funny that 
Mr. Goring should be down here, isn't it ? every- 
body says he is sure to marry Mrs. Walsh. But 
I hope he won't; if we do take this place I had 
rather not have her for a neighbour." 

Charlie left off caressing the fair locks, and moved 
-away from her sister. It pained her to see how 
entirely indifferent Ellen was as to what would 
become of her (Charlie), should the Prescotts " take 
this place." But on EUen holding out her hand 
sjxi smiling sweetly, Charlie reflected, " She nfever 
means to be ill-natured . she is not like Bobert;'' 



TWO OFFERS. 21^ 

SO she returned to her place by Mrs. Prescott's 
side, and that lady continued, 

" I should like to go for a very long drive, and 
take all the children, to-morrow, Charlie ; it can be 
done, I suppose ? " 

" Oh yes ! " Charlie repUed. 
" May I ask how ? " old Mrs. Fellowes struck 
in. 

" Well . really I don't know," Charlie said with a 
laugh ; ** but it seems to me that there are plenty of 
horses and plenty of men to drive them." 

" Do you all six or seven of you mean to cram 
in to one phaeton, for instance ? " the old lady 
continued. 

"Allow me to drive you and your sister, Mrs. 
Fellowes . do allow me," Walter Goring said, and 
as Ellen smiled assent to the proposition, Charlie 
Agreed to it right willingly. 

"When I live here I shall have a pony-chaise 
and pretty pair of ponies,'' Ellen remarked amiably. 
And once more Charlie felt devoid of all natural 
affection for her sister. 

Before the party separated that night, Mr. Goring 
so managed as to get a few more quiet moments 
with Mrs. Fellowes. 



220 WALTER GORING. 

"I want you to give me Frank's address/* he 
said. She wrote it hastily and handed it to him. 

" I am going to make a bid for his picture," he 
continued ; and Charlie smiled upon him gloriously 
by way of reply^ but at the same time said, 

" No, don't do that ; Frank would rather not be 
patronised. A fair field and no favour is all he 
asks." 

"But I'm delighted with the study he made 
for it . that figure of Guinevere was exquisite." 

When he said that, Charlie remembered that the 
figure he considered "exquisite" was the figure 
of Mrs. Walsh; and then she smiled no more. 
In fact, she felt that the evening had been a great 
failure, as she gave him her hand and said good- 
night to him.' 



CHAPTER XIV. 

A SYBEN SMILE. 

It soon came to be an understood thing that 
Walter Goring should drive Charlie and Mr. and 
Mrs. Prescott out every fine day. He had plenty of 
time at his disposal, and Henry Fellowes was too 
much absorbed in business matters and miserable 
speculations as to the future to have time or incli- 
nation for anything that did not appear to him to 
be a work of necessity. There had been another 
heavy call made upon him, and now the worst was 
known. It was no longer a question of letting The 
Hurst and retrenching. He knew that he must sell 
the old place, and the knowledge made his heart 
very heavy. 

"Do keep square with Prescott, if you can, 
Charlie," he said to his wife two or three days after 
Mr* Goring had dined there. 



222 WALTER GORING. 

" Square with liim, why I'm sweet to him," she said. 

" Yes, I know ; hut the fact is, I don't want any- 
thing to put him oflF his plan of buying the house 
and grounds. Goring has made me a capital o£fer 
for the land, but he doesn't want the house, you 
see. It was such a munificent offer that I closed 
with it at once. 

Charlie looked up with sparkling eyes and a 
crimson fSetce. 

" I don't understand, Harry . ^why should Mr. 
Goring seem to come forward as a benefactor in 
this way? I don't quite like it. I would rather 
have heard that the land was sold to anybody else, 
or at a moderate price to him." 

"I'm not in a position to split straws;^ . but I 
was saying, it's not such an easy matter to get rid of 
a house and pleasure-grounds when there is no 
{arm to go with it down here, so I should be sorry 
if Prescott gets put off his bargain." 

" I won't put him off. Meek is no word for what 
I have been to him for the last two or three days ; 
indeed, the only thing in which I have ventured to 
xxin counter to his miserable little will, was in not 
making myself the medium of his impertinence to 
Frank; that I wouldn't do." 



A STBEN SBOLE. 22;t- 

^'Look at his motiye, not at his manner. He 
meant kindly by Frank, after all, and Frank haa 
had the sense to see that he did. He wrote to^ 
Frank himself. curtly enough, I allow . ^but Frank 
has answered him straight-forwardly and civilly,'* 

" Does he accept his oflBer ? " 

*'No; but he gives such excellent reasons for 
refusing it that Prescott can't be annoyed at the 
refusal. He says he has had an offer of j£400 for 
his picture, before it's painted, too ; it's fabulous 
are you not surprised ? " 

Charlie turned her he^d away and made no reply. 
She did not like to say, (since Frank had kept his 
own counsel), that she knew by whom that offer had 
been made, therefore she said nothing; but she 
thought, " I wish Walter Goring would not make- 
himself our guardian angel in this way ; there is 
no need for the halo about him to be deepened." 
^. When she did speak, it was to say, '' Dear Frank t 
well, I'm glad that he has contrived to satisfy Mr. 
Prescott," and then she went away to prepare for 
the drive. 

Ellen, being the senior matron, was always given 
the place of honour on these occasions by Mr. 
Ooring^s side, and Charlie and Mr. Prescott had to- 



224 WALTER GORING* 

make the best of each other on the back seat. He 
was a wearisome companion to his sister-in-law at 
any time, but during these -drives he was simply 
odious to her; and she did at times find that it was 
very hard to obey her husband's injunction and 
**keep square with Prescott," 
' There are several kinds of people whom it is 
unpleasant to drive about . ^to act as coachman to^ 
or even to sit by them while a third person drives. 
But there are two orders whom it is more than 
unpleasant, it is almost unbearable, to have with 
you. 

The type of the one order is the man, or woman, 
who accredits either the horse or you with all 
manner of malice prepense. If the horse be the 
object of his distrust, he concentrates all his powers 
of observation on the noble animal, and is deaf to 
all you say, and blind to all you pass. He inter- 
rupts and worries you perpetually, to ask " if there's 
not something uncertain in that creature's eye ? " or 
''if he doesn't mean mischief when he drops his ear 
in that way ? and would you oblige him by being 
particularly careful how you pass things, as he sees 
that horse is bent on a collision." If, on the other 
hand^ he distrusts the driver, he becomes a nuisance 



A STBEN SMILE. S35 

of a deeper dye. He wants to *^ ease the horse " at 
everj dip and rise by getting out and walking. He 
thinks you a cruel monster if you *' don't stop him 
and let him breathe, poor fellow/' every twenty 
yards. He would like nothing so much as to have 
you up under Mr. Martin's Act if you don't get 
down and wipe away a pertinacious fly from the tip 
of the horse's ear with your pocket-handkerchief. 
He deems you guilty of wickedly overtasking a 
willing but helpless servant if you drive more than 
four miles an hour ; and finally, and worst of all, he 
is always sure that your matchless-actioned trotter 
is "going lame.'' Now all these things are very 
hard to endure ; but there is a certain cowardice in 
the first series of o£fences which calls for contemp- 
tuous pity, and a certain kindly tender-heartedness 
in the second which enlists the sympathy even of 
the aggrieved. But for the man who, knowing 
nothing of them, expects and demands impossible 
feats of endurance and Speed from the horses, there 
is and should be no toleration. 

Mr. Prescott was one of these men. He was as 
unreasoning as an infant on the subject. Ac- 
customed as he was to be wafted about behind those 
wonderful screws which adorn the Hansoms of the 

VOL. II. Q 



236: WALTER GORINa. 

metropolis, he held it to be quite in the order of 
things that a similar pace should be maintained for, 
say twenty or thirty miles without stopping, when 
a friend took him for a drive in the country. He 
knew nothing of horses ; they were mere locomotive 
machines to him, and he held it to be but a puerile 
policy which ever sought to spare them. " Your 
cattle don't travel very fast," he would say to Walter 
Goring, when they were going along at about twelve 
miles an hour ; and if Mr. Goring, goaded by the 
repetition of the remarks, increased the pace, Mr. 
Prescott would resettle himself complacently, and 
observ0 to Charlie, " That's a little better, if he 
only keeps it up ; but he won't." 

" No, of course he won't," Charlie would retort. 
"Why should he run their legs ofif? Where do 
you want to go, that you are so anxious to get over 
the gi'ound ? Because I daresay there's a train to it, 
and we could drop you at a station." 

" I don't want to go anywhere ; but when a man 
makes me come out with him, I don't want to crawl 
along no faster than if I walked." 

" Ah ! it's only when you're on horseback that 
you like crawling," she would reply ; and then Mr. 
Prescott would look about him discontentedly in 



A STREN SMILE. %Vt 

silence, until he fancied he saw another fair oppor- 
tunity for saying . 

** Your cattle don't travel very fast/' 

Or if he was not engaged in finding fault with 
the pace, or employed in looking discontentedly 
over the prospect, he improved the opportunity by 
.catechising Charlie as to what her husband's plans 
were when he left The Hurst " He will have very 
little to live upon, I can tell you that," he would 
say, encouragingly. " And I don't know what he's 
fit for, but a farmer ; it's been a very bad business 
for you." 

"For him, not for me," she replied. 'Tm 
thoroughly contented, and shall be thoroughly happy 
if I only find that my husband thinks as little of it 
as I do. Don't pity me, Robert." 

She certainly never looked an object of pity on 
these occasions. The long-sustained excitement of 
mingled doubt, suspense, and hope, had imparted 
a certain brilliancy to her manner and face that had 
generally been wanting in the old " dark days of 
nothingness" at Bayswater. The knowledge that 
a. great deal depended upon her . ^that if she seemed 
faint in spirit and down-hearted her husband would 
be more unhappy than he was already . deepened 

Q2 



\ 



I 



228 WALTER GORING. 

and improved her nature. It made her more 
careful^ more thoughtful and self-reliant. Not in a 
depressed, saddened way, but in a rich, full, generous 
one, that made itself manifest in a more glowing 
physique. She certainly was no object of pity, 
possessing, as she did, the determination to make 
the best of things, and the bright belief that things 
would never be at all worse than she could bear 
without breaking down. In his heart of hearts Mr. 
Frescott did think that Charlie should have carried 
herself a little more humbly in these days . that 
she should have borne these trials which had come 
upon her unrepiningly, as became a Christian ; but 
humbly, nevertheless. He did not wish to be un- 
just or harsh in his judgment of her ; but " when 
people haven't a penny to bless themselves with," 
he would say to Ellen, " they shouldn't hold their 
heads so high and look so uncommonly well pleased, 
as Charlie does; it's all nonsense her pretending 
not to feel this downfall at all : she ought to feel 
it.*' Mr. Prescott was a great advocate for a fitting 
demeanour being observed on all occasions. In 
his estimation there was no piety in the heart of a 
man who did not look perniciously sour in a pew. 
He Uked outward and visible signs of things, nni 



i.^ 



A SYBEN SMILE. 229 

Charlie Fellowes would not soothe him by any 
signal of distress. 

Meanwhile Walter Goring was making a good 
many. More than ten days had passed, and still 
there was nothing heard of Daisy. After all her 
elaborate paqking up, she had gone away, taking 
nothing with her, save the £600 which had been 
deposited at the bank ; but, feeling convinced that 
she was gone to her mother, Walter Goring did not 
like to put a detective on her track . a piece of self- 
denial on his part which saves me an immense deal 
of trouble in following the devious paths which a 
detective is popularly supposed to take. But for 
all this prudent self-denial, Walter Goring was very 
anxious and unhappy about Daisy> and his signals 
of distress were clearly visible to Charlie's naked 
eye. 

At last his patience was rewarded. The girl 
herself came upon him suddenly one evening when 
he was sitting, as was his wont now, in the room 
which had been sacred to her . sitting there think- 
ing of her sadly, and reproaching himself with 
having been false to his charge. She came upon 
him suddenly like a ghost, so haggard, pale, and 
sad-looking, that he had not the heart to be severe 



WALTER GORING. 

to her, when she came almost crouching before- 
him, entreating him to forgive her. 

" I will go back quietly, and never want to leave 
Mrs. Osborne again," she said, when he had some- 
what passionately interrogated her as to where she 
had been. '^ I did long so to see my mother ; but,. 
Walter, donH ask me about her ; only I shall never 
want to see her again." 

" You have been to see your mother, then ? " 

" I have seen my mother . ^yes." 

" Foolish girl ! Why not have told me you were 
going ? Would I have prevented it, do you think ? 
I would have raised no barrier." 

** But some one else would. Don't ask me any- 
thing . don't drive me wild by speaking about it I 
Let me forget all this . do . do . do! She has a 
husband, you know ; and . and " 

She threw herself down on the sofa, crying out 
aloud, and wailing as a child does in some passion- 
ate grief. Then he saw that though her face was 
worn and wan, that she had gained a fuller, rounder 
beauty of form since their last meeting. She was 
more womanly altogether . as graceful as ever . ^but 
with a more luxurious grace than the lithe one of 
old. She had altered the disposition of her hair,. 



A STREN SMILE. SHI 

too : instead of being bound tightly round her head, 
as formerly, she wore it now unbound, pushed 
behind her ears, and hanging down her back, a 
rippling sheet of living gold. The fresh arrange- 
ment was a new-bom beauty to him. He could not 
feel angiy with her, as she was lying stretched 
before him, weeping in her passionate prettiness. 

He went over to The Hurst at once, and claimed 
Charlie's good offices, and Charlie acceded to his 
proposal, that she should receive Daisy and keep 
her until such time as Mrs. Osborne could be com- 
municated with, and her good pleasure about taking 
Daisy back be learnt. It was also agreed that no 
one save Henry Fellowes, who knew it already, 
should be told that the young lady had been a 
defaulter from the path of duty. ''Her romantic 
love for her mother led her into the scrape, but she 
shrinks from the subject in such a way that I fancy 
that love has received some awful shock," Walter 
Goring said to Mrs. Fellowes, when he was on the 
point of returning to Goring Place to fetch his 
ward. 

"Tell me? How am I to account for her 
here?" 

" That I leave to you," he replied, promptly. 



232 WALTER GOBING. 

in the manner men have of appearing to deem a 
woman capable of coining any story on the spot. 
" You are sure to account for her in the best way 
possible under the circumstances. Besides, you 
are not accountable to any one . are you ? " 

No, of course she was not; and he was veiy 
anxious to throw the onus of his ward upon her . 
that was very evident. Well, she liked him so 
much, that she was capable of enduring even mis* 
apprehension for his sake. So she prepared herself 
to. defend stoutly, if need be, the appearance of the 
yellow-haired girl upon the scene, and to suffer a 
little for friendship's sake at the call of Walter 
Goring. 

Young Mrs. Fellowes had schooled herself well 
by the time Daisy appeared. She took the elder 
woman's place . ^the married woman's place . at once, 
before that young lady, assuming that it was a 
thing of course that Daisy should be very much 
more to her guardian than anybody else. The girl 
with the sweet voice and the winning ways (ah! 
how much sweeter they all appeared to Walter than 
they had been of old !) was not one from whom 
such a woman as Charlie could stand aloof. Mrs. 
Fellowes took to her young guest kindly. Daisy*s 



A SYBEN SMILE. 283 

silvery voice, and feline grace, and look of sad, 
thrilling experience, fascinated Charlie into a feeling 
that was stronger than liking at the outset of their 
intercourse. Mrs. Fellowes had no faith in Daisy's 
possession of any one of the more subtle and 
exalted qualities, which Daisy, by an inflection of 
voice, or a gleam of the eye, or a quiver of the lip, 
would seem to express almost against her own will. 
But such is the wonderful influence that well- 
managed dramatic power has over acutely sensitive 
people, that though Charlie did not believe in these 
things, she was carried away, and, as it were, par- 
tially intoxicated by them. 

And Daisy acted her part well. She was the 
impassioned penitent . the wrong-doer through 
right feeling . to perfection. Every line of her 
flexible form, every varying expression on her 
mobile face, appealed to all sorts of feelings in 
those who looked upon her, that caused them to be 
lenient in their judgment of her. How far the fair 
beauty of her forehead, and the cobalt-blue of her 
eyes, and the living gold of the unbound waves of 
hair, acted upon Walter Goring and biassed his 
judgment, I cannot tell. However that might be, 
something about her had inclined the young 



234 WALTER OOBING. 

guardian so favourably towards Ills fair ward, that 
when he left her that night at The Hurst, and went 
home to Goring Place, with the melody of the last 
song she had smig them rin^g in his ears, he no 
longer thought the terms on which Goring Place 
was to remain his at the expiration of the four 
years after his uncle's death, hard, or derogatory. 
In fact, there was a fifty-syren power in Daisy's 
smile now, partly because, when she was not 
smiling, the cobalt-blue eyes were so very sad. 



CHAPTER XV. 

DAISY WINS. 

Daisy Goring remained for a month at The 
Harst» as Charlie's guest, while Mrs. Osborne went 
through the stages of tremulous anxiety, virtuous 
indignation, and unforgiving rectitude. Finally, 
Mrs. Osborne was appeased; she consented to 
becoming interested and responsible afresh for 
Daisy, and then Walter Goring found out that he 
was very sorry that Daisy should be going away 
from his immediate vicinity. 

During that month of her stay at The Hurst,. 
Daisy had entwined herself about his heart mar- 
vellously. She had been the motive of his paying 
almost daily visits to The Hurst, and she had been 
one of the principal causes of his finding those 
visits very agreeable . only one of the principal 
causes, be it understood. The society of young 



236 WALTEB GOBIKG. 

Mrs. Fellowes had an interest for him, too. Bat he 
reminded himself that she was ** ont of the betting ; '* 
and so, being a good fellow, and no would-be Don 
Joan, he did not care to analyse the interest he had 
in her, but strove to make himself believe that 
Daisy had the strongest spelL 

Indeed it would have been a strange thing had be 
stood the test of Daisy's daily presence, and Daisy's 
desperate determination to please and win him. 
She seemed to have given up childish things . to 
have merged suddenly into one of the gentlest, 
softest, most tractable of women. The defiant 
manner, and the impertinent expression, were utterly 
gone, and in place of them there had come a tender 
twilight, that was specially touching when contrasted 
with her old sunny, spasmodic habits. 

She made no secret of her desire to please 
Walter. To win his approbation she was ready 
to do anything now, even to make those educa- 
tional efforts which had oppressed her so heavily 
of yore. "I'd burst my brain to satisfy him/' she 
would say to Charlie; and Charlie, though the 
saying it caused her a painful sensation in the 
throat, would tell the truth and reply, " No need for 
^hat ; he is satisfied enough with you already." 



DAISY WINS. 287 

Once . a day or two after she came back . Mr. 
Goring strove to assume his rightful authority over 
his ward. He told her that there must be an .nd 
of this affectation of mystery, that he insisted on 
knowing who, and what, and where her mother 
was ? She lapsed into stubborn silence then . a 
silence so dark, dogged, and determined, that none 
of his entreaties could move her from it. Defiance 
he could have mastered, open refusals to tell him 
anything he would have routed . but with a woman 
who could hold her tongue he felt powerless. 
Finally, he had to declare his own defeat by telling 
her that he would not press her further, but that 
" if she loved him,'' she would prove her love some 
day by giving him her confidence. That appeal 
touched her . ^not to confidence, but to such tears 
and caresses that she made him forget that he had 
any cause of displeasure with her. She sat down 
on a low stool by his side, and leant her head on 
his shoulder, and slipped her thin hand into his, 
and made the love he had seemed to question mani- 
fest to him in a thousand ways. It was almost as 
if the soul of Vivien had come back and entered 
into this girl, Charlie thought, when on Walter's 
departure Daisy went to her, and recounted the 



"288 WALTER aORINO. 

scene with such accuracy that Charlie wondered 
what was real about her (Daisy), and whether she 
was acting now or then. In short, irresistibly im- 
pelled as Mrs. Fellowes was to watch the evolutions 
oi this girl and to take an interest in her progress, 
fascinated as she was by Daisy's voice, and grace, 
^nd matchless gift of seeming, she distrusted Miss 
Goring's perfect integrity in many respects, and 
-specially did she doubt the sincerity of Miss 
Ooring's love for her cousin. 

For Daisy was redolent of that air of small 
trickery and intrigue which disgusts another 
woman who is capable of detecting it, more than 
a larger, bolder sin would do. She employed the 
fulifices of artlessness too freely for one so clear- 
sighted as Charlie not to find her out. It disgusted 
and offended Mrs. Fellowes to see Daisy adopt a 
sort of pleadingly caressing, half-childish manner 
towards Walter . to see her hanging on his arm and 
pressing her cheek against his hand, and even 
twisting his brown curls round her white, taper 
fingers. It disgusted and offended her even more 
to see that he rather liked all this than otherwise, 
and that half-childish as the manner was, it was 
rapidly winning him to think Daisy the one woman 



DAISY WINS. 239 

in the world. Yet for all the chagrin and annoyr 
ance she felt daily almost, Mrs. Fellowes was very 
sorry when JDaisy left her, and this partly because 
the girl had exercised over her the Lamia fascina- 
tion, and partly because Charlie would rather have 
watched the growth of the danger than know it 
flourishing away from her. 

At an early stage of their intercourse, Daisy had 
taken the very surest means of averting anything 
like antagonism to or interference in her plans from 
Charlie. Miss Goring had a mind fully capable of 
grasping all the contingencies of such a case as this. 
She knew herself too well to believe that she could 
successfully deceive Mrs. Fellowes ; therefore she 
resolved upon confiding in, and so appealing to, 
Mrs. Fellowes' honour. "I am very fond of 
Walter," she said t6 Charlie, the morning after her 
arrival. '' I didn't feel inclined to let myself fade 
out of his recollection by staying at Brighton; he 
would have come to think of me as a little girl." 

" Was it that which made you cause him all this 
anxiety ? " Charlie asked, holding her head a little 
more stiffly erect than she had held it before. 

" Yes," Daisy replied, coolly. " Different people 
take diflferent paths to the same place very often ; 



240 WALTEB GOBING. 

I wanted to make him think a great deal about me, 
and I have succeeded. I want him to fall in love 
with me now, and I'll succeed in that if he is not 
interfered with.'* 

" I don't think you need fear any interference," 
said Charlie. 

" No, I don't think I need now, for Mrs, Walsh 
is away, and you are . married/' She dealt the last 
word out like a shot, and she had the satisfaction 
of seeing Charlie wince. Charlie felt conscious 
herself that she had not heard it entirely unmoved, 
and that through her inopportune twitch of nervous- 
ness she had put herself in Daisy's power. 

*' There is no occasion for you to take that fact 
into your calculations/' she said, and Daisy re- 
plied: 

" Nevertheless I do, for Walter thinks very highly 
of you. I believe you might set him against any 
one. Mrs. Walsh tried and failed ; but I made her 
smart for it.*' Then she laughed, and recounted 
what took place during that journey to town 
which has been already described, and Charlie 
listened and found the recital to the full as inte- 
resting as Daisy desired she should think it. " It 
was veiy unfair of her . ^very wicked, as she had a 



DAISY WINS. 241 

husband alive then: don'^t you think it was?" 
Daisy wound up with. 

"Do you mean that it was wicked to come to 
Goring Place, and unfair of Walter . Mr. Goring, 
to like her ? " 

"No; but unfair and wicked to try and come 
between us," Daisy answered. " And do you ever 
call him Walter to his face ? You said his name so 
naturally." 

" No ; of course I don V 

"Vm very glad of that. I never shall be . 
because you are always sure to behave beautifully. 
but I could be jealous of you." 

"You'll please to remember that I am mar- 
ried," Charlie replied, gravely. The conversation 
had taken a turn that was peculiarly disagreeable 
to her. She seemed to herself to have suddenly 
come down to a very low level of girlish folly; 
therefore she threw herself upon her strong- 
hold . her dignity as wife, and regained her 
position. 

Or nearly regained it. She felt that, after all, it 
was but a drawn game . that she had not check- 
mated her daring young assailant, when Miss Daisy 
replied : 

VOL. TI. » 



242 WALTER GORING. 

" Yes, I know ; but isn't it funny that we should 
both have seemed to think it necessary to recall 
that fact when we were talking of Walter ? " 

From that moment, never by word, or look, or 
gesture, did Charlie hint to Walter Goring that his 
cousin was not all that a man could desire the girl 
he is thinking of falling in love with to be. Indeed, 
she eschewed private conversation with him on 
the subject of Daisy, dwelling solely, when he 
forced her to say anything about the girl, on the 
witchery of her ways, the fascination of her fair face, 
laid the thrilling joyousness of a voice that grew 
clearer and more bird-like daily. 

Indeed, gradually Charlie eschewed private con- 
versation with him altogether on any subject. It 
came about quite naturally, this change in her cus- 
tom and desire. The time was approaching for 
them to leave The Hurst, and Henry Fellowes 
began to be subject to severe fits of despondency. 
Mr. Prescott had bought the house and grounds, 
and was very anxious to get possession of them* 
And Ellen longed to have the house clear, in order 
that she might refurnish . a fact she considerately 
impressed upon Charlie in every letter. The cot- 
tage which Mrs. Walsh had hired went with the land 



DAISY WINS. 243 

Walter Goring had bought, so she suffered no in- 
convenience through change of landlords. 

At last Henry Fellowes applied for and got the 
situation of steward to so much of Lord Harrogate's 
land as was kept in the family about Deneham. 
There was no house for him, though, on the estate. 
Accordingly it was proposed and carried, greatly to 
poor Charlie's horror and disappointment, that the 
whole family should migrate to a small house in the 
village, unite their incomes, and live together. 

But only to her brother did she express a word 
of what she felt. Before her husband she exhibited 
neither distrust nor down-heartedness ; but to 
Frank she wrote : 

" While there was a prospect of a separate esta- 
blishment I almost rejoiced in the convulsion which 
has thrown us out of The Hurst. I would willingly 
have gone to Australia, as Bobert Prescott proposed 
we should do ; but this going into a small square 
house in that naiserable High Street, Deneham, 
with Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah, is rather hard. 
The walls are so thin, that I shall hear their voices 
from morning till night. However, other people 
have stood worse things. Forgive me this one 

& 2 



244 WALTER GORING. 

howl, dear Frank, and tell me if the accompanying 
story is worth ^reading? If it is, revise and get it 
off for me. not under my married name, though. If 
it failed, all the females of the house of Fellowes 
would revile me into my grave. You know that Mr. 
Goring's cousin has been staying rather more than 
a month with me. She goes back to Brighton to- 
morrow ; but not for long, I fancy. She's attractive, 
and he*s attracted. How about the picture? I 
hope you haven't made Lancelot look anything but 
rather ashamed of himself. It was what old Mrs. 
Fellowes would call * most unblushing,' to have that 
talk with Guinevere and then to go off and let Arthur 
fling one arm about his neck and call him 

' Lancelot, my Lancelot, thon in whom I hare 
Most loye and most affiance.* 

" The auction is fixed for this day three weeks, 
and we have to give a fine luncheon . that's the 
custom here. Fancy, people coming to eat at our 
downfall ! 

" Believe me, dear Frank, 

" Your affectionate sister, 

"Chablie Fellowes." 



DAISY WINS. 345 

The day after writing this letter, Daisy left her, 
and, as was said before, when it came to the point, 
Charlie was very sorry to part with the girl. She 
was touched by the way in which Daisy hung about 
her, with the tears in her bright blue eyes. "You 
have been so good to me, Mrs. Fellowes ; yon have 
done more than any one else in the world to make 
me happy," she said. 

" Except Mr. Goring," Charlie replied. 

" Always excepting Walter . poor Walter ! '* Daisy 
said, putting her hands up to her forehead and 
leaning her elbows on the table. After a few mo- 
ments* pause, she went on : " I may as well tell you to- 
day as write it to you to-morrow . as I surely should, 
Mrs. Fellowes . ^Walter asked me to marry him, last 
night. I have won the game I came down to play.'* 
She looked up, and smiled faintly as she spoke. 

*' You have won much too honourable a man to 
speak of it so lightly," Charlie replied. Then she 
remembered all the circumstances under which she 
had accepted Henry Fellowes' offer. True, she 
had never done a single thing with design to win or 
attract him ; but she had taken him in such utter 
indifference, that she felt not from her lips ,c6uld 
Daisy be reproved in justice. 



246 WALTEB GOBING. 

"Poor Walter, poor Walter!" Daisy went on, 
putting her head down between her slender hands 
again. " Shall I tell you all he said, and how he 
said it ? " 

"No, no," Charlie replied, hastily; "pray don't. 
How can you ? " 

" How can I ? . Oh ! capitally, I am sure. I 
couldn't help thinking he looked so handsome, and 
he spoke so beautifully that it was like an opera 
scene, though the words were English. Do you 
know, I could hardly help singing my answers," she 
continued, laughing. " Wouldn't he have been sur- 
prised ? He didnH go on his knees." 

" I should think not," Charlie replied, pettishly. 
" Come, Daisy, do take your coflfee. You will have 
to start without breakfast if you don't ; for Harry 
is going to drive you to the station, and he never 
lets anyone be late for a train." 

"All right," Daisy rejoined. "I have seen him 
very near to kneeling before Mrs. Walsh, I assure 
you." 

" Mrs. Walsh never knelt to him. There's no 
occasion for the adoration to be on both sides," 
Charlie said. 

" And you mean that I have half-knelt and 



DAISY WINS. 247 

.seemed to wholly adore ? " Daisy rejoined, looking 
up quickly. " Poor Walter ! he does think I love 
him so much ; it*s that that brought him down, I 
know; but I'll go on just the same all my life, 
Mrs. Fellowes. It wasn't real at starting, I allow ; 
but it's a thing to grow, isn't it?" she looked 
keenly at Charlie as she spoke. 

"Daisy, you don't mean that it has all been 
sham?" Charlie asked, almost piteously. She 
liked Walter Goring so much. It seemed to her 
such an awful thing that this girl should go to him 
ss his wife, seeming to love him so desperately, and 
not loving him at all. 

Daisy wheeled round on her chair, and bent her 
face over the back of it, turning the long waving 
mass of bright yellow hair towards Charlie. 

" I know you'd never be mean enough to try and 
break off the engagement, however much you like 
him. I dare trust you." 

" You may trust me ; but this is . oh ! Daisy, it's 
horrible ! Don**t do him the bitter wrong of marry- 
ing him if you don't love. You don't know what 
it is ; you don't know what it is." 

" Do you ? " Daisy asked, suddenly facing round ; 
and Charlie sprang up, exclaiming, . 



248 WALTEB GORING. 

"You turn oflf from the subject . don't speak 
about it any more.'* Then she added^ more gently, 
** Forgive me : I had no right to oflFer you advice, 
and you may trust me, Daisy." In her self- 
abasement, Charlie looked upon herself as a fellow- 
sinner, though she had never fooled a man by a 
feigned love. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 

Such of my readers as have had personal expe- 
rience of the difficulties and disagreeables attendant 
on removing, with a large family and a limited 
income, from a large house into a small one . and 
such alone . ^will read this chapter with interest; 
for it chronicles veraciously, and at some length, 
the Hegira of the Fellowes from The Hurst. 

It had been decided that enough of the furniture 
should be kept to furnish the small square Dene- 
ham house of which Charlie had made irreverent 
mention in her letter to Frank. The work of 
selection, in itself, was therefore an arduous one; 
and it was made more arduous than it need have 
been through the eternal diversity, of opinion which 
prevailed on the subject of each article between 
Miss Dinah and her mother. 



1250 WALTER GOBINa. 

These ladies had, with an amiable willingness to 
le ready in time . a willingness that was praise- 
worthy in itself when isolated, but that could not 
l)e isolated, and therefore became a detestable 
nuisance . commenced packing up about a month 
before there was the slightest occasion for it. " If 
we never make a beginning, we shall never get the 
few poor things we are suffered to retain, together/' 
Mrs. Fellowes would say, vigorously unsettling the 
standing order of several things in constant use, 
and judiciously mislaying them. Miss Dinah per- 
fectly agreed with her mother's proposition, but not 
with her mother's manner of carrying it out. Mrs. 
Fellowes' earlier measures were weak, but inoffen- 
sive; Miss Dinah was of a more martial mind. 
She desired to resort to extreme measures at once 
. to have all the carpets up and all the bedsteads 
.down, in order that they " might see what they had, 
;and know what they wanted," she said. 

" Don't you think," Charlie once mildly ventured 
to suggest, ''that it will be as well to leave the 
things as they are till the men come to pack them ? 
It will all be done at once then, and you won t be 
worn out beforehand.'^ 

" My dear, you know nothing at all about it,'* 



THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 251 

her mother-in-law would reply; and Miss Dinah 
would add, " No, indeed ! I am not going to have 
the men touch that beautiful glass and china that 
we have never so much as used for the last twenty 
years : I shall pack that myself." 

" Wouldn't it be as well to sell it, as it's never 
used ? " Charlie hinted. 

" No, it wouldn't," Miss Dinah replied ; and after 
that Charlie contented herself with watching pro- 
ceedings. " You can make copy out of it all by- 
and-bye," Frank replied to her, when she wrote and 
told him some of these minor miseries. 

At the time, Charlie had very little chance of 
making copy out of anything; for the library was 
never safe from raids from some one or other, 
who would come to look for some missing or 
wanted article that was supposed to be buried in 
one of the cavernous closets of the room. More- 
over^ she had to answer business letters for her 
husband, and to act as his secretary generally ; for 
the poor fellow's troubles had made him less clear- 
headed than of old. She did not know to what to 
attribute it ; but at times he seemed to be in a 
haze, and to be weak of purpose both in manner 
and words. She did not know to what to attribute 



252 WALTER GORING. 

it, but the sight of it sent many a sharp pang 
through her heart. When it came to the wind-up, 
CharUe was useless. "I never could keep an 
account in my life," she exclaimed, piteously, to 
Walter Goring one day; "and my husband tells 
me that he relies almost entirely upon my aid in 
making everything clear . what has been sold, and 
what spent, and what's due. I can write any 
number of letters, but the very sight of the bills 
and account*books drives me mad.^' 

.* Don't go mad ; ask your husband if he will let 
me help him.*' 

"Oh! Mr. Goring, why should you be so very 

kind ? Why should you waste your time in such a 

very dreary way? No, no; we must do the best we 
can." 

" Of course you must . ^but you will let me do the 

little I can ? I would do anything in the world to 

serve you, Mrs. Fellowes," he continued, warmly ; 

" as I can only do it in these trifles, you must suffer 

me to try. It's such a short time," he continued, in 

a lower voice, " since I presumed to give you advice 

about the management of your life, and now I see 

you teaching any man a lesson who likes to take it ; 

bearing up and behaving as few men do indeed. I 



THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 253 

hardly know which is my strongest feeling-. admira- 
tion for the change in you . ^the development, rather 
. or regret for the cause of it." 

"Don't pity me, and don't praise me," she replied, 
*' you know we women stand either very badly ; but 
you shall help my husband, if you will." 

He did help her husband. No clerk bound down 
by duty and the hope of promotion could have 
worked more unremittingly at the loosely -kept 
chaotic accounts that accumulated with rapidity just 
before the wind-up of Henry Fellowes' affairs. It 
was a wearisome, thankless office, this labour of 
friendship for Charlie, which he had undertaken ; 
but he felt himself to be well rewarded by her grati- 
tude, and the increased knowledge he gained of her 
gratitude being a thing worth having. He had 
resumed his old place with her, almost the place of 
the sympathetic confidential friend he had seemed 
to be before Daisy came. To him she even confided 
the undefined dread which she had sometimes on 
account of her husband. " I wish we were out of 
this," she said, impetuously, one day ; " I wish my 
husband could get at once into his new occupation. 
Doesn't he sometimes strike you as seeming stupid 
now?" 



254 WALTER GORIKa. 

Walter Goring coloured a little as he replied : 

''He thinks about this miserable business too 
much, . ^he gets a fit of depression whenever he thinks 
about you." 

" But he shouldn't . men should not break down 
about a mere money matter." 

" My dear Mrs. Fellowes, I have seen the noblest 
minds break down under the want of a five-pound 
note." 

" That's pitiful," she replied. 

" It may be so, but we cannot argue about it ; it's 
a great fact, whether it be a pitiful one or not.'* 

On one other occasion, before they accomplished 
the move from The Hurst, Mr. Goring, on his way 
over to see them one afternoon, met Charlie walking 
along in the side path that led to the blocked-up 
lane into Goring Place. There were dark marks 
under her eyes, and her cheeks looked drawn and 
pale.' " If it were any other woman than you, I 
should say you had been crying,'^ he said, as he got 
off his horse and joined her. 

" Turn back with me, the other way. I can't go 
home yet," she replied, hastily. " Crying . ^yes, I 
have been crying till I have got such an attack of 
neuralgia in my head, that I wish I had never been 



THE LAST DAT IN THE OLD HOME. 355 

born. All the pleasure Vm ever likely to have in 
life can't compensate me for the maddening pain Fm 
enduring, and hare endured for hours." 

" I'm very sorry.'* It was all he could say, there- 
fore it was all he did say ; but he walked along by 
her side,, and it was pleasant to her to feel that 
there was one human being near to her who did not 
insist upon saying right things at the wrong time. 
She was suffering terribly, poor girl ; suffering from 
one of those agonising mutinies in the head, when 
all the nerves rise up in array against each other . 
when thought, and sounds and light, one and all 
affect the sufferer to an equal degree, and set all the 
head machinery scrunching one part against the 
other . when a specially lively demon seems to seat 
himself upon the bundle of nerves on the left temple^ 
and hammers away with both feet upon some very 
sensitive strings that run from that place to just 
behind the eyes . when the brain seems to be 
pressing forward, and there is a great feeling of 
pulpiness at the back of the head^-^when meaning- 
less words repeat themselves unceasingly, and lines 
of poetry, that have no special application to any- 
thing on earth, insist on being pronounced with 
emphasis . when, in fact, it is just touch and go 



256 WALTER GORING. 

between temporary insanity and permanent madness, 
and one can feel nothing but pain. As he glanced 
down at her^ he saw that the slight " Cain's mark/^ 
as she herself called the light line on her forehead, 
had deepened into a plainly perceptible division, and 
he was shaken by his pity for her agony, and his 
own incapability of relieving it. 

'^ Mrs. Fellowes," he said at last, " do come home; 
take my arm, and come home." 

" Don't make me talk,'' she replied ; " speaking 
makes my head grate against itself." He had never 
heard other than bright, nervous accents from her 
lips before ; the change to this low tone of suffering 
despondency was exquisitely painful to him. He 
felt, too, that he could do nothing; he knew that 
she did not ask him not to speak in order to urge 
him to do so. Suddenly she turned round and 
spoke again : 

'^ had better get home as fast as I can, Mr. 
Goring. I have tried to walk it off, but it won't 
go." Then she put her hand on his arm, and he led 
her back to The Hurst; and when Mrs. Fellowes 
and Miss Dinah saw them approach, they agreed 
that it did not look well in Henry's wife . very far 
from well, they were sorry to say. " Evidently went 



THE LAST DAY IK THE OLD HOIIE. 257 

out to meet him," Miss Dinah said, walking away 
from the window in virtaous haste, *' and has been 
crying, I should say." 

" Can it be about his engagement ? . ^perhaps they 
have been talking about that?" Mrs. Fellowes 
. rejoined.. 

" I shouldn't wonder ; there, do you hear the way 
she has rushed upstairs; what would poor Henry 
think, I wonder?" 

"Poor Henry" was incapable of thinking about 
anything just then. It was early in the aftemooi^, 
but he was sound asleep on the sofa in the library, 
" It has been a bitter bad business. God help her, 
poor dear girl," Walter Goring thought as he weni 
into the room, and stood looking at the recumbent 
figure for a moment. Then he turned and went out? 
without waking Henry Fellowes, and rode back to 
Goring Place. 

They had not been, as Miss Dinah supposed, 
talking about his engagement. It was a subject 
that they very seldom did talk about, much as they 
saw of each other again in these days. Indeed, it 
was a subject that Charlie cared very little to talk 
about. It was not the most pleasant topic in tlifi 
world. Very few women do care to discuss the 

VOL. II. 6 



258 WALTER GOBING. 

love of a man they have liked^ or could have liked, 
for another woman. In the abstract it is easy enoagh 
to contemplate his future devotion to "other lips 
and other hearts," but not in the concrete ; not when 
it is concentrated upon one individual. 

And in this particular instance, Charlie had not 
the poor comfort of despising the lover of another 
woman. When a man swears eternal allegiance, and 
backs the vow with all the eloquence of eye and 
tone^ to a woman one week, and she hears the next 
that he is offering duplicate vows to somebody else, 
a very brief contempt for what is so lightly lost and 
won, is all she is apt to feel ; and contempt is the 
best refrigerator when one is left lamenting. But 
Walter Goring never had offered vows, mute or 
spoken, to Charlie, and Charlie had never had the 
remote possibility before her that he ever could come 
to do so. Nevertheless it was hard for her to feel as 
she did, that he, the friend she valued most in the 
world next to her brother, was bowing before an 
unworthy shrine. 

For, married woman as she was, her husband had 
ceased to be the friend she had hoped in their honey- 
moon days he would be while their bond lasted. 
Nemesis was hard upon her indeed; deservedly 



THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 

iard, she told herself. Every single thing which 
she had hoped to gain in this marriage, which she 
had made without love, had failed her. The com- 
petency, the comfortable home, the position in the 
<50unty as the wife of a landed proprietor . all these 
were gone; and now the friendship for Henry Fel- 
lowes, which, in all honesty, she had resolved upon 
keeping so pure and undefiled, that it should only 
be a little less than the love she could not give, was 
going too. An atmosphere which she did not care 
to analyse, but through which she could not pass, 
was growing thicker between them each day, and 
she stood alone, both as woman and wife, to such 
a degree, that she feared the extent of her soli- 
tude becoming known to the only two who might 
have solaced her in it . her brother and Mr. 
Ooring. 

Perhaps there is nothing more disagreeable than 
the last day in an old home. In Martineau's 
charming picture, though the pain and misery of a 
fine old family household breaking -up is placed 
vividly before us, the artist has avoided painting the 
pettinesses which always add stings to the big grief. 
On that canvas the stately side of sorrow is shown 
to us in the grand old matron lady, and the heart- 



260 WALTER GORIXa. 

sore refined wife ; and there is redeeming grace anfl 
light -heartedness about the debonair handsome 
.young spendthrift who has brought them to this 
pass, and who sits with his gallant little son at his 
knee, uplifting a glass of sparkling wine on high, tind 
toasting his parting glory. A poetic, if a painful 
part of the day has been selected. But in real life, 
the last day in the old home is all pain and no 
poetry generally. 

At any rate, the poetry of it was not apparent to 
Charlie as she roamed about through the dismantled 
rooms the day they left The Hurst. In her heart 
she was very sorry for all the Fellowes ; she knew 
that this break-up must cut them to the core. But 
she could scarcely express her sorrow for them with- 
out seeming to include herself in the list of unfor- 
tunates, and this she specially wished to avoid. The 
small recompense she could make to the man she 
had married, for having married liim solely because 
he was a great gentleman of fortune and positioD, 
she would make. It was not much^ she thought, 
but she would make it as perfect as it might be ; 
never from her, by word or deed, should he or any 
one else learn that she gave so much as one regretful 
thought to the vanished geniality, fortune, and place. 



THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 261 

It was the least she could do, but she would do that 
thoroughly. 

At last all the things they were to take were 
separated from all the things they were to leave. 
Waggons full of the former were dispatched under 
fitting escort to the house in Deneham which they 
were to occupy henceforth, and the rest of the 
things were arranged ia lots by the auctioneer's 
men. Then Henry Fellowes and his mother 
walked together for the last time through the house 
that was no longer theirs ; and Charlie could not 
go with them, being in a state of excited pity, and 
fearing that they would misunderstand her, and 
fancy her pity was for herself. 

If the early part of that day was worrying, the 
latter part was simply woeful. The tears of his 
mother and sister combined with many glasses of 
sherry which he took with the good intention of 
"keeping himself up," made Henry Fellowes as 
lachrymose as a woman might have been. Ser- 
vants . even servants who had been in the employ 
of the family for a few months only, and who had 
been utter strangers to them before . deemed it 
incumbent upon them to bedew the melancholy 
occasion, and speak in the falsetto of sorrowful 



262 WALTER GORING. 

sympathy. The incoming people . the Prescotts . 
were perpetually alluded to disparagingly, and 
dark doubts were expressed as to what they would 
do with divers rooms, and how they would presume 
to alter standing arrangements. Already the Pres- 
cotts were looked upon as personal foes of a pecu- 
liarly black hue by Mrs. Fellowes and all those 
who desired to stand well with her. Charlie felt 
that she herself was regarded with an increase of 
distrust by reason of her relationship to them. 
Only Miss Dinah insisted upon speaking of them 
as anything S8.ve deceitfully dangerous traitors. 

" The place had to be sold; . and it's just aa 
well that they should buy it as any one else," she 
said. " I don't see that their having stayed here 
before, makes a bit of difference." 

" I only know, that never, as long as I live, will 
I put my foot inside the gates again after I leave it 
to-day," the poor old lady would reply, weeping 
sadly. 

Some faint feeling of satisfaction shot through 
'her mind as she said it ; she fancied that the Pres- 
cotts would feel this as a fit and dire punishment. 
The not putting her foot inside The Hurst gates 
would be so very much to her, that she could 



THE LAST DAY IN THE OLD HOME. 263 

but imagine that it would also be very much to 
them. 

"And I shall not take it well if Henry's wife 
flaunts about here with her sister as if nothing had 
happened." 

"You can't expect her to cut her sister, mo- 
ther?" 

" Ah ! . we're told we can't serve God and mam- 
mon," Mrs. Fellowes replied, irascibly. 

Then she went on her way again, making a few 
more faint preparations for getting away, and tell- 
ing herself, sadly, that there " would be more wall- 
fruit than ever probably this year . the trees had 
been so well pruned last . ^but that never a bit of it 
would she touch, though they might beg and im- 
plore her to do it." 

It was all very small and trifling, no doubt, these 
weak womanish outbursts of contemplated revenge. 
But the sadness of it outbalanced the smallness and 
trifling. 

At last they got away, drove over to Deneham 
in the carriage behind the horses that were to be 
sold at the auction. Every horse was to go save 
the old brown hunter which had dropped Mr. 
Prescott in the ditch. Even the old Major was to 



264 WALTEB OORINa. 

be sold, as Henry Fellowes had learnt from Lord 
Harrogate's outgoing steward that one horse would do 
all his work. They reached the new house about 
six o'clock, and found all the wrong things put 
into the wrong rooms. And their new life com" 
menced* 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE AUCTION. 

The morning of the auction dawned clear, 
bright, and fine. The sun shone upon the de- 
molishment of all of the old at The Hurst. 

" If I were you I wouldn't go over, Harry/* his 
wife said to him, as he was restlessly stalking up 
and down in their own room waiting for his horse 
to take him over to The Hurst. " Take me out for 
a drive instead," she continued. 

" Nonsense ; I shall go. I don't want people to 
think I've any shame in the sacrifice," he replied 
moodily. " I'll go over and show myself amongst 
them . one of them for the last time ; after to-day 
I drop the Esq., and am only Lord Harrogate's 
steward." 

She liked and sympathised witli the spirit that 
dictated the move^ but the move itself did not com- 



^66 WALTEE GORING. 

mend itself to her taste. That he should so deport 
himself did chance throw him in the way of any of 
his own order, was well and good . ^was only manly, 
and what should he, in fact. But to her mind it 
savoured of bravado to go and put himself in their 
midst at the auction. However, she did not attempt 
to dissuade him further. What a man determined 
on doing he should do, she thought ; she had no 
inclination to develop any latent infirmity of 
purpose by using her womanly wiles on the man 
she had married. 

This first day in the new establishment bade 
fair to be as unpleasant as any she had yet passed 
during the term of her sojourn on earth. The 
curtains were not fitted to any of the windows yet, 
and the blinds were all. painfully new and glaringly 
white. The sun was rather bright this morning, 
consequently there was not a square inch of shade 
in any one of the small front rooms . and to these 
she was restricted. Chaos and Miss Dinah reigning 
in those with a northern aspect. 

It is never very hopeful work getting things that 
were not designed for a place adjusted in a place 
that was never intended for them. The little rooms 
looked oppressed by the weighty old-fashioned fur- 



THE AUCTION. S67 

niture. When the dining-table and sideboard were 
finally settled, there was great difficulty in inserting 
the smallest person between the former and the wall& 
all round. 

" One will have to sit in the grate, and the other 
on the window-sill, and the rest will be cruelly com- 
pressed," Charlie thought, as she noted the effect ; 
and then she spent an hour or two in giving frantic 
little pushes and tugs at the table in order to make 
the most of the bit of room that was round it. 
" When the contents of the huge waggon that's still 
unpacked are brought in, the house will burst,'' she 
thought at last, as she steered her perilous way 
through the little hall. " We've brought so many 
things to make us comfortable, that there will be no 
room for any of us." 

After a time, it not being in the nature of things, 
that twenty-two can labour long under inactive 
depression, she picked out the smallest bits of fur- 
niture she could find, and tried to make a shrine 
for herself in the drawing-room, which was to be 
her special domain. It had been ordained by old 
Mrs. Fellowes that as Henry would be away at the 
auction all day, they should content themselves^ 
with a loose sort of luncheon, and no dinner; that 



268 WALTER GORING. 

they should, in fact, as Charlie phrased it to her- 
self, commence their new life like pigs. But she 
acceded to the proposition partly because she felt 
it would be useless to combat it, . she was deter- 
mined to make every concession that might help 
to keep the atmosphere of the new household 
serene. Accordingly they partook of their viands 
in a sketchy way early in the day, and dispersed 
and resumed their several efforts at adding to the 
confusion immediately after doing so. 

Charlie laughed to herself as she stood late in 
the afternoon surveying the effect of what she had 
been doing. After a tolerably hard day's toil, she 
had succeeded in making the place look just com- 
fortable, nothing more; and she remembered the 
plans she had made for combining English comfort 
with Oriental splendour in the lobby at The Hurst, 
when she came there a bride. " All that's over for 
ever, . and serve me right too, for I did think so 
much of that sort of thing," she said to herself, 
cheerily enough ; and then she laughed again, and 
thought " what lots of faults Ellen will find with all 
I have been able to achieve here, never thinking 
that I'd gladly do more if I could ; what a world of 
trouble such a nature as Ellen's must save its pos- 



THE AUCTION. 269 

sessor, to be sure/' Then, having done all she could, 
she turned away to go and dress herself, in order to 
look as fresh and pretty as it was possible for her to 
look when her husband came home, for the day, 
though not very disagreeable, had been very dusty. 

Meanwhile, the first day's auction at The Hurst 
was drawing to a close* It had been well attended^ 
for Henry Fellowes' teams of cart-horses were 
celebrated, and he had been careful to have all the 
latest improvements in implements on his land. 
Moreover, in addition to its being well known that 
all the things to be sold were good, there was much 
sympathy felt for the sellers. Men who had not 
the remotest intention of expending a penny, were 
heartily willing to go and drink a glass of sherry to 
Henry Fellowes* future fortune ; and he being there 
took a glass with them as a matter of course, until 
after a time he came to regard his future fortune 
alternately as the brightest and blackest of things. 
Then they would turn away from him, and gather 
into knots and discuss the future owner, Bobert 
Prescott, Esq. " The king is dead ; long live the 
king." It was only the old, old story; Henry 
Fellowes had no right to be cut by it. But he was 
cut . to the soul. 



1270 WALTEE GORING. 

Walter Goring was there, bidding for things, of 
the use of which he had not the remotest concep- 
tion, and lavishing his money for the good of the 
Tellowes in a way that made him a marvel to some 
people. ** That young fellow who has come in for 
Ooring Place seems to be going a-head," they 
remarked, when his nods became chronic ; " he's 
going to try experimental farming and novel-writing 
together." Then they cited the example of the 
author of " Mr. Midshipman Easy," who honoured 
Norfolk by residing in it for the last few years of 
his life, as an instance of how " that sort of thing " 
might be expected to succeed. 

Three or four times in the course of the day did 
Walter Goring seek Henry Fellowes and urge him 
to go home. But Mr. Fellowes would not go 
home; at first he merely refused to do so ener- 
getically, but after a time he refused in the excited 
declamatory style. " Why should he go home ? " 
he asked; "it would all be the same a hundred 
years hence," with other irrelevant riders, which 
eaused observers to shake their heads benignly as 
he passed, and prophesy unpleasant things regard- 
ing him as soon as he was out of hearing. At 
last the late owner of The Hurst took to demon- 



THE AUCTION. 271 

strating that a man was a man for all that, meaning 
apparently all that he had lost, and all that he 
might lose; and everybody agreed with him, and 
advised him " to go home." 

At last, as the afternoon was closing in, Walter 
Goring induced Mr. Fellowes to have his horse 
round and make a start for home ; and then even 
the old hunter seemed ashamed of the three or four 
futile efforts which his master made to hoist him- 
self into the saddle after he had got his foot in the 
stirrup. Several of his old friends shook their 
heads and said if was an awful thing<. his heart 
was broken, poor fellow! . ^and he might be ex- 
pected to go altogether wrong now," as he rode 
away . the truth must be told . in a maudlin state 
of intoxication. 

Walter Goring rode with him, not for the sake of 
the man who could seek oblivion from anything, 
however bad, in such a sotirce, but for the sake of 
the high-hearted girl at home. Mr. Goring was 
beginning to understand the best of Charlie Fel- 
lowes, but he knew well that she was not cast in the 
patient Griselda mould, and he did not know how 
she would stand this last drop in her cup of sorrow- 
ful experiences. " If she breaks out, everything 



d72 WALTER GORING. 

will be gone/' he said to himself as he rode slowly 
along by the side of her husband, who was sitting 
crampled up over the fore part of the saddle, mis- 
directing the horse with heavy hands. Walter 
Goring dreaded seeing her, but he dreaded even 
more her facing this sight which he was escorting 
to her alone. 

When they reached the house, the young, refined, 
fastidious man of letters, whose worst sacrifices to 
Bacchus had been made in bubbling, brilliant wines, 
which only made him sparkle more, got off and 
helped the man who seemed absolutely weighted 
with dark, glowing liquid, from his horse. Then 
they got into the hall, or passage, of the little house, 
and it was so small that Henry Fellowes seemed to 
be oozing out of it into every room. Walter Goring 
opened a door quickly, and got the master of the 
house into the room that was to be held sacred to 
him and his wife ; got him into this room by a lucky 
chance, and then looked up and saw Charlie rising 
from her desk by the window, and coming forward to 
meet them. 

He saw, as Henry Fellowes sank on the sofa and 
Charlie came forward, even in those few minutes, 
Walter Goring saw that the soul of the woman was 



THE AUCTION. 273 

in revolt. He would have given a goodly portion of 
the worldly goods of which he was possessed to 
have been able to couch some phrase which should 
have the effect of soothing her at first. Of soothing 
her and of lessening the shock of disgust which she 
was experiencing. But he could say nothing . ^he 
could utter no word . he could only feel that it 
would have been wiser on the whole had he suffered 
Henry Fellowes to stumble into the house alone. 

It must be borne in mind, in partial extenuation 
of the following scene, that Charlie Fellowes had 
never been for one half-minute what is called ^' in 
love'* with her husband. She had never expe- 
lienced for him any of that romantic feeling which 
. whether it be founded on fact or fiction . whether 
it be based on the real or solely on the ideal . still 
enables a woman to endure and forgive even to 
seventy times seven. Such a feeling had never 
obtained, for the briefest period, in her heart with 
regard to the man she had married. She had never 
done more than like him very much. She had 
believed him to be faithful, and generous, and 
manly; she had known him to be very truly and 
fondly attached to herself . and this belief and know- 
ledge wrought in her the determination to do more 

VOL. ir. T 



274 WALTER GORING. 

than her mere decorous duty to this man ; she could 
not accord him the unreasoning, hlind devotion of 
love, hut he shojuld have from her the devotion of a 
friendship that only was not love . friendship such 
as the saints in heaven might envy. Her heart 
eould not he his ; that was their mutual misfoi*tun& 
. to the full as great a trial and misfortune to the- 
unloving wife as to the unloved hushand. Her 
heart could not be his. But her sympathy, her 
counsel, her hearty co-operation and interest in all 
that concerned him, her unswerving comradeship 
through the campaign of \i{ey her earnest endea- 
vours to brighten his home and make their union 
as happy as possible-*-all these she had sworn to- 
herself to render him so long as they both should 
live.. 

But now he had brutalised himself, and no saving 
memory of old romance rose up to temper the 
loathing that she had for her lot, as she looked 
upon him lying there a helpless log before her,, 
trying to articulate a request that she would " come 
and kiss him." Kiss him ! the convulsive shudder 
with which she recoiled from him and the idea wa& 
an answer that made its way to Mr. Fellowes'" 
brain even through the fumes of the wine. 



THE AUCTION. 275 

" It has been a fearfully trying and exciting day," 
Walter Goring whispered ; " quite enough to upset 
any man . let him keep quiet for a time. Ill say 
good-by to you." 

He moTed towards the door, and as he opened 
it, waves of disgust, of dread, of sickening aversion 
to being left alone in this way, surged up and over- 
whelmed her judgment. She sprang after him, and 
exclaimed . 

" Don't go, Mr. Goring ! " and the passionate 
piteousness of her tone made him wish more than 
ever that he had not come in. She was too pretty 
to play the part of outraged wife with impunity, 
especially to a select audience of one impressionable 
man. 

They went across the hall into the dining-room. 
Mrs. Fellowes and Miss Dinah were still upstairs 
unpacking, and the room looked cold, and chill, and 
cheerless as they entered it. " You think too much 
of this, Mrs. Fellowes," Walter Goring said, trying 
to speak in a light, careless tone, as Mrs. Fellowes, 
interlacing her fingers with angry vehemence, and 
giving vent to a series of frightened, dry sobs, com- 
menced walking up and down. There was no 
affectation about her agitation; she was horribly 

T 2 



276 WALTER GORING. 

frightened in the first flush of the realisation of the 
undefined dread which had haunted her for some 
time ; and even worse than the fear she felt, was 
the blinding sense of shame. She sickened at the 
thought of being left alone with the man who had 
soaked all semblance of manhood out of himself. 
'* If he takes me in his arms and kisses me, it will 
kill me/' she thought; and as she thought it a 
shiver passed through every fibre of her being, and 
she turned again to Walter Goring. 

"What am I to do. Everything is gone. I 
can't bear it . I won't bear it," she said, wringing 
her little hands together, fiercely. 

"Do calm yourself; this will pass. You will 
forget it, or if you remember it at all, you ought to 
remember at the same time how the poor fellow has 
suffered to-day." 

"Forget it! and what if it comes again and 
again !" She sat down, and put her arms and her 
head down upon the table, and he saw the big 
blinding drops of rage and shame pouring from her 
eyes. He went over and stood by her, and bitterly 
regretted that he could not, that he dared not, 
soothe her. He was sorely tempted to raise that 
bright bent head^ and rest it on his heart. But he 



THE AUCTION. 277 

did not yield to the temptation. Perhaps in the 
sight of the God who has not seen fit to portion out 
passions alike to all, Walter Goring's conquest over 
himself at that moment was not less meritorious, 
than the absence of any such feeUng of being 
strongly moved towards Charlie, would have been 
in a colder-blooded man. 

All at once she lifted her head and looked round 
at him, as he stood by the side of her chair. The 
outburst of feeling had rather exhausted her, and 
her voice was very low and very touching, he 
thought, as she said . 

"What must you think of me ? '* 

His arm was over the back of her chair, and as 
she moved it pressed against her shoulder. " Think 
of her ?" He did not dare to answer that question 
even to himself, as with all an impulsive woman's 
disregard of consequences, she curved her hand and 
put it on his arm, saying . 

" When you go away, what 8haU I do ? I'm so 
utterly wretched." 

Then the strained cord snapped, and Walter 
Goring seized the hand, flung his arm round her 
waist, and for one moment held her to his heart, 
and his lips to her face. Then they started apart. 



278 WALTER GORING. 

and he stood with bowed head before her, saying 
humbly . 

" I have been mad . ^forgive me. I shall never 
forgive myself." 

" It was all my fault/* she sobbed ; " my fault 
and my misery. I forgot you were not the brother 
you have seemed.'' 

So she saved them both from deepening the spell 
they, assisted by fate and circumstance, had been 
weaving for themselves ; and he, bitterly penitent as 
he was, followed the hint she gave. 

" Dear Mrs. Fellowes, be tolerant to your hus- 
band during this phase ; it will pass directly and be 
forgotten ; you will, won't you ? You will let me 
still think of you as all that is bravest and truest 
and best in woman ; and if I can ever serve either 
of you, you'll remember that only Frank has a 
stronger fraternal interest in you than I have." 

" Yes, I will." She hesitated for an instant, and 
then went on, " Now, I'll go back to my husband : 
his mother, his poor mother and sister mustn't 
know anything of this ; and if I don't see you again, 
for a long time, good-by, Mr. Goring. God bless 
you." . She paused and held out her hand, and as 
he took it the versatility of her nature asserted 



THE AUCTION. 279 

itself, and she laughed, and added, " If it were Daisy 
taking leave of you after that, she would sing . 



'Be luippjr, mj brother, wherever you are 
Qood speed to your courser, good luck to your bow. 
But will you not ? . will you not think of me still. 
As you thought of me once long ago, long ago T" 



" Long ago and always. My opinion of you is 
not likely to alter," he replied, heartily. Then he 
went away, and she returned to the room where she 
had left her hushand in her hurst of irrepressible 
disgust ten minutes before. She had recovered now, 
and she was humbled by the memory of the impru- 
dence into which her emotion had led herself and 
another. She was quite ready to take up the 
burden of life again, after giving one fleeting 
thought to what might have ^een. She thanked 
Providence for that she had been enabled to make 
the termination of that impassioned scene so pro- 
saic . ^prosaic even as her future life should be. 

She sat by the fire, thinking, struggling, and re- 
solving, until a servant came and knocked at the 
door to tell her tea was ready. When she went in, 
she told Mrs. Fellowes that " Henry was asleep ; 
quite tired out, poor fellow.'* " I think he might 



280 WALTER GORING. 

have come and let me know how things went, and I 
think you might have let me know he was in before," 
the old lady said angrily. Then Miss Dinah said 
she would take a cup of tea in to her brother, 
and Charlie exclaimed, starting up, ** No, no ; I'll 
do it.'' She could not bear that they should learn 
what additional cause for grief they had in seeing 
the effect their misfortunes were having on a son 
and brother so believed in and trusted. ** I'll spare 
them while I can," she thought. Accordingly she 
begged them not to disturb him at all by going in 
that night, and they obeyed her request, indignantly 
assuring each other that it was as they had said 
all along . Charlie was trying to separate them from 
Henry. She knew that such was their thought 
from the extra stiffness of their demeanour towards 
her, and she accepted it as part of her punishment 
for her many sins, one of the worst of which, she 
told herself, was her so having wrought upon the 
feelings of a man who had never made any pretensions 
to being a St. Kevin, that she had caused him to be 
for a moment less noble than himself. 

The following day Walter Goring left Goring 
Place for Brighton. He stayed a day or two in 
town, in order to see Mrs. Walsh, whom he had not 



THE AUCTION. 281 

seen since his engagement. She was staying for a 
week or two with some firiends at Kensington, 
making preparations for a lengthened trip abroad. 
He wanted to get her to go with him also to 
Frank's studio, to see the picture wherein that 
warm admirer of her beauty had immortalised her 
as Guinevere; therefore when he called he was 
glad to find that she was at home and alone. But 
the interview they had was too long to come in at 
the end of a chapter. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

"she shines me down." 

Until Walter Goring found himself awaiting Mrs. 
Walsh's appearance in the drawing-room of the 
house in ^hich she was staying, he had had no idea 
of the extreme dubiousness he felt as to her appro- 
bation of his choice. He knew that she did not 
like, and he knew that she would not like his 
marrying, Daisy. But the thing which caused him 
the most present anxiety was the doubt he had 
whether she would let that dislike appear, or 
whether she would accept Daisy as inevitable, and 
for his sake make the best of her. 

For his sake ! and why on earth should she do it 
" for his sake ? " He could not help asking himself 
this as he stood there waiting. Why should she 
smile upon and accept Daisy's attainment of the 
position for his sake . now ? It was no use aflfect- 



**SHE SHINES ME DOWN.*' «83 

ing to forego all the former facts. His heart had 
played fast and loose with him as far as these 
women were concerned, and by this means he had 
seemed to play fast and loose with Mrs. Walsh. 
It had only been in seeming; in reality he had 
never loved her less or more than while her hus- 
band lived, and the feeling had been differently 
named. But she was not a woman to forgive the 
smallest slight . the tiniest trifling . tliough it were 
only in "seeming,'^ he told himself. Of all the 
women he had ever met, she was the one most 
certain to " scorn, and let him go " utterly, did 
she fancy that he had given ever so small a tug at 
his chain. When she knew him gone as lover, 
she would never keep him on as friend, espe- 
cially after that last hand-kissing business down 
at The Hurst. 

All this he told himself as he stood there waiting 
for her, and all this he was perfectly justified in 
believing, judging her from the side of her cha- 
racter which he had studied most assiduously. 
That side was the one in which love and pride were 
blended together deftly as are the gorgeous hues 
in an Indian shawl . ^he scarcely knew where one 
ended and the other began. But she would teach 



284 WALTER OORINO. 

him how . she would show him that she knew 
where to draw the line ; she would teach him that 
since he had developed this fatal faculty of loving 
whatever he looked on, he had made a poor and 
paltry mistake in ever looking at her. 

Again: would the girl for whom he would lose 
that undefinahle essence which had made his 
existence sweet for so many years, repay him for 
the loss ? Walter Goring had never " gone in for 
killing." In a light, easy, give-and-take way he 
had played the game that is carried on everywhere 
under so many different names . suffering his heart 
to seem every woman's toy for an hour or so, hut 
never going far below the surface. Mrs. Walsh 
had said of him in a moment of anger, that " he 
was a dreadful flirt;" but this was an exaggerated 
charge. She was the only woman to whom he had 
ever exhibited any depth of devotion or earnestness 
of feeling. To every other one he had shown 
clearly that they were but the Cynthias of the 
minute, and if after that showing feminine vanity 
led them into error, the error could not in justice 
be charged to the account of Walter Goring. 

But between Mrs. Walsh and himself the bond 
had been widely different . always, be it understood, 



"she shines me down/* 285 

with the full knowledge and hearty concurrence of 
her husband. He had made her the repositary of 
his hopes . of his temporary defeats. of the nume- 
rous minor matters which go so far in making the 
happiness or misery of every man's life. She was 
the first woman he had ever known well . the first 
woman, that is, a full knowledge of whom was 
improving to a young man, for he never had a 
sister, and his mother had died when he was a boy. 
Through her influence he had gradually withdrawn 
himself from the set of clever, idle, dissolute men 
with whom he associated on his first entrance 
into London life . artists who never painted . 
authors who never wrote . men all of them with 
expensive tastes and limited exchequers, and very 
few good women friends. His intimacy with the 
Walshes had been very good for him ; he could not 
go into her presence fresh from an atmosphere of 
rattling recklessness, he had felt immediately. So 
he had withdrawn from the haunts and the habits 
which he could not discuss with her, while still too 
young for either to have tainted him. 

Her influence had been very good for him, and he 
had loved her very much for the exercise she had 
always made of it, and for its beneficial effect upon 



286 WALTER GORING. 

himself. She had been to him that which he had 
been wont to call her, "his goddess," the purest 
saving power of his life. He had loved her very 
dearly, but within bounds which he had never anti- 
cipated seeing broken. When 'they did break, he 
had gone on thinking of her and loving her in the 
old way, for man is a creature of habit. Any 
change in her would be hard to bear, and would 
Daisy have the power to make him indifferent to» 
even if not forgetful of, the subtle charm which had 
been over him so long ? 

He knew, or thought he knew, Daisy thoroughly 
by this time. He was well aware that he would 
have no calm of love with her. As a wife she 
would probably give him even a more lively time of 
it than she had given him as a ward. Her love for 
him was very warm now . he thought ; but he knew 
that it was a flame that would require a good 
deal of fanning to keep it as bright as at present. 
He foresaw that she would be jealous and exacting 
. that she would want to cut him off from Mrs. 
Walsh and Mrs. Fellowes, even if they did not cut 
themselves off from him. He knew that Daisy was 
one whom it would be stark madness to rely upon 
to any great extent ; her love of acting little parts, 



" SHE. SHINES ME DOWN." 287 

and her wild desire for admiration would require a 
very light, firm, watchful hand and eye to keep them 
in check. All this he knew about her, yet, at the 
same time, she had so fascinated him that he did 
not regret it very much. There were drawbacks to 
perfect felicity in their union doubtless ; but these 
were more than counterbalanced by her passionate 
love for him, and the expediency of a marriage 
with her. 

Meanwhile, as he thus ruminated, Mrs. Walsh 
was preparing herself to meet him . and the pre- 
paration was not easily made. For many years,, 
from the time indeed when she, a mere girl . 
but such a steady-minded, self-reliant one . ^had 
been London's beauty and Ealph Walsh's bride . 
she had been accustomed to feel herself to be first 
friend and counsellor to Walter Goring. He had 
brought his young man troubles, his maturer 
cares, and at last his success and fortune to her-^ 
and to her husband . to discuss, till at length she 
had come to love him as a brother while Balph 
lived. At any rate, if the love she had for him 
lacked any of the fraternal element^ she never 
acknowledged that it did, even to herself, and when 
first she made her appearance in these pages, she 



288 WALTER GORING. 

would, as was then averred, have heen quite 
capable of seeing Walter Goring take upon himself 
the trammels of holy matrimony, and of being 
grandly gracious to a bride of his of whom she 
approved. That she might have been rather 
difficult to please in the matter of his choice is 
extremely probable; but to the idea of his mar- 
riage in the abstract she would have been sweetly 
acquiescent. 

Since that time things were altered. Balph 
Walsh was dead. In the face of reason, nature, 
and facts, some people will persist in deeming it 
monstrous that a widow should wed again. With 
the right or the wrong of their doing so the mere 
narrator of the story of the life of one has nothing 
whatever to do. I can only say, that having loved 
Walter Goring for long years, within the strictest 
bounds while her husband lived . having become 
interested in all that concerned his welfare, keenly 
alive to all that was good in him, thoroughly con- 
vinced of the perfect integrity of his regard for 
herself, and perhaps a little vain of the influence 
she had had over him so long . having done and 
been all this for years, she slackened the boundary 
line when her husband died, and suffered her heart 



"she bhines me down/' 289 

to tell her that all would deepen into something 
more exquisite still . an' only he willed it so. 

When she replied to his letter announcing his 
engagement she did so in such brief, and at the 
same time such unconstrained terms, that they told 
him nothing, save that, as ever, she wished him 
well. 

"Dear Walter,^' (she wrote), "In this first 
moment of hearing it, together with the confusion 
I am in about taking all I may want, and nothing 
superfluous abroad with me, I can scarcely say 
whether I am surprised or not. Of one thing I 
am sure, and that is, that you will believe that my 
hopes for your happiness are as hearty as my re- 
gard for you is warm. 

" Yours always truly, 

" HoRATiA Walsh/" 

Yes, he was very sure of it ; but the assurance 
scarcely comforted him while he sat awaiting her 
this day. 

At last the door opened, and she came in . a 
Jimo in deep mourning. A very hurricane was 
raging in her heart, and it acquired a wilder force 



290 WALTEB GORING. 

the instant she read in his eyes that he was rather 
more than agitated. But she kept her proud 
beautiful face composed, and there was no sign of 
trembling in the hand which she held out to greet 
him. 

*^ I am so glad that I have found you at home," 
he began at once. 

" Even if I had been out I should have written 
to your address and asked you to come again," she 
replied cordially; "it will be so long, probably, 
before we see each other, and so much will have 
happened before then," (she tried to smile as she 
said this, but foiind that, on the whole, it would be 
safer to fight her battle without any waving of flags) 
" that I would not have let this opportunity pass 
on any account." 

" Nor I," he answered. " You hold to the plan 
you hinted at; you are going on the Continent?'* 

" Yes ; immediately almost. I shall not be here 
to see you married, Walter ; when is it to be ? " 

Having come to the end of her sentence, she 
essayed another smile h^re, and this time she suc- 
ceeded in making it play over her face with toler- 
able naturalness. " To see you married *' . ^to 
somebody else ; they are not pleasant words for 



" SHE SinNES ME DOWN." 201 

a woman to utter to a man she loves ; tli6y seem 
to gnaw. 

"In May," he replied. "Come back and see 
the last of me." 

He lifted his eyes to her face as he spoke, and 
the tone was the old well-known, well-loved, plead- 
ing one that had been for her ears alone for so 
long . ^that would fall on the ears of another woman 
with a higher claim to it henceforth. He was not 
a flirt ; but he really had a great deal to answer for. 

" That will be impossible," she said, and then 
she paused, for she was afraid that at another word 
her voice might falter, and she did not want to 
falter before him. ' 

"Will. you come with me to-day to St. John's 
studio ? " he asked. " I want you to see a picture 
he is painting for me." Then he told her about 
Frank having taken her as Guinevere, and what 
the subject was. 

" And where is his studio ? " 

'* Only in Sloane Street. Let us walk up to it 
through the Park.'' 

For a few moments she thought that the trial 
would be too long sustained to be gone through to 
the end as well as she had gone through it up to 

u 2 



292 WALTER GOBIN6. 

the present juncture. Then she remembered that 
after this day she might never see him again, for 
if these feelings lived she could never see him as 
Daisy's husband. 

" Yes, I will go ; I shall like to see it/' she said. 
"How many years is it that w^ have gone the 
round of the studios together before the Academy 
opens, Walter?" 

"I forget. I only hope that we shall go the 
round of the studios for a good many years to 
come." 

She did not echo his wish. The prospect of 
going round in the train of his wife was not one 
of delicious bliss. 

They walked up through the Park and came out 
into Sloane Street, where they soon found Frank's 
number. But here disappointment awaited them. 
Mr. St. John was not at home. Could they see his 
painting-room, Walter Goring asked. The land- 
lady was exceedingly willing that they should do 
so, but their approbation of this affability of hers 
was marred by their immediate discovery of the 
fact of Mr. St. John having locked the door and 
taken the key away with him. Accordingly they 
were compelled to return unsatisfied, and defrauded 



'' SHE SHINES ME DOWN.*' 293 

of those subjects of conversation which they had 
both legitimately anticipated being supplied with 
for the walk home. 

It had all been very well going up. They had 
commenced when they started talking about Frank, 
and his happy faculty of being able to do every- 
thing, and bright-hearted reliance on everything he 
did succeeding. " He is very clever, with a dash 
of something that almost amounts to genius,'' 
Walter Goring said of Frank. " If he lives, and 
doesn't wear himself out, the world will hear a good 
deal of Frank St. John." 

" Yet he doesn't seem to be very much in 
earnest; he seems to take all things very lightly, 
at least I thought so." 

"That external lightness conceals a prodigious 
amount of go." 

" It's the same, then, with his sister Mrs. Fel- 
lowes," Mrs. Walsh remarked. 

" Yes, exactly the same; she's a queen," he con- 
tinued enthusiastically. ** There's a fate . ^there's 
a crew for such a girl to be thrown away upon." 
Then he told Mrs. Walsh about the auction, and its 
effect on Henry Fellowes, and the scene he had 
witnessed after it, but he refrained from sU mention 



291 WALTER GORING. 

of his own share in the scene. Mrs. Walsh could 
not be sympathetic; she had not witnessed the 
scene, and so could not realise it. 

" What nonsense her talking in that way ; * she 
would not bear it/ and ' she could not bear it/ 
Why, she'll have to bear it." 

" And she will bear it well, I fancy," he rejoined. 
" She spoke almost recklessly, but she will never 
act recklessly.'* 

" You thought her like your cousin at one time ; 
do you think them alike now ? " 

He shook his head. "I have left off drawing 
parallels between them. Mrs. Fellowes is one in a 
thousand, and I know very well that Daisy has 
numerous duplicates." 

This was the sole mention that had been made 
of Daisy during the walk up ; but on their return 
Mrs. Walsh spoke of her again. 

" Tell me, Walter,'* she began, abruptly, " does 
Miss Goring know the terms of that sealed letter ? 
or secret trust? or whatever you call the illegal 
nonsense ? " 

" No ; she knows nothing about if 

" I was in hopes that she did." 

"Why?" he asked. 



" SHE SHINES ME DOWN." 295 

" ! because then I should have been better 
satisfied that she is going to marry you for pure 
love of you ; the fact is, Walter, I'm as jealous as a 
mother for you." 

" I don^t think you would doubt Daisy's love for 
me, if you saw her with me," he replied. He had 
no intention of being cruel, but the picture those 
words conjured upj caused the ground to quaver 
under her feet; that sentence went to her heart like 
a sharp knife . and made her tongue curl itself in 
parched speechless pain . and caused a dull thud- 
ding in her throat that interfered with her 
breathing. But she walked along as erect «nd 
stately as ever in her grand Juno-like beauty, 
making no sign of the agony, of the bitter nausea- 
ting agony that was gnawing at her the while. 

There was such horrible pain in that walk home. 
She could not bear to speak of her life to come, for 
he, the man by her side . ^the man who had made 
the poetry of her existence, would not share it 
with her. So silence came upon them; and 
jj^ence under the circumstances was very dangerous. 
Walter Goring could not help thinking what a 
miserable man Swift must have been whenever he 
thought of Stella and Vanessa, since he, all blame- 



296 WALTER GORING. 

less as he but could hold himself, was so miserable 
now. 

" You must come in with me, Walter ? " she said 
to him, when they were nearing the house. "I 
have something to give you." 

He went in, and once more she left him waiting 
for her while she went up-stairs to take off her 
walking-dress, and to get a little jewel-case. She 
arrayed herself very carefully before she went 
down ; she meant it to be her last interview with 
Walter Goring, and so as a priestess would robe 
herself for an important sacrifice, she robed herself 
for this. 

The grandeur of her beauty struck him vividly as 
she came into the room again. She was a woman 
with one of those long slender throats, who can turn 
their heads over their shoulders without distorting 
their frames or faces in the least. So, now as she 
turned to shut the door^ she curved her head round 
like a swan, and said to him, . 

**I cannot be at your wedding, Walter; but I 
have something to send to your bride.'' Then she 
seated herself by a little table and opened the case, 
and he stood close over her, looking at the gift she 
disclosed. 



"she shines me down." 297 

It was a broad band of diamonds and emeralds 
for the arm, and as she held it up to him, he 
said something in deprecation of the value of the 
present ; but she checked him hurriedly. 

" Pray don't say anything of that sort, I shall 
never go out of mourning; therefore, I shall not 
wear coloured stones. Take it, Walter, and think 
as little of the gift as of the one who gave." 

The reproach dropped from her lips almost with- 
out her knowledge, and in uttering it she threw 
away her strongest weapon, the reserve she had 
hitherto maintained. " Take it, Walter," she con- 
tinued, *' give it to her ; tell her she shines me 
down." 

She rose up as she spoke, and held out both her 
hands to him. As he grasped them and muttered 
something about her having been so pure a guiding 
star to him, that none could ever outshine her, 
she said, " God bless you, Walter . ^for the last 
time," and went away, leaving him with the 
diamonds in his hand and her words ringing in his 
ears. "For the last time,'* she had said; had it 
really come to this . was he to realise so painfully 
that there was truth in that axiom, " A man that's 
married, is a man that's marred." Even as he 



298 WALTER GOBING. 

thought thisy she turned back and gave him her 
hand and said " Good-by ! " once more. It was so 
hard, so very hard to part ; she could only do it by 
degrees after all. 



END OF VOL. II 
WALTEE GORING. 



CHAPTER !. 

love's TOUNa DREAM. 



Walter GoBiNa knew that Daisy was wayward 
and wilful; but at the same time . despite those 
little tricks of hers . ^he did belieye her to be the 
truest, purest, tenderest child, in whom a man 
ever trusted. He recalled all her endearing ways. 
the shimmer of her dear blue eyes^. the pouting of 
the red wet mouth, that was always so ready to kiss 
him. He recalled all these, as the train whirled 
him down to Brighton the following day, and 
altogether thought himself round into a very tender 
frame of mind about Daisy. Moreover, he was 
additionally tender to her, in consequence of a vague 
and indistinct feeling he had, of having been more 
wrought upon by other women lately than Daisy 
would altogether have approved of, could she have 

TOL. in. B 



2 WALTER GORING. 

known it. He thought that the dear loving child 
who had given him the first fruits of her heart 
deserved this at least in return, namely, that no 
lingering old romance should ever disturb him 
again. 

Nor should it do so. There was pain, un- 
doubtedly . pleasurable pain, perhaps, but still pain 
in the lately-gained knowledge that Mrs. Walsh 
loved him. It was utterly impossible that any 
man should have been indififerent to the love of such 
a woman. It was such gloriously gratifying love, 
too . ^it was so utterly unselfish, as strong and gene- 
irous at what she had declared to be " the last," as 
when it might have been repaid. For all his good 
intentions as to maintaining perfect fidelity of 
thought even to Daisy, his mind would dwell a 
good deal on the last words and the possible future 
of her who had been his goddess. 

Not that he would have exchanged Daisy for her 
now. Before his engagement, had he been certain 
of that of which he was now certain about Mrs. 
Walsh, Daisy would have lost the game which she 
came down to play. But he, not being certain of 
it, had gone on suffering the probability to remain 
in the haze it had been only discreet to Buffer it 



love's young dream. 8 

to remain in for so many years. Warm friendship 
had been all that he dared to suppose she felt 
for him in the past; so he had continued to 
take the warm friendship for granted till it was 
too late. 

Not too late for his happiness: that would be 
well assured he hoped, and nearly felt convinced, in 
a marriage with Daisy . the true-hearted, if occa- 
sionally wrong-headed. Not too late for his happi- 
ness, but too late for " hers,** he half thought, 
and then checked himself for being a conceited 
coxcomb ; and told himself that IVIrs. Walsh would 
in all probability love and marry one of the many 
men who worshipped her from afar. 

An awful twinge of unadulterated jealousy shot 
through his heart as the probability struck him : 
"1 hope not; it would drive me mad to see her 
married to any fellow who didn*t appreciate her; 
it's quite enough to see that poor girl down at 
Deneham . ^to have another woman I admire and 
esteem in such a position would be too much.*' 

The heart is deceitful above all things and 
desperately wicked ; or rather, the simultaneous 
birth of a dozen emotions, each one good in itself, 
and their consequent clashing, frequently makes it 

B 2 



4 WALTER GORING. 

appear so. On the whole, Walter Goring was not 
sorry when the train stopped at Brighton and he 
was forced into action. It might have been an 
interesting study to analyse his own conduct and 
feelings, and the mainsprings of both; but assuredly 
it would have been a painful and humiliating one. 

He meant this visit to be an unexpected treat to 
Daisy, and he was quite sensible enough to feel 
that it was worth while to try and appear at his 
very best, before the girl who was now bound to 
him. So he sent round to the stables where Daisy's 
horse was kept, and had the chestnut saddled ; and 
when he was dressed he rode out to Mrs. Osborne's 
villa, looking, as Daisy observed from an upstairs 
window, a splendid specimen of a modern cavalier. 
The small trouble he had taken was not thrown 
away. With a woman's quickness of perception on 
these, and indeed most points, Daisy marked in a 
glance the daintiness of all the accessories of his 
costume : the trim cut and careful arrangement of 
his brown hair and golden-brown beard, . the perfec- 
tion of each detail that goes to the making-up of a 
well-bred man's morning-dress. She marked it all, 
and felt proud that he was her lover, and hoped that 
several people would see him, and know that she 



LOV£ S TOUNa DBEAM. 6 

was a much more important person than his ward . 
that she was going to be his wife. Then she heard 
from the servant that Mrs. and Miss Osborne were 
both out, and she reflected that since none were by 
to see him, it would have been just as well for him 
to have come later, "I wonder how long he'll 
stay ? " she thought, as she slowly dressed herself; 
** if he will go out for a walk it will be all very well; 
but to sit in all the rest of the day will be dreadfully 
dull and tiring/' 

Her eyes looked heavy, and her cheeks were very 
pale and thin. She saw that they were so when 
she was ready to go down at last (with what different 
feelings had Horatia Walsh prepared to see him 
the day before), and she tried to brighten up, and 
attempted to rub a little colour into her face by 
pressing her hands almost roughly over it* But it 
was of no avail, so she went down at last with a 
slow heavy step and a heavier heart. 

There was not the faintest excitement to her in 
the prospect of seeing him, whom she had lured on 
to love her so tenderly. She liked him very much| 
and she tried to get up a faint pleasure at this 
devotion of his, by saying to herself as she went 
along, " Dear Walter, how good of him to come to 



6 WALTER GORING. 

me;" but she could not help adding, "I wonder 
what he wants, and how long he will stay ? " 

She made a great effort, as she neared the door, 
to throw off that appearance of weariness which 
eould but strike him harshly, she knew, contrasting 
it, as he surely would, with her old manner before 
he was won. " If they had only been in to have 
made a fuss, it would have been all right," she 
thought, discontentedly ; " but what's the good of 
his being here, when there is no one to see how 
fond he is of me. I hope he'll go on the pier; 
he's such good style that every one will look, and it 
will soon get about that he's my property." Then 
she opened the door, and as he came towards her 
holding out his arms, she sprang into them and hid 
her face on his waistcoat, which at once satisfied him 
that she was delighted to meet him, and saved her 
the trouble of looking so. 

Presently he put his hand under her chin and 
raised her face, '* My darling Daisy, how pale you 
have grown . it was time for me to come and look 
after you." 

The shimmer he had longed to see and thought 
of so lovingly, came over the cobalt-blue eyes ; in 
an instant she threw herself into her proper part. 



LOVE S YOUNa DBEAH. 7 

" Think how long it is since I have seen you, 
Walter . and you all the time taken up with those 
Fellowes's/' 

He bent his head and kissed her on the mouth 
till her face flooded with crimson ; and she jerked 
her head back sharply. " You take away my breath, 
Walter/' she said, petulantly. " Are you going to 
stay here to dinner ? " 

" Yes, if Mrs. Osborne will give me a dinner," he 
replied, laughing. Then Daisy seated herself on a 
couch, spreading her dress over as wide an extent 
of it on either side as she could, and Walter lounged 
over the arm of it, and took up a tress of her straw- 
coloured hair and kissed it. 

" You, Daisy," he said presently, reproachfully, 
" are you not going to give me one kiss when I 
have come so far to get it ? " 

She turned to him, exclaiming, " Dear Walter!" 
mth effusion, and holding out the pouting mouth ; 
but she took it away again in a hurry, thinking, 
" Oh, dear ! if this is to go on for hours what a 
bother it will be." 

" Shall I sing to you, Walter, dear ? " she asked. 

"No, speak to me, my pet." If any one had 
been by to see him then as he came before her 



8 Walteb goring. 

and clasped her round the waist, Daisy would 
have been delighted. As it waSj though she began 
putting his hair further off his forehead with her 
old bewitching touch, she was thinking, ** I wish he 
wasn't so spoony . ^it tires me out." 

" I have nothing, to speak about, Walter. I am 
so desperately dull here." 

*' Then I have something to speak about. I 
want you to promise me something, Daisy, dar- 
ling." 

A frightened look came into her eyes. 

.. Oh, it's not about that, is it, Walter ? " 

"What?" 

"What I wont tell." 

" No, dearest, I want you to promise me that 
you will be my wife in May: it's sooner than we 
thought of at first, but it will be better for many 
reasons. Will you have me in May, Daisy ? " 

For a few moments her bosom heaved convul- 
sively, and her mouth quivered. Then she re- 
covered herself and laughed. 

" Yes, on the first of May, Walter, if you like." 

" The dear unconventional Daisy," he thought, 
fondly; "most girls would have humbugged about 
it." 



xote'b touho dbeah. 9 

'' And now let me sbg to yon,'* she said, hastily, 
when he had thanked her with another kiss, and 
she had undulated away from under it 

" My darling, you can sing to me when other 
people are here," he pleaded. 

She checked a resigned sigh which she had heen 
about to heave, and looked as if she thought his 
suggestion a delightful amendment on her own. 
Then he took out the diamond and emerald bracelet ; 
and Daisy put it on, and gave way to ecstasies of 
admiration. When she had done, he framed a neat 
little message from Mrs. Walsh for her; but he 
omitted that statement Mrs. Walsh had made re- 
lative to Daisy " shining her down." 

" They're lovely," Daisy said, and she meant all 
she said about them. ** Oh, Walter, they make one 
feel bright and sparkling, don't they ? I'd like some 
for my neck and some for my head." 

" You shall have them, dear ; they shall be one 
of my presents to you on our wedding-day: the 
other is to be a picture, in which Mrs. Walsh 
figures.'' 

" Yes. I heard of that when I was with Mrs. 
Fellowes. Has her brother found a . whoever it 
was he wanted to find, yet ?" 



10 WALTER GORING. 

" A model for * Elaine/ Yes ; I haven't seen it, 
though we went to his studio yesterday on purpose. 
St. John was out, unfortunately." 

St. John's heing out was indeed unfortunate . 
far more unfortunate than poor Walter Goring had 
any idea of. 

''Whom do you mean hy *we'?" Daisy asked, 
quickly, with the carping jealousy that springs from 
vanity, not love. 

" I walked up with Mrs. Walsh.*' 

"Walter, I helieve you are very fond of Mrs. 
Walsh?" 

" I know I am," he answered. 

" And I believe she's in love with you," she con- 
tinued. 

" Then you believe what is not true." 

" Do you mean to say that she is not, Walter ? " 

" I mean to say that any man who thought it, 
would be a blind fool not to test the truth of his 
thought ; and I am not that, Daisy." 

A queer expression . half sorrowful, half satiric . 
shot from her eyes as he spoke. She seemed to be 
pondering over his words for a few moments ; then 
she replied . 

" So, if you had thought that she was in love with 



love's youkq dream. 11 

you, you would have proposed to her instead of to 
me ; isn't that what you mean ? " 

" Yes," he Answered, resolutely, " I would ; for in 
that case I should have been in love with her. As 
it was, you see, none of these conditions were ful- 
filled. You won me instead, and will never have 
reason to he jealous of anything I have felt, or 
might have felt, or may feel for another woman." 

" No ; I will never be jealous, Walter. I hope 
you won't either ? " 

" I won't promise that," he said, laughing. 

She heaved a short full sigh. 

" You will never have cause. I shall not be a 
married flirt, like your friends, Mrs. Walsh and Mrs. 
Fellowes. I believe Mrs. Fellowes likes you much 
better than she does her husband, wluch isn't to be 
wondered at." 

" You believe most extraordinary things," he said, 
more gravely than he had yet spoken. " I'm afraid 
you have studied human nature in a bad school, 
dear." 

She shook her head vehemently. 

" I have indeed," she said, bitterly. ** Oh, Walter, 
do forgive me! I ought not to forget what my 
parents were when I am talking in this way." 



12 WALTER GORING. 

** Daisy, dearest, your over- sensitiveness makes 
you unnatural. Don't speak . don't think of your 
parents in such a way. Eemember one is dead, and 
the other is " 

" Worse," she interrupted hastily, " Well, if you 
won't let me sing to you, Walter, come out for a 
walk on the pier ? " 

" I hate the pier. 1*11 go for a walk anywhere 
else with you." 

"On the parade?'' 

*^ That*s as bad as the pier. Let us go along this 
road, it looks quiet and pretty enough." 

** It's so dull," she said, pettishly. She wanted 
to take him out and show him, in order that those 
acquaintances whom she had made through the 
Osbomes might see him, and say what a fine young 
man Miss Goring was engaged to. There would 
have been a little pleasurable excitement in such a 
walk ; but there would be none in going along a dull 
road, where no one would mark and inquire about him, 
and find out that, in addition to being a fine young 
man, he was the owner of a fine property, a cele- 
brated novelist, and her own very devoted slave. 

" I would just as soon stay in, dear," she said 
softly. 



love's YOUNa BREAM. 13 

"And I would much rather stay in," he re- 
plied. And again Daisy began to feel terribly 
bored. 

Perhaps if she could have known of those two 
recent scenes, and the sensations which beset the 
female actors in them . the spirit of emulation, the 
feeling of pride, which is said to be engendered in 
the feminine breast when the fact of winning a man 
who has been wanted by other women is made 
patent, would have come to the aid of the fatigued 
Daisy, and caused her to feel the time less tedious. 
As it was, she could hardly help yawning. She 
was bored; and he was so all-potent with such 
much better women. It was a mis-shapen order of 
things unquestionably. 

" I tell you what, Daisy," he said, after a time ; 
" I shall take you to Borne to see the Levinges." 

She shrugged her shoulders. **Did I ever tell 
you about Mary Levinge coming here ?" she asked, 
with what she would not su£fer to be a blush. 

"Coming here?" 

" Yes* She wanted me to go and stay with them 
in Bome." 

" Mary Levinge must have had some reason for 
such an extraordinary proceeding," he said, medita* 



14 WALTER GORING. 

tively. Then he asked abruptly, "What was it, 
Daisy?" 

" I donH know. Caprice, I suppose. They liked 
me ; and was there anything so very extraordinary 
in that r* 

" My pet, eveiyone likes you'' (with a magnificent 
disregard of truth) ; " but everyone does not invite 
you to stay with them in this way. What brought 
it about, Daisy ? " 

"I'm sure I don't know. Go and make your 
Mary Levinge account for her own caprice. Don't 
come to me for an explanation," she said, hotly, 
tossing the straw-coloured head. "You think all 
she does is proper^ and all she says is right ; she 
has unsexed herself." 

" Daisy, that's not your own sentiment ; that is 
one of her graceless brother's." 

" Oh ! don't make me give up my authority for 
every word I use, Walter. If you begin that, I shall 
be afraid to speak before you." Then she laughed, 
and put her arms round his neck, and added^ 

" You're so accustomed to plagiarise yom'self, you 
mean boy, that you can't help suspecting me of doing 
the same. Do try to believe that I think Miss 
Levinge rather coarse all out of my own head." 



love's young dream. 15 

** Mary Levinge never does anything without a 
motive," he replied, seriously. 

'*What a disagreeable toad she must be to be 
always planning. Well, I will find a motive for 
ibis, and flatter your vanity. She wanted to get me 
out of your way; they are all in love with you, 
Walter, and you think more highly of every one of 
them (the deceitful wretches) than you do of me." 

"You remarkably unjust and illogical Daisy," 
he said, laughing; "you foolish jealous pet," . ^it 
was quite pleasant to him to imagine that she was 
jealous. he rather cultivated the idea. "Do you 
think that Mary Levinge and I nurse a hopeless 
passion for each other ? " 

" I don't suppose you would ever have a hopeless 
passion for such a great big-handed woman," Daisy 
replied. " What she may do for you I can't say." 

" There being no accounting for taste, hers may 
be as bad as your own, you think ? " he replied, 
laughing. On which she got up and said, . 

"Now J will sit down and sing, Walter; you get 
so dreadfully silly." 

She sang to him without cessation, until Mrs. 
Osborne and Alice came in. She sang to him, and 
at him, and amused herself very well/ and he looked 



16 WALTER GOBING. 

upon all the vocal efforts as so many pure and 
simple-minded attempts to please him still further. 
He was yery much in love with her youth and 
delicacy. The way in which she shrank from his 
passion whenever it became demonstrative allured 
him; she was " Warning the touch while winning the 
sense, and charming most when she most repelled/' 
in a very pleasing way, considering she was to be his 
wife. After all, as he told himself that night when 
he rode back into Brighton, his was the happiest 
choice . the freshest selection. Those other women, 
for all their subtle charms, had loved others, even 
if they had unloved again 1 But Daisy ! Daisy was 
the driven snow ; the softest, richest bloom rested 
still undisturbed upon the peach he was going to 
pick. She was all his own ! there was no old ro- 
mance to dispute possession of her heart with him. 
Heaven shone in her dear blue eyes for him, and . 
he never dreamt that he was in a fool's paradise. 



CHAPTER IL 



woman's at best a contradiction still.** 



Late into the night following that unfortunate 
<iay of the auction at The Hurst, young Mrs. 
Fellowes sat on a little stool by the fire, with her 
elbows on her knees, and her chin in her hands, 
thinking. There was no external interruption to 
her quiet Her husband was lying on the sofa in a 
deep heavy motionless slumber, and his mother 
and sister had gone to bed at nine, rather tired, and 
more than rather huffed* 

So she sat there thinking . with no fear of his 
speaking to her, or of their coming in. Her past 
life spread itself out like a panorama before her, and 
she went over it inch by inch as it were, courage- 
ously, though the travelling was not pleasant 

First, she recalled the old joyous reign of mis- 
rule in her father's house ; the happy careless time 



18 WALTER GORING. 

when all her most strongly marked and worst 
qualities had been encouraged and applauded with 
admiring laughs, and with an affected censure that 
was a still more flattering form of admiration. Her 
frank defiant nature . ^her restless spirit . her in- 
tense passion for all that was new . her habit of 
impatience . her disregard of every form of autho- 
rity . ^her blithe contempt, too openly expressed, 
for all that seemed contemptible to her keen young 
mind! All these qualities had been fostered by 
injudicious training, until they had dominated her 
entirely, and had caused her to domineer over 
others. Th^n her father had died, and she had 
learnt a portion of the bitter lesson the world is 
always so beautifully ready to teach those whose 
eircumstancee are altered. 

She had learnt a portion of this lesson, but she 
had learnt it very insufficiently. It remained for 
Robert Prescott to impress it more fiilly upon her 
mind. If he taught her nothing else, h6 taught her 
to feel the helplessness and the humiliation of her 
position-. and to hate it. So she escaped from it 
at the first opportunity; because she was too 
impatient to endure it, and too proud to stoop to 
try to amend it. She had told herself that the 



"woman's at best a contradiction still.*' 19 

situation was unendurable, therefore she never 
attempted to endure. For the sake of attaining 
ease and freedom, position and wealth ; above all, 
for the sake of attaining greater bodily and mental 
independence, she had married without love, with- 
out the faintest feeling that could even have misled 
herself into the idea that she did love. Never for 
an instant had she deceived herself. She had told 
herself that she should surely come to regard her 
husband warmly, and to esteem him well ; she had 
vowed to be the truest friend, the most cordial 
sympathiser, the most earnest and devoted adhe- 
rent to the cause of the man she had married. But 
she knew that she should never love him, so she 
never lied about it, even to herself. 

Now she was shaken to her soul as she thought 
this, but still she did think it . he had dashed those 
determinations of hers with doubt. Already he had 
made it very hard for her to keep to the plain 
path . unlighted by love . of duty. Already, he had 
made it very hard ; what if lie should go on and 
make it impossible ? 

She dropped her arms on her lap, and raised her 
head as her thoughts reached this point, and looked 
at him and . loathed him. At any sacrifice, which 

2 



20 WALTER GORING. 

could haye been made wholly and solely by her- 
self.which could never liave touched or pained 
another . she would have taken her freedom, and 
got away somewhere . anywhere ; away out of the 
possibility of ever seeing him again as he was. If 
she could have concentrated all the pain and dis- 
honour and anxiety on herself . if the very few 
who loved her would never have felt a pang . she 
thought that she would not have cared into what 
outer darkness she might flee, so long as she 
escaped from this house of bondage. But she 
knew that she could not so concentrate the pain 
and anxiety, and she could not shake the faith 
those had in her, who by believing her to be so 
good, bad made her better. 

" No, it must be borne," she thought, placing her 
face down into her hands again. But how? It 
must be borne, together with the knowledge so 
startlingly brought home to her heart this day, that 
a man whom she could have loved, knew how to 
soothe, and fire, and value her. 

It was a dangerous knowledge. She knew that it 
was dangerous, and at first she tried to check the 
remembrance she had of it, and of the manner in 
which the knowledge had been gained. But this 



" woman's at best a contradiction still." 21 

putting aside a thing, was foreign to her nature. 
There was something mean, not to say cowardly in 
it. " I may as well face the facts,'' she thought, 
with a little shake of the head. *' I behaved dis- 
gracefully this afternoon . any man with a grain of 
feeling would have done what he did, when I cried 
at him, and put my hand on his arm ; it has made 
all things ten times harder to bear than they would 
have been without it, and that's a fitting punish- 
ment for me ; but there will always be the feeling 
and the memory, and what am I to do with 
them.*' 

She rose up as she thought this, and went over 
with soft steps to look at her husband, who had 
slept on through this storm that was raging in his 
wife . slept on, not in blest, but in brutal uncon- 
sciousness. There would always be this in addi- 
tion to the feeling and memory of that which had 
gained form and substance in that brief moment 
when Walter Goring lost his head . this . this 
man, who was losing the power to guard her 
honour and his own . ^this man, who was already a 
thing to blush and tremble for, and shrink from. 

She began to sicken at the thought of his awaken- 
ing. he would be so fearfully ashamed and penitent. 



.22 WALTER GOMNG. 

and how could she respond? "I really hope he 
will not say a word," she thought. " I hope he 
will never look me in the face again ; what a life 
mine is. I have to turn away from something on 
every side ; why couldn't he have left me some- 
thing to hold on by ? now I have nothing ; where 
shall I drift?" 

Once more she sat down, and with a little 
groan, went on " thinking out " the subject after 
the manner of women. It was hard, very, very hard. 
But she sat up erect under the sudden conviction 
. she was not the sole, or indeed the most im- 
portant consideration in this business. What if 
she felt his . her husband's . degradation? would 
he not feel it himself ten times more ? What if 
she regretted a vanished possibility, a moment's 
weakness, was there not one who would regret it 
too . ^for her sake ? Ay ! and regret it in exact 
proportion as she showed that she remembered it. 
" ni try and make Mr. Goring forget it all, by 
seeming to forget it myself; we ought not to be 
interested in each other, and he won't be so in- 
terested in me if he thinks me quite happy/' Then 
she felt that even if she could not be happy herself, 
she might try to make others so ; and she rose up 



" woman's at best a contradiction still." 33 

agaiiiy and with even, softer steps than before, went 
over and re-arranged the disordered pillow nnder 
her husband's heavy head. So " she took up the 
burden of life again, saying only, it might have 
been." After all, hers was a sound, sweet nature. 
She had a thousand impulses in those hours of 
trial, but the only ones on which she acted were 
good. She came out of this shai'pest ordeal to 
which she had yet been subjected intact, even if 
not purified and refined. But that feeling, that the 
burden must be taken up again after a dream of 
" what might have been," is almost maddening . ^let 
it come to whom it wilL 

Very few things come up to the expectation 
formed of them. The thing has been said ten 
thousand times in ten thousand different ways. 
Anticipation is invariably fairer or fotder than 
reality. We all know that this must be. We 
accept this hideous fact when we grow old; but 
when we are young the constant recurrence of the 
truth is simply overwhelming. 

Charlie . poor, imaginative, faulty Charlie . made 
a dozen little mental sketches of what would be 
said and what would be looked when her husband 
came back to his place in the scale of humanity 



84 WALTER GORING. ' ^ 

again. She gi'ew more gentle and more humblet 
and so more tolerant to his faults and less tolerant 
to her own every minute. Her heart throbbed as 
she resolved to stem down the torrent of his self^ 
reproaches, and be that best of friends to him . a 
friend who could wisely ignore, and cheer instead 
of depressing. She felt capable of putting herself 
and her own feelings out of court altogether, as she 
renewed her vow of making the best of things, and 
reminded herself afresh that it behoved her to 
brighten, to the best of her ability, the lot of the 
man who had fallen upon evil days, but who had 
sought her when the sun was on him. 

Her nerves were strung up now to a terrible 
tension. Women of her order always go off at a 
hard gallop when their burden has been readjusted. 
What with her penitence and her pity, and her pro* 
found conviction that she had been guilty of the 
very grossest error a delicate-minded woman can 
commit in her own eyes, she was quite ready to put 
herself in the position of the offender instead of the 
offended when Henry Fellowes woke. For many 
hours she had been dwelling with keen pain upon 
the possible results of his conduct . upon the 
effect it might have upon her practice, and the 



.* rxrrk'kM ku^t 



WOMAN S AT BEST A CONTRADICTION STILL.'* 25 

effect it most have upon her character. She had 
been investing the occasion with very great im-* 
portance. I will not say with undue importance, 
because that which shocks and disgusts a woman 
nearly out of all sense of propriety, cannot be too 
seriously regarded. She had looked upon it as a 
turning point in her destiny ; it was a never-to-be- 
forgotten episode : and the part she meant to re- 
member was not his short-coming, but her own* 
She shook all over when she saw him rousing 
himself; she longed to throw herself before him, 
and entreat him to believe that she would forget as 
entirely as she had already forgiven. But just as 
she was about to put her design in execution he 
got up, and stopped her, by saying, 

*' I think I have been asleep, Charlie ; do let us 
get to bed at once.*' 

Then she shrank back cold and chilled, as, I 
suppose, it is the just fate of those foolish ones 
to be, who are born with the weak habit of dying 
of roses in aromatic pain. 

Her legs trembled under her as she walked up 
the creaking stairs before him. She had suffered 
the first moment of his recovery to pass without 
speaking to him, and now she could not bring 



26 WALTEB GOBING. 

herself to utter a word. She had fancied that 
he had looked at her angrily, and she had fancied 
rightly ; it had not been all such utter obli- 
vion with him as she had imagined. He had 
seen and felt two or three things dimly through 
the mists which obscured his brain, and he was 
aggrieved. 

"Why wouldn't you come and kiss me when I 
asked you to do it, Charlie ? " he said to her as 
soon as they reached their own room; *'it was 
hard just at the time when everything is gone from 
me to see my wife turn away from me and go off 
with another man." 

He put his hands on her shoulder as he spoke, 
and made her face him, and she stood with her 
head thrown back as far from him as she could. 

" I couldn't do it," she replied ; " if you don't 
know the reason I can't tell it to you." 

" It stabbed me to the heart to see you rush after 
Goring in that way," he went on, complainingly ; 
and when he said that she shook herself free from 
his detaining hands. 

"I should have rushed after a dog that was 
leaving me alone with you then," she exclaimed in 
a quick low tone. 



msmm 



" woman's at best a contradiction still." 27 

" And he consoled you, I suppose . consoled you 
for having a husband, who is such a poor creature 
that he feels it when all his old friends give him the 
cold shoulder/' his voice broke with a ^ob ; but he 
recovered, and went on immediately, "by heaven, 
Goring shall not play that game here." 

The last part of the sentence was injudicious; 
she had softened when he spoke of old friends 
giving him the cold shoulder; but the allusion to 
Walter Goring stung her. 

" Leave his name out of the question." 

'^ But I won t leave his name out of the question ; 
I'll have no man coming here supplanting me with 
my wife, and showing her what a much finer fellow 
he would be under the circumstances, I'll have no 
sneaking hound " 

" Will you stop ? " she asked. 

"Yes; when I have finished. It was a mean 
thing . a mean thing of any fellow to do. You 
both thought me senseless, I suppose, because I 
was sleepy." 

" Why will you force me to remember what you 
were ?" she asked, contemptuously. 

" I daresay Goring took care to impress what 
I was upon you." 



28 WALTER GORING. 

" You are mad.** 

She walked towards the door as she spoke. As 
she opened it he went after her, and laid his hand 
on her arm. 

" Charlie, where are you going ? " 

" Downstairs ; let me go . let me go. I'm afraid 
to stay here to-night.'' 

.'Afraid of Tij^/"' 

** No, of myself." She was speaking the truth ; 
she was terribly afraid that she might say or do 
something which could never be unsaid or undone. 
The barrier between them was quite high enough 
already, 

" What do you want ? . ^tell me what yon want." 

'. I want nothing but to be let go," and as she 
said it, she twitched her arm away from under his 
hand. 

" Fll have no nonsense of the kind ; " he put his 
arm round her, and drew her back almost roughly 
into the room, locking the door as he did so. 
" The mischief has gone farther than I thought ; 
fallen as you fancy me, madam, I'll show you that 
I am strong enough to put a stop to the puling 
romance of that fellow." Her strength was weak- 
ness when he said that, all her good resolutions 



*' WOMAN^S AT BEST A CONTBADICTION STILL." 29 

failed, and she was nearly shaken to pieces by the 
storm of fury that swept across her soul. 

" If you degrade me by acting as you say you will, 
I'll leave you.*' 

" Desert me in my difficulties/' he almost whined. 

" Oh ! if you only knew what I would have done 
for you, and how cheerfully I would have shared 
whatever troubles you have,'' she exclaimed, as the 
tide of fury ebbed again ; '* but how can I hope to 
make you understand that when you misunderstand 
the best friend you have." 

" Meaning Walter Goring?" he asked* 

" Yes ; meaning Walter Goring," she replied, and 
her voice thrilled as she named him. 

"Well; I want no more of his friendship," 
Henry Fellowes said sullenly. His head was 
aching violently by this time, and he was uncom- 
fortably conscious of several things. Amongst 
others that the ache served him right . ^that he had 
not been absolutely victorious in this first matri- 
monial tussle . and that he had to get up early the 
following morning to ride round another man's 
land. After all there was much to be urged in 
extenuation of what he had said, and what he had 
done; and so Charlie came to feel when he left 



BO WALTER GORING. 

oflf talking to her, and she was free to reason and 
reproach herself again. 

The following day she heard that the Prescotts 
would be down almost immediately, and that Walter 
Goring had gone to Brighton ; and she told herself 
that " it was better far that he should go than stay/* 
and hoped that she might not see him again until 
after his marriage. 



CHAPTER III. 

IN DOUBT. 

The dulnesB and monotony of both feeling and 
action which set in in the Fellowes's household 
after that first unfortunate quarrel between Charlie 
and her husband, was broken after a few weeks by an 
active annoyance. The Prescotts came down, and 
notified their arriyal very shortly to Charlie in a 
message requesting her to go up and see her sister 
the following morning. 

They were sitting at dinner when the message 
was delivered, and it told on each member of the 
party at once. The words " John has come down 
from The Hurst to say, &c." were hardly out of the 
servant's mouth before Henry Fellowes lost his 
appetite, and laid down his knife and fork. John 
had been one of his own grooms. The Hurst had 
been the home of the Felloweses for generations. 



82 WALTER GORING. 

Charlie saw and sympathised with his emotion, but 
it was no use increasing it by noticing it just then. 
So she said . 

" Give my love to Mrs. Prescott, and say I'll be 
up with her in the morning.'* 

*' I think, considering all things, that Mrs. Pres- 
cott might have had the good feeling to call on us 
first,*' old Mrs. Fellowes exclaimed, as soon as they 
were alone. 

" Ellen never does consider all things,'* Charlie 
replied, good-humouredly. She was still in Mrs. 
Fellowes's black books for having kept Henry to 
herself on the night of the auction. The exacting 
mother little knew how willingly her son would 
have been released then and for ever by that young 
jealously- watched detaining power. 

" More shame for her, then," the old lady replied, 
tartly ; on which Miss Dinah remarked . 

" Just so ; but it's not Mrs. Henry's fault." 

Charlie felt grateful to Miss Dinah. It was not 
active partisanship or even zealous partisanship; 
but young Mrs. Fellowes did not, therefore, think 
the less of it. Indeed, on the whole she rather 
preferred that which resembled the violet . that 
which was just felt in the atmosphere, and not too 



IN DOUBT. S3 

plainly seen. Active and zealous partisans take 
high rank in the army of friends from whom we 
pray to he delivered. 

" Perhaps you will walk over with me," she 
suggested. "I can hardly fancy Ellen in a half- 
empty house arranging things." 

" Oh, your sister has come to every comfort, 
every comfort," Mrs. Fellowes said seriously, as if 
there were something impious and to be regretted 
in the fact. *' I am sure I only hope that it may 
last. I don't wish them ill. Furniture sent down 
from London days before the family arrive, and 
men sent down to arrange it ! I hope it may 
last.'^ 

Charlie did not echo the expression of this hope, 
partiy because she dared not do it, and partiy be- 
cause it did seem to her a matter of very small 
moment whether Mr. Prescott's new goods and 
chattels " lasted " or not. She was conscious, too, 
of a faint feeling of pleasure in the prospect of 
having her sister near her for a time. Ellen, 
though not a too congenial, would be a safe and 
tender-hearted companion, and she clung now to 
what was safe and kind. There had been danger 
in the sympathetic interest which had been the 



34 WALXEK GORING. 

ofifspring of too congeitial a mind; and there was 
utter bankruptcy at home* Every bill she had 
drawn of late had been dishonoured. These things 
conspired to make her glad even of the prospect of 
Ellen's society, and desirous of keeping the peace, 
and so enjoying that society without verbal moles- 
tation. 

That conjugal scene of the unfortunate auction 
day had been repeated several times with variations. 
Mr. Fellowes, who in the days of his prosperity 
had seemed to be as strong-headed as he was soft- 
hearted, was becoming surely and, alas ! not very 
slowly, a sorrow and spirit-sodden man. Charlie 
thought that it was the pecuniary ruin which had 
befallen him which preyed upon him, and this 
roused her contempt. But she wronged him there. 
Had she known the truth, her anger and contempt 
would have deepened. He had taken in a vague 
jealousy of his friend and, distrust of his wife, and 
under the influence of these feelings he went a very 
good way to give himself cause for both, had the 
nature he was blindly striving to alter been worse 
than it was. 

After that one outburst of feeling when he had 
made the miserable mistake of charging Walter 



IX DOUBT. 35 

Goring and herself with playing a double part . a 
dubious game . Charlie had accepted the situation, 
and bravely, if not cheerfully, made the best of it. 
'* It would have been better for us both if you had 
not spoken as you did last night, Henry," she said 
to him the following morning ; " but since you have 
said so much, I must say a little more. You said 
jou would not have Mr. Goring come here again . 
Even if you hadn'^t said it, I should." 

"Why so?" he asked. 

" Why, because I should get fond of him, pro- 
bably,'* she replied, recklessly. " Slop, don't say 
a word; he*d despise me as much for it as you 
would, and I have a greater respect for his opinion 
than for that of any other human being. How 
should it be otherwise ? . ask yourself.*' 

She was no hypocrite, therefore she told all that 
there was to tell about herself. But on the other 
hand, she was no traitor, therefore she said no word 
relative to Walter Goring*s share in the matter. 
To her own heart she acknowledged that the man 
had been indiscreet, but quick upon that acknow- 
ledgment followed her heart's free, eager confession 
to itself that she had been the cause of that indis- 
cretion. Any blame that might fall upon herself 



30 WALTER GORING. 

alone she could bear and brave ; but she would 
have cut her tongue out rather than utter a word 
that should inculpate him. With rash truthful 
recklessness she told out the tale of her being 
ready to love ; but with a woman's reticence she 
held back the statement of another being ready 
to love her, since it must injure him. 

Having made a clean breast of it, she seemed 
even to Henry Fellowes's jealous observation to 
forget her avowal and the subject of it altogether. 
As she had been a cipher at The Hurst, so she was 
a cipher in the new household ; but the small part 
that was assigned to her she accepted and played 
out bravely and contentedly. He could find no 
fault with her. Her round of duties was not large, 
certainly, but she never left one of them unfulfilled. 
She bore with the petty details of domestic life 
which his mother and sister insisted upon wearying 
her with, patiently. She* devoted her energies to 
serving him, in every way in which it came within 
the scope of her power to serve him, assiduously as 
ever. She cleared up what he confused frequently. 
She never suffered him to forget an appointment of 
which she had once heard. With the spasmodic 
energy that was one of her most prominent charac- 



m^^mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm^ 



IX DOUBT. 37 

teristics, she got up hard dry details connected with 
the management of land and property of a similar 
nature to that of which her husband was now 
steward, and arranged facts and successful experi- 
ments and promising schemes, in such a way as 
enabled him to grasp and act upon them often. 
Her mind and her memory were invaluable to him, 
and were always ready at his call, and yet . what 
was it ? He felt that, had they been in diflFerent 
hemispheres, they could not have been more widely 
asunder than they were; and she felt the same, 
only far more keenly and remorsefully. She never 
reproached him, though cause was not wanting. 
She never recoiled from him outwardly. She 
carried herself so contentedly, that her "pluck" 
became the theme of a hymn of praise which was 
constantly being chanted in her husband's ears. 
But he would willingly have bartered away all 
these for one love-glanoe from the quiet, eyes whose 
language was a mystery to him . ^for one fond touch 
from the little hand that was as unwearied in his 
service as it was unwilling to meet his. But these 
would never be his now . ^never, never ! He strove 
to drown his knowledge of the fact, and the drown- 
ing it made the fact itself more fatally certain. 



38 WALTER GORING. 

However, externally all things were fair, that is 
to say, they were as fair as things ever are in a 
household where the means are small, and the 
members not united by any very strong bond of 
love. On second thoughts, I am far from feeling 
that the latterjcondition makes the slightest differ- 
enoe, so I will amend the phrase. Things were as 
fair as a person who had nothing to gain and Httle 
to lose, and who was yet resolved to hold on by 
that which was, could make them. 

Before Charlie went up to The Hurst to see her 
sister according to promise, she received a note 
from Frank :. 

" My dear Charlie," (he wrote) : " Your book 
is annotthced, in two volumes. I have been through 
the proofs for you.^^I think it will do very well, but 
don't be ddwn-hearted even if it should not. A 
letter from Goring puts to flight my intention of 
trying to get * Elaine ' into the Academy. He 
wants to have it to give to his cousin the day 
they're married, which is to be in May, he tells me. 
I saw Prescott yesterday in a shooting-coat and a 
wideawake ; the sight was pleasant. He was just 
off to The Kurst, he told me. I'll send you any 



IK DOITBT. 89 

notices th«t miiy appear of your book, and be down 
soon to see how you are all getting on. 

** Your afiectionate brother, 

.* Feahk." 

This letter gave her plenty to think about as she 
walked up to The Hurst. It afforded her pleasant 
. ^yesj of coarse it was pleasant, though confusing 
just at first . ^matter of reflection. Her book out, 
and Walter Goring to be married in May 1 Delight- 
ful brace of facts. 

" I wish we had gone to AnstraUa/' she sighed, 
as she went into the house, and was immediately 
fallen upon by all the young Prescotts. Then she 
walked into what had been the drab dull drawing- 
room, and found it strangely metamorphosed. But 
Ellen was sitting there, and the sight of her, cool, 
and calm, and pinkily pretty as ever, did much 
towards reconciling incongruities. 

" I'm glad you have come so early, dear," Mrs. 
Prescott said, as she met her sister. " I wouldn't 
decide on the curtains for the bedrooms till you 
came ; you have such taste.'' 

** My taste is at your service. Don't say by-and- 
by, though, when Kobert makes long lips about 



40 WALTEB GORING. 

the bills, that yoa would have had the cheaper 
things if it hadn't been for me. I remember the 
ire and scorn I brought upon myself by exercising 
my taste when you were remodelling your Bays- 
water drawing-room. How pretty all this is," she 
continued, looking round the room. " The differ- 
ence between this room now and the first time I 
saw it ! " 

" Yes, it is pretty, . ^I must drive you home after 
luncheon and see your house, . I dare say it is 
pretty too, though small,'' Ellen replied, with the 
pretentious feeble magnanimity of her order. 

Charlie laughed. "I think I will leave you to 
form an unbiassed judgment, Ellen; come and 
show me all the rooms, will you ? " 

Mrs. Prescott was auspicious, so they went to- 
gether from room to room, Charlie taking as, hearty 
an interest in, and expressing as unfeigned an ad- 
miration for, the improvements and alterations as 
though this place had never been her own. At last 
it occurred, to Mrs. Prescott to say . 
" I hope you don't mind it, Charlie ? " 
" Mind what ? Why, Vm deUghted." 
" I mean, I hope you don't feel my being here, in 
what was your home once." 



IN DOUBT. 41 

" Indeed, no, Ellen," she said, sincerely : she had 
so much more to weigh her heart down and cloud 
her happiness, than the loss of what had never been 
dear to her. 

"I was afraid you might; . oh, dear, what an 
unfortunate thing that marriage has been for you, 
Charlie. What a lottery marriage is, isn't it ? " 

"I seem to have heard the remark before," 
Charlie repliedj trying to laugh carelessly, but 
catching her breath, and nearly choking in the 
attempt. " At any rate, Ellen, we've drawn, . there 
is nothing more to be said." 

"No, nothing; and, as Bobert says, if it has 
been bad for you, it has been good for us. We 
wanted a house in the country, and this suits us 
charmingly; . it's an ill wind that blows nobody 
any good." 

" Exactly so ; let those words be the last requiem 
sung over the grave of my dead fortunes, dear. 
What a joyous time this is for the children, there's 
no one to look after them; how well Ella looks; 
she'll be as pretty as her mother." So she ran on 
until she had succeeded in luring Mrs. Prescott^s 
thoughts entirely away from the too suggestive sub- 
ject of her own marriage and its consequences. 



43 WALTER GORING. 

At luncheon, Mr. Prescott appeared, looking very 
country-gentlemanly in his shooting-coat. It was 
the first garment of the sort into which he had ever 
inducted himself, and he was very conscious of it. 
He could not help giving CharCe a dubious depre- 
catory glance when he met her; her eyes danced 
and the corners of her mouth went up. "I 
shouldn't wonder if that brother of hers has sent 
her a stupid caricature of me in this costume 
already," he thought. " I saw him laugh. Both 
these young people are much too fond of laughing 
for their position in life." 

He told his sister-in-law that he should get her 
husband to look out for a riding-horse for him. 
" A nice nag, steady, with a good spirit, one that will 
take me along over anything," he said, jauntily, 
forgetting the ditch and the brown hunter. 

" I'm sure he will do it with pleasure ; and I hope 
that you'll keep a riding-horse for Ellen, and then 
when she doesn't want it she'll lend it to me ; won't 
you, dear?" 

Mr. and Mrs. Prescott both looked pleased. 
Charlie was so thoroughly at her ease, so entirely 
resigned to the inferior position, so enchantingly 
willing to accept the goods they and the gods gave 



IN DOUBT. 43 

her. Mr. Prescott loved to patroDise people when 
he could do it inexpensiyely. Charlie's manner 
developed this love of patronage now. 

" Of course she will lend it to you," he said, 
pompously ; " in fact, any little pleasures that we 
can put in your, way we ghaU put in your way.'* 

"You're very good," she replied. She was not 
heeding either the matter or the manner of his 
speech ; she was thinking of that event which was 
to come off in May ; and hoping that they would be 
happier than she herself was. 

" We shall entertain a good deal," Mr. Prescott 
went on in an expansive manner. " We shall enter- 
tain a good deal . and I may say in a good way . 
and we shall always expect to see you." 

"And in that way you will get asked out by 
other people who will meet you here," Ellen struck 
in, in the lavishly explanatory manner. 

" Get what ? " CharUe interrupted. 

" Asked out . invited to parties, you know." 

Charlie began to laugh, then she checked her- 
self, reflecting that it was hopeless trying to make 
them understand why the prospect they were seek- 
ing to open to her seemed absurd. They were 
meaning well^ and she was so much more ahve to, 



44 WALTER GORING. 

and grateful for, anything that was kmdly meant, 
than she had heen when we knew her first. They 
would think her envious and soured, perhaps, if she 
explained to them that under all the circumstances 
there was more pleasure to her in absolute solitude 
than in any number of little evening parties. They 
'would think her soured, whereas it was only her 
perfect appreciation of the expediency and pro- 
priety, nay more, of the absolute necessity, of the 
give-and-take system of society which dictated the 
feeling. So she checked her laugh, and asked 
Eobert Prescott another small favour on the spot, 
in order that he might not think her ungrateful for 
his more lofty and glorious designs in her behalf. 

** Give me a lot of flowers to take home with me 
to-day, Eobert, will you ? " 

" Of course,'* Ellen replied. " How dull you 
must be, often, Charlie." 

" Not often ; I manage to get a good deal of time 
quite to ipyself," Charlie replied, unguardedly. 

Eobert Prescott looked up at her sharply. 

" A good deal of time quite to themselves is what 
most young wives would consider very dull work," 
he said more gently than he had ever spoken to her 
in his life before. The touch of truth in her tone 



IN DOUBT. 45 

had gone home to him. He felt at once that all 
was not as well even as outsiders supposed in this 
marriage which she had made ; and his conscience, 
though it did not pinch him severely by any means, 
told him why she had made it. She blushed as he 
spoke, and when he paused and looked at her for an 
answer, she said . 

" I never was romantic, you know, Robert ; my 
own is the only society of which I should never tire, 
I believe." Then for the sake of appearances she 
attempted an equivocation, and added, '' and as my 
husband is compelled to be away from me a great 
deal, I nurse the feeling as much as possible in 
order to keep contented." 

In about a month after this, Frank fulfilled his 
promise of sending her all the notices that had 
appeared of her first venture on the literary ocean* 
The book itself had come down before, and had 
been carefully read by each member of both fami- 
lies ; but remarks upon it in each case, save Robert 
Prescott's, had been reserved. Mr. Prescott, Charlie 
heard through Ellen, disapproved of her having 
published under her maiden name. 

" It seems to me that that concerns Frank more 
than it does Robert, and Frank advised it," Charlie 



46 WALTER GORING. 

argued. "Never mind about that. What does 
Eobert think of the book ? " 

** Well, he thinks it has some merit. some, you 
know." 

This, though it could not come under the head of 
rash encouragement, was more than Charlie had ex- 
pected. She was so nervously alive to the blemishes 
in it herself, that the merit had no opportunity of 
making itself apparent to her. 

The first review that came down was of the 
laudatory order. It dealt in gorgeous prognostica- 
tions of future success, and full-bodied epithets 
expressive of admiration. She thought it meant 
fame and fortune as she read it . fame and fortune, 
and a rapid rush up Parnassus. She learnt every 
word of that first review by heart, and adored the 
writer of it as such a discriminating demi-god 
deserved to be adored. Then her husband read 
it, and was pleased also ; and then it was perused 
by old Mrs. Fellowes, who forthwith fell into sym- 
pathetic ecstasies, and expressed herself as coin- 
ciding entirely with the reviewer's sentiments. 
"And in your next, my dear, I hope you won't be 
ashamed to appear under your real name,'* she said^ 
afiably. To which Miss Dinah replied, ** Perhaps 



IX DOUBT. 47 

it will be just as well that she shouldn't, mother, . 
you wouldn't like it if the next were a failure." In 
a cooler moment Charlie would have felt all the rea- 
sonableness of Miss Dinah's remark ; but what 
young author ever was reasonable over a first 
favourable notice ? Failure ! after all those bril- 
liant qualities which the intelligent reviewer had 
discovered in her? The idea was too preposterously 
absurd. 

The following day a much more important paper 
. one of the literary journals . came down, and with 
it a line from Frank. 

"You're well slated in the . . ; but never mind, 
it's so splendidly done, you^ll enjoy it," he wrote ; 
and thus prepared, Charlie opened the paper, and 
prepared to enjoy it. 

No doubt it was very enjoj^able, if she could only 
have gone to the perusal in a proper frame of mind. 
The sentences scintillated before her eyes. The 
article abounded in clever epigrams and brilliantly- 
turned sentences. Nevertheless, she was very far 
from enjoying the reading. Unfortunately, too, she 
had opened the paper before the whole family, and 
she knew that they were watching her, and felt that 
she could not keep on reading and holding her 



48 WALTER GORING. 

peace about it for ever. The splendour of the way 
in which it was written was less visible to her 
than the fact that she was denounced as ** coarse " 
in it. If it could have been been kept to herself 
altogether, she could have accepted it as a whole- 
some lesson, for she acknowledged that it only told 
the truth, though it told it somewhat severely. But 
she could not keep it to herself; she was only a 
woman, and she knew that it would be made to 
adorn morals and point endless tales for some time 
to come. Even Frank, instead of being indignant 
at it, thought it " splendidly done." 

She gave it up reluctantly at length, and tried to 
go on eating her breakfast, as if she were a callous 
and time-hardened author, to whom these things 
were but as the buzzing of summer insects. But 
the bread went into dangerous crumbs, and the tea 
seemed to scald her, when Mrs. Fellowes, who had 
insisted on reading it aloud, began to shake her 
head, and otherwise deplore. 

But if the review itself was hard to beai*, the 
commentaries on it were worse. 

" * Coarse ! ' Ah, that's what I thought, to tell the 
truth," Mrs. Fellowes began. Though if she had 
told the truth, she would have confessed that the 



IN DOUBT. 49 

idea had never entered into her mind until she saw 
it there in print. 

" I was afraid you had touched on one or two 
points that you had better have let alone, Charlie," 
her husband said, rather severely. " If you remem- 
ber, I said so." 

" Never to me, Henry." 

" Oh ! didn't I ; well, I thought so, then." Then 
he ran his eye over it again when his mother put it 
down; and when he had finished, he said, in the 
tone of one who has just made a fresh and before 
unthought-of unpleasant discovery, " Besides, there 
is scarcely any plot, and no moral whatever.'* 

" They are not * besides ' all the sins the review 
mentions, Henry ; they are included in it, in the 
very words you use." 

He did not look in the least ashamed of himself. 
Self-elected private critics are the most hardened 
plagiarists. He simply said, " Oh ! are they ? that 
proves me right, then." Then Dinah picked it up, 
and read it slowly, syllable by syllable, and Charlie 
steadied herself in expectation of a shock from that 
quarter . but it did not come. All Dinah said was, 
" It seems to me that if you're all going to be wafted 
about by every wind of doctrir.e in this way, that 



50 WALTER GORING. 

your noyel-writing will be more pain than pleasure 
or profit to you, Mrs. Henry. There's a great deal 
of truth in this; but I suppose you knew that 
before, though neither Henry nor my mother did ?" 

" IVe thought it all along, Dinah," the old lady 
replied, with dignity . " all along ; it's exactly what 
I've thought . exactly." 

"You fancy now that you have thought so, 
mother, that's all," Dinah replied, decidedly; and 
Charlie felt more grateful to her sister-in-law than 
ever. 

She could not help wondering what Walter 
Goring would think of it. It would have cut her to 
the heart to think that he could believe her to be 
several things that that review implied. She hated 
her novel lying there in its violet binding, as she 
thought of this possibility. She hated her " Gerty 
Grey," and wished with all her heart that she could 
crush the fatal longing that possessed her to go on 
writing. But she had another nearly ready, and 
she could not bring herself to destroy it, or to leave 
it unfinished. 

In the course of that morning, Mr. Prescott and 
Ellen came up; and just as their carriage stopped 
at the door, Henry Fellowes came home ; so 



IN DOUBT. 51 

they all went into Gharlie's drawing-room together, 
and the review was bronght forth for them to 
look at. 

When Mr. Prescott had got about half throagh it, 
he looked np at the luckless authoress, and said,.' 

*^ Well, I thought at least you would have had a 
good word here. Your friend, Mr. Walter Goring, 
does nearly all the notices of novels for this paper." 

'*I wish mine had fallen into his hands . he 
wouldn't have been so hard on it," she said, with a 
quickly flushing face. 

** But I think . ^indeed, I'm almost sure . ^that this 
is his," Mr. Prescott replied, resuming his reading. 
" Oh, yes ; there's no doubt of it. There's a sort 
of tolerant taking-both-sides-of-the-question style 
about it that is essentially Goring's." 

" H'm ! that's what you've got from your friend," 
Mr. Fellowes remarked, with as near an approach 
to sarcasm as he was capable of. 

.* Oh, it's Goring's, undoubtedly," Mr. Prescott 
pursued, with quiet satisfaction. " Know his phrases 
very well." 

" I don't believe for one instant that it is Mr. 
Goring's," Charlie said, attempting to speak calmly, 
and falling far short of her attempt. 

B 2 



52 WALTER GORING. 

" You don't think that he would see a fault in 
you, I suppose ?" her husband suggested. 

" Yes, I do. Do you imagine that I think him 
such an idiot? Of course he would see and 
censure a dozen faults. but in a different way. I 
should be sorry, indeed, to think that any man who 
knew me wrote that." 

" Especially Mr. Goring T Mr. Fellowes asked. 

"Especially Mr. Goring," Charlie replied, with 
the hardihood of desperation. Then as the remote 
possibility of this stab being dealt to her by Walter 
Goring struck her, she added, "He couldn't hurt 
me so." 

" Tm sorry to shatter your faith in him," Mr. 
Prescott said, with a little laugh (" they were not 
his corns that were trodden on," and our latest lost 
great humourist told the truth about the consoling 
power of this fact, as he did about every other on 
which he touched), . " I'm sorry to shatter your 
faith in him ; but there's conclusive evidence 
in this review, to me, that it's written by Goring. 
We called to take you for a drive . will you come, 
Charlie?" 

' No, I don't think I will to-day," she said. "I 
had made up my mind to ask my husband to let me 



IN DOUBT. 53 

walk round the farm this afternoon with him ; will 
you, Henry?" 

He agreed to her proposal ; and so the Prescotts 
went away, and the Felloweses went for a long, duU, 
tiring walk together. But she courted bodily fatigue 
this day; any amount of it was better than the 
thought that would intrude while she was inactive. 
The thought that Walter Goring thought so meanly 
of her as to try to cure her by cruelty ! " It can't 
be his," she told herself a thousand times; and 
speedily after that telling came the miserable doubt, 
" Why did he do it ? Walter Goring, for his own 
sake, ought to think better things of me than are . 
implied in that." 

So it went on rankling . ^that one review. No 
matter what the others said, for good or ill ; that 
one which might be impregnated with his ideas 
about her was all in all . ^the thing worth living for, 
and living down. 



CHAPTER IV. 

BY THE LITTLE BBOOK. 

May was approaching rapidly, as May or any 
other month has a habit of approaching when some- 
thing that is not regarded with rapturous impatience 
is to occur in it. All things were going on much as 
usual with the different characters of this little 
drama. Walter Goring was dividing his time pretty 
equally between Paris and Brighton. Fate kept 
him away firom London, therefore he never chanced 
to see Frank St. John's picture, which was pro- 
gressing steadily, and the young artist hoped and 
believed favourably; and something else, perhaps 
it was feeling, had kept him away hitherto from the 
vicinity of Deneham. 

As for Charlie, she was, so to say, steeped in the 
last section of her new novel and some disquieting 
speculations. The dream of fame and fortune was 



b; the little bbook. 55 

gone, but the defiire of having some interest inde- 
pendent of her home life still flourished. Indeed, it 
became more desirable every day almost that she 
should possess some such safeguard. Her legal 
lord had lost the hold he had had over her at one 
time ; she stood by herself now, and the worst of it 
was that she knew that she stood by herself. As she 
had never had love, so now she had neither respect 
nor sympathy for him ; nothing but pity, more than 
slightly dashed with contempt. In fact, she stood 
on shifting sands, and knew well that there was 
none who could help her to maintain her footing 
save herself. 

And she was desperately afraid of failing herself. 
She was not one of those women who from custom 
and conceit believe themselves to be founded on a 
rock. She recognised fully and gratefully, that great 
truth, which so many women persist in ignoring, 
that her daily prayer had been answered, namely, 
and that she never had been " led into temptation." 
It is easy and pleasing to sit in the seat of the 
scornful over those who have not been " delivered 
from evil," in time to recover breath and save them- 
selves, until one's own strength has been tried and 
found weakness. 



56 WALTEB GORING. 

Her strongest safeguard was this . ^that she knew 
many of her own worst points. She was not one of 
those who, because they never have done wrong, 
think it impossible that they ever should do wrong. 
She always remembered that better ones than 
herself had gone down in the contest to which she 
had never been called. Better equipped and better 
endowed ones had gone down . women who had 
far more to lose and many more weapons of defence, 
and who must have had originally as strong a 
desire as she had now to stand. The reflection 
inevitably induced speculation on those subjects 
which it is perhaps just as well that a woman should 
not speculate on too freely, predestination and free- 
will. If the former be implicitly believed in, the 
inutility of any effort to avert or control becomes the 
leading idea, and an active-minded woman is in 
danger of drifting into any madness that presents 
itself. While, on the other hand, illimitable faith in 
the freedom of the will does away with the cherished 
feminine notion of spontaneous passion, and insists 
upon reason ruling without a moment's cessation. 
Theoretically, Charlie gave in her adhesion to this 
form of faith; it was a creed that appealed to all 
that was strongest in her nature. She had a great 



BY THE LITTLE BBOOK. 57 

sense of expediency, a keen sense of humour, and a 
profound appreciation of .that power which is the 
portion of those alone whose heads govern their 
hearts. The rule of reason ranked high above the 
law of love in her estimation, whenever she thought 
about it. But for all that, she knew very well that 
there had been little reason and less expediency in 
the way in which she had suffered the warmest 
regard she was capable of feeling to go out and 
settle upon Walter Goring. Had her will been 
perfectly free, she would not have given herself up 
for one moment to his caresses. Had she believed 
in predestination, she would not have put a stop to 
them when she did. In practice, she had wavered 
between the two beliefs, and both had failed her ; 
and the memory of that failure mocked her when- 
ever she was thinking of the future and vowing 
always to be true to herself let what would come. 

It is perhaps because we are not taught to think 
coherently on any topic that it is not habitual to 
discuss in family council or society, that directly a 
woman takes to thinking about anything she is 
almost sure to build up some frail and faulty fabric 
of philosophy about it. There are so many things 
that come before our eyes, and the mysterious 



68 WALTER GOBING. 

mention of which, falls upon our ears daily almost, 
that we are forbidden to '^ speak about/' and advised 
not to " think about." Naturally we do think about 
them, but cloudily, and from the reprehending side 
alone. Under these circumstances, it is inevitable 
that either a merciless or a maudlin judgment is 
formed ; we are either too pitiless or too pitiful. If 
we accept unhesitatingly the dicta of those who have 
discreetly thrown the halo of mystery, the charm of 
something to be found out, over the subject on which 
they recommend silence to be held, and thought to 
be banished, we are hardened against the offender, 
without having the faintest notion in what way we 
may be lured to the offence ourselves. "While if we 
do not accept this view of the case, we blindly go 
over to exactly the opposite side, and sympathise 
stupidly with the result, equally without any know- 
ledge of the cause. Checked thought, repressed 
doubt, murdered misgivings, surely these have been 
the rule too long. To deny what is, and to believe 
what is not . ^to avow that that is impossible which 
is proved a possibility daily . to hope that founda- 
tions which are rotten will be good enough not to 
crumble in our time . to turn the eyes away from 
some sight which jars, and then feign a faith in its 



BY THE LITTLE BBOOK. 59 

not being because we cannot see it . ^to dread nothing 
so much as certain things being found to be lies 
because our grandmothers who held them true ran 
safely in their grooves . to fence ourselves in with 
modest fictions, and then feel virtuously sure that 
all who declare them not to be facts are upsetting 
the order of things, . all these things have been 
done too long and too fervently for there to be 
social safety for the first generation that emancipates 
itself, far less for the solitary ones who see light 
through the darkness, and seek to stray to it 
through new paths. 

Of course, when it is said that Charlie had arrived 
at the stage of doubting, it will immediately be 
understood that even so far she had not gone on her 
own unaided instinct. Women are essentially the 
undoubting section of humanity. Gifted as they 
are with marvellous powers of discernment, they 
rarely bring these powers to bear on anything more 
important than the paintings, powderings, and flirta- 
tions of their unmarried, or the peccadilloes of their 
married, rivals. When anything larger is set before 
them in a new light, it is invariably so set by a man. 
It has never been a woman who has first suspected 
corruption in either a creed or a cabinet. If they 



60 WALTEB GOrvING. 

have a doubt, they crush it. They like to believe in 
a lot of things, the more the better. Calls on their 
credulity in things of vital importance to humanity 
are never made in vain. They like to have large 
bundles of things that have been said and held to be 
trustworthy for generations, put before them and 
around them prominently, in order that they may 
have something to lean upon. Whether they keep 
all the commandments or not, they would willingly 
see the number doubled, and this not out of careless 
indifference, but out of a genuine regard for safe- 
guards that have stood the wear and tear of time. 
Whatever their practice, they are unfeignedly shocked 
at the idea of defying any law which has lasted a 
long time. Whether they crack the cords which 
constrain' them or not, they will avow that anyone 
who says openly that those cords can be cracked, is 
an atheist. 

How very many fall far short of the requirements 
of the human code of honour, who yet despise and 
dread from the bottom of their souls any one who 
dares to hint that some minor point in what is 
declared to be the " divine law " is of the earth, 
earthy. How many more who fear that if the 
twaddle be winnowed from the truth, the whole will 



B7 THE LITTLE BROOK. 61 

be found chaff, which the first breeze that arises 
shall bear away into nothingness. How many who 
imagine that if a paltry bit of badly-designed orna- 
mentation be removed from what they term» sono- 
rously, one of the fundamental pillars of the edifice, 
that the whole thing will go to pieces and be shown 
a sham. Probably it is well that they are so nume- 
rous, after all. The " Brazen Head '' was right, may- 
be, in chanting ** Nought is worth a thought, and 
I'm a fool for thinking ! " 

The foregoing reflections, all loose, crude, and 
contradictory as they are, were the ones that filled 
young Mrs. Fellowes's mind, and considerably dis- 
turbed young Mrs. Fellowes's peace at this time. 
They came and went, they were dwelt upon and * 
banished flickeringly and disjointedly, therefore to 
have thrown them into the form of a soliloquy would 
have been to have made them assume a position 
which they had not attained as yet. When women 
sit down and strive to think out and reason upon 
any subject for five or six pages, they do it on 
paper. At present Charlie had only arrived at the 
stage when one point at a time would come up and 
prick and rankle, and then be forgotten as anotl^er 
would rise. She felt that something was wrong 



62 WALTER GORING. 

either with her fate; or with her will. perchance 
with both ; and she did not see how it was possible 
to make the two agree. She knew that there had 
been a wild mistake somewhere, but whether Pro- 
vidence or the want of sublunary powder had been 
to blame she could not decide. She was sure of 
nothing, in fact^ save that she meant to do well. 

One pretty, half tearful, half smiling April 
morning she had been over to The Hurst, and was 
hurrying back through the grounds, the nearest way 
to Deneham, between one and two o'clock. She had 
promised her husband to be home by three, in order 
to draw out a little plan or map from his rough 
sketch of a proposed alteration on Lord Harrogate's 
property. Henry Fellowes thought he saw the way 
to reclaim a large piece of marsh land from the 
encroachment of the tide, and he was anxious to put 
his plan before the owner of the soil as soon as 
might be. 

The way Charlie had chosen led her across the 
fields that had been her husband's. They were 
Walter Goring's now, and were let to the same Mr. 
Greyling who tenanted the home farm belonging to 
Goring Place. The partition-wall which had been 
put up in ill-feeling, had been demolished as soon 



BY THE UTTLE BROOK. 63 

as Henry Fellowes and Walter Goring knew one 
another . even before The Hurst land passed into 
the possession of the latter gentleman. So there 
was no obstruction now in the short cut to 
Deneham. 

It was a very pretty day. There is a sort of 
girlish " when-the-brook-and-river-meet" beauty and 
simplicity about a young spring day that almost 
compensates for the want of that richness and in- 
tensity which are the portion of the maturer summer 
and more gorgeous autumn. All things look delicate 
and slender. The insects that make their way 
about amongst the tender pale-green blades of grass, 
are not full-bodied and bloated in the face as they 
are later in the year. Someway or other, too, the 
sun is more suggestive of all manner of purity and 
refinement than when his beams grow stronger and 
hotter. More suggestive ! In the latter stage, 
indeed, they are not suggestive of purity and refine- 
ment at all. If one is not physically tired, the hot, 
fierce kisses of an August sun on the lip and brow 
make the blood leap. If one is tired, he always 
serves one as he did immortal " Mrs. Brown " on 
the occasion of heT memorable journey to the 
" Victoria Theatre." It is useless thinking with 



64 WALTER GORING. 

the German sage, " 1*11 turn me round." When 
one feels the setting sun at all, it is always in the 
** small of the back," and forthwith a hopeless feeling 
of vulgarity and a wild desire to sneeze sets in. 
His brazen rays, in fact, make one feel wicked, or 
weak and dusty. But in the spring they are almost 
more silvery than golden, and they touch all things 
with such a tender light that the eyes that look 
upon them are softened in spite of themselves. 

In the hedges and on the trees on every side, 
the birds that were come from the south were 
announcing their arrival to each other by their 
several call-notes. The blackbird and the swallow, 
the white-throat and the turtle-dove, were each 
singing a different strain with a widely different 
motive. But what wonderful harmony there was in 
the medley ! Sincerely feeling the sweetness of it, 
Charlie tried to go further, and cheat herself into 
the belief that she thought it better far than any of 
** the operas that Verdi wrote." She wished to feel 
as unsophisticated and fresh as the weather and the 
scene. 

On her left, a very little way out of her direct 
path, a little rivulet trickled merrily along, and its 
banks were fringed with the graceful alder, the 



BY THE LITTLE BROOK. 65 

weeping willow, and the tremulous aspen, in a way 
that was very fair to see . so fair, that she turned 
and walked up to it, and then stood, half hidden by 
the drooping boughs of the trees, whose young 
green leaves threw out the scarlet feather of her hat 
in strong relief. 

There were little hollows or holes in the brook, 
and in them the water lost its crystal clearness, and 
seemed almost black. Tall bulrushes grew in 
sturdy clumps, making her think of the " Great 
God Pan,'' and the rare treatment he received in 
the verse of Mrs. Browning. Feathery plants on 
the banks were putting forth their young fragile 
leaves cautiously, to look at themselves in the water 
below. The bright black eyes of a nervous toad, 
who dreaded some disturbing influence from the 
young lady might injure her spawn, were fixed upon 
Charlie from a bole in the opposite bank. A cart- 
mare and her large-kneed daughter stood out. the 
one a chestnut touched to gold by the sun*s rays, 
the other a bronzed black . on the emerald green 
of the meadow over the way. A fair harbinger of 
the coming summer, in the shape of a speckled 
wood-butterfly, waltzed about in the air to the 
music of its own thoughts, which perhaps were to 

VOL. III. » 



m WALTER GORINa. 

the effect that it " would never languish for wealth 
or for power^ or sigh to see slaves at its feet," as 
Haynes Bayly avowed he would never do, could he 
but compass his wishes and be a butterfly born in a 
bower. All these things Charlie saw and felt, as 
she stood there, to be as fair a picture of the boy- 
hood of the year as she might ever hope to look 
upon again. What was wanting ? What caused 
the weary sigh to float from between her lips, and 
then made those lips close themselves in sad reso- 
lution ? What was wanting ? *' The touch of a 
vanished hand, and the sannd of s voice that was 
stiU?'* 

The bright-'minded gentleman who finds time to 
write capital verses, amongst his other multifc^ous 
avocations, has painted vividly somewhere, but in 
what I cannot recall, the stinging pain of awakening 
to the knowledge that the poetry of life is over. I 
hope Mr. Edmund Yates will forgive me if I make 
A mistake in them, for I quote the following lines 
from memory : . 



'*Tet I have known . ay, I have known, 
If e'er 'twere given to mortal here, 
The pleasure of the lowered tone^ 
The whisper in the trelliaed ear, 



BY THE LITTLE BROOK. W 

The fartive toaoh of tiny feet, 

The heart's wild efferrescing beat| 
The maddened pu Ws play. 
Tboee hearU are dow all stUl and oold, 
Those feet are 'neath the chorohyard mould, 

And I have had my day ! *' 

This is sad enough ; but bow about one who has 
never had the joys, and who yet feels that it ig all 
over? The sharpest pangs of a memory that 
recalls bygone blisses cannot equal the dull, darki 
hopeless pain that weighs upon the one who has 
nothing sweeter to look back upon than the know- 
ledge that there would hav^ been a possibility of 
highest hajypiness had not something else inter* 
vened. It is bitterly hard io feel that the poetry of 
life is oyer ; but it is harder still to feel that all 
chance of such poetry ever lightening the road is 
past before one has ever read one line of it On 
the whole, most people would rather " have thcdr 
day," however it may be about the after-part» 
Memory must be a better companion than nothing. 
" 'Tis better to have loved and lost, than never to 
have loved at all." 

She stood there a long time. Small wonder that 
she did so. The purling stream, the banks and 
trees robed in new verdure, and the smiling sun, 

V 2 



t6 WALTER GORING. 

were pleasanter companions than awaited her in 
that Deneham house. The hum of the recently- 
born insects soothed her into temporary forgetful- 
ness of the plan she had promised to draw out 
fairly. 

All at once another sound smote upon her ear, 
drowning the babble of the brook and the hum of 
the insects. The toad turned, and vanished, feeling 
that it was no use keeping her maternal eye on tlie 
invader any longer. The cart-mare whisked her 
tail, and tried to prance, but fell short of her 
worthy endeavour by reason of being out of prac- 
tice. The sun shone out more brightly still as 
Charlie looked up, and the picture was completed. 
There, on the other side of the rivulet, rode Walter 
Goring, smiling, and raising his hat from his head, 
and his horse to the leap across the water, as he 
caught sight of her. She reconciled the antago- 
nistic beliefs at once. 

She was predestined to meet him, and of her own 
free will she went forward to the meeting gladly. 



CHAPTER V. 

TJNDEB GBEEN TREES. 

The sunlight glowed upon his broad clear brow, 
as he reined up at Charlie's side and bent down 
with his head still uncovered to speak to her, and 
she forgot that she had vowed to be very steady and 
cold and composed whenever she chanced to meet 
him. Her heart beat, and her eyes sparkled, and 
the colour deepened on her cheek as she put her 
hand out to greet him in a way that showed him all 
too plainly how glad she was that the greeting could 
be given. 

Do we not all remember how prudent and exem- 
plary was the conduct of " The Lady of Shalott " 
for any number of years ? Vaguely she had listened 
to the tale of a curse being liable to fall upon her if 
she stayed her weaving. So she kept on steadily 
at her weary work . seeing the troops of damsels 



70 WALTER GORING. 

glad, the plump abbots, the curly-haired shepherd 
lads, the crimson-robed pages, occasionally even 
gallant knights, *' go riding by to Camelot," without 
turning away from her mirror to glance after them 
in the flesh. But when Lancelot rode along, she, 
oblivious of the fact that queenly fetters fast 
enchained that peerless cavalier, braved the curse, 
and left the loom, and looked after the '' bearded 
meteor." Of course she was very foolish ; we who 
are not placed upon a little islet in a river^ with a 
loom and a mirror^ and nothing more to intetest 
ourselves with, can estimate hev temptation and 
folly with admirable exactitude. '"Tis wiser being 
sane than mad;*' but a Lancelot flashing across 
one's solitude is a fearful trial of sanity* 

The man who broke in upon Charlie Fellowes's 
day-dream was devoid of those gorgeous accessories 
which strengthened Lancelot's charms in the golden 
word-picture Tennyson has painted. He had no 
shield with a red-croaa knight for ever kneeling to 
a lady in it . ^no gemmy bridle-- no thickly-jewelled 
saddle-leather . no helmet, and helmet-fe«ther to 
burn *'like one' burning flame together.'' But 
though he had none of these, he was ail-sufficiently 
bewildering. The young, good-looking gentleman 



T7NDXB GREEN, TREES. 71 

sitting his handsome, thonmghbred horse with the 
ease and grace of a centaur, or rather of an accom* 
plished equestrian, I will say . preferring to draw 
similes from things I have seen . was as disturbing 
an influence to the modem-minded yictim of soli- 
tude, as Lancelot in all his glory was to the type of, 
and warning to, her sex. -the lady who looked 
indiscreetly, loved unwisely, and then had nothing 
for it but to die. 

For no solitude could be more complete or more 
painful than was the heart and mind solitude of this, 
wife, whose husband's eyes were too frequently 
glazed with wine for her ever to look in them and 
find companionship. To her sorrow she knew that 
she had never loved her husband ; to her terror and 
remorse she feared that she did love this other 
man : to herself, however, she had vowed, that never, 
by look cfr word or sign, would she su£Fer that love 
to manifest itself. But when she saw him . saw 
him so near, when she had thought him so far off. . 
when she heard his voice, and her heart's chords 
thrilled to it . when she met his eyes and the old 
truth struck her afresh, that question and answer 
passed between them without speech . ^when she 
marked that gladness sparkled over his brow and 



7St . WALTEB GORING. 

lips and eyes at thus meeting with her, she forgot 
all sorrow, terror, and remorse, and through every 
fibre of her frame was conscious of nothing but 

joy- 
Why did she love him so well on so little? it 
may be asked, I do not know. The spell was 
wrought, but how, it is hard to say. She loved him 
best in the world, because he was the best she 
knew . ^the one than whom nothing ever could be 
better, brighter, and kinder. She loved him 
because on her darkest hours he had the power of 
shedding light. In her hardest moods his smile 
could soften her . ^in the midst of her unhappiness 
the mere sight of him made her happy. It was no 
mere blinds besotted, animal passion. He was 
clever, refined, generous, and gallant ; yet after all 
it was not these things for which alone she would 
"have left the loom." It was something else . 
something which cannot be defined in words . some 
subtle atmosphere which was partly the result of 
those qualities blended with something else to 
which she was sympathetic. a certain restrained 
passioi^ which, had he let it go, would (she knew) 
have carried all before it, but which he never w^ould 
let go, or seem to restrain with difficulty. But the 



UKDEB OBEEN TBEEB* 73 

best reason which can he given after all is, that she 
loved him hecause . she loved him. 

Had she stood alone in the world in seeming as 
she did in fact*-had no man trusted her with his 
name and honour, she loved Walter Goring well 
enough to have echoed Eloisa's declaration-^ 



** Not Ckmi^s Brnprev would I deign to prore ; 
VOf make me mistreta to the man I love : 
If there be yet another name more free^ 
More fond than mistress make me that to thee.'^ 



But a man had given his name and honour into her 
keeping, and so she told herself in a fit of temporary 
self-delusion, as Walter Goring got off his horse and 
stood by her side . ^told herself against the evidence 
of her heart beating thickly in her throat, that she 
loved him as a brother. 

" I didn't know you were home,'* she said, 
quickly, hoping that the explanation would satis- 
factorily account for a certain flushing of the cheeks, 
of which she was conscious. It was no bad tribute 
to him, that she felt that she would rather that any 
other person in the world than himself should 
fathom her feeling. Then she went on, " How is 
Daisy ?*' 



74 . WALTER GORING. 

"Very well, when I saw her last. Which way 
are you walking?'* 

" Oh ! any way/^ she replied, forgetting all about 
the " plan ** she had promised to be home at three, 
to draw out. " I have been over to see my sister." 
Then they talked a little weather, and he told her 
how he had been a couple of fields off when he 
caught sight of her red feather through the 
trees. 

"Have you seen Frank?'* she asked, almost 
abruptly. 

" No. IVe not been in town at all. I went over 
to Paris, with a man I know, meaning to stay a 
week ; instead of which I stayed many.'* 

" So Frank told me. He told me also that the 
picture will be wanted in May.*' Her lips trembled 
a little as she spoke, but she covered the trembling 
with a smile. 

He laughed and coloured a little. " Does Daisy 
ever write to you ? " he asked. 

" Never," she replied. She was longing for an 
opportunity of saying something magnanimous, not 
to say enthusiastic, about Daisy. It seemed to her 
that she was a debtor to Daisy, in that she dared to 
find solace in the smile of Daisy's future lord. 



UKBEB aBEEK TBEES. f^ 

But she did not see a good opening for the magna- 
nimity ; if Walter Goring was a genuine lover, her 
warmest praises of the one he loved would fall flatly 
on his ears. 

If he were a genuine lover ! The thought that he 
was such to Daisy made her eyes shoot fire, and her 
heart dance, and herself hate herself for giving thesd 
signs of jealousy without right. ** Daisy write to 
her ! " Nor Why should Daisy write to her ? she 
wanted no letters from Daisy ! She wanted nothing 
save . what? Well, nothing that she could ever 
have. It is horrible that such trivialities should so 
deepen and act upon all that makes life worth 
having. horrible, but true ; but the smallest inflec- 
tion of the tone in which he said the lightest word 
this day, deepened the love she had for him; and 
his silence was more dangerous still, because in it 
she had time to think. 

" I hoped that she had written to you," he went 
on ; " those people she is living with are wide apart 
from her in reality ; she isn't happy, Mrs. Fellowes, 
and she has no woman friend there. I hoped that 
she had found one in you.'' 

It was not the tone of blind lover-Kke belief. It 
was the- tone of a man who had a weighty sense of 



76. . WALTER GORING, 

responsibility; he spoke affectionately, but as a 
brother might have spoken of a sister. Charlie 
could only reply . 

" Oh ! you must be mistaken ! " It did seem to 
her so wildly incredible, that perfect happiness 
should not be the portion of the one in April who 
was going to marry Walter Goring in May. 
. He shook his head, His love for Daisy was no 
big overwhelming passion, such as he knew himself 
to be capable of feeling, did he dare ; but it was 
warm, honest, and active, nevertheless. He had 
not come to the conclusion that she was not happy 
without pain ; but before he left Brighton for Paris, 
Daisy had often been bored, and had frequently 
jerked her head away impatiently, not to say ill- 
temperedly, when he was kissing her. He had 
offered her her freedom once, and she had rejected 
his offer with a disquietude that led him to suppose 
that it was but the girlish doubt of how far it would 
"be proper " to go that made her repel him. But 
though he was willing to suppose this, he could not 
cheat himself into the belief that she was quite 
happy. 

"I wish she could have stayed with you,*' he 
went on; and then poor Charlie saw the opening 



UNDER GREEK TREES. 77 

for the expression of that magnanimity which she 
was longing to display towards the betrothed of the 
man she loved. She forgot that her husband's 
home was not entirely her own; she forgot the 
hours of anguish it would assuredly cost her ; she 
forgot everything save that it seemed to be within 
the scope of her ability to serve Walter Goring ; ot if 
not to serve, at least to please him: and even if 
she had "remembered," why she would have 
counted years of pain to herself as nothing, to 
the giving him one moment's pleasure. So she 
said . 

" I wondfer if Daisy would come to me till you 
marry her, Mr. Goring? Ask her . ask her, will 
you?" 

" Do you really mean it ? " he asked, eagerly. 

" Mean it ? yes, thoroughly, honestly.'* She did 
" mean it " thoroughly and honestly as she spoke. 
She would have done anything to please him that 
she could do and at the same time act fairly to the 
man she had married. Had she been Charlie St. 
John still, she would have counted her own hap" 
piest hereafter well lost in making Walter Goring 
happy here, could hid happiness not have been 
effected at a lighter cost. As it was, she felt it well 



78 WALTER GORING. 

worth While to risk paining herself for the sake of 
pleasuring him. 

** You can't think how glad I shall he to see her 
with you, Mrs. Fellowes; there's fiomething. -." 
He stopped, and Charlie asked, quietly-^ 

"What is it? Tell me." 

''I don't know; ytm saw how it all came on 
with Daisy and me. I don't think I'm a con- 
ceited fellow, but I did think when I asked her 
to be my wife that her love for me was very 
strong. She did seem to t»re for me, didn't 
she ? " 

Charlie nodded assent. Daisy had *' seemed to 
care tot him." Charlie could assent to that pro- 
position; but she knew very well that Daisy had 
not cared for hbxu Monstrously improbable as the 
idea appeared to her on the face of it, she could but 
fear that Daisy preferred someone to Walter 
Goring. But she remembered that Daisy had de- 
clared that if Mrs. Fellowes suffered a hint of the 
sort to escape, that it would be because she desired 
to see the engagement broken off; and the remem- 
brance fettered her tongue. Of all things she could 
not have that said, and she knew that Daisy would 
be very prompt to say it, and ** what would he think 



UNDER GREEN TREES, 79 

of me then/' she thought. Presently Mr. Goring 
resumed . 

*' Now I sometimes hardly know what to think 
about it Heaven knows I would sacrifioe anythmg 
and release her if she wished. But she wonH hear 
of that, and yet she doesn't " . ^he was going to say 
. "care to have me much with her;" but the 
confession was a humiliating one» therefore he did 
not make it. 

*' Perhaps she is so fond of you that she can't 
help being shy," Charlie suggested. She knew 
that she herself would have paid this man every 
tribute of open worship, had she been permitted to 
do so. She would have gloried in her love, and 
seen no shame in making the most open proclama- 
tion of it. But it might be that an equally sincere 
affection T^uld affect another woman differently, 
and so cause her to act differently. She tried to 
think the best of Daisy. 

They had walked the length of the meadow 
through which the little brook ran by this time, 
and they had walked it very slowly. In order to 
get out at the Deneham end they were obliged to 
retrace their steps along the bank, and the water 
looked so cool' and limpid that it fascinated them 



80 . WALTER GORING. 

into standing still several times as it murmured a 
running accompaniment to their conversation* 
Presently, after once more asserting that he was 
delighted that Daisy would be with Mrs. Fellowes 
for a time, " your influence is good fot everybody," 
he added, warmly, Walter Goring took a little, 
thin, sage-green book out of his pocket. 

" I have brought you something youll like, I'm 
sure, Mrs. Fellowes. Heine's poems." 

" Ah ! I don't read German," she replied, in a 
provoked tone. 

" But these are translations . the best 1 have 
seen. Of course, they lose immensely in their 
English dress ; but you'll delight in them." 

Then she took the book from him, and sat down 
on the bank to look at it. After a minute or two 
he placed himself at her feet, and asked her to let 
him find the " pine-tree standing lonely " and think* 
ing of the palm-tree ! And when she had read and 
rejoiced in that most exquisitely suggestive and, at 
the same time, simple poem, he found another and 
another, and the afternoon wore on. 

Under the circumstances, perhaps, Heine's poems, 
with their subtle mixture of cynicism and passion, 
were not the safest and most soothing things these 



tJNDEB GREEN TREES. 81 

young people could have read. Their author's 
profound knowledge of the human heart so impreg* 
nates every one of them, that each says too much 
almost to the most careless reader. In their bitter 
gaiety, their mad passion, their abrupt change from 
either of these things to the darkest despair or the 
most callous indifference . ^they take such a hold on 
the one who reads them as cannot be shaken off. 
Alternately they plunge you into a fiery furnace 
and an ice-cave. The praises of love are hymned 
too hotly to be holy or " good for the constitution/' 
as Heine says himself. The jeer at the inevitable 
failure of it comes too quickly on the wild rapture ; 
one feels the whole time, that neither the madness 
nor the morbidity has a touch of affectation in it, 
and so are deprived of a safeguard against. too 
free a sympathy which one has in reading Byron, 
or even Little's looser Lays. Paradoxical as it 
may appear, his very knowledge of the fleeting 
nature of all things makes him invest them with a 
terrible intensity that absorbs one* " We men 
who have no faith believe in so much more than 
you do/' a world-renowned man said to me once. 
If I read his riddle aright, he meant that all things 
were equally false, and so commanded an equal 
VOL. m. o 



82 . WAI^TEB eO&Ilfe. 

amount of belief, which is the view Heine Beems to 
take of the lore he sings so thrillingly. 

However, whether they were safe or soothing, or 
quite the reverse, Charlie Fellowes took to the 
perusal of them very kindly« The little streamlet 
babbled on, the afternoon wore itself away, Walter 
Ooring's horse stood at ease on each leg in suc- 
cession and found ease on neither, and still the pair 
under consideration sat on the green bank under 
the quivering aspens and graceful willows, reading 
and talking, and finding it all passing sweet« At 
last, fell recollection assailed Charlie, and she 
sprang to her feet, exclaiming . 

" I promised my husband to be home by three ! 
What shall I do? It must be hours after the 
time." 

" Its nearly half-past five," Walter Goring said, 
looking at his watch. *' Allow me to walk home 
with you and eicplain to him that literature and I 
are to blame for your forgetfulness." 

But this proposal she strongly negatived, for she 
felt uncertain as to what case her husband might be 
in by the time she reached home. So they said 
good-bye and separated; and she walked away to 
Deneham with a miserable feeling oppressing her, 



UNDEB GREEN TREES. 83 

that it had all been very pleasant and very wrong, 
and all Jier fault, and that Walter Goring would 
marry Daisy and be no happier, she feared, than 
she herself was. 



02 



CHAPTER VI. 

A MOONLIGHl^ WALK. 

No sooner was Charlie free from the influence of 
Walter Goring*s presence, than she remembered 
all the things which she had forgotten while 
she was with him. She recollected that she had 
intended being composed, not to say chilling, in 
her demeanour towards him; and she recollected 
the review. Then memory became a poignant 
nuisance as she thought of what construction he 
might possibly put upon her refusal to allow him 
to walk home with her. " He will think that I 
want to keep it from my husband, and throw an 
atmosphere of secrecy over it," she thought; "and I 
shall go down in his estimation. I can't tell him 
that I dared not bring him back with me, because 
Henry might make me feel ashamed of being his 
wife/' 



A MOOKLIGHT WJLLK. 85 

It was past six o'clock when she reached home ; 
the dinner was on the table, but ^'Master was not in/' 
she heard from the servant, and she was conscious 
of a slight feeling of relief as she listened to the 
statement; but the feeling of relief was of the most 
transient nature. The moment she came into the 
room, and seated herself at the table with old Mrs. 
Fellowes and Miss Dinah, she felt that the former 
regarded her as very culpable, and the latter as 
very thoughtless. " It's a pity your sister tries to 
wean you from your duty, Mrs, Henry," the old 
lady began, severely, 

" Why, what has Ellen done ? " Charlie asked, 
wonderingly. 

" Oh, only induced you to break your promise to 
your husband: its nothing, of course. Mrs, Prescott 
supplies you with amusement and gaiety, and so I 
tell Henry he must expect to be neglected.'* 

" Then it was very unfair of you to tell him any- 
thing of the sort, Mrs, Fellowes," Charlie replied, 
decidedly. She was very angry; the only thing that 
restrained her from disclaiming against the in- 
justice that was dealt to her more determinably, 
was the unwillingness she had to drag Walter 
Goring's name into the discussion. She could not 



36 \7.kxans3t ooszNa. 

repel the dmrge as to the eyil effect of the fatal 
fascmudoas of The Hurst, without statisg where 
and witibi whom she had been. She fiilly ii^nded 
to tell her husband, bat she did shrink from saying 
anytiiing about it to his mother and sister. Petty 
mjostiee from one of her own sex is eren harder 
for a woman to bear than petty injustioe from a 
man. " This is the first time Henry has had cause 
of complaint against me. I am very sorry that I 
lorgot my promise to be home at three, but I did 
forget it.'* 

" Well, I should be ashamed to say it," Mrs* 
Fellowes senior replied.? 

"I should be more ashamed to say I had not 
forgotten it, when I had.'' 

^ I can't see that it's anything to boast of^ Mrs. 
Henry." 

"I am TKrt boasting of it," Charlie replied, 
warmly. The reaction after the excitement of seeing 
Walter Goring had set in, and GharUe was Tery 
weary. ** I am not boasting . ^I am only telling the 
truth, and I am very sorry that it should be the 
truth ; but, beliere me, it is not Ellen's fault ihat I 
am late." 

" Whose fault ifli it, thcfn ? " 



L 



A MOOVZjaHT WjIXiK. 87 

-' Mjr own, efttSrelj my own ; do one asked me to 
stay, BO one wislied me to stay ; I forgot it*' 

"Bbve yott been for « driFe wifli Mm. Presoott ?** 
Mies DiBfth askenL 

CluurUe eoloured a little as she replied* '*No.*' 
She began to wish thai the had explained ai first to^ 
these ssereiless io<}uieitorB that she had not been 
detained at The Hurst. Now there would be a 
certain awkwardness in making the annooneement 
of where she had been« 

'* Did you stay there alone, then?" Miss Dinah 
went on. **I saw Mrs. Preseotfs carriage go 
through the town, and I said to Henry, when he 
was waiting for you, that no doubt you had gone 
out with your sister.'* 

**I think, as your sister went out and left you, 
that you might hsTe come back to Henry, when 
you knew he wanted you," Mrs. Fellowes put in, 
severely. 

Charlie began to feel as one who is baited, and 
her spirit rose. As they went on censuring her for 
nothing, the error of which she really had been 
guilty looked less and less in her eyes. 

**I shall explain my shortcomings to my hus- 
band," she said, coldly. 



88 WALTER GORING. 

**When he comes in," Mrs. Fellowes pursued, 
remorselessly; "but he went out quite annoyed. 
During all the years he lived with Dinah and me 
alone I never knew him stay away needlessly at 
dinner-time ; such a thing never happened . never ! 
while he lived with Dinah and me alone." 

"I wish he lived with Dinah and you alone now," 
Charlie replied ; on which his mother plunged the 
culprit into a state of penitential despondency by 
shaking her head, and beginning to cry, and lament^ 
ing that she should have lived to see such a day ; 
and the dinner was brought to a conclusion in 
thickest gloom, 

". The path of duty may be the way to glory, but 
it's a hard road to travel," Charlie thought, about 
ten o'clock that night, as she put the finishing 
stroke to the plan she had mapped ouL For three 
hours she had worked assiduously at it, and the 
report which was to accompany it, and which she 
had put into form from the rough notes which she 
had found scattered over her writing-table. She 
had worked at it assiduously, but she had felt no 
interest in her labour. The embankment of Lord 
Harrogate's marsh-land was a matter of no moment 
whatever to her; whether the German Ocean or 



A MOOKUOHT WALK. 89 

the best engineering talent gained ultimate pos* 
session of the soil or not, she did not care. She 
performed her part of this task because it was her 
duty to perform it, that was all* 

The fire had burnt itself out when she finished ; 
for the last hour and a half she had worked unre* 
mittingly, being anxious to have her tale of bricks 
completed by the time her husband came home. 
Bright and sunny as the day had been, the evening 
was chilly ; and now as she put the pen down, and 
pushed the paper away, the chill struck her and 
made her shiver. Of all external influences cold 
dulness is perhaps the most depressing. She was 
alone . she was in dread of the state in which her 
husband might come homie after his prolonged 
absence in anger. she had been so happy a few 
short hours before. She was only a woman; so; 
thinking of these things, she drooped her head 
upon her hands, and made. her moan over the 
mistake of her life. 

The weary woman in the moated grange was 
agreeably situated in comparison with this one, the 
sharpest pangs of whose solitude consisted in the 
knowledge that it might be broken in upon at any 
moment. ' Mariana at any rate had herself to her* 



90 WAZiTEB GOHING. 

self, while she was longing for the advent of him 
who came not. But Charlie Fellowes, however 
mrenrj she might be feeling, was eonstantly liable 
to a couple of litigious women, and a liege lord, 
who was too ofiben in a staSbe that would have made 
her prefer the society of some of the beasts that 
perish. 

She had not succeeded in uttezly concealing this 
chssige which had come over hiaa from his mother 
and sister. Despite her best endeavours, they had 
seen it and sorrowied oner it, and old Mr& Fellowes 
had snarled at her about it. '' Depend upon it/' 
she had said, considerately, '*if a man has never 
been addicted to that before marriage, its the wife's 
&alt if he takes to it after." And Charlie had 
stood even that . the charge of having conduced to 
his gross excesses . ^patiently. 

Meanwhile, Walter Goring was sitting alone too ; 
but his solitude was. so widely different from hers. 
His was so easy and refined . so well booked and 
well lighted, so fraught with everything that could 
contribute to the pleasure of both mind and body- 
so redolent of that charm which perfect taste and 
wealth combined does throw over the spot on which 
their forces have been united under good general- 



A HOOKUGHT WALK. 91 

ship. A charming solitade his; but one which, 
nevertheless, he would have been very glad to have 
had broken by Daisy or another. A charming 
solitude, with the firelight faUing flickering on the 
pale walls, and deepening in the folds of the 
pomegranate-coloured velvet hangings. A charming 
solitude to sit and smoke a fragrant cigar in, won- 
dering the while whether Daisy would ever play at 
olijecting to his doing so when she came to be its 
presiding goddess. A solitude that was peopled by 
so many objects that were dear to his taste . ^by a 
Bembrandt, portrait of a monk, whose face was all 
power, and whose forehead seemed to be tumbling 
out of the picture . ^by a Velasquez, a proud-faced 
woman in brown velvet, covered with tracery . by 
one of Greuze's litUe French beauties, a sweet 
embodiment of «in, the light of whose eyes would 
have made many a man drunk . ^by a fine copy of 
the Cenci herself, with that maddening mouth of 
hers, and that fair fatal beauty of the brow . by a 
pure-lipped " child '^ of Sir Joshua's, saying its 
prayers . by one of Vandyke's cavaliers (taken from 
his place in the corridor, because he was the 
beauty-man of the Goring family), whose eyes 
showed plainly that he had been " very bold to 



92 WALTER GORING. 

take" whatever he wanted . ^hy a marble copy of 
the Clytie, with her passion -charged bust and 
purity-charged mouth, with her down-cast brow, 
and up-heaving bosom . by a fair erotic group . and 
by a Leda, preparing to render up a passionate 
kiss. A charming solitude, one in the midst of 
which a woman infallibly takes up a better attitude, 
and thinks more gracefully; and Walter Goring 
knew this truth, and thought of what Charlie would 
have been in it. 

Perhaps even she, sitting alone in her own little 
sordid ugly room, did not feel the full force of the 
bitter bungle she had made of her life, as this man 
felt it for her. By the light of her liking for him he 
read her character plainly enough. He saw how she 
turned to what was fair, and recoiled from what was 
foul. He marked how exquisitely alive she was to 
externals, and at the same time he recognised the 
northern chill in her southern blood. Had she been 
all a daughter of the sun, she would have thrown 
everything but love overboard. As it was, there 
was a dash of snow in her composition, which made 
her graver perhaps, but decidedly less happy. He 
had said of her once, that she would talk recklessly 
but never act recklessly ; and after the interview of 



A MOONLIGHT WALK. 93 

this afternoon, he saw no reason to change his 
opinion. Since he had known her at all, he warmly 
regretted that he had not known more of her before 
she suffered herself to drift into a marriage with 
another man. "In that case, Daisy and Goring 
Place would both have gone," he told himself; but 
at the same time he felt that " Daisy was a darling, 
and he should be very happy with her." Daisy was 
a darling ! and as " Charlie," as he called her to 
himself now, was marriedj and neither polygamy 
nor polyandry were the law of the land, or accord* 
ing to his tastes, the best thing was to think of Daisy 
alone. 

It would have been the best thing to do unques- 
tionably. The worst of it was that he could not do 
it. The thought of the other one would intervene, 
and he could not delude himself into the belief about 
her, that it was " merely the old regard," a thing he 
was wont to tell himself about Mrs. Walsh. The 
thought of her as she seemed to him^ a sweet, wasted, 
loving, clever woman, would intervene ; and loyal as 
he was to Daisy, he could but regret that he could 
be so little to the other one, whom he felt could, 
under kinder stars, have been so much to him, 

By-and-bye, as he could not shake ofiP these 



94 WALTER GORING. 

thoughts and the uncomfortable feeling {hey engen- 
* dered, he got up and walked away through the hall 
out into the garden, picking up a Glengarry cap as 
he went. The sky was deep blue, unclouded, star- 
spangled, and above the silvery moon was sailing, 
touching a thousand points in the earth below, and 
bringing them into sweeter beauty. It was a shame 
to go to bed on such a night . no day could show him 
anything fairer. So he thought that he would go 
round by some plantations where the shadows were 
lying darkly, their boundary lines delicately tipped 
with silver. Bound by these plantations, and past 
a pretty ivy-covered lodge, where a gamekeeper lived, 
and so home by another path. He determined not 
to take any of his dogs. He knew their propensities 
to go off hunting at wrong times, well-bred as they 
were ; and he did not care to be obliged to distract 
himself from the scene, by having to whistle up 
depredating pointers and defiant setters^ 

As he walked along he could not help hoping that 
Daisy would come to care for these things as he did; 
or even if she could not care for them to the same 
extent, that she would invest a little more interest in 
them than she did in the fall of her drapery and the 
fit of her Balmoral boots. At present he could but 



A ICOOKUGHT "WALK. 95 

feel that, on the nre occasions of their taking walks 
togefher, Dmsy's sole thought had been how she. 
conld most expeditioiisly and becomingly get over 
the ground ; and again, he wished that Daisy were a 
little more like Mrs. Fellowes; and then he fell to 
wondeiing why young Mrs. Fellowes had not suffered 
him to go home with her that day ? He scoated the 
idea that woold intrade, that it had been because 
her husband might feel a certain jealous annoyance. 
"It can't be that,** he thought; "he surely can't 
bother her in that way/' Yet what conld it be ? 
Charlie had been so much in earnest in her rejection 
of his escort 

The gamekeeper*s cottage stood close to a gate 
that was very rarely used, which opened out from 
the Goring Place grounds into the Deneham road. 
Walter Goring thought that he would just go past it, 
and see the moonbeams amorously trembling on the 
ivy, and try whether he could not get over or through 
the gate, and out into the road along which he 
intended to walk to the principal entrancci which 
was some quarter of a mile higher up. As he neared 
the lodge, two figures loomed above the little garden 
hedge, and remembering that Dagom, the game* 
keeper, bad a very pretty daughter, he thoughtr^ 



96 WALTER GORING* 

" Halloo ! some rustic Juan sporting with Amatyllis 
in the shade ; old Dagorn should keep a sharper 
look-out on his daughter ;'* and he began to whistle 
loudly, and to step more firmly^ in order to give 
signal of his approach. As he did so, the figures 
separated; one went fluttering towards the ivy- 
covered porch, and the other came out and went 
hastily towards the gate, where a horse was standing, 
with his rein fastened through the bars. Involun* 
tarily Walter Goring checked his steps, and sought to 
turn before he could be seen. In the man, who fled 
like a thief in the night at the approach of another 
man . ^in the midnight whisperer of dangerous words 
to pretty Alice Dagorn, Walter Goring had recognised 
the husband of the woman he admired and was 
interested in above every other in the world . save 
Daisy, of course. His heart beat thickly with indig- 
nation and several other feelings, as he saw Henry 
Fellowes mount' and ride rapidly away. It was the 
worst thing he had learnt in connection with her yet; 
the worst, the most dangerous knowledge. "The 
dirty hound," he thought, " wasn't it enough that he 
should get drunk?" Then he thought of Charlie's 
frank fearless eyes, and of the honest defiant nature 
which was being taught and trained down by duty 



A MOONLIGHT WALK. 97 

and necessity to live a lie* " If I were her brother, 
rd take her from him," he thought, passionately. 
But even in that moment of passion he swore never 
to try to do it, since he was not her brother. 

He walked on, though there was no more beauty 
in the moonbeams for him. His heart was oppressed 
with a weight of doubtful sorrow, that he could not 
throw off. He thought of Charlie as he had seen 
her some hours before, in the pure light of the spring- 
tide day, by that limpid water ; and as he thought of 
her thus, and of her sweet womanly warmth, his 
anger rose hotly against the man who had gone home 
. to her from a flirtation with the gamekeeper's pretty 
daughter. 



YOL. III. 



CHAPTEE VII. 

AN EMPTY SADDLE. 

" Love in a hnt, with water and a crost, 
Is. Love forgive us I. cinders, ashes, dnst.* 

If this be true . and who can doubt it? . ^what 
is hate in a hut ? or indifference, strongly dashed 
with disgust and dread, in a square, incommodious 
little modem house, in a mortally dull country town. 
The cinders, ashes, and dust, which are the portion 
of love in a hut, must be succulent and daintily 
flavoured morsels compared with the mental and 
moral diet on which the luckless one whose situa- 
tion was sketched secondly must feed. 

For about an hour after the completion of the 
work which she ought, the miserable sinner, to have 
been home at three to do, young Mrs. Fellowes sat 
cowering over the table, with her face buried in her 
hands, making her moan. She was horribly un- 



AN EMPTY SADDLE. 99 

happy ; her soul was very dark. The best she 
could do, were she true to herself, without a mo- 
ment's wavering, would not brighten the dreary 
swamp of her life . ^it would only enable her to cross 
it safely. Was the safety worth the struggle ? 
Was aught worth anything? She had striven to 
do right all her life, and this was the result. Could 
she have been more unhappy, more severely 
punished, if she had committed any number of 
sins, which might have been pleasant at the time ? 
"It doesn't do to sit and think,*' she exclaimed, 
at the expiration of an hour. " It's only those who 
are well fenced in in pleasant places who may 
indulge in the luxury of turning things over in 
their minds," Then she got up and unbarred the 
heavy shutters, hurting her fingers with the iron 
bar as she did it, and thus distracting herself a 
little, and peered out into the street, trying to think 
that she was anxious for her husband's return. 
After flattening her nose against the glass for a few 
minutes, and seeing nothing but her own eyes, by 
reason of the moon being hidden by the chimney- 
pot of an opposite house, she went back to her 
writing-table and got out a chapter of the nearly 
completed novel . ^the one of which she was hopeful, 

H 2 



100 WALTER GORING* 

the one that was to eflEace " Gerty Grey " from 
the memory of man. As she got into the swing 
of her story she forgot her dulness and despair, 
and felt that though her grand venture was a 
failure, that she might get up a sub-interest in 
life suflBciently strong to carry her through it cheer- 
fully. 

Her pen was not a grey goose-quill, but it was a 
clearly-running steel slave to her thoughts this 
night, and her thoughts ran quickly and brightly, 
. as one^s thoughts are wont to run at such an 
hour. For a few pages she progressed very pro- 
misingly. Her people had been rather stiff for a 
chapter or two, by reason of certain doubts which 
had assailed the mind of their creator, as to what it 
would be well to make them do next. Everything 
that occurred to her as desirable somebody else had 
used of late, and she had began to fear that she had 
. exhausted her slender stock of original ideas. But 
to-night she had no doubt; the puppets fell into 
positions that were most awkward for themselves, 
and consequently most pleasing to the reader . of 
their own unaided will, as it seemed. The first 
sentence she penned was happy, both as re- 
garded its reason and rythm, she thought; at any 



AN EMPTY SADDLE, lOi 

rate, it led her on, which is the most one asks of au 
opening sentence. 

At last the puppets grew stiff again. The curtain 
drew up on a love scene, or what she wanted to 
make a love scene; but she dared not fall back 
upon her own personal experiences, and she found 
that without this she could not make them talk with 
a touch of truth, or move other than in a wooden 
way. Imagination could not supply the void that 
was made by a determined obliteration of the most 
she knew about it. Everyone who writes fiction 
must have experienced the difficulty at the shy stage 
of the outset of their respective careers. 

The moment of hesitation relaxed her energies. 
She began to trace little profiles . ^idealised Walter 
Goring's on the blotting-piaper . a dangerous pro- 
pensity, which it is just as well to nip in the bud . 
and as she did it she thought how ** well his love 
scenes were always done, and what a lot of practice 
he must have had to make them so perfect." She 
was but a tyro in the art as yet ; she did not know 
that, given certain conditions, and the chances are 
very much in favour of everyone acting alike under 
similar circumstances: and so the life-like reality 
of the desperate love he made on paper made her 



102 WALTER GOBING. 

fancy that Walter Goring had flattered iand flurted 
with many besides those of whom she knew. 

Then his poems again . those despairing wails, 
howls almost . by which she had known him first. 

He was a very sweet singer, but, as is the case 
with the majority of young aspirants for the bays, 
the melancholiness of most things was much before 
him in his verse. She ran through the list of those 
whom he had reviled in old heroic measure, and 
forgiven with a broken heart in lines that ran trip- 
pingly off the reader's tongue. She recalled the 
ladies of high degree, who, in his first volume of 
" Poems of Life and Love," had always been doing 
dark and dismal things, in gorgeous array and high 
places, with composed countenances and corroding 
care at the core of their hearts. Occasionally even 
he had made hazy allusions to royalty . ^his boyish 
pride had 'been flattered, he aveiTed, through two 
and a half verses, by some one who had in the last 
eight lines resumed her crown and sceptre. There 
was great consolation to Charlie in recalling and 
dwelling on these wild effusions of his earlier muse. 
She found herself feeling more than half convinced 
that the love he painted so vividly in prose was ' 
equally ideal. 



AN E]kIFT7 SADDLE. 108 

Presently the clock of the town-hall boomed out 
the hour one, and a sudden qualm at the continued 
absence of her husband brought her back from the 
regions of romance to the real life around her. She 
put away her chapter with the barely begun love 
scene in it, and stole softly to the hall door, which 
she opened quietly. Then gazing anxiously up and 
down the street, she found herself saying, almost 
against her will, "Pray God he may come home 
safe ! " 

The utterance of the prayer brought the pos- 
sibility of some accident having happened to him 
home to her with hideous force. Supposing;. 
but no, she would not suffer herself to suppose 
anything. She drove back thought, but she could 
neither quiet the vague dread nor stop the chatter- 
ing of her teeth, as she stood there, looking up and 
down, in pitiable ignorance of the side from whence 
her husband or evil tidings might come upon her. 

All at once the ^ound of a horse's hoofs, striking 
on the hard surface of the street, smote upon her 
ears. She listened more attentively, and recognised 
the sharp quick walk of the old brown hunter. Lis- 
tening still, she heard the horse come on steadily 
till he came just abreast of a road that led away 



104 WALTER GORING, 

from Deneliam to The Hurst, and then the sound 
decreased, and with a thrill of alarm she became 
conscious that he had taken the turning to his old 
home. 

For one minute she stood irresolutely at the door, 
then she closed it gently behind her and ran off rapidly 
in the wake of the retreating horse. She knew the 
step of the old brown hunter so well. Those who 
are accustomed to horses learn to distinguish their 
steps as infallibly as they do those of their fellow- 
creatures. She knew the step so well, and she did 
so dread that it might bear its master to The Hurst 
and proclaim the open shame of the habits her hus- 
band had formed, to some groom or stable-boy, who 
might be roused by the sound of the hoofs and 
some out to know the cause of their being there. 
The fear gave her wings* She had fled through 
the street and into the solitary road that led away 
to The Hurst, before she remembered that there was 
anything out of the common in h^ doing it. 

Her pace soon brought her close upon the track 
of the horse, and she was just thinking, "Henry 
will be furious with me I'm afraid," when, with a 
cry of horror, she came near enough to see that the 
saddle was empty. It was useless now to follow the 



AX EMPXT SAOPLE. 105 

horse ; she let hun go on where he listed, and turned 
back to seek despairingly for help and her husband. 

All thought of keeping anything from anybody 
was over now. She gathered up her dress and 
ran back to the house faster even than she had run 
away from it. One frantic struggle with the door- 
handle ended in her failing to open it, and then she 
rang the bell furiously, rousing all the household 
from their dreams of peace. 

Naturally, the first impulse of women when they 
are rung up in the night is to congregate together 
and ask each other if they '' heard the bell/' That 
fact ascertained beyond doubt, they light a candle, 
or rather strike matches, with hands that are un- 
steady through nervousness, and then essay to apply 
the light to the wick of the candle^ under the aus- 
pices of eyes that are half blind with sleep. The 
result is rarely a success for the first five minutes, 
but eventually a blaze is achieved. Then they fall 
to wondering whether they had better go down to 
the door and tackle the invader there, or merely 
challenge him from an upstairs window. 

This programme was religiously attended to by 
Mrs. and Miss Fellowes and the cook and house-* 
maid, on the presentoccasion, Charlie nearly went 



106 .WALTER GOBING. 

mad with impatience as she watched the flitting 
ahout from room to room. At last a blind was 
cautiously lifted and a window sash raised, and 
Miss Dinah's roice asked. 

"Who's that?" 

"It's I. Charlie," Charlie replied. "Do dress 
and '' 

"How very improper of you to be out there at 
this hour of the night, and *' 

"Henry's had an accident . thrown from his 
horse along the road to Goring Place," Charlie 
interrupted ; " follow me as quickly as you can, 
Dinah, and make the servants dress." 

"Wait a minute," Dinah cried. Then she ran 
down nimbly, and let her sister-in-law in. Now that 
she was called upon to act, Charlie took her place 
as the ruling spirit with a decision and promptitude 
that almost paralysed Miss Dinah. 

" We must keep it quiet if we can, but if he's 
hurt," (at this poor Charlie's voice broke a little,) 
" a doctor must be sent for at once . so bring Ann 
with you, Dinah, and be quick." With that she 
turned, and went off again on the hardest mission 
that had been hers in life yet. 

She did not run now; She knew that in any case 



AK EMPTT BADDUg. 107 

all het strength and all her composure would be 
needed^ and these she could not retain if she ran 
herself out of breath* But she walked at a pace 
that soon brought her well on the Goring Place- 
road, and then she began to look eagerly at every, 
place where the bank of the hedge on either side 
curved and the shade was lying dark as a human 
body might; to: look : eagerly, and to listen atten- 
tively-rbUt for awhile she heard nothing save the 
croaking of some frogs /who were going a wooing, 
and the chirp of the grasshoppers in the turf under 
her feet 

Suddenly she heard a man's step . the next in- 
stant she faced the man himself, and with a cry that 
burst from her hearty telling him all her loneliness 
and all her helplessness, she recognised Walter 
Goring. His first fear was that she had been out- 
raged beyond her powers of endurance, and had left 
her husband's home. It was almost a relief to him 
when she stammered out . 

"Have you seen my husband? . ^he has been 
thrown from his horse." 

** Not along this road, Mrs. Fellowes. I have 
been sauntering up. and down for the last hour." 

" But it must bjB this road . ^beyond where you've 



108 WALTER GORINO. 

been walking, perhaps!" Then she told him 
quickly of the evidence the horse had given, and he 
could not tell her that he had seen her husband 
start for home within the range of his (Walter's) 
sauntenngs. 

^' He must have turned down some bye<lane into 
the town," Walter suggested, 

" No, no ! the horse came straight along the high 
road . ^I had listened to his step ever so long; do 
let us look along here first." 

He turned with her, and oflfered her his arm, for 
she was shivering with the cold night air, and her 
legs were tottering under her. Then they walked 
along, looking and listening, and dreading that the 
worst that could happen had happened to Henry 
Fellowes ; and Charlie girded fiercely against Dinah 
for not following faster. 

At last they gained the entrance into the Goring 
Place grounds, where Dagom's lodge stood, and 
Walter Goring knew that the man they were 
looking for had not ridden in the other direction. 
"We may as well turn back now. I'll take you 
home, and then find him by myself. do believe that 
it will be all right, Mrs. Fellowes." 

But she could not believe that it would be all 



AN £MPT7 SADDLE. 109 

rights She was picturing the worst possibilities at 
one moment, and the next going through a thrilling 
scene of reconciliation with her husband, who might 
be just enough hurt to be grateful for her anxiety 
about liim. The worst of it is, however fertile 
imagination may be in conjuring up miseries, one 
or two disagreeables of a very poignant order are 
sure to crop up when the end comes, and take us by 
surprise. 

Very many years ago when I was a small child, 
and long before Free-trade was in the ascendant, I 
was startled out of my baby-dreams once in the dead 
of night by confusion and uproar and the words : 
"Papa is fighting the smugglers!" Now smug- 
glers were a very familiar abstract idea to me. Papa 
was popularly supposed to be always looking out for 
them and ** boarding them," together with the band 
of Coast-guard men under his command ; but he did 
these things away from home, out in Blakeney 
Harbour, or the Pit. The charm of mystery was 
over smugglers to me. It was delightful intelli- 
gence to me that " Papa was fighting them in the 
watch-house yard." 

Even at this distance of time I can recal the sen- 
sations with which I wriggled out of my crib, and 



110 WALTER GOBING. 

ambled away unnoticed in the confiiaion that 
reigned to a western window that commanded the 
scene of carnage which I hoped to witness. As I 
ran along I heard an order given for " lots of hot 
water." "That was for washing the wounds," I 
thought. I pictured my papa surrounded by 
smugglers, cutting and slashing, and killing them 
with that sword of his which I liked so well, and 
which I should have liked so much better if he 
would but have assured me that he had ever " killed 
a man with it ; " but he never would assure me of 
this. This blood-thirstiness of mine had been 
engendered by desultory dips into " The Chronicles 
of Froissart," . a book which few children know, and 
fewer still care about, . to the perusal of which I had 
been driven, first by dulness and the want of some- 
thing else to read, and afterwards by a certain 
sanguinary taste, which developed as I grew in the 
knowledge that honour and glory, and medals and 
pensions, and "honourable mentions," were the 
portions of those who had run the greatest risks, 
and destroyed the greatest number of their foreign 
fellow-creatures in the cause of that " Service " in 
which the men of my family were steeped. At any 
rate, whatever the cause, I had the taste, and on 



AN BMPXr SADDLE. Ill 

this occasion I ambled off excitedly and delightedly 
to see my papa fighting the French smugglers. 

It never occurred to me that he might be killed 
in the skirmish. I was too much ' accustomed to 
run my fingers along a deep sabre scar on his head, 
and to hear of sundry bullets which gave him great 
pain sometimes, and which were poured into him 
during a cutting-out expedition from the " Gany- 
mede," off the coast of Spain in 1813. I was too 
much accustomed to hear casual mention made of 
these wounds for a single spasm of childish fear to 
assail my heart' on account of my papa. So I ran 
briskly off to that western window, and looked 
through it, hoping to see his sword flashing and 
lots of blood flowing. Instead of these things, I 
saw a number of French sailors handcuffed and 
huddled together, while my father was deciding 
whether he should billet them in the stable or in 
his own house for the night. There was no fight- 
ing, no danger. The hot water was not wanted to 
wash the wounded, but to make coffee for the poor 
fellows, who were the tamest and merriest of 
smugglers . they were not even angry with their 
captors! I was bitterly disappointed. I pattered 
back moodily to my crib, and was presently found 



112 WALTER GORING. 

crying, and consolation was then offered me under 
the mistaken impression that I had heen affec- 
tionately fearful that " my papa was in danger." 
At the time I was not honest enough to state 
the true cause of my grief, having the grace to be a 
little ashamed of it even then. 

So Charlie Fellowes, wandering along miserably 
in the moonlight, leaning on Walter Goring's arm 
and looking for her husband, was conscious of 
feeling that she had not prepared herself "for 
the worst," when she came, as she presently did, 
upon Henry Fellowes. 



CHAPTER VIIL 



ONLY A WOMAN. 



They had turned back, Charlie hanging on Mr. 
Goring's arm, and suggesting at intervals of about 
four moments the dreariest and most doleful of pro* 
babilities connected with the subject of the dis- 
appearance of her husband, and Walter Goring 
consoling her as best he could. as only he could ; 
and wishing with fullest fervour that he could 
console her better. 

In his own heart he had no very over- weaning 
sense of horror at the probability of Henry Fellowes 
having broken his neck. The man had' let himself 
down so of late, and had this night put such a . 
finishing stroke to his conduct, that Walter Goring, 
though no Sir Galahad^ had conceived a con- 
temptuous aversion for Mr. Fellowes . ^an aversion 
that would have rendered it a matter of indifference 

VOL. IIL 1 



114 WALTER GORING. 

whether he lived or died had it not been for Mr. 
Fellowes' wife. As it was, the thought of her 
banished the indifiference, and made him feel, even 
as she trembled with emotion on his arm, that it 
would be well for her if her worst anxiety were pre- 
sently well-grounded. He felt so keenly the bitter- 
ness of her fate ; and at the same time he felt more 
keenly still that any attempt on his part to sweeten 
it temporarily would only embitter it still more in 
the future. But, though he felt this, he could not 
but be conscious of the subtle, unintentional flattery 
of her reliant touch on his arm and comfort in his 
presence . and, feeling this, it was hard for a man 
not to respond. 

They had retraced their steps nearly into Dene- 
ham High-street, when they heard footsteps and 
loud voices advancing towards them, and presently, 
before they could realize the possibility, though they . 
had recognised his voice, Henry Fellowes and his 
sister met them, and Mr. Fellowes was as evidently 
as sound of limb as he was in a furious passion. 
Charlie took in both facts by the light" of the 
moon, and her heart began to harden. Her 
sjixiety about this man had been an agony for the 
'.ast hour^ and now he met her with anger in his 



ONLY A WOMAN. 115 

face. What though he was her husband ? She was 
a human being . one, too, of a higher order of intelli- 
gence than himself. He could have been no more 
than angry with a dog who had acted against his 
wishes in ignorance and with good intentions. 

"Heniy, I have been terribly frightened about 
you," she began at once, without moving her hand 
from Mr. Goring's arm. " How did you lose your 
horse and get home ? " 

" Alarmed have you been?" he replied, giving her 
a full stare in the face, and a sneering laugh. 
" Convenient alarm, madam ; the next time you feel 
it you'll be good enough to remain in your own 
house instead of coming out to meet Mr. Goring." 

" Henry 1 " his sister remonstrated, ranging her- 
self up to Charlie's side as she spoke. By nature 
Miss Dinah was a distrustful woman, but she could 
not distrust the motives which had actuated her 
brother's wife on this occasion. " Come home, my 
dear," she went on to Charlie ; " don't mind him 
to-night." 

But Charlie had recovered the breath which her 
husband's speech had taken away, and she could 
not take her sister-in-law's advice. 

" Not mind him," she cried, passionately. " No, 

I 2 



llff WALTER aORlNG. 

. he has said the worst thing he can to me now, . I 
shall never mind anything else/* 

" You can hardly need my assurance of my 

meeting with Mrs. Fellowes being " Walter 

Goring was beginning ; but he checked himself. 
He could not bring himself to offer an explana^- 
tion to Henry Fellowes, . the doing so would be an 
insult to her. 

" I don't need your assurance about anything," 
Mr. Fellowes replied, roughly. " I only know that 
it's a thing I'll not stand : here I come home worn 
out and exhausted, and I find my house in an up-* 
roar, and my wife roaming about the roads." 

" It shall never happen again," Charlie said, coolly. 
" Good-night, Mr. Goring." 

" I didn't mean anything offensive to you, Goring ; 
but I was very much annoyed ^-very much an- 
noyed, indeed," Henry Fellowes said, holding out 
his hand to Walter Goring. 

For Charlie's sake, Walter Goring took the hand 
thus extended, but its touch was loathsome to him 
. it was brought to bear so coarsely and so heavily 
on her. Then they parted . ^Walter Goring going 
back to his own place, and the Felloweses walking on 
to the house, where the wildest speculations were 



ONLY A WOMAN, 117 

rife amongst the maids as to what would be the end 
of this. 

The two maintained a strict silence until they 
were in the house and the door was barred. Then 
Miss Dinah spoke, 

" Your horse is gone on to The Hurst, Henry," 

" How do you know ? " 

'* Because your wife saw him go when she first 
went out frightened about you." 

** Then why didn't she bring him back ?" he said, 
rudely, once more giving Charlie a hard determined 
stare. His mad unfounded jealousy had culminated 
this night ; he rejoiced in being able to show the 
woman who turned to Walter Goring because he 
was refined, gentle, and considerate, how entirely 
she was in his (Henry Fellowes') power. He re- 
joiced in mortifying the woman he had once loved 
so well . the woman he still loved after a fashion. 
He knew that he had lost all mastery over her 
heart and soul ; and so, like a brute, he determined 
on exercising the mastery that was still left to him. 
He would make her feel that she was his property 
. ^he would " break her in," he told himself. So 
he said now . " Then why didn't she bring him 
back?" 



116 WALTER GORINa. 

And Charlie shivered to her soul as she lis- 
tened. He could speak of her in this way. as 
he would speak of a groom or a stable-boy. She 
had grown so common in his eyes, that he not only 
forgot that she was his wife, but appeared to forget 
that she was a woman. She shivered as she lis- 
tened, and thought that under such treatment she 
must surely deteriorate. The best of her must be 
bruised away by such coarse handling; and, as 
she thought this, she hated him. And she lifted 
her head and looked her hate of his physical power 
.but still held her peace. 

Miss Dinah left them almost immediately ; and 
for the first time' she betrayed that sort of femi- 
nine affection for Charlie which is shown in a kiss. 
She was very sorry now for her brother's wife ; she 
pitied her profoundly ; and she was terribly afraid 
of Charlie being driven into open rebellion by his 
manner, and so of a scandal coming upon the name 
of Fellowes. So she kissed Charlie's burning 
brow ; and, as she did so, she prayed Charlie to be 
patient. 

As soon as her sister-in-law left them, Henry 
Fellowes altered his manner a little. He had taken 
«noufifh wine not to be intoxicated, but not to be 



ONLY A WOUAN. IIST 

one thing long; and his versatility was about as 
odious as anything that can be imagined. Having 
humbled her, as he hoped, before Walter Goring, 
.the man whom she preferred to himself, . and his 
sister, he now wanted to make friends^ in order 
that the subject might be dropped till such time as 
he chose to resume it and humble her again. If 
any surprise be felt that a man so hearty, good- 
humoured, and good-natured as he was, when he 
first came into this atory, should have developed 
into such a coarse, mean-spirited, half-tyrant, half 
profligate, let it be borne in mind that the hearti- 
ness was the result of full health and prosperity, 
that the good-humour came from good fortune, and 
the good-nature from an animal indifference to 
every form of annoyance that did not affect him- 
self; and that none of these things were ever shown 
to be other than they were. When he lost the 
position he had been accustomed to fill, the plea- 
sures which money enabled him to purchase, and 
the consideration which position and money alone 
command, he had nothing to fall back upon. His 
big handsome frame contained a very small mind 
and no soul worth mentioning. While it came 
easy to him, he had been generous; while there 



120 .WALTER OOBING. 

had been no special call for it, he had shown a sort 
of graciousness and manly consideration for his 
wife that was partly the result of his thinking her 
so pretty and graceful, and partly the result of that 
deep-rooted dislike he had to discussing unpleasant 
subjects till he was compelled to do so. In fact, 
while he had been a prosperous animal he had 
been a veiy amiable and agreeable one. But when 
the prosperity vanished, nothing but the animal 
was left. 

The alteration in his manner as soon as his 
sister left them, did not strike Charlie as being 
either graceful or desirable. She had seated her- 
self on her own low writing-chair, and he came 
and leant over the back of it and kissed her, 
saying. 

" We have both been rather foolish to-night, 
Charlie. Let us forgive and forget." 

"I can't make the smallest pretence of doing 
either ; and I have done nothing for you to forgive, 
or that I want you to forget," she replied, quietly. 
She could not forget that Walter Goring had heard 
her taunted with . she hardly knew what. She 
could not forgive it. She had been lowered, she 
told herself, in the eyes of the man with whom 



ONLY A WOMAN. 121 

she most desired to stand well. She could not for- 
give it, 

*' You must think that it was enough to annoy 
any fellow, Charlie," he went on ; and really, though 
he had brought the annoyance on himself, and fully 
deserved it, he was quite right as to its being 
'* enough/' It must have been altogether about as 
annoying a reception as could greet any gentleman 
on his return to his home, when his horse has pre- 
viously arrived with its saddle empty. 

" What was enough to annoy you . ^your horse 
throwing you ? or my being anxious about you ? 
They are the chief points of the case." 

" My horse didn't throw me," he replied, irascibly. 
And as to your being * anxious,' you might have 
been that without going out to meet Goring." 

" What is it you think of me," she exclaimed, 
getting up : she could not bear his leaning over her. 
It nearly drove her wild to remember that he had 
the right to do it. " Say it out . what is it you 
think of me?" 

He followed her, and put an arm round her waist 
. drawing her up against himself. He was a little 
cowed by her manner. As he pressed her to his 
heart, a choking sigh burst from her lips ; but she 



122 WALTER GORING. 

remained passive. She would not cast herself free 
from his embraces ; but how she abhorred them ! 
Instinct told her truths. 

" What do I think of you ?. Don't take it so 
seriously, darling. I only think what's good of 
you." 

" Then you told a falsehood just now, when you 
said I went out to meet Goring ; and what you 
have made him think of me." 

Her words rang put so fiercely, that he started 
and let her go ; and she sat down again, running 
the fingers of both hands through her short waving 
hair. The thought that Walter Goring would know 
now that her husband was Jealous of her about 
him, nearly maddened her. This was the real 
sting. She did not know that Walter Goring had 
read the secret without any aid from Mr. Fellowes ; 
read it, and regretted it, and felt it to be too sweet 
a one for him to dwell upon with safety. 

" You might have a little feeling for me in the 
matter, I think," he said, moodily. 

" Feeling for you;. ah! it can't be all on one 
side. What feeling do you show for me? How 
you leave me ! How you come to me ! Do I ever 
ask where you go, or reproach you for what cuts 



C7XLY A WOUAK. 

me to the soul? No . ^stop," (as she saw him 
about to interrupt her,) ** I don't want to make a 
merit of it . ^I know it's my duty to bear it all. But 
haven^t I borne it ? Have I failed in my duty ?" 

" Never," he answered, abjectly. 

" And there's very small merit in that either," she 
continued, recklessly. " I have never been tempted 
to stray from it. If I had been . just ask yourself 
. are you going the way to make the path plea- 
sant ? I never professed any romantic love for you 
. God forgive me, I never had it to profess . and 
I don't tell falsehoods : but I could have felt so dif- 
ferently for you . if only you had let me." 

The last words came out with a sob ; she could 
but pity herself, knowing how her heart must have 
been wrung before she could thus bring herself to 
pain a fellow-creature by uttering such words. 

"CharUe! is it too late ? " 

He was thoroughly sobered as he asked it. How 
he hated himself for having of late found bliss in 
revelry and forgetfulness in wine, and balm gene- 
rally in flirtation with bar-maids. Still there was 
comfort in the thought that his wife didn't know 
the worst. If she would only forgive, and smile 
upon him again, he would amend the error of his 



124 WALTEB GORING. 

ways. But a woman cannot forgive to seventy 
times seven unless she loves the sinner. 
' '' Yes,. it is too late," she said, sadly. « The 
kindest thing you could do now' would he to let 
me go away from you. Will you do it ? " 

" Never ! " he replied, grasping her round the 
waist, and never heeding the sickened look that 
spread over her face. " If I can't have your love, 
I'll have you." Then he kissed her passionately, 
almost hiting her in his frenzy ; and her heart died 
within her as she took in the truth, that there was 
jio escape. 

The next morning, at breakfast, Henry Fellowes 
offered a full explanation of the cause of the old 
brown hunter and himself not coming home together. 
Need it be said that he lied freely. He had been to 
a distant market-town, he told them, to meet a man 
about '* that embankment," not the engineer, *' but 
another fellow" (here he grew sketchy), "who pro- 
posed something that promised well," Coming home 
at a slinging trot, the brown hunter had stumbled, 
and he had gone over its head. On recovering the 
fall . ^for he had been stunned . and getting up, he 
found the horse had walked on, and so he had come 
home a short cut across the fields. Even as he 



ONLY A WOMAN. 125 

offered the explanation, he could see that Charlie 
was perfectly indifferent about it, and "by Jove,** he 
thought, "it ia too late." 

Then she offered her explanation. Not a word 
had been said the night before about her having 
broken her promise to be home by three, but now 
she referred to it. . 

" You will find the plan drawn out, Henry," she 
said. " I didn't get home till six, but it is all ready 
for you." 

" Thank you," he ireplied. 

" The reason I was not home at three was, that 
in coming through the fields I met Mr. Goring, 
and he had a book for me; we stayed together 
reading it, and I forgot my appointment till half- 
past five.'* 

She spoke quite coolly and collectedly, and Henry 
Fellowes, though his brow flushed, felt that he had 
made too much ado about nothing previously for 
there to be safety in hinting at displeasure now. So 
he only said, " Oh ! " timidly, and then Charlie 
proceeded. 

" He told me that he is to be married in May, and 
he wanted me to see Daisy before her marriage ; so 
I asked her to come here and stay with me till the 



126 WALTER GORING. 

wedding. Now I shall write, and tell him that I 
can't receive her!" 

" No, don't ;" Henry FeUowes protested, faintly. 

" Her coming would put us out dreadfully," Mrs. 
FeUowes, senior, said, crossly. 

" Besides," Charlie went on, with a burst of her 
sex's irrationality, " Mr. Goring can't wish Daisy to 
see much of me, after hearing what an opinion you 
have of me, Henry ; after that I should think he will 
feel that the less his wife sees of me the better ; so 
I'll give the initiative by telling him that I can't 
have her." 

So, despite her husband's entreaties, she wrote to 
"Walter, and told him this, and he read her reason 
for doing it. He knew her so well, so very well, 
that he could but care for her warmly. 



CHAPTER IX. 

daisy's appeal. 

It had been Mr. Goring's wish, from the date of 
his determination to marry his cousin, if she would 
marry him, that the wedding should take place at 
Deneham. It seemed only just and well that Daisy 
should go forth from Goring Place as a bride, as any 
other Miss Goring of that special branch of the 
family had gone forth. Therefore it had been an 
understood thing, and a thing that caused much 
commotion in the detached villa outside Brighton . 
that Mrs. and Miss Osborne should accompany the 
bride -elect to what had been her father's, and 
was her future husband's home, the day before the 
wedding; and the wedding was fixed for the 10th 
of May. Mrs. Fellowes' invitation to Daisy would 
have made, if accepted, but this difference in the 
original programme ; namely, that the whole party 



128 WALTER GOBIKO. 

would have come sooner by about ten days or a fort- 
night, and Daisy would have gone to the Fellowes', 
while the Osbomes would have taken up their abode 
at Ooring Place. Now, howeyer, since Charlie 
backed out of her offer, the first plan was to stand 
unaltered ; and Daisy would be without that good 
female influence which Walter Ooring had hoped to 
see Charlie exert over her, at that turning-point in 
her career when a woman is popularly supposed to 
be peculiarly open to impressions for good or ill. 

There were to be no other guests at the marriage 
ceremony and breakfast, save the people who have 
appeared in this story . the Prescotts and the Fel- 
lowes', the Travers', and Frank St. John, who was 
to come down with his picture on the night of the 
9th, made up the list of those invited. Happily for 
himself, some undefined feeling intervened and pre- 
vented Walter Goring from making a greater parade 
than was possible about his projected plan* 

Daisy had asserted that there was an absolute 
necessity for her to break the journey from Brighton 
to Goring Place, by staying in London for part of a 
day and one night, in order that she might get 
innumerable " things," which, at the last, she had 
remembered were forgotten. Whatever was pointed 



daisy's appeal. lid 

out forcibly, Mrs. Osborne was prone to see invari- 
ably. Accordingly, she now, as nsoal, took Miss 
Gofing's view of the case, and agreed to go up to 
town on the 8th, and remain there the night, instead 
of passing right through on the 9th. 

From the moment that Mrs, Osborne saw the 
beauty of, and acceded to, Daisy's proposition, Daisy 
was delightfully agreeable. She had been rather 
thoughtful, rather downcast, rather sullen, to tell 
the truth, of late ; but when this last harmless whim 
of hers was pronounced worthy to be acted upon, she 
recovered her vigour and animation marvellouslyf 
and forthwith proceeded to make herself delightfully 
agreeable to Mrs. Osborne and Alice. In fact, she 
overpowered the latter with presents of things that 
Walter had given her, and that were not strictly 
according to her taste, " He gave me this for my 
engagement ring," she said, handing Alice a little 
hoop of turquoise, '' but the beastly things turn green 
if they get wet. you'U remember to take it off when 
you wash your hands, Alice. I always forget, so 
you may have it.'* 

. "But what will Mr. Goring think?" Alice had 
suggested ; and then Daisy had shrugged her should 
ders and replied, that " if Mr. Goring didn't like 

VOL. lit. K 



130 WALTEB G0BIN6. 

itj. lie eould. well ! give her another." Tlien she 
stopped further protestation on. Alice's part^ by 
BEte^ing that bamble^minded young person in a 
imponr-bath (tf gratitude, by telHng her that she 
should ''come and stay at Goring Place, by-and^bye, 
8ft often as^ she eeuM/^ 

They rea^died London on t&e morning o£ the: 8th 
by an eleven o'clock train ; aaad when th^ had put 
down their tmntka at the hotel to idoch Walter had 
directed theiiB, Daisy urged that they should start 
on their shop^ng expedition at onee, walking. She 
.was the gniding stai^ the ruling spirit of that walk ; 
and. she betrayed stn intimata acquaintance with 
localities, and with the sevend specialities of different 
shops, that caused Mrs. Osbozlxe ta look upon her 
with awe, and fallow her blindly. 

It conld not be thai Daisy had any design in 
tiring out her respectable duenna; yet it was a 
terrible dance which she led her on that miomingv 
Up and down Regent Street, along Piccadilly to 
Sloane Street; back again to some matchless silk*- 
mercers on Ludgate Hill, and always walking. More 
than once, Mrs. Osborne faintly proposed a cab. 
The May sun was a strong one that year, and the 
pavement was hot, and Mrs. Osborne was a woaaan 



daisy's appeal. 131 

of weight. But whenever she proposed a cab, Daisy 
looked alarmed, and said, *'^not a fottr- wheeled one, 
sureljr; all the people with small-pox and fever go 
to the hospitals in them, you know.'* It was: useless 
for Mrs. Osborne to say, "those epidemics are not in 
town now, my dear." Daisy looked unconvinced, 
and gave pretty shudders, which Mrsr. Osborne 
blindly accepted as being illustrative of fear, and 
entreated that they might " take a Hansom," which 
entreaty was not complied with by reason of there 
being a difficulty about all three of them getting into 
it. The end of it was, that when they returned to 
their hotel in St. James's Street, at half-past two, 
Mrs. Osborne was worn out by the combination of 
unaccustomed excitement and fatigue. The din had 
made her head ache, and there " was nothing for 
that," she said, " but to go and lie down quietly, and 
get to sleep.'* 

Daisy waited until Mrs. Osborne had taken off her 
boots and her dress, and placed herself upon the bed. 
Daisy even waited until slumber had begun to press 
Mrs. Osborne's eyelids down heavily. Then she 
crept into her room, and spoke in a drowsy kind of 
tone, in order not too thoroughly to disturb and 
rouse her sleepy protectress. "There are some 

K 2 



132 WALTEB GOBING. 

things that I have forgotten even now/' Daisy said, 
standing in the solitary ray of light which Mrs. 
Osborne had still suffered to have free access into 
her room . standing in it, and looking such a pale- 
faced, yellow-haired embodiment of truth and purity, 
that a keener and more sceptical person than Mrs. 
Osborne might have been deceived into believing 
that all things about Daisy were as they seemed. 
*^ There are some things that I have forgotten even 
now . ^little presents for Mrs. Fellowes, who has been 
80 kind to me, you know^ Walter will be quite vexed." 
Daisy looked pensive, and Mrs. Osborne gave an 
inward groan, and moved her tired feet wearily, 
but resignedly, in a manner that indicated to the 
acute Daisy that the owner of the feet was about to 
flounder off the bed. Seeing this, the considerate 
young lady went on abruptly-. 

" It would be cruel to drag you out again, Mrs. 
Osborne : let Alice go with me." 

" Mr. Goring won't like it," Mrs. Osborne faintly 
protested ; but Daisy saw that her protectress was 
Amenable to the amendment. 

"He won't mind it a bit when he knows the 
motive . to get something that will show his friend, 
Mrs. Fellowes, that I remembered her at the last. 



daisy's appeal. 188 

Do let Alice go with me, and you rest yourself^ Mrs. 
Osborne.'* 

"But you won't be long now, will you, Miss 
Goring ? " Mrs. Osborne said, suffering the charm 
of possible repose to come over her senses again. 
"I hardly like it. It's not what ought to be . ^you 
two girls running about by yourselves ; but" (and 
she looked down upon them piteously) " my ancles 
are so swollen." 

" We shall not be long, of course not. You'll see 
Alice back in less than an hour, and you know it's 
Alice you are most anxious about," Daisy replied, 
laughing. Then she gently went out of the room, 
and Mrs. Osborne blinked and winked, and tried to 
keep awake long enough to make up her mind that 
she ought not to let those two girls go out alone, 
and failed in doing so. 

Daisy went back into the room where Alice was^ 
and told her of the assent that had been given by 
Mrs. Osborne. " Your mother is too tired to come 
out, Alice, so you're to come as watch-dog, please ; 
I am only going to a shop in Piccadilly. We'll go 
in a cab, and you can wait in it at the door if you 
like. I shall not be more than a minute getting 
what I want." 



184 WAl4TB» GORING. 

. '' I thoD^t you were Afraid to go in a cab this 
morning." 

" So J was, this morning. I have got over my 
' group41eft6 alarm '^^that was what your mother 
c^ed it. J am not at aU obstinate ; I'm always 
rwkdy to be convinced.'' 

When they reached the door of the shop in Picca- 
dilly, Daisy said agi^n, " You needn't come in with 
me, Alice. Wait here, and I'll soon be out again ;" 
and Alice obeyed her, partly out of delicacy and 
partly because she was tired. It occurred to Mjas 
Osborne that the liberal bride^elect was going to get 
some offering of friendship for the lady with whom 
she had been living of late, as well as for Mrs. Fel- 
lowes, " and so, naturally, she would xiather that I 
didn't 0ee it till she gives it to mamma," Alice 
thought, looking affectionately after tb^ peaceful, 
s)»iUng Paisy, as she went into the shop. 

Miss Goring paused at tib^e first counter and asked 
for sonjtething. Before they could show it to her, 
she rase |ro.m the chair and ^aid she would '"just 
go m and look at those shawls," pointing to some 
whi«h "wd^r^e hanging iji l;he dim distance beyond an 
Bush in BXJ^&»r roc^t She would go and look at 
them and then come back for the embroideired hand- 



DAI8Y*S APPEAL. 185 

kerchiefs she had &*st Mked for. As fihe walked 
along towards the shawls her heart thumped hea- 
vily. She was horribly «^aid of one of tiie men 
following her . one of the men who had seen her 
leave the cab waiting and come in. But they did 
not do so. They knew that the next department 
was competent, and that their aid was not required 
to bring the young lady and a shawl together. 

When she passed under the arch she looked back. 
There was no one looking, no one following. 
One of the attendant spirits salaamed, and went 
through the rest ^f the formula observed when a 
customer enters; but Daisy passed on, saying 
simply that she had been served. She passed on 
and out at another door into another street, and 
then she called a cab and got in, giving n dicection 
hastily and ati order to drive fast. 

She never thought onee as she was jolted and 
rattled through the streets, of the girl she had left 
awaiting her. But she thought a good deal of one 
who thought to make her his wife so soon. "Poor 
Walter ! it's only kindness to him tiiou^, if I suo* 
ceed; and if I f ail--oh ! t/IfaU.'* 

She could not even think of what woidd happen 
then. A white horror crept all over her at the bare 



186 WALTER GOBINGt 

possibility^ and au awful sensation of sickness came 
into the palms of her hands and caused het jaws to 
quiver and open helplessly, A dampness broke .out 
on her brow, and for a few moments she saw and 
heard nothing. In fact* she nearly fainted under 
the influence of the thought of failing in the some* 
thing on which she was bent. But by the time she 
reached her destination, the sickly pallor had fled, 
her heart was bounding high, and her cheek was 
blushing brightly with hope. 

Her destmation was a house in a dull dreary 
street, in the west-central district,.the door of which 
was opened to her by a shabby maid-servant, with 
a swollen face. ^ In answer to her inquiry for 
some person, the servant said, " Yes, he's at home," 
adding, in a mutter that did not reach Daisy's ears, 
" It ainH often he dare stir out. Then she opened 
the door of a back drawing-room, and Daisy walked 
in, stood for a few moments trying to call to a man 
who sat writing at the extreme end of the room, 
failed in doing so coherently, and as he looked round 
and rose, rushed forward to him and threw her arms 
round the neck of Laurence Levinge. 

His ^ first words nearly crushed her to the 
ground* 



daisy's AFPEALt Idt 

" Daisy» Daisy, why have you come ? Why won't 
you let us keep what little honour is left us/' 

She fell down on her knees before him^ sobbing 
and kissing his hands passionately^ 

** You promised to marry me once. I shall die if 
you don't. I can*t go on . ^I can't marry Walter* 
Oh, Laurence, let me stay with you I I love you 
bo! I love you so!'* 

** You'll drive me mad, Daisy.'* Bemorse for 
her, and regard for her, and regret for so many 
mad things, were tearing at the man's heart. He 
was not all a villain . no one is ; but her love for 
him made him feel himself to be the greatest the 
sun ever shone upon. Presently he lifted her up 
and seated her on the chair from which he had 
risen, and still she clung to him as to the only 
thing that was dear to her on earth, and prayed him 
to let her stay with him, for she loved him so. To 
every argument he used, she only answered that " I 
love you so. I can't live away . ^I can't die away 
from you." 

It was a maddening interview for him. In vain 
he painted his worse than poverty, his tremendous 
debts, his inability to go out even now in the light 
of day* In vain he told her that he was a gambler 



188 WALTEB GOBING. 

out of lock, and prayed her fervenUj not to try and 
induce him to add the ain of dragging her doim 
with him to the many he had committed, ^e iras 
paying a bitter, penalty now for having tried in sport 
to make this giri 1ot« him. She was doing it in 
terrible earnest, and he loyed her too. 

Laurence Levinge had fallen upon very evil days 
indeed. It was his own fault truly that he had done so. 
He had gambled and cheated and been found out ; 
he had swindled some of his best fdends, and;been 
cut by them. He had deceived a girl who believed 
him to be good and true, as he looked . 'who loved 
him so well that she would have given her life, 
her hononr, her hopes of all happiness, to have 
served him, and who asked, who cared, for nothing 
in return save that she might stay wilh him, and 
this (it was his hardest punishment) he could not 
grant. For a few months, if her money lasted,. »the 
few poor hundreds, which he knew he should risk 
at the tables, if he could touch them,. -they might 
live. After that, she might starve, perchance ; and, 
selfish as he was, he could not do it, «^dently as she 
prayed him " not to fear for her, but to let her 4S»tay, 
for she loved him so.'' It was hard, it was pitiful, 
bad as he was, to crush her plea and beseech her 



daisy's appeal. 139 

to marry and be happy with Walter Goring, and 
finally to force her back into the cab, and torn away 
resolutely from her loving lips, and the eyes that 
were nearly blind with tears shed for this parting 
with him. He had been very false, very craeL He 
had taken the hottest heart that ever throbbed in 
a woman's breast, and trifled with it The end . 
the miserable end . justified h^ in thinking these 
things. Yet as he turned away, after telling the man 
to drive her back to her hotel, his wonderful beauty 
aud the lov« in his sad-looking eyes made Jber mrear 
that she would many no other man, though she 
should not have the courage to tell Walter Ooring 
so until the very last. '' None bat Lfturenoe. my 
Laurence/' sba sobbed, fondfy^ 



CHAPTER X. 



'MY ELAINE. 



The 9th of May was the fairest day the year had 
seen yet So fair, that one looked invduntarily for 
the hawthorn blossom on the hawthorn hedges^ 
forgetting that what is customarily called "May'' 
rarely blooms till June . so fair that women thought 
of muslins and men of cooled beverages, and every- 
body of economical plans, that would enable them to 
" get away '' somewhere to be cooler in the autumn. 
Up in London, exquisite complete suits of the 
calibre of cobwebs dawned upon the vision in divers 
shop windows. Ubiquitous Gatti broke out all 
over town at once in feverish-looking ices and irre- 
pressible bottles of ginger-beer . a liquid which 
neither cheers nor inebriates, nor does anything, 
save painfully distend. And down at Deneham and 



Ul 

idl about Goring Plaee, people were saying that if it 
were only ** equally fine to-morrow," it might be 
hailed as a remarkably auspicions omen about a 
remarkably hazardous match, 

Daisy and the Osbomes arriyed about five in the 
afternoon, and Walter Goring met them at the 
station, after the fashion of princes and other young 
men of mark when their brides-elect come dreadful 
distances to marry them. Not that Daisy had 
come a " dreadful distance ; " but she avowed that 
she had done so when Walter remarked how pale 
and tired slie looked, ** Its enough to make any- 
one look pale and tired, Walter-*the dreadful 
distance, and such a beast of a train," she said, 
looking away from him; and since no other was 
offered, he was obliged to be content with that 
explanation, 

Daisy had made all things smooth and straight 
with the Osbomes, When she returned to them 
the day before, after that visit to Laurence Le- 
vinge, she found them, as she anticipated, rapidly 
driving each other mad by a series of broken- 
hearted, not to say idiotic, suggestions, Alice had 
waited in the cab at the shop-door as Daisy had 
ordered her to do, until her modesty and anxiety 



142 WALT£B GOIUNa. 

combined to make ber believe that alftr tms the 
cynofiure of aU eyetsr. Then she bad mad« her way 
into the gorgeous emporium which seemed to hanre 
swallowed up Daisy; and when she did this, melan« 
cboly Qoickly claimed her for his own. In mswer 
to the most Incid, description she cotdd offer of 
Daisy to the four men who simtdtaneonsly poshed 
chabrs out, and asked what they cotdd do for her, 
the sole answer die got was th»t '*^ihey would 
inquire." Naturally, their inquiries ended in no- 
thing. So finally, po<»r Alice went home in the cab 
amd ai state of blank misery. 

For about an hour^ Mcs. Osborne and her daughter 
made helpless i^marks to each other* Alice's cir- 
cumstantial evidence was flawless up to a certain 
point. **She got out of the cab and walked into 
the shop as quietly as possible," the girl said, for 
the twentieth time, and for the twentieth time her 
mother made reply, *' Walked in qm«tly and didn't 
seem flurried, you say, Alice ? " ** No," AKce 
said, decidedly; but after this her evidence grew 
weak, dealing principally with the thoughts that had 
beset herself while she waited. At the end of an 
hour, and just when they had plunged themselves 
into an abyss of confusion, respecting what it would 



be well to do-^jost as Mrsv Osborne had shaken 
her head reproachfally at the a&cles> whose inoppor^ 
tune swelling had been the indirect oaaae of the 
Tmaehief,, and Alice had began to entertain dark 
suipicions as to the soMve shopmels having msde 
BiWBy^ with Daisy for the soks of the jewellery she 
wore^ and bnried her lacerated corpse under the 
coimtep-^jmst at ihia joneture. Miss Goring came 
back. 

She did not absofaxtely assert xt| but she im|died 
that she had been to her mother once more, for the 
last time. She was gentle, sweet,, subdued to a 
degree, and Mrs. Osborne was teo glad to have her 
back safely to question, her rery cloGsely. She 
apologised to Alice for le«mig her in such a way. 
" But I couldn't have taken you with me, dear, and 
so I had no choice, you see," she said. " I knew, 
too, that when yon got tired of waiting you would 
come home.^' 

'^I was tired of waiting a long time before I 
came back. Miss Goring/' Alice said, reproach- 
fully. 

" Oh ! were you ? " Daisy made answer, frankly. 
"Well, that was your own faulty you know. I 
should have come away the instant I felt bored." 



144 WALTER GOBING. 

^^I hope you understand that it is my duty to 
conceal nothing from Mr. Goring,*' Mrs, Osborne 
said, faintly. She more than half expected that 
Daisy would reply that she *^ didn't understand 
anything of the sort," and insist on her (Mrs. 
Osborne) observing silence. To her surprise, how- 
ever, Daisy only said, '*I shall tell Mr. Goring 
everything, I promise you, to-morrow night : only 
don't you do it ; leave it all to me,'* 

She was thoroughly in earnest. She believed 
that she should tell Walter Goring " everything " 
«. that she could not marry him included . the first 
minute she could speak to him alone. But when 
that minute came, her courage failed her. '* I will 
wait till later in the evening," she thought, as her 
heart began to beat thickly in her throat at the bare 
idea of saying the hard words. 

Young Mrs. Fellowes had promised to come up 
to see Daisy on this last evening before the wedding. 
She had promised to do so because Walter Goring 
had asked her, and because she might never again 
have an opportunity of pleasing him in even so 
small a thing. It was hard Work to keep the 
promise at all . to come up and see him another 
woman's lover for the first time . very hard work ; 



145 

but as she kept it at all, she kept the promise 
bravely. 

Daisy ("Can it be hypocrisy?" was CharUe's 
first thought) seemed strangely glad to see her . so 
glad, that Walter Goring could but contrast the 
greeting she gave Mrs. Fellowes with the greeting 
she had given himself. Both these women were so 
helpless . so apparently God and man forsaken . 
that though each felt the other to be her rival . 
though neither knew the full pitiful meed of help- 
lessness and misery of the other . ^they did, through 
some fine feminine instinct, incline towards and 
pity each other. Moreover, some subtle sense told 
Daisy that, let what would come, Mrs. Fellowes 
would be staunch to any professions she made in 
prosperity; and Daisy did not feel at all sure of 
what might come, even now, when all seemed made 
safe for the ring and altar to-morrow. 

The poor little fair girl, with the dulcet voice and 
the yellow hair, and the eyes that but such a short 
time since had been so young and untroubled in 
their blue impertinence, was tossed about tumul- 
tuously by the very vague notions of right and 
wrong which had been sown by a shaky, vacillating, 
maternal hand in her mind. She was only sure of 

VOL. III. L 



[ 



U0 WALTSB OOBINa. 

one tbing, poor child ; and tliat one tiling was that 
she loved Laurence Levinge. Loved him in a way 
that robbed the ftiture of all terror to her. No hell 
that he shared would be hell to her, she felt ; no 
heaven whftre he was not would be a heaven. If 
through suffering, through sorrow, through sin, she 
could have gained him--gained the ever-present 
companionship of his beautiful fatal smile, of his 
low, sweet words, of the atmosphere of the man who 
was her god. she would have sought suffering, 
swrow and sin, and counted them all well endured 
for his sake. But she could not~she could not. 
She writhed under the fact, she groaned in her poor 
misguided little soul ; her heart sank away and 
died within her, as she remembered the way in 
which he had striven to make the inevitable truth 
patent to her. Between them there was the gulf 
made by those social laws which part us from the 
living truth, and which men and women, with their 
wits about them, are so prompt to recognise. Be- 
tween them were these laws; and on her side 
perjury and the position which a portion of her 
nature craved. "If I dared tell Walter the truth/' 
she thought within her quailing heart ; *' but ". - 
she dared not. She only bemoaned the truths foxd 



147 

wonaefed whether she could live long under the 
black shadow which it cast orer her. Love was no 
summer romance, no blithe pastime, no pretty toy 
to her. It was the very essence of her being, and 
Laurence Levinge had absorbed it all. 

By the seven o'clock train Frank St. John arrived, 
bringing with him the picture wherein he had 
striven to immortalise Mrs. Walsh's beauty. His 
sister and Mr. Goring both went out into the hall 
to meet him when they heard him come in, and he 
pointed to a large eanvas-Ksovered case, and told 
them they were not to see the ** Elaine " until he 
had hung it to his own satisfaction, in a good light. 
" Which room shall it be in, Goring ? " he asked ; 
and Walter Goring suggested a little room that 
opened out of the large drawing-room, which Mrs. 
Walsh's taste had hung with pomegranate-coloured 
velvet curtains, " The very thing," Frank said, 
anxiously superintending the moving of that into 
which he had thrown his whole heart and working 
power. " When it's up I'll call you.'* Then he 
went on into the room Walter Goring had indicated, 
and the master of the house and Mrs. Fellowes 
returned to Daisy. 

She was at her best that night. The cobalt-blue 

L 2 



148 WALTER OOBINa. 

eyes seemed to have been brightened and deep- 
ened by the tears she had shed the day before, 
and the cloud of yellow hair which fell in soft, full, 
undulating waves, from off her face down over her 
shoulders, had never looked more golden. The 
teari^ had done something else, too . made her face 
of one unvarying pearly hue. Still, charming as 
was this increased softness and delicacy both of 
colouring and expression, Walter Goring hoped to 
see her look happier . more like a creature of flesh 
and blood again, when she became his wife. 

Charlie was nervously anxious for the moment to 
come when her brother should call them to look at 
his picture. '^ I wish you had seen it before," she 
said to Walter Goring, " Supposing you shouldn't 
like it? I wish Frank hadn't sold it till it was 
finished, and you had seen it.^' 

" In any event I should have bid for it, I was 
determined to be the possessor of Frank's first 
picture," Walter Goring replied. 

" Supposing it should be a daub," Charlie urged. 
" Not that I fear that ; but I shall fancy whatever 
you say about it that you were determined to say it 
beforehand. I wish you had seen it before. If it 
falls short of what we all hope, I shall go mad.^' 



" Mt ELAINE." 149 

Charlie got, up and moved restlessly about the 
room, and Daisy presently joined her. *'I care 
much more about seeing your brother than I do 
about seeing his picture. Walter has told me what 
a charming fellow he is, often.'' 

" I never used the adjective, Daisy ; he*s the best 
fellow in the world. There, he's calling us," Walter 
Goring said. Then he came between the two girls, 
and as Charlie walked along before them he put his 
arm round Daisy, saying, '* Come and see my pre- 
sent, my pet." 

Frank St. John stood with his back to them as 
they walked through the drawing-room, which was 
dark by comparison with the brilliantly-lighted little 
cabinet in which the picture was hung, against a 
pomegranate-coloured curtain. 

For a few moments, as they still advanced, they 
saw nothing save that the picture was a bright one. 
It had been begun with a view to its being seen in 
the Academy, and it was painted up to Academy 
pitch. Moreover, it was an absolute condition of 
the attempt at reproducing so bright a scene, that 
there should be almost a dazzling brightness in the 
picture. He had seized the moment when Gui- 
nevere, with full white arm still upraised, has flung 



the duanoDjcUi^ down into tiie water, feont whence 
otiher diamonds are flaglnjiig to meet them; Then 
¥diile tO' watch tibem-t^ 



** Sir Lancelot leant, in half disgast 

At loTe, life^ all tldogi^ oiv4ke windorvr-ledgey 
GHose undezneath his -eyes, and right across 
Where these had fallen, stowly past the barge 
Whtttoot tiie lily-maid of Astolat 
Lay smiling, like a star in blackest lught.'* 

Still mth bis arm about the golden-haired girl who 
was to be his* wife to-morrow, Walter Goring went 
on to show her the picture, and introduce her to his 
friend, the painter of it. The rare likeness that had 
been maintained to Mrs. Walsb, his absent goddess, 
caught his eye first. Then- before he could look 
further, Frank, looking rery artistic in a black 
velvet suit, turned round, and as he did so his eyes 
fell on Daisy, who, shrinking, trembling, yet with 
her gaze firmly fi:£ed oel the '* Lancelot leaning in 
half-disgust Upon the window-ledge," and in whom 
she recognised Laurence Levinge, heteed Charlie 
cry out: 

«Why^ it's Daisy P' at^ the same moment that 
£!rasik St. John exclaimed : 

" Good Heavens ! my^Elatne ! *' 



CHAPTER XI. 

.T BAT. 

Had & brace of bishops united their forces in 
former days in hallowing the bond that had existed 
between Dais/s father and mother, Daisy herself 
cotild not have exhibited more unmistakable signs 
of race than she did on this occasion. The 
daughter of a hundred earls, whosi^ mothers had 
all been countesses, could not have faced the 
position more gallantly than she did now. The 
gentle breeding which was hers by right of her 
sire, told her that no amoxmt of weeping, wailing, 
and gnashing of teeth would remedy the evil and 
alter the past, while it would very materially com- 
plicate the mixed and unenviable feelings of her 
tmwilling detectors. Therefore she neither wept, 
nor wailed, nor gnashed her teeth; sh^ simply 
stood aloof from them all on the instant, seeking no 



152 WALTER OOBINa. 

support, praying for no partizanship, acting the 
part of one who could dare the consequences of all 
she had done to perfection, as Daisy always would 

act even at such a crisis. For the rest 

Frank St. John had met with one or two little 
checks in life, as may have been surmised. The 
navy had been his career, the one to which from 
his childhood he had looked forward, and it had 
been blasted, and an old schoolfellow, a boy, who 
had got the cadetship, from the Boyal Naval 
School, the year before he himself had been so 
fortunate, had made things very unpleasant to him 
from the height of another " step," even before the 
blasting of that career. He had loved and unloved 
in a good many ports ; had '' been thrown over once 
when he had really been very far gone" for a brother 
officer. But each and all of the pangs he had 
suffered on these and other occasions, were light in 
comparison to that which assailed hiih now, when 
through him this slight, fair, innocent-eyed girl 
was brought to bay. Nice as was his own sense 
of honour . grieved as he would have been to see 
Walter Goring's perilled . it brought the first glow 
of shame that ever had been there to his cheek, to 
feel that his had been the hand to point out where 



AT BAYt 163 

the stain was. For he remembered the circum- 
stances under which he had seen his pale-faced 
'* Elaine '' at the' Opera-^he remembered having 
described her to Walter as a ** half- world" . and 
he knew with horrible certainty that the stain was 
there. 

As for Charlie she was one of those people to 
whom a thing is never one whit the blacker for 
being found out. Doubtless this is an unsafe order 
of mind, nevertheless she had it ; the crime was not 
in the detection to her. She had never believed 
that Daisy cared for Walter Goring ; indeed Daisy 
had almost confessed as much to her, but had, at 
the same time, so appealed to her pride and honour, 
that she was fettered and powerless to protect him 
from the evil of the marriage. Now all danger of 
that evil was over. -thus much was patent to them 
all at once. But she did not think worse of Daisy 
for it than she had thought before; nor did she 
intend to stand aloof from Daisy, as Daisy proudly 
gave her the option of doing. Her greatest regret 
in the business was, that her brother should have 
been instrumental in bringing the exposure about ; 
for Walter Goring, she felt that there would be balm 
in Gilead still. 



1&4 WALISB GOBING. 

But though she was right in feeling this^ Walter 
Qroring had got a very bad bloWr He had been 
left the guardian of thi^ girl'^ honottr, and now, 
before he had been in chai^ a jrear^ he feaired 
he ynm given tntibly anre. pioof, in fact, that her 
honour was gone. He remembered yividly how 
!ffrank had spoken of his chance model and of her 
handsome cavnUer^ who would do for a Sit Lanedot> 
He remembered now how Daisy had been ndssing; 
lostt at the time of St. John's having li§^ted upon 
an ** Elaine;^' and remembering these things, and 
looking at Daisy, the living duplicate of the pictured 
lily-maid of Astolat, he could but feel her lost to 
him, and himself a defaulter in the. matter of his 
loveless trust* 

Have yon never heard some high-toned rocalist 
fail by the portion of a note, and in the next 
instant triumphantly assert her claim to ** touch* 
ing'' some&ing impossible more clearly than any 
of her contempomries? Have you ever seen a 
spent thorou$^-bred drop, and pick itself up again 
before the eye has conveyed the fact of the fall to 
ihe brain of the majority ? Have yon ever marked 
the manner in which a man will bucMe-to afresh 
when he has succumbed for awhile ta the ** ex&xair 



AS* iSAt; 156 

notioK fever," and the day of his destiny is near? 
There ia^^ ooiirage in all these reactionary bursts; 
but these was mone courage in the way in which 
Daisy held her fair little face aloft, and looked at 
them steadily from out of the cobalt blue eyes, 
when^ after bending for one instant beneath the 
faet, she knew herself found out. It is useless to 
deny it» Those who howl and go down under 
punishment, no matter how well^merited, nerer 
command our sympathies to the same extent as one 
who stands the consequences, no matter of what, 
without flinching. 

As Daisy stood it now. She was not cast exter- 
nally in the heroic mould. No one would have taken 
her for a type of a gallcmt woman. She had not 
the lofty composed brow and the bony aquiline 
nose, with which, aided by illustrations in the 
annuals of a past era, we associate feminine com- 
posure and determination. Her nose never looked 
more resolutely tmno^-up than it did on this occasion ; 
her forehead seemed to narrow itself between the 
line of her hair and her brows; her lips didn't 
close thesnselves steadfastly, or express scorn, or 
anything of the sort. They had paled for an 
instant, those lips, but they looked red and resolute 



156 WALTER GORXNG. 

Plough by the time anyone could lo6k at them . 
red and resolute, and ready to say anything. The 
gentle blood told ; she was brought to bay, but she 
was quite ready to fight it out* 

The silence that fell after those exclamations of 
Frank's and Charlie's lasted only for a few mo- 
ments; then Dai^y broke it . ^broke it with her 
silvery tones-*-tones that never faltered, though she 
was so cruelly abased before another woman. 

" Walter, you canH be toc^ much disgusted with 
me; but I should have told you" . ^for half a 
second she paused, and bent her head the least bit : 
the telling was bitterly hard; but she recovered 
herself quickly, and went on . "what you see 
there," pointing to the picture. 

Walter Goring moved towards her; she had 
plunged them all into a horrible position ; but, her 
eyes were so very blue, her wantonness, her wilful- 
ness, were all so very babyish, he could but pity 
and desire to protect her still. But she edged 
away from his brotherly loving-kindness. 

"No, Walter! I have been a deceitful little 
wretch; but it's no use saying that here before 
other people, is it?'* Then she looked at Frank 
St. John and fathomed some of the feelings that 



AT BAY. 167 

were tugging at his heart. Suddenly she went up 
to him, and held out her hand : " I believe you 
would rather have cut off your hand than it should 
have painted my fault; don't think I don't know it, 
and so does Walter ; but it is better, much better, 
that it has/' Then she eyed Charlie distrustfully, 
and Charlie saw that she was so eyed, and did not 
quite know what to do. Perhaps she did the best 
thing that was to be done, in going up to Daisy, 
and saying as she did u 

" Vll stay here with Frank while you go and tell 
your cousin everything you have to tell him, Daisy, 
m stay because you may want me;^' and at that 
Daisy was a little melted. Female arrogance she 
was prepared to meet and repel, but not female 
affection. 

So Daisy and her cousin . each felt that he could 
never be more than a cousin to her now . ^had a 
long interview, in which Daisy told him, as Charlie 
had advised her to do, " everything,^' with certain 
reservations. For instance, she would not tell him 
where Laurence Levinge was then, nor would she 
confess that Laurence Levinge had sought her to 
the full as much as she had him. According to her 
statement it had all been her own fault, her own 



158 WALTBB GOItlNa. 

weakness. She offend to bear the whole bnmt of 
the blame; she scorned the notion of any being 
bestowed upon Laurence. According to her, she 
had been the wooer and he the wooed, and Walter 
was fain to accept her yersion of her story through 
the dread he had of raking up worse things than 
had been already brought to light. That she had 
seen Laurence Levinge that time when she ran 
away from Brighton was evident, in a very ghastly 
way ; but he would not seek to find out when or 
on what terms. The only thing of which he was 
quite certain indeed, in this first hour of darkness, 
was, that it behoved him to see her married to 
Leviuge, and to enable Levinge to marry her. 

Shall it be told how the truth crept through the 
house like a snake ? A part of the truth-r»that is, 
that part of it which told to the eagerly listening 
many that there was to be no marriage to-morrow. 
Shall it be told how late into the night young Mrs. 
Fellowes stayed with Daisy, not questioning her, but 
just giving her that wonderful, subtle, reassuring, 
sense of womanly comradeship, without which we 
can't do, let us strive as we will ? Shall it be told 
how Frank St. John and Walter Goriog stayed up 
together, not because they cared for the endless 



AT BAY. lfi& 

cigars they smaked, bat because each felt such 
generous sympathy for the other.- such pity for the 
fair, frailj little ereatuise who was the cause of that 
sympathy spriugiug up, that the!re could be no 
thou^t of sl^ep for either Of them ? Perhaps it 
will be «8 wdl not to attempt to more fully portray 
these thin^. They were done I And in common 
with the rest of that night's work, they had better 
be lightly sketched, and got away from as soon as 
possible. 

It was not pleasant to make the £aet of the 
wedding being deferred patent to the parson and 
the parish the next day. Mr. Travers bore it like a 
Christian ; but, as his wife observed, he had not got 
a new Frenoh white silk for the ceremony. " It's a 
dispensation," she said^ in the course of a call she 
made on Mrs. Prescott on the afternoon of the day 
that was to have seen Daisy married. ^* It's a dis- 
pensation, the sins of the fathers visited upon the 
children, as we are told." Then, though she did 
not word her thoughts, they ran on to the effect 
that it was most ioconsiderate of the ruling powers 
to have timed the visitation just when she had got 
a new French white silk towards a different c<Hi- 
summation. Mrs. Travers was a y&cj good womatt. 



160 WALTBB GOBINa. 

with a great capacity for kissing the rod; but . 
her milliner's bill was limited. 

Mrs* Prescott bore the disappointment mach 
better. She had not invested in a new dress for 
the occasion, and the sins of Daisy's father had not 
been the staple table-talk in her house for years. 
Still she had a little pebble to fling, . and she flung 
it like a ^woman. 

** Until I were quite sure of the cause of the 
rupture, I should be very careful not to mix myself 
up with the young person, if I were my sister 
Charlie,'' Ellen said, with a little brighter blaze in 
her cheeks than was ordinarily there. It was so 
nice to call the girl who had so nearly taken a 
higher place than herself in the Deneham neighbour- 
hood, " a young person.*' There was nothing strong 
or uncharitable in the designation . nothing harsh 
or unfeminine. It was just a nice disparaging form 
of notice that fitted the subject, Ellen thought; not 
because she knew anything adverse to Daisy's 
morals, but because she went on the broad principle 
of its being well to think the very worst of her 
fellow-women whenever their chariot wheels ran 
roughly. 

But Charlie was quite the reverse of prudent in 



AT BAY, 161 

the matter. It seemed to her to be so very possible 
that there should have been extenuating circum- 
stances, though Daisy did not seem inclined to ex- 
plain them. Moreover, it seemed very possible to 
disapprove of a sin without striving to crush a 
sinner. Daisy still held to the course she had 
adopted at first, namely the course of giving Mrs. 
Fellowes the option of standing aloof from her alto- 
gether, if she (Charlie) chose to do so. But Charlie 
ignored the mute offer. " It's very hard for your 
brother, that his picture . such a beauty, too . should 
be what Walter will be ashamed to see hung in any 
room in the house ! I'm very sorry for that" Daisy 
said, when Mrs. Fellowes was leaving her that 
night ; and Charlie replied, " You see if Mr. Goring 
does not have that picture hung, and well hung too, 
and like it for containing the portraits of three 
friends, if only you'll let him, Daisy!'* But Daisy 
shook her head at this, and seemed very dubious. 

The following day . the day on which he was to 
have been married . Walter Goring went up to see 
his lawyer, having first induced Daisy to give him 
Laurence Levinge's address. Before nightfall that 
gentleman stood in the utterly unexpected and much 
" too good for him " (to plagiarise the title of a very 

TOL. III. u 



162 WALTER GOBING. 

capital novel) position of being pledged to become 
the husband of Daisy, on whom her cousin had 
tightly tied up 20002. a-year. This sum he had 
settled on Daisy at a considerable sacrifice ; but he 
felt bound to make any that he could make without 
being absolutely Quixotic about it. So he arranged 
to sell such property as did not belong to the old 
original Goring Place estate, including The Hurst 
land* The fruits of this proceeding, together with 
the large funded property left him by his uncle, 
enabled him to secure to his uncle's hapless 
daughter a sum that gave Laurence Levinge no 
further excuse for not keeping the promise, the 
non-fulfilment of which had nearly destroyed Daisy. 
Nor did he want an excuse; her devotion, blind, 
childishly passionate, dangerously passionate as it 
was, had touched him. He accepted all the con- 
ditions which Mr. Clarke . who was far keener in 
the matter than Walter would have been . ^imposed. 
Perhaps the hardest one was, that he was to give up 
what had been the sole thing that made life worth 
having to him for many years . gambling in every 
form, either on the turf or at the tables. This was 
the hardest condition, but he agreed to it, partly 
because he really loved Daisy, and had no desire to 



AT BAY. 163 

impoverish her, and partly because one clause in the 
settlements set forth that, should he not accede to 
and keep this condition, half the money was to 
revert at Daisy's death to her cousin, Walter Goring, 
or his heirs. 

" Did he offer any explanation of the heartless- 
ness that made him compromise her so ? " Walter 
asked, choosing the mildest expression he could 
find to fit Mr. Levinge's conduct. 

" Not a word," Mr. Clarke replied. " He only 
said, when the business was settled^ ' I hope Mr. 
Goring does not think me a greater blackguard than 
I am ? ' and I said, * Certainly not.' He looked at 
me rather queerly when I said that ; but he was not 
in a position to quarrel with any man's words. By 
the way, he said he should write to his mother and 
sister, and get them over at once." 

" I shall write to Miss Levinge, too, or she won't 
believe him," Walter Goring said. "The sooner 
they come, and it's all over, the better. My poor 
little cousin! thank God, I was never harsh to 
her." 

He was more thankful still for that he had never 
been harsh to her lightest caprice in a short time. 
Poor Daisy's dream of joy was a very short one. 

u 2 



CHAPTER XIL 

WEAKIXG AWAY. 

Uktil the arrival of Mrs. Leyinge and Mary it 
had been ordained that Daisy and Laurence shorild 
not meet. Then Daisy was to go to his mother, and 
be married from under her protection and tem- 
porary roof. Until this arrangement could be 
carried out, she was to remain at Goring Place, 
where Mrs. Osborne and Alice still stayed with 
her. 

The girl was rapturously happy now. So intoxi- 
cated by her happiness, in fact, that she never gave 
a thought to the murky paths by which she had 
come to it. For the first time since Walter had 
Imown her, he saw the little fair face with a biilliant 
-spot of crimson on either cheek brightening the 
jshining eyes till their gleaming would have been 
painfvl, had one not felt that it was only with 



WEARING AWAY. 1C5 

happiness they gleamed. "For weeks and weeks 
she has not eaten enough to keep a bird in good 
condition ; so I fancy she's a little feverish now," 
Mrs. Osborne told him. Somehow or other, they 
were all very gentle to Daisy ; gentler than people 
usually are to one who has done wrong, and dares 
to be rapturously happy immediately after it. 

On that night, when they had first looked upon 
the semblance of Daisy shining like a star in 
blackest night in the picture, Charlie and her 
brother had been left alone, as has been said. No 
sooner were they alone, than Frank began reviling 
his task ; the end did not justify the means at all to 
him. -* It's a foul start to have made, Charlie," he 
said, decidedly, when Charlie strove to comfort him, 
by declaring her belief that Daisy would have told 
. ^would not have suffered the marriage to take 
place, even if the picture had not saved her the 
trouble. " I'm very glad that Goring has escaped ; 
but when I saw that little creature tremble, and 
then get herself together for the worst, I felt like a 
mean hound. It is no use my reminding myself tliat 
I had worked in the dark, I feel like a mean 
hound still. I shall never be able to touch a brush 
again in that place in Sloane Street ; the face of my 



166 WALTBB GORING. 

poor ^ Elaine ' would haunt xne in every comer. Til 
be oflf somewhere . to South America or Cali- 
fornia." 

"Oh, Frank!" Charlie gasped; she could not 
help a little thrill of despondency passing over her. 
She was terribly alone now; but with Frank in 
South America or California, the sense of loneliness 
would be deepened. So she felt for a few moments, 
in the which she gasped out, " Oh, Frank !" 

'' Don't be afraid that * I shall take some savage 
woman to rear my dusky brood,'" he laughed. 

" No, I'm not afraid of that ; indeed, it would be 
very good for you to travel, and Tm not afraid of 
anything, Frank. Do go, and paint some Cali- 
fornian forest scenery." 

" And get out of the way of thinking so much 
about what isn't vital after all," he went on, medi- 
tatively. "Shake oflf the trammels of civilisation, 
and try to banish the crushing notion that it's all 
up with a girl who isn't chaperoned properly. Don't 
look shocked, Charlie; I'll take up the notion 
again when I return to England, home, and beauty. 
But dropping it for awhile will be the only way 
to enable me to spend my first ill-gotten gains 
comfortably. 



WEARING AWAY, 167 

"And look here, Frank," she said, eagerly; 
" persuade Walter Goring to go with you." 

He pulled his light moustache reflectively. 

"Why?" he asked. 

" Oh, only because he must want a diversion 
even more than you do," she replied, colouring 
slightly. " And we (the three of us) must give up 
that idea we had of working at something together ; 
but you and he might write and illustrate an artist's 
tour through that glorious scenery with effect.^" 

" Sage counsellor ! I shall put it to him ; the 
|)lan pleases me much," Frank replied^ Then Mrs. 
Fellowes was called to Daisy, and the subject had 
dropped. 

But it had been resumed at a later date between 
Frank and Walter Goring, and satisfactorily settled 
that, when Daisy was married, the two young men 
should start and travel, and work together for a 
year. They were to go somewhere, and da some- 
thing; but where they were to go, and what they 
were to do precisely, was not definitely fixed. 

Meanwhile there was little peace or pleasure 
beneath the Fellowes' roof. Charlie had once 
more repented herself of that burst of feeling in 
which she had asked her husband to suffer her to 



168 WALTER GORING. 

leave bim. She had repented and humbled herself, 
claiming the fault to be hers, and entreating him to 
believe that she had spoken in haste, and that it 
was not too late for her to be the best helpmate a 
man can have . a wife capable of being his friend. 
But he had injured her, so naturally he could but 
be distrustful of her. Earnestly as she laboured to 
please him, untiring as she was in his service, he 
felt jealous even of her having so small an interest 
as her writing gave her independent of him. It 
annoyed him, half unconsciously, that she could 
get away in the spirit into realms whither he could 
not follow her. And when her second novel came 
out, as it did about this time, and she was paid a 
price that made a very important addition to the 
family exchequer for it, he took up the narrow- 
minded notion that she was always remembering 
the fact, and wanting to spend the money on 
herself. 

Moreover, there were other stmgs in that novel 
for him. He tried to trace the characters back into 
real life, and to find out whether they had any of 
them ever stood in similar relations to her that they 
did to one another; whether they had ever whis- 
pered the soft nothings into her ear, or listened to 



WEARINa AWAY. 169 

the sweet words from her lips, which were scattered 
so freely over her pages. He did not understand 
that she simply painted, as well as she could, things 
which she had seen, heard, and read about, super- 
ficially, probably enough, but still up to a certain 
point clear-sightedly. He did not understand that 
she painted these things backwards, as it were, 
arguing from effect to cause, instead of following 
the commoner (and better) practice of analogism. 
Some of the experiences had such a genuine ring 
about them, that, forgetting the happy feminine 
faculty of arriving at a probability through an in- 
ductive process which can hardly be explained . 
forgetting this, Mr. Fellowes chose to believe that 
the experiences were autobiographical, and so grew 
more jealous than ever. Consequently there was 
little peace or pleasure beneath the Fellowes* roof, 
but Charlie made no sign by which an outsider 
should guess so much. She was striving honestly 
to teach herself to ** suffer and be strong,'^ and the 
lessoni hard as it was, was nearly learnt now. 

As the day approached for the Levinge? to arrive 
and claim her, Daisy grew nearly wild with im- 
patience. She had ceased to observe any sort of 
reticence now with regard to Laurence to l^Irs. Fel- 



170 WALTER GOBINQ. 

lowes. The love which had been gnawing at and 
fretting her like a prisoned bird for so long a time 
was let loose now, and it revelled in the liberty. 
She would talk of him, of his beauty, his tender* 
ness, of the tone of his voice, and the light of the 
eyes that had gone into her soul, till she panted 
with agitation, and the loving words would not fall 
coherently from her lips. She counted the hours . > 
the minutes almost . ^that were bringing her nearer 
to him by their flight. And then, when she would 
cease from sheer exhaustion, and they would pray 
her to be calmer, she would quote Cleopatra's 
request for Mandrogora, " the only bit of Shakes- 
peare for which she cared," she said, and pity 
them for never having known what she felt in Hie 
love of Laurence Levinge. " What do you think 
Mrs. Osborne says to me?" she asked Charlie; 
" * that when she was going to be married to 
Mr. Osborne she should have blushed to talk 
about it so much as I do.' "Who cares what 
she'd have done ? I daresay I should have 
blushed too if I had been going to marry old 
Osborne, in his table-cloth cravat and broad« 
brimmed hat ; as if she could know anything at 
all about it with an old Osborne. I can neither 



WEARING AWAT. 171 

eat nor sleep for j6y, and Pll tell the truth 
about it." 

This was said two days before the one on which 
she was to go up to town, and Charlie looked at her 
with a vague senile of pity, despite that brilliantly 
pourtrayed happiness. The not eating or sleeping 
of which Daisy, spoke so lightly was beginning to 
alarm them all. She looked too transparent when 
she was flushed crimson in the fa'ce ; the rounded 
lines of her jSgure were gone. 

That night she sat and sang to them in the little 
room her father had had furnished for her. Good 
and self-forgetting as Walter was, he had some 
feeling which prevented him liking to be with her 
in the beautiful little room which. h£ had had fitted 
up as a boudoir for her, when he thought she was 
to be his bride. So they sat this night in the old 
place where she had so often sang to them when 
the Walshes were staying at Goring Place. 

There were only two or three (bundles burning, 
and the room was lofty, consequently the light was 
dim. For a time she sang brilliant opera airs 
alone, but at last she stopped, saying she would 
sing something " sweet and tender, like the light;*' 
and then she sang more sweetly than he had ever 



173 WALTEB GORING. 

heard her sing before . ^with more pathos, more 
feeling . "I'm wearing away to the land of the 
leal/' 

They all . ^Walter, Mrs. Osborne, Frank St. John, 
and Alice . drew nearer to her as she sang, and 
they were all most strangely thrilled. She did not 
seem to heed them, but sang it through . ^nearly 
through. She was striking the last chord, her 
glorious voice was floating away on the last note, 
filling the air with a strain than which no sweeter 
can be heard in heaven^ when her head went down, 
the song changed to a cry, and a stream of blood 
chased the music through her lips. At the height 
of her fullest happiness she had sung her own 
death-strain. They knew at once that she had 
broken a blood-vesselj and they knew all too soon 
that she was "wearing away to the land of the 
leal" with fearful speed. 

She died before her lover, summoned though he 
was at once, could reach her . before she had time 
to feel much regret at the thoughts of dying at all. 
Up to almost the last she could not realise it, 
urging that " she was too young and too happy to 
die." But suddenly the truth came home to her, 
and then her sole thought was of Laurence. 



WBARINa AWAY. 173 

" Poor Laurence ! Let him have all the money, 
Walter. You're so good you will, I know ; and be 
his friend, because I've died for love of him, you 
know. Be his friend, will you ? *' 

So she wore away, pleading for the man "for 
love " of whom she had died. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

VERY UNDECIDED. 

Poor Daisy's last words, "You'll let Laurence 
have the money, and youll be his friend because I 
loved him so/' were strongly in Mr. Goring's mind 
when he met Laurence Levinge immediately on the 
latter's entrance into the house. There was no 
need to tell Levinge that Daisy was dead . ^he had 
heard that already. There was no need to reproach 
him for aught concerning her; clearly he was re- 
proaching himself bitterly enough. Moreover, no 
one else felt inclined to do anything, save to try and 
comfort the man who had been so richly loved by 
Daisy, 

He went alone into the room where she was 
lying, with the life still upon her yellow hair, but 
death within her eyes . ^into the room where there 
was solemn quiet, and a sad soft light ; and, stranger 



VEBY UNDECIDED* 175 

than ally a Daisy who was for the first time cold 
even to him. Mrs. Osborne had prepared some 
platitudes wherewith to console the bereaved man. 
She was ready to tell him that he " mnst hope to 
meet Miss Goring above,'* after the manner of 
material-minded people, who will persist in offering 
spiritual comfort to others in defiance of their own 
practice. As Laurence Levinge bent over the 
waxen cold form of the ^1 who had loved him so 
hotly, he was too far from feeling that love is t)ie 
soul's alone, for Mrs. Osborne's contemplated con* 
solations to stand any chance of having a soothing 
effect upon him. 

He stayed in the room a long time, not mouthing 
out a long-winded monologue on the vanity of 
human hopes . scarcely thinking, indeed ; only 
feeling, that Daisy was dead. He was too com- 
pletely stunned by this even to muse upon the 
matchless organisation of the divine system of 
rewards and punishments. It was to occur to him 
afterwards, that Daisy, who had been more sinned 
against than sinning from the hour of her birth, 
was cut off in the flower of her youth at the very 
moment that the cup of joy was about to be offered 
to her, while he . ^lived; and, by her will, was well 



176 WALTER GOBING* 

endowed with the goods of this world. These 
things were to occur to him afterwards, but as he 
stood looking at her he only, felt that the sweet 
child who was to have been his bride was dead, and 
that he was the cause of her death. 

His face was as white as the corpse when he 
came at last out of the room. His impulse was to 
get away out of the house unseen; words of any 
sort from any one would be too much for him, he 
felt. But he checked the impulse for her dear 
sake, and so Mrs. Osborne had an opportunity of 
offering her crumbs of comfort. 

It had been Walter Goring's intention to put the 
picture, wherein the story was all too plainly told, 
away out of sight while Laurence Levinge was 
there. " It*s no use cutting the poor fellow to 
pieces with remorse; my darling Daisy would re- 
buke me from her grave if I did it," he had said to 
Mrs. Fellowes ; but she took a different view of the 
matter. 

" He knows about it . she wrote and told him, I 
know. Don't seem to hide it from him. It will be 
kinder to let it hang than if you let him suppose 
you shrink from his seeing it." 

So, on Charlie's advice, the " Lily of Astolat," 



VERY UNDECIDED. 177 

Daisy's parallel, was still hanging when Laurence 
Levinge came down, and he soon found it out ; and, 
rather to the surprise of those who knew where, 
and when, and how Frank had seen his poor 
" Elaine," commenced talking, about it. 

" My poor little darling," he said, mournfully, to 
Walter Goring, " I was trying to be generous to her 
that night I took her to the Opera, little knowing 
I was breaking her heart. From the time she had 
rushed up to me . ^half frantic, because she had seen 
her mother, and her mother's husband wouldn't let 
them speak to each other. from that time, till she 
left and came down here, she was under the protec- 
tion of my landlady, a good woman, who thought 
she was my sister. That night I was trying to 
make her understand the truth . that it was for her 
well-being that I wouldn't marry her, and drag her 
down with me." 

" Levinge," Walter Goring began, earnestly . then 
he checked himself:.** no, no, VU ask you nothing," 
he added. 

" You may ask what you will," the other replied, 
eagerly ; ** but before you ask anything, 1*11 tell you 
that heartless as my false prudence and cowardly 
fear of poverty with a wife made me, I have not the 

VOL. III. K 



178 WALTER GORING. 

sin on my soul of having wronged her. I loved her 
too well," he added, hastily. " She was as pure as 
her prototype,'* and he pointed to the picture as 
he spoke. 

Directly after Daisy's funeral, Laurence Levinge 
went away. A great restlessness was upon him; 
he could find no rest for the sole of his foot, as it 
seemed. He met his mother and sister. Ah ! how 
futile their journey was proved: and there was 
something in his face that made them spare all 
semblance of reproach ; though they had come 
charged with it. *' Come back with us and lead a 
new life, Laurence," his sister said to him. " You 
will never forget heif . at least, you never ought to 
forget the poor loving child . but you*ll think about 
her less miserably if you're with us. Come back to 
Eome." 

But he refused, averring that he could not settle 
down just yet. He would " wander about for a few 
months. or a year, and then rejoin them," he pro- 
mised. Then he left England, and as he will 
appear no more in these pages, it may as well be 
stated that he never kept that promise. He " wan- 
dered about ^^ for a time, trying to train down 
memory by day, by walking long distances in all 



VERY UNDECIDED. 179 

sorts of weather; and at night he could not bear 
to sleep for the dread he had of dreaming. It was 
for love of him that Daisy died ; but Daisy's friends 
had no feeling but one of sorrow when, in little 
more than a year after she had sung her own death- 
strain, they heard from Mary Levinge, who had heard 
it from a hotel-keeper, that her brother had fallen 
a victim t6 a low fever which had come on after a 
long-sustained and successful struggle to save an 
unfortunate woman from drowning in the Sorge, 
near Vaucluse. So for the best action of his life, 
he was rewarded by being taken froni the world of 
which he was so weary. At his death the money 
which Daisy had implored that he might be suffered 
to have, came back to Mr. Goring; and so, at last, all 
things were precisely as if his uncle's daughter . his 
dearly loved, wilful ward. had never existed. 

Meanwhile Frank St. John and Walter Goring 
were redeeming their time manfully. They took an 
" artist's tour," that was really worthy of the name, 
writing and illustrating it ds they went. The scene 
of their operations were the plains, forests, and 
mining districts of California, and they took up the 
life of hunters, living in a log hut, riding unbroken 
little Mexican mustangs, depending on their guns 

V 2 



180 WALTER GORINa. 

for everything they ate, " save flour and sardines/' 
Frank wrote to CharKe. So they stayed about in 
the Califomian solitudes for a year and a half, 
during which time Goring Place was delivered over 
to a housekeeper, and swathed in brown holland. 
At the expiration of that time Frank was obliged 
to quit his companion and come home for two 
reasons, one of which shall be given at greater 
length in another chapter. The other, and second- 
ary reason, may be stated briefly: their mutual work, 
" The Artist's Tour," was ready, and Frank was to 
come home and see it through the press. The 
literary part of it was entirely Goring's work ; and 
at first it had been decided that he should be the 
one to come home and see it brought out. But 
circumstances occurred to alter this decision. He 
felt that he was better away from England for a 
time, and Frank felt that he was most sorely needed 
there. So they parted, and Charlie, who knew 
that they were to do so, and which of them was 
to remain, had direful dreams of Walter Goring 
being devoured by bears and other monsters of the 
wilds. 

The chief cheerers of his solitude even while 
Frank was with him . the only extraneous cheering 



VERY UNDECIDED, 181 

influence that came to him after Frank left . were 
the long letters that he received, at long invervals, 
from his old friend, Mrs. Walsh. She knew nothing 
of the discovery of Daisy's perfidy to him, and the 
consequent disannulling of his marriage with Daisy. 
She only knew that Daisy had died, and so she 
wrote to him as a sister might do to a widowed 
brother, and said more generous things of the 
buried Daisy than she had ever brought her tongue 
to utter of the living one, 

Mrs. Walsh had lived abroad for some months ; 
at first in quaint old Nuremberg, and afterwards in 
brilliant Vienna, and both places had been equally 
barren to her. She was not a woman to adapt her- 
self easily to a new life . she was essentially one 
who required to be sought, and who never could 
bring herself to seek ; and as it was the character- 
istic of her beauty to look colder and prouder than 
she was, few cared or dared to seek her. Conse- 
quently, the quiet dull city and the gay capital 
were equally barren to her . ^in both she was alone. 
Not all the memories she could scrape together, in 
the one of the cobbler-bard and Albrecht Diirer . 
not all the beauty of those blue Franconian moun- 
tains which loom above the town, or the " fountains 



18S WALTER GORING. 

wrought with richest splendour standing in the 
common mart" . could keep her mind away from 
dwelling constantly on the past. Of old, she had 
heard Walter Goring and her hushand talk of these 
things . of the grand medisBval aspect of the place ; 
of the venerable old iron-bound linden planted in 
the court-yard of the castle by Cunigunde ; and 
hearing them spjeak of these things, and of the Old 
World atmosphere in which they were steeped, she 
had desired to see them. Now, she was seeing 
them daily . ^living in their midst. and it was all 
emptiness. So at last she gave up the cultivation 
of the mediaeval mind in Nuremberg, and went to 
Vienna, and found it all emptiness there, too. 
Finally, she obeyed her instinct, and went back to 
her cottage in Deneham about the same time that 
Frank St. John, away in the wilds of California, 
felt that there was a strong reason for his return to 
England. " I will go back, and stay in that cottage 
until Walter comes home, in order that I may see 
him, and assure myself that it is all over," she 
thought. " I believe it to be . he is a dear brother 
to me now ; but I will see him, and test myself, and 
at the end of my three years' lease I *11 leave the 
\ce, and try my old London life again." " Try my 



VERY UNDECIDED. 183 

old London life again ! " Bather a hopeless phrase 
for a completely-cured woman. 

Her old London life ! As if she could ever taste 
the flavour of it again ! She could have the old 
society very probably, the old style of dinners and 
drives, of" drums" and operas, the old round of shop- 
ping and calling, and general fatigue in the social 
mart. All these she could have; but that would 
be missing which had given them all the requisite 
zest. No; the old life would soon be proyed a 
mistake, she knew it. What she needed was a new 
life . a new interest. " I 'm, only thirty-three," she 
said to herself on the morning after her return to 
her Deneham cottage, while looking at the reflec- 
tion of her face in the glass. " Time has flown by 
on the wings of a dove for me, but he has not marked 
his flight by the feet of the crow yet. In the course 
of nature, my life is not half spent even yet ; the 
best of it shall not be barren because Walter Goring 
is " 

What? She did not know how. to phrase it. 
" Blind " had been on the tip of her tongue ; but 
was he blind, after all ? Did he not see her fairest 
of the fair, and feel indifferent to the fact ? Then 
she recalled the expression of his eyes when he had 



184 WALTER GOBING, 

lifted them to her face after bending over her hand 
and kissing it, and calling her his goddess ! What 
a pity it is that a woman cannot forget the tender 
thrill of lips that have thrilled many another hand 
maybe. The loving deference of the action may 
mean so little ; but it is stamped indelibly on the 
recipient's memory. It may mean nothing; but to 
a woman it always means so much ! 

She was haunted by him as he had been, and 
" that was why," so she told herself, " she so longed 
to see him again as he was^" If he only came, and 
was friendly . not frigidly friendly, but friendly after 
the manner of a man who likes you very much, and 
knows you like him, and yet feels and shows that 
he feels that you can get on very well without him 
^if he would only come and be this, it would all 
be well. "I've idealised him in his absence, because 
I have been duU,^' she told herself; "if he comes 
and shows me that he likes me very much, and 
thinks me an excellent woman, and . ^nothing more, 
my folly will kill itself.'' 

All these contradictory soliloquies betokened a 
very wavering frame of mind. Of course they did ; 
they betrayed the truth. She loved the man; 
naturally she veered about perpetually, and said 



VERY UNDECIDED. 185 

many things that would not agree with the rest 
about him. But during every phase she wrote to 
him as a sister might have done, feeling that her 
love was half the offspring of habit, and that circum- 
stances might arise again which would render it 
expedient for her to crush it. " My folly will kill 

itself if " he adopts precisely the line of conduct 

best calcidated to conduce to the suicide. That 
was what she said, or rather that was what she 
meant. The danger was, that he might come and 
make the expediency of her folly killing itself patent 
to her in some other way than that which has been 
sketched above. How, if he married' some one 
else ? Oh ! it was far better, she thought, to put 
herself where she should '* see him at once when he 
came home again . see him, and show him that he 
was free to do even that/' Then she took herself 
to task for the wording of that phrase even. " Free 
to do that ! " Was he nof" free ? " Had he not 
always been, and shown that he knew that he was 
free ?. But it is so very hard to think by line and 
rule when the heart is much in the subject thought 
about. 

The romance was over, and it would be idle or 
worse to recall it. Well ! she was not striving to 



186 WALTER GOBING. 

recall it ; she was only going to act on the good old 
medical suggestion of "taking a hair of the dog 
that had bitten her." The romance was over . and 
there had never been any romance . and she wasn't 
wanting to recall it . and yet why shouldn't she 
wish to recall all that there had been ? Absence 
disillusions most women^ but the disillusioning is 
the fruit of certain conditions. They have no time 
to think of the absent one, if they have some one 
else present. She had been oppressed with too 
much idle time for the last eighteen months, and 
she had seen no man capable of displacing Walter 
Goring from his pedestal. Faithfulness in the 
case of the unbound very often is but a shallow 
euphemism for lack of opportunity. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

RELEASED. 

When her brother Frank and Walter Goring 
went away together, the dead calm that succeeded 
the lately tempestuous moral atmosphere was a hard 
thing to live through gracefully. Charlie could not 
help marvelling sometimes whether she had indeed 
been bom for no other end than this, that she might 
make things as pleasant as possible to a man who 
made things uncommonly unpleasant to her. One 
half of her time was spent now in being ashamed 
for him, and the other half in being afraid for him. 
Whenever he was away from her she feared a repe- 
tition of that stumbling performance when he had 
gone over the old brown hunter's head; and when 
he was with her he brought the blushes to her face 
with such fell frequency,' that wifely feeling was 
pretty well burnt out. 



188 WALTER GORING. 

People who " knew " them still, who recognised 
the existence of the Fellowes*, though they were of 
The Hurst no longer, in a gracious and merciful 
manner that was infinitelymore disgusting than any 
amount of obliviousness would have been . these 
people said, ** how well he bore his reverses," and 
what '' a comfort it must be to her that her husband 
didn't give way to low spirits,'' thus making it 
patent that the air he adopted abroad was one of 
offensive jollity. They little knew his black moodi- 
ness at home. The moodiness that made almost a 
tangible cloud in the house, and that knew no 
shadow of a change save into maudlin self-pity. It 
was very hard for her to live under it ; to feel that 
her youth was passing away under it. Very, very 
hard to feel that she had none other than herself to 
thank for it. The memory of the manner in which 
she had accepted this man's offer of marriage, back 
{how far back it seemed) in the pretty road near 
Portslade, was always with her. The recollection 
of the honest feeling against accepting it which she 
had crushed and put away from her, because, oh, 
fool ! she had yearned for any change . would not be 
banished. It was very hard, but the punishment 
was less than the offence, so sh^ would go on re- 



RELEASED. 189 

adjustiDg her burden and trying to walk with her 
head up under it. 

There was such an absence of every element of 
diversion in her life. The dull little country town 
in which she lived, the dreary women with whom 
she dwelt, were very stagnating in their influence. 
She had no friends, no society, no amusement save 
books and . old memories. She was as badly placed 
as a woman with a quick imagination can be placed ; 
it was* surely some slight merit in her, that under it 
all she kept a bright face, and struggled to think 
that her lot. was quite as good as she deserved or . 
desired. 

She wrote constantly now . when her husband 
was not rabid in his claims on her attention . and 
she had succeeded (or her publishers had succeeded 
for her) in making a little bit of a name. But it was 
the pursuit of literature under difficulties. Now 
that Frank, and that other one who knew what she 
meant always without her needing to give wordy 
explanations,. rnow that they were away, the saving 
interest, the helping sympathy, the encouraging 
word, which we all need, were each and all lacking. 
Her husband had a vague kind of notion, to which 
he would give utterance sometimes in a vague kind 



lUO WALTER GOBtNG. 

of way, that it was her romance-writing which had 
weaned her from him, and inclined her to another 
. as he could not hut see that she did incline. But 
she might have replied to this charge in L. E. L's. 
tinkling words : 

** It WM not my loTed lute," she said, 
«My gentle late, that wrought the wrong ; 

It was not song that taught me lore ; 

But it was loTe that taught me song." 

But he, as people are very apt to do, made confusion 
between cause and effect. 

At last she was deprived of even the poor diver- 
sion of making pleasant and miserable the lives of 
imaginary people. Henry Fellowes fell ill from 
cold and other causes, and then the hardest, sad* 
dest duties of a wife were laid upon her, and every- 
thing gave way before the great necessity of nursing 
him through a long wearying sickness. 

For six months the days rolled along with no 
shadow of a change, at least with none greater than 
his being a little better one day and much worse the 
next. A terrible time, for he was more exacting 
than ever ; he would take nothing save from her 
hand, and he would not suffer her to be five minutes 
out of his presence. He did not like her to read-. 



BELEASED. 191 

the very thought of her writing threw him into such 
a state of irritable agitation the first week of his 
being confined to his bed, that she locked up her 
desk, and promised him that imtil he was quite 
well she would not open it again. From that time 
she sat through the days in that> darkened room, 
never moving save to serve him, with no other 
object than to soothe and ease one of the most frac- 
tious patients it ever fell to a woman's lot. to tend. 

She never seemed to w.eary over her task ; he 
grew more satisfied with her every day. more 
satisfied, that is to say, that she was loving him at 
last, . ^in which, poor fellow, he was mistaken. She 
was not loving him ; she was only feeling more and 
more sorry for him because she could not love him, 
now that he was so ill and helpless and dependent 
on her. The knowledge that she could not do it 
made her tender, with a tenderness that was as 
.watchful, patient and long-suffering as love itself 
could have been; it gave her the indomitable 
courage to endure, which love alone is popularly 
supposed to give. It sustained her as the days 
rolled into weeks, and the weeks into months, and 
the once strong hale man became more and more 
attenuated, more and more helpless, more and more 



192 WALTER GORING. 

hoIlow*eyed and sunken-cheeked, and, alas! more 
and more fractiously exacting. That tenderness 
and the feeling, half pity, half remorse, from which 
it sprang, enabled her to keep np, in a way that 
made her mother-in-law marvel at her, and acknow- 
ledge to the doctor that " Henry might have done 
worse." It carried her through darksome, hopeless 
days, when he was so very ill that it was only 
through the hold he kept of her hand . ^the little 
hand whose light fine touch was the only one he 
could bear . ^that she knew he was asleep, not dead. 
It carried her through sleepless nights of bending 
over his pillow, when he could not bear her to be 
even so far away from him as the little sofa at the 
other end of the room. It carried her, in fact, 
bravely through as sad and fatiguing a half year 
as can well be imagined. And at the end of the 
six months it deepened, and the feelings from whence 
it sprang deepened too, when her task was brought 
to a conclusion by her husband's death. 

This was the reason which Frank St. John had 
for coming home . his sister was alone in the world 
in reality ; and perhaps this was the reason Walter 
Goring had for remaining away. 

For some three or four months after Henry 



1 



RELEASED. l93 

Fellowes* death, Charlie remained with his mother 
and sister. Strangely enough, they seemed to cling 
to her now; they had a jealousy of her leaving 
them. It was not even pleasant to them to hear 
that Frank was coming home to take his sister to 
live with him. So Charlie, as a still farther faint 
sort of expiation for the never-forgotten wrong she 
had done her husband in marrying him without 
love, promised ,to stay with them as long as they 
willed it, gave up the happy prospect oi a home in 
London with Frank . of Frank's bright companion- 
ship and aid, and promised to remain in the atmo- 
sphere that she could not alter her nature sufficiently 
to find congenial. It was about this time, just as 
she had promised to stay with them, th^t Mrs. Walsh 
came back to Deneham, and then, among other 
pleasing and diverting topics of conversation that 
kindly callers indulged in, was the probability . 
which they discussed freely . of Mr. Goring coming 
home, and marrying his beautiful tenant. 

There was very little intercourse between the 
two widows. They went occasionally, and sat the 
orthodox ten minutes in each other's houses; but 
Mrs. Walsh's was the well-endowed and refined 
country life, and, to tell the truth, Charlie did not 

VOL. III. O 



194 WALTER GOBING. 

like to contrast it with her own. Mrs. Walsh lived 
in a cottage, but it was a cottage that stood on a 
sloping lawn, in the centre of which beds of the 
fairest flowers, geometrically arranged, made a gor- 
geous mosaic. It was a cottage the pretty low 
walls of whose rooms were hung with delicately- 
tinted satin-surfaced papers, against the pale green 
and grey of which gilt frames and good bronzes 
stood out magnificently. It was a cottage where 
the simple Jatticed windows were hung with rose- 
coloured or crimsoti silk cwrtains, which threw 
good marble copies of the best antique sculptures 
into fair relief. It was a cottage that was always 
pervaded with the perfume of fresh flowers . ^that 
was always as trim, and perfectly appointed and 
delicately ordered as money alone permits a house 
to be. Small wonder that Charlie, whose taste was 
much towards similar things, should eschew con- 
trasting it with her dwelling-place. 

The great London beauty was living an idylls 
She would not respond to the advances the county 
people made to her, ^mply because she knew that 
it was upon the cards that at the expiration of her 
lease she might see cause to remove herself from 
the neighbourhood, and it was useless to get in with 



RELEASED. 195 

a lot of people for so short a time. But though she 
did not visits and though Walter Goring was away, 
she was not at all dull. " I hold it true, whatever 
befall,*' that one never can be dull if left to oneself 
with beautiful inanimate things ahout one, plenty 
of books to read, and nice horses to ride and drive. 
Mrs. Walsh was surrounded by these conditions of 
successful solitude. Her ey. was always pleased 
when she was in her house; the things were her 
own, and were dear to her by association. Things 
of beauty that do not belong to one are not half so 
satisfactory. And when she was out of the house, 
she was fain to confess that the Norfolk roads may 
not easily be surpassed for riding and driving pur- 
poses. 

There was a certain pleasure too. besides the 
mere fact of driving her handsome chestnut cobs . 
in going over the ground once more which she had 
gone over with Walter Goring on the occasion of 
her first visit to Goring Place. How merrily the 
days had spun by then, to be sure, when they had 
bowled over the ground in Walter's trap, she up in 
front with him, and that poor dead Daisy behind 
with Mr. Levinge ! As she went along the roads 
sometimes, she felt that, surely, though two of the 

2 



196 WALTER GORIN'G. 

dramatis persona were gone be3'ond the bourne from 
whence there is no return, that the two who wiere 
left would see the old places together again. Here 
at Walsingham Abbey they had all four of them 
knelt laughingly at the " Wishing Well,*' and drank 
and wished in that bright unclouded August weather 
when she saw the place first. It was August again 
how. three years after. as she stood by the well 
alone, having left her cobs and man down in the 
village. Had any of their wishes come true ? 
None ! None ! The Daisy had not wished for 
crossed love and early death, assuredly, when she 
had bent down with her yellow hair floating behind 
her, and drank of the crystal water. Was it worth 
going on and evoking other memories by visiting 
some of the other shrines to which they had made 
pilgrimages ? No, certainly not. 

It rarely is worth while to harrow up one's own 
feelings by recalling old memories* These latter 
are pretty in poetry, and fascinating in fiction, but 
they are generally intolerable in real life* There 
almost invariably appears to be a touch less of 
pleasantness (to say the least of it) in the present 
than the past. Three years is a long time in a- 
woman's life. It is impossible for her to avoid: 



BBLEASED. 197 

contrasting her looks then and now when shQ 
glances back through the Tista. She was paler, or 
more pinky, better rounded, or more sylph-like, in 
the bemoaned by-gone she remembers. The inter- 
vening years have witnessed the dissolution of some 
friendships and some hopes that made life a little 
brighter while they lasted. On the whole, resus* 
<?itations are always obnoxious and to be avoided. 
Nevertheless, in her case, alive as she was to the 
propriety of forgetting, the dead days would not 
quite bury their dead. Her memory was unfprtu- 
nately green. 

When she was well out on the road once 
more passing along between the close, regularly 
clipped hedges, what innumerable old associations 
leapt out upon her from either side ! There, at the 
sharp turn, where one of the drives from a pretty 
manor-house gleaming white among the trees ran 
down into a point and joined the road, the trap 
had swerved, and Daisy had been nearly off. She 
remembered now how she had not condescended to 
look round and ascertain the amount of damage 
done, though Daisy had given a well-modulated 
scream. The road was unaltered . there was pre 
cisely the same tint upon the trees now as then, 



198 WALTER GORING. 

the same degree of warmth in the air, the same 
sounds from the harrestmen in the fields ; bat she 
herself was three years older than she had heeik 
then, and Daisy was dead ! 

Somehow or other, a feeling of depression eame 
over her. " You nice county that has been brushed 
and combed into almost beauty, you won't be my 
abiding-place I " she thought, half shaking her head 
at the landscape as she passed along it. " * Few 
views worth painting about here ! ' poor Balph said 
once. How is it that so many of them have painted 
themselves on my heart, I wonder ? I suppose it 
would be the same with any place I knew with Walter 
Goring; he has the art of making things pleasant. 
Absurd of me, at my age, to be undergoing the 
* Wherever thou art would seem Erin to me ' sen- 
sations ! " Then she whipped her cobs, and tried 
to forget him; and went on remembering vividly 
that he had been wont to call her " his goddess,** 
and that young Mrs. Fellowes was free as well as 
herself. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 

Frank St. John did not receire the announce- 
ment of his sister's determination, to- stay with the 
family of her late husband so long as they needed 
her, at all well. He had given up a life that suited 
him, pursuits that pleased him, and the companion- 
ship of a man whom he liked very much, in order to 
come back to make a home for Charlie. And now 
Charlie made all this null and void out of some ab- 
surd scruples. " TU wait and see the book out, and 
then I will go back to Goring," he said, but by the 
time the book was out, and he quite ready for the 
start hack to California, things arranged themselves 
according to his first wishes. A gentleman who, 
twenty years before, had been suspected of enter- 
taining tender feelings towards Miss Dinah . having 
tested himself and her by this sensible unhasting 



SOO WALTER GORING, 

gauge of waiting nearly a quarter of a century to see 
whether anybody else intervened . suddenly took 
heart of grace, and declared himself. Accordingly 
Miss Dinah took him in holy matrimony, and her 
mother to live with her. So Charlie was quite free 
to go away at last, and live the life Frank had pro- 
jected for her. 

It must be acknowledged that Mrs. Walsh was 
very glad to witness Charlie's exodus from Dene- 
ham* Not that Mrs, Walsh had jealous forebodings, 
but she did not want things to remain undecided for 
a week after Walter Goring came back, and Walter 
Goring might come back any day, and Charlie might 
have the effect of rendering him uncertain. So she 
witnessed Charlie's exodus with pleasure, and hoped 
heartily that Charlie would like her new London 
life too well ever to come back to Deneham. 

Both the brother and sister were thriving in 
their respective walks of art. Frank drew for wood 
engraving a good deal, and Charlie, considerably 
elongated, was useful to him as a model very often 
for those wonderful young ladies who adorn the 
pages pf our illustrated magazines, young ladies 
who are all six feet high, and richly gifted with eyes 
that are bigger than their mouths . and Charlie sold 




THE PEAD TO THE UVING, 201 

her stories at flactaatuig prices truly, but still sold 
them. The first thing they did, therefore, was to 
take a pretty little house in a. western suburb, in 
what, in blind reliance on the agent's, veracity, they 
believed to be a quiet neighbourhood, A semi* 
detached house in a road some little distance from 
the highway. A road in which willows wept, and 
ladies stood out on their little drawing-room bal* 
conies on summer evenings . ^and crickets chirped 
in a confiding way as darkness feU in a most anti* 
metropolitan manner. A road rendered respectable 
by a church all to itself at one end . and rendered 
something else (shall it be called interesting ?) by 
divers parrots in divers windows, shaded by the 
pinkest of curtains . ^by little dogs of snowy hue . 
by two or three retiring little broughams which were 
great at waiting . ^by miniature mail-phaetons and 
pairs that went out with a dash and came home with 
a limp. A little road in which the residents were 
almost exclusively of the gentler sex, and the 
visitors almost as exclusively of the other, through 
nature's great law of compensation* 

*^ A sweet little road, close to the park, and quite 
near enough to Piccadilly, and yet so quiet. just the 
very place to work in," Charlie said to her brother. 



202 WALTER GORDKJ. 

in a boTBt of satisfaction with her new abode cm the 
night of their taking possession. She modified that 
statement about its being the very place for working 
in afterwards. From nine o'clock in the morning 
till ten at night sons of harmony ground their 
weary length along the quiet road. Italian boys 
with monkeys found it a pleasant place wherein to 
spend the noontide hour. On Monday it was the 
favoured resort of a distressed father and five 
dilapidated children, who sang their agonies in 
jerks. On Tuesday a corresponding mother im- 
I)arted an additional and purely maternal interest to 
a similar performance. On Wednesday an ingenious 
but unpleasant man made miserable melody by 
rubbing his wretched wet fingers round the rims of 
glasses arranged on a board. On Thursday the 
whole of the above-mentioned had a grand field day, 
and out-howled one another. On Friday a band of 
German boys eased their tender hearts by playing 
** Fatherland ;'* and on Saturday the agonies of the 
week culminated in the Indian with his tom-tom. 
The quiet little road was catholic in its musical 
tastes, undoubtedly, but the general liberality of 
sentiment on the subject was not of an order to 
appeal to a working resident whose nerves were 



J 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 203 

on the surface, and who was conscious of ft 
brain. 

However, they had taken the house, and it be- 
hoved them to make the best of it. " Nice customs 
curtsey to great kings," but mere insignificant sub- 
jects are compelled very often to curtsey to nasty 
customs. In time Charlie got into a habit of 
enduring the Indian with his tom-tom . which is 
more like the toothache than anything else in tMs 
world; she even grew calm enough about him to 
contemplate the possibility of making copy out of 
him at some future time. 

So time rolled on for about a year-^then a break 
occurred.* There had been some trifling business 
relating to the affairs of her late husband still un- 
settled when Charlie had left Deneham. Some 
house property in one of the adjacent parishes had 
fallen to the late' Henry Omry Fellowes (as a lapsed 
legacy), or rather to the late Henry Omry Fellowes' 
widow and sole legatee. The houses were old, 
incommodious, and consequently ill-let, but the site 
on which they stood was good. A practical builder, 
with an eye for the picturesque, saw that it was so, 
and made specious advances towards purchasing 
them of Mrs. Fellowes, who, lacking the business 



204 WALTER GORINGf 

mindy suffered these advances to . drift away into 
nothing for a period of many months. 
. At lasty on the occasion of receiving the small 
quarterly rents, it occurred to her to tell Frank that 
some man had wanted to buy on lease the land on 
which these unremunerative tenements stood for 
building purposes, and it was decided that when- 
ever Frank should chance to find himself with a 
couple of days at his disposal that he should go 
down and see about making the best bargain he 
could for his sister. 

" You'll have to stay a night or two down there, 
Frank," she suggested, when the spare days came, in 
due course, and when he replied, ** Yes," she added, 
' ' Then make Deneham your head-quarters, and just 
give a look at " 

" Mrs. Walsh ? Yes, certainly," he interrupted. 

" I wasn't going to say Mrs. Walsh, but Goring 
Place," she laughed ; " but if you should see your 
Guinevere, say something very civil from me." 

It was late summer weather when Frank went on 
his business mission to Deneham, and it was settled 
that on his return Charlie and he should start for a 
tour they had long contemplated through the 
western counties. They had not organised a perfect 



1 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 205 

plan of operations yet, but they had ahmost decided 
on avoiding railway-riddled tracks, and travelling in 
search of the picturesque on stout ponies, . ^their 
luggage to be sent on to certain salient points here* 
after to be fixed upon, and they themselves to be 
quite free to vagabondise for a month, unfettered by 
all time-table considerations. 

This prospect had a great charm for both the 
brother and sister. They had had a long spell of 
uninterrupted hard work, and they both felt that it 
would be good for them in their respective arts to 
lie fallow for a time . to get away out of the atmo- 
sphere of publishing and picture-dealing, of reviews 
and reviewers . to breathe an air unsullied by the 
sordid interest attaching to these things . to get out 
of the orbit of the daily papers, and the sound of 
the roar of the young lions thereof . to flee paint, 
pens, and paper, and not to give their address to 
anyone. 

** Be ready to start on Friday, Charlie. We'll go 
right away down to Dawlish at once, and cruise about 
from there for a few days,'* Frank said to his sister, 
when he was leaving for Deneham on the Tues* 
day morning. So, during the two or three days of 
his absence, Charlie looked forward to preparing 



S06 WALTER GORING. 

traveUing-dresses that should stand any weather and 
much wear for a month . dresses in which she could 
mount a pony without looking ridiculous, and whicli 
would still be suitable for walking on the earth in. 

Meanwhile Frank had gone down and settled the 
building business, and had made a duty call on 
Mrs. Foster, late Miss Dinah FeUowes, and a 
pleasure call on Mrs. Walsh, who gave him that sort 
of welcome a woman does accord the friend of the 
man she is most interested in, when that man is 
absent, and the friend has seen him long since she 
herself has. 

" I was up in town for a few days in June, Mr. St. 
John," she said to him, " And I saw your picture in 
the Academy." 

"Which one?" he asked, "'A Turning Point' 
or * A Falling Star ? * . the second is a sequel to the 
first" 

" I only saw the * Turning Point,* and I liked the 
feeling with which you indicated a terrible story ; 
there was great tenderness in it, and great truth." 

Frank felt his face flushing with pleasure; his 
fair critic's husband had been a great painter, and 
had taught her to discriminate . must have taught 
her to discriminate. He felt very much flattered. 



THE DEAI> TO THE UVING. 207 

"Did you erer chance to see my Guinevere ?" he 
asked) presently. 

She shook her head. 

" Never ; long ago before you had nearly finished 
it, Walter Goring and I walked up to your studio . 
in Sloane Street you were then . to look at it, but 
you were out, and the door was locked.'* 

*' You know it is at Goring Place ? " he said, in- 
terrogatively. 

** I did not know it. Had I known it, I should 
have gone to see it long long ago ; for I did hear, 
Mr. St. John, that you paid me the compliment 
of introducing a very flattering portrait of me 
in it." 

" Will you come and see it now, Mrs. Walsh ? " 
he asked, eagerly ; " do let me show it to you. It 
was my first work, and now after three years in- 
cessant study and labour, I should like to learn from 
your remarks on it whether I have made any head- 
way in my art or not." 

She grew rather pale at the idea of going to 
Goring Place with another than the master of it. 
There was a' touch more pain than pleasure in the 
prospect of doing so. Such trifles chill and sting a 
woman when the course of a love that she fancies 



208 WALTER GOBINO« 

true does not ran smooth. Still she desired to 
please and encourage the man who, though he was 
her rival's brother, was her lover's friend. 

" Then we'll drive over at once, I have never 
been inside the gates since Walter left. There are 
few things more unpleasant to me than going alone 
to a deserted place where I have once been very 
happy, if not gay." 

"If it will give you pain *' 

" It will not, to go with you," she interrupted, 
smiling. **I spoke of going alone.*' Then she 
rang the bell and ordered her pony-carriage, and 
shortly after scandalised and excited the worst 
feelings of Deneham by driving the handsome 
stranger through its streets. 

It is a very dubious and a very ghastly pleasure 
after all, going to the deserted home of one who is 
dear to you- There is a sense of blankness and 
desolation about the unused rooms that induces^ 
melancholy reflection in the most vivftcious and 
least reflective. Half the furniture is shrouded in 
chilling linen and the other half in dust. Black- 
beetles and other monsters which in inhabited 
days were only to be found in the " vasty deep " of 
the cellars, advance upon you from unsuspected 



ITHE DEAD TO THE LIVINO« 

corners, and "rise up on their hind-legs, gnash- 
ing their teeth upon you '* and obliging yott 
to skip, in order to avoid crushing them, in 
a way that causes you to feel a forlorn' and 
foolish wanderer in insect and old memory- 
haunted wilds. All things that have pot taken 
the damp have taken the dry-rot, and the rest 
are rusty and broken. The piano -is out of tune, 
and so are you* There is too nmch reverberation 
and too much echo, and too much contrast between 
what has been and what is, altogether for sadness 
not to obtain a temporary dominion* 

When Mrs. Walsh pulled up her ponies at the 
lodge-gates, the first sign of the marked difference 
they were soon to see more fully, smote upon both 
Frank and herself. Instead of the speedy orderly 
opening of other days, when a smart young woman 
(the under-gardener's wife) had always held herself 
in readiness to swing open the gates at the first 
sound of the approach of her master or his guests ; 
. ^instead of this prompt portress, a little child 
pattered out of the lodge . gazed at them with an 
expression of pleased amaze in its wide blue eyes . 
advanced gallantly upon the gate, and then, instead 
of opening it, strove to insert its broad chubby feet 



210 WALTER GOEINO. 

between the bars, for the purpose of claxnbmsg op 
and more fiiilly examining the invaders. 

" Open the gate, my little fellow ! '' Frank shouted ; 
but instead of opening the gate the child made a 
shrill appeal to its '' mammy '^ to come out; mid 
then a strange woman came through the doorway 
and demanded, rather insolently, whether they had 
a pass for the park, as she couldn't let them ia 
without it. "Mr. Goring don't wish it showed,*'' 
she continued, turaing about as if to go into the 
lodge again. Then Frank parleyed with her i& 
a high key, much to his own indignation, and 
finally they were admitted, half on sufferance as it 
seemed. 

^* Seeing my Guinevere won't repay you for all 
this bother and annoyance, Mrs. Walsh," Frank said,, 
in a vexed tone, as they drove through the gate-way 
at last; and Mrs. Walsh gave her chestnuts a fierce 
little cut which betrayed that she had felt being 
made to wait. 

" I think it will more than repay me ; considering 
my vanity will find balm in the sight of myself 
idealised." 

" I had no occasion to idealise. I wanted * beauty 
such as never woman wore,* and I found it." 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 211 

A blush SO slight that it might only have been 
the effect of the sun, covered her face as he spoke. 
Then she flicked her ponies again, but not fiereely 
at all this time, and said, . 

" But you had only seen me once, Mr. St. John, 
had you?" 

" I had only seen you once ; but I never forgot ^a 
line of your face. I knew the pencilling by heart, 
from the moment I first saw you, so well, that at any 
time during these three years I could have painted 
your portrait from memory, and made it a vivid 
likeness." 

She looked him frankly in the face, and said, . 

"I am very much flattered." 

" You! flattered by anything I can say ? " 

^' I am very, very much flattered by your ^" 

" Admiration," he interrupted. " I can t express 
to you how strong it is. I never thought that I 
should have dared to try to express it. No one 
knows the depth of it, save Walter : he called you 
my inspiration." 

The blush burnt more brightly on her face, as 
Frank poured the sentence out rapidly. " Walter 
knew it and didn't disapprove of it," she thought ; 
" on the contrary, he rather fostered it by giving it a 

p 2 



WALTER GORING. 

fine name. I dreamt of being Walter's inspiration 
once. What a glorious face this Frank St. John 
has. as fair, frank and proud as Apollo's." 

They had come, by the time her thoughts reached 
this point, to the gravel^sweep in front of the house. 
The gardens showed the absence of their owner. 
The bedding-out plants had not been bedded-out ; 
the croquet-ground no longer looked like green 
velvet ; and a raggedly grown untrimmed Westeria 
in splendid bloom drooped down, entirely concealing 
the windows of the drawing-room, where poor Daisy 
had broken the cabinet and claimed the picture, 
and where afterwards Mrs. Walsh had been intro- 
duced by Walter to his wilful, wayward, charming 
ward. 

They had to go through this room, when after a 
little more delay they were admitted into the house, 
in order to gain that small room where the picture 
had been hun^ As they approached it Frank felt 
the old sensations of sorrow and remorse that his 
should have been the hand to discover Daisy's 
fedseness to Walter and love for Levinge, which had 
oppressed him that night when the poor little girl 
had stood braving them all at bay. 
" You know the story, don't you ? " he asked in 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 2 18 

a low voice, when they came at last before the 
picture, and Mrs. Walsh started and exclaimed at^ 
sight of the *^ Lancelot and Elaine," . > 

" Mr. Levinge and Daisy ! No, I don't know it» 
Walter wrote me word that his marriage with his 
cousin was broken off, and that she was engaged to 
Levinge. But he offered no explanation, and I 
asked for none.'* 

" They are both dead now. The truth can't hurt 
them," Frank said, mournfully. So then, standing 
before the picture, he told the story, and Mrs. Walsh 
found herself far more affected than she once 
deemed she could have been at aught concerning 
Daisy. 

'* Has it ever been found out who her mother was, 
and why Daisy made a mystery about her ? " she 
asked, wiping her eyes as she went and sat down 
before the Guinevere. 

*' Making the mystery was one of her weaknesses. 
Yes, we found that her mother had been a concert* 
singer . ^not a famous one by any means . ^when old 
Goring knew her. He wronged her, as you know," 
he continued, hurriedly, " and then forgot all about 
her, as it seems. Two or three years afterwards a 
man, a clergyman, fell in love with and married her. 



r 



214 WALTER OOBIKO. 

on condition she quitted tke boards entirely, and 
she consented to marry him on condition of being 
allowed to retain Daisy^ whom she passed off as her 
niece, the child of a dead sister. After fifteen or 
sixteen years marriage, the scruples of her sex 
assailed her. She gave herself up ; she betrayed 
her former lover, and she forfeited her child to her 
husband's wrath. She had never been wicked you 
see, Mrs. Walsh, but she was weak as water.'* 

"And Walter would have married the daughter 
of that woman ! " Mrs. Walsh exclaimed ; " a woman 
who could sin and repent for the sake of gaining a 
mediocre establishment, and who ended by sacri- 
ficing the man for whom she had sacrificed herself ! 
It*s a pitiful story.'* 

" It i4)uld have been but for Daisy," Frank said, 
stoutly ; " there was nothing pitiful in Daisy^s 
share in it : she would never have married Goring, 
even if that daub had not made the truth manifest 
when it did. Poor little creature! I shall never 
forget her standing there fironting us all, trying not 
to quail at the sight of Walter's sorrow, for fear we 
should think she was ashamed of her love for 
Leviiige." 

** Was Walter so very sorrowful about it? " 



k 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. ^16^ 

**He was. Wliat xnim wouldn't haro beea?*' 
Frank cried, heartily. 

"Yours was the worst position. You were so 
blameless and so miserably placed ; you to play the 
part of domestic detective, however undesignedly I" 

"It was undesignedly . ^heaven knows! You 
know that, donH you ? '* 

" Do I not ? Indeed I do so well. What a lot 
of pain there is in life," she continued, sadly. 

" But each pang has its compensating pleasure.'* 

"I don't think so: instance yourself, Mr. St. 
John. What compensation can you ever find for 
the pang of having been the cause of that dis- 
closure ? We can't be too thankful for Walter's sake 
that it was made when it was ; it enabled him to try 
to make that poor girl happy. But what cin com- 
pensate you for the pain of being the cause ? " 

" Your sympathy . ^that compensates me.'* 

" Such a poor trifle ! does it ? " 

She looked so bravely up at him as she spoke, 
and she was so very beautiful. " By Jove ! I wish 
I hadn't come," he thought; "I was very well 
before ; . ass that I was not to know how it would be 
if I came down and saw more of her." 

" Shall we go away now ? " she asked, presently. 



21Q WALTER GORING. 

in A low voice, and he assented to her proposition, 
though he hated going away. He seemed to have a 
nearer interest in her standing there before that 
semblance of herself which he had painted, 

The thing he liked next best to her exceeding 
beauty in this woman was, that she was not piously 
anxious to draw morals and adorn tales from Daisy's 
story. The little blonde who had looked upon that 
picture of his, and known herself a found-out fallen 
star, had sinned doubtless ; but had she not suf- 
fered . suffered unto death ? He would have loathed 
any untempted woman who had sat in judgment 
upon her. he would have deemed any woman weak 
who had for effect seemed to seek to find common- 
place excuses for the girl who had been con* 
sumed by her ill-placed passion. But Mrs. Walsh 
did not seek to extenuate, nor did she set down 
aught in malice. She just accepted the facts of 
Daisy's case, and found them sad ; but she did 
not strive to improve them for the edification of the 
living. 

He liked this quality in her . ah ! and how many 

others ? 

<< A thing of beauty is a joy for ever, 
It's loveliness increases ; it will never 
Pass into nothingness.*' 




THE DEAD TO THE LIVING^ 217 

So he 0ang who touched the beautiful mythology of 
Greece, and did tiot ** dim its brightness,'* and so he 
believed probably when he wrote the opening lines 
of his " Endymion." But Frank St John knew 
better, or thought he knew better. The beauty of 
this woman now looking up into his face would i 
cease to be a joy to him^ did it pass . ^not into 
" nothingness,'* but into the possession of Walter 
Goring, ^'I shall never be able to stand it,'' he 
thought ; '' I shall leave dear little Charlie to fight 
her way by herself, and cut my native land. Fancy 
the fellow who could come home and have her-^ 
staying away in California !" There was the law of 
compensation at work even here, Walter evidently 
had not the joyful power of fully appreciating the 
glory that had befallen him in having gained this 
woman's tenderest smiles. 

*' Shall we walk round the house ? " she asked at 
last, and then they made their way to the room 
wherein Daisy used to sing with Laurence Levinge. 
The room was the same ; not a tint of its delicate 
green was faded ; no blur had come over the surface 
of the gold on moulding and picture-frame. The 
same spider-legged litjle tables stood about to upset 
the unwary ; the same untarnished mirrors flashed 



218 WALTER GORING. 

back your £ace wliea you looked into them ; the 
same myrtle which she had planted bloomed and 
budded in the jardiniere ; the same low couch on 
which Mrs. Walsh had sat» with Walter at her side, 
on the night of her first arrival at Goring Place, 
stretched its luxurious expanse ; the same winking 
Cupid on the ormolu clock on the mantle-board 
levelled his golden arrows at the hour and half- 
hour ; but the piano was silent, and Daisy was 
dead. 

The room was ghastly in its unaltered state. 
Whether it had been through mere carelessness, or 
through some half-unconscious sentiment on the 
part of the housekeeper, they could not telL They 
could only feel that it was all painfully as of old. 

There on the centre table . open still, and turned 
down on the face of its pages . ^was that volume 
of Macaulay's lays which Daisy had been reading 
when Walter took her away to Brighton first, when, 
his own educational code had failed. It was such a 
little thing to touch them. Probably the book had 
been taken up scores of times since Daisy put it 
down ; taken up and dusted, and carefully readjusted 
by Some housemaid's hand. ^But for all this pro- 
bability it seemed to be so very sacred to the fair 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 219 

dead girl who had opened it at that page. It was 
such a very little thing to touch them, but somehow 
or other they were touched- by it, or something else 
which I caxmot define. 

Briefly, but very kindly, as they were afterwards 
walking through the picture gallery which Ealph 
Walsh had rearranged, did Mrs. Walsh allude to 
her husband. '^ There was no method observed, 
and every picture was hung in the worst light 
when we came down here to stay; now the true 
artist's hand is traced in the placing of each one. 
Don't you see it ? " 

" They're hung as well as they could be hung on 
such walls; these deeply-embrasured windows are 
not the ones to show off pictures to advantage." 

" Well, no, they're not ; but my husband did all 
that could be done. It was the last exercise of 
his great talent . the better adornment of Walter 
Goring's house." 

She smiled almost tenderly as she spoke, and 
Frank waxed uncomfortable. Allusions, fond al- 
lusions to Walter, friend though Walter was of 
Frank'si wei^ not too pleasant things to which to 
listen. But this linking together of the " loved lost 
and the loved Uving'' was specially distastefal. 



220 WALTER GOBING, 

''It all falls to Walter's share," Frank said, after 
a brief space, 

"All what?" 

"Friendship, fortune, success, love. everything 
that makes life worth having, in fact." 

" Has he availed himself of it all ? Does he seem 
as if he cared for the friendship ? He knows our 
hearts are wrung with anxiety for him, yet he stays 
away in those horrid wilds from choice/' 

She spoke in a sudden gust of afiEectionate indig- 
nation ; she could not resist betraying the chagrin 
she felt at this perversity of my hero's. Frank 
could not sympathise with her. 

" I must acknowledge that my heart isn't much 
wrung with anxiety about Walter. It's not half so 
savage as you're pleased to suppose: he has his 
rifles and dogs, and two or three Mexican servants 
with him." 

*' Oh, I don't doubt his capability of taking care of 
himself," she replied, with her sex's inconsistency. 
"Shall we go away now? It's rather depressing, 
walking about these deserted halls." 

As they were driving home, Mrs. Walsh asked, 
" Have you seen your sister? " 

"I saw her the day I left, of course," he an- 



THE DEAD TO THE LIVING. 221 

swered. To him, there was but one sister in the 
world . Charlie* 

" Ah ! I meant your other sister, Mrs. Prescott." 

" No ; are they at the Hurst ? " 

'^ Oh, yes ; and you must go and see them," she 
replied, wheeling her cobs round rather too sharply 
into the re-opened private lane that led from Goring 
Place to the Hurst* The sudden swerve excited 
the chestnuts; they made a sharp bolt forward 
before the hind-wheels of the phaeton could turn ; 
the bricked comer of the hedge came crashing 
against them ; the cobs started off at full speed, 
and in an instant or two the phaeton went over the 
near side, and Mrs. Walsh and Frank were both 
shot out. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



MORNING AND EVENING. 



" Thank the Lord, it's the left arm," Frank 
thought, when he had picked himself up and dis- 
covered that the limb of which he spoke stood off 
from the elbow at an acute and unnatural angle. 
He had seen immediately that Mrs. Walsh was un- 
hurt, or he would not have thought an adjuration 
about himself at all. 

The cobs had kicked themselyes free of the pole ; 
and they now stood panting, with their traces hanging 
loosely about them, and the buttoned boy, who 
always accompanied Mrs. Walsh, at their heads. 
That youth stood very much agape when his ordi- 
narily composed mistress reproached herself and 
her chestnuts and her page as the cause of the 
accident to Mr.* St. John, all in one breath. " My 
awkwardness ! They are full of vice from want of 



MORNING AND EVENING. 2^8 

-work ! Why iiidn't you take Robin Hood up a hole 
or two before we started, John?" she continued, 
angrily aUuding to the pony that had been in on 
the near side, and nnrho had, to tell the truth, evinced 
a marked inclination to shirk his irork and play at 
going breadth-ways several times. " Mr. St. John, 
what can I . what co/h I do ? " 

Frank's arm was swelling rapidly. It was a 
promising dislocation- at the elbow; the small bone 
was broken immediately below it, and the wrist was 
sprained. Altogether the accident was a remark- 
ably complete one. 

" I tell you what I'll do. Trust me to pull yom- 
arm in . ^I caai ! " 

He saw that her face flushed as she spoke. He 
would hav« distrusted the pulling-in powers of a 
woman who had gone pale while proposing it. 
** Trust you ! I'd trust you to do that or anything 
else," he replied ; " but you haven't the strength." 
Then he tried a feeble smile, and added, "When 
men get out of joint, they don't go in again in a 
hurry." 

" Let me try . do let me try ! " she cried. " Have 
you a knife ? " 

He had a knife, very much at her service. 



224 WALTER GORING. 

Accordingly, she ripped his coat-sleeve from the 
wrist to the shoulder*seam ; cut open his shirt* 
sleeve very daintily, and then without the shadow 
of a tremble prepared to pull in the swollen limb 
which she had been the cause of dislocating. 

All round the region of the elbow-joint the* flesh 
had puffed up terribly. She shuddered inwardly when 
she saw it, but she would not suffer the shudder 
to make itself visible. " Put your arm round my 
waist to steady yourself. 1*11 be like a rock, Mr. 
St. John," she said, when she laid her long, snowy- 
white fingers on the battered wrist ; and, tender as 
her touch was, it seared his tortured flesh like hot 
iron. The next moment there was a creaking and 
a horrible jerk, and-^the joint was rightly adjusted 
again. No one who has not had his elbow dis- 
located can quite appreciate the profound intensity 
of that love of the beautiful which enabled Frank 
to think only of the grace and charm with which 
Mrs. Walsh performed this little bit of surgery 
while she was doing it. 

When she had made a temporary sling out of the 
silk scarf she wore, there was nothing else to be 
done save to get home and send for a doctor as 
soon as possible. Mrs. Walsh wanted to send her 



MORNING AND EVENING. 225 

boy into Deneham for a carriage, but Frank declared 
himself able to walk. 

"I must drop a line to Charlie," he said, "or 
shell be wild on Friday if I don't put in an 
appearance; and I don't think 1*11 risk a railway 
journey on the Great Eastern yet." 

" I should think not. I will write to Mrs. Fel- 
lowes> and beg her to come down, Mr* St. John. 
You must stay at my house till you have qpiie got 
over the effect of my carelessness." 

Frank St. John tried very hard to refuse this 
invitation with manly firmness and decision* He 
knew well that it would only be the worse for him 
eventually if he did put himself in the way of 
seeing her constantly. But she routed every excuse 
he made, and finally he gave way and consented to 
go and be happy for a time under her roof, and to 
be in diurnal receipt of her tender sympathy. 

" She does it for Walter's sake," he thought ; 
" Tm Walter's friend. No doubt she'd nurse a dog 
of his just as tenderly. Well, it's my luck . it's 
this child's destiny. * No woman's eyes shall smile 
on me, no woman's heart be mine,' I suppose. I 
hope Ellen won't come over and bother me to go 
to The Hurst, though there'll be more pain than 

VOL. III. Q 



926 WALTER GORING. 

pleasure very likely in staying with Mrs. WalsL, 
especially when the edge of her admiration for him 
is whetted by the sight of Charlie. But I'll be a 
Christian martyr, and bear my share of pain." 

The doctor came^ and found his task made com- 
paratively easy through the prompt measures Mrs. 
Walsh had taken. He advised that Frank should 
go to bed at once, and sent him a sleeping draught. 
Frank took neither the advice nor the liquid com- 
posure; he sat in the drawing-room till eleven 
o'clock, and was made much of by Mrs. Walsh in 
a way that was far more soothing to his feelings. 
In order to retain this state of things he would not 
have had the smallest objection to dislocating each 
one of his limbs in succession ; he blessed those 
swerving ponies and that obtrusive corner, and 
thought kind things of the boy who had neglected 
to take Eobin Hood's traces up a hole or two. 
Finally he went to bed at eleven very much in love^ 
and very conscious of his folly in being so. The 
consequence was that he passed a feverish night, 
and in the morning was found by his attendant to 
have vague notions about the majority of things. 
This grew, until by the time Charlie arrived (which 
she did late on the day following the accident) 



-.^ 



MORNING AND EVENING. 2U7 

he was delirious, and Mrs. Walsh unfeignedly 
frightened. 

Women almost invariably meet each other gra- 
ciously in times of sickness. The hostess and her 
guest had been rivals . undiscovered rivals ; never- 
theless now that they had this common interest 
they seemed to banish all memory of that rivalship, 
and to incline towards one another as sisters might 
have' done, or rather as sisters are supposed to do 
by those of limitless faith, but do not too frequently. 

Frank's was a very brief access of delirium, that 
is to say, he only stayed " out of his head " as the 
domestics of Mrs. Walsh's establishment termed it, 
for a day and a night. But the time, all brief as it 
was, had been quite long enough for him to commit 
himself to the statement of sundry sentiments which 
were quite new to his sister Charlie. They were 
new in verbal form also to Mrs. Walsh (who heard 
some of them very undesignedly in the course of 
sundry missions of mercy and assistance which she 
paid the sick-room), but that they were utterly un- 
suspected by that matron, after those passages 
before the pictures, is more than can be stated in 
truth. 

Charlie had brought down all the letters which 

q2 



228 WALTER GORING. 

had arrived for Frank since his departure, and 
among them was one from Walter Goring. '' It has 
the San Francisco postmark upon it. He has 
evidently left the wilds and has come down to San 
Francisco ; perhaps is on his way home," Charlie 
saidi as Mrs. Walsh and herself stood investigating 
the envelope of the letter late at night. 

"How very glad your brother will be to see 
him home again.'' Mrs. Walsh remarked in 
reply. 

"Yes, and how his return will improve your 
neighbourhood." 

" I don't suppose he will be here much . just in 
the hunting and shooting season.' But there'll 
be too many claims on him in town for him to 
reside here altogether." 

" Well, you know him much better than I do," 
Charlie said, with a spasm of pain at the truth of 
her own words. ** You re far better able to judge of 
what he will do than I am." 

"I have known him years . how many years 
longer . ^but do I know him better, Mrs. Fel- 
lowes?" 

" I think you do," Charlie replied, frankly. 

" I think I do not." Mrs. Walsh said, with equal 



MORNINa AND EVENING, 229 

frankness* " I thought I knew him well, . ^knew him 
as well as I loved him, until he wanted to marry 
Daisy ; that staggered my own faith in my knowledge 
of his character : she was imsuited to him in every 
way. 

*^ Do you think that the consideration of suitable- 
ness enters into people's calculations when cir- 
cumstances bring about their marriage?*' Charlie 
asked. 

Mr. Walsh remembered Charlie's marriage and 
her own, and declined to give a decided opinion. 

" Because I don't," the embyro philosopher went 
on. ^' What men think about chiefly, I can't say ; 
pleasing themselves, I suppose. But the majority 
of young women think about everything save those 
contrasting or sympathetic points in a man's cha- 
racter which are essential to happiness in a close 
union. My own idea now is that if I couldn't take 
extreme pleasure in a man's society and companion- 
ship under any circumstances, that sense and 
decency demand that I should utterly put down 
the possibility of marrying him. This may seem 
a very mild statement of feeling till you think about 
it, Mrs. Walsh ; but when you do think about it, 
say, how many girls are actuated by it after all ? Girls 



230 WALTER GORIXG. 

take as their Lasbands men with whom they would 
ridicule the idea of forming intimate friendships* 
I know it/' 

''But on the other hand, how many intimate 
friendships we form with men whom we wouldn't 
marry on any consideration ? " 

"Yes . and that's redeeming, I allow; but my 
proposition has a great deal too much trutii about 
it, you'll find, when you come to consider. Now I 
must go to Frank.*' 

"Let me sit up with you. What sorrow and 
trouble I have been the means of causing you ! " 

" Yes you have/' Charlie thought, " but not in 
the precise way in which you mean it." Then she 
thanked Mrs. Walsh for her offer of sharing the 
vigil, and refused it, and went away with Walter's 
letter in her hand to Frank's bedside. 

The next morning Frank was better ; well enough 
to break the seal and read his letter and tell them 
coherently that Walter announced his return. " We 
are to expect him by the next mail . ^not the next, 
the one after, unless he's delayed," Frank said in 
the reverse of enthusiastic tones to his sister ; then 
Charlie passed the news along to Mrs. Walsh, and 
the two women out of the intensity of their ner- 



MOBNING AND EVENING. flSl 

Tousness grew almost affectionate to one another 
while discussing it 

Ellen came over as Frank had dreaded, and was 
anxious in a sisterly yfsj about him. ''I should 
like to see him, if he's not bruised in the fisice, 
Charlie,^' she said, after greeting the young 
widow. 

" He's not bruised in the face, I assure you ; but 
if you have . any doubts about your oWn nfsrves, 
don't go in: he's suffering too much to be disturbed 
by other people's emotions." 

''I don't so much mind what he suffers if it 
doesn't show," Ellen replied, candidly. 

'' How consistent you are, Ellen ; always the same, 
dear. I would venture to stake my life on what 
your expressed feelings would be whenever you 
heard of anybody being hurt or injured." 

Ellen bridled her fait pretty little head with 
pleasure. " Yes/* she repUed, '* I always was dread- 
fully tender-hearted. I can't bear the sight of 
blood, or anything nasty. I daresay you don't mind 
it so much ; you always were a Utile coarser in your 
tastes. But really it is fortunate for Frank that 
you don't mind, isn't it ? " 

" Perhaps it is. Well, come in, Ellen. But mind 



232 WALTER 60RIK6, 

* 

1*11 turn you out the instant you air your delicacy 
of feeling. I won't have Frank agitated.*' 

Mrs. Prescott was very far from being cold-hearted 
or ill-natured. These are black qualities, and none 
of hers were ** put in " in anything but the most 
undecided neutral tints. She was weak, that was 
all; therefore, at the sight of Frank apparently 
helpless in bed, she showered down a soft spray of 
tears, and said *' he was unfortunate, always un-* 
fortunate! dreadfully." 

''Oh! this isn't so bad," he said, carelessly. 
"How's Prescott?" 

" Very well . ^in health," Ellen replied, as if her 
husband were very ill in something else. 

'. Is he at The Hurst now ? " 

.'Yes, he's there; you don't want anything of 
him, do you, Frank ? " 

" I ? No, certainly not." 

" Ah, I*m so glad . I told him I didn't think you 
would, but he was afraid your arm, you know, 
might prevent your doing anything for a long time, 
and it put him out : upset him." 

** He's very good to be so considerate on Frank's 
account," Charlie put in, rather haughtily. 

" Yes, he is very good ; I often think how lucky I 



MORNING AND EVENING, 233 

was to be settled and well proyided for so young, 
while everything has gone wrong with you and 
Frank ; it makes me quite wretched, quite low^ when 
I think about you both often," Ellen continued, 
with that delightful vivacity people do occasionally 
display when discussing the sorrows of others. 
.* There's Frank, now, no further on in life, and 
with not such good prospects as when he first went 
into the navy ; and you have to write for your living, 
Charlie ; it does seem hard." 

"I think we've talked long enough to Frank 
now,'* Charlie interrupted. 

" No," Frank said, laughing. " Ellen's sympathy 
is so uncommonly sweet that I'd like to have more 
of it," 

" We think you might have found time to call at 
The Hurst, Frank,^' Mrs. Prescott resumed, suddenly 
adopting an injured tone. ** You could go and see 
Mrs. Foster, and drive about with Mrs. Walsh, but 
your own sister you couldn't give an hour to. Don't 
you think Mrs. Walsh is falling oflf ?" 

" Not a bit," Charlie replied. She heartily wished 
that she could think Mrs. Walsh less beautiful than 
of yore, but it was not possible to do so, 

**I suppose she's not likely to marry again . 



^34 WALTEK GORING. 

unless she marries Mr. Goring, after aU ? " Ellen 
went on, meditatively. 

"After all what?" Charlie questioned, sharply. 
The supposition was not a pleasant one for either 
Frank or herself, she felt 

"Why, after a^l you know; there's one thing 
certain, she can't marry unless the man has 
money." 

"Why not?" Charlie was the speaker, Frank 
had turned his face rather more to the wall. 

" Oh, because her husband made that a proviso. 
Mr. Prescott saw the will when he was in town last ; 
if she marries again she loses her income." 

" How unfair . ^how abominably unjust !" Charlie 
cried, indignantly. 

" Mr. Prescott and I don't think so ; his will is 
the same." 

" I think I should like to have a sleep now, if you 
won't mind leaving me," Frank muttered, drowsily. 
Whereupon his sisters left him . ^to sleep ? 

No ! not to sleep,. to think. Ellen was right. 
She had spoken a bitter truth in her feeble incon- 
siderate way when she said he was unlucky, and no 
further on in life than when he had gone into the 
navy a mere boy. Hope fled from his breast as he 



MORNING AND EVENING. ^35 

recalled the past and pictured the futui'e. He was 
stung to the soul, and all energy was crushed out of 
him. 

Unconsciously he had nurtured the hope that 
when Walter came home Charlie would reap her 
reward, and win him, and that then Mrs. Walsh 
might in time incline to another love. Frank had 
determined to give Walter fair play. He would 
take no mean advantage of his friend*s absence, he 
liad told himself,, but would just bide his time, and 
if, when Walter came back, Charlie lost and his 
Guinevere won, he (Frank) would accept his defeats 
like a man. If, on the other hand, Walter Goring 
gave unmistakeable evidence of its being only 
friendship pure and simple which he had felt all 
along for his Goddess, Frank would put his fate 
to the touch, and seek her for his " wife " who had 
been his " inspiration." 

But now these resolves were broken up, sent to 
the winds like chaff before the fell blast of Ellen's 
tidings. For himself he did not want the money; 
it would have been pleasant to have it together with 
her of course, but it should have been under her 
sple control. Nevertheless, though he did not want 
the money, he felt that he could not ask her to for- 



236 WALTER GORING. 

feit it by marrying him. Here, again, the gods 
favoured Goring ; he could make it up to her, what 
she lost would be as notliing to what she would gain 
in becoming the mistress of Goring Place. Luck 
was against him in every way. 

Lying there in a good deal of pain from his 
broken arm, and a good deal more pain from his 
broken hopes, his future looked a dreary dark blank 
before him. "The many fail," in all things . 
especially in all branches of art. "It was more 
than probable that he was among the ^many' 
destined to do so . ^it would only be like his luck. 
Truly he had done tolerably well, had made good 
progress heretofore, but it wouldn't last, nothing did 
last with him. It was more than likely such creative 
power as he had would fail him. Naturally the 
public would get tired of his style. There were so 
many better men than himself in the field that he 
could only come in with the ruck. As it was, during 
the period of his temporary popularity (he was con- 
vinced that it was only temporary) he would have to 
waste his time and the little talent he had in doing 
things that died with the day, and would never make 
him a decent name. Whoever looked twice at the 
pictorial part of a magazine ? Or, indeed, for that 



MORNING AND EVENING. 237 

matter, whoever looked twice at any part of H maga- 
zine ? He wished from the bottom of his heArt that 
he had never written those essays in which he had 
sought to prove the brilliantly original theory of 
what is good in itself being acknowledged in time« 
He had written them when he was in high spirits, 
when he was happy, when the day was sufficient to 
him, before he had seen so much of Mrs. Walsh, in 
fact ; and now they seemed like unto the brayings of 
an idiotically contented and absurdly hopeful ass. 
There was poor Charlie, too ! Wasn't her life one 
unceasing struggle to seem happy and light-hearted, 
when he knew very well that she wasn't so in reality ? 
The whole thing was a big sham, and not worth 
keeping up any longer ! " So things looked to him 
in the morning. But in the evening they brightened. 
John, the neglectful^ who had omitted to take Bobin 
Hood up a hole or two, proved a capital valet. 
Through his aid Frank inducted himself into his 
clothes, and when he was dressed Mrs. Walsh sent 
up a deputation in the person of Charlie to ask him 
to come down into the drawing-room. 

He went down, and his hostess met him at the 
door, and drove the will and its consequences out of 
his head by taking his sound hand in both her own 



238: WALTER GORIKG. 

and welcoming him warmly. She was out of her 
weeds, but she still wore black as a rule; this night, 
however, ** she regarded as a festival," she said, and 
she had dressed for it accordingly. She was radiant 
in her beauty, and her joy at seeing him down again, 
and her white, soft, semi-transparent robe, girded in 
round the waste with a silver cord. As Frank 
looked at her and listened to her, he forgot his dark 
doubts of the morning, and felt that he was safe to 
do ever so much in the world, and to succeed 
brilliantly. 

It was very pleasant to play the invalid under 
such auspices. Mrs. Walsh carried him his cup of 
tea as he sat in one corner of the couch that was 
generally sacred to herself; and she held the saucer 
for him while he took the tea in slow sips, feasting 
his eyes the while on her beauty, over the brim of 
the cup. She also readjusted his sling for him. 
Finally, she made a proposition which nearly sent 
Frank off into delirium again. 

The night was very lovely; daylight had not 
quite died out of the sky yet, and as they sat near 
to the open window the beauty of the evening and 
the fact of Charlie havuig had no out-door exercise 
that day struck Mrs. Walsh, who accordingly asked. 



-J 



MORNING AND EVENING. 239 

*^Now wouldn't you like to go out for a drive, 
Mrs. Fellowes ? it would do you good." 
^- Frank's face fell ; he thought he was to be 
deserted; but it brightened presently', when Mrs. 
Walsh added : 

" John should drive you round to The Hurst and 
to see Mrs. Foster, if you liked. I will stay with 
Mr. St. John, and try not to let him feel dull while 
you're away." 

Charlie hesitated, but Frank decided. 
" I think you ought to go and see the late Miss 
Dinah, really, Charlie ; and the air will do you good, 
dear." 

So Charlie went, and Frank and Mrs. Walsh 
were left alone together. 

For five or six minutes after the little exciteinent 
of watching Charlie drive off, there settled a calm 
and a silence down upon them. Mrs. Walsh began 
to wish she had not proposed the drive ; Frank 
began to wish he had not seconded it. To what 
end, he asked himself, was a tite-d-tete vouchsafed 
to him wlien he could not in honour profit by it. 
Even if there had been no Walter Goring in the 
case, he could not ask a woman to give up liberty 
and plenty for penury and himself. The bare idea 



240 WALTER GORIKG. 

was preposterous; he could not be so mean . -he 
could not be such a fool . ^he could not presume to 
reward her gracious condescension by such a piece 
of presumptuous madness. 

His meditations were interrupted by. her saying, 

" Don't be oflfended with me, Mr. St. John, when 
I tell you that I'm perfectly surprised to see what 
a charming woman your sister has grown, or 
become rather.** 

" Do you think she has ? " he replied. 

He really could not take any intense interest in 
Charlie's development at the moment. 

" Yes, very. I didn't like her at one time . I 
don't know why, but I did not . and she responded 
freely, I fancy ; but we understand each other better 
now, and are very good friends. She is sure to 
marry again. You mustn't hope to keep her with 
you." 

" I hope she will marry again ; but I have heard 
her say that she never will." 

" That means nothing," Mrs. Walsh said, quietly. 

" In the majority of cases unquestionably it means 
nothing; but Charlie had a remarkably unpleasant 
experience, remember. She married a wealthy, 
jovial, manly, frank fellow, and in a few months he 



MORNING AND EVENING. 241 

turned out a bankrupt, drunken and ill-humoured. 
I never said a word against my sister's husband 
to anyone while he lived. I should never say what 
I thought of him to her now, but I assure you, it 
was the best news I had ever heard in my life when 
I heard he was dead. She must have had an awful 
time of it ; not that she howled or complained . 
she stood to her guns gallantly . but I know she 
had an awful time of it." 

"Yes; Walter Goring told me of one scene 
which he witnessed the night of the auction at The 
Hurst, the first time her husband stood a sot before 
her." 

" She has never told me of it," Frank said. 

"Mr. Goring told me that the struggle between 
her refinement and her sense of duty was an 
agonising thing to witness; he was very much 
impressed by it. I should have thought that she 
was more likely to be swayed by feeling than any- 
thing else ; but she didn't allow herself to be so in 
that instance, Walter said." 

" Her feelings always sway her in the right 
direction," Frank said, fondly ; " still though I 
know that, I hope when I leave her that it will be 
under a husband's protection." 

VOL. II r. K 



242 WAIiTEB GORING. 

" Leave her ! Where are you going ? " 

" That I hardly know, myself, Mrs. Walsh. I 
only know that I must get away somewhere . 
because I dare not stay." 

He spoke in an eamest, impassioned tone, fixing 
his eyes full on her face as he spoke. She was * 
sitting on a low chair by the side of the little couch 
he occupied. As he said this she put her hand 
up and rested her brow upon it, covering her eyes 
by this means. 

" Going away ? you too ! *' she said, softly ; 
" though I have known so little of you, I can't help 
feeling very sorry that you should tliink of going 
away. I detest these dissolutions," she continued, 
suddenly rising and walking away to the window. 

" Dissolutions ? " he repeated, echoing her last 
word. 

"Yes, dissolutions; here just as Walter Goring 
is coming home, you, the only man who has been 
much to him during these later years, talk of going 
away. Walter had a reason for going and trying 
to turn himself into a barbarian . a reason I appre- 
ciated; but now that he is coming back sound and 
quite recovered from all that sorrow and morti- 
fication . coming back as he thinks to a band of 



MORNING AND EVENING. 243 

friends who will welcome him, and be about him 
as of old . why should you want to be off? " 

She faced round as she asked it . ^fronted him 
fully in all that "beauty such as never woman 



R 2 



CHAPTER XVII. 



She fronted him in all her beauty^ reproaching 
him for thinking' of going away, and her doing so 
nearly sent all his magnanimous determinations to 
be noble and miserable to the winds. Then he re- 
minded himself that it was on Goring's account that 
she objected to the scheme. on Goring's account 
entirely. ** She's not one of those women who like 
to see men wear their hearts upon their sleeves ab- 
jectly," he thought; "she's not one to want to add 
any fellow to her train of worshippers . she's had 
too many of them . that isn't why she wants me to 
stay ; she thinks about me so little that she doesn't 
even see that I love her." 

He was uncommonly blind, quite as blind as he 
gave her credit for being. She did see how things 
had gone with the handsome young artist He had 



" NOXIOUS vapours/' 246 

made his state of mind quite clear to her, and she 
was not ill disposed towards it. His passionate ad- 
miration for her, and the chivalrous feelings which 
kept him back from folly avowing the same were 
patent and pleasant to her. But she could not make 
any further move in an encouraging direction. She 
had appealed against his determination to go away, 
and he had reiterated that determination. There 
was an end to that, of course. 

It was rather hard w^ork to go back to mere com- 
mon places immediately after the excitement into 
which they had both been betrayed; but she had per- 
fect tact, and managed it. She rang for lights, and 
everyone knows how infallibly the strongest thread 
of conversational interest is snapped by the entrance 
of a servant, who disorganises the room, and 
abolishes the light of heaven for the evening. By 
the time the lamp was on the table and the blinds 
were down Mrs. Walsh and Frank were quite them- 
selves again, toned down to perfect safety for any 
number of hours' solitary confinement together. 

By-and-by Charlie came back from her drive, not 
at all exhilarated by it, as those who had advised 
it had hoped she would have been. Indeed it may 
be questioned whether one ever is exhilarated by 



246 WAI/TJBK GOKING. 

a viaity after a lengthened absence, to old scenes and 
old acquaintances. When, after a period of separa- 
tion, one goes back to, or meets, old friends the case 
ia widely diflferent; but friends are not plentifully 
scattered over any one's path. The majority of people 
with whom one meets are of that calibre that one 
doesn't much care whether one ever meets them 
again or not. Therefore, when they do turn up, 
either premeditately or unexpectedly, one is apt to 
feel them to be uncommonly depressing and burden- 
some. 

On the most shallow pretext they wiU refer to old 
times. They will go and dig in the mouldy past, 
and resuscitate the most unpleasant memories. 
They will remind one of something, not so intoler- 
able in itself perhaps, but that brings to mind 
* something else that is more than intolerable. They 
will remark upon one's tenderest points . on the 
crow's-feet of the maiden lady, who knows her last 
chance is going, if not gone . on the grey hair that 
plentifully besprinkle the raven locks of a past young, 
Apollo . on the immutability of one's prospects, which 
are no better and no worse than when they met one 
last. They will enlarge upon the preposterous 
prognostications that had been formed in the by-gone 



"noxious vapours." 2iT 

time for one, and sigh over the falsification of the 
same. They will remind one that as one was then, 
and is now, so one will in all probability ever be in 
this world. They ruthlessly (and undesignedly, 
which makes matters worse) brush away the little 
bloom that is left, and knock down the few remain- 
ing illusions. One can but ask, "What is the 
motive" of all the striving, and struggling, and 
sorrow, and suspense which, passed through, leaves 
one in precisely the same position as before ? Many 
who read this passage on a gloomy afternoon in 
November will ask themselves the same question. 
Here I think is the answer. 

Because the ordeal brings out the highest quali- 
ties, develops the noblest faculties. Patience, endu- 
rance, pluck, none of these can have fair play while 
there is no opportunity for their displayal. The 
circumstances which call forth these qualities are 
not pleasant . ^if they were the qualities wouldn't be 
called forth ; still they are as good and strengthening 
as a dose of quinine or a dip in the sea when the 
chill of October is on it. They brace. Life is fully 
worth all we suffer in it, as we must all acknowledge, 
when we remember that on going into partnership 
in the great firm of Humanity, we put nothing in. 



248 WALTER GOBING. 

All that comes to us of joy or grief, of pain or 
pleasure, is clear gain. We paid no premiom. The 
majority ^^of howls against the all-pervading sorrow 
and sin of this fair world are bom of the cup that 
inebriates without cheering, far more frequently 
than from sober conviction. There is unfortu- 
nately too much of those sad alliterative twins, but 
inveighing against them in neatly turned sentences, 
or in mellifluous verse, does little good. 

There is a very bright side to life as well as the 
dark one which has been so well worked by poets 
and romancists. There is a great deal of literal, of 
moral, and of mental sunshine, abroad in this 
world, which art too often " renders " gloomily. 
Of course it " is not always May." What a bore 
May would be if it were ? But if we look for the 
light we can generally find it even in suicidal 
November . or dreary dark December. I have a 
perfect faith in change and alternatives. If one 
place is wearisome, go somewhere else. If one 
thing does not answer expectation, try another. 
Every one may not be able to avail themselves 
of the former piece of advice, but the latter is at 
the command of all from the highest to the hum- 
blest. Work is an unfailing panacea for every 



249 

evil. Work induces hope, and assists digestion. 
It is those who are drunk with idleness, not those 
who cannot pause to dally, who find the world so 
dark, and life so drear. 

The story is so nearly told, that I have allowed 
myself this digression without compunction. More- 
over, the matter of it is not utterly irrelevant to the 
declared subject. Mrs. Fellowes came back from 
her visit to old scenes and old familiar faces, con- 
siderably depressed, it was stated, as may be re- 
membered a few pages back. This depression was 
a natural consequence of certain conditions to 
which the most prosperous mortal may be sub- 
jected. In the first place, the h^at of the day and 
the confinement to the house had physically weak- 
ened her. In the second j)lace, she had been com- 
pelled to sit for an hour in the society of a stupid 
well-meaning man (Mr. Foster), and a couple of 
women equally stupid, and perhaps not equally 
well-meaning, who had no interest in common with 
her present all-engrossing pursuit, and no know- 
ledge whatever of the place where she dwelt, or the 
people with whom she mixed. This in itself would 
have been of no consequence; but it became im- 
portant when she was committed to sit amongst 



250 WALTER GORING. 

and converse with them for a time. It is impossible 
for mediocre women to talk other than foolishly or 
far too curiously on any social topics of which they 
are utterly ignorant. Mrs. Fellowes, senior, and 
Mrs. Foster were eminently mediocre . the word 
seemed to have been made for them. They asked 
irritating little questions ahout things that could 
not possibly concern them, and they reverted to the 
old days with suppressed lamentations, and to the 
future in subdued tones that betokened much doubt. 
Altogether, Charlie was conscious of her chin hav- 
ing lengthened itself a little when she left them. 
They had stolen over her like a fog . ^they, and the 
recollections of the past. 

Nor were matters brightened a bit when she 
reached The Hurst . ^h«r old home . the sight of 
which made her think rather kindly of the man 
who had lost it, and gone to distraction for grief at 
that loss. Mr. and Mrs. Prescott were sitting in 
the library, Ellen sitting at the still open window 
with a little stand close to her on which stood a 
candle and a plate of peaches. Ellen looked like 
a peach herself. There was a bloom . a downy 
tender softness on her cheek still. Not a line 
on her sweet, pretty face. "Time tries all but 



"noxious vapours." 251 

Ellen/' Charlie thought, as she looked at her 
sister. 

Her brother-in-law was far less pleasant to 
behold. Mr. Prescott was sitting with a magazine 
in his hand, holding it up behind a candle, the light 
of which was cast fully on his face. Charlie saw 
at a glance that the magazine was one of those for 
which Frank drew. Presently she discovered that 
Mr. Prescott was criticising one of Frank's drawings. 

Mr. Prescott's canons of taste were by no means 
uncommon. He liked what it was safe to like; 
what had received the commendation of centuries, 
or at any rate of the preceding generation. He 
would go and stand close up against Baphael's 
cartoons till each limb of each figure seemed a 
monstrous deformity, and find them surpassingly 
beautiful. He would view a Turner from that 
special point from which it was nothing but a 
smudge, and declare it " glorious." But he could 
see no good in the work of any young man without 
a name. 

He had no faith in aspirants. " Fulfilments, not 
promises, were the things," he was wont to say. 
The young men who were upsetting tradition, and 
painting things as they were, received no encourage- 



253 WALTER GOBING. 

ment from that liberal patron of art, Robert Pres- 
cott, Esq. He would have his' walls covered, but it 
should be with something that was * by/ or at any 
rate * after/ somebody of old, who could never cast 
a suspicion on Mr. Prescott's taste by failing pro- 
minently to succeed contemporaneously with him- 
self. Need it be said that he took a particularly 
hopeless view of his brother-in-law's future. On 
the advent of every fresh magazine . or new 
number, rather . bearing those now well-known 
initials, " F. S. J/* in the corner of the principal 
illustration, Mr. Prescott would enquire of his wife 
' what the good of it all was ? '' adding with a snarl 
that "that brother of hers wouldn't gain either 
fame or fortune by drawing croquet-mallets and 
neat ancles." Ellen agreed with him, of course, 
and sighed for half-a-second over Frank and his 
perversity. 

When Charlie came in the evening, Mr. Prescott 
put the magazine down on the table before him, and 
gave it a fierce little pat. 

"It will be a long time before that brother of 
yours is able to do even this sort of rubbish again?" 
he asked, addressing Charlie. 

Charlie by way of reply took oflf her hat, and 



" NOXIOUS VAPOURS." 253 

held her curly hair out to its extreme length, to let 
them see how long it^had grown again. 

*' I say that he won't be able to do any of this 
rubbish again for a long time," Mr. Prescott re- 
peated. 

" Do you think not ? '' Charlie replied, uncon- 
cernedly. 

Mr. Prescott felt his gorge rising. If Frank 
had only declared himself to be in an evil case, 
Mr. Prescott felt that he could have forgiven much. 
He didn't know what he had to forgive exactly, but 
" much " sounded magnanimous and was marginal, 
and he was ready to forgive it. But while Frank 
. and Charlie for him . bore himself bravely, 
Mr. Prescott could neither forgive nor wish him 
well. 

'' I can tell him that when he finds his daubing a 
failure he needn't look to me to repeat that offer I 
made him before of a berth in the city," Mr. Pres- 
cott said, testily. 

"I don't think he'll want it, Eobert; and I'm 
certain he'll never apply to you for it," Charlie 
replied. 

" How's he to do without it, if his * artistic 
talent ' " (Mr. Prescott tried a sneer and couldn't 



254 WALTER GORING. 

lift hiB lip) " fails him ? I'm speaking seriously, 
of a thing that may very possibly occur." 

"Pray Heaven it won't, any more than all iJie 
shares you hold in everything may come to smash. 
However, Frank and I have cast in our lots to- 
gether ; while one of us can work, the other won't 
want'' 

" Maudlin nonsense," Mr. Prescott snorted con- 
temptuously ; " sounds very well just now before 
you have * wanted;' but I*d have you think, Charlie 
. I'd have you think." 

" What about ? " she asked. 

" What about ? why about what is to become of 
you both; how you're to live and be clothed and 
lodged; fine talking and fraternal affection won't 
satisfy your tradesmen, I'm thinking." 

"Ah, don't try to dishearten me, Eobert," she 
cried. 

" I'm not. Tm only putting things before you in 
a plain light ; you're not a girl any longer, unfortu* 
nately.'' 

" Eather * fortunately,' since I am compelled to 
shift for myself," she interrupted, with a rising 
colour. 

" Well, that's a matter of taste on your part ; I 



255 

said ' unfortunately ' because there is no longer a 
chance of your marrying comfortably and being 
provided for in a way that will ease your friends 
of all anxiety on your account/' 

She remembered the time at Brighton . the 
hints that she had even before then received about 
establishing herself. She could not quote the hor- 
rible experience of her married life to these people, 
so she only said : . 

" Putting that out of the question altogether, 
have you any other unpleasant fact to put before 
me?'' 

" No ; I was only going to say that that maudlin 
nonsense you were talking about Frank and you 
having cast in your lots together being all humbug, 
it would be well for you to think seriously of what 
you'll do in the event of his marrying. Why 
doesn't he propose to Mrs. Walsh ? " 

If Mr. Prescott had asked why Frank did not 
propose to the Queen of Sheba, Mrs. Fellowes 
could not have been more astonished. She re- 
garded Mrs. Walsh as apportioned indisputably to 
Walter Goring. if Walter Goring chose to take her. 
"I really don't know. In the height of our 
* maudlin nonsense ' we never question each other 



256 WALTEB GORING. 

on such topics ; besides, Frank would never ask a 
woman to sacrifice for him . she would lose her 
property if she married." 

" How do you know ? You're very much mis- 
taken/' 

" Ellen said so this morning." 

" I'm sure I thought you said so, Robert,** Ellen 
put in deprecatingly. 

" I said I should make it a condition of my 
widow's marrying again, and that Walsh was a fool 
for not having done so. Of course you made a 
mistake ; you never do comprehend if a fact and 
a suggestion are set before you at the same 
time." 

" Well, it's no consequence," Ellen said, blandly ; 
" take a peach. Mrs. Walsh is sure to marry Mr. 
Goring, so what does it matter whether she loses 
her picture or not. I remember once I thought 
that he'd have proposed to you, Charlie." 

" EeaUy . when ? " Charlie asked ; then a pang 
of annoyance caused her to add, *' considering that 
I was engaged the second time I saw him and 
married the last, your reasons for thinking so must 
be very sound." 

" Ah, but it was the first time you saw him . ^how 



257 

many years ago it seems. Gracious! how yoa*re 
aged, and altered, and " 

"Dear Ellen, how exactly the same you are," 
Charlie replied, rising and patting on her hat ** I 
must go back now; Frank won't care to be late, and 
he'll want to see me before he goes to bed. We're 
off to town to-morrow, you know ; so I shall not see 
you again." 

So with a general embrace, the pleasant evening 
at The Hurst came to an end, and Charlie went back 
to Mrs. Walsh's, and when she arrived there was 
found to be not at all exhilarated by her drive and 
visits. 

There was no opportunity of repeating a word 
of this conversation to Frank that night. Indeed, 
she felt no desire to do so. It had been very unim- 
portant in reality, so far as she knew. All it was 
worth, in fact, was the further insight it had afforded 
her into a character of which she had known quite 
enough before. She determined to keep it till she was 
quite cool, and then recount it to Frank and make 
him laugh. As a study from real life, it might not 
be utterly valueless to them both. 

The next morning Frank's arm was pronounced 
fit to travel, and Mrs. Walsh lost her guests, and 

VOL III. 8 



258 WAL1!EB OOBING. 

Denefaam its choicest gossip. Frank and his sister 
went back to the semi-detached house in the secluded 
roadj and Mrs. Walsh found Deneham duller than 
ever. 

The talk about the old familiar topics had touched 
some long silent strings, and caused her to long to 
be free of that old world again ; to be once more 
within ear -shot of the jargon with which she had 
sometimes declared herself to be bored while Ralph 
lived. These are interests that can never be 
dropped entirely when once one has had a large 
share in them, and the wives of men who are eminent 
or earnest in any branch of art have a far larger 
share in their more aesthetic interests than outsiders 
imagine. The wife hears the best passages when 
they first drip from the pen ; she sees the favourable 
review, and points it out to him before anyone else 
thinks of looking for it ; she is his guiding star in 
all matters of costume, and indeed in all that is 
good and at- the same lime feminine in his book, or; 
most correct in modem costume in his pictures. 
After the never-ceasing excitement of such a life, it 
is almost impossible for a woman to settle down 
contentedly to a career of middle-class nothingness. 
Mrs. Walsh tasted blood in conversing with Frank 



259 

St. John. She hungered and thirsted for niore -when 
he was withdrawn, and there was no one left with 
whom she could go on conversing in a similar 
manner. 

"I was never meant to live an idle, albeit godly, 
life down in the country," she said to herself, 
laughing and shaking her head, after thinking l6ng 
and earnestly about these and sundry other things 
the night of her guests* departure. "I wonder if 
it^s to be my fate to be seized with restlessness 
now, and like the Paradise bird, never to find a 
resting-place ? I catf t go on living here . of that 
Tm sure. I should die of myself in a few months. 
What a horrible vacuum agreeable people leave, to 
be sure. in that Mr. St. John would see the law 
of compensation at work again. He ought to do 
something brilliant with that power of his. He s 
one -of 'the men who would b^ disheali;ened by 
prudent recommendations to plod, but who might 
be incited to do soitiething splendid by one who 
understood him. The painting and the poetry of 
that * Guinevere 'are equally good ^ if he hatt 
Only learnt draTting before he did it, it wouli 
have been superb ; as it is, in the cant phrase* 
it's full of prormise, and shows that he will take 

8 2 



2G0 WALTER GORING. 

a foremost place amongst modern painters. How 
proud . 

She checked her reflections by rising up abruptly 
as she recalled the fixed determination she had read 
in his eyes not to speak the love that lived in them. 
He had adored her too openly the first day . the 
day they drove to Goring Place . for his after 
scruples, whatever they might be founded upon^ to 
be. justifiable. "Pythias won't interfere with the 
bird notoriously winged by Damon," she thought 
scornfully. " I daresay Walter is conceited enough 
to believe that no amount of his indifference is 
capable of curing me, and possibly has breathed 
this belief into his friend's ears ; if it wasn't that, 
what could have come over the man ? " 

What will the " only love " theorists think of all 
this ? That it is untrue to nature ? or that I 
viciously choose to depict a bad type of woman ? 
Either supposition is equally incorrect, as any one 
will find who can contrive to extract the truth from 
the best women whom it is his happiness to know. 
If Walter Goring had come home befot'e this 
meeting with Frank, Mrs. Walsh would never have 
wavered ; but Walter Goring had not done so, and 
Mrs. Walsh was conscious of wavering considerably. 



"noxious vapours." 201 

Frank had stood a far better chance with the beau- 
tiful widow than he had imagined even in the 
maddest moments of his delirium. 

It must be acknowledged that the long-contem- 
plated tour through the western counties proved. a 
mistake. They began to feel dull at Dawlish before 
they had been there two days. Then they moved 
to a village at some littie distance inland, and hired 
the ponies according to programme, and regularly 
for the first three days of going out upon them, got 
wet through. Charlie had repeated that conver- 
sation which has been already detailed, which she 
had had with Eobert Prescott; and from the moment 
of her doing so Frank grew more restiess and 
gloomy than she had ever seen him before. He 
thought now, that had he only known this before 
he left Deneham, he would not have left 
Deneham in doubt; but after having behaved in 
the "idiotically undecided way I did when she 
said she was sorry I thought of going away, can't 
go back or write : it would look like an after- 
thought, and she wouldn't stand that; the game's 
gone. Goring, as usuaf, will have the luck." 

By way of improving his own spirits and ren- 
dering himself agreeable to Charlie, Frank took to 



262 WALTER GORING. 

discussing the pQS9ibiIity that was so odious to 
them, both very freely about this Juncture. " Pro- 
bably we shall not see Goring when he first arrives; 
naturally ha will go straight away to Deneham," 
he would . say ; and Charlie, thou^ she did not 
think it at all natural that Goring should so conduct 
himself, was compelled to agree, because she had 
not the spirit to differ. 

Dull as they found it . mistake though their 
riding tour was . they stayed away from London 
till the beginning of November, partly because 
Charlie dreaded the interval that must elapse 
between their going home and Walter Goring's 
return. But at the beginning of November they 
were . compelled to go back in order to answer 
certain professional calls that were made upon them. 

Once since leaving Deneham Charlie had written 
a sort of note. of recognition for services rendered 
and kindnesses received to Mrs. Walsh, and Mrs. 
Walsh had replied to it civilly and briefly, and 
then the correspondence had ended. But they 
heard from EEen that the widow was still down 
at her cottage, but that she had; . such was the 
report . determined to give it up after the next 
quarter. 



"noxious vAPOxms." 363 

" Sharp measures/' Frank growled. " Of course 
she won't want the cottage when she has Goring 
Place. But she's shaking off her old shell be- 
times." 

The time was drawing very near for Walter's 
return. The housekeeper at Goring Place reor- 
ganized her staff, and the gardeners made frantic 
efforts to get the grounds linto such order before 
the master's return as should induce that gentleman 
to believe that they had never been neglected. Mrs. 
Walsh robbed her own conservatory of the best 
flowers for the adornment of the room that had 
been Daisy's, in order that Walter might feel that 
neither he nor the dead Daisy were forgotten when 
he came home. The steward wanted to have some- 
thing like a triumphal arch erected^ and something 
like a procession of the tenantry and villagers 
formed to welcome back the Squire. But this Mrs. 
Walsh. to whom the steward confided his desires . 
negatived strongly. " I am sure Mr. Goring would 
hate it," she said; " consider, it will be his first visit 
to the old place since his cousin's death, and he was 
very fond. I know Mr. Goring so well that I may 
venture tb say that he will be far better pleased to 
be received as quietly as possible." The steward 



S64 WALTEB GOBINa. 

assented to her amendment quietly enough while 
in her presence, but he went away and grumbled 
at her interference. " She's a proud one, she is,*' 
he said to the select many to whom he had confided 
his triumphal-arch hopes ; " when she's married to 
the master we shall have to mind what we're about, 
or my lady will have us out in no time." 

Up in town amongst those with whom we have 
to do, there was equal excitement. The long-looked- 
for had come. Frank found the announcement of 
Walter's being in London awaiting him in a note at 
his club one evening, and Frank rushed home with 
the tidings. 

" Goring is home! " he exclaimed. 

" Oh, is he," Charlie replied. " I am sure you're 
very glad." 

" And are you not very glad, Charlie dear ? " 

Frank asked it very seriously. The sudden light 
which had flashed all over his sister's face when he 
told her that Goring was home, proved to him 
plainly that Goring was very much to Charlie ; so 
much, indeed, that Goring's marriage with Mrs. 
Walsh would be as bitter a misery to Charlie as it 
would be to himself. Could that silly little Ellen 
have been speaking the truth, when she said that 



265 

they were always unlucky ? " IVe had my share of 
ill-luck, surely/* he thought dejectedly ; " but this 
will be the worst of all ; and I might have won her 
that night, if I hadn't been an ass and believed 
Ellen's gossip." 

When Frank asked, "And are you not glad, 
Charlie dear ? " Charlie replied : " I hardly know ; 
it's two years and a half since I saw him . ^he may 
have forgotten me now ! " 

Frank laughed. " Have it your own way ; I sup- 
pose it gives women pleasure to nurse such imagi- 
native unpleasantnesses, or they wouldn't do it. 
Why on earth should he have forgotten you ? Or 
how on earth could he, when he always mentions 
you in his letters to me, and I always mention you 
in my letters to him ? " 

" You never told me either fact, Frank," she said 
in a slightly injured tone ; but the news though late 
was very welcome. 

From that hour till the hour of seeing Walter 
Goring, young Mrs. FeUowes lived in a mental 
maze, and was conscious of it, and only quite alive 
to the fact of its being just as well not to make it 
patent to her brother that she was doing so. She 
was very impatient and very anxious. She was well 



( 



8G6 WALTEB GORING. 

aware that they had been very sympathetic to one 
another. She knew thai Walter had. takeo a great 
deal of pleasure in her aodetj, even whooi he was 
engaged to the younger^ prettier, more exciting 
Daisy . even when that wonderfully heaatiful Mrs. 
Walsh was attainable. But she also, knew very 
well that a man may take a great deal of pleasure 
in the society of a woman who likes, admires, and 
appreciates him, without any feeling stronger than 
friendship reigning in his breast the while. She 
knew that he may be sympathetic, and that the 
very openness with which he makes manifest that 
he is so, is no poor proof of his being nothing more. 
She was very impatient to see him ; but very doubt- 
ful whether that sight would bring more to her than 
confirmation strong that she had sighed for that 
moon who smiled on so many brooks, and that the 
stars were unpropitious. 

The best panacea for impatience . ^for every form of 
mental ill, indeed . ^is work. It is utterly impossible 
to be down-hearted when you are striving to be as 
coherent, amusing, or engrossing as it is in you to'be 
on paper. If Mariana ini the South had only been 
fortunate enough to get upon the staff of some of the 
magazines of the day, she would have ceased to be 



267 

90: yerg yrw^., She could not have cared so much 
$houtih]@,comiixgiwhiIe she was making copy; and 
respite &om. Trretohed reflection is a great goad 
gained^* . OharHe. believed in this all-potent panacea, 
and worked a goodmanyhours that day. Laboured 
through some pagea of. Chaucer, at Frank's instiga« 
tion aif first,. find then read him for love of those 
subtle, delicate, quaint conceits . ^those turns of ex- 
pression which can but enrich the vocabulary of the 
most careless reader % read the '' Faery Queen " with 
a gleam of understanding, thanks to Frank ; and so 
m^maged to pass the time away that necessarily in- 
tervened between that note of return being sounded, 
and Walter?s coming to them, without falling a vic- 
tim to that sick prostration of soul which is the 
common lot of the woman who fondly loves the man 
whO' is coming to her . ^and to her rival. 
' She had been out a good deal since her return to 
town. The visiting had come about gradually. 
Frank had a good many friends, and was a very 
good«looking man. The natural result of this com- 
bination was, that he was invited out a great deal; 
and as he would not go without his sister, she doffed 
her deep widow's weeds and went out with him. 
Moreover, she was sought on her own account, as 



268 WALTER GOBINO. 

being not alone a pretty, fascinating woman, but as 
the author of a book that had succeeded, and that 
augured well for her future success. And she 
revelled in these recognitions of what she had done, 
and of what she was expected to do, and went for- 
ward, as was her wont, gladly, to meet any hand 
held out to her in honest, unpatronising kindness. 
She went once more, in fact, into the society of 
which she had had glimpses in the Walshes' house 
long ago, but, as was natural, on a very different 
footing. 

Altogether it had been a happy time. The friend- 
ship that exists between a brother and sister is as 
fine and thorough a one as can be formed between 
any brace of human beings. It is untainted by the 
jealousies and misgivings which assail the subtler 
union between husband and wife. It is stronger than 
any possible bond between sisters, and warmer than 
the friendship of man. And the best of it is, that if it 
was cemented in childhood, however it may be in 
seeming, nothing can destroy it in fact. In boy- 
hood's scrapes and manhood's troubles a sister is 
sure to be a sympathetic confidante, though she may 
be sorry enough for the matter confided ; while for 
the girl, a brother is the best, the only ally. 



"NOXIOXTS YAFOUB8. 269 

Frank and Charlie were Mends after this pattem. 
She was prond of him . ^prond of his handsome face, 
and his debonaire bearing ; prond of his popularity 
with women, of his inyanable success with them, at 
the same time that his frank manliness made him 
well reputed amongst men. She was proud of his 
talent too ; of the ease with which he was winning 
his spurs in two fields of art. In short, she was 
proud of him altogether, and especially proud of 
his pride in her. 

She got more fun out of society when he was 
with her. Those hours that one spends on London 
staircases, or gasping in the doorway with a ghastly 
smile ready prepared to let off at your hostess and 
impress her with the fact of your being there and 
liking it when she is good enough to glance at you, 
those hours are all their length occasionally, when 
you haye no sympathetic child of misfortune near 
to give back smile for smile. But when her brother 
was with her, Charlie was sure to get all that could 
be got out of the gathering. They were both very 
quick to see, as became artists ; their correspondlsnce 
was perfect, and their memories were good. On 
the whole they owed a good deal to society. 

It happened on the day after Walter Goring 



270 WALTER GORING. 

came home that they were going to an Ht-home at 
a house familiarly known as the ** Menagerie/' 
Walter Goring had called on them the night of his 
arrival, but they were out and missed him. How- 
ever, he IdEt a note stating that he had met the 
husband of the lady who was *' at home *' on the fol- 
lowing night, at his club, and that he had pledged 
himself to go to the Menagerie, where he hoped to 
meet them. - ^ 

When night came, Charlie, who had succeeded in 
keeping apparently quiet during the day, gave up 
the attempt, and got away to her own room ''to 
dress," she said. " What do you want to be hours 
dressing for ?" her brother asked . ^he was finishing 
a drawing on wood . and thought- it "would be quite 
soon enough if they got to Mrs. Drayton*^ at eleven/- 
As a rule, Charlie thought so' too; but Walter 
Goring might go and come away again befbrethat ; 
she could not stand it. r 

** Oh, Ftank, let me go at ten. do i Mrs, Dray- 
ton 'says we're always late, and I don't want- her to 
think me affected about it." - * : , i - 

**Who cares what she thinks? No; wait f^t 
me, Charlie dear." 

Not till eleven, Frank ; I ean^if 



"noxious valours." 271 

*^Why can't you?" he asked, wonderingly, look- 
ing np at her as she stood playing with the door* 
handle. 

" I have nothing to do but dress, and when I'm 
dressed I think it odious to sit at home ever so 
long with bare shoulders and flowers in my hair." 

"You needn't bare your shoulders or put flowers 
in your hair. I think you look nicer when you do 
neither/' Frank replied ; after the maimer of men^ 
he had some weak theory about simplicity and 
beauty unadorned. 

"Let us compromise then/' she said, latighuig; 
'^I'H meet you half way . ^half-past ten . will you 
go then?" ^ 

"Yes, m go then," he said; and then Charlie 
got away without further enquiries as to the cause 
for hurrying being made of her. . 

At half'past t^i they reached 'Mr6. Drajrton's, 
and had the satisfaction of' finding .themsdves 
amongst the earliest. "TUs is very* lively and^ 
pleasant,'/ Frank whispered to^ his sister aS' he fol- 
lowed her up to the reception-room; "thfere^S a^ 
thin sound flowing through the doorway that Wttrns 
me that those of my fellow-creatures already as- 
sembled are conscious of fediing hideously con- 



272. WALTEB GOBING. 

spicuoos. This is your doing, Charlie; yoa wanted 
to come in vdih the lamps." 

" Never mind," Charlie pleaded ; " we can go the 
sooner." 

There was the half-guilty look on the faces of 
those already there when Charlie and Frank came 
in, of being very clearly oatlived, and also of 
feeling very glad that some others had come to 
share the sensation. The centre of the room was 
a barren waste, and the sides were but delicately 
fringed. A noble-miuded girl was taking off her 
gloves towards the piano, and the hostess was 
wildly introducing people who did not want to be 
introduced. " So glad you're come,*' she exclaimed, 
holding out her hand to Frank. *' Mr. Goring, the 
author of that delightful book on California, has 
promised to come in ; and you've been there, 
haven't you ? You can talk over your different 
experiences." Frank tried hard to look as if he 
saw the humour of this happy speech being made 
to the artist of the book eulogised, when Charlie 
laughed about it afterwards, but he did not quite 
succeed someway or other. 

Time dragged on; the rooms filled and over- 
flowed on to the staircase, but still the author of 



273 

that delightfal work on California did not make 
his appearance. " He has gone down to the place, 
to see Mrs. Walsh," she thought sometimes ; and 
when she could banish that worst dread another 
assailed her. " When he comes I shall be lost in 
the crowd, and he won't see me; or I shall be 
fastened upon by some bore, and he will be too 
polite to drive him away." 

At last the floor seemed to surge up to the 
ceiling and the ceiling to come down to the floor, 
and the faces around her grew indistinct, and their 
voices sounded far away, and her heart thumped 
audibly, as Walter Goring came in and saw her and 
made straight for her at once, with the old look 
in his eyes as he bent down to speak to her, with 
the old warmth in the hand which she put hers 
into so gladly, with the old tone in the voice that 
said: . 

" The sight of you makes me realise that I'm at 
home again ; nothing else could have done it. 
Where's Frank ? " 

" Here, somewhere in the room," she replied, and 
she trembled a little as she spoke. Two or three 
people standing near to them scented a flirtation 
immediately with the acuteness that marks the by- 

VOL. III. T 



274 WALTER GORING. 

standing mind. They did not know that it wad 
long past that stage with one of them at least/ if 
not with both. 

He took her hand and placed it on his arm. 
''Let us get out of this; it's much cooler and 
clearer outside on the staircase ; besides, some one 
is going to play, and I agree with Keats, 'Heard 
melodies are sweet, but those unheard are sweeter/" 
They made their way out into a comparatively 
quiet spot, and then she, finding that she could not 
stand steady any longer, sat down on the top stair^ 
and a few who were near to them moved farther off 
judiciously. 

" You look as you did the first time I saw you 
at Mrs. Walsh's," he said, bending down ; " have 
you forgotten it ? " 

" No. I thought you would have gone down to 
Mrs. Walsh's at once." 

"I shall go soon. I shall be glad to see her, 
and she'll be glad to see me ; but there's no hurry 
about it. Long ago it might have been different, 
but somehow it wasn't different ; now I perfectly 
understand. You remember the 'Knight of Tog- 
genburg ? ' " 
. "Yes; what of it?" 



Mi 



"noxious vapours." 375 

"He sat down in the damp and died when she 
told him, ' Knight, a sister's quiet love gives my 
heart to thee/ I'm not going to die under the 
knowledge that my dearest old friend can give me 
no more, Charlie." 

The words, the words she had longed to hear for 
so long a time, were on his lips almost, but at the 
moment Mrs. Drayton came up with a little red- 
faced man, who looked like one smile. 

"My dear Mrs. Fellowes," the hostess began, 
" do let me introduce Mr. Moore to you ; " then, in 
a whisper, "a remarkably clever young man . the 
author of an admirable work on * Noxious Vapours.' 
I knew you*d like to know him." 

What banes people are who won't let their 
guests find bliss according to their lights, especially 
when those lights lead them into sequestered nooks 
on staircases. 

The talented author of " Noxious Vapours " was 
a tremendous bore to poor Charlie; but so Ana- 
creon or Sidney Smith would have been at the 
moment. Mrs. Drayton had carried Mr. Goring 
back with her, however; so Charlie had nothing 
for it but to endure the man of science and his 
smiles. " He looked as if he had been buttered," 



276 WALTEB GOBINa. 

she said afterwards to her brother ; " ' Noxious 
Vapours ' is without exception the most odious 
specimen of leamedom I've seen yet." 

It happened, unfortunately, that '* Noxious Va- 
pours '' thought kinder things of the young novelist 
than she did of him. He was one of those hapless 
men who never know when a woman is bored ; and 
who clever though they are, never know how to 
avoid boring her. So he held her in the leash of 
his conversation till there was a move made to go 
down and have champagne cup and ices. Then 
Walter Goring went back to her, and somehow or 
other Mr. Moore, the talented author of '' Noxious 
Vapours," saw through his own dazzling smiles that 
he was not wanted. And when Charlie left the 
Menagerie that night she was as happy as even an 
animal with a lot to eat and nothing on its mind 
can be. She was marvellously happy for a human 
being . ^with a happiness that stood every chance of 
lasting, for she felt that she was forgiven that first 
false marriage vow ; her sharp, weary duty-time had 
been accepted as partial expiation. She had lived 
down the consequences of her first mistake, and was 
to be rewarded for a certain struggle, to endure the 

sequences of that mistake . a struggle which she 



"noxious vapoubs." 277 

had made unceasingly, though she had been some- 
times worsted . a struggle during which she had 
humbled herself very much, and suffered very much, 
and thought and repented very much . a struggle 
during the continuance of which she had learnt that 
the means do not justify the end, and that though 
*^ there is a Providence that shapes our ends, rough- 
hew them as we will," that we must not hew them 
carelessly and rely on luck making all things straight 
for us. She was rewarded for that struggle after 
long years by being asked to marry a man who 
loved her, and whom she loved. As she came down 
to her carriage that night, leaning on the arm of 
another than her brother for the first time for many 
months, she felt that the clouds had cleared away 
from her life, and that the stars which were shining 
above did not make the sky half so bright as did the 
love Walter Goring was throwing over it make her 
future. 

So the end came in a crowd, after all. No, not 
the end, the beginning. We romance writers err 
wofully in this, that we drop the lives of our young 
people generally just when they are richest in pro- 
mise. The "end" had not come to Walter and 
Charlie when they pledged themselves to each other. 



278 WALTER OORING. 

any more than it had to Mrs. Walsh when she heard 
of that pledging. "I loved your husband very 
much from the hour he came to me with his first 
disappointment in literature/' she said to Charlie 
some time afterwards, "and I love him still very 
dearly : but Frank would have put him out of my 
head, even if you had not put me out of Walter's." 

That picture of Frank's had a mission, un- 
doubtedly ! 



THE END.
