


ICE BOUND. 



On the last day of May, 1836, the 
Stormy Petrel set sail from Hull harbour, 
on a pretended whaling expedition, but really 
on a voyage of discovery, in search of the 
passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific — a 
favourite dream of our brave old commander, 
Captain Beaver, who died five years ago last 
Michaelmas, in the Orkney Islands. 

We were rigged as a barque, as being most 
suitable forworking through the ice, and requir- 
ing the fewest men, and were strengthened 
with additional timbers, such as Captain 

TOL. I. B 



2 ICE BOUND. 

Parry's vessels, the Isabella and Alexander^ 
had adopted. I must not torment my readers 
with professional jargon, but I may just say, 
that we carried thirty-six men, and having, be- 
sides our mizen-topsail lengthened, our mizen- 
mast, topmast, gaff, and driver-boom, so as to 
make up, by a large driver and gaff topsail, 
the same quantity of after-sail as before. 

We ballasted with coals — about thirty-four 
chaldron we could stow. We took care to have 
housing cloths to roof in the deck, to keep out 
the snow; and the men were supplied with 
wolf-skin blankets, as well as good suits of 
warm clothing. 

I, John Perry, the first-lieutenant, as well 
as Thomas Sidmouth, the surgeon, and George 
Siderfin, the astronomer, a Devonshire man, 
took great pains to make sure that all the 
anti-scorbutics that we took out should be 
good, as well as the essence of malt and hops, 
and the pemmican, so important to Arctic 
voyagers. 

As to the azimuth-compasses and dipping- 



ICE BOUND* 3 

needles, Siderfin took care of those; while 
I took charge of the sailing requisites of 
the vessel, and of all that was necessary for 
the health and well-being of the men; for 
Captain Beaver, though an admirable com- 
mander, was rather apt to day-dream, and to 
indulge in visions of discovery. 

Well, we started, as I have said, without 
cheer or "God bless you," for no one 
knew our purpose ; and on September the 
22nd we made the island of Bono, and Bara 
on the following morning. On Sunday the 
30th we passed "the sunken land of 
Bus," as it is called in Dawson's chart, and, 
heaving-to, obtained soundings in one hundred 
and forty fathoms, in a bottom of very fine 
white sand. 

On June the 13th, Sunday, we saw large 
flocks of Cape hens-*-a proof of our being off 
Cape Farewell, as these birds are never seen 
in any other part of Davis' Straits, or even 
in Baffin's Bay. 

On Thursday, the 17th of June, we ob- 

^1 



4 ICE BOUND. 

served the sea to be of a lighter green than 
usual; and the next day, standing to the 
northward, fell in with our first stream of ice 
and several icebergs. 

Now Siderfin grew serious, and got out his 
self-registering thermometer; and I looked 
to my log books, for we were fast entering the 
region of death. The ice grew hourly more 
packed and heavy ; the birds, as the fulmar, 
petrels, boatswains and kittiwakes, the black 
guillemot and Greenland swallows, more 
numerous than usual. 

A breeze soon springing up from the east- 
ward, we bore away to the W.N.W., through 
rather close-sailing ice ; and here, as I shall not 
have much room, I may as well describe the 
various horrors we had gradually to encounter. 

We had got gradually into it — ^by it I mean 
the ice : first came floating slabs, looking like 
large rounded blocks of diamond, soon lost in 
the broad wallow of blue water and forgotten, 
either as warnings or as harbingers of the 
cold land of silence and death that we so 



ICE BOUND. 5 

rashly sought. Then, in a few days' more 
sail, sharp teeth of ice jagging the edges of 
the shore, and taming them into huge saws, 
miles and miles long. Next, slvdge — as the 
sailors call it —or a general thickening of the 
whole surface of the sea, as if some turbid 
substance had been mixed up with it — the 
thickening matter being really, when ex- 
amined by Siderfin's ever-ready microscope, 
a mere mass of fragile prismatic crystals, resem- 
bling wet snow. Here we saw the unspun 
hemp with which Winter, some hundred miles 
farther on, spun his adamantine chains. 

The next region of death we entered was 
where the sludge-ice, being broken by con- 
tinual oscillation into irregularly-shaped frag- 
ments of some three inches diameter, froze 
at night into a continuous sheet of a firmer 
texture, which, as it brittled up under 
the ship's keel, dropped into thin cakes, that 
our men called "pancakes." Then, the ice 
began to thicken into real bay ice, two inches 
thick, on which we could walk near the shore, 



6 ICE BOUND. 

and on which the polar bears ventured, growling 
at the sailors of our boat — and the light ice 
would sometimes, in a few nights, deepen into 
heavy slabs three feet thick, as Siderfin ascer- 
tained by careful measurement. 

We all knew that before we came to the 
ice-fields — as we called the sheets of ice, so 
extensive that the further end could not be 
seen from the crowds nest — we should pass 
through various degrees of cold and danger. 
Through fl^es^ for instance, or large, wander- 
ing, heaped up masses; through hrcuih ice^ 
or flocks of floating masses ; and also wide 
drifts of open ice, through which the 
Stormy Petrel could easily pass. And long 
before this we had begun to meet icebergs, 
half-a-mile long, and often 100 feet high, 
bristling with frozen aiguilles, or glistening 
with a thousand jewel colours. Once, when 
we had been moored to one on a previous 
voyage, I well remember, after a strong north- 
westerly swell beating some hours on the 
shore, seeing a huge buttress, as large as a 



ICE BOUND. 7 

charch — 150 feet high, at least — suddenly 
topple over and fall into the sea, with a crash 
as of an outburst of thunder cannon, and a 
lather and churn of the water that seemed 
to smoke and steam for hundreds of yards 
round. I trembled when I saw it; for I 
heard at Hull that a similar piece had once 
fallen, near the Seven Icebergs, on a Eussian 
ship — killed the mate and two able-bodied 
seamen, broke the fore and main masts, and 
sprung the bowsprit. But what at first 
alarmed us most of all, and excited the super- 
stitious fears of our sailors, were the noises — 
groaning, muttering, moaning, and thunder- 
claps — ^made by the ice at night, when split- 
ting either through a ground-swell, or some 
sudden contraction of cold or expansion of 
heat. I have, I assure you, reader, seen the 
ice in a few moments break away for miles 
along the shore, and then, beating together, 
sink with the roar as of a thousand cannon. 

And one special night, when the ice seemed 
full of threatening and angry voices, I particu- 



8 ICK BOUND. 

larly remember, because that same night our 
lemon-juice bottles in three cases burst, and at 
the same time we lost nearly all our vinegar, 
except a few bottles of highly-concentrated es- 
sence, which had been removed from near the 
ship's side, where the rest was kept. 

Directly it became evident to us, clamping 
itself as a dreadful certainty in our minds, 
that the good ship, the Stormy Petrelj must 
winter in these Arctic solitudes, it became 
essentially necessary to amuse the men and 
keep their minds alert, cheerful, and full of 
hope. 

Sidmouth was most attentive about the health 
of the crew, and instituted, by Captain Beaver's 
permission, a daily exercise drill, when the 
men were not on shore shooting ptarmigan, 
or looking for sorrel, or tripe de la roclte. He 
drew them up in single file, put them through 
musketry-drill, and then " worked them,*' as he 
called it, in his manly merry way, racing them 
up and down stairs — ^fore and aft — ^till the 
blood spread freely to their extremities. The 



ICE BOUND. 9 

men grumbled a little at firsts at what seemed 
to them a useless expenditure of time ; but 
they soon learned to like it, and used to romp 
and laugh over their drill like boys playing 
at soldiers. It is mere justice to Sidmouth to 
mention^ that, from that time till we sighted 
England, only one man of his exercise 
squad was ever ill, except from accidental 
frost-bites — save one boy, James Parker, 
who became despondent and afflicted with the 
scurvy, being, as I always said, of small 
stamina and sluggish in circulation. 

We were now well wedged in for the winter 
— the ice twenty inches thick, cut with ice- 
saws all round the ship — an iceberg adjacent of 
a dangerous height, hewn away level with the 
ship's bulwarks — the awnings secured firmly 
over the deck — the men's beds made perma- 
nent, the hammocks stowed away, and every- 
thing made close and snug— lastly, double win- 
dows put in to the cabins and closed with felt 
at the chinks. The third night after we had 
determined to spend the winter in our present 



10 ICE BOUND. 

quarters Captain Beaver said to us — ^I made 
a note of his words at the time : — 

" Gentlemen, God helping" (he was a pious 
man, was Captain Beaver, of the Wesleyan 
persuasion, as his father, I heard him say, had 
been before him) — " Gentlemen, God helping, 
we shall do very well here, if we can but keep 
the men's hearts up/* 

And we all agreed to it ; for we well knew 
that, once discouraged, the men would mutiny 
and compel us to turn the ship's head to Eng- 
land, to our eternal disgrace, and even pecu- 
niary loss; for the Admiralty had oflFered a 
large reward to arctic discoverers, and we were 
in an untrod region, as Captain Beaver and 
Siderfin well knew; and if they did set sail, we 
well knew, from the present state of the packs 
and the early setting in of the Aurora, as well as 
the peculiar colour of the ice-blinks, that the 
ship would be beset, and in a few days crushed 
to pieces by the icebergs that filled the chan- 
nel, and grew larger and more dangerous a( 
the mouth. 



JC£ BOUNIX. 11 

Siderfin, suddenly looking up from the nm- 
bery glass of grog in which he was watching 
the miniature reflection of his face, suggested 
the erection of a theatre, and the performance 
of plays twice a- week. 

We agreed unanimously that nothing could 
be better. The very next morning, indeed, we 
fell to work, collected all the spare spars and 
canvas, rigged up a new theatre, the very erec- 
tion of which exhilarated the men and gave 
them perpetual subjects for conversation; and 
rummaging out " The Mayor of Garratt," 
one of Footers broad farces, and " Miss in her 
Teens," an amusing, old-fashioned comedy, with 
Fribblef a ridiculous, attenuated dandy in it 
—conned our parts when we were on watch 
(against rules), while Siderfin set to work 
to paint the scenes, being an amateur artist 
of no mean order. 

It was a delightful thing to leave the deck, 
and the ghastly glimmer of the ice-blink, over 
perpetual snow, or the lurid semi-darkness 
of noon- day, to enter a little cheerful lighted 



12 ICE BOUND. 

room, a trifle warmer than the outer air, to 
see Captain Beaver in the stage box, grand in 
his full uniform, with which he always 
honoured us — to find the pit full of hearty 
grinning faces — and to hear the orchestra of 
two violins and a trumpet begin their labour 
with more energy than skill. 

Well, all this went on with great spirit for 
nearly two months ; then the theatre be- 
gan to flag — merely because we had only 
one torn volume of the ^* British Theatre" from 
which to draw our repertory. The men 
never got tired of the performers. The 
performers never got tired of trying to amuse 
the men ; but I, Siderfin, and Sidmouth, the 
chief actors, felt, I confess, a little jaded with re-, 
peating the same words and gestures night after 
night, and grew afraid that we should soon 
cease to obtain that applause that, rolling 
about like laughing thunder, had so long 
kept us vigorous to our work. Siderfin, 
a very wag always, went so far as to declare, 
in our little green-room, the last week of our 



ICE BOUND. 13 

performance, that he had taken careful note 
of the yawns^ and found them steadily on the 
increase — from two on Monday to fourteen 
on Thursday. The older hands began, too, to 
sleep — and snore, which was worse ; alto- 
gether it was evident, hurt our vanity as it 
might, that the days of our Royal Arctic 
Frozen-up Theatre were numbered. 

That night was a sad one with us all. 
Captain Beaver, who never talked much, and 
was generally a real kind soul, in a sort of 
reverie balanced his grog spoon, and sat in 
rather a melancholy silence. The ship's boy 
had just told him privately that there had 
been grumbling round the galley-fire about 
the cook having been punished for selling the 
boatswain's mate salt grease that Siderfin had 
denounced as likely to produce scurvy. 

I at once suggested the starting a newspaper, 
to be called "The Whaler's Journal, or the Ice- 
berg Intelligencer," which Sidmouth was to 
edit. The proposal instantly took. We had 
an old cigar-box fitted up as a sort of lion's 



14 ICE BOUND. 

mouth, to receive contributions. The several 
articles — ^to which nearly every one contri- 
buted, from worthy Captain Beaver himself 
to the cabin boy, who wrote love songs in the 
Yorkshire dialect — were all read, condensed, 
revised, and annotated by the editor, 
copied in a fair hand into a large quarto 
volume, and then read every Saturday, after 
evening grog, to the whole ship*s company, 
except the watch, with wonderful applause, 
by Sidmouth, who had a good voice and 
some degree of elocution, acquired from 
certain early theatrical tastes. 

This went on very well for six weeks, at 
the end of which time an alarming tone of 
personality began to pervade the paper, so 
utterly subversive, as Captain Beaver thought, 
of all discipline, especially in a time of special 
need and emergency like the present, that he 
instantly, though with relentless hand, sup- 
pressed the paper, ordering all the last boxful 
of contributions to be burnt, much to the secret 
indignation and annoyance of all the crew. 



ICE BOUND. 15 

particularly of the ship's cook, who had that 
week perpetrated a sonnet to a certain 
" Clarinda/' bar-maid at a low tavern in Hull. 

We were all of us now really at our wit's 
end how to wile away the long evenings, and 
keep the men's minds diverted and engaged, 
without leading to any infringement of good 
order. 

Many a night on the watch, on deck, or 
in my hammock, did I cast over any games 
or amusements that could be practised by 
many men at once. At last Siderfin, one night 
after looking at the cabin-lamp for thirty min- 
utes without removing his eyes, suddenly 
leaped up, upset his grog, snapped his long 
white pipe across his knee, flung the fragments 
at a portrait of Lord Nelson that hung on the 
cabin-door, and exclaimed, " I have it ! " 

His plan, it seemed, was that anyone of us, 
from the first lieutenant to *the surgeon's assist- 
ant, who had any taste for writing, should at 
once set to and write by turns a short novel or 
story, to be read aloud three times a week by 



16 ICE BOUND. 

Sidmouthy so many chapters an evenings after 
the tantalizing system adopted by the de- 
lightful lady in the "Arabian Nights." 
A Charles the Second story, an Egyptian 
romance, some Welsh tales, and a novel 
of the time of the Roman emperor Tiberius, 
were instantly promised. Indeed, I have re- 
marked that men who are in the habit of 
scribbling much have always a wealth of 
such trifles in store. We gave our authors 
a week's "law," as people say when out 
coursing, and then began our public readings, 
which soon became exceedingly popular. I 
might, were I sarcastic, say much more popular 
than they deserved ; but then, remember that 
the stories, if poor, were entirely original — 
that our sailors had exhausted all other kinds 
of amusement — and that the intervals between 
the readings lent zest to the reading by 
delaying the moment when the listener's 
curiosity would be gratified. Many a time 
when the men were at work of the afternoons, 
drawing and knotting yam, or making 



ICE BODND. 17 

points and gaskets, have I beard knots of 
them criticizing the several stories with all 
the keenness of young reviewers. 

And here, before I come to my first story, 
I may as well mention our hours on board ship 
during this wintering in Hooper's Bay. All 
hands were turned up at a quarter before six, 
and the decks were then rubbed with stones 
and warm sand till eight, when both officers and 
men went to breakfast. At a quarter past 
nine we beat to divisions, when the men (as 
in Parry's expedition before) were in- 
spected as to their personal cleanliness and 
the warmth of their clothing. If the weather 
was fine, the men then went on shore to walk 
till noon, when they dined. 

In the afternoon they drew and knotted 
yarn on the lower deck ; at half-past five the 
decks were cleared up ; at six we agdn went 
to divisions, and inspected the men, their 
berths, and bed-places; after which the people 
went to their supper, and the officers to their 
tea. 

VOL. I. 



18 ICE BOUND. 

It was after this pleasant meal that we 
asuallj had our readings. On other evenings 
the men danced or sung on the lower deck till 
nine, when they went to bed, and the lights 
were extinguished. Nor should I forget to 
say that, for fear of fire, the quartermaster 
visited the lower deck every half-hour, and 
reported to the officers of their watch that 
all was safe. We also, I may mention, during 
the whole winter, kept a tank-hole cut in the 
ice near the ship, and sawn out regularly twice 
a-day. 

With this proviso, I begin with my own 
poor story, " The Madman's Novel." 



19 



THE MADMAN'S NOVEL. 
(in two chaptebs.) 

WkITTKN by a PaTIBMT now OONFDfED IH BeTHI.XM 
H06PITAI«. PUBLISHSD BY KIND FEBMI88IOH OF THB 
CrOYSBNOR. 



The Governor of BdJdenCs Certijicate. 

''This is to certify, that the MS. now 
deliyered bj me into the hands of the pub- 
lishers is the bona Jide composition, and is 
in the actual handwriting, of John Levison^ 
lunatic^ a patient. No. 32, in B ward of 
Bethlem Ilospital, St. George's- in-the-Fields. 
Levison^ who is a joumeTman printer, of 
Banner Lane, St. Luke's^ was apprehended 

c2 



20 ICE BOUND. 

on the 4th of January, 1834, for threatening 
bis wife's life, and killing his infant child, aged 
five years, in a fit of mania. Since he has 
been under my care, bis frenzies have gradu- 
ally subsided into a belief that he is Gehazi, 
the Wandering Jew, who, having struck our 
Saviour on his way to Calvary, was doomed 
to remain on earth till the Last Judgment. 
Levison spends his whole time, when not walk- 
ing in the long galleries or the airing grounds, 
in writing out what he calls the story of his 
various transmigrations. On most other sub- 
jects he is quite sane. It is with bis full 
consent that I have handed over his MS. to 
the publishers. 

*^ Witness my hand, this 12th day of Au- 
gust, 1836, 

"George Castleton, Governor." 

" Bethlem Hospital, 
" St. George'S'tn-the-Fields:^ 

Medical Certificate fr(yin the House-Surgecm. 
" John Levison has been under my care six 



THE madman's hotel. 21 

months next Tuesday. His frenzj-fits have 
quite subsided, and he now needs no restraint. 
His eye is bright, no longer troubled and 
restless — his tongue quite clean. With the 
exception of an unshakable belief that he is 
Gehazi, the Wandering Jew, and that he has 
lived more than 1800 years, he is in the full 
possession of his senses. His memory is good, 
and his powers of combination and invention are 
exceedingly active. I consider him, however, 
as not in a fit state ever to be discharged, as 
his bnun must eventually undergo a softening. 
" Signed by me, 

" Edward Wilson, House-Surgeon. 

'' BetMem Hospital, 

"/». George'S'tn-the-Fields, 

'' August 12, IBSe."" 

MS. 
• • • • • 

No, I didn't kill my child — ^no, no ! Oh I 
not that dark room where the fiery eyes grin 

and stare I Well, then, I'll be quiet, 

keeper, and get to my paper and ink, as the 



22 ICE BOUND. 

governor told me ; for he is going to publish 
to the world who I am, and all my lives — ^my 
library of biographies — and then the King 
will send for me, and I shall be dismissed 
with honour — (ah ! to think of cheating so 
that cold-eyed man ! — ^the fool, to be made a 
governor!) 

Poor dull materialist ! he sees no red hell 
boiling down under the paving-stones of this 
London. He knows of no golden heaven up 
above the dark fogs that ever overshadow this 
house of woe ! He will not believe that I, 
John Levison, of Banner Lane, St. Luke's, 
formerly of Blue Anchor Court, Rotherhithe 
— first, groom in Sir Richard Dyce's family, 
then bookbinder, and, lastly, journeyman- 
printer at Clowes's, in Blackfriars — ^was once 
Gehazi, the physician of the Street of the 
Pomegranate, in the road leading to the 
Golden Gate of the city of Zion. 

No! When I proclaim it in the w^ing- 
grounds, these madmen all laugh and point 
at me. The mad soldier, who was with the 



THE madman's koyel. 23 

Bloody Half-Hundred in the Peninsula — 
the old man, who swore he would take my 
life — stark mad both — ^flout and mock me! 
And on dull cold days in the galleries, when 
yisitors' earnest faces are looking timidly 
through the bars, and the mad painter is busy 
at his canvas, and the mad tailor is shaping his 
tinsel crown, I am ever the butt of the ward 
because I tvUl talk of that dreadful noon, when 
I came back from the plains of Jericho, and 
met the bleeding wretch who I now know 
was the Saviour — God in the flesh — the Mes- 
siah of the prophets — 1800 years ago, and 
no death — no death ! God I hasten on the 
Judgment, for this my punishment is greater 
than I can bear I 

There, now — ^look at that old man: isn't 
that a sight to make the angels weep ? Look 
at him I Like a new-caged bird against the 
wires, how he beats against the bars of that 
staircase window, one thin leg, warped and 
shrunk, thrust out into the cool pure air, as 
if even that poor freedom gave him hope and 



24 ICE BOUND. 

life. But, then, he deserves it — ^he is raving 
mad, and killed his old wife at Hackney ! 

No, keeper, I didn't— don't drive me mad ! 
I didn't stab the child I Don't remind me of 
it, for it cuts into my brain I 

How he clings to the bars, and never looks 
up, though, laughing and merry, the gay 
visitors, thoughtless and happy, pass him by 
to gaze at the mad pilot, who believes he has 
a glass head I 

It is enough though to disorder one's senses 
to see this crowd of mad creatures, pacing all 
day up and down, up and down these long, dull 
galleries, with their fixed, hopeless looks, and 
their pale, purgatorial faces — creatures without 
a God, without hope, without memory, with a 
fierce animal life latent in their eyes, the fire at 
the brain and the load at the heart. This for 
love, that for religion — ^A for ambition, B for 
avarice — all very mad, and I, the only sane 
one here ; for, let me say, the keepers are not 
all of them right, and the governor's quite 
cracked on some points. 

But I must go write down my transmigrations 



THE madman's novel. 25 

•^how I died and changed — ^that's what he 
gave me this paper for ; I must begin with my 
first life, mj Jewish life ; and I will toil at it 
as much as these groans and howlings will 
let me^ because I think that when the world 
knows mj storj I shall be released at once 
from this house of doom. I promised^ too, to 
have a chapter ready before the governor re- 
turned, and the clock's now pointing to three. 
I only wish I had a quiet room away from 
these madmen over the cupola, or could get 
into the porter's lodge in the portico ! Well 
— 1820 years ago — ^well, well. 

My Jewish Life. 

Yes ; it was thus. 

I was a physician in the street of the Pome- 
granate, hard by the Golden Gate of Jerusalem, 
that points to Damascus. My name was 
Grehazi, the son of Phinehas, the son of Elkanah, 
of the tribe of Benjamin. 

I was sitting in my shop, three hours afler 
sun-rise, weighing out some spikenard, very 
precious, when a meagre Arab, wearing a torn 



26 ICE BOUND. 

cloak of cameFs hair, and having a yellow 
handkerchief fastened round his dusty hood^ 
entered, and bade me rise and come with him 
a day's journey, to the city of palm-trees, 
where his sheikh lay ill. 

I, desirous to collect round that Jericho 
specimens of the spider moss, very virtuous 
against bites of the rock-scorpions, arose and 
went, paying (with a curse underbreath) the 
usual fine of thirty pence to the armed cen- 
turion at the gate, for leaving the city before 
noon. 

And I said, looking up to Calvary hill, 
" Soldier, what mean those three bare trees 
yonder by the olive bushes on Mount Calvary — 
are they fresh signal-posts for the hill country 
forts?" 

He insolently replied, " They are male- 
factors' crosses, and are ready for the Jewish 
dogs, who die to-morrow at the third hour." 

"What ! ^' I said, " has, then, some slave bro- 
ken a Soman lady's fan, or have the carp in the 
governor's tank been over-fed?" 



THE M ADM AN'8 NOVEL. 27 

'^Neither of these," he said, showing his white 
teeth, and dropping his spear with a jolt, for 
he was a barbarian soldier, blue-eyed, and 
from the Rhine country ; " the two are thieves 
and murderers who stabbed a priest in the 
outer court ; the third, I know not whom, a 
mad preacher, who leads about idle fishermen, 
and heals lepers, but does no special harm." 

*^ Ay, some snake-charmer, perhaps," said I; 
and, mounting my dromedary, passed quickly 
down towards the brook Kedron, chanting a 
psalm of jubilee, and thinking over the last 
strange case of delirium, in that soldier of the 
Dragon legion,'who lodged in Mount Acra, and 
had served in Egypt, and who believed that 
he had seen a street beggar, one Barti- 
maeus, a vagabond fellow, who lived among 
the tombs, suddenly cured of blindness ; I 
knowing him stone dark, with ten years red 
ophthalmia, having dismissed him last Nisan 
as incurable. 

" Curse on these cut-throat Romans!" I 
thought, " with their Mars, Romulus, their 



28 ICE BOUND. 

« 

taxes, and brutish idols ; still one good at least 
we get from them, if we rid us of such dan- 
gerous quacks as this street curer of the blind, 
who retards our noble science of healing, and 
draws the hard-earned pence from the foolish 
poor, who kiss his feet, and despise us, the 
true ministers of God." 

Jericho being six hours' journey from Jeru- 
salem, we had determined to rest at the spring 
of Elisha, which is half-way between Beth- 
Jamel and the doomed city where the Arab 
lay ilL Our road, after we left the Valley 
of the tombs, at the doors of some of which 
the madmen hooted at us, passed between 
patches of com and sesame, and broken 
slopes and water-courses, here and there shaded 
with trees. Already the lower elevation of 
the plain weighed upon us with a sense of 
dull, feverish heat, so at noon we rested. 

Who should suddenly meet me under the 
terebinth tree but Bartimaeus, the blind beggar, 
his eyes still, as I expected, covered from the 
glaring sun. As I approached he did not beat 



THE madman's novel* , 29 

and shuffle with his stick, and gasp out a 
salutation, but slowly cutting in two a melon, 
asked me not for alms. 

"Hail, Rabboni!'' he said. 

" And who's this juggler who cures blind 
men, BartimsBus the blind," I said, half-angrilj; 
'^ I pray that the tree to make his cross be as 
tall as this terebinth. Did I not often tell 
thee that none but God could heal thee, 
thou leper's godson?" 

Bartimseus answered quite calmly, and with 
no frown or stamp— 

"Thou saidst truly, none could heal me 
but God ; and he, God, haih healed me." 

As he spoke he pulled away his band- 
age, and behold his eyes were whole as my 
own I " Blessed be Jesus ! " he shouted. Then 
I cried, in the blindness of my heart, " Thou 
filthy impostor, thou wert never blind, and this 
is one of thy beggar's tricks, that will one 
day bring thee to Herod's amphitheatre. 
Smite him, Arab, with thy nebout !" 

And my Arab smote him ; but, without a 



30 ICE BOUND. 

taunt or mock, the man cried, ^^ Blessed be 
the name of the Lord ! " and passed away 
into the san, his lips moving as if in prayer. 

And I said again, being full of wrath, 
^^ Eun, Arab, after that beggar, and take away 
his stolen melon, for he is a liar and a cheat !" 

The Arab, with a cruel laugh, did so; 
but he said, "The beggar only cried, 'The 
God who sent the ravens will send the beggar 
food ! ' " Then I cursed him, and took my 
meal, saying long graces, after the manner of 
the Pharisees, knowing that the Arab wor- 
shipped the Devil of the Moon, and knew not 
the God of Israel. 

We had long lost sight of Mount Moriah, 
and what the Arab called '^ the Great Spirit's 
house," from whence you can see Pisgah, 
the hill country, and the great range of the 
Dead Sea ; and we were descending that pebbly 
mountain road, leading rapidly down into the 
plain, where the silver trumpets had once 
sounded so terribly. Every stone was to me 
a monument, every rock a home of memory. 



THE madman's NOYEL. 31 

Below lay GUgal, where the angel ap- 
peared to Joshaa ; there was the school of the 
prophets ; yonder Samuel sat in judgment ; 
there the first Passover was celebrated, after 
our fathers passed the Jordan ; here Elijah 
mounted in the burning chariot, that was 
drawn bj the horses of fire ; here, too, on the 
sixth bridge, my father once smote the Philis- 
tines, having lefl his plough in the furrow to 
rally the chosen people in the pass of Bethoron. 
I was feeling the pulse of my Arab -guide 
— ^for he had complained of a burning pain in 
the chest, and his tongue was furred — when, at 
a turning of the road, we met a litter, carried 
by four people of Mauritania, having silver 
bracelets on their black arms, and scarlet tur- 
bans on their heads. Two young Copts be- 
hind led each a hunting-leopard, while a third 
carried an ape, with a gold collar round its 
neck. Inside the litter reclined an unwieldy 
Boman officer, far gone in dropsy, pale and 
bloated, his flaccid fingers loaded with scaror 
hod rings, by which I knew him at once to be 



32 ICE BOUND. 

Lucius Junius Bibo, Governor of Gaza, lately 
Proconsul of Upper Egypt, but disgraced by 
Tiberius for not having sent a sufficient num- 
ber of hippopotami for the supply of the 
Roman amphitheatre. He had lately written 
to me for a talent's worth of Lemnian earth, 
and I supposed he was on his way to visit 
me at Jerusalem. 

A blow from my Arab's ready nebout 
stopped the insolent Moors, who would have 
pushed us to the wall. I then advanced to 
the litter, and, drawing the purple curtain, 
announced myself as Gehazi, the son of Phi* 
nehas. 

The miserable debauchee did not even open 
his pig eyes, but said, languidly, ^^I have 
nothing for him. Bid him be gone, or loose 
the Indian leopards.'' 

'^ I am Gehazi, the physician of Jerusalem !" 
I cried indignantly. 

" What ? Jesus, the son of Joseph — ^the 
great magician who cured the centurion's ser- 
vant ? " he said, with a sigh of fatness. 



THE madman's novel. 33 

" No, Bibo ; but Gehazi, the great physician 
of the Street of the Pomegranate." 

" Then, for the love of Venus, let me sleep ; 
for I want neither thee nor thy filthy Lemnian 
earth, which is but the scrapings of Vulcan's 
sandals, and only fit for Jews, or the poor 
Cyrenian I threw it to at Bethlehem." 

" My shekels, Eoman I " I exclaimed, " or 
Caesar shall hear of it ! " then, exchanging ana- 
themas, we passed on, the Moors shouting, 
the leopards growling, and the ape chattering. 
By heaven ! if I had had a spear, I would 
have run the white-blooded sot through the 
stomach, and have at once rid him of his life 
and his disease ! 

Determined to bring these religious cheats 
before the notice of the Sanhedrim at Tiberias, 
I rode moodily on, and, passing the huts of 
Jericho, and the Bull Tower that Herod 
erected to keep the Gideonites in check, I went 
on an hour farther to the banks of the Jordan, 
where the chief lay encamped. 

Hills dotted with rare cypresses, black, 

VOL. I. D 



34 ICE BOUND. 

silent, and untenanted by birds ; slopes 
of thomy* bushes, shallow water-courses, 
already dry with the heat, led us at some 
distance from the balsam fields for which this 
district was renowned, down to the bed of the 
Jordan : not the mere moving current of sand 
that pours itself into the salt bitterness of 
the Dead Sea ; but a swift and rapid river, at- 
tended on its course by dense multitudes of 
nepal, tamarisk, and plane trees, that crowd 
down to its waters as if to do it homage. 
Beyond the corn fields spread the rose laurels, 
beyond these the acacias, the almond, and 
the fig; on the higher ridges rose the 
dwarf oaks and the box; and below lay 
these flowering thickets of oleander, where 
the nightingale sang even at noon-day, its 
nest trellised with the vine and the sedder 
tree. 

I forgot all my professional jealousy at the 
sight of this land of milk and honey. The 
lark sprang from the broad surfaces of the 
com, not yet brazen red in the rich ex- 



THE madman's noyel. 85 

panses of full Bummer^ and carolled to God a 
psalm joyful and holy as that of the child 
David beside the sheep-folds. The nightin- 
gale answered it from the thicket, careless of 
the wild beast, whose lair likewise is often 
among the flowers. 

All of a sudden my Arab turned a comer 
of the path, and, shading his eyes f^om the 
glare of the sun, uttered an exclamation of 
amazement. He pointed and rubbed his 
eyes; but I could see no black cone-like 
tent, no blood-mare tied to a spear stuck 
in the sand. There were no children swarm- 
ing in the date trees, no playful kids 
bleating round their dams. 

"Here I left the Arab,'' he said; "and, 
by the star Semphan, I know not whither 
he is gone." 

As we drew nearer, we could see the marks 
of an encampment, the holes in the sand 
where the spears had been, the trample 
of hoofs, the marks of the tent pins, and 
the black rings of the camp fires. 

d2 



36 ICE BOUND. 

While my Arab was applying his hand to 
the gray ashes to see if they were still warm, 
to ascertain how long his friends and the sick 
chief had left — ^for he had now found prints 
of camel hoofs in the direction of the Dead 
Sea coast — in searching for the track I 
came upon a man of a solemn and winning 
countenance asleep under a wild fig-tree. 

Sisingx calmly to his feet, he returned my 
angry look with a solemn greeting, followed 
by a long and enquiring look. 

" As the cedar," said my Arab, reprovingly, 
" loses none of its perfume by imparting it to 
him who sits under its trunk, so does a man 
lose no honour by courtesy to a stranger." 

" A second Solomon," I said, angrily ; for 
the day's disappointment had disturbed my 
temper by ruffling my pride. 

" As we Arabs," he said again, paying no 
heed to my annoyance at his composure, "care 
not for the pearls, because they are not pulse, 
and will not boil — so the Jew cares not for 
those from whom he cannot bleed the shekels." 



THE madman's novel. 37 

" Son of the Edom horse-stealer," I said, 
'^is it not enough that thy chief must send 
for me on this fool's errand, but thou too, 
son of a dog, must mock me with thy foolish 
sayings? Know that to kill thee were but 
to me as to crush a scorpion on the wall;" and 
I picked up a huge flint to stone the unbe- 
liever. 

Then he, leaping on my camel's throat, 
more like a jackal than a man, raised his 
club as if to brain me, his eyes flashing fire, 
the veins swelling on his dark forehead ; but 
suddenly calming himself, as if by force; he 
lowered his knotted stick and addressed me : — 

" Wretched weigher of poisons," he ex- 
claimed, " I spare thee, that thou mayest yet 
further diminish thy countrymen. An Arab 
knows how to obey — ^I believe in destiny. If 
our labour has been in vain, it is Eemphan's 
will, and he will have it so, in spite of all 
the plaister-sellers in Judaea. Farewell, and 
may the blessings of the evil angels, which 
are curses, be with thee for ever ! " 



38 ICE BOUND. 

So saying, the yile horse-stealer tumbled 
me from the dromedary's back, threw my 
bags of medicines and phials in the sand, and 
galloped off at a rate incredible to any but 
those who know the desert. / 

As I stood rubbing the dust from my robes, 
and adjusting my sacred phylacteries, now ex- 
amining my jars to see if any hellebore had 
been lost, now opening a roll of amulet to see 
if the precious snake-stone of Lyene were safe, 
the sleeper whom I had dbturbed gravely 
accosted me. 

" Gehazi, son of Elkanah,'' he said, " be 
not troubled, for God has laid his hand on 
the Edomite, and he haa returned to his own 
land." 

" Who art thou ? " I exclaimed, feeling 
my pulse as I spoke, to see to what high 
degree of fever my temporary rage had 
thrown me, by the same token — my pulse 
beat quick and thumping, 85 at least. 

^^ I am Lazarus of Bethany, endowed with 
the power of healing by Jesus of Nazareth." 



THE madman's noyel. 89 

"From whom?'' I said; for I trembled 
with rage, to think that I saw another of 
that itinerant's disciples, and I, tired and 
travel-worn, to return to Jerosalem, the 
mock of the whole street, and perhaps to 
be suspected of treason by Pilate himself; 
looking at him closer, I remarked red marks 
round his wrists, which were thin and long, 
as if marked by Soman manacles. " Thou art 
some runaway from the galleys at Joppa, and 
art only food for the boatswain's whip." 

" These marks," he said, " are from no 
felon's chain — ^they are the marks of the grave- 
dothes of Bethany, from which I was loosed 
but a week since." 

"Ah I a madman," I thought to myself, 
strayed from the tombs, and afraid of being 
beaten for stealing sycamore fruit in the val- 
leys — a likely story; so I, to humour him, 
asked who, forsooth, raised him from the 
dead. 

And he replied, " Jesus of Nazareth, he who 
healed Bartimssus, the servant of the Cen- 



40 ICE BOUND. 

turion — He, the Redeemer, the God manifest 
in the flesh/* 

"Out, madman!" I cried, and turned my 
face to return to Jerusalem. " Any poor priest 
of Egypt can cure by stroke and touch. 
As I am a Pharisee, I swear the grave of 
this Jesus shall soon be in Hinnom, and his 
father's house he made a by-word in Israel." 

" Come, Gehazi, share my meal, and rest, for 
it is the passover," said Lazarus, sitting down 
and drawing a handful of Carob-pods, dates, and 
dried locusts from his wallet, as a substitute 
for the roast lamb and bitter herbs. 

" I will eat with no madman!" I exclaimed; 
and, turning, strode away in the direction of 
Jericho. There I resolved to hire a mule, 
and start back to Jerusalem before daybreak, 
intending to remain outside the walls till 
sunset, and then, bribing a legionary, to steal 
into my house unobserved. 

But I had not got many paces from the 
black rings of ashes on the sand, when my foot 
caught in the branch of a thorny creeper, that 



THE madman's novel. 41 

had crawled out of the path from a neigh- 
bouring thicket^ and I fell heavily on my head, 
and lay insensible. What star was over me 
I know not, but so it was, and I conceal 
nothing. My sapphire ring, the Samaritan 
told me, would preserve me from bruise and 
fall ; but they are liars, all these Samaritans, 
and nothing but the steel bleeder and the 
cautery of fire will ever cure them. 

When I came to myself I was sitting 
under a mimosa tree, the fresh shadow falling 
on me with gracious coolness, for the sun's 
golden arrows cannot pierce the broad tar- 
get of its dark boughs. Across the hot sun, 
without the magic circle of the dusk, the 
sand lizards shot quick as the shuttles of the 
silk weavers of Damascus On the broad 
purple disks of the stone-thistles near me 
the bees fretted and fed. I lay with my 
bleeding head in the lap of some one whom 
I could not raise myself to gaze at. 

I painfully lift my eyes — ^it is Lazarus 
watching me, not with scorn or anger, but 



42 ICE BOUND. 

as I have seen a shepherd of Nazareth Tvatch 
a lamb torn by a beast pf the wood. Not 
conscious that my senses had returned, I 
watched him as he looked fixedly at a jezboa 
that fed behind us on a distant sand-hill. He 
speaks — I can hear his words. 

"Do good to those that despitefuUy use 
you and persecute you; by so doing thou 
shalt heap coals of fire upon his head." 

" Are those the words of the Arab poet, 
Ibn Mejnoun," I asked with kinder voice, 
rising and brushing the dust fi*om my saffron- 
coloured robe as I spoke. 

" They are the words of Jesus of Nazareth," 
he replied. 

" Raca!" I exclaimed — "yet they are good 
words, and worthy of a better man. Had 
Eleazar the High-Priest, or Ananias the chief 
scribe, uttered them, I had held them worthy 
of a place even in the book of the law." 

"Talk not of the Master and such as 
Eleazar and Ananias in the same breath," said 
Lazarus, with a look of horror. " The Lord, 



THE madman's novel. 48 

who is a searcher of hearts, knows that one 
is a cormpter of virgins, and another the 
worshipper of idols. Did not one, the third 
day of last Abib, purchase of thee one 
drachm of the white powder of Chios, and 
the other, on the calends of first month, a 
pound of the narcotic gum of Egypt?" 

I started, and he proceeded: — 

^^ All their crimes has God revealed to me ; 
yet you still doubt that I have power from 
heaven. Let these signs be witnesses to thy 
hard and stony heart, for God has sent me to 
thee/' 

As he spoke Lazarus stood erect, and raised 
his hands to heaven ; then, drawing a handful 
of dates from his goat-skin wallet, and step- 
ping into the sunlight, he flung them into the 
hot and burning air, which now, though past 
noon, seemed to quiver and pulse, and almost 
ready to burst into a consuming flame. 

" In the name of God ! '' he said ; the 
golden fruit, already falling, turned at once 
into a cluster of song-birds, and soared up 



44 ICE BOUND. 

into the burning azure of the sky, singing as 
they rose far out of sight, a white cloud, 
swooping down, seeming to receive them into 
its soft bosom. 

*'Very wonderful 1" I said; " but such 
tricks are common in the Arab tents, where, 
to win the sesterces of travellers, they cut oflf 
a child's head, and restore him again to life; 
pour out many-coloured sands from the same 
clay amphora; or make a palm-shoot in a 
few minutes spring up and bear fruit. Such 
tricks cheat the wise man's eye, but not his 
reason. He knows that what the peasant fool 
thinks magic is but a shrewd man's observa- 
tion of some concealed law. Look here ! 
Here in my pouch is a dead weed — dead 
these 30 years ; for my father — and he's dead 
— ^picked it up by the Red Sea shore. I put 
it in the water, and it blooms into the rose 
of Jericho. Look — see 1 This dry, shrivelled 
seed, 4,000 years old, found in the jaw of a 
mummy king at Edfou, I plant it, and lo I 
in two months a green shoot, the promise of 



THE madman's novel. 45 

a latent fruit. I have in these bags gems 
that guard the wearer from fire and steel, 
stones that attract iron, and moss that grows 
in the crystal ; yet I claim not to be a god, 
nor yet a juggler." 

"Well said," exclaimed a voice from be- 
hind a tamarisk bush ; and the next moment 
stepped out to us an African snake-charmer, a 
mocking grin on his mouth, a laughing malice 
in his eyes. I did not then know he was 
one of the possessed. 

" The gentleman with the hollow eyes here, 
by the good Typhon of the Cataracts, makes 
too much of his pretty sleight-of-hand. Why, 
sirs, such tricks wouldn't get a man bread in 
the forum at Rome, though they do very well 
for the beggarly wildernesses of this accursed 
land. I and my snakes here, (and, as he spoke, 
he pulled two hissing reluctant vipers from a 
box that was slung round his neck by a chain 
of ebony and ivory beads) are almost starving 
for want of audiences in this glum country, 
where nothing goes down but preaching and 



46 ICE BOUND. 

OYerreaching. If I were Caesar, I would turn 
the country into a breeding-ground of beasts 
for the amphitheatre, and, save your worships, 
sell all the beggarly chosen of God in the 
Alexandrian slave-markets. Talk of tricks — 
why, look here, and Beelzebub take your 
dates, that are too good to send flying away 
like that." 

As he spoke, the African suddenly drew a 
dagger from a fold of his belt of lion's-skin, 
and plunged it into his body. The blood 
spouted from the wound ; he fell heavily on 
the sand. I, who knew all signs of death — 
the heaving chest, choking breath, glazing 
eye, quivering lip— ^aid the snake-charmer 
was dying, and threw myself down beside the 
body, calling Lazarus, who stood by calm 
and unmoved. 

"Wretch!" I said, "wflt thou let the 
man bleed to death, and look on as if he were 
a mere frog some camel's hoof has crushed ?" 

What seemed to me a slight smile passed 
over the features of Lazarus as I spoke. In 



THE midman's novel. 47 

my wrath, forgetting my braises, I sprang 
upon the man of Bethany, and would have 
struck him to the ground ; but at that mo- 
ment the apparently dying man leaped from 
the ground, with a laugh that was hoarse and 
grating, and seemed to convulse only his 
mouth. It was the laugh of the intellect, and 
not of the heart. 

" Oh, oh ! " he said, " what a triumph for 
poor Ozan the snake-charmer, to deceive the 
great physician of the Street of the Pomegra- 
nate — and all with a false parchment belly 
and a cupful of chicken's blood I " 

My rage at the smile of Lazarus, now 
widening over his face, gave me invention. 
I turned the juggler's trick into an argument 
against the miracles of Christ, who, I heard, 
called us Pharisees — a generation of vipers. 

" This fool," I said, turning to the snake- 
charmer, who was feeding his snakes with 
scraps of raw chiellen's flesh, *^ declares that 
he has just been raised from the dead by one 
Jesus of Nazareth." 



48 ICE BOUND. 

" By the god NUus ! but that beats the lie 
that was so big it took two Grecians to utter 
it. Why, by Caesar the divine, and Jupiter 
Tonans too — and that's a big oath — the 
fellow would make his fortune storytelling in 
the tents of Wadymousa — ah — ah ! Why, 
man," he shouted, slapping Lazarus on the 
back, " ril give thee sixpence a-day to carry 
my snakes, and tell lies about these pagans, 
while I play the double-pipe or the scabellus." 

" Son of Shem," said Lazarus, " even the 
beggar cannot feed on carrion." 

" I don't know anything about carrion, or 
begging either," said the vagrant ; " but as 
for Son of Shem — as you Jews call the Psylli, 
and those tribes beyond Mauritania — I am no 
such, but honest Junius Simio of the Suburra, 
who learnt snake-charming at Denderah when 
an eagle-bearer of the 10th Legion. Behold ! " 
and, with a scrap of some Eoman tragedy, the 
merry scoundrel, who I fo%nd afterwards had 
just stolen my girdle, made a grimace, threw 
himself into a mime's attitude, and pulled off a 



THE madman's noyel. 49 

curly wig, which showed his short black hair 
underneath, and the light brown of the upper 
part of his forehead, where the umber-dye had 
not touched the skin. 

" But lookee here, friend," he said, turning 
to Lazarus ; ^' as this wise son of ^sculapius 
seems to doubt thy mission — and, by the 
snake-rod of Mercury, I think very justly — 
^ve him, I pray thee, a further proof of thy 
wonder-working power — (see his colour go ! " 
under voice to mej. " I have here, in a small 
camel-hair bag, a horned asp, bought by me 
this morning from an Egyptian merchant, who 
had found it in a bale of papyrus. It is 
extremely deadly, for I have not yet taken out 
its fangs, and its bite killed a child yesterday 
in fourteen minutes. (How the fellow is 
taken aback ! By the god Momus, but 
this beats the Troy games of the Campus !) 
And here, as a spur to thy somewhat waning 
courage, take a draught of this pure Chian 
from my calabash." 

Lazarus replied, " I will abide the creature's 
VOL. L E 



50 ICE BOUND. 

bite, but I will take no wine, for I am a 
Nazarene/' 

" By Jove above, these Jews will kill me 
with laughing! No pork, no wine, always 
fasting, lamb and hyssop, bread without leaven, 
bare temples without images and pretty priest- 
esses — ^no Bacchus ! no Venus ! Well, now 
then for the little fellow with the teeth like 
lancets, that gives the pain that requires no 
doctor. (What shall we do with the fooVs 
body?) The storyll make my fortune, by 
Eomulus ! (But the fellow will be running : 
if he does, knock him down and throw him to 
the Jordan). Now — one, two, three — curse 
the knot ! Gentlemen, take your seats ; the 
play's a-going to begin." 

The fellow undid the bag in which the 
asp coiled and struggled, and, with a jerk, 
threw the snake into the hands of Lazarus, 
which were outstretched placidly to receive it. 
The instant that the strange man of Bethany 
received the reptile, it rose, with its distended 
hood and fiery eyes, and bit him through the 



THE madman's NOYEL. 51 

finger ; not heeding the pain or the yenom, 
the man stooped and picked it up, and 
holding it up to his face by the head, looked 
it earnestly in the eyes. Before that gaze 
the creature seemed to lose its malignity. It 
closed its eyes as if wounded^ and^ then 
sliding from his hand, fell on the sand, and 
gliding off, was just entering in a jerboa hole, 
when a shirike, bearing down from a neigh- 
bouring clump of thorny acacia trees, bore it 
off in its beak. 

*^ There go my hundred pence ! " said the 
snake-charmer, wringing his hands. *^ Oh, 
my pence, my pence ! Curse on the asp, 
and the Jew, and the Egyptian, and the mad- 
man, and the doctor 1 Curses on myself 
for wasting my time in such a land as the 
Jews'! But, Sol, here's revenge! Ten mi- 
nutes and the poison works; then, a clean 
robe and a firesh shirt, and I'm off to Magdala, 
for there's no money to be turned here. 
Curses on the bird! the asp that cost me 
100 pence — ^hard pence — 100 pence this very 

£2 



52 ICE BOUND. 

morning. Well, how do you feel, Jew ? — ^bitter 
taste in the mouth, eh? — eyes hot, tongue 
parched, pulse quicker — then dry ? Nothing ! 
Why, the man knows the secret then, and has 
virtue ; for I saw the fangs go in, and there 
are the three black marks on his ring finger ! ** 

But the sequel may be easily foreseen. The 
poison had no power over Lazarus ; and, 
uttering his blessing and prayer for our belief 
in the one Saviour of mankind, he left us, 
and passed on towards Edom, the snake- 
charmer insisting on following so great and 
good a man, whom Zeus hipself must have 
endowed with the power of working miracles. 

I, hiring a mule at a small village near the 
banks of the Jordan, where I slept, returned 
by early morning within sight of Jerusalem ; 
then, dismissing my guide and beast, I 
proceeded to wait for sunset, that I might 
enter the city unobserved, still enraged at all 
jugglers, cheats, and despisers of the law. 

It was about noon that I reached the foot 
of the Valley of Jehoshaphatj and, watching 



THE madman's novel. 53 

first the mule grow to a mere speck against 
the horizon, turned into a narrow path, lead- 
ing to the rock-tomb of a friend, at whose 
interment I had only the Tuesday before been 
present. I looked up at the mouth of the 
cave : it was dark and still as an entrance to 
Hades. In its cool depth of shadow I deter- 
mined then to wait for sunset. 

Over the stone of the portal was cut — 

"' Here, in the arms of eternal sleep, as in a bride^s, lies 
Thothmes. Envy him not, for thou too shalt one. daj 
sleep in those arms." 

For my friend was an Egyptian merchant, an 
Epicurean and a Sadducee, who believed not 
the resurrection. 

" Here, then," I pondered to myself, " lies 
a clay mould in which Jehovah ran the pre- 
cious fiery essence of the soul ; here, to be 
corroded by damp and heat, to be gnawed by 
worms and vile insects, lies that body that 
loved and hated; that lay in the mother's 
bosom, and the harlot's lap ; that trod down 
the enemy, and succoured the friend ; all here 



54 ICE BOUND. 

sealed up in a cavern, far from sun and 
light, to await the great change ; while the 
poor earth, once so nursed and pampered, 
passes into flower or star, into cloud or sea." 

I was pursuing these reveries, which every 
man who has stood by a grave must have felt 
— a feeling of humiliation mixed with that 
internal kindle of brain and heart which 
comes at such moments, like an angel voice 
assuring us of immortality — when a low sound, 
from a passage leading to the tomb chamber, 
roused my attention, and filled me at once 
with alarm and dread. Legends of the vam- 
pire spirit that animates the dead thronged 
into my mind. Fear of personal danger, too, 
bade me remember that the outlaws of Judea, 
and slaves flying the cross, sometimes sought 
refuge in these houses of death and corrup- 
tion. 

Before I had time to think even of flight, 
a tall gaunt form, swathed in white grave- 
clothes, strode suddenly out of the dark into the 
path of golden light that the sun cast through 



THE MADlfAN*S NOVEL. 55 

the doorway. The face was that of a corpse, 
the forehead was bound with a napkin^ while 
the jaw was tied up loosely with a cloth ; the 
shrivelled arms, white and rigid^ had escaped 
from the swathings ; the nails were like claws, 
the lips were livid. 

" I am Thothmes !'* cried the figure ; " I 
am the King of the Scarabcei and the Croco- 
diles. I ride on the fiery-flooded wind of the 
desert, and chase all night Death, who flies 
before me on his great black camel. Ho I 
thou Spirit of the Pyramid, with the gold 
crown, the scalped skull, and the emerald 
eyes ! Ho ! thou Spirit of the Rock-temple, 
where the mummies of the two Arsinoes wait 
for the sound of the golden bells of the dead ! 
Dancing girls ! come to Thothmes, for he calls 
ye! I am the prince of the skeletons of 
the desert; the genii of the poison-flower of 
the Thebaid know my voice, and so do Moses 
and the Prophets. Lash the reeds, waves of 
the Red Sea ! Tear them as the river-horse 
does the spears, or the sea-wolf the net! 



56 ICE BOUND. 

Tear the palm trees, salt winds of Sodom ! 
for I am Thothmes, prince of the dark 
house ! " 

Then, seeing me, the half-starved demoniac 
— ^for such I now perceived the unhappy being 
to be — exclaimed — 

" And who art thou ? What I Baal— the 
god whose crown is the sun, his weapon 
the rainbow, and his arrows the lightnings ? 
— or Rimmon, who rides on the earthquake, 
whose chase-hounds are the white leprosy 
and the black pestilence ? Embrace me, 
dead king ; for I am Thothmes, prince of the 
skeletons of the desert; I live on the fat 
night air and the Dead Sea vapours that slay 
the shepherd ! '' 

So saying, he leaped on me, winding his 
bony arms round my neck ; but the moment 
he pressed his cold lips against my burning 
forehead, and before I could escape from his 
noisome breath, or the clammy chill of his 
emaciated body, he had sprung back with a 
howl of rage and astonishment. 



THE madman's novel. 57 

" Avaunt ! " he cried. " No cavem devil 
this is, nor fiery Moloch, nor golden 
stony cold Baal ! but a living man, with 
a live moving heart in his bosom — 
no blue mould of corruption on his 
cheek, but warm rose-paint on his flesh. 
What has he to do in the tomb, which is the 
dead king's own — Thothraes' own ? — ^he who 
bought it with sobs and death-rattles, and a 
phial full of tears ; giving up for his dark 
dominion, wife, and love, and home ! '' Then, 
foaming at the mouth, he seized me by the 
throat, and tried to strangle me with a band 
of his shroud. 

Grappling each other — I with a despair that 
lent me strength, the madman with a frantic 
fury that his feeble body rendered almost im- 
potent — we reached the door of the cave ; we 
rolled struggling down the sandy bank; we 
tumbled in a watercourse, down whose dry 
pebbles we fought and jostled — ^he trying to 
blind me by thrusting his thumbs into my 
eyes, I trying to stab him in the throat with 



58 ICE BOUND. 

my iron writing stylus, which luckily I kept 
hung in a case by my tablets in my girdle. 

" Help 1'' he cried, " for Thothmes, prince 
of the skeletons of the desert ! " and he 
foamed at the mouth, " help, vultures of the 
clouds! — help, asps of the sand holes! — 
help ye the dead against the living, for I am 
brother of the great crowned Vampire of 
Gomorrah 1 " 

Abeady I was at the edge of a steep rock, 
down which the madman would have certainly 
hurled me, when, at once, through the dust 
and glare and heat, I felt a strong hand tear 
us apart, and drive the madman stunned to 
the ground with the blow of the butt-end of 
a short Soman sword. 

" Why, Gehazi,'* said a horseman, whom at 
once I knew as a Greek freedman of the 
Governor's — one Conon, a wily, quick-witted, 
vivacious Athenian, whom I had once saved 
from the hot clutch of a Syrian fever — 
" what drives you from the herb-furnace, and 
Charon's vintage in the Pomegranate Street, 



THE madman's novel. 59 

to ramble out here and fight with demoniacs 
among the tombs ? Is this a patient who has 
come to life again, to have his revenge for all 
the blood and min88 you drained fi*om him ? 
or did some rare grave-balsam lure you from 
your drugs and amulets ? " 

I told him my story, and he laughed till he 
grew red; all the time, however, employing 
himself in binding the madman's hands, and 
attaching them to his stirrup. " What ! — 
thou, learned doctor, to be gulled by a vulgar 
cheat and a snake-charmer ! Why, the poorest 
galley-slave at the Piraeus could take in you 
Jews. Though you are so fierce and proud — 
but there — ^there — ^no hot reply : Zeus didn't 
make all men Greeks, and Hermes be thanked 
for it ; for if all beasts were lions, what food 
would be left us men ? But now — quick, doc- 
tor — mount behind me ; for, at a turn of the 
road, a light Gallic car waits for us — the 
Governor's wife is ill at ease, and needs your 
help. I was bid follow thee even to Jericho ; 
the Governor has been fearing a sedition 



60 ICE BOUND, 

of your countrymen, and all the Dragon 
legion are under arms, as well as three com- 
panies of our Spanish horse. By the hair of 
Berenice — and that's a star — ^there is no hopes 
of lettered ease in this dismal city, where to 
go out after nightfall is to ensure a Jewish 
knife in your liver, if you don't march wrapped 
all over in Spanish steel. Only last night 
Zoe sends me a scented billet. I go out at 
the appointed hour ; my steel must needs 
shine — a coat made of moon-mirrors — and 
I am stopped by a sentinel, who thinks I must 
be Herod himself in disguise, or the rogue 
Barabbas again, fresh from the plunder of a 
palace." 

" What has become of that Barabbas?" said I. 

^^ Barabbas, why he was taken last calends, 
for carelessly blee4ing a young knight at the 
door of the temple, and was to have been 
crucified to- day at noon; but Pilate, wishing 
to be talked of by the rabble, releases him, 
for he is a pet in the cook shops, and crucifies 
in his stead one Jesus^ a street preacher, who 



THE madman's novel. 61 

has been exciting some idle fishermen of 
Galilee to leave their honest labour and take 
to the word-nets of the philosopher. Poor 
silly men! but they must be made an ex- 
ample, for he calls himself King of the Jews, 
and has deceived many. The poor man's 
companions were Rufus and Simon — the one 
a horrid snake-eyed villain, for poisoning his 
master, a vile tax-collector of Samaria; and 
the other for the far worse crime of breaking 
off the head of an image of our blessed 
Emperor Tiberius, the one that is to be placed, 
by the order of Sejanus, in the inner court of 
the Temple, and sticking on it a satyr's." 

" Never," I said, " while Zebulon and Gad 
can lift a spear." 

" No treason, friend Doctor, for learned men 
do sometimes mount that tree without leaves." 

I could scarcely, I confess, contain my joy, to 

hear of the punishment of that man of Nazareth. 
***** 

We were just entering the gate of Judg- 
ment, as the portal was called, by which pri- 



62 ICE BOUND. 

soners were led outside the walls to execution, 
I was in trouble, for I had not eaten yes- 
terday of the Passover, nor offered up my four- 
teen prayers, according to the laws of Rabbi 
Shareza, when the challenge of the sentinel 
and the ring of his grounded spear compelled 
me to dismount from my car and await a 
cavalcade, which was slowly approaching 
up the steep and unpaved street. A coxcomb 
in the guard-house put down " Apicius de Re 
Coquinaria," and looked languidly out, coaxing 
his scented hair, and playing with the scale 
straps of his coat of mail. With a sickly 
drawl, which implied the languor of the 
debauchee, he hummed one of Anacreon's 
voluptuous songs, as he pointed out the crimi- 
nals to a brother officer, who was examining 
a sapphire ring through the light of a looped 
window. 

" Oh, that!" said he, " is Joshua, or Jesus, 
a Nazarene, who tried to make himself king, at 
least so a Pharisee told me, for I don't know 
a word of their Hebrew jargon — disgusting 



THE IIADMAN'S NOVEL. 63 

language. That other is the gladiator, Riifus, 
a fellow all scars and gashes— one who kills 
a lion in two blows, but has been fool enough 
to poison a greater rascal than himself— so 
to the cross with him; and that rogue 
Barabbas got off. Well, so the world wags — 
for one the hook and the stairs, for another 
the purple and the nard." 

" I will wait here," I thought, " and see 
this preaching cheat, to give him the Satan's 
blessing, which is a curse, and the Devil's 
gift, which is a blow;" for I hated him to my 
heart, and my heart was black with envy, 
and my blood boiling for revenge for yester- 
day's vexations, dangers, and delusions — I, 
who would in my better moments lift the fly 
from the water-jug, and labour to keep the , 
night moth from my study-lamp. How this 
envy corrupts the heart. 

There was one blast of the horn, as a 
centurion, reining his horse of the Pannonian 
plains, came leading on a procession of 
spearmen and shouting rabble, who flung 



64 ICE BOUND. 

stones and mud at the three prisoners, who 
were toiling in a burning sun under the weight 
of their crosses, with all the cruelty with 
which the dregs of a city always hunt down 
the victim of the hour. 

I could see for a moment the angry up- 
turned faces, laughing, grimacing, sneering, 
I could hear the shouts of " Hail, King of 
the Jewsl'' as an idiot-prince whom they drove 
before them waved his reed and robe in 
mockery of the Nazarene, 

Yes, I had only eyes for him. I expected 
to see a brazen-faced, bull-necked demagogue 
of the market-place, like the Egyptian that had 
led out into the wilderness 4000 men, who 
were murderers to a man, a fellow with a 
voice like a wild beast, a sensual lip, and 
half-shut cruel eyes ; but I beheld a face as 
of an angel, pale and wrung with suflFering, 
stained with blood from the crown of thorns 
that a brute butcher of the Lower Market had 
thrust with a curse upon his head, his eyes 
languid, but pure and bright, with a super- 



THE madman's koyel. 65 

natural lights as he bent under the weight of 
a ponderous wooden cross, that made even the 
soldiers whisper in pity. And on either side of 
him, singing vile songs, and cheering one an- 
other, with curses and execrations and jests 
about fighting Charon for his fare, came the 
thief and the gladiator. 

But at that moment I felt no pity, I re« 
joiced to see the pain of the smooth-faced 
impostor, as I deemed him, and, pushing for- 
ward through the soldiers, I struck him on 
the half-naked back, still red with the lashes. 
He turned, and in a low voice said — 

" Tarry thou till I come.'* 

And as the centurion shouted to push on — 
for it was past the ninth hour — I fell back 
in a swoon ; I felt the judgment was upon 
me, and that it was indeed the Son of God. 
As I fell, I heard a soldier say, "Run to 
the barrack for the myrrh and the wine ; and 
mind and bring the dice, for his robe is with^ 
out a seam, and worth a good penny ;" and 
the last object I remember seeing was a boy 

VOL. I. P 



66 ICE BOUND. 

running past roe with a roll of parchment, and 
on it was written, " The King of the Jews ! '* 
And when I woke and looked up, a great 
darkness was over the sky, veined with bars 
of fire ; but, against a lingering sickly white- 
ness to the east, where the skull-place rose, I 
could see three tall black crosses ; and as I 
rose to go home, a centurion rode slowly by 
up the street, and I heard him say to a com- 
panion, "Yes! truly this was the Son of 
God 1 " A crowd of women passed me, weeping, 
as I went home. I was immortal, and I was 
accursed ; but I bore no brand like Cain. 
Doomed, I felt, to inhabit an endless series of 
bodies, and to survive all love and hope — ^na- 
tion and home — wife and children! To me 
death was to bring no respite from suffering, 
no rest from care and pain, no opiate for sor- 
row, no balm for grief. The Messiah of my 
people had come, and I had spurned him, as I 
might have done a beggar in the street ! Then 

I WAS FOR EVER ACCURSED I 



67 



CHAPTER 11. 

MY LIFE AT ROME. 

It was a cbudless day in August, when, just 
at the fourth hour, our Alexandrian spice 
vessel, the CanopuSy put into the bay of 
Naples, I, a prisoner, sent to Tiberius by 
order of the Procurator, Pilate, on suspicion 
of being more than half a Christian, ran up 
from the cabin, at the sound of a cry that 
made me at first think some disaster had hap- 
pened to the ship. 

My first astonishment at the beautiful bay 
— " the mirror of Venus," as a poet on board 
called it — ^blue and golden, as alternately the 
sunbeam stretched out its golden sceptre over 

f2 



68 . ICE BOUND. 

it, or the shadow fell on it cool and dark — was 
soon dissipated by my greater surprise at 
seeing the whole crew, grim captain and bluff 
sailors — even the fat flute-player we used to 
laugh at — all standing on the poop clothed in 
long white robes, and crowned with garlands, 
shouting with one voice, *^ By you we live ! " 
I saw that every eye was turned on the pur- 
ple awning of a ten-oared Libumian galley, 
whose parti-coloured sails and gilded gunwale 
rendered it conspicuous, as belonging to some 
Eoman of high rank. With a burst of flutes 
and horns, its great gilded oars began sud- 
denly to move, as if animated by one common 
impulse of motion, as the brilliant vessel flew 
glittering past us over the waters towards Baias. 

" By Plutus, how it shines 1 " said a Syrian 
money-lender. 

" She skims the waves resplendent as the 
vessel in which Paris bore away his Helen," 
said the poet. 

"And what use," said a rough Epirote 
ailor, " are such gimcracks ? A good strong 



THE madman's koyel. 69 

Cilician beak would go smash into them, and 
break them up like so many sea-biscuits. 
Give me good oak plank^ with a streak of red 
cinnabar, or something of that sort, that'll 
stand the lash and the roll of the sea-lions off 
Calpe/' 

" Is that a Consul's galley ? " I said to on6 
of the revellers, whose rose crown had just 
blown into the water. 

" Consul ?" said the fellow, angrily. " Bless 
the Jew ! — why, it is the holy Tiberius him- 
self ; and surely he is a god, if ever there 
was one.'' 

"Now, look here, friend Jew," said a 
friendly young fop, who, during all the voy- 
age, had been teasing me for antidotes against 
sea-sickness, and, draggle-tailed and helpless, 
had been the sport of the hardier sailors and 
older travellers. Now in sight of land, he had 
gained courage, and resumed all his foppery, 
his curled %ig, his light summer rings, his 
soupqon of rouge, his scarlet Gallic cloak, and 
his signet, a beautiful work of Grecian art. 



70 ICE BOUND. 

" Allow me, friend Jew," he said, in a shrill, 
affected voice, and with a profusion of Greek 
phrases and scraps of verse, " to serve as 
chorus, and explain to you the places that 
surround this triumphant work of Poseidon's 
art. I need scarcely tell you that this city is 
Naples, where the illustrious poet, Virgil — of 
whom, I daresay — I shudder to say — you 
know nothing — wrote his * -Sneid.' By-the- 
bye, mind I show you a remarkable epigram I 
wrote upon it. That purple mountain that 
pierces heaven, and is now helmeted and fea- 
thered with a crimson cloud, is Vesuvius : 
under it lie the giants whom Jupiter chained 
and bound. That little pile of rock out at 
sea to the right, crowned with a diadem of 
towers and a Pharos, is Capri, where the 
Emperor lives. Those are his twelve villas 
— Jove, Mars, Juno, and all of them. Yes — 
twelve. The Pharos faces the temple of Sor- 
rentum, on the opposite shore. You see it 
there — a white, marble-glittering speck, stand- 
ing out from the gray olives and green pome- 



THE madman's novel. 71 

granates like a nestling dove. Through the 
thin violet air you can see from that great wall 
the land of Circe, that Ulysses fled from. To 
the south, far, are the fiery isles of J^olus, and 
the chestnut heights of Sicily. Away there, 
from Circe's promontory, you see, far as the 
three temples of the city of roses, Psestum. 
On those blue Falemian ridges grow the 
richest wines that ever scented an amphora; 
and further on, with snowy crests, rise the 
Samnite Apennines and the Lucanian moun- 
tains." 

I, who had drunk deeply of Boman lore, 
forgot for a moment my burden of woe in 
gazing at this scene of beauty. Sea of jewel 
clearness, sky of magic transparency, moun- 
tain, plain — ^all that can carry the mind into 
infinity was there. 

" And God saw that it was good I ^ I 
exclaimed. 

" By the twelve gods I ^ said the Boman, 
" I would rather be SBdile in this dusty Naples 
than king of such a land of mud and sand as 



78 ICE ABOUND. 

that Egypt, where, if you even set your dog at 
an old woman's cat, you are stoned to death by 
the rabble, who call everything sacred. By- 
the*bye, did you ever hear what our 53 did 
at Sycue ? Why, they caught a fellow who 
was stealing one of the silver cohort eagles, 
and they shut him up, and kept him for three 
days on sacred onions. But the Governor at 
Thebes got hold of the thing, and here I am 
— bound, I expect, for Charon's ferry, unless 
Mercury helps me. But what's that ? — there 
— no, there — from the Emperor's galley? 
One flag — two flags. Oh I that's the signal 
for us poor devils to come and meet the 
Emperor at Bai». Now, the good genius of 
the old Manlian gens help me, or my last 
dice is thrown, and the 53 lose a good 
judge of ostriches' tongues." 

" In half-an-hour," whispered to me a Greek 
philosopher, arrested for seditious haranguing 
at Alexandria, ^^ you will make acquaintance 
with what ApoUonius beautifully calls, * that 
kind of beast called a tyrant.' " 



THE midman's noyel. 73 

"No whispering I '* said a sailor, pushing 
us apart. 

"He who bears misfortune like a god is 
already more than half divine,'' said the 
Stoic. 

" No mutiny on board ship ! " said the 
surly sailor, in whose way we had got, and 
striking the Greek a heavy blow over the back 
with the knotted end of a rope. 

In a moment the Stoic, forgetting his phi- 
losophy, roared with pain, and, seizing the 
sailor by the hair, flung him over a heap of 
buckets that stood near. 

" To revenge is human,'' I said, laughingly ; 
" but to forgive becomes the gods." 

" To resist oppression," said the Stoic, 
slinkmg away rather chapfalleu, " is fitting all 
but the slave." ^ 

An hour's sail brought us back to Bais. 
Accustomed to the* great palaces of Herod 
on Mount Zion, the mountains of marble that 
formed the Holy Temple of Mount Moriah, 
and the great viaduct of the Tynpoeum that 



74 ICE BOUND. 

leaped over the valley and linked the two, I 
was still astonished. The huge moles of 
Pateoli and BaisB led on the eye to the Lucrine 
lake, and the distant fabulous avenues that 
lay beyond. Hercules, who was said in earlier 
ages to have thrown up a dyke on this coast, 
could scarcely, in all the might of a demigod, 
have imagined such miles of palaces as the 
Eoman voluptuaries had here, raised in end- 
less terraces, that the sea chafed at, but 
could not destroy. Bath-rooms, and colon- 
nades, and porticoes, to catch the fresh sea 
air and expel the sun, arose in endless suc< 
cession. Palanquins and chariots thronged 
the white roads ; vessels gay with streamers 
encircled the imperial galley, now still at her 
moorings ; the shore resounded with the sound 
of drums and horns; spear-heads glittered 
on the mole; horses dashed past, either 
bringing or departing with messages to Borne 
— the great city that lay only two days' 
journey from us over that distant poisonous 
plain of the Pontine Marshes. 



THE madman's noyel. 75 

''And here is that Leviathan/' I thought; 
'^and what am I in his sight but a bro- 
ther of dragons and a companion of owls ? " 
But then again, in mj despondency, I thought 
of the prayer of Isaiah, and sang, " Lord, 
be gracious unto us, we have waited for 
thee ; be thou our salvation also in the time 
of trouble ; " and I was comforted, 

" Oh, by Bacchus," said thefop, fawningly,. 
waiting for the boat that was to take us on 
shore, " if you must sing, give us, * Daphne, 
stay me with thine eyes,' or some pretty love 
thing, and none of those Hebrew dirges ; for 
when a man's thinking of the lictors he 
wants something lively and epicurean. Curse 
these Stoics, I haven't lived half a life yet 1 " 

We passed through long galleries of busts 
and statues — ^the treasures of Athens and of 
Corinth ; we passed rooms through whose 
doorway I could see costly citron tables and 
rich couches, inlaid with amber and tortoise- 
shell ; the floors were starred with Mosaic, or 
paved with hard slabs of the red and green, 



76 ICE BOUND. 

marble of Numidia. The walls, sometimes 
black, sometimes of a pale straw coloar, often 
azure, were painted with the loves of danc- 
ing nymphs, fluttering garlands of birds and 
beasts, and chains of flowers. Here was 
Perseus rescuing Andromeda, there Icarus 
trying on his waxen wings. 

" And how is Caprineus ? " said a man 
behind me in a low voice to an attendant 
soldier, who had recognized him — " still dis- 
coursing who was Hecuba's mother with the 
grammarians, what tunes the Sirens played, 
or I suppose still writing death-warrants for 
his favourite, Sejanus ? " 

" Hist I " said the man — " the Jew hears 
us." 

^* Callipedes," said the other, "is just as 
usual, always starting for Bome, but never 
venturing far from his den, with the green 
ditch round it. May the gods blind me if I 
believe he is not sinking fast; for he only 
"drinks one amphora a-day, and that of Augus- 
tus's Setine ; he's mad now about building, 



THE madman's novel. 77 

nothing goes down but plans for cupolas and 
forums, till I am sick of the sight of a 
fellow with a roll of paper in his hand — still 
anything to keep him from murder. '' 

As the gossips were thus venting their 
spleen at their Emperor's expense, we suddenly 
entered the room in which the Emperor stood 
surrounded by his builders, Greek astrologers 
and grammarians. In the background were 
several tributary kings, whose suits were 
pending at his court. They thought them- 
selves his guests. They were, in fact, his 
prisoners, and he their jailor. Some attend- 
ants were measuring the doorways, while 
bronzed workmen stood by, ready to turn 
this villa, which had once belonged to Lu« 
cullus, into some fresh form of grandeur and 
luxury. 

Advancing with slow and solemn steps, 
my companion saluted Tiberius as Augustus 
and Imperator, but he did not for a moment 
even turn his back. 

When he did, I saw he was an old man^ 



78 ICE BOUND. 

with once handsome features, now grown red 
and swollen, and spotted with excess. His eyes 
were large, fixed, and severe. He held his 
neck stiff and erect, and eyed us frowning 
and in silence — looking occasionally, from 
time to time, at the fawning builder's plan. 
I observed he was bald, and wore a laurel 
crown. In the prime of life he must have 
been robust and hale, for his chest was broad 
and his hands large and strong ; but he was 
now shrunk and withered, and the paper 
shook as he held it. I saw at once the sus- 
picious, pedantic, reserved, tyrant of Capri. 
He whispered for a moment .with an attend- 
ant, to whom he handed a lyre, which he had 
held in his lefb hand; and then, stealing 
towards us, he fixed his eye full on me, 
and addressed me in an angry voice, as he 
called for a plumb-line to make some fresh 
measurement. 

"Are you,'' he said, "the god-hater, 
who denies the divinity that eleven dties 
of Asia, and that all the world besides. 



THE madman's noyel. 79 

are so eager to adore — by the Lemures I 
will'' — and he swept the air with his hand^ 
as if he held a sword. 

*^ Lord and master/' said the ambassadors 
of the eleven cities, pressing forward from a 
throng of freedmen and courtiers, ^^ still more 
and more justly will you htte these Jews when 
you learn that they alone of all mankind have 
refused to sacrifice for your safety." 

" My Lord and master," I said, fallmg on 
my knees, " we are slandered " — for I saw 
his tiger's eye darken, and feared instant death 
— " we have sacrificed for you whole burnt- 
offerings, not feasting on the victims, but 
making holocausts." 

" Be it so," he said — " you sacrifice for me, 
but not to me," and he tore the plan with his 
teeth, in the outburst of his rage. " Here, 
Magasbas," to an African slave, '' for though I 
am a god, I drink Falernian," up to the gold. 

Ere I could stammer a word of excuse, 
or explain that I myself was no rebel, but a 
quiet physician of Jerusalem, the Emperor 



80 ICE BOUND. 

|iad hurried off to another apartment to see 
the plans for a new tepidarium ! 

We hurried after him^ backwards and for- 
wards, up stairs and along galleries, the 
ambassadors pointing and mocking at me as 
we went. 

The windows of the chamber, filled with a 
transparent stone, that admitted light, but not 
the wind, and tempered the sun, astonished 
me even in my fear. 

All of a sudden, at the end of a gallery, he 
turned on me, and said, " Pray, sir, why do 
not the Jews eat pork?" 

At this the ambassadors burst into such an 
astonished roar of laughter at the Emperor's 
wit, that they had to be forced back, 
amid the shrugs and corrective looks of the 
attendants. 

I saw the Emperor face about, and I seized 
my opportunity. 

"Every nation," I said, hurriedly, "has 
its own customs, even our colonies ; the 
Greeks have their mysteries. Some na* 



THE madman's novel. 81 

tioDS refrain from eating the fiesh of lambs.** 

" Quite right," said Tiberius^ drily, looking 
round for applause ; " the meat's bad." 

Again the ambassadors roared, and Tibe- 
rius laughing too, the attendants also laughed ; 
I alone stood angry and vexed. 

" Laugh, man," said the dandy, in my ear ; 
"laugh, or your life isn't worth an hour's 
purchase, and you'll be a sop in that cursed 
yellow Tiber, perhaps, even before me." 

Eoused by this I smiled mournfully. 

Instantly the Emperor relaxed his iron face, 
and said, as he shaded his eyes to criticise a 
fresco picture of two Cupids drawing a Biga 
that was driven by a butterfly, 

" Men who think me no god, are, after all, 
more unfortunate than criminal — ^let the poor 
Jew go." 

The moment he had said these words the 
expression of every face around altered. Some 
made way for me — others offered me a place 
in the front rank — the fop kept jogging my 
elbow and instructing me to keep my face in 

VOL. I, G 



82 ICE BOUND. 

a smile^ or I should still float in that cursed 
pea-soup river. 

While I was still tremhliug, like a man just 
snatched from the edge of a precipice, one of 
the train stepped forward. 

But before I knew whether I was even yet 
saved from the jaws of this monster, who 
gnawed the world, a rhetorician of Cos, a loud- 
voiced, conceited declaimer, vain and empty, 
advanced, and tucking up his mantle in thq 
Grecian fashion, began, in the name of the 
people of further Spain, to entreat that they 
might be deemed worthy to erect a temple to 
worship Tiberius. 

"The best of mortals, as Hercules and 
Bacchus among the Greeks, and Bomulus 
among the Bomans, had sought and gained 
such a place among the Immortals. For the 
hopes of such an apotheosis Augustus had 
lived a hero's life ; but Tiberius, by nature 
almost divine, had won the crown before the 
genius of death had reversed his torch.'' 

Then with a grand flourish and a look 



THE madman's ngyel. 8S 

round to secure applause^ lie concluded, 
** Princes/' he said, " may command the pre- 
sent, but it should be their dearest ambition 
thus to take pledges for the future — ^mdiffer- 
ence to fame is indifference to virtue/' 

To all this harangue Tiberius replied with 
a single smile at the Greek accent with which 
the coxcombical orator pronounced his Latin. 
He even drew out his ivory tablets and made 
what I suppose were notes of the most 
flagrant anachronisms. The flattered gram- 
marian^ thinking the Emperor was taking 
notice of his speech, strutted about in a 
way that roused even the courtier's mirth. 

"By Bacchus, is this thy Silenus?" said 
the Emperor, selecting from the crowd a 
squat ^dile, who, very uncomfortable in 
superb Sidonian robes, was hiding his con- 
fusion behind my friend the fop, "Speak, 
man; on what bean-soup errand art thou 
eome,^ for I'll swear thou art no shunner 
of pork?" 

" This man," said a dignified chamberlain^ 

g2 



84 ICEBOUHD. 

looking at the fat countrjr magistrate: with 
extreme contempt^ ^'is an iBdile of the once 
famed Ilium '' (every one stared, for one more 
unlike Priam nev^ walked), ^^and he comes as 
an ambassador from that town, to sympathize 
with your highness on the death of the illus- 
trious Germanicus.'^ 

I never saw on human, face so horrid a 
shadow as passed over the face of Tiberius 
at the mention of that hated name. In a 
moment, as by an effort of habitual reserve, 
the deadly purple that had darkened his 
cheeks faded, however, into a still more 
ghastly paleness, a stottnge smile brightened 
his stealthy and bloed'-shot eyes^ and with a low 
bow he said, turning to the perspiring jSSdile— 

^^Tell the people of lUum I. thank them, 
and beg to express my sincere regret at 
tiie loss of their much-lamented townsonan^ 
Hector.'* 

Th^, with a scowl of rage, the Emperor 
and his train of stewards, builders, and work- 
men, poured out of the <^hambei;* 



THE MADMAK'3 HIOYEL. 85 

The iBdile was wonderfal to contemplate. 
I could see that he hardly knew whether to 
treat Tiberius's answer as a sneer or a compli* 
ment ; but the alarmed looks of those around 
him, and their ominous whispers, soon con* 
▼inced him of the truth ; he stood like one who 
had just been scared by the Medusa's head^ 
and feels his flesh fast hardening into stone. 

The fop seized the opportunity (rather un- 
seasonably) to ask the unhappy man if it wa9 
not true that the quails about the Scamander 
were of a rare flavour; and the rhetorician, 
now the centre of a crowd of flatterers- 
one of whom, with loathsome servility, was 
brushing some pretended dust from his sleeve 
— ^bade the iCdile be of good courage, and he 
would befriend him with Caesar. 

While we were all occupied with our 
mingled hopes and fears, and were discussing 
the Emperor's smiles and gestures, the sten- 
torian voice of a Libumian usher suddenly 
awed us into silence. 

'^Tiberius, the princeps, commands that 



S6 ICE BOtJKD« 

Colophon, the grammarian of Oos, for daring 
to address him by word of mouth, contrary to 
the Manlian law, be banished for thirty years 
to the island of Melita, in the JBgean; he 
also dismisses the JBdile of Ilium, Julius 
Bessus, and presents him with a beryl can- 
tharus, to keep as a remembrance of his 
painful journey.'' 

Immediately the fat JBdile's face gathered 
up into pleasant puckers, and the ^ammarian's 
whitened into that of a corpse. 

"Oh! my wife and children!'' he cried; 
^^ what, no delay ?" 

But the next moment two strong Cap- 
padocian attendants tied the wretched man's 
hands behind him, and pushed him before them 
to the doorway. 

As he passed through he turned, and ex- 
claimed with a sigh, "Farewell, friends; a 
dying man salutes ye !" 

I must say this for the fussy, good-natured 
^dile, that I saw him run after Colophon and 
push a purse into his girdle. I wish I could, 



THE madman's novel* 87 

for the credit of humanity, however, suppress 
the fact that the moment the kind Trojan's back 
was turned, one of the guardsmen snatched the 
bag from its receptacle, and wagging it in the 
orator's eyes, grinned at his companion. 

Perhaps a tedious hour had elapsed before 
J was called bj an attendant to wait upon the 
Emperor in his library. I found him writing ; 
his favourite dwarf, ludicrously called Atlas, 
was sorting some rolls and parchments, the 
newest works just arrived from Eome, the 
latest despatches from the East; the drip, 
drip of a bronze water-clock was the only 
sound that broke the silence. 

The Emperor scarcely noticed my presence 
as I entered, but went on muttering, ^' I have 
got a wolf by the ears, but the toils are ready 
—let's see" (and he counted on his fingers) — 
*^ on the Ehine eight legions, three in Iberia, 
Africa two, and two in Egypt, a legion at 
Antioch, and one at Cesarea, two on the 
Danube, and two in the Isles ; two more 
in Dalmatia, and then the Suban and Praetorian 



B8 ICEBOUND. 

Guards, if they do not plaj Mse, and Macro 
is but true." 

Then he looked up, and called an officer 
who was writing at a neighbouring desk. 

*^More complaints, Piso, of this Pilate 
— a carpenter's son of Nazareth executed; 
just when we should be firm in the East, 
to strike the one blow that saves all. Bid 
him be recalled; write to-night — and send 
him to the Alps — ^that will cool his insolence, 
after the sun of Syria; but no more state 
affairs now, Atlas, till after csena." 

Then suddenly glancing at his tablets — » 
^^Oh, notes made by the delatores (spies) 
during the voyage of the 'Serapis,' that, 
during a storm off Corsica, Lucius Balbus, 
cornet in the 10th legion, vowed to Neptune 
to offer his hair in the temple of that god — 
that at the same time Mycon, a Stoic philo- 
sopher, of Alexandria, also a state prisoner, 
vowed, if he got safe to land, to fight a lion in 
the amphitheatre. 

" These being my friends, I would not," 



THE madman's koyel. 89 

said the Emperor, with his usual devilish smile, 
"that such pious vows as theirs were broken. 
No, by the gods, let the fop be shaven, and 
the Stoic sent instantly to the lions at 
Some ; and when the fop is shaved, despatch 
him to help his fellow-traveller — for a 
Libyan lion is work enough for two such 
men as our philosopher. No parleying — you 
heard what I said, Piso — ^to the lions with 
them — away!" 

I stepped forward, and, falling on my 
knees, caught hold of the Emperor's robe, and 
prayed for the soldier's life. 

" By Zeus," he said, " but a Jew makes a 
better friend than a Eoman — let the fool 
then be sent to Syene." 

" He comes from there," said the attendant. 

" Then let him be sent back there, for I know 
no worse punishment; and tell him to pray 
twice a-day for my health, for I have a cursed 
cough that torments my chest. Begone 1 am 
I no Casar, that I am to be obeyed by no 
one ? Begone, slave, or beware the carp tank I " 



90 ICEBOUND. 

I shuddered at these words, for I had 
been told, during my voyage, not only of the 
fact that the Emperor delighted to watch 
victims writhing in the waves under the rocks 
of Capri, but of one wretched slave whom he 
had thrown into the fish-tank, where he was 
devoured by pike kept there for the use of 
the imperial kitchen. 

He saw my terror, and smiled — again that 
dreadful smile! 

*^ Do you like poetry ?" he said suddenly ; 
*' you Jews, 1 hear, have no poetry." 

I humbly alluded to our great poets, and 
quoted him a part of the triumphant psalm of 
Miriam, so full of martial exultation, having in-> 
deed turned it, during the voyage, into iambics. 

^^ Sophos," he said, with a pedantic air, that 
affected omniscience, '^but I object to that 
word * emblema,' it is mere Greek, and not 
pure Latin. I have here by me a mere — ^a 
trifling work of my own, written in the 
manner of Messala Corvinus. It is though 
hardly worth your hearing — ^it's only a dia* 



THE madman's hotel. 91 

logae between a thrush and an oyster, a. dis- 
pute settled by the interference of Juno." 

I listened with all the interest I could 
assume, but mj applause was hardly rap- 
turous enough for one so cloyed with flattery, 
*^ I observe," he said, " the elaborate construe^ 
tion of our verse escapes you.'* 

I could see that all this time some trouble 
preyed upon him, and would not let him 
rest. His eyes were always wandering to the 
door or the window. His clammy fingers 
were feverishly pulling off his rings, or 
fumbling in his breast as for some concealed 
weapon. He opened now his pencase — ^now 
loosened or tightened his robe. All of a 
sudden he clicked his fingers, and a black 
slave entered. 

" Cygnus," he said, " call Caius hither, re- 
quest him to bring the despatches fi*om Se- 
janus, and bid Macro order out the guard, for 
I go at once to Eome." 

**To Rome!" stammered the slave, and 
disappeared. 



92 ICEBOUND. 

Sejanus, I knew, was the dreaded favourite,' 
novr at the climax of his power, and about, 
it was rumoured, to become son-in-law to the 
Emperor. I wondered what had led me into 
the confidence of the tyrant, who every now and 
then spoke to me with a kindness unusual to 
his cold and reserved nature. 

Preceded by an usher, Cains, generally 
known by the soldiers' nickname of Caligula, 
entered. The son of Germanicus was tall 
and thin; his limbs shrunk and lank, his 
walk shambling, his head prematurely bald, 
his complexiQU sallow, his voice shrill and 
harsh, his handsome features deformed by a 
scowl and writhing expression. 

" What news, Caius, from our beloved 
city?" said Tiberius, in reply to Caligula's 
humble salutation. 

" The best news in the world,'' he replied, 
with shrill and excited gesticulation, as if 
lashing a horse. " The green are everjrwhere 
victorious, and talk of building a fresh circus 
in the fourteenth region." 



THE MADMA1¥*3 NOVEL. 93 

" Bah I " said Tiberius, " what trash is 
this I Leave the red and blue charioteers to 
the tavern gossips, and such fools as Yerus 
and Mile* What tidings bring you from our 
Sejanus— our beloved Sejanus?" 

" Our beloved Sejanus/' replied Caligula, 
looking keenly from under his eyebrows, ^^ not 
having room on earth, must needs jostle you 
on Olympus. Not satisfied with the consul'^ 
ship, the senate have just decreed an altar to 
Clemency and Friendship, and by its side 
images of their Jupiter'' (bowing to Tiberius), 
"and of this Prometheus are to be placed." 

" A second Patroclus to a second Achilles,'' 
said Tiberius. 

. "He prays, also, that the gods may soon 
bless him, and enable him to visit his dear 
father-in-law, and his equally dear bride, Li- 
villa-r— whose indisposition grieves him to the 
soul— at the tranquil nest of the muses, Capri." 
* Caligula turned aside as if to conceal a 
slight smile at the obvious insincerity of the 
erafty favourite's letter. 



94 ICE BOUND. 

'^ And what saj the private letters of the 
delatores (spies) ? " said Tiberius, impatiently 
— ^^ what is the talk of the forum and market^ 
places?'' 

"They say that the proudest families of 
Bome — ^the Manlii, Camilli, Cincinnati, and 
Sevii — wait like slaves at the doors of this 
modem Tarquin; that the blues and greens 
have vowed rival races in his honour ; that all 
the flat-nosed gladiators of the fencing schools 
are swearing to fight in the games on his next 
birth-day; that altars are raised before his 
pictures, and sacrifices are being ofiered in all 
quarters of the city/' 

" He is the shadow of the Emperor/'^ said 
Tiberius, calmly^ without moving a muscle, 
" and the bean-eaters of the Suburra love its 
shelter/' 

Long distrust of mankind had given the 
Emperor an iron fixity of face, that furnished 
no indication of feeling for the keenest phy- 
siognomist to observe. 

" Seven hundred and fifty-two years," he 



THE madman's novel. 95 

continued, '^ since Rome was foanded, and 
never before lived the man whose robe the Fabii 
and Mamerci ever knelt together to kiss. Such 
a minister is as the vine to the elm/' 

*'0r the ivy to the oak," said Caligula; 
but Tiberius took no heed of the sarcasm. 
" Here is, also, the last fable of your freed- 
man, Fhsedrus, one which is the talk of all 
the cookshops of the herb-market. This 
letter tells me that, at the baths and the law- 
courts — at temples even during the sacrifices — 
tliis fable is buzzed about amid the laughter of 
a thousand mouths and ten thousand eyes." 

"Read it!" said Tiberius. "Something 
against the object of our favour, or it would 
not, by Hercules, I know, go down with the 
greasy rabble, whose only cry is, * Bread 
and games!'" 

With a keen smile of intelligence, Caligula 
read aloud the following well-known fable, 
which a crafty Greek intended as a satire on 
the reigning favourite, Sejanus, at a time 
when plainer truth would have brought the 



96 ICE BOUKD. 

writer to the Tarpeian Hill or the fatal stairs. 

" A certain jackdaw, puffed up with vanity, 
tricked himself out with the stray feathers of 
a peacock, which he found dropped upon the 
straw of a farmyard. Elated by his gaiety, 
the foolish bird mixed with a flock of the 
proud birds of Juno, and strutted about as if 
their equal, or even their very king, elected 
by Jove. For a time the peacocks took no 
notiice of the intruder ; but, at last, provoked 
by his insolence and assumption, they fell 
upon him, beak and claw, in a moment stripped 
him of all his borrowed finery, and finally drove 
him away cruelly bleeding and half dead." 

" Half dead — very well I " cried a parasite 
of Caligula's. 

"Well for a Thracian,'' said Tiberius; 
"but the fable is full of old phrases from 
Ennius, quite out of date. I will re-write the 
thing for him, throw in a little more alle- 
gory, and turn it into flowing alcaics." 

" Flowing alcaics ! " said the parasite, whose 
business it was to echo. " Sophos 1 " (bravo). 



THE madman's noyel. 97 

** But, Agrippa/* said Tiberius, turning 
round abruptly, with the air of a man who 
snaps a brittle net. 

I could see that the Emperor was leaping at 
the throat of an overwhelming thought. 

I looked up, and at once recognized, in the 
commanding figure that pressed through the 
doorway, where the more favoured guards and 
officers waited, watching me as I stood a 
spectator of the imperial conferences, Agrippa, 
the grandchild of the cruel Herod, the bro- 
ther of the beautiful Herodias, the claimant 
of the Jewish throne, and the favourite com- 
panion of Caligula. His oriental features were 
imperious and beautifiil, his chin was full, his 
«yes were dark and lustrous, his bearing that of 
one who, accustomed to unqualified obedience, 
found it difficult to conceal his contempt for the 
herd of pimps and slaves that filled the court 
of a Eoman palace. His very step was lighter 
and more free than that of these conquerors 
of the world, who trembled at the voice of a 
dying old man. 

VOL. I. H 



98 ICE BOUND. 

"I find it difficult," said Tiberius, "to converse 
freely with this Jew, who is, I find, a learned 
physician of your Jerusalem," said Tiberius to 
Agrippa. " I would have you ask him" (for I 
had affected to know but little Latin, in order 
to escape the tyrant's interrogation) " whether 
the star of — " (here he whispered, and pointed 
to a horoscope marked with Chaldaic characters 
on the table) — " and mine are not, as Thras- 
^illus, my seer, tells me, antagonistic." 

Agrippa instantly replied, that he had fresh 
despatches from Syria to submit to the Em- 
peror. He had discovered that Caesarea could 
bear an annual tax of ten millions more ses- 
terces ; but he craved the dismissal of the 
proconsul Lucius Balbus, who had persecuted 
the Jews at Alexandria, and who had been 
there three times the usual term of procon- 
sular stay. (Balbus I knew as an insolent 
creature of Sejanus, but one not hostile to 
my countrymen). 

An unconscious glance of my eye caught 



THE madman's hotel. 99 

the attention of Agrippa, who returned it with 
a look of hatred. 

"I can tell fables as well as Phaedrus," 
said Tiberius. " Listen, Agrippa, and observe 
the purity of my Latin, for your own pronun- 
ciation is not quite perfect: — 'A number of 
flies once settled on a soldier's wound, and a 
compassionate passer by the camp would have 
brushed them away. To his astonishment, the 
sufferer bade him refrain for the love of Jove ; 
^ For,' said he, ' these flies have been at it ever 
since Prandium, and are beginning now to be 
bearable ; but, if you drive them off, they will 
be instantly succeeded by new comers, with 
keener stings and fresher appetites.' " 

The courtiers laughed as the Emperor con- 
cluded; Caligula screamed, and the parasite 
echoed, '^ Fresher appetites!" as if he could 
not restrain his delight. 

Agrippa^ ever cool and self-concentrated, 
occupied himself during the buzz of praise 
and compliments in bidding me^ in Hebrew^ 

h2 



100 ICEBOUND. 

tell the Emperor that much danger awaited 
him from Saturn, under whose influence that 
nameless person's house of life seemed to be, 
according to the Chaldaic diagram. 

" As the Lord liveth, and as my soul 
liveth!" I exclaimed, wringing my hands, 
"oh, Agrippa! I know nothing of the jug- 
gling art of the Chaldeans/' 

" Miserable cheat ! " he said, drawing me 
into a comer, and squeezing my wrist with a 
clutch that made me bend with pain, ^^ dare 
to refuse thy king, and thy blood shall be 
poured out this very night as a sacrifice to 
devils 1 Blab ! and I will declare thee a well- 
known poisoner, and thou shalt go feed the 
fish that swarm round Capri 1 " 

" By the wringing of his hands, you see," 
said Agrippa, turning to the Emperor, " that 
this astrologer sees much evil in the stars." 

" By Him that sitteth between the Cheru- 
bim, my lord Agrippa ! " I said, still in Hebrew, 
supplicatingly, " I cannot do this great wickedi- 
ness and sin against God ! " 



THE madman's novel. 101 

^* What says the man ? He appears trou- 
bled/' said Tiberius. 

'' He declares that death is indicated by the 
star MarSy and the Pleiades convince him that 
the danger is but five days hence, and that it 
comes from " 

" But why does the sage turn away ? " 

" He is lost in thought." " Dog ! " he whis- 
pered to me, in Hebrew, " say from Rome, or 
thou diest to-night by my hand." 

"From Rome," I said, mechanically. I 
saw the Emperor shudder, and close his tablets 
with a clash. I little knew on what fresh 
crime he had just then determined. 

" The Rubicon must then be crossed," he 
muttered, in an under breath, that few who 
stood near him could hear. 

" What name was that to-day, Caius?" Tibe- 
rius said, leaping on his feet and calling for his 
litter. "We will to Rome to-night; we must 
get as far as Appii Forum, or at least to the 
sixth mile-stone. What ! are we to have vipers 
hatched under our very pillows ? No. But 



102 ICEBOUND. 

these are no words— I am not well, gentle- 
men — ^I must to Rome — ^what, a pet fox 
grown dangerous ! — clear the room ! I have 
had no sleep ; keep out that detestahle sun- 
light, it hums my hrain, to see it dance on 
the water in the court/' Then the Em- 
peror threw himself on a couch and called for 
wine. 

" Kneel to kiss his hand," said Agrippa in 
my ear ; " and contrive to touch his pulse." 

I did so, and whispered in Hebrew that it 
was low and feeble. A glance of triumph 
leaped up in his eye, and he made a signal 
almost imperceptible even to Caligula's stealthy 
dissimulation, no outburst of the Emperor 
could ever throw him off his guard. It was 
said of him afterwards that he was the best 
servant and worst master that ever lived. 

"Tell him," said Agrippa, turning to me 
imperiously, and still speaking in Hebrew — 
for the Emperor was now engaged in listening 
to a number of lampoons, with which his sus- 
picious nature delighted to vex itself daily — 



THE i^uldman's noyel. 103 

" that yesterday you saw a white owl killed 
by a butcher bird, and that that is an omen of 
the noble being in danger from the base." 

^'I cannot^ and will not, sin thus against 
God and my own soul/' I answered. 

''£efuse/' he said, '^and thou shalt be 
thrown at once into the slave prison, or sent 
for sale to the trainers of the gladiators. Thou 
canst go to no part of the world but my long 
hand will seize thee. In the furthest Libya 
even my poisons will taint sure as thy asp, 
or my invbible arrows pierce thy heart." 

" Drive me not to despair, Agrippa,'' I 
cried; ^*for even the worm turns, even the 
nest-bird pecks at the serpent." 

"Another word," he said, twitching my 
cloak fiercely, '^ and I will splash the wall with 
thy brains, thou minister of Pluto." 

"My lord Tiberius," I said, rushing for- 
ward, and falling on my knees, to kiss the hem 
of the Caesar's robe. "Imperator, prince, 
protector of the weak, save me from this 



104 ICE BOUND. 

fierce noble, in whose sight I am bnt as the 
dust of the earth." 

" By Hercules, what slave of mine dares to 
threaten one who has proved himself a wise 
physician (though a Jew), and a good judge 
of poetry ; some sweeper of the hall, I dare 
swear, whose sceptre is his palm-brush, and 
whose only rival is the porter. Name him, 
fellow ! Is it my strong Thracian, who can 
sweep a sheep in two at one blow of his 
sword ; or our burly Ligurian, who can fell 
a bull at a buffet?" 

" It is neither of these, great Emperor," I 
said, veiling my face ; " but the one that stands 
beside you," pointing to the grandchild of 
Herod. 

''Whatl thou, Agrippa?" 

" Nay, sire ; I did but ask the fellow, who 
I doubt is no pure Jew, the means of testing 
the true Arabian cassia, and he flies at me 
thus like a madman." 

"Be silent I" he whispered, in Hebrew, 
"or thou shalt n^ver see another Feast of 



THE MADMAli's NOVEL. 105 

Tabernacles — I swear it by the glory in the 
Temple/' 

" He threatens me again, my lord, now — 
not a moment since ; he tells me, in Hebrew, 
that I shall never see another Feast of Taber- 
nacles, if I dare to speak." 

*'What is this, Agrippa?" said Tiberius, 
stamping. his foot; "is CaBsar to be fooled 
before his very eyes, — was it for nought that 
Herod treated his children, as the divine Au- 
gustus said, worse than his swine?" 

" May the king live for ever 1 " said Agrippa, 
with an Oriental motion of homage ; " but the 
quack is sick in the brain. I only bade him 
come to my chamber, that he might prepare 
for me a febrifuge, such as the Syrian leeches 
use." 

" I suspect some stratagem," replied Tibe* 
rius, " for I see an evil spirit in thine eye ; 
but the Jew shall not be hurt, he shall 
read me the verses of his people sometimes 
after the bath — ^they will give a zest to the 
warmer fancies of our own Ovid." 



106 ICE BOUND. 

*' Prepare thy tomb!" muttered Agrippa in 
Hebrew. 

'^There, again he threatens me, and bids 
me prepare for death," I cried. 

"Agrippa," said the Emperor, turning 
round with an air that betrayed no particle 
of emotion, "two days since, at the fourth 
hour, you drove with Cains towards Naples. 
At the third milestone from Pausilippo you 
spoke to your companion in Greek." 

" Two days since I drove to Naples," said 
Agrippa, sullenly, and fixing his eyes on 
Tiberius, whose face was stiff as tiiat of a 
corpse. He continued, paying no heed to 
the reply : 

" You said to Cains: *The lion is near his 
end, his claws are blunt: write to Sejanus, 
and offer him a tribunate if he will convoke 
the senate, and send two lictors to ^" 

" It is false I" murmured Agrippa; " the 
deaf charioteer is a spy, and hired by my 
enemies." 

"Macro," said Tiberius, pointing to Agrippa, 



THE madman's novel. 107 

f^ake him to the Mamertine. Agrippa, 
farewell^ and thank thy God that the lion 
has not used his claws; Caius^ learn dis- 
cretion, and never employ deaf charioteers. 
A second such drive may bring you to the 
narrow house in Eome, that stands so 
dangerously near the edge of the Tarpeian. 
But no more jesting; now, Caius, what say 
the plebs of me ?" 

" The journals are dull," said Caius, " and 
the Squibs duller. Nothing but rhymes to 
the comedian Bathyllus and odes to Galloper; 
that won the last race for the Blue party in 
the Circus. Let me see— oh, Plautilla, who 
went to BaiaB a Penelope, has returned a 
Helen." 

"Well put," said Tiberius. 

" An epigram too on old Scaurus, who is al- 
ways giving a feast to celebrate his reconcile- 
ment with his wife. Fhsedrus calls him the 
man who has been married a thousand times, 
and always to the same woman." 
- " Good," said Tiberius, assuming the critic 
—"good!" 



108 ICEBOUND. 

'^Beport that a Sabine vintner, in disgust 
at his district's wine, has invented a means of 
making water intoxicating. Proposed that 
500 statues be erected to him in the Forum, 
and that he be called * Benefactor of the 
Boman world/ if he is successful ; but if not, 
that he be ducked in the Tiber^ and then 
drowned in a wine vat, to propitiate the 
vintners, who, if it is true, intend to ravage 
Gaul/' 

"Te gods!" said Tiberius, suddenly rising 
and stamping with impatience, ^'is all the 
world leagued to drive the old man into Hades? 
Te are all traitors and cheats, all — all ; there 
is no hope but in Jove — only in Jove. Listen- 
ers at every door, and behind every hanging — 
every kiss of the hand but to see how long my 
pulse will beat in life" — (glancing at me in a 
way that showed me he had observed the ges* 
ture of Agrippa) — " no smile but to deceive — 
no look of greeting but to count my wrinkles 
or measure the hollows of my cheek. If I eat 
less than usual, then a hundred letters ; if I. 



THE madman's noyel. 109 

eat more^ then slanders of my debauches; 
but, mark you, I bid you beware !'' (and the 
slaves, accustomed to these outbursts of fury, 
shrunk from the room) — " there is life in the 
old tyrant as you call him yet ; let traitors 
beware — but go, Caius, and bid Hierocles 
bring the letters of the spies, that we may 
try and smoke some more of these foxes out of 
their holes. Had I but a hundred heads now 
at my feet, I should grow young again, like 
^son in his magic bath. 

• • * • • 

" Excellent!" said Tiberius. 

" Here is something rather ribald — shall I 
read it?" said Caligula. 

"Read on." 

'^ It is a foul, foolish thing, not worth 
reading." 

"Nothing disturbs the wise; not slanders, 
nor the fire-forged thunder-stone," said Tibe- 
rius, quoting a line of some Greek poet. 

*^ It is a letter," continued the reader, with 
a malicious smile, and an air of affected re- 



% 



110 ICE BOUND. 

luctance, "affecting to be from the King of 
Parthia, and addressed, not to Claudius Tibe- 
rius Nero, but to Caldus Biberius Mero. It 
prays you to take compassion on the world, 
and to destroy yourself, in spite of the philoso- 
pher's axiom, that only gout and stone are 
sufficient arguments to induce the wise man 
to fall on his own sword." 

" Cookshop wit/' said Tiberius, writhing at 
the satire he loved to affect to despise. 
"The Praetor should look to such buffoons. 
These slanders get, like the scorpions, into 
every wall, and, like flies, they sting and 
buzz in every chamber." 

"They say," continued Caligula, reading 
calmly on, and paying no attention to the 
suppressed anger of the Emperor, " that 
these baths of Baiae are only fit for the puny 
foplings who swim about in seas of floating 
rose leaves — ^fellows who could not lift one of 
my German spears — ^pah! — ^fellows whom I 
could kill with a pinch of my finger and 
thumb. Sons of Komulus, indeed I " 



THE MADMAN*S NOVEL. Ill 

With the gladness of one doing a task he 
took pleasure in, Caligula strode out of the 
room. 

" There goes/' said Tiberius, with a smile — 
for he remembered how Augustus had called 
Caius slow and cruel — "a water-snake for 
Rome, and a monster for the universal world. 
But, to work, for it is now the fourth hour. 
I must strike but once, but strike- sure I '^ 
• • • • • 

At the loud blast of the slave's trumpet, 
announcing the fourth hour, I was hurried 
from the Emperor's presence to exercise my 
new functions as sub-librarian and amanuensis 
of the Roman Caesar. 

Was it but a dream then that I was doomed 
to an eternal curse? Which of these laughing 
and groaning slaves had ever heard of the Mes- 
siah ? Who would believe me if I told them that 
the Son of God had lately been crucified in 
Jerusalem like a common thief? Why, there 
was a slave of Tiberius impaled but yesterday 
for stealing a silver cup, and there was one 



112 ICE BOUND. 

strangled only the daj before for breaking a 
marble Cupid in the atrium ! * * 

Sejanus was at this time the favourite of the 
Emperor, and the sole ruler of Rome, of which 
he was the only resident Consul. The priests 
and senate became his dependants ; his frown 
was death. Originally the son of a poor 
knight, he had begun life as the parasite of 
the father of that miserable epicure, Apicius, 
who had just committed suicide because he 
had only some millions of sesterces left, 
scarcely sufficient to procure him one meal 
of flamingo's hearts, nightingales' brains, 
fatted snails, dormice, with the usual ex- 
pensive sauce of ambergris and other per- 
fumes. At once pliant and persevering, 
generous and rapacious, atheistic yet a 
respecter of religious decorum, his skill in go- 
verning without appearing to govern soon won 
him the favour of Tiberius, whose reserve and 
timidity alike made him weary of Rome. A 
long year of intrigue — the discoveries of plots^ 
real and imaginary— a pressure of business, 



THE madman's novel. 118 

iiigeniously contrived to weigh unduly heavy 
on the Imperator — soon drove Tiberius to the 
luxurious caves of Capri, where, according to 
ttie gossip of Rome, scenes that would shock 
a Spanish dancing-girl, and tortures that would 
disgust a hangman's help, were daily and 
nightly enacted. The bald Caprineus, as the 
rabble called the Caesar, was said to offer re- 
wards for new vices, and for new modes of crush- 
ing out life from gashed and writhing bodies. 
At once a pedant and a debauchee, Tiberius 
openly avowed in my presence that he cared 
not if he were hated, so he were feared. The 
city seldom heard from him, but when he 
issued a decree approving of the seizure of 
some rich senator's vineyards by the hated 
Sejanus, or when he wrote one of his subtle 
and studied letters to the senate, ordering the 
arrest (and therefore death) of some member of 
that order who had dared to speak the truth. 
The people hated him, because he did not love 
the city, and lived, like a barbarian exile, 
away from the circus and the games that 
VOL. I. I 



114 ICE BOUND. 

Augustus used to daily preside at The patri- 
cians hated him, because they feared him ; and, 
indeed, such proud families as the iBmilii, 
Manlii, Camilli — men in whose halls stood the 
effigies of the great champions against the Yolsci 
and the Sabine — were scarcely yet prepared 
to bow down in full homage to the descendant 
of one scarcely equal to themselves. Tiberius 
had no sympathies With Rome ; he cared 
neither for the law courts nor the forum, the 
sacrifices nor the games. Though he was 
fond of blood as a Scythian, he was effeminate 
as a Greek : he did not care, for the sociable 
csBua, the bath, or the sports of the field of 
Mars. Even the men of pleasure despised a 
man who could shut himself up in a rocky 
island, in company with a mere band of slaves, 
grammarians, and executioners. The vices that 
would have been to their minds rather befitting 
the purple in the Palatine, became hideous in 
a distant island. The oppressions they might 
have borne from the Caesar, became intolerable 
when inflicted by a servant of the Gsssar 



THE madman's NOYEL, 115 

like one of themselves. Augustus had been con- 
tent to reign, and yet preserve an appearance 
of liberty ; but this Tiberius shook the sword 
in the eyes of those who knelt before him, and 
clanked their chains rudely in their faces. 
A series of crimes had raised Sejanus to 
a height of power that had alarmed a suspi- 
cious tyrant, who loved no one that did not 
ease him of his care or minister to his plea- 
sure. The death of Germanicus, of Livia — 
the wise mother of the Emperor — the murder 
of Drusus, the imprisonment of his son, and 
the banishment of the " she- wolf," his mother, 
had all been so many steps of Sejanus to 
empire. 

But a month since he had been made joint 
consul with the Emperor; and had even 
ventured to propose an alliance with the im- 
perial house, by marriage with the widow of 
Drusus. But this request Tiberius had, for 
the first time, met with procrastinations and 
delays — more than even his usual distrust 
and hesitation would seem to have augured. 

i2 



116 ICE BOUND. 

Still; the favonrite stood firm in what I 
must call the affections of Tiberias, in spite of 
slander, absence, and conspiracy. True, every 
hour brought the Emperor letters from his 
vicegerent at Rome, and relays of couriers on 
smoking horses were every moment spurring 
up to the palace door. True, that nearly 
every soothsayer and augur, every slave and 
freed-man, was in the pay of this candidate 
for empire. From the slaves who swept the 
Mosaic floors, to the fowler who brought in 
his strings of thrushes and quails into the 
kitchen, there were few but had been tampered 
with by this dangerous subject. The very 
augur who interpreted the nightly dreams of 
the Emperor, and the visions that made him 
dread to sleep, was perhaps infusing suspi- 
cions of some enemy of Sejanus. The rheto- 
ricians who daily read to the Emperor their 
tedious declamations, instilled into him that 
horror of Rome, or that fear of popular power, 
which served the purpose of the minister. Se- 
janus spoke through a thousand tongues, he 



THE madman's NOYEL. 117 

wrought by a thousaDd hands, he listened with 
a thoosand ears. Tiberius had his slow rack 
and axe, but this man's wrath fell sudden and 
irresistible as the lightning : it was omnipre- 
sent, and swooped no one could foresee where, 
when, or on whom. All the intrigues of Cali- 
gula and his party were to induce the Emperor 
to return to Rome, and to watch the movements 
of one who they declared was aiming at some 
secret and dangerous plot. The Emperor was 
all indecision. Now he called for a galley to be 
manned ; now a letter from Rome, informing 
him that there had been treasonable cries heard 
in the ox-market and the Velabrum, drove 
him back to Capri ; now triremes were fitted 
up to bear him to the legions of Gaul or Syria ; 
now he revelled at a debauch, and drank 
smilingly to his absent friend. 

It was recorded to the favour of Tiberius, 
that he listened to my praises of his poems 
with a satisfied smile, and, though not correct- 
ing what I pointed out, he attended to my cri- 
ticisms. I soon became his favourite physician. 



118 ICE BOUND. 

and sometimes my writings^ sometimes my 
opiates, procured him sleep. 

One morning I found him hot and fevered ; 
his pulse was violent ; his countenance 
worn and troubled. He looked more aged 
than when 1 left him the night before : he 
was bent and feeble, his knees shook, his 
hands trembled. He refused to eat, and he 
bade me darken the curtain of the doorway. 

Everyone I met assumed a saddened 
face, but I saw that all eyes stole imper- 
ceptibly to where Gains stood, silent and ob- 
sequious, by the head of the couch. Con- 
spicuous among the sympathisers was Livilla, 
the widow whose hand Sejanus had claimed, 
not, aa it was supposed, without the consent 
of this woman, who, known to be licentious 
beyond even the Roman ladies of the day, 
was accused by public rumour of the death 
of her husband, and of an intrigue with the 
favourite who sought her alliance. 

" Oh, the gods, my life and soul!" she 
sobbed, in a false and wanton voice, " I vow to 



THE madman's NOYEL. 119 

raise an image to Jupiter the preserver, if 
but Atropos holds her cruel hand." 

*' If she'd spare her vows," said a rough 
Roman, who was in the body-guard, "and 
hold her tongue, the great Caesar might 
keep cooler, and cheat the three sisters yet. 
Why, now, this is what I say, friend Gehazi, 
— how can a man face a shoal of German darts, 
and yet be crammed into his urn by a mere 
blast of a fever not hotter than the sirocco. 
I tell you what " — and here he whispered — 
" I believe it's all a trap — take care you 
don't put your foot in it. The old weasel's 
too much for us, he has got his eye on us, 
rU bet a shekel." 

Before I could express my astonishment 
at my old friend's caution he was gone, and I 
heard his lusty voice soon afterwards chal- 
lenging the sentinels on their rounds. The Em- 
peror had already partly verified his suspicions, 
by petulantly pushing Livilla from him, and 
calling for supper to be served in the open 
court. 



120 ICE BOUND. 

" My pulse goes somewhat slower/' he said, 
turning to me ; ^^ but there is a black weight 
still at my heart, that nothing but blood- 
letting will remove/' 

111 or not the Emperor ate largely of eggs, 
salad, and Calabrian hams, ending with a 
dish of goose liver and truffle sauce, Nea- 
politan chestnuts and pomegranates from 
Sorrentum and the gardens of the temple 
of Minerva. 

A single pigeon circling round the court- 
yard, he suddenly called for a Thracian fal- 
coner, who practised the hawking of his country 
for CflBsar's amusement. The Greek came 
smiling, and running, and threw up his hawk. 

" By Hercules, what a bh-d ! " said Tibe- 
rius. " Look, Caius — ^now he mounts, mounts 1 
— now he swoops ! Dead ! for a mina ! — dead, 
and at my very feet ! Grant it an omen, thou 
Nemesis of Latium I What here ? — a scrap of 
papyrus under the left wing, and writing — 
ah! yes! and from- '' and he slipped it in 
his robe. 



THE madman's NOYEL. 121 

" Jew," he said to me, drawing me aside, 
" I love thy nation and honour thy God, to 
whom I have vowed a temple ; I hold thee 
indeed as one of the nearest and dearest to my 
heart. The King of Rome will be here soon, 
and I most be abed. Tell the slaves I am 
sick to death, and hush the singing of the 
spinning-wheels ; quiet, too, at once the noisy 
dice-players in the vestibule, and that cursed 
Syren who wearies me with lib double pipe. 
Follow me; for if this arrow misses, I must 
take to my catapult, and my war engines." 

As I left the Emperor, to publish to the 
slaves and courtiers (synonymous terms), the 
sickness of their chief, I heard the rattle of 
the wheels of a Biga, and the next moment a 
stranger entered, of proud and imperious bear- 
ing, lackeyed by a dozen running couriers, who 
tripped at his heels, watching for a gesture of 
his eye or hand. He was in the prime of life, 
and a crisp black beard curled round his low 
chm. His face was handsome, but for two 
dark stealthy eyes, that seemed never to 



122 ICE BOUND. 

regard you in full front, but to watch for you 
under the ambuscade of the lowering eye-brow. 
He wore a Spanish cuirass, richly chased and 
ornamented at the shoulders with bosses of 
lions' heads ; from his waist hung scales and 
flaps, terminating in Medusas. His legs 
were bare, but on his feet were richly orna- 
mented buskins, of a costly fashion. From his 
shoulder hung a military sagum, of scarlet 
Gallic cloth ; his sword was the short 
and heavy one of the Roman legionary. 

In my hurry I ran against him, and he 
called out — "What! a Jew in the palace? 
Give him a dozen stripes for daring to thrust 
himself in the way of a Eoman patrician. 
No, fellow, not now — unbind him, for my 
lord and master is, I hear, ill, and knows not 
of my coming. Softly, for perchance Caesar 
sleeps, or is busy with the lawyers about 
weighty matters of the state." 

"My Lord Tiberius," I said, "does not 
sleep, but is very sick, and will not that 
any intrude. May I crave your name, sir? " 



THE madman's noyel. 123 

''I am Sejanus," said the favourite, proudly 
drawing himself to his height, and dropping 
his cloak into the hands of a Sygambrian 
slave ; as he spoke, he tossed up the curtain 
that covered the door, and entered the pre- 
sence with me. 

" Sejanus ? " said the sick Emperor, in a 
weak voice, but still with affected surprise and 
indignation, "what brings you from Rome, 
against my special wish, without announce- 
ment, and without the usual ceremony that 
befits a palace ? " 

" A motive, Tiberius," said the wily favour- 
ite, flinging himself with affected devotion at 
the foot of the couch, and seizing the old man's 
languid hand that hung from the coverlet 
— " that has redeemed so many of my pre- 
vious errors — one that makes the father forgive 
the prodigal, and the wife the spendthrift — 
love; a fear that something went ill at Capreae, 
and that Jove, jealous of such a friendship as 
ours, was forging some weapon to cut the soft 
silken cords that unite our twin minds." 



124 ICE BOUND. 

" No thought, then, of the old man's death," 
said Tiberius, watching with careful dissimu- 
lation the countenance of his minister — ^^ no 
dreams of power, no visions of guilty sue- 
' cession to the throne of the divine Augustus ? " 

Again Sejanus expressed his disinterested 
and passionate love for one whom he desired 
not to survive. Might Jove, he said, ordain 
them a common funeral pile, he should die 
happy if he knew that — one small urn should 
hold the mingled ashes of Tiberius and Sejanus. 

" I restore thee to my heart," said Tibe- 
rius, coughing with the air of a dying man ; 
"but lend me thy hand, -Slius, that I may 
rise awhile — ^rest a moment; tell me whose 
handwriting this papyrus bears ? " 

" It is a forgery ! " exclaimed the discom- 
fited favourite, turning pale. 

"And this, too," said Tiberius, drawing 
another from his girdle, " which I intercepted 
yesterday at the same hour." 

" Bribe an augur to warn him of Rome ! * 
— (Sejanus read the paper.) 



THE madman's noyel. 125 

" Now, look," said the Emperor, leaping up 
iD full strength, and snatching an axe from 
the foot of his bed. Sejanus instinctively 
put his hand to his sword. 

" Do not fear, ^lius, but see the old man 
has some life still,*' and with a single 
blow of his axe he clove in two a massy 
citron table which stood near. With his left 
hand -he then snatched up a silver cup that 
lay on a table near him, and squeezed it to- 
gether with a grip, the force of which had be- 
come proverbial. 

" My Lord Caesar, I thank the gods to see 
your Herculean strength is not a whit abated. 
As for these letters, they are but the work of 
spies that use my name. Were I but one mo- 
ment alone with you, I could convince you 
of the plots of my enemies, and of my own 
unabated truth." 

With a wave of his hand Tiberius cleared 
the room, and the halls were soon filled with 
a huge crowd of whisperers engaged in fore-^ 
telling the favourite's downfalL It was m- 



126 ICE BOUND. 

moured that the Emperor had always had sus- 
picions of his loyalty ; that once at a sacrifice 
he had handed him a leaden instead of a steel 
knife, and that the way in which he leant on 
his minister's arm when they met was only to 
prevent the possibility of Sej anus's drawing a 
concealed weapon. All sorts of foolish prophe- 
cies and auguries were hinted. One serious- 
looking fanatic vowed that the lower part of 
the last victim's liver was folded inwards. 

Others declared that the. Emperor was 
about to immediately start for Rome, having 
taken the consulate from Sejanus. Some of 
the more experienced courtiers, with sour faces, 
entreating for silence, professed. to be able to 
ascertain exactly what was happening from the 
sound of the distant murmurs of the two voices 
in the small apartment branching from the 
hall where the Emperor and Sejanus now sat. 

"Now," they said, "he demands his be- 
trothed wife, Livilla, and the Emperor refuses 
him, for fear of increasing the popular jea- 
lousies against him. Now Tiberius declares 



THE madman's noyel. 127 

his intention of going to Borne, and Sejanus 
warns him of plots and many dangers. Now 
the buzz is higher and more angry — ^the Em- 
peror tells him he is too proud and insolent, 
and requires a curb ; that not content with 
greatness, he must needs ally himself to the 
blood of the Caesars. Now Sejanus offers to 
surrender all his titles, and to return as plain 
freedman to serve at the Emperor's table. The 
Emperor, indignant at his pride, now orders 
him into exile — into the fever-haunted Sar- 
dinia, where he canH live a twelvemonth." 

Every now and then, at the summons of 
the imperial voice, an order was sent for a 
trireme to be instantly equipped, for an escort 
of guards, for a litter to be prepared for 
Rome. By the next messenger each order 
was countermanded. The Emperor seemed 
distracted by the multifarious procrasti- 
nations; once we heard a sword flung vio- 
lently on the floor, and the next moment a 
bronze seat thrown down, but none dared to 
disturb the conference. Then came passion- 



128 ICE BOUND. 

ate expostulations^ angry questions, and lastly 
long dialogues of familiar conversation. 

The last message of Tiberius had brought up 
two quaternions of soldiers. The enemies of 
the favourite believed his doom was sealed; 
but suddenly the curtain drew up, and the 
Emperor appeared, smiling and talking, leaning 
on the arm of his favourite. 

" Farewell,'' he said, " thou one-half of my 
life, may the gods of Eome guard thee and 
reward thee as thou hast deserved." 

With a low and Oriental obeisance Sejanus 
bent and kissed the Emperor's hand; then 
strode out slowly, exchanging smiles with his 
friends, and frowns with any malign eye that 
met his. 

" Friend," said Tiberius to me that night, 
as we read the love verses of Gallus together ; 
" you must hence to Rome for me, and Macro 
with thee. When men oflFer a bull to Neptune, 
they need one to wield the axe and one to 
hold the rope." 

He is always talking of victims, this Caesar, 



THE madman's novel. 129 

I thought ; but I shrugged my shoulders and 
bent my head in silence as I girded my robe. 

"Thy nation is curious in poisons," said 
Macro to me, as we rode together that night ; 
" so the Emperor tells me ; he says thou hast 
a drug that will kill a kid in five minutes, 
which may aid the work." 

"What work?" I said, with an air of 
surprise. 

"What 'work?" he said, turning a quick 
eye upon me, with an expression first of 
annoyance, then of wonder, which melted into 
a grim smile. " I have hitherto thought the 
Jews a wise people," he said, as he turned 
his head and looked towards Kome. 

« • • • # 

. It was morning when we entered the gate 
of the city of Romulus. The seven hills were 
diademed with marble palaces, which were as 
crowns ; the gardens lay like strings of jewels 
round an empress's neck 

Already the defiles of the Suburra and 
Yelabrum, the poorer parts of Bome, the ox 

TOL.I. K 



130 ICE BOUND. 

market and the via lata, were crowded with 
slaves, carrying strigils (scrapers) and per- 
fumes to the baths, brawny gladiators hurry- 
ing with their oil flasks and wooden swords 
to the fencing schools, and boys going to school 
with slaves behind them to carry their satchels. 
Here came a crowd of Syrians with chalked 
feet being led to the slave market, here a 
band of Cappadocian porters swinging along 
with a knight's gilded litter. Huge waggons 
of Alban stone and Libyan grain thronged 
the streets, that were so narrow that the in- 
habitants might have shaken hands together 
from the top windows of the eighth story. 
The suburb taverns beside the Tiber were 
full of noisy^ sailors, thieves, runaway slaves, 
and coffin makers, all talking of Sejanus, 
his return in triumph from Capri, and his 
anticipated appointment to the tribunate, in 
anticipation of the succession. I heard a 
drunken priest of Cybele singing his 
praises to a crowd of the rabble, who were 
discussing their bread and strong wine on a 



THE madman's novel. 131 

tavem bench. "MsBcenas!'* said one, "why, 
he wasn't fit to pour out his wine. He gives 
us games, doesn't he, he gives us bread — 
and he hates the cursed Jews, doesn't he? 
Very well then." 

As we rode deeper into the city, its vast- 
ness awed and astonished me. These count- 
less temples contained the treasure of the 
world. This was built with the spoil of 
Parthia, that with the gold of Spain. " Here 
Scipio trod," said my delighted guide — de- 
lighted with my honest admiration — " and here 
Curtius leaped. Up that hill Caesar climbed, 
crowned with laurel, and yonder in that hall 
he fell. The Forum, with its temples and ba- 
silicas — the Campus Martins, with its theatres 
and circus — the Pincian Hill, with its gardens 
of Sallust and Lucullus — ^the yellow Tiber itself 
that lay before me — ^the Palatine, the Esquiline, 
the Viminal, the Coelian, the Aventine, were all 
soon familiar to me as the hills around Jeru- 
salem. 

The riches of the open booths and shops 

k2 



132 ICE BOUND. 

astonished me even more. There were the costly 
Murrhine cups, and those of onyx and amber ; 
ostrich eggs mounted in gold, and studded 
with gems ; couches of ivory, inlaid with tor- 
toise-shell, were in the stalls of the Corinthian 
silversniiths ; in the sculptor's shed Greek 
artificers toiled to rival or imitate the works 
of Scopas and Myron, Phidias, and Praxi- 
teles. Next door, perhaps, might be a fruit- 
erer's, with huge golden globes of melons 
hanging at the door, or speckled monsters of 
gourds, rolling under the window. There 
were Venafrian olives, Chian figs, and the 
leeks of Tarentum. 

Presently we passed a Moorish cook, his 
glassy dark features set off by a snowy turban, 
who was carrying home, in small leaden tanks, 
slung by a pole to his neck, the black fish 
of Egypt, or the Sicilian lampreys ; round his 
girdle were slung bundles of fog peckers, or 
ortolans ; and a boy carrying an immense 
Sabine cheese, ran before him. In this 
shop hung bladder lanterns, wax lights, 



THE madman's novel. 133 

and torches^ and in another were Memphian 
reeds, pen-cases, and piles of plaited papyrus, 
ready for the author's use. Now came by a 
patrician in robes of the light Greek fashion, 
followed by a slave carrying an umbrella to 
shield his precious complexion from the sun. 
Now we passed a vintner's, who boasted on 
his sign of having some ninety sorts of wine, 
from Sebine and Falemian, Caecuban and Sor- 
rentine, down to vulgar Sabine, and honest 
Egyptian vinegar. Now through the crowd of 
swaggering soldiers, Spanish dancbg girls, 
Egyptian priests, begging Jews, Syrian 
snake charmers, the poor clients going for 
their morning dole, the Libyan courier-boys, 
and Cappadocian porters, loads of building ma- 
terials, and swaying timbers, groaned a waggon 
laden with Iberian wool, or bales of Indian 
fitinkincense and Babylonian hangings. In 
the market-place and round the fountains 
lolled itinerant hucksters, selling hot sausages 
and stewed vetches, while Spanish showmen 



134: ICE BOUND. 

and Arab jugglers divided with them the 
attention of the crowd. 

One sign invited attention to Picentine 
loaves; another to the now less renowned 
Gantabrian hams, Lucanian sausages, and 
Luna cheese. At this stall were the well- 
known painted baskets for which Britain was 
famous; and here were slung up Spanish 
shields and Thracian bucklers, spears, Assy- 
rian poniards, and the bipennis of GauL 
Here I saw a showman exhibiting an ape, at 
which he allowed any spectator to fling a 
lance, amusing the mob by the nimble evasions 
of the animal. Next him, perhaps, shouted a 
rope-dancer or a reciter of tragic verses. 

" And what think you of the great CaBsar,'' 
said Macro, looking away, as if inadvertently, 
as he spoke. I, knowing the wiliness of the 
man, to whom the most secret services of the 
Emperor were ever intrusted, and who even 
now looked to the world but a mere bluff sol- 
dier, riding on a careless search for pleasure^ 
though I knew him bound on some special 



THE madman's novel. 135 

dangerous errand of state, did not reply at 
once, but, after a few minutes, answered with 
some monosyllables meaning nothing. 

"A shrewd man," said Macro, eyeing me 
significantly, ^^ learns as much from silence as 
from speech. No answer could convey 
so much to me as your silence; I begin to 
think you really honest. Why, Tiberius, or 
old ScsBVola, or that smiling fool Piso, would 
have met me, ere I had finished my sentence, 
with a dozen scraps of rhetoric, full of admi- 
ration for the divinity of Capri. His wisdom 
they would have compared to Jove's, his poetry 
to Apollo's, and his skill in governing to 
Agamemnon's ; but between men of the world 
why this artifice ? — we know whom we serve, 
and what we came to do — and " (ringing his 
sword, as he spoke, with a clash into 
his scabbard) ^Met us do it hand in hand, 
and without any Grecian shuffling. Mars 
knows I am ready enough to brave the 
lightning alone ; but if Ca&sar will send us out 
as spies on each other, why, so be it ; for you 



136 ICE BOUND. 

see I am blant^ though I am a courtier, worse 
luck; but still, between ourselves, let me 
tell you, I think our task about as dan- 
gerous as that of the German brave, who, to 
show his courage, rides into the sea, and 
slashes with his sword at the leaping 
breakers." 

*^ What task ? " I said — ^for I knew of no mis- 
sion of mine to Eome, save that I was to be en- 
rolled into the household of the favourite, my 
introduction to whom had been so ill-omened. 
Homeless and houseless as I was, and with 
the weight of the curse at my heart, I cared 
not where I went, and my life was passing 
before my eyes like a dream. 

" What task ! '* he said, with a violence 
that astonished me. "Does the priest not 
know the ox he has to strike when a creature is 
led in with gilded horns and a garland round 
its neck? What task! do you think, Jew, 
that this shallow pretence is to deceive an old 
soldier in this warfare of wits ? Does 
the engineer know what is meant against the 



THE madman's novel. 137 

city when the earthwalls are thrown up ; the 
sUngers begin to melt the lead, and the tortoise- 
man to wheel the ram and join the shield. 
I wish I had had some bolder man though, 
as Junius, who rides in at once on the spears^ 
and flings his helmet in the German's face. 
Though I am an old courtier, I like bold 
open counsel in these dangerous affairs. Keep 
the smile on the face, and the knife in the 
sleeve for every-day work." 

" Why do you smile ? " I said, for I saw 
him then looking at my saddle-bow, where 
the leather-bag hung that contained the more 
precious of my medicines. 

"Laugh — only to think that this sober- 
visaged man, sly as a flamen or a Syrian 
eunuch, carries at his saddle stuff that would 
turn a king blue in an hour, and kill a kid in 
three minutes. Behold, I feel ready to cry out, 
comes one who brings to Eome opiates that will 
give the old man the sleep the young man prays 
for — that will give rest to love, anger, envy, 



138 ICE BOUND. 

and even ambition. You turn quack, and I'll 
be your mime." 

" I am a physician, and not a poisoner," I 
exclaimed, angrily, spurring my tired horse ; 
'^ and I come as Jehovah's minister alone, to 
comfort and to soothe — ^to bring rest to the 
great, and forgetfulness of sorrow to the 
afflicted." 

" Eest to the great ! " cried Macro ; "yes, 
very true," and he laughed grimly, and 
brushed the red feather of his helmet. 

" Oh, the sly Jew," I heard him mutter, as 
he asked the way to an inn in a retired 
part of the Transtiberine quarter, near the 
Temple of Fortune. 

*^What do you?" I said, as he suddenly 
leapt off his horse, thrust the bridle into 
my hand, and ran into the open temple. 

"Just one prayer for success," he said, as 
he returned ; " I thought, too, the silver eyes 
of the goddess shone on me propitiously. 
Was that thunder on our right hand not a 
good omen?" 



THE madman's novel. 139 

" Success in what?*' I exclaimed, anxiously. 

He did not answer me, but rode furiously 
on, and never turned his head. 

"Too late to-night — to-morrow for the 
work — I sup with Sejanus at the fifth hour 
— and which is the poison for the bird?'' 
he exclaimed, with affected innocence and a 
meaning smile, as he handled my various 
packages. 

I made no answer ; but, surpri^d at his 
importunity, pushed him a harmless powder, 
the basis of a cosmetic well known to the 
beauties of Judea. 

" Is this for the cup or the dish ?" be said, 
eyeing me closely. 

"For neither,'' I replied, rising from my 
seat. " Understand me, Macro, I am a Jew, 
and understand not these black deeds ; I would 
do harm to none, the very fly I drive from my 
wine cup ere he drink. J will meddle in 
none of these dark crimes. I will not be 
a courtier's tooL" 

"And you received no commission from 



140 IGEfiOUND. 

Tiberius?" said Macro, fastening his clOak 
with angry haste. 

"None," said I; "he merely touched my 
medicine case and said, *Eid me, then, of this 
gnawing pain, and hold me thy debtorfor ever.'" 

"And call you that nothing; do you ex- 
pect Caesar to speak plainer ? " 

"Nothing," I said, 

"Then thou art either as wily as Ulysses 
himself, or the poorest guU that ever mixed 
up chalk and water," said Macro. 

Exchanging no more words, I soon after 
fell asleep. It was the fourth hour of the 
ensuing day ere I awoke, and with that 
drowsy numbness about me that proved to me 
that I had partaken of some narcotic. 

I asked the busy landlord for Macro — he 
had gone out with a slave, who had brought 
him a gay banqueting dress full two hours 
since — soldiers ef rank and senators had 
been, he said, all the morning in his room. 
I looked round the place for my medicine- 
chest, for some remedy for a sickness that 



THE MIDMAN's novel. 141 

beset me. I examined my packets, and foond 
a poison, which I kept apart, in a secret 
pocket of a case, gone! 

No time was to be lost ; so drinking off 
a cup of vile myrrhed wine, I asked for the 
palace of Sejanus ; a flat-nosed, thick-lipped 
boxer, who was reading a notice of games 
in the Circus, stared at my eagerness. 

"Sejanus's?" he said; "why, there away, 
that marble mountain there by the gardens 
of Maecenas, to the right of the Pincian, on 
the Esquiline." 

I girded up my robe and ran ; the crowd 
I jostled thought me a runner exercising — an 
angry centurion struck at me with his vine 
stick — ^ome brawny fair-haired German slaves 
tried to trip me up — I ran against a fat 
priest of Isis, and soiled his white linen robes 
•—I shook the litter of some old republican 
patrician, and his slaves chased me through 
narrow lanes, across market-places, up hill, 
past hovel, shop, palace, temple, foun- 
tain, right through the Campus and its 



142 ICE BOUND. 

Egjrptian obelisk and golden sun^ up to the 
Esquiline. 

At the door a slave I jostled seized me by 
the arm. 

" What ! not know me/' he said, " not the 
snake-charmer, who baffled Lazarus at the 
Red Sea — not the courier of Sejanus, who 
can drive six wild horses, run down a wild 
deer, and throw a knife to a hair's breadth ? " 

I seized the opportunity. '^ Here are fifty 
pieces of silver,*' I said. 

"So I see; and very good silver too. 
What shall I do for this? — ^you can get 
a father removed, or a troublesome wife 
quieted.'* 

" No fooling, slave," I said ; " lend me a 
waiting-dress, and let me visit the banquet. 
Let me stand at the door with a fowl, or 
carry the amphoras fi'om the cellar — any- 
thing, so I see the guests and this great 
lord of Rome.*' 

"Lord indeed !*' said the quondam juggler, 
with a grin. " Here he is consul and priest^ 



THE madman's novel. 143 

sending whom be likes to the dogs, feeding both 
the asses of Eome, and the lions that amuse 
them. And now comes Macro with a message 
that Tiberias must needs make him Tribune. 
Talk of Mars and Venus — ^here is the god to 
worship ! But what brings you here ? Is 
Jerusalem grown too healthy or too wise for 
your trade ? or have you killed them half, and 
left the rest dying? — eh, man? And what 
trick is this? But still, for fifty pieces of 
silver a man can do anything — even get a 
courier to hold his tongue/' 

I shall never forget the sight when, properly 
.disguised, and bearing a huge chased silver 
dish for mixing wine, I entered the banquet- 
room of the favourite. On couches round a 
centre table, which was covered with an Eas- 
tern embroidered cloth worked with gold 
thread, sat twelve guests, dressed to represent 
the chief deities of Olympus. Sejanus — for 
I recognized him at once — ^sat as Jove, with 
a gold thunderbolt in his hand, and a tame 
eagle chained at his feet^ his hair arranged in 



144 ICEBOUND. 

the Phidian fashion. By his right side sat a 
broad-chested noble aping Neptune, with his 
trident and a robe clasped with a small gold 
dolphin ; and on the left reclined Macro, fully 
armed as Mars, and shining in the light of the 
bronze candelabra, which were formed of rings 
of dancing Cupids. The hangings of the walls 
were Indian silks, wrought with golden stars 
and badges of flowers ; and from the roof came 
every now and then, through subtle apertures, 
delicious mists of perfumes, while the smoke 
of incense crept in at the ivory doors. 

Occasionally the richest dishes were handed 
round, and cut up by the dave-carver with 
extraordinary skill and extreme speed — Nn- 
midian attagens, Sicilian lampreys, and wild 
boar from the Pontine Marshes— all faded 
away before his keen and swift blade. The 
guests laughed and joked at the mimic's ges- 
tures, the fool's rants, and the graceful gam* 
bols of the Spanish dandng-girls, who floated 
in the air, or twined and bounded in mazy 
fantasies, which the eye could scarcely follow. 



THE madman's noyel. 145 

Bat the jester was the real centre of mirth. He 
ran from couch to conchy balancing goblets on 
his finger^ or tripping up the boys who bore 
golden bowls^ chased with reliefs, from the 
hands of the rarest sculptors of that Corinth 
that Mummius destroyed. 

" What are you looking for," said Sejanus, 
^* in the. wine-jug ? Has a scorpion fallen in ? 
—or have you found the wit that I lost there 
in yesterday's caBua at the villa of Lucullus ? " 

" Neither, my lord," said the buflfoon ; " but 
I look for truth ; for the proverb says there is 
truth in wine. This is the second amphora 
I have emptied looking for it, and all I find 
is,, that the more I drink the more lies I tell, 
and the worse I see." 

"Never go to Savenna, then," said Se- 
janus. 

*^And why not?" said a guest. "I de- 
mand^ Jupiter, your excellent reason." 

"Because at Bavenna they sell the water 
and give the wine. Now, a riddle for the 
twelve gods— one that will make lame Yulcan 

VOL. I. L 



146 ICBBOUHD. 

throw aiYay his crutcheS; and Pluto laugh till 
he drops his sceptre. Why has the land of 
the Chauci no carpenter^ ? '' 

<^We give it up/' shouted the ten gods, 
impatient of thought. 

'^ Whj, because the land of the Chauci has 
no wood." 

" What news from the island of Do-littles ?'^ 
said one of the guests. 

" Why, none — ^but the people of Patmos, 
who are all blind, have, I hear, chosen a 
one-eyed king." 

At this sally the twelve gods laughed, and 
then, as if laughing made them thirsty, called 
for wine. At once a dozen red arches of wine 
frothed into their cups, and i^ain the perfumes 
fell and the incense rose. 

^^ If CsBsar became divine because he slew 
some thousand Britons, and such cattle, why 
should not Milo the gladiator be made Con- 
sul ? " said the jester. " Now, come, knight, 
answer me that, or I shall deem you not 
worthy of your three names. And tell me 



THE madman's novel. 147 

this : — If every Caesar's to give a name to a 
months like Julias and Augustus, what is to 
be done with the thirteenth Emperor? '' 

"May the gods confound me, Sejanus," 
cried one of the Olympian deities, whose voice 
was rather thick with wine, "but this jester 
of yours gets more libellous every day !" 

" Why is not Varo here ? " said another, on 
his right hand, arranging his garland of vio- 
lets as he spoke. 

" Varo," said Sejanus, with a calm voice, 
" bled himself to death yesterday, in his bath, 
by the orders of our good Lord Tiberius, 
which' I had the honour of forwarding to him. 
A brave Soman and a good citizen — ^he first 
made his will, then offered up a prayer, and 
retired with the lictors to die." 

" What, Varo ! " said one-r-" why, we met 
yesterday at the Treasury, and he offered me 
a million sesterces for my pretty dancing- 
girl ; and I met him afterwards at the Mint, 
and promised to send him a dish of carp 
from my own tank." 

l2 



148 ICE BOUND. 

^^ What was his crime ? '' said the jester — 
^^ was he too rich, or had he too many clients 
walking at his heels ? '' 

^^ Take away this fool and give him the 
whip," said Sejanus, angrily; "he grows inso- 
lent." The next moment the screams of the 
miserable slave were heard above the laughter 
of the guests, but no one pleaded in his be- 
half. With all his virtues, the Boman was 
ever cruel. 

"A toast 1 " cried Macro ; " let us throw the 
die for the first to give it round. Who 
throws Venus ? I always throw the dog — 
curse on it. Venus, by gad I — ^the great 
Sejanus, favoured of the gods and man, has 
it. Were I so lucky, I should throw away 
something, like Folycrates, to propitiate the 
envious Nemesis." 

"I was born for perpetual summer, 
Macro," said the favourite — "now, seven cups 
to the lady that I love." 

As they filled their cups, I observed Macro 
shake a powder from his sleeve into his cup. 



THE MADMA!)'S NOVEL. 149 

As the hands were raising the cups for the 
toast, he called, I observed, for a drier wine ; 
but kept beside him the deadly mixture he 
had prepared for a fittifig occasion. I placed 
myself behind a pillar, close to his side, ready 
to save the great Soman from the death of which 
I seemed about to be the unconscious cause. 

" What is your opinion of the last love 
verses of Symmachus?" said Sejanus to a 
critic who was waiting, in some anxiety, for 
the opportunity of destroying some reputation. 

" Mere frizzled ringlets I " he said, super- 
ciliously, and waiting for the laugh that fol- 
lowed his blow. 

"Have you read the last elegy of Di- 
norius ? '' 

"He steeps his verse in myrrh and un- 
guents," said the same remorseless judge. , 

" By-the-bye," said a fop, who had been also 
burning to show his wit, "did you hear the 
reply of Phcsbe to her husband when she en- 
tered the theatre with a crowd of us young 
fellows at her heels, and at the same time her 



150 ICE BOUND. 

mother-in-law came into the next seat with a 
train of only some half-dozen poor grammarians. 
No ? Why, she said, * These young men will 
grow old with me ! ' Cursed clever hit at the 
old bird—" 

^^She has a smile," said Sejanus, ^Hhat 
would soften a usurer. I heard her the 
other day at the Circus, when her father, the 
old republican, complained that she came 
covered with all the pearls of a Syrian king, 
that she dressed so to please her husband. 
The next day she came in plam violet ; and, 
when he seemed pleased, she said that she 
dressed so to please her father. By Juno, I 
would give my bronze Cupid but to kiss her 
hand." 

"Forty-five thousand knights died at 
CannaB, yet I would rather have been one of 
those than have fallen on my sword, in a 
fright," said a morose-looking man, abruptly. 

" What do you mean, Balbus ? " 

" Mean ! why, our old friend Scaums last 
night offered himself as a sacrifice^ because 



THE madman's novel. 151 

the lictors knocked at Us gate to invite him 
to this very caena." 

" And you knew nothing of this, Sejanus ? " 

"Not a word, upon my conscience I " replied 
the favourite, striking his heart, a suspicious 
rattle at the same time indicating that he 
wore a breastplate under his festive gown. 

"Your conscience sounds somewhat hoU 
low," sjud the satirist ; " but I believe you, 
for I know Scaurus stood a little in your way. 
Now, did he not ? Be frank." 

"As much," said the &vourite, proudly, 
"as the worm does in the ploughman's. 
The fool who died of a knock at the door was 
BO very formidable foe." 
. " I am glad, verily," said the critic, " that 
the fellow made at least one good use of his 
sword, for he was of a rank Fompeian family, 
though he was allied to the Aurelii. His 
wife's brother married one of the CamiUi." 

" I never trouble myself about a scorpion's 
grandfather," said the wit, smiling on his host, 
whom he wished to propitiate. 



152 ICB BOUND. 

" Verus is right/' said Sejanus; " let's talk 
of love and wine — ^no matter if there is one 
urn more in the tomb of the Scauri. Some 
has still sons enough. Nor can I think Rome 
has any right to mourn while I see around 
me such sages^ warriors, and philosophers. 

^^JBEear himT' said Macro, under breath to 
a companion. Sages — what! Messala, who 
hires witches to draw the moon down into his 
garden — warriors I old Donatus, who thinks 
he deserves a triumphal arch because he put 
down a bread riot at Lugdiinum — philoso- 
pher! young Gallus, who studies the laws of 
motion in dancing-^ls and race-horses." 

This was said while the air was ringing 
with the flatterer'is cries of "pulchre!" and 
*'bene!" (bravo). 

^^ Macro/' cried the host, his face radiant 
with pleasure, "your cup stands full — ^now, five 
cups of CsBcuban to the health of Phoebe, the 
pretty widow of the Aventme." 

"Widow!" said Macro. 

" Yes ! her husband died last night at the 



THE madman's novel. 153 

fourth hour/' said Sejanus, quietly, ^^ of disease 
of the heart ; an hour before he had been busy 
in the Temple of Concord and at the Segister 
Office." 

^^ Sudden deaths increase/' said Macro, 
meaningly^ and stirring up the powder in the 
wine with a rose-stalk from the garland he 
wore. 

I think he was just about to kiss the cup, and 
recommend it to his frowning host as a peace- 
offering, when a stout man, very hot and 
anxious, ran in, and without ceremony handed 
a letter to Sejanus. 

*^ Junius Marciusy are you acquainted with 
the new work of Domitius Marsus on 
urbanity ?" said Sejanus, smiling, and offering 
the new comer a seat on his couch. 

" I don't know what you mean," sidd Marcius. 
^ I come from the baths of Agrippa, and meet 
Prsetorian guards ; I go to the arcades, and 
meet soldiers ; I walk to the portico of the 
Graces, and meet soldiers." 

'^ There are rumours of riots about the new 
prices at the theatre," said Sejanus; ^* and I 



154 ICE BOUND. 

am unexpectedly called to a meeting ot 
the senate in the temple of the Capitol ; I 
must stop these riots^ and these " 

^^I pass the cup of peace/' said Macro, 
rising and presenting it to his host^ whom he 
regarded fixedly, and I thought with an 
almost imperceptible smile of triumph. 

Sejanus took it, and was about to raise it 
to his lips with some commonplace on the 
blessings of friendship, when I rushed for^ 
ward and threw the cup to the ground. 

^^ It is poison I" I cried ; ^^ see the dog that 
sniffed those drops that fell upon the door-post 
is already pining and faint ; in three minutes 
he will be deadl" 

" Who is this slave?*' cried Macro, drawing 
his sword, and calling for his sandals; what 
runaway from the galleys has come here to 
insult the nobles of Eome — who . art thou, 
rascal?" he said, seizing ine by the throat. 

^^ I am Gehazi, the physician of Jerusalem," 
— afresh from Capri — I would have said, but 
the next instant I felt Macro thrust a handful 



THE MADMAN*S NOVEL. 155 

of his sleeve into my mouth. ''Another 
word," he said, *^ and I stab thee where now 
thou standest.'' 

" Let the fellow alone," said Sejanus, with 
a generosity I thought peculiar to him. 
'' There may be something in what he says. 
Loo^, the dog is dead! Lydia, thou wert the 
best Molossian that ever pulled down a boar 
in the rushes. There has been some cursed 
tampering with the wine, but the slaves shall 
answer for it. Bibo, order three crosses for 
to-morrow morning; and first goes up that 
sly Syrian I bought at Ehodes, for I know 
he dabbles in cosmetics, and such men learn 
dangerous secrets — ^he may tell them charms, 
to make them give him a passage firee. Macro, 
a word. The character of the man who 
governed Laodicea so well is above reproach. 
We all know how many statues the wool- 
sellers of that city have erected to the honour 
of Priscus Macro." 

I saw Macro's eyes flash fire at this irony, 
for there had lately been a riot at Laodicea 



156^ ICE BOUND. 

to pull down a statue set up by a hireling 
to his honour. 

"No, not yet/' said the insolent noble, 
seeing that Macro was about to hurry off his 
festive robe and leave the room, the veins on 
his forehead swelling with rage, and his hand 
opening and closing as if in search of a 
weapon. 

"Not yet, good Macro, for I purpose to 
let Bathyllus, my favourite mimic, furnish 
us some new and more exquisite amusement 
before we break up for the senate; before 
the wine grows stale, the lights turn dim, 
and the perfume grows vapid. Bathyl- 
lus," he said, to the mimic, who was gesticu- 
lating in a corner with one of the musicians, 
" give us your last imitation of that great 
rhetorician of the Basilicas." 

As every face grew settled into a demea- 
nour of attention, and every voice hushed 
its slander, praise, sneer, and jest, Bathyllus 
stepped forward, and, wrapping himself in a 
toga of the severest anti-imperial cut, com- 



THE madman's novel. 157 

menced a declamation in the manner and 
with the voice of Macro. The clever low 
comedian of the Soman stage, with his droll 
eye and twisted mouth, imitated with ridi- 
culoos gravity the severity of the courtier's 
manner — so many words and the right hand 
up, so many and the left hand went up, so 
many and the right foot went forward, so 
many and the left foot went forward — so 
many inches from ihe robe the right hand 
was to be fixed, and so many inches the 
left. As every eye turned on Macro, and 
every mouth relaxed with a smile, I thought 
I never saw a proud man suffer so much as 
Macro; I saw that his long habit of re- 
serve enabled him to conceal his rage, and 
in some degree to assume a painful ease ; but 
ever and anon a burning glance from under 
his brow at Sejanus betrayed the bitter re- 
cord that his revenge was laying up for these 
insults. 

At a universal burst of laughter at the 
crowning gestures of the mimic the assembly 



158 ICEBOUND. 

broke up ; some sprang up and called for their 
sandals, others tore off their garlands and 
flung them in a brazier that stood in a 
comer of the room, apparently ashamed of 
the temporary madness that had stolen away 
their senses — others, plimting them firmer on 
their heads, sallied forth arm-in-arm, as if 
proud of avowing themsdves the subjects of 
Bacchus. Some, not forgetful of religion, or 
at least willing to colour their debauch with a 
religious form, sprinkled their incense in the 
braziers, flung it up into the lamp flame, or 
emptied the last drop of their wine-cups, as a 
niggard libation to the gods who had loaded 
them with their gifts. 

I, mixing with the slaves, observed Macro 
thrust his sandals angrily on his feet, and 
strike the page who brought them ; then, 
pushing through the crowd, I heard him 
whisper in the ear of Sejanus — " A drop of 
blood for every jest." 

" Pooh, pooh ! my friend," said the favou- 
rite, turning sharply and regarding him 



THE madman's novel. 159 

fixedly in the face, with that cool smile of 
contempt that is so maddening to pride, 
^^ that wine the dog could not drink has 
got somewhat into your head ; the fumes will 
go off in the cool air ; and I owed you, too, 
a turn for your trouble in mixing that vintage. 
Adieu — ^we meet again anon in the senate." 

" Friends," he said, " let us go for half- 
an-hour to see a grapple in the amphitheatre 
of Metellus ; by that time the senate will 
have met ; the gods only know, friends, 
what bounties I shall lavish on the faithful 
and the true when I am once tribune, and 
havepower to switch down these flies that still 
vex us with their stings. As for you, Jew," 
he said, turning to me, ^^ I thank you for pre- 
serving my life. I enrol you at once in my 
service as Tiberius wished me ; and though I 
detest your nation, I present you with this 
gem as a mark of my gratitude." 

As he spoke he drew from his finger the 
splendid Grecian gem which served as Us 
dgnet, and thrust it into my hand. 



160 ICE BOUND. 

'^ No thanks/' he said ; ** I allow no thanks 
— what I give I give as Joye ^ves, wishing 
no return." 

" Behold a god !" cried a few of his para- 
siteSy and fell on one knee. 

By this time we had reached the amphi- 
theatre, and passed through the double colour 
nade, which was re-echoing with the roar and 
growl of wild beasts, the laughter and the earth- 
quake applause of 80,000 people. We received 
our tickets at the door, and mounted to our. re- 
spective wedges. The first glare of 160,000 
eyes astonished me ; for they were all bent, 
with gloating eagerness, on. the struggling 
swordsmen in the sandy arena below, which was 
already marked here and there with patches 
of dull red. Strict order reigned in this vast 
assemblage. There was the imperial pavilion, 
with its Indian hangings and purple canopy 
— on one side the vestals, saintly and demure, 
on. the other the senators and the knights. 
Here sat the past tribunes, praators, and 
other magistrates ; on the left the freedmen 



THE madman's novel. 161 

and ambassadors. Even the married and 
unmarried sat apart ; and the young men, 
noisy and enthusiastic, presented a strange 
contrast to their graver tutors, who sat behind 
them. In the third row were the women, with 
the rabble behind them ; and on the highest 
bench of all the servants of officers of state, 
and other favoured persons. An immense 
mast, rising in the centre of the circle, round 
which the shrieking, cursing, and furious com- 
batants drove each other, formed the support 
for a vast awning of striped canvas, which 
kept the fierce sun from the spectators, and 
threw a strange-coloured light on the thou- 
sands of eager faces. 

At intervals of the games, when a gashed body 
had just been dragged out by the slaves' hooks 
and ropes, or the down-turned thumbs had cast 
despair into the staggering gladiator, as he 
reeled, faint and giddy, supplicating mercy with 
a despairing andfilming eye — a sudden fountain 
of cool water, quickened by perfumes, threw 
a freshening gust into the heated air, and 

VOL. L M 



162 ICE BOUMD. 

awoke the smiles of the ladies, whose fans 
moTed like clusters of coloured flowers 
shaken hj the wind. A ro^ fence, and a 
railing with spikes and rolling limbers, guarded 
the lower seats, where Sejanus and the noblest 
of his adherents now placed themselves. The 
spring of no leopard, however fierce — ^the 
plunge of no lion, however savage— could 
there endanger the spectator, though it might 
drive him back pale and dismayed. 

When all these things grew clear to my 
eyes, and I could look fixedly down, I saw a 
procession of gladiators enter, two-and-two, to 
the blast of straight trumpets, and the impa- 
tient, fitful beat of drums ; there came some 
mounted — ^Moor and Greek, Syrian and Ger- 
man ; others on foot, matched in height and 
muscle — Sardinian and Fannonian, Gaul and 
Arab; some half naked, and others fully clad, in 
closed helmets, breastplate, and greaves ; the 
fishermen^ with their knotted nets stained with 
blood, and their deadly tridents — the pursuers 
with their short strong swords and long square 



THE madman's novel. 163 

shields, blazoned Tfith eagles and thunder- 
bolts. 

Smiling grimlj at the plaudits and mock 
cries of ^^Hahetr these fierce butchers rode 
and trampled round the ring, clenching their 
fists, or swaying their weapons ; a few rubbing 
their shining oiled limbs; othersfastening firmer 
the deadly cestuses, which covered their im- 
mense hands and arms ; some smiling at friends 
in the seats above them, beat the air to express 
their confidence in their hopes of victory ; others 
whispered in the ears of their antagonists, or 
felt the swelling muscles of their own arms. 

I saw, as my brain danced, blow and stab, 
tnd thrust and parry — ^I felt as in a dream, 
till an unusual stir in the amphitheatre be- 
low aroused my attention* 

In the centre of the sandy ring, covered 
with dusty sweat, and streaming with blood 
firom a chop in the shoulder, strode a young 
Greek slave, perfect in fi[)nD as an AebiUes, 
agile, symmetrical, and graceful as a young 
leopard* His beautiful &ce, though flushed, 



164 ICE BOUND. 

was calm, and bore an expression of winning 
frankness. He had already slain a huge black 
slave who had striven to entangle him with a 
nety and a Nabian horseman who had attacked 
him with a javelin. Now, mounted on his 
wounded horse, he reined up his steed, and 
prayed for mercy for the love of Zeus ; and 
he looked at the young men, " by the white- 
armed Aprodite ; " and he looked up at the 
circle of the ladies, then, sweeping in a gallop 
round the arena, he held up his bleeding hands 
to heaven. His fine clear voice sounded dis- 
tinctly in the hush. 

" I have a father," he said, " Komans, 
an old man, who waits by the banks of the 
Eurotas for the boy his son, hoping once more 
to embrace him, and to die in his arms! 
Sons I spare me, for the sake of him who 
is your father 1 Fathers ! spare me, for the 
sake of him who is your son ! '' 

A murmur of applause rang round the ring 
at this brave lad's appeal ; the majority 
were for mercy. A few malcontents alone 



THE madman's novel 165 

were lond in their contemptuous hisses, and 
kept their hands turned conspicuously down- 
wards. The superintendent of the games 
looked towards Sejanus' seat for his casting 
rote. 

Sejanus was vexed at the want of enthn- 
siasm displayed at his entrance, and determined 
to show his power. Stepping from his seat, he 
passed into the royal pavilion, and stood up, 
tmid the shouts of his more immediate fol- 
lowers. 

"Silexjce the rabble!'' he cried, and the 
trumpets of his retinue sounded. 

" Pit two of our Grecian prisoners against 
tills runaway actor/' he cried, haughtily; 
in a few minutes the doors of the dormitories 
opened, and two fi^sh antagonists stalked 
dowly out, looked up and round, and then, 
poising their axes, advanced with a nod to 
each other to the attack. 

I saw the brave stripling dismount and kneel 
for a moment on the sand, heave a deep sigh, 
then, singing a war Fsean with a Mnt voice. 



166 IG£ BOUND. 

on to the combat Victory appeared to Mm 
hopeless, death ineyitable. 

SejanuSy still vexed and irritated at Tfhat 
he termed the insolent demeanour of the 
populace, seemed to take an inhuman delight 
in the prospect of the approaching destruction 
of a stripling on whom the populace had 
heaped the applause denied to the fayourite of 
the Emperor. 

" He has it ! '' he cried, standing erect, and 
straining his eyes to anticipate the blow — 
" he has it ! No ! The bungler— rand run 
through the arm too ! Serve him right. 
What's come to my old gladiator of Rhodes ? 
— old Sepho, who felled the three Germans in 
one morning ? He gets too fat : he shall have 
a turn at my country mill, to bring him into 
wind ; or we'll chase him with a lion, to see if 
that'll give him a quicker eye and a surer 
foot." 

Stung by these taunts, which reached him 
through the medium of the growing murmurs 
— ^for the fickle populace were beginning to 



THE madman's novel. 167 

get yrearj of one combatant so long holding 
the championship — the butcher of Bhodes, 
veil known for his strength and ferocity in 
the ox-market and the slaughter-houses of 
Borne, as in the frequent seditious risings 
of the suburbs, drew back, and, swing- 
ing his weapon, drove it with prodigious force 
at the shield of his young antagonist. His 
brutal scheme seemed to be for a moment suc- 
cessful. The youth reeled at his first blow, 
and, falling on one knee, bent as if danger- 
ously wounded. 

The cheers rolled like thunder round the 
great amphitheatre. But, just as the burly 
gladiator stooped to strike him a lopping blow, 
the youth leaped back^ and stabbed him to 
the heart with a fierce side-thrust. The giant 
fell heavily, and the youth, removing his 
helmet, wiped his brow and then his sword, 
shouting a thanksgiving to Zeus. 

During this time an old Greek gladiator, a 
third, who had remained leaning against the 
rope-netting that guarded the podium, with his 



168 ICE BOUND. 

back turned to the combat, had been employed 
busily, with a tremulous hand — ^for he was old 
and worn — in tying up the laces of his sandal. 
It was evident that he disdained to assist in 
so unequal a combat, and reserved himself for 
some greater danger. 

A thousand voices crying, " No sleeping ! '' 
" Down with the youngster ! *' roused his 
thoughtful and perhaps now phlegmatic na- 
ture. Tightening his belt, and swaying his 
axe, he strode deliberately to the fight. Seeing 
him coming, the discomfited man struck fierce 
and faster. It was evident the youth's hour 
had come. 

But at that instant a gleam of recognitioa 
lit the old man's eye. 

" My son I " he cried, " my Crito ! " in a 
moment he had embraced him, and struck 
down his last antagonist, who fell dead, cloven 
to the chin. 

At that moment, Sejanus, seizing the bow 
and arrow of an archer of the guard who 
stood guarding the entrance, lodged a shaft 



THE madman's novel. 169 

in the old man's breast. Staggering towards 
his son, he fell in his arms^ and expired with- 
out a groan. 

"To the lions with him!" cried the fa- 
vourite — *^ the lad escaped by a trick I " 

But the moment the attendants broke in to 
throw him into the dormitories, a tumult, 
which had hitherto been lurking in secret con- 
tempt at this deed of blood, broke into open 
mutiny. Benches were broken into wea- 
pons, ranks and orders were mingled, the 
ladies shrieked and fled, the boys huddled 
back in confusion. In vain the herald called 
order, and the trumpets sounded the signal for 
the combat of beasts. A band of the more 
daring broke down the nettings, and, leaping 
into the ring, bore off the young Greek in 
triumph on their shoulders. Others, putting 
a papyrus crown on the bound-up head of the 
dead gladiator, thrust him into the imperial 
seat, from which Sejanus, attended by a strong 
guard of adherents, clients, and slaves, had 
now retired. Others, heaping up broken 



170 ICE BOUND. 

spears, shields and seats, raised a funeral 
pile for the dead Greek ; some strewed on it 
their robes, while others ran for torches. 

" This is the climax of this wretched inso- 
lence,'' said an old soldier to me ; "Jove 
first maddens those whom he b willing to 
destroy." 

" Is such a man fit to reign ? " cried an 
orator, mounting on a bench. 

" No — not to live !" cried a hundred spec- 
tators, waving their swords. 

"The grain fleet is wrecked, citizens," 
said a baker, evidently rejoiced at the 
news, " and we all know what that is an omen 
of." 

" Not of cheap bread, so hold thy tongue, 
short- weight," said a woman in the crowd; 
and the baker fell back with that painful 
smile which shows that a man is abashed. 

" What I say is," cried a fisherman of the 
Vesta Street, "that the plebs don't get 
enough feasts, and bread tickets, and fish 
get so scarce an honest man can't live." 



THE madman's novel. 171 

" Well, then, there is all the more room for 
you," said the virago, clearing a way with her 
tongue ; '^ and for what good deeds, can any 
one tell me, is this blood-sucker to be made 
to-day tribune ? " 

" To the senate-house ! " cried a loud- 
voiced fellow, who gave the catchwords to 
the mob. 

Partly out of curiosity — ^for I cared not 
where I went — I followed the crowd to the 
temple of Juno in the Capitol, where the 
Senate was now sitting. I was surprised to 
find every avenue guarded with troops of the 
Pi-setorian guard, which Sejanus himself com- 
manded. I observed they got in knots and 
whispered, and that their officers occasionally 
passed through their ranks, as if verifying 
their watch-word. 

" He promised us three hundred sesterces 
a man,'' said one veteran as I passed, casting 
up the items on a drum-head as he spoke, 
^^ besides a public banquet to the citizens, and 



172 . ICE BOUND. 

free shaving for a year. But hang the citi- 
zens — that does us no good." 

I wondered who had offered this largess ; 
but when I asked, the soldiers laughed — their 
white teeth showing through their black 
beards ; and one of them said — " Who? — ^why, 
who but the old fellow without hair ? " Now 
I knew this was the soldier's nickname for 
Tiberius ; and I augured mischief, for I re- 
membered the mysterious hints of Macro, and 
knowing his fierce and crafty nature. 

" What is the matter with old Macro ? " 
said one, breaking into the circle, and clap- 
ping a centurion on the back with a blow 
that would have felled a tailor — '*he spits 
fire and looks dangerous. I wouldn't let 
such a firebrand be in the senate." 

^' He don't put up his horses with the new 
king — that anyone can see." 

"Not he," said another. "He doesn't 
like anyone to be his charioteer." 

While I was standing listening to this 
gossip of the Caesarians, who were full of what 



TH£ madman's novel. 173 

old Crassus would have done years ago had he^ 
only got to Parthia with twenty eagles, wh^en 
a jBlave of Tiberius ran up to me. He bore 
sealed tablets and a roll, and put them in my 
hand. I opened the tablets. They were from 
Hacro. The letter ran : — 

" Tou have been false to Tiberius, and de- 
serve death. To redeem your life read the 
roll the bearer will give you in an hour's 
time in the senate-house. The guard have 
orders to let you in. Say aloud — ' This by 
the last courier from Capri.' " Macro." 

Concealing the roll beneath my cloak I 
was at the senate-house at the appointed 
time. I entered and found a creature of 
Sejanus speaking of the tribunate which the 
Emperor was about to bestow so justly on 
his favoured subject, and proposing that his 
statue should be placed in the holy circle 
of the Pantheon, into which even Augustus 
himself had professed himself unworthy to 
be admitted. 



174 ICE BOUND. 

^ A buzz of servile applause ran round the 
room, and Sejanus, snuffing up the incense, 
sat with his arms folded, in his own estimaw 
tion, if not a god, at least a Gsesar elect. 
Great schemes of dominion were revolving 
in his mind, perhaps, too, a plan of 
conquest in Britain, or means of bringing 
flamingoes quicker from the East, and tran- 
sporting fresher to Rome the oyster which in 
the Bay of Baiae is known as *' the ear of 
Venus/' 

On seeing me Sejanus nodded, and every 
one was silent. He rose — "I see, senators," 
he said, ^^the man that, I am told, was to 
bring the grant of the tribunate to me from 
Tiberius — may he read the roll he carries, 
senators?" 

" Let him read," cried a dozen voices. 

"Hush!" cried a lean debater, well known 
and dreaded in Eome — I suppose by a 
prepared plan of Tiberius's — " I would first 
crave leave to denounce to the tribune elect 
and the Emperor, a man who, abu^ng the con- 



THE madman's novel. 175 

fidence of CsBsar^ has deluged a certain city 
of Italy with blood — has carried off honest 
men's wives as slaves — ^has misappropriated 
public money — ^has given to the lictors rods, 
good citizens — ^has^ in a word^ been false both 
to gods and men. What^ Sejanus and sena- 
tors, should be such a man's doom ?" 

"Death!" cried Sejanus; "but in what 
city lives such a wretch, and what name 
does he disgrace?" 

" The city is Rome," said the debater — " the 
wretch's name is Sejanus — soldiers!" (here he 
shouted to the guard) "seize this man !" 

I remember that at this moment, as if at 
some pre-arranged signal, the temple doors 
burst open, and the soldiers rushed in, fol- 
lowed by a mob fierce as wolves and blood- 
thirsty as tigers. 

I remember a whirlpool of swords striking, 
clashing, hewing, all at one red-plaited robe, 
all at one groaning, cursing, screaming human 
creature. I remember a storm of slaves, with 
ropes dragging out with shouts a dead, man- 



176 ICE BOUND. 

gled body. I remember a weeping woman in 
a white mantle falling on the body, and being 
instantly trod to death. The shouts were as 
of many seas. Suddenly a stone from a 
sling struck me to the ground — I saw a pale 
face crowned with thorns appear in the air — 
and awoke to find myself in — ^Bedlam ! 



177 



INTRODUCTION TO SIDERFIN'S 
WELSH STORIES. 

A MONTH had now passed, and we were still 
fast locked in amid the huge blocks of ice 
— ^those links that winter had welded together 
to form one vast frozen chain around our 
tight little ship, the Stormy Petrel. 

It was about five days after the reading of 
my eccentric novel had commenced, that 
Captain Beaver determined to cut a channel 
in the ice, so as the better to moor the vessel 
for the winter season out of the reach of the 
toppling bergs, whose fall by night used to 
seem to me as if the very pillars of the world 
had been thunder-struck and were falling. 

TOL. I. N 



178 ICE BOUND. 

The work took us fourteen days to accom- 
plish. We began by scratching out deep lines 
with the boarding pikes, then setting groups 
of men to cut the pieces across with ice- 
saws into diagonal blocks, which the seamen, 
with their usual fun, ingenuity, and heartiness, 
contrived to affix sails to, and so towed them 
out on to the wide ice-fields beyond the channel. 

It was a grand day when the vessel was 
dragged finally into the ice-harbour, crushing 
the pan-cake ice of the night's growth before 
her. We had decorated her with flags, 
because it happened to be Captain Beaver's 
birth-day. And we should have fired cannon 
in honour of its being also Christmas-day, 
but we were afraid of bringing some ice- 
bergs as tall as churches down about our 
ears. 

That evening, when we had turned in, we 
had extra grog served round among the men, 
and a fiddle set going for those who liked to 
dance and sing. The officers, however, and 
the older and staider men, adjourned to the 



ICE BOUND. 179 

state cabin to hear the first chapter of Sider- 
fin's bundle of Welsh legends, one of which 
was to last the night, serving well to 
divert oar mind from our dangerous position 
there in the Arctic Seas. 



m2 



180 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 

CHAPTER I. 

The&e are few people who have taravelled 
through North Wales with any eye for the 
beautiful or love of the sublimei but must re- 
member the Yale of Festiniog. From the top 
of the Merionethshire mountains, that belt it 
in like old grim warriors, jealous guardians 
of the enchanted beauty, a wonderfid 
panorama is presented to the view. 
From either Hawks Mountain, or the 
White Mountain, Moel Gwdion, or Myndd 
Mawr, the river Dwyrd may be seen wind- 
ing its way, singing like a released captive, 
as from some dark lift in its parent rock 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 181 

it makes its way with gladness to the 
ocean weltering in the horizon. Before ns 
lies Cardigan Bay, and far beyond the vast 
altar pile of Snowdon stretches the sea- 
coast of Caernarvon, glowing in the sun. 
Every spot is surrounded by a halo of 
legendary recollection : here runs the half- 
obliterated Roman road, there the line of 
the first English march. 

So hemmed in is this beautiful vale, that 
ties calm as a tarn, hollowed out between 
these giant mountains, that at once guard 
and hide it from the rest of the world. 
Here turbulent chieftains have waved the 
dragon banner; here the steel-clad chivalry 
of the Normans have encamped; thither, 
long ago, have the Roman legions won 
their way from their strong station of 
Segontium, the ruins of which may still be 
seen without the walls of Caernarvon. 
lis one of the fairest and most peaceful of 
the Welsh valleys; more calm and pastoral 
than the savagely grand Llanbens,' more 



182 • ICE BOUND. 

retired and wild than the modernized Llan- 
gollen, The rude village of miners at the 
head of the vale, the cataract of the Cyn- 
val below, the wooded heights, the rippling 
stream, now gliding gently on, now chafing 
with obstructing rocks that bar its pro- 
gress to its inevitable goal, all contribute to 
make the scene one highly characteristic of 
a mountain country. The approach to this 
hidden spot Nature has carefully barred 
against intruders; for her wildest beauties 
are to be disclosed only to the united spell of 
labour and of love. The country is savage, 
bare, broken, and beautifully wooded; while 
here atid there large masses of rock, that 
no time could crumble, yet shivered by frost, 
and lightnings, and the thunderbolt from the 
mountains above, rise up from the thick 
underwood, clouded over with purple heather ; 
while from fissures in their surfaces springs 
up the beautiful foxglove, like a flag waving 
from a ruined tower. At the present di^^ 
the barer tracts are divided by rough stone 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 183 

^walls, loosely built, straggling in irregular 
lines, bemossed with age, and flecked and 
stained with white lichen, like the ancient 
ramparts of a rock fort. These walls are 
covered with trailing bramble and toothed 
fern, which nod mocking over the ruin, 
and wave in the wind to salute the passing 
traveller. Everywhere through the mossy 
bank oozes forth limpid water, trickling 
.down in diamond drops, or rippling on with 
A gentle, gushing sound, that refreshes the 
ear like the memory of music. So it is 
by every road and on every mountain : *' Deep 
answers unto deep at the sound of their 
water-pipes." So it is throughout Wales : tor- 
rent shouts to torrent, cataract roars to cata- 
ract, stream calls to stream, rivulet whispers to 
rivulet, while the deep-voiced thunder of the 
storm overhead, on some day of elementary 
tumult, seems like the cry of a chiding 
angel to the spirits of the waters. Around 
this vale stretch, in undulating masses, the 
contorted roots of Snowdon, and the bare, deso- 



184 ICE BOUND* 

late marshes of Fort Madoc, athwart which 
Harlech, once the dwelling-place of kings^ 
looks over the sea. 

Eound the vale itself, mountains covered 
thick with oaks slope down to the narrow 
and rocky bed of the Dwyrd ; while to the 
distant north the great White Mountain towers 
above its brethren, who have seen wild deeds 
pass beneath their eyes — ^scenes of murder and 
of patriotism wrought out in their stony recesses 
and darksome caverns. Here and there a black 
crag, dark as if seared by the thunders of cen- 
turies, recalls scenes which the cultivated 
fields, yellow with the harvest, or green with 
the youth of spring, almost belie* In these 
hanging woods lie unknown beauties, from tiieir 
inmost heart comes up the rush of concealed 
streamlets, or the roar of the falling rapid. 
The Dwyrd is a type of the mountain stream 
in its most perfect loveliness. Foaming along, 
it wanders careless as a younker or a prodigal, 
chafing at the rocks that block up its bed 
and shine through its pure waters, washing 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 185 

over their black and polished surfaces; now 
rippling over pebbled shallow, where the fish 
leaps at the fly ; now lashed to rage by some 
strong barrier, through which it forces a way 
beneath huge piles of stone, from which grow 
wild flowers that nod over the tiny wave, and 
mirror their neglected beauty in the crystal, 
like village maidens at Eve's first mirror; 
then in gloomy silence or calm repose, as if 
weary with the conflict so lately ended, and so 
soon to be renewed, flowing softly, and linger- 
ing in deep, black, silent pools, overhung by 
nodding hazels, or lit up by the gleam that the 
silver shaft of the birch throws upon the mo- 
mentary darkness ; haunt for the water-spirit, 
bath for the wood-nymph, favourite resort of 
the Welsh peasant-angler, who knows well 
that under mossy stem and rotting log lurk 
what he tells us, in very bad English, are 
"vary big trouse" (brellyll) : on goes the 
stream through its varied pilgrimage to the 
wide ocean, bursting out from its dark haunts, 
where the sun seldom breaks through the star- 



186 ICE BOUND. 

proof covering of matted boughs to rejoice 
again in the sunlight and purer air, like a re- 
leased captive. To where the trees form but 
a light-woven tabernacle above its head, and 
with a shifting golden light of emerald 
it flows between broad deep banks, through 
meadows fringed vdth wild thyme, where the 
bee dwells the summer day through, and where 
in the hottest noon, when the reaper sleeps, 
the glistening dragon-fly and the yellow-banded 
fly skim over its surface, or swell the silver 
sound of falling waters with the tiny but 
shrill hum of their minstrelsy. And in every 
field around are little rills, pouring in their little 
tributes of dark peat waters gathered from 
the swamp and the morass ; and if you climb 
any of the mountains that rise above the vale, 
making your way with much difficulty and 
some > danger, by dint of sure eye, firm foot, 
and trusty hand, clambering over loose rocks, 
the haunt of foxes, you will hear, long ere 
you have reached your watch-tower, the sound 
of water-springs distilling for it through the 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 187 

thick, green, soft moss beneath your feet ; and 
if you scoop it away with your hand, as a Druid 
might have done as he clomb to his rock-altar, 
you will see the pure lymph come bubblmg up 
between your fingers till it forms a little tarn 
around you, where the wolf and the eagle 
might have drunk ages ago. 

But it is to a spot even still more beautiful, 
and some distance to the right of the vale, on ^ 
the river Cynval, that we would now lead 
you. It is a warm summer evening, and the 
swallows are skimming for their prey over the 
marshy and dewy meadows. The Cynval is 
situated in a deep glen, hidden by dark woods, 
tiirough which a winding and scarcely defined 
path leads, by broken steps of rock, to a small 
plateau, hung over by shelving masses of rock 
and half hid by underwood and winding roots of 
die trees that cling together above, scarcely 
wide enough to afford footing for one person. 
Below you — ^sheer below you — ^without one 
obstacle between you and death but a fi'ail 
bush, or firailer flower, gapes a deep narrow 



188 IC£ BOUND. 

chasQiy walled by precipitous and smooth-sur* 
faced rocks, of a reddish tint, as if the hue of 
sunset were petrified upon them. On the 
other side, and far below you, arched ov^ and 
rendered dusky and gloomy by the depth of 
shade, a waterfall leaps madly down, pouring 
its foaming, narrow flood of water over rough 
angular masses of black rock, that are all but 
hidden by the silver veil of spray and the bub* 
bles tossed up into the air to catch the rare sun* 
beam ; and form in rainbow-hues another and a 
still more transient form of beauty. It glistens 
at night in the moonbeam like a torrent of 
molten silver, flashing in bright radiance 
through the coal-black foliage, throwing a 
shade deeper than that of noon-day. To the 
double ledge of rock it steals along as if it 
were heedless or unconscious of its danger, till 
with a roar and a splashing torrent it falls sud* 
den to the narrow chasm below ; after gaining 
which, like one in the calm triumph of escape, 
who has left its baffled enemies far in the rear, 
with spent fears and abated force it steals 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 189 

along the vale in open day, a "brawling stream- 
let as peaceful and noiseless as its fellows. 
Less sublime and terrific than the Pistylls of 
South Wales, the falls of the Cynval have still 
an exquisite beauty and unrivalled grace, that 
steal imperceptibly to the heart. Their gentle 
veiee is the very whisper of Nature herself. 
How beautiful in the calm peacefulness of 
a June evening, when a regal sunset is 
Rowing overhead, reddening the western 
trees, and throwing a melancholy, depart- 
ing, diminishing light upon the ceaseless tor- 
rent ! There was something wondrous in the 
ceaseless volume of water, with its surging 
thunder, its dewy spray, and embowered rocks, 
with the dim, obscure recesses, like caverns 
in which the wood-nymphs sport, and the 
grey crags peering forth amid the sunlit 
wood. 

Follow this stream up the valley, and every 
foot you traverse will present new scenes of 
beauty, eternally varying. Now it steals 
along, creeping forth wondrously fi:om deep 



190 ICE BOUND. 

red pools in the hollows of crags worn smooth 
by the torrents of centuries, now it rages 
along as if some water-spirit had invested 
it with all the power of evil, and, sweep- 
ing massive fragments in its course, it falls 
full forty feet to the bed below ; now splash- 
ing in tawny-coloured volumes, edged with 
foam, over shelves of table-rock, and now 
stealing in a deep but narrow current, under 
vast horizontal crags that bridg6 over and 
almost choke the stream. 

Equally varied in character are the preci- 
pices that edge the bank : they slope in 
wooded tiers to the water's edge ; they rise 
in perpendicular ramparts of immense height, 
that seem to shut out the very air of heaven ; 
again in broken ramparts of unequal height, 
they sink gradually to the stream's brink. 
What a wild chorus the waters make ! I hear 
mingling the full diapason of the torrent, the 
silver ripple of the rill that drips down the pre- 
cipice, the distant plunging and intermittent 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 191 

thunder of the cataract, and the throbbing 
plunge of the nearest fall. 

But the wildest scene of all is where the 
stream grows deeper and more fitful, and is 
half swallowed up in deep "pots," as the 
peasants call them, which the summer's heat 
dries up, and the winter's overflowing fills 
again, as it wears year by year a deeper channel 
in the rock, and slowly hollows out a new 
course for its impetuous pent-up water. 
Here firom the middle of the river's bed rises a 
grey throne of rocks almost isolated fi*om the 
bank ; on the rough summit of some ten feet 
grow a thousand wild flowers, which shed 
their leaves upon the water, and are borne 
away by the tiny waves that are dashing ever 
unceasingly round its base, as if shouting for 
its victims, and cover the narrow pier of stone 
that binds it to the shore. 

On this pinnacle, still attainable by the 
lonely fisherman, who clambers up here to 
throw his line with greater advantage into the 
ripple below, and sit by the hour in mute 



192 ICE BOUND. 

communion with the s^nrits of the wood, the 
air, and water, that seem to lurk around him, 
and to he invocable by any spell sufficiently 
powerful, tradition says some magician, in 
league with Apollyon, once sat and hurled his 
curses into heaven. Here a kelpie might 
whisper weird secrets to the water-wraith, 
who shrieks over the drowning traveller when 
the storm is at the wildest, and who waves in 
yon red pool its long, black dishevelled 
locks, weltering amid the discoloured foam, 
where the over-shadowy rock, lit so brightly 
by the golden moon, sheds so deep a 
shadow upon the spot, when the storm has 
lulled, that the heavens seem to grow blue 
again as you look up from this chasm. 

Truth, however, in this case, as is usual, 
little less romantic than fiction, affirms that 
this magician bore the homely name of Hugh 
Lloyd, and was an old Ironside of Cromwell's 
army, who retired to these his native solitudes 
to die in peace. It was in such places as 
these — ^wild spots left unfinished by nature. 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 193 

and still half-chaos — ^that the Scotch Covenan- 
ters assembled to pray in secret, where the 
sound of their psalmody might be drowned b j 
the roar of the waters. Far above this spot, 
which is, indeed, immediately contiguous to the 
cataract, the stream is joined by another rill 
that meets it at a right angle, leaps to meet it, 
dashing its waters in a thin veil over a broad 
tabular rock, and after this junction they flow 
on together in peaceful union, like a calm old 
age after a stormy and tempestuous youth. A 
mile higher up, among the hills, there is 
another fall of a very different character. 
Here to the left, at the foot of crag and 
mountain, embedded in marsh and bog, half- 
covered with rush and peat, and intersected 
by cuttings of deep black water, are many 
lakes visited only by fishermen, their shores 
strewn with grey pebbles, treeless, bare, and 
desolate. To the right, the country slopes 
into broad, bare, smooth, precipitous, green 
hills, like mole-hills grassed over. 

Here, between two of these green, rounded, 

VOL. I. 



194 ICE BOUND. 

unbroken hills of enormous height^ and where 
the trustiest mountaineer can scarcely get a 
foothold, through a very narrow black pass, a 
torrent of yellow water pours its foaming 
stream over a fall of some forty feet, with a 
sound quite appalling in that drear loneliness 
of solemn solitude. Below, it sinks into a 
dark channel, black as Lethe with the oozings 
of the peat swamps. It is a beautiM sight to 
see, towards sunset, a storm beat up hither 
from the sea ; breaking through lurid clouds 
dyed red with thunder. The sun at times, 
piercing these, will burst forth with all its 
splendour, spite of some envious cloud, bent — 

To dim his glory and to stain the track 
Of his bright passage to the ooddent, 

and shedding a rich and concentrated lustre 
on the peak of one mountain alone, ]ike some 
priest pouring on a monarch's head the royal 
benediction, invests it for a few short moments 
with all the glory of Sinai at the moment of 
Transfiguration! Then suddenly a mist of 
grey darkness will drive up the valley from 



THE MIDNIOHT MEETING. 195 

the sea, and in an instant the rain ponr down 
in drenching torrents on the luckless traveller 
and fisherman or the miner returning from his 
labour in the evening. It blows past, and 
again a golden vapour of clouded radiancy 
flashes past us stealthily, the storm following 
on its track like a pursuer. It seemed like 
those clouds, at first no bigger than a man's 
hand, and afterwards large enough to cover 
the whole earth, that, in the Ehoran, Mahomet 
says, God has sent at sundry times and in 
divers places to destroy sin-spotted cities. 



02 



196 



CHAPTER II. 

It was almost the sunset of a June even- 
ing, 16 — f when a man seated himself in a 
meditative attitude on the throne of rock 
which we have before mentioned. He looked 
anxiously at the setting sun, took off his 
plumed hat, laid it beside him, drew his 
Provant rapier, flashed it in the sunbeams, 
drew a pistol from a secret hiding-place be- 
neath his short cavalier coat, cocked it, 
handled the lock, and put it back into its, lurk- 
ing corner. He then stood erect, and looked 
up at a path scarcely visible in the underwood 
but to a practised eye, still nothing stirred. 
He shook his head like one dissatisfied with 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 197 

his glance. ^^Duw a digon" (God is enough), 
he mattered with the voice of one who de- 
spaired of his cause, and has all depending 
on a venturous stake ; then he bent his head 
upon his hand, his dark plume falling over 
and hiding his features. With the sunlight 
falling upon his noble face, overcast with such 
a deep air of melancholy, he might have 
seemed to a poet a fallen monarch musing 
over his fate, or our own first Charles de- 
ploring the fury and fanaticism of his subjects 
in one of his solitary hiding-places. The 
stranger was of a fair complexion ; his 
features were almost Grecian in the beauty 
of their outline; over his forehead and 
shoulders fell dark clusters of hair, that 
hong upon his rich lace collar, and con- 
trasted, as the old painters knew so well, 
with the dark velvet of his doublet, and the 
soft shadows thrown by his short cloak. But 
his meditations had not lasted long when a 
sound caught his ear in the thick copse on the 
right bank, and the practised ear of a soldier 



198 ICEBOUKD. 

heard it above even the fall of the torrent. 
In a moment, with the practised foot of a 
mountameer, and of one who had scaled both 
the rude ramparts of natore and the weak 
stone piles with which man attempts to baffle 
his brother-worm, in an instant he had hid 
himself behind the largest rock, watching 
the cause of the disturbance, with the 
cool determination of one practised in war- 
fare, or rather with the keen, fiery eye of a 
panther waiting beside some forest pool for 
its prey. 

In the swiftness of descent, however, a gust 
of wind caught the broad brim of the cavalier's 
hat, and whirled it far into the calm surface of 
the stream, down which it floated towards the 
fkll. At the moment it fell, a louder rustling 
was heard among the trees, and from behind a 
isudden turning of the rock, richly hung with 
trailing ivy and rude tapestry of ti» birdweed 
and the flowering clematis, stept forth a 
man, who, by his sombre buff band, red jer- 
kin, steel skuU-^ap, and polished corselet^ 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 199 

seemed to be a dismounted trooper of the 
Parliamentary faction. Trampling a way to 
the water's edge^ with an eagerness that his 
0tolid and sour face would seem scarcely to 
have promised, he dipped a heavy halberd that 
he held in one hand into the stream, and soon 
drew the fugitive hat towards him. On the 
very edge of the fall he arrested it, not without 
difficulty keeping his footing on the slippery 
stones half covered by the water. Lifting the 
hat in his hand, and wringing the water from 
the dark plume, he looked at it with a gaze as 
expressive of astonishment as any face could 
display, that had never brightened at anything 
before but the sight of a full tankard, and 
whose brain had been addled by discourses of 
interminable length from the lips of the arch- 
rebel Prynne himself. Then, with the air of a 
huntsman, who, following slot, has traced a 
wounded deer by blood drops to the very covert, 
he commenced at once a diligent search for the 
wearer of the vain adornment. Tightening his 
belt, getting his halberd ready as if it were a 



200 ICE BOUND. 

musket in his hand, and clapping on his sallet, 
or morion, firmer, the Puritan retraced his way 
slowly to the path which led to the front of 
the pulpit rock ; observing the flowers trodden 
down, and the bushes beaten aside as if by a 
heavy tread, he half shouted some Scriptural 
form of rejoicing over an outwitted enemy ; 
but checking himself with difficulty, he pur- 
sued his search with all the steady and inflexi- 
ble perseverance of an old hound certain of 
the scent, but for a moment thwarted. Screen- 
ing his eyes with his hand from the red rays 
of the setting sun, he strained them to catch 
a glance of some companion whom he seemed 
^'to expect, as he cautiously beat over twice 
every inch of thicket that could conceal a 
lurking foe. Then, apparently satisfied with 
the vigilance of his search, he seemed to think 
that on the other side, if at all, lay the am- 
bush. For a moment he stood uncertain, one 
foot on a stone half covered with the water, 
the other booted foot on the rock of the shore, 
his head bent forward like an Indian's on a 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 201 

war-partji his ear tense and strained to catch 
the faintest whisper of danger that might be 
borne upon the breeze, or. that might pierce 
the deafening thunder and the ceaseless plunge 
of the water. It was a fine sight to see that 
hard stem soldier, with every sense braced, 
every faculty drawn at once into action. With 
the cautious instinct of a veteran, the trooper 
decided on the ford. Unbuckling his sword, 
lest its metal-mounted sheath should clink 
agaiiist the rocks, he held it in one hand, 
while with the other he quickly divested him- 
self of his corslet, and hid it beneath a bush, 
lest the sun's rays glittering on its polished 
surface should catch the eye of some fugitive, 
lurking, perhaps, even now, like a hare trem- 
bling in its form, waiting, as if fascinated, for 
his captor. 

But, for a moment, when all these prepara- 
tions were completed, he stood, like one light- 
armed and equipped for a storming party, in 
hesitation. Over the mind even of this rude 
soldier crept a shadow of fear, of superstitious 



202 IC£ BOUND. 

fear — of fear rather of immortal than of mortal 
foes. Fanaticism had in him rather heightened 
than repressed the spirit of the age. In that 
moment^ like the flash of heaven's fire, came 
up in his memory thoughts of fales that he 
had heard by winter hearths— of saints en- 
countering the enemy of mankind in wild 
scenes like this, where the saints had sought to 
escape from the persecutions of their fellow- 
men. The soldier was one of those enthusiasts 
who formed, at this early period of his progress 
to supreme power, the very soul of Cromwell's 
army. He believed that the millennium was 
at hand, and that Christ waited only for the 
total defeat of the Dragon by the followers of 
the Lamb, to descend to earth, attended by 
all the ' crowned companies of the blessed^ 
And it was thoughts of the muster that the 
devil was making of his forces, amongst whom 
Charles Stuart, those " gifted in the word " 
believed, would not be last, that now filled 
his mind. But he waved his hand, as if 
defying his invisible antagonist, and ex- 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 203 

daiming half aloud^ ^^ There'll be hotter work 
than this in Armageddon/' strode quickly 
across the stream. The second step was above 
his boot-tops ; the third it ran shallower ; with 
difficulty saving himself from a fall^ as his 
sword flew out of his hand, and with something 
very like a curse^ this son of Cain stooped for 
his weapon^ that had fallen some feet off, with 
a ringing nobe, upon a ledge of rock hidden 
by only about an inch of water. 

With eager eye, and heart throbbing with 
excitement but not with fear, the cavalier had 
been watching every motion of his unconscious 
foe ; not a muscle of his face had moved with 
his knowledge. Already he had clearly descried 
the rogue's intentions, and satisfied himself 
that he had as yet no suspicion of his hiding- 
place. His heart beat so loud that it seemed 
to knock with violence against his breast ; he 
could not choose but hear it. Another stride, 
and the Puritan soldier had put his very foot 
upon the rock behind which he crouched ; — ^he 
must clamber over — one ready foot on the 



204 ICE BOUND. 

nearest tufts of purple heather and scented 
thyme, one hand above his head on the rough 
tufts of broom that grew from a higher cleft. 
Now was the time. Drawing his sword, the 
cavalier plunged it into the defenceless breast 
of the climber. Slowly his grasp relaxed, 
heavily he sank backward, and fell with a 
groan and a deep plunge on the rock below — 
the huge body of the dying man sank with a 
deep, dull, hollow sound, like that so well 
known to those who have seen a burial at sea ; 
the scale clasp of his steel cap breaking and 
coming off in his fall, and the helmet rang as 
it sank and struck upon some concealed rock 
in the bed of the torrent. He never rose 
again; not even a groan showed that a soul 
had passed into eternity. 

So sudden had been the scene, so true the 
blow, so providential the escape, that the 
cavalier for a moment remained as if entranced, 
gazing on the corpse that looked up at him, 
with pale, distorted face, through the dear 
water, which the blood, welling from the 
corpse's mouth and from a deep wound in the 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 205 

breasty slowly discoloured and turned to purple. 
With a shrill scream a large hawk that, with 
a wonderful instinct and quickness of ear, 
sight, or smell, had already caught the scent 
of death around him, like some incorpo- 
rated form of sorrow, hovered about his 
head, as if it would attack the living since 
the dead were not to be seen. With a tame- 
ness that seemed almost supernatural at the 
moment, it perched for a second upon a rock 
near, on which some drops of blood had 
fallen, and then flew up again, wheeling in- 
quiringly around. With a quick impatience, 
the cavalier drew his pistol from the breast of 
his doublet, and was about to fire at the bird, 
but he lowered the point and replaced it, 
with a smile, in his doublet. 

" It is weU— I had forgot," he said ; " God 
prompts the poor bird to scent out the blood 
with which man bedews his earth. Let the 
bird of the torrent prey, if he will, on the 
flesh of this beggarly, scurvy man-hunter." 

^^ The blessing of the Lord and his saints be 
on thee," cried a deep, low voice from the 



206 ICE BOUND. 

thicket, that had not even waved or rustled at 
his approach, and an elderly man, clad in a 
cassock and band, advanced, and waved his 
hand in greeting from the shore. His fea- 
tures had a benevolent cast, yet overshadowed 
by the misfortune that had fallen on his own 
roof-tree, as on the kingdom at large, or both 
together, and his cheek was hollow, as if it was 
concealment and scanty food that had helped 
to dull his eye. 

" Welcome, good minister of Christ, at our 
rendezvous," said the cavalier, with a tone of 
glad recognition. ^^What tidings bringest 
thou from Caernarvonshire? — are the true 
men strong there ?'' 

"God be thanked, they are, though for 
fourteen days I have lurked like an outlaw in 
a poor hut, hemmed in by bog and marsh, 
with no richer viands than a black loaf once 
in four days, and no better Xeres than some 
water as black as ink. And you. Sir Charles, 
where tarried you ?" 

" I have lain perdu for some five weeks — 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 207 

they seemed centuries — in a wood-loft above 
the stable of a poor cotter^ some dozen miles 
from hence, as meny as a scorvy rogae in 
the pillory, or a bear with a chain round his 
middle. But when I was just sharpening my 
rapier for a foray, I suddenly heard the jingle 
of sword against steel-bound saddle and stirrup. 
I looked forth through a hole no bigger than 
a mouse's, that I had made for breathing, 
and I saw a troop of horsemen, whose leader 
I knew was loyal to the backbone. I leaped 
out; such a leap no Pagan ever effected, 
joined them, and told my tale. Never was 
friend welcomed more cheeringly, for Deveril 
had heard that a pike had ended my days at 
Naseby. Never shall I forget, good doctor, 
the angry ringing of their swords! Never 
bride heard marriage bells with more delight. 
Half dead with cramp and dulness, I longed 
for a change ; and would have greeted with 
joy a band of d — d fanatics, though they 
had come to strike off my head, which now 
seems firmer on than ever, after the loose way 



t 



208 ICE BOUND. 

in which it has been since yesterday se'n- 
night. Deveril told me that they were sent 
with provisions from Caernarvon, and with 
orders to break into Harlech Castle now be- 
leaguered by that cursed malignant, Mytton ; 
and they had heard that the people here- 
abouts were enraged at the exactions of the 
besiegers, and had by them concealed arms, 
which they would use had they once a leader.'* 
" The glad news reached me too," said 
the doctor, sitting down, like one worn out 
with watching, on the nearest rock, *' in 
my dog-kennel, and hearing of this lonely 
place, whither a well-affected peasant led me 
— ^by token, I paid him with my last broad 
piece and my blessing — I determined to tarry 
here, and offer a prayer to Heaven for the 
success of our cause, which is, God knoweth, 
so righteous. It wanteth but five minutes to 
the hour of meeting ; we are to be under the 
north bastion ere eight, disguised as waggoners, 
and driving carts covered with canvas and 
driflings of hay, concealing stalwart men, and 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 209 

a goodly store of petards, if there be need of 
such things. Pardon me, Sir Charles — ^pardon 
one who loveth thy honoured house," said the 
doctor, suddenly rising from his seat, throw- 
ing himself on his knees, and seizing the hand 
of the astonished gentleman. 

" Get up, get up, good doctor ; such 
attitude becomes not one of thy sacred pro- 
fession." 

"Get up, good doctor," echoed the clear, 
youthful voice of a gallant stripling, who leaped 
from behind the covert of a hawthorn bush, 
and fell upon his father's neck. " Forgive me, 
sire, and forgive the doctor, who did but try to 
conceal what he feared too hastily to disclose.'* 

"I forgive thee, with all my heart," said 
the father, pausing for a moment in astonish- 
ment, and brushing back the rich clustering 
locks that hid the fine open brow of the 
young gallant who stood before him in all the 
pride and purple light of youth, flushed with 
excitement, and with his eyes sparkling with 
love and admiration at rejoining his father. 

VOL. I. P 



210 ICE BOUND. 

" But, by all the saints, what brought thee 
hither, my boy ?'' 

" The love of God and my king,*' replied 
the stripling, drawing his rapier and flashing 
it proudly in the setting sunlight. ^^ I was 
like a friar cooped up in my gloomy cloister, 
bound to pace quadrangle, while traitors prison 
kings, and cobblers aim at crowns — bloody 
crowns they shall have, I trow." 

"Dost thou not remember, Charles, what 
immortal Will's Richard saith? — 

No hand of blood or bone 

Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre, 

Unless he do profiEuie, steal, or usurp. — 

Well, but what didst thou do when thou 
lefst gown for corselet, and flat cap for 
helm?" 

" Why, I sped down as fast as horse would 
carry, or rather some half-dozen; for some 
three good hacks fell dead on the road, in 
spite of sops of wine, as Henford used to tell 
us to give at such times. Damian called 
together the tenantry; armed them all; 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 211 

turned off two fellows who would sing Psalms 
and expound the Word as they followed the 
plough ; left behind old Jennings, who is too 
weak for harness; and brought me the rest 
into these fastnesses, where I thought we 
might strike a hard blow for our pious but 
unfortunate king/' 

** Indomitable Don Quixote 1*' said the 
father, turning his head to hide a tear of 
pride. ^'And how many buff-clad men hast 
thou got at thj back to follow the old 
banner ?" 

^^ But a poor dozen, father ; and lame 
Tomkins is one of them, for he would not stay 
behind, though it's all over with him if his 
horse is once shot ; — ^yes ! even to hard-riding 
Jenkins and the keeper's boy, Long John, who 
knocks over a sparrow at a hundred paces 
with a musquetoon." 

" Oh ! a truce, Charles, to your long list 
of paladins, who, if they are not such knights 
of the Round Table as your partiality would 
draw them, are at least trusty varlets and 

p2 



212 ICE BOUliD. 

lojal to the back-bone. Bat where are they? 
Have the Caemaryon men joined you?^ 

'^Thej have, sire, and are picqueted in 
the yallej above, ready to join us when 
I blow this bagle.'' 

And, as he spoke, the gay-hearted boy 
seized a silver bugle that hung from his 
white scari^ put it to his mouth, and 
blew a blast loud and ahrilL It awoke 
a thousand echoes from hill and mountain; 
they came like ripples following the parent 
wave, or like an army of fdries replying 
with shrill clamour to their chieftain, 
Oberon. Ere the sound kad wdl died 
away, it was responded to by a kora. 

"Why, thou art a second Sobin Hood,** 
said the father, laughing; "is he not, 
doctor, with his bugle, and his outlaws, 
and his Long John, with caliver for bow, 
and good sword for wood-knife?" 

Again the bagle was blown — a mourn- 
ful note, such as the rangers call the 
mort^ that announces the death of the stag. 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 213 

"There's danger in the wind, father, 
for that is the signal: we must defer 
our gathering then till midnight, when 
the peasants will be easier assembled, till 
then we must keep covert. If my sergeant 
report true, 0! there^ll be a pretty rising 
of scythe and pike." 

"In the hot charge I would not preach 
to thee, Charles, but in the tactic I may 
bid thee tell each peasant to strap round 
him a bag of flour and whatever spare 
lead he may scrape together. We may be 
cooped up in Harlech for a month ere 
our brave Eupert send a vessel to our 
aid.'' 

" Then, when he does, we'll break, father, 
like a storm upon them. The red light- 
ning from the cloud is a poor trope to 
which to liken our charge. Whoop ! up with 
King Charles, and down with the canting 
Roundhead ! " said the brave fellow, with 
the head of a boy and the heart of a 
man — ay, and a brave man — as he threw up 



214 ICE BOUND. 

bis plumed bat in tbe air, and caugbt it as 
it fell almost into tbe water. As he stooped 
low, his eye caught tbe pale glimmer of 
tbe corpse. " Why, what's toward ? Here's 
a murdered man! there's been foul play 
here. Help, father — drag bim out." 

"Quietly, gently," siud Sir Charles, 
repressing an almost involuntary smile at 
tbe impatience and fire of the young 
soldier. "'Tis but a scurvy jackanapes 
that I knocked on the bead but ten 
minutes since, as I would a mad dog 
if it came gaping at me, with all his 
white fangs showing.*' 

"Compare him rather, Sir Charles," 
^aid the doctor, "more scripturally, to 
the enemy of mankind, who goeth about 
like a ravening beast, or, as tbe Vulgate 
more justly has it, ut leo furens—OTj 
rather " 

"Let us drag out tbe drowned knave, 
and search his pockets ; there may be somcr 
thiug that may serve us. And if he have an 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 215 

angel or two, it were pity tbej should rust/' 
So saying, the young gallant — already 
not inapt in that useful commissariat 
department of warfare, incorrectly termed 
by the Yulgar, pillage — ^hauled at the body, 
and tilting up its legs, by the help of 
his father, upon the rock^ proceeded, with 
all the coolness of a camp-follower, to 
ransack the dead man's capacious pockets. 
^^ Imprimis — here's a pamphlet, entituled 
' Crumbs of Comfort for the Chickens of the 
Covenant, baked in the Oven of the Word.' 
Cursed cant! let the trout digest what 
cavaliers can't;" so saying, he whirled the 
edifying volume over the fall. "And here's 
four groats — ^the Puritan's month's pay, I 
surmise. But here's — oh, here's the thing :— 

" ' The Leaguer, Harlech, Six o^dock. 

" * The storming party advance from the 
lines one hour after midnight, and advance 
over the breach of the northern tower. 
Watchword—* Ahab.' 

u i Mytton.' 



/ 



216 ICE BOUND. 

" Ah, Mytton, thou son of Belial, the prey 
shall be snatched from between thy teeth. 
But I had forgot to tell thee, father, a 
dragoon put into my hands a letter from 
William Owen but an hour since; I have 
it here. Plague on me, I have it not; 
I must have dropped it at the hostel, or 
somewhere — anywhere but where such a 
despatch ^^ 

" What is here ?" said the doctor, who 
had taken off the dead man's corselet, and 
had been fumbling in a pocket made in 
the breast of his thick buff jerkin, as he drew 
out a sheet of paper which had been torn 
impatiently open, and to which the silk 
thread and wax that had bound it were still 
depending. 

•* God's mercy on my shallow brain, it is 
the very letter. I dropped it, doubtless, 
and this bloodhound who dogged me hither, 
though he missed me by a wrong turn, 
picked it up as rich spoil for his general." 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 217 

" 'Tis well I paid his reckoning, and 
rewarded him as Joab did Amasa, bj a 
blow under the fifth rib, to use the 
villain's own profane language. Well then, 
good General Charles,*' said the father, 
with a voice of good-humoured banter, 
"how long then is it thy pleasure that we 
tarry here in ambush?" 

"Till midnight," replied his son; "for 
there are Puritan stragglers abroad, and a 
stray shot would bring overwhelming numbers 
upon us, and frustrate every plan. Within 
an hour all will be quiet; at eight 
they set the watch, as the country is up, 
and their foragers are often cut off by 
the peasantry if their party be not large. 
I'll go and order the varlets to bring thee 
some pasty and sack hither, for there 
are both at our saddle-bows. Your old 
cavalier cannot go long without food, 
nor doth he care much whether it come 
from friend or foe." 

With three bounds the youth leaped tho 



918 ICE BOUND. 

bushes, and was out of sight. With a 
contemptuous push the knight sent the 
Puritan's body back into the deep pool 
from which it had been drawn, and with 
a deep bubbling plunge it sank. 

"A brave, noble-hearted feUow is Charles 1'* 
tl^e father said, as he strode to the streamlet 
bank, and stretched himself at his full 
length upon the short thick grass, purpled 
with wild thyme, on which the doctor 
sat. 

"He cometh forth like a bridegroom 
out of his chamber," said the doctor, his 
mind running on his professional readings, 
"and he rejoiceth as a giant to run his 
course." 

"My good doctor," said Sir Charles, 
"you retain your divinity better than I; 
for these hard shifts and hard knocks rather 
drive theology out of my head, but I'm 
content to look up, as I do now, at the 
stars, and pray our great God to save me 
at the hour of need." 



219 



CHAPTER III. 

The sun had long since set; already the 
moon, through the thinner fissures of the 
clouds, poured her silver beams upon rock 
and mountain, covering them with the tran- 
sitory snows of her silver light ; while on 
tree-tops the moonbeams shivered, turning the 
fall to molten brightness, lighting up even the 
dark nook where the dead lay, and throw- 
ing strange shadows everywhere upon this 
scene of fairy-land. 

Ere many minutes had passed away, the 
youth appeared high up on the furthest 
path, marshalling the way to two stalwart 
troopers, who carried between them a basket 



220 ICE Bom^D. 

of provisions, indicative by its size of rich 
contents. Staring about them at a scene so 
unexpected, and making awkward salutations 
to one who appeared of high rank, they placed 
their load upon the ground. 

'^Wait above till the midnight signal is 
given," said the youth, "and let pickets be 
instantly set to guard against surprise." 

" Your two heroes," said the father, " are 
rather awkward specimens of the knight- 
errant. Their bandoleers sit awkwardly, and 
their plumes don't hang very jaunty." 

" Oh, they're mere recruits pressed yester- 
day, and don't know yet a morion from an 
iron pot, but their hearts are in the right 
place, and they'll serve. But what news, my 
father, from the southern counties?" 

"Our royal master, when I left Oxford, 
was a fugitive, seeking refuge, it was sup- 
posed, in the charcoal-burners' huts in Hamp- 
shire ; but the country was rising everywhere 
against the Rump, and Cromwell had enough 
on his hands, what with Roundhead members 



THE MIDIUGHT MEETING. 221 

and royal levies. All may yet go well, so the 
king lies dafe till he can again burst forth 
like the san.'' 

^^ Yes, which goeth about from the one end 
of the heavens unto the other, and nothing 
hid from the heat thereof/' said the doctor, 
unable to restrain a quotation, and rejoicing 
at the free use of that unruly member, the 
"tongue," after so long and compulsory a 
silence ; " which word heatj as Stephanus 
observes, may rather be interpreted as 'the 
all-pervading life-spring.' " 

" Oh, if thou must deliver a homily, good 
doctor, pray ascend yonder pulpit- shaped rock, 
out of the reach of our ears,'' said the youth, un- 
mindful of the re{H*oving glances of his father. 

The doctor, abashed at this rebuke, shrunk 
back into his nook, and turning himself to a 
very quiet, mossy stump near him, continued 
to mutter, as if still discussing the knotty 
question, every now and then a word — such as 
"cestus," "pythikos," "adonai" — thus dis- 
closing the polyglottic bent of his thoughts. 



222 ICE BOUND. 

" Learn to bridle that fiery tongue of thine, 
Charles," said his father, ^*as well as thou 
makest that good war-horse Glennock curvet 
and caracole. But this is no time for rebuke,'' 
he said, seizing his son's hand, and pressing it 
in all the warmth of his heart ; then smiling in 
that every-day hypocrisy by which men throw 
a veil over the best emotions of their hearts, he 
laughed as he added, " Now, rip open the fat 
paunch of that wallet, for my stomach is just 
in that state of revolt so well described by the 
old Soman in his parable. Dost thou remem- 
ber the story — thou tall fellow of thy hands ?" 

But the youth's mind was far away. 
Drawing his rapier, and bending it almost 
double over his knee, he bade his father mark 
the generous temper of as true a Toledo as 
ever crossed the Channel. 

" Where are thy good wits gone to?" said 
his father, as he seized the basket, and tore it 
open, warmly aided by the good doctor, just 
relieved of a satisfactory theory upon the 
word cestas and its Hebrew root. He drew 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 223 

forth, with a triumphant look, two dark-brown 
pasties of a goodly size, and a plump bottle 
of sack, that looked light and golden when 
held up against the moonlight. Not many 
minutes had elapsed ere the knight and the 
doctor, (divested of his ragged canonicals,) 
were deep in the bowels of the largest pasty. 
Having summarily unsealed the flask by 
knocking off its head, they all took deep 
draughts and long pledges to '^our rightful 
king;" their loyalty much increased by the 
hunger and thirst of some days past — a fast, 
if not quite as sanctifying as that of a Papist, 
at least as difficult to endure with patience. 

Then, like tired wrestlers, they laid them- 
selves down under a bush to rest, the knight 
leaning his head on a rich tuft of heather, the 
doctor on his canonicals, conveniently rolled 
up into a soft, yielding pillow, as conducive to 
sleep as one of his own sermons. Seated on a 
felled tree by the side of his sleeping father sat 
the young Cavalier, now looking at the sleeperd, 
now musing, with hand on his brow, upon 



224 ICE BOUND. 

the revels and masks of the vanished court. 
Over his half-sleeping fancy loomed grim faces 
of foemen — ^looks that dying men had cast 
upon him — the stem, proud triumphant eyes 
that look upon fallen enemies — changing to 
lovely faces and grouping maidens. Then 
his hand relaxed; he doubted the whole 
scene, and thought it was but passing in a 
dream, from which he fell into another and 
deeper abyss; thinking himself in his own 
quiet chamber, with the fire-light playing 
upon the arras, or lighting up the family por- 
traits on the dark, glossy panels. He awoke ; 
he looked at his watch with a catgut main- 
spring, that vibrated like a church-clock, but 
which, in those days, was an heirloom of consi- 
derable value. It wanted but ten minutes to 
midnight. His father and the doctor were 
still asleep. The doctor snored audibly; 
his father muttered in his sleep, and turned 
restlessly : " Up, faint hearts — upon them 
with the pike — ^remember bloody Naseby!'' 
The doctor, catching and mingling the sound 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 225 

with his dream, replied, as if awaking, though 
in the deepest depths of a weary sleep, '^ In 
the opinion of Johannes Turns Crematus, the 
word nasetus, rendered in the Hebrew dijaif 
should be ** Here he sank into an in- 
audible mutter, as if the real opinion of 
Johannes Tunis Crematus were far too 
valuable for vulgar ears. 

The solitude felt lonely to the madcap 
youth. He thought of the dead lying below, of 
the spirits, of the fays, of the elves. He must 
awake the two : the hour of rendezvous had 
all but come. But he paused, as every one 
would, before he shook off that sweet oblivious 
spell that weighed so gently upon their senses — 
that fairest portion of a sad life — that sleep that 
covered them, as Sancho says, ^^ like a cloak/' 
He waited till the watch-hand was approaching 
the hour, had reached, had passed. How rest- 
less, how swift, and how untiring is time, though 
the fool complains of his lingering! He 
shook them at the same moment by the arm. 
It was amusing to observe the different bias 

VOL. I. Q 



226 ICE BOUND. 

of their returning senses. "Help! help! 
To arms !" cried the knight, and leapt upon 
his feet, with a poniard, hitherto concealed, 
shining in his grasp, his eyes staring ; but at 
once restored to his senses, sheathing his 
weapon like one ashamed of an enthusiastic 
transport, he embraced the son whom he 
loved so dearly. The doctor, slowly turning 
himself, exclaimed with a dreary and pro- 
tracted yawn, as if exhausted by his somni- 
ferous disputations, "The word cestasy thus 
mistakingly rendered——" But seeing the 
wondering looks of the two spectators who 
bent over him, he yawned again— deeper, 
longer, and wider thiin ever — ^rubbed his eyes, 
apolo^sed for the length of his sleep, and 
shaking himself with the reluctant air with 
which a poor man resigns the cup of oblivion 
slowly drawn from him, and of which no 
draught but that of death can be too deep, 
looked at his pleasant lair, and exclaimed, 

" Verily, good Sir Charles, canst thou help 
me to the time ? for it seemeth to draw near 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 227 

to that hour which that worthy Arabian gen- 
tleman alludes to when he says, ' In the night 
when deep sleep falleth upon men/ '' 

^^ The time is past, I should think, by the 
deep bass you have so long kept up to the light 
treble of my breathing," said the young soldier, 
then unable to restrain a gibe at the inconsis- 
tencies of an amiable character, so strangely at 
variance with the scene and the thoughts which 
crowded in his own mind. " And if 1 can judge 
aright by half articulate whisperings, even in 
your dreams you have been digging for 
Hebrew roots, though not, I trust, in that 
barren soil where the adage says they gene- 
rally grow ; why, you were engaged in a hot 
dispute about that knotty word cestas, on 
which, some four hours ago, you were about to 
deliver us an interesting discourse, of which 
we (aside, fortunately), heml I am sorry to 
say, heard but the text.'' 

" You do too much honour, young gentle- 
man, to my poor learning, but a disqui- 
sition on the subject I certainly have writ^ 

q2 



228 ICE BOUND. 

ten, and will at some convenient time read 
you/' 

But already the versatile youth grew weary 
of the good man's harangue, and exclaiming, 
" 'Tis midnight, father," blew his horn 
shrilly. " Trali, trali, trala." 

A pause of a moment or two, as if men 
were arousing, and it was answered nearer 
and louder than before. In another moment, 
a trampling and crashing was heard as some 
two dozen men made their way through the 
narrow paths, and ranged themselves in 
irregular order upon the bank. With a cheer 
they greeted their young leader, who, grace- 
fully drawing his sword, presented it on his 
knee to his father, as a token of resigned com- 
mand. His father returned it him. 

"I will not command the brave fellows 
your own loyalty and courage have banded. 
I will be at thy right hand, will temper thy 
headstrong valour in the charge, and urge 
thee to fresh exertions when thy young heart 
is damped with defeat.'' 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 229 

A louder cheer greeted words bo worthy of 
so noble a father and so brave a son. 

Every moment now peasants poared in| 
armed with scythe, and pike, and fork; rude 
goads, rough arquebuses, halberds as old as 
Elizabeth. 

'^ What tidings bring the scouts?" said the 
young Cavalier to the oldest man of his 
troop ; '^ but yonder is one ; let him speak for 
himself." 

As he spoke, a dwarfish man, with long, 
ragged black hair, and keen eyes, pushed 
himself forward, with all the self-esteem with 
which the deformed seem invested by kind 
nature. 

" I have not been near Harlech to-day, 
good sir; but yesternight the garrison was 
much straitened, so one of their deserters 
told me, they had barely oatmeal enough in 
half-rations to last two days more ; and even 
now their food is rats, and hides, and messes 
of the weeds pulled from the ramparts. As 
I was playing the harp an hour ago at an inn 



230. ICE BOUND. 

by the roadside, I saw two of My tton's re- 
giment pass. They had corselets on, and had 
^en foraging, but they took no heed of me." 

" How stands the country disposed towardsr 
the right cause ?" said the elder knight. 

"Well, they stay but for the rising, and 
the word, ^King Charles and the Cavaliers 
for ever!' and there'll be many a stout 
fellow's foot in stirrup, and many a matchlock 
taken down from chimney-rest." 

" The array, in the words of old Ben, is 
'somewhat of the fewest' to raise a siege," 
said the knight, whispering to his son ; " but 
we know what bold hearts have done, and 
we know what they may do again." 

"But there is no time for delay, if we 
march. Let's to horse I" cried the young man. 

" Stay, stay, master general," said his 
father. " Sergeant, read the roll-call." 

The officer read, and but one man was 
found missing — " Thomas Lewis, better known 
as Hardriding Tom." 

" Who knows anything of him?" 



THE MIDNIGHT MATING. 2^t 

No one answered. 

" He can't have turned traitor. A soldier 
says he has taken lately to say his prayers^ 
and when he cursed him for it, and said there 
was enough time, he hoped, for such things 
as that, and asked him if he was going tc^ 
turn Puritan and join Mytton and the Sump. 
Tom told him to hold his foul tongue, or he'd 
slip his knife between his ribs. Perhaps he'a 
proved traitor, and all is lost. But na 
gloomy forebodings. The fellow drinks beer 
as if he wad at a continual term^ and is 
thirsty as a sand-bed. I'll wager forty 
crowns he's dead drunk now, in a handful of 
Straw, in our last hostel. I dare swear he's 
drunk, but no traitor. He'll join us, will Tom, 
when he hears the trumpet." 

Then, ascending the highest ground over- 
looking the stream, whose roar rendered hia 
voice inaudible beyond the circle of the little 
band, all, both noble and commoner, knelt be-, 
fore the holy man, as, with glowing eye and 
irrestrainable emotion,, he exclaimed, 



232 ICE BOUND. 

^^ Let God arise — ^let his enemies be scat- 
tered — ^let those that are mighty flee before 
him/' 

And then selecting from the stores of his 
memory verses suitable to the occasion^ he 
continued, after a moment's pause, 

'^ Plead thou my cause, Lord, with them 
that strive against me, and fight thou against 
those that fight against me. Lay hand upon 
the shield and buckler, and stand up to help 
us. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way 
against them that persecute me/' 

And all the people assembled cried 
"Amen." 

But never on earth was that half-finished 
prayer to be concluded. Already the God 
to whom they prayed had frustrated those 
wishes, Tf hich his mercy thought unmeet for 
accomplishment. 

"Let them be confounded and put to 

shame that seek Sir Charles — ^hush ! 

hush! What are those sparks, like the 
fire-flies of Hispaniola, amongst the trees 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 233 

that crown yonder craggy bank? They 
seem to move, and flit, and come nearer/' 
he exclaimed; '^ or are they rather what 
the learned call falling stars?" suddenly 
breaking off, and pointing, with outstretched 
fingers, to the objects of his wonder and 
fear, for, with heads bended, none but 
himself could see the scene around. 

" The Philistines are upon us !" cried 
Sir Charles, with a shout, as his men 
sprang to their feet and grasped their 
arms. 

It was not a moment too soon, for the next 
instant pistol-shots and the distant clang 
of steel were heard, followed by a close 
volley, that poured upon them from their 
hitherto ambushed enemies, who now showed 
themselves in thick array on the opposite 
bank, headed by an officer, who appeared, 
from his plume, rich baldric, and proud 
bearing, to be of rank. 

One trooper fell; a bullet had struck 
him; toppling from the plateau of rock. 



234 ICE BOUND. 

he fell into the torrent beneath, its roar 
concealing the crash made by his descent. 
One other man was hurt in the arm, 
bat could still handle his piece, and in 
an instant the scarf of the young knight 
had bound up the wound. 

At a glance, the experienced eye of the 
old soldier had caught the dangers and 
the advantages of his position. 

"Doctor," he cried, "ensconce yourself 
behind that jutting point, and keep close. 
Let each man fall behind the nearest bush 
or slab of stone, and reserve his fire, for 
there is hotter work ere we part." 

In a moment every man had disappeared, 
as if they had sunk into the earth, or 
like Roderick Dhu's clansmen, but not 
before the fiery young Hotspur, whose 
ardour seemed irrestrainable as that of a 
l7ar-horse who scents the battle, had 
snatched a musket from the hands of a 
trooper, and, taking deliberate and cool 
aim, fired at the leader of the Parliamentary 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 235 

party, who, shouting, "Who is on the 
Lord's side — who?'' was waving his sword, 
as if urging his men to some deed of 
daring from which they shrank. 

"A murrain on the fool!'' he said. "I 
saw the bullet leap from his head-piece 
as a hail-drop would skip off a cabbage- 
leaf." 

"Let them be as the dust before the 
wind, and the angel of the Lord scattering 
them !" cried the doctor, peering from his 
hiding-place, but retreating instantly, as a 
stray bullet nearly deprived the English 
Church of one of her warmest supporters. 



236 



CHAPTER IT 

The fire continued straggling and inter- 
mittent, not one Cayalier, however, being 
touched behind his stone rampart, while two 
Puritans fell apparently wounded, perhaps 
dead, and were instantlj borne off by their 
fiiends to the rear. Now, however, imitating 
the tactics of their enemies, in perfect silence 
they advanced, taking advantage of every 
bush, stone, or inequality of the ground, to 
pour a volley upon their enemies or to save 
themselves. 

The stripling's impatience could be kept in 
no longer. Kising on one knee, in spite of 
all the entreaties of his father, who lay beside 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 237 

him, he placed his musket on a low ridge of 
rock, and fired at a soldier who had attained 
a point higher than that on which they were, 
and was about to discharge his piece with 
fearfiil effect. Down he went, like a prey the 
eagle has dropped from her eyrie, crashing as 
he descended, till he fell a shapeless mass on 
the rocks below. A cheer from his followers 
greeted the daring champion who so fearlessly 
exposed his person for their safety. He was 
still watching the result of his shot, when a 
well-aimed Puritan bullet cut off his white 
plume, and sent it floating below. With a frown 
his father pulled him down into the covert. 

" Rash youth,'* he said, " this is not 
courage ; it is hair-brained, unreflecting mad- 
ness." Then turning to the doctor, who, 
ensconced safe behind a huge mass of project- 
ing rock, was urging on the combatants, 
praising the best shots, condemning the bad, 
instructing each as to the peculiar deficiency 
of his aim, and shouting, " They rejoiced and 
gathered themselves together ; yea, the very 



238 ICE30UND. 

abject came together against me unawares*'— 
^ Silence, good doctor ; your shouts draw on 
us a warmer fire, and make our bullets the 
less effective.'' 

The rebuked doctor instantly ceased his 
theological war-cry, and watched the fight si- 
lently, with as rueful a face as any old burgher 
who had strolled into Alsatia would a bully's 
brawl, advancing up a cud-de'Sac towards him. 

^* I swear by St. Carlo de Borromeo, who 
is my patron," whispered Sir Charles to his 
son, who lay eyeing the enemy as the golden 
eagle of Snowdon might the falcon who has 
approached too near his eyrie, **I know no- 
thing of war's stratagems if the villains are 
not going to throw some planks across the 
torrent and charge us. Were our party 
strong enough to hold this tete-de-pont, I 
would send a party of five round to wade 
the stream higher up, as we did once in 
Flanders, the sound of the water hiding the 
splashing of our boots; but, with this poor 
handful, we must make what play we can here. 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 239 

Give the word round, Charles, that when 
they are past that first white rock beyond the 
pulpit we fire a volley, and that instantly 
ten of the best and bravest pikemen, with 
you at their head'' — ^the young man's eyes 
sparkled with fire — " bear down upon them. 
I'll be at your side, and the rest must keep 
their pieces loaded, ready to fire when an ad^ 
vantage presents itself, or to press on at our 
back when need is the sorest. Let our cry 
be ^ God and our king.' " 

He scarcely had given the directions to the 
men, ere two Puritan halberdiers advanced, 
preceded by five skirmishers, who kept 
up a warm fire at every head that showed 
itself an inch above the defences that nature 
was so lavish of in that wild spot. With the 
ready speed of habit, impelled too by a sense 
of danger and a desire of distinction, they threw 
three broad, thick planks from a flat rock in 
the bank over some deep, wide pools, to 
another rock immediately contiguous to the 
pulpit, and beyond which a mim might wade 



240 ICE BOUND. 

and force his way to the opposite bank. In 
an instant three men, with pikes readj, 
advanced^ and leaped upon it; a bullet 
pierced the first ; the second, turning to save 
his comrade, was wounded as he crouched 
behind the rock. There was a moment's 
pause. With word and blow, fix)m the bank, 
exposed himself to the bullets that whistled 
round him, their leader urged them on. As if 
stung by some biting taunt, four more, two 
and two, rush past; they cower — ^they reach — 
they pass the white rock. With a shout that 
rung high above the roar of the fall, the 
Cavaliers leaped up from rock and bush, and 
bore down upon the enemy, to meet them 
midway. At their head ran the young 
knight, dosely followed by his father, waving 
his white plumed hat in one hand and his 
drawn sword in the other. With a dreadful 
shock they met. With push of pike, and 
blow of sword, and butt of pistol, corse and 
shout, and groan and yell, and splash, as the 
wounded ML to drown, or to be borne away by 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 241 

the fall, bleeding, and waving their bloody 
or begrimed hands for assistance, till they 
came to the edge of the fall, eddied round 
for a moment, and were then swept over 
with a roar, as if the water exulted proudly 
in its triumph over weak man. 

To it they fought, foot to foot, hand to 
hand, with noisy clang on helm and corselet, till 
the pools ran dark with gore ; fanaticism and 
party urged them faster on, and infused a 
deeper hj^tred in their hearts. No quarter 
was asked or given. To fall was to die. 
But though the Cavaliers were undisciplined, 
they were a band of brothers, men brought up 
on the same estate, and headed by those whom 
they had learnt from youth to respect^ to 
love, and to obey. They were enraged at 
being thus caught like foxes in a net ; 
their hearts glowed with warm affection for 
a king whose very misfortunes rendered him 
only the dearer to his followers. They pressed 
the enemy ; they gained the planks ; hotter 
grew the fire ; as, surrounded by the enemy, 

VOL. I. R 



242 ICE BOUND. 

led away by uncontrollable and dangerous 
temerity, fought Charles ; his father watched 
him like a guardian angel in the fray, 
warding off blows, throwing himself be- 
fore him like a shield, directing his attention 
to danger, now praising him when he struck 
a good blow, and now checking his overhasty 
rashness. Suddenly, from a thicket dose to 
the water's edge, leaped out two Puritan pike- 
men upon the temporary bridge, and, urging 
forward their companions, who were retreating 
before the impetuous yiolence of the young 
gaUant, advanced upon him with their pikes 
full before their breasts. In a dark rank, two 
abreast and ten deep, the enemy drove upon 
him. Losing his footing of the plank, Sir 
Charles leaped upon the nearest rock and 
slowly retreated, glaring upon his enmnies^ 
like a boar at bay when he chums the foam 
and shows his white tusks ere he rushes at 
the hound. 

With eager solicitude^ fbrgetfid of his ex- 
posed person, and of the bullets that flattened 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 243 

themselves upon the rocks by his side, the father 
watched his son slowly retiring and makings 
for the nearest covert to rally his men, whose 
bandoleers were now nearly empty. With 
B savage bound a pikeman drove his pike at 
the bare breast of the young knight; he 
parried it, and returned the blow with a fierce 
thrust, which, glancing on the breastplate of 
his antagonist, a dismounted cuirassier of 
Haslerig's regiment, shivered his blade to the 
very hilt. With the broken fragment the 
heroic youth stabbed his antagonist in the 
neck, just above the corselet, and he fell, still 
alive, but grievously wounded, into the stream. 
His companion, before the youth could re- 
cover himself, rushed forward to avenge his 
comrade, and thrust his pike deep into the lad's 
breast; and, at the same moment, a pistol- 
bullet of the Puritan officer, who had watched 
the. fray with interest, drove into his brain. 
Charles fell dead, without a groan, into the 
arms of two of his followers. 

To bear him to a bank, and place the body 

r2 



244 ICE BOUND. 

with reverent care beneath the bush, where 
.)>at a short hour since he was watching with 
a brain teeming with ambitious hopes, was 
the work of a moment. Then, with a deep 
howl of execration, every man leaped from 
bush and from behind rock, forgetful of life, 
and bore down upon the triumphing foe, who 
made the air ring with cries of " Down with 
the sons of Belial !'' ^'Down with the armies 
of thePhilistmes!'' 

Every eye was looking for the slayer of 
their gallant young leader, every hand 
clutched his weapon firmer, every heart 
throbbed louder, and longed to be his avenger. 
But God had already sent one. Even the 
doctor, with streaming eyes, seized a pike, 
and exclaiming, ^'He that slayeth by the 
sword shall perish by the sword,'' brought up 
the rear in a gallant manner. 

Who can picture the father? His blood 
froze at its source, his eyes were glazed, as if 
he, too, had felt the death-blow his son had 
received. For a moment he stood thus, and 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 245 

then, like a she-bear robbed of her cub, he 
leaped upon the Puritan ; with one broad backn 
handed slash he cleft his jaws open till the very 
head gaped in two, and the wretch fell a horrid 
ape-like picture of death upon the body of his 
fallen corporal, who, shot through the brain, 
had fallen on his knees and blocked up the 
path to which he had led his fellows. 

With a shout the brave menthenrushed upon 
the discomfited enemy, at the very moment a 
band of loyal peasants, armed with scythes and 
rude pikes, tore down from- the hills above, 
and hallooing cheerily, swelled their ranks. 
At the sight of the new allies, advancing 
like yelling demons, and holding torches in 
their hands — for the moon had now sunk — 
which flashed and flamed, and threw a red 
light upon the woods, the Puritans turned 
and fled. Halting as they gained the shelter 
of the woods, they then formed anew under the 
direction of their officers, and poured a close 
but ill-aimed volley at their new assailants, 
who now, clearing the planks of the dead, 



246 ICE BOUND. 

were prepared to defile in force and fight for 
Ae possession of their last stronghold. There 
was a whispering together for a moment 
amongst the Puritans — of those at least of 
them who were not busied in bending over 
the wonnded, or replacing their shattered 
weapons with those of the dead. Pre- 
sentlj the officer whom we have before men- 
tioned fiEistened a white scarf to a broken 
pike-shaft, and advanced towards the bridge, 
waving it in the air as a flag of truce. 

*' I demand a parley, with your leave," he 
cried, " thou of the white plume.*' 

There were low growls of rage, as Sir 
Charles prepared to advance to meet him 
half-way. "Let's have blood for blood,'' 
cried one mutinous fellow, whose blood 
was now well up. With portentous face of 
chiding solemnity the doctor pushed the 
men back, placing finger on his lips, as 
already the two leaders had met. 

"Knowest thou," said the Puritan, with- 
out one indication of courtesy, although a 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 247 

slight tone of pity seemed to pervade his words 
— ^^knowest thou, malignant^ that thj men 
shed their blood without avail ? Harlech, 
that thou wouldst have relieved, has fallen 
under the sword of that holy vessel, Obadiah 
Fight-the-good-fight-of-Faith, better known, 
it may be, to such as thee by his once 
profane name of John Mytton/' 

"Harlech fallen?" said Sir Charles, even 
in the depths of his grief with difficulty 
repressing his astonishment at the unexpected 
news. 

" Yea ; finding from one of thy malignants 
who joined our ranks that relief was coming, 
we prepared to storm the hold at ei^ht 
of the clock, but they surrendered at our 
first summons. Sesistance, thenceforth, is 
hopeless." 

"Thou trustest too much on this poor 
victory," said Sir Charles; "half Wales 
will presently rise at our summons." 

"To fight for a prisoner in a distant 
island?" 



248 ICE BOUND. 

" Prisoner ?" 

" Yes, Charles Stuart, whom thou callest 
king, is now in durance in the Isle of Wight; 
I received but yesterday a despatch from my 
lord commissioner." 

"Greneration of vipers 1" said the doctor, 
who had crept up to the back of the 
general during the conference. 

"Everywhere the Parliament is pro- 
claimed, and Cromwell lays waste the 
rebellious provinces with fire and sword." 

"Let his name be blotted out of the 
book of life," chimed in the doctor, "and 
his inheritance let another take." 

"^^ Bather, schismatic sir," said the Puritan 
unbending into a grim ill-favoured smile, 
"seemeth he likely to take to himself the 
possessions of others. We give thee twelve 
hours to disperse and gain the sea-side or thy 
own homes; after that, look to yourselves, 
for there will be a lion in the way." 

"The roaring lion," said the doctor, 
"yea, the devourer of souls." 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 249 

"We submit to your conditions," said 
Sir Charles, after a moment's pause of 
deep mournful thought, betrayed by the 
muscles that writhed like things of life 
upon his forehead, "since better may not 
be granted; and the less feel I for my 
followers, since I myself, to whom life 
is no longer dear, shall lose more than 
them all. But on one condition alone I 
yield: that our deserter be surrendered 
according to all rules of warfare on such 
hard-plighted . treaties as these." 

The officer whispered to those nearest 
to him, and within a minute they re- 
appeared, dragging between them Hard- 
riding-Tom, his hands bound behind him 
with his own belt, his face wan with 
fear. 

"Do unto him as seemeth good to thee. 
Farewell 1" Then retreating to the shore, 
and speaking in a low yoice to his 
followers, the Puritans disappeared as 
suddenly as they had come, a measured 



250 ICE BOUND. 

tramp alone annonncing their departure. 
Two or three remained behind, still look- 
ing at, perhaps plundering, the dying. 
The wounded had been long since carried 
to places of safety: these stragglers, too, 
soon disappeared. 

" Does this villain deserve death ? '* 
cried Sir Charles, after a long and terrible 
silence, full of bitter thoughts of the past, 
and sorrowful anticipations of the future. 
"He does," cried a dozen voices, 
advancing their pikes as if they would 
crush him like a reptile. 

"Thou hearest the judgment of the 
companions thou hast betrayed," said Sir 
Charles, with a voice of slow, suppressed 
rage; "what hast thou to say why thou 
shouldst not suffer? for the blood of him 
whom thou hast slain still crieth from the 
wet earth." 

" God's curses on ye all I " sud the 
wretch, foaming with rage and pale with 
fear; "thy son struck me with his stir- 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING 251 

rup-girthy and swore at me for a country 
rogue, because, as I cleaned my horse, I 
forsooth sang a psalm/' 

''And was it for such a trifle as this 
that thou madest me childless among men? 
Take the white scarf, Corporal Gwyn, from 
the dead, reeve it over yon gnarled oak, and 
loop it round his neck.'' 

The doctor fell on his knees, and ex- 
claimed with an impressive voice, faltering 
with emotion, "God have mercy on thy soul !" 
The wretch the next minute hung a quivering, 
vibrating corse, a thing for the crow and the 
mountain falcon to feed their young with. 

It was already daybreak, and the almost 
heartbroken father bent over the new-made 
unclosed grave. They scarcely could tear him 
from the corse, as, clasping it in his arms, he 
printed his hot kisses on the pale brow of 
the dead. Hastily they lowered it into the 
grave ; and not an eye was dry when the 
doctor, pulling from a pocket of his gown a 



f 



252 ICE BOUND. 

much-thumbed prayer-book, read the beauti- 
ful and solemn prayers of the English Church, 
which seem almost to forget the sorrows 
of the living in the hopes of their joyful 
rising. With more than usual solemnity 
fell these words upon the ear as the deep 
voice of the doctor uttered them : 

''Man that is bom of a woman hath 
but a short time to live, and is full of 
misery. He cometh up, and is cut down, 
like a flower; he fleeth as it were a sha- 
dow, and never continueth in one stay. In 
the midst of life we are in death." 

And never was amen uttered more fer- 
vidly than when the priest gave God thanks, 
and proceeded with the words so expressive 
of pious resignation : 

"Almighty God, with whom do live the 
spirits of them that depart hence in the 
Lord, and with whom the souls of the faith- 
fiil, after they are delivered from the burden 
of the flesh, are in joy and felicity ; we give 
ihee hearty thanks, for that it hath pleased 



THE MIDNIGHT MEETING. 253 

thee to deliver this our brother out of the 
miseries of this sinful world, beseeching thee 
that it may please thee, of thy gracious 
gocTdness, shortly to accomplish the number 
of thine elect, and to hasten thy kingdom/' 
Amen. 

There was no dismal sound of mould on 
coffin-lid; no hollow knell such as has often 
gone well-nigh to crack the heart strings. 
With a scarf bound over his face, his hands 
crossed upon his heart, his wound covered, 
his broad-leafed hat pulled over his fixed 
and open eyes, and his sword drawn, by his 
right hand, they buried the lad as a warrior 
should be buried, on a field not the less 
noble because but a dozen, and not a hundred, 
good men had yielded there their souls to 
God. 



254 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY 
PLAIN. 

A Tale of the Sixteenth Century. 

CHAPTER I. 

O Yillain I yiper I damned without redemption : 

* « « « 

Snake in my heart blood warmed, that stings my heart : 
A Judas and one thrice worse than Judas. 
* ♦ Terrible hell make war 

Upon thy spotted soul for this offence. 

Richard IL 

1 it is monstrous 1 monstrous 1 
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it. 
The winds did sing it to me ; and the thunder, 
That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced 
The name of Prosper ; it did bass my trespass. 

The Tempest. 

It was the autumn of 1533, not twenty 
years since the sturdy apostle of the Eefor- 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERT PLAIN. 255 

mation had burnt the Pope's bull at the 
very gates of Wittenberg. The Gospel flame 
had spread through Germany like fire in the 
long dry grass of the Indian savannahs. 
Already it had burnt through to Switzer- 
land, where Zuinglius had sealed his faith 
with a martyr's blood, and had spread on to 
the dark forests of the north, from whence it 
was so soon to sweep back, with all the 
impetuous fury of the ice winds, upon the 
hireling armies of the seven-hilled city. Al- 
ready even kings had pushed forward to com- 
bat with pen or sword for the new heresy or 
the revival of truth, as it was alternately ap- 
plauded with one name or branded with the 
other. 

In our own land, state policy and the 
violence of a proud and sensual monarch, 
had opened the way for the Reforma- 
tion, like some poor pursuivant that clears 
the way for a gorgeous cavalcade of the 
noble and the great. Never king sat upon 
a firmer throne. His father, a crafty mon- 




256 ICE BOUND. 

arch, with the head of a shuffling diploma- 
tist, and the toad heart of a miser, had 
been the trusty pioneer to smooth the path 
for his accession. Like his more debased 
prototype of France, the whole labour of 
his life had been to repress the bloated 
power of the nobles, to encourage the 
burgher class, and to balance them both 
by the dread of popular revolt. The good 
work done in France by Louis was pushed 
on in Italy by a Borgia, and perfected in 
England by the Eighth Henry: worthy 
trio— the vulture, the fox, and the viper — 
that still paved the way for the liberty of 
future ages. 

But the good days had dawned in storm in 
England; not without a struggle gave up 
priest his jeweled cup, and abbot his chased 
chalice; slowly, and with agonised contor- 
tions, they had surrendered the keys of their 
store-chambers to the harpies of Henry. 
The ignorant peasants, misled by those who 
moulded their souls, had risen in arms, and 



THE MONASTERY OP THE FLOWEBY PLAIN. 257 

their banners had been emblazoned with the 
cross and the five wounds of Christ, to testify 
that, to defend the old faith of their fathers, 
they had thus traitorously banded together. 

In this very year (1533) ten abbeys and six- 
teen nunneries had been suppressed, including 
those great conventual buildings, the Cis- 
tercian convents of St. Mary of Bellesden, 
in Bedfordshire, and the abbey of FurnesSy 
in Lancashire. This very year, ten thou- 
sand monks had been driven out as vagabonds, 
with but two angels and a gown each, to 
beg their bread; while 32,000/. of their 
rents were seized, and 100,000/. worth of 
their rich plate and jewels. 

What wonder, then, at the number of 
the disaflFected ; for, with the great bark of 
Popery, laden with sins as a galleon with 
gold, in the deep vortex that she made as she 
sank, had gone down a myriad of fortunes. 
With every convent that fell, a swarm of the 
beggars, both within and without the walls that 
it had created, had been cast upon the world 

VOL. I. 8 



t 



258 ICE BOUND. 

to live by their scanty wits, and to feast, like 
the " palmer worm and the locust," upon the 
more numerous but less sympathising classes 
-.—on the noble who was too rich, and the 
peasant who was too poor, to share their griefs 
or to dole them alms. 

It was an autumn evening, wanting but 
an hour to vespers, and the monks of Tstrad 
Flur*— or the Monastery of the Flowery 
Plain, as the English called it — ^were assem- 
bled in their chapter-room. Anxiety sat on 
every face, as the whisper went round from 
monk to monk, like a watchword for the 
night, for prime was the usual hour for such 
meetings, and the subject must be one of 
unusual interest in those eventful times that 
could lead so strict an abbot to convene to- 
gether the white-robed order at an hour so 
unusual in their ritual.f * 

Around the room, which was at once the 
chapter-room and the library of the monastery, 
on rows of stone benches ranged in tiers, with 

* Cardiganshire. t Cistercian. 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 259. 

bended heads^ sat the monks, with the novices, 
the elder brothers, facing each other, on 
either side. At one end, nearest the high 
throne and lectern of the abbot, sat the prior 
and the refectioner; and above their heads 
hung a large ivory crucifix, surrounded by a 
gilded halo. The architecture of the room, 
as of most of the monastery, exhibited in its 
utmost perfection the bold massiveness and 
almost rude simplicity of the reign of Edward 
of Caernarvon, during whose inroads into the 
wild county of Cardigan it had been built. 
The great shelves that lined the walls 
above the benches on which the monks were 
seated groaned with the weight of gilded 
MSS. and ponderous folios, bound round with 
brass and silver, studded with crosses, and 
clasped with metal. Within these coarse 
caskets great thoughts lay entombed — sarco- 
phagi they were in which those long dead 
had left inumed the rich balms gathered 
from long centuries of study. 

Over the richly-bossed doors which led into 

82 



r 



^ 



260 ICE BOUND. 

the cloisters hung the emblazoned flags of the 
Welsh princes, whose records lay still within 
the archives of the convent — banners which 
had once flattered high over the press of 
battle, bat which now hung withered as the 
autumn leaves without, for their black, dusty 
folds were rotting in the house of peace. 
No fierce war-cry greeted them now, nothing 
sterner than the distant murmur of mass or 
psalm breathed through long cloisters from 
the distant choir. 

The sub-prior, an ignorant but simple 
monk, repeated with careless rapidity, in that 
monotonous drone, worse than the nasal 
twang of the Puritans, which acquired for 
the monks the name of ^^ mumble matins/' 
the usual prayers for deceased benefactors, 
long since forgotten but for this, by which 
the daily chapters were generally opened; 
while the abbot remained, like one deeply 
immersed in meditation, his head between 
hands, his eyes fixed immovably on a broad 
letter that lay on the lectern before him. 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 261 

and his lips moTing as if in prayer or mut9 
soliloquy. 

The abbot was a man of some sixty sum- 
mers ; but time had dealt kindly with him, 
and it was neither thought nor care, but 
rather mystic reveries and pious contempla- 
tion, that had ploughed those deep furrows 
on his benevolent, gentle, and passionless 
features. He looked like one who had all 
his life been gazing calmly forth at the 
storm from a convent casement, soothed by 
the sounds of peace within, and careless of 
the roar without. Fortune had dealt gently 
with him, and he loved mankind rather 
from his ignorance of their follies and crimes 
than from any more than theoretical know- 
ledge of their virtues. The convent was his 
only world. His only cares were its petty 
duties and its dull round of monotonous cere- 
monies. His voice was sweet and gentle, 
there was a soft benevolence in his calm, 
blue, serene eye, and something even apos- 
tolic in the soft white locks of the tonsure 



r 



262 ICE BOUND. 

that crept round his temples. The cynical 
observer might perhaps have observed a want 
of energy in his motions and in his bearing, 
might have augured a love of ease in the 
very attitude in which he seated himself 
in his chair of state, or have discerned, 
in the chain of gold and the richly-furred 
robe that peeped through an opening of 
his plain white robe, something that showed 
that even from that holy mind the world was 
not fully alienated. He was one, however, who 
would have died heroically at the stake to 
vindicate some abstruse mystery or doubtful 
tradition of his Church, but who shrank 
from the political storm now glooming in 
the horizon. 

Leaving his bench ere the murmur of 
the prayer had well died away, and in 
the midst of the hum of the monks pre- 
paring themselves to listen, the prior, an 
Italian by birth, whispered earnestly for a 
moment to the abbot ere he rose to speak, 
and hastily resuming his place, bent over 



THE MONASTERY OP THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 263 

some papers that lay scattered before him 
with an impatient air, like one with diffi- 
culty bending a proud spirit to obey the 
commands of a superior he despised ; then, 
pushing them aside with a quick hand, 
he scanned with an eager and restless eye 
the collected brotherhood, and particularly 
the abbot, upon whose head fell a stream 
of light from a stained-glass window above 
the crucifix, crimsoning his white robe 
with the rich dye of the Tyrian purple, 
and playing round his temples like the 
visible glory that gilds the countenance 
of a dying saint. 

A saturnine expression had Fra Cozza, 
the prior ; a sneer sat ever upon his curled 
lip and his sallow and sunken features. 
There was suspicion in his deep sunken eyes, 
and they seemed to often rest with special 
malignity, or even hatred, upon a young 
monk of frank, generous bearing, who in 
a distant comer was talking in a low 
and earnest voice to an aged brother who 



i 



264 ICE BOUND. 

sat beside him, and \?ho seemed from his fea- 
tures to be a German by birth. Bat 
who would dare to malign Father Cozza, 
whose vigils were so frequent, whose fasts 
were so oft, whose camel-knees were grown 
callous with kneeling on the cold altar-stone^ 
whose lean back was livid with the dark scars 
of penance-stripes — one whose book against 
the heresy of the demon-madman, as it 
called Luther, had attracted even the at- 
tention of the holy Pope himself, and had 
procured a valuable grant to the monas- 
tery? 

Brother Jerome, the young monk of whom 
we speak, was a young Englishman, the 
younger son of a noble house — one who had 
voluntarily retired from the splendour of his 
sovereign's court to devote himself to the 
service of the King of kings. Grief and 
pious resignation seemed blended in his 
face; while over all reigned the serenity 
of a pure heart and a clear conscience, 
and the calm happiness of tranquil piety. 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 265 

His pale and hollow cheek was, however, now 
flushed by the excitement of dispute, and a 
deeper red shaded it as he saw the abbot's 
eye turned upon him benignly. Turning his 
head from his tranquil and unmoved an- 
tagonist, he told his beads, and muttering 
a prayer against temptation, started as 
his companion pulled his robe and directed 
his attention to the wandering and unset- 
tled gaze of Cozza. 

At that moment, and before he could re- 
ply, the abbot rose — a murmur went round 
the room, in a moment succeeded by the 
deep stillness of anxious expectation, as all 
eyes turned towards the speaker: 

"Brethren in Christ — evil tidings of 
troubles and commotions have already reached 
our lonely convent. I need not tell ye 
what ye have heard daily from guests in 
the Hospitium, of 'wars and rumours of 
wars, on earth distress of nations,' and per- 
plexity; the seas and the waves roaring 
'for fear of the things which are to come 



I 



266 ICE BOUKD. 

upon the troubled world/ Thunder and re- 
bellion hover over the land, dreadful minis- 
tars of divine vengeance, and heralds of the 
latter days, and now more than ever should 
ye remember the command of Christ : Vtffi- 
late et oraiej ne intraiis in tentadonem. 
Evil men are abroad, brethren — Christians, 
it grieves my soul to say, but in name, 
and not in very deed — qui ore confiterUuTj 
et fdctis negant; false prophets, lying var- 
lets, wolves who devour the flocks — lupi 
graves qui rum parcunt gregi — men who dis- 
dain the commands of our sovereign lord 
the king, the defender of the faith, whom 
Grod has set over us ; and what God hath 
chosen, call not that unclean. Men who, 
for filthy lucre, would preserve the empty 
and impotent worship of dead men's bones, 
and such fantastic mummery — especial en- 
gines of Apollyon, as Origen, I think, some- 
where calls them. Yea, a generation of vipers, 
who serve not Grod aright, who worship 
Mammon, who is at once their god and 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 267 

king, and from whom Jesus himself pre- 
serve us/* 

A murmur almost imperceptible went 
round the room at this daring avowal of 
principles which the abbot had long been 
suspected of secretly advocating. Cozza, 
like one entranced, remained with his head 
buried in his hands. The abbot heeded 
not, or perhaps heard not the interruption, 
but, with a glance around, again pro- 
ceeded : 

"Will it not, then, rend your breasts, 
my brethren, when ye hear that but a short 
hour since came hither a messenger from 
my Lord Cromwell, bringing intelligence of 
a revolt in Lancashire, where a vast throng 
of mere stabbers, vagabond monks, and 
spendthrifts, misled by those who tear 
asunder the Tobe of Christ, once woven 
perfect and without seam, beleaguer the 
castle of Pomfret. On their banner, stained 
with the blood of their countrymen, are 
blazoned the wounds of Christ, which they 



I 



268 1C1B0I31IL 



wvre ia Muam of oar Holy Fsdier in 

God, ibe Aidibidiap of To^ -mho haA 

Onyvn limstM widun tlie koU. Tralj; it 

ii mat lake tiieae wiio cnKify the Son 

i of God sfireaii, and pvl km to in opeit 

i akme. O Godr cried tlie ibbol^ orcr- 

^ eorae b j Ae ini en aiij of Ids frdii^rs ^ is it 

to flidi liedge-fnests as tiieae dttk dMMt 

aaidsly ^Pasce, pasee;* to Murderers^ wk» 

bBov ]io4 tlie tiungs wkidi be of God, and 

«ae the keys of kearen but to unlodt tke 

tieasnie-hoiises ci tiioae tkej pfamdcr? Tet, 

mj ketkren, worse tMfings tiian these tkreaftcn 

I to bEing my grey kairs wi& sorrov to the 

I grare" (and a ncNseless tear ndkd down kis 

I dieek as he ^poke). ""Woold to God that on 

my head al(Hie fifl tke Uow! Thus writes 

my Lord Cranwelly and Ae Uack fines are 

i graren cm my keait : 

'^ 'I griere to tdl thee, my kurd, b^erin^ 
Aee to be a true and bumble serrant rf God, 
ttat intdfigene^ frcmi a source tiiat cannot 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 269 

be suspected, hath reached mine ears, that 
many of the inmates of thy monastery of the 
Flowery Plain, or, as the religious term it, 
^Strata Florida,* are in constant communi- 
cation with the rebels who have risen in arms 
in the southern counties, contrary to the 
allegiance of true subjects; and, moreover, 
that z, pilgrimage of grace j as the knaves term 
it, is even now secretly forming in the valleys 
of Cardiganshire. I therefore hereby give thee 
power, in the name of our royal master, to 
apprehend any suspected traitors, whether 
their guilt be deep or their loyalty be waver- 
ing, whether in thy convent or abroad ; and 
I shall hold thee accountable with thy head 
(I say it in all friendship) for any outbreak 
in thy townships. A band of hagbutteers 
shall be spared thee, if thou need them, to 
crush this hornets' nest. 

♦* ^ Yours very heartily, 

" * Cromwell. 

" ' Given at the Palace of Windsor, 
15th of September, 1533.' 




270 ICE BOUND. 

" brethren, ye know not how this wrings 
my soul! With what divine verity did the 
blessed St. John say, ^ Omnis qui confitetur 
Jesum Christum in carne ex Deo est ;' and yet 
how hard it is for us to throw oflF the bond of 
iniquity and the gall of bitterness. It paineth 
me to use the sword which is given me from 
the Lord, and I fight as one that fighteth the 
air against I know not whom. Better were 
it for me to struggle with those frightful 
forms of temptation, whom St. Paul compares 
to wild beasts of Ephesus, than thus to smite 
those who are * bone of my bone and flesh of 
my flesh.' I cannot believe there are guilty 
ones among you. Are ye not all of Christ ? 
or are some of you indeed devils, who must 
be cast out, and whose ministry another shall 
take? 

" When I look around, I see you receive 
the tidings as the world does news of evil. 
Some are bowed down, and groaning beneath 
the unbearable weight of sorrow" (he looked 
at Cozza) ; ^^some look aghast; while others, 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWEBY PLAIN. 271 

perhaps the guilty of the flock, prate and 
whisper as if nothing were amiss. Fear and 
tremble, ye guilty ones, ^ for I bear not the 
sword of the Lord in vain/ In compliance 
with the claims of my conscience, dear 
brothers in Christ, for so I must still call ye^ 
I have drawn up an oath of allegiance to our 
sovereign lord King Henry, which 1 shall 
require all of ye, whether servants of God or 
the devil, to sign at to-morrow's chapter, held 
at the usual hour of prime ; with this, as with 
a touchstone, I will prove ex patre diabolo 
estis — with this, I will exorcise the fiends of 
treason that lurk within our cloister, and, 
rooting them out like the tares of the parable, 
will deliver them over to the temporal magis- 
trate for the burning. To-night I journey to 
Aberystwith, having business of some moment 
with the governor, and the prior, Cozza, goes 
with me. Brother Jerome will guard the flock 
till my return, and let, I beseech ye, the prayers 
of the faithful be oflered up that saints and 
angels may def^d us all against the lion thatr 



t 



272 ICE BOUND. 

walketh about seeking whom he may devour.'* 
Then extending his hands oyer the assembly, 
the abbot pronounced the benediction, and the 
assembly broke up, the monks disappearing, 
like spectres, with the noiseless tread with 
which they had entered. In small groups they 
hastened to their cells to prepare for vespers, 
or to mutter together their expressions of mu- 
tual wonder, fear, and suspicion. 

The prior alone remained like one in a 
vision, or him of whose soul the apostle spoke, 
" whether in the body or out of the body, I 
cannot tell, God knoweth.** There he sat, 
his head still bent by the habit of affected 
humility, apparently unconscious of the soli- 
tude in which he was left. His eye fixed, 
his lips moving convulsively, his fingers 
passing over the beads of his chaplet half 
mechanically. 

"Brother Cozza,** said the abbot, rising 
from his desk, and touching him on the 
shoulder, after looking at him for a moment 
with a look of calm approval, " turn thy pious 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 273 

thoughts for a moment to earthy and now 
mount thy white palfrey and come with me 
to-night to Aberystwith, for we need counsel 
in these troublous times." 

Cozza started at his touchy and looked 
round at the vacant chamber like one who 
sees a spectre. The abbot started as the 
prior's upturned face met his gaze, for a 
world of contending passions seemed boiling 
within his heart, and his sunken eyes gleamed 
with a wild phosphorescent light, that looked 
almost like the first gleam of madness. On 
his brow, ordinarily pale, there was, too, a 
deep hectic patch of scarlet that spread and 
throbbed beneath the calm glance of the 
abbot. He might have seemed a long- 
imprisoned captive, the Ugolino of his own 
country's poet, brooding in hell over his 
great wrongs. 

" Thy vigils are too numerous, holy father; 
thy fastings too severe for frail man. Thy 
spirit is willing, but thy flesh is weak. Come, 
come, go bid our lay-brother, Gwyllim, saddle 

VOL. L T 



f 



S74 MS lOUSD. 

file hones fx our jownejj and meet ns anon 
at the ofdiard ftrmJ* Widioiit ooe gesture, 
hot a bend oi assent, Cossa stole aknUf 
fircMn the room with aroted eye and down- 
cast head, as if still wrestfii^ wi& some 
HJ^^itj and all-engroflsing thoQ^t. 

^ A holj man,** sifloqiiised tha benerolent 
ahbot, as he soo^ the ridi ^ambcfs which 
were deroted to his nse^ '^ hot too aseetical in 
hb deeds of charity; I also fear, sopezstitioaa^ 
and too standi an upholder of Ae descendaBtB 
of the fidierman: b«t Christ's net is large^ 
aoiid in its medies aD varieties of fidi are c^* 
tared. Let oar Parity, thou, be wide and aD- 
cm bracing as his.* And with anodier ^ance 
at his retreating fi»m, the abbot hastened to 
prepare fw his jonmey, and to pwe directiiH» 
lor the chapter of the felhnring day. 

Within an hour, tiie abbot and die fnar. 
Suited by the setting san of an antonm daj, 
were &r on Hoot way towards Aberfstwidi. 



275 



CHAPTER II. 

Other sms only speak, murder shrieks out ; 

The element of water moistens earth, 

But blood flies upward and bedews the heavens. 

Webster. 

Such a guilt as sure will lie 

Howling for ever at your wounded heart, 

And with -you rise to judgment. 

Ibid. 

Th£ sun was near its setting, and ere the riders 
were out of sight of the monastery " night's 
pageant'' had commenced in the west. 
Yonder was the monarch of day, girt with 
clouds that caught a tincture from his crown 
of flame, like a hero undaunted though de- 
feated, striving with his shafts of light to still 
break a way through the dark phalanx of his 

t2 



r 



276 ICE BOUND. 

rival, night. Already daylight shone, ere the 
stout palfreys had paced a mile, with a fainter 
glow, dying out like the last lamp of a 
glorious banqueting-hall. As they turned to 
look back, they saw its pale and melancholy 
lustre gilding the distant pinnacles of Tstrad 
Flur, that a turn of the road now again ren- 
dered visible as they rose, hemmed in by the 
dark- wooded banks, that once gave it shelter 
and ornament. 

" Such a radiance,'' said the good abbot to 
his absent companion, who had dropped be- 
hind, and now spurred his palfrey to reach his 
superior, " I saw playing upon the calm 
features of our dear brother Anselm, when he 
yielded his soul to the God who gave it, last 
All-Hallow mass." 

His companion made no answer. As he 
spoke, they were in the act of crossing the 
Teivy, a small stream that has its source some 
two miles further to the north-east, and which, 
breaking through the rampart of stone that 
in vain tries to confine the subtle element 
within a tarn, which legends say is unfathom- 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN, 277 

able, finds its way slowly to the green, dreary 
plain which they were traversing. 

For another mile they rode on in that 
silence which, for such different reasons, was 
congenial to both minds. The tranquil and 
pious spirit of the abbot had been shaken to 
the centre by the news of the morning. The 
calm soul that ordinarily brooded in peace was 
perturbed and ruffled. Cozza, too, had cause 
for thought. His mental eye was fixed on the 
boiling torrent of his own passions, like that 
of a traveller who watches the fusion in a 
crater's mouth. His soul was convulsed by 
the recent birth of a hideous thought toa soon 
to be put in action. For one — ^for two miles 
they had thus ridden, undisturbed by any 
sound but the monotonous clattering of hoofs 
and the jingling of their ornamented trappings. 
They had now arrived at a bare, melancholy 
spot, such as even dreary Cardiganshire can 
boast but few of, where the horizon was 
hemmed in with broad green hills of unbroken 
outline, which the very goat seemed instinc- 
tively to have shunned. Even by day no wild 



r 



278 ICE BOUND. 

bird sang there, and no bee roamed thither, in 
search of thibly-scattered flowers ; a grey still 
evening it was, chilling even to men inured 
to the life of a convent. The place seemed in 
the dreary twilight the region of a purgatorial 
dream. In such a waste might St. Anthony 
have been tempted by the "prince of the 
powers of the air." The clouds were low 
. upon the hills, and there was an oppressive 
density in the atmosphere such as often heralds 
thunder. All nature seemed weighed down 
and oppressed by the dread of the approach- 
ing Clementine war. Twilight alone reigned 
during this dreadful interregnum of sun and 
moon. 

The abbot, arousing himself from a deep 
reverie into which he had half unconsciously 
fallen, first broke the silence. So loud and so 
supernatural seemed his voice, after that long 
pause, that the Italian started like " a guilty 
thing upon a fearful summons," but, instantly 
recovering himself, pushed on his palfrey to 
his companion's side. 



THE MONASTERY. OF THE PLOWERY PLAIN. 279 

" I feel such a weight at brain and heart, 
dear brother," he said, **as I never felt 
before. This seems to me such an eve a3 
may have heralded the dreadful dawn of 
those days of darkness that fell upon the 
Egyptians ; but I would talk to thee now of 
deeper things than such lemures of the mind, 
as Origen calls them.'' He looked at the 
sky for a moment, and proceeded: "Un- 
bosom thyself to me, thy father in the faith, 
and tell me if thou- indeed knowest of any 
of our brotherhood who favour the Judases of 
whom thou this morning heardst ? Alas ! that 
any should indulge in a sin worse than that 
compact with the Evil One which I, with 
many of the fathers, could almost believe is 
the sin against the Holy Ghost, spoken of by 
our blessed Lord/' 

"I know of none," replied Cozza, sternly, 
" except it may be brother Jerome, or that 
heretic Eisenstein. They whisper together, 
they are less constant at lauds, and are 
oftener shut in their cells." 



r 



280 ICE BOUND. 

^^ I cannot mistrust them/' ssdd the abbot^ 
firmly; "they are good men, though they 
do not conceal their opinion that the Pope 
should have no jurisdiction in this land/' 

" And callest thou this little/' said Cozza, 
with an ill-concealed expression of rage, that 
however passed unnoticed by his unobservant 
companion, " to deny the authority of him 
to whom Jesu gave the keys of hell and 
heaven? But hast thou heard aught lately," 
he added, with the concentrated manner 
of one who would dive into the very heart 
of him he addresses, " of that runaway monk 
Luther — ^that blasphemer, that sin-spotted 
son of perdition ?" 

" Speak not so harshly of one whom God 
alone will judge," said the abbot, reprovingly. 
"The holy Pontiff can well spare from his 
well-filled treasuries the profits of those his 
misused indulgences." 

His companion's brow had been growing 
darker and darker during this speech in 
favour of one so odious ; in another instant 



THE MONASTERY OP THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 281 

he would have forgotten all respect due to 
a superior whom he secretly despised; but 
at that instant the sound of the vesper-bell 
came borne towards them upon the almost 
breathless wind. It was the voice of religion 
speaking to the shepherd and the traveller 
on the mountains ; it seemed, as Dante says, 
" to mourn the passing day." 

Dismounting, the monks knelt for a 
moment and again rose. At that instant the 
hand of Cozza was groping in the folds of his 
robe, but, withdrawing it, he calmly mounted 
and rode on behind the abbot, who, crossing 
his brow and breast, was uttering a short 
prayer against ^Hhe terror that walketh 
by night." It was a stiletto that Cozza 
sought for in his robe. What stayed him? 
— The lurid glare of that comet iihat now 
flamed forth like a burning world in the 
heavens. His ghastly eye turned upon 
it with an expression of pain, fear, and 
hatred. 

" The moon will be up soon to 



282 ICE BOOKD. 

light us to our desired haven/' said the 
abbot, cheerfully, with an anxious look at 
the luminary, which, almost as he spoke, 
came forth from behind a dark vaporous 
cloud, whose skirts it suffused with silver; 
"but prithee, good Cozza, spur on thy 
palft'ey, which cares for thee truly no more 
than a Flemish charger for a page, rouse 
thyself from those trancelike contemplations 
which too often unseat reason, and look 
at yon comet, like a flaming sword, that 
threatens more woe to the earth/' 

Involuntarily his companion looked up at 
the fearful symbol that seemed to his heated 
fancy to redden their very path, and he 
shuddered as he looked. 

" 'Twill be midnight ere we reach Aberyst- 
with, my lord Abbot," he exclaimed, assum- 
ing, with all the versatility of his reptile na- 
ture, a correspondent joyfulness, as if he 
had shaken away all care from his heart; 
" but still, methinks, if the moon shines as 
it shineth now, I could even point thee out the 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 283. 

new and dangerous fissure in the arch of the 
Pont y Fynach, could you'* (and he assumed 
the blandest tones of courtesy, and of one pro-? 
posing an unreasonable request) ^'but dismount 
and descend a few rude steps of a fisherman's 
path that leads to the black torrent — ^but 
that were impossible.'' 

"What fissure dost thou speak of?'* 
said the abbot, in a tone of wonder ; " I 
think, good Cozza, that thou hast conversed 
so much with the sialnts, that lately thou hast 
forgotten how to speak to sinful men/' 
(Why did Coaza avert his eyes from that 
gentle glance, as though it Jiod been the 
withering gaze of a lost spirit?) "Hast 
thou known me to ever shun fatigue and toil 
when God or man could be served, weak 
and erring as I am? How should I la- 
ment if harm were to betide that old 
bridge built by the religious of an early 
age, consecrated by the feet of the preachers 
of the cross, and over which so many 
saints in heaven have passed and repassed, 



284 ICE BOUND. 

while toiling and sorrowing on this our 
earth. Have we not still in our convent 
traditions of the struggles of our blessed 
founders with those horrid monsters of the 
old religion who^ rising from the black 
abyss which seemeth like a sallyport of 
hell, thwarted those who would have firSt 
spanned it over with a pathway of stone 
for the love of Christ? Judge me not so 
unkindly, Cozza.'' 

" Pardon me, Father Abbot, I did but try 
thy zeal. A peasant to whom but this morn- 
ing I gave alms at the convent-grate, told me 
of a fissure which had lately appeared, and 
which threatens danger; already a troop 
of horsemen has turned back and sought 
a safer road. The danger needs, he says, 
but to be arrested in time, and to our 
care, as its early founders, appertaineth its 
restoration, though the vulgar say it was 
reared by ApoUyon Himself.'' And Cozza 
essayed to smile. 

"Oh! God forbid!" said the abbot, 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 285 

whose zeal was now fully aroused — " God 
forbid that, to get an hour sooner to our 
hostelrie, we should imperil the life of man 
or beast." 

The good man had scarcely spoken, ere, 
turning an abrupt angle of the road, the 
Pont y Fynach, or Monk's Bridge, came 
in sight. The course of the Mynach, the 
thunder of whose falls they had long 
heard pulsating through the rocky glen in 
which it roared, lay beneath. Within a hun- 
dred yards of those broad, unbroken, bar- 
ren mountains, the landscape had changed, 
as if they had suddenly passed oyer the 
boundary of some new region. In the 
midst of a wide arena of gathered hills 
broke the great black chasm, worn as by the 
dark subsidence of a deluge, through 
which, unseen, tearing their impeded way, 
roar the twin torrents, the Mynach and the 
l^heidol, that, leaping down from their moun- 
tain homes to whisper weird things, and 
to work woe to man in this wild, dreary 



286 IC£ BOUND. 

spot, crash on, rending a path between 
the thick-wooded rocks that vainly at- 
tempt to restrain their blind fhrj. On 
the one side of the road lay the thick 
sloping forest, like an immense but silent 
multitude, beneath the moon, now newly 
risen, the tree tops tinted by its pale diver 
fire; beneath them, hundreds of feet be- 
low on either side, roared the waters, as 
they dashed over huge firagments of blanched 
rock, and wore them into deep channels 
with the lashing foam, which a great poet, 
speaking of such a scene, calls ^^the sweat 
of their great agony,'* in very scorn of the 
brute might that would bar their progress 
to the fi*ee, broad, peaceful current beyond^ 
Here and there in the distance, through 
breaks in the green woods, might be seen 
the white flashings of tiie highest fall, 
which, surging and boiling, filled the air 
with the eternal sound of its unintermif- 
ting thunder. Under their feet, poised in air, 
dark against the dear sky, rose the bridge 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 287 

which tradition reported to have been raised 
hj supernatural help, angelic or devilish, 
as monk or peasant told the tale. Be- 
neath its arch lay the deepest torrent, 
whose silent rushing was more dreadful than 
even the clamour in the distance. The shadow 
of the arch threw the water's black depths into 
a deeper shade. 

How solemn it looked, that work of men^ 
who had passed away, even dwarfed as it was 
by the Titanic workings of nature which 
lay around it and beneath it. Could man's 
dark thoughts plan evil there, with the 
very sounds of God's unceasing voice in 
the cataract ringing in his ears? The 
good man could hear that still small whisper 
of angels in the little runnelet that trickled 
through the woods to its own soft silvery 
murmur; but the wicked was deaf even 
to those mighty warning-throbbings that 
seemed to shake the firm-set earth. 

^^ Might not peasants well imagine, dear 
brother, that spirits of the waters dwelt 



288 ICE BOUND. 

in these depths, to tempt travellers to de- 
struction ? *' 

Cozza replied not; but could the abbot 
have heard his mutterings, he would have 
known that he was articulating between his 
teeth, "Not yet— not yet!" 

" Cozza, I fear for thy * health. I never 
saw thee look so wan as now. Thou shalt 
stay awhile by the sea, down at Aberystwith ; 
it will render thee fitter to bear the toils and 
asceticisms of our cloister." 



289 



CHAPTER III. ' 

Tying his patient palfrey with that of the 
abbot, to whom he pressed to do ser- 
vice with all the feigned humility of a 
lay brother, to the trunk of a birch, whose 
silver stem sprang up like a slender pillar 
of silver from a crevice in the old bridge^ 
Cozza knelt for a moment in prayer at the 
foot of a wayside cross, reared, as the le* 
gend ran, to the memory of a knight who> 
long before the erection of the bridge, had 
perished while crossing the ford below dur- 
ing a stormy January night, though, ao^ 
cording to a conflicting story, it recorded 
the later murder of a Flemish merchant in 
a dark cavern near the falls, far beneath 
TOL. I. u 



290 ICE BOUND. 

the grey arch. A half-obliterated inscrip- 
tion on the shaft, bidding the passer-by 
pray for the soul of Sir Walter de Clare, 
favoured the former opinion; and still, at 
stated periods, the monks of Strata Florida 
sang masses at midnight for the soul of the 
departed kpight. 

Taking the arm of his more youthful 
and vigorous companion, the abbot, turn- 
ing into a precipitous path to the left of 
the road, commenced the descent with the 
hesitating step of one more accustomed 
to rush-strewn floor and smooth-paved 
cloister than the broken passage of a tor- 
rent-path. At every step he glanced up 
inquiringly at the bridge, whose dark sha- 
dow contrasted strongly with its rough 
surface, frosted by the moonlight, which, find- 
ing its way by devious openings through 
the obscure trees above, strove in vain to 
light up the black stream that foamed and 
seethed in impotent madness in the narrow 
hell of waters beneath* Many a traveller 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 291 

bad entered that rocky mouth and returned 
no more. 

" I i?ee no fissure/' said the abbot, impa- 
tiently turning round to his companion, 
whose pale face grew darker, as if it had been 
shaded by the wing of a passing spirit. 

"Further down — ^yet further down,'' he 
said, in a deep hoarse voice. " Gird up your 
robe to the very girdle; I say the fissure 
gapes wider than even on yesternight. Step 
on yon broad, smooth table-rock that over- 
hangs the bed of the torrent. Bend more 
over; I am close at thy back." 

The abbot leant forward and peered into 
the darkness, and, standing again erect, 
looked like a spectre, as his white robes 
gleamed in the moonlight, that now broke 
through the noon of night to the very surface 
of the hell-pool. 

" How dreadful is this place !" he ex- 
claimed ; " well might the holy men of God 
believe that here lay an entrance to the pur- 
gatory of Ocean, the roar of the torrent 

u2 



292 ICE BOUND. 

drowning the cries of the suffering wretches. 
Domine, dirige nos !" 

" Then join them, fool !" cried Cozza, who 
had hitherto remained silent, with the shriek 
of a madman when the hour of frenzy ap- 
proaches, and striking the wretched man as he 
spoke heavily on the brow with his clenched 
fist. There was a heavy plunge, a whirlpool of 
spouting foam, a stifled cry of " Oh, Mother 
of God T' and a mangled form, borne through 
the winding chasm in a moment with the 
speed of light, helplessly as a thistledown on 
a swollen river, perceptible to the eye only by 
the flash of the white robe as it passed, 
floated out slowly, spread out upon the dark 
water, floated under the dull shadow of the 
bridge, was retarded for a moment by some 
rock that impeded its progress, then hurried 
on by a side current — ^hurried on, and passed 
away. 

" Heretic ! dullard !'' exclaimed the monk, 
"well hast thou deserved thy fate. Now 
have I requited thee for proud scorn and 



THE MONiSTERY OF THE FLOWERY PUIN. 293 

for cruel jibes on the poor motik of Italy, 
now thy vacant seat shall another take — 
let the cause of Grod go on and prosper! 
I thank God for this hour of vengeance!" 
And the murderer fell on his knees, in impious 
mockery of the God of peace and love. 

For a moment he remamed motionless; the 
fire of conscience was already lit in heart and 
brain — a flame that would grow fiercer, but 
never could be extinguished. But an instant 
before the abbot had stood beside that red- 
handed murderer, his own baleful look had 
rested on those calm, placid features, now 
marred and defaced by death. And such a 
death ! One little moment, and that soul 
stood before the face of its Creator, if such 
there were — ^for Cozza doubted of hell and 
heaven — and it was he who had sent the soul 
^^ unknelled and unannealed," with all its im- 
perfections on its head, to that dread bar! 
€ould he, who but three short hours since sat 
at the head of his chapter in all the pride of 



294 tCE BOUND. 

spiritual and temporal power, be already a 
swollen and disfigored corpse ? 

Cozza was a murderer — ^bis livid face was 
branded by passion as with the badge of Cain. 
It was base and cowardly he knew — ^yet he 
trembled with the fears of those poor supersti- 
tious serfs at whose confessions he had mocked. 
That peal of thunder, rolling among the dis- 
tant hills, and now yibrating nearer, was it 
the voice of God, such as spoke to Cain when 
the first-shed blood was still steaming up an 
accursed libation to the evening clouds? 

How it blasted him, that lightning, that 
clove through the arch like the flaming 
sword of some avenging angel! Now all 
nature seemed gifted with a voice to denounce 
his crime and to proclaim it to the universe. 
Into his perturbed mind there thronged le- 
gends of murdered saints, and of the dreadful 
end of their murderers. 

The thunder's dreadful "organ-pipe" pro- 
claimed it, and told it with the voice of Heaven 
to the winds; the roaring waters caught it 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 295 

next, as they fell from rocky ledge to shelf 
below, and they shouted it to the little silver- 
tongued brooks that rippled down the hills ; 
then the fading leaves became instinct with life, 
and nestled and bent together in fearful whis* 
paring, that maddened him to hear, as some 
night-bird, screaming far overhead, like a soul 
taking flight, bore it away to other lands— 
perhaps to his own fair country of vine and 
orange-blossoms, the land of his innocent 
youth, the land of his earliest crimes. 

But the sternest witness was the wind that 
howled around him, and flapped his robe as he 
stood gazing with wild eyes and clutched hands 
at the spot where the body had disappeared. It 
was the wind that, pouring down the ravine 
of the mountains, roared like a demon for his 
prey, and shook the surging and rocking trees, 
and bellowed in defeated rage through the echo- 
ing arch, muttering as if men were standing 
above and calling for the murderer, over the 
dark abyss of the torrent. Was some spirit 
coming to smite him where he stood — ^the 



» 



296 ICE BOUND. 

murderer, the infidel, the sinner against the 
Holy Ghost, if ever one lived on God's earth? 
Now the wind grew calmer, and died away in 
inarticulate mutterings; then it swept along 
with redoubled violence, so that the very 
trees bent under it like pliant rushes. And 
this storm his crime had called up. Groans 
and shrieks seem to reach him from the dark* 
ness beyond. The merest imagination grew at 
once to a reality. The storm grew bolder. 
Crime never looks so horrible as on such a 
night, when the minister of God seems 
abroad riding on the storm. 

The monk, clinging to the rock, looked 
down again upon the fatal spot from which 
his eyes had hitherto been averted. The 
waters, swollen by rain that had fallen at 
noon, were foaming like a hell-caldron within 
their narrow prison. He could not see the 
body ; one fragment of a white robe lay upon a 
rock almost beyond the reach of the water, but 
as he gazed a blast carried it down the stream 
and it passed away. The arch threw its deepest 



THE MONASTEEY OF THE FLOWEKY PLAIN. 297 

shadow upon one still eddj, there the body 
might lie, or it might have been borne down 
to the falls below by the raging impetuosity 
of the stream. What if it had been dashed 
on some drj-lichened rock, where it would be 
seen by the first fisherman who waded down 
thither ere daybreak? Oh, horror! that 
crime should prove so useless, that all should 
be lost in heaven and nothing gained on 
earth I 

Come what will, he must see the end. 
Bedrenched as he was, with the speed of one 
who, winged with hope, follows a wounded 
der, the Italian clambered ahne up that 
steep, rarely-trodden path, and in a moment 
was again upon the wayside. There, beside 
the cross, lighted by a momentary break in the 
storm, still stood the palfreys, drenched and 
trembling in the rain and wind. The abbot's 
he unfastened, and lashing him with a thong, 
urged him at the height of his speed towards 
Aberystwith. Swift as a mountaineer he 
sought the right*hand path to the river. Clam- 



298 ICE BOUND. 

bering down the rocky side, pushing his way 
through bush, bramble, and thick under- 
wood, he hurried on to the lower falls, guided 
by the sound of their loud-voiced thunder. 

Working his toilsome way, soaked with 
rain, and bleeding with the thorns that tore 
his hands, he reached a small cavern, the 
scene of ancient murder, hollowed out of a 
rock that overhung the falls. Close to him — 
so close that he could have touched it — 
poured down the sheet of water from a height 
of ninety feet, like a river flashing past with 
the speed of light, broken into crystal foam by 
the angles of black rock that jarred the thin 
veil of water that leapt on to basins below, 
from whence it fell again to the bed beneath. 
No mangled corpse was there — ^no relic of the 
deed of blood ; pure and unstained by gore, 
the waters passed like molten silver from a 
mine fused by the hidden fire of a volcano. 

"But, ah! God above. Holy Virgin, and 
all the saints who pity man, was that a human 
voice, or a mocking fiend, that cries so shrilly 
from above, 'My lord abbot!' In God's 



THE MONASTERY DF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 299 

name, answer!" — a quick footstep is crushing 
its way through bushes. The murderer will 
be caught like a wolf in his den ; to escape is 
impossible ; the steps come nearer. With a 
scowl of rage and terror Cozza grasps a 
poniard. The blade flashes in the moonlight. 
Hush ! keep closer, cower down behind that 
jutting rock. " My lord abbot ! " He comes — 
'tis Jerome ; he passes so near that the mur- 
derer felt his warm breath ; one blow, he falls 
with a deep groan. Cozza stays not to repeat 
the stroke. Deep panting, with glaring eye, 
and with his hand still clutching the knife in 
all the wild energy of his despair, the monk 
regained the path. With a hurried look 
around, and listening for a moment, he leapt 
on his palfrey, set the other loose and galloped 
in the direction of the monastery. 

Away from the scene of blood, his fears 
soon subsided. He grew calmer, and mocked 
at his own guilty qualms as he urged on his 
benumbed steed with word and blow. White 
was that monk's robe when he had bent his 
knee at early matins, but now, tf) the eye of 



300 ICE BOUND. 

sorrowing angel and guardian spirit, it was all 
blood bestained. He harries on, hardly daring, 
m spite of the hardihood of a seared conscience, 
to look back upon a track traversed but a few 
hours since ; shutting his eyes at lonely spots 
which he had seen lying peaceful beneath the 
sunset, when his mind was but labouring with 
thought of a murder as yet unperformed— with 
thoughts of priestly power and potency yet to 
come. The moon looked forth again, as if the 
struggles of nature had passed away with the 
crime it were vain to veil. How calmly it looked 
down upon him, like the sorrowing gaze of 
God himself. The shadows that fell on road* 
side wall and hedge seemed double. ^^ 'Twas 
fantasy," he said ; " mere brain-sick thought." 
He had but sent two accursed heretics a few 
days earlier to judgment. 

He thought of the dropping of blood when 
the ripples of a rill caught his ear ; and now 
he sweats for very anguish, for 'tis scarce a 
mile from the monastery, and behind him, on 
the night wind, comes the Irampling sound of 
horse's hoo&. The dead pursue not the living I 



301 



CHAPTER IV. 

Conscience needs no corporeal form to 
haunt the criminal ; she is inyisible^ but still 
present in the cell and on the scaffold; 
and her loudest voice is when he stands 
for the moment before death, trembling and 
appalled before the gazing thousands. Cozza 
is paralysed with fear; his hardihood for- 
sakes him. From his half-frozen hand drops 
the bridle, as a horseman rides up and sa- 
lutes him. A plain trooper by his dress — 
a cross on his plain doublet, and a red 
feather in a plain sterol morion. 'Twas a 
hearty, jovial voice that bid Cozza hall. 
Strangely discordant it seemed in the mur- 



302 ICE BOUND. 

derer's ears — could it be a minister of 
blood? 

'^ Pax vobiscunif Sir Monk I but I have 
ridden hard to reach thee. Thy palfrey 
flew as I've seen a wild horse do before the 
wolves of the savannahs. But how pale 
and haggard thou lookest — ^art unwell, man ? 
Hast thou just left some bed of death? 
They say monks spend not all their time 
by dying men/' 

"Death — dying men!" stammered the 
Italian, unable to shake off the fears that 
beset him in spite of the subtlety of his 
nature. 

"Death, good Signor Echo — ^yes, death; 
and why not? Do Adam's children never 
die among these healthy mountains? Sure, if 
none look better than thee, thou sheeted 
ghost with thy shroud on, the sexton has 
good guerdon and worn-out shovels." 

"A peace to thy ribaldry, good sol- 
dier, for such I judge thee," said the monk, 
instantly sobered by the vicinity to danger, 



THE MONASTERY .OP THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 303 

and assutning his wonted soft and servile 
voice. "I ride on business of the convent, 
and have visited no dead to-night." 

"Well, by the mass! if thou hadst 
just emerged from a charnel-house, thou 
couldst not look more like a mould-turner 
than thou dost. By our Lady! if thou 
hadst seen death in as many shapes as I 
have, the fearful change, as the mumble 
matins call it, coming over white and dusky 
faces alike, thou wouldst not fear it much, 
but prepare to meet it gaily, flask in hand, 
like a welcome guest or an unexpected 
bride, rather than freeze thy blood on cold 
stones, or whining out prayers in damp cells, 
wrapped in sackcloths, as those of you who 
don't love women and the wine -cup do. 
It's a cursed scurvy life — ^give me the camp, 
father." 

"Good night, friend. I am bound for 
yonder monastery," said Cozza, impatient 
of the wild license of the rough trooper. 

"Not too fast, pious brother. I wend 



304 ICE BOUHB. 

thither too; and this stout roan longs for 
his oats as much as his rider does for a pasty.*' 

They had approached the gate as they 
spoke, and within could be heard the deep 
sound of the bell tolling for lauds, or mid- 
night service. The lay brother that opened 
the barred door started at the mght of 
Cozza, who, frowning at his wondering 
gazC; silenced his curiosity by bidding him 
quickly find fit lodgings and refection for 
the stranger. 

" And where leftst thou our holy fitther? ^ 
said a monk who met them on their way 
to the hospitium. 

^'I bade him adieu/' said Cozza, coldly, 
^^ within sight of the ocean. He bade me 
tarry with him; but I would no longer 
loiter amid worldly scenes, unfitted for the 
Christian mind. For there was a pageant 
on the morrow, and jousts." 

"Farewell till the morning," said the 
soldier, as Cozza left him oyer a flask of 
Xeres and a smoking fowl. " It is already 
reddening for the dawn." 



THE MONASTEEY OT THE TLOWERY PLAIN. 805 

" Red as blood/' muttered the " Italian 
with a sigh, as he hastened to his cell, and, 
apparelled as he was, threw himself on his 
poor pallet, but not to sleep; for with 
each half-formed dream came thoughts of 
seas of blood, of the torrent, of floats 
ing corses and inarticulate yoices ; every 
scene, just as if it should have melted into 
gentle, soothing, blessed sleep, was lit up 
with the glare of an impending comet, that 
went through Cozza's brain like a blinding 
flash, and made him leap up and stare 
around. Then he would lie down, and 
act over each moment of the crime^ 
feel the night ah* play upon his fevered 
cheek, and the blood agfdn throbbing more 
leisurely to his heart, when that cry of 
"My lord abbot!'' rang in his ears — ^thei 
voice of that accursed monk who ever 
crossed his path to thwart and to torment 
*— whose presence was as hatefcd to him, as 
torturing, as a pure angel's would be to the 
mad blasphemers of hell's dark regions. Again 

VOL. I. X 



806 ICEBOUND. 

that hot breath rests upon his cheek ; it seems 
for hours — ^hours of agony. Once more the 
cry, " My lord abbot ! " and he wakes from 
his first short sleep. It is day ; the realities 
of a gnawing conscience are less dreadfiil 
than the pangs of those dreams. There are 
the bare walls of his cell ; a stream of pale 
light falls through the narrow-grated apert 
ture on a crucifix — the image of that Sa- 
viour whom he had crucified afresh, to whom 
he dared not pray. He awoke to the 
dreadful consciousness — ^which no sophistry 
can hide from itself — of the black and 
eternal presence of crime that forces itself 
into every thought, and blends with every 
scene-^he has, too, fears for the future. 

How can he meet the questions of his 
inquiring brethren? How can he give a 
probable account of a death of whidi he 
knows so well, but should know nothing? 
What if the body should be recovered ? He 
^ rises and sits on the side of his pallet^ 
and leans his burning brow upon his hands. 



THE MONASTERY. OF THE FLOWEEY PLAIN. 307 

He has a dozen immature schemes within his 
mind ; it is his to twine them into all the 
glosed semblance of truth. Could the pal- 
frey have fallen over the precipice — the 
moon was too bright. ITow he has it ! He 
leaps up in delight: that wild stranger 
must weave (he snare. A knock. He starts 
as guilt alone will start. 

"Fra Cozza/' 

"Who's there?" 

A well-known name. A monk enters* 

"I heard a shriek; and came^ thinking 
jou might be in some grievous pain^ for 
you have lately looked overworn with vigU 
and penance.'' 

"I am well, brother; but in a dream I 
wrestled with a demon who would not leave 
me, and I shrieked in my despair ; at last, I 
muttered an exorcism and it fled, But 
what of the — Je — ^the — are aU our brothers 
within at their devotions ? " 

/' All save the abbot and brother Jerome, 
whom none have heard of since vespers." 

x2 



308 ICEBOUND. 

'^ Vile heretic ! I gage my golden cmcifix 
that Jerome has left ns for ever. Bat talk 
not of him — ^mention not his accursed nam^'' 
said Cozza^ with an outburst of passion so 
unexpected from one so saintly, that it at 
once astonished and awed into silence the 
humble serviton *' Tarry not here with 
this idle prating; ,in the absence of the 
renegade the management of the holy house 
devolves by right on me. The day draws 
on ; bring pens and an inkhom to my cell^ 
then rouse the stranger who came here last 
night, and bring him hither in half an 
hour. 

In an instant the lay brother returned with 
the inkhom, and, bowing humbly to the 
spiritual regent, withdrew. Then barring his 
cell carefully, the Italian, lifting his rude 
mattress, drew a paper from a hiding-place^ 
and began to write earnestly, but slowly, 
and with the air of one who studied the 
shape of every letter. Then folding the 
sheet into a square form, he bound it with 



THE MONASTEEY OF THE FLOWEEY PLAIN. 309 

a silk band and sealed it with a seal drawn 
from his girdle. He had scarcely finished 
ere a tap at the door announced the arrival 
of the stranger. Cozza unbarred it, dismissed 
the attendant o^onk, admitted the soldier 
with a smile of recognition^ and again- closed 
the door cautiously behind him. 

**A soldier, as thou seemest to be/' he 
said, in a confidential voice, *^ will, I suppose, 
do anything for an angel, when he ventures 
his life daily for a paltry groat ?" 
' " I draw my sword for him who pays me 
best,'' said the soldier, bluntly, making an 
awkward salute as to one whom he now dis* 
covered to be of higher rank than he had 
supposed. '' Is the service a perilous service? 
^ The harder the knocks the more crowns in 
the pouch,' says the adage.'' 

'' No perilous task is mine, fiiend. I 
would have thee but deliver this letter to 
the chapter, to whom thou must represent 
thyself as sent from the castellan of Aberyst- 
with." 



310 ICE BOUND. 

" Oh, mere lying and a little honest per- 
jury/' said the man, with a glance of half- 
sarcastic ndivetS. 

" But I had almost forgot to ask thee on 
what errand thou art bound to these wild 
regions away from hold or garrison. Art 
thou one of Vaughan's men, or but an hag- 
butteer from Conway ?'* 

^^ In nomine sanctorum Lutherus ana- 
thema,'' said the soldier, quickly, eyeing 
keenly his interrogant. 

" Lutherus anathema maranatha," replied 
Cozza, giving the countersign of the Pilgrims 
of Grace. 

'^ I am sent hither from the North to bid 
the pilgrims hasten, for there the fiuthful have 
abready risen against a robber king and his 
butcher minister, who is more fit to trail a pike, 
as he once did, than hold the reins of state." 

" The beacon needs but to be kindled ; 
bills and bows are already distributed. Once 
ring our convent-bell backwards, and half 
Wales will rise from sleep." 



THE MONASTERY OF THE PLOWERT PLAIN. 311 

'^ But have you no false heretics whom we 
have to fear?" 

" A few such are there within our convent; 
but for them/' said Cozza, with a boding 
frown, "we will provide. Beneath this are 
vaults where many skeletons lie in chains — : 
the living shall take their place.*' 

'^ Ah, ah/' said the soldier, smiling ; 
"there's nothing like your monk when his 
blood's warm, if the stake be piled, and the 
fire ready." 

But Cozza heard him not. Calling a 
humble monk who was praying in an adjoin- 
ing cell, he bid him summon those he wot of 
to meet him in the chapter-room without a 
moment's delay. 



" This soldier brings us a letter from 
Aberystwith ; doubtless from our holy father." 
Breaking the thread, he read its contents 
with a simulated voice of sorrow and astonish- 
ment: 



312 ICE BOUND, 

^^ «To the Beligious of tlie Convent of Strata Florida — 
Salntem in Domine. . 

" * I grieve to tell you that your father in 
God, Abbot Hilary, fell asleep in Christ soon 
after his arrival in this our castle. Departing 
without a groan, his blessed spirit flew to 
join the just in heaven. He will be buried 
in the castle chapel, privately^ to-morrow at 
eventide, and masses shall be said for his 
soul. Pray that he rest in peace. Farewell. 
" * Thomas Grenyille, 

" * Governor of the Castle of Aberystwith for his Miyesty 
King Henry Vni., Defender of the Faith.' " 

All were silent for a moment; some shed 
tears, and others hid their faces in their robes. 
A grey-headed monk broke the silence. 

"A sore blow, dear brethren, has indeed 
this day befallen us ; but for the blessed man 
weep not, nor can we regret the loss, if, as we 
-fear, the late abbot had rather swerved in his 
heart from the faith of his fathers^ having, with 
some others of his flock, imbibed lately some 
tenets of the damnable heresies of Gerpiai^^ 



THE MONASTERT OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 313 

In these troublous timeil the abbot's throne 
must not remain a day untenantecL And 
who is more fitting to guard the flock from 
the wolves than Father Cozza? whose sanctity 
so few of us can equal/' 

Those present hailed the choice with ex- 
clamations. The Italian had risen to address, 
them^ when a monk, pale and trembling, 
rushed in. 

"An armed multitude/V he cried, "be- 
sieges the monastery, headed by one bearing 
a banner blazoned with the wounds of Christ. 
They demand audience of the abbot, and 
refuse to believe his absence." 

" Bid them tarry awhile," said Cozza, with 
a proud gesture of command that astonished 
his associates, who had seen in him before 
only the self-denying ascetic, " till the abbot 
come forth." 

Then quickly assuming the rich dress of 
his predecessor, which the obsequious servi^ 
tors brought him, and followed by a. train 
of monks, he hastened to the barred gate,^ that 



314 ICEBOUND* 

now echoed with the thundering blows of 
the assailants. 

^* Burst them open/' cried a voice, ** in the 
name of the Three Kings, and purge the 
convent of heretics!'' 

** Open not the doors to the vile rabble,*' 
said the soldier, scornfully. 

"Throw them wide," said Cozza to the 
porter, who with trembling hand fumbled at 
the massive bolts. 

With ferocious cries, like a pack of famished 
wolves upon a sheepfold, in burst the motley 
crowd of assailants, who fell back at the sight 
of the procession that fronted them* 

The leader, a man with the grizzled hair 
and stem look of an old soldier, bore a 
halberd in his hand. At his back came a 
small body of men, whose richly-embroidered 
doublets and ornamented weapons seemed to 
indicate a higher rank than their followers, 
who thronged behind waving rude bills and 
pikes. Their costume was as various as their 
arms, for while some wore the plumed hel« 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 315 

mets of knightS; others had donned the old 
hood of a former century^ or the flat cap 
of the citizen of the day. 

The stem look of defiance in the leader's 
eye changed to fiiendly greeting as he beheld 
Cozza. 

"We came, holy father/* he exclaimed, 
"thinking to find one who loved not our 
cause as thou dost. From thy hand, then, shall 
our banner receive consecration, ere we sweep 
down, like a storm, upon the guilty land." 

Cozza replied not, but, raising a crucifix 
on high, led the way into the church. Two 
by two followed the monks, and the rebels 
thronged after in a tumultuous band. 

The church was a beautiful erection of the 
decorated period, though here and there a 
low and massive pillar, with its toothed 
moulding, spoke of ruder hands and an ear* 
lier age. Over the gorgeous altar, lustrous 
with golden chasings and velvet blazonries, 
the stained windows threw a deeper and a 
softer radiance. 



316 ICE BOUND. 

The music thunder rolling shook 
The prophets blazoned on their panes, 

As with unfaltering voice and finn hand the 
murderer elevated the Host above the kneel- 
ing multitude. There was a moment's silence 
ere he pronounced the solemn ritual of coa-^ 
secration. It was broken bj a loud footstep 
— then another. The foremost intruder was a- 
noble, richly dad in the costly furs and sump-^ 
tuous robes of the period, who, holding his 
plumed hat, fastened by a carcanet of rubies, 
in one hand, and a drawn sword in the other, 
and disregarding all glances fixed upon him, 
strode firmly and slowly to the altar. 

The new abbot trembled as he laid his hand 
softly upon his shoulder. Cozza dropped the 
wafer ; the golden cup against which he 
reeled fell, and the red wine streamed over 
his white robe. 

" There are stains on thy robe deeper than 
those of wine," said a harsh voice. It was 
the soldier, who rose from the crowd. 

"I denounce thee," said the noble, "Fran- 



THE MONASTEBY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 317 

Cisco Cozza^ as a murderer^ and as a traitor 
to thy king t Guy Beckton^ did he not pay 
thee to bring a forged letter to the chap- 
ter?'' 

" He did/' said the soldier ; " he gave me 
two angels for the price of bloody which I now 
fling at the assassin's feet." 

" Bring in the body of the murdered ab* 
bot," cried the noble, " that it may blast the 
wretched monk/* 

As he spoke, a trampling was heard with- 
out, and four peasants entered bearing a 
corpse, covered with a sheet, upon a hand- 
bier, and placed it before the altar, the kneel- 
ing men shrinking from its contact. Again 
cried the noble, and the words pierced the 
murderer's heart like the sword of the Spirit, 
** Bid Brother Jerome come before us." 

For the first time Cozza spoke, convul- 
Bively. "No, I defy you — ^he is dead! Say, 
rather, bring in the second bier. Who dare^ 
to^ '' 

" Father Jerome is present," cried a figure, 



318 ICE BOUND. 

rising from the crowd, throwing off a dark 
hood that had hidden his face, and stepping 
beside the bier. 

" Miserable reptile I " he shouted — " mur- 
derer! demon! for whom hell most frame 
some novel punishment — some redder cham- 
ber — Oh, thank thy Saviour, whom thou hast 
scorned, that thou hast but one victim to 
accuse thee at God's bright bar, and to shame 
thee before the fiery seraphim ! It was I who, 
suspecting the workings of thy black heart, 
and penetrating the thin veil of thy miserable 
hypocrisy, followed thee to the terrible abyss, 
lively image of the terrors of that day of doom 
to which thou art hastening so fiist. Thy 
dagger scratched my flesh, but pierced not 
deeper. Seeing me struck to the earth by the 
shock, thou thoughtest me dead. Ere the sound 
of thy horse's hoofs had died away in the dis- 
tance, I had met with the minister of ven- 
geance whom. God had sent — ^my Lord Crom- 
well" — the multitude started — "and you 
3ee him before you I" It was the soldier. 



THE MONASTERY, OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 319 

^^ Innocent as I am, I trembled when the 
morning's light showed me this poor man- 
gled body/' As he spoke, he withdrew the 
cloth from the face of the corpse. The crowd 
were hashed into silence at the awful scene, 
for the monk, standing in all the ardour of his 
passion, his face lit bj the sunlight, and his 
robe dyed richer than that of princes with the 
reflection of the painted windows— 

Bich -with the blood of prophets and of kings. 

Fairer than are the tiger-moth's deep damasked wings— » 

looked like some avenging angeL Upon the 
bier were turned the glassy eyes of Cozza. 

^* I come here," said Cromwell, assuming at 
once his natural voice, and treading the rebel 
flag contemptuously under his feet as hQ 
spoke, " in the king's name 1 " 

The rebels started at the sound. Some 
even brandished their arms, others raised 
faint shouts of "Down with the heretics!" 
but they quickly died away. 

" Besistance is in vain," he said ; " a force 
treble yours, of arquebusiers with lighted 



820 ICEBOUND, 

matcheSy gird round the monastery ; we took 
care to gather the hounds together ere we 
pitched the toils. In the name of King 
Henry, I offer an amnesty to all. I bid you 
hasten to your homes, and leave those to 
govern the realm who are fitter for the office 
than a pack of base hmds and scurvy drudges. 
Ten bad monkSj whose names I have here, shall 
be furnished with a crown apiece, and shall be 
sent forth to till the earth ; but to one alone 
God and man refuse pardon — ^for him the 
headsman waits impatiently, and counts the 
minutes/' 

He pointed, as he spoke, sternly to the 
trembling abbot, who dung helplessly, as if 
all courage had deserted him, to the altar* 
cloth. 

^^ Francisco Cozza, thy crimes are manifold. 
This is not the first blood that has stained 
those hands. Remember Amalfi — ^but why 
waste words on such a black monster? Bro* 
ther Jerome, esteemed for thy sanctity and the 
unostentatious virtue of thy life, we ^appoint 



THE MONASTERY OF THE FLOWERY PLAIN. 321 

ihee abbot of the monastery of Strata FloridJEt^ 
in the room of Frtnoisoo Co2za^ condemned 
to death for a thousand crimes/' 

At the hated name of Jerome, 0022% who 
had hitherto stood motionless as the corpse on 
which he gazed, started up, and, cleaving his 
way through the crowd, drew a short poniard 
from his sleeve, and aimed a blow at Jerome ; 
but his intended victim swerving aside, the 
weapon failed to inflict a wound. Then, forc- 
ing his way through the multitude, who made 
a path for him in their terror, Cozza leaped 
through a door leading to the belfry, and 
disappeared. 

" Ten gold pieces if he's taken alive T' said 
Cromwell. With horrible coolness of prepa- 
ration, an arquebusier lighted his match at a 
censer, and, followed by two billmen, hurried 
in pursuit. It was too late. Ere they could 
reach him, the murderer, winged by despair, 
had thrown himself to the paved court below. 

By the order of Cromwell the villain's body, 
having been for awhile hung upon the topmost 

VOL. I. Y 



322 ICE BOUND. 

pinnacle of the tower, was taken down and 
buried, without mass or requiem, in the or- 
chard of the monastery. 
"Vengeance is mine; I will bepat rr, 

SAITH THE LOBD." 



END OF VOL. I. 



S BOBK, PBINTEB, GLOUGESTEB STBEET, BEOEMT^S PARK. 





ICE BOUND. 



THE MINER'S TALE. 

FOUNDED ON A TRADinON CURRENT AMONG THE 
MINERS OF CAERNARVONSHIRE. 

A WEARY man was Griffith Owen ; sick 
at heart and sore of foot. Long seemed 
the mountain way, and heavy tht .load of 
glittering trinkets and rustic finefy ii his 
ponderous pack. Many a steep jnile had 
Griffith, the sturdy pedlar^ plodded since 
the simrise ; at many an «inn had he in 
vain displayed his tempting wares ; many 
a cottage had he fruitlessly visited. The 
times were bad; for war, like the Arab 

VOL. II. B 



2 ICE BOUND. 

wind of death, had swept over England, 
the angel of destruction had yisited alike 
noble's tower and peasant's hut, nor had 
stayed his hand even at the "lintel dashed 
with blood;' 

Hard times they were, and the flames 
of civil war glowed over the land ; brother 
foi^ght against brother, and armies more 
terrible than those of the stranger. 

Like the wind^s blast, never resting, homeless, 
Stormed o'er the war-convulsed earth. 

Hard times for the peasant, for what the 
Cavalier trooper spared, the Ironside bore 
off; and the mpuntaineer, who to-day 
might be playing the humble but generous 
host to Bome Soyalist officers in his poor 
homOi was to-morrow, perhaps, on his way, 
as a branded malignant, to a bloody grave in 
the courtyard of the nearest Puritan fortress. 
What broad pieces had village lovers 
now to waste on pedlars' gewgaws, when 
half their hard -won earnings went to 
swell the forced loan of some parliamentary 



THS iaK£R*S TALE. 3 

commissioner, who had all the power of 
an Eastern despot without his attempering 
mercy? What heart had pale- cheeked 
maidens for gaudy love-knots and gay tirings, 
when they were either cowering by their 
father's hearth, spinning by firelight in the 
l>arred-up cottage, listening to some panic* 
stricken messenger from the nearest tows^ 
or, mayhap, stealing out in the twilight 
to drive home the now almost wild 
sheep from the rock- strewn mountain 
side? 

The Soyalist cause, at the time of the 
great civil war, of which we now' write, 
was at its lowest ebb. Monk, the sturdy 
wielder of the dead giant's sword, had 
overawed with it those who already longed 
for the restoration. Those beautiful valleys 
of Caernarvonshire, of which I write, had 
rung already with the din of fire-arms; 
long since had those mountains, on which 
Owen gazed now as he had done when an 
infant, given back the echoes of death a3 

b2 



4 ICE fiOUND. 

if with the reverberations of a spirit's 
voice, and with them, those sounds no less 
terrible, the execrations and the mad- 
dened cries of struggling men. Old towers 
built by great chiefs, whose names were 
still current in the country side, in the 
song and legend of the mountaineer and 
the dalesman, had fallen under the iron 
hand of Cromwell — ^last relics, glass sta- 
tues of an expired feudalism, shattered by 
the genius of democratic fanaticism — and 
their fall, like the last throbs of a strong 
man dying, had shaken the land as with 
an earthquake. Castles, which the peasant 
who lived near them had been accustomed 
to consider as eternal as the mountains, 
those tombstones of former worlds which 
towered above them — ^had passed from the 
scene like the clouds with which their 
turrets had so long held dark communion. 
The old rock nests had been pulled down, 
the birds had flown, the proud descendants 
of the Cambrian kings — once the glory 



THE hiker's tale. 5 

of the valleys beneath — were wanderers 
now, ay, and even beggars in a foreign 
land. 

An unnatural lull had followed the storm 
thunders, for in these distant and lonely 
valleys of Merionethshire, where our scene 
lies, the stray broad sheet of the day had 
not reached for weeks. But now and then 
some passing traveller brought word to the 
anxious listeners at the village inn, that 
Monk was ruling with a rod of iron, that 
plots were hatched but to be discovered, and 
that the Eoyalists crept to their hiding- 
places like birds of night at the approach 
of day, at which news the Royalist shrugged 
his shoulders, bit his lips, swore an oath 
or two in his sleeve, and preserved a very 
prudent silence, while the Puritan smiled 
grimly, and uttered, with due twang and 
emphasis, some text adapted to the occa- 
sion. 

How could Owen, then, sell his gay 
treasures in times like these, when the 



6 ICE BOUND. 

sour fathers of village mudens thought 
silken ringlets hooks of the great tempter, 
and the ribands that adorned them the very 
snares of Apollyon himself ? 

It was almost evening — a summer even- 
ing — when our friend the pedlar turned 
from the great road that leads from the 
eagle-towered city of Caernarvon into the 
heart of Merionethshire, and trudged away 
over a steep mountain-path in the direc- 
tion of Drws y Coed, " the door of the 
wood/' a pass formed by the great granite 
roots of Snowdon, that stretch forth like 
the feelers of some giant monster frozen 
to stone — a spot which, as its name and 
the legends appertaining thereto indicate, 
was once covered by dense forests, the 
haunt of the boar, the deer, and the wol^ 
where the Welsh kings hunted animals 
scarce less savage than themselves. In 
the western sky, ^* night's great pageant" 
had commenced ; in the horizon, was 
streaming up a red light aa of some burn- 



TH£ MINEB'S tale. 7 

ing town/ the fainter reflection of which, 
fainter and calmer as of a dawn before 
its time, lit the peaks of the eastern 
mountains, sufiiising them with a rosy light, 
^w if the internal fire of a volcano was 
shining through its stony casket, rendered 
transparent by some spirit of a bygone 
religion that still haunted its summit. 

On strode manfully the pedlar; encum- 
bered as he was with his heavy pack, 
he clambered over jutting masses of 
rock, keeping his eye fixed on the ground, 
to trace out the ill-defined path which 
led from one hamlet to another ; but one 
mile led but to another steeper than the 
last, and still no irillage in sight. In vain 
he gazed below on the lakes, as if to see 
if any cottage was mirrored in those clear 
depths which now glowed in the purple 
light, reflecting the transitory splendours so 
unearthly and so sublime. Wending at last to 
a small defile that was hemmed in by rocks 
which seemed to forbid an exit, the weary 



8 ICE BOUND. 

man, with an expression of impatience, 
threw his pack on the ground, placed his 
pedlar's staff beside it, and first leaning 
against a mass of lichened rock, finally 
seated himself upon it, and gradually yield- 
ing unconditionally to the overpowering 
influence of fatigue that overcame him, 
threw himself at full length upon the 
ground, resting his head upon the load that 
had so grievously galled his shoulder. 
While he thus tarries, reader, let us sketch 
pur friend Griffith more minutely. A broad- 
leafed hat shadowed a good-looking face, 
whose regular features bore an expression 
at once of shrewdness and generosity ; 
neglect, eccentricity, or a wish for dis- 
guise, not unlikely in those troublous times, 
had led him to nourish a beard of formidable 
length, which, mingling with the hw* of the 
upper lip, gave the wearer so wild and per- 
haps so savage an appearance, that a passer- 
by, forgetful of the conventional form of dress, 
might have imagined him a British chief rest- 



THE MINEE'S tale. 9 

ing after the tofls of the chase. " Strange," 
he muttered half aloud, as he lay with his 
eyes closed, ^^that a mountaineer should lose 
his way in a spot as familiar to him as the 
chambers of his father's house ; but my 
thoughts have been lately wandering far from 
hence, and Alps and Apennines are blended 
with Snowdon and Flinlimmon in my recol- 
lections, God help me I Would I were 
well housed ; for the night draws on, and my 
bones are as yet too well cased to feed the 
mountain hawk. A shame on these aching 
limbs ! will toil never season them ?'' he said 
with a sigh, as he raised himself, and was 
about to once more shoulder his pack and re- 
sume his toilsome walk. A sharp, deep, rolling 
sound of thunder burst suddenly from the very 
rock against which he had but the moment be- 
fore been leaning, while a thick vapour and a 
strong sulphurous smell filled the air. The 
pedlar looked back as if he had heard God 
speaking from the clouds, the mountain-top 
overhead gave back its last faint ray, as if 



10 ICEBOUND. 

reflecting the glare of some red storm. The 
pedlar's eye wandered as the vapour passed 
away over the storm-tinted rocks from whence 
the sound had come, and saw that, from a 
deep narrow rent in the nearest, a thin curl of 
smoke was still wreathing into the noiseless 
air. What madness has seized the pedlar? 
Again, with the speed of thought, he flings 
down his pack, and rushing to the aperture, 
gazes in with glaring eyes, as if he would 
pierce the very secrets of its stony heart. 
Hurrah I Owen Griffith is a made man. 
Adieu, pack and staff I adieu for ever I 

" God be thanked I" he cried, as he fell on 
his knees on the hard mountain side, and 
raised his hand in earnest adoration to the 

setting sun, that sank like a flaming world in 

» 

the horizon. "God be thanked I" he cried, 
. " and the knockers that are his ministers in 
the deep places of the earth, if this is, as I 
augur right, a rich vein of copper, come King 
or Protector, Griffith Owen will again rear 
.the roof-tree of his father's house*" , 



THR MINEB'S tale. 11 

Then, rising from his knees, and half mad 
with jdy at good fortmie so providential and on- 
expected, he gave a bomid in the air, whirled 
his staff roupd his head, hit the rocks a blow 
of friendly recognition that would have felled 
a mammoth, the blow sounding hollow, like 
an invocation for the hidden spirit of the 
mme; whistled " Tri ban gwyr Morgannwg,'' 
a national ditty, in the shrillest possible key ; 
and then, clapping his pack hastily on his 
back, ran down the rarely-trodden and stony 
path with more of the speed of a hounded 
Indian than a decent Christian, much less a 
foot-sore pedlar. 

Going down a mountain is easier work than 
going up, and no hair-splitter will deny that 
jaded horse and weary traveller brush up 
their speed when home is in view. • • 
A turn of the path brought him, in the dar- 
kening gloom of night, to his native village of 
Llanllyfni, from whence, some ten years since, 
as a wealthy young farmer, he had set forth, 
.with his father's benediction and the family 



12 ICE BOUND. 

musket, to bear a gun in the cause of bis 
prisoned king. With tbe cautious step of 
a spy be re-entered bis native village, wbieb 
lay nestling at tbe mountain's foot, its roofs 
looking gloomy in tbe darkness of a clouded 
and almost starless nigbt. As be entered tbe 
street, an old bound, tbat be remembered 
well, slank by witb a surly growl. No 
cbildren gambolled tbere as of yore. All 
was cbanged and solemn. No Ugbt flasbed 
from tbe cottage panes, for tbe greater part 
of tbe windows were cautiously barred, wbile 
in otbers tbe gleam of a scanty peat fire 
scarcely lit up tbe small and diminisbed circle 
round tbe beartb. 

Tbe village was as silent as if a plague bad 
withered it — ^as silent as be remembered it 
wben, as an urcbin, be stared at tbe funeral of 
some old sachein of tbe district. A cross 
wbicb bad stood where tbe two roads tbat 
intersect tbe village met was gone, or, worse 
tban total destruction, its shattered shaft told 
of tbe storm of fanaticism tbat bad smitten it. 



THE MINSK'S TALE. 13 

Who bad done that ? Could it be old Stand- 
fast'in'the'Faiihj the Puritan baker^ who used to 
say a grace of half an hour over a stale herring? 
Ah I here is the inn ! Griffith rubbed his 
eyes. Was the mountain, the thunder-clap, 
all a vision ? Was he Griffith, or no ? 
Where is the sign of the "Kose and Crown" 
gone? Where is the roaring fire that once 
lit up the windows of the hostelrie, even on a 
summer eve? Where are the revel songs 
that once poured forth from the doorway, 
blent with the sound of squeaking fiddle and 
twanging harp, to scare the passing spirits of 
the night ? Is the " Kose and Crown," too, 
closed ? No, there is indeed a dull hum, as of 
gossip, from the inner room, and from the half- 
opened door looks forth Cicely Jones, the 
once buxom daughter of the merry, knavish 
landlord, whose ale was as good as his honesty 
was bad, and who, at least, with an admirable 
consistency worthy of all praise, cheated rich 
and poor alike. Cicely ! But, oh ! how 
changed I with paler and sharper features, 



14 . ICE BOUND. 

deadened eye, more sober garb; and primmer 
head-tire than of yore. 

"Cicely!" he would have exclaimed, for- 
getful for a moment of the lapse of years and 
his pedlar's disguise ; but the words died away 
in a faint rattle in his throat. 

"Why standest thou there, good man?'' 
said the transformed Cicely, with a shrill and 
sanctimonious voice. " Thou lookest like one 
of those ungodly hawkers of silly wares that 
haunt the country and taint the land — one 
not fit to enter here, for thy looks are pro- 
fane, and thy calling is ungodly." 

" I want but food and a night's lodging," 
said the pedlar, gaily, in a feigned voice, 
" and to-morrow I go on my way, my pretty 
maid ; in God's name let me in." 

"No idle using of God's name, sirrah," 
said Cicely, with an ill-suppressed smile of 
satisfaction at the compliment of the stranger, 
as with a somewhat milder manner she 
ushered the wandering man into the large 
kitchen of the quondam " Rose and Crown." 



THE miner's tale. 15 

The old kitchen, indeed; but what a 
change ! Where was Jenkins's harp that once 
stpod in the comfortable nook, and over whose 
strings the hands of the old minstrel of the 
village used to wander nightly, as if over the 
threads of some magic loom. There were 
no flitches hanging now from the smoke« 
dried rafters overhead, like great mellow fruit, 
ready to fall — fruitage of the kitchen Hes- 
perides — which it was so delightful to look 
at, looming through a smoke cloud. Where 
was the withered sprig of mistletoe — ^happy 
tradition of Pagan times — ^that was wont to 
hang there from one merry Christmas till 
another. All gone 1 The room looked bare 
and comfortless in the light of a scanty 
fire, that struggled with a green log on 
the hearth, scorched it with its ardent 
tongues of flame, and failing in its attempts 
at conquest, sank back in despair. No jolly 
revellers sat round the broad, cold hearth; 
no fiery faces roared out lusty Welsh dit- 
ties, or such English catches of the day as 



16 ICE BOUND. 

"Old Sir Simon, the king," and "Three 
merry men be we." There were there but 
half a dozen miserable-looking dogs clutch- 
ing their ale stoups, and trying vainly to 
imagine themselves happy. Nearest the 
fire, in the ancient, polished seat of honour, 
sat — who? — Old Bhys, the burly landlord, 
whose laugh was so contagious, whose an- 
cient jokes were wont to set the table in 
a roar? No, God guide us, who but old 
Stand-fast-in-the-faith, the baker of former 
days, looking sourer, more self-righteous, 
and thinner than ever, and at present — as 
Griffith soon gathered from stray remarks, 
as he seated himself in a spare seat, and 
hid his pack behind a settle — ^landlord by 
right of possession of the £ose and Crown, 
now denominated the " Holy League and 
Covenant," and husband of Cicely, whose 
gall and shrewishness seemed rather heigh- 
tened than mellowed by years;— on the 
broad oak table, beside an upturned mea- 
sure, lay open a greasy and well-thumbed 



THE MIKSB'S tale. 17 

book of Canticles of interminable length, and 
very indifferent merit. The last stave of 
one embracing a chronological view of the 
biblical history, with a passing glance at the 
doctrine of election to grace, and a brief 
view of justification by faith, was just dy- 
ing away as Griffith crossed the thres* 
hold. 

"What news from England, friend ped- 
lar?" said the landlord, to the intruder, 
in a shrill voice, eyeing him suspiciously as 
he spoke. 

/'I know of none, your worship," said 
Griffith, with a look of affected humility; , 
"nothing later than the retirement of my 
second Lord Protector, who indeed seemed 
more fit to drive his father's dray than hold 
the reins of justice." 

"Talk not so lightly, knave, of the 
Lord's most chosen vessel," said the land- 
lord, with a frown, and an angry glance 
as an ill-suppressed smile stole over the 
faces of the village worthies. 

VOL. II. c 



18 ICE lOUXD. 

^^I don't know abont a chosen Tessd," 
said a thin, miserable man, the Tillage tailor, 
whose sneaking, half cayalier air blended 
somewhat strangdj with his evident awe 
of the newly-appointed magistrate and head 
saint of the township. '* Ha, ha, excuse 
me, your worship, bnt I think, if I may 
say so, he's a yessd not seaworthy, and 
Ukely to soon ran ashore on the sharp rock 
of the parliament." 

An irrepres^ble langh followed the 
speaker's sally, which was re-echoed by 
Griffith, as the landlord of the nieful vi- 
sage rose to reply, and drawing a paper 
from his pocket, contfuning his last Son- 
day's harangue on the subject of profane 
jokmg, was about to commence an exor- 
dium, which might have lasted until some 
two hours after midnight, when the clat- 
ter of horses' hoofe was heard without, 
and a voice was heard calling so lustily 
for a drawer, that the room rang again. 
A bundle of something that had lain un- 



THE MINEB^S TALE. 19 

noticed^ couched beside the landlord's 
chair, rousing itself at the well-known 
sound, resolved itself gradually into a 
humpbacked ostler, and ran to gire the 
needed aid. In a moment the clatter of 
spurs and sword was heard in the passage, 
and the next instant with a whispering at 
the door, and a sound which scandal might 
have supposed a kiss to Cicely, and the 
stranger entered the room. He seemed a 
a cavalier of about middle age; little care 
sat upon his unwrinkled brow, and a smile 
of contentment crept over his frank sol* 
dier's face as his eye caught sight of the 
now genial fire that blazed up the vault of 
the hearth. He entered, humming a song, 
resembling marvellously a well-known love 
ditty of Carew's, and pulling off a riding 
cloak, threw it with his plumed hat and 
fiword upon the table beside him. With 
tone glance of his keen eye — such a sweep- 
ing glance as a general gives the battle- 
fiield-^he scanned the circle. His lordly 

c2 



20 IC£ BOUND. 

and commanding look was so mixed with 
arch affability, as to win even the cold, toad- 
like heart of the landlord, who, rising from 
his village throne, offered the vacant seat 
to the newly-arrived guest, while one or 
two of the quasi revellers rose to allow him 
to take possession. 

" Keep your seats, my worthy host and 
friends,'' said the stranger, in a bland voice, 
as he seated himself on a bench beside the 
discomfited tailor, and drew it nearer to 
the fire, "I leave it to crop-eared knaves 
and murderers to take either the seats or 
the thrones of others." 

A whisper ran round the assembly as he 
said these words, whose boldness was so 
unusual in those times of suspicion and 
distrust. The landlord shook his head mys- 
teriously, and was silent; but the other 
guests, taking courage at the daring utter- 
ance of long-suppressed opinions, threw 
off in some degree their awe of their 
new-elected magistrate, as he threw himself 



THE MIKEB'S tale. 21 

back in well-affected drowsiness^ and listened 
to the detail of the death of this friend 
and the flight of that, half hinted at only 
as connected with some more recent events 
of the day. How Griffith longed to ask after 
his father ; but how could he throw off his 
disguise? First one guest thawed and then 
another, as the ale grew better and the 
fire the warmer, till all blended in one 
clatter of voices, shrill and clear, above 
which, like the old hound of a pack, rang 
that of the stranger, who seemed in half 
an hour to take as deep an interest in 
the village state policy, ay, more than 
the grim-visaged landlord himself, who, 
at last fairly routed from his uneasy 
dignity, vindicated his authority by a loud 
hem! At the oracular sound the voices 
again hushed, for that hem they knew 
boded news of weight ; nor were they mis- 
taken. 

"Heml my Christian friends," said the 
sage, " the bustle of this cavalier's arrival 



22 ICEBOCSII. 

has prerentcd me fix>m telfing joa befiure 
that not an hour since a m^senger from 
CaemarTon iNnought me a d&paldi from 
the eomnu^oner of the pariiamenl^ acquaint- 
ing me that a certain malignant officer, 
one Sir Sichard Salisbaijy who is deeply 
implicated in some late con^nracies against 
the Commonwealth, and especiaUy against 
the late lamented Lord Protector," — here 
the landlord affected to shed a tear, 
but the stranger smiUng, he frowned and 
proceeded — ''has been lately seen in Ches- 
ter, and being likely to penetrate into 
Wales, to sow fresh seeds of rebellion 
against the congregation of the righteoas, 
he therefore begs** (here the reader looked 
important) ^^aur as^stance in his appre- 
henaon if he yentnres towards Merioneth- 
shire.'' 

'' Ha, ha! " laughed the stranger, to the 
astonishment of the awe-struck auditors. 
'' I once saw Sir Eichard in the French expedi- 
tion — and know him far too cunning a moun- 



THE miner's tale. 28 

tain fox to be canght by the banters, 
^ charm they ever so wisely/" 

"Pervert not scripture, sir stranger/' 
said the landlord, with the air of an of- 
fended saint. 

" Ah ! ah 1 the devil rebuking the sin« 
ner,'' replied the traveller, carelessly; "but, 
pooh ! no cavilling when men are weary ; this 
is no place for party strife. Here, fresh measures 
of ale for these very thirsty friends of mine. 
What was that you spoke of but now, friend 
Jenkins?'' he continued, diverting the conver* 
sation, and addressing himself, in a gay tone, to 
a tailor who sat beside him ; " of a wedding ? 
And, above all, who is the happy groom, who 
the wanton bride? One of those fair ones, I 
warrant you, like your fair mistress, master 
host ; such a one as my worthy pedlar here is 
perchance dreaming of; one whose cheeks, as 
Suckling says well, 

Are like a Catherine pear, 
The side that's next the son*** 

The pedlar snored audibly as he spoke; 



24 ICBBOUIIK 

Imt, in reality awake, he listeoed, with braced 
sense and hot brow. 

''A TDlage beUe, the pride of the Tsllej, 
m knight— Mabel Uewdlyn: cme that has a 
weUfilled parse.** He stopped; for at this 
moment the pedlar, pretoiding to awake, 
jmwned, and rising and poslung back the 
bench on which he sat, wished the landlord, 
the stranger, and the company, a yery good 
night, and retired to his room in some out-of- 
the-way comer of the inn. The gaests reset* 
tied themselyes when he shut the door behind 
him, as the rear rank dose up the Tacoities of 
a batUe-square. But the kneU of retiring 
had been tolled; slowly, one by one, the 
pundits of the Tillage retired to thar happy 
helpmates or scolding shrews, as the case 
might be. Before, howeyer, the last Ungerer 
had retired, the worthy landlord proposed a 
psalm, which proposal bdng seconded by a 
shrivoled notary, was given irith much unc- 
tion by the holy pair, aided by Cicely and the 
ostler, who were called in as auxiliaries. At 



THE ioneb's tale. 25 

the 140th yerse, the cayalier, who had twice 
&llen asleep, &ilmg in a convulsiye attempt 
to conceal his yawns, took up a lantern that 
stood beside him on the table, and bow- 
ing to the smgers, strode to the chamber 
pointed out to him by the landlord, who, 
breaking off in the middle of his ^^song of 
Zion," hurried off after his impatient guest, 
not without muttering as he went some- 
thing yery like an anathema at the caprice 
and insolence of the military ^^sons of 
BeUaL'' 

Leaying our cayalier pacing up and down 
his narrow room, wrapped up in thought^ 
which, as Sancho said of sleep, ^'coyers a 
man like a garment,'^ the landlord and his 
worthy friend below finishing the last eighty 
yerses of their psalm, and the tailor and his 
companions wendmg their way homeward, 
and talking oyer the adyentures of the night, 
we will return awhile to the pedlar, who re- 
tired to his chamber, as we mentioned before, 
so suddenly. There he is, seated in a chair. 



26 KSBouni. 

with his head now resting on his psck, and 
now buried in his hand, as if his heart's blood 
had fnm&i at its Yeiy source. 

''Great Godl" he muttered, as he threw 
himself in anguish on the bed, whidi, now the 
rushlight had flickered ont^ was alrered in 
the moonshine, ''is thb tiie hj^piness," he 
groans, "that awaits the stranger who re- 
turns to his native land? Mairied to-mor- 
row I Mabel! the noUe, the true-hearted! — 
and to some crop-eared TiDainy who, if I 
struck him to the earth as he clasped her 
hand at the altar, would disdain to raise his 
arm against a furtive so yile, who, though 
heaVte hath granted to him riches, and the 
yery mountain hath burst its doors to show 
him treasure, is still a helpless wretch, and 
dares not show his proscribed fiu» in Us 
£Bither^s house. Who's there ? ** 

A low, muffled tap at the door stopped the 
outpourings of his breaUng heart. 

"Who's there?'' he cried agun, in a low 
tone of fear and caution* 



THE miner's tali. 27 

^^ Tush, in nomine sanctorum I '' said a deep 
voice; and the cavalier, whom he had seea 
below, entered the room, and carefully clos- 
ing, and then bolting the door, drew a pistol 
from his pocket, coolly cocked it, and placed 
it beside him on the table, as he sat down 
with the calm familiarity of one in the pres- 
ence of an inferior. 

''War has taught me,'' he said, nodding 
recognition to the pedlar, and smiling at his 
astonished face, '' to take such small precau-» 
tions as these against surprise from the enemy 
or the traitor." Then calmly composing him-' 
self, he drew forth a pipe, and lighting it 
with flint and steel, which he pulled from a 
small embroidered pouch, appearing to be 
perfectly at his ease, addressed the astonished 
Griffith : '* Thou art one who loves the true 
cause, I do not question, or otherwise I should 
not be in thy chamber ; that I am one, if you 
have not already guessed, thou mayst now 
learn ; who I am, thou mayst imagine. The 



28 ICE BOUID. 

fox, when hird preaaed, knows no retreat is 
safisr than the tanM^'s kmneL" 

<<SirBichaidSalisbiii7?''sudthe pedlar, 

mqnirin^y. 

''The Tery same," re^ed the caralier; 
''now an onUaw, and one whose head, to fit 
on a Pniitan ^ike on Tonple Gate, were 
worth a good pnrsefol of angds." 

'* God forbidl" said GriiKh, heartQy- " The 
stag of ten is no fit prey for the carrion 
crow/' 

"Wen said; like a good heart and tme," 

exdaimed the cavalier, grasping his hand and 

shaking it vigoronsly. "It warms one's 

blood to see one of the troe canse, after sach 

psalm-singing, cheating, canting knayes as my 

host below, whom I left but now taMng his 

posset — but beshrew my tongue, I must to 

my errand. I wonld not intnide, fiiend 

pedlar, on thy priyate grie^ but still I would 

fain know what made tiiee start as if a viper 

had stung thee, when tiiat mandrake of a 

fellow, Jack tiie tailor, spoke of the wedding 



THE ioher's tale. 29 

— surely, Mabel, of whom he spoke, is dear 
to thee, and yet art thou not a stranger in 
these wild regions? Ahl thou tumest pale; 
thou knewest not that I espied thee/' 

** Oh ! prithee, sur knight, touch not that 
wound, it bleeds so new. I am of this vil- 
lage, but ten years since I left my father's 
house, on the very day that I plighted troth 
with Mabel, to bear a musket for my king. I 
shared in the flight at Worcester, and escap- 
ing in a fishing-yessel to France, returned 
some months since, in the disguise of a pedlar 
to Bristol, and making the best of my way 
hither, determined to see again my dear one, 
though death should follow.'' 

"A brave varlet! truly well spoken; 
hovering about the spot, as the spirit does 
round the body it has shaken ofl. Pretty 
Mabel has your heart; you seek it here at 
the risk of life. Well, well, that such fools 
love makes of us, I have heard ; — ^but you're 
not dead yet ; and Will — immortal Will ! — 
may still speak true — ^Men have died, and 



80 ICE 80URD. 

worms have eaten them/ bat not for love. 
Well, I would not jest with thy sorrow, for I 
know the barb rankles in a young heart worse 
than Carib's arrow. But hark! Cicely but 
now whispered me, on the stair, that our 
friend, good master host, has a shrewd sus- 
picion of evil — ^likes not me, and holds me 
for some noble malignant; for so the paltry 
knaves dare call us ; so I should be away ere 
daybreak. And yet, too, I would willingly 
dd thee in saying Mabel — ^pretty doye 1 — from 
the talons of the hawk ; and I will, too, if 
heaven aid me.'' 

^'6od reward thee, noble sirP said the 
pedlar — ^'He who has thus twice sent his 
angel since the dawn to bless the vagabond 
and the outcast'' 

** Gall me not an angd," said the cavalier, 
smiling, and puffing his pipe with renewed 
vigour, ^* providential as my vidt to thee may 
seem, whatever be the result. But still I am 
but one, friend Griffith— I think that is thy 
name— and who is the second? " 



THE IONEB'S tile. 81 

Eagerly Griffith told the wonders of his 
tale. The cavalier's eye lit up with delight 
as he listened to the recital which the joyful 
man poured forth. 

"A marvellous thing, truly, my worthy 
vendor of points, as I ever heard at a camp- 
fire.'' 

<< Marvellous, indeed," replied the pedlar ; 
^^ and proof, if aught were wanted, of the ex- 
istence of spirits of the mines — ^as we, the 
Gymri, believe — who disclose treasures to 
men. Your worship may, belike, have heard 
of them?" 

^^ Heard of them I have," said the knight, 
laughing at the credulity of his companion ; 
" but believe nought. IS I, or Druesius, know 
aught of science, this was but the natural re- 
lease of pent-up vapours. But the night 
grows on, and I must to my resting-place, or 
my crafty host may smell a rat, and snap me 
in my hole. By to-morrow, if all holds true, 
I shall hear from one of our cavalier party ; 
till then, adieu. I rejoice that Mabel will find 



83 ICS SOUND. 

thee on thy return a richer man — heir of a 
oopper-mine in perspectire.'' 

Gathering up his doak, and secreting his 
pipe and pistol, the cayalier shook the hand 
of his humble friend, and, softly shutting his 
door, stole gentiy away on tiptoe to his cham- 
ber. Griffith listened ; and as he lay down to 
sleep, clothed as he was, he thought he heard 
the shuffle of some eayesdropper's foot retir- 
ing from the door; but, rejecting it as an 
idle creation of fimcy, and pondering over the 
adyenture of the mountain, his yidons gradu- 
ally melted into golden dreams, and he fell 
asleep. He slumbered peacefully till morning. 
The gay carolling of a song awoke him ; it 
was Sir Bichard, looking more joyous than 
even on the preceding night, and waging a 
letter in his hand. 

'^ I have news," he cried, ''of importance 
from the capital; but I wiU not tell tiiee yet ! 
Some spy overheard our last mght^s conver- 
sation. I wager my frdth, dther the host or 
the shockheaded ostier; for they look black, 



THX MIHER'S TiXE. 83 

and are silent — even churlish. They whisper, 
lArug their shoulders, come not when I call 
them, and turn away when I speak. Misdhief 
is brooding, I pledge my life. But^ up— up, 
friend pedlar, for the sun's up before you an 
hour.'' 

As he spoke the pedlar leaped fi^m Ids 
bed, shook himself, put on his hat, and looked 
forth at the day. He sighed; for already 
a group of persons were passing, dressed 
in holiday trim, but not wearing the gay 
ribands of the bride-ales of his youth. Grif- 
fith had slumbered late; for just as the pair 
had cleared a trencher and emptied a flagon, 
according to the custom of those undegene^ 
rated days, the bridal procession passed on 
their way to the church at the other end of 
the village. No merry fiddlers led the way ; 
but in their stead came the village notary, 
arm-in-arm with the host, while the unsanctified 
tailor walked singing a dolorous psalm, more 
fit for a funeral than a wedding ; conspicuous 
among his doleful followers was the bride* 

VOL. n. D 



34 icsBooni. 

groom. Silas Steadfitt^ a lidi aulkr and m 
magistrate of the district^ came next; and 
after him the bride, dressed in white, her ejea 
red with weeping, and her cheeks Uanched as 
her wedding array. Foor firettj maidois, aa 
one hand, plied her with consolatory azioma i 
while, on the other, stalked by a grim man^ 
Apparently her fiither, who, gr^ng her hand 
at intervals, appeared to freeze her rery blood 
with his chilling frowns. In the rear followed 
9Lpasse comUatus of melancholy YiUagers, whd 
whispered to each otiier tiieir comments on 
the appearance of the rdactant bride. The 
pedlar, ¥ritii his hat drawn deeper oyer his 
eyes to hide his ill-restrained rage, and the 
cavalier, who eyed the bride and the surround- 
ing group with his hawk's glance, entered the 
church unnoticed in tiieir rear. 

How altered was tiiat old church »nce 
Griffith left it but ten years ance; the 
dark-yisaged man of to-day looks back upon 
the scenes of his youth, and sees those walls 
again with the eye of a child. How he used to 



THE MINEB'S tale. 85 

listen to Parson Haghes, who on all other 
days sat and chatted with his father, discnss* 
ing the village news over a black jack of ale, 
but on Sundays came forth in solemn and 
long-flowing robes, and, with a face lit up 
with holy zeal, spoke like an Evangelist to the 
mountaineers. He remembered how, as a 
child, he would wander in at the open door 
of a week day, and gaze with awe at the re* 
cumbent knight of stone in the aisle, on which 
the sun, falling through a painted window 
above, threw at noon a rainbow light, beauti- 
ful as the iris on the spray of a torrent, light- 
ing its stony cheek with the hue of life. 

Dreams— <ireams all ! but could this then 
he reality ? He awoke from his reverie : the 
statue Was gone — that heap of battered stone 
dn yonder comer may, perhaps, be its relics ; 
the window above was there, but half the 
glass was broken ; one prophet had no head, 
while his brother saint bore an ominous crack 
*--a sort of bend sinister — across his visage; 
sfaJl the summer sun fell through it as of yore. 

d2 



86 ICE BOUND. 

The beaatifiil glass, fair as a summer doud, 
had dissolved before the rude storm of fanati* 
cism. The altar was gone, and a deal chair 
stood in its place ; while in its stead, in the 
middle of the church, was a long oaken 
communion-table, that looked as if it had 
been wrenched from its time-honoured situa- 
tion in the baronial hall of some pillaged 
castle. The walls, too, had been covered 
with whitewash, which gave a glaring and 
harsh tone to the building, and through which 
peered some half-covered monuments of a cen- 
tury back. But his attention was again re- 
called to the altar ; for now the bridal groups, 
who had stayed for the moment, which he 
devoted to a reverie, so silent, that above 
their low breathing could be heard the iron 
pulsation of the belfry clock, and the deep 
soft cooing of a pigeon in the turret out in the 
sun, were startled by the shrill, nasal tones of 
the hateful voice of the bridegroom. With a 
sanctimonious leer, in which a tinge of anger 



THE IONEB's ULE. 87 

at the bride's evident reluctance seemed to 
mingle^ he exclaimed — 

" Dear Dorcas — for so I must hence- 
forth call thee — remove, I saj, this vain 
chaplet of flowers from thy head; it sa- 
voureth far too strongly of the world;" so 
saying, he pulled it rather roughly from 
her white brow, and, breaking the blue ri- 
band that hdd the flowers together, strewed 
them on the rushes that covered the floor. 
Mabel's cheek glowed for a moment with 
shame and anger, but the flame sank back 
again to the troubled heart, as, in spite of the 
rude frown of her father, she was about to 
reply in impatient terms. With difficulty the 
cavalier held Griffith down, as, with flushed 
cheek and deep-drawn breath, he saw the 
rude insult offered to one whom he held so 
dear, 

" Restrain thyself, Griffith," whispered the 
knight, ^' and await the issue. See, here 
comes the minister, and a fit fool truly to join 
so happy a pair." 



38 ICE BOUND. 

The minister who entered as he spoke 
wore a cold, unimpassioned face, of which 
prominent cheekbones and compressed lips 
formed the chief features. Behind came 
— and Griffith's heart leaped within him at 
the sight — ^his father, looking careworn and 
a little graver than ten years since, but with 
step as light and as firm as ever. In his rear 
followed the ostler, in a new doublet. The 
bride's cheek flushed again with a fever's 
glow as she gazed upon the new comers, who 
were exchanging greetings and well-wishes, 
as sincere as those forms usually are, with 
those around her. Her father clutched her 
arm again convulsively, and whispered in her 
ear, as she stood there mute and with fixed 
eyes, like one half turned to stone. 

" As the time draweth on," said the 
minister, with a nasal twang, eminently 
pious, "and all who will take part in this 
beremony^ blessed of the Lord, are here 
assembled, we had better commence." 

A prayer having been offered up, the usual 



THE mikeb's tale. 89 

charge was given to the pair, to declare any 
impediment that might exist to the marriage, 
as thej should answer at the dreadfal day of 
judgment. Again Mabel looked up to heaven 
as if for help, and was about to speak, but 
at the sight of her father, and the admonitory 
whisper of the bridesmaids, she bent down 
her head, and buried it in her hands. The 
ostler grinned with a fiendish smile of mali- 
cions pleasure. Again Griffith attempted to 
burst from the clutch of the cruel stranger. 

" Keep silent, you hot-headed Welshman, 
in the name of all the saints,'' he muttered, 
in a deep, fierce whisper ; ** wait a few sen- 
tences more, and then at him, like a hound 
dipped at a stag. I'm at your elbow. For 
your own — ^for Mabel's sake, stay," he added, 
more tenderly; and Griffith again crouched 
down behind the distant oaken bench, on 
which he sat glaring with eager eyes, like 
a leopard before its spring, clutching his 
good staff convulsively, in a way that the 
worthy Sir Sichard thought to himself boded 



40 ICEBOUND. 

no good to the bridegroom, and still less to 
the humpbacked ostler. 

With a shrill, harsh voice, the Geneveae 
minister proceeded in the service, taming up 
the whites of his eyes, as if he was going to 
offer the bride up as a sacrifice to the demon 
of fanaticism. 

" Wilt thou havQ this woman for thy 
wedded wife" (the bridegroom looked patron- 
isingly at Mabel), ^^ to live together^ after 
God's ordinance, in the holy state of matri- 
mony? Wilt thou love her, comfort her, 
honour and keep her, in sickness and in 
health, and, forsaking all other, keep thee 
only" (the bridesmaids, as in duty bounds 
appeared affected to tears) '^ unto her, so long 
as ye both shall live ?" 

Then there was a moment's pause, broken 
only by a sob from Mabel, as the bridegroom 
assumed the bearing of a suffering saint, and 
replied, "I will." 

" You won't 1" thundered a voice from the 
other end of the church — 'twas Griffitli's 



THE miner's tale. 41 

toice; a moment before the time he had 
burst from Sir Eichard^ leaying his short 
cloak, like a second Joseph, in his hands. 
The bride gave one look at the maddened 
figure of the pedlar, and fell, as if in death, 
into the arms of her attendant maidens. The 
bridegroom turned pale with terror, and 
Mabel's father with rage, while old Griffith 
ran into the extended arms of his returned 
son. With a sudden shriek, the humpbacked 
ostler drew a knife, and was rushing upon 
the bold intruder, when a round blow from a 
staff, in the strong hand of Sir Bichard, felled 
him to the floor, where he lay stunned, his 
head striking, in his fall, against the comer 
of an oak bench, the knife flying far from his 
hand, and ringing on the stone pavement of 
the churcL Mabel's father was the first to 
recover his courage, and to demand ^^the 
cause of this irreligious, and, he might say, 
unchristian intrusion." 

^'Intrusion, quotha, worthy sir," said Sir 
Bichard, in a gay tone, 'Mt's time for in- 



42 ICE BOUND. 

trusion, when the hooded crow carries off 
the pet dove of one's bosom. Know you my 
angry friend here?'' 

" I do, sir stranger," said Mabel's father ; 
^^ I recognise in him a godless youth, who left 
his father's house some ten years since, to 
bear arms for a tyrant, whose headless corpse 
now rots in a nameless grave." 

^*Now, by my Lord and Saviour," cried 
Sir Richard, " it were too great a kindness to 
stab thee on the spot, thou drivelling dotard, 
that darest first do the work of a murderer, 
and then boast of thy butchery. Now, be- 
gone, ere my blood rise l"*-^ (he drew his 
sword as he spoke, and pointed to the church- 
door) — "and all thy associates, who love a 
clown and a brewer better than a crowned 
and anointed king, or I'll make thee and thy 
fanatic crew skip to a tune played by this 
sharp fiddle-bow." 

Sullenly slow, with lowering looks and angry 
mien, the Puritan, accompanied by only three 
of the villagers quitted the church. 



THE mikek's tile. 43 

'^ Get thee out, too, thou shapeless villain/' 
said Sir Sichard, as shaking the remaining 
ostler by the collar of his doublet, he throst 
him out after his friends. The worthy 
minister, Who had dropped his book on the 
first alarm, and, amid the screams of the 
bridesmaids, was quietly sneaking away, when 
Sir Richard's strong hand, grasping his robe, 
detained him. " No, no, my venerable 
drawler, not so quickly, no stealing a march 
on a cavalier ; thou must, ere thou leavest this 
church, if thou wishest to leave without a slit 
weasand, join the hands of this happy pair, 
who stand there with April faces, not more 
eager for the office than thou art to escape." 

Mabel had, indeed, recovered from her 
swoon, if a blushing cheek is any sign of 
returning life, and now threw herself, with 
her pedlar lover, at the feet of her benefactor, 
who, raising them, led them hand in hand to 
the table. With a low, discontented voice, 
the Puritan minister performed the sacred 
duty, and had just concluded the service amid 



44 IC£ BOUND. 

the congratulations of the bystanders, who, 
in the absence of their worthy magistrate, 
evinced strong symptoms of a violoit reac- 
tion to royalty, when a load tap was heard 
at the door, and a voice demanded entrance 
in the name of the Commonwealth. The 
door was opened, and in walked the landlord, 
in full bloom of magisterial dignity, followed 
by the bridegroom, with his lowering face; 
the ostler, with his head boond up with a 
stablecloth ; and last, not least, four troopers, 
whose spurs tingled as they strode up the 
aisle, with pistols cocked. 

''I hold here,'' said the kndlord, <<an 
order, sealed by Sir John Gratton, govern 
nor of Caernarvon, to arrest and detain 
the person of a malignant rebel, named 
Sir Sichard Salisbury; and I also hold hen 
a warrant, agned by the magistrate of the 
southern district of Merionethshire, which 
is myself, to iqfqprehwd one John Griffith, 
hna&Aj a pikeman in the malignant army, 
and now an itinerant pedlar, who is sua* 



THE Mnmt'S TALE. 45 

pected to be a spy and conveyor of 
intelligence to the disaffected. CSorporal, do 
your duty^ in the name of God and the 
Commonwealth; yonder are the^ ** trai- 
tors he would have said, had not at that 
moment the staff of Sir Bichard felled him 
to the earth with the shock of a slaugh- 
tered bullock, while at the same time 
Oriffith, in spite of the screams of Mabel 
and her bridesmaidens, struck down the 
ostler by a well-directed blow of his fist; 
and, before the soldiers could interfere, fell 
upon the bridegroom, and gave him such a 
pommeling that he roared again, evincing an 
impatience mider suffering quite unworthy 
^iher of an ancient or a modem smt. Sir 
Eichard, in the act of drawing his sword, was 
however pinioned from behind, and his arms 
being tied with his own scarf, he rolled help^ 
tessly on a bench, cursing alike his enenues and 
thar new allies. The pedlar, in the act of 
making for the door, was stopped by a heavy 
blow jfrom the butt-end of a pistol, the 



46 ICEBOUND. 

force of which was^ however, somewhat 
broken by a small skull-cap, which, con- 
cealed in his broad-leafed hat, he had clapped 
on his head in the first alarm, with all that 
promptitude which a person acquires who 
has been long habituated to scenes of dan- 
ger. Mabel saw not the blow, for she had 
swooned. 

Placing a bench upon the communion* 
table, and seating himself thereon, the ma- 
gistrate, with his usual dignified preliminary 
^*hem,'' collecting his body-guard around 
him, called — ^in a pompous voice— on Dig- 
gory Jackson, ostler, the first witness, who 
x^ommenced, in a voice faint firom exhaus- 
tion, a detail of the conversation which 
(as our readers already may guess) he had 
overheard the night before between the 
<5avalier and the pedlar. The magistrate 
jstarted at the strange account of the dis- 
covery of the copper-mine, imd eyed sus- 
piciously, first the prisoner, and then the 
witness. 



THE miner's tale. 47 

' ^'And have you, Diggory Jackson, who 
have b^en sworn to tell the truth, the 
whole truth, and nothing but the truth, 
which means no gloss or commentary, and 
Nothing besides the truth, visited the moun- 
tain to see the said orifice?" 

^^I have, your worship, and ever since 
daybi'tek, poor weak vessel that I am, 
wiUi my wounded head, and other infirmi- 
tieS) I have spent in a vain search in the 
mountains/' 

" Diggory Jackson, your wits wander ; 
you hiBive but just received the said wound 
from the son Of Belial; for your poor 
sword was not blessed like Gideon's: God 
favoured it not/' 

"I Wander rather. I failed, your wor- 
ship, from not knowing the name of the 
mountain, which th6 vagrant had whis- 
pered too low for my ear." 
' The pedlar, downcast as he was at the 
array of justice, and at the ill fortune 
which had thus dashed the chalice from his 



48 ICE BOUND. 

yery lips^ could not repress a smile, which 
the cavalier reciprocated. 

** Advance, corporal ; and stand down, 70a 
first witness, Diggory Jackson/' 

The corporal, a rough soldier, advanced, 
making an awkward and ungainly bow to 
the magistrate, as he produced the con- 
tents of the pedlar's pack, which had been 
forced open by command of the landlord* 

** I find here, amongst various accursed 
vanities and devil's snares for weak Chris* 
tians, two rebel songs, one entitled ^The 
Brewer's dead, his Son's an Ass,' and ' The 
Return of the Cavaliers.' " 

"Search the other prisoner, and produce 
the description of his person." 

"Eyes blue, nose aquiline, hair chestnut, 
a scar over the left temple " 

" What is that paper in the prisoner's 
doublet?" 

" I will read it myself to his worship," 
said Sir Sichard, with a voice of triumidi> 



THE UNES'S TILE. 49 

st&nding forward and snatching the paper 
from the soldier's hand. 

'* 'Meronriug Bediyiyns, London, 8th of May. 

"'Yesterday the CommonSi to the uni- 
versal joj, appointed a committee to invite 
his Majesty to return and take possession 
of his dominions ; * and here follows a line 
more to my own purpose, which may save a 
btdlet or two at Caernarvon: 'The king's 
letter, received yesterday from Breda, pro* 
mises an amnesty to all persons whatso- 
ever/ and therefore to me and my friends 
here, Mr. Magistrate." 

The magistrate looked petrified as he sat ; 
the soldiers, lowering their pistols, shouted, 
with all the ardour of sudden proselytes, 

"Long live the king and Sir Richard 
Salisbury!" 

" Peace to all," cried Sir Richard ; " up 
with the 'Bose and Crown,' down with the 
'Covenant;' set the beer barrels going," he 
added, throwing a handful of silver to the 
soldiers. " All shall be Cock-a-hoop to-night». 

V0L.IL E 



50 ICE BOUND. 

for the meanest Christian shall this eve^ 
ere the sun set, see two moons rise over 
the mountains, and every loyal man shall 
let his brains reel, in honour of his 
blessed majesty. Shout, my masters, God 
save the king, down with his enemies ; 
and God bless the bridegroom and his 
bride r' 

And they did shout, such a shout that 
made the welkin ring, a joyful sound that 
started the owl in the belfry, and drove 
him forth hooting into the dazzling sun- 
light. ' 

A merry night they had of it, too, at 
the great bridal feast ; at the '^ Bose and 
Crown'' many a health was drunk to the 
lusty pedlar and his pretty bride; and the 
knight was the merriest of them all, for 
he pledged every one, and took especial 
delight in proposing toasts expresdve of 
extravagant and flaming loyalty, and in 
making any suspected semi-Puritan go down 
upon his marrow bones and empty a mea- 



THE miner's tale. SI 

sore to prove his truth. To judge from 
ike lip-zeal| never were so loyal a band as 
the quondam adherents of the landlord-jus- 
tice and the fallen Bump; they must have 
been perpetually burning to rush into 
arms for Charles. 

On the morrow, to the universal sorrow 
of the whole village, and more particularly 
of two we know well, Sir Eichard departed 
on his way to his own estate in Pembroke- 
shire! to rouse the dormant loyalty of that 
county. Within the week, Mabel's father^ 
in spite of her tears, attended by the no- 
tary, the minister, and our worthy friend 
the ostler, converted their goods into broad 
pieces and departed for the Plantations. 

Need we say, dear sympathising reader, 
that Griffith and Mabel lived happily; and 
that by the vigorous exertions of the for- 
mer in the copper-mine, their family rose 
to great importance in Merionethshire? If 
the reader visits Llanllyfhi, he may be sure 
that the rosiest-cheeked child in the groups 

£2 



52 ICE BOUND. 

of players, and the most ingenious archi- 
tect of mud-pies in that broad meadow near 
the church, are youthful descendants of 
Griffith Owen, the lucky pedlar, and Mabel 
Llewellyn his bnde. 



58 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 

CHAPTER I. 

The "Vale of Waters" is one of the fairest 
spots in North Wales. If it b not so sub« 
limely wild as Llanberris, it is more peaceful 
and pastoral; if less beautiful than Llangol- 
len, it possesses more of legendary interest. 
It is hemmed in on one side by the blacky 
precipitous walls of the " Eagle's Mountain/' 
as the Welsh call Snowdon, long since di- 
vested of those forests, the shelter of the 
wolf and boar, that once covered the peaks of 
Tr Wyrdfe, or "The Conspicuous/' to use the 
language of the bards. Behind it lies Nant 
Glasi or the Blue Valley, with it stream 



t 



54 ICE BOUND. 

forcing its way through a chaotic world of rocks^ 
on which no tree, no wild-flower, and scarcely 
the rudest lichen, can find nourishment ; yet so 
tinted, and shaded, and brightened by mists, 
and rains, and frost are these crags, that they 
glow beneath a sunset with all the beautiful 
and shifting colours of an iceberg. 

Here every crag has its legendary tale, 
beginning from the very twilight of Druidical 
times down to the full daylight of mediaeval 
history. Here the Knights of St. John had a 
hospice ; there the wretched Vortigem, the Se- 
bastian of early British story, found a dis- 
honourable shelter, protected by the spell of 
Merlin, who seems to have called devil, fiend^ 
and spirit to ransack the elements to win back 
for him everything but a kingdom. Here, 
too, are recollections of the Romans and St. 
Helena. On this height, in a grated dungeon 
of that tower that still affords an eyrie for the 
golden eagle, groaned the brother of the jea- 
lous Llewellyn; and here for twenty-three years 
he lay, companion of the gilded. newt and 



THE CORPSE H0T7SE. 55 

toady watclung the hawk fly past, and hearing 
the wind roar free among the mountain 



Nature, within the circle of a dozen miles, 
has, indeed, concentred all the beauty of Wales 
— mountains crowned with mist, and girt round 
with lakes so clear that you can count theur 
polished pebbles, and see the speckled trout 
that glide in them ; cataract and stream, green 
meadow wd wooded height ; while high over 
the highest p^ak, hidden, save when revealed 
by the lightning, rises Snowdon, its great 
broad base enveloped by the enfolding moun- 
tains, seen only here and there through a 
break in the range, that opens like a breach 
in the rampart of a stormed city. 

The merriest-hearted fellow in Nant Gwyn- 
nant, now nearly a century ago, was Owen 
Glas; the best runner, the best leaper, and 
the best rider; the best fisher, the surest- 
footed cragsman — ^in a word, the most skilful 
at all the six feats of strength that constituted 
the Tadogian in the old Welsh Olympic 



56 .' ICEBOUND. 

games. The merriest dancer was Owen round 
the bonfires on the eve of All-Saints^ and the 
clearest, fullest voice was his at the Plygan^ 
or Cock-crowing, as the Welsh call the assem- 
bly held in their churches on the morning of 
Christmas-eve. 

Happy, indeed, would have been the maiden 

whose charms could have won him to ^betrothal* 

bedding. Not that Owen was by any meana 

a perfect hot-pressed hero. He had the vices 

of his nation. He was hot and passionate, a 

full tide of Celtic blood ran tingling in bis 

veins, and he would use his knife at a country 

revel as quickly as any Elizabethan cut-purse* 

It was a " word and a blow" with him, and 

the blow generally first. He had, moreover — 

for truth must out, and we'd better make a 

clean breast of it at starting — more than the 

Cymri's usual partiality for the barley-broth^ 

or carwj without caring much whether the 

honest liquor came to us from Egypt or 

Scandinavia. In his stepfather's cabin — for 

Owen was an orphan — ^hung ten spigots, as 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 57 

trophies of his yictories at as many termingSf 
a bacchanalian custom of the mountain-land, 
'* more honoured in the breach than the 
observance/' 

The terming was thus carried on : a band 
of topers, who had earned some celebrity for 
strragth of head, used to retire to some lonely 
ale-house, tap a barrel of the strongest 
October, and seated round it, horn in hand, 
drink till it was consumed. From '^mom 
till dewy eve'' they sat, from midnight 
till the reddening of the day, no rest, no 
food, till to the victor at this rude revel 
the spigot was awarded as a well-earned 
prize. 

Barbarous as such debauches may appear, 
they seem to have once prevailed in England, 
if a legend connecting Shakspeare with one can 
be relied on. For Scotland, let Bums's 
^ Song of the Whistle" speak. Oh, well did 
logo say, ^^ I learned it in England, where, 
indeed, they are most potent in pottmg. 
Your Dane, your German, and your swag- 



58 lOB BOUND. 

bellied Hollander — ^Drink hoi — ^are nothing 
to your English/' 

Owen GlaSy with all his cheerM laagh and 
merry eye, was an orphan^ and had no home 
but the cottage of his foster-father, and he 
was an old blind harper, who was known to 
every one, gentle and peasant, in the whole 
country-side. 

There was never a merry-making, but Old 
Howell and his telyn were there; never a 
miner's dance on the welcome Saturday night, 
but there might be heard, pouring out from 
the inn's latticed window, " The Ash Grove,'* 
or ^^ The Eising of the Sun ;" any night in 
the week, in some farm-house or hall, Howell 
might have been found surrounded, like an 
old Homer, with his train of rustic flatterers 
and admirers, while the dancing throng footed 
it round the candle on the floor, or kept up 
an equally old remnant of by-gone ages, by 
placing crossed pipes upon the floor, in the 
room of more harmful swords. 

It was to travel back three good centuries, 



THE OORPSE HOUSE. 59 

to see the old man's grey locks falling over 
the harp; to see the strings swept by his 
trembling but skilful fingers; to see his 
vacant eye turned up as if for inspiration, or 
his head bent forward to catch the light 
footsteps of Owen, the son of his heart. For 
Howell was no vagabond musician, and he 
had a love of his gentle art, that men of 
higher note, who would have derided his wild 
marches and plaintive dirges, might well have 
envied. His misfortunes had heightened, too, 
his powers of reflection, and increased in him 
the natural superstition of his imaginative 
race. He knew by rote every fairy legend, 
every story of exorcised spirit, fiend, or devil, 
that haunted mountain, lake, or fen. He 
was the oracle of the children, whom he loved 
to gather round him at a farmer's fire, and, 
clambering on his knees, to let them play with 
his grey hair, or twang his harp-strings, on 
which he would illustrate the magic wonders of 
which he told. He had, perhaps, arrived at that 
state of mind when imagination takes almost 



60 ICE BOUND. 

the place of reason^ or reigns rather in an 
empire of its own, unchecked for the time by 
the faculty which too often rules it so despo* 
tically. To him the spirits that had passed 
away^ '^the fair humanities of old religion^" 
were sober realities. To his dimmed eye 
they existed as much as those tangible beings 
among whom he dwelt, whose cheering voice 
he heard, whose kindly grasp he felt, at 
whose board he sat, and at whose hearth be 
basked. 

Howell had roamed among the mountains 
from a child, until he knew every crag as 
well as he did the streets of his birthplace—* 
for he was not bom blind. He was sixteen, 
when a sudden desire came upon him to sleep 
upon Snowdon ; for he who did so, say the 
bards, will awake either mad or inspired* 
^^ The firstlings of his thought" became the 
firstlings of his hand. He sought a nook in 
the rock, just where the region of mist begins 
its twilight, and told not even the firiend of 
his bosom of what he planned. He fell 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 61 

asleep in his strange rock-chamber. He 
dreamt of bliss; bat in ^^the dark nighty 
deep nighty the blackest of the nighty" a storm 
burst upon the mountain ; a flash of light- 
ning cUsclosed to his eyes, for the last time, 
tiie valley of his burth, with a red glare Vke 
the dawn of the day of judgment ; then deep 
night fell upon him; and he waited long, 
long for morning, but to him it never came. 
Some shepherds, searching for their flocks 
that the storm had scattered, found Howell 
groping his way on the very edge of the 
terrific chasm of Crib Coch. They led him 
home, and told him what they feared. Every 
restorative that village art could furnish was 
resorted to in vain. He had been struck blind, 
incurably blind. From that day, however, true 
inspiration dawned upon him; now for the 
first time, as if a new sense had awakened 
within him, he heard the voice of nature in 
everything, firom the sighing of the summer 
breeze to the roar of the torrent. And he 
had need of such consolation, for heavier 



62 ICE BOUND. 

sorrows fell upon him now that he was leoi 
lible to bear them. In the bitterness of Im 
heart he thought that even his God had 
forsaken him, in not tempering the wind to 
the shorn lamb. The maiden he loved £(ir» 
sook him in his misfortune, and married 
another. Perhaps he had been prepared for 
this blow, for her inquiries for him had grown 
less and less frequent, though she had wept 
when she first saw his grey, sightless eyes, and 
sobbed that her love was still unchangeable. 
But even in this sore trial Howell gathered 
patience. ''The Lord hath given, and the 
Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name 
of the Lord!" was his only exclamation. She 
married, and died in her first childbed, and 
the peasants whispered that there was divine 
vengeanqe in it. Howell never mentioned her 
name again, but it was observed, when he 
played the well-known air of '' Merd Megan,'' 
'' Margaret's Daughter" — ^her name was Mar^ 
garet — ^that a tear would sometimes roll from 
his sightless orb, and he would then invariably 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 63 

change it to the beaatifol ^^ Codiad yr 
Hedydd,'' or "The Eising of the Lark/' so 
full of hope and life, and spring and mommg, 
as if by this he meant to imply her having 
risen to her home among the angels. But this 
story was very well for work-a-day sort of 
people, it would not do for the more super- 
atitiouSy who with sundry shrugs and " hems/' 
by which they implied that they could tell 
more if they liked, declared that " Howell had 
been thus punished by the demon of the 
f Adders' Lake/ for daring to sleep all night 
upon its shore.'' 

Yet not even with blindness did Howell 
cease his lonely wanderingS| not even with 
advancing age that robbed him of his vigour 
and his speed. He would still stroll for hours 
beside the pathless morasses that lie among 
ike hiUSi finding his way by a sort of 
instinct over the dark tracks, where one 
fiK>tstep aside would have dragged him 
down to ''muddy death/' scrambling over 
peat cuttings, and wading through low rushy 



64 iciMunx 

pools, to readi some londy lake, known to 
few but the fiahennen. There, on the flat 
shore, strewn with grey pebbles, oyer which 
the water crept with soft, low mnsic, when 
the east wind drove in fiister the tiring wayes, 
he would often stretdi himself till tiie chill j 
wind told of coming ni^t; thenwonldheiise^ 
stride home, eat hastily his frogal meal of 
battermilk and black bread, and hurry off to 
the '^inn's best room,'' to busy himself with 
his harp, and describe npon it die emotions of 
the day — now animating the rerellers with 
the stirring march of the '' Men of Harlech ;*^ 
"CodiadyrNant;" " The Kiaing of the Son ;•* 
« Meddwdd Myr ;" " Merry and Tipsy f or 
throwing the deep melancholy of his sool, like 
a warning voice, into " Ar hyd y Nos," " The 
live-long Night," or the simple '' Pro Gftn," 
"TheLnlkby/' 

Althongh Owen Glas was an orphan, and 
depending, indeed, on the charity of one who 
lived himself on alms, he was tiie son of rich 
parents, his fig^ther having hdd one of the 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 65 

liirgest farms in the Beaver's Valley^ where of 
old the last King of Wales was taken prisoner 
by Edward I. He died suddenly of fever, leav- 
ing his son, with his last breath, to the guar- 
dianship of his brother-in-law, Hugh-y-Fwyall, 
a poor descendant of the celebrated Constable 
of Criccieth Castle, who, at the battle of 
Foictieis, took the French king prisoner, 
having first hewn off the head of his charger 
with a single blow of a broad axe. 
- Everybody supposed, of course, naturally 
enough, that in due time the infant would 
succeed to his father's patrimony ; but on the 
day of the funeral, when, after the interment, 
all the guests were assembled at the feast 
usual m Wales on such occasions, Fwyall 
produced a will, found, as he said, by him in 
a drawer of the deceased's old cabinet, leav- 
ing all his property, and even his personals, 
^* to his dear brother," Hugh-y-Fwyall, and re- 
commending his infant son to Hugh's parental 
eare, to adopt him as his own, and to bring 
him up with his own daughter of nearly the 
VOL. u. F 



66 ICEBOUHD. 

same age. Strange looks were exchanged, but 
men shrugged their shoulders and were silent ; 
nobody could question the caprices of a man 
scarce cold in his grave. The subject was a 
nine-days' wonder, and, after that transitory 
existence, it passed away as nine-days' wonders 
do. Some, endued with that rather late spirit 
of prophecy common in the world, whispered 
to their neighbours that they always thought 
the deceased hadn't much natural affection ; 
others remained silent, but, by frowns and por- 
tentous winks, implied the existence of fraud; 
while a third party, of a neutral tint, in- 
different to everything but their own affairs, 
declared that they thought the thing very 
reasonable, and did not see why parents 
should not leave their property as they liked^ 

as long as it was not to a d Saesneg. 

Time passed on ; Hugh, from a poor man, 
struggling with difficulties, almost over- 
powered by their multiplicity, and just keep- 
ing his head above '^ a sea of troubles," grew 
a thrivmg farmer, built bams and homesteads 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 67 

in the midst of his bro&d acres, and finaUy 
commenced working a small copper-mine in- 
one of those little wild recesses which scarcely 
desenre the name of valleys, in the strong 
buttresses of Snowdon. But Hugh had been 
soured by a long course of adyersity, and had 
too long felt the pitiless chidings of the storm, 
to relax at once into bland smiles at the first 
burst of sunshine. He remained still black- 
browed and churlish. He was beloved by 
none, for he seemed to hate all ; even the men- 
dicant sped faster by his door. The rumour 
spread that he was a man sceptical about all 
the old superstitions which were handed down 
from father to son ; and the dalesmen held this 
as but the beginning of a deeper, darker infi- 
delity. He trod haunted paths at nightfall with- 
out a fear ; he hung no sacred plants over his 
threshold on the eve of St. John; and to 
show openly his contempt of such " cursed 
folly/' as he called it bitterly, he buried his 
best-beloved sister on the north side of the 
mountain church — ^the wrong side, as the 

f2 



68 ICE BOUHD. 

peasants shudderingty call it — among suicides 
and children unbaptised. He was^ indeed, a 
man who seemed to bear the brandof an inhu- 
man crime upon his brow. People shunned him 
in his walks, grasped not his hand readily in 
the market-place, and shrunk farther firom his 
seat in the inn-kitchen. 

Unconscions of these feelings, and too 
merry-hearted, perhaps, to regard them even if 
he had known them, Owen grew up to a man's 
stature, with all the fair fieu^ of his father, 
all his mother's dark eye and frank brow, 
with all his sire's sense, and with what he 
loved to boast of — the foot of a goat and the 
eye of a falcon. Yet to one less cheerful 
than himself his life would have been a hard 
one. It had been long seen by all, and even 
he at last came to the horrid consciousness, 
that he was hated by his stem guardian. 
From a boy, Hugh had disliked his proud, swell* 
ing spirit, and now, in fuU manhood, when 
they stood almost on the same footing, it 
became mtolerable* He had long stinted him 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 69 

in food, and beaten him ; now he set him at 
hard tasks, beyond his strength, and con- 
demned him to worse than Egyptian slavery, 
in the dark, narrow, noisome chambers of the 
lonely mine, that secluded him for twelve hours 
together from daylight and the cheerful sun. 
But the youth bore it unrepiningly, spoke of 
it to no one, and never bated an atom of his 
merry-heartedness at the village dances. His 
thoughts were those of Shakspeare's Fer- 
dinand — 

There be some sports all painfiil, bat their lalxmr 
Delight in them sets off ; some kinds of baseness 
Are nobly undergone ; and most poor matters 
Point to rich ends. 

Let US tell it without further mystery — he 
loved the daughter of his taskmaster. The 
fair maiden bore the ancient Welsh name of 
Myrannwy ; a gentle, innocent, warm-hearted 
creature was she, pure as the Miranda of the 
poet. She loved Owen ; she knew not why ; they 
had been brought up together till their hearts 
had ^wn into one ; so trees grow together 



70 ICE BOUND. 

by contact. She tempered his fierce nature ; 
he felt solace in the soothing ; thej were 

like two berries on a common stem. 

Beautiful in contrast as the birch and oak 
that grow side bj side upon the mountain, 
she clung to him as naturally and as unin«* 
quiringly as the bind-weed embraces the 
forest tree. He loved her as a sister; he 
loved her because she pitied him. Her love 
lightened his sorrows^ and consoled him for 
his toils. When her father was absent, she 
would often trip over the mountain-paths, and 
sitting down upon a rock at the mine's mouth, 
carol like an angel till evening came, and with 
it rest ; she was a guardian-angel of purity 
to dear Owen ; and when Hugh flamed forth 
into frenzied passions, and half-drew his knife 
upon Owen, she would cling to his knees, 
and bring him straightway to such a melting 
mood that his large tears would drop faster 

Than Arabian trees their medicinal gum. 

But the breach soon grew visibly wider. 



THE OOBPSE HOUSE. ' 71 

The youth became more impetuous ; the old 
man more covetous, steru, and unyielding — 

As with age his body uglier grew, 
So his mind cankered. 

Mistaking the patienqe of Owen for pusillan- 
imity, Hugh laboured toinventtasks in the mine 
to crush his spirit ; planning new levels, where 
none bat a madman could have expected to 
find ore ; declaring, in a hypocritically-assumed 
fit of superstition, that he had heard knockers, 
as the mine-spirits are called, in the workings. 
A spark fell upon the train prepared. In a 
diance conversation with an enemy of Hugh's, 
Owen heard the whole history of his life, and 
of the imputed fi-aud, painted in the worst 
colours of detraction. The very suspicion 
was enough to an impetuous mind, heated 
by injuries so recent. Confronting Fwyall, 
lie taxed him with his crime, forswore his 
acquaintance, defied his utmost vengeance ; 
and finally, bearding him in an inn-kitchen, 
in spite of all the entreaties of his foster-father, 
struck his tormentor to the earth. Eising 



72 * ICEBOUND. 

slowly from the earth, with the blood streaming 
from a cut on his brow, Hugh then cursed the 
orphan, prayed God to send the eagle's ulcer* 
upon him ; and finally, declaring himself freed, 
by this base ingratitude, from all claims, for- 
bade him his house, and turned him a beggar 
upon the world. 

None who saw it could forget, to their 
dying day, the dark malignity of Hugh's scowl 
as he thus spoke ; but, ere he had ended, Owen 
had left the room. Rushing frantically through 
the village, he hastened to his father's house, 
now no longer his home, and bidding adieu to 
Myrannwy, who wept in horror at his blood- 
shot eyes and disordered hair, left her, as he 
said, perhaps for ever. To a boon companion 
whom he met he said, in answer to his anxious 
and wonderiug inquiries, that he was going to 
" St. George's Well, to make an offering for 
an enemy." He stayed no longer, but, plung- 
ing down a mountain-path that led towards 

* A legendary disease. 



THE CORPSE HOUSE, 73 

Caernarvon^ he was soon lost in the coming 
night. 

But from these few words the horrified pea- 
sants had gathered too clearly the nature of 
his journey. From time immemorial it had been 
the custom in Wales^ when hatred ran high, to 
go and curse an enemy at a saint's well : the in- 
jured man was required to lay there a small piece 
of money upon the altar, upon which he knelt 
bare-kneed, uttering the curse, and praying 
God to bring it to pass. Pallid and breath- 
less, the man broke into the circle at the inn- 
fire^ and told them of the news. Fwyall had 
already gone, but the tidings soon reached 
his ears. Terrible was the rage of the misan- 
thrope at such palpable evidence of a deep- 
rooted hatred ; but he afiected to be indiffe- 
rent to the story, and to disbelieve its truth. 
Finding his daughter in tears, he burst forth 
into blasphemous execrations, bade her not 
weep for such a villain, or he would turn her 
also adrift to follow him through the world. 




74 



CHAPTER !!• 

It wanted two hours to sunset on the next 
day, and the maiden was weeping over her 
distaff, with her face buried in her hands, 
when she heard a low tap at the window by 
her side, and, looking up, beheld the well- 
known face of her lover staring in at the 
pane. So fearful and so altered was his gaze 
that she cried for help, and as her father 
rushed in from an adjoining room, the face 
again disappeared. He started when she told 
him of what she believed to be an apparition, 
and, with a frown of rage and fiendish gesti- 
culation, he soon afterwards left the house. 
It was half an hour later, as it afterwards ap- 



THE OOBPSE HOUSE. 75 

peared when these points were put together^ 
that Owen was seen by a village boy who was 
tending some goats on a hill near the mine. 
JEe carried a small crowbar in his hand^ 
walked at a rapid pace towards the working, 
and was then seen no more. 

It was the day after, when, in consequence 
of the statement of the boy and Myrannwy to 
the anxious inquiries of old Howell, that one 
party of villagers set off in the direction of 
St. George's Well, and another to the level of 
the copper-mine in the mountains. They took 
with them matches and torches, for the wind- 
ing passages had already been pushed some 
hundred yards in search of metal. Entering 
hastily, with a nervous anxiety, not unmingled 
with superstition, the foremost man stumbled 
npon something on which he had put his 
foot. He stooped down to pick it up; it 
was an open clasp-knife. " Hugh Fwyall's," 
said one of the miners, holding his torch to 
it ; "I know it by that notched handle ;" and, 
lihrusting it into his pocket, they hurried on. 



76 ICE BOUND. 

They had reached the last windmg but one^ 
when their leader^ suddenly uttering a shrill 
exclamation of horror and wonder, rushed 
forward — It was the body of Owen Glas, 
quite cold and stiff. A mass of rock resting 
upon his temple, and crushing his fair features 
to a shapeless mass, disclosed the cause of 
death. In one cold hand he still clenched a 
crowbar; by his side lay an extinct torch^ 
and a tin of the coarse powder used in blast- 
ing. With an outburst of exclamations at a 
death so horrid and so untimely, and with 
muttered allusions to the curse of the Well — 
which seemed to have fallen upon him who 
uttered it — ^they hastily constructed a rude bier 
of birchen boughs, and covering Owen's face, 
to hide the traces of so frightful a death, they 
bore him to that house he had left in such 
hot and sinful anger. 

The crowds that met the sad procession 
had already borne the news to every house. 
Fwyall, with his brow still lowering, but wear- 
ing a decent sorrow, came forth to meet the 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 77 

corpse^ and to thank the bearers for their 
pious care. 

None may tell the agony of Myrannwy. 
Believing now confidently that she had really 
seen the spirit of her lover^ she fell into a 
succession of swoons^ that seemed almost to 
promise that death should unite those who 
through life had been as one. She did not, 
indeed; long survive him. 



78 



CHAPTER III. 

Five days had elapsed since the finding of 
the body, and the people were assembling 
about sunset round the door of the "Ty 
Corph/* or " Corpse's House," to take part in 
the ceremony called by the Welsh themselves 
" gwylaos," which, although tinctured with a 
deeper tone of solemnity, resembles in all its 
salient points the wilder Irish " lykewake." 

The door was constantly opening for 
the egress and ingress of the nearer 
friends of the deceased, for the farmers 
who stole in to drop a word of comfort 
to Fwyall, or for the matrons and white- 
cheeked maidens, to soothe, if they could 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 79 

not console^ Myrannwj^ who still mourned, 
and would not be comforted. 

On stools in the centre of the room, 
covered with a white sheet, to signify 
that he had never been married, lay the 
coffin of Owen, and upon it burned three 
candles, emblematical of the Trinity, their 
pale glimmer scarce lighting up the darkness 
of a stormy evening. A frozen crowd at 
the door seemed as if moved by a common 
feeling to stay for some person, either of 
consequence or nearly connected with the 
femily. 

While some looked down the road, 
others gathered in knots, and discussed the 
dangers of mining, not without hurried 
glances at the corpse. There was not one 
present who did not appear moved when 
old Howell entered, his head buried in 
Ms hands. Heeding not the greeting of 
iFwyall, he sat down, without a word, at 
the right hand of the corpse, as if claiming 
by prescription the title of chief mourner; 



80 ICEBOUND. 

then suddenly rising, he asked for Myrannwy/ 
and shaking his head moamfiilly at tibe- 
answer^ resumed his plaoe. 

In a few minutes a slight movement and' 
whispering was heard without, and the 
squires and magistrates of the district 
entered, the crowd pouring in and dosing' 
the door after them. Not surprised at 
visits so frequent on such occasions, Fwyall 
rose, and welcoming the guests, beckoned 
them to a seat of honour. Every one 
being seated, a servant passing round, 
handed pipes and lights to each. Then 
for a moment there was a deep silence, 
as the parish-clerk rose to read the prayers 
usual on such occasions, when suddenly the 
old harper, thrusting him gently back into 
his seat, rose, to the astonishment of all^ 
to speak: — 

"Friends," he said, in a voice deep* 
and husky with emotion, "the body of 
a murdered man lies before you!" 

Fwyall, who had remained hitherto almost 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 81 

imconcerned, tnmed pale at these words, rose, 
bat sank down again into his chair, and 
gazed with lack-lastre eyes on the speaker, 
as if some spell, too powerful to be broken, 
retained him. 

" Te all know,'' continued Howell, turning 
himself towards Fwyall — " ye all know with 
what lore I loved him who lies dead 
before us — he was to me more than a 
tson, and I loved him more than a father. 
I watched over him as a mother over her 
diild, — he knew it, and he loved me 
for i^. I had long seen ill blood ris- 
ing between him and Fwyall; and I 
heard Owen, though he didn't know it, 
vow to go on ar pilgrimage to St. George's 
Well. I heard him come home, too, 
fop I knew the path by which he would 
return, and I lay waiting for him all day 
by the scorching sun, and all night by 
fhe blessed moon; and I heard him come 
and followed him, all unseen, to the cot- 
tage— 'yes, to Fwyall's cottage; and he 

TOL. n. Q 



82 ICE BOUND. 

got his tools out of the shed, and hur- 
ried off towards the nune. I was suie 
he was gone there, for I heard him 
mutter, ^ Once more--once more !' Theii 
I followed him — ^but far, far behind, for 
I am old, and he was fleet of foot ; 
here and there I had to creep round 
some rock to prevent his seeing me ; once 
I lay down to rest by the side of the 
cool . lake — ^for I was weary with watch- 
ing, and my mind was overtaxed. 

'^ Tes I I made on ; I listened when 
I got to the entrance of the level, think* 
ing I should hear the clink of his pick ; 
but, to my horror, I heard instead angry 
voices — ^the voices of Owen and Fwyall.'' 

All eyes were turned on the murderer, 
who seemed to turn to very stone under 
their gaze. 

"Fool that 1 was to linger I I heard 
a dull blow, a groan, then the fall of a 
piece of rock; and ere I had scarce 
time to sink behind a shelving crag 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 83 

at the mine's mouthy Fwjall there rushed 
forth as if a devil had chased him^ and in an 
instant he was oat of sight. I groped my way 
in, and felt for the body ; for all is dark for 
me. I hinted indistinct fears, the search was 
made, and the body was found. I found it, 
but there was not even a pulsation at the 
heart. Let us give up this murderer to 
justice I 



g2 



84 



CHAPTER IV. 

It was dim evening, and sentence was about 
to be passed upon a prisoner. He turns 
his head. It is FwyalL The chief, and 
almost the only witness, has been the 
old harper. The Chester jury retire just as 
the lamps are lighted. They return in half 
an hour. It seemed a lifetime to the 
prisoner. There is a pause of intense 
expectancy. 

*^ Gentlemen of the jury, haye you agreed 
upon the Terdict? Is the prisoner at 
the bar, Hugh-y-Fwyall, guflty of the 
crime whereof he stands indicted, or not 
guilty?" 



THE CORPSE HOUSE. 85 

"GuUtyr 

Then for the first time Fwyall, who 
had never spoken daring the trial till 
now, with a countenance expressive of the 
most diabolical malice and revenge, poured 
a volley of execrations upon the harper 
who had accused him: — 

' *' D — ^n seize you, you foul old villain 
— ^the red plague blister you! Had I 
liberty now, I would use it to take your 
life If I escape from prison, I vow to 
Heaven I will murder you !" 

"May God visit the blood of this man 
upon my head if another murder is com- 
mitted by his bloody hand," said the 
judge. " Go, Mr. Sheriff, procure a 
carpenter, have a gallows erected and 
a coflGin made, on the very spot where 
the monster stands; for from this bench 
I will not remove until I see him exe- 
cuted."* 

* A similar execution did take place in the last century, 
improbable and horrible as it may now seem. 



86 ICE BOUND. 

The Sheriff obeyed the order; a gallows 
was erected within that very hall of justice, 
and that same night, in the presence of 
the judge, the jury, and the people, 
Fwyall ascended the scaffold, cursing and 
blaspheming with his latest breath, spum^ 
ing the consolations of the chaplain, and 
defying the angry God whom he was about 
to meet. His body was hung in chains at 
the mouth of the deserted mine. 

So upon Owen, as well as Hugh, the 
wretched murderer, fell the curse of St. 
George's Well 



87 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 

A TALE FOUNDED ON PACT. 

I do love these ancient ruins. 

We never tread upon them, but we set 

Our foot upon some reverend history. 

Websteb's DucTiess of Malfy, 

It is now full thirty summers since; as a 
young artist, I spent some months of a 
long vacation in a pedestrian tour in North 
Wales. 

. I remember well, as though it were but yester- 
day, setting out with a full purse and a light 
heart, staff in hand, from the gate of old gable- 
^nded Chester, through Wales to wend *^my soli- 
tary way.*' I sailed without chart or compass. 



88 ICK 

fiiDowing no more impoatiTe gnde Aan die 
G^ffioe of the momoit^ or the vanderingi 
oi my own swed wSL Here I scaled a 
moaQtain, kgend-haanted, there I visited an 
antique maniirion Here I lay like a cniaed 
poet^ mnsing in ^ite of mjsdf tor homn 
beside a &II, lolled by tlw throbbing pbmge 
and the mnsic-thonder of its waters ; there I 
groped tor the fire-long day assid the lardy 
Tistted rains of srane grey-sfeoned, namelfss 
abbey, repeopling it with the beings of tlie 
past, and sammoning its white-dad duqpter 
firom their long long deep in the edioing 
tombs beneath my feet, befiure the tribonal of 
my mind. Now I stroTe, perdied on some 
jutting crag^ to realise the moantain-worsh^ef 
the antedihirian raeei^ or to di^pe qpiiita ef 
the stonn firom the white mist that boiled up 
in smoking wreaths firom the seeding jawa of 
the bottomless fit bdow ma. Now lyii^; 
under the pinnades of sosm rained sea-tower, 
I f h apsodis e d firom the xi^es of a bfain, 
stuibd with old nonMe,'* tlm pa' 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 89 

geanMes and savage revelries once held in 
those Welsh halls now vaulted only by heaven. 
Such were my reveries ; yet still more fre- 
quently, must I own it, loving as I do to 
espy Nature embosked in wildest solitude, 
fishing-rod in haod (a mere excuse), and some 
loved poet in my pocket, I strolled from my 
rustic inn and sallied forth like an early dis- 
coverer into an unknown country. Then, for 
hours, oblivious to the social frankness of my 
Welsh landlord, and the charms of his black- 
eyed daughter, I would follow the windings of 
some brawling mountam-stream, and led 
farther and farther by its chafing ripple, I 
strayed through rocky pass and wooded 
glen, till, with mind replete with scenes 
of beati;y^ and with pannier filled with such 
a goodly array of speckled trout as would 
have made honest Walton positively swoon 
for joy, I returned, weary in body, but elastic 
and refreshed in mind, to a good supper, and 
a cool-blanched and lavendered bed in my 
pleasant hostelrie of ^^ The Three Salmons.'' 



90 ICE BOUID. 

It was on aheart-warmhig; somiy motiimgia 
August, thatlstarted fiur soch a lamUe as I have 
mentioned, firom the odd little fishing-town of 
Barmouth, or Aher Maw, on the coast of 
Merionethshire, a comer i^thc woild that the 
artist-tourist may ronemher, with its quaint 
houses perdied upon a rock aboTe the riTer, 
its white-sailed Tessels, and its group of 
hatted womoi and stalwart fidiermen enli- 
Tening the beadi ; here, in tiie Tery heart of 
jMscators' land, haring pitched my tent^ I had 
adTenturously risited the adjacent lakes, the 
deren tributary streams that empty their 
little unis into the sea, mdA the broad Mawdr 
dach, which, threading its dcTious way among 
the mountains^ anircs at las^ after passing 
many a &ir spot, at the scattered town oC 
Bolgdfy, not 






but as a Wdsh riiw should^ flowing wildly 
on its way past bdd rockf pfomontories^ thoe 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 91 

dad with dark, star-proof woods, and here over- 
shadowed by hills that were hid only with the 
thick purple blossoms of the heath flower, or 
the vari-coloured weayings of the rock-lichen. 

But I had heard of Druids, and nothing 
would satisfy me but I must now visit the Meini 
Gwyr Ardudwy, or the obelisk stones that 
mark the grave of the heroes of Ardudwy ; 
the Celtic ramparts of Cors y Gedol; the 
British camp of Dinas Corddyn; the holy 
^mrcle of the Druids, called Cameddi Hen- 
gwm; and last, but before all, the great 
Coeten Arthur, or rock, denominated " King 
Arthur's Quoit," which every Welshman, and 
therefore every lover of the Welsh, amongst 
whom I enrol myself, is bound to believe was 
hurled thither by the semi-Homeric champion 
above named, all the long way from the blue 
peak of Moelfre, let alone the mark of the 
hero's grasp upon its lichened surface. 

But should I forget Harlech, towering, in 
its pride of strength, upon the rock that over- 
looks the sea. I made a long day's visit to 



92 ICE BOUND. 

that ruined fortalice of the princes of North 
Wales^ enjoying from its walls (he distant 
views of the vast Snowdon range, upreared, 
like Titan ramparts, between me and 
Englimd. I (Grayed, too, down to the 
broad sand-beach, now far distant from the 
castle, whose lower walls the sea once 
washed, and, proceeding some miles farther 
along the shore, I seated myself upon the 
Sam Badrig, or St. Patrick's Causeway, an 
old sea-bulwark, mentioned, I believe, in the 
" Triads," probably erected by some ancient 
Cambrian king, and which still runs defyinglj 
into the d6ep ; and as I listened to the murmur 
of the waves, I thought over wild legions of 
barbarian chieftiftins and cities beneath the sea* 
I was so much delighted, indeed, with 
Harlech and its stone-built cottages, that I 
came thither several times from Barmouth, 
and on one of those occasions entered into 
conversation with the old seneschal who 
shows the castle to visitors — a life about as 
suggestive of mortality as a sexton's, and per- 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 93 

haps equally perverted* My cicerone was an 
intelligent old man, and delighted me with 
the warmth of his manner and the interest 
he seemed to take in the ruins and the 
legends. 

Finding me a ready listener, he used to tell 
me that the oldest wall, which he pointed 
to as he spoke, was of the time of Malgwyn 
Gwynedd, Prince of North Wales, who 
flourished in the year 530, a remote date, 
which is but yesterday to genealogists, who 
put Noah himself at least half-way down their 
genealogical tree. Here, too, he said, lived 
Bronwen, "the white-necked," a proud 
beauty, who, being struck by her savage 
husband, lit up the flames of civil war it. 
the land, and added another item to those 
three evil blows which the "Triads" say 
were the ruin of Britain. But the strong- 
hold where the wearers of the golden torques 
and the amber wreath have ruled fell into 
decay, like aU sublunary things, and was not 
rebuilt till the conquest of Edward, the lion- 



94 ICS fiOUHD. 

hearted, who held it as a pomt soitahle to re* 
press the harharians of the interior, it being 
adapted by its situation to reodve saccours 
from the sea. There the arch rebel, Owen 
Glendower, stood a siege, and thither the '^ She- 
Wolf of France'* came with her jewels and 
treasore after the slaughter at Northampton^ 
ere she fled to France and to the arms of old 
King Bene, the minstrel king ; for Harlech was 
the last tower that held out forfalling Lancaster 
and the king too good for earth, just as it 
afterwards was the last standing-place for 
the Stuarts. 

The old man seemed to love the place, 
which was to him a court-jard of the tomb« 
His pale thin cheek glowed with plea- 
sure as he leant oyer the ruined wall and 
looked across the still blue expanse of the 
Irish Sea, that seemed, as the poets say, like 
an uncovered mine of gold veiled beneath 
the last rays of a noonday's sun. With the air 
of a veteran he would point me out the triple 
defences of the tower-crowned rock, the gloomy 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 95 

strength of the dangeons^ and the great 
breach which one Mytton (whose family 
is still existing in Cheshire) made^ and which 
forced the brave Major Pennant and his 
brave little band to yield the hold. 

Then my old friend showed me the sally- 
port which once opened on the beach^ but 
now on meadows, since the sea that bore 
hither the English vessel and the Danish gal- 
ley has retreated, like a generous foe, from 
an old disarmed knight, where the warrior, 
from the mast head, has often fought hand-to- 
hand with the bowmen on the battlement of 
the lowest wall. 

'* Oh, it was a famous strong place," said 
the seneschal, "when our own kings ruled 
the mountain land ; and many a tough bout 
of war these walls of ours have beaten back. I 
recollect a story now that I heard long ago, 
of a knight who once kept these towers, and 
shouted out to his besiegers, who shook their 
long spears far below, that he had once held 
:a castle in France (it was in the time of 



96 lOS EOUHD. T 

Edward of Caernarvon) so long that every 
old woman in Potoo (Poictou) talked of it ; 
and that if he hadn't good terms he would 
now hold Harlech till every old woman in 
Wales talked of iV 

I smiled, as in duty bound, at the naive 
eflfrontery of the knight — 

Whoae bones aze dost, 
And his good sword nist ; 

and charmed with the castle and its situation, 
and not less with my grey-headed friend, I 
seated myself by his side on the broad stones 
of the terrace wall, and began to enter into 
conversation with him about the distinctive 
beauties of Dolgelly, near which town I found 
he had been bom. 

^^ I was there but yesterday," I said, ** fisfab- 
ing down the Mawddach, amuidng myself by 
collecting legends of the country from any 
fishermen and quarrymen with whom I met^ 
and inquiring the names of places in your 
own beautiful language-— of one place with a 
romantic name — the Money Banks, I tiunk 



THS MONET BANKS FIELD. 97 

ihey called it— I could, however, get no dis- 
tinct explanation/' 

" Oh ! '* replied my friend, eagerly, " you 
mean a retired, peaceful spot, not far from 
Cymmer Abbey, in the vale of Llanelltyd, a 
lovely field just by the monks' orchard? '' 

" The very same," I replied. 

" I know it well," he said, " and have rea- 
son to remember it well, for with it is con« 
nected a story of singular interest." 

" Pray, relate it," I replied, in my blandest 
tones, and with all the eagerness of a tourist ; 
** and let us sit beneath the shadow of this 
half-ruined bastion, for here the sea-breeze 
tempers the heat." 

" It is some forty years ago," he com- 
menced, seeing me a willing auditor, ^* since I 
laboured as a stripling on my father's farm at 
the abbey you just mentioned. It is a beau- 
tiful spot, that little vale, with its wooded 
hills, its mounttdns crowned by the twin peak 
of Cader Idris, with its crown of mist, its 
tiiundering cataracts, and its peaceful mea- 

TOL. II. H 



98 ICEBOUND. 

dows, through which the little Maw^ unchecked 
bj rock or crag, glides so sweetly. I had ao 
great love for those things then, but still I felt 
a secret pleasure in their sight, which, I sup- 
pose, stole unconsciously to my heart* Almost 
the first tales I can remember hearing at 
my father's house were about the old abbey. 
I can recall, as if it were but yesterday, the 
glowing of my heart when some old crone 
told me of the noble monk who betrayed your 
English^king, Henry, to the ambushed army 
of the indomitable Llywelin ap Jorworth. 
The thought of those things coloured my life, 
and followed me forth into the scenes around 
the farm, where, as I lay by the river side, 
watching my sheep, I would dream of the great 
Welsh princes who founded the little chapel 
whose ruins were beside me, or would picture 
to myself the white-robed monks angling in 
the stream on which I gazed. My own bed- 
room, indeed, had been, if tradition said true, 
either the abbot's chamber, or the refectory of 
the order ; and although I knew little enough 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 99 

pf the manners of those old times, I knew 
saffident to enable me to people it with beings 
and scenes of the past, for in the past more 
than the present I lived, moved, and had my 
being. I could not have been more than 
thirteen, when one day, as I was busied in 
clearing the overgrown ivy from one of the 
long, lancet windows of the chapel, I heard a 
msding sound behind me, which made me 
torn and rest for a moment to gaze on the 
intruder. It was a youth, fantastically 
dressed, and wearing a square college cap, 
bound round with a garland of laurel ; he was 
pale and careworn, and his eye wore a vacant, 
wild, and restless expression. Ee did not 
speak to or even notice me, but went on, 
stooping over the shivered fragments of a 
tomb which he was examining, and which, 
with a solemn air, he cleared of the lichen and 
moss which encrusted it. He then attempted 
to fit together the scattered fragments ; seeing 
him unable to lift one of these from its extreme 
weight, I went and helped him to raise it to 

h2 



100 ICE BOUND. 

complete his toil. He seemed pleased, but 
did not speak ; and, finding no shape or form 
resulting fi*om his labours, he walked on. I 
often saw him after this, and found, on in- 
quiring of my father, that he was an idiot^ 
the only son of his mother, and she a widow. 
Her large family estate, at the death of her 
husband, owing to the mismanagement, or per- 
haps knavery, of a steward, had now dwindled 
down till scarcely a field was left around the 
old mansion which she could call her own. 
But what cared she for this, when her son 
was carrying off every honour at Oxford — 
was the pride of his college — and was afford- 
ing promise of rising one day to the highest 
distinction in the law, the profession for which 
he was destined ? His natural ambition was 
spurred on by the poverty which drags down 
the little mind.*' 

"Was his name Penlyn?** I ezdaimed. 
" Wasn't he seized with a brain fever on the 
eve of taking his degree ? I think I have 



THE MONET BANKS HELD. 101 

Heard his history mentioned hy Oxford men 
as a warning against over-application ? '' 

" He was, poor fellow ! '' continued the old 
man ; '^ and from that fever, which kept him 
for weeks suspended over the brink of the 
grave, he awoke to worse than death — to 
helpless idiocy. He was taken to Italy, but 
•n was of no avail ; he seemed to pine for his 
native hills, so they brought him home ; and 
the servants of the big house wept, as I have 
heard, to see their young master return in so 
pitiful a state. HLs only pleasure was to 
put on his Oxford gown, and roam about alone 
among the fields. 

''It nearly broke his mother's heart at 
first, but she lived through it, and, after a time, 
she bore the sore blow with a holy patience, 
which only Heaven could have sent her. She 
nursed him like an infant, and would have 
tended him with the ever- watchful care of a 
guardian angel, had not another grief awaited 
her to wean her heart still more from earth to 
heaven. But it was her other's will, who 



102 ICE BOUND. 

was in heaYen, and she bore this too. For he 
would not now rest, as before, in the grand 
but gloomy chambers of his father^s house, 
but would hurry out to the mountains, where 
he would lie on his back on some difl^ and 
watch the passing clouds, as if he was con- 
versing with the angels, for hours together. 
Often he would wander down to the beach 
and speak to the waves, as if he was address- 
ing a stormy multitude ; but oftener stiU he 
used to stroll amongst the abbey ruins, and 
spend half the day in digging up the chapd 
floor, in scraping the moss firom some carved 
corbel, or in examining the wall stones, as if 
in search of some hidden spring. 

^^ Some said this arose from the thought of 
his mother's poverty weighing upon his heart ; 
others, that it was but a half-effiu^ remem- 
brance of his old enthusiasm for Gothic ar- 
chitecture; but to me there was always 
something intensely touching in seeing one 
whose soul was ah^ady in heaven so intent 
on the past, when to him the present was but 



THE MONET BANKS HELD. 103 

dark, undefined night, and the future an 
unknown country. 

" Here, even at the early dawn, I would 
find him kneeling on the cold earth, the tears 
of joy running down his poor pale cheeks, as 
the sun, to him a newly-created world, rose 
slowly over the east window. 

^^ But still more often, the dreams of an 
ambition, lost for ever, would seem to press 
on his thoughts, and he would sit on the 
river's banks till nightfall drew on, gazing 
with lack-lustre eyes on a book in some strange 
character — Hischylus, I think I heard his 
mother call it" (I nodded assent), ^^ which 
he always kept in his bosom. 

"And Fve known my father, when he's 
been dtting there, striving, as it were, against 
fate, turn away his head to hide the large 
tears running down his cheeks ; for, indeed, 
it was a pitiful sight, and my father felt for 
him the more because he knew he was the last 
of an old stock descended from the King of 
Powisland, and known half the country over. 



104 ICE BOUND. 

^' Mr. Penlyn was always silent, and seemed, 
with knitted brow, ever trying to collect his 
scattered and wandering thoughts, and to re- 
sume the suspended projects of his earlier life. 
More than once an old college friend came to 
see him, then looked thoughtful, bent down 
his head, as if trying to remember faces he 
had seen before, smiled faintly, again rested 
his eyes on his book, and wandered forth 
on a ramble. 

'^ I often found him bending over the water, 
as if holding communion with some spirit 
within its depth, or in our sunny orchard, 
stretched out beneath a shady tree, one hand 
under his head, and the other clasping his 
Hischylus, still open, to his heart.'' 

'^ I think," said I, apologising for the in- 
terruption — " I think he was employed in a 
translation of iBschylus when the hand of 
heaven smote him." 

" Very like, sir. Perhaps, as I was saying, 
heaven granted him glimpses, in those short 
slumbers, of eternal peace; for if he awoke 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 105 

toddenly at the sound of my foot, or the loud 
song of a bird in some adjoining tree, he would 
start up, fall on his knees, and point in rapture 
to the skj. 

^' All these things made a deep impression 
on my boyish mind. I soon learnt to re* 
gard him with a love mixed with awe, and I 
would bring him food into the field, or help 
him as he toiled at his useless digging. He 
too soon learnt to know, and even to love me. 
He would run to meet me, wait for me as I 
went afield, and, occasionally, even call for 
me at my father's house. My mother always 
kept a vacant seat for him, for she used to 
say, good woman, that it made her heart 
bleed to see one well bom so grievously 
afflicted. He even kept his mattock in a comer 
of our room, from whence he would take it at 
regular and never-forgotten hours. 

" Such were his habits when I first knew 
iiim. He loved me, he knew not why. I 
loved him, as a boy might an infant brother. 
It was just such an evening as this — I re- 



106 ICE BOUND. 

member it well. We were all seated at 
our evening meal, when he entered, looking 
more anxious and thoughtful than usual; a 
wild light, I thought, seemed to gleam in bis 
soulless eyes. 

" ' God be with thee, Mr. Penlyn,' said my 
father, respectfully bowing and rising from his 
chair to make room for him at the board. 

" ^ Be seated, good Mr. . I know not 

your name ; but 'tis well. I only came to bor- 
row a crowbar and an axe ; for I dreamt last 
night of a treasure under the chapel window, 
and I go to prove the truth of God's voice.' 

" An involuntary smile crept over my 
father's face; but he was a warm-hearted 
man, and he stifled it at the birth. 

" * Owen,' he said, in a low voice, to me, 
* follow Mr. Penlyn, my lad, and help him to 
carry the tools — ^humour him, poor fellow I' 

^^ In silence I followed him to the chapel. 
The sun was just sinking in the west, and 
shed a solemn light over the grey ruin. 

^^ My friend paused for a moment, as if in 



THE MONET BANES FIELD. 107 

recollection^ and then^ in a deep voice, said 
to me, pointing to a spot beneath a half- 
defaced rood-cross carved on the wall, ' Twas 
here where the finger on the tomb pointed to 
me. In God's name, and the great statue's, 
dig!' And so saying, he struck the crowbar 
into the ground with great violence. 

^' It might have been that my mind was ner- 
Yonsly excited, for I fancied the earth sounded 
hollow, and echoed to the stroke. We worked 
steadily on, and in half an hour's hard toil 
had dug a hole of some depth. 

" ' My bar strikes something hard,' I cried. 

^' A few minutes more, I reached and 
drew forth a rusty iron casket of large size, 
half decayed by time, and through whose 
broken side streamed forth a shower of silver 
coin. We both shouted for joy, and my poor 
fiiend clutched a handful in rapture. ' All 
is over,' was his cry, and ^Penlyn is re- 
stored!' 

" 'Twas all disclosed. It had been the 
thought of his life — one that, perhaps, driving 



108 ICE BOUND. 

him to insanitjy had sorviTed eren the wreck 
of reason — ^to raise his mother from porert j, 
and restore the ruined house of Penlyn. 

^^ A few more strokes of the pickaxe dis- 
closed a small vaulted recess — ^perhaps origin- 
ally connected by subterranean passages with 
the abbot's lodging — ^in which were several 
gold vessels of curious workmanship and great 
value, probably buried there at the time of the 
dissolution of monasteries. My astonishment 
was unbounded ; but Penlyn seemed to have 
anticipated the truth of his heaven-sent dream. 
I had come but to humour the caprice of an 
^ innocent/ and here was I utterly confounded 
by results exceeding all that a sober judg- 
ment could have anticipated. 

" I need hardly describe the surprise of my 
father, or the wonder of the townsmen, who 
were inclined to see in it something ^ passing 
man's judgment/ The event, to a super- 
stitious mind, seemed to be like a red comet, 
from the heavens foreboding the future ; 
my father himself refrised any share of sudh 



THE MONET BANKS FIELD. 109 

hesTen-sent treasure, and only kept a few of 
the smaller coins as a remembrance of so 
extraordinary an event. 

''Again the family of Penlyn looked up, 
and again the broad lands widened round the 
old mansion. But my poor friend drooped 
after this, as if blasted by the communication 
of the secret from heaven ; he drooped, he 
grew weaker and weaker ; but still he visited 
daily his old haunts, and strolled, with fond 
interest, round the scene of the treasure- 
finding. 

"The early days of January, 1785, were 
wild and stormy ; one night in particular 
the wind roared with surging thunder among 
the leafless trees, and our house shook to its 
very foundation in the hurricane. I went 
early to the chapel, and there, beneath the 
ruins of a fallen wall, his mattock still 
dutched in his small white hand, and the 
well-known iEschylus, all wet with rain, near 
him, lay my poor friend. He was quite dead ; 
but a smile played about his lips, as if reason 



110 ICE BOUND. 

had returned as death smote his frail body 
and sent it unsummoned before its merciful 
Judge. May we meet again in hearen I His 
body lies under a plain stone in Dolgelly 
churchyard." 

The dd man wiped a tear from his eye as 
he concluded, and I, unwilling to stifle the 
generous emotion of the o'erfraught heart, 
slipped a coin into his hand (I won't tell you 
how much, reader), and set forth a sadder, 
and I trust, therefore, a wiser man, for Bar- 
mouth. 



Ill 



THE SEXTON'S BROTHER. 

It was bitter cold; the spider ykls frozen 
in his web^ and the cowering bird glued to 
the ivy-bough. 

The yery dead were frozen in their shrouds. 

Well; they didn't care for that at the 
'TOuke of Marlborough's," on New Tear's-eve, 
1760, not they. Still the wind over snow 
sounds drearily even to those who sit round 
a fire, and though logs do blaze in a glow 
of crimson, against which still unconsumed 
firagments stand out dark and sharp, like 
the black roof-trees of a burning house, when 
a single flake of snow finds its way through 
smoke and flame, and hisses in the little 



i 



112 ICE BOUND. 

fiery gulf below, it does make one shudder 
at the death and desolation without. 

How the drifts are piling up over the 
gravestones m the quiet churchyard, 
darkening the old kings of the pidnted 
windows, and substituting a poor pale sha- 
dow for the crimson sunset stain that loves 
to linger all the noon long about the half- 
defaced brass of the De Tracys in the 
chancel, like a memory of blood shed long 
ago, or like those dusky spots that blot the 
boards of the long corridor of the Moat 
House. 

The moon upon snow, good lack, is a 
dreary sight, but there wasn't even that 
to-night ; for, if there did linger a star or 
two, you couldn't well see them till you 
looked about ; and the stars didn't light the 
night, for it was only the glimmer of the snow, 
that even in the darkest places, in thick 
coverts and under matted trees, cast a pale re- 
flexion on all surrounding things. 'Twas like 
Nature in her grave-clothes, so the village 



THE SEtrON'S BROTHER. llS 

crones said, and laughed; for even life, 
hope, and infancy remind them only of the 
graye, how much more, then, this very 
ghastly image of the face of death ! 

The cold wind drifted the snow, which rose 
dowly and silently as the waters of a new 
deluge over the foot-prints of man and bird, 
twisting up in white columns like smoke 
when the north-east caught up a handful of it 
iand cast it away with a howling laugh as 
his deadly gift to man. For the snow, 
though beautiful and fair, and of the very 
colour of the May blossoms, brings but suffer- 
ing and death' to man; though it shelters 
the bud, piles warm over the flower, and 
hastens on the spring, it slays the shepherd 
in the fold and the watchman in his shel- 
tered nook. It smiles and slays ; yes, the 
angel of the snow is passionless and cruel, 
mocking at prayer, for she is the youngest 
daughter of winter and the white death. And 
tip through the snow — ^for foul things will 
float up— peered still the dead fingers of 

TOL. n. 1 



1 



Hi ICE BOUND 

autumn — the withered reeds and the last 
leaves red and brown. 

It drew colder towards midnight ; then the 
very owl was chilled deep in the sheltering 
ivy, the sleeper's breath froze upon the cot- 
tage pane, the child awoke crying, and the 
weary peasant tossed restless in a dream 
of men lost in snow gullies, and buried 
where they fell by the snow that slew them* 
The dog howled in the kennel, and the 
cock crew from his perch, awoke by the 
light of the snow, and rather wishing than 
believing it were the dawn. 

The deep footprints round the village 
forge, where the idlers had crowded at 
nightfall to warm themselves at the sight 
of the ascending blaze, to rejoice in the 
roar of the bellows, or to wonder at 
the perpetual firework of the sparks, and 
crimson their blue faces in the warm light, 
grew fainter, and still the snow fell on, as if 
it would never cease till it had quite buried 
the world. There was still but one uncovered 



THE sexton's BKOTHER. 115 

track, mid that led to the village inn. 
Therei round the kitchen fire, sit the 
dignitaries of the village : the tailor, 
a thin, wizened fellow, jou may know 
•him bj the needle and thread stuck in 
his coat sleeve. He is warming his 
lantern jaws over the steam of a pot of 
buttered ale, and is at present examining 
with a curious eje the deep cuff of the 
landlord's coat, which he proclaims ^^verj 
curiously cut, and undoubtedly the work of 
a man of parts." Bj his side sits the black- 
smith, who having just probed the fire, 
from the mere habit acquired in the stithy, 
is eyeing the poker enviously, with a look 
which seems to say, ^^If that's your cast- 
iron work, I could beat out better with my 
old hammer." Then there are half a dozen old 
£Eurmers looming red through smoke-clouds ; 
and, not to be overlooked even if you wished, 
is the landlord, a perfect butt, both as to 
oze, shape, and capacity for holding liquor, 
with a face as red as a London sun in a fog. 

i2 



116 ICE BOUND. 

. Just opposite his old high-backed seat of 
honour, too, are the sexton and the school- 
master, engaged in a controversy, which, 
having long existed in whispers, has at 
last risen above and silenced all the smaller 
circles of conversation, and merged them all into 
one. Both are lean, cadaverous-looking men; 
but the sexton being dressed in a faded 
black coat of the minister's, who has gone 
home about an hour ago, looks more angular 
and bony than the schoolmaster, who re* 
joices in an old brocade waistc^oat of the 
squire's, glowing with a twining mass of 
faded yellow roses, as big as cabbages ; very 
gorgeous for the dog-days, but, to say the 
least, somewhat chilling in cold winter. 

"I tell thee what," said the school- 
master, rather angrily for a man of his dig- 
nity, and the more angrily as he had just 
burnt his little finger in attempting to 
use it as a tobacco-stopper, "the story is 
a flat remnant of paganism and heathen- 
dom, and rU never believe it. I say 



THE sexton's brother. 117 

again; gentlemen, does it sound like Chris- 
tianity?" 

^^YeSy yes/' said the sexton, a waspish 
little man, with a malicious mouth and 
hard-lined features, looking snappishly round 
at those he addressed, ^^it is true, as sure 
as the Pope's in Kome." 

^* Is what true ? '' said the landlord, sud- 
denly roused from a reverie which had 
some affinity to sleep. ^^What is it that 
makes gossips quarrel over good ale, that 
should be the very milk of human kind- 
ness? Adzooks! let's have no schism 
here.** 

"Why, why, Master Nicholas, who be- 
lieves that the white rose flowers under 
the snow, and a lot more stuff that King 
George should know of, will not credit 
me when I tell him that I — I, Griffin 
Denner, parish sexton, saw this night three 
years^ with mme own eyes, a blue light playing 
round the coffin-plate of old Sir Robert 
Fortrose — such a light that I could read 



118 ICE BOUND. 

the name by — and when I said a charm, 
and muttered the Lord's Prayer backwards, 
it disappeared, and left the vault in dark- 
ness. Haven't I heard my grandmother 
say a thousand times, that when the old 
baronet was buried they found his body 
the next night thrown out of the grave, 
and lying stiff and stark in its grave-clothes 
at the grave's edge, with the corpse's teeth set 
just as if he died in pain, yet he went 
off in a sleep, the waiting woman told 
me. Say what you like, there's a curse 
gone out 'gainst the family^ — there's a corse 
gone out 'gainst the family." 

" Pooh ! " said the schoolmaster, " nought 
but that curse we all suffer from — ^poverty/- 

" And a bitter curse it is," said one who 
had not before spoken — a morose-looking man, 
the brother of the sexton, and who lived with 
him as a poor dependent, having been, if 
report said true, a highwayman till a chance 
shot from some traveller's pistol lamed him 
for life ; " and there's only one greater, and 



THE sexton's brother. 119 

that's riches^ though I should be glad to bear 
it." Then he laughed savagely, rousing him- 
self for a moment from a now habitual manner 
of crawling and hypocritical servility. *' We 
sell everything in this age — our own lives and 
our daughters' virtue. Money ! — 'tis the first 
thought of the son by the bed of his dying father, 
and makes him bear the loss with resignation." 
And, as the man spoke, such a fiendish sneer 
distorted his features that those who saw him 
shuddered. " With money, a leper loves life," 
he continued, ^Hhough his brain be seared 
with fever and his hands be red with blood ; 
"without it man is but a thing fit to chain up 
as you would a bull-dog to snap at beggars, 
tear thieves, and to feed with the broken scraps 
that you cannot yourself eat." 

" Hold thy tongue ! " said the sexton, with 
the air of an offended superior. ^^ A man of 
good parts need never want ample food and a 
comfortable home while a relation or a friend 



^' The leavings of plates that the dogs re- 



12Q IGEBOUHD. 

jecty and the scanty crumbB of a miser's tablei 
are always to be had/' 

^^ Robert I Kobert ! '' said the sexton, 
'^ thou knowest that I keep from thee nought^ 
for we all know that 'tis of thyself thou speak<t 
est. I will not bear this ingratitude— this 
passionate humoor — from one whom mj owA 
hands feed. Thou knowest I am poor and 
old ; yet I toil willingly on, and divide my 
pittance with thee. A few nights' less card- 
ing, an honest life, and thou wouldst have 
been rich and free, sound in body, pure, in 
mind, and clean of hand." 

^^ And who art thou, miserable carcasa*- 
robber ! " said the cripple, as he limped vio- 
lently from his seat, throwing down the tablt 
and scalding the thin tailor with a jug of mulle4 
ale as he advanced, as if he would lift hiB 
hand against the grey head of his brother, '' tQ 
talk of clean hands and pure life ? — ^filcber 
of rings from corpses' fingers — pilferer of 
grave linen — profaner of the peace of death 1 " 
Then, suddenly, as if checkin£[ this paroxysm 



THE sexton's BROTHEB. 121 

of rage by a sudden spasm^ he lifted his fallen 
chair from the ground, and held out his hand 
to his brother. ^^ I cannot help this violence 
of temper ; but forgive me, William, for I 
have done thee wrong." 

Without a word the sexton accepted the 
proffered hand, and shook it warmly. 

'^ It wants but five minutes to midnight," 
he said, after a short pause ; '^ brother, we 
must to the belfry to ring the year in with 
the Fortrose knell ; so, make ready." 

After a few minutes of reluctant lingering 
the two brothers, so quickly reconciled, rose 
and left the room. 

'^Say what you like," said the landlord, 
looking up after a long interval of thought, 
'' I don't like that brother of Denner's ; 
as sure as I live he'll make a bad end 
of it. If he doesn't stretch a rope some 
time or another, may I never score a pint of 
ale again." 

" Tis a harsh saying," replied the school- 



122 ICE BOUND. 

master, ^^ and hath less of good-nature in it 
than thy ordinary talk/' 

The conversation, for a moment hashed by 
the brothers' quarrel, now rose louder than 
ever, as fire is kindled fiercer by the wind 
that for a moment has beaten down its flame. 

'^ And what knell is this ? " said a maa 
more wizen-looking than even the tailor, no less 
a person than the village barber, a man with 
several days' beard growing on his chin, with 
peer-eyes, and an anxious, hen-pecked face, a 
a great retailer and a no less eager recipient 
of news. " 'Tis a strange hour and season 
for a knell." 

" Why, if thee weren't a stranger, Master 
Winkin," replied the landlord, "thee could 
never ask about such an old tale as that. Didst 
never hear how old Sir Robert Fortrose, in a 
hard night's drinking, on just such a night 
as this — a new year's night — ^ran his only son 
through the heart in a drunken quarrel, as 
they both sat alone at midnight over their 
wine ; and when day broke, and the servants 



THE sexton's brother. l23 

came mto the room^ they found the grey old 
&ther raving mad^ moping and moaning in 
his chair at the head of the old table, 
cursing at his son for a poor milksop, because 
he wouldn't pledge him in another bottle; while 
not far from him, with his hands spread over 
fhe table, and his head hidden, lay the dead 
son, the dark-clotted blood frozen and fasten- 
ing him to the board, and the old man's fin- 
gers red with it, for it had trickled amongst 
the glasses." 

" Ah ! 'tis a sad story," said another audi- 
tor, dressed in a shabby livery, who had in 
his youth been a servant at the Fortroses', 
^* and there's no human hand will ever wash 
that stain out of the boards : a many a 
morning I have rubbed at it till my very 
heart ached, and as sure as there's fish in the 
sea, before nightfall it would break out again 
in a red rash. There's something not right 
about that old house. When I was a boy I 
nsed to be frightened into shivers — and yet I 
iras a sprightly boy — to see the old portraits 



124 ICE BOUITD. 

following me with their eyes, or at night to 
see the fire flames twinkling and forming in 
strange figures, dogged by shadows over tiie 
wainscot. Lord ! often on a windy night, wheu 
I have had to come alone down the long 
north corridor to put up the shutters in the 
red parlour, as the room was called, Vy^ 
fancied I've heard shrieks and gurgling 
sounds, and the jingle of glasses, and then a 
drip, drip, like blood upon the floor. Lord I 
I've stood there saying a prayer, and afiraid to 
open the door, ay, half an hour/' 

^^But tell that story, William, about the 
key-hole," said the landlord, patronizingly, 
trying to obtain a share in the glory of the 
lion of the evening, 

" Oh, it's a mere nothing," said William, 
looking down with a smile of gratified 
vanity, and repeating, in a very slow voice, 
as a hint of its importance, '^nothing — at 
— alL" 

" The story ! the story ! " cried the whole 
company, eagerly, drawing in a doser drde 



THE sexton's bbotheb. 125 

it)and the quondam batler^ who, filling his 
pipe with the artfiil, 007 delay of a prac- 
tised tactician^ began, in a much longer 
Btorj than we have room for, to narrate 
that, on one particular occasion — it was a 
December evening, about five o'clock — ^the fa- 
mily were abroad, and he was left alone to 
take care of the house. He had been sit- 
ting before a great wooden fire in the hall, 
watching the black logs glow into red, rib 
into fiery gaps, and then fall away into white 
ashes, till, getting tired of this reflective but 
rather monotonous amusement, he got up and 
looked at the sunset ; he saw the deep cloudy 
blue change into molten gold, and then settle 
into a melancholy grey ; and at the same in- 
stant that the sun went down, a low, dirging 
wind sprang up, and as he heard it a strange 
cloud of melancholy fell over him, although 
he was naturally a cheerfiil youth, and the 
best dancer in the village — ^here he held out 
bis thin leg and patted it — and he tried to 
whistle *' Lillibulero/' but it wouldn't do, so he 



126 ICE BOUKD. 

thought he'd just go upstairs, and, like a 
bo/s curiosity, as it was, look through the 
different rooms that he had never yetentered, to 
see if all was right and divert his qpirits. Then 
clapping on a laced cocked hat which hung 
on a pair of antlers in the hall, and seizing 
an old gold-headed crutch-cane, he took it 
into his head to fancy himself for a moment 
the squire, and the old ghost-house his own. 
So up he went slowly the old oak stairs that 
led from the hall to the gallery of the bed- 
rooms. All of a sudden the thought of 
that dreadful night struck him ; he felt as 
if a hand of ice were laid angrily on his 
shoulder; but when he turned and looked 
fearfully round, there was nothing — ^fool 
that he was ! of course there was nothing. 
Then he thought of how they bore the body 
up those very steps, how the blood drip- 
ped from it as they bore it up, and how 
the madman hollowed and shouted with 
laughter till the hall rang agam at the dolt 
who could not carry three bottles, and when 



THE sexton's brotheiu 127 

he saw the blood said it was a burning shame 
to see such good Burgundy wasted. Still he 
tried to dismiss those thoughts, and on he went 
to the old state bedroom, but everything wore 
such a funereal aspect there that his very blood 
turned cold. The chill of the damp room 
struck him like a vault, and as he opened the 
first creaking door the dusty black hearse- 
like plumes on the huge crimson brocade 
bed waved mournfully. As he entered 
rapidly he thought he saw a white shadow 
pass across the old mirror that stood on the 
fiided ^t toilette-table, and though there 
^as no wind that could be felt the pictures 
flapped on the walls as when a strong gust 
enters the room. At this moment a door 
in a distant part of the house slammed vio- 
lently, a bell rang in the state chamber; — 
he could bear it no longer ; he hurried down, 
dropping his hat as he shut the door, but 
afiuid to return even a step to pick it up, 
and fancying, as he hurried down the long 
corridor, that he heard light footsteps behind 



128 •'' ICEBOUND. 

him, and the stiff rustling of silk gowns ; and 
as he passed each door, from which seemed to 
come low voices, he trembled lest one should 
open with a burst and disclose some hideous 
sight Then as he was putting his first foot- 
step on the stair, he remembered that th^ 
old amber cane that dangled by a thong of 
perfumed leather from his vrrist was supposed 
by legend to have belonged to the mur- 
dered man, and although he held it not, it 
seemed as if a bloody sweat still hung about 
it as he grasped the thongs, so he threw it down 
in horror, and it rolled with a clatter to the hall 
below, strangely, as he thought, to his aston- 
ishment and horror, snapping in two as it 
touched the marble floor. Having picked up 
the fragments, to be carefully repaired at his 
leisure, an irresistible curiosity must then needs 
impel him to peep through the keyhole of the 
Red Parlour, which opened from this very 
hall at the end of a small dark passage ; — 
creeping on tiptoe, he looked in, and when he 
looked in, to his indescribable heart-sickening 



THE sexton's brother. 129 

terror^ he saw another eye, bright and lu- 
minous^ looking through at him from within ; 
when he listened the death-bell rang in his 
ear, the wind seemed like voices wailing 
over the dead ; and as the door suddenly flew 
open and showed no one within, he swooned 
in terror. When he came to it was a dark night, 
and a dozen servants with lights were bending 
oyer him, for the family had suddenly re* 
turned while he lay m his trance. 

As he told this strange detail of the 
fears of a superstitious serving- man, full 
to repletion of family legend and '^auld 
world '' story, the death-bells instituted by the 
Fortrose fiunily to be rung annually on New 
Year's-eve, and to ring which muffled peal the 
two brothers had sallied out an hour since, 
boomed out on the cold dark night, adding a 
deeper melancholy to the sad relation of family 
crime and its dreadful retribution. 

The bell had long ceased, and the greater 
part of the fireside circle had gone — ^all but a 
few jolly bachelors who feared no domestic 

VOL. IL K 



130 icKBOinai. 

chidingSy withthehndlordyandafiBW yeteraiiB 
who neyer retired while there was a friend to 
season the cnp or pass the tankard, when a 
low fiunt knock was heard at the outer 
door. 

''Is that a knock?** said the wizened 
tailor, timorously, " or the w — w — ind ? " 

''The wind,** sud the landlord, stoutly, 
knocking the ashes from lus pipe with ten 
times louder noise than usual. 

" There it is again !** cried the tailor, look- 
ing oyer his shoulder. 

Yes! there it was again : a low, feeble knock, 
more like a death watch, or a dying beggar, 
than any noise a human bemg^s hand would 
make. 

" It's an omen^** said one. 

" Somebody should go and see what it iB," 
cried another. 

" It may be robbers,** shivered a third, as 
if he felt a draught. 

"It's the wind/* said the landlord, deci*» 
siyely ; " the wind is in the habit of a-doing 



THE sexton's brother. ISl 

Hb^ The coQYersation proceeded for some 
minnteSy when again came a low knockingi a 
little loader than before^ such as a bough 
makes when the wind beats it in a sort of 
rude cadence against a door or window- 
pane. 

''Man or devil, here goes I" said the land- 
lord^ provoked by finding it wasn't the wind 
lifter all; and snatching a candle fi:'om the 
table with one hand, he grasped the huge 
kHcben-poker in the other, though not one 
of his suggestive advisers ventured to follow 
the daring adventurer. 

In a moment his cry of mingled horror and 
fflirprise drew them all from their chairs, and in 
an instant afterwards he entered the inn kitchen 
bearing the body of an old and apparently 
dying man in his arms, and placing him in his 
own seat, he began to chafe his fi^ozen limbs 
with aU the assiduity of a kind old nurse. 

" Good God, it's the sexton ! " cried half a 
dozen voices in chorus. 

: The old man lay like a child helpless in the 

k2 



132 ICE BOUVB. 

landlord's arms, insensible, his eyes: closed^ 
and his month opening and shutting like that 
of a dying man, while blood oozed from a large 
wound in his forehead. With great difficalty 
they forced a little brandy down his throat, 
and, after some minutes of assiduous car^ the 
old man began slowly to open his eyes^ look 
round wildly, as if his reason were somewfaat 
shaken, and mutter half inarticulate words 
— "Spare me — I'm an old man^ — heSpi!" 
Then, as he revived more and more, he rose 
slowly and feebly to his feet, and, lifting his 
hand to the wound in his forehead, exclaimed, 
" God be thanked, Fm safe r* 

The story of his wonderful escape is 
soon narrated. On leaving the inn, he 
walked as quickly as he could towards the 
church, carrying the lantern, and leaving his 
brother to follow at a slower pace. He ob- 
served that he loitered behind, and muttered 
.words that he! could not hear ; and when' he 
turned the light of the lantern . upon him, he 
jtumed away his face with a curse, as if Lthe 



THE SSZTON'S brother. 133 

light d&zzled and annoyed him. They passed 
through the churchyard without a word^ 
except that he observed under the yew-tree 
h long shallow grave^ recently dug^ and 
almost full of snow^ but he made no remark 
upon it to his brother^ who had walked 
quickly on, and had already succeeded in 
j' falsing'' the bell and commencing the accus- 
tomed iknelL They had finished, and he 
WM complaining of the cold, when he sud- 
denly saw, by a rapid movement of a 
riiadow on the helftj wall, his brother's hand 
raising a mattock to brain him. He turned 
round, but before he could utter a cry or 
Siise a spade that stood by the wall to defend 
bimsel^ he received a blow on the forehead 
and fell senseless. He awoke with a sense of 
sliffiication and of a dense weight pressing on 
lib &ce a&d limbs. He was buried alive ! He 
tried to scream, but no sound came. He 
Btmggled stronger, in all the agony of despair. 
He felt the shallow earth yield to his efforts ; de* 
fpair lent him strength ; his head was fi:'eed, and 



134 ICE BOUND. 

his hands once slowly drawn forth, he ^- 
dually released the superincumbent weight 
that pressed upon him. After resting for a 
long time, clinging for support to the yew and 
the tombstones, he had crawled out of the 
churchyard and made his way to the nearest 
house — the inn. 

Many were the groans, sighs, and excla- 
mations of indignation and of pity with which 
this narrative of a half-<vompleted firatridde 
was listened to; deep and long was the 
consultation as to what steps should be taken 
to track the murderer and bring him to 
justice. At last they resolved, as the night was 
already far spent and the day well-nigh at hand , 
to bind up the old man's wound, wrap him 
in blankets, place him in the warmest nook 
beside the fire, and while he refreshed his 
exhausted frame by sleep, to watch silently 
for the first dawn of day as the signal to sally 
forth in pursuit of the wretched object of 
their deserved hatred. 

An hour or two had passed, and the old maili^ 



THE sexton's brotheiu 135 

worn out with the fatigue of his straggle for 
life, and exhausted by loss of blood from his 
wound, had sunk into a feverish and restless 
deep, broken by sudden starts, horrible 
groans, and broken exclamations. Thin grey 
streaks had already barred the east, and were 
kindling into minute veins of fire. The dawn 
had already commenced, and the landlord had 
just given the signal for starting, having left the 
old man in the care of the thin tailor, whose 
ardour for the pursuit had gradually oozed 
out at the thoughts of a day's work lost and 
the chance o^ perhaps, a life-and-death struggle 
with a desperate man. 

The landlord had armed his party, and they 
were still circling lingeringly, and whispering 
around the fire, as the landlord unbarred the 
door, when a loud hurried knock attracted 
iheir attention. The landlord threw open 
the door : it was " the Sexton's brother," 
pale and trembling. With an air of affected 
gaiety he bid the landlord good morning, and 
Asked him what news was stirring. 



136 .' ICE BOUND. 

<< Very strange news/' said the landlord^ in 
a deep hollow voice^ as he dragged, rather 
than led, the questioner into the room with an 
affected merriment, his companions having in^ 
stinctively, at the sound of his voice, gatliered 
in a circle round the fire, so as to hide the 
sleeping man. '' But what ails thee, man ? " he 
sliid, clutching him hj the collar in a sort of 
savage wonder, which the unsuspecting man 
took for blunt jocularity, ^^ why, thy grizded 
hair has turned grey since we last met.^' 

Ere the wretched man could answer, and 
while he was still stammering out his own 
ignorance of the fact, a sight appeared which 
was as blasting to him as if the dawn of the 
day of judgment bad then suddenly reddened 
in the heavens, for the circle that surrounded 
the fire suddenly giving way, the sick man^ 
wrapped in a white sheet, which had been 
thrown over his blankets, and withawhite band- 
age surrounding his brow, stained here and 
there with blood, arose and stood before him. 

For an instant only the murderer stared at 



THE sexton's brother. 137 

Ids ihtended yictim as if an angel had de- 
aoended from the sky^ his eyes almost leaping 
from their sockets^ and glaring with incipient 
madness; the next^ he uttered one shriek 
and fell dead upon the floor. The blood 
gushing from his mouth and nostrils told too 
plainly that a blood-vessel broken had occa- 
fiioned his death. As he fell, some pieces of 
gold coin rolled from his pocket, declaring at 
once the object of the contemplated crime and 
the fruitlessness of his guilt 

For what object the murderer came to the 
inn on the morning after the perpetration of 
his crime jcould never be ascertained. It is, how- 
ever, supposed that, after the dreadful scene in 
ihediurchyard, he had returned to his brother's 
iionse, broken open a chest — as it was, indeed, 
afterwards found — Bladen himself with the spoil, 
and hastened forth on the road to the town ; 
but the way was across fields, and the snow had 
buried all the usual landmarks. Fear, the 
agony of a tormenting conscience, and repent- 
ance of the crime, had destroyed his memory, 



138 ICE BOUND. 

and rendered him vacillating and thoughtlesil 
as a child. He had walked round in a circle 
without knowing it, and when day broke, 
found himself not far from the very spot 
where he had set out — ^so, at least, it was 
conjectured by the footprints tracked over the 
snow. Once, it appeared, he had sat down, 
as if to die, but the desire of life was too 
strong, and he arose and went on. That 
unaccountable impulse that impels murderers 
to their ruin drove him, it is further con- 
jectured, to knock at the door of that very 
inn where himself and his brother had been 
happy inmates but a few hours since. 

Avarice, heightened by a rankling hatred^ 
and superstitious terror suddenly paralysing 
a mind already shaken by a night of conflict* 
ing passions, were sufficient motives to impel a 
bad heart to crime, and, indeed, ample causes by 
which to explain this sudden retribution. The 
Sexton's brother was buried in the very resting^ 
place that he had prepared for another. 



139 



SIDMOUTH'S STORY. 



INTKODUCTION TO THE LITTLE 
BLACK BOX. 

Anotheb month, and two more men besides 
Sidmouth were affected with snow blindness, 
and had to adopt crape spectacles, which 
soon relieved them. A week after this dis- 
semination of the disorder, Captain Beaver 
served out crape spectacles (of which we had 
luckily a good store from that very excellent 
optician's nearly opposite the Admiralty), 
and ordered all the crew, officers included, to 
wear them. The dreadful disease Siderfin, who 
had been in Egypt, considered very analogous 
to ophthalmia^ and attributed it to the changes 



140 ICE;.BO!XJin). 

of temperature experienced in going from the 
ship to the ice coast. 

A few days after this two men began also to 
complain of their gums, and showed symp- 
toms of unmistakable scurvy. This we soon 
abated by doses of lemon essence, and hj 
having some mustard and cress in the cabin, 
which vegetables, mixed with the young leaves 
of peas that we succeeded in inducing to 
sprout, soon relieved them. 

About this time the Captain's dog, straying 
from the ship to associate with the wolves, who 
sometimes sent hiin home much bitten, was 
pursued to the ship by a polar bear, which 
a party of our men dttaqked with pikes and 
killed, first wounding him with a musket 
bullet, but losing the body, however, in a deep 
hole gnawn by seals in the ice. 

A day or two after this we had a visit 
from a party of three Esquimaux, who .were 
hunting musk bulls, of the scented flesh of 
which these people are singularly fond. They 
wore bundles of dirty fur, and conversed 



ICB BOUND. 141 

88 mach by their gestures as bj the English 
words, " with a will, pull away," the oaths, &c. 
that they picked up. We bought of them 
some canoe paddles, a bow and arrow, and 
a harpoon. The men would have made them 
drunk, but Captain Beaver forbade this, and 
even punished one of our main-top men for 
selling them his grog for some ptarmigan 
and seal's flesh, which he wanted to make a 
feast of with his messmates. 

It was the night the Esquimaux left us 
that Sidmoutb's dever historical story was be- 
gun to be read aloud to us by Captain 
Beaver — ere rotundo^ as the saying is. 



142 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 
A Story of the Shaftesbury Plot. 

CHAPTER I. 

THE DARCYS OF CROWDS NEST ; OR, THE OLD 
CAVALIER SQUIRE AT HOME. 

Crow's Nest was an old Tudor mansion, dis- 
tant some twelve miles from Oxford, whose 
countless towers and steeples might, indeed, 
be seen on a clear day from a hill at one 
end of the Home Park. In the days of rufl& 
and farthingales the house had been the ga- 
thering point and centre of hospitality for the 
whole county: nor did Queen Elizabeth^ 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX« 143 

ivhen she visited the University and shire, for- 
get to visit the home of the Darcys. 
' "More by token," says the old family 
chronide, whose veracity can be depended 
on, ''her majesty dropped her silver fan, 
the gift of Sir F. Drake, into the moat, as 
she took the air one noon on the battlements 
pf the Lady Tower ; and a young page of the 
jQunily, diving to recover it, was stricken on 
ihe head by a buttress of the turret, and 
60 died, drawing tears from the eyes of her 
majesty at the extreme piteous and unhappy 
right/' But the tall twisted chimneys that 
crowned the gables, though undiminished in 
number since those days of prosperity, served 
BOW for the most part only as snug recep- 
tacles for the nests of starlings and of daws. 

From one or two shafts only, on the soft 
warm summer morning of which we write, 
ascended thin pillars of pale blue smoke, 
which gradually, though unbroken by the 
gentle wind, melted into the sunny air. 
i But the gilded vanes, bright as stars, still 



144 ICB BOUND. 

twinkled as of yore against the blue sky, like 
guardian planets of the house, though warped 
and bent by the storms of many bygone 
winters ; almost, indeed, as brightly as when^ 
long ago, Crow'sNest loomed at the early dinner 
hour of eleven through the fragrant clouds of 
smoke ascending from the royal banquet of 
Queen Bess. The windows of the norih fix>n:^ 
cold and leaden in the vapoury shade, con^ 
trasted singularly with those of the south side^ 
which overlooked the garden, and which, glitt 
tering in the morning sun, now shone golden 
and metallic, as if belonging to some enchants 
ed palace of El Dorado. On old deserted 
rooms, once trod by nobles — on faded figured 
hangings-— on shelves of warped and dusty 
books and on embroidered beds of ponderous 
size, plumed like hearses, the sunlight fell with 
a calm consciousness of peace and joy. In 
this golden sea of light that bathed the old 
house, shadowed by so many sorrows, and 
sinking so rapidly into genteel pauperiani| 
floated like vast coral trees rising through the 



THE LITTLE BLACK fiOX. 145 

Biiiin J ocean, the old avenue-elms/ whose sable 
inbabitantSy noisy and solemn as the congre- 
gation of a Puritan conventicle^ had originally 
giyen their name to the manor-house. Their 
unceasing cawing filled the rooms with a 
domberous murmur, that, while it cheered the 
mind with a sense of the vicinity of living 
^things, soothed it like the whisper of a distant 
sea ; far though some of the birds were always 
absent, swooping down in long, low trails upon 
the dark new-turned plough-land of forty acres, 
or basking in the sun on the tender grass of 
the broad-oak meadows, there were alwayssome 
respectable citizens who remained gossiping 
b^de the nests — ^half idlers, half watchmen 
— discussing perhaps the fortunes of the young 
birds who had scarcely as yet left the egg^ and 
certainly seen very little of the world. 

Sir Bichard Darcy, a crusader, was said 

to have built the original house of Crow's Nest ; 

and some grassy undulations in the park were 

pointed out as the linesof his old castle ramparts. 

The second fortress had arisen in the days of 

TOL. n. L 



14ff ICE BOUHIX.. 

his gnmdson, wko, retardng! irom Gresgfy 
devoted to rebaildmg his stronghold Ae 
ransom of' three iVenoh borons whom big 
stout axe hod beaten down on tliat menforabls 
field) and had erected hianew keepon the »to 
of the old chapel where the cmsato^s^ boneii: 
were resting ;^ the foundation of whiohboUd^- 
ing consisted, tradition Kkid, of earth bi^i^lit 
firom Hie Holy Land^ inpnrsoaneeofa custom 
not unusual in those days of gnat faitb and 
little science. The present mansicNa wa%^ 
however, the work of Sir John Dwcy, « 
courtier of Henry VIIL, who chose him as a 
favourite chiefly because he stooid six feet iff 
his stockings^ and had killed a French knight 
of gigantic stature in a tournament on tiie 
" Field of the Cloth of Gold." His cogw 
nizances and proud motto—" Fight on/* 
under a gashed hand, holding a broken sword 
bedropped with blood, gules — could still btf 
seen on the square keystone of the gatewa]^ 
leading into the base-court, in old time thtf 
chief entrance to the house, tUl his son, Sir 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 147 

Walter Darcj, in a fit of irrestrainable loyalty, 
blocked up the arch, which his queen swore 
had been disgraced by his father's marching 
through it at the head of fifty hagbuteers to 
join the northern Pilgrimage of Grace, and 
made the northern door, by which Elizabeth 
Imd entered Crow's Nest, henceforth the chief 
qiproach to the moated mansion. 

The ground-plan of Crow's Nest was simple. 
It consisted of two courts — the base-court, 
with the blocked-up gatehouse, surrounded by 
the stable, smith's forge, and all those offices 
usual in feudal houses, which were, indeed, 
floiall Tillages in themselves. Fowls strutted 
about it, proud and despotic as sultans, fol- 
lowed by their chattering harems and attend- 
ant courtiers, eyeing their scarlet wattles in 
the mirrors of the stable-pails, while over their 
heads flew about white whirls of pigeons. 
Hare Sir Sobert's hawks were fed, and his 
hounds kenneled. A huge pair of antlers 
mdicated the entrance to the stable ; the 
grassy stones leading to the second door 

l2 



148 ICE BOUND. 

showed that it had been long disused. A 
second gateway, through a clock-house, led 
into the inner court, round which rose the 
brick wall and gable roof of the TudOr 
mansion. 

A door to the right of the gateway, as we 
enter here, leads to Sir Robert's smoking-room, 
and a passage from thence to the long dining- 
chamber, now seldom used, that extends along 
the whole of the south front, and from this room 
a covered cloister brings you into the immense 
kitchen. A low arch to the left is the en- 
trance to the chapel, at the end of which is 
the drawing-room. On the east side is the 
hall, with a door at one end leading to the 
buttery. The house is entered from without 
by a flight of steps leading from the terrace 
into the porch, and so into the hall ; over 
which is the queen's room, still religiously 
kept sacred, and a small oratory, or painted 
closet, to the left, which is appropriated to the 
use of the fair Mabel Darcy, the daughter 
of the present proprietor. 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 149 

The gardens of Crow's Nest are a sad relic 
of &ded splendour. Clipped yew-hedges, 
still retaining traces of the fantastic shapes of 
birds and beasts into which they were once cut 
and clipped by scientific gardeners, now, 
thanks to indignant nature, have recovered 
the wild luxuriance of their aboriginal state, 
and are intersected by weed-covered walks 
and flower-beds fast relapsing into shapeless 
fallow, but still sprinkled by a few straggling 
flowers, which feebly assert their aristocratic 
birthright, just as a poor gentleman of the 
time might have endeavoured to make up for 
broken elbows and threadbare waistcoat by a 
knot of new ribbons fluttering at his sword- 
belt or on his hat. 

The inner garden was distinguished by the 
Darcys by the name of " Queen Elizabeth's 
Walk," because there Her Majesty, says the 
old chronicle aforesaid, still preserved in the 
family library, " did graciously, and with a 
most heavenly smile, pluck, with her own royal 
hand, two roses from neighbouring and inter- 



150 IC£ BOUND. 

twining bushes^ one white and the other red ; 
and patting them into either bosom, thanked 
God that He had, in His mercy, Toochsafed, 
in the person of her grandfather, to end such 
senseless bloody wars as those of old between 
the houses of York and Lancaster." 

In the midst of this garden — now a mere 
tangle of hedges, where thrushes, blackbirds, 
and nightingales built and sang all day as in 
a thicket, undisturbed by busy gardener <^ 
prying boys, being allowed to feed with 
impunity on the few cherries and plums 
that grew on the neglected trees and the 
unpruned branches breaking from the gar- 
den walls — stood a fountain, crowned by a 
white marble figure of Italian workmanship, 
generally supposed to be Diana. It repre- 
sented a Grecian maiden, with downcast head 
and modest eyes bent on the ground, almost 
naked but for a thin, fluttering drapery, which 
she seemed to have snatched up hastily from 
the ground at the first alarm of some distant 
Toice, or the sight of some daring intruder. 



THI LITTLE BLiCK BOX. 151 

Xhe Tillage curate said it was Diana alarmed 
hj AeteBon ; bat the rector, who was thought 
a much more learned man in the parish, be- 
mxme he never preached a sermon without quot- 
ing St Chrysostomi to prove the divine origin 
jQi tithes, declared it was meant for Niobe la- 
renting the death of her children. Fed by an 
a^aoent spring, the fountain had never ceased 
.to flow during the family's births and deaths, 
luroaperity and misfortune, and still threw its 
'Odomn of volatile silver far into the air, 
showering its broken crystal over the figure 
9Df the goddess, and shrouding it in a thick 
ifmi of pearly drops, that the rector fancifully 
Mid resembled the tears of the weeping 
another ; his imagination, never very conspi- 
.tnoua in his sermons, which were of the driest 
school of theology, being in this case, per- 
thapa, stimulated by his desire to prove his 
jHTgament. 

The curate, on the other hand, with a quiet 
Anile of triumph, used on such occasions to 
dedare that no person of parts or skilled in the 



152 ICE BOUND. 

humanities could deny that the water not 
unaptly represented the drippings of the river 
Alpheus, as the goddess rose hastily from its 
stream. The knight^ when appealed to on 
such occasions^ used generally to say that, 
^^ Zounds I it looked to him more like a milk- 
maid who had upset her pail^ and was going 
home dripping to get a change." 

Yety without entering into thediscussion, Ma- 
bel would then playfully interfere, and holding 
all three by the band^ would make them watch 
the " Fairies' Arch/' as she called the silver 
jetting, as it bloomed into a rainbow in the 
sunlight, or fell with a musical babble into 
the mossy cracked cup of marble below, fr(mi 
whence it wandered away, in a little well-worn 
channel, to freshen the surrounding turf and 
feed the neglected flowers. 

'^Methinks a pretty emblem of Christian 
charity," said the rector on one such occasion^ 
'^ doing good by stealth, nourishing the roots 
of upsprung blossoms, and wandering away ere 
they can delight it by their grateful perfume^ 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 153 

or shade it from the thirsty sun with their 
playfiil shadow." 

'' Drat it/' said the knight, '' don't talk so 
like a playbook ; leave that for wenches in 
loye. founds, if I can compare it to any- 
thing bat my cask of canary, that is always 
filling, yet always emptying. It is like a 
woman's tongne — ^there's a simile for you, 
master rector — always babbling, never still.'" 

^' Yet always like music in the ear," chimed 
in Mabel. 

'^Tes, indeed, when it isn't scolding, or 
lecturing, or preaching, or begging for money 
or new satin gowns or silk fallals — eh, Mabel ? 
I have you there." 

^'Was my brave mother's tongue such a 
wicked tongue as that ?" said Mabel, looking 
down, after stealing a reproving glance at her 
boisterous father's jolly face. 

^* Hang it, girl, don't — now, don't mention 
her I She, you know, was perfect ; but there 
are no such women now — are there, master 
rector? Adad^ no! now they must paint. 



154 ICE BOUND. 

wear muffii, and ride in thiB ring, and 
such fallallery. There are no such women 
now, Mabel. Bat there, don't pout ; thou'rt 
a good girl, and shalt ride Black Jack to- 
morrow, and go a-hunting just as thy mother 
used ; and thou s^alt see a buck killed too, 
that thou shalt ; and though Fm but a poor 
gentleman, and forgotten by the King — God 
bless him ! — thou shalt sport a blue feather 
with the best. So cheer up, gh'l, and don't 
be angry with the old trooper, though he k 
rough ; for he loves thee to his heart — don't 
he, master rector? And thee shalt have a 
Imsband — an honest fellow, come of good 
Tory stock, who can follow hounds ; none 
of your scented fops, with wigs and snuflf- 
bozes, who don't know a barb from a Galloway 
sorrel, and never breasted hunter in th^ 
lives." 

" Will Mr. Troutbeck, father, be in the 
field to-day?" 

^' Don't mention the name, wench," said 
the father, with a furious look, " The Trout- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 155 

becks and the Darcys are sworn foes — Whigs 
and Tories, cat and^ dog, baker and devil ; 
as my father used to saj, our very blood 
wouldn't mix in a basin. Didn't the old Whig 
langh when Roger told him that I was going 
to cut down ten more elms in the avenue? 
-—and the next day, in the hunting-field, 

didn't he sneer (d him !) and ask me if 

I could sell him some good elm- wood to make 
gates for his five new farms ? And he a 
Whig too," said the old Cavalier, "and an 
exdusionist, and a whining, psalm-singing, 
snuffling rogue in the old times — one that, by 
God's grace, would, I bejieve, have cut off the 
blessed martyr's head with his own hands." 

"And how did you answer him, father?" 
tMid Mabel, with a smile at her father's 
vdiemence. 

" Answer him, wench ? Why, I told him 
I had forgot how much coffin plank was a 
foot since the day after Wigan Lane, when 
I had to bury some of his canting brothers ; 
and then. I rode off, whistling 



156 ICE BOUND. . 

' Now let him be con&iinded. 
And 80 be every Boundhead.* ^ 

" ' A soft answer tumeth away wratV " 
said the rector. " Marry, though, the kuave 
was well answered, with his proud flouting; 
and some might even have repdd him with 
a buffet.*' 

'^ Egad,'' said the old soldier, ** when I rode 
by the side of Prince Hupert through Bir- 
mingham, we pistoled a dozen of them for 
daring only to call out ^ Down with the rob- 
bers!' but then they were armed, and had 
swords. No I I would not strike even a Puri- 
tan if he had no sword on ; besides, there has 
been blood enough shed in that quarrel." 

Sir Bobert Darcy was an old impoverbhed 
country gentleman, so long removed from 
court, and even the camp, that he had now be- 
come in manners little better than a farmer. In 
education he had never been much superior to 
one. He was an excellent swordsman, but a 
bungler in logic ; a sure shot, but a bad gram- 
marian ; a bold rider across country, but ig- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 157 

norant of any book but the Duke of New- 
castle's pedantic work on horsemanship. He 
would have ridden forty miles before breakfast 
to see a game-cock of a particular breed; but 
not one to have converse with Dryden. Ne- 
glected by the court in whose cause he had 
mortgaged acre after acre, he knew nothing 
ei court politics beyond what the weekly 
papers told him of the Popish Plot, which he 
thought an imposture ; and occasional scandals 
about Madam Carwell and Mrs. Nell Gwynne, 
about whom he was very tolerant. His time 
was spent in hunting, hawking, and cock- 
fighting, interspersed with visits to the assize 
town ; where he delighted to beard the Whig 
gentry, quarrel about precedence, tell old 
tales of Goring and Lunsford, and discuss a 
bowl of sack with old Tories like himself. 
His daughter's education he had entrusted to 
Mr. Bichard Wilson, a poor, expelled, non- 
conformist clergyman of ultra-Calvinistic prin- 
ciples, whom he had learned to tolerate from 
love to the memory of his wife, who had 



158 ICE BOUKD. 

turned heterodox during her last ilhesd, and 
had engiaged the persecated man fbr her ]psU 
yate chaphdn. 

Mr. Bichard Wibon was one of tdiose men 
whom perisecution educates from time to time to 
preach toleration to the cruel world. Hisfatmfy 
had been dowered by just nature with two 
gifts — virtue and misfortune. His father had 
been shot ais a spy while pofiying with a dying 
soldier of the Ironside regiment, and he himfielf 
had lived a life of concealment and disguise ; 
yet, in spite of all this^ his mind had remained 
nnhardened. What might halve' made otdier 
men cynics made him a gentle lover of man- 
kind, pure as an apostle, but too humble and 
shy to become a reformer or a public preacher. 
He had learnt to suffer for his faith, but not 
to extend its doctrines ; nay, his gentle spirit 
had almost learnt to dread eyen too zealous pro* 
selytism, as a first step to persecution. Of the 
vices of the court he knew little. Shut up 
among his books, and absorbed in religious 
abstractions, which to him were the only snb^ 



TBI LITTLE BLACK BOX. 159 

j€et8 worthy of study in life, he had grown 
into a pale, thin, shy student, whose only wish 
was that his sect might be tolerated, and that 
Popery might be rendered harmless. 

To Mabel, whom he taught as a daughter, he 
had confided all the polite learning of 
which he was master, including the Italian 
handy a little French, the use of the 
^obes, and an outline of the legendary 
botany of those days. Taught to consider 
Latin necessary for a gentlewoman — ^for Lady 
Jane Grey was Mr. Wilson's type of the 
Protestant gentlewoman — ^he had enabled 
her to read Virgil with ease, and was now 
busily engaged in trying to make his less 
steady but affectionate pupil master of the 
Greek alphabet; Greek being, as he told 
her, in his stiff and old-fashioned phrase, 
''a speech Tery rich in fit epithets, and 
as it were the foster-nurse of all succeed- 
ing languages of the European family." 

"So the old play says, dear Mr. Wil- 
son," Mabel would say, disregarding the slight 



160 ICE BOUND. 

shudder with which her instractor heard the 
source of her quotation : 

* The ancient Hebrew, clad with myBterie ; 
The learned Greek, rich in fit epithet,* — 

Do you hear? — 

* Blest in the lovely marriage of pore words ; 
The Chaldee wise, the Arabian physical ; 
The Roman eloquent, the Tuscan graye ; 

The braying Spanish, and the smoothed-tangned 
French.' 

" Very apt, very apt, dear child of minfe," 
said the minister; ^^for the Soman doth 
always sound to me, peaceful as I am, 
resonant like a blast of the lituusj as Horace 
calls it — ^but we have not got so far 
as that, or the battle-trumpet — useful 
chiefly for orators and princes (while God 
permits such men to dominate) ; while 
the Greek is fit for lovers, or warriors, or 
statesmen, or citizens, or any one, being 
alternately soft as the breath of Zephyms, 
and stormy and loud as Aquilo or Boreas — 
Arbiter Adrice. Do you remember dear 
Horace's words, Quo non arbiter? — '' 



THS UTILE BLACK BOX. 161 

But Mabel, whose mind had been much 
wandering from her book during this ha- 
rangaOi suddenly clapped her hands, and 
flinging down the Greek Grammar, ran to 
the window, dancing like a child with de- 
hf^t '' Oh, Master Wilson, look here I " she 
cried ; '' here's Boger currying Black Jack ; 
and I'm to ride him to-day to the hunt. I 
shall lead the field, papa says, and ride like 
a beggar on horseback. Put on the fringed 
housing,'' said she, ^^good Boger. Clean 
the heayy silver hunting-whip," she cried, 
opening the lattice, and calling out of win- 
dow to the delighted servant, an old sol- 
dier^ with a long white scar down one side 
of his &ce. Boger looked up delighted, and 
pulled off his felt hat. 

" Alas 1 " cried the pale student, sighing 
over his books. " Behold, said the preacher, 
all was yanity and vexation of spirit, and 
there was no profit under the sun ; one 
event happeneth to alL" 

'*And why, dear sir, these unhappy 

VOL. n. M 



162 ICE BOUND. 

texts? Is not your religion happy like mine? 
Does not the same Being say, there is 4 
time to laugh, as well as a time to weep?" 

" But, my child, he putteth ' to weep' first ; 
and even the Pagan writer learnt to say, We 
begin life with sorrow. Tes 1 Well indeed did 
the Thracian, as Nicomedes tells us, weep when 
a child was bom, to think of what he should 
suffer, and laugh when he died, to think of 
the sorrows he had escaped. But it is na* 
tural for thy years to assert that the Yulgate 
only says: ^Man is bom to sorrow, as the 
sparks fly upwards.' God forgive me for 
such flippant animadversion on Scripture.'' 

The laughing girl, sobered in a moment by 
the serious look of her instractor, now turned 
again with a half-sigh to her Greek alpha- 
bet, covering the letters one by one with 
her tiny finger, as if committing their names, 
to memory; while the tutor, bending with 
closed eyes, as if absorbed in inward medi- 
tation, repeated half-aloud the dicta and pro- 
phecies of his stern creed : 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 163 

^'Then I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on 
ih6 Mount Zion, and with him an hundred 
fixrty and four thousand, having His Fa- 
iher^s name written in their foreheads ;'' 
and he repeated again in a low chant, '^ Hav- 
ing his Father's name written on their fore- 
heads." Then a low murmur, as of a prayer, 
and these words became audible : '^ And there 
ahall in no wise enter into it any thing that 
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomi- 
nation, or maketh a lie, but they which 
ve written in the Lamb's Book of Life — 
bat they which are written in the Lamb's 
Book of Life. Yes ! " cried he, starting up 
as from a sort of trance, his hollow eyes 
taming in their sockets, his thin hands 
clasped and raised in adoration towards heaven, 
his whole frame quivering as if shaken by 
a apirit, '^before the earth arose, or light 
was bom, the number was written in the 
Tolume of the Book ; before the voice was 
heard in Fatmos, or the great cry of ' How 
long, Lord, how long ? ' resounded in the 

ic2 



164 ICE BOUKD. 

goldra courts^ and over the crystal sea ; be- 
fore the pale horse had trodden Paradise 
into graves^ or death and hell Had blasted 
the smiling world ; yea I and it shall be found 
there/ when the stars have fellen like ripe 
fruit from the wind-shaken tree/ and the 
bloodstained Ahabs of the world have crept 
into the caves> and the heaven is rolled up 
likd a s6roll| the sea turned to bloody and 
the last trumpet broken^ and the globe, like 
a cup of glass — " 

^^ My dear Mr. Wilson, what means this? 
My father will hear you — ^^ 

** Be not frightenedi maid ! for I am moved 
to speak of these mysteries, and the vision 
of last night stirs in my blood like a 
fever." 

** My deMT Mr. Wilson/' said Mabel, ding- 
ing to his arm, and gently forcing him into 
his seat, where he sat fbr a moment eit- 
hausted, shading his eyes with his hand^ 
and wiping the moist drops from his pale 
forehead, ^^I have long seen you troubled^ 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 165 

Imt dared not speak, lest my father should 
mayhap anger you with some rude story about 
fliose dreadful times of bygone trouble. I 
obaerred you pale and haggard when you 
came down to breakfast, you did not 
nrnle when my father filled up your cup^ 
wd made his usual joke of Sir John Bar- 
bycom being able to throw the best wrest- 
hn in England; and on Tuesday — ^yes, 
Tuesday — ^when we walked out together to 
cull simples in the Home Wood, you picked a 
Bagged Bobin and called it ' Bedstraw.' Now, 
dear Mr. Wilson, do tell me what's the mat- 
ter with you. Tell your own child Mabel;'* 
and she fondled and kissed his hand with all 
the tenderness of a child. ^* What has hap- 
pened? My father loves you, and never 
flunks of your admiration for Titus Oates ; 
he's forgotten all that. Has Roger dared to 
taunt you ? He shall go in a moment — ^ye% 
that he shall — ^though he did save my fa- 
ther's life at Naseby. What of that? Would 
not any brave man save another's life ? " 



16ff ICEBOUND. 

'^Nay, dear Mistress Mabel/' said the mi- 
nister^ calmly as before, ^^ it was but a verti- 
go, a cephalic weakness — ^nay, go not for 
the cordial-water ; it would but heat the 
blood/' 

*^ I can think of but one thing. Roger 
told me that the stage coach dropped a letter 
for you last week at the lodge gate ; and that 
when you saw it you turned pale, and mut- 
tered between your teeth *God give me 
strength ' three times." 

^^ I had a vision last night/' said Mr. Wil- 
son, answering without replying to the ques^ 
tion. ^^ It was in the dark night — ^the middle 
of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon 
men — ^I lay awake and prayed, as the moon« 
light, which had been for hours moving 
across the room like the shadow upon a dial, 
at that moment fell athwart my couch, and 
shone upon my face. I could hear the 
great clock ticking above me in the turret; 
the owls had long ceased hooting, and the 
dogs had fallen asleep, weary of howling. 



THE LrrrLE black box. 167 

The pale Uae light fell, I say, upon the wall 
and upon the floor, and seemed now to me 
the flame light I had once seen when 
a child — ^the day before my father's death 
— ^when I awoke at midnight, and felt a 
cold hand upon my forehead. Suddenly 
{he li^t seemed to grow into a spot of 
brightness ; I was aware of a presence ; 
feaTi as the Uzzite says, came upon 
me, and trembling, and made all my 
bones to shake. Then a spirit passed 
before my face, and the hair of my flesh 
stood up. It stood still; but I could not 
diflcem the form thereof. An image was 
before my eyes, shadowy and vague; and I 
heard a yoice. Then I shut my eyes, and 
prayed ; and when I looked again, I saw my 
fiither just as I beheld him after death — calm, 
pale, almost smiling, a bloody rag about his fore- 
head, his hand pressing the death-wound in his 
side. I leaped fi:om my bed, and would have 
embraced him, but he waved me back, and 
pointed thrice in a particular direction. Then 



168 ICE BOUND. 

I hid my face and prayed for strength ; 
and when I looked up again the moonlight 
had faded, the wind had risen, the rain 
lashed in fitful drifts against the window 
glass, and I feU asleep commending myself 
to God." 

^^ And whither pointed the apparition ? '' 
said Mabel. 

^^ That I may not now tell thee. But let as 
resume our studies. The storm is gone. It 
is as the preacher says so beautifully : ^ Lo, 
the winter is past, the rain is over and gone ; 
the flowers appear on the earth, the time of 
the singing of birds is come, and the yoice of 
the turtle-dove is heard in the land.' Do 
you remember, dear child of mine, how Flac- 
cus tersely describes such a change? which, 
although he speaketh of the physical macro- 
cosm, does not unaptly resemble the vicissi- 
tudes of our microcosm : 

* Solyitnr acris hiems grata vice yeris et Fayoni, 
Trahontque siccas machinse carinaa ;* 

referring here, as the commentators tell us, to 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 169 

the launching of the galleys and frigates at 
tiie approach of spring. Then, again, with 
equal tmth — 

^ Ac neqne jam staboliB gandot pecus, aut arator igni ; 
Kec prata cank albicant proinis.* 

Tet how inferior is the Roman to the Jew, inas- 
much as the former does not see the moral 
beanty of nature in its typical and profoundly 
prq^hetic aspect ! For are not day and night 
emblems of joy and sorrow ? — winter and 
spring of life and death ? Does not spring ever 
arise like a beautiful soul, as St. Jerome hath 
it^ fipom the icy grave of winter ? Are not 
the flowers God's love, written in strange 
ciphers, differently interpreted by each ? Are 
not the winds and storms types of sin and 
evil? That swallow yonder, just flown be- 
neath th^ eaves, is an emblem of the soul's 
migration. Is not the sunlight full of the 
present, and moonlight of the past ? Then 
look you, again, at the voices of the year. The 
robin carols sad and lonely in autumn, like a 
lament for youth, which is spring, and man- 



170 ICE BOUND. 

hood^ which is sammer^ So the nightin* 
gale embodies the deep but unsatisfying joy 
of summer, and the cuckoo the hope and pro- 
mise of May, repeatmg and babbling over it as 
children chant the names of those they love. 
Oh, why does spring change into summer, 
then just as we learn to love it^ fade into 
autumn, and lastly sink into the old age and 
death of winter, whose corpse is strewn but with 
dead leaves and frozen flowers ? Why, doth 
not the scripture answer us all this in a breath, 
and say ; ^ Man is but a pilgrim and a so« 
journer; few and evil are his days. Man 
groweth up, and is cut down ; he is like the 
morning cloud, and like the early dew ,* we 
pass by, and lo, we are not.' " 

*^ Oh, dear sir, why did you not become a 
poet or a preacher? " 

*^ When I was yet in the bonds of iniquity, 
and was still at college, I did — I did hanker, 
my child, after the flesh-pots of Egypt ; but 
when I grew a Christian man, I put away the 
things of the reprobate child." 



THS LITTLE BLACK BOX. l71 

'* These words of thine are but to divert 
me from my question/' cried Mabel; '^for 
though I know little of the world, I know I 
have not yet plucked out the heart of thy 
mystery, as the playwright says. But here 
18 my father : let us to our studies." 

As Mabel hurried to her book, the tramp 
of heavy jack-boots could be heard along 
the corridor, accompanied by the jingle of 
spurs, the occasional crack of a hunting- 
whip, and the whimper of a gang of pup- 
pies, whom the owner seemed attempting 
to keep in order, while he shouted out a 
Tory song with such accompaniment as the 
following : — 

"*He that is dear 
A Cavalier ' 

(Come, t'heel, Towler !) 

* Will never sure repine, 
Althougli so b w ' 

(Come, to heel, I say.) 
[^Howl of the doffj as if belaboured to the music. 

^ His substance grow 
That he may not drink wine.' 



173 ICE BOUND. 

(Kat yel Who-o-o-op, Dewlap; down pnp, 
down.)" 

Several doors were opened and shut, with 
curses ; then the voice broke out again with 
the old Cavalier song : — 

*' It was a black doak, 

Witk truth be the joke. 
That killed many thousands, yet neyer much spoke : 

With hatchet and rope 

The gallows old Scope 
Did join with the devil to pull down the Pope. 
He set all the sects of the city to work, 
And rather than fail would haye shared with the Turk. 
Then let us endeayour to pull the doak down 
That cramped all the kingdom and crippled the crown." 

" The morning to ye, Master Wilson ; and, 
in the name of the hrave king Charles, where 
were ye, Mabel ? for I've been all through the 
house — ^in the still-room, and the blue cham- 
ber, and the tapestried chamber, and the 
queen's room, and heaven knows where; 
it's dull work ferreting a warren with a hun- 
. dred holes when there's only one rabbit. 
Why, girl, I'm in such spirits I could run a 
deer down on foot, if it wasn't for a twinge of 



THE LiriLB BLACK BOX. 173 

rheumatism in the hip— a remembrance of cold 
caught by night-bivouacking. Lord I I havra't 
felt in such spirits since Edgehill morning. 
Roger remembers it : we've been talking over 
it Boger, are the hounds ready ?" said the 
old cavalier, shouting out of the window into 
the court, where the sound of hoofs, neigh- 
ing, and the clatter of puis, indicated much 
bustle. 

'' In a trice, your honour," shouted a lusty 
voice. 

*' That bright morning, I say — don't waste 
your time over those dusty books, Mabel — when 
the Show troop, as some of them called us, 
and I at their head, prayed to lead the charge 
intik the Life Guards at Edgehill, and all the 
orange scarves waved before us like a field of 
marigolds— I had only time to bend to the 
mane of my horse and say — egad, I could think 
of nothing but grace, for it was just dinner- 
time — ^ For what we're going to receive, the 
Lord make us truly thankful.' Jacob Astley 
laughed at me, and said, ^ Darcy, repeat 



174 ICB BOUND, 

after me a soldier's prayer : " Lord, Thou 
knowest how busy we must be this day : if 
we forget Thee, do not Thou forget us.'*' 
Five orsix of us repeated that; for we knew 'No 
brave man need be afraid of hell,' as the adage 
goes. ' 'Tis good to be^ well,' is one good 
proverb ; and ' He can want nothmg who has 
God for his friend,' says another. The enemy 
lay before us in waves, thick as com in a 
field. There were Denzil Holles's men, flam- 
ing in red — ^that was the reserve ; Lord 
Brooke's, in purple ; and Ballard's, in grey ; 
and Mandeville's, in blue ; and Stapleton's 
lobsters, as we called them — ^they were so 
difficult to crack — ^that shone in steel like so 
many looking-glasses; and we had some of 
Newcastle's ' lambs,' white as the foam on our 
horses' breasts ; and Bupert's men, like grave- 
digger's, as they were, in black. Then his 
majesty rode down our restless ranks, the 
star shining on his breast; and Bupert, his 
scarlet cloak glittering as if it was on fire, 
swept after him ; then the trumpet rang out, 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 175 

'God and King Charles I' and we drove 
Aroagh ihem with a burst and a crash^ like 
a hawk through a cloud of larks^ or like a 
whale through a shoal of herrings." Unable 
to restrain the wild flow of his spirits^ the old 
soldier broke out^ 

«( ' Marchmg along, fifty score strong, 

BraTe-hearted gentlemen, singing one song/ *' 

" Well, but, father," said Mabel, wishing at 
least to divert the conversation, if she could 
not stop it — ^for it was at Edgehill that her 
tutor's father was shot — " tell me that story 
I am so fond of, of the siege of Bristol, where 
brave Colonel Lunsford was shot by your side 
on the steps." 

** At the Frome Gate, my wench — the steps 
at the Frome Gate," said Sir Robert, de- 
lighted to launch into the full tide of his old 
recollections. " Tou remember the old 
ballad: — 

* There came a post from Banbury, 

Biding in a blue rocket, 
And told how bloody Lunsford fell, 
With a child^s arm in his pocket.' 



176 ICE BOOND. 

Weill we were with the Cornish men, and 
were played upon by musketeers from win- 
dows, so near that we were literally scold- 
ing one another-^-ay, that were we; ^rob- 
bers' and ^crop'heads' flew about as quick 
and stinging as the bullets. Well, we had 
two or three brisk bouts, and were just put- 
ting a petard to the city gate, when they 
saluted us with iron slugs and pike-shot^ and 
ten of our van fell, and Lunsford among them. 
Sir Nicholas Stanning was groaning, for a 
case-shot had broken his thigh ; and Colonel 
Bellasis was by me bleeding in the forehead, I 
myself had a shot on the bar of my headpiece : 
you may see the mark still, for it hangs in 
the hall." (Mabel had seen it a thousand 
times, and heard the story as many, but she 
listened with smiling interest. A tale of such 
danger had always a charm, especially when of 
danger endured by one so beloved.) " Luns- 
ford, when I went up to him, was shot 
through the brain, and past all surgeons ; but 
seeing Stanning groaning, I went up to him, 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 177 

Jioming out a flask of Canary that I had 
8boat me into a steel cap that lay near, and 
Idd it to his lips. 'White coat/ he said to 
me — ^he thought I was a friend — ' white 
ooat^ it tastes of blood !' But, before I could 
answer^ Bupert came spurring by, and ordered 
me to head the attack on the Windmill 
Forty and I dashed off. ' Come rack, come 
rope/ said the prince^ ' we'll turn out these 
Yennin before dusk.* I took it with a wet 
thumbs and was about to lead a party of the 
Gravediggers to wade over the quay into the 
dty, when they sent out a drum to desire a 
parley, so I sent back a trump ; and, egad, 
if before night we weren't carousing in the 
governor's own house, and at day-breaking 
were marching on to storm Berkeley. Well, 
who rode with me through Gloucestershire but 
Will Scroop, a young scapegrace, whom his 
blessed majesty had just before reconciled to 
his father, who was as proud as Lucifer and 
haughty as the devil. He was the same who 
said at Edgehill, ^ I am now going down the 
VOL. n. N 



i 



178 JCE BOUND. 

hill^ my son, to serve the king ; and if I be 
killed, you, my son, will have enough to 
spend/ ^And if I be killed/ said the witty 
rogue, 'you'll have enough to pay/ Egad, 
the boy, though, died. They were mad 
times, my lass, mad times ; so it's^ 

* Farewell, my Lord Wharton, with hey, 
And farewell, my Lord Wharton, with ho. 
The sawpit did hide him, 
And spade did unhide him. 

With my trolly, lolly, ho 1 ' " 

'^ And were either of the brave gentlemen 
killed?" 

" Old Sir Gervase was found stripped, lying 
among a heap of sixty dead men of Lincoln 
— pikemen — and with sixteen wounds in his 
front — always the front; no true Cavalier 
got shot in the back. And why ? — ^because 
he never showed it We left that for the 
Bumpers. Sixteen wounds had he, and all 
got in defending the standard ; but the frost 
had stanched the old man's Flantagenet 
blood." 

" One would think by your talking, &ther, 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 179 

ihat blood improved, like wine, with age." 
" So it does, girl, if a man doesn't turn it 
sonp with Whiggery. Well, the brave lad, 
his son, found him out ; warmed him by a fire 
of broken muskets ; poured some wine, which 
jg as good as life-blood — ^poor old man ! — ^if it 
be anything like our claret — down his throat ; 
carried him to a warm lodging, and the next 
day, in the king's coach, to Oxford. Those 
were the times, when with Tories it was 

^ Boot, saddle, to horse and away ! 
Saddle the roan and the flea-bitten gray ; 
Boot, saddle, to horse, and away ! ' 

But you seem glum, Master Wilson, as if you 
hadn't heard these old campaigning stories of 
mine before; and Mabel here hearkens with 
4US much relish as a Whig listens to treason. 
Have you seen to-day's Gazette? Egad, I 
thought as long as Tony (Shaftesbury) lived, 
and those murdering Londoners, no true Tory 
would ever get in the saddle again ; but here, 
I see, the Duke of York was busy last week 
in Scotland, trying his new sort of boots on 

n2 



180 ICE Bouin), 

the Covenanters. * Once a knave, ever a 
knave/ is a good proverb; and, 'If clods 
won't do, try stones.' " 

'^ Blood-drinking Rabshakehs ! " cried Mr. 
Wilson, suddenly starting from his seat with 
a vehemence that astonished the old knight, 
who always upheld him for the only worthy 
Roundhead he had ever known, his heavy folio 
as he rose falling, and nearly crushing one of 
the puppies, who had been playing with Sir 
Robert's whip-lash. " Blood^drinking sons of 
Belial, there shall come a day when James of 
York and such as he shall drink of the wine 
of God's wrath ; for in Jehova's hand there is a 
cup, and the wine of that cup is red ! " 

" My dear sir," said Mabel, " be composed. 
My dear father, his head has been much dis- 
ordered; his pulse is feverish, his mind a 
little wanders. Let me lead you to your 
room, Mr. Wilson." 

" Ah, do," said Sir Robert, kindly, "for 
he talks rather at random. And, harkee — 
tell William the butler to mix him a glass of 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 181 

Strong waters^ and bid the cook make him a 
posset for night 'A stitch in time saves 
nine/ ' Better a penny to the doctor than six- 
pence to the sexton/ And^ Wilson^ read some of 
* D*Urfey's Pills to purge Melancholy/ forget 
Ahab and Sabshakeh^ and I wager a jacobus 
to a bad halfpenny you're well before the 
day's run out. But what's this?" he said, 
stooping to the floor, and picking up a paper 
the puppy was tearing with his teeth. '^ A 
leaf from the — ^the — what? — the Prophecies 
of Muggleton 1 What — Muggleton the mad 
tailor! And this? — 'A pious justification of the 
Parliament's conduct in the late war.' Is this, 
Mr. Wilson, what you teach my daughter ?" 

" No, no, father — indeed he does not : he 
never speaks of anything but Virgil and 
Horace." 

"Who's Vu-gU, wench? Not Virgil that 
wrote on farriery ? — it can't be he. You 
don't mean that Virgil who held Stamford 
against us for six weeks, and made his men 
poison their bullets, d him ! Now, look 



182 ICE BOUND. 

you here, Master Wilson ; I respect you as a 
good sort of man — ^youVe taken much trouble 
with this sweeting here ; but, drat it ! may I 
never stride horse again if I don't turn you 
out neck and heels if I find you talking any 
more nonsense to her about your Rabshakehs 
and Ahabs. Leave that for Sundays and 
Church-of-England men, who have got a right 
to the Bible — ^no thanks to Oliver/' 

*^ I cannot hold my tongue," said Mr. 
Wilson, whose usual fear and respect for his 
patron seemed melting rapidly in the force of 
a fanatical fervour, which increased in the 
very attempt to repress it, " when the Lord 
bids me speak. No— not. Sir Eobert, even 
for thy bit and sup, can I hold my tongue. 
' I will bless the Lord at all times ; His praise 
shall be continually in my mouth.' I have 
put my hand to the plough, and have looked 
back; I have been lukewarm in the true 
cause, and shall, if I amend not, be spit out 
like those of Laodicea ; for I have been nei- 
ther cold nor hot" 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 183 

"'Eaten bread is soon forgotten/" said 
Sir Robert; with an angry snort, bursting 
into a quotation from one of the few books he 
ever read — 

* Still 80 fenrent and opposite, 
As if they worshipped God for spite ; 
The selfisame thing they will abhor 
One way, and long another for,' " 

" Am I to honour God or man most ? " 
" Oh ! none of your cant with me. So ho, 
Towler 1 But I warn you, Mr. Kichard Wil- 
son, if you teach your cursed rubbish to my 
daughter, my doors shall be shut upon you. 
No, no, Mabel — don't talk to me. I'll have 
no canting fellows here, to make the maids 
hang themselves because they think they are 
not elect, or my butler cut my throat and 
steal the family plate on the strength of his 
predestination. We're old friends, Mr. Wil- 
son ; but take care — ^for, egad, the Darcys keep 
their word." 

And so saying. Sir Robert, whose string of 
cavalier recollections had revived all the par- 
tisan fury of his younger days, his Toryism 



184 ICE BOUND. 

having been somewhat fanned by the remem- 
brance of its being the anniversary of Edge- 
hill; strode out of the room^ clacking his whip 
and followed by his train of puppies, who 
yelped, howled, and barked, as they chased 
each other down the long corridor. Mr. 
Wilson, according to his usual custom, came 
to wish the hunting-party farewell at the hall- 
door. 

"I tell you what it is, Mabel — and give 
me a kiss, my beauty — ^th^y're a bad lot; 
and, as the proverb goes, ^ What's in the bone 
won't out of the flesh.' I'm sorry I said any- 
thing about the meat and the drink, though— <- 
for, drat it, if he was Old Nick himself, he was 
welcome to that — ^but my blood was up ; and 
it does gall me to hear a man quote Scripture 
as if it belonged to him and no one else. But 
he's a worthy, gentle-hearted man — ^tender as 
a woman ; and I hardly know what I could 
do without him. Well, there, you know 
what it says in Hudibras. Talk of wit ! 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 185 

* He could raise BcrapleB dark and nice, 
And after solve *em in a trice, 
As if diyinity had catched 
The itch on purpose to be scratched.' " 

This was, however^ said in a low voice, so 
as not to be overheard by Mr. Wilson, who, 
having apparently relapsed into his former fit 
of abstraction, was wandering slowly after 
the pair, with his finger keeping a place in a 
ponderous book which he brought with him, 
dther unconsciously or firom pure affection. 

Sir Bobert, gay in a rich embroidered suit, 
had already mounted his old chestnut charger, 
and was administering playful and paternal 
flips to the incorrigible puppies, who seemed 
to do nothing but roll on their back, and run 
about with the stumbling sprawl peculiar to 
the youth of such animals. Mabel was jaunty 
enough on the back of Black Jack, her de- 
light, examining her whip, looking at her 
bridle, and patting her horse's neck with all 
the grace of the fullest beauty of maidenhood. 
But we must describe Mabel, and not leave 
the reader to invest her with false attributes. 



18S ICE BOUND. 

She was now about nineteen^ and the toast of 
half the county^ though she seldom appeared 
in public but during assize time^ once a year^ 
at the county ball. Her cheek wore a flush 
of sunny crimson ; her complexion was of 
that mellow brown which you see on a newly-r 
expanded hazel-leaf. Her eyes were of a 
deep summer-blue, of the hue of a June 
twilight, contrasting richly with the deep 
lustrous ruby of her full lips and the snowiness 
of her bosom, which the dress of that day left 
rather more exposed than in the severer cos- 
tume of modem ladies. Her blood, too, had a 
pretty habit of rising in beautiful flushes of 
" rosy red," as Spencer calls it, in moments 
of enthusiasm, as when she heard a thrilling 
story of bygone patriotism from her father, or 
some recital of stem martyrdom from her 
gentler tutor. She was dressed in a tight* 
fitting horseman's coat of fine purple doth, 
the broad golden buttons of which left it open 
below the waist ; its flapped pockets spread- 
ing over a skirt of a deeper colour, which fell 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 187 

in broad folds below her feet. A bright yellow 
breast-knot fastening her jerkin at the throat, 
left two broad pendent ends to flutter up 
agamst her eyes, or cling to her cheek. As 
she coquettishly cast them behind her to 
flutter around her, waving in the wind, her 
father, gorgeous and erect, in black velvet 
and silver lace, eyed his daughter with pride 
and fondness; and her old charger fretted 
wantonly and proudly with its little burden, 
as she adjusted her fringed gloves and her 
French riding-whip. 

"Where's old Eoger?" said Sir Eobert 
impatiently to the rough-haired red stable-boy 
who held the horses. 

"Fm a-coming. Sir Robert," said Roger 
cheerily, as he appeared, according to imme- 
morial custom, bearing a huge silver race-cup 
npon an embossed salver ; " and a blessed day 
of remembrance it is. Sir Robert, to think 
what a different hunt we were leading this 
day twenty-two years. Well, my — if Miss 



188 ICE BOUND. 

Mabel isn't as beautiful to-daj as a rose on a 
May morning !" 

"None of your flattery, Koger^ or you'll 
turn the minx's head. She is pretty enough, 
as times go ; but you should have seen your old 
missus when she danced the Canary with me 
at the king's mask. But we shall be late. 
Here's to the memory of the blessed martyr," 
he said, raising the cup to his lips, while 
Eoger took off his hat with the deep venera- 
tion of a trooper of the old school. Mabel 
took a sip ; and Sir Robert handed it to Mr, 
Wilson, and bade him drink to the blessed 
memory. 

Mr. Wilson, without replying a word, re- 
placed the cup on the salver, put both down 
on the door-step of the hall, and re-entered 
the house. 

" The man's moonstricken," said Sir 
Robert, shrugging his shoulders. " He used 

to laugh when I spoke thus ; but now, a 

of him, he turns as black as Hugh Peters : soon 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 189 

hell be forbidding the name of the king to 
be mentioned in my own house." 

" If you please, your honour, I think it was 
this day twenty-two years ago that a party of 
our Gravediggers shot his father, I've heard 
say 60 ; but in my humble opinion, if he would 
preach up treason, they did quite right." 

" If he preaches rebellion here, out he 
goes," said Sir Kobert. "I'll make every 
jade and fool in the house sign an oath of 
allegiance to the king to-morrow." 

" He can't abide the king, Sir Robert ; I 
seed him turn up his nose when you said 
something about the health of the king 
martyr." 

" Turn up his nose, adad ; 111 cure him of 
that. But never mind now, Mabel; it's an 
hour's trot to the * Three Oaks.' To horse ! 
Soger, and shout, Roger, 

' For liberty and privilege, 
Religion and the king, 
We fought ; but O, the golden wedge, 
That was the very thing.' 



190 ICE BOUND. 

Now then, Roger, strike in, and let the old 
psalm-singer hear it : 

^ There lies the cream of the cause, 

Beligion is a Whig ; 
Pure privilege eats up the laws, 
And cries for king — a fig 1 * " 

Then, to the loud blast of the French horn, 
which Sir Robert wore strung round him, and 
which sent the rooks in a black cloud out of 
the elms, to the loud cracking of whips, and the 
joyful yelp of some half-dozen stag-hounds, 
the whole party swept down the avenue. 



191 



CHAPTER XL 

THE STAG AT BAT. 

It was scarcely more than eight o'clock, and the 
dew still lay gray upon the grass, over which 
they cantered, laughing and singing, beneath 
the tall trees, some of which were already 
destined for the axe. The wind had arisen, 
and seemed chasing the shadows before them, 
the quick slant sunbeams coursed over their 
path, swift and silent as if scared by the 
sound of the horses' hoofs. The birds hush- 
ing their song as they approached, flew 
'with startled notes down the hedges. The 
rabbits leaped away amid the furze ; and the 
hare limped off over the long bare fallow. 



192 ICEBOUND. 

After a time, turning to the right from the 
avenue, they entered a long sandy lane, shut 
in with hedges ; and from thence, on to a high 
upland of downs, on to the edge of the covert, 
which was their destination. Before them 
lay a hroad country, of dark plough-lands, 
green meadows, and wheat stubhle. The 
horizon stretched far away, like a broad 
purple sea, amid which the white farms lay 
like white-sailed barks, the spires cutting the 
sky-line like the tapering masts of some huge 
craft, the hull of which escaped the eye. 

The morning was fresh and bright, the 
wind piped merrily amid the tangled rigging 
of the dwarf oaks that edged the covert 
within which lay the wild stag, whose doom 
was already decided. Overhead the white 
piles of clouds floated like ships under a presd 
of sail through a melting sea of Mue, which 
turned here and there to amber, as if washing 
the roots of some golden island as yet out of 
sight. 

Many were the greetings that met the cans 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 193 

of the party. " Grood morning, Sir Robert ; 
and hoVs the rheumatism ?" " Pretty Mis- 
tress Mabel, all the pleasures of summer 
attend you.'' Or it was, " Sir Robert Darcy, 
I greet you well; and. Miss Mabel, may 
the summer's, sun smile on you." Or, "Brave 
Sir Robert, well met on this glorious anni- 
versary." Then Sir Robert flung out his 
hands to them all^ and sang, and shouted, 
and quoted proverbs, and talked of Edgehill ; 
while Mabel looked at her glove-buttons, and 
played with her whip, and smiled, and darted 
arch looks, won half a dozen hearts, and 
sent home old gouty justices — ^those at least 
who were bachelors — to drink her health, 
after the third bottle, from a jack-boot, and 
with other fantastic feats of gallantry now 
very justly passed into oblivion. Now as 
the party, every moment gathering in num- 
ber, the riders not merely in scarlet, — ^for 
they were chiefly old oflBicers, — [but in all 
descriptions of gay colours, cantered up, 
along lanes and past farms, slowly following 

VOL. II. 



194 IC£ BOUND. 

the hontsmau as he maved forward to the 
second cover, it was an exhilanKting sight to 
see ^the chiMren run out, and comely maidens 
in straw hats that threw flickering latticed sha« 
dows over th&r prettj sunburnt £aices, hurry 
to open the gates, with a ^^ God save ye, gen- 
tlemen, and send you good sport ! " and notne 
without a spedal greeting for Mabel, who 
would stop behind a moment with all sorts of 
kind inquiries after bedridden grandmothers 
and crippled fathers, and then gallop on to 
join her impatient father, or some old cavaHer- 
gaUant with a long black patch saddling his 
nose, from whose Icmg-winded compliments 
she had broken, perhaps, somewhat abruptiy. 
But though none felt more keenly than Mabel 
the charm of the sportsman's ezpectatieiii 
she had been dowered also whh a sense of 
pleasures more subtle though less palpalJie. 

That summer morn her imagination, though 
she never wrote a verse in her life, and cer- 
tainly had as yet not read many (for such 
beings as English poets had nc^ part to play in 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 195 

Mr. Wilson's gloomy cosmogony), was filled 
with sounds and senses that hurried in min- 
gled sweetness through her mind, leaving no 
image, but merely a vibration as of music but 
just suspended, or that perfume as of Paradise 
that surrounds us when we wake slowly from 
a dream of unattainable happiness. 

She heard the larks singing in clusters as 
they stormed heaven's gate, tried to outrun 
the returning sunbeam, or to nestle in that 
low white cloud that, all brightness itself, 
overshadowed their nests; she saw them, drunk 
with the madness of song, fall back from the 
sun they could not reach with all their cease- 
less strivings. She marked with no straining 
efibrt — for her love of nature was a beautiful 
uneducated instinct — vast striding shadows 
passing over the young wheat as if they were 
spirits wandering round the world ; every sound 
of the wind was full to her of unformed words 
and music, hinting at sweeter harmony than 
was ever heard on earth ; and she laughed if 
the butterfly hovered round her cheek, as if he 

o2 



196 ICE BOUND. 

took it for some rare flower. Then, with a 
pretty pettishness, she would beat her glove 
with her whip, and say, " Forsooth, this stag 
is very slow in rousing ;" and the next minute, 
remembering a scrap of the Horace lesson of 
the morning, would hum it to the old French 
air of " La Vendange/' 

" I don't like your cursed French words,'' 
said a horse-dealer, who was heaping a lover's 
praises on a certain '^bit of a mare," and 
almost persuading Sir Eobert into a purchase ; 
" I don't like the people, or none of their 
Imgo." 

" Give us * My father was bom before me ;' 
that's the tune, Mabel," said Sir Kobert; 
"don't buzz in that way, like a bee in a 
bottle, but out with it ; for, zounds ! there's 
no one here with half so pretty a pipe." 

" Fie, father !— what, before all the field? 
And besides, * My father was born before me ' 
is a jig ; and I only know minuet tunes." 

"I think, by the plenitude of this solar 
light," said an old brother soldier riding up 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 197 

at this moment, and shaking Sir Eobert 
ferociously by the hand, ^^ as we used to say 
at court, I never saw this little lady of thine 
look so charming.'^ 

Mabel^ who had, of course unconsciously, 
just turned her head to watch a lark rising, 
now suddenly flirted round, and greeted the 
old friend with girlish warmth ; for in those 
days cold prudery was not thought a neces- 
sary voucher for maidenly purity. 

"Ah, ah! Tom — none of thy old court 
compliments, or you'll turn her giddy head. 
Tis a pretty thing enough, too," he said, fondly 
chucking his daughter under the chin, just as 
if she was a foal he was buying ; ^^ and these 
roses don't lose their colour in a shower like 
our court madam's." 

" Stars and planets ! " whispered a young 
bystander to the horse-dealer ; "the Whigs 
of Oxfordshire can show nothing like 
that." 

" Kick me ! " said the horse-dealer, rather 
disgusted with Sir Robert, who had broken 



198 ICE BOUND. 

off on hearing the filly was by the Troutbeck 
runner out of Rapid Jack ; '^ you should see 
Miss Lucy Bellsize ! Why, shell drire her 
fatiber's coach-and-six full gallop round Cromp- 
ton Park." 

"Well, but I thought—'' 

"Oh, there was something unpleasant 
about young Churdiill/' 

But we leave their conversation, to return 
to stout Sir Robert, who, affable, a good 
boon companion, a brave old soldier^ a sound 
Tory, and above all, what was of more 
consequence in such a company, a superb 
rider, whom no fatigue— even now in his 
sixtieth year — could weary, and no fence 
daunt, was already surrounded by a doasen 
friends. Never before was seen such pull- 
ing at gloves, shaking of hands, and touch- 
ing of whips, mingled with such curses at 
straggling dogs and jibbing horses. 

" Quite a stranger, Sir Robert ; and your 
fair daughter here, I vow, a complete ves- 
tal. Is Crow's Nest turned into a nunnery?" 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 199 

said a stiff-throated gentleman in spectacles 
rather leaning to the Whig persuasion, and no 
▼ery cordial friend, in consequence, of Sir So- 
bert, whom, however, he respected as of gen- 
tle blood and an old stock — almost as old as 
his own — ^for proud men do not like a prouder 
race. '^ We saw nothing of you at the race- 
ball; and there was lady Wildfire running 
ererywhere to find this charming young lady. 
Rel Are you growing precise, eh, Sir Ro- 
bert, eh?" 

'^Reasons, Mr. Wildfire, reasons, Mabel 
was not unwilling,'' he chuckled, " to go, you 
may bet a jacobus. Egad, when you find a 
Darcy quarrel with mince-pies and plum-por- 
zidge, and rail at custard, hang him for a 
d — d Trimmer ; we are none of those fellows 
who won't sit down to eat a stolen goose, but 
will nevertheless trot off snuffling a psalm on 
a stolen mare, as Tribuhiion Barebottle does 
in the play. Do you remember what Rabe- 
lais says ? " 

"Now don't quote that naughty book, 



r 



200 ICE BOUND. 

there's a good papa/' said Mabel, laying her 
hand gently on his. 

^^ That's where it is ; this daughter of mine 
won't let me have my own way ; she rules me 
like the Associations did the seven counties. 
Is that old knave Troutbeck here to-day ? " 
he said; abruptly turning with a frown upoii 
his honest face to the stiff-necked friend, who 
had dismounted to tighten his saddle. 
^^ What ? I can't hear what you say with 
your head under that flap." 

" Mr. Troutbeck, I hear, has gone with 
sixty of his tenantry, armed back and breast, 
to meet the Earl of Shaftesbury, who is com- 
ing at the head of four thousand men of the 
London Protestant club to attend Charles 
Stuart at the Oxford parliament, that opens 
to-morrow; pray God we be preserved from 
Popery and bloodshed." 

" And a pretty way to prevent it, to let 
old Tony bring up his clubmen, with their 
cursed blue ribbons and leather lungs, to shout 
down all good men who love God "and the 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 201 

Church of England. And harkee here^ 
Mr. Wadfire ; youVe of a good old family, 
and have suffered as I have for the rights but 
to prevent quarrelUng, pray call the king the 
king, for the future, and not Charles Stuart." 

" And may I also beg of you, Sir Robert 
Darcy/' said the Trimmer, with a starched 
smile, ^^to denominate that true Protestant 
the Earl of Shaftesbury by his full cognomen 
of Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of Shaftes- 
bury?" 

" What I " said Sir Robert Darcy, digging 
his spurs in his horse, and pulling him almost 
on his haunches, just to give vent to his in- 
dignation. " What 1 Anthony Ashley Cooper 
Earl of Shaftesbury and his gracious Majesty 
all in one breath I Out upon it, if I wouldn't 
lay him by the heels, and Oates too, and the 
whole of the crew ! There, there, there, Ma- 
bel, never mind me. Egad, it sends the 
blood to my head, and fills me full of those 
old songs; for what does the old proverb 
say ? ^ He is a fool who cannot be angry.' " 



202 ICE BOUND. 

And he broke out, much to Mr. Wildfire's in- 
dignation, with 

' Farewell, Saj and Seale, and hqj, 
Farewell, Say and Seale, and ho, 
And tiiose sons of Ayman 
Shall hang as high as Haman, 
With the old Anabaptists they came on, 
With a hey trolly blly ho.' 

'He's a fool who cannot be *ngry/" he 
growled again. 

'' But he*s a wise man who will not," said a 
merry voice, aa a horseman rode up and took 
Sir Eobert's hand;, "and there's a prorerb 
clenched. In these times," he said, whisper- 
ing in his friend's ear, ''we want plaisters, 
not blisters; even a brave man should not 
wilfully ofiend his enemies. There's a mutual 
friend here you little expect; let me introduce 
you." 

But before Sir Eobert could clap his merry- 
eyed but prudential friend upon the back, a 
clump of horsemen, rather more soberly 
dressed than the other gallants of the field, 
and some of whom had had their backs turned 
to Sir Robert, broke up as he approached, 



THE UTTLE BLiCK BOX. 203 

and, to the utter astonishment of all, Mr. 
Troutfoeck and his son appeared as the leaders 
of the troop. 

But as these two nonconformist gentlemen 
are likely to play a somewhat important part 
in our story, we will interrupt the scene for a 
moment, even at this critical period, to de- 
aoribe the new actors who have just entered 
abruptly on the stage. 

The elder of the two, who was clad in a 
sombre coat, unadorned by lace, except on 
the cu^, was a morose-looking, sallow man, 
of about fifty, who, disliked by the world, had 
consoled his pride by turning round and hating 
mankind upon strict Galvinistic principles. 
His eyes were hard and cold, his features had 
no life or pliability, and his mouth was drawn 
down by habitual melancholy. In stature he 
was tall and thin, and he stooped slightly, as 
if from long sedentary habits. If report was 
true, Mr. Troutbeck was a dangerous man, 
an enemy of the Government, a member of 
many secret societies ; and his enemies said. 



204 ICE BOUND. 

even of the notorious " Calves* Head Club" — 
a club that, among Tories of this age, had 
acquired as disgraceful a notoriety as the 
noted "Hell-Fire Club" did among quiet 
people of a century later. He was said also to 
be a correspondent of Shaftesbury, a leadfer of 
the disaffected of the county, an attendant at 
secret conventicles, and an applauder even of 
the bloody tenets of the Fifth-Monarchy men. 
To add to the incongruities of his character, 
although in his own country cold, reserved, 
and difficult of access, he was said to be a 
sociable visitor of the London coffee-houses, 
an occasional attendant at court, one who 
knew Algernon Sidney, and attended the 
meetings of the Soyal Society. Sir Robert 
he looked upon as a decaying gentleman, 
hardly worth regard, but for the oldness of 
his family — a claim which his pride acknow- 
ledged, although with some reluctance. 

But grey November and golden June are 
not more dissimilar than this unloving, plotting 
sire and his son, who rode beside him, not on 



THE LITTLE fiLAGE BOX. 205 

that pale horse that made the peasantry call 
his sire Father Death, but on a chestnut 
stallion, full of fire, and curveting in all the 
measured antics of the manige. He was a 
frank-looking, open-browed young man, of 
some five and twenty ; clear-eyed, and with a 
dightly sarcastic smile always playing round 
his mouth, which was yet firm and clamped 
at the comers, matching a full and prominent 
chin. He was rather pale, for the red had 
retreated a little to the centre of his cheek ; 
his crisp brown moustaches were twisted up 
from the lip. He wore no wig ; but his thick 
clustering hair fell in dark masses on to his 
shoulders, almost hiding the plain broad lace- 
folds of the snowy Steenkirk, that contrasted 
with the deep green of his velvet hunting- 
coat. His broad-brimmed hat was ribboned 
with green ; while his high boots, and 
heavy hunting-sword, with its silver hilt, 
hanging from a purple fringed sword-belt, 
gave him more the character of a cavalier than 
a young Whig huntsman. 



206 JOE BOUND. 

As the gentlemen raised their hats, with a 
few short cold greetings and stiff salutes^ a 
keen obseryer might have observed that Mabel 
slightly coloured^ and grew saddenlj anxious 
to disentangle a knot in Black Jack's mane ; 
while the young man's eyes turned towards 
her, and rested there, as if rather by magnetic 
instinct than wilL 

'^ I had heard you were gone to attend this 
meeting at Oxford/' said Mr. Troutbeck to 
Sir Ebbert ; '^ for we coted by the way two 
gentlemen from the courts who asked us the 
nearest way to Crow's Nest; but I heard 
them sayi as they rode off, there was not 
much chance of your not being a Trimmer, 
for they beard that you kept a nonconformist 
chaplain, and had ceased going to the race- 
balls." 

^^ And I just heard," said Sir Eobert, much 
elated by the news, and cutting the air with 
his whip, at the bare thought of turning 
Trimmer, "that you had ridden to join Tony 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 207 

and his 'prentices, to go and shout 'No 
Popery ' with our good king's bastard." 

" We shall ride a troop of sixty," said Trout- 
beck, drawing himself up to his full length ; 
"and join the earl at the cross-road by 
Wllliton ; boot and saddle after dinner, and a 
few Protestant toasts." 

" ' One fool makes many,' that's all I say," 
said Sir Bobert ; '^ and you may take it to 
gnuff if you like, — ^you, or any man. If the 
old days of buff and Cavalier come again, if I 
won't melt down eyery spoon, ay, and my 
lady^s silyer £ui here present; egad, I'll 
pawn my last acre, and cut down my last oak 
too, for the good old cause. And though I 
haven't three hundred men at my back, as I 
once had, before Whiggery ate into my land, 
I can still mount half a dozen ; and half a 
dozen true men can make twenty Boundheads 
—don't take offence — ^tum tail ; for blood 
and heart is not lost with fields and farms, no, 
nor bought with them; and your paltry 



208 ICE BOUND. 

Grecian pillars, what are they to an old 
avenue that no man can buy?'* 

" I don't come here to quarrel,'' said Mr. 
Troutbeck, his lips whitening with rage ; for 
a dozen Tory gentlemen were laughing round 
him, to hear what they called '^ Sir Robert's 
ballyragging the old mummy of a Whig;" 
" but my door can be found at any time by 
any friend of yours." 

'^ A challenge, a challenge I " roared a 
dozen squires' voices. There was no know- 
ing what might have happened, for the two 
parties were beginning to knot and pair, when 
a loud blast of a horn was heard; the 
next moment, half a mile distant, a stag of 
ten was seen for a moment crashing through 
a low bushy copse, and the next breaking out 
across the champaign country beyond, with a 
few of the foremost hounds hard at his 
heels. In an instant the disputants forgot 
their feud — forgot king, crown, covenant, 
and Whiggery — and galloped off like 
mounted demoniacs in the direction of the 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 209 

yelps, that came by starts upon the wind. Not 
the last among them was Sir Robert; re- 
stored in a moment to perfect serenity and 
happiness, leaving Mabel, if she could not 
reach his side — ^which she generally did — to 
follow, guarded by Boger, whose watchful 
eye never lost sight of her for a moment; 
although when he had heard Sir Robert at 
words with the "old Whig," he had, it 
must be confessed, pushed into the ring to 
strike a blow again beside his old master 
if the need came. 

Conspicuous in the flight was the horse- 
dealer, driving his steed at extravagant 
leaps in order to show its mettle and en- 
hance its price, although with great proba- 
bility of breaking its neck before he achieved 
a sale. "The pace is too fast for music," 
old Boger said, when he saw Mabel's cheek 
glow with excitement as she cleared a 
hedge like a swallow, and joined him in 
the charge. Behind them old Troutbeck 
and a few of the staider men could be 

VOL. II. P 



r 



210 ICE BOUND. 

seen following at a leisurely pace, rather 
like spectators than abettors of the sport 
Above all sounded Sir Robertas horn, cheer^ 
ing on the dogs, and urging them to the 
attack with all the energy of the old sol* 
dier. 

Young Troutbeck rode moodily beside his 
father, his laced cocked-hat drawn over his 
eyes, appearing, from frequent whispers, to be 
restrained from joining in the chase ; ignorant 
that fate destined him, however unexpectedly, 
an important share in this day's achieve* 
ment. The stag, now cut off from escape in 
the direction of the Troutbeck woods, "took 
to soil,'' as hunters call it, in a small stream 
which wound amid the sloping meadows 
some six miles distant The Troutbeck 
party, striking across the country, to be in^ 
if possible, at the death without fatiguing 
their horses by the chase — ^for they had 
other work on hand — were among the first 
who arrived at the water, where the stag 
of force, with sweeping antlers, of ten tines 



THE UTILE BLACK fiOX. 211 

at least, was standing at bay, eyeing the 
farioos and baffled dogs that lined the river- 
bank. 

In an instant the Troutbecks, and a few 
stragglers who had now joined them, leapt 
from their horses, many of them, especially 
one fat justice, at the great risk of never 
mounting again ; for getting off a horse, if 
you are at all of the Falstaff build, is some- 
thing like abdication, a difficult thing to re- 
tract. 

''Make in at him," cried half a dozen 
voices; but no one seemed inclined to be 
either drowned or gored. 

"I care not a straw for a stag on dry 
land," said the horse-dealer, who had come 
to display his horse, not his courage ; '' but 
I can't abide them cattle on terra in- 
jirmerJ^ 

"What's this, what's this — a camp-meet- 
ing?" said Sir Robert, with a sneer, as he 
burst into the ring, having been delayed by a 
stirrup-leather breaking, and saw their check- 

p2 



r 



212 ICE BOUHB. 

mated position. ''Swim in, prick him out 
with your sword, and neyer mind the old 
woman's saying, 

* li thon be hurt with horn of hart, it brings thee to thy 

bier; 
Bnt barber's hand will boar's hurt heal, therefore thou 
need'st not fear.' 

A man who has got four inches of fat on his 
brisket can't be hurt very much by a prog with 
a buck's horn. Here goes, man I" and Sir 
Robert was actually tugging at his immense 
jack-boots in order to wade into the stream 
with less impediment to free action, when the 
deer, with a furious splash, scramble, and 
bound, leapt upon the bank, escaped a dozen 
blows of hunting-swords made at it, gored 
one dog, trampled another, and galloped off 
not a hair the worse, dripping as it went, and 
tossing its broad antlers as if in scornful de- 
light at its triumph. 

This time young Troutbeck was something 
more than a spectator. Stung by Sir Bobert's 
taunts, which Mabel had heard — ^for she had 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 213 

by this time joined the baffled party — and 
vexed by a fall which he received from his 
foot slipping on the moist clay of the bank 
just as he slashed at the fierce and dangerous 
prey, he had even been foolish enough to be 
offended at the horse-dealer, who had laughed 
and whispered to a firiend, as if implying that 
the &11 was well-timed. But the horse-dealer, 
being of a cold temper, and essentially prudent, 
stammered out a hasty apology, and slunk off 
for fear of any further quarrel. In a moment 
the young horseman^s brain was fired with 
the thought of a disgrace with which he now 
imagined himself, in the fumes of his pride, 
to be for ever tainted. In a moment, with 
his untired horse, he had distanced Sir 
Robert, and was close upon the heels of the 
stag, and some distance before the huntsman. 
Three dogs, staunch and swifb, had already 
" set him up " at the foot of a withered fir 
that, barked and bleached, stood like a skele- 
ton at the entrance of a glassy glade. Trout- 
beck tried at first to gallop in roundly, but 



( 



214 ICE BOUND. 

was afraid of hurting the hounds that were 
trying to get at his throat. A noble spec- 
tacle of courage under adversity was that 
royal stag^ his dark dun hair steaming, his 
eye glaring, his foot spuming the turf, as he 
stood beneath that withered tree, with his 
face firm set against a world of foes, hope cut 
off, yet still heart-whole and undaunted, while 
round him, like so many creditors round a 
debtor in sanctuary, barked the hounds. One 
tawny-muzzled dog, of more than usual 
courage, lay with its nose between its paws 
waiting for an opportunity ; the rest yelped, 
howled, and raved, while keeping at a prudent 
distance from the sweep of those terrible 
antlers, already tipped here and there with 
crimson. 

In a moment the deer broke through the 
dogs, and making at Troutbeck, tore his 
horse's side close to his thigh. This escape 
made the hunter more wary, desperate as he 
was; for he heard the hunt rapidly approaching, 
with Sir Robert at their head, fretting at 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 215 

being oatridden by a " whiniDg young Whig/' 
Finn and of ready apprehension, the young 
huntsman leapt from his wounded horse, tied 
him by the bridle to a neighbouring tree; 
then cheering the dogs to a rush, so as for a 
moment to draw the deer from the pine-trunk 
that protected him, he leapt in and ham- 
strung the buck with a single sweep of his heavy 
hunting-sword, then leaping on his back cut 
his throat with a second blow from a hand as 
sure as it was quick. 

When the first riders came up, and Sir 
Bobert had sounded the mort, or death- 
signaly they found Troutbeck bestriding the 
fallen deer that still quivered with life. His 
hat had fallen off, and his hair blew over his 
eyes. One hand held the red hunting-knife, 
while the other, dripping with blood, held the 
antlers in its firm grasp. The Whig party 
were loud in exultation at the bravery of their 
young hero ; the Tories loud in depreciation 
of his rashness at the hazard. Some shouted 
applause and waved their hats ; others whipped 



216 ICEBOUND. 

off the hounds and shrugged their shoulders. 
Sir Robert only wound his horn to summon 
stragglers, and said nothing. 

"Wasn't it bravely done?" said Mabel, 
putting her hand on his shoulder, as her 
father drew somewhat back from the exulting 
erowd, that pressed to shake hands and con- 
gratulate the young huntsman, who was 
examining his horse's side with great anxiety. 

" Pretty well for a Whig," said Sir Robert 
testily, turning away his head ; " but, 'zooks, 
the thing's done every day. 

' We're not the only person durst 
Attempt this province, or the first.' 

Don't go shouting in that way, Boger, as if 
you'd thefalling-sickness. Haven't you seen me 
do this very thing a score of times ; besides, 
didn't Swapem tell us the young psalm-singer 
slipped down just now at the brook to escape 
goring. ' All's well that ends well,' is true 
enough ; but * Well begun, is half done,' is 
truer still. I say the lad's no mettle, and 
hasn't ridden to-day as a gentleman should ; 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 217 

almking about like a schoolboy at his old 
father's back, who's as black-hearted an old 
Puritan as ever sat on the bench." 
. "Tou liel" said a low stem voice behind 
them. It was Troutbeck himself. '^ It is not 
for this slander alone that I demand satisfac- 
tion/' said Mr. Troutbeck, leaping from his 
horse, and calmly drawing his sword, '^but 
for a growing Tory insolence, that I see 
nothing but bloodletting can cure." 

'^ It diall never be said that a Darcy was 
slow at that game," said Sir Robert, giving 
his horse to Boger, and bidding him ride 
home with Mabel, who neither screamed nor 
swooned, but dung to her father's arm, and 
in a low voice poured passionate entreaties 
into his ears. 

" There, there, girl ! Now, for God's sake 
don't disgrace me. I know you would be an 
orphan; but still I cannot let my name be 
stained for twenty times worse than that; 
and there's your uncle at Paris, though he's an 
old man. Mr. Troutbeck, I'm at your dis- 



218 ICE BOUND. 

posd. We need scarcely measure swords; 
we're too old for such fencing-school tricks. 
The sun is in neither's favour, and we're both 
in boots — ^a plague on 'eili. Boom, gentle- 
men, room!'' 

By this time the whole hunt were around 
them, wrangling, encouraging. " There's 
always been bad blood between them, and 
there was with their fathers before them," 
said' one. ^'A cold-blooded upstart," said 
the Tories; "a proud old ribald," said the 
Whigs. 

"/ claim the privilege of meeting Sir 
Robert Darcy," said young Troutbeck, put- 
ting his hand on the shining blade of his 
father's sword ; " the insult was to me." 

" I have already told Sir Robert," said his 
father sternly, " that I draw my sword to 
avenge twenty years of foul-mouthed inso- 
lence, and not the mere petulance of a baffled 
huntsman." 

" D'ye hear that ? " said Sir Robert, beating 
the ground with his foot. "Adzooks, and 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 219 

haven't I been outwitted of my land^ gentle- 
men, acre after acre, by this old plotting fox 
— ^my patrimony torn from me by crafty 
deeds?'' 

" Lead the lady away, my son," said Mr. 
Troutbeck. "This is no sight for woman's eyes; 
and we may not both go hence alive. There 
shall be at least one enemy of liberty less on 
the earth to-night, if God nerve this arm." 

" Don't let him touch her," said Sir Robert 
furiously. " A Roundhead shall never come 
near a daughter of mine. Roger, take home 
my daughter. Mabel, God's blessing on 
thee!" 

Before she could reply, the duel had begun. 
Mr. Troutbeck, contrary to expectation, fought 
impetuously ; and Sir Robert coolly, con- 
temptuously parrying, with careless ease, a 
succession of forious and hasty lunges, 
scarcely seeming to be willing to risk an 
attack on a thinner and more active man till 
he was in some degree wearied out. 

The audience grew red-faced with shouting 



220 ICE BOUND. 

applause as Whig or Tory effected a thrust or 
parry of unusual dexterity. On a sudden Sir 
Bobert assumed the aggressive, put in three 
swift thrusts, and then, receiving a slight 
flesh wound in driving off his enemy's sword, 
passed his blade through the fleshy part of 
his adversar/s shoulder, who, staggering back, 
stumbled against a molehill, and fell heavily 
to the ground, amidst roars of approval from 
Sir Kobert's Tory friends. 

"My old trick, my old trick," said Sir 
Kobert. "I knew I should have him. A 
Whig is never prepared for a new move ; and 
that last stoccado of his was weakly put in." 
As the crowd of friends were gathering round 
the fallen man to see if he was able to renew 
the combat, a richly-dressed horseman came 
up puffing and blowing, his arms working, and 
his whole bearing full of full-blown bustle and 
importance; while a thin, sallow, ferret-faced 
man rode on a small pony close at his side, 
with a blue bag swollen with papers dangling 
like panniers on either side. 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 221 

'' Quite againrt the law, gentlemen/' said 
the country justice; for such was the new 
arriyal. 

''3rd Elizabeth, cap. 36/' whispered the 
clerk. 

'' 3rd and 4th ElizabeUi, cap. 56, is against 
you, gentlemen,'' said the justice courageously ; 
'* and I must beg you to disperse. Sir Bobert, 
I am astonished to see a gentleman of your 
years. Mr. Troutbeck, a person of your 
gravity — ^you surprise me. Do not compel 
me, do not accelerate me, drs, into reading 
the Kiot Act." 

" 3rd and 4th James I." 

" Eh, what ? yes, 3rd and 4th James I., 
I am informed—" 

"And 2nd Car. I." 

" And 2nd Car. I. prohibit all riotous 
assemblies, and make all such gatherings 
treasonable. Don't drive me, gentlemen, to 
sign a mittimus." 

" There's no occasion for statute-law," said 
Mr. Troutbeck, as the crowd opened and 



222 ICE BOUND. 

showed him pale and with his arm bound up ; 
"nor any other exertion of arbitrary and 
tyrannical power. I cannot lift my sword 
Again to-day ; but there'll come a time — 
there'll come a time." And so saying, he 
rose, assisted by his son, mounted his horse, 
and rode slowly in the direction of Troutbeck. 
" One less for old Tony's procession," said 
Sir Kobert, bursting into HudibrcLS : — 

'* ^ Alas, what perils do environ 

The man that meddles with cold iron.* 

But he drew it on himself, and was never a 
good neighbour. I'm sorry, though, that I 
decried the young fellow's stroke ; for 'twas 
well done : but never mind. Now, Eoger, 
join in the chorus: — 

^ A hound and a hawk no longer 
Shall be tokens of disaffection ; 
A cock-fight shall cease 
To be breach of the peace, 
And a horse-race an insurrection.* " 

"Allow me to congratulate you. Sir Robert," 
cried a horseman, advancing from the crowd, 
"on your success over the old Whig, as I 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 223 

hear he is. I have seen something of sword- 
play, but never saw a thrust in tierce better 
put in. I am the bearer of a message from 
his grace the Duke of York; I and my 
companion here, Colonel Claverhouse, having 
sought you at Crow's Nest, found you were 
out hunting, and came on hither. I am Mr. 
Churchill, of the Second Life Guards. Allow 
me to introduce to you Colonel Claverhouse, 
just arrived from putting down disturbances 
in Scotland ; he is dying to be acquainted 
with so well known and gallant an officer as 
Sir Kobert Darcy." 



224 



CHAPTER III. 

THE TWO AMBASSADORS. 

" Colonel Clayerhouse,'* said his compan- 
ion, bowing coldly, and keeping his stern un- 
moving eye fixed on Sir Eobert, " is proud 
of meeting one who has bled for that good 
cause which seems now again endangered." 

" Adzooks, gentlemen both," said Sir 
Eobert, flinging abroad both his hands at once, 
"no court congSsmth an old trooper, who can 
only beg you to come and take a poor Cava- 
lier's refreshment at his broken-down house 
of Crow's Nest. Egad, though, I wish Mabel 
was here. Did you meet a lady and a groom, 
gentlemen, as you skirted Kavenhill woods? " 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 225 

"We did, indeed," said Churchill, kissing 
his hand to an imaginary goddess ; "beautiful 
as Diana, and queenly as Hippolyta. My 
friend here, who has a poetical vein, Sir 
Robert—" 

"la poetical vein !" scowled Claverhouse, 
but did not speak. 

" Swore," said Churchill, quite undaunted, 
" that the flowers sprang up from the foot- 
prints of her horse, while the sunbeams seemed 
to run before her like heralds of her coming." 

" Pretty court language, but thrown away 
on a poor squire's daughter, gentlemen. Tour 
news from his Grace." 

Breaking abruptly into this conversation, 
Claverhouse, in a few soldier-like words, in- 
formed Sir Eobert that his Grace the Duke of 
York being alarmed, not for his own sake, 
but for his Majesty's, at the rebellious pro- 
cession of the Green Eibbon and other Protes- 
tant clubs, headed by Shaftesbury and the 
heads of the Whig party, had made an effort 
to muster all the Tory gentlemen of Oxford- 

VOL. 11. Q 



226 IG£ BOUHD^ 

shire wild were of approved lOjiltj tfnd stanch 
adherents to Church and kmg,- and who were 
begged, to attend the opening of the parliar 
ment with as many blue-^at men and tenants 
as they could muster, armed back and breast, 
and carrying (listols in th^ir hoUters. ^^ The 
lands of Crow's Nest we find, by an oldr^turnf 
of the troubles^ furnish sixty horse ? " 

'^ They did," said Sir Robert with a sigh. 
'^But now, thanks to that Whig scoundrel 
I have just pinked, my own body-servants 
are all I can mount.'^ 

"You're steel of the true tiemper rfter all, 
I see," said Claverhouse, with a cold smile. 
*! But to be frink with you, Sir Eobert, I 
expected a far diffei*ent response ; for I heard 
you were but little better than a Trimmer, 
and even kept a Puritan chapldin.*' 

" So I do," said Sir Eobert, wilii a wince ; 
" it's more frdm charity, though, tiian choice. 
But, egad, I'ke^phim down, and mdke him 
drink loyal — at least — that is — ^he's a good 
sort of man." 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 227 

^^ Try him with the oath of allegiance, *\ 
said Clayerhouse ; ^' that is the best touchstone 
in these times ; and then twist — ^" 

"My friend Claverhouse," said Churchill, 
laughing, "Js exceedingly anxious to intro- 
duce several new systems of torture into 
England ; he is determined, if the boots do 
not become soon popular with English judges, 
to join Eirk at Tangiers, and devote the rest 
of his life to exterminating the Moors.^' 

"Churchill, you know the limits of my 
patience ; so keep your wit for La Belle Ha- 
milton or the blushing Bagot. If my feeling 
of duty seems to you cruel or ascetic, that is 
between me and my God. I have, at least, not 
devoted my life to the study of dress-wigs^ 
Martial's gloves, ragouts j or chatelains ; it is oif 
the fidelity of such gentlemen as Sir Robert 
Darcy the de jure succession may depend/* ' 

" Now, don't be angry, Claverhouse," said 
Churchill. "I yield to no one in a sense of 
a soldier's duty; but we may surely some- 
times stand at ea,se. You're always seeing 

q2 



228 ICE BOUND. 

great political consequences in Bab May's 
treading on the tail of the king's spaniel, or 
in Chaffinch^'s combing his flaxen wig.'' 

" And you," said Claverhouse, " must 
have earthquakes or volcanoes, sieges or 
battle, or you think the world standing 
still." 

But as during this short conversation, 
which was carried on in a low hot whisper. 
Sir Eobert was attentively observing the two 
messengers of the court, we may as well 
briefly give the result of his observation. 

Churchill, the younger of the two, may 
perhaps be better known to our readers under 
his more celebrated name of Marlborough. 
His features were bold, his eye keen, and his 
presence commanding ; yet report deemed 
him at this time a mere voluptuary of the 
court, remarkable even now for parsimony, 
and tarnished by several acts of meanness. 
He was dressed in the height of fashion, and 
wore his cocked hat pinned up with a large 
crimson rosette. His companion, a few years 



THE LITTLE fiLAGK BOX. 229 

later immortalized as Dundee, was of a pale 
complexion ; his features were of great beauty 
and delicacy ; his mouth small but firm ; his 
face almost Grecian in the perfection of its 
ovaL He wore no scented wig like his com- 
panion, but his own dark brown hair fell flowing 
to his shoulder; a short musketoon hung at 
his saddle-bow, and his saddle was high-peaked, 
and of the military fashion. His eyes, the 
worst part of his face, were cold and melan- 
choly, and his mouth was sad and sarcastic. 
A keener observer than Sir Robert might 
have shuddered to see a man who, in the 
stem asceticism of his ambition, would go 
through the world pitiless and cruel, though 
he had to wade in blood up to the lips. 

" Beautiful excrescence of earth, intended 
by nature to pay debts ! " said Churchill, look- 
ing up at the trees of the avenue through 
which they were now riding. 

" Ah, ah — very well, sir, very well I '* said 
Sir Eobert, giving him a tremendous thump 



230 ' ICE BOUND. 

on the back, that set him coughing, and drove 
the powder in a cloud out of h^ wig. 

." Killigrew is witty,*' said Claverhouse, 
with a sneer, "though he does play the 
buffoon; but yet the buffoon is as good, I 
think, as the fop." 

"Tou're too bitter," said Churchill, in a 
whisper; "but, egad, that old gentleman's 
clap on the back was my best punishment for 
stealing the joke.'* • : 

"An excellent good spot for defence, if 
the Whigs ever rise," said Claverhouse, his 
eye kindling as he rose in his stirrups, and 
pointed to the old hall in the distance between 
the trees. " A double ravelin there, with a 
traverse or high breastwork y — ^a redoubt 
would stand well on that knoll where the 
three beech-trees are, though the pass would 
be shallow — ^" 

" A true young soldier," said Sir Robert, 
eyeing him from top to toe with admiration. 
" Crow's Nest had the honour, sir, of being 
for six months an outpost of the Oxford gar- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 231 

rison. Tes I in that time we repulsed Ho less 
than five attacks of Haselrig's men with onlj 
forty Babe-eaters and ten musketeers of 
Moyle*s brigade. Once they fired the barn 
with a grenade, and another time put a petard 
to the kitchen door, and blew ii in : but we 
soon rallied, and played upon them from the 
upper windows with pistols, and with cul- 
verms from the top of the clock-tower roof, 
for Meldrum had sworn to bring me into 
London alive or dead. But it's always the 
same — one. Cavalier, to three Roundheads. 
' He who fears death lives not ;' as Hudibras 
says— 

* Their words 
Were sharp and trenchant, not their swords.* 

So when they sent in the trumpet, they found 
me sitting on a powder-cask in the hall, apd 
holding a black^ flag that we had carried . off 
in a sortie ; a broken drum near me was frdl of 
white cockades for night attacks, and a smok- 
ing musket was leaning against my< barrel. 
^ Base slubberdegallion,' I said, ^go back to thy 



233 ICE BOUND. 

masterSi and tell them that well stew all our 
buff coats for soup before we surrender.' 
And| egad, it was all a trick ; for that night 
they broke up, and this hou3e you see here 
was never taken after all." 

^* We shall never hear the last of this," 
whispered Churchill, who had been for some 
time betraying marks of uncontrollable ennui^ 
fingering guitar tunes on his scabbard, hum- 
ming French airs, and otherwise diverting 
himself. 

" A brave man's story can only be dull to 
the thoughtless," said Claverhouse between 
his teeth, as they rode into the courtyard. 

"No apologies, gentlemen — no apologies; 
I see you whispering together. The chine of 
beefs ready, and the claret is longing to see 
the daylight. An old soldier cannot allow 
two young troopers to boot and saddle with- 
out spilling some sack or a little burnt wine. 
^ No pottage is good without bacon,' the 
proverb says; and I say, a fig for a meal 
without wine. And here's my daughter, come 



^ 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 238 

to bless God her father's got off sc!ot-free; 
she ifill add her wishes to mine to detain 
you; unless times are altered, young sol- 
diers do not often refuse requests from such 
pretty mouths." 

Of the gallant compliments paid to Mabel; 
of her modest pleasure at the homage of the 
gay Churchill and the cold Claverhouse, 
heightened by her joy at her father's escape, 
which she had long ago known, for she left 
Soger to watch the result; and of the old 
knight's campaigning stories — we will say 
nothing. Suffice it, that after a hasty colla- 
tion the two gentlemen mounted their horses, 
with the understanding that Sir Eobert and 
his four men would be ready, armed, at the 
park gate at ten o'clock of the morrow, pre- 
pared to fall into the king's train as he passed 
on his way to Oxford. 

" Gallant gentlemen both," said Sir Eobert, 
as they rode off. "That proud lad is the 
riper man ; yet the gayer fellow is no worse 
soldier. But it will be a busy evening with 



234 lOE BOUND. 

me, girl ; for I must look up my best back- 
and-breast piece, with the Damascene gorget 
I wore at Edgehill; and Eoger must brush 
up the crimson housings with the gold-lace 
fringe; for I must turn out as a Tory gentle- 
man and one of an old family should do, to 
guard his: king from a. pack of noisy rebels, 
wha would set up another Commonwealth if 
Shaftesbury were only another Cromwell." 

With these words the old knight hurried 
bff to execute a series of multifarious duties ; 
namely, to see his dogs fed, his hawks ditto, 
his armour cleaned, his pistols furbished, and 
his saddle-cloth brushed ; not forgetting, how- 
ever, amid all his occupations, to inquire for 
Master Wilson, who had not attended as usual 
to say grace when dinner was served up in 
the hall; luckily, perhaps, for him, as the 
toasts were chiefly " Down with Tony," and 
** A strong rope instead of a green ribbon." 

Mabel's first impulse on returning home 
was to inquire for her tutor. The old house- 
keeper, Mrs. Rachel, supposed he was up poring 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 235 

over those everlasting books. Pretliy Betty 
tossed her head^ and said he was moping^ she 
supposed^ as usual^ up in his room in the clock- 
tower. Roger was jsent to call him. No one 
answered. Mabel grew anxious, and tripped 
up in search of the indefatigable student. 
Tremor cordis was upon her, she did not 
know why. She felt a strange vague appre- 
hension, all the more terrible from its causeless* 
ness. A sense of approaching evil hung over 
her. She stood still a moment at the foot 
of the worn brick Iteps leading up to Uie 
ofken-visited room ; she could hear many 
sounds— the swallows chattering under the 
eaves, the great iron pulsation of the clock 
above, the distant noises in the court, her 
father's voice whistling and cheering his 
hawks, and even the muffled throbbing of her 
own heart. The sunset-light fell red and soft 
upon the whitewashed wall, still' dented here 
and there by the marks' of Puritan bullets. 
She listened. There was no isound — not even 
.the leaf of a book turning, a pen scratching, or 



/^ 



236 ICE BOUND. 

a foot shuffling on the matted floor. Should 
she call her father? — ^there might have been 
murder. 

Half ashamed of her fears, and remember- 
ing that she was a soldier's daughter, Mabel 
ran upstairs. The door was ajar : should she 
push it open ? It creaked bodingly ; the 
wind moaned sadly and desolately through 
the keyhole. She entered; the room was 
empty. The light cane-backed chair stood at 
the same place, with the crutch-headed cane 
leaning against it; tht old quarto Horace 
still lay open at the ode the two had read that 
morning; some dried wild flowers lay on a 
shelf; rows of folios basked on the floor, 
leaning against each other for support, some 
marked for reference. Mabel could not help 
looking behind the arras, as it waved, appa- 
rently without wind, to see if any one were con- 
cealed behind its tawny screen. She opened 
a small bureau ; it was empty. Mabel was 
about to leave the room, to inform her father 
jpf Mr. Wilson's strange disappearance, when 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 237 

a volume of Calvin that lay on the table 
arrested her attention, for a strip of paper 
projected from between the covers. She drew 
it out. It contained only these words, evi- 
dently the last farewell of the fugitive : — 

"My dear Child and beloved Pupil — 
Bemardus Viscontinus doth say that Hyperi- 
con, or St. John's-wort, gathered on Friday in 
the hour of Jupiter, when it comes to its effec- 
tual operation — that is to say, about the first 
full moon in July — ^suspended or borne about, 
or hung at the neck, mightily helps digestion, 
cheers the heart, nourishes the brain, and 
drives off all fantastical spirits. Wear it, 
then. Farewell on earth.'' 

When Sir Robert heard of the flight, he 
ordered Boger to saddle Black Jack, and 
make inquiries for twenty miles round. 
Boger insisted on searching the ponds, be- 
cause, he said, " Master Wilson was melan- 
cholious.'' The housekeeper always thought 
it would come to that ; for he had lately 
refused her succory pottage, and taken to 



288 icBBorap., 

extreme fastings. Betty had always said he 
was n witch, and she was sore of it; for she 
had seen^ three di^s running, a black mouse 
run round his room, while she was sweepmg it, 
and he bade her not haarmthe little creature* 
And hadn't she seen at Da^rentry the Kev. 
Mfi — — drive a devil out of a young man 
with the falling sickness,, who afterwards con-* 
fessed he had five familiars visit him in the 
shape of dun chickens ? 

Sir £obert was up next morning before 
eock-crow ; the busy rooks were only just 
awaking one by one, and croaking drow- 
sily here and there, high up in the mist of a 
summer morning. The hawks whistled from 
their perches when they heard his voice^ shook 
their wings and fluttered ; the dogs rattled 
in and out of tbieir kennels, and the horses 
neighed greetingly from the. stables ; while the 
red-haired stable-^boy had to be squeezed into 
a tight buff jacket, made for Sir Robert when 
he was at Westminster School ; the gardener 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 239 

had to hide his spindle-shanks in enor*' 
mous jack-boots, with broad flaps of stirrups 
leather. 

It wa&ted about ail hour of the time .of 
meeting^ and terrible was the amount of work 
still to be done. Roger could only find two 
odd spurs; the gardener's stirrup-leather 
had broken ; and Sit Robert had lost one 
of his Edgehill pistols. At this crisis, as 
Mabel was tying on her father's crimson scarf, 
as trail as his fuming, smging, and perpetual 
motion would allow her, a horn was heard 
sounding three times at the extreme end of 
the avenue. Gradually the sound came 
nearer ; the next moment « gay carriage- 
and-six, with outriders, and running footmen 
carrying the usual silver sticks of office, drove 
rapidly up to the gate. 

"It^s his Majesty, by St. Peter!" said 
Sir Robert, obiserving the royal arms on the 
panels, and hastened to the hall door to 
receive his illustrious visitor. Can that be 
the king that steps out, shakes his wig into 



240 ICEBOUND; 

order^ looks at himself in a small pocket 
glasSy then bows three times till his wig 
touches the doorsteps ; while the servants 
laugh and chatter^ and the coachman bends 
from his box to hear what he says? The 
new visitor, king or no king, takes no 
notice of Sir Robert, but anxiously superin- 
tends the unpacking of several small valises 
and chests, crying out various directions in a 
shrill important voice. 

" Antoine, ser, prenez garde, canaille ! Zat 
sauce sail be ruined if zu zall disteerb heem. 
Jacques — James— fripon, break zat flagon, 
and it vill bring you to the ^chafaud — ^vat you 
Anglais call gibbet/' 

" 'Zdoks, whafs all this? Do you take 
my house for an inn ?'' said Sir Robert. 

" Sare," said the Frenchman, putting on a 
conical cap of white linen, shrugging his 
shoulders, and thrusting down his hands deep 
in his pockets, " I am Monsieur Ortolan, 
cuisinier franqais, zat is, French cook to his 
majesty ; and I am come to prepare a small 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 241 

Collation for his majesty, who will be here 
tout de suite. (Yieuz Mte Anglais I)'V 

''There, there, he says something more« 
Bun for Mabel, Roger ; it's something about 
the king and his relation." 

"Don't be flustered, your worship," said 
one of the running footmen, leaning com- 
placently on his stick, and whispering to Sir 
Bobert with a side-glance at Monsieur Orto- 
lan, who was unpacking a case of silver 
stewpans, polished like mirrors, and of a 
dozen different sizes ; " it's only the way of 
them furriners. His Majesty is going to lun-^ 
cheon here on his road to Oxford — ^that's alL'' 

The haU was already strewed with chafing- 
dishes, bags of charcoal, cases of essences, 
stewpans, trussed fowls, and various long- 
necked bottles of propitious appearance* In 
five minutes Monsieur Ortolan was attired in 
a white dress, and, with his case of ^ons and 
knives by his side, was absorbed in the manu&e* 
ture of various fricassees of delicious odour, 
tioung everything with a stop-watch, taking 

VOL. n. E 



24t r ■■ ICEBOUND*^ 

snuff with an air of great nonchalance^ and* 
occasionally looking at the smoky 'walls and* 
ceiling with an insolent shrng of affeeted pity, 

'^Lor^ a massy on his messes i'^ sidd the 
cook, indignant at being ezpdled from her 
own donunions; ^'if he only knew how to 
cook a good honest joint T' 

^^ If I <san cook ze cotdette, if I can cook 
ze soupe N^politaine, — mon Dien^^if I could 
make ze dying man eat I Antoine, apportes^ 
moi ze poivre. Le vieox soldat, qu'U est en 
colore! Pah! ah, ah, coquin, ahi I will 
teach him to respect his majesty's officer de 
cmsine." 

^^ What does the wizened old fellow say, 
Mabel?" said Sir Robert, looking at him with 
mingled curiosity and wonder.' ^^I^seehis^ 
jaw going like an ape's with the ague." 

^^Flait-il, mademoiselle,: que yoos Stes 
charmante. Qu'est-ce qu*il: dit^. ce vieox 
monsieur-Ik ? II est farouche comme toos^ les 
diables, n'est-ce pas?'' 

Acting as prudent interpreter- between her 



THE LITTLE BLACt BOX. ^4S 

father and Monsieur Ortolan^ Mabel sbon dis« 
covered that he h$d been sent forward, 
according to the king's usual custom wh6t^ 
Ms visits' were sudden and unexpected/ to 
save Sir Eobert any annoyance to preparef 
a hot luncheon/ in order that he might' rbsif 
before his public entrance into Oxford, and 
await a strong egcort of Life Guards, under 
Colonel Claverhouse, who was to join him at 
Crow's Nest; the attitude of the mob that 
swarmed the road being unusually threatening 
and'alarnnng. 

Mabel ran to put on her silver-lace goWn/ 
and begged her father to resume his black 
velvet coat and his— 

" No, no, girl," said he ; " proud as I atn' 
of receiving his Majesty this day undet my 
roof, I will' recdve him as a soldier^ and not 
as a courtier; egad, if I don't feel as gay as 
a h^wk that's just whiistled off the fi^t:" And 
he began j much to Monsieur Ortolan^s amuse-' 
ment,' to shout, "The king shall- enjojr'hiist 
own againr^ 

r2 



244 ICE BOUND. 

" Only look at them messes, Sir Robert,** 
whispered Soger ; ^* they ain't fit for a dog to 
heat/' 

^^ They turns my stomach/' said the house^ 
keeper, who had been stalking about with 
upturned nose and folded arms. 

^^An Englishman would be ashamed of 
hisself/' said Soger, ^^ for spoiling good beef 
in that heathenish — I call it heathenish — 
way. Lord, Sir Robert, do you remember 
how we cooked that horse-steak on a ramrod 
after Edgehill; and how it was done to a 
turn?" 

There is no knowing what series of cam- 
paigning stories this might have led to, had 
not at that moment a second horn been heard, 
and the next instant two coaches, attended 
by a few outriders, dashed up the arenue, and 
drew up at the door. 

The door of a heavy gilded coach flew 
open, and with a hearty laugh the merry 
monarch stepped forth, depositing a long-eared 
spaniel upon the ground, giving it lui affec- 



THE LITTLE BLkdK BOX, 24^ 

iionate ^ick with his royal foot ; he took off 
his bat) as Sir Robert sank upon one knee, 
and welcomed him to " an old Cavalier soldier ; 
poor house of Crow's Nest/' Who but 
knew the swarthy deiep-lined face, full lip 
md mouth, heary eyelids, dark upturned 
moustache, and black periwig of Charles, the 
worthless good-humoured hon-vivant ? Hd 
was now dressed in deep-blue satin, looped back 
at the cuffs to show the full ruffles at his wrist. 
Round his neck was a cravat with long end! 
of the richest Flanders lace. He wore th* 
blue ribbon of the Garter, and the George, set 
with diamonds, hung under his left arm. His 
stockings were of the finest pearl-coloured 
silk, and his shoe-buckles glittered with crys- 
tals. Behind him came Arlington, with th« 
black patch saddling his nose that Eilligrew 
so often laughed at, produced originally by a 
pistol wound received during the civil wars; his 
uncurled li^t wig falling on his shoulders ; he 
was remarkable for a certain stiffness of manner 
that made him the butt of the gayer part of 



846 ICEBOUWD* 

the court. Thep armrin-«rm walked the Eail 
of .Rochester .^nd Sidney Godolphin — the 
forxni^r not the licentious wit, but the son ,of 
%]^0 great Lord Clarendon-^ his rhandsome 
piquant features Qpntrasted singularly with 
Oqdolpliin's double ^hin, high broad forehead^ 
and massive featul*ei^, always bland and calm, 
and ever attuned.to that courtly smile that had 
raised its master from a page to the Treasury 
bench. Cautious and .calm, he offended no 
party ; clear-headed and incorruptible, vhe 
was equally useful to all. "Sidney Godol- 
phin,'' said Charles, " is neyer in the way nor 
out of the way.'* Prudent and cool, -he de- 
tested factious men, and was a Conservative 
from very necessity of temperament.; grave 
and reserved, he might have passed for a 
bishop, ^ad it not been known that all his 
spare moments were spent in horscnracing and 
cock-fighting. 

His friend Hyde, quick and penetrating^ 
a fervent Tory and experienced statesman 
of the Cavalier school, might have made an 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. ^ 247 

excelienfe>jMime*mini8ter but for his: arrogance 
and violence of temper. His consistencj, 
however, )in suoh a corrupt age had made 
even Hyde seem respectable. 
. : Last ;of naUL his head bemt as if absorbed in 
meditatioof came a maa that, mentally, far tran- 
scended either the king or his two companions. 
This was Sunderland, the secretary of state, 
the wiliest diplomatist of that abandoned age, 
when statesmen were without (principle and 
women without virtue— cold-hearted, keea- 
eyed, restless, insatiable, hireling of France, a 
lukewarm republican in theory, a lukewarm 
royaUst in action, he was a microscopic observer 
of character and lif^, but with a less compre- 
hensive glance than Shaftesbury. He was 
<a distinguished writer himself, cunniQg, sup- 
ple, shameless, free from all prejudices, and 
destitute of all principle, courted and feared 
by all parties ; in the royal closet potent, 
^t th6 council-board taciturn, in the House 
of Lords a mute and sneering listener to 
ihe brilliant, philosophic Halifax and th^ 



248 ICSBOUHD. 

•droit and ready Sfaaftesboij. Fascinating, 
yet insineere, he was the fair-qpoken Belial 
of his oentory's politics^ and had an utter 
contempt for sach virionaries as Algernon 
Sidney, whose purity seemed to him Quixotic. 

But, leaving for a moment these statesmen, 
let ns describe the hall into which Sir 
Robert ushered his guests, and on whose 
ponderous table, thanks to Monsieur Or- 
tolan, a dainty luncheon was already smok- 
ing. 

It was a lofty room, its ceiling covered 
with square panelling, with coats-of-arms 
painted at the intersections. The floor was 
payed, but covered here and there with 
mats, and, where the king sat in Sir Robert's 
state chair, with a small Turkey carpet. The 
walls were panelled with oak, and studded 
with stags' horns, foxes' brushes, and a few 
pikes and old matchlocks. At the end stood 
a perch, on which rested four hawks, two 
long and two short winged, adapted for the 
striking either heron or partridge ; and over the 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 249 

vast fireplace hung a tapestry of fox-skins. 
In one comer of the room, on a heap of straw, 
was a litter of puppies ; in another stood a 
bunch of hunting poles. From the chimney- 
piece dangled a string of hawk's bells, and a 
long twisted whip ; while on a shelf above 
lay an old felt hat full of pheasants' eggs, and 
on the window ledge were a pack of old cards 
and a pipe, besides a book of Chronicles and 
a work on farriery. A low door at one end of 
the hall opened into the chapel, a spot now 
seldom used, but the pulpit of which served Sir 
Eobert as a convenient cupboard in which to 
keep a cold chine of beef and a pasty for a 
"snack'' between whiles. 



.250 



CpAPTEE IV, 

THE HOT LUNCHEON. 

Sir Robert would have served as cup-bearer, 
but the ^g insist^ on his taking his usual 
seat at the table ; while he himse|f sat beside 
Mabel, who, with many blushes, had just l;»een 
introduced to his Majesty. 

"'Tis a good wench,'' said Sir Eobert, 
fondly pinching her arm ; " ^ better daughter 
than her old father deserves ; and though she 
knows few of the modish airs, she can play 
'Sellenger's Round' indifferent well on the 
old spinet — ay, that she can.'' 

" As beautiful and virtuous as her father is 



THE LITTLE BLieK BOX. 25l 

honest and brave, I yentore to swear/^ said 
Charles, with an admiring smile that won -Sir 
Sobert'js rheart* 

In five minates more Sir Robert was quite 
at ease, stirring roand his wine with ^a spirig 
of rosemary. 

■ ^ Is the day yet fixed: for. my brother Tony^s 
coronation ?'' said Charles, breaking suddenly 
into the copversation that at the other end of 
the table was now swelling into a Ipud mur- 
mur. " Has Little Sincerity been measured 
for his crown, or will the old one he had made 
foriPqland serve his turn?'* 

"I have not heard, your Majesty,* -said Godol- 
phin ; ^^but I, met the old mole on the/Oxford 
road to-day, at the head of the Green Ribbons, 
alllettered * No slavery, no Popeiy,' and shout- 
ing, I'll wager a crown, as if they were going 
to fling. down. the .walls of a new Jericho." 

" And yet, cdsfish, if Tony hasn't more 
divinity than all my bishops, and more law 
than all my lawyers. No one sees quicker 
into a heart than Cooper ; yet he must needs 



252 ICE BOUND. 

ase the stirrups of religion to get up into the 
saddle of power. EiUigrew says he is nour 
devoting himself to prove that I am engaged 
with the Jesuits of St. Omer in a plan to cut 
my own throat.'* 

"How well, your Majesty, old Hudibras 
sketches him !'' said Sir Eobert, pouring some 
syrup of gilly*flowers into his sack : — 

^ 'Mong these there was a politiciaii, 
With more heads than a beast in yisioxi ; 
So politic as if one eye 
Upon the other were a spy/ " 

" Have you heard of the last joke of the 
Tory wits at the 'Rose'?'' said Godolphin. 

" No, nor of their first either,^' said Charles ; 
" but what is it ? Nothing more, I hope, of 
drubbing poor Dryden in Rose Alley, or re- 
acting D'Urfey's terrible duel with Mr. Bell at 
Epsom, when they fought for one hour by l^e 
clock at the 'Well' as to whether a note in the 
last Gavotte was B flat or G sharp, and ending 
with one of the combatants receiving a cut on 
the lute-finger, giving him such exquisite tor- 
ture that he fainted.'' 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 25S 

^^ Better than that, sire. To commemorate 
Shaftesbury's dropsy, they have dabbed him 
Count Tapskiy a title adopted by him 
when he missed the Polish crown. His em- 
blem with them is a tap, and they drink 
their wine out of a ffllver urn with a tap 
accordingly/' 

^^May that urn be a type of his funeral 
urn being nearly ready/' said Essex, bit- 
terly. 

" Nay, nay," said Charles, " I wish Tony 
no hurt. He is as agreeable a companion 
as ever helped one to kill an hour. I like 
Little Sincerity as well, aye, as many better 
subjects. Odsfish, it makes me laugh to hear 
James talk of Cooper's plots to cut me off at 
Hampton, or surprise me at Newmarket; 
then the next day to see Tony hobble in, 
with an air of eternal friendship on his brow, 
and a gentle smile on his mouth." 

At this moment the conversation was inter- 
rupted by Fidelio, the king's pet spaniel, who, 
having been for a long time tugging at the 



2H ■'" ICBBOUND*/ ■' 

long lash of Sir Bobert^s whip thiat hung 
invitin^j from the mantelpiece, had at last 
sac^ceeded in pufling it down, together with 
an-old copy of Fox's- Martyrs, three tobacco 
pipes^ and a hat fiill of - pheasants' eggs ; he bad 
then snapped at Boger, and run between hid 
royal master's legs, where he now bstrked, half 
frightened, half in defiance. 

*^ He has done no hurt, your Majesty—* 
only a few birds the less ; the old book 
ther* I only use to teep my May-flies in ; I'm 
getting, too old to fish." 

At this moment Kog^r, who, from behind 
his master's chair, had kept his eye during 
the whole of dinner fixedly on the king,: 
suddenly, broke out into a sort of crying 
laugh, rand cried, ^* I beg your Majesty's 
pardon for the liberty, bul your blessed 
face is so like your father's of immortal 
memory." 

" I forgive you, Roger," said Charles, with 
a smile, pulling down his wig; "but I'm 
sorry to find you already tainted by courii 



THE LITTLfi BLACK BOX. 255 

flattery,^ for I'm universally known in London to 
be the ugliest dog in the three kingdoms — aj, 
and clap the colonies into the lot. But, Sir 
Kobert, you seem uneasy ; do not let me 
disturb youf daily habits. Do you go to 
bowls after dinner ? — or do you take the 
tobacco?'* 

"If yoii please, your Majesty/- said Eoger, 
"and begging pardon for the liberty, as an 
old soldier, and one who won the colours 
at Edgehill " — (Sir Eobert was all this time 
making deprecatory signs, and frowning ter- 
ribly) — "but my master, for twenty years, 
whenever the pudding has been brought in, 
has been accustomed to sing, ^ My part lies 
therein-a.'" 

" Well, yoijr Majesty^ it's no use denying it ; 
but in your presence. Lord! I would not " 

" Pish, Sir Eobert I Clap into it as you 
love your sovereign, and perhaps I will give 
you a song of my own writing afterwards, 
if Baptiste has brought my French lute. 
Now, man, no coughing and clearing of the 



25& ICE Bouim. 

throat; but roundly to it, as if it was a 
view-halloo/' 

^^Tour Majesty, it's nothbg but an old 
thing not worth the hearing/' 

"Now, don't be coy, Sir Bobert;.and 
mine's only a new thing not worth the hear- 
ing. Silence, gentlemen, for Su* Robert's 
song, and none of your critical carwitchets." 

Thus encouraged, Sir Robert pushed back 
his plate and knife and fork, as if they 
were in the way of his voice ; took the 
cover off his London pudding, which Roger 
had just brought in to give him inspiration ; 
foMed his hands on his sturdy chest, half 
shut his eyes^ and then sang in a dear lusty 
voice the following trifle : — 

** ^There is a pudding by tbe fii^. 
And my part lies therdn-a ; 
The lads in the hall, go call them all, 
And bring them All within-a.' " 

Loud applause foDowed this quaint ditty, 
upon which Sir Rob^ bowed, turned red, 
drank off a full bumper of claret to hide his 
confusion, and then, as if able to eat better after 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 257 

the observance of his usual habit, fell to on 
his pudding. 

" Sir Robert, a slice of yours. It must be 
a good pudding that produced so good an 
air. Mine is but a poor lackadaisical thing. 
I wrote it in an old avenue of limes at Buda, 
where I used to walk and think of England, 
and wonder how I should pay for my next 
new clothes.'^ 

'* Oh ! no more of that, an't please your 
Majesty ; for that raises the waters,'* said the 
good old baronet, whose sympathies two bottles 
of claret had perhaps somewhat helped to elicit. 

" Baptiste, the lute. Merd. Here's the 
song. You all know it,*' he said, turning to 
his courtiers, " as well as my Worcester 
stories ; but youll pardon the fondness of a 
father." Charles, then standing up, and 
putting one foot on the red cushion of his 
chair, sang to the accompaniment of a lute, 
which he played with considerable skill, the 
following song in a rather hoarse but yet power- 
ful voice : — 

VOL. n. 3 



258 lOS BOUND. 

*' * I pass all my houni in a shady old groYe, 
But I live not the day when I see not my love ; 
I survey every walk now my PhiUis is gone, 
And sigh when I think we were there all alone. 

then, ^tis O then that I think there's no spell 

Like loving too welL 

But each shade and each eonsqious bower that I find, 
Where I once have been happy, and she has been kind ; 

1 see the print 1^ of her shape in the green, 
And imagine the pleasure may yet come again. 
O then 'tis I think that no joys are above 

The pleasures of love.' 

But, adzooks/' said CharleSi as he finished 
his song, and threw his lute with a careless 
air to his attendant, ^Move is not what it 
used to be in our young days: then lovers 
broke their neeks in the tiltyard to show their 
constancy/' 

" And now they do it in fox-hunting," 
said Godolphin. ^^Once they used to show 
the strength of their limbs, now they show 
the strength of their heads. They ride like 
mill horses round the £ing in the Park, 
till they get as dusty as a miller's man, 
and then spend half the night in drinking 
Burgundy to wash the dust out of their 
throats." 



THE LITTLE BLICK BOX. 359 

Ere Charles had time to replj, a thunder 
of horses' feet muffled bj the turf, but ring^ 
ing out louder at mtervab ou the grarel^ was 
heard. It grew deeper and dearer, till the 
rattle of swords and scabbards against metal- 
bound saddles or jingling stirrups could be 
heard mingled with shouts of command; the 
next moment a troop of fifty Life Guards, 
beaded bj Claverhonse, dashed ->* the men 
red-faced and the horses covered with foam 
—into the ce^urtyard. 

''Egad/' said Sir Robert, starting up and 
slapping his thigh with delight, ^^ it does, 
me good to see the willing hearts thei»: 
are in the land to sweep away the Green 
Ribbons/' 

In a moment Claverhouse. entered, and,, 
addressing the king, assured him that the 
appearance of the mob that was then pass-? 
ing rendered it necessary for his Majesty to 
arm ; at the stamp of his foot three pages 
entered, carrying a helmet and a breast and 
back piece* 

82 



260 ICE BOUND. 

Charles gave a groan at the sight of these, 
threw himself back in his chair, filled up his 
glass, and yawned } then got up, stretching his 
arms and looking in the glass, while he stood 
bareheaded without his wig, and put on 
his helmet — a curious contrast to his other 
dress. 

" Egad,** he cried, " I sometimes wish I 
could shut up Whitehall for the summer 
months, pawn my crown to old Metrolle 
the goldsmith at Temple Bar, ship my twenty- 
four fiddlers that D'Urfey made the song 
about, and sail off with Nelly to some snug 
little island out of the reach of the cry of 
^No Popery* and the jingle of Bow bells, 
where Chaffinch should be my cook, and Bay 
May my groom." 

^^ Theatres, tennis-courts, and pall-malls 
are rare in desert islands, and the exche- 
quer of such delectable places is generally too 
rather scanty,'' said Godolphin, as he helped 
to buckle on his monarch's sword. ^^ A king 
would be very happy without subjects ; but. 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX« 261 

unfortunately, where there are no subjects 
there is no one to pay taxes/' 

"Well, thank God/' said Charles, "Mon- 
mouth's away, dancing at country fairs for 
the sake of Protestantism somewhere in 
Somersetshire; and James and that bluster- 
ing Lauderdale are busy hanging in Scotland. 
They are all better out of the way when 
London comes to Oxford." 

" Killigrew was right," whispered Go- 
dolphin to Arlington, " when he said Charles 
could see if he would, and James would 
see if he could. There are the materials 
here for something better than a Whitehall 

Ere Charles had done arming, Roger, who 
was also a skilful gardener, and proud of his 
skill, came in, and with a scrape of his leg 
and an awkward bow, begged his Majesty 
would allow him to put in the royal carriage 
a basket of pearmains and jennetings from Sir 
Sobert's home-garden. 

"Another day such as this^'' said CharleS; 



262 ICE BOUND. 

i^ith a good-hamonred laagh, as he tlirew 
himself back in his chair, stretched out his 
legs as if ' tUej were atill cramped by the 
confinement of the coach, first boking at his 
.8hoe-bu<^les, then reac^usting the blue ribbon 
of the Garter, and lastly, passing his fingers 
ihrougfa the scented curls of his black wig, 
^^ and Tony wfll lose half his subjects. How 
many a fat aldermin to-day from Fortsoken 
or Bishopsgate has endured martyrdom on a 
hard-trotting horse ! Odsfidi, Arlington, how 
the portly city-feeders must have shuddered at 
the very thought of such a ride, and consoled 
themselves by the thought of all the bonfires of 
Smithfield and the * blessed cause ! "' 

** Upon my life, your Majesty,** said Hyde, 
^^ it's too bad, though, to saddle the Papists as 
they do. If a fellow is knocked down now at 
Hammersmith and loses his silver-hilted sword, 
the highway-man is always a concealed Fiqpist ; 
if a man reels into the gutter on his way 
home from his club, and a link-boy picks his 
^pocket, it's a Piqpist ; if I go into a tavern, 



THE LITTLE BLAGi: BOX. 269 

and won't pay my host's exorbitant bill, he 
mobs me with all the drawers, and dubs mei 
^Papist;' if I cane a bully in Spring Gardens 
for treading on my toes, he shouts ^Papist!* 
and I'm driren out and treated worse than 
a bailiff in. Whitefriars." 

" Egad," said Charles, laughing at Hyde's 
Tory indignation, " I take these things pUlo- 
sophically, and laugh at them in my sleeves ; 
but, faith, the people are moonstruck, I think. 
There's Nell told me this morning that the 
very people round the theatre yesterday were 
crying ^Protestant pears,' and 'Hot Protestant 
pudding.' " 

"Your Majesty is too good-natured with 
the canaille/^ said Hyde, fiercely. "This 
earl of theirs will be turning '81 into '41, and 
Aldersgate into Whitehall. We shall have 
yet to trample them under our horses' feet, 
and pull down that den of sedition where the 
old traitor sits, day and night, fanning the hot 
coals of rebellion." 

"Why, you're another £upert, Rochester,"^ 



264 ICE BOUND. 

sdd Godolphin, with a good-humoured smile, 
helping himself as he spoke to a favourite dish 
near him, and then holding up his glass to 
the light with all the gusto of a connoisseur* 
<< We shall have you soon heading the Life 
Guards in the battle of Moorfields.'* 

*^ And the great siege of Thanet House," 
said Charles. 

"Defeating the allied forces of Little 
Britain and Shoreditch/' echoed Arlington, 
with his usual stiff deliberation. 

^*We shall have Buckingham introducing 
you as one of the kings of Brentford, with an 
army of three bandy-legged drummers and a 
knock-kneed pikeman.'' 

" If your Majesty choose to turn everything 
into a jest, well I Tou chased a moth all the 
night when your fleet was burning, just as 
Nero fiddled when Borne was blazing." 

" I know the taunt," said Charles ; " I've 
read it twenty times in the Protestant news- 
papers. Go on : Fmch is not here to indict 
you for treason." 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 265 

^^Yonr Majesty must pardon my natural « 
vehemence." 

^^Hb Majesty is too accustomed to such 
vehemence to be the least disturbed. Besides, 
after court compliments, it is really quite stimu- 
lating. Go on. It's like hearing a trumpet 
sound a point of war after listening to Tor- 
celli's lute, or the siren Davis a-trilling of 
French airs." 

" It troubles me to see your Majesty bear 
so patiently the factious working of turbulent 
spirits — these knaves who under their Geneva 
gowns carry the assassin's knife and the head- 
man's axe. Methinks, when I mount the 
peak of history, and look upon the past and 
future as on two oceans, I behold this glory of 
all islands, this mistress of four seas, a prey to 
the flames of civil war and the whirlwinds of 
rebellion." 

" I see — why, you're all in the heroic vein 
to-day, Essex," said Charles, wearily; "but 
cannot you keep this eloquence for the council- 
chamber to-morrow, and not weary me and 



866 ICE Boum). 

Sir Sob^y who will certainly think me a 
strange uncivil guest for thus shuttmg him 
from our convarsation." 

" Will you not, sire,** said Hyde, passion- 
ately, after a moment's mumig, '^ remember 
that those whose hands were dipped in the 
most innocent blood of that illustrioas mar- 
tyr—?" 

^^ now, I can't stand that old dap-trap ; 
odsfish, man, I can't stand that," said Charles, 
motioning. - ^^ Is a man's father of no use but 
to reproach his son with? Only the other 
day, at my last levee, that Bishop Fell had the 
impudence to tell me I swore more than be* 
came a good Christian ; and didn't I say to him, 
^ Your martyr swore worse than that.' " 

" The king of blessed memory," said Sir 
Robert, rather shocked at the levity with 
which the thoughtless monarch spoke of his 
royal father, *^ was not sparing of adjurations 
when he was directing a charge, or riding down 
the squadrons ; for I remember, at Newbury, 
when we had to screw jand jumble, in a heap 



THE UTrUL BLACK BOX. 267 

over a low wall to get at some cursed mus- 
keteers that galled our flank, his Majesty, m 
my hearing, cfdled out lustily, *A pest oii 
those fellows, they are shooting us down as if 
we Were young crows V " 

" That's nothing. Lord 1 in Noll's times," 
-said Godolphm, ^'when the Parliament put 
fines on swearing, it is said to have cost that 
young Hector Bellasis a thousand a year for 
oaths alone. Lord 1 ' pest' counts for nothing.'' 

"I'm afraid we're growing effeminate," 
said Charles, " in oaths. Look at Queen Bess^ 
that the Weddy Discovery is always talking 
about ; she swore by Grod's wounds, and such 
grand Popish oaths ; but now our ladies lisp 
out, ' Upon my honour,' a foolish oath ; and 
'Upon my reputation,' a venial oath. To 
return to Bochester : what has made him turn 
a Wentworth all at once ?" 

"I wager he was scared by the Green 
Kibbons, or that the 'prentices hissed him the 
last time he went into the City," said Sun- 
derland, sarcastically. 



268 IGS BOUND. 

^' James is fonder of hunting than I am/' said 
Charles, discursively ; '' I prefer the paradise 
at Hampton Court, and chasing about my gar- 
dens after a rabbit with my spaniels. Odsfish, 
if gentlemen like you/ Sir Sobert, wouldn't 
rather have hares than friends; why, you would 
forswear any king who dared to hunt on your 
land. Egad, though, if I haveever liked the sport 
since I was hunted so myself after Worcester. 
When we were last at Newmarket, James and 
I went out every day ; and every day, at a 
certain place, we met an honest fellow of a 
butcher, who, from my speaking to him, had got 
in a habit of asking what sport we had. If 
we said we had a good run, he always said, 
* Did you kill ?' and if we said * No,' he put 
his fingers to his nose, and jogged off. Uds- 
fish, at last, if I didn't get ashamed of looking 
that fellow in the face." 

" I was once riding with the Duke of York," 
said Arlington, " near Windsor, when we were 
warned off an enclosure by a gentleman in a 
greasy buff coat. *Do you know who you 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 269 

have, sir?' said his grace* 'Tes/ said our 
friend; 'I am speaking to a duke; but on 
my own property I am king/ His grace 
grew black, and was much troubled at this ; 
and I think but for me would have sent baclK 
and have had the dogged fellow's nose slit." 

"If I had been there/' said Charles, "I 
should have merely laughed, and bowed, and 
said, * Sir, you make me feel I am the greatest 
prince on earth; for while others rule over 
slaves, I rule over a race of kings.' He'd have 
been a Tory ever afterwards, bet you." 

" I think Sir £obert beats all fox-hunters 
I ever met with," said Sunderland, " but old 
Matchem of Leicester, who rode twenty stone, 
and his huntsman eighteen; he got drunk 
every day to the toast of ^ All the hunters in 
Christendom ;' and once, after a hard day, 
when he went home with two brushes in his 
hat, he had the fox's head devilled for dinner." 

" Ah, ah ! and better, too, than half your 
foreign kickshaws," said Sir Robert, looking 



270 icxwraD. 

hard out of the window to prevent liU eye 
glancing at bis MajestyV plate. 

'^Is thai a good dog (tf yours ?'' said Charlesy 
pointing to a fox-hound that was nuzzling hm 
nose with his master's hand. 

" Never a better, your Majesty, ever 
gave tongue. Stout, tender-nosed, and no 
babbler; stanch and true, swift and keen; 
one that has tasted Ibx, too, before this. With 
your Majesty's leave, I'll propose his health. 
' GrapplOT^s health, with three times three/ " 

With demure faces, the company filled their 
glasses and drank the toast. 

" Gentlanen," said the king, '*I have now 
to propose a toast which I am sure will be 
drunk with enthusiasm : • The Little Whig.' " 
Sir Robert, not seeing the allusion to Sunder- 
land's beautiful wife, tossed off his glass with 
a look of inquiry. 

"I never heard of that dog," said Sir 
Eobert, " your Majesty ; but there was 
Whigger, by Glider out of Blossom, well 
known m this part of England." 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 271 

'^ It's a welloknown toast in London,'' said 
his Majesty, '^ but not confined to sportsmen." 

" Ah," said Sir Robert, " save your Majesty, 
I see them all abreast, carrying a lead, never 
coming to a fault, spreading like a sky-rocket, 
twenty-five oouple all in a dump. Then push 
forward all of ye ; scream, yelp, bark — such 
music 1 Halloo, forward 1 gone away 1 Tally- 
ho 1 he gets a head ; they're gaining him I " 

^' Heigh, Baffler, Buxom, Bounder ! So ho, 
Conqueror, Chimer, Crasher I Ho, Forester, 
Flasher, Jester I" 

" Heigh, Traveller^ Baper, Reveller 1" said 
Godolphin, led away by the enthusiasm. 

" Tally-ho, tally-ho ! tear him to pieces !" 
said Sir Robert, throwing up his arms as if 
flinging the dead fox to a maddened pack, 
and then sinking quite relaxed into his chair, 
he ended a stammered apology to his Majesty. 

" No words about it. Sir Robert. 1 love an 
honest sportsman, and I know Godolphin's taste 
of old. But isn't this much better than the 
field^ — here's all the excitemrat and nofatigue. 



272 ICEBOUND. 

And how long mayhap did that chase take?^ 
^' Let me see/' said Godolphin, smiling and 
looking at his watch, as he wiped off the heat- 
drops from his good-humoured forehead; ^' by 
this stop-watch, exactly one hour and twenty 
minutes. We went away with a dog-fox, 
stuck to him down Wetherby Hill, had a 
check at Guymassy Woods, tried back at 
Woollerton, were thrown out atClanson Earths, 
and killed at last at Winnesly Bottom, after a 
twenty-mile run*" 

'^ The fox is a sagacious animal, and of much 
discernment," said Arlington inquiringly; "but 
still a very loathsome vermin, and not worth 
the catching." 

" As to its smell, I prefer it to wig-powder, 
or ladies' sweet-washed gloves, on a clear 
morning," said Sir Robert. " As to sagacity, 
I should like to hear any one, saving his 
Majesty, match this story of mine. When I was 
with Lunsford's regiment, gentlemen, in Essex, 
in 1643, we went three days running to Crick- 
9ell Wood, and always lost in the churchyards 



THE UTILE BLAO& BOX. tH 

We were 6ne day all at fault, stumbling about 
among the graves, when a celebrated bitch of 
mine, Fidget, leaped up several times at a 
buttress and gave - tongue. Some thought 
nothing of this ; but trusting to her stanch- 
ness — ^for she was my favourite — I leaped off 
my horse, and dimbed up by some ivy to the 
low roof of tiie church, where we found a fox 
kennel sure enough. We then helped three 
or four couple of dogs up, and, 2X)unds, they 
went in fiill cry on the chancel-roof in a mo- 
ment ; and there reynard died, without bene- 
fit of clergy, after afiye-mhiutes' run." 

" Extraordinary !" shouted all. 

"I know another old fox," said Chai*les 
aside to Arlington, ^^ who generally uses the 
Protestant Church as a place of refiige.'^ 

" I never heard of another," said Sir Robert^ 
in high glee at the interest the royal party 
took in his sporting stories. '^ You know Sir 
Henry Woolett, at the Gable House at Chehns^ 
ford?" 

VOL. IL .T 



2?^ icEBOUin)^ 

"Tes, yes 1" cried every one, to get the 
quicker to the story ; " well ? '' 

^'I was hunting there once, when, we ran 
the fox up into a tree; and, twenty feet 
up, we found a hole with four cubs. Egad/' 
said Sir Eobert, *^ I don't know if a kingdom 
is not easier to manage than a pack of fox- 
hounds; and some of our rules might, 
mayhap, be of use to your counsellor- 
gentlemen here. Hit your dog first, and 
rate him afterwards, for instance/' 

" Lauderdale does both," said Charles; "for 
he scolds a poor devil of a Covenanter and 
then hangs him/' 

" Silent at going into cover, noisy at 
coming out, is the huntsman's business." 

'^ As men who are quiet in office are noisy 
in opposition," said Godolphin. 

Sir Robert looked rather puzzled at these 
allusions. Charles good-humouredly asked 
him, "What are the requisites of a good fox- 
hound?" 

"Legs like arrows," said Sir Robert; 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 275 

"wide breast, your Majesty, deep chest, 
broad t back, thin neck, small head, and 
thick taa;' 

" I remember some old distiches about a 
greyhound," said Godolphin : 

^ Head like a snake^ 
Neck like a diake. 
Back like a bream, 
Side like a beam, 
Tail like a rat, 
Foot like a cat.'" 

"True enough, true enough, sir,'' said 
Sir Eobert, approvingly, looking round be- 
nignantly, and filling his glass "to the im- 
mortal memory." 

" And what is the best sort of morn- 
ing for your fox-hunting?" said Arlington^ 
sedately. 

" The scent lies, look you, when the wind's 
southerly or westerly; north and east are 
what I call Whiggish winds, good for nothing 
but to save foxes' brushes, weary the dogs^ 
and send the huntsman home swearing like 
a trooper; a warm day without sun, a hot 

t2 



276 ICKSQUMD. 

close fogi when there's a white frost, or 
hard rain, and mild ur, are good. Bat of 
all things in the world, there's nothing spoils 
an honest man's sport more than joor cursed 
stinking yiolets. Drat me, if I don't hate 
the sight of them." 

'^Ah, ah!" said Charles, bursting into a 
laugh at this odd antipathy. '' Why, you're 
like my old huntsman at ^Windsor, who goes 
about the park wishing all my sheep were 
foxes; and well he may, for I pay him 80/. 
a-year for nothing but hallooing." 

"As well earned as a lawyer's money," 
said Sir Robert; "I wager a very honest 
fellow, and one I should like to crush a pot 
with." 

*' All I wonder is," said Arlington, *' that 
a man ever hunts twice — ^running like a 
madman, after a bad smell, just to feed a set 
of dogs, who are the only creatures that really 
relish the sport" 

" Out upon you !" said Godolphin. " Sir 
Robert's right. The finest moment in life is 



THE LITTLE BLiCE BOX. 277 

when the first challenge is heard in the dark 
of the cover, 'Hark to Chirperl hark to 
Battler !' as the best dog speaks in the thicket 
and owns the fox." 

Charles now rose to go ; but Sir Eobert, 
who by this time had taken far too much 
claret, held the king's hand, and dragged him 
back to his seat, entreating him, with tears 
and many allusions to '^the blessed memory,'' 
to finish the bottle. 

With a good-humoured smile, the king 
released his coat from the £ood knight's 
grasp, and whispering, ^'A drunken man 
is as great as a king," sat down, and 
completed his task, much to the indigna- 
tion of Essex, and the delight of the pliant 
Godblphin. 

With a discharge of patareros from the roof 
of the dock'tower, the cavalcade at last set 
forth, the king riding at their head fully 
armed, to publicly express his apprehension, 
at the armed followers of Shaftesbury. 

" Honest old fellow," said the king, " as I 




278 lOEBOUKD* 

ever saw ; full of old Cavalier stories that 
would delight Eupert, and as. fond of fox- 
hunting as his servant is of gardening/' 

^' What in the world took Sowley to that 
dreary old house?" whispered Churchill to 
Claverhouse. 

** k pretty face, as usual/' said Claver- 
house ; ^' and he talks of sending for her to 
court, so let Portsmouth tremble/' 

"Bah/' said Churchill, "what fear from 
the red cheeks of a village Cicely ? Take 
canary, and rinse your brain clear. A fiend 
when seen through a rambow-cloud by lovers 
seems an angel/' 

"Yes," said Claverhouse — "there, don't 
shrug and bite your glove — ^but to the vulgar 
herd only an imperious, wanton Jezabel/' 

"What's that about Jezabel, gentlemen?" 
said the king, turning round. "Churchill 
hasn't turned Quaker, I hope, to win fa- 
vour with the duke. As for Claverhouse, 
he never turns, except he turns colour when 
he's angry, and that's too often." 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 279 

"Have you heard Tony's last trick, your 
Majesty ? " said Godolphin^ as the royal party 
rode on. 

" Not I/' said Charles^ whistling a song of 
Dryden's. 

"Why, he declares an agent of his in 
France has discovered in a convent at Paris 
a little black box, containing the deed of mar- 
riage of a gentleman named Stuart with a 
Welsh girl named Walters. It's now on its 
way oyer.'' 

" A little bhck box,'' said Charles, laugh- 
ing. " What next ? And so Monmouth 
turns out James, and gives the empty box 
as a money chest to Shaftesbury, who will 
keep the Exchequer under his own key. A 
little black box! — ah, ahl Very good I A 
little black box! Ancara. Very well — ^very 
well, indeed." ' 



278 



280 



CHAPTER V. 



THE FB0DI6AL SON. 



S 



ever sn 
would ' 
huntiri; 

drear} 
Clave 

hoiis^ 

couri 

(( 

the* ****** ^^^ return to Mr. Wilson, and 
^ ^ the manner of his flight from his old 
^inioile at Crow's Nest. 

llie sounds of Sir Bobert's horse's hoofs 
^ scarcely died away ere he had betaken 
l^nself to his room, tied up a worn serge 
OMt and a few other necessaries in a bundle, 
with a Bible and a volume of Baxter, closed 
his volumes with a sigh, shut his window for 
fear of rain, arranged some dried flowers on 
a shelf with as much care as if he had been 
going to spend his life in studying them ; and 
then, with a parting glance at the old com- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 281 

panions of his solitary hours of study, de- 
scended the stairs, much to the astonishment 
of Mabel's maid, who saw that he was dressed 
in a Norwich drugget coat, as if for a jour- 
ney. He paced once down the avenue, visited 
the garden, listened a moment to the foun- 
tain, watched the restless birds, so careless 
of his sorrow ; and then, passing through a 
back wicket, entered the fields, and struck 
into a path that led to London. 

His friend the curate passed him on the 
other side of a hedge, but he had not the heart 
to accost him. A farmer's boy ran up to greet 
him, but Mr. Wilson passed on as if in a hurry, 
and the boy ceased to follow him. His eyes 
filled with tears as he took a last look at 
Crow's Nest ; and then, descending a hill, 
he lost sight of it, as he believed, for ever. 

At the first stile, when well beyond reach 
of being met by any who knew him, Wilson 
drew a letter from his pocket, and, with tears 
in his eyes, read it aloud. One could see by 
the worn folds of the letter, how often it had 



282 ICE BOUND. 

been perused^ and the paper was stiff and 
blistered^ as if with tears. 

"Dear Dad" (ran the letter) — "I am now 
in Newgate, taken by a beggarly mercer, on 
whom J, drew my pops a week ago, some- 
where between Acton and Uxbridge. As I 
have no doubt I shall die in the air, I should 
like* to see you before I dance my last caper 
on earth. The chaplain preaches to me from 
the prattling box to-morrow, just as he did 
to the great Jack Hind. I send you three 
pistoles to help you on the way. 
"Your true gamecock son, 

" Tom Chambers, 
" Alias The Flying Dutchman." 

" Heaven I '* cried the old man, tearing 
the letter into a thousand pieces, and falling 
on his knees with passionate vehemence, 
^^ how dost thou visit our youthful sins upon 
our hoary heads I Truly does Scripture say, 
^ He that sows the wind reaps the whirlwind.' 
But for your sin this had not been. Trem* 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 283 

Wing on the edge of etemitj, yet no repen- 
tance, no fear — and he none of the elect ! 
Bttt why sit here ? I may be too late — 
Saturday — Sunday — Monday." And as he 
spoke, he arose and walked with a haste 
almost beyond his strength. He had not 
proceeded more than five miles, and was now 
just at the junction of two roads, when he 
espied a man, dressed as a pedlar and carry- 
ing a pack, conning with great attention a 
printed notice headed " 50/. Reward^^^ pasted 
up against a tall gibbet-like finger post, whose 
three arms pointed confusingly in three diflfe- 
rent directions. As he approached, and put 
on an enormous pair of spectacles to read the 
* name upon the post, the pedlar turned his 
back, stared him in the face, and then running 
up, shook him by the hand. 

^' My son ! " said the old minister, and fell 
upon his neck. ^^ God be thanked, you are 
then free I " 

" Free ? — ^yes, thanks to a good file and a 
quick wit." 



284 ICE BOUND. 

" Thank the Grod who freed Peter from his 
chains/' 

"Only to think of thisl" said the high- 
wayman, with a gay laugh — "but then the 
Lord's anointed, like you and me, dad^ are 
specially favoured/' 

" Oh, my son ! do not talk so wildly 
and impiously ; but, ere it is too late, 
prepare for eternity. Do you never think 
of eternity?" 

"Not I — ^not I. I'm like the fellow in 
the play — as for the other world, I sleep 
out the thought of it. This world takes 
up all my time, and would I had twice as 
much of it." 

"How have you lived for the ten years 
that I have lost you ? " said the father, with 
a tenderness he coul4 not conceal. 

" Well : shifted — shifted pretty well. Ton 
remember, as a lad I was always hanging 
about the playhouses ; and when they called 
out and asked who would be a 4ovil, and see 
the play for nothing, in goes I, and earns a 



THE LITTLS BLACK BOX. 38$ 

shillings Then I went as a Jack Pudding." 

^^What abomination is that?'' said the 
father — " what mystery of iniquity ? *' 

" Clown to a mountebank, for I can't 
help my bits of pedlar French. Well, I made 
the jokes and he made the money; but I got 
tired at last of spitting fire out of a walnut- 
shell, and swallowing ribbons; so I turned 
pedlar, and sold washballs, toothpicks, and 
tooth-powder, which * I swore came froni 
Japan, in the fiery deserts of Tartary. 
When I had stocked half Hertfordshire with 
brick-dust and powdered charcoal, I then sel; 
up as travelling doctor— Signer Anabaldo 
Ferabosco, just arrived from Ducatoon, on 
the Malabar coast.'' 

" Father of lies,'' said Wilson, interrupting 
him, " these were thy promptings 1 " 

" Well, at the great Aylesbury, fair I |)ut 
up a placard, denouncing all cheats, whether 
physical, chemical, or polemical; challenging 
any chirurgeon within thirty miles to answer 
my q[uestions in the sciences of astrology, 



286 ici mojmD. 

pahnistrj, physiognom j, msthemsticsi govern^ 
menty therapeatiGSy and eyerTthing except 
hydraulics, which I was not at present 
prosecuting. My piDs I swore ^ 

'^^ Swear not at all,' say the Scriptures^'* 
said Wilson, aghing. • 

''That, by yarioos secrets discoTered in 
fifteen years' trard in Abyssinia and the 
Soman Empire, I had learnt by an easy 
Aqua Parabohmij without destroying com* 
plexions, as paints and daubings do, to free 
skins from all spots, freckles, heat pimples^ 
and scars ; to cleanse and preserve the teeth 
wiiite as pearls, to torn the gums to coral, 
and make all maidens' lips soft and kissable. 
Egad, it makes me laugh now to think how 
ibis brought the country gurls in shoals to my 
booth/' 

^' They were like the silly women that Paul 
mentioned/' 

"Ah, but my great hit was the cure 
of what I called Tabes Britannica, or the 
grand English disease peculiar to our country 



THE LUTLE BLACK BOt. 287 

— ^the scurvy. I treated this, not with any 
of your Mercuries, or antimony, or spirits, or 
salts, or such poisons, but the real Mirabolana, 
gathered on the hill-country of the Peruvian 
mountains : — it was really powdered rhubarb. 
Egad, as the play says, * Every church, every 
sermon, finds a careful man work;' they 
filled my purse, and I picked their pockets. 
From a Jew fi*iend I learnt, too, how to cheat 
alchemists — ^by putting gold dust into a hol- 
low stick, and offering to stir their mixtures. 
I^ then began to turn up the best cards at 
primero, till one day a gull, whom I had 
picked cleaner than usual, foolishly ran upon 
my sword, and was ^pinked,' as Romeo 
calls it." 

"His blood is on your hands," said Wil- 
son. " 'Whoso sheddeth man's. blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed.' " 

" Well, there's one thing," said the repro- 
bate; ''I've got as many silver cups, posset 
dishes, silver-hilted swords, and watches, on 
my mind, as even Claude du Yal himself, ay, or 



288 IG£ BOUND. 

Jack Hind either ; but I never would — ^no/not 
though I had to sleep for a week at the glass-^ 
houses, when I'd no horse to take the road 
with — ^I never would kidnap. That seemg 
to me a game only fit for devils, and I'd 
have no hand in it. But, Lord ! I have 
invented wig-snatching, with a boy in a co- 
vered basket carried on a man's head ; and 
I'd do anything else — ^whether it is stiver, 
ducat, pistole, or orown, it's all one to Tom 
Chambers." 

"And you have been hunted like a par- 
tridge on the mountains," said Wilson, " and 
have not yet learned to repent." 

" Hunted ! " said the highwayman ; " but 
what use hunting an old mountebank ? Look 
here." Then, turning his face for a moment, 
he appeared with a grey wig, grey moustache, 
and grey beard ; in a moment after he had 
red hair, and one eye tied up. "Why; I 
could get off on my very way up the' dreary 
hill to Tyburn ; ay, and dance a sara- 
band with the hangman first. I'll take ypu 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 289 

five shillings — ^make it crowns— but, bah — ^I 
forget, you're of a different sect. Why, once 
at Leicester, when I was m limbo, I got a 
painter to paint me over with plague spots, 
and I was put in a coffin bored with holes, 
carried out, and given to my friends. What 
do you think of that ? ' Where be now 
your quips and your quillets? What, quite 
chapfkllen ! ' as the play says — ^for I was an 
actor once in a small way.'' 

"Did you never feel, then, the sting of 
the worm that never dies?" cried Wilson, 
flinging his thin arms to heaven. "Good 
Lord, send the dew of Thy mercy upon this 
stony heart." 

" Now, don't talk in that way — it gives me 
the shivers; and I've no huff-cap here to 
drink myself steady again. I would not for 
a purseful of gold pieces that my bullies 
should know I was the son of a canting old 
Calvinist. Why, I should be bobbed to death 
about it, I should never hear the last of their 
crambo rhymes. But there, the candles wilt 

VOL. n, u 



£90 ICE BOUND. 

go oat some day, and we shall be left dark- 
ling; so, 'tis 

* A bonny lad came to the court, 
His name was Daniel Cooper, 
And he petitioned to the long 
Xhat he might be a trooper.* 

But now I must bring you to our rendezvous, 
where I shall give thee money to take thee to 
London. Not a word about father and son ;. 
trust to me to get you off at a dead lift. 
Mind, you're John Wilson, travellmg in aid of 
the Protestant cause.*' 

'^ I can tell no. lies though I lose my life. 
^No liar,' God's word says, * shall enter the 
kingdom of heaven.' " 

" Then all I can say is, the good will have 
plenty of elbow room," said Chambers ; "so 
keep your prayers for the Tyburn tree, where 
we may meet some day.-' 

In a few minutes' walk the old tutor had 
narrated to his reckless son the cause that 
had led him to leave Crow's Nest. 

" Old gentleman, I see it in a jiffy. Tou 
hear your young Absolom's going to dance 



THE LITTLB BLACK BOX. 291 

on a tight rope ; yon are not proud of the 
connectie^^ and^ in &ct, rather ashamed of it ; 
therefore packed up that old church Bible 
and a bundle of worm medicines, to tramp 
off to Newgate. Having now found him, 
safe and sound, you will tramp back again, 
tell the butler youVe been out botanizing 
and lost your way, order a posset, and go 
to bed.'' 

^^No, my sonf I return no more to the 
house of the persecutor. God has gifted me 
with some knowledge of the Greek tongue 
and of the Italian hand, and I propose to 
teach in families of quality.'' 

" It won't do," said the pedlar, biting his 
nails in perplexity. ^'But stop — I have it 
In the odd scenes roguery has brought me into, 
I have^ once or twice lately had some smaU 
dealings with this Lord Shaftesbury all Lon- 
don's talking of now. I will to him, remind 
him of certain passages of my life, and present 
you to him as a secretary." 

"He's a good Protestant, John, and has 

u2 



292 ICE BOUND. 

smitten the scarlet woman many a time on 
the cheek bone. I approve of thy plan, and 
will fare with thee." 

"They tell me — at least Nimming Tom 
does, who frequents the coffee-houses and 
reads the Intelligencer — that he has got hold 
of a certain little hlach box, with a deed in 
it which proves Monmouth legitimate, and 
, sends James to the cold side of the throne. 
He threatens to produce it at the Oxford 
Parliament, and all the clubs are agog 
about it.'' 

"Pray God," said the father, "that he be 
kept safe from Jesuit knives." 

" Trust an old fox," said the pedlar-high- 
wayman. " He's the lad to make the court 
shake in its shoes, and raise Oates to prime- 
minister." 

" This little box then may be indeed," said 
the father, " a second Noah's ark for deluged 
England." 



293 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE MOHAWKS AT SEA. 

It was a bright^ fresh June morning, and 
the good schooner Saucy Jane was plough- 
ing fast and freelj through the boiling gold 
of a summer morning's sea. If there were no 
larks above it racing each other to the nearest 
cloud, there were snow-winged gulls, like 
drifts of foam driven skyward by the waves. 
If there was no bird-music in the boughs, 
for the simple reason that there were no 
boughs, the fresh breeze — "just a catskin'' 
the sailors of that day called it — made a 
pleasant whistle in the rigging, and the 
crimson pennon struggled out fitfully from 



294 ICEBOUND. 

the schooner's mizen-peak as if it was some 
gay tropical bird tied by a chain. 

But this is on deck, and oar business is 
below with the Saucy Janets only passenger. 
Sir Eoger Wildfire, a gentleman of rank and 
fortune, on secret service at present, and now 
in the Channel, half way between France 
and England. He has been up an hour 
already, and has been employing his time in 
several ways. First, in looking through the 
great cabin window, and watching the chalk 
cli£& of Dover rising against the blue horizoii 
like the silver walls of some enchanted city. 
ISecondly, in looking out and listening to the 
plash and rush of the water, as long lines of 
foam fall back into the ship's wake. Thirdly, 
in fuinbling the last French song he hail 
heard at court upon a battered and worm- 
eaten guitar, which he had found in a locker 
buried under a pile of dusty charts and torn 
books of signals. As the music he extracted 
was not Orphean, and it was evident the 
instrument was not strung ^'with bright 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 29^ 

Apollo's hj&if/' Sir Boger had just flnng it 
with a curse into a corner^ and was no^ 
sipping, with many yawns and a rather 
quMmi^ face — ^for the night had been rough 
' — a cup of chocolate. He opens a valii^e ; 
he has now extracted with iniich care a parcel^ 
which^ when unpapered, proves to be a small 
square casket, covered with black velvet, and 
studded with a gold border of ornaments re- 
sembling the letter S. Lifting the lid, he has 
drawn out a legal-looking paper, from which 
hung several seals, and attentively periised 
it, stopping between every line as if weighing 
eadt word. Absorbed in this, he did not 
mark the sound of an ajpproaching boat; 
and if he heard a speaking-trumpet hailing 
the Saticy Jane, he probably, with the igno- 
rance of a landsman,' supposed it to be the 
captain giving some important order. The 
boom of a cannon just over his head, a 
clamour of diouts^ and the sounds of tram- 
pling feet, attracting at last his attention^ 



S96 KBioraniL 

kepofc Im ktnd to a snill bdl to 
tkeciptadn. 

At tint inf nt tte ciplBii psdied c^en 
Ae dooTy md hutitj ffrtwrd. Hie ma witli- 
oafc Ids bit^ Us fiffing baid matoniy and 
stimed lij aewcnl drops of Uood ; bat WDdfire 
Ad not dbsenre ai^ mmiidy ttoa^ lie anr lie 
Md Us ligkt kud ti^ktiy to kis kft ana. 

^Finta!" ma tke odtf word ke atiered, 
lyfAiiig iauklly vitib a aMwii. 

^Adiooia!* cried WDdfiie, alaiBed, but 
stm&sliiaiabtyeoQL ''C^tun^obfigefliefliea 
by haii£iig me nj perake finom tkat peg over 
joor kead. Tkankee. By tUs B^i^ I mvsfe 
Ude. I wouldii't for a tkoasuid Jacobs kare 
tiiese de^wrtchfs taken. Ton Jen of Maka^ 
don*t tnm ckkken, bat siD V me (I tUnk OaftTa 
Ae amd) in your bixaitlocker.'* 

^Ikafs tke fint phee tke Tflbhis ma- 



^In tke povdeiHnaganne tiien : tiwyH 
nercr kok tkere; and I cm amnse mTsdf 
widi a pipe of Trinidado till dieyVe gone.* 



THE LITTLE BLiCK BOX. 297 

" Why, you'd be blown up, Sir Roger, be- 
fore I could count six.'' 

"Egad, so I would; I never thought of 
that. Well, anywhere ; and if they ask for 
me (but they won't ask for me), say I'm dying 
in my hammock of the plague-r-call it the 
Black Death ; it'll frighten 'em ; or—" 

"Lor' love ye. Sir Boger, avast with all 
that ; these fellows will search the very bal- 
last before they go ; and curse me, for all I 
know, perhaps shave us both without a razor." . 

" The Mahommedans 1 " said Wildfire, care- 
fully cramming the paper into the box, and lock- 
ing it. Then, unscrewing the round knob of 
his sword-hilt, he thrust the small silver key 
into the handle of his rapier, which seemed 
made tubular for such purposes. After this, 
with the utmost[coobess, he drew a letter from 
a secret pocket in his broad richly-laced sword- 
belt, and slipped it under his voluminous wig, 
re-adjusting the peruke with much care in a 
cabin-glass. 

While he was still doing this, the noise of 



^98 ICE BOUND. 

some one with a wooden leg stumping ddwn 
the cahin-stairs was heard ; and the next mc^ 
ment a truculent red-faced fellow^ with a patch 
of black taSeta over one eje^ and with a woodeii 
leg^ swaggered into the cabin^ stroking a huge 
pair Of red moustiEichoes that curled up to his 
pig-like eyes^ that seemed literally choked by 
the Inultitude of wrinkles with which years of 
villany and cunning had pleated his &ce. He 
held a broad sabre in one hand ; while from d 
belt, fastened with a huge biinch of blue rib- 
bons, hung four pairs t)f pistols. Hie hardly gave 
the cia^ptain or Wildfire a look ; but slashing i^ 
piece of wood about a foot long off the table 
with a blow of his sWord, seated himself 
across one of the great guns^ and fired off 
a pistol as a signal for help. 

In a moment two bearded sailors^ brown 
and swarthy, and wearing yoluminous white 
shirts and wide Panama hatd, flung themselves 
into the cabin. 

" What's this footy little wash-tub loaded 
with?'' 



THE LimE BLA€K BOX. 299 

^^ She carrier a cargo of clal^t^ as a prese&t 
from Lonia the Great (so the ship's papera 
call him) to t&e King of England." 

<^ m saye him> then> one debauch at least. 
Bring some punch for me and these gentlemen ; 
and harkeoi Jack Bolton, if I hear you again 
caUitig that d— d Mounseer Loiiis the Great, 
ship's papers or no ship's papers, 111 cleave 
yott to ti&e 1)risket; and you know what old 
Timbertoe'a word is; so do the Spaniards, 
d — ^'em^ and the Indians too, for like of that." 

And as he sidd this^ the rbugh-fingered vil'- 
lain looked down his sword, and observing a 
wet patch of blood half-way down the blade, 
deliberately wiped it on WUdfire's wig. 

Wildfire's coolness at this forsook him. He 
leapt on his feet, and, dr&wing his sword, Was 
about to run the insolent ruffian through the 
body, when he felt his arm seized, and looking 
behind, observed that four sailors stood at hii 
back^ and two b^ind Us friend the captain 
of the Sawy Jam. 

"Nowi Jookee here/' said the pirate^ gria* 



300 ICE BOUKD. 

ning and showing his teeth; "I forgive-ee 
this 'ere time^ because you are what we may 
call a lubber^ and unused to our ways ; but 
by G — if you touch your fox agaiti^ 111 whip 
off both your hands at the wrist^ and you 
know what old Timbertoe's word is/' 

Then^ taking a tremendous draught at the 
smoking punch-bowl that had now been 
brought in, he bade Wildfire and the captain 
both drink ; for care killed a cat, and it was 
the fortune of war, reminding them that they 
were fortunate in falling into gentlemen's 
hands — gentlemen who knew what breeding 
was, too, and who were judges of claret. 

Then, observing that these trite maxims 
of piratical philosophy neither abated the 
white heat of Wildfire's rage, nor the despair 
of the captain, he cursed them both for a 
set of downhearted fools, and finished the 
bowl himself 

At a shout of the commodore, "Bring 
'em up!" the "gentleman of fortune," — as 
he called himself, pirate being a vulgar 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 301 

word — stumped up-stairs^ desiring his men to 
bring the prisoners, and firing off a pistol to 
announce that he was coining. 

An extraordinary scene met Wildfire's eye 
when he ascended upon deck. On the 
quarter-deck stood the pirate-commodore — a 
short burlj man, of proud bearing, who spoke 
with a Welsh accent. His eyes were large 
and fierce ; his mouth thick and sensual, 
turned up at the comers with a mixture 
of ferocity and cunning. His thick roll of 
double-chin was half hid by a thick lace 
crayat that fell in ample folds over a splendid 
Spanish dress of crimson brocade. His hose 
were of crimson velvetj and his shoes were 
tied with crimson ribbon. In his hat was a 
feather, also of crimson. He wore no wig, 
but his own dark brown hair, thick and 
coarse, fell upon his shoulders. Round his 
neck hung a gold chain of great size, with a 
diamond cross at one end, and he held a drawn 
sabre in one hand, and courteously beckoned 
Wildfire to advance. The sailors of the 



StnKyJamlKfhtmml m kopt « tke dec^ 
Aegme witib trae wAm^ mB^ 
i; fir cKMMilj kad Ataij got tihe 
of far. Swoi H lot iBiiHyy Wilffire 
ooddnofclidpHiEiigtoseeliB nkl^ Mffle- 
fleoTy psle md lihttinfe im Ae kiads of m 
dofln Um^ mm cfwkm hdd pikes in 
Ov hndB, md often HadxIiL Hie ms- 
jiHitj of &e pirate nOonwcrCykoweiw, bwf 
tippiBg m pile of dnct ads md leffing oai 
file fiquor vUk cms md c^ol A Sbw^ wmate 
nddj' dressed, were I71BS ^^ iiAs of tte 
finest Bnen, endenfiy the prodoee of some 
recent pfamder; snd two otters were '^mA- 
ing" some Innfy-liolfles fcf kiiockiiig off 
liie necks widi tte Uow of s cnflasSy s proceas 
Ast liroke about one in three. AD ike 
piraten^ Wildfire olwened, were Isrown as 
ppoBS, md seessed tanned by tropeal 



Tne conunodorey enj^ojed in reading tibc 
ASfn p^en, fid not fir a mmnent or two 
address a word to Ae prisonen^ or eren fift 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 303 

his eyes to look at them. A select guard — 
consisting of the boatswain^ conspicuous hj 
his silver whistle ; the gunner^ holding a roll 
of lighted match still in his hand ; and the 
quartermaster^ the leader of the boarders — 
were peering over the commander's shoulder 
with looks of admiration at the learning with 
which '^ he spelled out the conjuring books/' 
The gunner broke the silence by commg up, 
with much apparent friendliness, and asking 
Wildfire "What it was o'clock?'' With a 
low bow, that gentleman presented him with a 
large gold watch set with diamonds, hopmg 
he would keep it ^'as a small memento of 
their meeting." The brutal wretch replied, 
^'Itll make a cursed good football;" and 
throwing it on the deck, skimmed it with his 
foot into the sea. 

At the roar of laughter from the sailors 
who witnessed this achievement, the commo- 
dore looked sternly up, and his eye falling at 
once with a pounce upon the offender, he 
drew a pistol from his belt and fired, and the 



304 ICE BOUND. 

gunner fell bleeding on the deck, shot through 
the shoulder. A murmur of disapprobation 
ran round amongst the crew. 

^^He broke our third article^ which is, 
' Never to insult prisoners when quarter has 
once been given/" said the commodore. 
'^Tve broken his shoulder; and I'd have 
done the same, bj the pody of St. Tafid! 
if he had been one of the best lords in the 
ship.'' 

The commodore^ Morgan, was an old bucca- 
neer, known to be pistol-proof; and the mur- 
murers grew silent as he coolly loaded his 
pistol again, as if instinctively, and slipped it 
into his embroidered belt. 

*'Sir Roger Wildfire," said the pirate, 
turning to the prisoners, having first taken 
up the gunner's lighted match, that lay 
smoking at his feet, then setting fire to a 
pile of papers, and bowing till his red feather 
swept the deck, "your servant; Captain 
Henderson, your slave. You, I believe," 
turning to Wildfire's companion, "are cap^ 



THE LITTLS BLACK BOX. 305 

tain of the gchooner Saucy Jane^ and 
formerly Keutenant in Monk's Cold- 
streams/' 

"I am/' said Henderson, bowing, and 
watching with a rueful side-glance the 
fire smouldering through his ship's 
papers. 

'^ Never mind those musty papers. 
€arajo, you seem as fond of them as if 
they were your first love-letters. You shall 
have half a dozen ship's papers, if that's 
any use. And you," turning to Wildfire, 
and offering him a pinch from a rich' gold 
snuff-box, the lid of which sparkled with 
diamonds, " Sir Soger Wildfire, of Flaming- 
ton, in the county of Cheshire. My name's 
Morgan — Captain Henry Morgan. I was 
bom not thirty miles firom Caernarvon. 
But that's neither here nor there. You 
are, I beUeve, the bearer of a present firom 
the French king to Charles of Whitehall. 
Believing it unpatriotic in his gracious 
Majesty to turn his back on honest Eng- 

VOL. II. X 



806 ICK BOUND. 

lish ale, and to poison himself with gour 
Freneh Tinegar, I shall, therefore, with the 
approval of these gentlemen, confiscate the 
whole of the cargo/' 

' A buzz of approval rang round at the 
tmly English sentiment, no one appearing 
alive to the want of morality that was its 
inherent defect. 

^ From the confession of Millefieur, your 
valet, who appears to have hardlj yet got 
his sea-legSy or even to know an anchor froflt 
a marline-spike, it appears that you are bearer 
of secret and very important despatches, and 
a small black box, to one Shaitesbury, the 
president of some secret club« — the Calves'- 
Head Club, in Crane Court, Chancery Lane.'* 

^Ut was all fidse, admiral," cried Mille- 
fieur, struggling with the negroes who held 
him, and holding a pouncet-box affectedly to 
his nose, to destroy the odour of the African 
men and brothers. '^It was all false and 
produced by fear; they would have some- 
thing/' 



\ 



THE LITTLE ELAOK BOX. S07 

Millefleur's fear of his master, it should be 
observed, had ik>w overcome his fear for the 
pirate/ particularly as Sir Boger, much to the 
admirati(»i' of the sailors, was carelessly 
combing lus wig, just as he would have done 
in the fiing at the Park, or in Fop's Comer 
at the Duke's Theatre; and one ^ance of 
his eye, implying reduction of wages and 
loss of many perquisites, had been too much 
for MQlefleur's feeble nature. 

"Here is conflicting evidence," said the 
commodore. " We must try what a sweating 
will do; this foppettee seems as if he needed 
exercise.'* 

" A ring, there, a ring ! " cried the pirates, 
some running to the arms-chest, and others to 
the cabin to get candles, more from habit 
than use ; for this punishment was generally 
practised at night, and after a debauch. 

Wildfire, who had heard of a pirate's 
*' sweating," determined, as a warning for his 
cowardly valet, to allow it at least to 
begin. 

x2 



808 ICEBOUND. 

' In five minutes twenty sailors^ armed with 
kniveS; forks, compasses, tucks and pikes, 
had formed a ring round the mainmast, and 
lighted candles had been stuck in the deck, 
within the ring, at intervals of about a foot. 
The musicians were then called ; and to the 
lively dance-tune of " Bobbing Joan,'' Millefleur^ 
half dead with fright, was dragged, shrieking 
and clingmg to everything he passed, till he 
had entered the dreadful circle. In vain he 
implored for mercy, and looked all round for 
help. His master folded his arms and looked 
on with a frown ; while the admiral rubbed 
his hands, as pleased as a butcher at a bull- 
bait ; his wide greasy countenance wore a 
smile of perfect philanthropy. 

" It was all true — ^it was all true ! '* cried 
Millefleur, indifferent to his master's frowns ; 
" by the brightness of heaven, it was all true, 
gentlemen ! " 

The blacks chuckled with delight, and 
pushed out their pikes, as if already in 
anticipation probing a human body. 



THE LITTLE SLICE BOX. 309 

The sailors shouted staves of Spanish and 
Cavalier songs, and scraps of plays. 

** May I live till I see 
Old Noll on a tree, 
And many such as he 1 '' 

roared one ; while a second, with an affected 
whine of devotion, screamed, 

" When we sat down by Babylon, 
And on the willows hung 
Our harps, why then the pagans vile 
Had wished us to have sung." 

" Caramba ! " cried a third ; " this is better 
fun even than singeing the old Spaniard at Ma- 
racaibo, when we burnt his gray beard off, and 
gave him the strappado four times running, 
till he showed us where he hid his pieces of 
eight." 

"Ay, ay. Jack,*' said his companion, roaring 
with delight at the amiable reminiscence; 
" or when we taught the fat fiiar how to swim 
on shore with two-hundredweight tied to his 
paunch." 

"The musicians are waiting for your 
honour to give the signal to strike up; the 



810 ICEBOUND. 

decks are cleared, and the dancers ready/^ 
Morgan yraited a moment, as if tasting a 
pleasure in the delay ; and then with a stento- 
rian voice, as if he was straining to be heard 
above the roar of guns, called out, ^^ Scrapers, 
strike up T 



811 



CHAPTER VIL 

THE RING. 

The moment the fiddlers drew their bows 
across their instruments, the sailor that stood 
nearest to Millefleur gave him a gentle prick 
with th€ sharp point of a boarding-pike. 
With a shriek of rage and terror^ Milleflear 
bounded forward, his thin legs flying with 
supernatural swiftness round the ring, his 
protruding eyes vainly searching for an 
aperture^ and resting only on laughing and 
pitiless faces. A rabbit in a net, a rat in a 
trap, a badger when he is driven into the bait« 
ing-pit, are fdnt types of Millefleur's anxiety 
and vacant horror. Now a poke with a pair 



312 ICEBbUND. 

of compasses sent bin flying to the right ; now 
a thrust of a bayonet, that never touched him^ 
sent him racing to the left. Already his hat 
had fallen ofi^, his coat flown open, his 
pouncet-box dropped, his band was torn off, 
and his silk stockings were slipped about his 
heels. A more pitiable object of vexation and 
despair and cowardice never drew laughter 
from a band of Indians. 

" Cannibals ! " he screamed, " for the love of 
Mary, let me go ! '' 

^^^He's a Papist ! make him dance a quicker 
step/' said the psalm-singer. 

But at that moment, when the hedge of 
porcupine-quills, as one fellow called them, 
was bristUng more terrible than ever, 
Millefleur, overcome by terror, fell in a 
swoon at the foot of the mast. 

A Cavalier sailor, thinking the swoon a 
sham, was about to wake him up with a touch, 
from a pair of compasses, when Morgan, in 
whose ear Wildfire had been for some time 
whispering, cried ''Stop!? with a voice of 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. Sl$ 

thunder.' Biit the men were not' willing to 
be 80 easily balked of their prey, and began 
to form again in a ring. 

" I swear by all that's good and bad, if you 
don't stop," cried Morgan, " as sure as I 
burnt Panama, I'll send some of you to your 
own place ! " 

At this threat the men fell slowly and re- 
luctantly into groups, and lowered the points 
of their various weapons ; while the gunner^, 
who had been leaning upon one arm shouting 
approval, fell back exhausted, and cried for a 
surgeon, " for the bullet was burning his blood 
up." Whilst three or four sailors were lower- 
ing the wounded man into a boat to take him 
into the pirate-vessel. The Englishman^ Re- 
venge^ that, with black flag displayed, was 
lying alongside, the pirate-cook, a greasy 
fellow, who was also the surgeon, threw a 
bucketful of claret over Millefleur to recover 
him. With a silly stare, he began at last to 
move, and his pale lips articulated, ^^ Coming, 
sir." - 



314 Ks Bouin). 

Before the laugh that this excited had died 
away, and just as tiie Talet was sitting up and 
staring at the laughing fiu^es roond him with 
the air of a man awakened fit>m an onpleasant 
dream^ the boatswain^ who, to judge from his 
only having one ear, had probably, at some time 
or other, suffered for his country's good at ar 
London pillory, picked the sufferer's pocket of 
a gilt box, which proved to contain the scented 
powder witii whidi the valet daily perfbtned 
his master's wig. In a moment a dozen homy 
fingers were plunged into it, supposing it to 
be some peculiar sort of snuff. The valet had 
just strength enough left to feebly inform 
them of their mistake, and to beg them to 
remember that Sir Soger was nearly out of 
Marischal Powder, and that there was no 
more to be got nearer than Paris. 

^^ Dear gentlemen, we shan't have enough 
for our wig for three days." 

To this plaintive entreaty the quartermaster 
replied by throwing a handful of the powder 
into Millefleur's eyes, and, under cover of the 



THE LITTLE BLIOK BOX. 815 

€loudy whipping out a iratch and three duca- 
toons from his side-pocket — a well-known 
pickpocket's trick, that was received with 
great applause. 

The wooden4egged fellow, to express his 
sympathy with the blinded and spluttering suf- 
ferer, now ordered another bowl of punch ; and 
shouting out as a toast, '^ Success to trade I" 
meaning robbery in general, invited Millefleur 
to drink, borrowing Morgan's gold cross to 
stir up the fragrant beverage. 

With an expression of great disgust, Mille- 
fleur, who was a Roman Catholic, pudied the 
bowl from hinu 

At this act of mutiny, the quartermaster, 
who had been shouting out, 

^' It Wew 80 iMurd, d'ye see, 
If joall credit Ben and me, 
It blew away the wig of the gallant commo— dore," 

stopped in the middle of the last word, and 
drawing out a pistol, pointed to the bowl, 
shouting, ^^That or this! Tom Sogers is 
steel to the backbone, and allows no man to 
flinch from his cup." 



316 I€E BOUND. 

With a rueful face Millefleur seized the 
bowl and gulped down a spoonful, upon 
which the Ganymede who bore the nectar 
gave the bowl a heel forward that sent thei 
Valet backwards, the punch pouring over his 
face, and the bowl covering him up like an 
extii^guisher. 

^^ Him in the common box, massa cap'n,'' 
said a negro gunner's-mate, deliberately strip-' 
ping another sailor of a richly-laced French 
suit that he had taken from Wildfire's valise^ 
" Him all fair and 'bove board here." 

^^ Leave him alone; we don't sell such 
rigging as that at the mast. Take this, you 
white lily ; I don't want your ticker as long 
as I've got the sun and the stars." And so 
saying, the quartermaster flung the black 
Millefleur's watch. The black fafling to 
catch it, it struck a spar, and the glass break- 
ing, it fell on the deck. 

The black, fingering his pockets to see 
after a place big enough for such a rich 
prize, picked it up with as much caution as 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 317 

if it was a snake/ and, with an extraordinary 
grimace, put it to his ear. In a. moment 
he threw it down on the deck with a 
tremendous smash, as he might have done 
a scorpion. 

" Why, what^s the matter, Jupiter ? '* 

" Yah ! him stone-dead." 

The watch had stopped. At this singular 
mistake — ^for the black had always supposed a 
watch to be either a living thing, or a powerful 
fetish shut up in a ^old case — the sailors 
burst out laughing; but one of them, who 
had perhaps been a watchmaker, picked it 
up, and opening the works,* touched the 
wheels, and setting them again in motion, 
held it to the Ashantee man's ear. The bla^k 
instantly fell down, and with clasped hands 
and prayers, mixed with wild gesticulations, 
prayed the great sleeping fetish to spare his 
life. 

At this moment Morgan came forward, and 
ordering a boy to beat a signal on the 
drum, and the trumpeters to sound, re^ 



318 iCKBOUKir. 

quested alence with the uBual amount of 
noise with which sueh requests ace generallj 
accompanied. 

^^Gentlem^i of fortune,'' said WiidfirCy 
stepping forward, '^ bear me witness, that I 
will rather be cut into pound pieces than 
betray my trust. You, captain, have got 
his. Majesty's wine and my ducatoons. To 
my clothes the sailors are wdcooie; but 
what good can a small black box be to a 
crew of pi — ^I mean, adyenturers — gallant 
adventurers?" 

^^ It's all one," said Morgan, his face pur* 
pling with rage. ^^Quartermaster, bring up 
that prisoner there, and try the * question.' ^ 

In a moment Millefleur was dragged up by 
two brawny sailors, while two others twisted 
a looped cord round the butts of two pistols, 
and slipped the noose over his head. In 
another instant the torture would have be- 
gun, when Sir Roger, stepping forward, drew 
the box from a secret pocket, and handed it 
to Morgan* 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 319 

^^ It's locked/' said Morgan^ with a sneer ; 
" and of course you've lost the key ; but I 
carry a master»key ready for such emer- 
gencies." He drew out a pistol, and then 
bidding a sailor hold out the box at forty 
paces, blew open the lid as deanly as if it 
had been done by a smith. He drew out 
the deed, and read with much interest the 
first two lines, then carefully rolled it up, 
and put it into his side-pocket. ^^ A thing 
of no consequence," he said, smiling ; ^^ but 
we sometimes want parchment, and we can 
scrub out this writing. It's twenty years 
since I saw the foggy old city," he con- 
tinued, turning to Wildfire, who stood silent 
and thoughtful, as if meditating some des- 
perate enterprise, " and I scarcely know how 
things go on now." 

"Why, bless my heart," chimed in the 
quartermaster, " didn't you overhaul that 
paper ? " 

" Tom Sogers, you clap a stopper on your 
jaw, or caspetto I'll shoot you like a dog>" 



320 ICEBOUND. 

said Morgan, griping his pistol with a scowl of 
rage at the interruption. " When I left Eng- 
land/' he continued, *^ old Noll ruled the roast, 
and everything was as cheerful as Porto Bello 
in a sickly season. The church bells rang from 
morning to night for prayers and exercises, and 
the old Cavaliers daren't put their noses out 
of the tavern doors — besides, half of them 
were in prison ; there was nothing heard 
but * My Lord Protector this,' and *My 
Lord Protector that;' and there was always 
some fresh raw head to stare at on Temple 
Bar or London Bridge. It was the fashion 
then to turn up the whites of your eyes 
when you called for a bottle of sack, and to 
say grace an hour long after a stale her- 
ring; to talk through your nose, and read 
scraps of the Crumbs of Comfort^ and Solve 
for a Wounded Conscience^ to the gentle- 
men at the ordinary-dinner. Then at night, 
whisperings and pale faces, set teeth and 
bits of bread in the Alicant, with toasts 
of, 'God send this crumb w^ down,* 



TOE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 821 

'The king shall enjoy his own again,' and 
'Stone walls do not a prison make/ sung 
under breath and with faint voices. Curse 
the time I The very thought of it makes 
me sick. Zounds^ a week of it cured me; 
so away I made to Wapping, and shipped 
in the Spanish Bounty for the golden 
Indies.'' 

'' It's as good as a play to hear the admiral 
talk," said one sailor to another. 

''As for plots, egad, it's much the same 
now," said Wildfire, resuming his usual cool* 
ness. 

*' So I'm told," said Morgan, winking with 
one eye, and putting his tongue in his cheek 
as a signal for the sailors to laugh, which of 
course they did, although they did not see 
the joke. 

" The succession is now the great subject 
of discussion at the cofiee-houses," said Wild- 
fire. " The True Blues are for Papacy and 
the Duke of York, the Whigs for the Duke 
of Monmouth. The Green-Ribbon Club and 

VOL. II. T 



322 .^ ICEBOtJND. 

the Singes-Head Club are in battle array; 
Nothing else is talked about. The papers foam 
at the mouthy the pulpits ring i^ith cries of 
Whig and Tory. The City, almost to a man, 
are for my Lord Shaftesbury, who rules them 
by a word." 

"And his Majesty?" said Morgan-^ for 
Millefleur had told him all this before. 

'^ Divides his gracious time between his 
dogs, his horses, and his mistresses. White- 
hall, the ducks in St. James's Park, and the 
game of mall, occupy his spare moments; 
in a secondary degree, the present state of 
France and Spain." 

" Gentlemen," said Morgan, turning to his 
crew, " I think we may now dismiss this gal- 
lant Whig gentleman, and proceed you know 
where; for time runs on, and we ought to 
sight the Lizard before " 

" Dead men tell no tales," said the quar- 
termaster, looking to the priming of his 
pistol; "and I say its clean against our 
tenth article to let a prisoner go when 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 823 

near an enemy's port. D j if we are 

trapped, if I don't lay it to the Commodore's 
womanish mercy/' 

^^ Listen to him ! " cried a handful of 
mutineers. 

" Harkee, Tom Eogers," said Morgan. 
"I'm captain, and I'll be obeyed, or I'll 
know the reason why. You've got to lead 
the boarders, and see that the men stick to 
their guns, there your work ends. I say 
these gentlemen shall go free ; and, diavoh^ 
I'U shoot the first man down who lays a hand 
on them 1 " 

** The admiral's right — ^hear the admiral ! " 
shouted the fickle crew, preparing to carry 
off their plunder, and hustling the quarter- 
master, who now slunk away, cursing in a 
low voice, and darting poisonous glances at 
the prisoners. 

"Sir Koger Wildfire, I wish you a very 
good morning, a fair wind, and good weather. 
My compliments to Lord Shaftesbury and 
his Majesty. Captain Henderson, save you. 



324 ICE BOUND. 

Trumpeters, sonnd up!" And with these 
words the pirate-admiral strode off to his 
boat, followed by all his crew in militarj 
order, the Ashantee man only staying be- 
hind to beg Millefleor to take back, his fetbh, 
for it was too powerful for him. 

The next moment a thunder of cannon 
sounded in salute, and the vessels parted 
company. 



END OF VOL. 11. 



a. BORK, PRDSTES, OL0UGE8TEB 8TB££T, BBQEHT'S PA&K. 






ICE BOUND. 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 

CHAPTER Till. 
THE TRUE PROTESTANTS. 

It was the sunset of a day at .the latter end 
of June; the rich light was burning in 
the western sky with a radiancy as if the 
golden doors that bar us from heaven had 
been for a moment thrown apart — a flood 
of molten gold, jetted up from some west- 
em volcano, whose fires seemed to flash out 
here and there through the swimming radi- 

VOL. III. B 



2 ICE BOUND. 

ancy spreadmg over London, that had bat 
lately arisen from its ashes like a spirit, 
purified and radiant, from the black embers 
of the martyr's pile. The western light, so 
full of ineffable splendour, blazing like a 
second conflagration on a thousand windows, 
both of garret and palace, weltered in 
such flakes of metallic lustre upon the 
Thames, that the old buccaneers at Wapping 
must have rubbed their eyes, and fancied 
themselves anchored safe in the El Dorado of 
their life-long dreams. But earth-worn men, 
now returning from their labours, turned their 
eyes upon the pavement, and cared not for 
such every-day wonders; a thousand water- 
men drove their oars through the glittering 
water, and thought only of the fare. 

Nor was it the property of such materialised 
minds alone to despise transitory nature 
pageants like this ; for, in its full lustre, the 
light passed into the rooms of a palace in 
Aldersgate Street — a nobleman's mansion of 
the Palladian style of architecture, rich with 



THX LITTLS BLACK BOX. 8 

wreatbs and dancing boys, Ionic pillars and 
sculptured pediments, designed by Inigo 
Jones himself, if we may trust to the traces 
of his evident manner. At the window of a 
magnificent room, hung with embroidered 
yellow satin that now gleamed like burnished 
metal in the innocuous flame of the sun, sat 
Lord Shaftesbury, the ambitious ruler of the 
turbulent Protestant democracy of London; 
the most powerful titled demagogue that 
perhaps England has ever known, careless 
of it all 

Anthony Ashley Cooper, otherwise Lord 
Shaftesbury, was at this time in about the fifty- 
sixth year of his age. His early excesses, 
and the infirm health produced by a fall from 
his carriage at Breda, when arranging the 
return of Charles, had made him prematurely 
old. His hair, long since grey, was, however, 
hidden by a richly curled wig of dark brown 
hair that streamed down almost to his shoulders, 
and somewhat concealed the inroads of time. 
But for a certain hoUowness of cheek and eye, 

b2 



4 ICE BOUND. 

Shaftesbury would have been still handsome : 
for his features were bold and in harmony; his 
mouth firm, but contracted by habitual craft ; 
his chin strongly cast and well set. His rest- 
less and eager eye, however, betrayed, through 
all the caution of the diplomatist, the fierce 
and hungry ambition of the man. Nothing of 
what his enemies called versatility was visible 
in his face ; for his political changes had been 
the result of deliberate and unprincipled pre- 
meditation. He had never shifted his parlia- 
mentary seat but to get nearer the throne. 
The deep deliberation with which he betrayed 
government after government had preserved 
the respect of his opponents and the awe of 
the multitude, accustomed to political changes 
still more palpably base and treacherous. 

Not a year since Shaftesbury had seceded 
from the Privy Council, of which he was lord 
president, to retire to his fortress in the city, 
over which he now ruled with a despotism more 
powerful than nominal royalty. Ten thousand 
" brisk boys," as he called them, would rise 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 5 

in arms at the movement of his finger, and 
the court at once dreaded and detested an 
enemy so subtle and so powerful. More 
practical than Halifax, more wise than Essex, 
of a more comprehensive mind than Sunder- 
land, Shaftesbury had now reached the cul- 
minating point of his political greatness. The 
planners of the Popish plot acknowledged him 
the saviour of the nation ; the infamous Oates 
himself laid all his honours at his patron's 
feet. If he appeared in the city, the turbu- 
lent 'prentices, flaunting with party-colours, 
crowded to drag his carriage ; at civic festivals 
he ruled as a king. Even at Whitehall he 
divided crowds with his sovereign, and his 
appearance in the park was sufficient to gatheif 
round him a vast retinue of friends, parasites, 
and trimmers. The Whigs, the Birminghams, 
the Patchmen, and the Exclusionists looked 
upon him as a deity ; the anti-Birminghams, 
the Abhorrers, and the Tantivies — ^in a word, 
the Tories — as a monster of sedition, a rebel, 
and a political quacksalver. Dryden's party. 



6 lOS BOUND. 

never forgetful of the poef s blood-drawing 
satire, called him Aohitophel ; the Earl's own 
friends looked upon him as a second David sent 
to slay the Goliath of Popery. His party con- 
sisted of rich citizens, disbanded officers, and 
wandering fanatics ; the Puritans and Fifth- 
Monarchy men, and the Bepublicans, were his 
ns well heart and soul. His opponents were the 
old Tory gentry and the whole body of the Bo- 
man Catholics of England. The court of pro- 
fligates, sceptics, and panders trembled at a 
man whose mandate had just brought Lord 
Strafford to the scaffold ; and Charles himself, 
amid all his heartlessness and fashionable phi- 
losophy, dreaded an ambition the more terrible 
because it was vague and undefined. 

The crafty statesman of whom we speak was 
seated at arichly ornamented tablethathad been 
wheeled into a window-recess, turning over with 
earnest, contracted brow one of the numerous 
piles of papers, and occasionally allowing his eye 
to wander over the grey stones of the court- 
yard, which the window commanded ; resting it 



THE UTTLB BLICK BOX. 7 

sumetimeSy with what seemed a half-restrained 
smile, on four cannon of large calibre that 
had been placed there under pretence of 
guarding his person during the first heat of 
the Popish plot, just a week after the dis^ 
coverj of the murdered body of Sir Edmond- 
bury Godfrey upon Primrose Hill. 

''Such is ambition, the poets say/' he 
mutt^ed half aloud, watching the sun already 
sinking behind the roofs, which cut black and 
sharp against its fading light. '' Bah ! what is 
ambition to the poet, a mftnwhowants ashilling? 
whose only ambition is for a dinner. Men rail 
against ambition who never felt the appetite ; 
one hour of this glory they might at least 
acknowledge is worth a dozen of tame noon- 
days. Who would trot along on a dull 
hackney who had the power to rein the fiery 
curvetings of a barb? Who would bathe in 
the stagnant horsepond of domestic life when 
he could bufiet the tempest billows into sub- 
jection, and make them bear him like tame 
horses to the land where he would be. 



8 ICE BOOND. 

Twenty jears more of life/' mused the states- 
man, feeling his pulsei with his watch in 
one hand and somewhat of the nervous eager- 
ness of a valetudinarian, eyeing, his thin 
wrist and shrunk hand, '^ say the physicians, 
— quacks and cheats, the whole of the crew, 
with their potable-gold, and life-elixirs. Well, 
say twenty years of life ; in five more I will'' 
'(his voice sank till it became inaudible), ^' or 
rule him that wears one. One has been 
already in my grasp, and, fool that I was, I 
let it go because a satire bit me in the heel ; 
now I am of stronger stuff. But enough of 
this. Let us see what the Protestant InteOir 
gencer says to-day; or I'll take the True 
NewSj for the Catholic lies are really more 
plausible than those we manufacture." 

Then, throwing himself back in his almost re- 
gal chair of crimson velvet, that was embroid- 
ered with arms and coronets, — for Shaftesbury, 
like many other ambitious men, loved to be 
surrounded by even the emblems of power, — 
he read earnestly for a few moments; then 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 9 

took up some long lists of names and figures 
that lay on the table, and laughed aloud. 

^' ' Thirty thousand Jesuits dressed as 
pilgrims to start from Corunna for Wales.' 
Very well conqeived, prettily thought of; Sir 
Henry Griffith and all you Popish splutter- 
ing squires tremble over your toasted cheese 
and nappy ale. ' A Roman Catholic banker's 
threat to kill his Majesty' (the heretical 
tyrant I yes, that's the phrase) ^ overheard 
by Captain Dangerville at an ordinary near 
the Bishop of Durham's house, Covent 
Oarden.' Ingenious fiction! 'Three thou- 
sand' (never less than thousands) 'priests 
coming over as Dutch sailors, French mer- 
chants, and Jew pedlars; left St. Omer on 
the 10th.' Inventive genius of Gates ! But 
really I must let somebody warn the fellow 
to throw more probability into his stories, or 
the Papists will laugh us out of court. How 
I see Halifax laugh at that — ^the trimmer ! — 
our Essex groan, and Godolphin bow and 
sneer I Now what does tny Catholic friend 



• 



10 ICE BOUND; 

0. at the old story — ^The body of MephibosKeth 
and the soul of Shimei ' ? That's rather too 
# bitter ; my friend with the elbows out must 

beware the cudgel, which is the best ciensor 
in these times, when the insolence of mankind 
can only be repressed by horsewhips or 
pistol-bullets/' , Then, with the impetuosity 
of his nature, the old statesman rose feebly 
from his chair, and advancing a step or two 
to the folding-doors which led to hiii secre- 
tary's room, called, " Mr. Locke, Mr. Locke.*' 
In a moment, calmly, with none of the 
hurry of the parasite and little of the obse- 
quiousness of the courtier, the great philo- 
sopher, then still young, entered with a 
paper in his hand. This noble preacher of 
toleration was at this time residing in the 
house of his patron, serving occasionally as 
his private secretary, and educating the future 
author of the Characteristics. Contrary to 
the fashion of the times, he wore his own 
hair, which fell in soft flowing lines upon his 
shoulders, which were already slightly bent 



THE UTILB BLACK BOX. 11 

by the incessant stooping of student-life. 
His features were bold ; but a smile of great 
benevolence played about his mouth. His 
forehead was broad and round, his lips being 
niether thin and ascetic nor full and sensual ; 
his chin was bold, and his head well set on his 
neck; his eyebrows were full and rather arched; 
his eyes bright and healthy, but somewhat 
cold ; his complexion pale, but still clear and 
fresh. As for his costume, it was plain and 
almost puritanical, yet neat, and with nothing 
of the slovenliness of a pedant. 

With an abstracted manner, the philosopher 
handed Shaftesbury the writing upon which 
he had been engaged. 

" ' A few thoughts on innate ideas ?' This 
is not it, Mr. Locke.'' 

" I beg your lordship's pardon, you have 
the wrong paper," said the philosopher, with 
a smile at his own absence of mind ; and 
stepping into the inner room, he returned in 
a moment with a pamphlet in which, by the 
direction of his patron, he had been attempt- 



12 I€S BOUND. 

ing to rouse his calm nature to the yiolence 
of political diatribe. Shaftesbury ran his eye 
oyer it, and looked up with an ur of yezation. 

"Very good, Mr. Locke; worthy — and I 
say it without flattery — of your thoughtful 
and forgiving mind ; but it wants the venom 
of personality. Take a lesson fnmi Shad well, 
and talk of the black patch on Arlington's 
nose ; or ridicule Lauderdale's broad Scotch, 
and Hyde's drunken furies. Throw fireworks 
among them, and spirt out the flame of true 
Protestant wrath, like Johnson. Make Halifiuc 
reading Machiavel and Plato alternately, and 
laugh at Sunderland's wise silence. Don't 
forget an allusion to Sardanapalus, and be 
sure to put in a eulogy of Queen Bess, to 
please the clubs. Call Monmouth the young 
Josiah, and finish off with allusions to the 
Inquisition and Smithfield. You use too 
tender colours ; you must daub with red and 
blue, to catch the people." 

"Really, my lord," said Locke, "this poll- 
tical writing is somewhat alien to a nature de- 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 13 

voted to philosophical meditatioDi and now ab- 
sorbed in abstractions on mental phenomena/' 

"Well, well, 'tis very well," answered 
Shaftesbury, glancing at the paper; "but it's 
too good for the readers. No one but silly 
Lord Coleraine feeds horses with cheesecakes. 
What think you of the plot; goes it not 
bravely, every clamour of the people now 
filling roundly the sails of the good ship 
Protestantism ?" 

^' I will yidd to no one, my lord, in ab- 
horrence," replied the philosopher, looking 
grave and sorrowfiil, " of the intolerance and 
despotism of the Boman Pontiff; but I have 
no sympathy with that fellow Gates, who, 
however he may be treated by the mobile, 
seems to me, with due deference to your lord- 
ship, to be, after all, but a greasy villain. It 
was but last night that I met him on my way 
home from Monmouth Square ; and he must 
needs link his arm in mine, and, all down 
»Holbom, pour into my ear such loathsome, 
nay, blasphemous, expressions against her 



li ICE BOUND. 

Majesty the queen (and he onoe a minister of 
God), that I called quickly for a sedan and a 
link-boy, and hurried hither, not without some 
expressions o^ I think, just indignation." 

^^ Gates is not an apostle," said Shaftesbury, 
smiliDg at the unworldly anger of the philo- 
sopher, which, in this case, might have been 
attended with danger. '' When the pot boils, 
the scum floats at the top. A less scrupulous 
man would be trodden under foot, my dear 
Mr. Locke, in such times as ours. If every 
one now has not his price, as the king's 
fitvourite adage rons, at least every virtue 
has its melting-point; for the purest there is 
some temptation or another, which is sailing in 
search of him, and will scuttle him one day at the 
first broadside. Every one sinks a mine now ; 
and if you would not be sent prematurely to 
heaven in a blast of fire, you must mine 
deeper than your adversaries. When a dixp 
is drifting on a lee-shore, and the sailors are 
drinking or at prayers, he surely deserves to be 
captain who first seizes the helm and drives 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 1 5 

her back from a danger so desperate. I am 
that sailor ; Titus is my first mate ; I 
steer to a port — ^he works at the ropes and 
trims the sails. Since the throwing-out of 
the Exclusion Bill, the Protestant enthusiasm 
has been at blood-heat ; for every fat alder- 
man imagines himself the peculiar object of 
Catholic hatred ; and Oates, who was lately be- 
ginnmg to smk in popular esteem, now struts 
and looks big, and mouths about * the plat ' 
more incessantly than ever. That defeat was 
better to us than a victory. But I have at 
hand a thing, Mr. Locke, that will be worse 
for James tiian twenty Exclusion Bills — a littl^ 
black box — a petard, sir. But no more of that 
tiU the times are ripe. Then let gloomy Essex, 
supple Godolphin, pompous Temple, trimming 
Halifax, and ruffian Lauderdale tremble ; for 
the game is my own, and no man shall pluck 
it out of my hands/' 

"Pardon me, my lord," said Mr. Locke, 
with a grave voice, " if I say that I think 



16 ICEBOUND. 

your text of Scripture ill placed ride by side 
with your political argument/' 

^' I honour your Christian philosophy/' said 
Shaftesbury, who, though the leader of the 
English Protestant cause, like many statesmen 
of the day, was little better than a sceptic ; 
'^ but I can scarcely allow the Scriptures to 
be more than an admirable code of moral 
doctrine, finer than Plato's, yet equally point- 
ing to an unattainable ideal* But no more of 
that now. Is Mr. Dryden still working for 
court-pay? Has any piece of his appeared 
lately?" 

^^ I hear," said Locke, '' that a new piece 
of his is rehearsing at Dorset Gardens, in 
which his grace the Duke of Monmouth is 
sketched under the garb of the Duke of 
Guise." 

^^ Let him beware another cudgelling firom 
Eochester. I'll set the dubs at the play." 

" Mr. Dryden writes with a divine energy," 
said Locke. ^^ 'Tis a pity that he has polluted 
his pen with obscenities worthy only of such de- 



THE UTTLB BLICK BOX. 17 

b'atfchees is the abandoned Sedley and the 
jester Eilligrew;' 

'^ You haye not a courtier's tongue/' stud 
Shaftesburji ''Mr. Looke; but what is less 
a loss, certainly not a courtier's heart ; and 
yet I would rather almost live widi such 
raikehellsy noisy and witty, than with such 
heavy divines as Lord Bussell, or that yehe- 
pient stoic, Algernon Sidney, who would play 
the part of a London Cato, and deems us all 
Sybarites." 

'' At least he cannot be said to be imbued 
with the vices of tiie age," said Locke, slightly 
colouring as he remembered that Shaftesbury 
was himself of a profligate life ; then, to hide 
his confusion — ^for his patron's equanimity 
was notoriously imperturbable — ''Have you 
glanced your eye, my lord, over the Duchess 
of Newcastle's last book, The WorlcTs Olio, 
which I found on your table yesterday ? " 

"Mention not the name of that femme 
savante/^ said Shaftesbury, " that most weari* 
0ome of virtuotis women, who, because she is 

VOL. in. 



18 ICE BOUNP. 

•childless, takes to adopting books, and is 
always miserable for fear one should think shei 
did not write them all herself; a lady M^ho 
discusses everything, from astronomy to 
Greek. Why, she would ruin all the pub- 
lishers in Little Britain." 

" Her book is, indeed, a poor fanciful far- 
rago," said Locke, but seeking, with his usual 
amiability, to side with the minority ; " yet, I 
dare assert, a very good wife— brave, prudent, 
and virtuous, and loving the memory of her 
gallant husband with a devotion that seems 
ridiculous to the pamted sirens of Whitehall 
and the Park." 

'' Commend me to the sirens," said Shaftes- 
bury, '^rather than to such a ridiculous form 
of virtue. I fancy I see the good duchess at 
her morning levees, surrounded by spectacled 
virtuosi, with just sense enough to be the 
meanest of flatterers, and calling her their 
princess and the tenth Muse, while she proses 
over long stories of my Lord and Don John 
at Antwerp.* The Royal Society, with all its 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 19 

new bungling learning, occupies much of her 
time ; she is always inviting parties of people of 
quality to see a flea magnified into a river- 
horse, or to discuss the possibility of supply- 
ing London houses with bottled air from the 
Surrey Downs — ^Pshaw I '' 

As Shaftesbury was still anatombing the 
worthy duchess, mth a slight sneer upon his 
lip, a servant entered the room, clad in the 
well-known orange and purple livery of his 
master^ and presented him with a note. 



c2 



20 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE INTEUDEB. 

Looking at the writing, with a slight contrac- 
tion of the brow, — the greatest evidence of 
surprise that this practised man of the world 
ever allowed himself to show, even in his 
frankest moments, — ^Lord Shaftesbury asked 
who had left the letter. 

The servant replied, it had been thrown 
to him when coming out of the Duke's 
Theatre that night by a lady in a vizard, 
who, whispering in his ear, "Bow,'' — ^the 
agreed word of the night with his lordship's 
adherents,^-drew the letter from her muff; 
when he replied, " Shaft," and slipped it 
4 into his sleeve. ^ 



THE UITLS BUCK BOX. 21 

<< Did any one see its passage, siitah ? '* 

" Only one, my lord — a tall Cavalier in 
blue and nlver/ who then drew upon me, 
and demanded the billiet/' 

^' You replied, of course, by running him 
through the Hver?'' 

"I did, my lord/' 

" And how escaped ? '' 

^^ San back into the dressing-room of the 
theatre, spoke a few words to a young 
actress of my acquaintance, put on a black 
periwig and a dark cloak, and slipped out at 
the badk-^oor into a sedan/' 

" And there was no hue and cry ? " 

"Indeed was there, my lord. Some 
Hectors, seeing my livery of purple and 
yellow, called out, ' Down with the Whigs 1 ' 
and drawing their swords, tried to break into 
the theatre ; but a few City 'prentices, mus- 
tering with their clubs, raised a shout of 
'Down with the Pope ! ' and I left them all 
full tilt, fighting down Fleet Street, — the 
women running to the windows, the watch 



^i ICEBOUND. 

ringing their bells, the Scourers turning out 
from the tavems^ and the flambeau-men and 
hackney^-coach drivers carrying off those that 
were the worst mauled." 

^^And all for this," said Shaftesbury, 
smiling, and holding up the little scented 
letter to Locke. "Jenner, you did well; 
for a first experiment in intrigue, the 
thing was not ill performed. You do right 
always to keep a back-door for retreat. Is 
the City up, think you? " 

"Undoubtedly, my lord. Fleet Street 
was as full as a hive before my sedan 
got out of sight. If it had not been for 
a slight fee, the chairmen would have dropped 
me at the comer of Gracious Street ; but I 
drew my sword, and drove them on ; and 
when I left them at the gate, the quarrel- 
some rogues found out they were Whig and 
Tory, and fell by the ears about the fare." 

" Upon which Tribtdaiion BarehotHe 
would immediately sing : 

* How sweet a thulig it is to see 
Men dwell in pioiu unity I * 



THE URLB BUCK BOX. 28 

Biit these things are well ; they keep np the 
enthiisiasi)ix>f the Protestant citizens, warm 
their blood, and rub the mst off the old 
toasting irons that haye been sleeping oyer 
the chimneys eyer since the ' crowning mercy/ 
as old Noll called it, at Worcester. But 
that last part of the story, Jenner, was^ I see, 
jadidoosly put in, to remind yonr master 
that danger desenres reward. There's a 
gold piece for you, to drink ' Destruction to 
Popery ' in/' 

^' Is it not, my lord,'' said Locke, with a 
ngh, as Jenner left the room with a low 
coTigiy ^^ a somewhat pitiable sight to contem* 
plate tiie uniyersal diyisions of these troublous 
and most unhappy times? Methinkb I do 
sometimes wish for that Mone mossy cell' 
that my friend Mr. Milton writes so sweetly 
of, and I long for a hermitage yet without cm* 
cifix or idol, where I might sit, afar from all 
the storms and fogs of political discord, and 
meditate on man's nature and the ways of 
Providence." 



24 lOB BOUIID. 

^* IVe never read Mr. Milton's ' Paradise 
Lost/ '' said Shaftesbury. <' But Statira teUs 
me— and she has a sharp wit-^that it's too 
theological ; and Bozana tows, with a pretty 
oath, that she had rather read one of 
Mr. Dryden's comedies/' 

^'It is somewhat sectarian, my lord," 
replied Locke, with more warmth than his 
calm and almost phlegmatic nature usually 
displayed, ^' as might be expected of one who 
was Latin secretary to the Lord Protector; 
and yet would even Mr. Sidney, who is some- 
what of the heathen stoic, marvel to see an 
old blind man, a poor widower, tortured by 
disease, deserted by his children, with nothing 
but his pen and his organ to soothe him^ dis* 
course of the deepest mysteries of heaven, his 
face growing radiant as Stephen's when he 
speaks of death." 

'^Egad," said Shaftesbury, '^mind Mr. Locke, 
and send your old rhyming friend some money. 
I honour him for the rebuff he gave the Duke of 
York when he once asked him if he didn't think 



THE LOTLS BIACK BOX. 25 

his blindness the Tisitation of God ; and Mr. 
Milton answered, ' Jost as yonr &ther*s exe- 
cution was/ I rejoice to thmk how Boches^ 
ter most have laaghed out, Lauderdale have 
threatened the old Nonconformist with the 
Gatehouse, and James looked black and 
foolish. M7 time gives me little leisure for 
such reading ; but do the wits not say that 
Mr. Cowley, in his ^ Dayideis/ has far tran- 
scended the old sour schoolmaster's work?** 

''Men who prefer KilligreVs 'Parson's 
Wedding/ with its foolish and somewhat 
obscene jesting, to William Shakspere's 
' Twelfth Night,' may justly acknowledge such 
a preference. But the one is a Jew's-harp, 
the other the harp of the great Jew king 
David." 

" Well, well, your opinion agunst the fops 
for a ducat, Mr. Locke ; but do not talk of 
Shakspere, who although full of genius, as I 
remember at college, when I acted in one of his 
plays, reads, I hold, better in that foul-tongued 
knave Dryden's riclumffk. His wit is 



26 ICEBOUND. 

hardly airy enough for our French taste, and 
is rather scholastic, inyolred, stale, and pon* 
deroos. For my part, give me Moli^re." 

^^ Monsieur Moli^re is given to buffoonery^ 
and doth savour in his merriest scenes some* 
what of the jack-pudding." 

"Tr"3, true," said Shaftesbury, with an 
abstracted air, as if his mind had already 
wandered back into politics, looking again at 
the letter, then turning his eye to the ceil- 
ing. " Look at that," he said, " Mr. Locke," 
pushing it into the philosopher's hand. 

Locke read half aloud: '''Light of my 
life, 200 tells me to-day in Spring hardens 
that it is certainly reported at 50 that A 1 
intends to summon the two Houses on the 
20th.' Really, my lord," he said, "this 
cipher is to me a shibboleth, although I make 
much use in my studies of the still more facile 
brachygraphy." 

" I had forgot you did not know all our 
ciphers. Well, the purport is thb — and it 
comes from a habd that may be depended 



THE UTTLE BUClC BOX. 27 

upon, for old Rowley's secrets are easily pro* 
cnrablei by money or loye — ^the king has 
ventured^ in defiance of my power, to summon 
a Parliament for the 20th. He forgets how 
near Guildhall and Whitehall are, and is 
ignorant of the great engine I can set in 
motion. The Restoration changed our rulers, 
but left the people still unchanged. All goes 
on well. The Duke of Monmouth arrives at 
midnight on the 19th; a public procession 
shall receive him; their shouts shall shake 
the very palace, making James tremble and 
Lauderdale bully and swear. This strong 
demonstration of popular feeling will keep the 
restless Sunderland with the country party, 
and frighten the waverers. You, Mr. Locke, 
must write an address to the citizens, and 
reply to the court-papers; fill it with 
allnsions to the young champion of the 
true religion and the rightful heir to 
the British throne. Speak of his hand- 
some person, winning manners, and zeal 
for Protestantism; recount his deeds in the 



28 ICB BOUND. 

Low Countries ; and hiftt at the Bhck Box 
(which people are so full of) some day tarn** 
ing up to clear his legitimacy. Ask if Wil- 
liam the Bastard was the worse king because 
his birth was not pure ; and conclude by say- 
ing that, this one defect remoyed, no true 
Englishman could doubt on whose head to 
place the crown, unless he wishes to see 
the unhappy kingdom thrown as a mere 
offering at the foot of the abomination of 
the Seyen Hills/' 

As Locke was busily noting dowu the headd 
of his intended pamphlet, a richly-dressed 
black page, wearing armlets of gold, entered, 
and begged Mr. Locke to come to Missus 
Soxana, who wanted his help (so the badly** 
spelt note ran, in the fantastic French 
jargon of the day) to inhale the fraicheur of 
the eyening breeze, '^ and aid her in penning 
a rondeau.^^ 

" Which means to write it for her," said 
Shaftesbury, smiUng. 

Before Mr. Locke, with* a sigh of regret, 



THE Lini4 BLACK BOX. 29 

had had well time to pat away his papers, 
a Freneh yalet entered on his tiptoes, and 
said — 

" Monsieur Locke, my lady^ ezpect-a you 
in tiie Blue Ohambre/' 

As he was on the point of quitting the 
room, the shout of an approaching mob ar- 
rested the nobleman's attention. 

" Mr. Locke,'- said the earl, " my side iS 
troublesome to-night. Will you oblige me by 
opening the window, and listening in what 
direction those sounds are coming? The 
city seems restless." 

'^ The sound," said Mr. Locke, as he drew 
up the rich satin curtains from the window, 
and put out his head to listen, ** comes from 
Cheapside, and seems — ^for the wind blows 
towards us — to be moving rapidly in the 
direction of Aldersgate." 

'*It is like the cry of my Dorsetshire 
hounds," said Shaftesbury, hb eye kindling 
in the esccitement of the moment. '^ Now I 
cannot hear it at all — it seems as far off 



80 ICEBOUND. 

as Temple Bar — ^now it cciases altogether. 
The watch have beaten them all home, the 
cowardly boobies — aht was that a shout 
again ? Yes — again — ^the brisk boys— that'll 
shake Whitehall! To it again! Shout as 
if you were calling from steeple to steeple! 
I should be amongst them now: a speech 
at this crisis. from a balcony might have k 
marked effect. Mr» Locke/ ring the bell; 
bid them bring me my sword and cane^ and 
order the chair* Mind — ^your Mr. Wilson I 
shall employ." 

"What bearers, my lord?" said Jenner^ 
who slided in noiselessly and swiftly. *^ Tom 
and ambling Harry ? They are stout fellows, 
and accustomed to shoulder a crowd — ^the 
same that used to take your lordship to 
the Privy Council. But I think, my lord, 
the mob works this way; for their cry I 
hear is, ' To Lord Shaftesbury's I — ^to Lord 
Shaftesbury's !' Believing it to be your lord-i 
ship's wish, perhaps, to address them, I sent 
put three of your stoutest-lunged fellows ta 
raise this cry." 



THE UTTLE BLiCK BOX. 81 

^'And here come the brave Protestants/' 
futid Shaftesbury; at that moment a roar 
of voices broke out into a shout, and a 
broad glare of light on the opposite house* 
fronts indicated the approach of a mob bear* 
ing torches and flags, and uttering discordant 
cries^ 

The next moment the heavy knocker of 
the courtyard gate was heard thundering 
to the accompaniment of a thousand impa- 
tient dubsticks* The earl could see a 
dozen of his servants running to open it ; 
before they could well throw them back, a 
dark tide of apprentices, citizens, and rabble 
rushed in and filled the court. The foremost 
ringleaders, halting under the window, da*' 
moured loudly for the Protestant earl. At first 
they mistook Mr. Lockefor their idol, andsaluted 
him with acclamations, tossing up their hats^ 
waving their flaring torches, and shaking their 
sticks* Alarmed at this unexpected, and 
sudden popularity, the shy philosopher re- 
tired from the window, and assisted the earl 



32 lOE BOUND. 

from lu9 chair. But the valetudinarian had 
forgotten diaease and infinnity. His tread 
was now firm and bold, his bearing dignified, as 
he advanced to the window, and bowed three 
times to Hxe multitude. 

It was an impressive scene— tiie dark sea 
of heads and upturned shouting faces, all 
reddened by the light of the torches, as if 
with the glare of a great conflagration* 
Many of the more turbulent had bloody 
rags tied round their heads, or had slung 
embroidered swordbdts, torn from beaten ad- 
versaries, round their own brawny, half-naked 
chests; others waved broken swords or watch- 
men's poles. At every word of the eari 
the populace bowed, and rolled like a sea 
after a storm; and the torch-waving and 
bell-ringing commenced with increased fury. 
"No Popery I" "Down with the Pope!'* 
'^ The Protestant succession 1 " were the 
cries. "Three cheers for the friend of the 
people!" "Three cheers for the Duke of 
Monmouth I '^ 



THE lutlb black box. 83 

^' Way for his holiness I '^ cried the mob,' 
as four stalwart draymeDy wearing the broad 
leather aprons of their order, staggered 
forward, amid hisses and laughter, bear- 
ing an effigy of the Pope, crowned and 
robed,, and sitting on a sort of pontifical 
throne. 

^^He should go home to Whitehall, not 
come to Thanet House," said a Protestant 
wig-maker, who was conspicuously dressed in 
the orange scarf and orange shoulder-knot of 
his party. 

^ He's thrown out the Exclusion Bill,'' said 
another, ^^ and is going back to Borne by the 
earliest conveyance." 

'^ rU scull him for nothing," said a water- 
man. 

" Send every cut-throat fasting Jesuit with 
him," said a butcher in a red nightcap ; ^* for 
they're a bad lot, flesh and bone." 

A tremendous blow of a drunken 'pren- 
tice's cudgel ended the question of the 
Pope's journey by smashing his representa- 

TOL. III. D 



34 ICEBOUND. 

tive, the mob joining in the demolition. In 
five minutes the effigy and its robes were 
torn into innumerable relics. The earl now 
addressed a few artful words to the mob^ 
apparently intended to quiet their fears^ but 
Iq reality still more exciting their apprehen- 
sion by mysterious hints of royal plots, a 
hhch boxj &c., and at the same time taking 
care to inform them of the constant watch 
which he kept over the safety of Protes- 
tantism. 

The crowd had all passed away, and the 
gates of Thanet House were closing for the 
night, when the three footmen who were 
engaged in the barring and bolting observed 
a sailor leaning with folded arms against a 
wall. He had a wooden leg, and a heavy 
cutlass hung by his side. 

" Now, old Sir Simon the king — now, my 
old Tarpauling,'' cried the footman, 'Mt ia 
time for you to trip your anchor, for we're 
going to shut the dock gates." 

The sailor said nothing, but turned up his 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 85 

coat sleeves — ^he had evidently drunk more 
than enough — ^and onlj replied by shouting a 
scrap of a sea song : 

" H^e'B to tliee, tarry Tom, 

Now here's a good healtii to the king ; 
While the larboard maD shaU drink, 
Let the starboard lubber sing.*' 

"Where's the commodore? Fve got a 
message for the commodore." 

" The earl admits no one after dark/' 

"What! — not a true Protestant sailor^ 
who helped to burn down Panama, and has 

many a dozen times flown at a d 

Spaniard*s throait?" 

"There, it's no use, my man," said the 
strongest of the footmen, growing impatient 
at the seaman's impudent leer of defiance, and 
seeing him prepare to light a pipe, " you must 
go at once/' 

" Pay the shot out of that,'' said the sailor, 
as he stumped furiously forward, and, as the 
footman laid his hand on his collar, felled him 
at a blow — -"pay the shot out of that, and 
never mind the change." 

d2 



36. ICE BOUND. 

" Are you mad?" sdd the men, rushing up 
to intercept his passage to the house. 

'^ Lookee here. My name is Tom Rogers, 
and I'm steel to the backbone. I see the 
captain up there on the quarterdeck, and 
I mean to overhaul him. Stand off! " then 
drawing bis cutlass, and swinging it round him 
to keep off the yarlets, who eyed him as one 
would a bear that has once squeezed him, he 
stoutly stumped backward upstairs, singing, 
at the pitch of a loud and not very smooth 
voice — 

^* Here's a liealth.to the oozswam, Will, 
Thou old Traepenny still ; 
While the one rogue tosses it off, 
The other can froth and fill.** 

"Servant, commodore. My name," said 
the sailor, as he entered the room where the 
earl was sitting, " is Tom Rogers, steel to the 
backbone, and captain of The Englishmaris 
BevengeJ' 

"What do you want, fellow?" said the 
earl, sternly, turning an angry eye on his 
undaunted visitor, who was coolly locking the 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 37 

door to prevent interruption from his* 
assistants. 

'^ Ton needn't look so scared^ commodore ; 
Tom Rogers is no cut-throat ; it's all plain 
and above board here/' 

<<Do you bring a message from Sir Soger 
Wildfire?" said the earL 

" Avast there!, commodore ; none of your 
tricks with Tom Bogers. Not 'xactly ; and 
yet it is, too, about Sir Roger. Our admiral 
has sent me to you with a flag of truce to 
offer you a black box for sale, containing a 
certain paper, for which he wants 5000 
pistoles, or hell surrender it to the 
enemy." 

Shaftesbury's countenance wore an expres- 
sion of angry inquiry. 

"We stopped the Saiuyy Jane between 
Calais and Dover; for the admiral, as you 
may have heard, is on his way here to answer 
charges against him from those cursed Don 
Spaniards ; and he thought Sir Roger's 
vessel might pay his travelling expenses." 



\ 



88 ICS BOUND. 

" Vmain, you did not kiU Sir Roger ? '' 

"Lord love you, commodore, we weren't 
a-going for to do that. Zounds, we kill 
nothing but Spaniards. He is all right, all 
ship-shape, and will be here in a day or 
two/' 

'^ Surrender that box/' said the earl, rising 
from his seat, and drawing his sword to rush 
on the pirate. 

'^ Hands off,'' said the captain, drawing a 
pistol from his pocket, ^^ or the consequences 
may be unpleasant. I don't carry the box 
about with me. Tom Rogers isn't such a fool 
as that." . 

'^ Help, break open the door I " cried the 
earl ; and the door began to bend with the 
force of the pressure. 

Tom Rogers' decision was quickly come to. 
Drawing his cutlass, he parried the earl's 
thrust ; and disarming Shaftesbury, held a pis* 
tol to his head, declaring he would fire if the 
earl did not secure him a safe retreat. 



39 



CHAPTER X. 

THE BAKE's LEYEE. 

It is a week since. the Saucy Jane was 
boarded by the unceremonious abstractor of 
the Little Black Box; and Wildfire has 
returned^ and reported to Shaftesbury the 
uztfortunate result of his mission. He has 
bound himself to recover it^ and his fertile 
brain has devised a notable scheme for that 
object. — But of that anon. We must now 
introduce him to our readers in his oWn 
fashionable house in. Covent Garden^ where a: 
short description of his morning levee will be 
the best means we have at hand for paintmg 
his versatile character. 



40 ICE BOUND. 

It was nearly the noon of a capridous 
April sort of day when Sir Soger Wildfire 
awoke with a start, as a swift shaft of misty 
gold shot through a thin chink in the shutters 
of his town mansion, and fell warm and re- 
provingly on his pillow. In a moment, for 
though indolent he was impulsive, like all his 
race — ^he rubbed his eyes once, yawned twice, 
and, leaping out of bed, slipped on an 
Indian morning-gown. The angry tingle of 
a little silver bell that he snatched from the 
dressing-table brought no attendant, nor did 
the second or the third ; at a fourth, however, 
distant steps were heard, a small door leading 
out upon a staircase flew open, and Millefleur, 
the valet, entered with many conghj and an 
affected mincing gait between that of a 
barber and a waiter; at that moment, as 
if to anticipate his question, the clock on the 
mantelpiece struck twelve. 

'^A pretty hour this for a gentleman to 
wake ; and I, a fellow deep in two 
plots and half a dozen love-affairs, with 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 41 

a horse-race and several duels impending. 
Why^ what detained yon, Millefleor? Egad, 
I thoaght you had. taken me for plague- 
stricken^ daubed a red cross on the door, 
sealed up everything not portable, and ab- 
sconded with the plate for fear of infection." 

'' Does your worship want particularly to 
know?'' said MlUefleur, bending his head 
with the wheedling air of an old servant who 
knows he will be forgiven. 

'^His worship (but don't call me that 
frightful country name again) does wish par- 
ticularly to know." 

''I and Monsieur Dortolan, the French 
cook, were engaged, sir, in a game at ombre. 
Monsieur had ace, knave, .and king. I played 
the three of diamonds, then — ^" 

" Oh, no more of that, Millefleur. Open 
the shutters, for I don't like this golden mid- 
night, as some one calls it." 

Millefleur threw open the shutters ; and a 
flood of light broke in sudden and silent, as if 
the sunbeams had been waiting outside, eager 



43 ICEBOUHB. 

for admittance, and now poured in like water 
from a broken dam. 

^^ Curse thb headache. Where was I last 
night; Millefleur ? Half my days are spent 
in . questions as to what we did yesterday. 
Plague on these qualms 1 Bring me a cup of 
spirit of clary, and then the chocolate. But, 
egad, if I waste my days, I make the most of 
my nights ; and old Bacon himself could not 
reprove me for often chilling my blood with 
early rising. Millefleur, didn't I ask you, 
sirrah, how I spent last night ? — ^for my 
memory, exercising a very sound discretion, 
positively refuses just now to remember any 
of my foolish actions." 

"The early part of the evening, sir, we 
spent at the 'Rose,' at cards — ombre and 
spadille. And may I ask your honour what 
sort of a hand you held in that second 
disputed game?" 

*' Curse your impudence ! Go on. After 
that?" 

"The concluding part of the night teiv 



THE LTTILE BLACK BOX. 4S 

minated in a fray at the 'Fleece/ You 
headed a party of Scourers, and were attacked 
by the watch, who tried to carry you to the 
round-house. You first routed the watch; 
then, aided by some chance gentlemen of your 
acquaintance, drove off the Scourers, who grew 
^oublesome, and had insisted on taking you 
on their shoulders to a tavern, and crowning 
you Prince of Scavengers.*' 

To this recital Sir Roger had been listening 
with the utmost affected gravity. 

" Were any of the gallant bullies hurt ?'' 

" Not much. One was scored with a 
quarter-staff, and another had his skull 
cracked with a halberd ; but beyond that 
nothing — Oh, yes, one of the watch was 
pricked a. little, and bled like a pig.'' 

" So much the better ; these corpulent 
watchmen are only kept from apoplexy by 
such timely bleeding. Stop a moment. Ah, 
now I remember ; my head is still full of the 
noise of fiddles, the glare of flambeaux, cries 
of 'Follow, follow!' * Knock 'em down!' 



44 ICE BOUND. 

'Scour, scour!' the rattle of dice, the jingle 
of glasses, and the clatter of broke^ windows. 
Millefleur, now, on your word, was I tipsy?" 

"You were very courageous, sir. I don't 
know what tipsy is ; is it the new word for 
being drunk." 

"Tes." 

" Ah, then you were decidedly tipsy." 

During this conversation, which may convey 
some impression of a fashionable gentleman's 
recreations at this period. Sir Soger had been 
languidly dressing. He now, as Millefleur 
handed him his coat fluttering with ribbons, 
dived his hand into the pockets and brought 
out a handful of miscellaneous contents — ^four 
torn cards, two dice, three sonnets, a love- 
letter, and the stand of a wine-glass. A loud 
noise of voices, as if quarrelling, was at this 
moment heard proceeding from a distant 
room, which was connected with the bed- 
chamber by a passage and folding-doors. 

" What in this enlightened universe is that, 



* TH£ LIRLE BLACK BOX. 45 

MiUefleur? Is there any one awaiting me? 
This is not mj leYee-morning, I tbmk ?'' 

.'^Parbleu/' said Millefleor, with a pitying 
shrugs '^ only some dozen or so vulgar crea- 
tures since eight o'clock. Those are the duns 
fighting for the nearest place to the door. 
The petitioners are always quiet and respect- 
ful — ^till they've got what they want." 

" MiUefleur, give me my periwig — On fur- 
ther consideration, wait a bit. Who of my 
creditors are there ? Monsieur Bedingote, 
the French tailor? — ^Monsieur ColognCi the 
perfumer?" 

"Tes, sir, they were there first, sir — 
ten minutes past eight. It's now half-past 
twelve." 

^^ ^ The magnanimity of great men is most 
conspicuous on occasions of peculiar emer- 
gency ;' so says Plutarch, and I think the old 
put was right for once." 

With this classic axiom, Wildfire, who had 
for some minutes been shaking his bald head; 
at MiUefleur, who was lazUy scenting an 



46 ICE BOUND. 

ample blonde periwig wiih richly-scented 
pulvily piit oh the peruke, and adjusted it in a 
mirror, i^hile his servant arranged his rich 
lace collar. 

'^Goddess of Invention, how shall I 
scare these intrusive vermin ? Shall I ad- 
vance, Millefleur, like a newly-arisen Apollo, 
tossing my ambrosial hair, and casting on 
them glances of benignity, melt them into 
gentleness by the Orphean sweetness of my 
voice? Pah! the fustian rascals are never 
gentle but when you buy and when you settle 
— ^between those poles eternal winter reigns. 
Egad, I have it I I send word by you that 
the burning coal, or inflammatory imposthume, 
has broken out in my throat, and I have been 
given over by three physicians — say, four 
physicians ? At that moment, as they stand 
flocking together, pale, aghast, and uncertain, 
I will rush in in my nightgown, with a bandage 
round my head, and the dispersion of the 
armada will be complete/' 

A few moments after this apostrophe the 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 47 

doors of the ante^room were thrown open with 
a crash ; the angrjr buzz of various vexed and 
impatient men subsided into a scarcely audible 
murmur as Sir Koger Wildfire . entered on 
tip-toe, his cane swinging from his wrist, be- 
nignly smiling, examining a silver pouncet- 
box he held in one hand, and scarcely heeding 
the numerous letters, petitions, and bills that 
were pressed into his hand. 

At the same instant fourteen nervous 
tradesmen presented their accounts, two pages 
knelt at his feet with scented billets on 
coloured paper, and one turbulent^looking 
fellow, with a scarred face, offered him a 
cartel on the point of his sword. 

" Millefleur," said Sir Boger, in a tone of 
exhaustion, "bum some Portugal sweets — 
the smell of these bills is offensive — and put 
some orange-flower water on my handkerchief. 
Take these two billets, and send in return 
those two madrigals I wrote yesterday— one 
on my lady's fan, and the other on her breast- 
knot. Who are you ?'' he said, as he pushed 



48 ICE Bouim. 

aside a dozen hands, untU he reached an ill- 
looking fellow in a rag gown, one eye tied up 
with a bit of dirty red scarf, and his arm in a 
sling. 

'^ The honest watchman your worship pinked 
last night, when you and Sir Charles, and one 
or two other maacaps, scoured the Mitre. 
Three pints and a gill of blood I've lost, as 
I'm an honest, sober watchman." 

^^ To be honest and sober at once is an im- 
possibility," drawled Sir Walter ; " so no more 
of that. How did I do it? Was it a good 
lunge, well put in?" 

^^Extraordinarily well put in," said the 
watchman. '^ I had just said to Jack — ^that's 
John Wiggings — ' Knock 'em down I' and 
lifted my quarter-staff, shifting my right hand 
so, when ^ Scour,' says you, throwing your, 
wig in my face, and whips me through the. 
shoulder." 

"Well, here's a smelt, as they say in 
Alsatia ; take this twenty-shilling piece and 
vanish — depart 1 Away to Mr. Wilkins, 



THE LITTLK BLACK BOX. 49 

the Templar, jNrhom I saw at the edge 
of the fray, and declare 70U were hurt 
by one of his party, as you were. He would 
give a gninea to say he pinked a watchman, 
for he once carried his arm for a week in 
a sling, and said he had been hacked in trying 
to pump on a tip-staff in the Friars^ There, 
no thanks, pr next time we meet 111 run you 
through the vitals. As for your master,'' he 
said, turning to the bully with the cartel, 
which he first skimmed his eye over, 'Hell 
him, in reply to his polite invitation to come to 
Chelsea to slit his windpipe, that I never fight 
irith dicers or Friarsmen ; let him keep his 
valour to drive bailiffs out of the Sanctuary, 
ids sword for slitting noses or fiightemng 
tame citizens who've lent him money. No 
vapouring, sir — ^begone 1" 



VOL. III. 



50 



CHAPTEK XL 

BISPEKSING THE ASMADA. 

''Now, gentlemen,'' said Sir Roger to the 
tradesmen, '' having deared off that buaness, 
let me know your errands.'' 

« Feathers "—« Swoid-belt " — « Pistols " 
— " Kaplers "—"Perfume"— "Horses," broke 
from the noisy crowd. 

"Friends, coontrymen, and debtors I you 
come to worry Csesar, not to hear him* My 
time being much engaged, partly at court 
and partly in literature— Millefleur, tell them 
what I mean." 

So saying, Wildfire threw himself into a chair, 
and began, as was the fashion for gentlemen 
in moments of repose, to comb his scented wig. 



THE UTTLB BLACK BOIL 5 1 

One fat citizen began to oongh ; another, 
a saddler, thought the smell enough to 
'^pisen ye;'* and his neighbour, a thin 
stable-keeper, agreed with him. 

" Sir Roger Wildfire,*' said MiUefleur, with 
all the dignity of a herald, ''my friends, 
offers you five hundred — *' 

" Five hundred ! " said the crowd, and 
every one looked and smiled at the other, 
while a buzz of approbation went round. 

" Five hundred apologies 1 " Every face 
fell. '' And being compelled to start almost 
immediately for Hampton Court, requests 
that half of the gentlemen present will call 
lo-morrow." 

" Which half? " cried the crowd. 

" The weakest half.'' 

In a moment the crowd broke into two 
parts with almost military exactness, and fell 
upon each other. Bands were torn, coats 
pulled off; but at last, with much jostling 
and noise, the weaker half were driven out, 
and the doors bolted. Shaking themselves 

e2 



52 ICE BOUND. 

like gamecocks after a fight, smiling and ar- 
ranging their bills, the yictorioas combatants 
then drew up in a semicircle around Sir Soger, 
who had thrown himself with gracefjal negli- 
gence into a royal chair, all crimson velvet 
and gilding. The joiner who supplied that 
chair, emboldened by the sight, fell on his 
knees, and presented his bill, which he flung 
out before him like a roll of stair-carpet. 

'^Monsieur," cried a small weak voice 
through the keyhole, ^^that very Marischal 
powder on your periwig is from my — *' 

'^ Shop," he would have said ; but at that 
moment the door flew open, a fat saddler 
kicked the complainant downstairs, and camei 
back rubbing his hands to join the crowd ; a 
courtier and a parasite was he in the worst 
form, and yet at home a great denouncer of 
the court that supported him. 

" Sir Roger being anxious to settle," con* 
tinned Millefleur. 

"Settle!" the crowd murmured approv- 
ingly. 



TH£ LITTLE BLACK BOX. 53 

"Everything amicably, desires me to bid 
you all leave the house within the space of 
ten minutes, or he will be compelled to drive 
you out at the point of the sword, being 
much distressed in his mind by the sudden 
and alarming illness of his butler, who has 
just sickened of a very malignant fever, 
which five physicians have pronounced — " 

** Epydemitous,'' nodded Sir Soger, yawn- 
ing, eyeing the buckle upon his shoe, and 
swinging the clouded cane that hung at his 
wrist. 

" And decidedly infectious — ^* 

" Decidedly and fatally infectious,'' chimed 
in Su* Eoger, looking hard at the ceiling. 
** If, however, any gentleman will wait till I 
get the butler's account-books, fumigate them, 
and pass them through hot vinegar — ^" 

With horrified faces, pale lips, and stam- 
mering voices, the creditors replied in a 
chorus that they would call again in a few 
days. The thinnest and the most timid 
sneaked out first, scarcely stopping to bow, 



54 ICE BOUND. 

and shunning the very wall as a man does a 
new-painted fence ; some holdbg their breath 
for fear of inhaUng the malaria^ others covers 
ing their mouths with the broad brims of their 
hats. A few of the sturdier still attempted 
to speak ; but becoming at last infected by the 
prevailing fear^ backed out^ and were heard 
stumbling down the staircase as fast as if 
their own creditors were at their heels. 

The room fairly cleared, Sir Roger threw 
himself back in his chair, having first adjusted 
his periwig in the chimney*glass, and gave 
way to uncontrollable laughter, in which 
Millefleur joined, in a lower tone and at some 
distance. 

'^ Cross-bitten the whole gang, egad, and one 
or two killed with sheer fright. That Puritan 
saddler will go home and drown himself 
in his neighbour the currier's tan-pit. Bupert 
himself never drove the sour citizens away 
faster. Millefleur, now sprinkle the room with 
some orange- water, and bring breakfast; for 
I go to the Mulberry Garden at four to meet 



THE LUTLE BLACK BOX. 55 

Chloe, and the eyening I spend at the Groom 
Porters." 

Sir Soger was nibbling at a piece of toast-^ 
for his last night's debauch had not left him 
much appetite — ^when a serrant threw open 
the door^ and announced Mr. William Trout- 
beck. 

Wildfire and Troutbeck were foster-brothers 
in friendship. They had starved together on 
a roll and an egg a-day in Fans, had fought 
side by side in Hungary, and had now 
learned in London to pace the Mall, match 
each other at bowls, tennis, crimp, tric-trac, 
and primero, and bet on each other's horses 
at Newmarket. Troutbeck was of a stronger 
and stouter build than his somewhat e£femi- 
Bate friend, and his cheek still wore a rich 
country flush of health, that even Lockett's 
claret and brawls at the '^ Bose" had not yet 
paled; his moustache terminated in crisp 
golden threads, and the somewhat darker hair of 
his head had been replaced by a fair periwig, 
whidi hung down on his shoulders. 



56 ICEBOUHD. 

. ^VWildfire, my friend,*' he said, when they 
had cordially shaken hands, ''court air does 
not agree with me ; I go hack to my country- 
seat next week, to forget intrigue, 43couring, 
and the hottle, and devote my time to — '^ 

'' Dogs, hawks, and horses." 

'' Your raillery I expected ; hut this Ihave 
ohserved,— round all great huildings, not ex- 
cepting palaces, there circulates a strong cur- 
rent of air, as at most seasons of the year round 
Whitehall ; this is apt to hlow up sometimes 
into a dangerous tempest" 

'' Most oracular. But you will never, man, 
go and marry some country squire's daughter, 
who can do nothing hut make clotted cream 
and distil aqm mirabUis; turn justice of the 
peace, forsooth, and spend long evenings 
making drenches for your horse and studying 
Markham's 'Farriery?' What, grow fat, and 
ring ' The king shall enjoy his own agam' at 
session-dinners, and tell long stories of old 
Bowley's escapes and the Boscobel Oak ! No, 
no, Troutbeck. Now, listen: Tve three 



THE UTTLE BULOK BOX. 57 

matches to be nm to-moirow at the Hay* 
market, and 111 bet money on every one of 
them. Ill hold you six to four on my 
geldmg against the brown mare, gold and 
silver on the bay against the roan, and an 
even fifty on the chestnut against the black 
filly • No? why, tiien, I have lost all faith 
in yon, and see a 

^change 
Into aomething new and strange.' 

In one year youll betelling doU stories likethis. 
After the third bottle, unbuttoning your coat, 
you will look vacantly into the fat ma^trate^s 
fishy eyes on your right hand; and laying 
hold of hun by the button-hole, you'll say : 
'That dog, sir' (here you hiccough), 'I 
christened myself* I'm that dog's grand* 
father — god&ther, I mean — (Pass the bottle); 
his name, sir, is Jowler: Jowler's fistther's 
was Bingwood, and his mother's Yenus — (No 
heel-taps). His brother Music's the best dog 
in the county at a cold scent — (The bottle, 
there); — ^hell make it. out, sir, when every 



58 ic£BOUin). 

other dog is puzzled. Ill bet you tea merrjr 
guineas he's never at a loss. Jowler's grand- 
father Dewlap was own cousin to his M^jest/s 
staghound Sapid.' Thus you'll grow fatter and 
stupider, till death comes to rdieye the world 
of a bore so intolerable." 

"Bah I Wildfire, hear me." 

"Your wife," ran on the wit, "will spend 
her time in brewing herb-drinks for the poor, 
starving the parish doctor, and destroying his 
patients; your own time will be equally 
divided between the kennel and the stable. 
In ten years you will grow tired of ruling at 
sessions and dominating in the hunting-field, 
and will return to court, though unfit to appear 
there ; your gait awkward, your step heavy, 
the dance, the jest forgotten. But now, in 
all confidence, what produces this change? 
Has Bowley firowned on you, or Buckingham 
looked askance ? Has Killigrew cut a joke 
upon the shape of your sword-hilt, or have 
you hit his Majesty's shins at tennis? I 
always observe when a man has been slighted 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 59 

at court, he takes a sudden liking to country 
air. But what is life, man, without the 
Mall and the Bing, the theatre and the 
'Bose?*'' 

In five minutes from this time the two 
friends had parted, and Wildfire had strolled 
into a tavern-door near the Mulberrj Gar- 
dens at Charing Gross. There was a deafen* 
ing noise ; but amid all the laughing, singing, 
and jingling of cups and tankards, the cries 
x)f ^^ Anon, sir,'' still used as in the days of 
Bardolph ; and the shouts of ^^ Score a pint of 
claret in the Dragon," — ^Wildfire's eyes fell 
at once, as a hawk spies out his prey, on a 
group seated at cards in a distant comer of 
the room. 

These were some half-dozen sharpers, evi- 
dently engaged in plundering a young coun- 
try gentlemian, who, by his blue-feathered hat 
and rich sword-belt, seemed to be as full of 
money as the greediest rook about town 
could desire. He had hitherto been allowed 
to win, and, in high spirits at his tan of 



60 lOE BOUKD. 

fortune, was counting the pfle of gold — 
twenty-shilling pieces — that stood at his 
elbow. As he bent his head, Wildfire ob^ 
served the gang, who had affected to b^ 
strangers to each other, exchange signs. In 
his chief Inend and adviser, who was now 
playing agdnst the unhappy fool, Wildfire at 
once detected the Scourer who had sent him 
the invitation to Chelsea fields. Drawing his 
hat over his eyes to prevent recognition, he 
strolled up the room, and mingfing with the 
bystanders, watched the game more firom pity 
at the gull's fate than from mere curiosity. 

The young gallant — a Mr. LasceUes — at 
this moment, affecting to search for his 
pocket-handkerchief, pulled half a dozen 
billets from his pocket. 

^'Plague on the things] I'' he lisped ; '^but 
ladies will write to me. Last night, Tfacks, 
I played a game at backgammon with Lord 
Coleraine, five up for half a-piece. Of the 
first set, I had three for love, and lost it. 
In the seccmd, I began by throwing doub- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 61 

lets ; he threw ace ; then I threw size ciiK^ue 
next, soon filled up my tables/ and had woh 
by odd men ; yet, upon my sincerity, at 
last I lost that too/' 

"Pull away, boys* Come aloft, say*!,'' 
broke in the sharper who . was his sworn 
adviser ; " and when we've played out these 
six games, and you have given us our re- 
venge, sir, then for a ragout at Chateline's; 
for, 'pon my reputation, the noise here, 
the smell of tobacco, and all together, is 
too much for my head; it makes .my hand 
unsteady and my play uncertain/' 

"The place is full of nothing — ^stap my 
vitals I " replied the youth, with a silly laugh 
and a look of admiration at his adviser — 
"but old pests in buff coats and slouching 
boots, who deafen you with stories of all 
the wars from EdgehUl to Brentford, and 
who sit and drink and swear at Oliver, as 
if they did not believe he was really dead." 
During this conversation, Wildfire noticed 
that under the left arm of the bully lay the 



62 ICE BOUWD. 

brigbt steel handle of his rapier, which re- 
fleeted in miniatare, but dearly enough for a 
keen eye, the cards of the next player. The 
tide was turning rapidly in his favour ; the 
pile of gold pieces was melting like snow- 
heaps in a thaw, 

^^What a scour we had last night down 
Fleet Street I " said the gull, talking louder 
and noisier to hide his anxiety ; for this was 
not the first of his losses, and the oaks of his 
ancestral avenues were ahready shaking to 
their fall. ^^We rubbed out all the milk<« 
scores from St Dunstan's to Ludgate, 
knocked down ten apple-stalls, twisted - off 
six knockers, and carried off three signs. 
We're the midnight boys to do it." 

The run of luck now turned for a deal or so, 
and each time he won. Wildfire observed that 
the youth, in the excitement of the moment, 
always snatched up the winning card and thrust 
it in his breast-pocket. The gamester seemed 
accustomed to such evidences of excitement, 
and played cooler and more warily. They 



THE UTTLB BLiOK BOX. 63 

now gave up ombre, and at their yictim's own 
request began to play at gleek and primero. 
As, pl»d witii wine, and constantly toasting 
varions ladies by name, the gall grew blinder. 
Wildfire observed the buUy slip the fool's ace of 
spades nnder his open hand, that lay flat on 
the table, and coyer it, nnobsenred by even 
his confederates. At that moment, Wildfire, 
who had silently unsheathed his sword, and 
held it perpendicularly reversed, nailed the 
bnll/s hand with it to the table. At his 
shriek, his-eompanions leaped firom their seats, 
flnng down their cards, and threw aside their 
dice; some pocketing them, thinking the bailiffs 
or the watch had arrived. 

"Gentlemen, I pray you to be seated," 
said Wildfire, bowing and taking off his hat 
with his right hand. "If this gentleman 
has not the winning ace of spades hid under 
his palm, I beg him a hundred thousand 
pardons." 

The bully scowled, bit his lips with rage 
and pain, but did not utter a word. The 



64 ' ICE BOUND. 

gull gaped with astonishment^ his head bemg 
now rather giddj with the wine ; and he 
stood alternately looking at his cards, at 
Wildfire, and at his unfortunate firiend, who 
sat with his bleeding hand nailed to the table 
like a specimen in a museum. 

'^ I beg all gentlemen to bear witness that 
this fellow is a convicted cheat," said Wildfire. 
" Behold ! " then drawing out his sword, and 
wiping it on the ruffian's shoulder, the card, 
now dyed ciimson, was at once exposed. 

'^ A cheat, a Whitefriars cheat!" stammered 
the victim, our old finend, Tom Chambers ; 
^' I demand back my pieces." 

'^The affair is a mistake," groaned the 
bully; ^^some unfortunate misunderstand- 
ing." 

At the very thought of returning money, 
the five sharpers flashed out their swords, and 
crying "Scour, Scour I" advanced at once 
upon Wildfire. He, stepping behind a table, 
with the utmost composure took off his wig, 
and deposited it on a hat-peg ; then, looking 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. H65 

round to see what support he might ezpeet, 
he stood upon the defensive, putting his haek 
against the door to prevent the egress of the 
bully, who, with his hand wrapped up in a 
napkin, was now thinking of retreat, liaving 
first swept the table of all the remaining 
coins. 

The cries of " Part 'em, part 'em I " had 
roused a group of old cavalier soldiers, who 
had been falUng out about which had been near- 
est hanging during the Protectorate ; a dis- 
pute which had been settled by the wit of the 
party — a red-nosed fellow, who had taken 
Noll's colours at Edgehill — declaring they had 
all deserved hanging, and, believing they 
would all die by the rope still, if they had 
patience, offered to fight them round for a 
brace of crowns. 

Beating up the combatants' swords, this 
sturdy arbitrator, with a volley of oaths, in- 
quired the cause of the quarrel. 

The guU, who had sidled up to Wild- 
fire, being assured over and over again 

VOL. in. f 



66 ICE BOUND. 

that he had fallen into a hand of thieyes, 
drew out his sword and joined the weaker 
party. 

"Draw out your porkers, and fight for 
the rhino I '' cried the wounded bully, 
groaning with pain, and using the slang 
of Alsatia. 

" Gad-a-mercy," said the gull, "what 
bloodthirsty rogues!" 

"The game was fair enough," grumbled 
the first swordsman, "and we never used 
the doctor (false dice). If a gentleman lose 
the smelts honestly, why must he whip out 
his tilter? If a decus or so would make it 
up, I and my firiends would — " 

" Down with the rogues 1 '* said the cava- 
lier, driving them before him, knocking down 
one with a blowfirom a heavy pewter tankard, 
and sending another headlong over a form. 
"Who are you, sir?" he said, as he turned 
quickly, and saw the country gentleman still 
irresolute, while Wildfire was exchanging 
passes with two of the gamblers, one of 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 67 

whom he ran through the shoulder, while 
the other kept him at bay with a brandished 
chair. 

*'Why, Gad-a-mercy, sir," said the gull, 
'Tm the gentleman you are all fighting 
about. I had, you see, sir, a knave of clubs — ^ 

^^ Odsfoot, man, then use your bilboa, if it 
is only for show." 

'^My dear sir, a thousand thanks," said 
the victim. *^ Will you accept the celebrated 
gamecock Nutmeg as a small token of my 
gratitude, and come and see me at my seat at 
Broadmere? Nutmeg is just backed to fight 
Lord Wilmot's Jackanapes and Tom Osborne's 
Duckwing for 50?. ; but, Gad-a-mercy, that's 
all one. Itll fight with Eed Bose, who is his 
cousin once removed." 

^^ Delighted to deliver so gallant a young 
gentleman," said Wildfire ; '^ I require no 
further reward than the happy consciousness 
of rectitude. Sir, I have not the barbarity 
to tear Nutmeg fi'om those arms." 

'^ Zounds, if he had a little more of Nut» 

f2 



68 ICEBOUND. 

meg's mettle U would be no harm,'* said the 
Cavalier in Wildfire's ear, as the latter gentle- 
man carefally put on his wig and combed it 
with much anxiety. '^ You let the fool off too 
easy. Mi*. What's-your-name, I shall be de^ 
lighted to accept Nutmeg. I love a main of 
cocks, Welsh mam— anything — as well as 
any man in London, pick it over." 

"Eh? What? Yes," stammered the guU. 
^^ The fight comes off to-morrow, and Tuesday 
I go to the Bull Bing to see the Irish butcher 
meet the Groom Porters' coachman at back- 
sword; on Wednesday I run my trotting- 
horse — ^" 

" You're a poltroon, sir," said the Cavalier, 
stamping his foot, "and grudge your brave 
deliverers the just reward of their valour. 
Draw, sir." 

"There, there; no more about it. Nut- 
meg shall be waiting for you here to-morrow, 
at two, gentlemen. A good morning;" and 
the mean, cowardly prodigal backed out of 
the room. 



THE LITTLE BLaOK BOX. 69 

" What made you ask for Nutmeg ?'' said 
Wadfire. 

" Only to try the depth of a fool's grati- 
tude/' said the Cavalier, sheathing his sword. 
Then^ stepping up to the table, and calling 
for a hammer and a nail, the stranger fastened 
up the bloody card oyer the mantelpiece as a 
warning to sharpers. 

'' The feilow deserved it for being detected 
— ^the greatest crime in Whitefiiars. Do you 
think that fool was thankful to you, sir, for 
sAving him from his plunderers ? Not a whit« 
Ha Would rather have been cheated than 
proved ^ gull.'' 

'' But, then, there is the duty we owd to 
floclety." 

*' Mere excuse, sir, for pride. You were 
glad to show your power by exposing a rogue. 
Don't put this down among your good 
deeds." 

'^ I never saw the carnal weapon used so 
discreetly," said a Puritan bystander. 



70 



CHAPTER XII. 

SIB BOBEBT AT GOUBT. 

The licentiousness of Charles II/s court has 
been overrated bj those who draw almost 
their sole impressions of it from the memoirs 
of that sneering, gay voluptuary, Anthony 
Hamilton, Count de Grammont. 

The ulcer of vice was on the brow of Engr 
land ; but the life-blood at her heart was still 
untainted. The land in which Izaak Walton 
was a dtizen and Evelyn a gentleman was 
still sound at the core. The corruption 
was that of individual natures, not of 
the race in general. Locke and Newton, 
Baxter and Bunyan, were contemporaries of 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 71 

Sochester and Backingham; the Duchess of 
Portsmouth and Lady Russell inhabited the 
same city. At the time of which we write, 
Barrow was not long dead, and Tillotson was 
still preaching; while Sherlock and Stilling- 
fleet were both labouring for Christianity. 

In the court, in spite of Rozanas, 
Statiras, and other &]lw angels, there were 
still many bright and undeviating planets; 
even of the twenty-one Hampton Court 
beauties painted by Lely and Kneller, twelve 
were of blameless life and spotless manners. 
Amongst politicians there were found, amid 
a crowd of hirelings, turncoats, tnutors, 
pimps, and pensioners, the noble Lord 
Russell, and the patriot Sydney. The vices 
of the court were the unfortunate result of a 
vagabond lifewasted in aforeign court Charles 
and his companions had learnt to pursue 
pleasure with the thoughtless eagerness with 
which it is seized by all adventurers, — ^by 
the courtesan, the pirate, the gamester, 
or the highwayman. Fawning ruffles or 



72 ICE BOUND. 

shoebuckles for ai dinner^ nestling in garrets/ 
jostled by the mob of Paris, — ^the exiled 
nobles df England had suffered, both in camp 
and city, all the privations of Grub-Street 
poets or Tonson's hack-writers. Bandied 
between two factions, intriguing with 
English traitors and French demagogues, 
they had, like their master, learnt to regard 
the world as a masquerade, — ^^men as 
hypocrites, and women as little better. 
All standards of virtue and morality they 
despised; expediency was theif only guide, 
and self-interest the pilot of their actions. 
Virtue they sneeringly called the means by 
which some men made a better market of 
their votes ; at forty, they were fond of say- 
ing men grew tired of being honest, and 
women of being virtuous. 

The great hall at Oxford shines like a tulip- 
bed with varied colours, glittering with ladies' 
jewels and gallants' sword-belts. The lovely 
Hamilton, the blushing Bagot, the bewitch- 
ing Stuart, the tender-eyed Temple, and La 



THE lutlb black box. is 

Triste Heritiire, are all there, disportmg in 
the careless luxuriance of dress that Leij 
and Eneller have immortalised. No pon« 
derous head-dresses are worn with wire frame- 
work and false hair; but careless ringlets, 
bound up with a single flower or a string of 
pearls. Bosoms are uncovered, and arms 
bare to the elbow. Long trains sweep upon 
tiie ground and make up for the scantiness of 
the coverings of the neck. Rouge and 
patches are, alas, too common. Brocades 
of gold and silver adorn the ladies ; the gen* 
tlemen rustle in gold and silver tissue, with 
embroidered sword-belts and ribbon sword- 
knots. The open bodices are tied with rib- 
bons or looped with jewels. Diamond and gold 
buckles have superseded the roses and huge 
ribbon bows of Valfere, Geronte, and Argan ; 
laced cocked-hats are carried under every 
arm. Moustaches are seen here and there ; 
and the scented wigs, ambrosial as Apollo's 
hair, are of enormous size. 
. Francis I. gallantly said that a court with- 



74 ICE BOUND* 

out ladies was like a fine garden without 
flowers. He could not have complained of 
any deficiency in the hall of Christchurch. 
There, surrounded by a gay circle of admir- 
ers, the swarthy, deep-lined face of Charles 
himself laughing over her shoulder, sat the 
Duchess of Portsmouth, the real empress of 
the court. Her son, the Duke of Sichmond, 
has just been installed Knight of the Garter, 
and she is at the height of popularity ; thanks 
to her condescension to Oates, the French 
birth and French religion of Madan^e Carwell 
are for a time forgotten. Her dark hdr is 
clustered up in thick short curls on each side 
of her forehead ; her thoughtless eyes are 
full of gaiety ; and her full lips are prattling 
scraps of broken English with the prettiest 
grace in the world. Her sleeves are open, 
but joined here and there with jewel-dasps ; 
and looped up at the elbow, allowing the 
rich lace firills that border them to fall about 
her fair rounded arms. 
. In ^uite a distant comer, under a canopy 



THE UTTLE BLiCK BOX. 75 

of state, soirounded bj the late Duchess of 
York's muds of honour — Miss Bagot, Mrs. 
Price Hobarty Mrs. Blagg, and Mrs. Nott— * 
sad and silent, stealing now and then a glance 
at her husband, or stooping to play with his 
inseparable spaniel, sits the deserted Queen 
Catherine of Braganza, the saddest-hearted 
woman in all that gay assembly. She is 
short and stout; her face round, the nose 
retroussii her eyes are black, but clouded; her 
mouth is disfigured by projectmg teeth. She 
is dressed in a simple dress of pearls and 
white satin, and her dark hair falls in long 
ringlets on her shoulders. 

The proud Duchess of Cleveland has left 
the court ; and La Belle Hamilton is in Paris 
with her husband De Grammont. La Belle 
Stuart, the beauty whom the Duke of Rich- 
mond bore away from his royal rival, is yonder, 
robed in sable ; andby her side are the Countess 
of Ossory and the Duchess of Somerset, also 
bereaved ; the three most beautiful of widows 
tihat ever wept together. And tiiere, laughs 



76 ICE BOUND. 

ing with Sir Charles Sedley — "the viceroy 
of ApoUoy** as he is caUed — and Sir George 
Hewet, the prototype of Sir Fopling Flatter, . 
who wears the largest wig and the smaUest hat 
in the room, Ndl Gwyn, now a lady of the 
queen's priyy chamber^ once an orange-girl in 
the Duke's Theatre; loved by the mob as 
Madame Ellen, in spite of her fiiults ; a frank, 
generous, sincere woman, without hypocrisy, 
but witiiout decency. Her light hair clusters in 
bright curls about her head, and wanders 
over her round innocent forehead and her 
frank clear eyes, till she shakes it off with a 
toss of her pretty neck : tiie wittiest, merriest, 
frailest creature she is that ever won a heart 
or lost a reputation. And behind her are 
the languid Middleton, the languishing Miss 
Boynton, tiie frdr blonde Wss Blague, and the 
brilliant Jenmngs ; and there, to the left of 
the Duchess of Portsmouth, talking in a low 
voice to Colonel Churchill, is the fiur widow 
Lady Bellasys, who succeeded Lady Denham, 
Arabella Churchill, Miss Sedley, Miss Hamil- 



THE LITTLB BLACK BOX, 77 

toD^ and Miss Jennings^ in the affections of 
that gloomy lover, the Dnke of York. She 
& not yery beantifhl, but still does not con- 
finn CharWs witty saying, '^that his bro- 
ther's mistresses seemed allotted to him by his 
priests as penances/' Her eyes are dark, 
her black hair falls in short carls npon her 
forehead, and droops in thick closters on her 
iyory, swan-like neck. 

And amidst all these languid beanties, with 
their half-shut eyes and rustling robes, pure 
and sdntly, with calm, full, innocent gaze, 
comes the Countess of Sunderland, that very 
'^little Whig'' whom Charles astonished our 
old fiiend Sir Bobert by once proposing as 
a toast ; the wife of the rashest and most 
dangerous politician of the time, she walks 
by his side the model of womanhood, and 
yet 

'^ A deatdie not too bright and good 
For hmnan natore^s daQj food. 
For simple sorrows, gentle wiles, 
Praise, blame, We, kisses, tears, and smiles.^ 

Now of the gentlemen. There, talk- 



78 ICE BOUND. 

ing to Miss Jennings, is the lord of the bed^ 
chamber, the Earl of Oxford, a handsome fop, 
who appears full of sense till he is imprudent 
enough to speak; pulling his sleeve, is the 
grave Sir Charles Lyttelton ; and there am- 
bles the madcap Killigrew, the master of the 
revels, and the king's jester, as the wits 
call him ; Lord Chesterfield, the would-be 
queen's chamberlain ; Dorset, the best-natured 
satirist that ever wrote ; the two wits, Sedley 
and Etherege, comparing snuff-boxes and 
repartees ; and Arlington, with that black 
plaster on his nose, that added so much to 
his air of pompous dullness. 

There, too, stands George SaviUe, the Earl of 
Halifax, the leader of the trimmers, the sceptic 
politician, the preacher of neutrality and tolera- 
tion : he has a full sensual face, dark arched eye- 
brows, a bright clear eye, with sarcastic mouth 
and a dimpled chin ; and small dark mous- 
taches lend a piquancy to his face ; a jest or 
sarcasm is always hovering round the upraised 
comers of those lips, and he spares neither 



THJB UTTLE BUCK BOX. 79 

fiiend nor religion when the mood strikes 
him. He has changed sides so often that he 
is tmsted hj none ; and yet the Tories know 
he would not aid them in despotism, or the 
Whigs in rebellion. When the king was dan- 
gerouSy he used to ask if any took a coachman 
to drive him because die man's father was a 
good coachman; and yet he yoted against 
the Bill of Exclusion. 

Beside him is Hyde, the Earl of Clarendon, 
his handsome flushed fiice lit with a bland 
and courtly smile ; yet is there a certain fire 
in his eye, as he glances at some Whig noble- 
men who have just entered, that speaks of 
violent political hatred and strong and tem- 
pestuous passions. 

In one comer, quite away from the crowd 
of fops and sirens, is a deputation of scientific 
men, who have come with a petition for a 
grant of a building site for the Royal Society. 
There is Boyle, with his weak eyes and grave 
long face ; Newton, with his quiet air of 
humility, his square jaw, thick, thoughtful eye- 



80 ic£ BOUin>. 

brows, and great pile of forehead; the great 
Dr. Sydenham, with his coarse shrewd features, 
and compressed month ; and old Hobbes, 
with his sarcastic, cynical smile» 

And next them is a deputation of church- 
men : miotson, the Intore archbishop, who is 
now Prebend of St. Paul's, and a popular 
preacher of the day. His shorty square fea- 
tures are shaded by no wig — he wears his 
own hair, sable, a little silvered, and looks 
round the hall with an ill-satisfied air and a 
meditative firown, for he is not in court 
favour ; Morley, the old Bishop of Win- 
chester, the friend of Falkland and of 
Clarendon, with a grey peaked beard, in the 
old style, ^ts by his ade. 

And there are Sprat and Burnet, the king's 
two chaplains; the one vain and prosy, the 
other wise and eloquent. 

There, too, is Dryden, with his round, noble 
forehead, keen eye, and twitching mouth, shy 
yet pleased at the notice of a band of 
^^urtiers ; Sir William Davenant and Sir 



THE UlTLK BLACK BOX« 81 

Roger TEstrange, who have come down to 
obtun his Majesty^s consent to the perform- 
ance at court of the king's favourite play, 
''The Maiden Queen/' Sir William's cheek 
IS already lined deeply, and his eyes grow dim. 
Rochester is dead, and Buckingham is 
fox-hunting at his Yorkshire country-seat, 
Death on the pale horse tracking him as he 
rides. 



Younu Q 



82 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE HONEST MAN THAT DIOGENES LOOKED FOR. 

"Stap my vitals/' said Sir Greorge Hewit^ 
with a drawl that seemed to indicate con- 
sumption, but really implied the extreme fash- 
ionable culture of that day (Sir Greorge 
pronounced all his O's as A's, though Titus 
Oates had begun to render this less mo- 
dish), ''if that daag Churchill has not 
been making me and the charming Temple 
die of laughing describing an aald fax-hun- 
ter squire that the king visited this marn- 
ing on his way to Aaxfard, who sung a 
saang aver his pudding, and drank two 
battles of claret to the memary of the 
' blessed martyr' ; 'gad, it would be quite re- 
freshing to see a real live Cavalier fax*hunter. 



THJB UTtLZ BLACK BOX. 83 

I thought the raee had gane by, like the 
Ficts and the Danes.'' 

^' Then you may have that pleasure sooner 
than you expect/ said Claverhouse, with 
a keen glance under his eyes at the fop 
he despised; '^for the honest man, at the 
risk of getting spoilt, by court dandies and 
robbed by court gamblers, favours the ball 
this night with his presence/' 

^' Was old Bowley searching for an honest 
man, like Diogenes," said Etherege, joining 
in the conversation, ^'or did he stumble 
upon this specimen by accident, just as 
men in ploughing wheat-fields often turn up 
the bones of the giants who lived before the 
Flood ?^' 

'^The curiosity has a daughter," said 
Churchill, stroking his moustaches apd look- 
ing demurely at the wax-lights in the 
nearest chandelier. 

"A daughter!" cried the circle, 

" Not so Joud, gentlemen, or old Row- 
ley will hear us." 

q2 



84 IC£ BOUND. 

^'Oh^ a red-cheeked bumpkin, I wager 
yoa a cool hundred,'^ oried another, '^ihat 
Btrams ^ Green Sleeves* on a cracked spi- 
net, spends all her days in darning the 
family tapestry, and brewing Hungary wa- 
t^, and half her nights in making pos- 
sets for the old Cavalier her fiither, who 
sends her to sleep telling stories of Edge* 
hill, longer and more tiresome than old 
Bowley's of the Pendrells and the Bosco« 
bel Oak.'' 

^'Generation of nnbeUevers,'* said Chnro- 
hill, ^'I tell you she has more fire than 
Miss Boynton, better eyes than Hiss Jen* 
nings, whiter teeth than Miss Price." 

''Ah, ahl'' laughed the circle. "What, 
Churchill, who plays the guitar better than 
Frandsco, dances a saraband as well as 
Sedley, the {^ory of the Bing, the star of 
the Mulberry Gardens — '' 

"Now, no flattery," sud Churchill de* 
precatingly. "Ask Troutbeck; he told me, 
and has seen her. But halloo 1 he's crept 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 85 

off; and Kow red the man tuned! Zounds, 
I think the squire^s daughter has already 
learnt how to use Cupid*s shafts. But 
what^s this? The Green Bibbons are not 
breaking in, and going to make a Protestant 
Bartholomew of it ? '' 

This latter remark was occasioned hj n 
scuffle which was heard in the lobby, — a 
sound of voices in angrj discussion increased, 
till the conversation in the immediate 
neighbourhood died awaj; the next mo* 
ment a servant entered, and, with an agi- 
tated face, inquired for the lord cham- 
berlain. Arlington, sedate and pompous as 
usual, accompanied him out, beckoning 
with his white wand of office, amid the 
suppressed laughter of Killigrew and a 
knot of young wits who stood conversing 
in an under-tone near the door. 

In a few minutes Arlington returned, 
«nd whispered to the king, who, looking 
for a moment puzzled, instantly smiled and 
^xclaimed^ ^'Why, it's my old friend the 



86 ICEBOUND. 

fox-hunting baronet, to be sure I Admit himy 
of course, Arlington/' 

"Indeed," said Arlington, "I think he 
would have forced his way in, sword in 
hand, if you had not let him ; for I saw him 
strike one pert French yarlet a blow on 
the ear that would have felled an ox. Had 
his daughter not prevented him drawing his 
sword, I think there had been mischief done ; 
I heard him say that his rule was, ^ A word 
and a blow, and the blow first / swearing that 
he was a true Tory subject, and the palace 
was open to all old Cavaliers. '* 

"A good old fellow,'* said Charles. "I 
long to see him, with his proverbs and scraps 
of Hudibras^ among our fine gentlemen and 
painted madams here. How hell yawn at 
Mrs. Davis's singing and Francisco's guitar f 

He had. hardly done speaking ere the door 
flew open, and to the sound of the twenty* 
four fiddles, which Killigrew had secretly bid 
iatrike up, by way of jest, entered old Sir 
Eobert, with Mabel on his arm. He was 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 87 

aftired in a long coat of dnnamon-coloured 
velvet, richly ornamented with buttons and 
loops of rather faded gold lace, and in a long 
flap-waistcoat of white satin, embroidered with 
gold damask. He held in his hand an old 
high-crowned hat, of a fashion twenty years 
exploded, the crimson feathers trailing on the 
ground; a heavy gilt*handled sword hung 
by his side; while round his neck was the 
chain of a silver dog-whistle that depended 
like an order upon his brieast. He wore no 
wig ; and his face, rather flushed with the 
late altercation, contrasted strongly with the 
silver grey of his hair ; but he walked erect like 
a brave old soldier, and looked round with an 
air of dignity, as men do whose self-esteem 
has been roused by some recent insult. 

Mabel, her hair lopped up with a simple 
string of pearls, shone like a silver statue in 
her white brocade ; as, With all the calm 
grace of an English gentlewoman, she looked 
round with ia startled air at a scene which as 
yet she had only realized in her dreams of 



88 ICS BOUHll* 

the Anbian Ki^ts, or tiie dreariest ro- 
manoes of MadQe. Scaderj. An inyoliintaiy 
murnrar ^read throiigh the room at the 
beautjr of the new comer. The sad qneen 
beheld her with melancholy interesti as if 
prepared to hail a new riyaL The prond 
Portsmouth firowned ; and her little court of 
parasites had in amoment invented, and b^gnn 
to inannate, a hundred diffisrent detractions. 
Mabel was at once too pale, too red; too 
tall, too short ; she had too much hair for it 
all to be real; she painted, she .ought to 
paint; she had cork heels; she laced too 
tight; she was sunburnt; she was a poor 
die-away, and she was a rude hoyden. 

With that usual suavity of manner that 
made Charles, with all his heartlessness, ever 
the darling of the crowd and the best beloved 
of English kings, he advanced through a 
lane of courtiers ; and as Sir Kobert, over- 
come witii the honour, was about to drop 
on one knee,- he prevented the homage 



THE UTILE BLiCK BOX. 89 

and sliook him hj the hand with all the 
fiuniliarity of an old acquaintance. 

"A troublesome gaest," he said, '* wel- 
comes his kmd host to his temporary court 
in his good city of Oxford/' 

" Tour Majesty does me too much honour/' 
jsaid Sir Sobert, reddening with pride and 
pleasure* 

^^A new star in our firmament,'' contin- 
ued Charles, turning to the crowd of scien- 
tific men who were discussing some deep 
proposition with such abstracted energy as 
to appear quite insensible of the new object 
of attention; ''one, Mr. Newton, not yet, 
I think, discovered, even by your profound 
researches." 

Mr, Newton bowed, and stammered an in- 
audible attempt at a repartee. 

''Only to think of the creature having 
no wig: quel mombre/*' said the Duchess 
of Portsmouth. " Does he come firom Abys- 
sinia? And that maypole of a daughter, 
with cherry-coloured ribbons to a white 



90 IGB BODHD. 

gown: queOe harreur, queOe bitiael We diaU 
have an the fanners' daughters lurouj^t 
to oonrt next; the actresses hxwe come 
abready," she said, ^ancmg to NeQ Gwyn, 
who was watdung Mabel with a smile of 
appiOYal, and heating time with her little 
foot to the music of a lute that an Italian 
was playing in one comer, not entirely nn- 
mindfbl of the heantyof the mnac, not entbrely 
nnmindfhl of the heanty of her foot. 

''Allow me to introduce a braTC old 
Cavalier soldier to the Duchess of Ports- 
mouthy" said Chaiies, pointing Sir Bohert 
a chair at his side, heing perhaps anxious 
to introduce Mabd to the queen, to whom he 
handed her, much to the indignation of Tarious 
euTious ladies, whose basilisk j^ces^ if there 
was any faith in the Turkish tradition of the 
evil eye, would certainly have been the 
death of the unconsdous MabeL 

Sir Bobert was a stout man in the hunting* 
field, loud-Toiced and hearty. He would 
hare been a brare man too at the head of a 



THE UTTLS BLACK BOX. 91 

troop of horse ; but, to tell the sober trutli, he 
felt now singularly awkward by the side of a 
grand jewelled lady, who he knew was the 
celebrated '^ Madame Carwell/' who did not 
speak very good English, frowned at all he 
said, and pouted at the king, who eyed the 
couple, as he bore off Mabel, with a look of 
sly sarcasm that enraged her. 

Sir Kobert alluded to the weather being 
favourable for sportsmen. Did her grace like 
Oxford? He hadn't been there since the last 
assizes. The duchess poiited, looked at hei 
bracelet, pursed up her mouth, and replied in 
French monosyllables. Did her grace like 
that twangling thing the fellow was playing 
in the corner ? He (Sir Kobert) preferred the 
tabor and pipe." 

"Pipe!" said the duchess, sarcastically; 
*' Oh, ah, (?w«— all you English like your pipe 
de tabac." 

Did her grace dance? He did not care 
about those new sarabands, as they called 
them, or any of your French — (Mum ; he 



92 ICS BOUHD. 

got into a scrape here) — ^but preferred the 
cushion-dance. 

^^What! the cushion-dance, where they 
kneel and kiss? — fc harharel^^ then getting 
up, the duchess fairly turned her back on the 
honest baronet, and sweeping off, train and 
all, with half a dozen toadies following, left 
Sir Robert somewhat dumbfoundered at the 
result of his first attempt at small-talk with 
a court Iady« 

'' Halloo, quotha,'^ muttered the baronet to 
himself, looking with a shrewd and puzzled 
air at the immense old-fashioned bows on his 
square-toed shoes, '^come up with her tan* 
trums ! and madam they say no better than 
lahe should be. Was that rouge, or did she 
blush ? Zounds, but I tMnk though it was 
rouge.^' 

" Decidedly rouge ; a French blush 
washes off very soon,'* said a low laughing 
Toice at his elbow. It was Nell Gwyn, who, 
having observed the honest fellow's perplexity, 
had good-humouredly come to his rescue. 



THS LUTLE BLACK BOX. 93 

' I am altogether of your opinion, sir," said 
Madam Helen ; \^ and think the old pipe and 
tabor I have footed to a thousand times 
better than these squeaking fiddlers all in a 
row — and a pest on 'em." 

^'Tis a merry one, surely, and has a 
dancing eye/' thought Sir Robert, quite 
ignorant whom he addressed. ''Are there 
many of the old troopers here, madam? '' he 
said to his companion. 

"But few,'' said NdU ''Court air does 
not agree with old Cavaliers." 

"No? Well, Oxford air does,'' said Sir 
Bobert, striking his broad chest. "Here I 
am, hale and hearty, after sixty years of hard 
riding and camping out, and hunting Puritans 
and foxes ; yes, here I am, worse off by some 
dozen acres, and maybe a hundred trees, but 
still stanch as ever; ay, if the rogues turn 
up once more, ready to boot and saddle, and 
do the old thing over again." 

"It was only last week," said Nell, her 
eyes sparkling with innocent fun at the 



94 ICS BOUHD. 

thought of what a story for the king this 
conversatiou would make, ''that I and old 
Kowley— '' 

''May I ask who is old Rowley? " said Sir 
Bobert. 

"Old Bowley?"" said Nell, laughing; 
"why, don't you know that's our name for 
the king? We were in the barge going firom 
Hampton to Whitehall, when an old soldier 
with one log came beg^g to the water* 
ride; and I prayed Bowley to build some 
sort of dock for such brave old hulks, and he 
promised to ; for he has a kind heart, what- 
ever the Wlugs say of 1dm." 

"The WhigsH say anything," said Sir 
Bobert, dogmatically. "And you did think 
of the old soldiers — a blessing on your 
heart for it. I must introduce you to my 
little daughter* May I beg your name, 
madam?" 

"My name is Eleanor Gwyn — genoully 
called Tor shortness Nelly — and very much at 
your service; " then curtsying with an air of 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 95 

mock respect the thoughtless, warm-hearted 
vaurienne rose from her seat, and plunged into 
the crowd in the direction of a loud laugh, 
which indicated the presence of some wit of 
the first magnitude. 

^^ Madam Helen I '' said Sir Robert, turning 
up his eyes. '^Well, give me the madam, 
and let those take the duchess who like her — 
a painted miss ! '^ 

Ere the baronet could well conclude his 
meditations, the crowd suddenly separated, 
and a celebrated actress of the day,, well 
known as possessing the most beautiful 
voice of the time, swam wantonly to a 
seat at a rich spinet. Where she began to 
trill Dorset's well-known sea-song, ,^^To all 
you Ladies now on Land,*' Dorset himself 
turning over the music. 

Sir Kobert listened very hard for the first 
verse, and beat time to th^ final ^^La, la, la;" 
at the second verse he yawned audibly; at the 
third he looked drowsy and vacant; at thQ 
fourth, terrible to say, he snored. 



96 ICE BOUND. 

The song was ended; but the baronet— 
tired by the late hours, the glare of light, 
and the sound of voices — did not wake till a 
hand tapped him on the shoulder. It was 
the king. With a startled stare Sir Robert^ 
aware that something had happened, at* 
tempted to make up for lost time by clapping 
his homy hands with great yehemence, and 
exclaiming, ^' Capital ! a very good song ! '^ 
in a stentorian voice, better adapted for a 
session dinner than the perfumed region of a 
court. Then, awaking to a faint remem-^ 
brimce of his last interview with Charles, he 
struck up the first line of ** There is a Pud- 
ding by the Fire;" but stopped suddenly, 
coughed, and relapsed into confosed si* 
lence. 

In the meantime the king, not without 
firequent shrewd glances at his friend the 
old baronet, had led fair Mabel through a 
crowd of courtiers, who divided into a lane 
as he passed, bowmg to some, shaking hands 
with others, jesting with all, he left those 



THE LmXE BULOX BOX. 97 

whom he passed smUing and pleased — ^the 
Whigs soothed and the Tories delighted. His 
free comments at his guests amosed Mabel, 
timid as she felt at the unusual honour and 
the unusual scene. 

^^Mj dear Miss Darcy/' he said, in a 
whisper so loverlike that it flushed her cheek, 
** consider me the keeper of this menagerie, 
and ask me any questions. I see your bright 
eyes directed to that stem-looking old soldier 
leaning against the folding-doors. He is an 
old Cavalier, who is so proud of his glass eye 
and wooden leg that he thinks himself fortu- 
nate in having spent aU his fortune and half 
his life to procure them. Do you see that 
fantastic lady who comes limping up to him ? 
That is Lady Muskerry, who delights in 
dancing, and never misses a minuet; a 
triumph over natural difficulties which adds 
greatly to the praises she earns by her 
skill. You will observe she frequently smiles, 
not from good nature, for she is of a severe 
disposition ; not at lovers, for she is the best 

VOL. III. H 



98 IC£ BOUITD. 

of wives — ^but simply to show a very beautiful 
expensive set of false teeth. The lady on her 
other hand not even Sedley's wit, you see, can 
induce to open her mouth. Near the fiddlers 
you will remark several people collected, and 
in pairs ; those I could swear are lovers, for the 
gentlemen are all whispering, and the ladies are 
all looking down. They get tiiere in order 
that the sound may. prevent their tender con- 
fessions being heard. ' One lady has just 
dropped a billet frotii hei' glove, which a 
rival is picking up. unseen by her. There is 
Sogers, describing how he broke his leg fox* 
hunting to l^e guitar-player, who seems 
tertiblemmt ermuyS-T-he wont spare him a pill 
or a plaster. And there's Sir Gregory Brice 
telling, as he always does every night about 
this time, how the great Conde offended the 
proud old Spaniard who defended Lerida by 
mounting the breach at the head of some four- 
and-twenty fiddlers crowned with laurel." 

"May I ask you» majesty who that. lady 
is to the right?'' 



THE LITTLK BLACK BOX. 99 

*^ That is a great heiress, who is wooed by 
everybodj with great intrepidity, though old, 
ugly, and rather insipid. Leaning over her 
is Sedley — Apollo's viceroy, as the poet 
calls him ; he rides the great horse well, is a 
good tennis-player, fences, dances, plays the 
guitar h merveUley pens a sonnet, speaks 
French like a native, reads Italian, knows 
all the jargon of the Grand Cyrus, and can 
repeat half the new Arabian Nights by 
heart." 

While the king was still speaking, Sed* 
ley suddenly took up the lute, looked up 
to the ceiling as if to remember some 
old song, and amid a crowd of smiling 
admirers, intermingled with here and there 
a frown or sneer of cold approval, com- 
menced, in a sweet full voice, a silly French 
love-song; his eyes keeping in one direc- 
tion, and if wandering, returning there, as 
the butterfly fixes on a flower, but after many 
flutterings. 

h2 



100 ICE BOUND. 

" Thy cheeks are chemee that do gioir, — 

N^oeerez-yous, ma belle amy ? 
Among the western mounts of snoir, — 

Je Yons-en prie, then pity me : 
N'oserez-Yons, ma belle, ma belle, 

N'oserez-YOUB, ma belle amy ? 

Thy lips yermilion full of bve, — 

N'oserez-Yous, ma belle amy? 
Thy neck as silver-white as dove, — 

Je vous-en prie, then pity me : 
IToeerez-YOUB, ma belle, ma belle, 

N'oserez-vous, ma belle amy ? " 

Sedley bad already sang two verses of this 
air, when a tremendous plunging crash on the 
keys of the neighbouring spinet, and the flight 
of a dark mass in a half-cu*cle through the 
air, preceded by a short snappish bark, and 
ending with a howl, interrupted the perfor- 
mance, and sent the ladies screaming, with 
many pretty interjections, expressed by the 
tossing of fans and pendent sleeves. It was 
Fiddle, who finding his tail trod upon by the 
heavy foot of Sir Bobert, had turned and 
quietly bit him in the calf with the same 
royal composure that he would have done 
a ^ page or a gentleman-in-waiting ; the 



THE UTILE BUCK 30X. 101 

sturdy old soldier, in the mementos pain, 
forgetful of all consequences, had given 
him a kick, that, raismg him in the air, 
deposited him, frightened but unhurt, on 
the keys of the piano. 

Charles, unable to control himself, sank 
into a chair, and laughed immoderately 
at the old baronet's mingled rage and re* 
gret, the ladies^ sympathy, and the mer- 
riment of the courtiers. 

"Not a word. Sir Eobert,'' he said, 
when he could speak. "Fiddle b always 
in mischief — ^tearing the ladies' mufl&, picking 
up stray love-letters, and pulling ribbons 
to pieces ; he needs more correction, I 
think, than Rogers or Chaffinch gives him.'' 

But further attention was diverted from 
this incident by the roar of voices that 
was now heard filling the quadrangle, and 
the glare of passing torches that, overpower- 
ing all the light of the wax candles in the 
room, shone red upon the curtains and the 
ceiling. Cries of " No Popery ! " could be 



102 ICE BOUND. 

heardy nndulatihg from street to street, 
and breaking out in fresh thunders, till 
they died away in the distance. 

The roar without was still ringing in 
the room, when th<9 folding-doors flew 
open, Btid the Earl of Shaftesbury, followed 
by Lord William Russell, and other no^ 
blemen of his party, entered the room. 
His eye was unusually bright, as if with 
a sense of triumph; his cheeks were, 
however, sunken, his complexion was sallow, 
and his mouth drawn at the corners as 
if with long illness. He leant on the arm 
of his friend. 

Lord Russell, the purest politician of 
the day, had a heavy broad face that 
showed no great intellectual power, full 
cheeks, thick lips, and a double chin; 
but there was candour on his clear brow, 
and undaunted courage in his grey eye. 

" Sir Robert Darcy, your most obedient^'' 
said la small eflfeminate voice ju^t then at the 
coutitry-g^titleman*s elbow. He looked round. 



THE UTTLE BUCK BOX. 103 

and a handsome young fop, with his cravat 
and sword-knot bright with poppy-coloured 
ribbons, bowed till he almost touched the 
ground. Sir Bobert returned the compli* 
ment with a rough, quick, hearty nod of re- 
cognition. 

''Mr. Fielding, I think; we met once 
In the Oxfordshire hunt?'* 

''Mr. Fielding, vraiment and very devot- 
edly at your service,'' said the beau, a mere 
creature of ribbon and feiather, sitting down 
beside Sir Robert, and with an air of the utmost 
self-confidence, pulling down his perfumed 
peruke, and eyeing with extreme complacency 
the buckle on his well-trimmed shoe ; then ex- 
changing, with a rapidity that staggered his 
new acquaintance, an ogle and bow right and 
left. 

" To a man.of the town. Sir Bobert," he said, 
languidly, " I think, without some of Cheva- 
lier's curiously scented snuff, such an evening 
as thisof ours with Bowley would be positively 
odious. If I were not a bit of a virtuasa — " 



104 ICEBOUKD. 

" What's that ? " thought Sir Robert, turn- 
ing up his eyes to the ceiling. ''A cock-fight 
is worth two of it/' he said, as if the remark 
was the result of long meditation. 

"Tou have reason, sir/' said the beau, 
tapping his snuff-box ; " but in fine — ^" 

" Gad-a-mercy/' thought Sir Robert to him- 
self, '^ Tve either forgotten my English, or this 
gentleman never learnt his. What does he 
mean by ' you have reason' and *in fine'? It 
may be Whitehall lingo ; but it isn^t Oxford- 
shire, 111 bet a guinea." 

''The society here," said the. beau, continu- 
ing his conversation without any regard to 
the patience or impatience of his listener, 
" but for Sedley and a few of the Levites — if 
I may use the h-Ja-mode phrase — ^would be 
dull, sir, dull, — I do not scruple to use the 
word to a good high Tory, — dull." 

''I beg pardon, young gentleman," said 
Sur Robert, ''but I don't quite understand 
these new-coined phrases that you use, as ' in 
&xe,' sir. I must have time to think.'' 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 105 

'Tour ladyship's most fortunately met/ 
said the bean, rising to bow to a beauty that 
swept by as he was about to speak, followed 
by a train of admirers, laughing, bowing, 
and ogling. '^ Think, sir ! '' he said, continu- 
ing his conversation ¥rith Sir Robert ; '^ men 
who know the h-hrmode never think ; that 
we leave to scriveners and dirty shop-people 
about the unknown regions of the City.'' 

'' By the mass, young gentleman, if I follow 
you; this is but dull work compared to the hunt- 
ing-field. By cox-wouns, if I can understand 
more than every third word of these Scan- 
derbeg fellows. Now, when Captain True, 
as I used to call my huntsman, told stories 
about old Reynard and the different runs he 
had had for twenty years past, I could follow 
him every inch, though he spoke broad Lan- 
cashire.'' 

'"Tis like basset, dear sir, it has to be 
learnt." 

'^ Odsbobs, man, but didn't I learn my 
mother English fifty years ago in my honf- 



106 I0£ BOUND. 

book ; and must I go to school again ? Bodikins, 
but I wish I was back now at Crow's Nest, with 
the good honest smell of the stable, instead 
of all their cursed spices and wigs, I warrant 
yon ; as if Nature hadn't given us hair, with- 
out needs of buying — ** 

" Have you seen Mr. Dryden's Art of Love^ 
Sir Robert, at the Duke's ? " 

^' Not I ; the last play I saw was at tiie 
Globe, twenty years syne — Shakspere's Temr 
pestr 

'' Obsolete; not at all h-la-mode; only 
known now by Mr. Dryden's Tersion. Won- 
derful talent ! Hero, a man who has seen no 
woman ; heroine, woman seen no man ; full of 
espritj parbku^ a tniraele de ginie.^' 

''Why, there it is," said Sir Bobert; 
'' there's your lingo again. I tell yoo. Sir, I 
don't know French, don't speak French, don't 
want to. I've found my own tongue sufficient 
for fifty years, and I won't learn another now.'' 

'' Do you see that gentleman in the sober- 
dDloured suit? " said the beau, looking with 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 107 

great earnestness. ** He's a good striker- out, 
but a better back-band ; he judges a ball well, 
but can't play for a chase.'' 

" Ay, verUy," said Sir Robert, looking in 
the direction, though not knowing the least 
in what science the peculiar excellencies of this 
gentleman consisted : for by back-handed he 
supposed he meant something the reverse of 
left-banded or under-handed. 

" Ton should have seen old Eowley yester- 
day, shouting about his nets and twists and 
forces; and callmg to the marker, ^ Forty 
love and a chase ! ' as he made his play. It 
was h merveilky it was admirable, it was chai'- 

" I don't know any of your card-games," 
said Sir Robert, not knowing that the beau 
was quoting the technical terms of tennis, 
Charles's favourite sport, and one that had 
almost superseded bowls, which his father had 
been so fond of. ^' Give me a Welsh main 
in a snug pit, and I would not change places 
with a kbg. Lord, to see a ginger pile and 



108 ICE BOUND. 

a dun spar at each other, just as if they were 
Christians; or a duckwing and a black- 
breasted red stand up like Whig and Tory, — 
whoop, lad, it's the rarest sport : ' Pull, baker, 
pull, devil,' as the proverb goes, the devil take 
the hindmost, say I; that is, mark me, if 
there's no rooking, no cracking the beak and 
blunting the gaffles, or cramping the thighs 
with a hair. A good game-cock by nature, sir, 
is a pattern to Christians." 

'^'Tis an unnatural and cruel sport, me- 
thinks," said Mr. Locke, who was standing by, 
and now joined in the conversation. 

^^Bodikins, where's the cruel, when the 
cocks are good and the spurs are sharp? 
Strike, strike right, strike left ; at last a hit 
through the brain — dead, like a hero I Where's 
the harm in that? Why, 'tis not so bad as 
pricking at each other, like court gallants, 
with steel skewers about a paltry guinea lost 
at cribbage. Out upon it ! " 

'^ You are perhaps a stranger to our Lon- 
don cockpits, where a set of cursmg ruffians 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 109 

collect to see two of the most innocent of 
Grod's creatures mangle themselves to death/' 

'^ ZonndSy now oat with ye I Providence 
meant 'em to fight. Who gave 'em spurs, 
look you, now ? — and who gave them courage? 
Havel got ye?" 

'^ He's one of Shaftesbury's canting Whigs," 
said the beau, as Mr. Locke mixed again with 
the crowd. 

''So I thought, so I thought," said Sir 
Robert. " No one but a Dissenter would go 
slap against Providence like that." 

As the beau was about to launch into a 
eulogy of the beauty of a certain lady, whom 
he had been ogling for some minutes, the king 
again approached, holding by one hand Mabel 
and by the other a lady of advanced age, but 
still of considerable beauty, whose mouth was 
pursed up and prim, and whose eyes were bent 
patronisingly on the old baronet. 

"Allow me. Sir Robert," said the king, 
with an air which a deeper observer than the 
old baronet would scarcely have known to be 



110 ICE BOUND. 

quizzical, ^* to introduce to you the Dowager 
Duchess of Newcastle, who, with her usual ame* 
nitj, has taken your lovely daughter under 
her patronage ; and who, amidst her profound 
studies of atoms, diseases, geometry, tooth- 
aches, and astrology, has still time to visit 
our court, and grace it with her august 
presence," 

Sir Bohert bowed ; and la femme savante 
took the fop's seat, who, glad to escape, mixed 
again in the more congenial crowd. 

The duchess, who had been wickedly in- 
formed by the king that Sir Robert was a 
virtuoso of great learning, and who attributed 
the negligence of his dress to his scholarly 
habits, plunged at once into her latest dis- 
coveries. 

" These amusements. Sir Robert, are little 
fitted to the learned, doing nothing but effer- 
vesce the brain and disturb the heart; 
especially being, as I am now, intent on study- 
ing the laws of heat, — heat seeming to me 



TH£ LITTLE BUCK BOX. Ill 

mere motion, and all minerals being hot 
bodies, whose motions have been suspended at 
various stages of their evaporation/' &c. 

Sir Robert bowed ; and the lady continued, 
much pleased with her patient and learned 
auditor ; ^^ the incomparable princess and nurse 
of art*' — as the poets in their dedications 
called her — being as voluble as she was 
learned, fiut we must not weary our readers 
with further details of this royal entertainment ; 
suffice it to say tiiat a little before midnight 
Sir Robert and Mabel retired to take horse on 
the morrow for Crow's Nest. 



112 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE TWO KINGS. 

A WET morning at Hampton Court, and the 
king was intolerably bored. The rain came down 
straight and fierce, with a dull threshing 
sound, that was relentless and vexatious. The 
rose-leaves at the great palace-windows glis- 
tened with wet ; and at every gust of wind rows 
of loose diamonds, big as crown-jewels, shook 
from the sharp stone ledges and cornices, from 
massy window-sills, and the stone garlands 
and bunches of fruit that garnished every 
crystal-paned opening. The broad gravd 
walks, bright orange as a new-fried sole (so 
M. Ortolon, the French cook, said), were 



THE UTILE BLiCK BOX. 113 

sodden into pools that shone mtii a doll white 
ligHt ; the fountain's echo in the inner court 
sounded wearisome and melancholy, and the 
square stones of the terraces were washed 
white and marbly. 

The king, swarthy and sallow, looked out 
of the windows and yawned. Every thing 
that miserable day had gone wrong, in spite 
of his four-and-twenty fiddlers having roused 
him from sleep by the newest French airs. 
He had quarrelled with Nell about a new set 
of diamonds, and Nell had retreated pouting 
to rehearse some private theatricals by herself 
in the Great Gallery. He had been sitting an 
hour to Lely, but getting tired of the restric- 
tion, had then written an epigram to Nell with 
his diamond ring on the window of the north 
drawing-room. He had begun to play with 
Chaffinch at bOliards, but lost the game ; and 
now, moped and fretful as a spoilt child, he 
was engaged in the throne-room in teaching 
one of his pet spaniels to beg ; the dog being 
placed in the crimsoii yelvet chair, above 

TOL. m. I 



114 ICS BOUND. 

which the royal arms shcme in gold, the idng 
being stretched on a pile of cushions, on 
which he occasionally threw himself back to 
glance over a pile of parliamentary papers 
with which his ministers had been perplexing 
him the day before. A more complete q>eci- 
men of a roifainSant than Charles presented 
at that moment oonld scarcely be seen. 

A l^ooght of importance strack the king; 
he sprang from his seat, and rang with im- 
patience a sOver bell that lay on a bracket 
table near. Ere the sound had died away 
a valet stood before him, silent as the genii 
that waited on Aladdin's ring. 

^' Francois, FidMe wants some milk and 
biscuit, and be sure the pups have some 
sopped rusks. — ^And, Francis, biing me a 
cold fowl and some sherry; it gets near 
meridian, and having notiiing to do makes 
even a king bungiy. But whose carriage is 
that driving so furiously into the court, the 
coachman wet as a sponge, the b<Nrses smokiDg 
sops? The prino^ as I five— gloomy aa 



THS UTTLS BLiCt BOX. llS 

ever I Come, I wager a thouMnd (Drowns, to 
petition for some one-eyed, one-legged, tmcn- 
lent old Cavalier who lost an arm at 
Worcester. It makes me yawn — the very 
sight of Bupert. Yes, by the powers of dark- 
ness, there is some fiiend, too, more villan* 
ous looking than usual, but arms and legs 
complete ; and dressed, like Tamerlane in the 
play, in crimson brocade and— -eh, what? a 
gold cross, as Fm a smcere Christian ; — ^why, 
it must be the ambassador of Morocco at least. 
Here, Francois, run for the crown and sceptre; 
I must dress like the king of trumps, I sup« 
pose, or I shall be what the prince calls 
unkingly. On second thoughts, never mind 
the crown, but bring me a glass of rosa solis; 
it refreshes the spirits and washes the cobwebs 
out of the cerebellum. Sweep out the dogs, 
diake up these cushions, clear away these 
eaxds and dice, and hang up that guitar in 
my bedroom. Show the prince and his 
villanous-looking commodore in, while I go 
and put myself to rights in this closet; 

l2 



116 ICE BOUHD. 

if I am detained more than an hoar, tdl 
Mistress 6wjn to inyent some pretexk to 
send for me. These old soldiers will be tiie 
death of me some day; they're wovae tiian 
the rascals who drove me up into tke oak. 
Did I ever toll you that story, Franfois? 
Well — ^but Tye no time now. Lcnrd, th«re 
they are ; I hear those dreadfhl jack-boota 
— ^tramp, tramp, creak, creak; the yery 
aoand gives me the vaponrs.'* And so saying 
—every sentonce broken np into a dozen 
frivolous episodes, with occasional attempts to 
bring in one of those long Worcester stories 
so much dreaded by the courtiers — ^the good* 
natured, frivolous, cynical, worthless king 
hurried off to put on something more suitable 
for the reception of the punctilious Bupert 
than the plain mouse-coloured velvet doublet 
worn smooth on the left side by the repeated 
thrusts of foils — ^whidi he then wore ; carrying 
a yelping spanid, beautiful, with long silken 
ears and liquid, timorous eyes, under each arm, 
fmd iVan9ois following him with an armful of 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 117 

"Cards, dice-l)oxes, foilsi lutes, and tennis- 
balls. ^ 

The tapestry had scarcely fallen over the 
door that hid the dressing-closet of the king, 
^hen another door, opening on a staircase, 
the wall of which was resplendent with the 
newly-painted works of Le Yerrio — ^fiddling 
tmgels, Cffisars, and Yenuses — ^flew open, and 
Prince Rupert entered, followed by the crim- 
son gentleman, whom oar readers may perhaps 
identify as Captain Morgan, the Welsh 
buccaneer leader, whose rencontre with Wild- 
fire we have mentioned in a previous chapter. 
His bent back and rolling gait denoted the 
sailor, his uneasy eye and cruel determined 
mouth the pirate and freebooter. 

Prince Supert, the Murat of the civil war, 
the scourge of England, the terror and de- 
testation of the Boundhead critics, was now 
rapidly sinking into old age ; but no dimness 
of time had yet weakened his fierce hawk-like 
eye, or bent his proud, erect, defiant frame. 
His grave soldierly dress presented as singula 



118 ICE BOUND. 

a contrast with tbcf alniost tiieatiical costume 
of Morgan as his meditatiye stem glance did 
with the suspicions, distrustful look with 
whidh Morgan scannied the cUtrk corners of 
the room, ejed the doors and windows, or 
watched the tapestry erery lime^it rose or 
fluttered. A distatt footfall, a far off laugh 
from the gallery where Nell was romping over 
her part, sufficed to make the buccaneer steal 
his hand to the heavy sabre he wore, or fumble 
tinder his cross for the concealed pistol he 
never failed to carry. His greasy fell of dark 
Jiair, his thick over-grown eyebrows, his rest- 
less bloodshot eyes, his scarred chin, and 
his cruel, distrusted mouth, sufficed to make 
up the totality of as thorough a ruffian as 
ever disgraced hiimanity. 

With an angry glance round the empty 
room, the prince turned round and questioned 
the aitendabt, who had told him that the 
king was awaiting him in the throne-room. 
The taan quailed before the old soldier*s eye 
and the scowling Morgan, who swore that, if 



THE lutle buck box. 119 

he had him afloat^ he*d strappado him be- 
fore he could heare a lead. The man stam* 
mered an apology t 

''His Highness — his Majestj — ^perhaps with 
Mistress Gwjn, rehearsing Roxaloma in the 
Great GaUeiy;' 

''So we tread. the primrose path/' said 
Bnpert, almost to himself, with a sigh; 
" fiddlers and harlots, pall-mall and ombre, at 
the very moment that the crown is melting 
on his head. Already rebellious flames 
break out with unquenchable violence; the 
yiUain cripple, Shaftesbury, is abready moulding 
the crown for the bastard fool's head, and the 
true successor dare hardly show himself in the 
streets of this London. Give me but half a 
regiment of horse, and I would sweep the earth 
of these howling rebels; slay the best of 
them, as Samuel slew Agag, to use their own 
cursed cant, and drag this lame hunchback 
to a miserable prison," 

"Clear the streets with grape, and use 
fire-potSy if they shut themselves up itx 



120 IC£ BOUHD. 

houses^^ said Morgan, his eyes kindling at 
the smell of blood ; ** have gibbets ready at 
Charing Cross; use the torture for the boys 
and old men ; theyll let out anything at the 
first sting of the burning match. Shut the 
city gates. Drag a ten pounder up the church- 
towers to command the squares — ^^ 

"But what hope of preserving royal 
honour/' said Bupert, apparently not hearing 
the sympathetic remarks of his proUege^ 
"when we have a king who sneers at the 
blessed martyr, wastes his time with jockeys 
and strumpets, and disregards all the cere- 
monies of his position ? '' 

" No, not entirely, Bupert,'' said a laughing 
voice as the tapestry lifted up, and Charles 
stepped forth, crown and all, dressed in his 
cloth-of-gold coronation-robes, which he used 
at the Oxford parliament he had lately opened. 
"Here I am, complete as the king of trumps^ 
come to welcome to my court the prince of 
diamonds and the knave of— Where?'' and he 
looked interrogatiYely, with a slight smile^ 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 121 

first at Morgan and then at Bupert. '' But 
there, don't scowl, Knpert ; I only did it just 
to amuse you, this wet day requires some 
amusement. My royal consort — '' 

" I wish your Majesty good morrow," said 
the prince, bowing, with the somewhat Span- 
ish punctiliousness of the old school; his 
Castilian gravity contrasting oddly enough 
with the laughing affectation of kingliness 
assumed by Charles* *^ I thought your royal 
consort of Braganza preserved her usual 
seclusion, so unusual in this frivolous age, at 
her palace at Somerset House." 

'^My royal consort is here," said Charles, 
stepping back into his closet, and bringing 
forth on his arm the merry grisette, Nell 
Gwyn, still wearing the fantastic trappings 
of the Persian Boxana. 

"How have you spent your morning, 
Kate?" said Charles, chucking the sparkling- 
eyed actress playfully beneath the chin. " I 
trust in devotions suitable to the season of 



122 ICE Bouin). 

the vigil of St Merryfellow and the eve of the 
Ten Thousand Virgms/' 

^' Yase, your Majesty^ three masses began the 
morning, which I have since spent in vorking 
an altar cloth for the church of St. Bartholo- 
meWy and in repeating three hundred litanza/' 
said Nell| imitating the broken Portuguese of 
the neglected wife, who had lately so nearly 
fallen a victim to the bloodthirsty promoters of 
the Popish plot, and bowing ridiculously to the 
angry prince and his companion. Morgan, 
though ignorantof court manners, seemed some* 
what astonished at the freC'^and-easy grace of 
her Majesty of Portugal, whose eye. was 
resting most approvingly, if tiot devotionally, 
on the diamond cross, torn from some bleed- 
ing Spaniard, which shone on his broad bull- 
like breast. Bepeated rough bows and 
scrapings of the legs indicated his recognition 
of the presence of Majesty. 

** May I ask,** said Charles, ^^ what espedal 
buriness of state brings my dear Hotspur on 
such a morning as this, in spite of gout and 



THE LUTLE BLiOK BOX. 128 

theumatism, to brave this campaigning 
Dutch weather, to spoil my royal grarel walks 
and to interrapt me in the pleasant task of 
bearing Nell recite her part? Now then, 
Nell, go on : 

* When XerxeB, shilling like a quenclileaB sun, 
Biassed in tlie gloiy — ^ 

Now go on. Where were we? Adzooks, 
what a fustian fellow this Nat Lee is. But, 
stop a bit; Hotspur is going to speak." 

** Is an old soldier to be yilified with nick- 
names?" said Rupert, itngrily, his month 
twitching under the thick covert of his 
moustache. " Tour Qoble father would never 
have disgraced my age with such revilings." 

"There, for (Jod's sake, Eupert, don't 
go and throw my father in my face — ^But, lud, 
the man's angry ! Why, Bupert," he said, 
touching his kinsman kindly on the shoulder, 
" I wouldn't hurt thee for the crown of France, 
including the claret country. Why, man, 
can't you bear with mad old Rowley, who you 
have said so often was a ^ood jack-pudding 



124 ICE BOUNft. 

spoilt, and remember that although he is not 
of such fiery blood as thou, he can sometimes 
— on wet days and cold nights — think deeply 
x)f the scurvy set of pimps and fools he has 
fallen amongst, and thank God that in a 
dismal old house in the Barbican — sur- 
rounded by pikes and guns and bows, retorts, 
crucibles, and air-pumps — there still lives a 
brave old soldier, clear of brain and sound of 
heart, who is ready to die for him at a 
moment's notice ?" 

"My kinsman and my prince," said Ru- 
pert, throwing himself with all the fire of 
his younger days, at Charleses feet, and kiss- 
ing the thoughtless monarch's proffered hand, 
but still averting his proud grave eyes from 
the laughing siren who hung with a clinging 
weight to the royal arm, ''my sword, my 
Jieart, my blood is yours/' 

'' I can't bear a scene, Rupert," said Charles, 
stepping forward to a richly carved cabinet, 
and drawing out a small handsomely bound 
book firom the top shelf. ** I need no proof 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 125 

that you love me; in such times as these, 
I should be indeed a miserable fopling if I 
didn't yalue sudh service. But, vive la 
hagateUel ^No more of that/ Hal, an you 
love me.' Now, Nell, go on : 

* Call Furies with their ctowbb of led-fanged snakeB.* 

You don't know it ? — ^This, Bupert, is not, as 
I see you imagine. The Gamestei's Complete 
Companion^ nor the naughty Dialogues of 
Aretino; but honest Master Evelyn's History 
of Chalcography^ illustrated with a marvellous 
mezzotint portrait of one of Salvator Bosa's 
most chivalrous-looking cut- throats. There 
pow ; what a powder-magazine you are I It's 
an admirable thing of yours, full of Bem- 
brandt's most poetic gloom. Very like indeed," 
said the merry monarch, holding up the por- 
trait to Bupert's face ; " his own invention, 
too, NelL'' 

"Fie! it's like a chimney-sweep,'' said 
Nell, pushing the matchless mezzotinto from 
her with her little, fat, dimpled hand ; for she 
did not like the severe old soldier. 



126 ICE BOUND. 

" Tou are a little fool, Nelly, and know 
more about painting and the hare's-foot than 
the burin and the steel-plate/' 

" I paint !*' said Nelly, pulling away from 
his arm, and pouting, at the same time 
chan^g crowns with Charles, who laughingly 
bartered his real pile of sapphires and rubies 
for her paste and Bristol diamonds. 

"Yes," sud Charles, pursuing his com- 
parison ; '^ the bold aquiline nose ; the same 
fine Greek mouth, perhaps a little disdainful — 
but let that pass ; the chin of Csssar, the nose 
of Alexander, the artist's swelling brow, and 
the soldier's hawking eye. But, in the name 
of confusion, what made you put this rag, 
Bupert, to hide your fine forehead? It gives 
him a little of the banditti air ; eh, Nell?" 

" Forsooth, quite a Claude du Val." 

''Nonsense, Nell! Gro and learn your 
ranting play, and give me my crown, or egad 
111 send you to the Tower, as I'm an anointed 
king. Isn't the chiaroscuro perfect?" said 



THE LITTLE BUCt BOX. 127 

Charles, turning inquiringly and politely .to 
Morgan. 

^'I don't know the lingo/' said Morgan^ 
with a confused scrape of the left leg ; ^' look 
you, by Saint Tavid, I never saw the word in 
any ship's books." 

. '^ Art is an island not often traded to,'' said 
Charles. " But, by-the-by, Rupert, I've got 
a prize for you — a rare animal, becoming 
rapidly extinct — ^a real old Cavalier, eyes, 
nose, and legs, too, complete, who can tell you 
stories by the hour of breaking in among the 
pikes at Edgehill, and killing Cromwell's 
drum-major at Wigan; swears and drinks in 
the real, old, original way, just like Goring 
or Lunsford — ^'gad, my head aches to think of 
it now; claps you on the back, man; and 
stirs up his canary with a fox's brush, to give 
it a sporting flavour." 

^^ And has a pretty daughter, I presume, or 
your Majesty had let him go whistle." 

" Well, there you have me ; he has indeed. 
Don't pout, l^ell; it spoils your expression. 



X28 ICE BOUND. 

Such eyes, Nell I no cruel, disdainful sparUers, 
that pierce and slay, but soft dove-like 
fondlers — so inquiring, and tender, and anxious. 
Such cheeks too: talk of peaches — ^pooh! 
scarlet blotches ; talk of roses — mere rouge T' 

" The hoyden 1" said Nell^ unable to con- 
tain the moment's annoyance and jealousy. 
*^ A great country Cicely, Prince, with large 
red hands and feet like flat fish. Pish I I've 
seen such on assize days, dragged in the old 
family coach, with the great down of a bro-^ 
ther, and the blockhead — " 

" Nelly," said Charles, " remember you are 
queen in Persia, and not in England. — ^By-the- 
by, Bupert, have you heard anything of this 
thief, Morgan, who has been cutting Spaniards' 
throats in Panama, and whom the court of 
Madrid plague me to death about ? A daring 
fellow he must be ; one of the real buU-dog race 
that you love, who always flies at head and 
throaty and never turns tail.'' 
. '^ He is now in England," said Bupert, a sar- 
castic smile slowly relaxing his severe features, 



THE UTTLE BUCK BOX. 129 

and glancing at Morgan, who had become dur- 
ing the last speech more and more uneasy* 

** And under arrest, I suppose ? '' 

^* No ; free as your Majesty.'' 

** Indeed 1 He must have a bold heart; as 
ready to face English judges with Spanish 
dollars, I suppose, as he was to face Spaniards 
with English steel Where lurks, then, this 
modem Drake, half«Raleigh and half-highway* 
man? Skulking, I suppose, in some of those 
tarry old inns about Wapping, whete crimps 
and pirates arrange their onuses, and laugh 
at justice." 

''At present, your Majesty, on the contrary, 
he braves the fuU sunshine, and is to be found 
not far from one of your country palaces.'^ 

'^ The daring rascal I I should like though 
to introduce him to my friend Blood, who once 
stole my crown, about the time Nelly here 
6tole my heart." 

^' Fie, your Majesty I *• said Nelly, tapping 
him playfully with the gilded iEiceptre of 
Persia* 

VOL. m* K 



130 ICEBOUKD. 

'^ What sort of fellow ia this Morgan in 
&Ge, Snpert?" 

** Well, not unlike my fiiend h^e ; a gal- 
lant officer, who has fought bravely against 
the Spaniards in the Indian seas." 
: *^ Does he dress weU ; or is he all flannel 
and tarpanling, like a Dutch skipper ? " 

^' On the contrary, he is fond of splendour, 
and generally appears in a dress of crimson." 

'^ What ! yes ; why, it must be— Captahi 
Morgan I '' said the king, turning to his 
visitor; '^the illustrious conqueror of the 
Spaniards, and the scourge of Panama? A 
.brave freebooter indeed," he said, under breath. 
. ^^ But, halloo I on one knee ; why, man, I don't 
look Uke a hangman, dp I? You are safe 
(enough here : and if we do presently have a 
sort of trial, and just slip a rope round yoitr 
neck, why, it will be but a form. Take my 
word for it, if I do as I like, you go out 
befpre the year is done as Governor of 
Jamaica." 

** Down on your knees, man," said Rupert, 



THE UTTLE BLAClL BOX. iSl 

'^ heartily down on your knees, and thank so 
good a king, who, if he were as — " 

*' Wise as he is good, would turn trooper, 
and pistol Shaftesbury, at the head of the 
Coldstreams; eh, Supert? But the man 
doesn't seem satisfied ; he still kneels. Rise, 
man, or I shall think you a greater rogue 
than I believe you were/' 

While the king thus spoke, Morgan had 
been fumbling in his breast-pocket, and slowly 
extracting a small parcel, that his nervous 
eonfusion scarcely enabled him to draw forth, 
and present with a bow to the king. 

" Why, what's this ? See how NelFs eyes 
sparkle I Spanish diamonds, I suppose ; a sort 
of magnificent bribe to buy off the rope. 
What I a black box, — a little black box! 
Not Shaftesbury's, eh? What 1— yes,— 
Shaftesbury's? What I the real box, and the 
deed ! the real little black box, and the old 
fox nicked I Why, Morgan, you shall be Ay 
admiral of the blue, my chancellor, my billiard- 
marker, my — ^" And the king, to the aston- 

k2 



182 ICE BOUND» 

ishment of Rupert^ NeUy, and even Morgan, 
began to ezecnte a minnet-step round the 
room, as he opened the box, and shook the 
forged deed in triumph in his hand. Gradually 
settling into calmer contentment, Charles sat 
down on the throne, and requested Morgan's 
history of its capture. 

" Marvellously good I Trapped, by Jove ! 
Little Sincerity boxed up, and out of court. 
Let my patron saint be henceforth Saint 
David, and toasted cheese supersede the 
omelette of Ortolon* By a chance shot, too I 
But, halloo 1 not so quick, Captain Morgan ; 
that box, if you please/' 

Morgan, paying no attention to the king's 
question, folded up the deed, shut the box, 
and replacing it in the wrapper, put it in his 
pocket. 

** The price of this box, that your Majesty 
seems so much to value, and which perhaps 
may contain some great court-secret, of which 
I am ignorant) is a free pardon for all incur-: 
sions of mine against the Spanish colonies/' . 



THE UTTLB BLACK BOX, 133 

'^ I grant it,** «ud Charles ; '' so giye me the 
box. Supert^ good morning ; meet me in the 
garden in half an hour, and your friend here : 
the game is not yet finished. Till then, au 
revoirJ^ 

As Rupert and his rough ^0%^ passed out, 
Charles threw himself ih a seat, and passmg 
his fingers through his thick black curls, 
laughed long and loud. 

** Well, Jade Fortune, I begin to love thee, 
after all. Parliament prorogued, and treason 
shut out at that door; and now this box 
snapped — another door to be barred up. 
Oh, Shaftesbury, Shaftesbury, I have thee on 
the hip, old plotter as thou art! Well, 
after all, Nelly, give me an old man of 
the world to hobble an old plotter, who 
thinks to cheat Lucifer himself, with his 
ciphers and bribes and spies and dubs. 
But now, Nelly, run and dress; for our 
court expects us on the Terrace, and we 
have the^ old traitor still to browbeat and 
publicly confound." 



134 losBOimD, 

It was just half an hour from this time, 
and a crowd of courtiers, footmen, and mu- 
sicians stood in the courtyard at the foot of 
the great staircase, awaiting the appearance of 
the king — some yawning with weariness, others 
uttering fashionable oaths in sheer impatience. 
Presently the four-and-twenty fiddlers struck 
up a triumphant strain, which, considering 
their salaries had not been paid for a year, 
was meritorious ; the gentlemen fell iAto 
knots, and ladies ceased shrugging and 
whispering, as Charles, dressed in a plain 
and simple dress, slowly descended the stairs, 
every hat flew off, and every head bent. For 
a moment even Nell Gwyn and the Duchess of 
Portsmouth ceased to exchange angry looks, 
and the jest died away even on thelips of Sedley. 

Through the cloistered quadrangle, under 
the clock-tower arch, and along broad terraces, 
guarded by huge orange-trees golden with 
fruit, and beautiful as that of the Hesperides, 
passed the royal train, laughing, jesting, 
humming suppressed songs, half-French, half- 



THE LUTLS BUCS BOX. 135^ 

English ; the king Walked first, wi(2i - a 
springy elastic step^ swinging his cameo- 
beaded cane ; now pinching Nell's ear, now 
slipping his arm into that of some favourite 
courtier, who, before perhaps unnoticed, from 
that moment became the envy of the crowd* 
There were mad-brained fellows there, who 
cared only for the carriage of their sword and 
the dean setting of their laced shirt ; but 
there were also Sir Politic Would-bes, who saw 
(political meanings in eyerything the king did. 
If he stooped to pet his French spaniel, it 
was a sign that peace was to be proclaimed 
with Louis le Grand ; but if he ki(iked it out 
of his way, nothing but inevitable war could 
be indicated by an omen so terrible. 

At the fountain the king paused for a mo-> 
ment, leaning over the marble basin to feed 
the Chinese gold and silver fish that flocked 
to greet their well-known visitor. 

''As diGiger as courtiers,'^ said a wit in the 
background, whom Charles singled out and 
richly rewarded with, n smile. 



186 ICE BOUHD* 

''But who's ihis?*^ said Charles, looking 
up suddenly, as a gronp of some half-dozen 
persona adyanced slowly towards the fountain 
from the part of the gardens adjacent to 
the river, and now known as Queen Mary's 
Walk. 

^^ Little Sincerity,'^ was the whisper. It 
was indeed Shaftesbury, who, supported by 
the arm of a friend, advanced with an air of 
courteous reverence towards his sovereign; 

** I pray your Majesty to remdn covered/* 
said Charles, with a sarcastic smile; '^this 
damp river air is ill-fitting your age and 
infirmities." 

'^ I pray your Majesty," said the old plotter, 
with a lower bow than before, ''to spare your 
wit, and not to reproach so true a subject 
with infirmities which, although great, do not 
deprive him of the means of being usefrd to 
his sovereign/* 
' '' Tour Majesty is too complaisant.*^ 

''Your Majesty is too witty for an old man 
to hope to cope with you/^ 



THE UTTLS BLACK BOX. I3f 

'^ Is it true that your Majesty is intending to 
turn your crutches into stilts, to mount " 

** This is part of the calumnies, your Ma- 
jesty, by which I am daily aspersed. Would 
to God I were strong enough to meet suck 
vermin with the sword, now almost rusty in 
the sheath.'^ 

"Tour Majesty is a complete Coeur-de- 
Lion,'' said Charles, smiling and bowing very 
low. " It scarcely becomes a poor fiddling 
tennis-player — ^I think those are the words — 
to pretend to help so great a man to govern/' 

" Tour Majesty,'' said Shaftesbury, beseech- 
ingly. 

"Bulwark of Protestantism, guardian of 
our dearest interests, denouncer of Sardana- 
palus and all his gang, may I lead you to 
your coach ? *' 

As Shaftesbury, in vain trying to escape 
from his merciless tormentor, drove off at the 
palace gate, Charles waved his hat, wiped 
his forehead, flipped his spaniel with hia 



138: ICE BOUND. 

scented handkerchief, and laughed boisteroudy. 
" Poor Tony,'' he said, " my impudence was 
too much for him. And now I have the box 
—the little jewel of a lying box — ^black as 
the lie it was made to hold/* 



189 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE TWO CONSPIRATORS. 

It was a pleasant evening on the Thames, the 
day following the scene in the palace garden, 
when, not a mile from Richmond, in the nook 
of an osier-bed, near an ait long since broken 
down by the persistent violence of the current, 
a small boat might have been seen moored — a 
small boat, which, rocking to and fro as 
gently as a cradle, fretted among the nodding 
bulrushes, or grated on the wet silt that 
fringed the little island. 

A sleeping man sat, with folded arms, 
silent as a statue, in the boat ; now and then 
he woke, but only to sing a scrap of a drowsy 



140 ICE Soum 

Puritan hymn^ to listen a moment to the rustle 
of the wind in the grey willows^ or the splash 
of a fish springing with a silvery sparkle at a 
fly, and then, with a muttered curse at some- 
body or something's delay, to refold his arms 
and sink back again into sleep. The atten* 
tive observer might have seen floating on the 
water, near where his right hand had an hour 
ago been splashing and playing, a torn card, 
the corners of which seemed greasy and 
turned down, as if it had been used for some 
gambling trick, and torn up in vexation at a 
recent loss. Indeed, a red cloth, dark with 
dried blood, wrapped round the boatman's 
left hand, would almost have indicated some 
recent fray, the result of a tavern brawl appa-* 
rently, for the dirty white ends of the plain 
band that tied the rogue's throat were foul with 
red and yellow stains of wine and tobacco* A 
more hang-dog looking rascal surely never 
waited on a gentleman ; and yet he must be 
. in the service of some old family, for he wore 
buttons on which the crest of a flying fish was 



THE LITTLE BLiCK BOX. 141 

clearly discernible; the sword hj his side, too, 
hung in a livery belt of purple and yelloWi 
indicated the trusty dependent; while the 
new glossy green ribbons in the old bruised 
felt hat declared him a true Protestant, and 
one of those adherents of Shaftesbury ready, 
as the humour went, to shed blood for the 
arch-traitor's cause* 

The boatman slept on. Great crimson 
clouds came and went ; the sunset fire burnt 
on the water : the fish, in the red reflections, 
swam like burning arrows, or scuds of red* 
scaled salamanders; every willow shone like the 
burning bushof thedesertmountain ; then slowly 
came the kindly glow of the twilight, and the 
trees stood out against the incomparable sky 
in dark nets, or sharp and clear as metal-work 
on the gilded surface of a shrine. Once only 
the man awoke, and that was to grope for a 
flask under a cloak at the bottom of the boat, 
to slant its gurgling contents into his mouth, 
then to fling the empty friend with a splash 
far into the river, and to subside again into a 



142 ICE R)nin). 

calmer rest. He had lain in this intermittent 
state of repose now some two hours, when a 
smoke saddenly rose from the opposite shore, 
which was in a moment answered by a flame 
from the middle of the island, and the next 
instant a man, muffled in a doak, and with 
his hat slouched over his eyes, tramped 
heavily through the osiers, leaped into the 
boat, and seized the oars. 

'^Drunken sluggard,'' sud the stranger, 
whose saturnine face and stiffened arm we 
easily recognize as those of Mr. Troutbeck; 
whom Sir Sobert braved in the hunting-field, 
'' up, for the Philistines are upon us 1 '* 

The man leaped up, half giddy with sleep, 
and flourished out his sword. 

^^ Upon them I Down with them I Kill I 
kiUI" 

But gradually awaking, and seeing that no 
greater enemy than his master was at hand, 
he sat down, scmiewhat ashamed of his ineffi^ 
cient watch, and stammered out some excuse 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 143 

about hifl wounded hand, and the iU-humiourB 
in the blood. 

** Sluggard/' said Troutbeck, '^ beware the 
grape of Eshcol; for what makes some men 
lions makes others only swine. It is such as 
thou who endanger our cause, and bring on 
us the Scarlet Woman and her leash of 
monsters.'' So saying, with suspicious eyeii 
he drew a short heavy musketoon from under 
his cloak, and examined its lock with the 
utmost care. 

^^The best plotter, after all," he said to 
himself— ^^ better than all the black boxes in 
the world, except the long black box, six feet 
by three, where I hope to see the tyrant one 
day lie. But what ails thy hand, Chambers?^' 

The man, cowed by his master's rebuke, 
muttered, with surly defiance, something 
about a late brawl with the unrighteous in 
the good cause. 

"Reprobate I — ^miserable reed on which I 
am condemned to rest — thy own cause, I 
wager, and bad cause epough. Some cheating 



144 ICE BOUKD. 

trick, I venture to say, thou foul-mouthed 
Babshakeh, and for once justly punished. 
Wilt thou never rest till thou mounted the 
tree without leaves, thou child of hemp and 
son of perdition ?^ 

The half'-drunken man, with a surly oath, 
stung by these rebukes, and a little fired by his 
too firequent draughts, at this staggered upon 
his legs, at the great risk of upsetting the 
boat, and clutching an oar, swore that he 
would stand no nuling, bad as he was, espe- 
dally firom a master who he well knew, fool 
as he was, wore a rope round his neck, and 
whose head was worth a hundred guineas any 
day in the week at Whitehall 

'' By the living devil, and the hell to which 
we are both hastening," said Tiroutbeck, 
raLnng his musketoon to the level of his hip, 
'^ thou^ I have a wounded arm, if I wDl not 
lodge these ten slugs m thee if thou comest a 
step nearer. Beware, dog; remember the 
old grazier with the ugly cut in the throat, 
jbund near Brentford, stuffed into a hay-rid^ 



THE UTTLB BLIOK BOX. 145 

• and touch not one who has taken good care 
to secure -hia safety before he came alone with 
such a child of Satan as thee.'' 

With a drunken stammer. Chambers felt back 
on his seat| and plying his oar with tremen* 
dous energy as a yent to his passibn, swore 
it was all a joke, and that when the chol^ 
was once quiet no one could have a trustier 
servant than Will Chambers." 

Trusty ; yes, trusty as the pet wolf or the 
tame cobra. 

The next mile was passed in silence ; 
the man bending to his oars, Troutbeck occa- 
sionally taking out a paper, which he read 
attentively/ or half-shutting his eyes and 
leaning back as if asleep, yet taking care at the 
same time to keep vigilant watch on every 
movement of his dangerous adherent. 

By this time the boat had reached a bend 
of the river, and on turning it a sudden burst 
of music rising in the distance made Trout: 
beck look up from the paper which he was 
reading, ^'S<merset, 2500 ; Ghueester, 3000,'* 

VOL. UL L 



146 ICE BOUKD^ 

and other items, apparently referring to 
some projected rising in the midland counties. 

'^ What gilded galleys are these ? '' he said, 
tnming inquiringly to the boatman; ''my 
sight fails me in this bat^s light; bat I can 
see, I think, a crimson canopy. Is it some 
city pageant^ some swanhoppiag of the greasy 
citizens? One son of Belial I can mark, in his 
accursed pomp and wantonness, standing up 
surrounded by a circle of others, who seem to 
pay him reverence ; he plays wiUi the curls 
of some Delilah, too. This must be some 
prank of Sedley^s. Is the centre figure short 
and portly, with a light flaxen wig stream* 
ing round a fresh-coloured face ? ^ 

'' No,'' said Chambers, shading his eyes with 
his hand from the last rays of sunlight, '' he 
is tall and bony ; his face is dark, lined, and 
swarthy, and he wears a black wig.'' 

'' What is that spot on his left breast that 
shines so ? '' 

'' It is a diamond star — ^it's the Stuart I '' 

'' It's the king!'' said Troutbeok, nervously 



THE LITTLE BLIGK BOX. 147 

fingering his musketoon. '^One shot now 
and the game were done ; one shot — ^they 
come nearer, curse on their pipes and 
whistles, their white-bosomed women and 
their scented fops. Such women are the 
canker-worms of the land; such men the 
yermin that gnaw into the nation's vitals. 
Babylon, Babylon! one shot/' and he tried 
to take afm with the short heavy gun, but 
the weight was too much for his wounded 
shoulder, and he dropped it into his sound 
hand with a bitter exclamation of pain — ^^ one 
shot, one touch of a sure finger upon this steel 
trick, and in a spirt of fire Charles Stuart 
were gone to join his poor, headless, witless 
father in his Windsor grave; but my old 
cursed, cursed fortune — always to lose the 
game at the last card. As for this drunken 
ruffian, I dare not trust him. Oh, for one 
moment with a sound limb, and I and Shaftes- 
bury would rule the world I '' 

By this time the royal galleys had ap- 
proached nearer; the banks of gilded oars 

l2 



148 * ICE BOUND. 

could be seen beating the dusky water into 
foam to the music of the four*and4wenty 
fiddlers, and a band of French flutes, of the 
Duchess of Portsmouth's special organisation ; 
that Semiramis being in peculiar good- 
humour this evening, in consequence of 
Charles having that morning presented her 
with the old palace of Nonsuch, which she 
had resolved to pull down and sell piecemeid 
ere it could be recalled by the somewhat 
capricious giver. There she sat, under the 
crimson canopy, in such a cloud of satin as 
Lely loved to paint, two black boys fanning 
her with swan's-down fans, and occasionally 
sprinkling dust of myrrh on a little silver 
tripod which lay at her feet. By her side 
stood Charles, playing with her ringlets, and 
ticklmg her little ear, that was pink as the lip 
of a sea-shell newly rescued from the ocean. 
In front sat a court poet, singing to a lute, 
his music-book being held by Nelly, who, 
seldom jealous, looked upon the Duchess of 
Portsmouth as a transitoiy fayouritei soon to be 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 149 

forgotten. Two or three other ladies were 
busy casting a silk net into the water^ others 
were leaning over the sides of the galley, or 
watching the throb and fall of the oars as 
they rose and dropped in regular and harmo- 
nious cadence. Others, who had picked 
water-lilies, twined them in their hair, aping 
the water-nymphs — attendants of Cleo- 
patra on her voyage down the Oydnus^ — ^had 
not, indeed, their romping laughter and noisy 
shouts at the passing swans, who with kingly 
dignity reluctantly surrendered them a pas- 
sage, have rather announced them as bac- 
chantes on a trip to the Siren islands; or 
wild strolling players, as Troutbeck had at 
first supposed them to be, bound for some 
pageant at Hampton. 

The conspirator, desirous of escaping royal 
notice, being at the present moment bent on 
a special errand in connection with a plot, all 
but ripe, desired Chambers to rest on hb oars 
and puU under the shadow of the river bank, 



150 ICE BOUND. 

there to wait in ambush the passage of the 
royal galley. 

But accident betrayed him. The king, in 
a fit of playful malice, had just snatched a 
love-letter from Nelly's bosom, having seen 
the sharp edge of it peeping above her tucker. 
In the struggle to retain it, it blew over- 
board, and, skimming with the wind, was 
drifted into a pollard- willow, that leaned over 
the bank in a sullen despairing sort of way 
peculiar to willows, just above the nook of 
darkness where the conspirators lay con- 
cealed. 

In a moment a boat had been lowered, 
and two of the king's guard had pushed off 
to recover the scented billet, that fluttered 
like a trapped dove in the entanglement of 
the willow-branches. To their astonishment 
they found a boat drawn up near the shore, 
and in it two muffled men, fierce, evidently 
alarmed, and one of them armed with a 
formidable musketoon. They had no doubt 
that a second Hye-House plot had been 



THE UTTLE BUCK BOX. 151 

detected, and that these were the red-handed 
assassins. In a moment they were dragged 
before the king, who, the onlj one of the 
galley's crew unalarmed, stood carelessly 
practising dumb fingering on a lute and 
awaiting their arrival. 

'^ A Shaftesbury plot 1 " roared out a dozen 
voices, as swords sprang out, and the fore- 
most men began to jostle and threaten the 
two helpless prisoners. 

^^ Adzooks I " said Charles, '^ gentlemen all, 
withdraw, or the Lord's anointed, but lately 
rescued from this bell-mouthed blunderbuss, 
will die for lack of air, and the successbn not 
yet established* Bring up the tallest of the 
villains — he looks the most gentlemanly of 
the two— -and ask him his name." 

'^ Your name ? " said one of the halberdiers,^ 
nearly choking Troutbeck, who stood calm 
and careless before the alarmed revellers, 
anxious to show Uieir loyalty and to distinguish 
themselves in the royal presence. 

" My name, your Majesty ? " 



152 KIE BOUND. 

^'For shame, gentlemen; let him free; 
don't you see he is defenceless, and one to 
sixty?" 

'^ Green Ribbons ! Down with them I '' 
oried voices in the cabins, with a general 
alarm at the rumour already current below 
that the king was shot. 

" My name, your Majesty, is Gideon Trout-' 
beck, of Troutbeck Hall, Oxfordshire. L 
have been out fishing, and am now retuniing 
to London, with a loaded musketoon, in 
hopes of gettmg a shot at a stray heron. Is 
there any new law by which this has become 
Reason?'' 

'/ AdzDoks, what fools we are I '' said the 
king. /Hs there anyone here who knows 
thb gentleman, who goes out fishing with a 
musket?" 

'^ I do," said Qodolphin, coming forward 
from the after-part of the vessd, rather flushed 
with champagne, and holding a cracked dice- 
box in his hand — " to be^ sure I do, or may I 
never throw the bones again, or win a cup; or 



THE LITTLE BLACf BOX. 15S* 

dmpty a cnp either. This is an honest Oxford- 
shire gentleman, rather sectarian in view, and 
not unfiiendlyto the old rogue Shaftesbury^but, 
God help us, as far from treason — je8y as Mass 
is from my coal-cellar. Mr. Trontbeck, I wish 
you well ; as for the cnt*throat boatman, he 
has gallows written about him: but, Lord 
love us, if every ugly man were to be hung, 
why, by Yenus, there would not be many of 
us left." 

" Well, I am myself a scurvy-looking dog, 
gentlemen," said Charles, smiling — "so my 
honest glass tells me every morning I put my 
wig on — ^but 'pon my rep, this Godolphin isn't a 
whit the better. His face is for all the world 
like an autumn moon in a Dutch fog — ^red, 
round, and no features. But night draws on 
— ^we must to Hampton, or these pretty doves 
of ours will catch cold, and lay their deaths at 
toy door. Now 

' That Btrain again, it came oV my soul,' 

et cetera, Mr. Troutbeck, good night; 



154 IGS BOUND. 

honest ruffian^ fare thee well. I regret jroor 
detention, and wish ye well/' 

As he said this, the Antes struck np, and 
Mr. Troutbeck and his boatman were lowered 
into their boat. The great lines of gilded 
oars rose and fell, first silently, thra with a 
splash and beat; in a few minutes the pro« 
cession of galleys, now radiant with torches, 
had passed into the darkness. As the boat 
sheered off the king kindly flung his richly 
embroidered claret-coloured cloak into the 
boat, for fear Mr. Troutbeck should suffer 
from the wetting he had unavoidably received 
in his capture. 

Without pursuing the boat's course stroke 
by stroke, let us pass over an hour of time, and 
rejoin the two conspirators, who have reached 
a small water-side inn at Chelsea. 

Leaving Chambers to tie his boat to the 
mooring-chain, Troutbeck leaped out of the 
boat, strode up a narrow water-side lane, and 
entered the courtyard of the '^ Drake's Head," 
an inn of evU repute, much frequented by the 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 155 

disaffected of the day, its isolated situation 
permitting it to be approached quickly, 
safely, and secretly, by water and land, unob- 
served by watchman or patrol. 

A shock-headed ostler crawled out of the 
mouldy stable at the sound of a strange foot, 
but sulkily slunk in again on finding the 
stranger without horse or attendant. 

The jingle of the parlour bell soon brought 
up the landlord, to whom Troutbeck addressed 
anxious inquiries as to the arrival of a Mr. 
Vivian. With his finger to his long capsicum- 
looking nose, and a twinkle of his little pig- 
like eyes, the landlord replied that the gentle- 
man had not yet arrived, and shuffled off to 
get up a bottle of the " Blue Seal," which 
Mr. Troutbeck ordered with the patronising 
smile of an habitual guest. 

Five minutes after a red-haired country 
wench bustled into the room with a tray 
covered with a clean doth, and began to lay 
the table for two. 

^* Who do you expect, my lass?" 



156 ICE BOUND. 

" Mr. Vivian," said the girl, in a low mys- 
terious voice. '^He ordered the dinner a 
fortnight ago last Tuesday, and he never 
misses his appointments/' 

'^At what time, my girl, did he order 
dinner to be served up?'' said Troutbeck, 
glancing at the clock, that steadily pursued 
its destined round of duties. 

"At six." 

It wanted three minutes to six. He looked 
down the road, whose long white coils stretched 
away in the moonlight, — ^but no coach, no 
horseman. 

"Conspirators like Mr. Vivian a&ct this 
mystery. It's part of their stock in trade ; 
like the mask and the dark lantern, it serves 
to frighten fools." 

He looked again out of window, and beat 
his foot with- a whip that lay on the window 
sill. 

"What wine do you take, Troutbeck?" 
said a calm voice behind hiuL 

He looked round, and to his astonishment 



THE lutle black box. 157 

saw a stranger ooolly seated at the table, eye- 
ing him with a smile of half maUoions 
triumph. 

" The Earl of Shaftesbury V he said. '' To 
what am I indebted, my lord, for this unex- 
pected pleasure ? I had hoped to have met 
Mr. Vivian, agent of Monsieur BariUon, the 
French ambassador.'' 

" Mr. Vivian and Mr. Ashley Cooper," said 
the earl, throwing his napkin quietly over his 
knee and ringing the bell for the roast ducks 
to be brought in, ^'are one and the same, 
both gentlemen " (and he bowed) '^ bemg 
much indebted to the fidelity and sagacity of 
Mr. TroutbecL But you don't take wine ? " 
(for by this time the wine had been brought 
in). ^'Touwere not always so abstemious; 
St. John's, if I have heard right, once rang 
with your bacchanalian fame ; " and the earl 
laughed. Now, nothing frightens and alarms 
a cunning man more than laughing; for he 
immediately thinks you are countermining 
him. 



158 ICEBOUND. 

** Those were in the days of the old Adam, 
my lord,'' said Troutbeck^ with a morose and 
sour smile. 

^' Ohy in the name of all fair ladies, don't 
begin to use Scriptural phrases; for when 
you do, I know of old you're dangerous. 
Take some wine. This ' Blue Seal ' is of an 
established goodness, and was once, I belieye, 
in Cromwell's cellar." 

" I never take wine, my lord," said Trout- 
beck grayely, ** when business is to be done." 

" Do you always carry such toys as that 
with you ?" said the earl, tapping Troutbeck's 
musketoon with the end of his fork as. it 
rested in a comer. '' A wing or a leg ? Egg 
sauce? Thank you, Polly, my dear; fresh 
glasses." 

" The only true friend, my lord, as I have 
long since found. I am not one of those who 
in these troubled times are content to stand 
on the sea-shore and send others to sea ; but I 
myself brave the storm, and try to bring the 
sinking craft to land." 



THE LITTLS BLACK BOX. 159 

'' All of which/^ said the earl coolly, using 
a gold toothpick, and watching the face of 
the speaker with a half-puzzled, half-inquiring 
air, in which anxiety, though visible, was only 
to be traced by the keen physiognomist, 
^ means that Mr. Troutbeck thinks himself ill 
rewarded for past services, distrustful of the 
present condition of our glorious plot, and 
generally jealous and angry with the world at 
large, and this marvellously good claret in 
particular; rCest-cepasf** 

" Before I answer these questions, my lord, 
may I ask what magic brought you so myste- 
riously into the room in which we stand ; did 
you come from above or below ? '* 

" From below, I know you think ; but to 
remove all mystery, by a sliding panel'' (shift- 
ing a piece of the wainscot behind his chair 
with his drawn sword as he spoke), ^^ which a 
good saw and a neat hand can render service- 
able in any room in half an hour. To impose on 
vulgar souls, I sometimes use such machinery, 



160 ICE BOUND. 

which safety fiometimes requires, and secrecy 
often uses." 

'^And this black box, which you have 
raised our expectations so long with, — when 
is it to be shown ? The clubs begin to call it 
a mere trick, and lament that we are not led 
by bolder spirits/' 

^'Is Mr. Troutbeck the leader of this 
opinion ? '' said the earl, watching him from 
under his brows. 

^' The opinion of a poor country gentleman, 
the mere drudge of a treasonable club, must 
be immaterial to an earl who has the crown 
of England all but in his grasp/' said Trout- 
beck, in a voice of angry humility. 

" No humility, for Heaven's sake ; for then 
I know your pride is hurt, and a man with 
hurt pride is about, as manageable as a cow 
that has just had its calf taken away. Now, 
man, out with your opinion ; nothing offends 
me." 

. '^ Then, my lord, I must confess I thought 
thewhole thingatrick; this boxis non-existing." 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 161 

"But do not now?" 

" No, I do not now/' 

" And may I ask the pourquoi f " 

" Because I know the thing to be a 
forgery." 

" By Heavens," said the earl, half rising 
from his chair, but immediately resuming his 
seat, " if you do not almost drive me out of 
patience with your cold sneers and suspicious 
distrust ! Of all the dogs in my pack, — bull- 
dog, slot-hound, greyhound, whether for 
mettle, bottom, speed, or scent, — you are the 
most unmanageable and the most useful." 

" A Troutbeck a dog 1 " said the conspi- 
rator, rismg and going to the door; "my 
lord, you shall rue this ! " 

"Why, Troutbeck, man," said the earl, 
filHng another glass, then rising and seizing 
the unwilling hand of his unruly agent, 
"this is sheer Bedlam to sit here and chafe 
and chafe till you strike fire. Remember 
we are sitting in a powder magazine, each 
on a barrel. Don't you know I value you 

TOL. IIL M 



162 ICE BOUND. 

as the trnest friend of the cause in all 
Oxfordshire, and one to whom even a peerage 
would be a poor recompense ? The box you 
talk of, by the most unfortunate accident 
in the world, has been seized by pirates as 
it was being conveyed from France. This 
has defeated all my plans, and put off the 
rising, already ripe for the thirteenth." 

^^ Does the scheme for abdication still 
hold?" 

'^It does. A great Protestant procession 
is to be arranged on the rumour of a mas- 
sacre of Protestants, as a means of secretly 
assembling all the Calves'-Head and Green- 
Ribbon Clubs, who are to surround the 
palace and seize the Tower at the same 
moment that the barracks are fired, and 
Somerset House occupied. At the same 
moment Monmouth, who has been lying at 
Kensington with fifty horse, is to march 
down the Oxford Road, and proclaim the new 
king at Thanet House. Now don't be bitter. 
That is my plan." 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 163 

^* One of your plans^ my lord," said Trout- 
beck, smiling with a cold significance ; *^ the 
plan that you keep to tell doubtful and wavering 
adherents ; or for the desperate and impatient 
fanatics who expect a millennium, and consider 
you a sort of fashionable John the Baptist. 
For these you have plots of blood and fire ; 
while for safer souls you talk of the great 
parliamentary demonstration and riot of the 
mobile, which is to at once frighten the king, 
and make him ship off to France with his 
women, dogs, and fiddles.'' 

"What a Timon of Athens thou artl" said 
the earl. " Dost thou not know my dearest 
secrets? Is not this head at thy mercy? 
And couldst tHou not roll it down the red 
gutter of Tower Hill within a week, if thou 
wert as base as thou art untoward? Who 
knows better than Mr. Troutbeck where every 
Protestant club holds its sittings, and where 
it stores its arms ? Who knows better than 
he how many troopers the Welsh squires are 
fending, and how many Gloucestershire fur- 

m2 



164 1C£ BOUND. 

nishes ? Are these wel)S of fancy that 
I spin? Are these horsemen mere knights 
of chess, that I move about on oivt 
board to settle some abstract problem? 
Am I some arch-fiend, Belial or Apollyon, 
working mischief only to increase the world's 
evil?'' 

" Sometimes, my lord, I could almost 
think so. But I suppose that dull brains 
like mine do not see the centres of these 
webs, and get confused in counting the 
rounds of the spiral ladders, finding not 
their beginning. Does the loss of this box, 
then, undo all ? " 

*^ Not it," said the earl ; " no more than 
a ship goes down because the best bale of 
the cargo is thrown overboard. To-morrow 
I post to Oxford to agitate the parliament; 
in private to expose the abuses of the 
court, asserting the legitimacy of Mon- 
mouth, and begging time to collect my 
proofs." 

" Not to-morrow, my lord, nor the day 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 165 

after/' said Troutbeck, shaking his head. 

"And why not? — why do you shake your 
head? To-morrow, I say, I set out to stop these 
noisy parrots and perplex the court. I go to- 
morrow, Troutbeck, to the Oxford parliament, 
the Green-Ribbons shouting at my back." 

"You'U not get in." 

" And why ? What minion of the Stuarts 
will dare to resist a man who has all London 
at his call?'' 

"Parliament is prorogued." 

The earl fell back in his chair as if he had 
received a bullet in the chest. " Prorogued I 
And he dared? Let him take care! The 
cripple shall yet lame his prerogative ; that 
may too limp for ever, while he goes begging 
at the court of the king who now pensions 
him ! " 

"It is a blow, but this may redeem it," 
said Troutbeck, drawing from his cloak the 
Uttle black hox^ and placing it on the white 
table before the earl's astonished eyes. 
, "The very box, by the twelve Csesaral" 



168 ICE BOUND. 

said the earl. ^^ This trick beats my sliding 
panel ; you'll be pulling ribbon out of your 
jaw like a jack-pudding next ! In the name 
of all that is miraculous, how came you by 
this treasure ? " 

In a few minutes Mr. Troutbeck recounted 
the singular accident by which he had re- 
covered the precious box and the deed it 
contained. Before slipping on the loose riding 
coat which the king had courteously flung 
into his boat as the galley pushed off, he had 
felt something like a parcel of letters pressing 
against his side ; and on pulling it out soon 
discovered from its contents that, by some 
fortunate occurrence, he had become possessed 
of the black box so long talked of among his 
fellow-conspirators. 

" Prime minister of mine," said the earl, 
unable to conceal the exultation of his tri- 
umph, "behold the Pandora's casket which 
shall let out all evils upon our enemies, but 
retain eternal hope at the bottom for ourselves I 
Now, go set the clubs buzzing like hornets. 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 167 

to chafe the aldermen who have been lend- 
ing money at court. Now to issue out 
the dustj pikes and the unsunned doub- 
loons. Now for unresting couriers, to rouse 
the provinces — to set Bristol on fire, and 
Wales by the ears." 

"And what day do you fix for the great 
rising ? " 

" The thirteenth — the anniversary of the 
day Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was found with 
his stupid throat cut on Primrose Hill. On 
that day, we assemble at the Calves'- 
Head Club in Crane Court, set the business 
going, arrange the subsidies, draw up the 
levies, and appoint our leaders. I must 
begone ; a heavy night awaits me — but, 
halloo ! what is that ? Be kind enough to 
look, for I am still somewhat lame with that 
old hurt of mine at Breda." 

It was a sudden clash of swords in the 
courtyard below that had arrested the earl's 
attention. He had now risen from his chair, 
and thrown his cloak about him. Troutbeck 



168 ICE BOUND. 

opened the window, and looking out, was 
surprised to see a medley of two or three 
persons, apparently dressed in livery, fighting 
with the utmost impetuosity. They tilted 
round the courtyard, exchanging thrust after 
thrust, and suddenly disappearing through the 
stable-door, which shut after them. 

" Only a drunken brawl," said Troutbeck, 
shutting the window and turning round, but 
the earl was gone; a slight noise below the floor 
only indicating the trapdoor by which the 
arch-plotter had descended. " His last trick,*' 
said Troutbeck, stamping on the floor over 
the square door, which he now distinguished ; 
and as he did so, he thought he could hear a 
faint laugh far below. 



169 



CHAPTER XVL 

THE CALYES'-HEAD CLUB. 

About ten o'clock of a September evening, 
various groups of muffled-up men might have 
been seen making their way by dim winding 
alleys and obscure lanes to the door of a small, 
smoke-dried, dingy-looking tavern, with an 
inn-sign much like a gibbet, situated in a nar- 
row court not many streets from Westminster 
Abbey. They could not well be what they 
looked most like — a congregation of conven- 
ticlers gathering for a prayer-meeting — be- 
cause the locality was of ill repute, and not 
very attractive to the strict members of any 
sect and party ; because also the hour was far 



170 ICE BOUND. 

too advanced a one for the purpose of any reli- 
gious assembly, unless, as was too often the 
case at the time of which we write, fanaticism 
were only a cloak for treason, and the meet- 
ing house were a magazine for French powder 
and Protestant pikes. 

About the persons of the men thus appa- 
rently assembling for a common, and probably 
mischievous, purpose in a secret parlour of the 
"Angel and Trumpet," in Covenant Lane, West- 
minster, nothing, however, could be discerned 
to peculiarly excite the suspicion of even the 
keenest spy. All wore the low-crowned hat 
and feather common to the period, though 
some favoured more of the old, greasy, steeple 
crown, that indicated the nonjuror; while 
others flaunted a gayer plume, and donned 
the beaver with a cock and air indicative of 
higher' birth and a better presence. While 
some slunk into the narrow doorway — where 
a sour-faced landlord received them with a 
whispereJ word and a peculiar gesture previ- 
ously agreed upon — others pushed in with a 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX* 171 

swaggering rakish gait, as if accastomed to 
peril, and either too honest or too abandoned 
to attempt to conceal their movements. 
Daylight and closer inspection might have 
marked broad toes and red heels, velvet and 
leather scabbards, gold-lace button-holes and 
serge suits, lace collars and plain cravats; 
but these signs of class were at this hour all 
veiled and obscured by that dark mother of 
evil. Night, 

One more accustomed to the club-life of 
these revelling days would have probably at 
once set down these mysterious and notice- 
shunning men as persons not very well af-* 
fected to the government, perhaps Millenni- 
umists assembling for a howl of mad psalms 
and maniac prayers; nor would they have 
been altogether wrong, though they would 
little have discovered how far such a guess was 
from sounding the tremendous mischief about 
to be brewed by these men, on this night in the 
dirty upper parlour of the " Angel and Trum- 
pet," Covenant Lane, Westminster, 



172 ICE BOUND. 

Could they be Hectors, or Tityre-tus, or 
Mans, or Mohawks, or any such street-^despe- 
radoes, who at this period of civilization 
nightly paraded the streets, with a posse of 
naked swords and blazing flambeaoz, to insult 
quiet people, kiss citizens' wives, break 
glasses at taverns, and notch unoffending 
people's noses — and why not ? Why, because 
there were no sedan chairs filled with bleed- 
ing men, no shouting bottle-holders with bare 
heads, no wigs shaking on watchmen's broken 
poles, no puddles of spilt wine, no pale dying 
men carried in triumph, and bowing with a 
sickly drunken satisfaction on the shoulders 
of half-naked debauchees; there were no 
satin gowns borne as banners, no bells ringing 
for help; no rush of angry men in retreat or 
in pursuit. No, l^ese were quiet, sober, 
dangerous men, their firm, strong step showed 
it; their eyes were bent downwards, and 
were malign, stealthy, and bloodshot 

Silently, but for the whisper and the 
gesture, they passed in one by one, and 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 173 

without exchanging any further greeting, 
proceeded at once to the club-room on the 
first floor, where through the carefully closed 
shutters a twinkle of wax lights could be still 
discerned even from the outside. But these 
were soon extinguished ; and in the dark, and 
between 'two of the num'ber appointed as 
sentries, as at a masonic lodge, each conspi^ 
rator, for so it must be confessed they were 
— entered, whispering the pass-word for the 
evening. 

When the forty men who formed the club 
had entered, the door was closed, and double 
locked, and at the same moment, by some 
ingenious contrivance worthy of Shaftesbury 
himself, forty wax-lights broke out in stars ; 
the club had opened. The most remark- 
able and dangerous sign of the meeting was 
the mysterious silence, preserved not only in 
the room, but all over the house. There were 
none of the usual tavern noises. No fretful 
bells clashed in discord from a dozen noisy 
rooms at once. There was no good-humoured^ 



174 ICE BOUND. 

important landlord bawling out "Score a 
pint of sherry in the Dolphin ; " or " Pipes 
and ale to the three gentlemen in the Blue 
Parlour." No men reeling up or down stairs, 
no smack of kisses behind the room doors, no 
stamp of duellists' feet, no glasses breaking — 
nothing but an oppressive silence, broken 
only by the slow tramp of a watchman 
in the lane, and a splash of oars in the 
river at the back of the house, upon which 
the windows looked. Anyone half acquainted 
with the plans of such conspu-ators as these 
would have needed no one to tell them that 
pickets had been placed on each side of the 
building, to give notice of any approaching 
danger. There was a watchman on the root 
with a smoke signal, to communicate with the 
other side of the river; there were watchmen in 
the street, watchmen on the river. No horse- 
men, no bayonet, no spy, could steal upon them 
without detection. They sat like spiders, the 
centres of a network of electric wires, and from 
far off the slightest pulsation of danger would 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 175 

be conveyed to them, wary and desperate 
as they were. 

The merest child, who had scarcely yet 
learned even the ABC of the human heart, 
could not have failed to see^ as the light shone 
out and drove the darkness victoriously from 
the room, that a strange set of men were here 
knotted together in this den of sedition. It 
was not merely the drawn down, clenched 
mouths, the wrinkled, half-shut eyes, the fur- 
rowed and trenched brows, but a certain des- 
perate gambling air of recklessness in each 
face, that indicated their character. Here 
were old Cromwell men, stern and cold ; rake- 
hell penniless prodigals ; tainted, branded re- 
fugees and outlaws ; Scotch officers and York- 
shire squires ; Protestant merchants and disaf- 
fected aldermen — the very knot and focus of 
a conspiracy as widely spread and threatening 
as ever menaced an English king. There 
were madcap young gamesters, scarcely able 
to restrain their open derision of any thing 
like prudence or deliberation; hot Whigs, who 



176 ICE BOUND* 

wanted to fall on the king on his way to 
Hampton, and slay him in the very midst of 
his hody-guard; and old wrinkled traitors, 
who had heen in every plot from Venner's to 
the Bye- House. There were men with patches 
over one eye, who had for years never spent 
two days in the same disguise, nor slept a week 
running in the same lodgings. There were 
men thirsting for any event that would place 
unlimited guineas at their disposal. There 
were honest country squires, new from the 
provinces, intoxicated with London noise and 
pleasure, decoyed into overt rehellion, and 
foolishly staring at confederates of whom they 
were at once ashamed and alarmed. There 
were courtiers, half wishing to he gone, but 
afraid of making the step; men whom Charles, 
with all his knowledge of the world and its 
vilest and most hardening disappointments, 
would have been ready to shed tears to have 
seen engaged in treason. There were de- 
graded clergymen, the vilest and most 
shameless of the gang, who, knowing their fall 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 177 

irretrievable, wished '^ the estate of the world 
were now undone/ There were landless 
squires, and courtiers whose names were an 
opprobrium at court, sitting there together 
with folded arms and determined faces. 

The most conspicuous object in the room 
was a tall oak chair, with that black twisted 
back and those cane cross-bars so common in 
old houses. It stood where the chairman 
usually sat, but was now empty. Anxious 
eyes glanced at it, as Macbeth looked at the 
empty chair of Banquo ; but no one said a 
word, though many glances full of meaning 
were exchanged between the guests as they 
took their seats at the long table, spread with 
a fair white cloth, one of the band marshal- 
ling them to specified places. But although 
the chairman's throne seemed destined to be 
vacant, the vice-president's chair, next to it, 
was occupied by a tall man in a black mask. 
The pale face of this mysterious leader of the 
assemblage was rendered more wan and sad 
by the sharp dark line of the vizai*d that 

VOL. III. N 



178 IGB BOUID. 

eoTered all lus fiiee boft Ids chin and 
montbu 

At a rignal of a long diriE wlustley the 
door soddailj flew open, and between the 
shining swords of the sentries strode in the 
soiu% TillanoDS-looking landlord, bearing in his 
armSy as carefidlf as nnraes cairy a child, a 
calfs head — the wdl-known mode of ridi- 
coling the martyrdom of Charles then common 
in treasonable dubs of the most dangerous 
kind. A murmur of approbation went round 
the chamber at this emblem of sedition. The 
eyes of some danced with ddight, while oiher 
conspirators of a sedater kind gaye that 
droning kind of hum by which Noncon- 
formists express thdr approbation of a 
choice passage in a sermon. After the land- 
lord paced a still more villanous and suicidal 
looking waiter, with long greasy hair, sensual 
inouth, and red-rimmed eyes, who bore in a 
baked pike, with a gudgeon &stened firmly 
between the sharp grinding teeth of that 
river-shark. No one present was ignorant 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 179 

that these fish were emblematic of the tyraniij 
so soon to be levelled to the dust ; and a low 
cheer broke forth, instantly suppressed at a 
wave of the right hand of the man in the 
mask. 

- Then, with solemn, deliberate step, the man 
in the mask paced between the black square 
of faces, and double-locked the door for 
further security, clamping it up with a silver 
nail which had hung by a steel chain round 
his neck. From his doing it with his right 
hand unaided, it might be presumed that he 
had received some recent hurt in the left; arm 
or shoulder, though he wore no visible support 
or bandage. He then slowly resumed his 
seat, and standing up, looked round each 
side of the room, bowed to the window, 
bowed to the door, bowed to the empty chair, 
and blew three times his whistle ; upon the 
third whistle, the forty sprang up as one 
man, drew off their bats, and waved th,eir 
ftwords. 

Ere the clash of the returning blades had 

n2 



180 ICE BOUND. 

died away, the man in the mask, who himself 
was a type of the execationer of a misgoided 
king, drew slowly from a small bag concealed 
beneath his cloak a little black hox^ and 
placed it before him on the clean white cloth, 
watching each eye as it rested on it with sur- 
prise and unrestndnable delight. 

He then, with all the gravity of a Pontifex 
Maximns at an ancient sacrifice, took up a 
large, glittering, axe-like knife that lay on the 
table beside him, and divided the calTs head 
into forty equal portions, passing them round 
with a sarcastic sneer peculiar to the man, 
having first drenched each with a splash of 
red wine — probably meant to typify the royal 
blood that men like these had once shed, and 
were ready to shed again. 

These preliminaries having been concluded, 
a deep voice at the lower end of the table 
broke the silence now so long maintained. It 
was again the man in the mask. 

"Brothers," he said, "the day and hour 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 181 

have come, and the forty are met. The 
great secret lies before you/' 

" Stop ! *' cried a voice near the chairman^ 
which came from a red-faced old captain, with 
a squinting eye, and a stammering, blustering 
voice, " here is a new member to be elected ; 
one who has suffered much for the cause. By 
Jupiter and the honour of a Christian, he's a 
sound one — by Jove, a sound one ! " 

At the same moment every eye turned at 
once upon the new member, who sat with an 
ear-trumpet turned vacantly towards the man 
in the mask, apparently quite unconscious 
that his fiery eyes were turned upon him with 
basilisk intentness. 

He seemed an old bent-up man, with long 
waves of white hair, which gave him the air 
of a Puritan minister of the old times, and a 
greasy black silk skull-cap, which came down 
far over his ears. 

"Who can vouch for the honesty of our 
new brother ? '' said the vice-president, in a 
hoarse suspicious voice, as the old man changed 



182 ICE BOUND. 

his seat, as if to obtain a better place for 
hearings and sat down exactly opposite the 
little black box, and near the man in the 
mask. 

" That can I, by Saint Peter and the fu- 
ries ! By Jove, sir, didn't he lose one ear at 
the pillory, and weren't five of his sons 
brought to the scaffold together in Ten- 
ner's affair— by Jove, sir, what would you 
want?" 

" It is enough," said a dozen voices. " Like 
us he has suffered, and like us he shall work 
the vengeance." 

" He is old for the firelock," said his blus- 
tering patron, with a coarse drunken laugh, 
t^lapping his old friend on the back with one 
hand, and twirling his tremendous red mous- 
taches with the other; ^^but, by Judas, 
the saints, and the forty thousand martyrs, 
curse me if he doesn't hold forth on a tub as 
well as the best of you — ^if he doesn't, smite 



me." 



^^Is our great cause to be tainted by such 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 183 

blasphemers as this?^^ said a thin^ morose, 
saturnine-looking man, in a buff coat, three 
seats lower down, addressing himself to the 
man in the mask. 

'^ Scullion I " said the captain, tugging at a 
rusty sword, as little really eager for the fray 
as its buUy^master. 

^^ Uncircumcised I " said his adversary, no- 
thing loth, clapping his sword-point to his 
throat. 

In a moment a dozen swords sprang out 
to the right and to the left ; and there is no 
knowing, with such inflammable spirits, what 
might have been the result, had not a loud 
stamp on the floor, and a furious cry of 
^^ Down with the fools' swords I " from the 
chair, at once quelled all disturbance. 

" Keep your blood," he said sternly, " to 
spill in other places. There will come a time 
when it may be well spilt." 

"The earl! the earll" cried twenty 
voices. 

" The earl,'' he said, " ever watchful for the 



184 ICE BOUND. 

plot| will be here anon. He is even now 
closeted with the duke; but the proof on 
which all turns lies before you. Am I speak- 
ing to dogs or wolves?" he said> looking 
fiercely ^ round, as a hubbub of voices rose 
around him, and one or two of the more in- 
credulous hands were thrust out in the direc- 
tion of the box, tumultuously and regardless 
of all laws. 

'^ One inch nearer,'' cried the man in the 
mask, springing a step back, and whirling his 
sword with a whistle round his head, '^ and by 
the God fools trust in, I will lop off every 
hand that touches it/' 

The hands fell back, and the fretting 
crowd resumed their seats. 

'^ What means this foolish distrust ? I hold 
in my hand,'' he said, opening the box, and 
drawing out a thin band of parchment, '^ and 
will show to anyone, so that I keep it in my 
own hand, a deed of marriage between 
Charles Stuart and Lucy Walters, establish- 
ing at once the legitimacy of the Duke 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 185 

of Monmouth and securing us a Protestant 



The tide of favour was now with the 
speaker^, the eyes grew brighter, congratu- 
latory whispers were exchanged between the 
members. 

"All goes well. The clubs assemble in 
,Aldersgate to-morrow at three, when the 
king comes to the Guildhall. At the same 
moment the flame breaks out in the provinces. 
At the first blaze of the burning barracks of 
the guards of this Belshazzer, our armed 
friends pour in simultaneously from Chelsea, 
Kensington, Bow, Clapham, Highgate, and 
Brentford.'' 

" The sword of the Lord and of Gideon I " 
cried a dozen voices. *' Curse ye Meroz I " 
" Woe to Babylon ! *' and other scriptural 
denunciations, flew round the room. In one 
comer a fanatic began to preach, with staring 
eyes and threatening arm. He was soon 
dragged down by some more cautious friends, 
who were afraid that his shouts and bowlings 



186 ICE BOUND. 

would reach the ears of the inhabitants of the 
neighbouring houses. 

^'The countieis are awake, are aroused. 
The beacon is heaped, and ready to be 
kindled. Already I hear the breastplate and 
the pike and the sword clash against the 
steel-tipped saddle. The Lord's people are 
awake, and woe to the oppressor I Charles 
Stuart, the days of thy wantonness draw to 
an end. The sound of the viol and harp 
shall soon cease in the harlot^houses of White- 
hall. Fiercer hands than Blood's now clutch 
at thy crown. The dead from their graves 
in the gaol-yards of England call out against 
thy Sodom, and the Lord slumbers not on 
high. Already ^" 

" Our posts 1 our posts I " cried the old 
man, rising up with a tottering feebleness, 
overcome by the moment's enthusiasm, and 
stretching out his hand to grasp the speaker's* 
^' Let us slay the tjrrant even as he sleeps." 

^'Moderate your zeal," said the vice- 
president, as the old man fell back as if 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 187 

Exhausted in his chair^ and resumed his ear- 
trumpet ; '^ it is not for such as jou. Leave 
Cod's work to stronger arms and stronger 
hands. To you^ Sir Thomas Golding^ is 
assigned the honourable task of arresting the 
king's person as he sets foot in his carriage 
for the City. Sixty of the brisk boys of the 
Green-Ribbons, heavily armed — ^with sword, 
pistol, and carbine — ^will be with you, I 
particularly beg that no violence may be 
offered to the Lord's anointed." 

''Smite him hip and thigh!" cried the 
preacher, held down in a comer by his 
friends, but foaming at the mouth in his 
frenzy. 

With a villanous smile. Sir Thomas, a red- 
faced, white-haired, old tock-fighter of Che- 
shire, nodded and touched his sword, with an 
"Ay, ay," dreadfully significant. 

"To you, Captain Bellasize," turning to 
the new member's patron, he said, " devolves 
the honourable task of firing th^ Life-Guards' 



188 ICE BOUND. 

barracks in Gravel Lane^ and taking prisoners 
the inmates/' 

"And suppose they won't be taken pri- 
soners ? '' said the old man, excitedly. 

"Why, then violence must, I regret to 
say, be resorted to. To you, Habakkok 
Goodall/' he said, turning to the preacher, 
who started forward like a maniac to hear 
him, "it appertains to harangue the Pro- 
testant mob at Temple Bar, to lead them to 
pull down the Papist chapel at Somerset 
House, and to clear the Abbey of its Romish 
trinkets ; but by all means abstain from the 
use of fire." 

" The fan is in my hand,'' said the preacher, 
breaking from his friend ; " as I live, and 
as the Lord liveth, before to-morrow at 
this time the Scarlet Woman's house shall be 
a scarlet heap." 

"To you," said the man of the mask, 
paying no attention to either the approbation 
or dissent of his auditors, "Sir Richard Cante- 
lupe, Mr. Vivian especially entrusts the rous- 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 189 

ing of the City — from the Barbican to 
Fimlico, from Charing Cross to Whitechapel, 
Let our cry be, 'A Protestant succession! 
and down with the bloody Papists!"' 

Sir Thomas, a proud, handsome-looking, 
young man, with unmfttakable brands of 
vice on his spoilt angel face, merely, rose, 
bowed, and resumed his seat. 

'^And what for me?" said a conse- 
quential-looking, little, fat man, with a 
great green rosette at his button-hole, 
pressing forward to the table. 

"The responsible and onerous duty of 
securing the person of the Lord Mayor, 
and preventing the calling-out of the Trained 
Bands, when our brave boys set the stee- 
ples rocking, when the great troops of horse 
come clashing down through the Bar, and 
the muskets peep through the windows. 
Gentlemen, we must now to horse! One 
bowl of punch, and then we part." 

As he spoke the door opened, and the 
sour landlord again entered, staggering be- 



190 ICS BOUHB. 

neath the weight of a smoking china bowl 
of pondi* At the sight of the fragrant 
smoke*cload rising from this pleasant sea, 
the eyes of the yonnger portion of the 
assembly glistened, while the moroser and 
sterner men tnmed away with a glance of 
reprobation, 

" Beware of the cup when the wine is 
red!" said the preacher. 

"Punch is not red, and is not wine,*' 
said the squintmg captain; "so I have 
no conscientious objections.*' 

"As for this box," said the man in the 
mask, pushing aside a dozen proffered glasses, 
intent only on business — ^for, next to the 
eaii, he was well known to be an influen- 
tial country gentleman, and the very life 
and soul of the plot, the organiser and subsi- 
diser, the secretary, the vice-chairman — "I 
must return it to the earl, who will guard 
it as the palladium of the Protestant cause. 
But while I bear it with me, who will dare 
to again wrest it from us?" 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 191 

^^I dare I" said the old man next him, 
suddenly dropping his ear-trumpet, white 
wig, black gown, and with them every sign 
of decrepitude, and laying the strong, bold 
hand of a man in the full bloom of life 
upon the box before a band of the aston- 
ished traitors could seize his throat, or be- 
fore a sword could be drawn to punish his 
temerity. But the moment's silence soon 
broke into a hell of discordant noises, shouts, 
and curses, as all the forty men at once 
cried out, " Kill the spy ! " " Down with 
the uncircupacised ! " "Hew him to pieces!" 
" Throw him out of window ! " " Bum him!" 
" Lamb him ! " " Cut him to mince-meat ! " 
Ere these threats could be put in execu- 
tion, young Churchill — ^for he it was who had 
thus braved the lion in his den — drew a 
pistol from his pocket, fired it at the lock of 
the door, which it split; and the next in- 
stant a mob of red-coats poured in, while 
more could be heard tumbling up the 
stairs, crying, "Down with the murderers! " 



192 ICE BOUND. 

"KiU them aU!*' "Flay the dogsl" tod 
other shouts of defiance and vengeance; the 
dreadful confusion being increased bj the 
smoke and explosion of a hand*grenade 
which one of the soldiers threw into the 
club-room. Swords crossing and snapping, 
pistols firing, groans, curses, tables falling, 
windows breaking, turned the place into a 
terrible scene of bloodshed and confusion. 
Nor was all this time the man in the 
mask idle; for, breaking through the 
crowd, and blowing his silver whistle, as 
a signal either for escape to those with- 
out, or for fresh aid from some unseen 
quarter, he set his back to the wall, and 
prepared to sell his life dearly, his eyes 
glaring like an angry snake's through the 
holes of his mask. 

Through the smoke that filled the room the 
strangest scenes of death and desperation 
could be witnessed. There was in one comer 
the mad preacher, careless of sword-thrust and 
bullet, hurling denunciations at the soldiers who 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 193 

tugged at his skirts, and tried to bind his long 
gaunt arms with their lace cravats. In an- 
other group lay the captain, mopping a sword- 
thrust in his side, and trjin g with stiffening 
mouth to swallow the fragments of an ace of 
spades on which some treasonable cipher was 
written. This was near the door, where the 
struggle was hottest ; but further on, near the 
window, from which a line of ten or twelve 
swordsmen still kept the red-coats off, stood a 
group of reckless young conspirators, among 
whom Sir Richard Cantelupe was conspicuous, 
who were hastily adjusting their wigs, snatch- 
ing spilling glasses of the reluctantly relin- 
quished punch, or exchanging cool lunges at 
any more than usually daring leader of the 
party of soldiers. 

" To horse !" cried Sir Bichard ; and in a 
steady line, five abreast, the young rakes 
forced their way towards the door, now and 
then a gap in the ranks- being made by a 
bullet or sword, which the laughing gallants 
instantly filled up. Suddenly a cry of " Fire^ 

VOL. in. 



194 ICE BOUND* 

iirel'' prodaimed that a more terrible enemy 
than even the king's body-guard was closing 
in upon the conspirators; smoke curled up 
over the cornice and oozed through the 
creaky floor*planks; here and there a hot 
tongue of flame shot out, and sank back 
again. 

^^The man in the mask — one hundred 
guineas for him, dead or alive I" oned 
Churchill. 

^^ The game is up/' said the squinting cap- 
tain, fighting his way up to the man in the 
mask, who, his hair half on fire, bloody^ 
gashed, but still stout-hearted and at bay, 
stood with his back against the smouldering 
wainscot, surrounded by a confused heap of 
upset cards, broken bottles, and dying men. 
^' All together, lads, and we'll still scour the 
Philistines." 

^^ Take care of yourself,'' said the man he 
addressed coldly ; ^^ my sand has run." 

'^ Die, then, like a trapped fox," said the 
captain, heading a tremendous and succes^ul 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 195 

rush at the soldiers who kept the doorway, 
felling one assailant with his pistol^hutt, slay- 
ing another with a throst in the ohest, and 
parrying several thrusts with his doak, which 
he had wrapped round his left aitn. A 
moment after, the clash of theu* hoofs, as the 
rehels took horse and galloped off, could be 
heard down the narrow street, accompanied 
by a pistol shot or two, and an " Hurrah 1" 
dying off in the distance. 

'^ This is the earl," said Churchill, lifting a 
dead body from the corpse of the man in the 
mask; he lay dead across a soldier, whose 
skull he had cut through, steel cap and all, 
by a last tremendous blow, such as despair 
alone can give. 

'^ Lift his mask. Travers would have got 
his hundred guineas but for this swashing 
blow/' 

^' This is no earl," said Churchill. 

He stooped and lifted the mask, wet with 
blood and drilled through the forehead with 

o2 



19 



fir 
tb 
in 
o\ 
cr 
to 



g 
C 



197 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE FLIGHT. 

'^A BLOODY business/' said Churchill to his 
friend Claverhouse, who had been by his side 
during every danger, as. he wiped his. sword on 
the dead preacher's gown; re-adjusting his 
wigy and re-arranging his scarf and sword- 
knot, with the usual cold, listless air of an 
every-day courtier. 

"Bloody? Poohl Nothing. A hive of 
hornets well smoked out/' said Claverhouse 
sternly. " Pity there are not a few of the 
villains, though, left for the hangman's quar- 
tering-knife or the gaoler's screw and twisters." 

^* Here, at least, was a brave man, fit for 



198 ICE BOUND. 

better things than to die with such penniless 
gamblers and fanatics as these/' said Churchill, 
touching Golding*8 body with his foot, 

"Pity he escaped the rope," said Claver- 
house. ** But what have we here ?'' turning 
over a heap of dead, and drawing forth a 
man, who, gasping for air, pressed his hand to 
his side, then slowly rising, stood up on his 
feet, apparently not much hurt. " Sir Bichard 
Cantelupel" said Claverhouse, approaching 
the abashed conspirator, and eyeing him close 
with a sneer of the intensest scorn. " Behold, 
Churchill, a novelty, — a Cantelupe, and 
afraid!'' 

" Afraid only of disgrace and of the scaffold, 
otherwise as careless of life as thou," said the 
young man fiercely. " Let me escape, gentle* 
men," he cried passionately, " as you hope for 
mercy. Think of my name, my mother, my 
blood tainted 1 Name any ransom; name 
any pledge." 

" All these results of rebellion," said Cla^ 
verhouse, coolly drawing his sword, "you 



THE LITTLB BLACK BOX. 199 

should have considered ere you joined a gang 
of murderers like this.'* 

" Spare him/' cried Churchffl. « He shaU 
give us pledge of future loyalty/' 

^' The coward goes not hence alive/' said 
Claverhousei advancing his sword-point to 
intercept the wretched fugitive's passagiB to 
the door. 

"The brave should be merciful," said 
Churchill, stepping between the cold-hearted 
soldier and the poor dishonoured spendthrift^ 
whose courage the fear of dbgrace had for a 
moment paralysed. 

"Tou have a woman's heart, Churchill," 
said Claverhouse, angrily. "Leave me to 
deal with this poor outcast. Now, sir," and 
he threw himself into a cold fencing-house 
posture of attack, "though I could order 
these men to brain you with their halberds, I 
choose rather, for the sake of old acquaintance 
andsome pleasant hours we have spenttogether, 
to treat you as a man of honour and a gentle- 
man. Draw, or, by the God above us, these 



200 ICE BOUITD. 

men here shall beat you to Newgate with 
their musket butts." 

Stupg by these cruel challenges, and seeing 
no possible opening for escape, Sir Bichard 
Gantelupe drew his sword, and advanced 
upon his imperturbable antagonist ; while 
Churchill, sitting down on a broken table, 
sheathed his sword and fanned himself with 
the broad brim of his hat, having first re- 
adjusted the rosette, wiped some blood off the 
lyhite facing of his stiff-skirted scarlet coat, 
and flapped his jack-boots bright with a 
scented handkerchief trimmed with matchless 
Mechlin. 

The duel was for life — to defend heart and 
lungs, and keep soul in body. The combatants 
had but two thin, sharp rods of steel, that 
/dashed against each other, and twined and 
thrust with a deadly intensity. Now a feint 
was repented of, and converted into an inevit- 
able thrust in carte; now a disengage was 
carried on into a passage straight at the arm- 
pit. All that rage, despair, and skill could 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 201 

• 

do was done by Sir Eichard; but atilastfaint, 
exhausted by the very violence of his attack, 
he gave ground, and fell on the defensive, as 
Glaverhouse, driving him slowly towards a 
comer slippery with blood and encumbered 
with bodies, seemed to slowly taste the delight 
of the last inevitable coup-de-grace. 

" Stop !*' said Churchill, stretching his 
hand, which held a full wine-glass of punch, 
between the combatants, in his usual rather 
effeminate voice, '^ it isn't fair. You should 
take off your breast-piece, Claverhouse. His 
rapier. can make no impression on your steel, 
while you have progged his rose-colour coat 
four times — no, five times. He can't. tap 
you, man. It isn't fair, 'pon my soul — it 
isn't feir ; is it Lascelles ?" 

" No, it really ain't at awl faare," drawled 
a young ensign in the background. 

V He should have, thought of that before he 
came out," said Claverhouse, driving his 
sword.through the left breast of his unhappy 
antagonist, who fell almost speechless. 



202 ICE BOUHD. 

'' Devilish well put in/' drawled LasceUes. 

As Churchill stooped over him, and nndid 
the dying man's cravat, Cantelape lifted his eye- 
lids with a painful effort, and fiimbled for some- 
thing in his breast-pocket. Churchill, anti- 
cipating his effort, undid the gold buttons, 
and drew out two sealed packets; in the 
centre of both was a small red hole where the 
sword of Claverhouse had transfixed them. 

'^ Give that," he said ^^ with a dying man's 
love, to Janette, and this to my dear wife.'' 

^' He has fainted," sud Churchill, sprinkling- 
him with water from a cup on the table. 

*' The fool's dead," said Claverhouse ; ** and 
look, you have given him extreme unction." 

Churchill looked, and shuddered to see that 
he had sprinkled the dead man's already pale 
fiice with l>lood. 

'^ Mistress first, wife second," drawled Las- 
celles; ^Uhat ain't right — ^"pon my soul, it 
ain't right." 

<< We shall get a step for this," said a third 
officer, looking round the room, as if estimate 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 203 

ing the saccess of the caujhde-mam. ** We 
have saved his Majesty's life." 

'^ Claverhouse is so d ambitious/' 

drawled Laseelles ; ^^ he'll never be satisfied. 
Let^s carry him now in triumph to the guard- 
house, surrounded by the spoils of these cursed 
ungentlemanlike fellows." 

^^ Look here, gentlemen/' said Claverhouse, 
" I'm in no mood for trifling ; and, by God, 
the first who dares to touch me with his 
drunken fingers I will treat as I have done 
this carrion !" and he spumed the dead body 
of his enemy with his foot. 

^^ Shouldn't we try and do something to 
hook old Tony ? " said Laseelles. '' He's 
doosed slippery ; he'll be off." 

'^ Laseelles is right for once," said Claver- 
house, knitting his brow, and striding from 
the room. " To horse — to horse ! " 

It was an hour later, and the grey dawn 
was just breaking over the red chimney tops 
of the sleeping houses, when a party of five 



204 ICEBOUND. 

Life Guards rode up at a fierce gallop, with 
smoking horses, to the great gates of Shaftes- 
bury House, which to their astonishment, 
Qommunicated by mutual shrugs, they found 
wide open; a great family coach, gilt and 
plumed, lay broken down, like a stranded 
wreck, at the front door* 

" We have him at last ! " said Claverhouse. 
^^ Tower Hill shall soon behold another sight, 
when Little Sincerity makes his last bow to 
the rolling mob." ^ 

" A scutcheon will look very well over 
the chief entrance," said Churchill, sketch- 
ing with his finger an imaginary hatchment. 

"How .the old son of Beelthebub will 
hobble out between two soldiers ! 'Gad, it 
will be quite a sight," drawled Lascelles. 

" Silence 1" said Claverhouse, "or, by the 
King of heaven, I will blow out the first 
man's brains who speaks. Without an am- 
bush we shall never have him. Here comes 
the man I have prepared." 

"By Jupiter, it's a Calfs Headl" said 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 205 

Lascelles^ half alarmed, in a very low whisper 
to the soldier who stood next him, as a man 
came forward, dressed in the very garb of the 
poor half-crazed preacher who now slept his 
sleep; cassock, bands, steeple hat — he was 
complete. 

"Now, gentlemen," said Claverhouse, set- 
ting the example, " dismount, and draw your- 
selves up in the street outside the courtyard 
wall, while Colonel Churchill and myself, 
hidden in this coach, watch the success of 
our stratagem; for we have a subtle rogue 
to deal with, and we ipust not be out- 
witted. There is no peace for our future 
sovereign, his grace the Duke of York, while 
this villain earl lives to plot." 

In five minutes the troopers had obeyed 
the orders of their determined leader. No 
light at the windows, no frightened face, no 
noise of jarring doors, betrayed as yet any 
preparation for flight or resistance. 

With slow, stealthy feet the sham preacher 
passed up the low flight of steps that led 



206 ICE BOUND. 

to the Grecian portico, and gave a low, 
petition-presenting tap with the ponderous 
knocker. No foot coming — nothing ; only a 
long echoing jar in the great, blank, marble- 
paved hall, with its statues and Grinling- 
Gibbon carvings. Another — still no response. 
The ten minutes' weary delay seemed hours 
to the fretting blood-hound Claverhouse, 
who began to curse his foolish haste for not 
having ordered up a; field^piece to blow the 
door to atoms, and storm the wasp's nest at 
once. 

At last a slow, shuffling step was heard 
along a corridor, and from an upper win- 
dow, slowly lifted, the head of an old man 
protruded, demanding who was there at that 
unseasonable hour, fretfully saying, ''that 
the house was neither a madhouse nor a 
doctor's. The spon^ng house was down the 
street, and the midwife's ten doors higher 
up." 

''Friend Zerubbabel," said the disguised 
soldier, "our cause triumphs. The chib in 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 207 

CoT^ant Alley waits for the noble earL 
'Arise, let us go hence/ they say; 'why 
tarry the wheels of his chariot ?' " 

" The chariot you see's broke down/' 
said the old butler, "and the earl's indis- 
posed. If you are a fiiend, give the watch* 
word/' 

" Come down and I'll gtve It." 

" I'D be down, if you'll wait till I slip on 
my livery ; for I am getting my lord's choco- 
late, and he has rung twice." 

In a few minutes the great hall door slowly 
opened, and the old man appeared. 

" Ah, one of the godly, such as my soul 
loveth ! The watchword ? Bless me> if the 
runaways haven't left the great gates open ! " 

"Grey hwrs are a silver crown, if found 
in the ways of righteousness. Bend thy 
head." 

The old man bent his head to listen, and 
the next minute his throat was in the strong 
grasp of the soldier, who dapped a pistol to 
his ear. 



208 ICE BOUND. 

"Blow out his brains!'' shouted Claver- 
house, leaping from the coach, " and keep the 
door." For the cries of " Francis ! Diggory ! 
Walter ! Roger ! " raised by the old man filled 
the air. "Squeeze him tight,. or he'll rouse 
all Aldersgate, and we shall be overpowered. 
Is your master within ? " he said sternly, as 
the old man fell on his knees and prayed for 
mercy. 

The old man bent his head, and shook with 
emotion. 

"Slip a cord round his head," said Claver- 
house, " and twist it with a pistol till he will 



"No cruelties on so old a man," said 
Churchill. *> Claverhouse, your heart is a 
wild beast's. Have youno &ther of such an 
age?" 

"This is no time for womanish puling," 
said Olaverhouse, stamping with rage and 
biting his under lip. " Lascelles, your 
pistol." 

"By Jupiter," said the young fop, "I'll be 



THE UTILE BLACK BOX. 209 

no party to such a cursed ungentlemanlike 
proceeding ! Stap me^ if it even comes to 
sharps^ I won't." 

" Well, then, if you're all a pack of old 
women, I must e'en put my own hands to the 
dirty work," said Claverhouse, turning up his 
hanging cuiF. 

'^ Spare me — spare me I " cried the old 
man, ^^and I will confess all. The earl is 
hidden there in the Cedar Parlour, with the 
panel-door." 

"Lead the way!" cried Claverhouse, put- 
ting a pistol to his head, and cocking it 
with a frown. "A word, dog, and your 
brains are out." 

With trembling step, stopping every now 
and then at stair-head or window embrasure, 
to sigh and shake his head and gasp for 
breath, till forced on by a riide blow of some 
soldier's musket barrel^--up staircases, past 
rows of ancestral portraits, smirkingly indiffe- 
rent to friend or foe — ^the old man passed to- 
wards the little secret study, where the earl was 

VOL. in. p 



210 ICEBOUND. 

accustomed to pen his most violent pamphlets, 
or to watch them secretly printing, and where 
it now seemed he had taken refnge as his 
nearest and most hidden den, to plan some 
mode of desperate escape, wait hetter 
times, or petition a kind-hearted king for 
mercy. 

"This is the door. God, my master 1 
Master, hut one minute ? '' cried the old man, 
sinking again on his knees. 

" Not a moment, '' cried Claverhouse ; " it 
is on moments things like these turn. Use 
the butt end, men. One, two, three — ^now 
it gives." 

." Hurrah 1 '^ cried the men. 

"I can see him," cried Lasoelles, puttmg 
up his eye-glass, and squinting ridiculously 
through the key-hole ; " he has his back 
towards us, and is writing. Ton my Chriis- 
tianity, he does not eiven turn round." 

" It*s a trick," said Claverhouse. 

"170, for I can see his hand move. Such 



THE LITTLE BUCK BOX. 211 

a hand I Stap my vitals, it's as white as a 
woman's/* 

^' It ought to be dirtj/' said Claverhouse, 
with a slight smile, his nearest approach to a 
laugh ; ^^ for it has done dirty work enough. 
Now, push altogether — ^with a will 1 *' 

" With a will !" cried the men, and the door 
fell in with a tremendous crash. Claver- 
house's foot was the first to pass over the 
splintered fragments; he placed his gaunt* 
leted hand upon the earl's shoulder. 

"Tou are my prisoner, in the king's 
name!" 

The earl moved not, but gave a low sim- 
pering laugh as his wig fell off, and disclosed 
a woman's head covered with ringlets. 

"Changed his sex, by Jupiter! Why, 
that beats cock*fighting," said Lascelles, with 
an astonished stare that made ev^ the iron 
face of Claverhouse momentarily relax. 

*^ Stolen away, as I'm a gentleman," said 
Churchill, as the sham earl stood up, knock- 
ing down the coroneted crutch that stood by 

p2 



212 ICEBOUND. 

his chair, and disclosed to the enraged Cla* 
verhoose, who had thought himself so certain 
of his prize, the too prodigal bosom and pretty 
voluptuous double chin of Arsinoe, a French 
lady under Shaftesbury's protection; who 
the earl's enemies boldly declared was his 
mistress, though his Protestant adherents 
more charitably called her an orphan ward, 
intrusted to his care by a friend who had 
fallen a victim to the machinations of the 
Papists and the court. 

Paying no attention to the cries and tears 
of the pretty woman who fell at his knees, 
Claverhouse, with a glance of madness, turned 
round, and seizing a pistol from a soldier, 
discharged it at the head of the old man, 
who, satisfied with the delay and convinced 
of the earl's escape — ^thanks to the stratagem 
of his mistress and the fidelity of his servant — - 
stood by calmly prepared for any fate. He 
fell bathed in his blood. 

^^ So perish the friends of traitors I But 
now search the house, every tile and every 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 213 

plank^ in case this old serpent may not yet 
have fled. It is a pity the mob should miss 
the pretty sight on Tower Hill." 

But it was too late ; the earl had^ong since 
escaped by a secret passage opening into an 
adjoining chapel, from whence, in a closed 
sedan, some trusty adherents had conveyed 
him to the water-side to ship for France. His 
son, intrusted to Mr. Locke, had also escaped 
to a place of safety ; and his servants, careful 
for themselves, at the first rumour of the earl's 
disappearance, had already gutted the house, of 
everything valuable, cut the rich silk hangings 
into lengths, broken up and divided the plate, 
stolen the family jewels, and, in fact, behaved 
much as wreckers used to do when a great 
Indiaman, laden with gold-dust and spices, 
broke its heart on the sharp tooth of a Cornish 
reef. Foremost among them was our friend 
Millefleur, whom Wildfire had sent with a 
message to the earl, announcing his abandon- 
ment of a political life; the good-hearted, 
careless fellow having resolved to take his 



214 ICE BOUND. 

friend Troutbeck's advice, and *^ bucolise/' as 
he called it, down among his tenants in the 
country. His speedy marriage, indeed, was, 
some said, a more than probable event. 

It will not, perhaps, surprise our readers 
to learn that Troutbeck's hang-dog boatman, 
Griffin, was the betrayer to the cruel Claver- 
house of the secret of the intended meeting 
and rising of the Calves' Head Club; the 
result of the surprise and the death of tlie 
ringleader, Troutbeck, we have already men- 
tioned. So ended one of the most dangerous 
plots perhaps ever concocted by English 
traitors. Had the Duke of Monmouth's heart 
not failed him, and Griffin not turned spy, it 
is certain that, in the then excited and irritated 
state of the popular mind, a gener^ massacre 
of the Papists and an attack on the palace 
would have been inevitable. The lame earl, 
however, never recovered this terrible down- 
fall of his hopes ; and, plotting and scheming 
to the last, died a pensioner and an exile in a 
foreign land, his fortunes ruined and his name 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 215 

a by-word. A more melancholy perversion <^ 
great talent is not recorded in our national 
biographies. As for the king, he laughed 
heartily at the tidings of ^^ Little Sincerity's'^ 
escape^ and swore that if he had been caught, 
he'd certainly have turned into a spider or a 
toad, and have got off. Incapable of much re- 
flection, it was not observed that the merry 
monarch played his game of tennis with a whit 
less zest the very day the news of his escape 
reached the court. As for Griffin (Chambers), 
he returned to Jamaica with the rascal 
Morgan, turned buccaneer, and eventually 
bleached on one of those scarecrow gibbets that 
6tudded the sandy quays of the Feari Islands, 
which his ghost haunted for many years, to 
the great hindrance of sailors who used to put 
in there for turtle and fresh water. The fate 
of Glaverhouse and Churchill are matters of 
hbtory, and need no comment of ours. 

But can we conclude without a word about 
our hearty old friend Sir Robert and his daugh- 
ter, who we hope are by this time somewhat 



216 ICE BOUND. 

endeared to our readers ? Troutbeck had not 
forgotten his threat on the hunting-field ; and 
a plan had been arranged by him which fixed 
on Sir Eobert's house as a convenient place 
of meetmg for the Oxfordshire rising. But 
an anonymous letter, thrown at Sir Eobert as 
he passed the bowling-green one morning, sur- 
veying the wreck of a walnut tree which Ro- 
ger had the day before been beating, had set 
him on his guard, and aroused all the pugna- 
city of the old soldier. The letter warned him, 
as he valued his daughter's life and his own, 
to call in all .his Cavalier fiiends or forma* 
tenants still fiiendly to him, and prepare for 
a night attack fi^om a body of forty horse^ 
without guns. 

^^ Without guns/*' isried Sir Hdhert. "Here, 
Eoger, come down fi-om that pear tree- — ^never 
mind if they do spoil ; curse them, let 'em 
spoil — saddle Black Jack, and summon all 
our Cavalier fi*iends — sword and fowling-piece, 
and those whom Grod hasn't given guns to, 
tell 'em — ^hark ye, Koger — ^to bring pitchforks 



THE UHLE BLACK BOX. 217 

— very pretty things for close fighting, and to 
keep doorways and guard roofs for escalade. 
And tell them, Eoger, to slip white shirts on 
over their coats, as Waring did at Hereford, 
so we shall know our men all the better. 
And before you go, drink to the memory of 
the blessed martyr ; and ride as if a devil or 
a bailiff were behind you, or Crow's Nest will 
be gutted, and the king's ca^se lost in this 
shire, God bless him ! Roger, say, ' Grod bless 
him I ' Drat it, if it doesn't bring the waters," 
said the good old squire, brushing a big tear 
from his eye, and hurrying to look to the bar- 
ricading of the front door, and arrange for a 
sally from the garden gate. 

In two hours' time. Sir Robert's friends 
came tumbling in — ^fat justices, lean justices, 
sturdy farmers — all friends of the Darcys, and 
haters of the upstart Troutbecks; brimful of 
love for Church and king, and contempt for 
Whigs, Trimmers, and Green Ribbons. There 
was great emptying of mossy claret bottles, 
and profound tossing off of ale to royal 



218 IC£ BOUND. 

toasts ; so that, bj the time the hour men- 
tioned in the letter drew near, the Darcy ad- 
herents were ready to have faced anything 
alive or dead. 

Many were already beginning to dottbt the 
whole plot, and to pronounce the writer of the 
anonymous letter some scurvy Whig, who had 
wanted to frighten the county, when Mabel 
— brave as her father's daughter should be, 
who had been up in the clock-tower earnestly 
peering into the uncertain moonlight, that lay 
pale and of a bleached wanness upon the gar- 
den wall, where the fruit-tree leaves threw a 
pretty patterning of shadow — declared she 
heard a sound of feet coming up the avenue. 

" Gently, gently ! " cried Sir Robert, 
keeping back the rush of half-drunken and 
pot valiant warriors, who leaped to their feet 
and seized their weapons. 

The enemy could be seen now, dismounted, 
a.% moving to the mere whisper of a muffled 
drum, darkly four abreast, they marched three 
times round the doomed house. 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 219 

" Fire low I '' cried Sir Robert, red with 
excitement, and flourishing a tremendous 
cavalry sabre, more fit to face a giant with 
than to decapitate honest Christians. '^ Second 
rank reserve their fire. Now then, gentle- 
men, for God and the king — one, two, three, 
Jiref' 

And they £d fire ; a storm of musket bul- 
lets burst forth, that struck down the first two 
or three ranks of the enemy, who staggered 
and, unprepared, fell back several paces. 

"Fall on!" cried Sir Robert, tremen- 
dously excited; "give them no breathing 
time." 

"Hadn't we better wait till they are 
more broken," said a timid, little, lisping at- 
torney. 

"Don't let them rally!" cried Sir Ro- 
bert. 

"Don't let them rally!" cried our old 
acquaintance the horse-dealer, who had an 
eye to the enemy's steeds. 

Then, all at once, with a bang of doors and 



220 ICE BOUND. 

a crash of upset tables, Sir Bobert rushed 
forth at the heai} of his troop ; Mabel shutting 
her eyes, having in vain tugged at the old 
knight's skirts to keep him where a command- 
er-in-chief should keep, calmly in the back- 
ground, to order, to rally, and to superintend. 
When Mabel's eyes opened the enemy had 
fled, were being hotly pursued by Sir Eobert 
on Black Jack and a score of mounted irregu- 
lars, looking like ghosts in theur white shirts 
and black scarves. 

" May a poor Whig, on such a day as this, 
hope for pardon from his fair enemy? " sud a 
voice, at Mabel's shoulder. It was young 
Troutbeck. 

" Tou wrote the letter that saved us," she 
stammered, blushing, looking for a moment 
down, then eyeing her lover with clear eyes 
full of confidence and undisguised affection. 

'^ I did ; I refused to be a partner in my 
father's crimes, though I fought for the same 
cause. I told him that I would die to save 
your life ; he threatened to disinherit me, 



THE UTTLE BLACK BOX. 22 1 

and renounced me as a traitor. I have saved 
you, and I am rewarded." 

^'This is but a poor recompense/' said 
Mabel, slipping her little hand into his. 

^^ Hoity toity, what is this ; so short a siege, 
and yet surrender? Why, Mabel? Why, 
Roger, bring your gun; here's Troutbeck; here's 
the villain who is at the bottom of all this! — 
drawing the garrison off, and then stealing 
my daughter! Shoot him, gentlemen; no 
justice for vermin. Somebody knock him on 
the head ; I'm a little winded with the chase 
after those infernal Whigs. I paid two 
rascals, though." 

" It was this gentleman who saved you. 
He is no friend to the viUanies of his party," 
said Mabel, putting out her hand to push 
back her father. 

" Well, well, my lass, if that's the thing, 
the matter changes a little." 

Sir Robert began, in fact, to have pleasant 
dreams of the possible junction of the Darcy 



232 IC£ BOUND. 

and Troutbeck lands, and the return of certain 
broad fat acres to the old name. 

^^But, egad, sir, IVe promised the king to 
give Mabel to Captain Morgan." 

'^ What! Morgan, the robber and pirate, the 
cnt-throat of the Spaniards? " said the attor- 
ney, coming forward. " Fie on you ! '' 

^^ I should be sorry to see Mabel married 
to a Whig," said Sir Robert, wavering ; " I 
never thought to see it, nobody ever thought 
to see it ; it don't look well. ' But then the 
young man is a brave young man, and a like- 
ly young fellow, and I owe him much, and so 
does Mabel; and as his black-hearted old 
father must be long ago off to France for his 
share in this rising — ^for papers on the dead 
men prove sad things against him — I suppose 
the thing must be." 

And the thing was; and terribly long were 
the old campaigning stories told by Sir Ro- 
bert at the wedding. 

As for the deed in the black box, a rascally 
Whitefriars attorney confessed to have forged 



THE LITTLE BLACK BOX. 223 

it for Shaftesbury ; and all we know of the 
casket is that in sotne old country-house near 
Blenheim we remember to have seen a portrait 
by Kneller of Marlborough^ with his right 
hand holding a general's truncheon, and his 
left pressed upon a little hhch boa:, 
, Nor must we forget our old fiiend the 
tutor, who had entered the service of Shaftes- 
bury ; but soon disgusted with the dishonesty 
and intrigues of that wily plotter, quitted his 
service, and betook himself to giving lessons 
in the ^^ Italian hand/' at which honourable 
employment he would probably have starved, 
had he not been one day recognised in Fleet 
Street by Sir Sobert, who, at once forgetting 
all past quarrels, carried him off incontinently 
in the family coach to his old haunts in 
Oxfordshire. 



224 



INTKODUCTION TO "THE TEMPLE 
OF SERAPIS." 

We had been frozen up now about six weeks, 
when our excellent reader became suddenly 
painfully affected with snow-blindness, and was 
obliged to entrust his duties to Captain Beaver, 
who, though rather declamatory, and, perhaps, 
a little pompous, did full justice to the stories, 
and was listened to by the men with extreme 
awe and breathless attention — although he 
did sometimes stick at a hard word, forget a 
stop, or cough^ to hide his forgetfulness or 
ignorance of a Latin sentence or a French 
quotation. Still — good honest soul ! — ^it was 
a fine sight to see him, in full uniform, his 
buttons shining under the lamplight, taking 



ICE BOUND. 225 

such kind pains to round every sentence, and 
make every point either of pathos or 
humour^ that the ambitious authors had in- 
tended. Yet, being myself quietly observant, 
I sometimes smiled to see the listening author 
colour, or slightly writhe, as our captain, not 
the keenest or most acute of men, passed 
over, in smiling, happy ignorance, some re- 
condite allusion, or felicitous turn of lan- 
guage. 

Our audience, too, I could describe amus- 
ingly, I think, had I room. You may easily 
imagine there could not be a ship's crew of Eng- 
lishmen and no odd characters. There was the 
boatswam. Jack Foster, for instance — a stolid 
old ^^ salt,'' who sat at the readings as if he 
was mastheaded — and, I believe, would have 
preferred the latter — ^but thought it right to 
set the men an example of being easily 
amused. Coster never smiled ; but he some- 
times shifted his quid, or took snuff, which 
showed he was moved. Then there was the 
"loblolly boy," who was sentimental, and 

VOL. in. Q 



^26 ICE BOUND. 

sighed at all the love passages; and there 
was the cook, who, since the suppression of 
the paper and his sonnets, had grown bitter 
and critical, was rather severe on flaws 
of plot, and alwajs stared undeviating at 
the reader, g^erally borrowing the MSS. 
to read again among the men in the 'foksal, 
and to talk it over and criticize it. Our 
JEgyptian story, however, being rather beyond 
him, drew from him great applause : and h^ 
said it " topped the lot.'' 



227 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 
A Tale of the Fifth Centuey* 

CHAPTER I. 

Alexandria, in the fifth century, was the 
largest and wealthiest commercial capital in 
the world. Its population was as notorious 
for their seditious and fickle disposition as 
for their wealth. 

The Eoman empire, for sevelral centuries 
crumbling to decay, had now been riven 
asunder by earthquake shocks, and from its 
withered limbs kingdoms were falling daily as 
numerous as dead leaves fi'om a sere oak in 
autumn. 

q2 



228 ICE B.OUND- 

God seemed impatient for the destruction 
of such a festering mass of impotence and 
yice. The northern nations were for the 
most part now Christianized, and become fit 
agents for the second creation of the Eu- 
ropean world. The windows of heaven 
were already opening — the deluge had 
begun. 

It was an evening in February — ^the spring 
time of Egypt. The sycamore was thick 
with blossoms, and the tender green leaf of 
the acacia was stealing forth beneath the 
cool mist already gathering o'er the night. 
The dreaded south wind, that, borne from 
Africa, blights Egypt with its breath of 
fire, had not yet come. Even the shore of 
the natron lakes was green amid the sur- 
rounding desolation, and beside even the 
waterless river — dreadful image of death, with 
its petrified trees and deserted channel — 
grew the almond trees, flushed with their pink 
flowers. 



THE TEMPLE OF StlRAPIS. 229 

It was the festival of the great' god 
Serapis, and Alexandria was gleaming with 
a thousand lamps, though it still wanted well- 
nigh an hour to sunset. 

The revellers in garden JEind in hut waited 
impatiently for the cool dews of refreshing 
nighty for the moon of Isis which might light 
the dance, and for bright Canopus, the special 
star of Egypt. 

Through the long colonnades of the mag- 
nificent city poured crowds of worshippers, 
increased every moment by tributary streams 
from the palace and the cottage. On the 
seaside alone there was silente. No signs of 
bustling trade, no shouting mariners, were 
there that night. There was a cessation from 
carking toil, for Egypt was presiding at a uni- 
versal banquet. From cityward over the 
dark waters came the soft breathings of flute, 
and lyre, and harp, and ringing laughter rose 
on the air. On the red waves eastward already 
shone the warning Pharos flame, high on its 
beacon rock; gently o'er the silent wave 



2S0 ICE BOUND. 

its gleam fell like the light of a torch on 
the rock-tomb's darkness. The westward 
waters shone bright as the jaspar pavement 
of some genii-built temple of the god Ptha, 
and the rays of the setting sun formed a 
path of golden fire, leading from the sea's 
caverns up to its globe of brightness. 

" Will he come ? " cried a dark-robed 
figure, standing at the entrance of one of the 
numerous tombs cut in the rock overlooking 
the sea and part of the western harbour, 
as he stood there, half concealed by the 
strong shadow that the sculptured doorway 
threw upon him. ^^He is bound by two 
sure promises, by love and by honour. May 
the black angel Nubi blight him if he fail 
to-night, when so much depends upon his 
faith I May Serapis be his judge this night I" 
Again the speaker gazed over the waters of 
the harbour, glanced inquiringly at some 
passing bird winging its way to the distant 
surface of the Moerotic Lake as it stood out 
dark against the ri^diant sky, and then bent hi? 



THE TEMPLE OF SSBAPIS. 231 

kead in the attitude of one listening for a foot- 
step ; careless of the sounds of joy borne from 
the city, unheeding the rustle of the lizard 
that burrowed in the sand at his feet. ^^ Zeus 
grant that those holy cries may come to the 
ears of the cursed Theophilus^ like the south 
wind to the lotus flowers I May they i»trike 
terror to the heart of the cruel persecutori 
and bring anguish to his brain I" 

"Kaire, holy father I" said a voice sud- 
denly from the beach below him. 

He started at the sounds but instantly 
greeted the comer, whose approach had been 
unobserved, and who now leapt from his boat 
and advanced with quick strides up some rude 
steps cut in the rock, and leading to the entrance 
of the tomb. He was a young man, a Grecian, 
as his features disclosed ; and his rich military 
dress showed him to be an officer of the Lion 
legion of the imperial army of the East." 

" What news from Syria, Jovius," said the 
Philosopher Olympias, High Priest of Serapis, 
for he it was who greeted the soldier. 



232 ICE BOUND. 

^^ Alas, good Olympias, each day some 
fresh temple of the eastern gods is polluted 
by these mad Christians^ who destroy the 
images but to replace them with the disinterred 
bones of those malefactors whom they worship. 
But a week since these eyes saw the frenzied 
hermits of the desert tear down the sculptured 
walls of Jove's temple at Apamea, and still 
the god slew them not with his thunders." 

" And when comes Cy negus, the praetorian 
prefect, hither ?" 

^' I know not when ; Serapis forbid that 
the destroyer bend his steps yet hitherward/' 

" I have much to tell thee, then, Jovius," 
said Olympias, in an earnest voice. " A slip 
of papyrus, put into my hands by a Nubian 
but an hour since, tells me, by a trusty spy 
at the camp, that Cynegus is already on the 
march to Alexandria, and with him comes the 
Lion legion." 

Pale as the foam on the wave below grew 
the cheek of the young soldier, and he fell, as 
if struck by a javelin, against the entrance of 



THE TEMPLE OF SEBAPIS. 233 

the cavern. " All is lost ! " he feebly mut- 
tered ; " then for thee and for Zoe I have ven- 
tured life — ay, and honour, more precious still!'' 

^^ I have much to tell thee,'' said the philo- 
sopher ; ^' but this place is not fitting, though 
the time is propitious. Follow me into the 
dark chamber of this tomb ; a secret passage 
leads through the catacombs into the temple ; 
its windings I know as well even as the walks 
of my own Academe, and there the surging of 
the ocean on the beach without comes soft as 
the ripple of our own dear Ilissus. Follow !" 

The young Grecian followed his conductor 
silently through a long passage, dark as night, 
and passing through a small room cut in the 
rock, entered another which was dimly lit by 
a lamp which hung from the carved vault 
above ; on a rude table, formed of the painted 
cases of sycamore wood in which mummies 
had been deposited, writing materials were 
placed, as if some recording angel had but 
just risen from his tablets; while before it, 
on a niche in the rock, was a small bronze 



234 ICE BOUlffD. 

statae of Minerva, of exquisite execution, 
vrhioh contrasted strangely with the sublime 
grotesqueness of the figures of the genii of 
the dead, painted in innumerable colours upon 
the walls. At the other end of the room 
stood a marble statue of colossal size, its 
features wearing a divine serenity, while a 
placid smile rested on its mute lips. The 
young Greek, nerved as he was to scenes of 
peril, started at the glimmer of supernatural, 
life that shone from the silver eyes of the 
statue. 

''These scenes of foolish mirth," said the 
philosopher, pointing, with a frown, to the 
groups of dancers and musicians on the ceil* 
ing of the tomb — '^ these scenes of thoughtless 
life match strangely with the calm sleep of 
the dead, against whose carved shrines you 
are now leaning. Start not I " he exclaimed, 
as the Greek leapt forward from a pile of 
mummies, against which he had unconsciously 
leant for support, " for all life is surrounded, 
^ thou art now, with forms and visions of 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 235 

death. The world from the Shcstian Alps to 
the region of the Huns is strewn with relics 
of past time ; each pebble is a tombstone of 
a vanished age ; change and death are written 
on the cloud, inscribed in dim hieroglyhics on 
the falling date leaf, shouted by the roaring 
cataract, or whispered in the turbid Nile. 
From death youth grows to age, and age 
blends with death. Passions, opinions, feel^ 
ings — ay, and even love — change ; and so 
even now, perhaps unwittingly, amid the vo* 
luptuous palaces of Antioch, thy love for Zoe 
has grown less." 

" No, by Zeus ! " cried the youth, leaping 
to his feet, his eye outsparkling that of the 
Libyan gazelle in the outspringing of its 
hidden fire, and his pale cheek again glowing 
with a warmer life, as if some hot sunbeam 
had pierced that darkness of Hades' threshold, 
and warmed it to burning ardour — " by 
Athene, and this her image, I swear that Zoe's 
love glows in my heart as ever inextinguishable 
as the vestal fire ; my eye, turned in loathing 



236 ICE BOUND. 

from the black-browed maidens of the Syrian 
gardens, the wanton damsels of the Koman 
palace, the blue-eyed, laughing virgins of 
Britain, and the bespangled matrons of Ionia, 
has ever sought the shrine of my inmost 
heart, where Zoe's image lies, and worshipped 
there ! " 

" I did thee wrong,'* said the philosopher, 
smiling at the lover's rhapsody ; ^^ thou art as 
true a lover as ever. I spoke of change, and I 
found it in heaven, in earth, and hell, but not 
in the heart of a Grecian youth. But the 
night draweth on : I know it by the dim blue 
vapour that fills the cavern; by the slow 
burning of the torch ; already bright Ca- 
nopus, ruler of thy destiny, is high in the 
cloudless heavens, and I hear the cool air of 
evening murmuring, like Pan's reed, against 
the orifice without. Tell me thy tale, then, 
Greek, so that, with the blessings of the gods, 
we may devise, ere it be too late, some counsel 
for the morrow." 

" Father, I swear by the head of the em- 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAFIS. 237 

peror — and I know no deeper oath — I have 
little to relate, for my wanderings, since I left 
thee in the groves of dear Athens, thou heardst 
me tell thee and Zoe at my last visit hither, 
and since then I have seen nought but broil 
and battle, siege and onset ; my life has since 
been a perpetual conflict, cheered only by the 
thoughts of Zoe, and by that wisdom that I 
learnt from thee." 

" Put like a lover," said Olympias ; " thy 
love first, and after her the divine lore of 
Plato." 

" So my heart places it. Tet, on Plato I 
pondered in the marsh and the forest of 
Britain, when we fought against the savage 
who feeds on his fellow-man — the painted 
Pict, more cruel than the wolf he slays in 
the chase. I have thought over the sublime 
mysteries of the 'Phsedon' by the deep Danube, 
when we beleaguered the fierce Alemanni in 
their own pine forest ; and I have muttered his 
^ Dialogue of the Soul,' as I rushed to battle 



238 ICE BOUND. 

against the keen archers of Persia, and the 
savage squadrons of Tanais." 

"And hast thou, then, seen those savage 
Norsemen, half demons, half men, who have 
lately spread over the west, as the Italian 
mariners tell ns, like a swarm of locusts on 
the fresh leaves of the palm ? '' 

" By Zeus ! have I," replied Jovius, with a 
a smile ; " our legion did good service 
against them at the passage of the Danube. 
Misshapen they are, indeed, as the Hermes of 
Achaia ; their eyes, black as those of the ibis, 
are deep-sunken in their heads ; their shags of 
rough hair hang like a monster's mane over 
their broad shoulders. Yet are they very 
Centaurs, and their darts fell that day in thick, 
driving, piercing hail-showers upon our un- 
armed hosts. Then were the purple robed, 
and the jewelled fingered, perfumed linen- 
wearers of Rome driven into trembling heaps* 
Oh, then we cried for one hour of Csesar ! " 

" And did no brave men hold their ground 
agamst these crud barbarians? Did none 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 239 

raise the eagle as did the legionaries of old? " 
^^ Alas I good father, bnt a handfiily 
amongst thousands. But, Hercules be 
thanked; I was one. Clad still in the heavy 
armour of the days of brave Julian, we stood 
firm, impenetrable as an eastern forest ; and 
against our dark mass of locked shield and 
bristling pilum they drove, shrieking like the 
Eumenides in the dances of hell, while in 
safety upwards of five hundred thousand 
friendly Goths poured over the Danube, and 
defiled on the plains of Lower Moesia. By 
day we fought, by night we camped in un- 
tiring watch round the blazing fires, while 
the hoar frost lay thick on our dented shields, 
and fell hissing on the hot embers.'' 

" Well striven," said the philosopher, with 
a tone of enthusiasm worthy of the descendant 
of him who slew the turbaned Mede, and who 
shed his blood on the barren rock of Fylus. 
'^^A brave handful; 'twas like the conflicts 
between the naked Nubian and the river- 



240 ICE BOUND. 

horse. The gods of Olympus alone could 
have saved thee." 

" That Danube/' continued Jovius, " was 
the Rubicon, the watery barrier that separated 
and saved Kome from the barbarian. I 
became a tribune on the day that the Western 
Empire was smitten to the heart, and ere a 
year was gone I stood upon the plains of 
Hadrianople, face to face with those very 
Goths I had helped to save — those men for 
whom the emperor had risked half his empire 
and I my life. The dreadful thunder of their 
rude horns, as they swept away our gilded 
ranks, still rings in my ears. I, who had 
come out scatheless from a hundred fields, 
had escaped the arrow of the Uun and the 
sword of the Persian, fell wounded by the 
dagger of a Goth at Hadrianople. As I lay 
half-buried under the weight of my Iberian 
charger, I saw the men of a thousand nations 
sweep pastl and to my fevered fancy it 
seemed as if that great conflict, that the 
Christian says is to end the world, had com- 



THE TEMPLE OF SEEAFIS. 241 

menoed. There flew the Soman cavalry^ the 
jewelled dandies both of the Eastern and the 
Western capitals — ^there trampled forward a 
serried band of stout-hearted Lancearii — then^ 
heralded by a tempest of stones from the 
military engines, rushed by a swarm of naked 
Arabs, one of whom these eyes beheld suck- 
ing the blood of an Aleman, who had fallen 
by my own sword. In vain our infantry 
formed in knots, and, unsupported by the 
cavalry, fought back to back, yea^ and for a 
time repulsed the Goths. In vain ; from the 
earth, from the very clouds, they seemed to 
pour upon our crowded band. Raising my- 
self with difficulty from the field, and binding 
up my side with a slip from the robe of the 
Goth I had slain, I dragged myself to the 
assistance of the emperor, whom, though his 
rich robes were torn and bloody, I knew by 
his proud brow and the golden eagles on his 
sandals as he flew for refuge to the hut of a 
neighbouring peasant. Here the enemy 
hemmed us round, and here our small band 

VOL. III. R 



242 ICE BOUND. 

fought for their wounded emperor, and for 
their lives. Sharp through each aperture 
drove the arrows ; in vain we tried to burst 
through the ring of spears. Maddened by 
the fall of a chieftain^ the Goths piled fagots 
round our hut^ and in our £u>es the keen 
north wind drove the flames^ more dreaded 
even than the arrows. In vain we strove to 
hew a path ; with a shout of scorn they drove 
us back with curses and prayers to the gods^ 
Now one fell into the flames, and now another 
was pierced by the arrows. I alone escaped. 
Dropping from a back window, I hewed down 
a single guard, who had spared my life. The 
emperor perished like a victim with its gar- 
land on amid the flames. I was rewarded by 
the new wearer of the purple for my wounds, 
and was sent to Syria, no longer a simple 
tribune of the Lion legion, but master-general 
of the Syrian cavalry.*' 

'^ The Emperor Theodosius,'' said Olympias, 
^^is a prince who hates the gods of the 
ancient world, and listens blindly to those 



THE TEMPLE OF SE&AFIS. 243 

Biadmen who tear do¥m the temples and defy 
the majesty of Jove, who dig up the dried, 
bodies of those who perished for their crimes 
by the gladiaitor's hand, and worship the life- 
less corse of the exhumed slave. Those who 
embalmed these forms m^and us, who fought 
against Cambyses, or who reared the won- 
drous pyramids, much as they venerated the 
empty caskets from which death had stolen 
the jewels that made them precious, never 
venerated them as gods, nor shed the victim's 
blood upon their altar/' 

*' I honour that mind that could look with 
veneration on the crumbling resting-place of 
the soul — the home from whence the soul 
once spoke like the oracle from its Delphic 
cha^m. Does it not, Uke the sun when it 
takes its flight, leave behind some lingering 
ray of love upon its last resting-place, so that 
the mind of him who loved it may rest on it 
with joy till he also wings its way to the un- 
known silent land? Would thine eye, Jovius, 

b2 



244 ICE BOUND. 

turn awaj in disgost from the corpse 6f th j 
Zoe?" 

'^ Hecate forbid/' said the joong Greek ; 
'' bat speak not words of such fearful omen. 
The name of Death links not with Zoe, no 
more than the vulture with the small singing- 
bird that lives amid the henna's blossom. 
But what has betided thee, holy father, since 
I left thee that day at the Canopus gate and 
took ship for the Piraeus? " ^ 

'' My life, my son, has been spent, as in 
Athens, in the calm reveries of a philosophy 
more fit for heaven than earth ; but I have 
lived to find that this dissolute age is too 
corrupt for the renovation of the pure re- 
ligions of the older world. I have laboured 
to maintain the citizens of this great city 
of the ocean zealous in the maintenance 
of their faith. By voice in the council, and by 
writing, I have openly attacked the Christian 
innovators, and the ambitious Theophilus, 
their high priest ; but, alas ! the sound of 
some falling temple daily rings in our ears. 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 245 

and wcy too, now seem marked out for de- 
struction. Slowly, but inevitably as the 
advancing Nile, the persecutor approaches the 
shrine of our Egyptian Fluto. The gods of 
Olympus turn in scorn from the pollution and 
the wickedness that defile the earth. The 
pure creed of Julian seems stifled by the 
warring Typhon of Christianity. No longer 
the world's altars smoke with incense; no 
longer the sacred hymn rises with the cloud 
to heaven ; no longer the altars smoke with 
the reeking victim; the very earth — the 
visible — ^seems to have lost. its power of body- 
ing forth the unseen. The sun in its bright- 
ness gives no boding sign ; the stars roll on 
unheeding ; and the very birds of the heaven 
shadow no longer. the unknown — no longer 
the dark secrets of the future can be wrung 
from the Hecate. The whole world is defiled 
with sin, and seems to wait for its second 
deluge of fire ere it return to chaos." 

^^ Blame not the just gods,'' said Jovius, in 
a tone of mild rebuke; ^^that be far from 



246 ICE Bouio). 

thee ; all maj yet be well. An insurrectioii 
of the true worshippers of this Qaeen of the 
East might still shake tyrants on their thrones. 
The flame of war, bat just extingoished, may 
still spread in a moment over half the Eastern 
world, and Christianity, driven to its cradle 
in the West, might perish m the yeiy spot 
which saw its birth. The gods will lo(d: again 
in smiles npon the earth/' 

^'Bnt on whose daring head should the 
crown of the Pharaohs and the Ptolemies 
rest ?" said the philosopher, musingly, eyeing 
the Greek askance. 

'^ On the brave man," said Jovios, warmly, 
''who should spread the fame of his name 
from the sea-deserted cities of the Nubian 
des^ts, whose banners should fly as the flag 
of Egypt once did on the walls of Hieroso- 
lyma; while under it should march enrolled 
the fierce Arab, the warlike Ethiopian, and 
the subtle Syrian. Then, like a new 0«ris, 
he might pierce into Europe, and, clearing 
Greece of the barbarian invader, make it 



THE TEMPLE OF SARAPIS. 247 

again a worthy dwelling-plaoe for the de- 
scendants of Pericles and of Plato/' 

** A world is quickly conquered in words," 
said Olympias^ smiling at the rhapsody of the 
young warrior; "but who wears this re- 
doubtable conqueror's crown^ and who is so 
worthy as thyself? Is not Zoe queenlike 
enough to become the royal tire of Arsinoe, 
framedof emeraldsfrom the granitemountains?" 

"Fair enough to claim place with Juno; 
but tempt me not, good Olympias/' said the 
youth, beseechingly; "I am bound by alle- 
giance to the Christian. Zoe is dear to me. 
Venus knows it^ and Eros too, but honour is 
dearer than all the pageants that an airy 
ambition can picture. I set out to-night for 
Middle Egypt, whither the prefect bid me 
rejoin my legion, which is expected there. I 
dare not see Zoe." 

" Jovius," said Olympias, in a deep voice^ 
"thou hast dallied by the way; a swifter 
messenger than thou brings me word that 



248 ICE BOUKD. 

fresh changes have taken place in the Lion 
legion's march/' 

" In the Lion legion's march?" echoed the 
young soldier. 

'^ I read from this tablet that a rich reward 
has been already offered, by sound of trumpet 
throughout the camp, to him who brings in, 
alive or dead, Marcus Lucius Jovius, master- 
general of the Syrian cavalry, at present 
absent without leave in Egypt, and who is 
suspected of treasonable correspondence with 
the Pagan faction of Alexandria, the accursed 
worshippers of the demons of hell. Read it 
for thyself, for it is written in the language 
that we both love.'' 

As he spoke, he handed a tablet in the 
Greek character to Jovius, who read it, and 
dashed it on the ground. 

'^Accursed slaves, then I am free from 
vow and pledge ! " he cried. " Is this the re- 
ward of life ventured and blood shed — are 
thus the base calumnies of a eunuch heard 
against the faith of the true-hearted and the 



THE TEMPLE OF 8ERAPIS. 249 

brave ? " And he bowed his head in anguish 
at the strok/s that thus shivered in a moment 
the rich fabric of his fortunes, and left him 
" bare to weather/' 

" Take it not so to heart, my brave son," 
said the philosopher ; ^^'tis thus thou mayst 
judge of the faith of the Christian, from whom 
Zeus has drawn thee forth, that his bolts may 
blast them at a stroke — ^'tis thus that heaven 
seems to crown the prophecy of the uncon- 
scious sage. I could not tell thee till now 
that Alexandria is burning for revolt; ere 
twelve hours the city shall be free, and thou 
crowned at its head." 

" Gods of a foreign land, hear me ! " cried 
the young Greek, with the divine rage of 
Apollo ere he slew the Python ; then drawing 
his sword as he spoke, he bent before the sta- 
tue that seemed to regard him benignly with 
its silver eyes. " I swear by all the gods of 
Greece — ^by the deities of sea and hell — ^you 
above and beneath the tomb — ^to devote my 
life to the preservation of thy faith among 



250 ICE BOUND. 

men." Then rising like a Pythoness, from 
whom the divine fury had not yet. passed, he 
exclaimed, as he seized the hand of Olympias, 
'^ Father, I am thine, lead me whither thou 
wilt ; but if thou hast deceived me in aught, 
may the curse of a broken heart and a -withered 
hope rest upon thee ! I follow thee/' 

"Priestcraft," said Olympias, appearing 
not to notice the Greek's adjuration, " and 
religion plan strange devices ; only as one of 
the initiated could I tell that this very tomb 
leads, by winding passages, to the great tern- 
pie of Serapis, where other scenes of glory 
await thee ; for even now, under the garb of 
religious ceremonial and festival observances, 
the faithful of Alexandria are met to devise 
means to resist the tyranny of the Christian 
despot. Thither I bring thee, as the long 
wished-for general of our armed bands, after 
that shalt thou see thy Zoe, who dreams 
not of thy approach, or how near thy heart is 
beating to hers ; and let us then see if thou 
wilt hurry oflf to Middle Egypt, or the region 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 251 

of the cataract, as if a beart steeled by philo- 
sophy and proof against the weapon of the 
Han were not penetrable bj the kind glances 
of a maiden. Aid me, Thoth, for I bring thee 
a noble votary/' 

Then rolling up the papyrus, Olympias hid 
it within a fold of his robe, and with hasty 
strides, torch in hand, left the chamber of the 
dead. On they went, between long ranks of 
the embalmed dead, through rock passages still 
rough with the chisel mark, and vaults never 
visited by the light of the day— dim haunts 
of the dead, where the silence of the mute 
throng was never broken by the busy hum of 
the port without ; a inlent multitude whose 
dull ear caught not the sound of the shout 
that hailed each alternate conqueror as he 
shook the Nile land with the song of tri- 
umph passed away and was forgotten, like 
the builders of the Pyramids before him. 
Sometimes, in a dark chamber that the red 
light of the torch illumined for a moment, 
there gleamed forth from a dark corner, 



252 ICE BOUND. 

brooding in the stilinesB and shining with a 
glimmeri a ghastly and unearthly glitter from 
a gilded mummy. The pomp of life seemed 
terrible in those eternal abodes of death. 
The young Greek had looked on all the forms 
of terror a battle-field can show, he had 
hidden those he had loved in the earth, but 
never before had he seen a body made eternal 
as if the dormant soul kept it still entranced. 
Now, clambering up stairs hewn in the rock, 
they passed through large chambers all covered 
with those hieroglyphic mysterious ciphers 
which no more disclose their secrets than the 
stars do to the stranger, where the ceilings 
were richly decorated with zodiac and planet- 
ary emblems, or studded with golden orbs. 
The walls were sculptured in relief with the 
conquests of the ancient kings. The sculp- 
tures spoke of a fame and immortality which 
the mummies beneath belied, as that great 
nameless statue did that kept stilly watch and 
ward over the dead. 

On strode the philosopher in silence; the 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 259^ 

I flame of the torch he carried waving in the 

, thick air which found its way slowly through 

j this still Necropolis. 

" These," said he, suddenly stopping, and 
I holding his light to the wall of the passage 

I through which they were passing, and which, 

by its superior size and the richness and 
abundance of its sculptures, seemed to indicate 
its vicinity to the great temple of the Alexan- 
drian god — " these," said he, *' represent Am- 
set, Hassi, Siumtff, and Eebshnuf, the genii 
of the dead. 'We are beside thee,' they 
whisper continually to the soul as it wanders 
through its changeful state by dark rivers and 
barren plains." 

"They are grotesque figures, ruder than 
the Cyclops of Zeuxis," said Jovius. 

" They are but symbolical," said the philo* 
sopher, '* yet much deep mystery lies within 
those emblems so barbarous to the eye. They 
are allegorical, as many of our own minor deities 
are. The Greek Kratos and Bios are no more. 
But the next chamber will be still stranger to 



246 ICE BOUND. 

thee ; all maj jet be well. An insurrection 
of the true worshippers of this Queen of the 
East might still shake tyrants on their thrones. 
The flame of war, but just extinguished, may 
still spread in a moment over half the Eastern 
world, and Christianity, driven to its cradle 
in the West, might perish in the very spot 
which saw its birth. The gods will look again 
in smiles upon the earth/' 

''But on whose daring head should the 
crown of the Pharaohs and the Ptolemies 
rest?" said the philosopher, musingly, eyeing 
the Greek askance. 

" On the brave man," said Jovius, warmly, 
''who should spread the fame of his name 
from the sea-deserted cities of the Nubian 
deserts, whose banners should fly as the flag 
of Egypt once did on the walls of Hieroso- 
lyma; while under it should march enrolled 
the fierce Arab, the warlike Ethiopian, and 
the subtle Syrian. Then, like a new Osiris, 
he might pierce into Europe, and, clearing 
Greece of the barbarian invader, make it 



THE TEMPLE OF 8ERAPIS. 255 

ftpoke he took a parchment inscribed with 
lueroglyphics from the bosom of his robe and 
scanned it hastily. '^ Touch the thirtieth ser- 
pent of eternity, and it yields to the hiero- 
phant/' He bent down and touched the gra- 
nite pedestal of the statue ; a spring disclosed 
its^. He pressed it in with force, a large 
sU^i^e fell slowly back with a creaking sound, 
antf a dark aperture presented itself that even 
the torchlight could not pierce. 

'* 'Tis darker thau Acheron," said Jovius, 

besitHtingly^ 

" Tush I " cried Olympias, " leap down, in 
Mame of Zeus/' 

'reek leapt, and in a moment shouted 

**I am safe^ oh, father, and I see 

listance/' 

cended after him, and, ex- 

ij closed the stone again 

ice, 

[ saidj '* within the sacred 
pie of which that honey* 
le necropolis/' And as 




256 ICE BOUND. 

he spoke, they harried on through one or two 
passages lit bj the light which poared in 
feeble streams through niches cut in the rock 
of some side apartments. A voice from a 
radiant side chamber arrested them — the 
words as of a prayer. It was the voice of 
Zoe, and sweeter to the ears of Jovius than 
the nightingale of his own Attica. 

Jovius would have rushed in and clasped 
her in his arms, but Olympias arrested him. 

"A holier duty," he whispered, ^^ awaits 
thee. . ^^Ares, and not Eros, is thy deity to- 
night. Take a last look, and pass in 
silence." 

^' Again the lover gazed a look of such 
intensity that his very soul seemed for a 
moment to have left his immovable form, and 
to be fluttering round his second self — ^his 
long unseen — ^his Zoe. 

The maiden on whom he gazed was bending 
over a richly-sculptured alabaster sarcophagus, 
on which the rich dark flood of her tresses, 
released from their jewelled band; had fallen 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 257 

in the ardour of her prayer to the deity, 
before whose shrine the lamp burnt dimly. 
From her parted lips gashed forth the half- 
andible words in the soft music of his dear 
native land. It was a prayer for him. 

Delicious sounds, they fell on the father's 
and the lover's ears like the summer-dew 
upon the lotus cup. Zoe's features, finely 
chbelled and spiritual in outline, showed 
traces of her Grecian origin, while the lus- 
trous brightness of her dark eyes, fringed 
with the broad sweeping finnge of lash, 
resembled more the voluptuous beauty of her 
Egyptian mother, a native of the city of 
Memphis. With a deep sigh, the Egyptian 
maiden arose from her knees, murmuring her 
lover's name, as for a moment she turned 
her gaze musingly on the darkness of the 
vaulted passage. How near were the guardian 
genii of her life 1 Her face, half illumined 
by the lamp, shone with a radiance as of 
some good genius freed from '^ this muddy 
yesture of decay." How unfitting a place, 

YOL. m. a 



S58 ICE BOUND* 

the home of the dead, for one so fair and 
pure ; how unfit a halo for so pure an angel 
—--a being less of earth than heaven ; how 
terrible to see the vapours of that grave 
enshrouding that form before the time ; and 
yet to the poets, and therefore to the lover's 
eye — ^for is not love the very life-essence of 
poetry? — she seemed like a soul that had 
freed itself from its dark corporeal husk, and 
was about, all glorified, to soar upward fr(»n 
the tomb to heaven. 

Olympias whispered in the ear of Jovius, 
*^ Hasten, for the time draweth on, and the 
Christian sleeps not when the cross is 
raised/' Again they set forth on their way 
through devious and half lit passages and 
stairs hewn in the rock, where the fading 
light of day waged incessant war with night ; 
some of the pillared halls lay in deep 
masses of shadow, while in others the 
dim brown light seemed to glimmer like the 
dawn. The Greek now observed that the pas- 
sages, halls, and chambers |prew more richly 



THE T£UPL£ OF SERAPIS. 259 

adorned with sculptures and paintings, and 
amongst the emblems on the walls he observed 
more frequently those genii of the dead over 
whom Serapis rules, intermixed with the cow 
of Isis, the hawk of Osiris, and the Nile 
beetle, the peculiar hieroglyphic of Kneph, 
god of fire. 

^^ How endless seem the passages of this 
great shrine of a strange religion," said the 
Greek youth, as, passing through a large hall 
supported by pillars, beautiful with their lotus 
capitals, they ascended a staircase and entered 
a circular gallery, which seemed to traverse 
the whole length of the temple. 

" This great passage," said the philosopher, 
** which resembles our life, for it begins and 
ends in darkness, leads to the ' great hall of 
the gods,' where the golden statue of Serapis 
himself is throned. By the distant murmuring, 
that sound of human voices that nothing in 
dead nature resembles, I conjecture the council 
is already assembled, and- waiteth but for 



me." 



82 



260 ICE BOUND. 

A small antecliambery branching from the 
passage, led at once into the great hall, 
in which the worshippers of Serapis had 
assembled. 

Jorius veiled his eyes for an instant, daz- 
zled at the brilliancy of a hundred cressets 
that hung from the carved roof, and threw; 
into deep shade the capitals of the sculptured 
pillars, round whose fluted shafts the Nile 
bulrush and the lotus twined, as if turned to 
stone by some mystic power. Before a wide 
vail of Tyrian purple, that probably shrouded 
from profane gaze the statue of the deity, sat 
those adherents to the old faith who still 
refused to bend before the altars of a new 
creed. Men of all nations were there : 
priests, nobles, and merchants, whom the 
hatred of the new creed, or their fears for the 
old one, had driven to take desperate connseL 
Deep-lined faces were there, for scorn and 
hatred were abroad, and they whispered, with 
heads bent together, as if they dreaded even 
the very god breathing theu* secrets to heaven* 



THE TEMPLE OF SE&APIS. 261 

So wrapt were they in their deliberations, 
that they saw not the philosopher till he 
stood amongst them. With an indefinable 
feeling, and therefore with greater awe, 
Joyius beheld the muttering conspirators 
seated beneath that dark cartain, which un- 
dulated with the night wind that stole 
through the avenues and courts of the great 
temple. To his excited imagination, voices 
seemed whispering behind its folds, and be- 
neath its shadow moved a deeper golden shade, 
as of a being not of earth. Even in this 
hour of need he thought how dreadful it was 
for Zoe to move among scenes filled with that 
supernatural horror that pervades only the 
dreams of the madman. The dress of the 
Greek arrested their attention, which the en- 
trance of Olympias, who was clad as an 
Egyptian, had failed to elicit. One, who 
appeared from his vestments to be a priest, 
arose. 

** Brave Mends," said Olympias, " I bring 
thee one who, if he knows not by their 



262 ICE BOUND. 

Egyptian names the hidden one and the 
leader of the heaven, venerates them not the 
less. I bring ye Jovius, the brave tribune of 
the Lion legion, of whose valour I spoke at 
the opening of the feast ; when he left the 
army of the Praetorian Prefect at Damascus, 
he was master-general- of the cavalry of 
Syria ; he is now a hounded fugitive as one 
of us." 

" And of what fresh cruelties of the tyrant 
Theodosius brings he word?'' said a dark- 
browed priest, who had started up at their 
approach. "Whither shall the worshippers 
of the gods fly from those accursed monks, 
who drive us from our very shrines ? May 
Kneph wither them with his breath I'* 

"Talk not of flying," cried Olympias, 
with a contemptuous glance at the saturnine 
countenance of the speaker ; " Jovius brings 
word that the army of the destroyer is already 
on its march to the city that queens it over 
sea and river, the great worshipper of holy 
Serapis, whose image is amongst us. To 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAFIS. 263 

arms^ then, to defend our shrines from pollution 
and destruction ! When, to the mind of the 
wise, the great secret of the universe lies 
hidden in impenetrable darkness/ is the 
religion of an Israelitish fisherman to lord it 
over the creeds whose hoary majesty has been 
worshipped by a thousand ages? — before 
whom the great Hermes may have bent 
myriads of years ago ? With the uninquiring 
faith of the poor boatmen of to-day, the new 
belief is rejected by the very land of 
slaves who gave it birth, the old needs but 
the warm ray of an emperor's toleration to 
fill its aged veins with the life of youth. The 
old path is tried and trodden; the new is 
perilous and unknown* In the past ages, 
when Osiris reigned in the hearts of all — 
great swayer of the sceptre of the universe 1 
— ^the world prospered, and the Pharaohs 
spread their name in nations known only to 
us by the legend of the traveller. Now, o'er 
the doubting earth, spread terrors, panic, 
fear, and a ghastly train of pestilence and 



S64 ICE BOUND. 

death. From their dark, oold homes in the 
frozen north, Typhon, for the first time 
dominant over the genii of good, leads forth 
his armies, half monsters, half demons, who 
give np these Christians to deaths befitting 
the accnrsed nature of their creed, their mid- 
night murders, and their ceremonies borrowed 
from our own pure faith/' 

''Olympias has well spoken," cried a 
Nubian, whose white turban threw a wan 
shadow on his duskj features; ^^our very 
sacrifices are prohibited ; and the despot who 
sees misery wasting our earth, forbids us now to 
seek a higher protector in heaven. No longer 
at night dare we feed the sacred crocodiles of 
the Moerotis ; our very mysteries are polluted 
by the rude shoutings of the Christian ban* 
quet, or by the profane intrusion of the monk 
whose brain is maddened by dwelling among 
the tombs ; no longer may we pour out the 
rich libation ; no longer cov^ our head witii 
the sacred garland ; no longer seek the will of 
the gods by omens and the slaughtered vie- 



THE TEMPLE OF SSRAPIS. S65 

tim. Bat yesterday^ by a decree of the cruel 
Theophilns, a fine of twenty-five pounds of 
gold reduced me to beggary; and by such 
means is the worship of skulls and bones, and 
the blood of gladiators, spread amongst a 
slavish race, who are too cowardly and lily- 
hearted to draw the sword in defence of a 
faith which at least they love, but the help- of 
whose gods they want courage to implore/' 

The Egyptian priest was about to reply to 
this taunt, and groped for something in 
the folds of his robe ; but a Eoman noble rose, 
and the priests sat down silently, hurling 
looks of defiance at each other, and awaiting 
the words of the new speaker. 

" It is in Home chiefly," said he who had 
risen, ^'that the vices of an iron age have 
paved the way for such a creed as this. The 
proud Anician family engrosses the power of 
an absent emperor, and shares it with the 
Christian bishop; leagued as the vulture is 
with the lion, they band to chase down virtue, 
while a nation of cowardly beggars feeds on 



266 ICE BOUND* 

the public alms. Their worthy descendimts 
of late^ forsooth, gloat over their piled 
treasmiesy now sell a farm for a jewel, and 
now a jewel for a farm, and rolling in cha- 
riots through the city, to show their embroi- 
dered robes to the gaping crowds, look with 
exultation at their own ^ded images, rear* 
ing high above that of the despised Jupiter* 
Guarded by their armies of slaves from the 
rays of the sun, which fidk to pierce the rich 
embroidery of their canopies, they appear 
like the parasites who clogged the heels of a 
Nero and a Heliogabalns, rather than the 
descendants of those who died before the walls 
of Carthage "^ 

** Or at Canuse," said the Nubian, fiercdy, 
who had listened impatiently to the harangue, 
and clutched a dagger that lay beside him, 
as if ready to do battle for the justice of his 
taunt. 

''This is no time for brawlinj^*' said 
Olympias; ''nor should the blood of wchv 
shippers be shed before the altar of that god 



TH£ TEMPLE OF 8BRAPIS. 267 

who will judge our souls at the inevitable 
hour — ^who knows how soon I No time is 
this for delay; before to-morrow Cynegus 
may be here, and this great fane, fit for the 
worship of a nation, may share the fate of 
Apamea, be polluted by the loathsome hands 
of the Christian monks. Let the god decide 
on whom the office of general shall fall ; but 
who is fitter than this young Grecian warrior, 
whose sword has been dra]¥n in half the 
regions of the world ? Let the god assent if 
he accord. Hear ! " 

There was an instant^s silence, for from 
behind the vail came a roar deep as the 
herald of the earthquake, which reverberated 
through the chambers of the rock like some 
dreadful summons to the dead. 

" The god wills it ! " cried the multitude. 
" Hail, Jovius, favoured of Serapis." 

No time had the Greek to reply to the ac- 
clamations of the crowd, for at that moment 
an Egyptian, whose dress betokened him to be 



26& ICE BOUND. 

a priest, though of an inferior order, rushed 
in with a terror-stricken face. 

^'An imperial fleet has just rounded the 
Pharos !" he cried. " To arms ! to arms !" 

A cloud fell on every face, so suddenly had 
the gods seemed to have anticipated the 
thoughts of their hearts. In a tumultuous 
throng they poured out, and gazed, from the 
lofty hiU on which the temple stood proudly 
with its pedestal of a hundred steps, upon the 
harbour. Beneath all was dark as a black 
ocean, save where the torches of sixty galleys 
lit the darkness. Remaining but for a mo- 
ment, with features fixed as if some Gorgon's 
head had turned him to stone where he stood, 
Jovius rushed forth far from that terrible 
chamber and the presence of the god into the 
cold night air without. He found the silent 
groups gathered in knots on the wide giant 
stairs that led from the city below to the rich 
sculptured gateway of^the temple. Its pyra- 
mi^cal and massive front was feebly lit by 
the stars of a moonless night, and its fifty 



THE TEMPLE OF 8tRAPIS. 269 

colttmns looked colossal in the deep masses of 
shade in which they lay half-hid, like the 
great patriarchs of some primeval forest For 
a moment his eyes rested only on the passions 
painted on the faces of those amid whom he 
stood; he was afraid to look down to the 
point to which Olympias pointed silently ; he 
knew that there was a sight that would sear 
his brain. With ayerted eyes he gazed — 
with averted face— on the winged globe, cat 
deeply in the centre of the square doorway, 
and illumined by the torch he held. The 
shrill note of a clarion, sounding dear and 
distinct through the night air, as if intended 
for his ear, rang out shrilly. It was the sig^* 
nal for landing. He looked. As in some ter- 
rible dream he saw the well-known legion pour 
from their galleys on the sandy shore ; they 
have landed, and are forming in marching 
order. By the light of a hundred torches his 
straining eyeballs can see one, who must be 
the hated Cynegus, at their head, with the 
standard-bearer who fought so well at 



270 ICE BOUHD. 

Hadrianople beside him* His gilded and 
embossed annoar glistens in the torchlight, 
fie fancies he can hear the words of conoi- 
mand, and even his own name whispered in 
execration; for the first time he feels like 
a branded helot gazing from a lurking- 
place upon his pursuers. Again their shrill 
music mounts up to that temple's summit. 
They march on^ they defile through the 
streets of pillars, they halt and pitch their 
standards in the great market-place of the 
city, beneath the palace of the archbishop; 
The tall shadows of the city roo& hid them 
from their sight There was a silence of fear 
among those gazers ; a hush as when some 
terrible thing has passed before the eye, and 
the shadow of its darkness, like the ripple of a 
Tessel's wake, is still amongst us. 

Olympias, calmer than the rest, first broke 
a silence more awful than even the clamour 
of onset. 

"They go," he said, "to proclaim the 



THE TEMPLE OF 8ERAPIS. 271 

imperial decree to the people in the 
forum." 

^' It may be tidings of toleration/' said k 
meek-featured man, who appeared to be a 
merchant, and who trembled either with fear 
or the chilly night breeze from the sea. 

^* The mercy," said the priest, with a sneer, 
" yes — ^that the vulture shows the sea swallow. 
But let us hasten down, that we may at 
least know and prepare for the worst; our 
adherents will throng thither, for I see them 
already yonder, hastening to the broad market- 
place." 

With shouts of approbation they hurried 
down the hundred steps that led from the 
temple to the city, and were soon threading 
their T^ay through the broad street of pillars 
that led to the forum, beyond the other end 
of which spread the wide Mediterranean. 

" Cover thy head," said the philosopher to 
Jovius ; and he whispered, " Throw off that 
guilty look, for see the gods smile upon thy 
sacrifice." A meteor shot across the sky as he 



872 IGS BOUND. 

spoke, and seemed to bound firom the dep&d 
of infinity into the ocean. '^ The gods qpeak 
to thee/' he cried, stopping for a moment, 
and pointing with extended hand to the dark 
sky, while his eye rested with a wild light oa 
the Greek, '^ so bright will be thy career.'' 

''And so short?" replied Jovinsi with a 
sigh, as of distrustful sorrow. 

'' Veil thy head/' said Olympias, '' and hide 
thy Grecian armour, for here is the forum ; 
and see, yonder is the imperial herald about 
to read the imperial decree to the vast throngs 
that surround us." 

The blast of a trumpet proclaimed the 
approadi of Uie herald; in a moment the 
stirring hum of that multitude had lulled into 
silence. 

''To the people of Alexandria the Emperor 
Theodosius, in the name of Jesus and the 
saints, sends greeting. On the recdpt of 
thb decree, he commands Cyn^us^ Prefect 
of the East, attended by the lion and GaUio 
legions, to destroy the tmple of the idol god 



THE TEMPLE OF SE&APIS. 273 

SerapiSy and to confiscate the riches of its 
treasury to further the Christian cause. 
People of Alexandria^ m the name of all the 
saints of Egypt^ farewell/' There was a wild 
outburst of rage ; but it lulled for a moment 
as the herald's trumpet again rang forth: 
'^ The Prefect Cynegus offers two pounds of 
gold to him who brings to the camp of Alex- 
andria the head of the fugitive JoviuS; late 
master-general of the Syrian horse." Amid 
the surging multitude Cynegus, a voluptuous- 
looking and effeminate noble, conspicuous by 
his white cheek and richly embroidered robe, 
whispered for a moment to the officers that 
surrounded him ; and then pushing his horse 
a little forward, waved his hand to the people, 
whose swelling roar seemed to bode a coming 
storm. 

"To the temple, to the temple 1" they 
cried. 

" People of Alexandria," said the prefect, 
in a pompous but affected voice, " I demand 
your assistance in this holy work. I entreat 

VOL. III. T 



274 IC£ BOUNI). 

youy in the name of the emperor, to surrender 
the rebel Joyius, who, I am told, harbours 
amongst you." 

"Down with the cursed eunuch of the 
palace!" cried the multitude, as they swayed 
backwards and forwards in their rage, only 
restrained by the presence of the legion and 
its hedge of spears. Louder grew the cries, 
and fiercer the shouts of seditious rage ; mis- 
siles darkened the air, and the mob shouted 
and howled like a monster impatient for 
blood. Cynegus's pale cheek darkened as 
a tile struck him on the brow ; raising his 
jewelled hand to the wound, he shouted to the 
legion, but his voice could not be heard amid 
the clamour of ten thousand yelling tongues. 
Again he shouted, and at the word the lances 
of the legionaries flashed like sunbeams in 
the torchlight as they lowered them, and 
slowly drove back the multitude ; while, at the 
same moment, some Koman slingers, aided by 
archers, poured their stones and shafts on the 
dark boiling mass that lay before them. The 



THE TEMPLE OF SERATIS. 275 

mob stood but for a moment, then wavered, 
and the square was clear; with slow steps 
the legion followed the fugitives, as 
shouting, "To the temple, the temple P' 
they fled, with cries of rage and terror, 
through the streets of the great city of the 
Macedonian Conqueror, 

Borne along by the flying army, Jovius 
was for a moment separated from Olympias, 
but rejoined him as he entered the dark 
avenues of the temple. Already, from the 
secret armouries, arms had been distributed to 
the frantic crowd. Conspicuous among them 
all stood Heredf, the priest of Serapis, who, 
armed with an Ethiopian war-axe, marshalled 
the fugitives as they entered the temple. 
Already an armed band were stationed to 
guard each avenue of the thirty doorways. 
Here a band of archera lay on the steps, 
waiting for the conflict, while some spearmen 
knelt on the first terrace below, ready for the 
battle. Passing Olympias, the young warrior, 
greeted with a thundering acclaim as the 

t2 



276 ICE BOUHD. 

leader of the fiddifiil^ rushed back through 
the long passage of the temple to the room 
where he had kst seen Zoe. She was no 
longer there; but even stiU the lamp burnt 
before the sepulchre. He hastened onward 
on the search. A white scarf, which he had 
observed twmed round her head when she had 
knelt, unconscious of his approach, arrested 
his attention. He picked it up, pressed it to 
hb lips, and bound it round his hyacinthine 
locks like a turban. Again he entered 
chamber after chamber, but in vain ; he had 
indeed given over the hasty JMarch, and with a 
heavy heart was about to resume his ward at 
the temple gate, when a deep sigh, the echo 
of a s(Mrrowful heart, caught his ear. It 
was Zoe. He rushed in. She was there, 
her head bent in grief, and her eyes 
fixed upon the ground. She turned her gaze 
slowly as she heard a step, and with the 
bound of the frightened antelope of the desert, 
sprang into his arms. 

"Light of my life,** she sobbed, as die 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 277 

leant her cheek upon the brieast of the Greek. 

" Zoe, my soul, my guardian spirit, to visit 
thee is to leave the dull earth and enter the Ely- 
sian Fields ; '' and he kissed her pale cheek, 
which kindled, like Pandora's, into a new life 
at the soft pressure of his burning lips ; he 
clasped her to his heart, and lavished upon her 
all the soft endearments of his native tongue. 

A footstep was heard without. It was 
Olympias'. 

"I thought I should find thee here. A 
lover can no more keep from his maiden than 
the night-moth from the torch's flame,*' he 
exclaimed, in a voice of chiding fondness. 
^'But thou must hence now, and arm thee 
as a Grecian should.'' 

The trembling Zoe tore herself from his 
arms, and gazed inquiringly into his eyes, 
that were as radiant and full of love as Apollo's 
might have been when he played invisible in 
the breeze around the soft cheek of Daphne. 

" I have arms here," continued Olympias, 
" and thou must dight them quickly, for there 



278 ICE BOUND. 

are mormorings already at thy absence. Let 
Zoe cling to the shrine of the god, and 
breathe tender prayers for thy victorious re- 
turn." 

*^ I cannot wear these," said Jovius, look- 
ing contemptuoudy at the quilted breastplate 
and helmet made of crocodile-skin, which 
Olympias tendered. ^' I want the arms of 
my country, to nerve my arm and to guard 
the heart on which the precious image of my 
Zoe is impressed." 

" Let not that hinder thee," said Olympias, 
" for I have in the armoury the armour of a 
Grecian king." 

Bidding a tearful adieu to Zoe, and tearing 
himself with a backward glance from her, Jovius 
followed the philosopher into a chamber where 
lay scattered arms of Europe and of Asia. 
Around its walls, hung the Grecian helmet, the 
blazoned shield of Sicily, the target of the 
Nubian, the long scutum of the Roman leg- 
ionary, the war-axe of Thrace, and the pilum 
of Italy. With hasty hands Jovius clad him- 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 279 

self in the garb of one who fell^ perhaps^ at 
Salamis. 

^^ Thou lookest like Achilles on Scamander's 
plain," said Olympias, jestingly. ^*Now would 
Zoe joy to see so trusty a warrior. But that 
sword, methinks, is of a truer temper than 
the copper blades that bent with the blows at 
Troy." 

A shout rang from the group that filled the 
chamber as Jovius stepped forth full armed 
for, the battle, and glowing like Mars as the 
effulgence of the torches played upon his em- 
bossed armour. ^^The god has sent his 
regent ! " they cried ; as they shouted, 
the head of a dark phalanx wound slowly 
round the comer of the street in which the 
temple stood, and halted at the foot of the 
vast artificial hill on which the temple rose ; 
the hands of a whole nation had assisted in 
piling it to the skies — ^poor aping of nature's 
grandeur. Like the mouth of a furnace 
glowed the thirty dark portals of the temple ; 



280 ICE BOimD. 

its granite slabs had neTer rang with sadi 
shouts nnoe they left their naliye rock. 

There was a moment's silence, then, 
with a dioat of battle, the light-armed 
legionaries prepared for the ascent of the 
steps that led to die sanctoarj, while an 
officer who directed the attack reined 
in a foaming Iberian steed, around him 
grouped the standard-bearers and the inferior 
tribunes. A dark drift of arrows drove in 
the teeth of the daring assailants, as coyering 
themselres under their taigets th^ rushed up, 
sword in hand, towards the defenders of the 
first terrace — ^for on this side alone was the 
temple-citadel assailable. The holj stillness 
of the night was profEmed by tiie war-cries of 
"SerapisI'' "For the temple!'' and 
counter-shouts of "Jesus and the Gross!'' 
Some of the legionaries fell ere they had 
reached die first step, ibeir brains crushed by 
the leaden pellets of tiiie Nubian slingers, who 
showed their white teedi in savage glee, and 
shouted for joy when some more conspicuous 



TH£ TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 281 

adversary fell under their blows; some of 
them were stricken by death ere they had 
struggled past the first few steps ; while 
others, more fortunate and more agile, ;suo- 
ceeded in winning their way to the first ter* 
race, where they fought hand-to-hand with a 
band of white-robed idolaters^ who, headed by 
Jovius, now rushed to meet them. Amongst 
these favoured of the gods were conspicuous a 
small band of British mountameers, who, distin- 
guished by their gold bracelets and their half- 
bared and blue-painted arms, clambered up the 
steps, as indifferent to the galling shower of 
missiles as if they had been but the pelting 
rain-showers of their own hills, and displaying 
all that untiring agility which few but moun- 
taineers possess. When one of their number 
fell under the dart or arrow of their dusky 
antagonists, they gave a yell of fury, and 
only spurred on indeed more fiercely to the 
height above. 

" These are Titans indeed, who would 
scale heaven,'' cried Olympias to one of a 



282 ICE BOUND. 

party of Egyptians who were rushing to the 
contest ; '^ but in the name of the god Serapis 
we will hurl them to Hades, or crush them 
with our blows/' 

*' See there 1 " cried the priest of Serapis, 
who stood beside him ; ^' thy Jovius is fight- 
ing hand-to-hand with one of the accursed 
blue-eyed warriors, who strikes like some spirit 
of Typhon's realm/' 

The philosopher looked. The young 
Greek was vainly striving to free himsdf 
from the grasp of a British warrior, who 
seemed endeavouring to topple him headlong 
over the terrace as he would have done an 
antagonist on his own native rocks. In vain 
Jovius exerted all the strength and skill of a 
Grecian athlete. Both hosts lulled for a mo- 
ment in the strife to witness the result of the 
contest. Jovius was nearer. He was on the 
edge. Another moment, and an Arab shaft at 
the instant of victory pierced the brain of the 
painted chief. His grasp relaxed, he reeled ; 
with a brazen clang he sank down below^ 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 283 

and rolling, all bleeding and croshedi from 
step to step, fell almost at the feet of the 
heavy-armed below. £ai^ng his hands to 
heaven, Jovius picked up the sword of a fallen 
Egyptian, and rushing against the few fugi- 
tives who still remained, by word and blow 
now urged his companions to the contest. 

With a shout echoed from above, the priests 
drove the remaining Bomans over the terrace, 
and followed them down the descent, till 
the advance of their comrades repulsed the 
pursuers in turn. Some wretched men, with 
battered helmets and shattered breastplates, 
or with bloody targets all feathered with 
arrows, still alive, were dragged up into 
the temple, in spite of the missiles of 
their friends below, saved only for a death 
more horrible. There was debating below 
for a moment, then from the legionaries came 
forth the herald who had read the proclama* 
tion, holdmg a branch twisted with wool in 
his hand. As the crowd above lowered their 
weapons when they saw the sacred badge of 



284 ICE BOUND. 

peace wave over the bodies of the dead, the 
herald ascended^ and was ushered by a banil 
of Alexandrians into the great hall of the 
gods^ where Oljmpias, Jovius^ and the chief 
supporters of Serapis were ready to receive 
him. 

The herald was an old, scarred Roman 
veteran, who returned the angry frowns that 
met him with stern looks of defiance. 

"I come/' he said, "fJrom the Prefect 
Cynegus to demand the surrender of this 
temple of the idol Serapis, and to ofier a free 
pardon to all but the ringleaders of this re- 
bellion against the great Emperor Theo- 
dositts. To all you citizens of Alexandria, 
and to ye aliens of Nubia, Arabia, and Syria, it 
is allowed to return unscourged and unfined 
to your houses; the sword of the execa-" 
tioner alone awaits the Philosopher Olympias, 
the priest Heredf, and this base traitory 
Jovius, whom I see here with his armour yet 
wet with the blood of his comrades and hid 
countrymen; one who has fallen from his 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 285 

ancient glory, and on whose wretched bead 
the great God, whose hell is even now flam- 
ing for the traitor, has lately so nearly 
sent the jast punishment of his crimes. 
Citizens of Alexandria, with what answer 
shall I return?'' 

"With this," said the priest of Serapis, 
drawing a dagger from his sleeve, and rushing 
on the daring herald. 

The hand of Jovius stopped him, and 
snatched the weapon from his hand. 

"Return," he said to the herald, "in 
safety, and tell thy master that we have armed 
for the defence of the altars of a god whom 
we loye. Go, and mutter no word of inso- 
lence, or thy head shall answer for thy 
speech." 

Slowly, like a lion before the hunters, the 
herald raised the badge of peace, and strode 
silently from the room. 

After a hasty deliberation of impassioned 
words and high resolves, the defenders again 
separated for the night — some to keep watch 



286 ICE BOUND. 

in the court and avenues of the temple; 
some to guard agidnst surprise, by bivouack* 
ing oh the terraces below ; others, by far 
the larger number, to guard the open en- 
trances of the great temple. JotIus and 
Olympias visited each post, and harangued 
the warriors on their high duty and the 
necessity of incessant care against so redoubt* 
able an enemy; while below was a hostile 
population of Christians, to whom they were 
hateful as the Bedouin is to the traveller. 
He roused their hearts by reciting the ancient 
glories of that land, which might still revive 
if they once could establish the empire of the 
old faith in their great city. Then, with 
eager step, the duties of the general dis- 
charged, Jovius sought eagerly Zoe's chamber, 
where he found her bending, like the muse of 
history ; so he whispered in her ear, over 
some papyrus-roll, whose strange characters 
her father had taught her to read, for her love 
had taught her to fill her mind with the sub- 
lime beauties of the Grecian writers. Swift flew 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 287 

the hours in the recital of the times that were 
past^ and in aspirations and fears (stifled 
kisses) for the future. 

The father sat at a distance, and looked 
with a delighted eye upon the happy lovers 
as they bent over some precious roll from the 
great library of the temple, cheek against 
cheek, the dark clusters of her hair held back 
by his gentle hand, lest they should over- 
shadow the book. Need we dilate on their 
conversation — the unchangeable, instinctive 
language of Adam's children ? — ^the same now 
in glance, and tone, and whisper, as when the 
world was still in her first fresh youth. The 
clepsydra spoke of dawn ere Jovius, led by 
an Ethiopian slave, retired to a distant cham- 
ber to snatch a few hours of sleep before the 
conflict of the day. 

It was broad noon when he awoke, for even 
in his dark chamber some ray of light stole 
in from an aperture in the roof leading to an 
upper story of the temple which overlooked 
the court-yard. By the indistinct light he 



288 ICE BOUND. 

coald see that a tablet lay beside his couch, 
which was not there when he slept. It was 
written in the Greek character, in the hand- 
writing of Olympias : ^^ Zoe is in the secret 
chamber. Touch the eye of the serpent of 
eternity. Thine Olympias." What meant it? 
Where was Olympiais, and why was Zoe im- 
mersed in the chamber of the tomb ? Had the 
fight been renewed, or was it over ? All these 
thoughts thronged in a moment through hia 
mind. His first impulse was to fly to Zoe 
and place her in a place of safety, and then 
rejoining Olympias, who was doubtless on the 
watch, to resume the guidance of the conflict. 
But a dreadful foreboding seemed to quench 
the rising terror of his heart. All was dim, 
and no torch was there ; how could he find 
his way through the dark passages? A rum- 
bling overhead: it was as of some one attempt- 
ing to descend into the chamber from the roof 
above. Silently he crouched in a dark comer 
as a black figure, which he recognised as that of 
the negro of the night before, holding a torch be- 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 289 

tween its teeth, clambered down the aperture, 
and fell light as a cat upon the rocky floor 
beneath. In a moment the young Greek had 
seized his torch and half-strangled him in his 
grasp. A bare sacrificial knife fell fipom the 
belt of his short tunic. 

"Spare me, noble sir!'' he cried, half- 
throttled, in the beseeching voice of one more 
dead than alive with terror at the suddenness 
and vigour of the attack — " and I will tell 
thee all. It was Heredf who sent me hither 
to assassinate thee, for thou art suspected by 
the garrison of indifference to the cause, and 
art even Mnted at as a base spy of the 
Eoman prefect. So he told me when he gave 
this knife into my hand.*' 

"Wretched caitiff!'' said the Greek, "I 
would kill thee at a blow were thy life not 
serviceable to one nobler than thyself. Art 
thou acquainted with all the dense labyrinth 
of the temple's passages? " 

"I am," said the Ethiopian. "I have 
tended the altar of Serapis for thirty years, 

VOL. IIL u 



290 ICE BOUND. 

and know every chamber here as well as thou 
dost the streets of Athens/' 

'^ Lead me then at once to the secret en- 
trance of the city of tombs, whose portal is 
known to few. On this condition alone 
I save thy life — attempt flight, and thou 
diest/' 

With quick step the negro ledthe way through 
the dim avenues, some of which he remem- 
bered to have trod the preceding evening, the 
horrible laughter of his guide still echoing on- 
ward against the rock, and contrasting strangely 
with that place of death. Still in the silent 
chambers sat the imperturbable statues, though 
some of the lamps which burnt the preceding 
evening before their shrines had gone out, as 
if some great convulsion had delayed the usual 
attendance of the priests. Blending with the 
scenes of yesterday, a deep melancholy then 
hung over the mind of Jovius. In vain he en- 
deavoured to learn from the Ethiopian how the 
war went on without. " He knew not,'' he 
said, '^ but he had heard that the legionaries, 



THE TEMPLE OF SEKAPIS. 291 

attempting to surprise the temple at daybreak, 
hajd slain some sleeping Arabs, but had been 
beaten back with great loss, and driven 
through the streets to their tents in the 
Forum." The heart of Jovius glowed 
within him at the tidings, but he had no 
time for reflection, for at the moment the 
Ethiopian stopped suddenly, and exclaimed : 

'' We are now at the farthest limits of the 
temple: the entrance to the Necropolis is 
known but to the chosen/' 

'^ I have a roll which tells me more,'' said 
Jovius, opening the papyrus, as he entered a 
small niche in the rock, richly decorated with 
hieroglyphics, conspicuous among which was 
the serpent, the emblem of eternity. Taking 
the torch from the hand of the negro, he bent 
down before it, and obeyed the injunction of 
the philosopher. In an instant a stone rolled 
back and disclosed an aperture, through 
which he leapt, amid the horrid laughter of 
the negro, which rang in his ears like the 
rejoicing of the fiends. Quicker than thought, 

u2 



292 ICE BOUND. 

a sword descended upon his casque; he 
fell heavily on the floor of the cave, and an 
armed hand seized his sword. As it flew 
from his grasp, a peal of fierce merriment 
from a well-known voice rang in. his ears. He 
looked up. Could that be Carmac, his old 
British comrade of the Lion legion? It 
was. 

"Why, Jovius,'' he cried, in had Greek, 
"whither so fast? First running like a 
thief from the brave Lion legion and those 
with whom thou hast lived and fought so long, 
and now running from the Egyptian dogs all in 
stealth. Why, man, thy neck here is not worth 
an obole, and thy head, thou knowest, is worth 
more than that outside. Thou art betrayed. 
Olympias, who cheated thee into a rebel, has 
fallen in a sally. Suspected by thy friends, 
he rushed forth this morning at the head of a 
band of mad priests, and fell fighting. ^ His 
wounds were all before. But come, thou art my 
prisoner, good Jovius. Come, grasp my hand, 
for I have much to tell thee. Look not so 



THE TEMPLE OF SERAPIS. 293 

fierce, man, for I have some in ambuscade thou 
knowest not of. Gallus ! " he shouted down 
the dark passage beyond. A dozen armed 
heads presented themselves from the dark 
vault beside him, and withdrew. " Thou art 
foully wronged,'' he continued; ^' thou hast fled, 
Jovius, from the roguish Christians to liars and 
murderers among the Pagans. There are 
traitors within thy camp; the trembling 
merchant Hebon, and the cowardly . priest 
Heredf, told the prefect of this secret entrance 
— but the death of Olympias, who alone 
knew the secret of its opening, has kept me 
here panting for action since the daybreak ; 
'twas this priest who sent that grinning 
Ethiopian yonder to shorten thy days before 
thy time. But now let us on silently, for all 
the defenders are at the entrance, and we 
shall take them in the rear, and catch them 
like a wolf in a pitfall." 

Hastily Jovius told his tale, and the 
motives which had led him to forsake the 
service of the emperor. 



294 ICE BOUND. 

"Thy philosopher lied/' said the Briton, 
laughingly. " None knew of thy flight till 
the orders came for the embarkation hither ; 
it was a secret messenger from a monk told us 
that thou hadst been seen in the temple with 
the cursed Greek." 

" Undone !'' groaned Jovius ; " on all sides 
lost. But despair is left, and death." 

"Think not of it so bitterly," said the 
Briton, merrily ; " but now" let us march. 
Thou grinning black imp, carry the torch in 
the van, and lead us on to the shrine of the 
great idol through these rabbit paths." 

Silently, with cautious tread, they wound 
through the long passage, till they reached 
the very sanctuary of the god. 

" Behold the idol Serapis!" cried the Briton ; 
and rushing forward he tore down the purple 
hangings that hid the niche in which it stood. 
Its colossal and silent majesty for a moment 
arrested the hand of the spoiler. Like the 
Jupiter of Phidias, its giant limbs were 
sheathed in plates of gold. It s&t on a 



THE TEMPLB OF SERAPIS. 295 

golden throne encrusted with countless jewels, 
blazing in light, while in his right hand he 
held a sceptre, in the place of the flaming 
thunderbolt of the Grecian god, in its left it 
held a monster, with the head of a serpent 
and the heads of a dog, and a lion, and a 
wolf. The superstitious Greek trembled 
before its serene majesty, for he had heard 
that, if a polluted hand violated the majesty 
of the god, heaven and earth would sink back 
to chaos. 

" Foul idol ! *' said the Briton, careless of 
his fears, upheaving his battle-axe and pois- 
ing it for the blow, "may the God of the 
Christians nerve my arm against the demons 
of hell and^ the realms of darkness!'' He 
struck, and the giant head of the idol fell, 
with a dull metallic sound, to the earth, dis- 
closing springs and pipes that led from a small 
cavity within its gigantic body to a chamber 
behind the shrine. 

"Such are the gods of Egypt," he cried to 
Jovius, as the shouts of his party rang 



296 ICE BOUND. 

through the air, and the Eomans rushed forth to 
attack the guards of the entrance, whom the 
sound of the blow had attracted. The warm- 
hearted Briton tarried for a moment behind 
ere he rushed to the charge. 

"Jovius/' he said, grasping warmly the 
hand of the Greek, " I pity thee from my 
heart. Thou art ignorant of the true gods, 
and the false deities whom thou didst worship 
have now proved as helpless as the friends thou 
didst trust. Before to-morrow this fair temple 
will be a heap of defaced ruins. Its treasures 
shall be pillaged and the cross planted in its 
place. Now, fare thee well. Away to some 
place of safety. Take ship from the port 
below, and hie thee to Syria. Venture among 
our legionaries, and thy life were not worth 
a moment's purchase. I have much camp 
news to tell thee, specially of the fat tribune 
Nicias, and of how we kept a sallow Egyptian 
for six months on the flesh of the holy cats — 
tales that would kill a mummy with laughter, 
and rouse thee, wert thou going to run the 



THE TEMPLE OF SEBAPIS. 297 

gauntlet the next moment through the ranks 
of thy own old legion. Farewell/' 

Again he grasped his hand warmly; and 
then poising his redoubted axe, the light- 
hearted and brave Briton rushed to join the 
battle, the sounds of which rang fearfully, 
mingled with shrieks and shouts, from with- 
out. 

For but an instant Jovius stood gazing at the 
last shivered monument of a fallen religion — 
fit emblem of his hopes ; then hastily grasp- 
ing a torch which a soldier had left on the 
altar, he rushed in quest of Zoe. His eye 
shone with some dreadful resolve. He 
searched in vain. The shouts grew nearer 
— ^it seemed as if the idolaters were driven 
back and were flying to the interior of the 
temple. The time might yet be too short. 
Swifter he flew — swift as when a boy he 
bounded over the plain of the Ilissus. Again 
he rushed through the secret opening, now 
for ever disclosed, for a soldier had wrenched 



298 ICE BOUND. 

the covering from the fastenings and dashed 
the statue to pieces. 

A light approached ; a lamp. It was Zoe^ 
her hair dishevelled, and her robe thrown 
hastily over her head; then flew weeping into 
his arms. 

'* Oh, Jovius 1 *' she cried, " where is my 
father ? What tidings from without ? " 

" Olympias is well — h^ is at rest." 

" Glare not so dreadfully," cried Zoe. 
" What mean thy words ? " Then she clung 
passionately to her lover, and gazed into his 
frenzied eyes. 

" Let us hasten," he said, " to the distant 
chamber by the beach." 

They gained it. With hasty hands he 
formed a pile of dry mummy-cases. 

** I hear steps," she cried ; " we are lost. 
Oh, Serapis, save us ! Oh, Thoth, ruler 
of heaven, hear us ! " And again she clung 
to her lover. 

He threw her on the pile ; then firing it 
with his torch, and blowing the flames that 



THE TEMPLE OF SBRAPIS. 299 

communicated with dreadful rapidity to the 
inflammable wood and linen^ he leapt beside 
her and clasped her in his arms. 

" Kneph, save us ! '' she cried. 

" We go together to the Elysian fields/' he 
said. "0 Zeus, where are thy thunder- 
bolts?" he cried, as the fierce tongues of 
flame shot up fiercer, and Zoe fell insensible 
into his scorched arms. 

The morrow dawned upon a pile of blood- 
stained ruins ; the Temple of Serapis, the last 
stronghold of Paganism, had fallen for ever ; 
the creed of Osiris and Isis had on that night 
faded from the land of the Nile, like the va- 
pours of the marsh that pass away from the 
sun's face. In vain the trembling Pagans 
trusted that the angry God would retard the 
rising inundation, and that famine might de- 
stroy the rejoicing Christians, though they pe- 
rished beside them. But slowly the calm Nile 
rose and fertilised its subject land, insensible 
to the voice of human passion. The very 
ruins of the temple were destroyed, in spite, 



300 ICE BOUND. 

as the monks affirmed, of the exertions of a 
hlack demon, who attempted to hinder all the 
effi)rts of the workmen. 

The machinery by which the priesthood 
had for centuries imposed on the credulity of 
an ignorant people was exposed to the light 
of day. Dark vaults were broken open, and 
skeletons of the victims of priestly vengeance 
were discovered. The secret entrance from 
the shore into the Necropolis was diligently ex- 
plored by the express orders of the prefect, who, 
however, took care not to trust his own per- 
fumed body within its dark chambers. Crowds 
of suddenly converted Pagans emulated the 
most fanatic monks in defacing the hierogly- * 
phics and the rich sculpture of the vaults. 
The serpent of eternity was peculiarly obnox- 
ious to the Christians, for they set it down at 
once as the emblem of the old serpent the 
devil; while the cow of Isis, as resembling the 
golden calf that led the Jews to sin, was crushed 
beneath the blows of the zealous destroyers. 

The most ardent proselyte felt an increased 



THE TEMPLE OP 8EEAPIS. 301 

glow of attachment to the new faith when he 
saw the unsunned treasures of the priests 
glowing beneath the light of a thousand wav- 
ing torches. The poorest slave in Alexandria 
wore, for a time, the embroidered vestments of 
priest and king; while jewels lay in the streets 
that night as plentiful as pebbles on the shore. 
But one thing was beyoiid explanation by 
the most penetrating. In a small chamber 
of the Necropolis they found some human 
bones lying amid a half-burnt pile, and still 
smoking. 

The cruelties shown to the prisoners by the 
Alexandrians was terribly retaliated upon the 
Egyptian heads; those that were not slain fight- 
ing desperately, hemmed in by enemies, were 
cruelly tortured and thrown into the sea. Of 
Jovius and Zoe, the beautiful daughter of the 
Grecian philosopher, nothing could be heard. 
A reward of ten pounds of gold was oflFered in 
vain throughout Syria for their arrest, and the 
remembrance of them soon died away. The 
British chieftain rose to distinction, and was 



302 ICE BOIIND. 

killed in the Hnnnish wars ; and the prefect 
Cjnegus was slain soon after in an insurrec- 
tion of a Syrian legion which mutinied in 
despair of escape from the oppression of its 
petty tyrant. 



303 



THE RETURN. 

On the 1st of March, Mr. Parkins, purser, 
going into the crow's-nest, observed a lane of 
clear water, narrow, and not altogether con- 
tinuous, spreading in the offing. The crack 
commenced at " White Reef,*' as the sailors 
called a certain huge berg; but the ice at 
the entrance of Hooper's Bay still remained 
firm and unflawed. 

It was not till the 2nd of March that 
clear symptoms of milder weather presented 
themselves. Siderfin observed, half an hour 
before sunrise on that day, the red light 
brighter near the south-eastern horizon, and 
there a column of light was also visible above 
the sun. The snow to the south-west began to 



304 ICE BOUND. 

glaze, a thick mist came on, and in the eren- 
ing the breeze freshened from the southward, 
sending up the thermometer a hair's 
breadth. 

On Tuesday, the 7th, the snow on the 
black paint of the ship's stem, which faced 
the south, slightly thawed; while the snow 
on the yellow paint, to the north, remained 
still hard. On the same day a snow drift on 
land, seized by the wind, blew up in columns 
a hundred feet high. 

I need not relate how, gradually and 
gradually, the openings in the ice widened 
and let us forth free. 

I think the 11th was our most dangerous 
day, for we were sailing among huge icebergs, 
and loose heavy fragments, on which the ship 
frequently struck with a heavy shock. Some- 
times the weather was so thick with snow 
that we made small progress, and could hear 
the bears growling upon the passing bergs. 
Seals, ivory gulls, and the little auk were now 
growing more numerous. 



THE RETUBN. SOS 

On the 21st| however, we sounded in two 
hundred fathoms, and were reassured of sand 
and shell, which gave us hopes ; but on the 
following day, instead of getting in with the 
coast at about the latitude of Mount Baleigb, 
we came however to a compact and im- 
penetrable body, I may say phalanx, of ice, 
over which we could not see any dear water 
from the mast-head. 

Soon after noon on the 24th we crossed at 
last the Arctic Circle, having been within it 
five months and three weeks. At noon on 
the 25th we reached the latitude of 
66"" 13' IV, being two miles and three 
quarters to the southward of the dead 
reckoning. 

On the 26th of September we stood to the 
westward again ; and finding the packed ice 
exteilding everywhere, and precluding all hope 
of further examining the coast. Captain Beaver 
determined, the state of the ice being so un- 
favourable, to now make the best of his way 
to England. The boats were therefore hoisted 

VOL. m. X 



d06 ICE BOUND. 

in — ^the fihip made snug while in smooth 
water under the lee of the ice, and a coarse 
was then shaped to the E.S.E., in order to 
ohtm an offing before bearing awaj to the 
^uthward. 

On the 14th of October our bowsprit was 
^rried away close to the gammoning. The 
foremast followed it over side, but we soon 
got up a jury-mast, and on the 26th (after* 
lioon) struck soundings in seventy fathoms — 
coarse sand and broken sheU — sure signs of 
pearing land. 

3i»nday, the 29th, we arrived at Hull. 



THE END. 

