
CHAPTER I. 

THE ARRIVAL OF THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 

THE train was ten minutes late. 
The porters kept looking Plymouth way, 
and Truro way, but it did not seem to hurry the 
train the least. As for the station-master, he had 
grown a little anxious, and was bullying the tele- 
graph boy, in order to conceal his anxiety; but 
that did not do much good either. 

An expectant Cornish town was represented 
simply by two fat hotel " touts" and one lean 'bus 
conductor, who were watching outside, with chins 
uncomfortably spiked on the wooden paling of the 
station, for visitors. 

Round at last, however, went the scarlet target 
signal, and in roared and raced the dilatory and 
fussy train. A great puff of exulting white vapour 
burst from the engine funnel — the myriad wheels 
slackened — ^the buffers beat together and re- 
bounded — the stoker lifted up his brass-bound cap, 
wiped his grimy brow, and nodded to a friendly 
porter — a dozen door handles turned simultane- 
ously, and out leaped the irrestrainable passengers. 

There was a shout running down the platform 

VOL. L B 



2 GREATHEART. 

of *^ Bodm'arod !" The shout was meant to sig- 
nify to strangers that they had arrived at Bod- 
min-Road Station. In rushed three wild 'bus con- 
ductors, who shouldered trunks, and turned them- 
selves into moving Atlases of luggage — up dashed 
two porters' trucks with half-intreating, half-im- 
perious " by your leaves." Tickets were given up 
at the gate, and off dashed the three omnibi, proud- 
ly triumphant, in a clumsy wa}'^ about their im- 
mured victims— off dashed the smarter and more 
youthful dog-carts — off drumbled Lord Rose- 
trevor's great yellow barouche. In less than ten 
minutes the station had relapsed into silence ; the 
impetuous train was half-way to Lostwithiel, and 
the station-master had gone to dinner. 

The 'buses had long since unloaded at their 
several hotels ; the bustling and important com- 
mercial gentlemen, imported by those 'buses to 
spread civilization and cotton goods through the 
furthest west, were snugly settled down ; lun- 
cheon and all the excitement of the arrival of the 
11*42 had, in fact, entirely subsided along the 
whole way from the station to the town, when a 
short thickset man, in a blue Flushing jacket, 
adorned with unnecessarily large black horn buttons, 
came tramping sturdily along the last turning lead- 
ing into the town, an unnecessarily big oak stick 
in one hand, and a strikingly small dingy carpet 
bag in the other. There was an honest weather- 
beaten, sturdy, simple-hearted look about the face 
of the latest arrival, and a slight roll about his 



ARRIVAX or THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 3 

i¥alk, that indicated the man who had so long lived 
on a fluid and variable element, that he could 
scarcely yet persuade himself that the earth was 
bond Jidej and solid, and to whom even yet dry 
land was scarcely entirely familiar. 

Bodmin is a tolerably large town, but still it is 
not so infested by travellers as to be devoid of all 
curiosity about a stranger, so it was, however, that 
a flock of geese stopped feeding off the roadside 
grass as the new arrival paused to scratch a fusee on 
the coping stone of a low wall, to relight the contents 
of a short blackened briar-root pipe, and followed 
him, strutting, hissing, and cackling, as if they had 
suspected him of being a poulterer, on a tour of 
inspection, and were determined to expose him. 
At the same moment, too, some rough Cornish 
boys stopped their battle with stones, and stared 
and grinned at the Gentile who had presumed to 
be born out of Bodmin. 

One bright-eyed rascal indeed went so far as to 
shout, with a bursting laugh, 

" Gooze seems to knaw him !" 

^^ Hurrah ! Gooze seems to knaw him I Hur- 
rah !" shouted his parasites and imitators, the 
younger boys. 

The stranger's grey eyes kindled with fun, as 
he stopped, smiled at the boys, took off his wide- 
awake to the leading gander, and said, 

" Good-bye, messmate ; hope to meet you 
again at Michaelmas. What's the best place, you 
boy, to hire a trap in Bodmin ?" 

B 2 



4 



4 GREATHEART. 

The boy happened to be an hostler s son. The 
sound of the word " trap " fired his blood. 

'^Show you, sir," said Master Beswetherick 
smartly. " The Royal, sir — this way, sir. A big 
house, with the gateway ; on the right, sir, as you 
go into the town." 

" How f ar's Camelf ord from here ?" 

*^ Don't know ; may be forty mile." 

Forty mile was the boy's way of putting an un- 
known quantity. He had the true Cornish blood 
in him, and was not going to affect ignorance to a 
man born out of Bodmin. 

" Forty be hanged I Belay there, boy ! When 
you can't answer a question, say so, then you'll 
grow up a man — now mind my words. Forty 
mile be hanged I" 

The boy coloured, and slunk back to his play. 

"All I know is, it is thirty from Craddock 
Moor, and father says Craddock Moor is ^" 

" Pshaw !" said the stranger, puffing at his pipe ; 
"a swab like you doesn't know what a mile is! 
Here's a penny for you. Don't buy those buttons 
on paper. I never allow my boys to buy them ; 
ain't wholesome — painted I" 

While the lad was still showing this heaven-sent 
penny to his retainers, the stranger strode away. 

" That's a rum un," said the boy, looking after 
him ; " but he's a good un." And the lad was 
not far wrong. 

Five minutes more brought the sturdy pedes- 
trian (as guide-books call travellers on foot) to 



ABRIVAL OF THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 5 

the archway of the Royal Hotel. He entered 
the commercial -room, where luncheon was still 
raging furiously, and rang the bell for a biscuit 
and a glass of ale. 

" Luncheon, sir ? — cold meat, sir ?" said a bold- 
eyed girl of the coarser Cornish type, who an- 
swered the bell ; " very good ham." 

" Avast heaving there, gurl," said the traveller, 
testily, but quite unconcerned about the staring 
commercial gentlemen who, not being themselves 
original, were astonished at originality ; " I asked 
for a biscuit and a glass of ale. Do you people in 
Cornwall always ask to go forward when you mean 
to go astern ? When I want ham, you may be 
sure ril ask for ham — I'm not bashful." 

"No, I'm sure!'' said the girl, under breath, and 
flounced out of the room. 

"Excuse me, sir," said a stout, blustering, 
Manchester man, in a white waistcoat, rising with 
a vulgar bow, and staring hard at the stranger's 
pipe, "but the law of our commercial rooms is never 
to allow smoking before nine o'clock at night — 
you'll excuse me, sir, but such is the rule of us 
commercial gentlemen." 

" Then all I can say, it's an infernal bad rule," 
replied the irascible stranger addressed ; " and the 
sooner it's altered the better. But if it's the law 
of the mess not to smoke before so many bells, out 
he goes ; and to prevent your being pained by my 
putting the hatch on before the cargo's out, let me 
inform you the pipe's just finished." 



6 GREATHEART. 

Messrs. Binns, Bags, Snip, Snap, and Co., in- 
dignant at an irony of which they caught only 
a glimmer, but still an irritating glimmer, scowled 
at the unconscious intruder; and in order to 
ignore him, commenced a noisy conversation about 
a certain bay mare that one Frip of Bristol had 
just bought " for nothing " at Truro ; really one 
of the " cleverest things " in the west of England, 
as all allowed. 

The stranger, in the meantime, heedless, as 
Gallio, did battle with the bread and cheese, and, 
to use the language of despatches, " covered him- 
self with glory." 

*^ If you please, sir," said the boots, a tall, thin 
fellow, in a black serge-sleeved waistcoat, who 
suddenly appeared at the door unsummoned, 
"there are two gentlemen upstairs going to 
Camelford in our waggonette, if you'd like to join 
them." 

" Waggon ! — what I — ay, ay, man, say happy to 
join them." 

" All right, sir — ^it'll be round in five minutes. 
Luggage, sir ?" 

" Carry it in my pocket." 

" All right, sir — ready in five minutes, sir." 

With a boots everything is " all right." They 
are so accustomed to use this expression to the 
coachman, when they go out to punch the near 
leader in the side, twitch off the horse-cloth, and 
see the land-ship roll off upon its road. It is 
not for a boots to laugh at jokes that " the gen- 



ARRIVAL OF THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 7 

tlemen " may possibly not intend, so the boots 
only pulled his forelock, looked very hard at a bust 
of Shakespeare on the mantelpiece, scraped one 
foot, as if he was a horse, and disappeared. 

The stranger rose, rang the bell loudly, and 
though a frugal, and naturally an unostentatious 
man, not to mention an old traveller, gave the 
pert waiting-maid twopence, no doubt in order to 
prove to her that he was a gentleman of property, 
and as liberal as any commercial traveller in Eng- 
land. He then, with a "good morning, gentle- 
men," left the room, and strolled to the door of 
the inn, to wait for the waggonette. Two trunks 
already stood under the archway, like two obelisks. 
One of them was a black one, stamped with a red 
diamond. The stranger patted this special valise 
twice, approvingly, as much as to say, "Sharp 
fellow this — any one can find his sheep by this 
bradd all over the market." 

At the post-oflSce, opposite the Royal Hotel, 
stood two young-looking pedestrian tourists, pro- 
bably lawyers' clerks — retiring, modest fellows, 
with no opinion of themselves at all. They wore 
wide-awakes, adorned with turkey feathers and 
sprigs of heather flowers ; they carried tremendous 
spiral sticks, that looked like the petrified snakes on 
the caducous of Mercury. In striking and rather 
theatrical attitudes, but without the least desire to 
strike awe and wonder into the minds of the 
Bodmin people, those puny overcomers of dangers 



8 GREATHEART. 

by land and sea, like two young Hercules, stood 
waiting for letters. 

At that moment, unluckily, Master Beswetherick 
happened to stroll by, sucking one of those dele- 
terious striped sticks of sweatmeat so quaintly and 
playfully denominated, probably during the old 
French War, "The Ribs of Bonaparte," and 
catching sight of the daring tourists, remained 
with his back to a saddler^s window, transfixed 
with a half-contemptuous wonder. 

The stranger, who happened singularly enough 
at the same moment to be looking in the saddler's 
window, with his back to the tourists, touched the 
boy on the shoulder. He held a penny in one 
hand — his retaining the penny implied that he 
required some preliminary service to be done for 
the penny. 

The boy^s eyes glistened at the discovery of this 
second vein of copper. * 

" Go and ask those gentlemen opposite " — (this 
was said in a low voice) — 

" What, yon buffleheads with the curly sticks ?" 

" Yes ; go and ask them when the wild beast 
show's coming into the town, and here's the penny 
for going." 

No Cornish Knight of King Arthur's Kound 
Table ever leaped forward more eagerly at the 
news of a fresh dragon to be hunted down, than 
did Master Beswetherick. 

In a moment he was across the street ; in a 
moment more he was dashing at a tip-top pace 



ABRIVAL OF THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO, 9 

do^ a side archway, to escape the frothing wrath 
and the upraised serpent sticks of the enraged 
cockney tourists ; who, however, as if some good 
genius had suddenly held a mirror to their eyes a 
moment after, pulled the ridiculous feathers and 
heather from their caps, as if ashamed at an as- ^ 
sumption well enough in the Tyrol or at the 
Finsteraarhom, but here ridiculous. 

The stranger did not laugh, but a sort of phos- 
phorescent sparkle was for a moment visible in the 
centre of his greenish grey eyes. 

" It will do my young customers no harm," he 
thought to himself; "and if I have taught my 
two young messmates that they were making 
precious tom-fools of themselves, I haven't thrown 
away my penny." 

Presently out trundled the waggonette, and 
soon after the two travellers appeared — they 
were two young Middle-Temple men, sucking 
barristers, shortly to be called ; nice, hearty, clever 
fellows, but a little cold and assuming (a fault 
Time, in his own rough way, very soon cures). 
The elder one, a square, stalwart, ugly fellow, with 
red hair and a big beard, wore spectacles, and 
their repelling glitter gave a supercilious air to 
his broad coarse face. The other was handsome, 
and had soft brown hair, and a bland manner, and 
was more obliging, talkative, and sociable. 

The Templars were full of the grand scenery 
about the Lizard, which they had just visited. 
The younger, who was poetical, and knew it. 



10 GREATHEART. 

discoursed well of the great rocks that, seen 
through the green shallow water, looked like rough 
blocks of emerald; of the sea spray scattering in 
white dust; of the black chasms hungering for 
wrecks ; of the little bays floored with the whitest 
sand, and strewn with drift-wood. Then, all at 
once, the eldest, as if inspired, stood up in the 
carriage, and, with a fine robust voice, spouted 
those fine sonorous lines of Tennyson's manly 
epic fragment, relating how King Arthur, when 
a child, was found on the Cornish shore among 
the wet, black boulders, having been miraculously 
sent to govern Lyonnesse. 

The lines the Templar spouted run thus, and 
they rather startled the driver : 

" Bom after tempest, when the long wave broke 
All down the thundering shores of Bude and Boss, 
They found a naked child upon the sands 
Of wild Dundagil, by the Cornish sea, 
And that was Arthur." 

"And yet," said the younger, "you go and 
compare a man who could write such Homeric 
lines as those with Browning — Browning! — a 
man " (here the Templar, as young barristers are 
apt to do — ^I suppose for practice — assumed a 
withering and Demosthenic air) "whose style is 
as thorny as a furze bush, and rough as verjuice ; 
who is as proud of his own affectations as a hermit 
is of his vermin. Why, you duffer, how can you 
be such a fool as to throw away a melting peach, 
and gnaw a sour crab-apple I The man who 



ARRIVAL OF THE BLEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 11 

would prefer Browning to Tennyson, would leave 
the nectar of the Gods, and feed on carrion." 

*^ And now, perhaps, as you're out of breath," 
said the other, biting the end off a fresh cigar, 
"you'll allow me to observe, Powis, that your 
metaphors I've met afore, and that your argu- 
ments are new, but bosh. Who can live for ever 
on blancmange and cheesecakes? Would not 
one sooner take even to horse-flesh ? I'm tired of 
lines filed down till they have no bur or sharpness 
about them, I'm tired of Locksley Hall, and the 
stagy outlaw, tired of second-hand metaphysics in 
verse, tired of vigour and robustness for ever sacri- 
ficed to harmony and lady-like mannerism. No, 
give me 

" Marching along ; twenty score strong, 
Great-hearted gentlemen, singing one song ;^^ 

or that tremendous and dashing ride, 'To bring the 
good news to Aix.' That's the stuff, O'Brien. 
There's 'robur et ces triplex^ there. Let Browning 
write a little more plain and musically, as he well 
can, and he'll bang Banagher, I tell ye." 

*' Very well, then, we'll appeal to an impartial 
arbitrator," replied Powis, turning sharply round 
on the stranger. "Now, sir, let me ask you, in 
your candid opinion, which of the two (Tennyson 
or Browning) is considered, by the world in 
general, as the greatest poet ?" 

"But I disagree," shouted O'Brien, who was 
a choleric disputer. " I disagree. I won't have 



12 GREATHEART. 

it, Powis. What does popularity show? Tomkins 
is popular in verse, so used Bodger to be in prose, 
so is Browser as a novelist. Time alone, I say, 
gives the true verdict. 

" Nonsense ! be quiet, old man. I come here to 
an intelligent member representing the English 
people, and I ask him this great question — ^^ 

"May I ask what is the question?" said the 
innocent arbitrator. 

" Is Tennyson or Browning considered by the 
bulk of the people as the greatest living English 
poet ? I think that's putting it properly, O'Brien," 
said Powis, hot with enthusiasm. 

O'Brien ungraciously yielded, so far as to con- 
fess that it was what he slangily called " tol-lol." 

The stranger looked down, rubbed his long 
chin, punched the side of the trap with his 
big stick ; then looked up and said, very gravely : 

"I never heard of Tinnyson — unless he was 
any relation to a captain of one of Green's vessels 
I once knew at Singapoor ; and as for Browning — 
to tell you the plain, downright truth, gentlemen, 
except the Bible, I never read but two books, and 
they were ^Pilgrim's Progress' and ^Robinson 
Crusoe.' Yes, I forgot, I believe I once began 
^ Peter Simple ;' but I never got through it, for 
we were wrecked ofif the Malabar coast before 
I'd finished the third chapter." 

The two Temple-men looked at each other for 
a moment, and then broke into a hearty laugh. 
It was the old story— ^men of a clique discovering 



ARRIVAL OF THE ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 13 

that the great outside work-a-day world cares for 
few of the topics that engross them. 

"You've read the Book of Nature, I'm sure, 
and that's the best book !" said Powis, pleasantly. 

" Well, I've travelled, young men, and I sup- 
pose I know a jib-boom from a foretop gallant- 
sail," said the stranger, receiving the compliment 
graciously. " But — God bless me ! — this is a wild 
country I" 

He was right this time — it had grown rather 
wild. No soft green Dorsetshire meadows, dap- 
pled red with sleeping cattle — no bonny Devon- 
shire orchards, billowing with blossom, rosettes of 
red and white — no winding lover's lanes, arched 
with wild roses — no soft air, warm with the breath 
of the gulf stream. No, this was a sterner and 
more masculine region, rough with honeycombed 
granite blocks, and lashed with Atlantic storms — a 
region of haunted moorland and lonely crag, of 
mine and marshy waste. 

Yes, the country /uzd changed, as if by enchant- 
ment. The green, wooded, sloping braes that 
shoulder round Bodmin on the Launceston side 
(the young oak tree boughs as close as a beaver's 
fur) had turned to a wizard-smitten mass of moor- 
land ; here rusty with withering fern, there spotted 
golden with the blossom of the furze. It was no 
longer England ; it was the home of some Celtic 
tribe — it was Wales, it was Brittany. 

Powis was in raptures, O'Brien was cynical and 
politico-economical . 



14 GREATHEART. 

Powis rhapsodised. 

"By George r he cried, *' isn't it like the 
country Balzac describes in his first novel ^Les 
Chouans.' Look at the old broken stone crosses 
at every turning, the deep sunken roads, walled in 
with huge rampart banks of stone and turf. The 
churches, too, named after saints, too, unknown 
elsewhere — Saint Advent, Saint Breward, Saint 
Teath, Saint Juliot, Saint Just, Saint Ives." 

" A century behind the rest of England," said 
O'Brien. " Every cottage a hotbed for fever, 
births unduly predominating over marriages, 
the people's manners rude, surly, and overbearing. 
By-the-bye, I wonder, Powis, if Saint Teath was 
dentist to King Arthur." 

" A vaunt, miserable and bumptious materialist 1" 
laughed forth the gushing and irrepressible Powis. 
" Keep your chaff for your next call party or the 
' wine ' some fool spendthrift asks thee to. Look 
at the miles of barren moorland rolling away 
till their waves unite and break forth in those 
twin mountains." 

"Brown- Willy and Rowtor," said the driver 
(who was no less a personage than Mr. Beswethe- 
rick, senior), pointing with the butt-end of his 
whip, thinking he had been asked, and hearing 
something said about mountains. 

" 1 wonder what wages are here ?" said O'Brien. 

" Bad enough, sir," said the driver, shifting his 
pipe with a sour grin. 



ARRIVAL OF THK ELEVEN-FORTY-TWO. 1 5 

"Any grouse on these moors, driver?" inquired 
Powis, 

Mr. Beswetherick shook his head slowly. The 
fact was, he did not know exactly what a grouse 
was. 

" Plenty of peal and trout in the Camel River 
down yonder, gentlemen ; water's been so low this 
year, some of my brothers have caught them in 
their hands. Worth sixpence a pound in Bod- 
mm. 

" What's that wild valley down there, with the 
tall rocks, called ?" asked the stranger, who had 
been brooding in silence. 

Beswetherick's eyes brightened as he pulled up 
his horses. 

'^ That's the famous Devil's Jump, gentlemen. 
You must take a good look at that — that's one of 
our Cornish sights." 

It was a stony and wooded valley intersecting 
the moor, torn apart as if by a flood, and evidently 
the lurking-place of a mountain stream. In one 
place it was walled in by two blanched ghostly 
rocks, which cropped out like ruined towers, fifty 
feet or so above the bed of the stream. Between 
them yawned a dark chasm, certainly beyond any- 
one's power to leap, except he was the devil or his 
very near relation. 

"There, gentlemen — they say the devil took 
his last jump, when he left Cornwall — and not a 
bad jump either." 

" I suppose his majesty left Cornwall to avoid 



1 6 GREATHEAKT. 

beincr put into a pie. They say the Devonshire 
and Cornish people put everything in a pie," said 
Powis lauffhing. 

They all lauffhed at this. 

In half an hour more the waggonette reached 
Caniclfoni Inn. The stranger and the Temple- 
men here parted ; they to go to Tintagel, he to 
push on fourteen miles more along the coast to 
Tolpedden, his ultimate destination. 

When the two dog-carts were out of sight of 
each other, Powis said to Mr. Beswetherick, who 
was now driving a fresh horse, 

" What do you think, driver, of that gentleman 
we just put down at Camelford?" 

Beswetherick puffed at his pipe for a moment 
or two, till the top layer of bird's-eye grew a fiery 
scarlet, then he turned his head slowly round, and 
replied solemnly — 

*' What do i think, sir? Why, I think he do 
know tinr 

" What the devil does the fellow mean ?" said 
Powis to his friend. 

"Mean?" said O'Brien, "why, it means that our 
driver thinks old aquamarine was a very sharp 
fellow. It's a favourite miner's sayinff.' 






IT GETS RATHER DARK. 17 



CHAPTER II. 

IT GETS RATHER DARK. 

THE country was wild ; the stone and turf walls 
that took the place of hedges were battlemented 
with slanting slates, to keep out the goats and the 
sheep. The stiles were not swinging wooden gates, 
but slabs of slate or granite. The cottages, square 
and massy, and all of whitewashed stone, stood few 
and far between. Here and there on the desolate 
horizon of moorland arose the gaunt ruined chim* 
ney of some deserted mine, or far away, to the 
right or left, on some f urzy slope, grew the appa- 
rently isolated grey fortress of a church tower. 
Broad tracts of grass bordered the roads, now and 
then only was there a plot of plough land visible. The 
small hayricks had their thatch bound sternly down 
with lines of straw cording, weighted with lumps 
of stone. 

All of a sudden the new driver pulled up his 
horse at the door of a village inn glorying in the 
eccentric name of "The Indian Queen," and 
hailed the driver of a large covered van, who 
stood at the door drinking a glass of amber-coloured 
ale. 

" Why, Rozzy (Cornish for Erasmus), my dear 
man, what traad have 'em there, mate ?" pointing 
at the van. 

" I've a ben to Bodmin church town," replied 

VOL. I. C 






^ 



18 GREATHHABT. 

Rozzy, ^^ for a pack of stew-pans, and skillets, and 
kitchen stuff, for that London ^ntleman that's 
come to Donchine — ^you'll meet two wagons full 
of coals ahead— ^they're for him, too. Augh ! he 
levs like a fighting-cock, I tell ee', Jan. You'll 
come up with un before you get to Four Hole 
Cross. Whatever's good by land or sea, he wool 
have — he wool." 

This is, I fairly confess, a very faint sketch of 
the Cornish dialect ; but I do not wish to vex my 
readers with any pedantic display of what, if 
thoroughly done, would be only, after all, unin- 
telligible. Once for all, let me say that I have 
aimed only to express the rustic manner, and to 
give here and there, throughout my book, a quaint 
and original word, avoiding the conventional stage 
rustic language, yet using no Cornish phrase unless 
it has a special power or beauty of its own. 

" Who is this gentleman your messmate spoke 
about?" asked the stranger, as Jan drove 
steadily on towards Boscastle, now and then jerk- 
ing at the mare's mouth, to make her mend her 
speed. 

"Genleman from London, as lives in pratty 
great style at Endellion, near Dunchine, sends all 
the way to Port Isaac for flesh — aye, and buys up 
all the mabjers (chickens) from here to Bude. 
He comes down every summer, fishing and shoot- 
ing ; the air in London, they do say, not being as 
good as it might be." 

The driver chuckled— he never laughed. The 



IT GETS RATHER DARK. 19 

stranger wondered to himself what sort of animal 
a mabjer might be, but was ashamed to ask. 

All at once, on the brow of a hiU, a deep grey 
bar of cloud rose above the horizon ; it was only a 
little darker than the sky, and yet it could not be 
sky, for there was an inner pulsation in it, a sort 
of vital movement, that cloud never has, even when 
quickened by the soft fire of sunrise. 

It was the sea, and the old sailor's heart beat 
faster when he again saw his old rough friend. 

On the left of the road spread headland and 
promontory; on this highland stood the Tower 
of Forraberry; on the next, Willipark Point, a 
coast-guard tower ; to the right, on the other side 
of Boscastle harbour, rose a white flag-staff, and 
beyond stretched a long grey line of wild and iron- 
bound coast. 

** What do they import here ?" said the stranger, 
looking down on the little clustering stone cot- 
tages and shops beneath them. 

*' Coals and lime-stone, sir." 

"Any smuggling!" 

This was said with almost a professional sharp- 
ness. 

The driver paused for a cautious moment, then 
said, half-carelessly, 

" Maybe a little, now and then, cappin." 

The new driver was not a careless, ill-dressed, 
reckless sort of fellow, with a pipe always thrust 
sideways in his mouth, like Mr. Beswetherick ; on 

c2 



20 GREATHEART. 

the contrary, he was a neat, elderly man. who had 
passed thirty years of his life on a saddle as a 
London post-boy; and since railways, had come 
home to turn driver. He wore a white hat, and 
his grizzled hair was twisted into jaunty crisp crops 
of side curls ; he had little, amusing, half -shut 
eyes ; and he boasted a healthy, frosty, red com- 
plexion that was pleasant to look at. 

As if seized with a sudden conviction that he 
had hitherto been rather unsociable and silent, 
Mr. Penrose (that was the driver's name) all of a 
sudden became very chatty and communicative, 
with possibly an eye to ultimate fees. 

"Wild country for 'ee to travel in, sir," he 
began ; " no getting a snap to chunk (swallow) 
yon side of Boscastle, till you get well nigh to 
Bude, unless — as we used to say in London when I 
was at Mr. Hart's livery-stable in the Old Kent 
Koad — ^you put up with a Spitalfield's dinner, 
that is to say, sir, a tight neckcloth and a pipe of 
baccy." 

Mr. Penrose bent his head down at this joke, 
and chuckled till his eyes began to swim with half- 
tipsy tears. 

" You know Mr. Tolpedden by sight, I think 
you saidt" inquired the stranger, in an absent 
way, as if he liked the sound of the driver^s talk- 
ing, but did not pay much attention to the sense 
of what he said. 

" Seen him scores of times at Bodmin, with his 
son — fine young man, sir; driven 'em from the 



IT GETS BATHER DARK. 21 

station when he first came to these parts — ^hoosh ! 
sir, ten years gone, I suppose now." 

Here Mr. Penrose, who took special pride in 
his knowledge of persons and localities, removed 
his dingy white hat, looked in carefully at the 
maker's almost obliterated name, threw defiantly into 
the recess a swab of red handkerchief that he took 
from under a cushion, and then flipped the mare 
with great exactitude on the extreme apex of the 
left ear. 

"I'm his brother," said the stranger, with a 
droll abruptness. 

Mr. Penrose slewed round on his seat, and 
looked with half-tipsy intentness in the face of his 
fare. 

"Anan! are tha indeed, sir? Well, Tm sure! 
— ^well, who'd have thoft it ! — well, I did rally thoft 
I saw a likeness I" 

It did not make the slightest difference to Mr. 
Penrose ; but he thought it due to his fare to ex- 
press surprise. 

" Tm not much like my brother Henry," said 
the stranger ; " I'm an ugly dog." 

"Well, well, there 1" croaked jovial Mr. 
Penrose, deprecatingly, then shook his head, 
as if there was a wasp on his ear, and chuckled 
again till the tears ran down. "You mustn't 
leave our country, sir," he said, " without going 
to * Jamaica Inn,' and from there to Dosmary 
Pool — that's the pool that no one yet has ever 
fathomed, sir — it's near Brown Gilly, up among the 



22 GREATHEART. 

hills, sir. There, in snow time, and winter time, 
they say, the giant Tregeagle is heard howling, as 
he does his work, weaving of sand-ropes, at the 
devil's orders ; or trying to bale out Dosmary 
Pool with a limpet shell. The lake was once his 
palace, and the moor his park, so the old story 
says, and the moor men see lights on the shore, 
and hear his coach o' nights jolt and splash down 
into Dosmary Pool." 

"Why doesn't he try steam power for the 
lake f suggested Mr. Tolpedden, drily. 

This produced a new convulsion, ending in a 
short, but, for the time, almost dangerous cough 
in Mr. Penrose, on whom rum-and-water, bought 
at the hotel at Camelford, in, perhaps, almost too 
sanguine anticipation of future fees, had done its 
work. All at once he rallied, and went on. 

" I've known the men who go there to cut peat 
and gorze from those moors round Saint Nitts, 
tell me that sometimes the^ve heard the devil 
hunting Tregeagle at night round Four Hole 
Cross, and on to Liskeard ; and all he can do then, 
they say, is to get, as well as he can, helter- 
skelter, to Roche Rocks, fifteen miles off the main 
road, and there ram his head in at the chapel 
winder, where the devil, and all his imps, witches, 
and wizards haven't power to touch him." 

"Suppose, sailing-master Jan, you shortened your 
yarns, and attended to your vessel a little more," 
said Mr. Tolpedden, somewhat sharply, for Mr. 
Penrose, in his enthusiasm, had slackened his 



IT GETS RATHER DARK. 23 

pace till the lazy mare was all but standing still. 
** We've been ten minutes getting up that last 
tope " (like most old Indians, Mr. Tolpedden was 
in the habit of almost unconsciously using Hin- 
dostanee words), "keep your weather-eye open, 
I say. I see some running tackle loose now about 
the mare's head ; why, it'll be midnight before we 
get to Tolpedden. Now, let's go smart, man, down 
this bit of a nullah." 

" Immedjantly ! immedjantly !" said Mr. Pen- 
rose, deprecatingly, and with averted face. " We 
haven't more than eight miles or so to go now, 
captain." 

They had by this time left Boscastle, with 
its strip of narrow streets, and water-mill, and 
pottery far behind. Its deep, stormy valley and 
little harbour lay some miles behind them. 
They had left, too. the beautiful valley that opens 
from Boscastle, and stretches away towards Lost- 
withiel, with its wooden coombes and bluffs covered 
with furze, sloping down as if to mirror them- 
selves in the trout stream that glides through 
their shadows, and were now once more in the 
high, lonely, half-moorland, unlikely country 
that lies between Boscastle, Saint Gennis, and 
the sea-coast ; a country only sprinkled here and 
there with a few small farm-houses, and inter- 
sected with bridle-roads and horse-tracks, hard to 
distinguish, being seldom favoured with stone 
crosses, much less with direction posts. 

Now a weasel slid across the lonely road; 



24 GREATHEABT. 

once a hare actnaUy ventured to shamble before 
them from hedge to hedge. There were no sing- 
ing-birds to be heard, only from time to time the 
peculiar ciy of the ^ moor-goat,** or larger snipe, 
from its hannt in the moorland splashes; even 
the furze-chaffinch had gone to roost in his 
favourite bush. 

It was a good deal past sunset; the sun had sank 
down seaward an hour since, into a crater of 
orange flame. There was now left but a pale 
greenish glimmer westward, below a first star 
that had just sparkled forth. 

Mr. Penrose seemed to think the distance re- 
quired apologizing for. 

" It's only a way bit more, sir," he said, turning 
round to his fare ; ^^ and Til undertake to do it in 
the vally of one hour — ^yes, I wUl." 

" Are you sure you know the course t^-do you 
think you are gone on the right tack, sailing- 
master?" inquired Mr. Tolpedden, in a tart voice. 

"Do I know my right hand from my left 
hand ?" replied the driver, angrily. " What have 
I been driving over the country for for forty 
years, if I don't know the road from Boscastle to 
Tolpedden ? Why, I should be a ' letter-pooch ' 
and a ^ tom-doodle,' if I didn't know the road 
across every moor thirty mile round Camelf ord T' 

And on he drove in silence, but administering, 
occasionally, severe lashes to the mare, per- 
haps wishing it was Mr. Tolpedden he had in 
harness, for just ten minutes or so. 




IT GETS BATHEB DARK. 25 

The unmeaning and wilful road seemed to 
wind on for ever ; miles of furze and rushes, now 
and then a cross-bridle tracks that seemed to lead 
only into an outlying bog, and no further — that 
was all. 

It grew rapidly darker. Mr. Tolpedden only 
wished that he had a light to look at the little 
compass that hung on his watch-chain. He re- 
membered, with a true sailor's instinct, that 
Tolpedden lay nor'-west by west of Boscastle, and 
if he could only see the compass for a moment, he 
could ascertain if the drunken fool of a driver, as 
he now ruthlessly called him, had lost his way or not. 

A bright thought suddenly struck him. He got 
his compass ready in his left hand, then snapped 
a fusee close to it. In the moment's sputter of 
flame, he instantly saw that they were going 
steadily north-east. He felt a strong inclination 
to punch the head of wilful Mr. Penrose, but he 
restrained himself. All he said was, grufliy : 

" You're going clean wrong." 

Penrose made no reply, but drove stolidly on. 

Luckily at that moment there were sounds of 
hoofs on the road, and in a moment or two up 
rode a horseman through the darkness at a sharp 
trot. 

" Hail him I — ^hail him I" said Mr. Tolpedden 
irascibly to the driver. 

Mr. Penrose did so, in a careless way, as if he 
did it only to pacify his fare, and secretly pro- 
tested against the interference. 



26 GREATHEART. 

" Which IS the turning to Tolpedden !" 

A bland manly voice answered loudly, 

" You're quite out of the way. You must go 
back a mile to the last stone cross, then turn to the 
right, down the third bridle-road across the moor 
— ^you'll know it by a great block of whitish marble 
at the corner. Good night." 

Mr. Tolpedden could restrain himself no longer. 

" Why, you lubber I" he cried to the immovable 
Mr. Penrose, " you ain't fit even to drive geese to 
market. Are you going to keep me out all night 
in this open sea here, and on a lee shore, without 
grog or biscuit ? Why the deuce didn't you take 
a pilot on board at the last place we touched at, if 
you can't steer us into harbour. If these are your 
Cornish ways, I don't like 'em. By George ! sir, 
if I had you at sea, Fd mast-head you to-morrow 
for this. Now, turn the horse, man — ^turn the 
horse ; and look alive, too, or be hanged if I don't 
take the tiller myself I" 

Penrose grumbled, and obeyed ; but the change 
led to no good. They came to a cross, and duly 
counted the branch roads ; but when a fusee was 
struck at the third turning, no block of white stone 
manifested itself. There was nothing at the comer 
but a cart full of furze bushes, and the turf and wall 
beyond seemed to lead only to a small quarry 
close to the road. On either side stretched the 
doleful endless moor. 

Mr. Tolpedden was very angry, quite hot with 
rage. He couldn't see the driver, but he put 



IT GETS BATHER DARK. 27 

his head close to his shoulder^ and said between his 
closed teeth, 

"If you 'aven't missed your stays again, by 
Jupiter. Here! give me the reins. Why, you 
scoundrel, I could have walked it sooner than 
this." 

**I thought afterwards," Mr. Penrose confessed 
over his night-cap glass, " that he was going to give 
me a ^ whister-clister' (Devonshire for a blow on 
the ear). I put my arm up, and in so doing lost 
a whip worth six shillings, if it was worth a penny, 
but I daren't say anything." 

"My head's all mingle'cumrpor (confusion)," 
he said in a humbler voice than before; "and 
in my opinion, we've been plisky-led (fairy- 
led)," 

"Don't know who's leading us," growled the 
wroth traveller ; " but whoever it is, let me tell you, 
he doesn't know much about it. Hullo I Why, 
look man, there's a light — there I over that wall to 
the left. That's a farmhouse. Now, you get 
down, and run and ask the way. Don't mind a 
shilling if the farmer will come himself, foot or 
horseback, and take us to my brother's door." 

Penrose descended gloomily, for he was now 
quite chapfallen, but not reluctantly, for he was 
getting rather afraid of being benighted. Over 
the roadside wall he blundered, stumbling over 
the " piliers," or great bosses and tufts of rushes, 
heather, dead grass, fern, and stunted furze, and 
was soon swallowed up in the darkness. 



28 OREATHEABT. 

It was full ten minutes before he returned. 
He returned groaning, scared, and dripping. 
Mr. Tolpedden could just see him by the red glow 
of his own pipe, which he had lit to comfort himself 
for the vexatious delay. 

"'Twas all a missment (mistake), I tell 'ee, 
mister!" he cried, shaking himself in a sour and 
frightened way. ^^All a blamed missment, and 
Tregeagle's got something to do with 'em, or the 
pliskies, or old Nick himself. It was no farm at all, 
I tell 'ee, but a gurt swamp-hole full of padgitipooes, 
with a blue light dancing and bobbing about it ; and 
while I was a-staring at 'un, I fell in simly (seems 
to me) up to my chin, and might have been drowned 
but for a clump of rushes I caught hold of, that 
helped me to fooch (push) my way out. There's a 
mile of feather bog out there, enough to drown 
Pharaoh and all his hosts. I tell 'ee we don't go 
a step further to-night. Back we go to Boscastle 
church town. Willy, nilly — ^wish ! mare !" 

Mr. Penrose was roused, and again he tmned 
the head of the tired mare. 

" Perhaps 'tis best," said the traveller, in a half 
reluctant way. "Bout ship then, and let's get 
to our moorings soon as possible, sailing-master — 
sorry you're wet." 

The mare cheered up, went faster on the 
straightforward homeward road, and seemed already 
to smell the distant stables. 

The belated men had not perhaps gone more 
than two miles before they suddenly heard, as they 



IT GETS RATHER DARK. 29 

slackened the mare's pace to ascend a stiffish hill, 
a vile nasal voice shouting a well-known Ranter's 
hjrmn — "Only repent, and you'll be saved" to the 
irreverent and certainly too lively air of " The King 
of the Cannibal Islands " — a rhythm which gave 
the words a rollicking and tipsy character shock- 
ingly unfitted to their gravity. 

" I wish a may die," cried Penrose, in an earnest 
voice, pulling the mare up, so that she staggered 
back almost on her haunches — " I wish a may die, 
if that isn't Sampy Sandoe, the Dowser. Hi I" 
he shouted, "Sampy — Sampy P' 

A disagreeable voice answered with the Cornish 
singing inflexion, 

" If you're a child of grace, as I take you to be, 
good hevenning !" 

" Why, Sampy, it's I, Jan Penrose, of Brother 
Jones's congregation at Camelford. How dost 
do!" 

" Clever 1 How be you, brother, then !" 

"Braave, thank the Lord ! But, Sampy, we've 
been and lost the way, and want you to show us 
the road to Tolpedden. Death I I tell 'ee the 
whole day it has been a missment with us. Come, 
get up, and master here 'U giv^ you a shilling, 
and a glass of grog. We're plisky led, and I've 
been almost drowned in a feather bog." 

" Jan, the elect are as safe in a feather bog as 
in Brother Jones's chapel, and that you ought 
to know. It was the Lord sent me to guide you 
this night I" said the Dowser, as he clambered 



30 OREATHEART. 

up into the chaise, and indicated the right way by 
pulling the reins roughly to the left. 

" Jan, keep on by Saint JuUiot's/' he said, **you 
ought to have taken the coast road ; but, with 
the Lord's help, I'll take you to Tolpedden in the 
vally of an hour !" 

"I'm glad we picked up this canting dog, 
nevertheless," thought worn-out Mr. Tolpedden ; 
" and he shall splice the main-brace, if there's only 
one glass of rum left in my brother^s house." 



CHAPTER in. 

THE TWO BROTHERS. 

" rpHE Lord be thanked, Jan, for this is sartinly a 
A special Providence !" ejaculated the Dowser, 
nasally, as Jan got down from the chaise, and felt 
in the darkness for the bolt of Mr. Henry Tol- 
pedden's gate. " The Lord be thanked for bring- 
ing us into our desired haven. Jan, lead the 
mare, and unite with me in a Hallelooliar." 

May the pen drop from my paralyzed hand if 
ever I make a mock at even the smallest and 
humblest evidence of true religion ; but there was 
something so gross and unreal in this man's voice, 
something so revoltingly conceited and hypo- 
critical about every word he uttered, that even 
Saint Ives himself, that great Cornish saint, would 



THE TWO BROTHERS. 31 

not have much blamed Mr. Tolpedden for saying, 
somewhat sourly : 

" Stuff, man, stuff ! We all know that there's 
an angel at every helm. Wreck or salvage, it is 
God's orders, and is all for the best ; but what's 
this hour or two in the dark ? Why, to hear you 
groaning there, one would think we had been 
rolling two days off Cape Horn, in a nor^ wester, 
masts gone by the board, and all hands at the 
pumps. It's an ill wind that blows no good ! If 
we've got cold, you've earned a shilling, man, and 
some grog by it." 

The Dowser gave a tremendous groan, and 
alluded to the hardness of some men's hearts. 
The wheels of the chaise crunched over the gravel 
walk, and Mr. Tolpedden felt outstanding boughs 
brushing past him. 

In an instant or two more the chaise had drawn 
up before the doorway of a tall, straggling house, 
the sharp gable-ends of which could just be dis- 
tinguished from the sky by their intenser darkness. 
There was a light at two windows, and two 
windows only. 

Jan pulled a bell imperatively. The sound 
seemed to vibrate all through the house, and a 
loud-toned, hearty bell rang a long way off. Mr. 
Tolpedden grasped his bag, and leaped down, 
glad to once more straighten his cramped limbs. 

There was a sound of voices, and of hurrying 
footsteps. The door flew open, and a tall, grave, 
stalwart man stepped forth, and shook Mr. Tol- 



32 OREATHEABT. 

pedden wannly by the hand. Behind him stood 
two smiling and bright-ejed Cornish maid-servants, 
one of whom held in her hand an enormous lan- 
tern. 

" ^Tiy, Nelson ! Nelson ! old boy I glad I 
am to welcome you to Cornwall. But how late 
you are, old fellow! Why, it's past ten! We 
began to get anxious. I was just going to send 
out Lizzie and Fanny to look for you in the moor. 
We thought Tregeagle had got you." 

" HallelooHar !" groaned the Dowser, deter- 
mined not to be overlooked. 

"We were nearly drowned, Mr. Tolpedden, 
sir,** said Jan, " but for the Dowser here, the Lord 
be thanked !" 

" Come in, man," said Mr. Henry Tolpedden, 
" and have a glass of the elixir vitae, and bring 
in your friend too. Lizzie will give your horse 
a feed, if you take it round to my stable." 

"The Lord be thanked for all his mercies T 
replied Mr. Penrose, assuming a religious tone, 
and facing his friend. " The fact is, the Dowser, 
sir, came yesterday to the Delabole slate quarries, 
to a revival meeting among the poor sinners there, 
and accompanied home a brother who was about 
to celebrate his weddinff feast at St. Petrock's, 
and it was while retniiing from there that a 
gracious Pro>'idence led him to meet our chaise, 
which he truly was the humble means of bringing 
here in safety." 

"I sartinly was a humble means, Jan," said 



THE TWO BBOTHEBS. 33 

the Dowser^ with a too palpable humility, and too 
obtrusive a groan. 

" Another shilling out of you, Nelson, for that 
pious ejaculation," said Mr. Henry Tolped- 
den, laughingly, as the two brothers walked 
into the room arm-in-arm, like two school-boy 
friends. " Well, and how's your dear little wife, 
and Johnny, and Ned, and Kate, and, above all, 
wonderful Miss Bobby T" 

"All well, Harry — all right and taut; mo- 
ther and chicks, they all sent their love to you ; 
and — ^but where's Nephew Arthur! He hasn't 
forgotten his old uncle, who taught him to swim, 
and how to rig a vessel, to be sure; and how's 
dear old Liddy?" 

" Arthur will be here soon. Nelson. The fact is, 
he is a most influential full private in the Royal 
North Cornish Rifles, and is gone to drill with his 
company at St. Petrock's. I keep him at it be- 
cause it sets the boy up, makes him smart and 
ready, and keeps his rifle-shooting going. But, come, 
off with your great-coat, and come up to my room 
and wash your hands, while Fanny lays the tray. 
There's a steak on the fire already for you. But 
you must first come and see Liddy. I can't think 
why she is not here by this time, for she's been 
talking of you all day." 

" Dear old Liddy !" 

But at that very moment the door opened, and 
in came the old servant, without knocking, just 
giving one last touch of arrangement as she opened 
VOL. I. D 



i 



34 ' GREATHEART. 

the door to a beautifully neat, old-fashioned frilled 
cap, tied under the chin in a bow, from which 
bow streamed broad, lavender-coloured ribands, 
which sufficiently explained her delay. 

" Why, you dear old bird, how are yout" said 
the new arrival, running forward, and taking her 
hand between his. " How glad I am to see your 
dear old face once more I" 

" Just as he used to be," said the delighted old 
nurse ; " just as he used to be ! And how's your 
wife. Master Nelson, and all the dear children?" 

The Tolpeddens remained always children in 
the mind of the good old woman. 

"All taut, Liddy, thank you — all taut; 
thank God, I've had no name yet to strike out 
of the ship's books. And how do you get on ?" 

" Well, you know, it's been a very busy season. 
Master Nelson, with the preserving ; not that the 
girls are not good enough girls, but then they're 
very young, you know, and since poor dear mis- 
sus's death, it all falls on me. Do you remember 
the apricot-tree in the far garden at Summer- 
lease?" 

" Of course I do, Liddy — ^the one just by the 
bee-hives, you mean. Poor George and I used 
to ^" 

" Now, look here. Nelson," said the elder bro- 
ther, " you mustn't let that steak spoil while you 
and Liddy get talking over old times — there is 
plenty of time for that. Go and get some wine 
up, Liddy— mind, we want both sorts ; and be 



THE TWO BROTHEBS. 35 

sure and see that the driver and his friend have a 
stiff glass of grog each." 

" I never did see such a country as yours in any 
cruise," said Mr. Nelson Tolpedden to his brother, 
as he was washing his hands upstairs ; '^ all moor 
and waste of stone and furze, by Jove I almost 
ever since we left that nullah, beyond that little 
town down there — what's its name ? " 

" Boscastle." 

" Yes, Boscastle ; why, Harry, it's only fit for 
snipes to live in. Why ^" 

" Wait till the morning, and you'll change your 
mind. There is not such scenery this side the 
Tamar. You should just see our coast — mining 
country, too." 

*' Any good harbours? — don't talk to me about 
scenery, Harry." 

" No ; but you take a mere professional point 
of view* Oh I yes, there's Port Isaac, forty miles 
down west, if you want a h^bour. Why, there's 
that boy of mine, Arthur, writes verses about the 
scenery here by the yard." 

"The shaver writes verse, does het" muttered 
the old preventive ofiicer, for such was his present 
profession ; and down went his nephew thirty 
degrees in the thermometer of his appreciation. 
He had never known anyone who wrote verse but 
a purser^s clerk in the Jemsetjee Jejheebhoy of Bom- 
bay, and he once borrowed a sovereign of him and 
never returned it* Honest Mr. Nelson Tolpedden's 
mind, never very subtle in its power of combining 

d2 



36 GEEATHEART. 

ideas, had always therefore associated poets with 
one of two disagreeable and unsatisfactory classes 
— rogues or beggars — two classes, indeed, by some 
remorseless and well-to-do people, considered as 
almost synonymous. 

Supper was over, and slippers having been 
brought by Liddy, that good soul was now busy 
cutting little delicate curls of lemon-peel, evident- 
ly for rum-punch; these yellow shavings she 
next proceeded to immerse in spirits, and entomb 
in dissolved sugar. 

**' And when do you expect promotion, Nelson, 
in that laborioils and ungrateful service of yours ?" 
inquired the elder brother. *' And here have we 
been for ten years, and never had a visit from 
you before — it is too bad." 

"Stronger, Liddy!" exclaimed the old sailor, 
intent on the punch ; " I never take but one glass 
of grog, and that only on high days and holidays, 
and I like what I d6 have strong — a wine-glass 
and a half of rum, Liddy — it's the weak grog that 
always disagrees with me — all sugar and water. 
S)a you remember, Harry, my father once com- 
plaining of how the old port went, and Liddy 
taking him to count the empty bottles in the stack 
in the yard, and showing him a specially large 
pik of them, saying, * There, sir, if you want to 
know, all those were out of your study V " 

" Indeed I do," chuckled Liddy ; " dear, dear, 
how the boy remembers things !" 

"I remember it ! — oh ! I remember it !" replied 



THE TWO BRO'THERS. 37 

the elder brother, laughing; "but about your 
preferment, Nelson, when is that rascally Admi- 
ralty going to give you a better station than 
Osmington I 1 suppose you'll have your retiring 
pension in another ten years ? Doesn't that con^ 
stant night-work hurt you ?" 

There was a peculiar dimness in Nelson Tol- 
pedden's eyes, and the slightest possible move 
of his head indicated that he wanted Liddv out of 
the room. His brother saw the signal. 

" Liddy," said he, " be kind enough to go and 
see that the two men are taken care of, and I'll 
ring when we want anything. It's almost time 
for Arthur to be home, too. See about his supper 
— he'll want something, poor boy." 

The moment the door shut, Nelson Tolpedden 
looked very hard into his tumbler, and as he kept 
bruising the lemon- peel with his spoon, said in 
rather a low voice, 

" They've turned me off without a pension." 

" The ungrateful, shabby rascals !" exclaimed 
his brother, fiercely ; " what ! treat gentlemen like 
hack-horses, that one sends without a regret to 
the knackers? — throw them forsooth under the 
table, like worn-out cards, and then expect fidelity 1 
Why, fie on them ! They say truly, Nelson, 
that public bodies are abstract essences, they have 
no hearts and morals; but these men are thB 
nation's servants, and have no right to neglect 
and ill-treat those poorer and humbler than them- 
selves. What reason do they give, then 1" 



38 OBEATHEAHT. 

*^Why, they bring forward a sort of agree- 
ment that some of us Indian officers entered into 
when we joined the coastguard, fifteen years ago — 
that, when superannuated, we should retire with- 
out pensions. They discharged all us Indians 
last Tuesday." 

The brother's face darkened, as a consulting 
lawyer's does when his client begins to relate some 
weak point of his case. 

"That agreement alters the matter," he said 
slowly. 

" Avast there ! not a bit ; the words are (not 
that I ever even signed the thing), when super- 
annuated; but I'm not superannuated — I'm as 
hearty as a boy — I'll run up a hill with your boy 
Harry. I was examined in. April — ^did I tell 
you? — ^in the guard-ship at Portland, and pro- 
nounced sound, wind and limb, and a good life. 
I wish still to serve ; I'm as fit for work as ever. 
The fact is — the simple fact is, Harry, they want 
to get rid of us all, and fill our places w ith a pack 
of coxswains and boatswains, and such twopenny- 
halfpenny fellows, the favourites of admirals and 
captains. They don't want to have gentlemen — 
they don't like them. But, isn't it too bad to 
set an old fellow adrift at fifty-two years of age, 
and without a penny of pension. I only ask you, 
is it fair?" 

"Fair! — it's infamous! But why don't you 
petition the Admiralty, Nelson ? — show it up in 



THE TWO BROTHERS. 39 

the papers? — worry them? — say that you are not 
past work, and don't want to retire ?" 

" I have ; but they won't listen to us. So 
the next thing I shall do, is to get one of the 
Elphinstones, who was a messmate of mine, to 
bring forward the case in the House — he'll tease 
them. I know whose doing it is, and, by Jove 1 
sir, I won't rest till I expose his injustice and 
his malice I We're not to be fooled and insulted, 
as if we were such trash of fellows as they're 
putting into the stations now, spoiling the ser- 
vice 1" 

" Shall you leave Osmington, then ?" said the 
elder brother, placing one foot on the fender, and 
staring abstractedly into the centre of the scarlet 
coals, and not into the face of the person he ad- 
dressed. There was a meaning in the way the 
words were spoken, quite unobserved by the hearty 
and guileless old ex-preventive officer. 

" We must leave, as the house belongs to the 
Government ; but God only knows where we shall 
go, or what we shall do. Jersey is a cheap place, 
and Jersey vessels touch at Osmington. Then 
there's the Isle of Man " 

^* Nelson," said Mr. Henry Tolpedden, rising, 
and pacing up and down the room, with his 
hands behind his back, *^ you must come, all of 
you, and live with us. I am not rich, as you 
know ; and Arthur will soon be going to college ; 
but still I can do something. It will, at all 
events, give you time to look round." 



40 OBEATHEABT. 

" You're a dear good fellow, Harry, and youjp 
heart's as sound as ever I" exclaimed Nelson Tol- 
pedden, jumping up as brisk as a boy, seizing 
his brother^s hand and shaking it warmly. " I said 
that about leaving just to try you ; but the fact 
is, I have managed to save nearly fifteen hundred 
pounds out of my pay, so I'm no beggar, brother ; 
and if I do come to Cornwall, I can contrive to 
live in my own frugal way, and send both the 
boys to school, too, though the Admiralty has 
been doosed shabby." 

"I needed no such touchstone. Nelson," said 
the elder brother, in a low voice. " Well, I am 
glad to hear of your savings ; but it's wonderful — 
why, you must have pinched yourself sadly ?" 

*^ Pinched 1 — no, nonsense; there is nothing to 
waste money on at Osmington. One glass of 
sherry a day — bread and milk at night, because I 
found it better than grog to sleep on; twice a 
week perhaps a game of pool at the market town 
— ^I win at pool ; — then I'm not a dandy in clothes ; 
I give no parties, and I only smoke three pipes 
a day." 

" Oh ! here comes the boy at last !" said the 
anxious father ; " I'm sure I heard him slam the 
outer gate." 

The anxious father's ears were keen. ^The next 
moment there were steps — ^then came a vigorous 
knock at the front door, which was instantly 
opened by Fanny, and a pleasant voice inquired 
if uncle was come." 



THE TWO BROTHERS. 41 

"Yes, here he is, all alive, and in the state 
cabin !" shouted Mr. Nelson Tolpedden. 

The parlour door flew open, and in darted a 
fine young fellow of twenty, wearing a well-fit- 
ting grey uniform, the cuffs and collar scarlet. 
His white gloves, a little stained with powder, 
were tucked in his broad leather belt ; and he had 
his rifle still slung over his left shoulder. 

Arthur Tolpedden was a fine, well-made fel- 
low, pleasant to look on, and dangerous to en- 
counter. There was an unquenchable vigour and 
life in every glance of his quick, frank brown 
eyes ; good humour and high courage even in the 
manner he strode forward to grasp his bluff old 
uncle's hand, at the same moment tossing off 
his cap, and placing down his rifle in a safe 
comer. There was nothing shy or awkward about 
the young Cornish rifleman — his strength was 
without clumsiness, his self-confidence without 
vanity. In his every look there was the inde- 
scribable bloom and magic of youth, and his fervid 
manner, and the quick and elastic versatility of 
his questions and replies, were pervaded by a sense 
of that boundless hope and imagination that but too 
soon desert us. Yet in no look nor gesture did he 
betray the slightest consciousness of his own 
courage or talents. He was neither a book-worm 
nor a groom; no one would have doubted that 
he rode well ahead in the hunting-field, but 
•they might not have conjectured that he was also 
passionately fond of reading. 



42 GBEATHEABT. 

But the ^eat charm of his character, his bold 
defiant moral courage, could not have been so 
long concealed from a keen observer, for it was at 
once apparent in the manly way in which, witliout 
any foolish shame, he ran up and touched his 
father^s forehead with his lips. There was none 
of that absurd affectation of cynical coldness or 
indifference, or that sham immovability about 
Arthur Tolpedden, which is the insolent charac- 
teristic of some of our modem youth. He had 
not yet learned to stare at his father with a sort 
of blank superciliousness, through an unneeded 
eye-glass, or to repress his own generous and 
warm-hearted individuality, and affect a stoicism 
that only age should bring, and that age has always 
80 much reason to regret. That immovability 
can only be purchased by the loss of the hopes and 
pleasures, of the illusions and ideals, that irradiate 
and glorify youth. We need not be eager to put 
on that changeless and death-like mask. Time 
thrusts it on us soon enough, and stops, one by 
one, with his cruel, chilling hand, all those warm 
impulses of the heart that fools who still feel them 
so anxiously disown. 

"How is Aunt Polly," he said, "uncle, and 
Jack — my favourite Jack — aud Teddy, and Kate, 
and dear little Bobby, your pet? How glad I 
shall be to show you all our lions ; you shall come 
and see our company shoot for the cup Colonel 
Tremaine is going to give us, on the seventeenth ; 
and we'll go fishing together, uncle ; you and I 



THE TWO BROTHERS. 43 

and Doctor Bradbrain will go snipe-shooting in the 
splashes, Camelford way," 

" Why, what a fine strapping lad the fellow's 
grown !" said his admiring uncle, passing his hand 
through his nephew's wavy brown hair, that 
clustered in a rich, half-curling mass, above his 
high, arched, prominent, white brow. "I only 
hope my Johnny '11 be like him — he's very like his 
grandfather.'' 

" And how did you get on, Arthur, at the target 
to-day t" inquired the father. 

" Pretty well up to the six hundred yards, only 
three misses in fourteen shots ; but the wind blew 
across the range, and drove the bullets so much to 
the left, that we all shot worse than usual. Why, 
even that dodgy fellow, Boscawen, couldn't get 
more than one bull's eye at the seven hundred and 
fifty." 

" Their range is on the cliffs up by Cape Corn- 
wall," remarked the marksman's father; **and 
is too much exposed to the wind, except in the full 
summer." 

*^Hal we had a gun at Osmington," said 
Nelson Tolpedden, "and we used to fire at a 
floating target, not easy to hit in rough weather, I 
can tell you, Harry." 

" Arthur," said the elder Tolpedden to his son, 
who was busy rubbing the moist powder-stains off 
his rifle, " you must ride to Endellion to-morrow, 
and begin your Greek play again with Mr. Tre- 
gellas. He has written to-day to say that he is 



44 GBEATHEABT. 

just back from Sldmouth, and that he and Euripides 
are ready for you." 

A slight cloud passed over the youth's brow ; 
but he was too accustomed to feudal obedience to 
dispute his father's wishes. All he said was, 

" To-morrow ! and uncle here t" 

" Yes, to-morrow, Arthur. You must be there 
by ten ; you can take the pony, and be back by 
two, in time to walk with us to Dunchine. We 
shall have letters to take in; besides, I want to show 
your uncle the wonderful castle, and the wonderful 
editor." 

Arthur Tolpedden laughed, as he drew up his 
fine, manly, alert figure, and made the military 
salute, gracefully, and yet without affectation. 

Just then a noisy hymn, howled rather than 
sung, and set to a most ribald and notable tune, 
arose from the kitchen. It was the irrepressible 
Dowser. 

Mr. Henry Tolpedden's brow darkened. 

" Go and stop that, Arthur," he said. *^ That is 
poor Lidd/s only fault, encouraging those noisy 
and vain itinerant preachers. It's the driver's 
friend ; tell them both to go, if they've had their 
suppers. My kitchen is not a Banter's chapel, 
and shall not be turned into one; but gently, 
mind." 

" Out he goes !" said Arthur ; and off he flew, 
eager as Mercury on a special errand of the Gods. 

The next moment a reeling step was heard 
past the window, and a voice, hoarse with much 



THE TWO BROTHEES. 45 

rum and water, groaned out under the window : 

** Hallelooliar ! seed has failed here in stony- 
places. Amen I Good night all. Brother Jan, 
get the chaise round." 

Then there was a sound of wheels and closing 
gates. 

"Who is that noisy fellow, Arthur?" said Mr. 
Tolpedden, as Arthur appeared, out of breath with 
laughing ; " is his name Browser, or Dowser, or 
Bowser 1" 

" That ! Why, that's the celebrated man for using 
the divining rod. He is always sent for to dis- 
cover metal. Half the miners round here believe 
he has a supernatural power. What! papa, do you 
mean to say you did not know the fellows still 
use the divining rod here r 

"Not I; but I am extremely curious to hear 
about it ; I never reject a thing because I don't 
understand it. Run, Arthur, run and try and catch 
him. Tell him he shall have a bed in the stable." 

Young Tolpedden darted from the room like a 
greyhound when the leash is slipped. 

" / used to run in that way, Harry, till I got 
the rheumatism in my left knee," remarked the 
old officer, with bland composure. 

"So used I, thirty years ago," replied his 
brother. 

The pursuit of the magician proved ineffectual. 
The Dowser, surly, and rather drunk, had refused 
to return to a house " built on the sand, to one of 
no faith, to one who had refused a cup of cold 



46 OBEATHEABT. 

water to a Christian brother who was dry!'* 

" Oh ! the wicked story !" said Liddy, who just 
then entered the room with a tray of bed candles. 
" Why, the man had three full glasses of grog, 
and as much bread and cheese as he could eat. 
What did he want r 

" Cold water," said his young expeller. " I should 
like to have had him pumped on, the hypocrite ! 
Let me show you your bedroom, uncle — ^you'll 
want no rocking to-night." 

" Well, at home I must confess I am an early 
man. I do feel the dust in my eyes. Good 
night, Harry — ^good night, Arthur, my boy. 
Call me early. Thank God, I've no patrol to- 
night 1 It's not a feather-bed, I hopef No. 
Well, that's all right. Good night." 

There was no paltry arithmetical doubts perplex- 
ing the brave old simple-hearted sailor; he knelt 
reverently down by his bedside, as soon as he had 
locked his door, and breathed forth his short, un- 
adorned prayer to the one great ever-watchful 
Being for his dear little wife and Jacky, and Kate 
and Teddy, and, above all, for his dear little Bobby. 
He named them all, dwelt upon their names 
with simple love, *as if he w^re talking to some 
good and wise and powerful friend. Then hastily 
undressing himself and leaping into bed, he lay 
tranquilly thinking of the pleasure of meeting 
again his favourite brother and his old playfellow, 
Arthur. 

It was not often that a metaphor intruded into 



THE TWO BROTHERS. 47 

that small transparent healthy mind, but as he lay 
there, in a new room, half asleep, thinking of the 
brave youn/; stripling so full of hope, courage, 
and ardour he had just parted with, there seemed 
to rise before his closed eyes a shipwright's yard, 
where an artisan was busy painting with careful 
pride the figurehead of an unlaunched vessel. 
The red, the blue, the gold, were clear and un- 
tarnished. To the old officer's eyes, the result was 
a work of art as wonderful as Raphael's. 

Presently this scene melted away into cloud and 
sea — turbid, drifting black cloud, yeasty rest- 
less, wild sea ; and through the breakers and the 
fountains of spray there rolled and struggled in 
upon the boulders of the beach a splintered and 
beaten piece of almost shapeless wood ; yet defaced 
and crushed and sodden as it was, he. Nelson Tol- 
pedden, seemed to be able to identify it at once as 
the gay figurehead of the shipwright's yard. 

"Yes; that's life, that's life I" he muttered. 
" That boy, Arthur, will wash ashore some day, like 
the rest of us. God guard him in that time of need I 
— God guard himl God bless him, and Harry 
tool" 

A moment more and the worthy old sailor was 
asleep — the slender tiny ray of one of the 
smallest but brightest of the guarding stars 
twinkling cheerily on the brass cornice of the 
bed just above his free sturdy old head, as if it 
had brought him from heaven some sweet gladden- 
ing dream of home and his little ones. 



48 GBEATHEART. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 

VERY soon, indeed, after daybreak that active 
and hearty elderly gentleman, Mr. Tolpedden, 
was up and about, and could be heard below 
piping away merrily on his nephew's flute the 
cheerful and not inappropriate melody of 

" How brightly breaks the morning ! 

Tra la, tra la, tumty ra, tra la, tra la." 

He was one of those equable ascetic men who 
never indulge themselves in unusual luxuries, and 
whose life is shaped strictly according to mechanical 
rules. Not that Burns could have denounced the 
old lieutenant as " tideless-blooded," f or his heart 
beat as quick as anyone's; nor, indeed, was the 
temper of the excellent old fellow always quite 
under its master^s control, but habits of routine 
had made him punctiliously methodical. 

Is it not a wonder, indeed, that so many people 
can, from mere want of will, deprive themselves of 
that intense and almost Pharisaical pleasure that a 
person feels who rises earlier than his fellows — 
not that he does not, of course, find himself a mere 
useless and petulant invalid, till breakfast sets the 
human will at work — ^not that he is not greatly in 
the way of the incensed servants, who look upon 
him as a fool, a spy, a meddler, and a mala' 
propos intruder — not that he really does anything. 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 49 

not yawn, and rub his hands, and flatten his 
hideous and obtrusive nose against the window- 
glass, but then he has done something which proves 
a power of will, and a tenacity of purpose, beyond 
the other inmates of the house, whom he covertly 
lectures and sneers at when they crawl down to 
breakfast, scarcely caring even to conceal his in- 
tolerable and insolent contempt under the mask of 
a still more insufferable pity. 

But Mr. Nelson Tolpedden's Pharisaism was of a 
more gentle and harmless description. It is true, 
that he was, of course, in the way of the servants ; 
but then he chatted with them, and retreated into 
the garden before their brooms. It is tnie he beat 
at his brother's door, and tatooed also loudly at 
the wall of his nephew's apartment ; but then it 
was done with such dry fun, and so much in the 
way of questioning, that it was like being awoke 
by the gentle violence of a sunbeam falling warm 
upon your pillow; and everyone, however tired, 
liked the cheerful disturbance. Men, as they ad- 
vance in life, we all know, require less sleep, so 
rising early is less of a merit in them; as for young 
Arthur Tolpedden, however, the soft warmth of 
bed was a Siren's narcotic to him ; and when he 
did at last dash out of that delicious warm nest 
into the cold lake of a sponge bath, the effort, 
though not perhaps quite Spartan in its intensity, 
was by no means a mean one. Men of iron, who 
work only their bodies, and let their brains lie fal- 
low as oxen's, do not require much sleep. Any- 
VOL. L E 



( 



50 GBEATHEABT. 

one can rise promptly enough from a bad bed, 
but there's birdlime in our dangerous modem 
seas of eider-down ; the organization of the 
nineteenth century people is surely more subtle 
and spiritual than that of Sparta or Eome ; and 
we need fresh and frequent encouragement to our 
rapid, strenuous, and unceasing toil, for the world 
works at high pressure now. 

The old lieutenant, in his hearty way, went 
into the drawing-room, a little tired of wait- 
ing; not in the smallest degree fretful, only 
requiring some quiet occupation to pass the time. 
So he undid the top and bottom bolts of the glass 
door opening on the little garden terrace, where 
the f uschias were weighed down with purple-eyed 
flowers, and stepped gaily out into the open air. 

It was a beautiful scene, for the house stood on 
the slope of a hill, and all the deep valley, trending 
away to Boscastle, lay far beneath him ; not so 
far off but that there rose from its recesses the 
sweet bubbling sound of water, beating itself to 
music against coloured pebbles and drooping 
boughs. Beyond, and facing him, rose the long 
waving line of hilly horizon, pieced out into great 
squares of grassy pasture, and chocolate-coloured 
fallow, and misty-tinted moorland, chequered with 
lines of stone wall^ and with here and there a lone 
cottage, or a tiny cluster of trees, that marked some 
outlying farm. Far to the left was the village of 
Lostwithiel — " Lost in the Hills," say the unques- 
tioning etymologists — a mere cluster of stone cot- 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 5t 

tages and bams, huddling, as if for protection, round 
the grey tower of a little church, that looked so small 
that a giant could have held it on the palm of his 
hand, and turned it into a pastille burner. It was 
a pleasant sight, radiant in the soft sunlight of a 
bright September morning, dappled with the fly- 
ing shadows of great volatile and fickle white 
fleece-clouds, bent on distant travel. 

The lawn at his feet was silvery-grey with 
dew — that here and there, however, turned to 
jewelry, where it caught the slant eastern sunshine* 
The pampas rose in huge feathers; plumes fit 
for Goliath, or the giants that warred on King 
Arthur. The dark red lobelias were glistening 
with moisture. The great blue and pink bunches 
of hydrangea flowers, too, were radiant with the 
warm, damp vapour of the night, that lay in 
glistening pearls even upon the white spongy heads 
of two or three large mushrooms, that, probably, a 
few hours since had been a resting-place for 
Titania's court. 

The old sailor looked at the sky in a sort of re- 
proachful way, and, compressing his lips, said, 
gravely aloud, these prophetic words : " Sou' by 
west it is I" He then unbuttoned his blue frock- 
coat on the left, and proceeded to button it on 
the right side, just as a cautious mariner might 
prepare for change of weather by some reduction 
of sail. Now I do not wish to imply that Mr. 
Nelson Tolpedden was by any means as severely 
frugal a man as a certain Welsh curate I once 

£ 2 



52 GBEATHEART. 

heard of, who cut and cut, and pared and pared 
the cu£Ps, and collars, and tails of his coat, for 
various not unnecessary mendings and patchings, 
till, in course of time, he actually turned the once 
lavish garment into that ridiculous vestment called 
a spencer; a change almost as absurd as that of 
the over-anxious poet, who altered and altered till 
he cut down his epic poem into an epigram. 

But this I must confess, that the old lieutenant 
was frugal almost to excess, and that the change 
of buttoning had indubitably some mysterious 
reference to a change of weather, since such a 
practice had been invariable with him for five- 
and-twenty years, whenever the wind turned south- 
west. 

Mr. Tolpedden's weather eye was no glass one. 
Even in a moment or two a great, white, luminous 
fog (they call this sort of fog prettily in Cornwall 
" The Sea-Fret,") came beating up fast from the 
seaward end of the valley, sponging out one by 
one field after field, till the whole became one 
moving mass of opaque and showery vapour. 
Then fell a fretful, irregular rain ; nothing 
could be seen twenty yards off, nothing heard, 
but the rattling chuckle of a disturbed magpie in 
one of the adjacent fir-trees. It came as sudden 
as the terrible glooming of destiny arises and 
darkens a Greek tragedy. 

Wisely is the future hidden from us. No 
ancient seer, however gifted, could have detected 
the lightning shafts of misfortune that were am- 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 53 

bushed in that sky, their points turned already 
bodingly towards the ill-starred house of Tolped- 
den ; and the old lieutenant returned indoors as 
happy as he went out. 

" That's master's study," said Liddy, as she ob- 
served Master Nelson, as she still called him, re- 
connoitfering a room that led from the parlour, and 
which seemed a congress of glass bottles, strange 
bent tubes, retorts, magnets, dusty drugs, electric 
machines, old worm-eaten books, journals of 
chemistry, and records of the Geographical Society. 
An acid smell pervaded the room. There was a 
small stove and furnace in one corner, and on the 
mantelpiece stood rows of geological specimens^ 
and pieces of ore. 

" We never are allowed to clean that room," 
continued Liddy. " As long as that skeleton is in 
the comer, there's no getting Fanny or Lizzy into 
the room, even to deliver a message." 

"I don't seem to know my reckoning here," 
said the old sailor, surveying the retorts, sand- 
baths, and air-pumps, with a look of wonder that 
was almost awe. " It would turn my brain in a 
week." 

"So I tell master," said the old servant, who 
disapproved of her master's chemical studies ; 
" and that he '11 go and work himself to death. 
Why, Master Nelson, do you know he pores half 
the night over those rubbagy books? Pack of 
rubbage, I says, better be in bed ! As well put 
red and blue bottles in the window, and keep a 



54 GREATHEART. 

hogshead full of black draught at once. And what's 
it all for, that's what I say I What good does it do 
the family, or young Master Arthur?" 

Servants are not often hero-worshippers. They 
are too materialistic, they look upon their master's 
brain- work as miserable and dangerously eccentric, 
as unpractical, profitless, and driving a man away 
from simple household duties. 

" Take up any of them," said Liddy, dipping 
down among piles of books, and selecting a dusty 
quarto of the end of the seventeenth century. It 
happened to be one of Newton's works, and the 
book opened where that great man seems to agree 
with Moschus, who lived three thousand years 
before him, as to the Atomic Theory. " Read it 
anywhere !" cried the enemy of science, thrusting 
the book before Mr. Tolpedden's face ; " read any 
of 'em, and see if they ain't all rubbage. Look 
at the * Holy War,' — now that's a book worth read- 
ing.' 

Mr. Tolpedden took the book cautiously, 
with a protest, and fixing his double tortoise-shell 
glass on his nose, read where Liddy pointed, in an 
angry and promiscuous way. He read slowly, and 
with rather perhaps too much of a parish-clerk's 
solemnity and slowness of inflexion. 

" It seems to me that God, in the beginning, 
formed matter in solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, 
moveable particles, and that these primitive par- 
ticles being solid, are incomparably harder than 
any porous bodies compounded of them — so hard^ 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 55 

indeed, as to be unbreakable and nndividable." 

" There, just hear that," said Liddy, contempt- 
uously ; " why, it's all Hebrew — a man to go and 
re-write the Book of Genesis, talking as if he 
had been present when the world was made." 

Mr. Tolpedden did not make a reply for a 
moment. He first relieved his nose of his double 
eye-glass, then winked both his eyes, like an owl 
in the daylight, and said slowly, 

^'I can't make out the stem of it from the 
stem, that's the truth. The * Pilgrim's Pro- 
gress' is the only book I ever did care much 
about, Liddy. This fellow seems to me to write 
as if he had taken this world and the next, beaten 
them up with a hammer, and then weighed the lumps 
in a pair of grocer's scales. In my opinion, a 
round dozen would not have done the dog much 
harm, going about unsettling people's minds, and 
talking such crack-brain nonsense. Why, Liddy, 
when I was once in the Gulf of Mozambique ^" 

But Newton's two simple-minded critics were 
at that moment disturbed by the approach of young 
Arthur Tolpedden, who came dashing downstairs 
with a scarlet and black pompon, that he wanted 
Liddy to fasten securely in his rifle shako; 
as be came, he was singing the glorious last 
verse of that great and most real ballad that Scott 
ever wrote, " Bonnie Dundee " — 

*^ He waved his proud hand and the trumpets were blown, 
The kettledrums dashed and the horsen^en rode on, 



56 GREATHEAKT. 

Till on Ravelston cliff and on Clermiston^s lee, 
Died away the wild war-notes of Bonny Dundee." 

"Well, uncle, good morning, how did you 
sleep I I have got a South American hammock 
in my room — would you like to have it to-night, 
and dream you are at sea again ?" 

" No, thankee, my boy ; can't leap into it as I 
used to," replied his uncle, greeting the fine 
stripling in his hearty way. "Oh! here's your 
father — well, I confess I shan't be sorry when 
breakfast comes!" 

The gong thundered as if for a feast of Jugger- 
naut, and instantly the muster of the house ap- 
peared, like the demon in a stage incantation. The 
servants, headed by Liddy, filed in, a chapter of 
the Bible was read, and then breakfast began. 

"Rainfall above the average here?" inquired 
the lieutenant, as he chipped an egg, wdth the 
manner of a man whose mind was already made 
up as to the answer. 

" A good deal of rain — but slight rain — a steady 
downfall, rarer perhaps than elsewhere," replied 
his brother. 

" We have a proverb here, that a Comishman 
is never lively unless the weather is drisky 
(showery)," said the son, standing up, the better to 
cleave a large crusty loaf. 

"By-the-bye, Arthur," said his father, as he 
rose from the table, " be sure to ask Mr. Tregallas 
when his daughter Lucy is coming back from 
Devonshire. She's a nice girl, I hear, and will 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 57 

be a pleasant companion for your Aunt Mary. 
Now don't forget. We shall start at three." 

The breakfast over, Arthur Tolpedden lit his 
pipe in the porch, mounted his pony, and cantered 
off to his tutor^s at St. Petrock's, a village about 
a mile from the sea, and four or five from Tol- 
pedden. 

Nature has little care for man, his joys or his 
sorrows. Her great laboratories work on, the 
seasons change, the skies lighten and darken, 
the sun burns its conquering way daily from east 
to west, the winds gently move the violets or rise 
and sink the ship, the waves carry the shells 
lovingly to the sand-reach, or break upon the cliffs 
with charging thunder ; and all the time Nature 
seems heedless of the tragedy or comedy man is 
playing, while he frets his petty hour upon the 
world's stage. Nature, in her awful imperturba- 
bility, calm as the sphynx of Egypt, scarcely seems 
thoroughly to harmonise with us, or, indeed, to 
recognise us as anything but poor transitory par- 
venues upon this planet — something only a little 
better than the sponge, a degree or two more 
spiritual than the oyster. 

There is no special glory in the sunshine that 
advents some great epoch of our happiness — there 
is, we fear, no special sadness in the rain that falls 
even upon our graves. It is only our restless vanity 
that turns Nature's regulated aspects into portents. 

Arthur Tolpedden, being unfortunately no 
prophet, saw nothing in that bright September 



58 GBEATHEART. 

morning either to excite his hopes, or rouse his 
fears. Perhaps, on the whole, a slight cloud of 
vexation passed over his mind as he thought of 
leaving his own discursive reading, his shooting, 
riding, and fishing, for the cold round of routine 
work with a tutor. His nineteenth century brain 
— full of dreams of chivalry, from Scott ; stoical 
self-denial, from Carlyle ; forms of ideal beauty, 
from Keats and Shelley; metaphysical poetry, 
from Tennyson; deeds of generous recklessness 
from Lever; sturdy kindliness from Dickens; 
pluck and Christian manliness from Charles 
Kingsley — was busy coining visions of super- 
human courage, beauty, and patriotism — treading 
tinder foot meanness and oppression, shooting down 
hypocrisy, inflicting mortal blows on selfish, effete 
feudaUsm, and, in fact, charging through the 
black squadrons of human vices and follies, with all 
the proud and defiant daring of a young Rupert, 
unconscious of fear, and heedless of defeat. The 
rout, the retreat, the repulse, were, as yet, un- 
known to him. The Deity that he saw enthroned 
upon the globe was an armed and triumphant 
virtue. The Astraea of his ideal world carried a 
diamond and invincible sword, and was aggressive. 
The virtue such men as Carlyle adore is a martyr 
virtue, singing hymns amid the bigot's flames ; be- 
cause old age sees the world as it is — ^youth only the 
world as it should be. 

Gaily Tolpedden cantered up the deep sunk 
Cornish lanes, striking at the slate battlements 



THE PBIVATE TUTOR. 59 

with his crop, or lopping off the green succulent 
tips of the brambles ; now riding as fast as if he 
was carrying a reprieve, now lingering like a lag- 
gard school -boy to pick blackberries from branches 
level with his head, to stick a bunch of purple 
foxglove bells in the band of his white deer-stalk- 
ing hat ; or to stop at a great granite stile, and 
listen to a lark, that type of ceaseless, simple hap- 
piness, that rose into the great azure hermitage 
above his head, to sing its little hymn of praise to 
God. 

Then striking the pony with his hand, he would 
dash again on his erratic ride to the local temple 
of learning, chanting forth, with a fine sonorous 
baritone voice, some verses of his own writuig, for 
he was not without a spark of poetic fire in his 
composition; and his thoughts seemed just then 
to marshal themselves almost spontaneously into 
verse. 

The lark had flown with lessening wings 

Far over furze and thorn, 

The rosy clouds were melting fast 

Before the proud sun^s scorn. 

The bee was nestling in the thyme, 

So purple, crisp, and sweet ; 

But oh ! the honey kiss I stole I 

In coming through the wheat. 

She looked down on the narrow path. 
Looped with the yellow ears ; 
As we stood between those golden walls, 
Hope drove away our fears. 



60 GREATHEART. 

She turned, and oh ! the look she gave 
Of love and wonder bom ! 
It was a plighting kiss I stole 
Amid the waving com. 

By this time Tolpedden had threaded the last of 
the intricate lanes leading to his father's house, and 
had debouched from a track of moorland that 
even the autumn sunshine could scarcely gladden, 
on to the main road leading to St. Petrock's — the 
sea now breaking upon his delighted vision with a 
broad grey lustre, only two fields off. Those fields 
led down to the caves at Endellion by a cross-path 
well known to such a seeker of sea-birds as our 
young student, and formed the last portion of the 
Tolpedden property; beyond which spread the pre- 
cipice and little bay of Dunchine. 

There were two or three red-hided cows sleepily 
feeding in the nearest field close to a tall slanting 
block of marbly slate, some tons in weight, sup* 
posed by such sound antiquarians as Borlase and 
Polwhele to have been a Druidical altar. 

Tolpedden stopped for a moment to look at the 
sea, vague as the future, sublime as immortality, 
restless as the human mind, treacherous as hope. 
All at once a man carrying a long-handled Cornish 
shovel, and a miner^s gad, stepped from behind the 
stone, with his back turned to the road, and began 
to pick and scrape eagerly in a place where the 
slate rock " cropped *' out of the surface. 

The indignation of a young landed proprietor 
instantly fired up in the spectator's breast. He 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 61 

leaped off his pony, tied his bridle to the gate, and 
running " at the double," was in a minute facing 
the intruder who, looked up slily and deprecatingly 
at his approach. 

It was the Dowser again — pale, sanctimonious 
and crawling as ever, in his greasy black clothes, 
that never seemed taken off, and a once white 
neckcloth, long since turned by age and dirt into 
the very ominous presentment of a rope. A huge 
purple birth-mark covering the whole left side of 
his face heightened the moist pallor of the other 
half, arid gave him a somewhat ghastly and super- 
natural character. 

" Wherewithall shall a young man cleanse his 
way even by ruling — ^" he said, as he squeezed the 
earth from his spade with his forefinger and thumb. 
"Ha, my dear Mr. Tolpedden, the gold of this 
land is good — ^yes, here is bdellium and the onyx 
stone.'* 

" Look here, you canting rascal," stormed the 
angry youth, "you be off — ^you know you're 
trespassing here? This isn't the first time Tve 
seen you sneaking about my father's fields. I won't 
have it. You mean as much good to us as a raven 
does to a sick lamb. Now, come, get out of it. 
You'll find nothing here, you rogue, to tempt 
greedy fools to dig bottomless pits to throw their 
wealth down. Now be off ; for I've a good mind to 
thrash you for your impertinent message to my 
father last night." 

"All good gifts may be abused," said the 



62 



Dowser, cantkrasly, however, all the time steallog 
towards the gate. ^The Lord sent us wine, bat 
he did not send ns drunkenness. Yes, I have been 
an instrument in my time, and so they'll tell you 
if yoQ ever go to St. Just ; tak them — ask them 
if they were not on the veiy point of abandoning 
the great copper mine under the sea, when I came 
with my divining rod and told them that there 
were acres of metal under the very blastings they 
had relinquished. Ha! my dear young friend, 
simly (seeming to me) you are one of those who, 
in driving from you the poor, sometimes turn 
away angels unawares. The wheal Mary Anne 
at ^" 

" Be off r said the young squire ; ** your impu- 
dent lies are worse than even your loathsome cant- 
ing — be off, I say T* 

The Dowser slunk away, showering suspicious 
blessings on his traducer^s head, like an evil spirit 
shrinking before some potent exorcism, as Tol- 
pedden, leaping on his pony^ trotted on towards St. 
Petrock's, singing with careless gaiety that beau- 
tiful and mocking air from RigolettOy ^ La Donna 
e mobile," having at the same time a most con- 
tradictory and profound belief in woman's truth, 
lying warm at a heart that love had hitherto scarcely 
visited, but for a flying moment. 

A quarter of an hour more brought him up to 
the rectory of St. Petrock's. As he pushed open 
the great gate that led through a meadow up to 
the house, a pretty little rosy nursemaid met him. 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 63 

driving vigorously a perambulator, containing the 
youngest Tregellas ; a fine little boy of a year and 
a half old, two bigger girls, and a pretty boy of 
some five years, bringing up the rear. They 
were going for their morning walk, that well- 
devised excursion that delights children, and at 
the same time leaves one's house for an hour or two 
quiet. The troop were in the most rampant spirits, 
and they all shouted together, *Mike one man," 
when they saw their playmate Tolpedden. 

" Give me a ride I" 

" Give me an apple I" 

" Dear Mr. Tolpedden — ^give me a kiss !" 

" Swing me on the gate !" 

"Let me pull some hair from Gipsy's tail!" 

Such were the entreaties of the young volup- 
tuaries, insatiable of noise, fun, sweets, and horse- 
hair. The elder boy, Leonard, ran up, and seizing 
the pony's bridle, led off Gipsy to the stable, as his 
own long-established privilege. 

" Do you know dear Lucy's coming home this 
week, Mr. Tolpedden?" exclaimed Bertha, the 
eldest girl, seizing both his hands prettily in hers ; 
" and we are all so glad — Lucy's such fun, and 
we do so love her 1" 

" Oh ! we shall have such fun when Lucy 
comes back," chimed in Dora. 

" We are all so glad !" loud chorussed the other 
children. 

Upon which Clara leaped about and danced; 
and even the little fat sultan in the perambulator 



64 6REATHEABT. 

clapped his chubby little hands together, and let 
recklessly fall a box full of red and white comfits 
jnst given him. 

**Yes, it's quite true,** said Kitty, the nurse- 
maid, ^^ Mr. Tolpedden ; and we are so delighted, 
because it's always cheerful when Miss Lncjr's 
a home, she sings and laughs all the day 
long." 

^' Jemmy, where are Lucas and Maclean?— out 
in the garden t" 

" Yes ; they're playing at single-stick," replied 
the boy, indignantly; "they^ve been pelting me 
with apples, I don't ^like it. I can't fling as 
far as thev can — ^'tain't fair ; and they do it every 
day." 

It was not more than half-past nine, and the 
young men at Mr. Tregallas's didn't ^^ go in to 
work," as they called it, till ten ; and knowing this, 
into the garden by a back door dashed the day- 
pupil. He flew past the green-house, lawn, and 
shrubbery, till he all but reached a long plot of turf, 
at the very bottom of the garden, a small Campus 
Martins, especially set apart for quoits, fencing, 
single-stick, boxing, and other athletic games be- 
loved by English youth. 

He had nearly reached the spot (the clatter of 
conflicting sticks sufficiently marking out the 
desired goal) which was still, however, hidden from 
him by a tall clump of Jerusalem artichokes, when 
a whistle through the dry leaves, followed by the 
whirl of a second missile, that burst to pieces on an 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 65 

apple-trunk close to him, sufficiently proved that 
his arrival was not unrecognised. 

Instantly, with the promptitude of a young 
Greek warrior surprised in an ambush, Arthur 
Tolpedden darted to the left of where he had just 
stood, and slipping into one of the side walks, 
picked up two of the greenest and toughest apples 
he could find. Then with the swiftness of an 
Indian brave, he stepped into a space that gave 
him a view of his assailants; well for Lucas 
that he wore a huge wire helmet, for the first 
shot of Tolpedden's burst full on that cumbrous 
defence ; while the second struck true and 
sharp just on the veiny part of Maclean's wrist, 
making him drop his single-stick, and utter an 
"Ohl I say!" and a half-angry shriek of pain. 
But before they could return the compliment, 
their assailant was in upon them, playfully 
charging Maclean with a single-stick he snatched 
from Lucas ; both enemies greeted him as he ran 
up, with an undemonstrative, but good-natured, 
" How are you, Tolpedden ?" 

"I say, you shouldn't shy so hard," groaned 
Maclean. 

" Have you seen the little man yet ?" (this was 
the irreverent term Mr. Tregellas's pupils gave to 
their worthy tutor), said Fitzhugh, a tall, flat-faced, 
loquacious fellow, in spectacles, who had been 
devoting himself to throwing up bludgeons and 
cricket-stumps at the walnuts in a tree, whose 
scrambling boughs spread over part of the Campus. 

VOL. I. F 



66 



"^How d^ye do, old fdlowt Fm toUd, thank 
yoa ! Noy I hsiTea't seoi the little man jet. Is 
he in his stnd j ?^ 

^Yes; and hasn't he beoi rowing about the 
wabiots r* said Fitzhngh, carefoUv aiming at thiee 
wabiats that hong half oat of their gie^i shocks 
on an ootlying boogh. ^Oh! he's a regolar 
goer-in f<ur wahiats. I swear he ate two-and>twenty 
jesterdaj, while I was reading Hiecuboy if he ate 
one. I tell von the little man 'U be ill — ^I bet he'll 
be ilL And it's jnst the same with the filberts, 
toomtoes (chom), kathapsas^ amphi (chom, cham), 
paidi (chmn). That is (chom) having bound it 
(cham) to what (chom) kid (chmn). Isn't that 
like the little man, eh, isn't itf 

There is a secret and unavoidable war always 
raging between a private tutor and his pupils; 
even if there had not been at St. Petrock's, no one 
could have well helped laughing at Fitzhugh's 
caricature of the harmless peculiarities of a tutor 
he really both liked and respected. 

^ I know that he counts those Kibston pippins 
by the kail-bed," said Lucas, just throwing in a 
gentle calumny, as a sort of hint, ^^ so don't you 
take one, Tolpedden. Oh ! I say, old man, I am 
going up to matriculate in May, so the governor 
says. What do you think of that ?" 

" That's about the time I shall enter," said Tol- 
pedden, ^ so perhaps we can both go up together. 
It's a long pull from here." 

'^Oh! I shall go to London first, ^nd stop a 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 67 

week with the governor and my people. I want a 
day or two to knock about, and go to the opera, 
a ball or two, and all that sort of thing." 

". Come, it's nearly ten, Lucas," said Tolpedden, 
snatching, up a single-stick ; " come on. I'll give 
you your revenge for the apple I shied. Come 
along — ^I'll warm you !" 

Lucas was lunging furiously with a foil at a 
walnut, inserted into a crack on an apple-tree, and 
had three times missed it. Maclean was practis- 
ing with quoits, and Fitzhugh, whose ambition 
was the bar, was spouting part of a speech of 
Sheridan's to two grave rows of Jerusalem arti- 
chokes, which rustled their approval. 

Tolpedden arranged the basket of the single- 
stick, hammered in the end pegs, for it was a 
little loose, and asl^umed that vexatious, and unap- 
proachable guard formed by turning the point of 
the stick slanting outwards and downwards, and 
holding the basket, with the wrist turned outwards, 
a little below the eyes. 

In vain Lucas lashed, cut, and sliced, till 
the bark was stripped from his ground-ash stick. 
He cut high, he cut low, he cut everywhere, his 
adversary's watchful weapon was always ready with 
the proper parry. The turf grew black with their 
trampling, Lucas began to puff and fall back. 
Then Tolpedden, like Wellington, bursting like an 
innundation from behind the lines of Torres- 
Vedras, all at once became his aggressor. He 
made a clever feint at Lucas's ribs, then 

F 2 



68 GBEATHEABT. 

leaped in, and cut him behind the right knee ; 
finally he gave him such a smart cut up under his 
guard, and on the elbow, that Lucas dropped his 
single-stick, and declared he had had enough. 

Tolpedden smiled, and, stripping up the shirt- 
sleeve of his right arm, showed a long red stripe, 
where Lucas had twice running caught him be- 
tween his parry and the basket. 

" You hit too hard — ^you really hit too spiteful ! 
Whew I" groaned Lucas, from an adjacent garden* 
bench. 

" I can't help it, Lucas," said Tolpedden, laugh- 
ing good-naturedly, as he tossed off his wired and 
padded mask. *' You know very well I can't play 
without hitting hard, I am not conscious of it 
at the time. And, after all, that second blow of 
yours hurt me, I dare say, quite as much, only I 
always try not to sing out." 

" Well, I cannot see the fun of being knocked 
about in that way," said Maclean, who was rather 
an effeminate fellow ; " as for boxing, that blow 
on the head I got from you last week, Lucas, 
makes me feel giddy now. But — ^hullo! there's 
the little man calling us." 

Yes, sure enough, there by the shrubbery, a 
hundred yards or more off, stood Mr. Tregellas, 
watch in hand, and calling out, " Mr. Lucas, Mr. 
Fitzhugh, Maclean — come." 

Tolpedden ran up. His tutor shook him warmly 
by the hand, inquired after his father, and 
asked if his uncle, whom he heard they expected. 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 69 

had arrived. The tutor was fond of a joke, and 
was full of a story of a malaprop of a country boy, 
who had just brought a leveret as a present from 
a neighbouring farmer, which animal he had insisted 
on calling "a Lazarus." Mr. Tregellas was in 
high spirits. It was the thought of soon seeing 
his favourite daughter that made him so. 

Mr. Tregellas, the high-church rector of St. Pe- 
trock's, was a short, square-built man of about forty- 
four, with good features, a high forehead, a firm 
mouth and chin, and a rather clever but subdued 
expression. He had been in the army in his early 
life, and still retained a little of the military 
manner in his alert and rather commanding bear- 
ing. He was a man of taste ; for he painted well, 
was no mean antiquarian, and carved so excellently 
that, when a curate, he had with his own hands 
executed the whole decorations of a church in 
Somersetshire. The rector of St. Petrock's was a 
man who lived the life he preached — his chief fault 
being quoting St. Augustine rather too often in 
his rather laboured sermons, and laying too great a 
stress on church furniture, and such things as 
altar cloths, wall diapers, encaustic tiles, and 
stained glass windows — all pleasant and decorous 
things, no doubt, in their way, but not in them- 
selves essential to faith, that can turn even a 
garden, a sea cliff, or a counting-house into a place 
of communion with God, and can transform the 
barest moor and the poorest huckster's shop into a 
temple for praise or supplication. 



I 



70 GREATHEART. 

Private pupils are not generally very deeply 
impi*essed with a sense of the truth of Buonarotti's 
golden maxim, that " life is short, and art is long," 
knowing little as yet of privation or the rubs of 
this jostling world ; they for the most part try to 
shirk as much as they can of hard work, hoping to 
slip past the frontier of learning, paying as little 
custom-house duty as possible, to such toll -col- 
lectors as the Reverend Mr. Tregellas. 

Even the vigilance of Argo once upon a time 
relaxed. The tutor had of course, sometimes, 
writing to do ; the last number of the clever but 
severe Saturday to read ; or pruning to do in 
the garden ; and would leave the room for twenty 
minutes or so, during which time the troubles of 
Hecuba, the wisdom of Thucydides, and the rather 
tough yarns of Herodotus, were alike disregarded. 
Fitzhugh preached, Tolpedden chatted and 
wrote verses, Maclean drew and read, and Lucas 
joked, betted, and clambered for cribs to parts of the 
bookshelves supposed to be inaccessible without a 
ladder. 

The moment the reverend gentleman shut the 
door a change came over every face. Out came 
the trout flies from Tolpedden's drawer, where 
they had been secretly planned; out jumped a 
novel of Balzac from under Maclean's superin- 
cumbent Greek Lexicon, that had been crushing 
it for an hour past; out fluttered Lucas's BelVs 
Life ; out stole Fitzhugh's " Life of Pitt," and 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 71 

then the four tongues went at it like a peal of 
bells long silent. 

Fitzhugh was the son of a rich pushing Man- 
chester man, and had been brought up under 
liberal and high-pressure notions. He adored 
Bright, delighted to call himself " the apostle of 
strikes," read "Mill on Liberty," and railed at 
the University system of education — a good-hearted, 
clever fellow he was, but a little vain, paradoxical, 
and mouthy, while the only conversation he ever 
countenanced was monologue. 

" I knew the Birmingham Game-un would 
never fight the Spider — Dawson was right, after 
all," said Lucas, with a dejected voice — " couldn't 
do it — ^not his weight ; but what the deuce is 
Fitzhugh drawing?" 

Fitzhugh held up the fly-leaf of an algebra 
book, and exhibited a female, long of neck, low of 
forehead, bosomless, shapeless, splay-footed, and 
with spindly twists of little tubular curls. 

" That is Miss Lucy Tregellas," he said, laugh- 
ing — " a fancy sketch." 

" It is a great pity, Fitzhugh," said Tolpedden, 
" that you always regard every new person, object, 
or idea from a contemptuous and supercilious 
point of view. Why should the girl be ugly ? — 
the little man isn't ugly — the other children ain't 
ugly ; why shouldn't she be pretty ?" 

" Not my style, I know," said Lucas ; " one of 
those strong-miuded girls, I daresay, who carry 



72 GREATHEABT. 

about flannel, and jelly, and opadeldoc to the poor, 
and wear woollen gloves, with large loose tops to each 
finger — no go about her — couldn't ride to hounds ! 
How chivalrous Tolpedden is about her !" 

" What verb's eporizonto from, Lucas ?" 

" Don't know." 

Fitzhugh arose in a fit of righteous indignation, 
and threw Hecuba on the floor. 

'^Whining stuff!" he cried — "drivelling old 
bore, with his Ai, ai! and O! O! and everyone blub- 
bering or scolding ! Why can't we read and scan 
Shakespeare t — ain't there old words in him to 
dissect and discuss, elaborate and beautiful struc- 
ture of sentences to study and examine, rhythm to 
imitate, and shades of meaning to explain and 
investigate ? How long are we to read third-rate 
Greek writers, because the pedants did so centuries 
ago! How long are we to forge nonsense 
Latin verse, useless as it is frivolous, because the 
monks, whom in other matters we condemn, made 
fools of themselves before us ? Who really cares 
for the little Pedlington war of Thucydides, the 
blundering voyages of Herodotus, the cold fire 
of most Greek plays, the tricks of that shifty 
scoundrel, Homer's Ulysses, and the miserable and 
discreditable jokes of Martial I I tell you we're all 
wrong ; the same time given to French, German, 
mathematics, history, philosophy, and an intense 
and thorough knowledge of our own great lan- 
guage and writers, would make men of us before 
we were twenty, and at twenty-one we should 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 73 

be fit to earn our bread in any profession. It's 
like teaching a boy to dance, but not to read. We 
are ruled by wind-bags, and are governed by 
shams, who lead us no whither." 

" Like a book," said Lucas, yawning profound- 
ly — "Hke a book; but, I say, Fitzhugh, BelVa 
lAfe says the Confederates have retaken Baton 
Kouge. Hurrah I they'll punish old Abe yet, if 
they once get his head into chancery." 

^* Hurrah for the brave Southern gentlemen !" 
shouted Fitzhugh, who was always oratorically 
impulsive. " Oh, for one hour of Washington to 
scatter the shivering ranks of those Yankee pedlars !" 

Tolpedden fired up. He was an ardent young 
Liberal, or rather, as he loved to call himself, " one 
of the great English party," and the spurious 
Liberalism of a "new man's" son irritated him 
sorely. 

"Are you quite sure," he said bitterly, "that 
Washington would fight on the side of slavery 
and political suicides ? It is always the new men, 
like you, Fitzhugh, who go about talking such 
stuff about the old families, and the old blood, and 
the chivalry of the South — people whom you 
ought to be ashamed of — stabbing, soul-huxtering, 
women-flogging planters, as they are ! I do not 
care myself much for so debased a race as the 
negroes, who are so degraded that they dare not even 
revolt ; but I do say this, that the man who is compelled, 
under pain of chain and whip and brand, to perform 
painfullife-longlabourforanother has aninalienable 



I 



74 GREATHEART. 

right to escape at any time, and at all times, by craft 
or by force; and, moreover, to turn and tear down, and 
crush, and batter and destroy, and trample out the 
life of any wretch who dares to pursue him and drag 
him back to slavery. 

" Here's a lark, Maclean !" cried Lucas. *^ Now 
they're at it, tooth and nail I Hie ! — hei ! — hei ! — ^at 
him, good dog ! Shoo !— pin him. Driver." 

Lucas had uttered these encouraging but not 
exactly complimentary words from half-way up a 
bookcase, whither he had climbed, at some risk, to 
procure a glimpse of a crib, and Thucydides 
(Bohn), that tough and condensed writer requiring 
much more attention than Mr. Fitzhugh could 
conveniently spare from the fascinating columns 
of BelTs Life. 

Fitzhugh's bulky brow darkened, and a con- 
temptuous and threatening light glittered on the 
glass of his insolent spectacles. 

" What do you mean by new men f " he said, 
biting his nails angrily. *^My ancestors are as 
good as yours. I have got a pedigree as long as 
yours. Our race is at the beginning of its best 
men — ^yours is at the end of it." 

*' That's stale, Fitzhugh," said his opponent con- 
temptuously, for both men were begininng to lose 
their temper. " You know very well, Fitz, what I 
think about race — although any great man can ini- 
tiate a race, not one in a million ever perpetuates it. 
Genius is not hereditary. Your vaunted pedigree 
is, I suppose, like half the pedigrees in the Peerage 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 75 

two thirds conjecture — a mere agglutination of 
similar names, collected from topographical dic- 
tionaries. But I do think that gentle feelings and 
refinement are often hereditary, and " 

" Well, and what ?— out with it I" 

"I'll be dictated to by no one !" said Tolpedden. 
" I was going on, when you interrupted me. I 
was about to say that the practices of modern trade 
is — are — not calculated to improve any race, and 
that '' 

"BoshI"stormed forth his antagonist, now crimson 
with rage. "I tell you that a Lancashire factory 
is the source of more civilization than all the 
petty " 

At this perilous juncture the door opened, and 
in stepped Mr. Tregellas. 

" Hallo ! — halloh !" he said, " young gentlemen, 
stop this stormy debate. Come, come, get to your 
work ; which of you is ready ? But, hallo ! — why, 
what bird is that perched up there I Lucas — 
Lucas I I must lock up those translations. I am 
surprised at you, sir — anything to escape work. 
You'll be plucked — ^you'll be plucked at your little 
go, take my word for it, yes, as sure as my name's 
Tregellas. Come, let us hear your Thucydides." 

Lucas leaped down, stammered something 
about a difficult passage, and, sitting down, con- 
trived to kick and tumble Belts Life softly and 
quietly underneath the knee desk on which he sat 
opposite to his irate tutor. 

" It's so horrid difficult, Mr. Tregellas." 



.Tiiiiiili^' 



76 GREATHEAKT. 

Lucas, in evident alarm, and much to the de- 
light of his three friends, plan^red at once, with 
great spirit, into the third book of Thucydides — 
that part where the seditions in Corcjra assume 
their most cruel aspect — ^fathers slew sons — sup- 
pliants were dragged from the sanctuaries, or im- 
mured in the temples, where they had taken refuge. 
As long as the Peloponnesians merely retreated by 
night, or drew their galleys over the Isthmus of 
Leucas, he stumbled along pretty well, Mr. Tre- 
gellas supplying any blank, in order to improve 
his speed ; but when it came to the closer reason- 
ing of the historian upon civil war in general, 
Lucas began to deduce from the words he had not 
looked out the most remarkable and imaginative 
meanings. 

" Ouk an ekontone — and as they — had no peace 
in time of war" (more mumbled Greek)," and no 
occasion to invite — ^when there was war— eporizonto 
— eporizonto— what verb is that from ?" 

" This is really too bad, Lucas. Sit down di- 
rectly, and learn it, sir — ^you know nothing about it. 
*No peace in time of war' — nonsense! One 
would think you were an Irishman. What's 
this thing, that keeps rustling under my feet ?" 
Here Mr. Tregellas dipped down, and sternly drew 
forth a crumpled BelUs Life. " Oh ! this is the 
way you spend your time, when I'm out of the room !" 

Lucas retreated in confusion behind an enor- 
mous Liddel and Scott lexicon bound in black 
doth. 



w 



THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 77 

" Now, Mr. Maclean, are you ready ?" 

Maclean handed his book, and fluently trans- 
lated two most difficult pages of " The Wasps " of 
Aristophanes quietly, and without a flaw, or scarcely 
a stop. 

"^Totus teres — factus ad unguem,' smoothly 
off the reel. That's what I like, Maclean," said 
the pleased tutor. " Now, Tolpedden, with your 
Herodotus." 

Tolpedden was ready. Herodotus was not diffi- 
cult to him, and he enjoyed the quaint stories of 
the old Halicarnassian. The structure of the sen- 
tences seemed simple, when the writer's manner was 
once known, and " Euterpe " was Tolpedden's fa- 
vourite book. 

Away he dashed at the story of the clever Egyp- 
tian thief, who robbs the treasury of King Rhamp- 
sinnitus, and who, being caught in a trap, entreats 
his brother who is with him to cut off his head, 
that his body may not be recognised, and the family 
ruined and disgraced; then leaving Herodotus, 
Tolpedden construed very poetically a Bacchic 
fragment of Bacchylides,.one of the imitators of 
Simonides. He described the soothing magic of 
wine, the sweet compulsion of the divine nectar 
that kills care and awakes love. The poet sings elo- 
quently of the dreams of the Thyrsus bearers, who, 
as they cast their eyes even for a moment on the red 
mirrors of their goblets, in that moment imagine 
that they overthrow embattled cities, and are 
crowned monarchs ; their houses suddenly glitter 



78 GREATHEART. 

with gold and ivoiy, and corn-laden ships come 
sailing to them from l^gypU " So soars the wine- 
cheered soul," concludes Bacchylides. 

"Grammar a little slip-shod, but the true feeling 
caught. You seem to relish poetry, Tolpedden," 
remarked the tutor. 

Tolpedden bowed, and his cheek slightly flushed, 
as, taking up the Greek book that he had placed 
before his tutor, he closed it, in order to place it 
back on the shelf among its companion Elzevirs. 
To his utter confusion, unfortunately (as once 
happened, we are told, to conscience-smitten young 
Osbaldistone in Scott's " Rob Roy"), a loose leaf of 
note-paper with some writing on it fell out and 
wafted to his tutor's feet. 

Mr. Tregellas took it up and read it, first to 
himself and then aloud, not uncontemptuously. 

" Roland, built up in his steel 
(Clamped from helmet unto heel), 
Rode three days beyond the Rhine 
Thro' the green rows of the vine, 
Where, upon the fir's black lances 
Here and there a sunbeam dances ; 
Roland rode o'er hill and plain, 
In the days of Charlemagne." 

" Upon my word — a poet, of all things ! Well, 
and what did Roland do then, I should like to 
know, after building himself up uncomfortably, 
in steel ? Oh ! beware, beware the Siren of 
Poetry! — she drowns men in whirlpools of ink, and 
impales them cruelly on chevaux-de-frise of steel 




THE PRIVATE TUTOR. 79 

pens ! I did a little once in that way — more fool 
I ! — writing fragments like this to no use ; they merely 
inflaten you with conceit, and with a belief in an 
imaginary and no existent power. Burn all 
your verses, epic and all — of course you ve tried an 
epic I" 

Tolpedden answered rather sharply that he had 
done nothing of the kind. 

'^ Here's some more," said the cruel tutor, turn- 
ing the leaf ; "this is our pastoral vein, I suppose." 

" When the swans in pouting beauty 
Of ermine radiant white, 
Sail down the rippUng river 
That floats in golden light ; 
When, in each bay and eddy, 
The saffron leaves " 

"Dear me! alas ! here there comes an hiatus in the 
MS. Well, and when all these extraordinary events 
do take place, what then ? Something ought to 
happen, you know, after this parturiunt monies" 

Tolpedden turned a wrathful red, and said half 
angrily, 

" No one has a right to read my private notes." 

"Tolpedden," said the worthy tutor sternly, "you 
forget yourself." 

At that moment there came a knock at the door ; 
Mrs. Tregellas looked in and said, 

"John, come and look at the apples Dawson has 
been picking. Come, don't keep me, dear." 

Mr. Tregellas rose protestingly, and said with a 
smile, pointing to Tolpedden, 



80 GBEATHEABT. 

*^ Allow me, Etty, to introduce to you a new 
poet." 

Mrs. Tregellas looked vacantly, and in a pre- 
occupied way, at the youth, and then said, 

" Come, John, they're waiting to put them in 
the cider mill. What are you talking about 
poetry ? Come. What's the matter then with Mr. 
Tolpedden ?" 

" And now you've got it," said Lucas to Tol- 
pedden, directly his long-suffering tutor shut the 
door behind him ; " how do you like it ?" 

" What has a private tutor to do with what I 
write?" protested the injured poet; "if he couldn't 
write verse, it is no reason why I should not." 

" Tolpedden, old fellow," said Fitzhugh, gener- 
ously seizing his hand, " forget what I said just 
now in a moment of petulance. The fact was, I 
was kinder riled at you're implying I was no true 
liberal. I ought to be ashamed of myself for 
having been so intolerant, after first reading, too, 
that glorious work of Mills on ^ Liberty.' " 

The two young men smiled and shook hands. 
You only needed to shake hands with Tolpedden 
at any time to shake out of him at once all anger 
and malice. It was only pride that ever led him to 
keep alive a quarrel. 

" There is good stuff in that young Tolpedden," 
said Mr. Tregellas that night as he sat over the 
fire with his wife, enjoying that pleasant period of 
married life (provided always there exists no chronic 
subject of difference) ; "there is what the Americans 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 81 

call ^the rigtt grit' in him; and he's got some genius 
too, if he doesn't get besotted with verse-writing 
and such nonsense." 

"He has beautiful eyes," replied his wife, taking 
quite a woman's point of view. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE SULTAN EDITOR. 

MR. TOLPEDDEN, senior, had two objects in 
driving to Dunchine. In the first place, he 
wished to show his brother one of the most beauti- 
ful and remarkable places in that part of the 
country. Secondly (for he was one of those far- 
seeing men who liked to kill many birds with one 
stone), he wished to call on Mr. Hookem, the Lon- 
don editor, who had come down for the autumn, as 
usual, to rusticate at Dunchine. Deep and stead- 
fast student of chemistry as Tolpedden was, perhaps 
one of the most progressive and fathomless of 
sciences, he was still a man of the world, and liked his 
" outing," his scenery, and his recreation as much 
as the merest boy-undergraduate. 

To those cynics who are accustomed, not per- 
haps altogether without groimds, to associate most 
brothers with those ill-assorted examples, Cain and 
Abel, it would have been a pleasant sight, (if 
cynics can ever really be pleased) to have seen 

VOL. I. G 



82 GBEATHEABT. 

Mr. Nelson and Mr. Henry Tolpedden driving 
together so pleasantly, and chatting so cheerfully 
in the dog-cart that bowled along so merrily on the 
dry, well-metalled road- 
Autumn had as yet done little more than crim- 
son and gild a few of the topmost leaves ; ex- 
cept the robin, perched on a stone wall, singing 
its little strain of almost playful sadness, nature 
seemed as yet insensible to the approach of ranter. 
The bramble tossed into the warm and sunny air 
its bunches of soft purple berries. The sun was as 
bright as if it was June. The clouds, too, over- 
head were as Uden with light as if winter^s fogs 
were impossibilities, and frost a fiction. 

Seated side by side in the dog-cart, the two 
brothers contrasted more strongly than ever. 
Nelson, short and thick-set, in his alert-looking 
Flushing jacket and grey wide-awake, looked almost 
like a man of inferior caste, but for the calmness 
and grave habit of command traceable in his brown 
honest old features, and even in the very way he 
clutched his bludgeon of an oak stick. 

And now it is fully time for me to describe the 
outward aspect of that singular person, Mr. Henry 
Tolpedden. He was a tall, sinewy man, nearly 
six feet high, well shaped, with no spare flesh about 
him ; his grave and dignified manner was chilled 
now and then by a shade of sternness, which arose 
from either intellectual pride, or the memory of 
some old sorrow, but the acutest observer could 
hardly have detected which was the true cause. 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 83 

His well-fitting dress was grave and dark coloured, 
his slight whiskers were iron grey, but, true to old 
tradition, he wore no beard or moustache. His 
eyes were dark grey, and had a peculiar power of 
expanding and contracting, so that he seemed 
capable of turning on their light as if they were 
lamps under his own control. In only one respect 
had he conformed to modem taste, and that was in 
his collars, which were turned down, his black 
silk handkerchief being fastened with a beautiful 
little cameo, engraved with a head of CaBsar. His 
features were handsome (he was thought by his 
London friends rather like the late Mr. Lockhart), 
and there was a healthy frosty red on his slightly 
sunken cheeks. 

Mr. Tolpedden had been alternately an officer 
and a clergyman, but the small fortune bequeathed 
him by his father had led him to abandon 
the latter profession, and surrender himself en- 
tirely to the fascinating pursuits of scientific dis- 
covery. Both professions had left some traces 
behind in his earnest and tenacious nature. That 
almost ascetic restraint of manner and temper was 
the result of his short clerical life; those com- 
pressed metallic lips, and that almost severe grip 
of the brow, betrayed the inward fire of one who 
had seen and defied death in its most hideous and 
appalling shapes. In every gesture of that man, 
in the way he held the reins, even in the manner he 
planted his feet on the little seal-skin mat of the 
dog-cart, there was vigour, ambition, and individu- 

g2 



84 GREATHEABT. 

ality. In the full, keen, far-seeing expression of 
his eyes, there was a restless thought, a subdued 
daring, and an almost regal consciousness of intel- 
lectual power. No one but a fool could have 
looked twice at that man without seeing that he 
was one of the old Koman stamp, who would 
brook no insolent assumptions of old or new money, 
and would endure no control from either pride, rank, 
or wealth. No wonder that his brother regarded 
him with a love by no means servile, and yet 
almost amounting to awe. In the nineteenth 
century Tolpedden was a discoverer, in the middle 
ages he would have been a leader and a con- 
queror. 

The two brothers had just reached a pretty part 
of the road, between Delabole and Launceston, not 
far from Camelford. It was a deep valley, with 
two or three roads leading out of it, and one of 
these was that trending away to Dunchine. At 
the bottom of the valley ran a stream, traversed 
by a stone bridge, and not far from a mill that great 
artists have before now visited. On one side of 
this wound down a broad green path, much steeper 
than the road, but taking a shorter cut across 
the stream. 

"That was the old coach-road, Nelson," said 
Mr. Tolpedden, pointing out the green track with 
his whip. "Steep enough; but our forefathers 
took rougher and shorter ways to their objects than 
we tamer people do." 

" Oughtn't we to fall in with that young shaver 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 85 

of ours soon ? But I suppose he's far too harum* 
scarum to keep an appointment I" 

" Oh ! he'll be at the next pike," said his father, 
curtly. " You don't know Arthur yet. This 
bridge. Nelson, they call Slaughter Bridge, be- 
cause, they say. King Arthur was slain here by 
his traitor nephew, who had leagued with the Lords 
of the White Horse." 

"Hullo! belay there 1 What's that, Harry, 
about a white horse? How the deuce can the 
fellows know what colour a horse was two or three 
hundred years ago I" 

*' It wag a flag I was talking of, you old Ig- 
noramus," said the elder brother, laughing ; " and 
as for two hundred years ago, if a King Arthur 
ever did live, he must have lived more than a thou- 
sand years ago." 

^^ Get away, Harry ; I know better than that — 
avast there 1" 

" You'll very likely see King Arthur in an 
hour or two, for they believe at Dunchine that he 
still haunts the headlands and caves there below 
the castle, in the shape of a raven or a gull, they 
will not swear which." 

" And what if they did ? — let them go and tell it 
to the marines, and not try and bamboozle an old 
man-of-war's man like me, Harry. I shall begin 
to think you've got a tile off, if you fill your head 
with such a pack of old Cornish woman's stories." 

"Don't you express a doubt about King Arthur, 
Nelson, to your nephew, his namesake, or you'll 



^86 GREATHEART. 

go down terribly in his estimation, for I can tell 
you he swears by that somewhat apocryphal British 
king." 

A mile farther, and at the door of the little 
turnpike house sat Arthur Tolpedden, upon sturdy 
little Gipsy, He waved his hand as they ap- 
proached, and a tidy, smiling widow came out to 
claim the toll. 

" Did you observe that woman's name, uncle ?" 
he said afterwards in alow and uncommonly solemn 
voice. 

Mr. Nelson Tolpedden replied that he only just 
glanced at it, but that he thought it was Jenny 
something. 

" Jenny ! — why, it was Jennifar^^ said Arthur, 
grandly; "which is our Cornish corruption for 
Gueniver, the name of King Arthur^s queen." 

" Oh 1 it is, is it," replied the immovable man, 
badly affecting an interest he did not feel ; and 
down he went like a plummet in his enthusiastic 
nephew's estimation, "I say, Harry, what skin 
is this mat made of that our feet are on ? It isn't 
calf-skin ?" 

"It's seal-skin, uncle, seal-skin," said Arthur, 
running in, and carrying off the conversation 
abruptly, but not rudely ; " the fishermen find the 
seals here on the ledges in the cliff-caverns. They 
go in with torches, and shoot and fell the beasts 
for their skins and oil. It's glorious fun — there 
are plenty about Endellion and at Willipark too." 

"That's the sort of thing for me. I like am- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 87 

phiblous sport. Harry, there, I tell you I should 
pine to death if I did not see the sea once a week." 

They had now passed through part of the Lesser 
Delabole slate quarries. On each side of them rose 
mountains of ochre-coloured slate refuse ; here and 
there aqueducts (flat wooden tubes), sometimes 
sheathed in stone, crossed the road high above 
their heads, stilted upon huge square supports. 
Everywhere the eye rested there was one chaos 
of discarded slate slabs, of all shapes and sizes, 
looking like the great Alexandrian library, after 
Amrou's barbarous order that all the books should 
be torn up to fire the Egyptian baths. 

Some of the older aqueducts were green and 
moist with damp ; the stones spongy with moss, or 
half-hidden with branching ferns. The only sound 
was the drip of some unseen spring, or the fussy, 
restless cry of a solitary stone-chat; here and 
there, among the grey shuffle of slate, lay an 
iron wheel or a broken pump-brake. Everj' now 
and then they would pass a small deserted quarry 
by the road-side, full of water, its precipitous sides 
red with ferruginous stains, or green with damp, 
while over-head hung some broken timber or 
rusty iron gear. 

"Why, this is about as lively as yesterday's 
drive," said Nelson Tolpedden, laughing in his 
dry, inaudible way ; 'pon my word if I don't think 
the moor was almost more lively. This is a nice 
country of yours, Harry 1" 

" Wait a bit, Nelson, and suspend your judg- 



88 GREATHEART. 

ment," replied his brother. ^* We'll just call on 
our editor first, and then you shall see a fine coast 
— and here we are at St. Nectans." 

St. Nectans certainly was a quaint little place ; 
one long, wide, straggling street, and that was all. 
There were two inns, a small shop or two, some 
miners' and fishermen's cottages, a general shop, a 
blacksmith's, and a post-oflSce. 

Such cottages some of them 1 There was one 
block opposite the post-oflSce that was as old as 
the Plantagenets ; the white-washed walls of the 
porches were many feet deep, and solid as those of 
a fortress ; the chimneys were tall, and of such 
enormous size, that they seemed to weigh down 
the whole block; the small windows were mere 
embrasures and loops ; the architect must have 
built them, you would have thought, to resist 
storms and war; the roofs were formed of over- 
lapping scales of cumbrous stone, in chinks of 
which grew weeds of great size and vigour, bristling 
house-leeks, crops of Aaron's beard, and even tufts 
of beautifully-patterned fern. 

The village of St. Nectans generally had cer^ 
tainly a wind-swept, lonely look about it, and 
required a great deal of sunshine to enliven it; 
but then it boasted a splendid ruin, and it was a 
fine place for conger fishing, and sea-fowl shoot- 
ing ; and those were the attractions that annually 
attracted many travellers. 

Mr. Tolpedden put up his trap at the " King 
Arthur;" the three then proceeded to the post- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 89 

office, where Mr. Hookem lodged, a rich crimson 
silk dressing-gown hanging at an upper window 
sufficiently indicating his habitat. 

The door was opened by the post-mistress ; but 
she instantly gave place to a smart London boy in 
a groom's dress, short frock coat, broad belt, and 
top-boots, who regarded the customers with keen 
and saucy eyes, and that peculiar contemptuous 
look peculiar to the servants of very rich or very 
influential people. 

" Is your master at home ?" said Mr. Tolpedden, 
sharply. 

"Not at 'ome, sir — out for the day, sir — name, 
sir?" said the boy, suspiciously. 

** Nothing of the kind, you infernal young liar, 
you I" cried a coarse, hearty voice from the top of 
the stair. " I only said * not at home ' till after 
lunch. Come up, Tolpedden — delighted to see 
you. Who have you got with you f 

Up they went, and found Mr. George Prince 
Regent Hookem, the Sultan of Editors — ^a portly, 
red-faced man, dressed in a costly shawl dressing- 
gown, and red morocco slippers. Coils of proofs, 
and long slips of printed paper, lay strewing like 
snakes around his easy chair. Bound files of his 
weekly review. The Forge, stood on the side-table 
near him. In one corner of the room there was a 
shuffled heap of the Times paper, sliced here and 
there by the editorial scissors ; on the table open 
lay the last Quarterly, a book of Mr. Ruskin's, 
and one of the worst novels of that peculiarly 



90 GREATHEART. 

(even for Paris) infamous \yriter — ^the younger 
Dumas. The little room was crowded with articles 
of luxury and elegance. There were exquisitely 
jewelled Sfevres cups of the Pompadour time on 
the humble mantelpiece. The Clyte stood on a 
bracket above a sumptuous French clock; the 
walls were hid with proof engravings of Landseer, 
Philip, and Frith, G6rome, Frfere, Delaroche, and 
MosB. Bonhenr. A door half open, leading to an 
inner room, showed glimpses of a French bed 
covered with an azure blue eider-down quilt, while 
about thirty pair of Judd's boots reposed in quiet 
companionship beneath a regally appointed toilet- 
table. 

These luxuries indicated Mr. Hookem to be a 
voluptuary of taste ; he was also an epicure and a 
sportsman. The bottles of Maraschino and golden 
water of Dantzig on the lunch tray, half hiding 
a cold pheasant, showed the one — the two guns and 
the fishing-rod in the comer proved the other. A 
pompous, unscrupulous, and sometimes overbear- 
ing man he might be — a mere pretender to litera- 
ture, and a crafty sucker of other men's brains ; 
but his blood was not, after all, by any means mere 
matter or bile, but evidently good red blood, not 
unsufifused with port wine; take the Republic 
of Letters through, there were, perhaps, worse 
men than Mr. Hookem in it. 

Not that the Sultan really cared for the party 
who paid him, or any other party, but still he em- 
ployed clever men, and did no more harm than 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 91 

was absolutely necessary for his commercial pur- 
poses. When he reasoned away a reputation, or 
butchered a young writer of genius, he only did 
It to try his knife, to keep his hand in, "pour 
encourager les autresy^ as Voltaire said, when 
that poor foolish Admiral Byng was shot for 
want of capacity. He stuck to his clique, and 
fitood up manfully for a sort of spurious toryism, 
hid under a mask of polite toleration. His 
natural capacity would have made him an invalu- 
able foreman in a printing-oflSce (a post which he 
had, indeed, filled years ago in the office of that 
high-toned, but now extinct paper— TA^ Scorpion) y 
but supernatural self-confidence, considerable tact, 
a sociable disposition, and great pliability, had at 
last raised him to the command of The Forge bomb- 
vessel, ninety guns, a dangerous privateer in the 
sea of Literature, and a rival almost to the stu- 
pendous Trimmer — that Jupiter Tonans of the 
London press. I would not imply, by all this, 
that Mr. Hookem was, by any means, a fool, but 
merely that his talent was rather of the social and 
commercial character. He had not genius enough 
to be very bad, or do mischief in any but a subal- 
tern way. 

It has often been observed that Napoleon at- 
tained the objects of his insatiable ambition chiefly 
by casting behind him all restraints of truth, 
honour, and religion; the same cause had led 
Mr. Hookem to the throne of the Forge^ over the 
heads of more honest, wiser, but less energetic men. 



92 GREATHEART. 

" Delighted to see you, Mr. Tolpedden, and you, 
my boy," said the editor, carefully removing from 
the edge of the table a glass flute which was in a 
perilous position, and placing it near a blue china 
pot, full of the most beautiful rose-coloured gladio- 
las, that stood in the window; *^ pardon a busy man 
for not calling so often as he ought ; I have had 
the Honourable Mr. Davenport (a love of titles 
was one of the parvenu^ s weak points) down here 
conger fishing, and all day yesterday I was up to 
ray eyes in work for Tlie Forge ;" here the Sultan 
suddenly broke off his monologue, and rang a 
silver bell violently, "pardon me for one mo- 
ment." 

The tiger appeared, pert, but pale. 

"Jackson, is that fellow gone to Port Isaac 
about the cod sounds ?" 

" Yes, sir." 

Jackson was certain. 

"Well, then, go round to the stables, Jack- 
son, and bring round my cob in about an hour ; 
and mind and bring the breech-loader and some 
cartridges." 

" Yes, sir," and Jackson disappeared. 

" But you have not introduced me to your friend, 
Tolpedden," said the editor, looking patronizingly 
at the old lieutenant. 

" My brother, Mr. Nelson Tolpedden, formerly 
lieutenant in the Indian Navy, and late oflScer 
in the Preventive Service." 

Mr. Hookem bowed grandly, not so much from 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 93 

politeness, as to show how he, the editor of the 
ForgCy could bow. 

"And a very fine and useful service, tool" he 
said. 

" Pretty well, for that," said the lieutenant ; 
" but useful or not useful, I've done with it." 

" And how are you, my boy ?" said the editor, re- 
moving a scarlet Fez cap he wore, and turning round 
and shaking Arthur Tolpedden by both hands. 
" When do you go up to dazzle St. Simon Magus, 
and make the Dons look to their fence ?" 

Arthur was too young and sincere to see the 
fulsome humbug of the man ; he observed only 
his good nature, his sharpness, the variety of his 
information and his power. He rather liked Mr. 
Hookem. 

"Soon, I hope," he replied. "I'm reading 
pretty hard with Mr. Tregellas." 

" Couldn't have a riper scholar. Whewell used 
those very words to me, when we were one day at 
Murchinson's, talking about Tregellas, and some- 
thing he'd written for me about etymology, 
apropos of Fergusson's book on Rivers. His 
daughter, a delightful girl, a belle in Florence last 
season, is coming back, I hear. High-spirited girl, 
great acquisition to you good people down here ; 
want ladies. I met her at the Casa Guidi ; I re- 
member she wore a small diamond and jet cross ; 
and speaking of her to Mrs. Bensolomon, I quoted 
those charming lines of Pope's : 



94 GBEATHEART. 

^ On her white breast a sparkling cross she wore, 
That Jews might kiss, and infidels adore/*' 

It was a singular fact that Arthur Tolpedden all 
at once felt, for an instant, pervaded by a sort of 
jealous dislike to all Anglo-Italian society, because it 
had admired the young lady whom every one 
seemed to love. These instincts some people are 
foolish enough to call presentiments. He began, at 
the same moment, to regard himself as a despica- 
ble bumpkin and bookworm, because he had seen 
nothing but local society, 

"Do you take snuff, Tolpedden t'* said the 
editor, offering a beautiful little amber and gold 
box. " I learned to relish it when I was in the 
East ** (Mr. Hookem had once been eight days in 
Algiers, and he made great play with it). " I love 
what Pope calls 

*• The pungent grains of titillating dust/ 

I find it revives me after brain-work." 

Mr. Henry Tolpedden declined, Mr. Nelson 
took a loose pinch and broke into convulsions of 
sneezing. 

. " I didn't like your article last week on Gallios 
at all," said Mr. Tolpedden, taking up a number 
of the Forge that lay on the table. 

The article alluded to was full of that plausible 
sophistry with which the Forge tickled the preju- 
dices of its readers. 

"Didn't you, really?" replied the Sultan, cozily 
arranging himself in his easy-chair. " Well, now. 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 95 

several of the Times men praised it up to the skies* 
A young man wrote it — we prefer men under 
thirty for the Forge. They're more pliable and 
quick; not yet got into those grooves that 
some men will insist on calling fixed principles. 
We don't let them go too far, or idealize, or fly in 
the teeth of common sense. The thing was all 
aimed at MacmillarCa ^W2iT Christians.'" 

" My dear sir, there was no high tone about it," 
said Mr. Tolpedden. " The beauty of Christianity 
is, surely, that it is above all expediency, and has 
ideals, almost but not entirely unattainable. The 
New Testament teaching is so pure and so perfect, 
that it is not to be reasoned on as if it was a book 
of Pluto. Your article spoke superciliously of 
Christianity as an invasion of the limitations of 
good sense, and yet of no good to mankind unless 
bound by those limitations. That surely means, if 
I understand your young rationalist's stealthy 
logic, that Christianity must be now modified to be 
of any use to the world." 

" Gallio was a very sensible, well-meaning man 
— that's what I think," said the editor ; " but, like 
most men of the world, he did not care to follow 
out all his conclusions; he respected the limita- 
tions of good sense — he had no taste, Tolpedden, 
for your great truths and great principles, as they 
are called. What do you say, my son ?" 

Arthur, who had heard all, and whose mind was 
at that moment at Florence, coloured slightly at 
being thus suddenly appealed to. Then, with a 



96 GREATHEART. 

brave effort of moral courage, and a generous con- 
tempt for mean, insincere temporizing, he said : 

" I'm dead against GaJlio. Great truths must 
contain good sense — ^yes, and the best sense." 

"I see I'm outvoted. But I might have ex- 
pected as much from the writer of those vigorous 
verses on that narrow-minded old soldier Gari- 
baldi," said the editor, drawing out a number of 
the New Monthly Magazine from under a pile of 
operatic music. 

Arthur tried to brace himself into composure, 
but he utterly failed. 

Mr. Hookem read the verses aloud, with rather 
a malicious exultation, still mouthing them with 
considerable spirit. 

** *No grinding cannon, smeared with blood and dust ; 
No savage faces, black with powder stains ; (capital /) 
No gory colours, hedged around with steel, 
Andmusketsfreshfrombeatingoutmen^s brains/ (strong!) 

And, here again, this is good : 

* Conquerors do devil's work in Heaven's name, (old!) 
And hew their pathway to a gilded tomb. 
To earn a trophied seat, a marble grave, a wreath 
Of fading leaves, to keep their scars in gloom !' 

Excellent! — ^reminds me of a cameo of Caesar. 
Then, this ending I like, only I don't agree with 
it: 

*■ Has the old dream come true ? — ^has then at last 
The golden age dawned to the perfect day ? 
Pull down the Caesar's trophies and their flags — 
This is a conqueror in a nobler way.' 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 97 

Good ; and in the lieroic vein. Young man, 
you'll do better than this some day; but, for 
Heaven's sake, Mr. Tolpedden, don't let him throw 
his verses into the dust-hole of a stale old faded 
magazine that nobody reads. Send them to Fraaer. 
Now mark me, Froude, though I don't agree in all 
his paradoxes, is a clever, kind fellow, and he'll 
give them a hearing." 

Mr. Tolpedden looked pleased, but rather grave. 

" My boy," he said, " has few secrets from me, 
Mr. Hookem ; but I certainly didn't know he had 
yet launched his verses into print. Vanity I — 
vanity ! Well, I like him to practise verse ; but 
I'd much rather he'd stick just now to his Greek, 
and train for a double first." 

'^The only poetry I ever heard that was worth 
reading twice was Dibdin's songs," said the poet's 
uncle, with all the effrontery of ignorance. 

" We're going to show my brother the ruins of 
the old castle, Mr. Hookem." 

"Then I'll go with you, bedadi if you'll 
only just wait while I slip on my coat and get a 
cigar," said the editor, leaping up with gay alert- 
ness, stout as he was, and darting into his bed- 
room. 

He re-appeared promptly, clad in a black velvet 
shooting-jacket, and carrying a big clouded cane, 
with a massive silver head, stamped with the some- 
what apocryphal arms of the Hookem family. 

During their walk, the Sultan became very 
eloquent on the failings of the poorer classes 

VOL. I. H 



98 GREATHEART. 

(or lower classes, as he always called them), for the 
country boys lost his parcels and blundered his 
telegraphic messages, "The fact is," he said, 
"I boldly confess, Tolpedden, I don't like the 
lower classes — they bore me with their dirt and 
stupidity, greediness and improvidence — they want 
a good tight hand. I should like to stop all fool- 
ish almsgiving for one year, and then they'd be 
more grateful to their rulers, I'll be bound." 

Arthur was just about to charge forward in 
defence of the long-suffering poor of England, 
so much talked about, and so little cared for, when a 
tall young clergyman, with long dark hair, and a 
thin pale face, with a pleasant but rather wild 
expression on it — with his sister leaning on his arm 
— came suddenly round a comer of a lane and 
greeted their party warmly, and wuth that hearti- 
ness that is indigenous to the country. 

" Well, how does the adult school get on, Mr. 
Trevena ?" said the Sultan, genially. 

" Excellently," he said, *' excellently. Two of 
the miners fought about a copy-book last night ; 
but that will not happen again, for I reprimanded 
them severely. I think I've done wonders. You 
must remember, Mr. Wilson, my predecessor, was 
twice knocked down in the school-room by one of 
the stronger lads, whom he had reproved for very 
improperly lighting a pipe." 

" I do all I can to make my brother more prac- 
tical," said Miss Trevena, a hard-faced woman, 
who was evidently no enthusiast in clerical work. 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 99 

The moment they had passed, the Sultan said, 

" That's one of the best low churchmen I ever 
knew ; but he's a perfect child in the ways of the 
world. He wears the rudest things, to save money 
for charity — paper collars, coats from Moses' ; 
spends whole days down in the slate quarries 
reading to the men ; but he'll never rise in his 
profession— he's too extreme." 

" Why ?" said Arthur, innocently. 

"Why I — ^w^hy, because he's a dreamer, and carries 
things too far. They don't want fanatics for 
bishops now ; bishops are chosen from the ranks of 
good scholars — the older the better — ^princes' tutors, 
relations of noblemen; they don't want saints, 
restless philanthropists, reformers, or troublesome 
original men." 

" The more's the pity, Hookem," said Mr. Tol- 
pedden, senior. *^ I cannot fancy the Apostles in 
the House of Lords." 

" Well, I'd rather have a sort of man like Tre- 
vena," said the Sultan, "I will confess, than a 
fantastic furniture man like our young high 
church curate at Saint Tudy's, who comes teasing 
me about money for splay-footed saints, and ridi- 
culous little sinks and cupboards, and slant slits 
in the wall, and Gregorian chants, and all that sort 
of thing." 

By this time the party had left the village 
behind them, and descended a long winding walk 
through a rocky valley leading to the sea, which 
the brook, whose course they followed, struggled 

h2 



98 GREATHEART. 

(or lower classes, as he always called them), for the 
country boys lost his parcels and blundered his 
telegraphic messages. "The fact is," he said, 
"I boldly confess, Tolpedden, I don't like the 
lower classes — they bore me with their dirt and 
stupidity, greediness and improvidence — they want 
a good tight hand. I should like to stop all fool- 
ish almsgiving for one year, and then they'd be 
more grateful to their rulers, I'll be bound." 

Arthur was just about to charge forward in 
defence of the long-suffering poor of England, 
so much talked about, and so little cared for, when a 
tall young clergyman, with long dark hair, and a 
thin pale face, with a pleasant but rather wild 
expression on it — with his sister leaning on his arm 
— came suddenly round a comer of a lane and 
greeted their party warmly, and with that hearti- 
ness that is indigenous to the country. 

" Well, how does the adult school get on, Mr. 
Trevena I" said the Sultan, genially. 

" Excellently," he said, " excellently. Two of 
the miners fought about a copy-book last night ; 
but that will not happen again, for I reprimanded 
them severely. I think I've done wonders. You 
must remember, Mr. Wilson, my predecessor, was 
twice knocked down in the school-room by one of 
the stronger lads, whom he had reproved for very 
improperly lighting a pipe." 

" I do all I can to make my brother more prac- 
tical," said Miss Trevena, a hard-faced woman, 
who was evidently no enthusiast in clerical work. 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 101 

fames scopulos Acroceraunia^ that Horace men- 
tions." 

It is a curious fact, that not only M.P.'s, but 
classical sciolists generally, delight to quote Horace 
almost as if they actually seriously believed that a 
worn-out truism became quite a new and original 
saying if thrown into Latin. Horace, the pet 
author of the House of Commons, was the only 
classic with whom Mr. Hookem was even decently 
acquainted ; so, when he did quote him, he mouth- 
ed his lines with an imposing dignity that was almost 
Ciceronian. 

A hundred yards or so further on there lay a 
rocky peninsula, almost severed from the main- 
land, and crowned by the ruins of the once famed 
Castle of Dunchine. 

They stood on a hoUowed-out broad platform of 
rock, over which the stream (its fretful wandering at 
last ended) hurried in a silvery cascade, over a green 
growth of weeds, whose seedlings, after a watery 
pilgrimage, had here found a precarious foothold. 
Below this platform, and out in the little bay, the 
great sea, turbulent, though defeated in the cease- 
less war of centuries, rolled and scathed, and 
dashed in a maelstrom of angry broth, round 
black isolated rocks, each of which, the fancy had 
little difficulty in supposing, must have been, on 
many a ghastly winter's night, the last hope of 
many a bruised and bleeding sailor. Beyond, to 
to the left, from innumerable low jagged masses of 
rock — with many undulations, and changes of 



100 GREATHEART. 

• 

restlessly to reach. Wild blu£Fs of ochry slate 
rock piled on either side, like stone tossed 
from a fosse dug by primeval giants, cropped up 
in grey chines and massy reddish ramps, like 
sketches of Titanic fortifications. 

At the door of a rude stone cottage, the resi- 
dence of some unsocial quarryman or fisherman, the 
entrance, as usual in Cornish cottages, turned from 
the path, Mr. Nelson Tolpedden made as dead a 
halt as if he had been a pointer. His eyes were 
fixed on a big, sodden-looking beam of wood, in the 
centre of which a leaden pipe had been sunk, while 
a stain of blue paint was here and there visible at 
one end of the wood. An all-pervading sense of 
pig filled the air, for there was at boy routing about 
in a dirty pig-sty. 

" Harry," said the old sailor, " that's a bit of a 
wreck, I'll bet twenty guineas — a bit of some poor 
ship's tank." 

Arthur asked the boy tending the pig with such 
brotherly care if it was so. The third time he was 
asked, the boy replied, 

" Ees ; 'tis." 

" It was a portion of a French wine vessel," said 
Mr. Hookem, turning and joining the group. " I 
tasted some of the w^ine the other day at Camel- 
ford, and it had the real Cote cCor flavour — ^no earth 
in it, but just a soupgon of the flint. Why, there 
isn't a cove on this north coast that hasn't some 
wreck timber strewn somewhere about. These 
cliffs, I begin -to think, were actually the ^in- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 101 

m 

fames scopulos Acroceraunia^ that Horace men- 
tions." 

It is a curious fact, that not only M.P.'s, but 
classical sciolists generally, delight to quote Horace 
almost as if they actually seriously believed that a 
worn-out truism became quite a new and original 
saying if thrown into Latin. Horace, the pet 
author of the House of Commons, was the only 
classic with whom Mr. Hookem was even decently 
acquainted ; so, when he did quote him, he mouth- 
ed his lines with an imposing dignity that was almost 
Ciceronian. 

A hundred yards or so further on there lay a 
rocky peninsula, almost severed from the main- 
land, and crowned by the ruins of the once famed 
Castle of Dunchine. 

They stood on a hollowed-out broad platform of 
rock, over which the stream (its fretful wandering at 
last ended) hurried in a silvery cascade, over a green 
growth of weeds, whose seedlings, after a watery 
pilgrimage, had here found a precarious foothold. 
Below this platform, and out in the little bay, the 
great sea, turbulent, though defeated in the cease- 
less war of centuries, rolled and scathed, and 
dashed in a maelstrom of angry broth, round 
black isolated rocks, each of which, the fancy had 
little difficulty in supposing, must have been, on 
many a ghastly winter's night, the last hope of 
many a bruised and bleeding sailor. Beyond, to 
to the left, from innumerable low jagged masses of 
rock — with many undulations, and changes of 



100 GREATHEART. 

« 

restlessly to reach. Wild bluffs of ochry slate 
rock piled on either side, like stone tossed 
from a fosse dug by primeval giants, cropped up 
in grey chines and massy reddish ramps, like 
sketches of Titanic fortifications. 

At the door of a rude stone cottage, the resi- 
dence of some unsocial quarryman or fisherman, the 
entrance, as usual in Cornish cottages, turned from 
the path, Mr. Nelson Tolpedden made as dead a 
halt as if he had been a pointer. His eyes were 
fixed on a big, sodden-looking beam of wood, in the 
centre of which a leaden pipe had been sunk, while 
a stain of blue paint was here and there visible at 
one end of the wood. An all-pervading sense of 
pig filled the air, for there was at boy routing about 
in a dirty pig-sty. 

" Harry," said the old sailor, " that's a bit of a 
wreck, I'll bet twenty guineas — a bit of some poor 
ship's tank." 

Arthur asked the boy tending the pig with such 
brotherly care if it was so. The third time he was 
asked, the boy replied, 

" Ees ; 'tis." 

" It was a portion of a French wine vessel," said 
Mr. Hookem, turning and joining the group. " I 
tasted some of the wine the other day at Camel- 
ford, and it had the real Cote dHor flavour — ^no earth 
in it, but just a souppn of the flint. Why, there 
isn't a cove on this north coast that hasn't some 
wreck timber strewn somewhere about. These 
cliffs, I begin 'to think, were actually the 'in- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 101 

fames scopulos Acroceraunia^ that Horace men- 
tions." 

It is a curious fact, that not only M.P.'s, but 
classical sciolists generally, delight to quote Horace 
almost as if they actually seriously believed that a 
worn-out truism became quite a new and original 
saying if thrown into Latin. Horace, the pet 
author of the House of Commons, was the only 
classic with whom Mr. Hookem was even decently 
acquainted ; so, when he did quote him, he mouth- 
ed his lines with an imposing dignity that was almost 
Ciceronian. 

A hundred yards or so further on there lay a 
rocky peninsula, almost severed from the main- 
land, and crowned by the ruins of the once famed 
Castle of Dunchine. 

They stood on a hoUowed-out broad platform of 
rock, over which the stream (its fretful wandering at 
last ended) hurried in a silvery cascade, over a green 
growth of weeds, whose seedlings, after a watery 
pilgrimage, had here found a precarious foothold. 
Below this platform, and out in the little bay, the 
great sea, turbulent, though defeated in the cease- 
less war of centuries, rolled and scathed, and 
dashed in a maelstrom of angry broth, round 
black isolated rocks, each of which, the fancy had 
little difficulty in supposing, must have been, on 
many a ghastly winter's night, the last hope of 
many a bruised and bleeding sailor. Beyond, to 
to the left, from innumerable low jagged masses of 
rock — with many undulations, and changes of 



102 6REATHEART. 

levels — ^rose the broad, billowing cliffs, green with 
tnrf, and padded with spongy lumps of sea-pink. 

Bat the point to which the ejes of the four at 
once tnmed was the towering peninsula of wall, at 
least three or fonr hundred feet high^ on the slop- 
ing side, as well as on the sammit of which conld 
be seen the cmmbling grey walls of the once 
stately castle, if not of King Arthur, at least of the 
great earls of Cornwall. Here, at least, it was 
historically certain, that Earl Richard, the son of 
that black tyrant, John, had revelled and banqueted 
with his guest, a Welsh prince. But no armour 
clanked now in banquet-hall — no horse neighed at 
the postern gate — no harp sounded — no drum beat 
— no flag fluttered, no lady's robes stirred in the 
sea-breeze — all was silent and grave-like, for the 
knights had been 

'^Dust, and their good swords mst, 
And their brave souls with the saints, we trust,^ 

centuries and centuries since. 

Above these grey ruins, on a grassy platform 
of the promontory, stood an isolated old chapel, 
with its massive stone altar still remaining ; on the 
mainland, separated by a chasm, where the sea had 
eaten its way through the isthmus, there were also 
more remains of walls and turrets; for a draw- 
bridge had once joined this peninsula to the part 
of the castle on the land side of the gulf. 

All these points of interest were duly and elo- 
quently dilated on by Arthur Tolpedden, as the 
party pursued their winding way up a long dan- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 103 

» 

gerous staircase, cut in the solid rock, to the door, 
the key of which they had obtained at the miner's 
cottage as they passed. 

" It is like Uhland's Castle," said Arthur, and 
he sang cheerily — 

" * There was a stately castle, 
A castle by the sea, 
Golden and red, the clouds o^er head 
Were floating gorgeously.* 

A penny for your thoughts, father !" 

" I was thinking what a strange junction there 
is here of slate, marble, and hornblende, so like 
the Cape Cornwall strata," said his father, who 
had been absorbed in thought, and was poking a 
crumbling rock with his stick. 

" Don't get bitten with the cursed mining mania, 
so fatal to you Cornish folk," said Hookem. 
"You see that big rock out there to the west; 
well, that's the finest place for big conger in the 
world." 

"In my opuiion, Arthur," said Mr. Nelson 
Tolpedden, "this place is only an old Martello 
Tower." 

Arthur flamed up into vituperative indignation. 

" Why, uncle, the castle is mentioned in Doomes- 
day Book as the Castle of the Cleft. The old ro- 
mances talk of it." 

" I don't care whose book it's in I" replied the 
daring sciolist, ignoring altogether the Conqueror^s 
great census-taking ; " but let's go down. I feel 
quite giddy " 



104 GREATHEABT. 

Out came a little wicker brandy-bottle from Mr. 
Hookem's capacious pocket, and the old sailor took 
some under protest, and medicinally. 

They descended again, till they reached 
the little stage overlooking the little bay. There 
were two boats lying like stranded fish on the 
rocks ; and they came to a wooden crane, girded 
with chains, that had once been used to lower 
boats, and load vessels lying below with slate. 

** Je-mi— ma T said the astonished old sailor. 
^^ Why, no boat could live in such a sea as there 
must be here nine davs out of ten.** 

" Not when there's a swell on,** said Hookem ; 
" but at other times, yes. By-the-bye, Tolpedden, 
that young Bradbrain, the doctor, I mean, called on 
me just before lunch, and told me that last 
night be had met a trap, and that the driver had 
inquired for your house, so I made sure that your 
brother had come.^ 

^ Oh ! then, that was the fellow in the dark," 
said NelsoD Tdpedden, 

At that mom^it a screaming doud of gulls 
rose from the mouth of a cavi»ii on the promon- 
tory^ not far off; Arthur, drawing a loaded re- 
voIt^t from a beh he wue, firal it into the middle 
of tli«iu They swonned, but none saeemed to hH; 
then lliey swiqpt off round the eastecn hewUand. 

^Nothiiij; to llie bag this time,"^ said Mr. 
Hookem, laogfaing. 

* Yes^ I think I winged one — ^I saw him stoop 
lower than llie rost,"^ i^qplied Aithon daiting down 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 105 

a path leading to the beach. He re-appeared iii 
five minutes with a dead gull, its right wing 
shattered by the bullet. He cheered as he came 
back to the group. 

" It was a fluke, of course," he said ; " but I 
took steady aim at the centre bird, and I thought 
I might catch one of the laggers, because I'm 
always practising." 

**I shan't call you out," said the Sultan, 
with a smile ; '^ it was a good shot, and a long shot. 
A revolver is no use for much more than thirty 
yards ; though I know they wiU caiTy a hundred. 
Well, good-bye all of you — tat ta. Fm going 
now to try and shoot a cock or two (not a cock- 
atoo, mind) on no man's land out there ; and may 
Mordred soon pull you out of Chancery, with a 
good sound title to it. I see the boy coming with 
my cob. Tat ta !" 

Before the Tolpeddens had gone far up the 
valley, they heard Hookem's double-barrel go off 
— bang I bang! 

*^ There goes the second barrel, I daresay to 
correct the blunders of the first," said Mr. Henry 
Tolpedden. 

" Oh ! Hookem's a good shot with everything 
but a rifle. Pater," said Arthur ; " he does brag, 
but I like the man after all. Do you know, he's 
been talking to me about giving a silver cup to be 
shot for by our corps ; and he purposes no end of 
jolly pic-nics and fishing-parties. He's really not 
a bad sort — what do you think, uncle ?" 



4 



106 OREATHEART. 

" Think ! — ^why, I think he'd talk a horse blind, 
if you'd give him time." 

*' He plays a good hand at whist, Nelson," said 
Mr. Henry Tolpedden. " Of course I don't swallow 
all that his paper, the Forge, says; but Hookem him- 
self is certainly what Dr. Johnson used to call * a 
club-able man," and a great acquisition to us down 
here — ^isn't he, Arthur t" 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE MERMAID. 



THE day after this visit to Dunchine, Arthur 
Tolpedden absented himself from Mr. Tre- 
gellas's, as every Thursday and Saturday, by his 
father's wish, it was his habit to ride to Boscastle, 
and there read and talk French and Italian with 
M. Achille Capron, an old ex-Bonapartist officer, 
who had for some inscrutable reason settled him- 
self down in that obscure nook of Cornwall. 

He returned to dinner to find his father and 
uncle very happy in each other's society ; and the 
latter especially delighted at the prospect of meet- 
ing his wife and children at Bodmin on the day 
following. 

At dinner the two brothers were full of old 
times; Arthur let them talk, almost without an 
interruption, for he enjoyed to hear old family 



THE MERMAID. 107 

anecdotes, and he was not so restlessly vain as to 
be impatient at being kept silent. 

" Do you remember !" was the key-note of the 
whole conversation ; and how pleasantly those magic 
words called forth old memories. 

"Do you remember, Nelson," asked the elder 
brother, as he dissected a hare with such skill that 
it seemed to fall to pieces under his keen, heavy 
knife, " how poor Charles fought Bogy GriflSn, 
because he let out the water from the mill-pond, 
where we were skating ?" 

" Of course I do (stuffing, if you please) ; 
Bogy tore out a handful of Charles's hair ; and 
do you remember how we used to go and tickle 
trout and get crawfish in the Sherrington brook, 
and how the ferret bit me through the nail in 
Farmer George's burrows f " 

" And, my ! what trout they were I" said Liddy, 
who presided at the sideboard, and ruled Fanny 
with a rod of iron. 

" They were, Liddy ; yes, bull-headed, broad- 
shouldered, crimson spots on them, and splendid 
flavour ; and do you remember. Nelson, the mad cat 
that flew round the kitcheri, and how Charles went 
in and killed him with my father's sabre I Poor 
Charles, he was as brave as a lion !" 

" Where did Uncle Charles die ?" inquired 
Arthur. 

"He died in a French prison at the Isle of 
Bourbon," replied his father ; " he was captain of 
a prize that his frigate, the Jaaoriy had captured, 



98 GREATHEART. 

(or lower classes, as he always called them), for the 
country boys lost his parcels and blundered his 
telegraphic messages. "The fact is," he said, 
"I boldly confess, Tolpedden, I don't like the 
lower classes — they bore me with their dirt and 
stupidity, greediness and improvidence — they want 
a good tight hand. I should like to stop all fool- 
ish almsgiving for one year, and then they'd be 
more grateful to their rulers, I'll be bound." 

Arthur was just about to charge forward in 
defence of the long-sufiFering poor of England, 
so much talked about, and so little cared for, when a 
tall young clergyman, with long dark hair, and a 
thin pale face, with a pleasant but rather wild 
expression on it — with his sister leaning on his arm 
— came suddenly round a comer of a lane and 
greeted their party warmly, and w4th that hearti- 
ness that is indigenous to the country. 

" Well, how does the adult school get on, Mr. 
Trevena ?" said the Sultan, genially. 

" Excellently," he said, " excellently. Two of 
the miners fought about a copy-book last night ; 
but that will not happen again, for I reprimanded 
them severely. I think I've done wonders. You 
must remember, Mr. Wilson, my predecessor, was 
twice knocked down in the school-room by one of 
the stronger lads, whom he had reproved for very 
improperly lighting a pipe." 

" I do all I can to make my brother more prac- 
tical," said Miss Trevena, a hard-faced woman, 
who was evidently no enthusiast in clerical work. 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 99 

The moment they had passed, the Sultan said, 

" That's one of the best low churchmen I ever 
knew ; but he's a perfect child in the ways of the 
world. He wears the rudest things, to save money 
for charity — paper collars, coats from Moses' ; 
spends whole days down in the slate quarries 
reading to tlie men ; but he'll never rise in his 
profession — he's too extreme." 

" Why ?" said Arthur, innocently. 

"Why I — ^why, because he's a dreamer, and carries 
things too far. They don't want fanatics for 
bishops now ; bishops are chosen from the ranks of 
good scholars — the older the better — princes' tutors, 
relations of noblemen; they don't want saints, 
restless philanthropists, reformers, or troublesome 
original men." 

'^ The more's the pity, Hookem," said Mr. Tol- 
pedden, senior. *^ I cannot fancy the Apostles in 
the House of Lords." 

" Well, I'd rather have a sort of man like Tre- 
vena," said the Sultan, "I will confess, than a 
fantastic furniture man like our young high 
church curate at Saint Tudy's, who comes teasing 
me about money for splay-footed saints, and ridi- 
culous little sinks and cupboards, and slant slits 
in the wall, and Gregorian chants, and all that sort 
of thing." 

By this time the party had left the village 
behind them, and descended a long winding walk 
through a rocky valley leading to the sea, which 
the brook, whose course they followed, struggled 

h2 



100 GBEATHEART. 

« 

restlessly to reach. Wild bluffs of ochry slate 
rock piled on either side, like stone tossed 
from a fosse dug by primeval giants, cropped up 
in grey chines and massy reddish ramps, like 
sketches of Titanic fortifications. 

At the door of a rude stone cottage, the resi- 
dence of some unsocial quarryman or fisherman, the 
entrance, as usual in Cornish cottages, turned from 
the path, Mr. Nelson Tolpedden made as dead a 
halt as if he had been a pointer. His eyes were 
fixed on a big, sodden-looking beam of wood, in the 
centre of which a leaden pipe had been sunk, while 
a stain of blue paint was here and there visible at 
one end of the wood. An all-pervading sense of 
pig filled the air, for there was a boy routing about 
in a dirty pig-sty. 

" Harry," said the old sailor, " that's a bit of a 
wreck, I'll bet twenty guineas — a bit of some poor 
ship's tank." 

Arthur asked the boy tending the pig with such 
brotherly care if it was so. The third time he was 
asked, the boy replied, 

" Ees ; 'tis." 

" It was a portion of a French wine vessel," said 
Mr. Hookem, turning and joining the group. ^^ I 
tasted some of the wine the other day at Camel- 
ford, and it had the real Cote dor flavour — no eartli 
in it, but just a soupgon of the flint. Why, there 
isn't a cove on this north coast that hasn't some 
wreck timber strewn somewhere about. These 
cliffs, I begin -to think, were actually the Hn- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 101 

fames scopulos Acroceraunia^ that Horace men- 
tions." 

It is a curious fact, that not only M.P.'s, but 
classical sciolists generally, delight to quote Horace 
almost as if they actually seriously believed that a 
worn-out truism became quite a new and original 
saying if thrown into Latin. Horace, the pet 
author of the House of Commons, was the only 
classic with whom Mr. Hookem was even decently 
acquainted ; so, when he did quote him, he mouth- 
ed his lines with an imposing dignity that was almost 
Ciceronian. 

A hundred yards or so further on there lay a 
rocky peninsula, almost severed from the main- 
land, and crowned by the ruins of the once famed 
Castle of Dunchine. 

They stood on a hoUowed-out broad platform of 
rock, over which the stream (its fretful wandering at 
last ended) hurried in a silvery cascade, over a green 
growth of weeds, whose seedlings, after a watery 
pilgrimage, had here found a precarious foothold. 
Below this platform, and out in the little bay, tlie 
great sea, turbulent, though defeated in the cease- 
less war of centuries, rolled and scathed, and 
dashed in a maelstrom of angry broth, round 
black isolated rocks, each of which, the fancy had 
little difficulty in supposing, must have been, on 
many a ghastly winter's night, the last hope of 
many a bruised and bleeding sailor. Beyond, to 
to the left, from innumerable low jagged masses of 
rock — with many undulations, and changes of 



102 GREATHEART. 

levels — rose the broad, billowing cliffs, green with 
turf, and padded with spongy lumps of sea-pink. 

But the point to which the eyes of the four at 
once turned was the towering peninsula of wall, at 
least three or four hundred feet high, on the slop- 
ing side, as well as on the summit of which could 
be seen the crumbling grey walls of the once 
stately castle, if not of King Arthur, at least of the 
great earls of Cornwall. Here, at least, it was 
historically certain, that Earl Richard, the son of 
that black tyrant, John, had revelled and banqueted 
with his guest, a Welsh prince. But no armour 
clanked now in banquet-hall — no horse neighed at 
the postern gate — no harp sounded — no drum beat 
— no flag fluttered, no lady's robes stirred in the 
sea-breeze — all was silent and grave-like, for the 
knights had been 

^^Dust, and their good swords rust, 
And their brave souk with the saints, we trust," 

centuries and centuries since. 

Above these grey ruins, on a grassy platform 
of the promontory, stood an isolated old chapel, 
with its massive stone altar still remaining ; on the 
mainland, separated by a chasm, where the sea had 
eaten its way through the isthmus, there were also 
more remains of walls and turrets; for a draw- 
bridge had once joined this peninsula to the part 
of the castle on the land side of the gulf. 

All these points of interest were duly and elo- 
quently dilated on by Arthur Tolpedden, as the 
party pursued their winding way up a long dan- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 103 

gerous staircase, cut in the solid rock, to the door, 
the key of which they had obtained at the miner's 
cottage as they passed. 

" It is like Uhland's Castle/' said Arthur, and 
he sang cheerily — 

" * There was a stately castle, 
A castle by the sea, 
Golden and red, the clouds o^er head 
Were floating gorgeously.* 

A penny for your thoughts, father !" 

" I was thinking what a strange junction there 
is here of slate, marble, and hornblende, so like 
the Cape Cornwall strata," said his father, who 
had been absorbed in thought, and was poking a 
crumbling rock with his stick. 

" Don't get bitten with the cursed mining mania, 
so fatal to you Cornish folk," said Hookem. 
" You see that big rock out there to the west ; 
well, that's the finest place for big conger in the 
world." 

"In my opinion, Arthur," said Mr. Nelson 
Tolpedden, "this place is only an old Martello 
Tower." 

Arthur flamed up into vituperative indignation. 

" Why, uncle, the castle is mentioned in Doomes- 
day Book as the Castle of the Cleft. The old ro- 
mances talk of it." 

" I don't care whose book it's in !" replied the 
daring sciolist, ignoring altogether the Conqueror^s 
great census-taking ; " but let's go down. I feel 
quite giddy " 



104 GREATHEABT. 

Out came a little wicker brandy-bottle from Mr. 
Hookem's capacious pocket, and the old sailor took 
some under protest, and medicinally. 

They descended again, till they reached 
the little stage overlooking the little bay. There 
were two boats lying like stranded fish on the 
rocks ; and they came to a wooden crane, girded 
with chains, that had once been used to lower 
boats, and load vessels lying below with slate. 

" Je-mi-ma T said the astonished old sailor. 
" Why, no boat could live in such a sea as there 
must be here nine days out of ten." 

" Not when there's a swell on," said Hookem ; 
" but at other times, yes. By-the-bye, Tolpedden, 
that young Bradbrain, the doctor, I mean, called on 
me just before lunch, and told me that last 
night he had met a trap, and that the driver had 
inquired for your house, so I made sure that your 
brother had come." 

" Oh ! then, that was the fellow in the dark," 
said Nelson Tolpedden. 

At that moment a screaming cloud of gulls 
rose from the mouth of a cavern on the promon- 
tory, not far off; Arthur, drawing a loaded re- 
volver from a belt he wore, fired it into the middle 
of them. They swerved, but none seemed to fall ; 
then they swept off round the eastern headland. 

"Nothing to the bag this time," said Mr. 
Hookem, laughing. 

" Yes, I think I winged one — I saw him stoop 
lower than the rest," replied Arthur, darting down 




THE SULTAN EDITOR. 105 

a path leading to the beach. He re-appeared iii 
five minutes with a dead gull, its right wing 
shattered by the bullet. He cheered as he came 
back to the group. 

" It was a fluke, of course," he said ; " but I 
took steady aim at the centre bird, and I thought 
I might catch one of the laggers, because I'm 
always practising." 

^' I shan't call you out," said the Sultan, 
with a smile ; '^ it was a good shot, and a long shot. 
A revolver is no use for much more than thirty 
yards ; though I know they wiU carry a hundred. 
Well, good-bye all of you — tat ta. I'm going 
now to try and shoot a cock or two (not a cock- 
atoo, mind) on no man's land out there ; and may 
Mordred soon pull you out of Chancery, with a 
good sound title to it. I see the boy coming with 
my cob. Tat ta !" 

Before the Tolpeddens had gone far up the 
valley, they heard Hookem's double-barrel go off 
— bang! bang I 

** There goes the second barrel, I daresay to 
correct the blunders of the first," said Mr. Henry 
Tolpedden. 

" Oh ! Hookem's a good shot with everything 
but a rifle. Pater," said Arthur ; " he does brag, 
but I like the man after all. Do you know, he's 
been talking to me about giving a silver cup to be 
shot for by our corps ; and he purposes no end of 
jolly pic-nics and fishing-parties. He's really not 
a bad sort — what do you think, uncle !" 



« 



106 OREATHEART. 

" Think ! — why, I think he'd talk a horse blind, 
if you'd give him time." 

*' He plays a good hand at whist, Nelson," said 
Mr. Henry Tolpedden. " Of course I don't swallow 
all that his paper, the Forge, says; but Hookem him- 
self is certainly what Dr. Johnson used to call * a 
club-able man," and a great acquisition to us down 
here — isn't he, Arthur t" 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE MERMAID. 



THE day after this visit to Dunchine, Arthur 
Tolpedden absented himself from Mr. Tre- 
gellas's, as every Thursday and Saturday, by his 
father^s wish, it was his habit to ride to Boscastle, 
and there read and talk French and Italian with 
M. Achille Capron, an old ex-Bonapartist officer, 
who had for some inscrutable reason settled him- 
self down in that obscure nook of Cornwall. 

He returned to dinner to find his father and 
uncle very happy in each other^s society ; and the 
latter especially delighted at the prospect of meet- 
ing his wife and children at Bodmin on the day 
following. 

At dinner the two brothers were full of old 
times; Arthur let them talk, almost without an 
interruption, for he enjoyed to hear old family 



THE MERMAID. 107 

anecdotes, and he was not so restlessly vain as to 
be impatient at being kept silent. 

" Do you remember !" was the key-note of the 
whole conversation ; and how pleasantly those magic 
words called forth old memories. 

"Do you remember, Nelson," asked the elder 
brother, as he dissected a hare with such skill that 
it seemed to fall to pieces under his keen, heavy 
knife, " how poor Charles fought Bogy Griffin, 
because he let out the water from the mill-pond, 
where we were skating ?" 

** Of course I do (stuffing, if you please) ; 
Bogy tore out a handful of Charles's hair ; and 
do you remember how we used to go and tickle 
trout and get crawfish in the Sherrington brook, 
and how the ferret bit me through the nail in 
Farmer George's burrows f " 

" And, my ! what trout they were !" said Liddy, 
who presided at the sideboard, and ruled Fanny 
with a rod of iron. 

"They were, Liddy; yes, bull-headed, broad- 
shouldered, crimson spots on them, and splendid 
flavour ; and do you remember. Nelson, the mad cat 
that flew round the kitcheri, and how Charles went 
in and killed him with my father's sabre? Poor 
Charles, he was as brave as a lion !" 

" Where did Uncle Charles die ?" inquired 
Arthur. 

"He died in a French prison at the Isle of 
Bourbon," replied his father ; " he was captain of 
a prize that his frigate, the Jasouy had captured, 



106 



tK-tatea. W two Fvmtli veBei&. a&n s 
too^ S^iit, Hfr cang^ cfae fcima fsw^^ poor 
Ty aHii died dk twf> daEv^*^ 
^Ha! dear feaopv,"^ sid die fsvoared obi aor- 
^ F^e ^oC s ■prfctarr ■aw^ mad^ of qoiDs^ 
diat lie sent jvsr dear Modker. Hr. X^bin. ssd I 
sian keep k tX Ae d^ of ht Auodk Ihope.*^ 



Rsember Us |]^4aO and be asfbrn—tfe 
be fim came borne firooa PortsBiMiddb ; iatkt Tm 
ftawbcT be bto^^ bomeaktiif powderaiidaii 
old diq^-pistol ? — Anbvn aEttleof tbateaiilifloiver 
— near tbe stalk— tbafs it— diank too.'' 

Widi SQcb a pleasant intercbange of old recol- 
lections paswd awar die dinner. Is not tbe brain 
Uke dwse snow-pictmes tbat turn bi%bt wben 
beld to die fire? The wanntb and exdtemrat of 
an <Jd friend's eooToaation will ahrajs brin|t oat 
many balf-eSaced tboogfats and associatiotts. 

'Saw it happened that Aithar*s readin^^ ahravs 
alternating between poetiy and histonr^ Gre^ 
faUe and duTafaoos romance^ Pilpaj and Gaj^ 
None Saga and Tom json's Idylls^ had, for the last 
few weeks^ tomed more espedallj to old ballads, 
particolarl J those of Scotland, which, indeed, far 
transcend those of either flngland, Wales, or 
Ireland, both in number and orimnalitr. The 
last book on this subject that he had disinterred 
from his f ather^s libraiy had been that cnrions and 
deli^tfol coUection, edited by one of amiable 




THE MERMAID. 109 

Stothard's Scotch engravers — " Oromek's Remains 
of Nithsdale and Galloway Song." And there he 
had read the enchanting ballad of '^ The Mermaid/* 
who, as late as the times of the Puritans, used to 
be seen " i' the first come o' the moon," especi- 
ally in the sweet summer months, seated on 
a block of smooth granite, on the shores of the 
Nith and Don, or on the edge of the Solway 
Sea, shedding her golden locks with one hand, 
and with the other combing them with a comb of 
pearl. 

The mermaid's beauty was such that no man 
could see *her face without his heart being in- 
stantly fired with an insatiable and unquenchable 
love. The framers of this legend had evidently 
blended the story of the Grecian Sirens with that of 
some wild early Celtic superstition, for the ballad 
went on to show that, whatever unlucky mortal 
heard the song of this sea-spirit, was at once en- 
tranced, and, in that sleep, was borne away to 
some hidden world below the waves. It was the 
young, the virtuous, the brave, that the Siren 
especially delighted to thus decoy to destruction. 
Indeed, to come down to prosaic fact, local tra- 
dition was daring enough to distinctly assert that, as 
late as the time of Charles I., a certain handsome 
young William Maxwell, of Cowehill, five miles 
from Dumfries, on the eve of marriage, too, was 
thus beguiled to his ruin. This unhappy young 
bridegroom was nephew to the "Lily of Nithsdale," 
whose premature death is so touchingly lamented 



1 10 6BEATHEABT. 

in an old Scotch ballad still extant — " She's gane 
to dwell in heaven." 

Arthur had learnt this mermaid ballad by heart. 
Those who know how tunes will sometimes keep 
ringing tormenting changes in the head for days, 
may imagine how the wild legend, enshrined in 
really admirable verse, kept possession of Tol- 
pedden's brain. Over and over again his fasci- 
nated memory recurred to how the young laird 
was warned by his more cautious page not to ap- 
proach the weird singer, and still was magnetically 
drawn to his doom, when he saw the fair maiden 
whose mirth was so unearthly, sitting on the rock, 
" washed by the white sea foam ;" then, when 
he had taken off his mantle, how the sea nymph 
knotted a tress of her golden hair, as a keepsake, 
round his brow; and how then came on, with 
deadly softness, the enchanted sleep, as the 
mermaid mockingly tossed his plumed cap and 
betrothal ring into the sea ; then 

^^ Faulded him i* her lilie arms, 
An^ left her pearlie kame, 
Her fleecy locks trailed ower the sand, 
As she took the white sea faem/^ 

The ballad is the finest apotheosis ever wTitten of 
the mermaid, and with few to sympathize with his 
tastes, and at an imaginative age, one can excuse 
Arthur's day-dreams. (Heaven knows they are 
rare enough in later life !) He had heard all sorts 
of allusions in poetry (from Shakespeare down to 
Tupper, and that's striking a tremendous octave) 



THE MERMAID. Ill 

to the mermaid, but he had never before found a 

poem that embodied the old belief so beautifully. 

He drew mermaids, he sang of mermaids, from 

Goethe's 

" Das Wasser rauscht, das Wasser schwoll, 
Ein Fischer sann daran." 

He dreamt of mermaids, he thought of mermaids, 
but not willing to tease people with the moment's 
ideal, he sensibly enough kept his thoughts to him- 
self, and refrained from talking about mermaids. 

Dinner over, Arthur resolved to run down to 
Endellion Cove — only a mile and a half distant — as 
the moon was full that night, just to see and study 
the beauty of a lovely place under a new aspect. 
He would be back to tea, he told his father, but 
they were not to wait for him ; so he saddled 
Gipsy, and buckling on his belt, and taking his 
revolver, with that enjoyment of the possibility of 
danger peculiar to youth, and with a thought of 
the contingency of a passing owl or nightjar, off 
he cantered up the lane, and over the mossy 
common to the field where he had rebuked the 
Dowser. 

It is a singular thing that an age so sceptical 
as ours should be, on the other hand, so 
ignorantly superstitious. Men who reason away 
the miracles of our Saviour, induce themselves to 
actually believe in floating guitars, stuffed hands 
and wires, and all the palpable sleight-of-hand of 
American jugglers, as Byron, who renewed the 
sneers of Voltaire, trembled at the most puerile 



100 GREATHEART. 

restlessly to reach. Wild bluffs of ochry slate 
rock piled on either side, like stone tossed 
from a fosse dug by primeval giants, cropped up 
in grey chines and massy reddish ramps, like 
sketches of Titanic fortifications. 

At the door of a rude stone cottage, the resi- 
dence of some unsocial quarryman or fisherman, the 
entrance, as usual in Cornish cottages, turned from 
the path, Mr. Nelson Tolpedden made as dead a 
halt as if he had been a pointer. His eyes were 
fixed on a big, sodden-looking beam of wood, in the 
centre of which a leaden pipe had been sunk, while 
a stain of blue paint was here and there visible at 
one end of the wood. An all-pervading sense of 
pig filled the air, for there was a boy routing about 
in a dirty pig-sty. 

" Harry," said the old sailor, " that's a bit of a 
wreck, I'll bet twenty guineas — a bit of some poor 
ship's tank." 

Arthur asked the boy tending the pig with such 
brotherly care if it was so. The third time he was 
asked, the boy replied, 

" Ees ; 'tis." 

" It was a portion of a French wine vessel," said 
Mr. Hookem, turning and joining the group. " I 
tasted some of the wine the other day at Camel- 
ford, and it had the real Cote dHor flavour — no earth 
in it, but just a soupgon of the flint. Why, there 
isn't a cove on this north coast that hasn't some 
wreck timber strewn somewhere about. These 
cliffs, I begin -to think, were actually the 'in- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 101 

fames scopulos Acroceraunia^ that Horace men- 
tions." 

It is a curious fact, that not only M.P.'s, but 
classical sciolists generally, delight to quote Horace 
almost as if they actually seriously believed that a 
worn-out truism became quite a new and original 
saying if thrown into Latin. Horace, the pet 
author of the House of Commons, was the only 
classic with whom Mr. Hookem was even decently 
acquainted ; so, when he did quote him, he mouth- 
ed his lines with an imposing dignity that was almost 
Ciceronian. 

A hundred yards or so further on there lay a 
rocky peninsula, almost severed from the main- 
land, and crowned by the ruins of the once famed 
Castle of Dunchine. 

They stood on a hoUowed-out broad platform of 
rock, over which the stream (its fretful wandering at 
last ended) hurried in a silvery cascade, over a green 
growth of weeds, whose seedlings, after a watery 
pilgrimage, had here found a precarious foothold. 
Below this platform, and out in the little bay, the 
great sea, turbulent, though defeated in the cease- 
less war of centuries, rolled and scathed, and 
dashed in a maelstrom of angry broth, round 
black isolated rocks, each of which, the fancy had 
little difficulty in supposing, must have been, on 
many a ghastly winter's night, the last hope of 
many a bruised and bleeding sailor. Beyond, to 
to the left, from innumerable low jagged masses of 
rock — with many undulations, and changes of 



102 GREATHEART. 

levels — rose the broad, billowing cliffs, green with 
turf, and padded with spongy lumps of sea-pink. 

But the point to which the eyes of the four at 
once turned was the towering peninsula of wall, at 
least three or four hundred feet high, on the slop- 
ing side, as well as on the summit of which could 
be seen the crumbling grey walls of the once 
stately castle, if not of King Arthur, at least of the 
great earls of Cornwall. Here, at least, it w^as 
historically certain, that Earl Richard, the son of 
that black tyrant, John, had revelled and banqueted 
with his guest, a Welsh prince. But no armour 
clanked now in banquet-hall — no horse neighed at 
the postern gate — no harp sounded — no drum beat 
— no flag fluttered, no lady's robes stirred in the 
sea-breeze — all was silent and grave-like, for the 
knights had been 

"Dust, and their good swords rust, 
And their brave souls with the saints, we trust," 

centuries and centuries since. 

Above these grey ruins, on a grassy platform 
of the promontory, stood an isolated old chapel, 
with its massive stone altar still remaining ; on the 
mainland, separated by a chasm, where the sea had 
eaten its way through the isthmus, there were also 
more remains of walls and turrets; for a draw- 
bridge had once joined this peninsula to the part 
of the castle on the land side of the gulf. 

All these points of interest were duly and elo- 
quently dilated on by Arthur Tolpedden, as the 
party pursued their winding way up a long dan- 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 103 

gerous staircase^ cut in the solid rock, to the door, 
the key of which they had obtained at the miner's 
cottage as they passed. 

" It is like Uhland's Castle," said Arthur, and 
he sang cheerily — 

** * There was a stately castle, 
A castle by the sea, 
Golden and red, the clouds o^er head 
Were floating gorgeously/ 

A penny for your thoughts, father !" 

" I was thinking what a strange junction there 
is here of slate, marble, and hornblende, so like 
the Cape Cornwall strata," said his father, who 
had been absorbed in thought, and was poking a 
crumbling rock with his stick. 

" Don't get bitten with the cursed mining mania, 
so fatal to you Cornish folk," said Hookem. 
" You see that big rock out there to the west ; 
well, that's the finest place for big conger in the 
world." 

"In my opinion, Arthur," said Mr. Nelson 
Tolpedden, " this place is only an old Martello 
Tower." 

Arthur flamed up into vituperative indignation. 

" Why, uncle, the castle is mentioned in Doomes- 
day Book as the Castle of the Cleft. The old ro- 
mances talk of it." 

" I don't care whose book it's in I" replied the 
daring sciolist, ignoring altogether the Conqueror's 
great census-taking ; " but let's go down. I feel 
quite giddy J' 



104 OREATHEABT. 

Out came a little wicker brandy-bottle from Mr. 
Hookem's capacious pocket, and the old sailor took 
some under protest, and medicinally. 

They descended again, till they reached 
the little stage overlooking the little bay. There 
were two boats lying like stranded fish on the 
rocks ; and they came to a wooden crane, girded 
with chains, that had once been used to lower 
boats, and load vessels lying below with slate. 

" Je-mi-ma !" said the astonished old sailor. 
" Why, no boat could live in such a sea as there 
must be here nine days out of ten." 

" Not when there's a swell on," said Hookem ; 
" but at other times, yes. By-the-bye, Tolpedden, 
that young Bradbrain, the doctor, I mean, called on 
me just before lunch, and told me that last 
night he had met a trap, and that the driver had 
inquired for your house, so I made sure that your 
brother had come." 

" Oh ! then, that was the fellow in the dark," 
said Nelson Tolpedden. 

At that moment a screaming cloud of gulls 
rose from the mouth of a cavern on the promon- 
tory, not far off; Arthur, drawing a loaded re- 
volver from a belt he wore, fired it into the middle 
of them. They swerved, but none seemed to fall ; 
then they swept off round the eastern headland. 

"Nothing to the bag this time," said Mr. 
Hookem, laughing. 

" Yes, I think I winged one — ^I saw him stoop 
lower than the rest," replied Arthur, darting down 



THE SULTAN EDITOR. 105 

a path leading to the beach. He re-appeared in 
five minutes with a dead gall, its right wing 
shattered by the bullet. He cheered as he came 
back to the group. 

" It was a fluke, of course," he said ; " but I 
took steady aim at the centre bird, and I thought 
I might catch one of the laggers, because Fm 
always practising." 

**I shan't call you out," said the Sultan, 
with a smile ; '* it was a good shot, and a long shot. 
A revolver is no use for much more than thirty 
yards ; though I know they wiU caiTy a hundred. 
Well, good-bye all of you — tat ta. I'm going 
now to try and shoot a cock or two (not a cock- 
atoo, mind) on no man's land out there ; and may 
Mordred soon pull you out of Chancery, with a 
good sound title to it. I see the boy coming with 
my cob. Tat ta !" 

Before the Tolpeddens had gone far up the 
valley, they heard Hookem's double-barrel go off 
— bang! bang! 

'* There goes the second barrel, I daresay to 
correct the blunders of the first," said Mr. Henry 
Tolpedden. 

" Oh ! Hookem's a good shot with everything 
but a rifle. Pater," said Arthur ; '' he does brag, 
but I like the man after all. Do you know, he's 
been talking to me about giving a silver cup to be 
shot for by our corps ; and he purposes no end of 
jolly pic-nics and fishing-parties. He's really not 
a bad sort — what do you think, uncle !" 



106 GREATHEART. 

" Think ! — why, I think he'd talk a horse blind, 
if you'd give him time." 

" He plays a good hand at whist, Nelson," said 
Mr. Henry Tolpedden. " Of course I don't swallow 
all that his paper, the Forge j says; but Hookem him- 
self is certainly what Dr. Johnson used to call * a 
club-able man," and a great acquisition to us down 
here — isn't he, Arthur !" 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE MERMAID. 



THE day after this visit to Dunchine, Arthur 
Tolpedden absented himself from Mr. Tre- 
gellas's, as every Thursday and Saturday, by his 
father's wish, it was his habit to ride to Boscastle, 
and there read and talk French and Italian with 
M. Achille Capron, an old ex-Bonapartist officer, 
who had for some inscrutable reason settled him- 
self down in that obscure nook of Cornwall. 

He returned to dinner to find his father and 
uncle very happy in each other's society ; and the 
latter especially delighted at the prospect of meet- 
ing his wife and children at Bodmin on the day 
following. 

At dinner the two brothers were full of old 
times; Arthur let them talk, almost without an 
interruption, for he enjoyed to hear old family 



THE MERMAID. 107 

anecdotes, and he was not so restlessly vain as to 
be impatient at being kept silent. 

" Do you remember !" was the key-note of the 
whole conversation ; and how pleasantly those ma^c 
words called forth old memories. 

"Do you remember, Nelson," asked the elder 
brother, as he dissected a hare with such skill that 
it seemed to fall to pieces under his keen, heavy 
knife, "how poor Charles fought Bogy GriflSn, 
because he let out the water from the mill-pond, 
where we were skating I" 

" Of course I do (stuffing, if you please) ; 
Bogy tore out a handful of Charles's hair ; and 
do you remember how we used to go and tickle 
trout and get crawfish in the Sherrington brook, 
and how the ferret bit me through the nail in 
Farmer George's burrows I" 

" And, my I what trout they were I" said Liddy, 
who presided at the sideboard, and ruled Fanny 
with a rod of iron. 

" They were, Liddy ; yes, bull-headed, broad- 
shouldered, crimson spots on them, and splendid 
flavour ; and do you remember. Nelson, the mad cat 
that flew round the kitcheii, and how Charles went 
in and killed him with my father's sabre t Poor 
Charles, he was as brave as a lion !" 

" Where did Uncle Charles die t" inquired 
Arthur. 

"He died in a French prison at the Isle of 
Bourbon," replied his father ; " he was captain of 
a prize that his frigate, the Jasoriy had captured, 



108 GREATHBABT. 

it was re-taken by two French vessels, after a 
tough fight. He caught the prison fever, poor 
fellow, and died in two days." 

" Ha ! dear fellow," said the favoured old ser- 
vant, " I've got a necklace now, made of quills, 
that he sent your dear mother, Mr. Nelson, and I 
shall keep it till the day of my death, I hope." 

"Potatoes, Liddy — thank you," said the elder 
Tolpedden. "How full of fun he was too — I 
remember his pig-tail and his uniform — the very day 
he first came home from Portsmouth ; don't you 
remember he brought home a lot of powder and an 
old ship-pistol t — Arthur, a little of that cauliflower 
— near the stalk — that's it — thank you." 

With such a pleasant interchange of old recol- 
lections passed away the dinner. Is not the brain 
like those snow-pictures that turn bright when 
held to the fire I The warmth and excitement of 
an old friend's conversation will always bring out 
many half-effaced thoughts and associations. 

Now it happened that Arthur's reading, always 
alternating between poetry and history, Greek 
fable and chivalrous romance, Pilpay and Gay, 
Norse Saga and Tennyson's Idylls, had, for the last 
few weeks, turned more especially to old ballads, 
particularly those of Scotland, which, indeed, far 
transcend those of either England, Wales, or 
Ireland, both in number and originality. The 
last book on this subject that he had disinterred 
from his father's library had been that curious and 
delightful collection, edited by one of amiable 



THE MERMAID. 109 

Stothard's Scotch engravers — " Ororaek's Remains 
of Nithsdale and Galloway Song." And there he 
had read the enchanting ballad of " The Mermaid," 
who, as late as the times of the Puritans, used to 
be seen " T the first come o' the moon," especi- 
ally in the sweet summer months, seated on 
a block of smooth granite, on the shores of the 
Nith and Don, or on the edge of the Solway 
Sea, shedding her golden locks with one hand, 
and with the other combing them with a comb of 
pearl. 

The mermaid's beauty was such that no man 
could see *her face without his heart being in- 
stantly fired with an insatiable and unquenchable 
love. The framers of this legend had evidently 
blended the story of the Grecian Sirens with that of 
some wild early Celtic superstition, for the ballad 
went on to show that, whatever unlucky mortal 
heard the song of this sea-spirit, was at once en- 
tranced, and, in that sleep, was borne away to 
some hidden world below the waves. It was the 
young, the virtuous, the brave, that the Siren 
especially delighted to thus decoy to destruction. 
Indeed, to come down to prosaic fact, local tra- 
dition was daring enough to distinctly assert that, as 
late as the time of Charles I., a certain handsome 
young William Maxwell, of Cowehill, five miles 
from Dumfries, on the eve of marriage, too, was 
thus beguiled to his ruin. This unhappy young 
bridegroom was nephew to the "Lily of Nithsdale," 
whose premature death is so touchingly lamented 



1 10 6BEATHEABT. 

in an old Scotch ballad still extant — " She's gane 
to dwell in heaven." 

Arthur had learnt this mermaid ballad by heart. 
Those who know how tunes will sometimes keep 
ringing tormenting changes in the head for days, 
may imagine how the wild legend, enshrined in 
really admirable verse, kept possession of Tol- 
pedden's brain. Over and over again his fasci- 
nated memory recurred to how the young laird 
was warned by his more cautious page not to ap- 
proach the weird singer, and still was magnetically 
drawn to his doom, when he saw the fair maiden 
whose mirth was so unearthly, sitting on the rock, 
" washed by the white sea foam ;" then, when 
he had taken off his mantle, how the sea nymph 
knotted a tress of her golden hair, as a keepsake, 
round his brow; and how then came on, with 
deadly softness, the enchanted sleep, as the 
mermaid mockingly tossed his plumed cap and 
betrothal ring into the sea ; then 

" Faulded him i' her lilie arms, 
An' left her pearlie kame, 
Her fleecy locks trailed ower the sand, 
As she took the white sea faem/' 

The ballad is the finest apotheosis ever written of 
the mermaid, and with few to sympathize with his 
tastes, and at an imaginative age, one can excuse 
Arthur's day-dreams. (Heaven knows they are 
rare enough in later life !) He had heard all sorts 
of allusions in poetry (from Shakespeare down to 
Tupper, and that's striking a tremendous octave) 



THE MEBMAID. Ill 

to the mermaid, but he had never before found a 

poem that embodied the old belief so beautifully. 

He drew mermaids, he sang of mermaids, from 

Goethe's 

^^ Das Wasser rauscht, das Wasser schwoll, 
Ein Fischer sann daran/* 

He dreamt of mermaids, he thought of mermaids, 
but not willing to tease people with the moment's 
ideal, he sensibly enough kept his thoughts to him- 
self, and refrained from talking about mermaids. 

Dinner over, Arthur resolved to fun down to 
Endellion Cove — only a mile and a half distant — as 
the moon was full that night, just to see and study 
the beauty of a lovely place under a new aspect. 
He would be back to tea, he told his father, but 
they were not to wait for him ; so he saddled 
Gipsy, and buckling on his belt, and taking his 
revolver, with that enjoyment of the possibility of 
danger peculiar to youth, and with a thought of 
the contingency of a passing owl or nightjar, off 
he cantered up the lane, and over the mossy 
common to the field where he had rebuked the 
Dowser. 

It is a singular thing that an age so sceptical 
as ours should be, on the other hand, so 
ignorantly superstitious. Men who reason away 
the miracles of our Saviour, induce themselves to 
actually believe in floating guitars, stuffed hands 
and wires, and all the palpable sleight-of-hand of 
American jugglers, as Byron, who renewed the 
sneers of Voltaire, trembled at the most puerile 



112 GREATHEART. 

omens. Modem superstition does not, indeed, 
shudder at witches, demon horses, fairies, and 
magicians, but it trusts in moving hats, spirits 
that answer questions for a guinea a siancey and 
tricksters that can only perform their silly >' can- 
trips " in the dark, and accomplices standing by, 
with prepared cabinets. 

But fortunately no arithmetical bishop, with a 
mind sharp and narrow as a gimlet, had disturbed 
Arthur^s honest faith. He had no fears, but still 
he had an active imagination, and that peopled 
the moonlight with white ladies of Avenel and 
Banshees rocking in grief, stately ghosts of dead 
knights, and the stalwart shadows of Celtic chief- 
tains. The very shadows of the furze bushes 
seemed to him to crawl and waver with a gob- 
lin life ; even Gipsy seemed to hesitate, as if in 
some degree conscious of the presence of "un- 
canny" things. The darkness was waiting 
under the trees, like mourners at the foot of 
gibbets. But there was no painful road of the 
past, wet with repentant tears, for Arthur Tol- 
pedden to look back upon ; as for the future, 
there were regions of airy castles, golden with 
perpetual sunshine, the flags on their summits 
fluttering in defiance of all care, sorrow, time, debt, 
and death. 

On dashed Gipsy up the long lane between the 
huge ramparts of stone and turf, and over the bars 
of shadow and moonshine ; the only sound was 
from a dog, with a disturbed mind, baying with 



THE MEBMAID. 113 

absurd and persistent melancholy from the Glebe 
Farm, at the great white moon that now flooded all 
the Cornish shore with its light. 
And as he rode, Arthur sang — 

Theresa a maid has sat by the salt sea-aide 
These ten long years and mair, 
And every first night o^ the new moon 
She comba her yellow hair. 

And aye while ahe aheds the yellow burning gold, 

Fu^ aweet ahe ainga o^ hie, 

Till the faireat bird that^a in the wood 

la charmed wi^ her melodie. 

The highroad was light as day. Young Tolped- 
den leaped off Gipsy, and tied her up to a field- 
gate. In a moment he had vaulted over the barrier, 
and was in the field where the Druidical stone 
reared its head, blanched with the moonshine. It 
was a dry warm night; strangely warm for Sep- 
tember. The sky was one soft, floating ocean of 
soft azure, studded with a sprinkling diamond dust of 
stars ; here and there only a thin scarf of white 
cloud passed below the moon, that glowed with a 
pure-white fire. 

Arthur^s path to the shore lay for some distance 
parallel with the edge of the cliff, then the track 
wound downward to Endellion Cove by a succes- 
sion of turns and slopes, some of them steep 
enough, leading from the rough upland common 
by zig-zags, till it reached the boulders of the 
beach, from which a tide, now bright as quicksilver, 

VOL. I. I 



114 GBEATHEABT. 

had just began to slowly retreat. Half-way down, 
Tolpedden stopped to light his little meerschaum. 
The seat he had chosen was a massive piece of 
wreck timber, in which could still be traced a 
large mortice hole where the mast was once sock- 
et€KL 

Behind him, in the cliff, there was an old de- 
serted mine sunk ages ago by Jew or Phoenician, 
Celt or Boman, and known by the usual Comish- 
miner^s title of "the old men's working." Ac- 
cording to a superstition still so prevalent in 
mining regions, the knockers, or mine spirits, 
were still often heard there mimicking the puny la- 
bours of men. 

But there was no sound now, though Arthur 
held his head on one side wistfully to hear any such 
indications of supernatural labour. Then, in the 
lightness of his heart, he began humming another 
verse of the Mermaid ballad that still kept posses- 
sion of his brain. 

'^ Oh! is it a voice frae earthly lips 
Which makes such melody ? 
It would lure a lark from the morning cloud, 
And well may it lure me/* 

He rose, ran down another turn of the path, 
then stood still, almost awe-struck, to look down 
on the molten silver of the sea, that raced and 
frothed round the isolated rocks, that repeated each 
other from headland to headland, mile after mile, 
while, fronting that dream-like ocean, the cliffs rose 
white in the moonlight. 



THE MEBMAID. 115 

It was after a sharp run down the last turning 
but one that Tolpedden reached a level path, about 
sixty feet from the shore, which, a few yards 
farther on, began gradually to descend. His 
eyes were fixed Port Isaac way, and were intent 
not on the little spark that pointed out the spot 
where St. Knighton's lighthouse stood, but on a 
small grey film of sail, pale and misty as a phantom 
ship, that slid slowly along the horizon. It was 
just a herring-boat, no doubt, rough with tar, and 
clumsy enough, but through miles of air it looked 
mysterious and beautiful. 

All at once, as Arthur turned his eyes carelessly 
from this object to the rocks upon the shore, he 
became suddenly conscious of a vision as startling 
as it was unaccountable by all human laws of 
reasoning. There, on the very top of a rock some 
twelve or fourteen feet high, and about a hundred 
yards from where he stood — there sat a maiden, 
wearing a robe of sea-green silk, and looking 
intently seaward ; she kept passing her white 
fingers, as she did so, through a long fleece of 
golden brown hair, and singing, at the same time, 
a song so artless, so wild, and so silvery clear, that 
Arthur could distinguish that the words were 
English, though he could not fully gather the sense 
of them. 

Even a man free from superstition might have 
been startled at a sight so utterly unaccountable. 
Here at once seemed to have risen before him the 
creature of his dreams — unearthly in her grace, a 

I 2 



116 GBEATHEART. 

syren in every movement, a dangerous witchery in 
her song — ^there she seemed sitting waiting for her 
merman lover, or watching to beguile some un- 
happy seafarer. 

With a fascination that seemed to absorb every 
sense, Arthur remained standing there still as a 
marble figure. The mermaid, unconscious of a 
human presence, had thrown herself back against 
an upright portion of the rock, and lay there with 
her head thrown back on her shining hair, as if to 
diy it in the moonbeams, while she sang still sweeter 
and wilder than before. 

For a moment or two the blood seemed to remain 
motionless in his heart, it fluttered slowly, and 
then it rushed back as if released from some sud« 
den check. 

Was it— could it be a dream ? — a mere delusion 
of the eyes ? He collected himself, he marshall- 
ed up quickly his various senses ; one and all of 
them pronounced him sober, in good health, and 
wide awake. He knew all the causes of ghosts — 
as indigestion, nervous excitement, disordered 
brain, temporary preponderance of imagination 
over reason ; but he felt in an instant that none 
of these causes were acting upon him. Was not 
this the Endellion Cove known to him now for ten 
years? — ^was not the grey sail he had just seen 
still moving like a crawling moth across the 
horizon? — ^were not "the Man and his man," 
those twin black rocks, wading out to sea, 
breast high, as usual? — was not yonder St. 



THE MERMAID. 117 

Knighton's headland, with the lighthouse lamp 
burning like a little ruby on its crest ? 

But, yes, there, there on the rock below, still 
sat that beautiful being, resting as on a couch, her 
face turned from him towards the moonlight, the 
transcendant and enchanted light, glowing and 
glittering in the folds and moving ripples of her 
sea-green robe, and streaming on the rich fleece 
of golden and clustering hair, that mantled her 
rocky pillow. 

Roused by a sudden impulse that he could not 
control, Tolpedden snatched his revolver suddenly 
from his belt, cocked it, and discharged it, almost 
perpendicularly into the air. Almost before the 
little jet of fire could pass from the mouth of the 
pistol barrel, before the sharp snapping report 
could startle the echoes of that lonely inlet, the 
mermaid gave a shrill, unearthly scream, arose, 
leaning on a pinnacle of rock, and, standing erect, 
gave one glance upwards at the figure of which she 
then suddenly seemed to become conscious. For a 
moment a pure and beautiful face, with eyes that 
seemed to glitter in the moonlight, was turned 
towards him. The next moment, with the speed 
of thought, the spirit passed from the rock (it 
seemed to fly), and disappeared among the dark 
shadows of the cliffs. Instantly there rose in the 
air the wild laughter of several voices, like the ex- 
ultation of mocking spirits, and all was silent as 
before. 

Then, and not till then, Arthur, with all the 



118 GBEATHBART. 

redoubled fire of a man who is vexed at his courage 
having been even for a moment daunted, replaced 
his pistol, and half ashamed at what he had done, 
half astonished at the result, ran at his swift- 
est pace down the slanting path leading to the 
sea-beach. 

" If it was a trick, I will discover it," he thought 
to himself ; " but if it was really a spirit, why, 
then I will own that the old world, whose igno- 
rance and superstition we are so fond of abusing, 
was right after all." 

But human doubts are stones that will not 
Always yield to the geologist's hammer. Weak 
and fallible man can never be sure that he will, by 
force of his own resolution, become conscious that 
he is wrong, merely because he knows that he has 
been refuted. 

Tolpedden ran clattering over the boulders, and 
drifts of bladdery sea-weed; in a minute more 
he had scaled the mermaid's rock, and stood on 
the very spot where he had just seen, or, at least, 
fully believed that he had seen the beautiful spirit. 
There was a large fan of the small pink sea-weed 
lying there, and that must have been left there by 
human or ghostly hands, as the top of the rock 
was far above high-water mark. But then, as he 
instantly thought, it might have been left by any of 
the miners' or fishermen's children, who came to 
the beach daily, to collect boulders, for road stone, 
or the kelp that the Cornish farmers in the north 
use for top-dressing. Tolpedden searched behind 



THB MEBMAID. 119 

every rock, and shouted into every cave, but there 
came no answer ; nor did the spirit he so eagerly 
sought deign to re-appear. It was unfortunate 
for Tolpedden that spirits leave no foot prints by 
which to track them; and, besides, Endellion 
Cove was strewn with large round shining wet 
boulders, and boasted none of that soft, plastic 
sand that is so beautiful a characteristic of some 
of the bays of western Cornwall. 

All abrupt transitions from the ideal to the real 
world are generally ludicrous; so it was that 
Arthur smiled to himself, as, tired and vexed at 
the fruitless search, he suddenly drew out his 
watch, and found it was past eight o'clock, and that 
his father and uncle would be waiting for tea — a 
pretty thing to be interrupted in searching for a 
mermaid by the bell for tea. 

He had scarcely, however, reached the last turn 
of the upward path, before a tall, sturdy man, 
with a tarpaulin hat pulled down over his eyes, 
started from behind a rock, and confronted him in 
a threatening way. The man had apparently 
purposely chosen a dark place near the old mine 
shaft for his ambuscade. 

" I know your little game," he said, in a hearty, 
rough voice; "I heard you a-snapping off your 
pistol to that 'ere French brig in the offing ; now, 
my man, it's no use resisting, you're my prisoner, 
and I'll grab the tubs, too, or I'm not Patrick 
Walker — come to the station, my fine fellow." 

It was a Preventive Service man, for once as 



120 GSEATHEART. 

much off the right scent as the supposed smuggler 
himself had been. 

" Why, Walker T' cried young Tolpedden, not 
angry, but amused, indeed glad to get on clear and 
rational ground once more. " Don't you know me? 
— ^I was only firing off my revolver at a mark on 
the beach." 

"Why, saw my wooden head into puttock- 
timbers, if it isn't young Mr. Tolpedden after all I 
Well, if I haven't been veering and hunting about 
here for half an hour, making sure I'd got my bird 
as safe as ninepence. Well, I 'urably ask your 
pardon, sir." 

"Nonsense! Here, Walker, take a weed." 
(He offered the man a cigar.) "Met any one 
on the cliff to-night ? Seen no one about here, 
I suppose ?" 

He asked these questions with an anxiety that 
would have seemed strange to an acuter man than 
Walker. 

" Lor^ bless you, sir, I never see any one this 
time of night, unless it is old Pengelly setting 
lobster-pots, and he's in bed by this time. Some- 
times, in full summer, we have some of the young 
fellows gallivanting about here with their sweet- 
hearts, but not now." 

Tolpedden was ashamed to ask any more direct 
questions, eager as was his curiosity, and all he 
said was : 

"Want a vesuvian, Walker!" 

" Thank 'ee, sir. They're handy things, though 



THE MERMAID. 121 

they bum your clothes. By-the-bye, sir, so I hear 
youVe got our old oflScer up at the house. I know 
him, sir. He's the right grit ; ay I he's a chip of 
the old block; but he'd have the work done, 
Muster Tolpedden, and no two ways about it; 
there was no shamming Absalom with him !" 

" He is sound as oak, Walker I So you were 
under him in Dorsetshire ?" 

" Yes, sir," (here Walker paused, and turning, 
removed the cigar from his mouth, and pointed 
with the butt end of it towards the deserted mine, 
now far behind them to the right). " You've 
heard tell, sir, among these Cornish people 'bout 
here, of the Knockers ?" 

Tolpedden nodded. 

These Knockers are mine spirits, whom the 
miners in Cornwall declare they sometimes hear 
echoing their blows above or below them, as they 
work, to indicate the presence of metal. 

" I have ; but they're never heard, I think, in de- 
serted mines, or in any of Hhe old men's workings.'" 

"Don't know nothing about the old men, or 
any of their doings. Muster Tolpedden. I was 
bom in Gloucestershire, sir, near Stroud, and was 
never much in the way of mining ; but this I do 
know, lies as I thought the whole biling of it, that I 
heard the Ejiockers in that 'ere pit-hole last night, 
when I was watching closely — ^it was about three 
bells; if I didn't, may I never draw my next month's 
pay. I am not spinning a yam, sir, to draw a 
glass of grog out of ye, but I am telling you the 



122 GBRATHEART. 

solemn truth, as I stand here ; and I heard them 
again to-night, I'll take a Bible oath to it." 

"I think every one is bewitched to-night," 
thought Tolpedden to himself. He was much 
less tolerant of Walker's superstition than of his 
own. 

^^ Small noises sound loud at night," he said, for 
the man's face wore an expression that showed he 
was quite in earnest. "It might have been a 
small slip of the slate rock, or even a fox or a 
badger scratching a hole somewhere near you." 

*' Oh, no, it wasn't, sir ! I've got pretty good 
ears of my own. You may believe me or not; 
it was the Knockers I heard. Good night, sir. I 
must be off to meet my messmate on the Willow- 
park Head." 

" Good night. Walker ; remember one cannot 
always account either for what one sees or hears." 

" The eyes are not so easily deceived as the ears," 
thought Arthur, and at once dismissed from his 
own mind the story of the Preventive Service man. 
"It is just one of those cock-and-bull stories of 
sailors," he concluded. "What would the man 
have said if he had seen my water-spirit ?" 

Then, leaping on the back of Gipsy, who was 
snorting petulantly, he cantered home. 

Tea was just over. His uncle was seated near 
a moderator lamp, deep in the Shipping Gazettej 
his favourite paper, and his father was in his 
laboratory. 

"Why, what's kept you, Arthur?" said his uncle, 



THE MEBMAID. 123 

dropping his double eyeglass from his nose. 
"Here's the vessel been quite becalmed without 
you. Fanny, avast heaving there ; leave the tray, 
and make some more tea." 

" No tea for me, thank you. You may take it 
away, Fanny, and bring me a glass of ale. I've 
been looking at the sea, uncle, and thinking about 
mermaids. That's a sensible occupation for a man, 
isn't it ?" 

" Hum 1 The only mermaid I ever saw turned 
out to be a seal. It is the marines always see the 
mermaids, not the real salts." 

Arthur dared say no more ; but as he worked at 
his Herodotus that night, there kept rising out of 
the pages a face like that of a beautiful corpse 
glorified by a moonbeam. 

When he went into the laboratory, to tell his 
father about Walker and the Knockers (not a 
word about the mermaid), his father looked up 
gravely, with his stem face, from a huge Latin 
folio of Paracelsus, for he was a great inquirer into 
the mysteries of the founders of chemistry, and 
shook a glass vessel, containing a liquid that 
turned to purple, from crimson, as he spoke. 

"It's their own pulse beating the fools hear," 
he said. " You go into a dark room, now, listen 
intently, and you will hear, or fancy you hear, 
the dull low throb of the blood-pump in your own 
heart; but don't, pray, listen to it too often, or you 
will superinduce a diseased action of that organ. 
As for that, every man's heart, Arthur, whether 



I 



124 GBEATHEABT. 

he hear it or not, is incessantly beating a dead 
march, but still, we need not hurry it. Mind, 
Arthur, no St. Petrock's to-morrow; we shall drive 
to Bodmin Station, for Aunt Polly and the chil- 
dren are coming, they write, by the three-twenty. 
Your Uncle Nelson can scarcely talk of anything 
else. We shall perhaps meet the Tregellases, for it 
is to-morrow they expect their daughter." 

Arthur felt, somehow, as if he would be half 
glad, and yet somewhat afraid, to meet the Tre- 
gellases. Why that unusual alarm at meeting old 
friends? 

When he returned to the sitting-room, he told 
his uncle that he had that evening met Walker, an 
old Preventive man from Dorsetshire. 

" I know him," was the reply ; " steady man, 
but rather fond, sometimes, of getting two sheets in 
the wind. They were always sending us broken 
down men-of-wars-men and invalids. Walker 
was the only sound man I had. Let me see — there 
was No. 1, he had only one eye ; there was No. 2, 
he had only one leg ; No. 3 was fat, and had five 
children; No. 4 was nearly blind (amaurosis); No. 5 
had a stiff ankle ; No. 6 was drunken, and ought to 
have had his discharge twenty times over ; No. 7 
was rheumatic, and No. 8 was Walker. Oh ! the 
Admiralty have played old gooseberry, Arthur, 
with the service. It's no good now. We must 
petition, and Elphinstone will work it for us in the 
House." 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 125 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 

THE next morning the old lieutenant was in 
high spirits. He was up pretematurally early, 
and, from old association, kept chanting to himself 
in the garden all the orders given on board ship 
when a vessel is getting under weigh. 

" Loose all sails, sheet home, hoist up top sails, 
top-gallant sails, and royals; brace your head- 
yards aback, then pull for the starboard tack, trip 
the anchor — now she's away ! For 

" I'm Captain Jolly, of the Lively PoUy, 
Just come home from sea/* 

And so da capo. 

If the lieutenant had not been indeed proverbially 
one of the most temperate of men, scandal might 
have accused him of having taken a morning dram 
of mountain dew, or some rich poisonous essence 
of malt, grapes, or juniper. But his good humour 
arose really from nothing but the pure animal 
spirits of an eccentric, warm-hearted, elderly man, 
rejoicing in the prospect of soon re-meeting bis 
young wife and children. 

Elderly men get a little fussy under excitement, 
and their promptness sometimes takes the form of 
nervous bustle. The lieutenant hurried down his 
breakfast — ^he was anxious to start before the 



126 OBEATHEART. 

time. He insisted on himself helping the gardener 
to harness the horses^ Thor and Peacock; he 
paced up and down, while Arthur was looking 
for his driving-gloves — he paced along the 
gravel walk opposite to the door, as fretful as 
Thor, who kept pawing a hole with the hoof of 
its near fore-leg — any one could see that Mr. 
Nelson Tolpedden longed to leap on the harouche 
box, and drive off dictatoriallj, mocking at all 
delays. 

His brother Arthur, and even Liddy, saw 
his nervous excitement ; but they said nothing, 
for they liked to see a good heart under even this 
aspect. At last the caravan got off, and once on 
the grey metallic high road leading from Boscastle 
to Camelford, Thor and Peacock put out their 
strength bravely, and on flew the yellow barouche, 
under Arthur's charioteering, as if the very 
horses were expecting to meet friends at the Bod- 
min railway-station. 

It was market-day in the assize town, so for 
the last mile or two the road was crowded with 
horse-men, market-carts, dog-carts, carriages, and 
country people. Kobert, the coachman, had 
as much as he could do to shout to men on the 
wrong side of the road, and to hail careless carters ; 
but Arthur was keen of eye, light of hand, and 
unflinching in nerve, his only secret regret 
was, that he had not four " bits of blood " with 
whom to display his talent, and to lavish his whip- 
cord. From under many a feathered hat, quick 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 127 

glances were directed towards the handsome father 
and the bright-eyed son ; and many a whip-end 
was turned upwards, to professionally greet his 
skill. Now and then a Cornish farmer, who had 
completed his bargains, and got drunk earlier than 
usual, passed them on his way back to Saint Tudy, 
or some such unacknowledged out-of-the-way saint, 
and touched his hat in a civil, but independent 
recognition, for the Gornishman is a stickler for 
equality. 

"Port the helml" (which means steer to the 
larboard), cried the lieutenant, who seemed to 
consider himself captain on this special cruise, 
to his nephew, as a ponderous waggon, laden with 
great, helpless-looking white flour sacks, bungled 
past without much regard to any laws of the road. 
" Ha, Arthur, I wish you had been with me the 
other day, when I came along the road with those 
two London fellows — ^how they did talk, to be 
sure 1" 

" What an emblem of tyranny that fellow in 
the miller's waggon is," remarked Mr. Henry Tol- 
pedden to his son, as the Juggernaut of a vehicle 
crushed recklessly by ; " he knows he has power, 
and you see he abuses it with as much insolence as 
any usurper in the world." 

"Had too much at the market, sir," said 
Robert, who was a taciturn man ; " and don't know 
where he's a-going of." 

Just as they swung round the corner, and past 
the Royal Hotel, up lumbered Mr. Prince Regent 



128 GREATHEABT. 

Hookem, trotting heavSj on Mammoth the cob. He 
had a spotless white camelia in the button-hole of his 
li^t grey coat, and was at once overpowering and 
condescending. 

Arthur pulled up to greet him. That and 
Peacock obeyed, as if thej loved, and at the same 
time feared their driver. 

« How do, Arthur T 

" How do you do t" 

^ Just been to town, Tolpedden,** he said, " with 
a packet of most important revises for the Forge — 
Littlemore's newpoem—changeof ministry expected 
— a cut at that vulgarian, Spurgeon, and so on. 
We've no sinecure, we poor editors. Also been 
telegraphing for some caviare and some Perigord 
pies from Fortnum and Mason's — ^written also to 
Turner in Bond Street for a silver cup for the rifle- 
men here ; and mind you win it, my young squire of 
dames. Tat ta T 

And off thundered the Sultan. 

A hundred yards further somebody hailed them 
from a pony-chaise at the door of a large draper's. 
It was Mr. TregeUas, muffled up, and sitting a 
miracle of patience, waiting for his wife and 
children, who were shopping within. He was 
sturdy and frank as usual, and greeted the whole 
party warmly, being first introduced to the lieu- 
tenant. As they were all talking, out burst 
two of the children, tossing their arms, re- 
joicing at the general fun of the day, and with 
pleasure at seeing Arthur Tolpedden. 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 129 

" I want to introduce my daughter Lucy to you, 
Mr. Tolpedden," said the rector ; " but I won't 
keep you now — ^I see you're in a hurry for the 
train. Good-bye. God send those you love back 
to you safe and sound !" 

" Oh 1 she came by the eleven-forty train, I 
suppose," said Mr. Tolpedden. " Now then, Ar- 
thur, for a spin to the station — we've no time to lose." 

Mr. Tolpedden was one of those proud Napo- 
leonic men who, from having known little misfor- 
tune, and having been always accustomed to attain 
his objects in a regal sort of way, had grown in- 
nately, though quietly, impetuous, and could not 
brook much contradiction or resistance. Among 
other things, he liked to keep good horses, to 
drive fast ; and to have all he had of the best, costly, 
solid, sound, and good. The speed with which 
Thor and Peacock now flew, seemed to delight his 
impetuous nature. The lieutenant, too, sat enjoy- 
ing the speed, as a captain does when the wind's 
full in his favour. 

It wanted five minutes to the time, when 
Bobert jolted down the steps, then ran to take 
the reins, and throw the clothes over the smoking 
horses. 

"Belay there — steady 1" cried the lieutenant, 
with intense satisfaction, as he leaped down, his 
hands in the two side-pockets of his Flushing 
jacket. " I say, messmate " — the messmate was a 
railway porter — " is the train from Plymouth due 
yet?" 

VOL. I. K 



130 GBEATHEABT. 

" We ain't signalled her yet, sir." 

Arthur had been very silent all the drive. He 
had been trying to reason oat the apparition. He 
had at last settled it could not be a vision, nor a 
^trolling player, nor a seal, nor a country girl ; but 
as to apparitions-here he wavered, half angry 
with himself, and left the matter for further de- 
liberation. One thing, at least, remained, and that 
was, the memory of that face, which seemed the 
embodiment of eternal happiness. 

The station-master had just arrived, and was 
busy at a sort of little dressing-case, transmitting 
Mr. Hookem's epicurean telegraph. There was a 
man with a bundle poring over the times of the 
trains. The cords of the signal-posts were flap- 
ping against the wood — the telegraph wires were 
murmuring mournful prophecies, perhaps, of 
future collisions. The porter was strewing gravel 
on the rails, to make the wheels bite better, and 
stop quicker. The luggage of a moody passenger, 
who kept reading his own directions, was piled up 
ready on the Penzance end of the platform. 

Suddenly the Rev. Mr. Trevena — ^homely in 
dress, and wandering and amiable as ever ; wearing 
a buttoned Inverness cape, with no gloves, his hat 
unbrushed, and his shirt collar by no means obtru- 
sively clean — emerged on the platform. He car- 
ried a black sermon-book in his hand, as if the very 
idea of putting it into his pocket had never entered 
his rambling head. He was going to Falmouth to 
speak at a missionary meeting. You could see 




THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 131 

that he was uncomfortable about something by his 
nervousness, and evident absence of mind. His 
shoes were dusty, for he had walked more than 
half way, and he looked worn and pinched, as if 
his too practical sister kept him on rather scanty 
fare. He asked irrelevant questions about 
the train, till the porters got sulky, and 
lounged off, on pretence of altering the signals. 
He eventually took a third-class ticket, and then, 
much to the station master's annoyance, wanted it 
changed for a return ticket. Effeminate, he was, 
nay, almost childish, in his utter want of common 
sense, yet there stood a man (if the world could 
have read his heart) with the soul of a mart)nr, 
and the stedfast faith of Christ's best beloved 
apostle. 

As the two brothers and Arthur were pacing 
uneasily to and fro, looking at the various adver- 
tisements — the large crayon head of a pretty young 
lady brushing her hair; somebod/s mustard, recom- 
mended by the appropriate picture of a fat bull ; 
Miss Braddon's last sensation novel, founded on a 
cunous complication of trigamy and murder, in- 
cest and arson; and bills of Appleshaw Sheep 
Fair, Volunteer reviews, and other local subjects 
— two persons passed through the side gate, and 
came on the platform. The one was Mr. Brad- 
brain, the dashing young doctor of St. Petrock's, 
who had set the lieutenant right when he was be- 
nighted on his way to Tolpedden — his companion 
apale,corpse-likeman,wasMr. Mordred,his partner, 

k2 



132 GREATHEAKT. 

also a banker^ who had made his money by miuing 
speculations down at Bedrath. 

Mr. Bradbrain was a robust, florid, handsome 
young man of about thirty-seven, with large black 
bushy whiskers, and no beard — the expression of 
whose face was spoiled by an incontrollable inso- 
lence, and a look of vulgar rakishness, that no pro- 
fessional quietude could altogether hide. His 
large brown eyes had a wandering, cunning, reck- 
less look about them, that was not prepossessing to 
a physiognomist, although to ordinary and hasty 
observers it might have assumed the character 
of frank, daring, and country bluntness. His 
dress was well made, but yet " turfish," and slangy. 
His scarf, barred crimson and white, was fastened 
with a gold horseshoe pin ; his Newmarket coat, 
glossy and new, was remarkable in its cut ; and 
while he kept one hand in his outer pocket, the 
other held a hunting-crop, with which he rather 
noisily and defiantly beat the right side of his brown 
corded trowsers, and still oftener the high riding- 
boots which adorned his well-made legs. To a quiet 
man there was something unpleasantly like a 
" bagman " in Mr. Bradbrain — something irritat- 
ing and aggressive in his every gesture — something 
straddling and vulgar in every step he took. His 
dress was new, expensive, and unimpeachable; 
and yet each separate portion seemed to have been 
lately ticketed up in showy windows, where one 
had seen it and avoided it. His white hat, bound 
with deep crape, he always wore, with an offensive 



r 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 133 

effrontery, a little tilted up over the left temple. 
When he passed a stranger, his first impulse 
seemed to be contempt, as if he expected a 
fight, and did not care how soon it came. The 
insolence of money and of physical strength was 
oozing out of his every pore. When the young 
doctor spoke to an inferior, unless he had some 
strong motive for a selfish and profitable politeness, 
it always seemed as if he longed to address him 
and strike him at the same time. 

His companion, Mr. Mordred, was a man some 
fifteen years older than Mr. Bradbrain. He was a 
tall, fleshless, gravely-dressed man, with what one 
might suppose the complexion of a resuscitated 
corpse. Matter, not blood, seemed to slowly ebb 
and flow through his veins ; an emaciated 
face, rendered livid by medicine taken years ago 
for supposed heart disease, seemed to prove that 
some mortal malady had already commenced its 
deadly countermines, against all the precautions of 
science. To those, indeed, who knew him, Mr. 
Mordred made no secret of the fact that disease 
of the heart had compelled him to take that dan- 
gerous medicine that is known to save life only by 
partially poisoning the blood ; and it disclosed its 
inward influence by a bluish pallor and a pasty 
opaqueness of the outer skin. Mr. Mordred's eyes 
were leaden, cold, and dead, and they seemed 
neither to receive nor transmit light. If there had 
been ever any hidden vein of fire in them, that 
fire had long since died out. A wild youth had 



134 GREATHEART. 

led to a premature age. Except gain, speculation, 
and the chess-moves of business, nothing now 
roused that imperturbable and coldly bland man. 

He had abandoned hunting ; he no longer pur- 
chased rights of shooting, or made the farmers all 
round St. Petrock's breed pheasants for him. His 
whole life was now spent in professional visits, in 
bank business, or in attending the meetings of 
mining companies. That thin, ghastly face, with 
its grey whiskers, was now seldom seen at the 
covert side, or in the stubble-field. Now and 
then, only, he gave cold, formal parties, to half 
the county, when everything was chillily splendid, 
and the profusion and display was satiating, but 
unsatisfying. 

Many might dislike a man whose whole life was 
narrowed into so narrow a round; but even calumny, 
with her thousand restless tongues, could not im- 
pugn the stainless honour and probity of the lead- 
ing banker in the north of Cornwall, whose word 
was good for as many thousands as there are 
starlings in a flock. His very dress was the 
essence of somewhat old-fashioned respectability. 
His large, upright, immaculate shirt-collars, indi- 
cated an unflinching conservatism, and his massive 
gold repeater was as large as the watches that 
people wore in Dr. Johnson's days. His very 
walking-stick was respectable, and suitable only for 
the wealthy, for it was pimento-wood mounted 
with gold. 

It was singular that so proud and independent a 




THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 135 

man as Mr. Tolpedden, after greeting the young 
doctor warmly, should give a sort of shudder as 
the elder partner advanced and touched, rather 
than grasped, his proffered hand. 

"Then you, sir," said Mr. Bradbrain to the 
lieutenant, to whom he was introduced, with a 
disagreeable display of coarse white teeth, " are, 
I presume, the gentleman to whom I told the way 
the night before last ? I had been to a case of 
diphtheria beyond Endellion, and I wondered who 
it was." 

"I am that gentleman, sir. We were helm- 
down, topsails clewed up, and there we should 
have remained, but for you." 

" What a queer old card !" thought the doctor. 
" We are just going," he said, " I and my part- 
ner, Mr. Tolpedden, are just going to attend a 
Commission de Lunatico at Helstone — tiresome 
things — one of the Darcourts, been cracked for 
generations." 

" Crack running in what direction ?" inquired 
Mr. Henry Tolpedden. 

" In the direction of acquiring and storing up 
gun-flints, and old shoes, and envelopes, and old 
postage-stamps, by the cart-load," said Mr. 
Mordred, without a smile. He never smiled, and, 
when he did, it seemed as if it gave him pain. 

"How about the rifle match, Arthur — does it 
hold for October ?" said the young doctor. 

While they were discussing this contest, and the 
Forge Cup, Mr, Henry Tolpedden wandered away 



136 GBEATHEART. 

to the end of the platform, beyond the signal-post, 
and, leaning over a railing looking towards the 
town, the strange man fell into a carious train of 
thought, apropos of railways in general, and of 
the indifiference of the town of Bodmin to the 
^urival of the three-forty, in particular. 

" Suppose," he reflected, " that death was done 
away with, his power cancelled, his dusty and re- 
volting pomp superseded, his mouldy and musty 
trophies pulled down and defaced — ^that no longer 
he was permitted to turn cheeks like the rose- 
leaf to yellow wax, no longer to change the eye's 
light of life into the glassy stare, no longer to 
freeze the warm heart to ice, no longer to tear 
from us those we love, in the old awful and 
ghastly way — suppose all earth's graveyards 
changed into flowering meadows, all sextons, un- 
dertakers, and cofEn-makers, in sheer disgust at 
the abolition of Death, their old master, having 
emigrated to the Antipodes, and there turned 
farmers, 

" Imagine, further," he went on, '* that, in place 
of dying, a mysterious black letter came to each 
doomed person at the predestined time — a letter 
simply requiring him or her to be ready at a cer- 
tain named station, at a certain hour, on a certain 
day, and that, on that day, hour, and place, they 
went, attended by those who loved them to the 
last, and that, at the hour specified, there infallibly 
came, growing larger out of the distance, a sable 
train driven by invisible hands, and that into it, 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 137 

urged by irrestisible impulse, the doomed person 
got, with just one last embrace at parting, and was 
borne away for ever. 

"Could time ever take from us the sense of 
terror, awe, and mystery, that the sight of such a 
parting would produce I And yet who would have 
thought that time would ever have lessened our 
sense of the sublimity of the abstract railway, of the 
giant force, of the tremendous imprisoned power of 
steam, that enormous addition to man's potency 
over the elements I Still the very country cows in 
the field now scarcely raise their heads from their 
munching as the express flies by, at fifty miles an 
hour; the farmers, driving to market, do not 
even look up, or cease for a moment the tossing 
about, in their hollowed hands, pinches of sample 
com. How can an age wonder at anything, when 
it has discovered that the sky above us is no longer 
the cloudy home of the gods, but only so many 
miles of ambient oxygen and hydrogen! The 
unknown — it recedes from us further and further 
every day. On goes science with her lamp, 
deeper and deeper into the mine, seeking the 
golden vein of Truth. The mine-spirits cower 
deeper in the darkness, avoiding the light. Alas I 
for the old simple wonder, and the simple, un- 
shaken faith of earlier days, have they, too, gone 
for evert Well, there are still secrets to dis- 
cover." 

Our thinker was aroused from his reverie by his 
son touching him on the shoulder. 




138 GREATHEART. 

" What ! in a brown study, Pater ? I have just 
come to tell you that Mr. Mordred says he will be 
very glad if you will call on him the next time 
you go to St. Petrock's. They have crossed over, 
because their train is signalled." 

His father answered, somewhat sternly : 

"Yes, I had forgotten. I will go there to- 
morrow. I shall want to call on the Tregellases. 
Ugh! I don't know how it is, I do detest that 
man ; yet I know nothing but in his favour, and 
I know the folly of such antipathies." 

Just previous to this conversation, Mr. Brad- 
brain had been dilating on a collision he had once 
been a sharer in, near Famborough, in 1860, at 
the time he was house-surgeon in the Salisbury 
Infirmary. His train had run into a timber-train, 
and several carriages were destroyed. All this the 
doctor related as you would relate a mere adven- 
ture out hunting. 

But the honest lieutenant, heedless of all danger 
at sea, was a child in matters of land travel, and 
was, moreover, keenly anxious just then about 
the safety of the dear cargo he expected ; so he took 
the narrative somewhat in dudgeon, much to 
Bradbrain's amusement and astonishment. 

" Sir, I beg to say I want to hear no more of 
your yarn !" exclaimed the anxious husband ; " and 
I think it very inconsiderate, talking of such disas- 
ters in this place and at this time." So saying, 
he turned on his heel somewhat abruptly, deaf to 
all the profuse apologies lavished in a loud and 




THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 139 

blustering voice by Mr. Bradbrain. " I hate that 
fellow," he muttered to himself. 

Arthur and Mr. Trevena were just interposinc]^, 
when up went the signal, the train swept 
round through the distant viaduct, swift as a 
cannon-shot, and every moment looming larger 
and larger, broke forth again with bragging puffs 
of smoke, as if it exulted in its own gigantic 
strength, as with much creaking, jostling, and 
sound of wheels, it slowly and grurablingly 
halted at the Bodmin Eoad Station. 

The good old sailor's delight was now almost too 
much for his head. He bawled out to the stoker, 
^* Heave to — put the helm down, and let go your 
best bower!" Very good orders for coming to 
anchor, but at that moment quite out of place. 
Then he darted down the platfoi*m, shouting with 
a stentorian voice, "Bodmin Koad! — Bodmin Road! 
Keep your seats till the train stops !" In fact, to 
tell the whole truth, with the best intentions in 
the world. Lieutenant Tolpedden behaved for j^ 
moment or two uncommonly like a lunatic; 
joy does get into our head, but its intoxica- 
tion is very brief, for some grave little drawback 
soon comes to sober one. 

I do believe firmly that if the agreed-on signal, 
the little white handkerchief, had not instantly 
fluttered from a cefitral second-class window, from 
which also emerged the heads of rejoicing children 
and a bird-cage, something dreadful would have 
happened to the lieutenant, so deeply had his feel- 



M 



140 GREATHEART. 

ings been roused, and such a tension of anxiety- 
had there been upon his nerves. 

With the alacrity of a man securing salvage, 
or, to use a humaner metaphor, with the hearty 
but yet determined bustle of a captain when his 
ship is about to leave the dock, and the shore-rope 
is already slackening, the lieutenant dashed at the 
carriage door, flung it open, pulled out a sky- 
terrier, a parrot, and a bird-cage, all at once; 
routed out the children, and a little maid-of-all- 
work ; then, a moment after, a pretty, dapper little 
woman leaped into his arms, with the sweetest little 
shriek of self-satisfied triumph ever heard, and was 
deposited with half a dozen kisses safely on the 
platform. Then came a little pink and white 
bundle — ^that was "Bobby," and the lieutenant 
tossed her up in almost ludicrous exultation; 
then out tumbled Kate, and Jack, and Ted, all 
of whom were by turns kissed and deposited with 
the other luggage. 

But all at once Mrs. Tolpedden tore herself from 
her husband, and screamed in small anguish, " My 
black bag ! — my black bag ! — oh I our trunks, and 
the big sea-chest — ^Nel, Nel, run, run! — ^they're 
in the van near the engine — ^we shall lose them 1" 

" ril look after the children," said Arthur. 

"And ril run and help to claim the luggage," 
said his father. 

"And allow me, Tolpedden, the pleasure of 
taking care of the lady," said Mr. Bradbrain, who 
had made his way to them through the crowd. 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 141 

" Oh ! my bag I my bag I — it had everything in 
it I — Where is it ? Oh, don't let the train go ! " 

" My dear madam, allow me to leave your side 
for a moment," said the young doctor, who really 
looked very handsome, glowing as he was with the 
excitement of the moment ; " and I will search 
every corner of the carriage." 

He dived under seats, he lifted cushions — ^in a 
moment he re-appeared with the prize — the lost 
bag. 

The little lady's delight and gratitude were 
prettier and more childlike than even her conster- 
nation. She was prodigal of thanks, she positively 
blushed slightly when she fixed her eyes on the 
handsome and showy young man, who bent over 
her to asssure her that he deserved no thanks. 
He was only too happy to be able to do the small- 
est service for any relation of his friend, Arthur 
Tolpedden ; and he said this with a book of eti- 
quette bow, lifting his remarkable hat. 

At that moment the impatient train gathered 
itself together — all its jolting vertebrae began 
to move — out flew the great white banner of steam 
— the doors slammed — ^the flag was shaken — 
up went the station-master's hands — ^the stoker 
pulled at his taps as if he was drawing beer — 
there was a kissing of hands, a last word or two, 
a shout, and off went the train, leaving the two 
Tolpeddens at the further end of the platform, sur- 
rounded by mountains of luggage. 

" Oh ! this gentleman has been so kind, Nel," 



142 GBEATHEART. 

said the little woman; as she came to where her 
husband stood. 

'* Much obliged to him — very much oblifijed to 
him, and I hope he'll forget the rough way I spoke 
to him just now," said the husband, all the time 
counting and overhauling the luggage. 

" Delighted with the opportunity, I am sure," 
said the doctor, with a dangerous side glance that 
seemed to photograph Mrs. Tolpedden's eyes, plump 
cheek, and little dimpled chin. 

" Now, then, Polly, for the bill of lading," said 
the lieutenant. 

She handed it to him from the rescued bag. 

" One sea-chest — say here^ somebody !" 

The eldest boy. Jack, said " Here." 

" Three hampers — a chest of drawers !" 

" Here." 

" One deal box, Katy !" 

'' Here." 

"Two trunks. Why don't you cry here, 
Johnny ?" 

" Here, father." 

" One bonnet-box, and one violin case." 

"Here." 

"That's all ship-shape, then. Now, we're ready 
for sailing, so hoist the Blue Peter at the fore, 
Harry !" 

By this time, a close, two-horse fly, ordered from 
the Eoyal Hotel by letter the previous day, had 
arrived, steered by the officious Mr. Beswetherick. 
With joyful clatter and pleasant bustle, in got the 



THE lieutenant's FAMILY. 143 

children, and Susan, the little maid, the parrot 
Benbow, and the delighted terrier Billy ; lastly, 
in got pretty little Mrs. Tolpedden, while her 
husband mounted the rigging, as he called it, 
and divided the box-seat with the driver. The 
chest was corded on, the hamper coaxed into the 
boot, the bonnet-box entrusted to the barouche, 
while the heavy boxes were left to be sent on by 
the carrier^s cart. 

All this time Mr. Bradbrain had been un- 
ceasingly polite and useful in his glossy and bagman 
way. He handed in the bird-cage, with that 
yellow puff, the canary ; he talked to the parrot, 
he arranged the plaids and shawls, he counted the 
umbrellas, he kissed the children, and he carefully 
tossed up the steps and fastened the carriage door. 
The lieutenant was too absorbed in his own happi- 
ness to be very polite, but even he stooped "down 
from the bad eminence wheron he was perched, and 
said: 

" Thankee I thankee ! Mr. Broadbean I" 

"Bradbrain, uncle." 

" Beg your pardon, Brodbrad ? Much obliged, 
Mr. Brodbrad, for all the trouble you've taken. 
Now then, coachee, put her before the wind. 
Polly, my love, are you all right and ataut'there? 
Very well, then. Coachee, straight for port it is. 
Harry, we'll race for home." 

And away the caravan went ; the barouche first, 
and the more plebeian fly in convoy. As Mrs. Tol- 
pedden, her brother-in-law, and Arthur simul- 



144 GBEATHEABT. 

taneously bowed to obliging Mr. Bradbrain, that 
gentleman remained, with hat waving in his hand, 
until the two carriages grew small as Titania's 
chariots in the distance. Then, and not till then, 
with one gloved hand twisted in the main of his 
irritable chestnut mare, Mr. Bradbrain leaped into 
his saddle with a single impetuous swing, and rode 
fast in the direction of the town. Yet, fast as was 
the pace, he found leisure, as he rode, to kiss his 
hand three times in the direction of the receding 
vehicles, and to utter these enigmatic words : 
" Donald Bradbrain, it's a casCy it's a case !" 



CHAPTER VIII. 

"blue byes op spring — THE VIOLETS." 

THE morning after their arrival, the house at 
Tolpedden was buzzing, like a hive, with 
children. Johnny, a sturdy boy of twelve, was 
leading the new-comers about, in detachments, to 
the garden, the stables, the shrubberies, and the 
orchard ; Ned, who boasted of the experience of 
six full summers, was looking everywhere for picture- 
books ; Kate, a buxom girl of thirteen, had made 
love to Liddy, and was being shown all the curi- 
osities; while Bobby, the pet, and permanent 
wonder of the whole family, was crowing and 
screaming with delight, as she pulled at the lieu- 



THE VIOLETS. 145 

tenant's bushy grey whiskers. Arthur, the 
servants, everybody was pressed into the service of 
the new-comers, and were delighted with the 
service into which they were pressed. The house 
seemed to bloom into life again^ as little feet 
sounded once more on the stairs^ and the walls rung 
again with the innocent laughter of children. 

It was quite delightful to see the lieutenant on 
the lawn, near the wall, where the apricot-tree was 
in full fruit, tossing his baby-child into the air, 
and loading it with kisses and caresses. 

"My own Bobby I" he cried; "there's no 
Bobby in the world like my Bobby ! No, Polly, 
I can't part with her yet. Come along, Bobby, 
come to father !'* and so on da capo. 

That morning, when Arthur Tolpedden rode 
as usual to St. Petrock's for his three hours Greek, 
there was a curious fluttering in his heart, a sen- 
sation of mingled delight and apprehension. He 
waa hardly conscious, however, of the feeling, and 
was ashamed of himself for allowing his fancy to 
run so wild, and all about a clergyman^s daughter 
whom he had never seen. But he was at a sus- 
ceptible age ; his imagination had^ in this instance, 
been excited, and he began to feel all that irre- 
strainable and not unnatural curiosity that most 
young men of twenty would have felt if they had 
been about to see a person newly added to their 
circle of friends, especially when that person was a 
young and prepossessing lady, and one much 
eulogized by her own acquaintance. 

VOL. L L 



146 GBEATHEABT. 

Arthur had dressed that morning with more care 
than usual. He even paid greater attention to his 
attitude in riding. It was a clear, bright, cold day, 
and the large yellow chestnut leaves rustled under 
his feet as he leaped off Gipsy at the Rectory gate, 
and led her into the stable. No children ran to 
meet him, but seeing the front door open, in he 
walked. There were no signs of the good rector 
or his wife, no signs of Fitzhugh, Maclean ; no- 
body, no, not even the servant seemed to be 
visible. 

Tolpedden opened the door of the sitting-room 
opening from the hall, and entered. The piano 
was open, and on the top there was laid a large 
bunch of Russian violets, still fresh with dew, 
premature prophecies of spring, sweet as the breath 
of Venus ; and near these relics of Paradise lay 
one little riding gauntlet, that had been already 
moulded into the form of its owner's hand, A 
certain beauty and grace seemed to animate both 
the flowers and the glove; Tolpedden stooped, 
and seemed about to kiss them both, in perfect 
confidence that she to whom they belonged must 
be both witching and beautiful ; but he only kissed 
the glove, and then laid it down with a sort of regret. 

At that moment a glance at the black and 
white keys suggested to him the notion of sitting 
down for a moment before he ran into the garden, 
and trying to spell but from his memory that wild 
and strange melody that he had heard the mer- 
maid sing, a spirit whom he now began to regard 



THE VIOLETS. 147 

almost as an unaccountable dream. That very 
morning he had risen early to adapt to it some 
verses of Heine, and these he had learnt by heart. 
There was a large mirror hanging on the wall 
above the piano, and he sat, as he played, with his 
back to the glass doors, now thrown apart, that 
opened on to the lawn. Arthur Tolpedden was 
almost a self-taught player, but he had a firm 
touch and a fine ear for harmonies. He played 
in a tender, expressive way, not fulminating, as if 
to show brute strength, or merely running up and 
down conceited chromatic ladders, and discharging 
batteries of noisy chords. He played, in fact, 
simply as if he was tracking out on the instrument 
the windings of some pleasant thought, passionate 
as Mozart's " II Tesoro," regretful as the tearful 
♦^ Che faro senza Euridice " of Gliick. It was 
plaintive, rambling, even faulty playing, and would 
have, I daresay, vexed a stormy professional player 
to the heart ; the words he sang in a low, mellow 
tenor were these, and they seemed applicable to 
the flowers that lay before him : — 

Blue eyes of spring — ^the violets^ 
Peeped sweetly from the ground. 
The little modest violets, 
In bunches I had bound. 

rd plucked than talking, teMng 
My thoughts so tender, dear ; 
The name my heart was hiding. 
The nightingale sang clear. 

l2 



148 GB£ATH£Airr. 

Loudlj she sang thoae trasmed thooghts — 
The echoes bore them far ; 
And the trees soon spread mj secret 
To wind, and doad, and star. 

^ Oh ! that wonderfnl sea-spirit T thon^t Ar- 
thur, quite losing himself in daj-dreamSy and 
pausing over his music ; ^ was it a dream, or but 
a mere ideal of mj brain, thrown forward upon 
my retina. Pshaw! Brewster, that's all very- 
well; but, then, what is to account for the 
sea-green silk, the duration and clearness of 
the vision and its disappearance? — ^besides, the 
retina does not laugh — stuff and nonsense, don't 
tell me ! — ^I am no gull of the Davenport brothers 
— I am no child to be tricked with magic-lanterns ; 
besides, what time was there for preparation? 
— who could expect my coming? — ^what glass 
could throw visions on an isolated sea-side rock, 
with nothing but moonlit sea for a backgroimd? 
No rubbish ! — ^it was no white lady of Avenel, no 
banshee with grey shadowy face. Why, bless 
me, I should know that face, that face among 
ten thousand — the clear, full, white brow, the 
sweet eyebrows, arched in such beautiful and 
mischievous surprise, the small, finely-shaped nose, 
the lips just parted, the lower one swelling so 
like a rosebud just opening in the sun ; her look, 
so defiant and Diana-like, yet as full of un- 
quenchable happiness as Titania's ; and then the 
hair, fit to wreathe Venus with braids of sun- 



THE VIOLETS. 149* 

beams. But, stop, I don't like the way these 
words run — 

Blue eyes of spring — ^the violets, 

Came — (that's better) — ^peeping from the ground ;, 

The nightingale had seen me, 

As the bimches I had bound. 

There is always a clumsy inversion about 
all poems either translated or stolen from the 
German," he went on thinking, "that always 
betrays their origin — the construction differs. If 
those lines had been my own, I should have 
written — 

As with the long grass ribbons 
I had the bunches bound. 

"Yet, no, that's not smooth either, and 1 lose 
the metre — ^let me play it once more." 

Arthur had scarcely played more than one verse, 
when, looking upwards, his eyes fell on the mirror 
that hung before him, and there he saw a beau- 
tiful face watching him, with evident astonish- 
ment and almost alarm, from the teiTace without ; 
while not far behind the face the figures of /Mr. 
Tregellas and a young clergyman, arm-in-arm, 
came moving towards the window. 

Arthur rose up and advanced to meet his tutor. 
Mr. Tregellas's brown grave face was radiant with 
a calm pleasure ; on his arm there clung and 
weighed (for in the short interval of time that it 
had taken Arthur to rise from the music-stool and 
face the window, the young clergyman had turned 



150 GKEATHEART. 

back into the garden) a tall, graceful girl, flushed 
with exerci'se, and holding a croquet mallet in one 
hand; in the other a round hat, which had a 
little fan of peacock's feathers in it, with their 
purple and emerald eyes arching round over the 
right side. Arthur recognised her face in a mo- 
ment — Heaven above us, it was that of the mer- 
maid ! His keen eye in a moment saw that the 
clear, oval face, the candid brow, the mouth 
more beautiful than any Greek sculptor ever 
fashioned, were all those of his errant vision. 
The hair was the same sunshine colour ; he re- 
membered the turn of the figure, the very bearing 
so proud and yet so winning — above all there was 
that same marvellous and indescribable sense of 
equable and unchanging gladness in every look 
and movement, a spirit (as it were) of eternal 
youth, and of a beauty that could not fade, be- 
cause it was an effluence of the soul within. 

In a moment Arthur's quick intelligence, swift 
as that of dawning love, discovered that although 
Lucy Tregellas had been surprised to hear a 
stranger playing over the wild German air that 
she had sung to herself that night upon the 
seaside rock, she had not had time in the 
hurried and half-frightened look that she had cast 
on the unexpected intruder, to observe his face. 
She was evidently surprised, but she did not recog- 
nise him. He felt glad of that, because it formed 
a sort of secret though invisible link between 
them* 



THE VIOLETS. 151 

"How d'ye do, Tolpeddenf said Mr. Tregellas. 
"Allow me to introduce to you my noisy and 
mischievous daughter Lucy, or Lilly, as the chil- 
dren call her, who has just come back from Devon- 
shire to throw the whole house out of gear, to beat 
us all at croquet, and to make us all as idle and 
troublesome as herself." 

Mr. Tolpedden bowed gracefully enough, and 
hoped that Miss Tregellas had recovered from the 
fatigue of so long a journey. 

" Oh ! she came back the evening of the day 
you were here," said her father ; " earlier than we 
expected ; and what should she do but go rambling 
down on the sea-shore the very same night. Oh I 
nothing tires Lilly except steady reading and use- 
ful work." 

" That evening 1" thought Arthur I " then it was 
her!" 

"Be quiet, papa," said Lucy, with pretty simu- 
lated anger, " be quiet ; you know I once read all 
through Russell's * Modern Europe.' I could not 
think who it was playing '^O die treumen.' It is 
such a favourite of mine, Mr. Tolpedden." 

" So it has been of mine lately," replied Arthur, 
in a meaning voice, but the words melted into air, 
and did not reach their mark. Perhaps Lucy 
Tregellas did not even hear them, for, placing the 
violets in her bosom, she had already sat down to 
the piano, and was playing "O die treumen" with 
exquisite expression. The piano seemed to live 
and breathe under her little fingers — it was no 



152 GREATHEAKT. 

longer a box of mechanical notes^ a mere combina- 
tion of wires and padded hammers. 

"Why, you have improved, Lilly," said her 
father, leaning over her, and patting her fondly. 
" I wonder if the shred-blankets get on as well ajs 
our accomplishments!" 

Lilly leaped up, and seizing both her father's 
hands, kissed him twice between the eyes. 

" They are done, Mr. Tregellas — ^they are done 
long ago." 

And then she laughed in triumph, a rippling 
laugh, in perfect musical cadence — crescendo and 
diminuendo — for her voice was one of Lucy's 
greatest charms. It was soft, rich, harmonious, 
flowing in one flute-like murmur, full of variety, 
yet never shrill, petulant, nor perturbed. It re- 
minded Arthur this moment of the deep, gurgling 
sound of a mountain brook, it was such natural 
music ; and then, an instant after, of the deep and 
brooding happiness of the wild dove's note at 
nesting time. That voice, surely, bubbled forth 
from a spring of calm happiness, deep in the 
centre of a pure and tender heart. 

Oh ! Arthur, Arthur Tolpedden, how dangerous 
it was for you to see Lucy Tregellas for the first 
time at such moments of quiet home delight and 
spontaneous affection. In the blaze and crush of 
silly soirees, in the fierce cyclones of the Deux- 
temps, during the unnatural scenes of childish 
or unhealty operas, the very cestus of Venus seems 
to lose its magic power, and the fatal arrows of 



THE VIOLETS. 153 

the Cupids, as they hover around their queen, fall 
blunted from the hearts of yawning men, so weary 
of pleasure as to be even bored by the mere indis- 
putable fact of their own existence. Love comes 
soonest when never thought of, and surely no 
practised glances or studied attitude wins like the 
sparkle of a happy moment, or the chance turn 
of a face radiant only with the innocent mirth 
of the instant. 

"Do you play at croquet, Mr. Tolpedden?'* in- 
quired Lucy. 

" Oh I yes, I do, a little." 

"How singular it is that every one plays a 
little !" said Miss Tregellas, maliciously. " Come, 
we want an arbitrator who knows Captain Rede's 
niles." 

^^ I know all the primary rules." 

" Then you are the very man we want," said 
Mr. Tregellas, "for Mr. Hookem is a dreadful 
cheat, he and Lucy do nothing but quarrel ; as 
for Lucas and Mr. Bradbrain, they think it below 
the dignity of sporting men to play at all, so we're 
obliged to take the children in." 

" Yes, and do you know, Mr. Tolpedden, that 
Mr. Bradbran is actually bear enough to call it ^ a 
spoony game ;' now it isn't, is it t There's lots of 
fun in it, isn't there, papa t" 

When they reached the croquet ground, the 
only fault of which was a troublesome green cage 
of a weeping ash tree, under which the balls of the 
worst players were always getting lost, the game 



154 GKEATHEART. 

was going on in a noisy and pleasant way, Mr. 
Hookem performing deeds of great skill and 
prowess. He was a rover, and was dashing about 
erratically, to the dismay of his enemies, and the 
exultation of his friends, especially Clara, who 
tossed about her fleece of hair in a dance of de- 
light. Lucas was smoking, and talking to Fitz- 
hugh, who had philosophical theories about the 
game, but never played. 

" I've been going on ever since, my fair antago- 
nist, ever since. Now then for blue," shouted 
exasperating Mr. Hookem, with one foot planted 
on a scarlet ball, as he croqued an unfortunate 
blue about seventy yards away. 

" Oh ! you cruel, cruel, rude man !" said Lucy, 
for that was the unoffending sufferer. 

"Horrid slow game," said Lucas, passing his 
penknife through a choked cigar. 

" You hold your tongue, sir," said Lucy, stamp- 
ing her little foot in a pretty, queenly way, and 
trying all she could to frown, as, at a cry of 
" blue," she ran to the ball, and, by an even, steady 
stroke, secured a very distant hoop. 

Mr. Bradbrain clapped his hands. 

"And I and Clara are to stand up against play 
like that I" said Hookem. " Did you ever see such 
an eye, Tolpedden ? Why, I would have bet heavily 
against that stroke. By-the-bye, have a weed t" 

Arthur, loud in praise of the skilful player, 
who was following up her victory with a mocking 
and bewitching laugh, accepted the weed. 



THE TIOLETS. 155 

But just as Mr. Hookem was following up the 
gift of an enormous and fragrant Intimidad by the 
offer of a bulbous-topped vesuvian, Mr. Tregellas 
stepped between them with a laugh, and gently 
pressed back the proffered present. 

" No, no, Hookem, thank you ; there is Herodotus 
waiting to have a talk with Mr. Tolpedden — we 
always go in to read, you know, at ten. Come, 
Maclean, Lucas — come. Fitzhugh, it is past ten 
by my watch." 

With great, but concealed reluctance, Arthur 
tore himself from the croquet ground, with eyes 
still bent on that unconscious enchantress, who, 
now pursuing the flying ball like a repentant 
Atalanta, was now steering it through one hoop after 
another, or driving Mr, Hookem's yellow projectile 
in the most cruel way into distant space, to 
that gentleman's mingled vexation and delight, 
and to the intense enjoyment of Mr. Bradbrain, 
whose rapture was perhaps rather overdone. If 
Arthur had been living during the Reign of 
Terror, and Cornwall had been Brittany — for 
there is no legal limit to supposition — I am afraid 
he would, if possible, have sent Messrs. Hookem 
and Bradbrain to the guillotine, as two gentlemen 
rather in his way, and quite unfit to win the heart 
of Miss Lucy Tregellas. 

The moment Mr. Tregellas had finished the 
reading, and had left the room to wish good-bye to 
the Sultan editor and the doctor, who had sent 
in the servant-maid to announce their inten- 



156 GREATHEART. 

tion of leaving, the " private pups," as Mr. Hookem 
persisted in calling them, burst forth in rapturous 
admiration of their tutor's daughter, each after 
his way. 

^^ She is stunning !" said Lucas, who was busy 
drawing race-horses on the fly leaf of his " Horace." 
*^ Did you ever see such a stepper I — I never did; by 
Jove I sir — why, she is fit for a duchess ! Where 
did she get her manner, that's what I want to 
know ? — ^the little man's no great shakes." 

^^ I tell you, sir," said Fitzhugh, in his grand 
oratorical way, carefully adjusting the left hand 
side of his spectacles with the middle left hand 
finger, *^I tell you, sir, she is fit to share the 
throne of the Caesars. Approach her not, ye pro- 
fane, with the language of the billiard-room and 
the stables, for she is fit to feast off gold, and to 
sit beneath roofs of ivory ; but she — oh ! here she 
comes ; and, by Zeus, the cloud-compeller, the 
moon among the lesser fires is not so surpassing 1" 

They all ran to the window which looked out 
upon the entrance, and there stood Mr. Hookem's 
barouche, the two sorrel horses chafing under his 
pompous restraint. Mr. Bradbrain was on horse- 
back a little further on. Into the vehicle suddenly 
leaped Miss Lucy Tregellas, bright and happy as 
the birds in spring. She was laughing with Mr. 
Hookem, but ceased in a moment to turn round 
and assist her mother, whose shawl had got 
hitched on the door handle. The children ran 
and closed the door, and off dashed the carriage. 



THE VIOLETS. 157 

" I do believe that those fellows are neck and neck 
for her," said Lucas ; " and, egad ! I don't blame 
them — do you, Tolpedden ?" 

"Nonsense, Lucas," said Tolpedden; "why, 
they're both old enough to be her father; and, 
besides, Hookem is a widower." 

"Well, and isn't Bradbrain a known lady's 
man? — and don't widowers ever marry again? 
Come, I'll take you a bet about it. I do believe 
he is spoons on her himself, Maclean I" 

"I won't bet about such subjects," said Tol- 
pedden, quite angry, for he felt jealous, unknown 
almost to himself. 

" And he's actually turning quite rusty — that's 
a clear sign," said Lucas ; " but, I say, you fellows, 
are you going to St. Tud/s Fair to-morrow, or not ? 
Bradbrain will be there to meet us for a game of 
pool first ; and he is going to manufacture some 
of that remarkable liquor he pleases to denominate 
^ Rumf ustian.' " 

" We will disport ourselves ; but, by Heaven I 
we must keep it very snug from the little man," 
said Maclean ; " let not the prating stones know 
of our whereabouts — let us be velvet-footed — close 
as oysters — let the little wily serpent be our 
emblem." 

" I shall not ask the little man," said Tolpedden, 
a trifle arrogantly ; " Tregellas's authority ceases 
with me directly I shut my books. I must be 
there, for I want to buy an Exmoor pony for a 
little nephew of mine ; and there are always droves 



158 OBEATHEABT. 

of the beasts at this autumn fair — ^I will meet you, 
then, in the fair, at two." 

" There's pippins and ale to come r exclaimed 
Fitzhugh, with all the energy of a prophet, as 
he adjusted his spectacles, inflated his chest, and 
inserted his thumbs into the arm-holes of his 
waistcoat, after the dignified and high-bred man- 
ner of the late Sir Robert Peel. "There shall 
be concussion of the ivory balls ; gold and silver 
shall be strewn over the board of green cloth; 
the sound of the violin shall be heard among us : 
and our crystal goblets shall overflow with that 
deUcious, but perhaps somewhat inebriating fluid, 
called by the vulgar * Kumfustian.' Now, isn't 
that like Hookem, in his grand moments?" 

Tolpedden and Lucas laughing, declared it was 
perfect. 

" But in the name of all that is gracious," said 
Fitzhugh, suddenly assuming a severe judicial 
aspect, and putting a large black pen-wiper on 
his head, as a sort of judge's black cap, " what has 
that man Maclean been sapping at all the morning? 
— he was at it when we were at croquet with that 
stunner of a girl, and I'm blessed if he is not at it 
now ! Maclean, prisoner at the bar, have you any- 
thing to say in your defence ?" 

A pale, thin, sarcastic face, nervous and mobile, 
looked up from a book which he was busy annotat- 
ing, and said in a vexed, petulant, and half 
alarmed way, 

" Oh 1 don't bother. Well, what is it ? I am 




THE VIOLETS. 159 

writing notes on ^ Glaubenicht's Reply to Haver- 
nick's Theory of the Mosaic Cosmogony/ and so 
leave me alone." 

'^That's a lively subject 1" said Lucas; "that 
man will kill himself." 

" Hookem goes and lends him German Rational- 
istic books," said Tolpedden, rather bitterly — for 
he did not much like Maclean's selfish self- 
absorption, and occasional cutting sneers, which, if 
they did often fall harmless, were, at least, meant 
to hurt — " to prepare him, I suppose, for taking 
orders, and subscribing heart and soul to the thirty- 
nine articles." 

This taunt, whether deserved or undeserved, 
roused Maclean, and he angrily split up the pen 
he was mending. 

" Glaubenicht is as useful to me, at all events," 
he said, " as BeWs Life is to Lucas, or the Drill 
Sergeant's Manual will be for you when you're 
up for your little go." 

"Now he's riled," said Lucas, twisting his 
steel watch chain round his fore-finger. 

"Ohl let him alone, poor fellow 1" said Tol- 
pedden, generously; "at all events, he studies 
more and knows more than any of us. Perhaps 
it is better to have Glaubenicht's creed, whatever 
it is, than no belief at all ; but, for myself, I 
am not one of those who wish to explain away 
our Saviour's miracles, and yet believe in the 
miserable twaddle of mesmerists, table-turners, con- 
jurors, and spiritualistic jugglers.'* 



i 



160 GREATHEART. 

Maclean turning red as a coal, struck Olau- 
benicht with his fist, with the air of King John 
denouncing Magna Charta. 

'^ Glaubenicht is one of the greatest ^*' 

The eulogy on an illustrious but sceptical 
German was interrupted by the door opening, and 
the pleasantly stem brown face of Mr. Tregellas 
presenting itself. 

The rector gravely took his place in his chintz- 
covered arm-chair by the fire, then opening his 
ivory pen-knife, and removing the lid of a little 
round silver salt box, he addressed himself to 
the peeling of the first of a heap of walnuts that 
lay beside his desk, glancing his eye at the same 
time on the pages of one of Mr. Fronde's delight- 
ful but paradoxical works, which lay opened be- 
fore him. The pupils were very busy. The only 
sound was the purring of the rector's favourite 
cat, that lay coiled in a corner of his arm-chair, 
and the fretful scratch of Maclean's restless pen. 
Peace, quiet, and learning were the domestic Lares 
and Penates of that pleasant study, at whose 
windows the autumn roses looked in, and on whose 
open verandah the robin sat pufiing out its little 
scarlet breast, and singing calmly and humbly its 
little anthem for the day. 

" Can you tell me, sir," said Maclean, suddenly 
rising, with Kitto's " History of the Jews " in his 
hand, "how to explain this passage of Exodus. 
When the six hundred thousand Israelites left 
Succoth, with their, probably, two millions of 



THE VIOLETS. 161 

sheep and oxen, and God had to send manna to 
supply them, what did the cattle live on ; for Kitto 
tells us that the wilderness of Shur, for the first three 
days' journey from the Red Sea, is a sandy, stony, 
and gravelly desert, white and glaring with sand- 
hills, that stretch to the coast ?" 

This question was asked with a quick and de- 
ceptive subtlety, which, however, did not delude 
Mr. Tregellas. His iron-bound face, so soldier- 
like and imperturbable, assumed, however, a sad- 
dened look, as he replied : 

"My dear boy, these questions are not to be 
solved by the multiplication-table, or hard, irreve- 
rent, and suspicious hair-splitting. Science is im- 
mature, geology and astronomy are still in their 
infancy, our discoveries are but first steps. Wait 
— read the Divine Book with prayer, and with 
humility. These arithmetical critics destroy, but 
they do not build on the ruins they make. They 
defile the Temple, and on the Holy of Holies they 
erect a mere gilded image of Intellectual Pride. 
Distrust them — distrust especially those hireling 
shepherds — ^whether priest or bishop — who are 
mean, cowardly, dishonest, and mercenary enough 
to accept their daily bread from that very Church 
whose great truths they disown, sneer at, and 
deny." 

This excellent advice might have grown almost 
into a sermon, such was the generous fervour of 
the rector, had not a little knock, to Lucas's in- 
tense relief, just then come at the door. 

VOL. L M 



i 



162 OREATHEABT. 

It was little Clara, come to ask for the keys, 
and to say that mamma particularly wanted to 
speak to papa, as the butcher had just come. 

"Tut! tutl tut!" said Mr. Tregellas, laying 
down half a walnut, lately peeled, and white as 
ivory, " just as I was going to begin my sermon ; 
and bless me if there isn't that tiresome young 
Trevena coming in at the garden-gate, to keep 
me all the .morning, I daresay ; always the way 
whenever one wants a specially quiet morning. 
Maclean, do you know your Thucydides V* 

" Yes, sir, I knew it an hour ago." 

"Good! Very well, get the books ready, I 
shall be back as soon as I can. Now no noise, 
Lucas, while I'm away. Tolpedden^ if you've 
done, write out some Russell's Europe, or do some 
Latin verse. Remember you go up very soon now, 
and your father^s son mustn't make a mess of it." 

The visitor proved to be that yoimg, over- 
zealous, and very high-church Rector of St. Tudy's, 
the Rev. Mr. Bernard Waverton, come to ask Tre- 
gellas's advice as to the burial of an imbaptized 
dissenter of the Sandimanian persuasion. Should 
he refuse to bury the Sandimanian or not ? He 
was all in a flutter of anticipated martyrdom, for 
the intended day of burial was his patron saint's 
day, on which he always delivered three full 
services to a congretation which was always safe 
to consist of himself, one of his servants, and two 
elder maiden sisters, who seemed to enjoy their 
religious duties with a bitter, and almost Pharisaic 



THE VIOLETS. 163 

self-mortification, good to behold, more especially 
on sour, cold, rainy, or foggy days. 

Mr. Waverton was a young enthusiast of the 
monastic school, who never spoke of the Virgin 
Mary but as "Blessed," who drew patterns 
for encaustic tiles, and helped young ladies to 
illuminate prayer-books, and slide to Rome with- 
out knowing it. Mr. Tregellas was of the old 
staunch high-church school of Jeremy Taylor, 
Hooker, and Ken, men who loved to reverence the 
Church, but still despised Rome and all its pesti- 
lent and mischievous errors, its cruel intolerance, 
its greedy ambition, its pride, its wealth, and all 
its other anti-Christian attributes. 

"Are you supposed to know that the Sandi- 
manian was unbaptized?" was Mr. Tregellas's 
first question. 

" No ; oh I no, certainly not. It was the clerk's 
wife told me." 

"Very well. Then don't know it, that's my 
advice. You know our bishop ?" 

"But isn't that '' 

"No, certainly not. Perhaps he might have 
been, after all — who can say ?" 

Mr. Waverton's small but zealous mind once re- 
lieved, he broke forth into narrations of ceremonial 
zeal, and of the persecutions it entailed upon him. 

" Do you know, Mr. Tregellas," he said, " would 
you believe it, my churchwardens actually object 
to lighted candles on the altar, and complain of my 
intoning?" 

m2 



i 



1 64 GREATHE ART. 

Mr. Waverton had no more voice than a mouse; 
Mr. Tregellas could not forbear smiling. 

" But," went on the small but fervid enthusiast^ 
'^ I push forward the work quietly, though I can- 
not well afford it, and get but little help. I have 
bought a rich altar-cloth, with a central cross and 
a monogram ; the encaustic tiles are getting on. 
Next Easter I shall press forward Paschal ceremo- 
nials. I do not insist on confession, but I urge 
it when I can ; and, above all, for the last three 
months, I have insisted on preaching in my sur- 
plice." 

" That is indeed a triumph," said Mr. Tregellas, 
with scarcely perceptible sarcasm. 

" By-the-bye," said Mr. Waverton, " to turn to 
less serious subjects, are you and your sisters 
invited to Mr. Hookem's grand fishing-party and 
picnic at Endellion on the 19th ? The Tolpeddens 
are going, and the Trevenas ; I believe Lucy will 
insbt on our going, although it's scarcely a thing 
in my way." 

" Oh ! yes — oh ! yes, we're going — ^I and Conny, 
at least; I don't know about Sarah and Grace, 
for they're busy decorating the church with ever- 
greens and letters of mountain-ash berries; and 
very sweet the effect will be — very chaste — it is 
the feast of St. Lucifer." 

" St. Lucifer I" said Mr. Tregellas, rather drily ; 
^' well, I thought I was a stickler for those good, 
neglected worthies, the saints and martyrs, but, 
'pon my word, I never rummaged out that saint 



SETTLING DOWN. 165 

before. What an equivocal saint ! — of course he 
was burnt to death ?" 

" St. Lucifer/' here Mr. Waverton looked very 
grave and reproachful, and crossed himself in a 
shy and rather underhand way, " was a bishop of 
Mesopotamia, in the times of St. Augustin, who' 
mentions him as ^ blessed of Heaven !' If I 
ever have a son, I shall call him after that saint." 

"By-the-bye, that dashing young doctor will 
be at the picnic, and perhaps his sombre partner, 
Mordred," said Tregellas. 



CHAPTER IX. 



SETTLING DOWN. 



ONLY a day or two had elapsed, and already 
the Nelson Tolpeddens were beginning to 
settle down. The ground-swell of excitement had 
subsided. The stormy and noisy reflux that had ne- 
cessarily attended the migration of a young wife 
and four children from Dorsetshire into Cornwall, 
had lulled, and the halcyon of domestic happiness, 
to pursue our metaphor, brooded once more over 
the summer sea of the old lieutenant's life. 

Sorrows and changes, in spite of all their aqua- 
fortis, do not bite very deeply into young brain- 
plates. Bobby chuckled and roared as happy as 
ever; Jack, the sturdy, the "owdacious," as 
Fanny called him, had begun raids upon the 



166 GREATHEART. 

apples, and, by a judicious pebble, had already 
deprived one of the ducks of the temporary use 
of his left leg ; Teddy roamed over the premises 
in a tranquil and rather studious way ; while Kate 
resumed her crochet, placed herself under Liddy's 
' command, and was even allowed to visit, on grand 
occasions, the china-closet and the preserve-room. 
Even the not over-clean little maid-of-all-work, 
Betsy, had been polished up, and had grown 
cheerful, and almost resigned, under the petting of 
Fanny. 

The swallows pretend to leave our roof-tops and 
chimneys with regret — they chatter, and cluster, 
and muster, and circle about the autumn skies, 
when they are gay and luminous with the yellow 
leaves that the wind is scattering; but a week 
hence they will be perching on the warm roofs of 
Egyptian temples, happy as kings, rejoicing in the 
wealth of sunshine, and heedless of frozen Eng- 
land. Children are wiser than old people, for 
they do not long lament the past. The Tolpedden 
children were happy as newly-migrated swal- 
lows, and had already begun to forget their old 
home. 

Only one domestic event had clouded the happi- 
ness of the lieutenant. It was a juvenile crime, 
and was perhaps somewhat abruptly announced 
to the house about 7 a.m., on the third morning 
after the children's arrival, by the beating of a 
short but massive walking-stick against the balus- 
trade of the staircase, and a tremendous shout, 




SETTLING DOWN. 167 

that rang through every corner of the house. 
It was directed against Johnny, and intended for 
the special ear of the lieutenant's wife. 

" My dear, there's Johnny been and stolen the 
leg of a cold fowl, and he's gone up in the attic to 
eat it." 

Liddy was shocked ; she sought the "owdacious" 
Johnny, and discovered the " young cannibal " hid 
away behind such a perfect rampart of band-boxes, 
chests, and old newspapers, that " only a cat could 
follow him." 

Half an hour afterwards, however, the alluring 
smell of breakfast drew forth Master John, as a mag- 
net does a needle, and boldly he presented himself to 
fill the vacant chair at the breakfast-table. His 
audacity was worthy of innocence ; but it did not 
avail him. Swift as a pike at a tender young 
frog, his father snapped at his wrist, and taking 
him from the room, stern as Herod's soldiers in 
ancient tapestry, he inflicted condign punishment 
upon him outside the parlour door, with a suffi- 
ciently heavy bamboo cane. From this rather 
Spartan father, " one of the olden time," John, 
writhing and shouting (for his grief was of the 
violent kind), was rescued by Liddy and Arthur, 
who pleaded John's youth and inexperience of 
the difficulties of moral philosophy. Mrs. Tolpedden 
said, " How could you, Nel?" while Mr. Henry Tol- 
pedden looked humorously grave, and began to 
think that it was time that he should begin to 
reflect over his new responsibilities, and if possible 



168 GREATHEART. 

get Farmer Vivian's house for his excellent 
brother. 

It was about half an hour after breakfast, and 
the children having all gone out under convoy of 
Fanny and Betsy, the lieutenant was pacing up 
and down the lawn, just as if it was a quarter- 
deck. His briar-root pipe was in his mouth, and 
puffs of thick white smoke, breaking from it at 
intervals, gave the impression that Mr. Nelson 
Tolpedden was a sort of human locomotive, set in 
motion by invisible machinery. His limit one 
way was an apple-tree, the other way a laurel 
shrubbery. Great white clouds were moving over 
head in the sunshine, as if in mockery of those little 
pipe clouds floating across the lawn below. Men 
who have led solitary lives frequently get into the 
habit of speaking aloud. In time they cease to 
distinguish between talking aloud to their outward 
selves, and speaking silently to their inner selves. 
There was one long ray of sunshine just where he 
was walking, and that he paced as if it was a 
ship's plank, taking a professional pleasure in that 
voluntary restriction. 

His practical mind was busy planning improve- 
ments, and in reconstructing his old routine of 
daily employments. 

^' Between those two apple-trees, in summer, I 
should sling my Nicaragua-net hammock. I shall 
smoke there on hot evenings. Then I should have 
a flag-staff on the lawn, as we had on the Pre- 
ventive Station at Osmington, and a small cannon, 



SETTLING DOWN. 169 

to fire salutes on birthdays; then I should 
knock a doorway between the bulkheads of those 
ground-floor rooms, so as to make a sort of main- 
deck, for keeping watch in rough weather, when 
we are under close-reefed top-sails. Then ^" 

This day-dream of summary improvement was 
stopped by some one tapping him on the shoulder. 
It was Arthur. He had a revolver in his hand, 
with which he had been practising at a mark in 
the orchard. 

"Uncle," he said, "will you come in? Mr. 
Bradbrain has just come to arrange about the pic- 
nic. He is talking with Aunt Polly in the parlour, 
as papa is hard at work at his chemistry." 

" I didn't much take to that fellow, Arthur — to 
tell you the truth, he is too glib and glossy for me. 
Don't like the cut of his jib, carries too much 
canvas. Polly calls him handsome. Well, he's 
not my idea of A 1 at Lloyd's ; his is not at least 
the style of figurehead that promises plain sailing, 
that ril swear." 

" Don't you be prejudiced, uncle ; he's a very 
dashing, frank fellow — a hard-rider, and a first- 
rate shot. You'll like him very much — ^he was 
brought up in the Mauritius, and has plenty to 
talk about." 

"Well, Arthur, if he's down in the ship's 
books I suppose we must make the best of him 
till we get into dock." 

One can't maroon one's friends' friends — we have 
sometimes wished we could — and the lieutenant 



170 OREATHEART. 

showed his good sense in putting his prejudices for 
once in irons, and thrusting them under hatches. 

"Where is the fellow r 

" Stop, here he comes, and Aunt Polly too." 

At that moment the glass door leading to the 
lawn opened, Mr. Bradbrain, with too self-con- 
scious a gallantry, holding it to allow of Mrs. 
Tolpedden tripping out upon the terrace. The 
Emperor of all the Bagmen — if there is such a 
person — never moved with an air of more affected 
and gallant deference. Mrs. Tolpedden stooped 
for a moment to raise a large branch of f uschia, 
heavy with crimson bells. The instant she let it 
drop, with a laugh, from her little plump fingers, 
Bradbrain darted on it, picked a tuft, and placed 
it ill his button-hole. 

" How d'ye do ? I was just telling Mrs. Tol- 
pedden how extremely sorry I was not to find any 
of you in when I called the morning after she and 
the children arrived. Extremely sorry I was, 
so I told Mordred, and he was extremely 
sorry too. I hope you like our wild country, 
Lieutenant Tolpedden. This charming retreat 
I am sure you must like. It was an Eden, only 
needing one thing, that was Eve — and now, Mr. 
Tolpedden, that want is indeed supplied I" 

This florid compliment, not at all to the lieu- 
tenant's taste (for he never paid compliments un- 
less he meant them), was received with ironical 
applause by Arthur, and with rosy smiles and a slight 
blush by the little simple-hearted young wife. 



SETTLING DOWN. 171 

" No compliment at all — simple fact, 'pon my 
soul!'' said Bradbrain, tossing about the dog- 
skin glove that he held coquettishly by one finger, 
and affecting a sort of affected agony of injured 
expostulation. " It was only last week I said to 
Lady Rosetrevor, * The only thing we want in our 
part of Cornwall, Lady Rosetrevor, is more female 
society ; we are all getting rough, bearish, fox- 
hunting, betting fellows, or else grinding, selfish, 
money-makers. We want rousing.' Those were 
my very words, Mrs. Tolpedden, and you mustn't 
drive me to despair by calling a real fact a heart- 
less compliment." 

" Oh ! I never said heartless, Mr. Bradbrain. 
Did I, father?— did I, Arthur?" 

" Oh 1 you really did," said the young doctor, 
trying to fix her half-averted eye. " Arthur, I 
appeal to you ; is not this an Eden, and is not 
your fair aunt a true daughter of Eve ?" 

** I leave you to fight your own battles, Donald." 

" Lieutenant Tolpedden, be kind enough then to 
hold a short court-martial on me. I ask you, is 
this fair of your wife ?" 

** Don't ask me, for I shall be sure to have a 
bias towards Polly," said the lieutenant, with a 
dry chuckle, as he put his arm round his wife, and 
drew her gently towards him. "Polly lets me 
have no opinion of my own — do you, mother ?" 

Mrs. Tolpedden was a pretty little plump wo- 
man, with soft, silky brown hair, silky eyebrows, 
laughing, frank eyes, and a charming dimple 



172 GREATHEART. 

just at the comers of the mouth when she smiled, 
which was by no means unfrequently. She was 
not the least tired of the bantering conversation, 
but she felt it wearied and fretted her husband, so 
she stopped it, with true woman's tact, by simply 
asking a question, as she pretended to pull her 
husband's grizzled whiskers, 

"And when is this delightful picnic to take 
place, Mr. Bradbrain ? — there's Arthur been talk- 
ing of nothing else." 

"Ohl I know why that is," said Bradbrain, 
knowingly; "he is smitten, like the rest of us. 
No one ever escaped who saw Miss Tregellas play 
a game at croquet." 

The lieutenant, who had stopped behind for a 
moment to scrape out his wooden pipe, and empty 
the sooty and oily contents on a dandelion, did not 
hear this fully, nor did he see how Arthur's colour 
rose. 

" What !" he said, " is that stupid game with 
wooden balls bad for the chest, then, doctor?" 

" Oh ! no ; but it's thought to be rather dan- 
gerous for the heart," replied the doctor, slily, as 
he passed his hand through his curly black hair, 
and lifted it foppishly off his forehead. 

" Then Kate shan't play at it, Polly, mind that," 
said the obtuse old sailor. " I hate all new-fangled 
things." 

The lieutenant was a true Conservative, and 
objected to all changes, even for the better. 

" But the picnic ! — ^the picnic !" cried Arthur ; 



SETTLING DOWN. 173 

" a pretty herald you are, Bradbrain ; you are like 
the congress of old — you dance, but you do not move 
forward. Here you have been gallivanting for half 
an hour, playing compliments to Aunt Polly, and 
yet you have not told us a single thing — ^by-the- 
bye, remind me I have something to say to you in 
private before you go." 

"Very well. Patience, Arthur my boy, and I will 
give you the programme — ^I had it from Mr.Hookem 
yesterday. His exquisite yacht, the Flying Fishy 
is to be off Trebarwith by five o'clock on Thursday ; 
four boats will be there to take us all on board. 
There will then be a fishing-party along the coast, 
and at Endellion his wagonnette will reach us 
with a cold collation, which we shall partake of 
on the shore at low water. Then will there be 
music, perhaps a dance — and if a dance, Mrs. 
Tplpedden, I must really claim your hand for the 
first set." 

The eyes are like magnetic needles — ^they al- 
ways show to where the ship is driving. All this 
programme had been directed specially to Mrs. 
Tolpedden, Bradbrain's large and hungry-looking 
eyes were fixed on her artless and unconscious 
face. 

" Oh 1 what a delightful day, Nel, we shall 
have !*' she said ; " we never got parties like this 
in Dorsetshire." 

" Well, I do like a sail, Polly, I must say ; but 
I'd sooner dine off a plain joint at home, I can 
tell you, than sit on the wet sand and dance — I 



174 GBEATHEART. 

don't, and never intend to, so I warn you. If it 
comes on rough, you are always ill, Polly, mind 
that ; and so is Kate — Jacky rather likes it — that 
boy shall be a sailor." 

Mr. Bradbrain, under the painful necessity of 
visiting a farmer who had been thrown off his 
horse at St. Tudy's, here left them, with great 
ceremony and florid regret. Just as he reached 
the great gate leading to the lane, he met the 
children returning, and being in sight of Mrs. 
Tolpedden, kissed them all round, tossed Miss 
Bobby in the air three times, patted Teddy's head, 
and gave Jack a lift on to the saddle of his horse, 
whose rein he still held. 

" What a handsome, dashing fellow !" said Mrs. 
Tolpedden, with just one momentary sigh, as the 
doctor swung himself upon his horse and dashed 
up the lane; "dear, how fond he seems of children 1 
Come, Nel, come and carry Bobby round the 
garden for me; Oh, Arthur, you shall do it. 
Father is going to give Jack a swim — he's learning 
to swim." 

"No one shall carry Bobby, my Bobby, but 
myself," said the lieutenant, with a grimace of 
affection that made Bobby chuckle with delight 
as she tumbled into her father^s arms. " Let Jacky 
wait — he's been a bad boy this morning. Child- 
ren," — here he turned to address the whole four — 
" to-morrow you shall go to the shore with me — 
the sea is the same jolly old fellow he was in 
Dorsetshire — he won't be a bit changed, my dears ; 



THE FRENCH MASTER. 175 

he has his fits of bad temper, but he's all right in 
the main — ^in the main, Arthur, do you hear that ? 
— that's a pun." 

"Dear, old, funny father, isn't he, Bobby?'* 
said the young wife. "Jack, I won't have you 
eating so many apples — oh ! he's such a bad boy, 
and so disobedient to-day, father — I really don't 
know what he'll come to." 



CHAPTER X. 

THE FRENCH MASTER. 

¥HEN that beautiful dream sent from Heaven, 
and which is called Love, visits the human 
heart, it first rises into the eyes, say the poets, 
like a magic vapour, and suddenly all the world 
seems transformed. The flowers become larger, 
brighter, and sweeter ; even the rose colour in the 
evening clouds glows more tender and evanescent ; 
the sea itself glitters with a smile of perpetual 
sunshine ; the very trees rustle welcome, and seem 
to palpitate with a sympathetic joy ; the fine selfish- 
ness of our emotion insists on seeing a kindred 
feeling in the lower kingdoms of nature. 

Mr. Ruskin, the most poetical, if not the most 
logical of our logicians, derides this assumption of 
human sympathy in nature, although Shakespeare 
has used it so often and so finely ; and Tennyson, 
and all the modern poets, have availed themselves 



176 GREATHEART. 

of a thousand metaphors drawn from the same 
beautiful belief. No, Mr. Ruskin, prove what 
you like, even that those omelettes of paint that 
Mr. W. M. Turner, in his old age, used to call 
pictures, were master-pieces, but you will never 
persuade those wilful creatures, the poets and 
poetlings, to believe that there is no joy nor hope 
in spring, no regret and sadness in autumn, no 
grief and suffering in winter. 

The lover will still find omens in the sudden 
rainbow, in the sunbeams and in the moonlight. 
The unhappy, while the world lasts, will still 
gather sadness from the rain and the storm — the 
guilty still shudder at the thunder, and see in the 
lightning the flashing sword of the Avenging 
Angel. Man, knowing not whence he is, or 
whither he goes, passing from dark to dark, as the 
Saxon poet said, will always insist on seeing in the 
lower forms of life evidences of sympathy, of joy, 
or of regret. The lower forms of existence may 
be supremely indifferent to man and man's care^, 
but our great egotism shapes their actions and 
movements to its own purpose, and from incon- 
gruous sjonbols gathers its vague predictions. Let 
metaphysicians talk till their tongues drop off, and 
write till all the geese in the world waddle for want of 
wings, we shall still remain uncertain of Nature's 
indifference, still disinclined to reject Nature's 
symbols. 

Now, this tremendous prelude is not meant to 
imply that Arthur Tolpedden was in love, but 



THE FRENCH MASTER. 177 

only that he was on the fair road to it, provid- 
ed no barrier arose, no unfortunate incident in- 
tercepted the course of the proverbially capricious 
stream. 

A vague restlessness filled his mind. He could 
have longed for the time to be annihilated between 
that September morning and the day of the pic- 
nic. The brave old uncle, the children who were 
his eager courtiers, pretty little Aunt Polly, and 
the father he loved so much, seemed to him now 
but mere hindrances, keeping him from the T^e- 
gellases. He longed to disclose the secret which 
he shared with the beautiful representative of the 
water spirits. He could not also be sure that some 
defect might not exist in this belle of St. Petrock's 
— some masculine assumption, some wilful pride, 
some frivolity or littleness, unfitted for his ideal. 
He longed to know whether she was or was not at 
all approaching his ideal. Perhaps she was of 
insatiable vanity, or an incurable coquette, spoiled 
for ever by one foreign season for all quiet do- 
mestic life, and the calm enjoyment of a country 
home. It never perhaps entered the brain of our 
modest hero to presume the young lady to be per- 
fect, and to mistrust his own personal advantages, 
his own prospects of success in the race for this 
fair Atalanta« 

And what was Arthur Tolpedden's idea of a 
wife t We should scarcely like to sketch it, even if 
we could. No doubt something between Imogen 
and Jane Eyre ; Desdemona and Zuleika ; Juliet 

VOL. I. N 



178 GREATHEAKT. 

and Mr. Dickens' Agnes ; beautif ol, of conrs^^ 
half love and half intellect. In fact — 

^* A creature much too bright and good 
For human nature^s daily food. 
For simple sorrow, artless wiles, 
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears and smiles." 

An angel truly, but he wanted an angel, mind, that 
could dance and also sew; an angel that could play 
the piano, and drive a pair of horses; an angel with 
no desire to rule, not extravagant, yet faultless 
in dress; in a word, an amalgamation of per- 
fections — a female impossibility. But then he 
was very young, and our early ideals perhaps differ 
a little from our later experiences. 

Arthur was on his way to Boscastle the after- 
noon of Bradbrain's visit, to read French with his 
master, M. Achille Chatelet, an old Napoleon 
officer, who had fled from the new Imperial 
dynasty, whose stealthy oppression he abhorred. 
His little Skye terrier, Nettle, a mere tangle of 
hair, ran in droll delight before him, with an ab- 
surd consequence, and a ridiculous assumption of 
protection and vigilance. 

Just at the brow of the hill whom should he meet 
but that worthy man the Rev. Mr. Trevena, on 
" the full clerical tramp," as Bradbrain used to irre- 
verently call such walks. He held a hymn-book in 
one hand, from which streamed a purple ribbon 
marker, and he had a large umbrella in the other ; 
while Br roll of obvious flannel protruded from the 
tail-pocket of a long, tight, and rather worn black 



THE FRENCH MASTER. 179 

^ 

great-coat, which was very white at the seams, 
and very threadbare round the button-holes. His 
hat would have made a Bond Street dandy faint ; 
it was so rough in some places, and so greasy in 
others. 

But Mr. Trevena, totally indifferent to these 
external matters, was as happy as if he was walk- 
ing to his own episcopal election. He was fresh 
from a Coal Club meeting, and he was now bound 
to the house of a farmer near Forabury, who was 
dying with dropsy. Always regardless of himself, 
Mr. Trevena instantly turned back to walk a few 
hundred yards with Arthur Tolpedden. If he 
had met a hundred friends he would have done 
the same with every one of them. 

" This farmer Cartland I'm going to see now," 
he said, ^^ is one of the hardest old sinners I think 
I ever met. He owned to his wife the other day 
that he had in his time broken every one of the 
Ten Commandments, except *Thou shalt not 
murder ; ' and even murder he confessed to having 
once planned, though the scheme fell to the 
ground ; yet only yesterday he took me in with 
a story he meant to tell afterwards, I daresay, in 
ridicule of me." 

"What was it r 

" Why, he told me, as he lay in bed, that he had 
never committed a murder but once. I was 
aghast ; and then he said it was only a young little 
helpless thing. He took it down one morning to 
a pond, and broke the ice^ and put it in ; th^n 

n2 



180 GB£AT£[EABT. 

it began to cry, and to struggle with its little feet, 
but he had no mercy, and thrust it down. ' Un- 
happy wretch 1' I groaned. He pretended to be 
deaf, and he replied, * What do you say ? Oh ! I 
forgot to tell 'ee, parson, it was only a little dog P 
Cunning old sinner I Ha I we Church of England 
clergymen, we don't get near enough to the poor. 
We are of another class, and I fear we do not always 
understand them. But what do you care about these 
things? By-the-bye, I hear loud praises from 
Bradbrain and others concerning Miss Tregellas. 
What do you think of her?" 

Arthur replied, with studied coldness, that she 
was very well. 

" Very well ! Why, you ain't very enthusiastic* 
There is no pleasing you. Mr. Hookem just asked 
me if I objected to dancing. I told him ^Not I.' I 
am not one of those men who don't want to exact too 
much of poor human nature. There is no putting 
a pint and a half of water in a pint cup. Human 
nature is like sand, if you try to fill your hand too 
full, it is sure to ooze out between your fingers* 
I see no harm in a clergyman hunting, if he hunt 
seldom, and forget no duty. Why not cricket and 
fish, in moderation ? Are we to be all old women, 
with jean boots, and limbs as flabby and thin as if 
our flesh was beetroot ? We are too effeminate ; 
ceasing to be like other men, we cease to influence 
other men," 

Arthur laughed, for he agreed with the excel- 
lent, unworld^ map, heart and soul. 



THE FRENCH MASTER. 181 

" There is one thing I don't like about the pic- 
nic, and that is, that that mischievous young fellow 
Waverton is coming, I hear. I know he'll begin 
about convocations and synods, then I shall get 
riled, and begin denouncing the pride and idle- 
ness of bishops, and the shortcomings of our 
Church." 

" Oh ! we'll keep him down. His sister Milly 
is such a nice, sprightly girl. She'll keep peace 
between you." 

" Well, good-bye. Here I've been, like a fool/* 
and walked a clear mile out of my way, so now 
I must pace it over again." 

" Oh ! stop one moment, Trevena," said Arthur, 
suddenly remembering a question be wanted to 
ask. **I met that new Preventive man the other 
night on the cliff near Endellion — by the old mine- 
shaft there. He declared to me he had beard the 
knockers. Did you ever hear them in your night 
walks t" 

" No, I never have, but I remember one of my 
parishioners, old Penwith, the prawn-catcher, 
telling me, a year or two ago, that he had heard 
them often. Why, don't you know, Tolpedden? 
it's one of the most prevalent superstitions among 
the Cornish people. It's as bad as the divining 
rod. I tell them often that, above all things, they 
are too superstitious. That, and their greediness^ 
and gambling (for mining is little better), are 
their worst faults. But, now I must go. Good" 
bye — God be with you I" 



182 6REATHEABT. 

A sharp ten minutes' walk brought Arthur to 
Boscastle, and to the door of the cottage of M* 
Achille Chatelet. It was a pretty little habitation, 
off the main road, to the left, past the post-office, 
as you go up the steep, hilly main street of the 
town. The newly-fallen pink leaves of a China rose 
lay in a heap on the clean white door-step. 

M. Achille had just stepped out to go and get 
his foreign newspaper at the post-office. Arthur 
sat down at a piano that stood in a comer of the 
meagrely furnished room, and began to play 
*^ Partant pour la Syrie," that gay battle tune, and 
after that the pretty German tune of " The Re- 
cruit," with its murmuring under-current of 
gathering drums. His martial enthusiasm being 
stirred by this, he then burst forth into the awful 
war hymn of the " Marseillaise," with its chorus, 
that sounds like the terrible march of a hundred 
thousand men. 

He had just got to the words 

" Le jour de gloire est arrive," 

when M. Chatelet entered. 

^^ Brava 1 brava ! bis ! bis !" cried the old French 
master clapping his hands. ^'It's good, mon 
gargon. That cheers me like wine ! You play 
wiz ze grand courage and spirit. Come, your 
Balzac, and your Victor Hugo — allezy allezj man 
brave eUve^ 

M. Chatelet was a tall, wiry old soldier, with 
handsome, bold features, a clear brown complexion, 
and long, drooping, white moustachios. 



THE FRENGH MASTER. 183 

" You must have a cup of coffee wiz me. I 
will ring ze bell." 

Arthur sat down, and began to translate, very 
vividly and fluently, several pages of Balzac's first 
novel ^^Les Chouans," a highly dramatic and 
picturesque book, in the healthiest and purest 
style. The stilted monotony of Eacine he had long 
since thrown aside ; many of the other classics he 
had already perused. He was now opem'ng the 
modem vein, and found the French mind a 
pleasant and useful complement to the English, 
more exact, more elastic. 

Presently the coffee came in, in solid white cups, 
the milk fragrant and boiling. Then M. Achille 
Chatelet drew out a cigarette book, laid down a 
little white sheet on the table, and filled it with 
Turkish tobacco, that looked like the dried whiskers 
of a red-haired man, cut into lengths. This he 
lit with a wax match, and then, as the blue 
smoke began to rise to the ceiling in sharp curls, 
he leaned back in his chair and listened with de- 
lightful complacency to the " c'est lui " of Victor 
Hugo, one of the finest of Napoleonic poems. It 
was not an unpleasant way of earning three 
shillings an hour, especially as the lesson was some- 
times relieved by conversation. 

** Ha 1 the Empereur," he said, suddenly, his old 
faded eyes kindling at the name of that Prome- 
thean genius; ^^I remember him, mon iUvej 
giving me the prize for ze math^matiques, when 
I was at the Military School. Yes, TEmpereur, 



184 GREATHEABT. 

he patted me on ze head, and said to ze 
master, ^This boy has a head like one of 
Plutarch's heroes V That was I, Achille Chatelet. 
The next time I saw him I was on the road to 
Smolensk, following Ne/s brigade and gnaw- 
ing at some birch bark, for we had had no rations 
pour trois jourSy for ze three days. I was on 
foot, and so was ze Empereor. Next me was one 
of Murat's aide-de-camps, riding on a strong grey 
horse he had taken from a Cossack. ' Dismount, 
sir !' cried ze Empereur ; * take your horse to the 
rear, and give it to the ambulances, for the wound- 
ed.' I shall never forget how ze Empereur looked 
when he said that. It was the face — cCun Dieu 

Arthur delighted in these stories of the old 
wars, thought them on the whole more valuable 
than the other parts of the lesson. He asked 
whether Moscow was a fine city. 

" Oui — ^yes, is it — ^yes, it ees a most charming 
city! Strange, oriental, the cupolas of the 
churches dre like the roofs of ze mosques, and all 
of bright brass. The Kremlin churches have walls 
covered with paintings, shrines glittering with pre- 
cious stones and radiant with light, before which 
grovel savage-looking boors wrapped in filthy 
sheepskins, still Tartars in feature, still oriental in 
their observances — maisj but you dream — man^Uve 
— ^y ou have ze abstracted air. You hear not what I 
say. I tire you with my old soldier stories t" 

Arthur started in a most guilty way, and pluck- 



THE FRENCH MASTER. 185 

ed out some tobacco from an India-rubber pouch. 

"No, no, my dear M. Chatelet, " he said. 
" You know I could listen for ever to anything 
about the great war." 

There was a short interval of French exercise 
inspection and discussion of idioms, then M. 
Chatelet broke forth again about Austerlitz — 
apropos of a question as to whether he liked the 
Russians. 

" Like zem t — oui — ^yes, as ze cat loves ze dog. 
Ha I you should have seen how our bayonets came 
moving down on the Muscovites, till we had ze 
greycoats like so many rats in a pit. Then we 
charged zem and drove zem into ze ice — cuiras- 
siers, infanterie, cannon, bom — hom — all! Ugh! 
they were ^crasSa. Zat was one of Napeo- 
leon*8 greatest victories. Mon Dim 1 talk of your 
paltry Almas. Zat was a victory ; but there, e?i- 
core again, you rfeve I Oh ! mon gargouy there is 
something wrong. Ha I vot is that you draw ?" 

Arthur was drawing a mermaid on a cliff. 
When the French master turned to look, he 
scratched it out. 

M. Chatelet turned suddenly round, and shak- 
ing his head till his two drooping grey moustachios 
shook, he laid his two hands, almost as a father 
might have done, on Arthur^s two shoulders, fixing 
his eyes upon him at the same moment, with the 
assumed potency of a mesmeric experiment. 

" Mon cher gargouy^ he said, " I think you are 
in love 1 — ^yes, yes, you are in love." 



186 OREATHEABT. 

Arthur denied it vehemently and laughingly. 

^^ Noy not quite so bad as that, man cher mon" 
near. ^2ijELt sl man be in a brown study with- 
out being in love?" 

" Ha ! zese lovers, they are so artful. Some 
black-eyed Cornish girl you have met out hunting 
has spread her nets ?" 

^^Not she. I don't like your Cornish amazons, 
with the great red cheeks, chubby, blowsy crea- 
tures, that one meets galloping about the country. 
That's not at all my style, M. Chatelet." 

"Come, zese irregular verbs, Mr. Tolpedden 
—we must practise them ; then we must, for a 
bonne bouche^ read once more that song of Beran- 
ger^s you liked so much ze last time. Allez — 
aUeZy mon gargon. It shall be ze cheese-cake after 
the piece de resistance^ 

The lesson went on, the song was read, then 
Arthur at last put on his gloves, whistled Nettle, 
and took up his hat to go. 

M. Chatelet followed his pupil to the door, 
and there stood talking. 

"Last evening," he said, "I went to St* 
Petrock's." 

Arthur started, but he scarcely knew why. 

** Mr. Tregellas wrote to me to come and arrange 
for lessons, as he wanted his daughter, who has just 
come back from Devonshire, to read French with 
me. Have you seen hert" 

" Oh, yes ! She is rather pretty. 

" Rather pretty 1 She is la D6esse Diane — she 




THE DOWSER. 187 

is ze model for a painter. She is so amiable 
so piquante^ so full of spirits, so riante — she 
is beautiful as the daybreak. How she walks! 
— ^bah ! yes, she glides. You should have heard 
her read La Fontaine's Fables. Such expression, 
such esprit ! How she laugh, mon Dim ! — how 
she laugh I But — ^but she is a charming girl. 
She must be a duchess — she is too good for rough 
Comishmen. Hein t" 

" I daresay our new arrival will settle down as 
the wife of some quiet curate. Why, M. Cha- 
telet, I never saw you so enthusiastic before. 
Good-bye, I shall be late for lunch." 

" Adieu I — au revoir^ mon iUve. I must go now 
and write to my boy — my poor dear boy." 

" Everyone seems in love with the mermaid," 
thought Arthur to himself. 



CHAPTER XL 



THE DOWSER. 



MR. MORDBED, of Hurlstone Lodge, St. 
Petrock's, was not an impressible man, nor 
was he troubled with much superabundant feeling. 
His heart was the patient servant of his cool, hard 
head, and seldom burst forth with any generous or 
spontaneous actions of indescriminate benevolence. 
The heart of this banker and doctor was as obe- 



188 GREATHEART. 

dient to his control as a steam-engine is to a 
stoker. 

Mr. Mordred was not an imaginative man. A 
tree was to him so much living timber, and nothing 
more ; the sky a mixture of oxygen and hydrogen, 
cold or hot, according to the season ; the sun a 
big lamp, always ready, and for which you had 
nothing to pay, which was especially convenient ; 
the sea a moving road for sailors— for landsmen 
a tonic bath, with plenty of salt in it. 

A religionist of some pretension, however, was 
the banker of St. Petrock's ; he had been through 
various forms of Dissent, and settled down at last 
as the magnate of the Independents of St.Petrock's. 
In extemporary pi-ayer, and in leading the hymn, 
Mr. Mordred was distinguished as a person of 
more than ordinary sanctity. His known wealth 
did not conduce to lessen this reputation. An 
ascetic in life, and a denouncer of even the most 
innocent amusements, Mr. Mordred's sole passion 
seemed to be the greed of accumulating money. 
He did not in the least degree resemble the 
conventional, haggard, imbecile miser so often 
met with in fiction, so seldom seen in real 
life. He did not hoard guineas, or roll himself on 
heaps of gold ; but, wise as Belial, he speculated 
astutely with his money, and made it hatch more. 
He had vast sums sunk in minins^ schemes, and he 
was a money-lender in a grand, private, and re- 
spectable sort of way. 

Avarice and usury are not perhaps the most 



THE DOWSER. 189 

Christian of virtues ; but the Independents of St. 
Petrock's did not care to criticize too severely the 
failings of so respectable and wealthy a man — 
one who never refused to preside at a missionary 
meeting, one whose life was one consistent sequence 
of decorum. Who could gainsay a brother who 
never hunted, played at cards, danced, gambled, 
or indulged in any amusements outside his office, 
except a morning call, an excitement that the 
severest of men has not yet been fanatical enough 
to denounce? Banking and professional visits 
formed the staple of Mr. Mordred's arid waste of 
a life — a local flower-show his greatest dissipation 
— his revelry the two or three solemn and icy 
parties with which he annually wiped off a score 
of such professional debts, after the manner of us 
over-sociable English. 

No love of home or children, none of those 
pleasant social relaxations that are like so many 
rose-bushes planted along the desert path of life, 
had any charms for him. He was an early 
Christian in his asceticism, a Shylock in his grind- 
ing cruelty and his exactions ; but these vices were 
glossed over with a smug sanctity, that most odious 
but most successful mask ever invented by the 
devil. 

Mr. Mordred was punctual and systematic evei^ 
in the most trifling affairs of life — ^he had gloves 
for October, and gloves for November; he had 
fires lit at the same day of the month every year. 
He was a slave to habit ; however cold the spring 



190 GBEATHEABT. 

might be, out went the fires on the first of May. 
Exactly at the same hour every morning he ar- 
rayed himself solemnly, drew his stick from the um- 
brella-stand behind the hall door, and sallied slowly 
and composedly down the road leading to the sea- 
shore. Nothing but an earthquake would have 
stopped him. He was remorseless as sunrise, 
inevitable as the equinoctial gales. He was not 
especially cheering as a daily spectacle; his 
dress, although almost supernaturally respectable, 
was always dark and sombre; his manner was 
frozen, reserved, suspicious, and purse-proud. 
Children realizing their little castles in the air, 
with most palpable mud, at lane ends, shrank 
from him as if he was a beadle ; old paupers out 
for a holiday scuttled away from him as if he was 
a poor-law guardian ; young mothers huddled up 
their children instinctively to their bosoms, almost 
as if they believed in the evil eye ; miners on their 
way to their subterranean toil touched their hats to 
him, not so much from respect or liking, as that 
he was held by them to be the very Plutus of the 
north of Cornwall, one whose very name in a list of 
directors seemed to make the most paltry vein of 
metal at once branch and fructify. 

Not that anyone exactly knew either his ante- 
cedents or those of his young partner, Mr. Brad- 
brain — all that was known was, that Mr. Mordred 
had formerly practised somewhere near Eedruth, 
and had there made money by extensive mining 
speculations, and by lending money at large rates of 



V 



THE D0W8EE. 191 

interest to embarrassed projectors. He was a 
widower, everyone knew that. Of Mr. Brad- 
brain, even less was known — he was said to be the 
son of a West Indian planter, and to have resided 
in his youth at Eio Janeiro. His extravagance, 
imperiousness, and occasional violence of temper 
were imputed to his tropical education. What 
had brought two such different dispositions to- 
gether — or what kept them together without 
dissension or rivalry — was not known, even to 
that prince of gossips the village tailor himself ; 
even the post-mistress herself had no certain in- 
formation on the point. Some said that Mr. Brad- 
brain had been the doctor at a large mine in some 
part of South America, and that his knowledge of 
metals rendered him useful to his older partner. 
But this was sheer conjecture. Others declared 
that all the money of the banking firm originated 
in him, and that Mr. Mordred was merely ad- 
mitted into the concern on account of his business 
and local knowledge. But this also was entirely 
hypothesis; and the castle ruins at Dunchine 
really knew as much about it as the most impor- 
tant-looking quidnunc between St. Petrock's and 
Bude. 

It was about a week after the arrival of the Tol- 
pedden family, that one Monday Mr. Mordred took 
his usual morning walk on the cliffs between St. Pet- 
rock's and Endellion. It was a fine autumn morn- 
ing, with a light breeze blowing from the north- 
west, driving before it through the sky flocks of 



192 OBEATHEAJIT. 

white toppling douds, and sending squadrons of 
snowy-maned waves to break in foam upon the 
shore. 

With a sort of selfish, chuckling enjoyment pe- 
culiar to the man, the banker stood inhaling the 
fresh and invigorating sea-air with the manner of 
a person who was receiving something as a right« 
Indeed, he imbibed the oxygen as if it was a com- 
modity that he had purchased, and was only waiting 
to make sure they put him up a good pennyworth. 
He looked as if he was cheating nature out of her 
property. 

Mr. Mordred reached the edge of the diff, and 
looked down. Below him, on the beach, not far 
from the Mermaid Eock already known to us, 
there were two persons, a man and a child. They 
were evidently preparing to bathe, for they were 
both undressing. They were, no doubt, father 
and son. All at oiace, the boy, a sturdy little 
fellow, shook off his last stocking, and ran shout- 
ing into the shallow green water. His father, 
shouting also, followed him, and tossed the water 
over him. Now they were wading further out, the 
boy with his arms outstretched, as if to preserve 
his balance, the father, a short, thickset man, is 
already swimming with stalwart strokes, that pro- 
pelled him through the waves as if he had suddenly 
turned into a fish. Now he has placed his hand 
under the boy, and buoys him up, while the child 
practises the frog-like motions of arms and le^ 
from which he relapses into laughing, splashing, 



I 



THE DOWSER. 193 

and uproarious testimonies of delight. It must 
be pleasant, this warm autumn morning, floating 
about in the tepid green water, like a riotous mer- 
man, so thought our old friend, the Preventive 
Service man, as he watched the bathers from a 
point of rock not very far from where Mr. Mor- 
dred stood. 

"Who are those people bathing at this late 
hour r 

" Lieutenant Tolpedden and his little boy, your 
honour. That gentleman was my officer down in 
Dorsetshire ten years ago." 

The man gave this answer as he passed along 
the cliff on his way to meet the guard half way 
from the next station, which was Dunchine. 

Mr. Mordred stopped one moment scowling 
at the bathers, then turned and walked slowly 
homeward, reflecting on the trouble of children, 
the habits of low people, the misfortune of having 
a Preventive Service officer for a relation, and 
the misery undergone by persons who had not 
servants enough to do all their work, and had to su- 
perintend the bathing of their first-born. These 
thoughts, together with the consideration of the 
time many men wasted in pleasure and levity, 
occupied him very profitably till he reached his 
own gate. 

Hurlstone House was situated a little way out 
of St. Petrock's. It was a large, gaunt-looking, 
square house, with a shrubbery and lawn before 
it, and a surgery and laboratory on one side. It 

VOL. I. 



194 GREATHEART. 

was an uncoinpromising, forbidding-looking house, 
Pharisaical and severe. 

A gardener was coming out of the gate with a 
wheelbarrow as Mr. Mordred entered. It was a 
barrow-full of cabbage-leaves, intended for the 
gardener's pig, an anti-Banting pig, rapidly getting 
ripe for the butcher's knife. 

Mr. Mordred stopped and poked his stick sus- 
piciously among the leaves, as if to see if any of 
his best broccoli had accidentally hidden themselves 
under their humbler neighbours. It is these 
suspicions that endear a master to his servants, 
especially the honest ones. The man — a little, 
wiry, red-haired man — evidently resented the act, 
but dared not say anything. 

" If you please, sir," he said, " we want two 
hundred yellow Dutch crocus for the riband 
border." 

Mr. Mordred made a note of it, and passed on, 
after expressing a hope that Pearce, the gardener, 
would not miss evening chapel, as he had done the 
last Sunday. 

Directly the front door closed on the banker, 
the gardener struck the barrow's legs on the 
ground and swore. 

" I'd rather be knocked in rags by powder blast, 
when driving level, than serve a master as treats 
me like a thief. Isn't it thieving throwing people's 
money down bad mines, I should like to know I 
If it isn't, what is t Ugh !" 



THE DOWSER. 195 

Half an hour later, just as Mr. Mordred had 
got into his ofSce, and settled down to his accounts, 
a knock came at the glass door which separated 
the bank from the inner room, where he spun his 
webs, cheered by the distant chink and tingle of 
gold, and the risp of the copper shovels full of 
sovereigns. 

"Well," he said, looking up crossly, his pen 
resting half-way down a column of figures, " can't 
you leave me alone one moment, Mr. Edwards ?" 

" If you please, sir, there's a man wants to speak 
with you." 

"What name?" 

" Sandoe." 

"Sandoe! Show him in directly," said Mr. 
Mordred, laying down his pen, and wiping it (for he 
was always, deliberate), but not rising to meet his 
visitor. 

The door opened, and who should present him- 
self but the Dowser ? Sneaking and cadaverous 
as usual, his mean features, half white, half 
purple, looked more ghastly than usual. He wore 
a long, thread-bare, snuff-coloured great-coat, and 
round his lean throat the dirty rope of a once white 
neckcloth. He carried a hazel stick in his hand, 
as a sort of badge of his trade as a searcher for 
metals. 

"Sit down," said Mr. Mordred, drily, but 
scarcely looking up from his row of figures. 

The Dowser gave a groan of especial sanctity, 

02 



\ 



196 GREATHEART. 

sat down humbly on the very edge of a chair, 
and let the hazel stick drop on the floor between 
his legs. 

"Well, Sandoe," said Mr. Mordred, turning 
round, pen in hand, " I thought you were at St. 
Ives, trying to discover copper for this new Cape 
Cornwall Company. The old story, I suppose — 
promising to intersect the great Botallac lode ?" 

Mr. Mordred uttered the words in a dry, sar- 
castic manner, each word cutting like the nick of a 
file. 

The Dowser did not reply, but he looked hard at 
the huge red " Post-Office Directory " on the table 
near the banker's desk, and said in a low voice : 

" The words of the righteous are like an excel- 
lent balm, and they breaks no bones ! — they breaks 
no bones, Mr. Mordred; it's good for us some- 
times to be rebuked, and well I knows it, for I've 
been long in the wilderness — so I have, I tell 'ee." 

Mr. Mordred turned on him. 

" Sandoe," he said, " I have often employed you, 
as you know, to procure me mining informatioji^ 
and for what news you brought me I paid you , 
but you deceived me, as you well remember, about 
the Wheal Rose Mine, at Camborne, and from 
that time, as I told you, all relations ceased be- 
tween us. It is the duty of a Christian to forgive 
injuries, and I forgive you, Sandoe, but I want no 
more to do with you. Your ways are not my 
ways, Sandoe." 

" Oh dear ! oh dear !" said Sandoe, with the 



THE DOWSER. 197 

greenish whites of his eyes turned up to the ceil- 
ing, and with the resignation of an early Christian 
martyr, for whom the boiling oil was already sim- 
mering. " Well ! well, oh dear ! but it's only more 
burdens for Christians — always cross and crown, 
simly." 

" Does the lode promise they have cut out of 
Wheal Polroze ?" said the banker, playing with a 
letter-scale as he spoke. The keen business man, 
distrustful as he was of the sanctimonious Dowser, 
was unable to restrain his cunosity about the 
prospects of mining speculations. "And how is 
the underlay looking at Wheal Drosking ! — is the 
adit driven yet at Bestraes, and is the ground as 
fair as the captain's report makes it at Halen- 
beagle ? There's no tin found in Cornwall that 
you don't hear of, I know, Sandoe !" 

" You do me no more than justice, Mr. Mor- 
dred. I've been an instrument — I've been an in- 
strument; and this little rod here, dry and 
shrivelled as it looks, my dear sir, has been seen by 
menny to strike water from the rock like Moses's 
rod, though I make no great por (disturbance) 
about it, and work with the pick and gad at my 
eight hours' coor to Bal (the mine), like my poorest 
brethren. 'Tiz zackly like that. This little rod has 
led many a believer into the Promised Land, mock 
as you may." 

That compliment of Mr. Mordred's had tickled 
the Dowser's vanity, and consoled him for his bad 
reception. He now poured off with glibness 



1 98 GREAXnEAKT. 

answers to all the banker^s questions, intermixed 
with perverted texts of Scripture, and many asser- 
tions of the power of the rod to discover metal and 
water. 

"I have no great faith in the rod, Sandoe; 
you should not be so poor as you seem to be," said 
Mr. Mordred, with a frosty smile, that seemed to 
give its proprietor a twinge of positive pain. " I 
fear you are something like the man who wrote to 
me yesterday to say that he is about to supply the 
Emperor of China with steamboats, value half a 
million, but, in the meantime, wants me to lend 
him five pounds. You've made some lucky hits, 
but that was owing to practical knowledge." 

" Did I not find the copper at Blackwater, and 
the tin at St. Ann's, that you cleared the four 
thousand pounds on? Don't talk so awful like 
the children of this world — t'is terrible to hear, Mr. 
Mordred. Untie (ain't I) known all over Corn- 
wall for power over the metals? It's different 
from those as digs holes in elvan, and only means 
to make money-traps of 'em." 

"Who does that?" said Mr. Mordred, sharply, 
and as near anger as he could get. 

" I don't say who does it — God forbid I I only 
say there's them as doz it, 'tez zackly so ; don't 
throw it in my teeth. If I 'aven't got rich, it is 
not because I never found metal enough to pave 
all Bodmin with gold, but because I've fallen 
among reprobates, and been, as it were, lost in the 
wilderness, among owls and pelicans, and bank- 



THE DOWSER. 199 

rupts and spendthrifts, and dragons and flying 
sarpints, which is the lusts of this world." 

"Mr. Sandoe," said the banker, sternly, and 
looking wistfully at a dusty bronze clock that stood 
on the mantelpiece, and which had just tingled 
off with mechanical merriment the hour of noon, 
" Sandoe, I know you are not a man to waste your 
time in mere meeting-house talk ; nor would you 
come near me (after your infamous deception 
three years ago at Camborne), unless you had some- 
thing to propose that you considered worth my 
hearing. Come, what is it ?" 

In the Dowser's eyes there instantly arose that 
light that arises in an angler's eyes when a long-ex- 
pected fish rises at the fly ; and yet at the same 
time there was about his whole manner a dogged 
air of self-confidence, that seemed to imply that 
some mysterious power of benefitting mankind 
rested in him inherently, but at the present mo- 
ment more especially. Mr. Mordred, who knew 
him for a poor ranting preacher, of no very estab- 
lished character, once a spy and agent of his own, 
could not understand the quiet assumption of the 
man's manner. 

Nothing alarms a cunning man more than a 
laugh, especially when he cannot understand why 
a man is laughing; still more so (as in theJ. present 
case) when the man with whom he converses is 
obviously a poor, penniless vagabond, completely 
at his mercy for his next shilling. The banker^s 
corpse-like face looked deadlier than ever; and 



200 GREATHEART. 

his dark lantern eyes, where no light was ever 
turned on, were fixed steadily on the Dowser. 

Sandoe made no reply ; but diving his hands 
simultaneously into the two tail pockets of his 
long brown great-coat, fished up two large pieces 
of yellowish ore, each as big as a miner^s fist, and 
with a cunning and rather mocking smile, fitted 
them together, and then chinked them till they 
yielded a rich metallic and inviting sound. 

" The gold of that land was good," he said, in a 
snuffling voice. "There was bdellium and the 
onyx stone, *and they of the isles were glad 
thereof.' " 

The Dowser was fond of quoting two incon- 
gruous texts, and welding them together, as field- 
preachers often do, much to the injury of the 
Scriptural sense. 

"Where — where is that from, Mr. Sandoe 1" 
said Mr. Mordred, with a greedy eagerness he 
could not conceal ; " is that from the Devon 
United, or is it from Wheal Basset t" 

" Oh ! now it's Mister Sandoe — just now it was 
only plain Sandoe. Well, the Lord's people must be 
thankful even for small mercies — we are told to 
be so, Mr. Mordred — text in Holy Writ." 

" Where is it from ?" The banker was too in- 
tent on his question to heed any sarcasm. " It's 
pure copper — there was no el van in that mine." 

" Cornwall is a large place, so 'tis — zackly so — 
who knows Botallac copper from Wheal Busy 
copper ? He who does must be a fine comraad — 



THE DOWSER. 201 

eh, Mr. MordreJ? This may be from Cam- 
Breh, down 'long coast, or from Cornwall up north, 
who knows? — who can know but Heaven above 
us, and one or two more underground, Mr. Mor- 
dred ? Yet it's gashly fine copper, that I tell 'ee, 
and worth as much a fathom as any in Cornwall ; 
and there's as much metal where this came from 
as in any lode this side the Tamar." 

" But where is it from, man ?" 

*' It may be from moor or cliff — it's from a lode 
between this and the Land's End, Mr. Mordred ; 
between Port Isaac and the Lizard — it's there, or 
thereabouts." 

" No more of this mysterious nonsense, Sandoe. 
You bring a fine specimen of ore, and you know 
where the rest of the lode is — has it ever been 
worked? Come, tell me that?' Do you want me 
to speculate ? — you haven't got money enough to 
buy a pick and a gad yourself ; and who'll give 
you as large a share of it as I will ? How am I 
to know this isn't a sham specimen ?" 

" Fair play — fair play ; the children of this 
world are too much for the children of light, and 
the children of light are resolved on fair play. I 
know you, Mr. Mordred — this isn't the first deal- 
ing we've had — I know who gets best share, and 
gives me the dirty work, and all the other traad, as 
I've often thoft ; and if I'm not mazed (mad), 
I'll do right this time foath (forth). I'll have no 
ugly ways with me this time — no, T\\ get to grass 
this time ; and there'll be no engine-beam move 



202 OBEATHEABT. 

at Wheal who knows where, I tell 'ee, till I see the 
colour of somebody's money, and get his promise 
downright on paper." 

« But '' 

" No buts — don't like buts ." 

" But listen to reason." 

"It's reason I'm talking to 'ee — ^I know of 
copper, good, close, plenty of it this time, and to 
be got for nothing. I know of it, because I know 
of it — I've proved it with the blessed rod of St. 
Keyne — I've proved it with gad and pick; but 
sure as the gad and pick are, and wonderful and 
certain as the rod is, the first proof, that which I 
don't tell 'ee, is best of all, and it must hold good. 
Now, what's my share to be ?" 

" A tenth of the profits." 

" No — I must have a third." 

"Pish! man, then I shan't give it. Look at 
the expenses of engines and shaft-sinking — look 
at the chance of failure. You know very well — 
no one, indeed, knows better than you, Mr. 
Sandoe — that the best copper-mine in all Cornwall 
is often a mere speculation, and may run to ruin and 
dead-ground any hour. No, no, Mr. Sandoe, I 
want more assurance before I risk gold for copper." 

" Good morning, then, my dear — and God bless 
'ee — I'm hum (home). You missed your comraade 
thid time, too — I baent like that at all. You might 
have entertained an angel unawares (even sinful 
creature as I am), but you put him from 'ee — 
you put him from 'ee. Well, thank God, there 



THE DOWSER* 203 

are those this side of Helston who'll knaw better. 
Good morning, my dear. You think me the worse 
for lying, surely — untie (not I). Those who live, 
'11 learn— that's true, esn't it ?" 

The Dowser's manner astonished and alarmed 
the banker. 

** Give me time," he said ; " give me even three 
days ; and if I write then, call on roe ; if I do not, 
consider I decline the speculation. I shall hear of 
the matter from* other people besides you — all 
mining news comes to me." 

The Dowser's face was convulsed by an unwhole- 
some smile. 

** You won't hear nothing. Don't 'ee fear — I 
don't tell many these things." 

« Where shall I direct ?" 

"I live now among my brethren — anywhere. 
Direct, Post-office, Boscastle." 

" Good — in three days." 

The Dowser wriggled his coat together, put on 
his hat, bowed clumsily, and left the office. 

Mr. Mordred remained a moment seated, and 
biting the end of his quill pen. The Dowser's 
manner had certainly impressed him. 

"I knew," he thought, "that the fellow was a low, 
drunken, impudent hypocrite — a spy who hung 
about mines, and spread false news, either good 
or bad, according as he was paid highest by captains 
or adventurers ; a low, sneaking informer, who 
practised field-preaching in order to get access to 
engine-houses and captain's rooms ; but still it is 



204 GREATHEART. 

just such men who have been sometimes known by 
accident or instinct to have secretly discovered 
valuable mines. There was the Wheal Hoskj'n, 
for instance, found by a Dowser's children, as they 
were digging holes in play on Trevellon Moor. 
And, besides, poor as he seemed, there was a sense 
of power about the scoundrel such as I never saw 
before; still, I shall not be too eager — that 
frightens away one's game. I shall not write — I 
shall let him call again, and beat him down lower 
still — I know these smaller rogues. He will not 
go to anyone else — what can those fools, Fox and 
Shakell, do for him ? He feels I can help him 
better than anyone in Cornwall ; and he is afraid 
of me, too, for I know one or two disagreeable 
things about him. However, let the fellow wait, 
and ripen on the tree — I can pick him when I 
choose. The man daren't trick me, even if he 
could, that I am sure of. I must talk it over 
with Bradbrain — hang that picnic, he'll be away 
to-morrow." 

So ran the worthy and prudent man's thoughts. 
This strain of reflection ended — he rose and pressed 
one of those bell-like alarums that they use at 
eating-houses. 

The glass door opened at the sound of the 
tingle, and a little old man, very neatly dressed, 
appeared, as the slave of the lamp did when Alad- 
din rubbed the ring. 

Mr. Mordred was all blandness — ^the morning's 
work had pleased him. 




THE DOWSER. 205 

" Edwards, I think you asked me if you could go 
to-morrow to see your married daughter at Bodmin ? 
Go, by all means, and do not think of returning 
the same night — it is too much for you." 

*^ Thank you, Mr. Mordred — much obliged, sir. 
But " 

"But what r 

" I suppose, sir, I might be allowed to take the 
petty cash-book with me 1 — I think it would help 
to pass the evening very pleasantly." 

" Oh ! by all means, Edwards," said the banker, 
smiling at the old fanatic of business ; " and please 
to send Harrison to me directly." 

The old clerk, a slave to the bank for years before 
Mordred came, retired, and in glided Harrison, 
a tall, shambling, red-haired young man, with a 
squint which seemed typical of moral obliquity. 
He looked alert, hard, cruel, and no stickler at 
trifles. 

" Harrison, write to Mr. Tolpedden again, about 
the interest on that mortgage, and beg an early 
visit from him." 

*• Yes, sir ; an answer by return ?" 

" And answer by return." 

" Yes, sir." 

The door shut behind him. 

" ni bring that Tolpedden to book," said Mr. 
Mordred to himself, " if he doesn't take care ; he's 
too proud by half, with his scientific discoveries 
and affected carelessness about money. He said 
he would call and see, and he neglects it, just, I 



206 GREATHEART. 

suppose, to show he does not care for me. Take 
care, Mr. Tolpedden — I Ve broken up better men than 
you, like so many china figures. I'll have no in- 
solence from fellows who are going to the dogs 
without knowing it, and give no thanks to the 
man who warns them of it, and tries to save them. 
Harrison," — here he touched the bell, and Harrison 
re-entered — " go over to the Kev. Mr. Thompson, 
and ask him if the Kamtschatka Missionary 
Meeting is to be held to-morrow, or if it's put 
off." 



CHAPTER XH. 
MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 

LIVES there even a Cockney man with soul so 
dead who never to himself has said, '^ What 
a lovely morning this must be in the country ?" 
There is scarcely any country season so pleasant, 
and no hours are so delightful, as those of a fine 
forenoon in October. 

How pleasantly, at breakfast time, the soft sun- 
shine glimmers on the ceiling. It lies in little 
squares of brightness on the white table-cloth, glit- 
ters on the silver tea-pot, touches here and there 
the gilding of a picture; outside it dapples the lawn, 
brings out into the light the pale red of some 
lingering rose among the laurels, glistens on the 
dewy bunches of mountain ash berries, and turns 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 207 

the yellow elm-leaves to gold, just where the little 
robin sits, puffing out his orange breast, and sing- 
ing as innocently as if he was one of the babes in 
the wood in a state of transmigration. 

Such a morning was the morning of the pic- 
nic, such pleasant cross-light fell athwart the 
breakfast-table of the Tolpeddens, as they sat dis- 
cussing the programme of the day, and lauding 
Mr. Hookem's hospitality and sociability. 

There is always a pleasant excitement about the 
preparations fo^ a day's pleasure, more especially 
when real enjo^pient, and not display, is the object 
of the host. Some cynics, indeed, are cruel 
enough to say ths^t, as courtship is the best part of 
marriage^ so is anticipation the pleasantest part of 
pleasure ; but I bite my thumb at those sour blasi 
gentlemen, and defy them in the name of honest 
love, and untiring, simple-hearted happiness. 
Even Mr. Tolpedden was not sorry to leave his 
furnaces, retorts, and sand-baths for one day, and 
get out into the fresh blue sea-air, where no chemi- 
cal fumes could reach him. 

The moment the last cup of tea was drunk, the 
lieutenant blew a silver boatswain's whistle that 
hung at his button-hole, and shouted, 

" See all ready forward for getting under way ! 
Heave short on your chain and mind the windlass. 
Loose all sails. Now, then, Polly, get on your 
bonnet, and don't be two hours about it 1" 

The lieutenant, indeed, took such an active part 
in hurrying every one, that when the waggonette 



208 GREATIIEART. 

came round he was to be seen on the lawn, still 
brushing his blue coat, which he held by one 
arm. 

" Come, come, Nel," cried Mrs. Tolpedden, 
laughing in her bright, pleasant little way ; ** why, 
you take as long as if you were rigging a ship." 

The lieutenant looked up with a chuckle. 

"Polly! Polly!" he said, "you know I am 
ready nine times out of ten before you; but haven't 
I been busy, as you know, getting the ship under 
weigh f 

" Yes, papa, and now your^re the last ready," 
said his wife, exulting in her punctuality. 

The lieutenant, seizing Bobby from the nurse's 
arms (all the servants had come out to see the 
start), tossed her in the air, and then took his 
place next his brother. Arthur mounted the box 
and seized the reins, upon which Johnny, who had 
been saving up for this juncture, burst into a de- 
termined howl, and cried : 

"Oh! take me. Oh! why not take me? 
Ho-o-o-o ! take me, father, to the pig-nig. Ho-o-o ! 
why can't I go. Ho-o !" 

" Oh ! you dreadful boy ! Let me get at him!" 
cried the lieutenant, preparing to leap down at 
Johnny, with his Malacca cane ; but he was pre- 
vented by his wife, and by Arthur's and his father's 
entreaties. 

"Haul up the spanker,then, shiver the afteryards, 
and let her go before it. Oh, I'll flog him when 
I come back," answered the lieutenant. And off 



■% 



MR. hookem's pio-nic. 209 

dashed the horse, and Fanny ran, fleet as swift 
Camilla, to open the great gate. 

"Be a good boy, Johnny," said old Liddy, 
" and you shall see the great wild-beast book." 

Johnny, having beaten Fanny, and blown 
points of war on a tin trumpet all over the house, 
was eventually appeased by the great family 
picture-book, and relapsed into reasonably good 
conduct. 

The drive was a pleasant one. The lieutenant 
told sea-stories, and Aunt Polly did nothing but 
laugh in sheer exuberance of spirits. There had 
been a slight frost, and it lay in glittering and 
sparkling powder on the turf walls, and on the 
shafts of the road-side crosses. The stray snow, 
already half melted on the grass, was crisp 
and furry on the hair-brush spikes of the stubble. 
The earth steamed as if it was too warm instead of 
too cold ; and as for the sky, it looked blue and 
hard as a arch of sapphire stone. The dying 
leaves shone and dripped- in the sunshine, while 
in the shadow they were still white. The road 
sounded clear and metallic under the horse's hoofs. 
There could not be a pleasanter morning for a 
drive. 

The rendezvous fixed on by Mr. Hookem was 
St. Kevin's Cove, between Trebarwith and Dun- 
chine, there being a sandy beach there, that ren- 
dered the landing from the boats easy even for 
ladies. 

The Tolpeddens reached there about noon. 
VOL. !• P 



210 GREATHEAST. 

Every mile nearer the sea-shore Arthur's heart 
beat faster, but why he scarcely knew. He grew 
so silent, too, that Aunt Polly remained it, and 
asked what sort of people Mr. Waverton*s sisters 
were; and if ililly, the youngest, was not very nice ? 
Upon which Arthur asked her, in self-defence, if 
she thought Mr. Bradbrain handsome, and that 
silenced her. 

" I've got a touch of headache still from reading 
those three chapters of that infernal * Peter 
Simple* last night," said the lieutenant; "it 
always takes me that way ; but I dare say it'll go 
off, Polly, when we're out at sea."' 

"Dear papa! he mustn't read so much," said 
his wife, in all good faith, kissing his forehead 
with as much tender compassion as if he had been 
undergoing the mental labours of a Newton. 

As they descended the winding road leading to 
the cove, and drew up at " The Three Choughs," 
the little inn where the horses were to be taken 
out, a gun was discharged as a welcx)me from the 
Flying Fishj that could now be seen lying at 
anchor about a quarter of a mile off the shore. 

There was a boat full of people, half-way be- 
tween the shore and the yacht. The men who 
pulled it wore red Garibaldi shirts, and, to the 
lieutenant's disgust, feathered their oars — a practice 
forbidden to men-of-war^s men. 

" The lubbers !" he cried ; " I wonder what Mr. 
Hookem is about, to allow it I" 

" Why, it's Mr. Waverton and his three sisters, 



r 



MB. hookem's pic-NIC. 211 

I declare !" said Arthur ; " there's little Milly with 
her scarlet and black feather — I should know her 
anywhere, she has such a saucy way of carrying her 
head." 

" I sometimes think Trevena likes little Milly," 
said Mr. Henry Tolpedden ; '^ if it wasn't for that 
dragon of a sister of his, who will not let him 
marry." 

" A very smart little sloop," said the lieutenant, 
patronisingly ; " Arthur, lend me your glass. 
Now then, Polly, jump down — ^I'U catch you — 
lower handsomely — that's it." 

There was another spit of fire, then a long 
roll of white smoke — it was a second gun from the 
Flying Fish^ fired as the boat reached the vessel. 
Mr. Hookem, who had insisted on no one bringing 
any contribution to the feast, was not a man to 
spare gunpowder. 

It was delightful to observe the great rows of 
tall waves, that rose green and transparent in the 
sun, come charging upon the shore, then curl over, 
their frothing crests reflected in the water below, 
and pour down in rolling snow, that ran chasing 
in upon the sand. There was something fierce 
and yet treacherous about the stealthy fury of the 
advancing tide. 

" I wish they'd bear a hand with that boat," said 
the impatient lieutenant. 

" Don't be impatient, Nel," said his wife, tap- 
ping him reprovingly on the back, her blue rib- 
bons fluttering in the wind; "look there — how 

p 2 




212 GBEATHEART. 

nice! — they're putting out all the flags. Oh ! 
Arthur, isn't it like a small wash of coloured things 
drying ?" 

" Ain't you glad you knocked off work for 
once, Harry?" said Nelson Tolpedden to his 
brother. 

" Oh ! yes, I think we shall have a very plea- 
sant day." 

Just as the boat came pulling into shore, down 
the path leading from the cliff dashed three young 
men, dressed in a picturesque and eccentric 
manner. They were all bearded, and they wore 
sprigs of samphire, heather, and furze blossom in 
their wide-awakes — one of them carried a violin- 
case. 

"Who are these fellows?" inquired the lieu- 
tenant. 

" They are three young artists," replied Arthur ; 
" very nice fellows — members of the Gridiron 
Club in St. John's Wood, and future academicians, 
uncle, every one of them." 

Up they came. 

" How do, Dodgeson ? — how do, Tolpedden ? — 
how do, Hewer? — how do, Fisher?" 

" Stunning day !" 

" Glorious day, to be sure !" 

" Rapping day !" 

" A 1 day," said Arthur, introducing his three 
friends to his father, uncle and aunt ; " and how 
do you get on in your quarters at Portneweth ?" 

" First rate," said Mr. Dodgeson ; " we get 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 213 

plenty of boating and fishing ; and the sketching 
is glorious all down this northern coast." 

The three young artists were by no means 
"Bohemians" in the bad sense. Two of them 
were married men, living in excellent style ; and 
all three were as methodical, hard-working,' and 
prudent men, as any merchants in Mincing Lane, 
with the advantage of a more intellectual and 
varied a profession, and the hopes of ultimate fame 
and income, beyond the reach of commercial vicis- 
situdes. 

In appearance they were all three rather eccen- 
tric — Dodgeson, an eminent book illustrator, was 
a fine tall, gaunt fellow of seven-and-twenty, with 
a Henri Quatre beard and moustachios ; Hewer, a 
marine artist, a short, wiry Irishman, wore a 
square beard of decidedly maritime character; 
while Fisher, a young figure-painter, distinguished 
himself by a tuft on the chin, and long mous- 
tachios curling upwards, like those of a Spanish 
don. They were all perfectly at their ease, full 
of a pleasant, but unobtrusive self-confidence, and 
quite disposed to talk and be amiable. Mrs. 
Tolpedden was charmed with their politeness and 
their observations on the scenery. 

In a few minutes the boat pulled in, the men 
tossing their oars up like spears, in a very sailor- 
like way. 

" Good ! — that'll do," said the lieutenant, with 
an air of command. 

In got Arthur, and helped the little lady. 



214 GBEATHEABT. 

In tumbled the rest, the lieutenant seizing the 
tiller cords with an air of professional dignity that 
was delightful to see. He seemed, indeed, to con- 
sider it absolutely necessary that this special pull 
from the shore to the ship should be conducted in 
the best style. 

The faster the men pulled, the more he urged 
them to exertion, by calling out, " Let her go ! — 
put your backs to it T till the boat literally flew 
as if driven by steam, much to the delight of his 
simple-hearted wife. 

As the boat neared the ship, white handker- 
chiefs coiJd be seen waving over the gunwale; 
th^re was a sound of shrill cheering, and again 
the pompous cannon boomed its welcome. 

"Steady now!" cried the lieutenant, in all 
his glory, as an old boatswain stood up and caught 
hold with a boat-hook of the sloop's gunwale 
** steady there — ^back water — ^unship." 

A crowd of pretty and pleasant faces peered 
over the gunwale of the Flying Fish ; conspicuous 
among them was that of the Sultan editor, who 
wore a large Panama hat, and looked like a 
planter. Nor did Arthur fail to see two peculiarly 
sunny brown eyes looking down at the boat, and 
sparkling with delight. 

" Penrose and Trudgeon, you two stop in the 
boat and get the conger-lines ready," cned out 
Mr. Hookem, "and let the boatswain and Tre- 
wellan come up here to help unpack the luncheon, 
and get that sherry out of the well." 



MB. hookem's pio-nio, 215 

" Ay, ay, sir." 

In a moment the Tolpedden party was stand- 
ing on the deck, and in among them dashed the 
Sultan, shaking hands, and greeting every one. 

"How de do, Tolpedden? Lieutenant, you 
shall be our sailing-master — ^we are most of us 
lubbers." 

" Speak for yourself," cried Mr. Tregellas. 

Hookem turned round and shook his fist at him. 

"Mrs. Tolpedden, you must keep the young 
ladies in order. I place you under Mr. Bradbrain's 
care. He's a sworn Squire of Dames. Arthur, 
my poet and huntsman, how are you ? I think 
you know every one here, but Miss Tregellas? 
YouVe been introduced ! Oh, well, one's not likely 
to forget it if one has been so fortunate. Why, 
how do you do, Raphael, Correggio, and Michael 
Angelo? I am proud to see you. Just divide 
those young ladies there. There are far too many 
daughters of Eve together. And now then for 
lunch!" 

The little sloop was nearly full. There was 
Mr. Tregellas, with his firm, sensible, brown face, 
and Lucy, in a yachting hat and blue ribbons, 
with cheeks warmed by the fresh sea-air till they 
made rose-leaves appear contemptible. Near her 
sat Milly Waverton, a pretty little pale girl, with 
small, mischievous dark eyes twinkling out of the 
shadow of her round hat. Then there were her 
two elder sisters, Sarah and Grace, graver persons 
altogether, and her rather silly and impulsive 



216 6BEATHEART. 

brother, the Rev. Bernard Waverton, a furious 
high churchman, trim and precise, in his cassock 
waistcoat, and effeminate little jean boots tipped 
with polished leather. Even that, with the host 
himself, made quite a party ; but there was, besides, 
Afr. Bradbrain, in a grey dust coat, and opera- 
glass slung round it, looking stjlish, " fast," and 
dandyish, though not nautical. Nor must I for- 
get Mr. and Mrs. Penrose, a worthy old couple 
from somewhere down the coast, and, next Milly, 
the Rev. Mr. Trevena, looking untidy, warm- 
hearted, and unpractical as ever, who was unpack- 
ing a game pie for his unappeasable sister, who 
was shredding a lettuce for salad. 

^^adies and gentlemen," said the Sultan, tingling 
two wine-glasses together to beget attention, " our 
plan is this — ^we take a slight lunch now, we fish till 
say about three o'clock, we then sail off to Dunchine, 
where we dine on the cliffs. Then we move on 
to Endellion, have some music and singing on 
board, and go on shore for a dance. Those who 
like this plan, be pleased to say ' ay,' and those 
who don't say *no.'" 

There was a storm of " ayes ;" one faint voice 
only cried " no." 

" Who was that said ^ no!'" 

"It was only I, and I meant 'yes!'" said Mr. 
Waverton, in a weak, apologetic way, and in his 
peculiar piping voice. 

" Then the ' ayes ' carry it ; and I must beg to 
say more beautiful ejes I think I never before 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 217 

had the pleasure of seeing," said Hookem, laugh- 
ing, and bowing, in his grand way, to Miss Tre- 
gellas, who was just then shaking hands with 
Arthur and his father. 

'* Jackson, get up the Amontillado, the yellow 
seal. Tolpedden, I think you'll like my Amontillado; 
I have it in the pipes, direct from DuflF Gordon's, 
and bottle it myself. Pure wine, depend on it." 

The luncheon was soon in full career. There 
were cold pheasant, cold fowl, brawn and lobster 
salad, the latter prepared under Mr. Hookem's 
own eye, and composed of remarkable iAgredients, 
such as cream, anchovies, and potatoes. The 
gentlemen were most agreeable, and ran about 
with the eagerness of newly-engaged waiters. They 
foresaw the smallest want, they dived into jars, 
they rivalled Jackson in attentive alertness. It is 
true that Mr. Trevena stepped once into a grouse 
pie, and that Mr. Waverton spilled a glass of 
sherry down Mrs. Penrose's back, but these trifling 
accidents merely. arose from excess of zeal, and 
only aflForded subjects for joking and fun. 

" If you allow more than two bottles of cham- 
pagne, Hookem," said Mr. Tregellas, to the host, 
*' we shall have so much flirting and talking, there 
'11 be no catching any fish. Mrs. Tolpedden, some 
more sherry ?" 

"Now do," said the gallant Mr Bradbrain. 

" Not a drop more, thank you," said that little 
lady, as her glass was rapidly filling. 

The young ladies repudiated the idea of flirting. 



21^ GSKHTHE. 



^Moie defeats erf die nortliaiias. I see,* said 
Hookem, ^in Testexdars Tines, Mr. Bfadbnin. 
The dashing sontheni gentlemen are too mndi for 
them.* 

^The dare-dealers ahvavs irere warlike and 
boDving. They aie iifiplli<r» br pcofesion« and ac- 
costomed to ooounand; but the Pnzitan Xoctfa 
has the rtamiinay and the true elastic eoPTgy^ said 
Mr. Tolpedden. 

^Comenow, that*stoofaad — that sreaDv too bad, 
im' t it Hookem f said Bradbrain, declining the 
contest, and toming to pick op a handkerchief 
which Mrs. Tdpeddcn had drc^^Kd. 

^I want TOO, Tolpeddoi, to read an article of 
mine this we^ on Littlemcve^s ' Mother-in^w in 
the Hoosef by Jore! sir, it's a great poem. 
Here's a fine passages, the simile, as yoa'U see, 
drawn from the merest ererv-daT life : 

^ See how the oockKrew twisdng hides, 
Deep boring in the ^XMigy oork. 
Then mockingly the fool derideB, 

And pcintB nnto the two-pionged fork. 
^ Lo, there 8 joor man and wife.^ he bitb ; 

But I oondnne, tsfite of jeer. 
Who breaks the botde^s neck, he pays, 
Wanting that subtle minister/ 

The poet's point is that, while young married 
people are often too enthoaastic, generous, and 
straightforward in worldly matters, the osefol 
mother-in-law winds to her purposes like the 
coi^screw, and draws oat the most stobbom diffi- 




MR. hookem's PIC-NIO. 219 

culty. Oh ! I think it is admirable ! — it's the right 
thing !" 

Arthur smiled sarcastically. Mr. Bradbrain 
cried " Clever ! — very clever !" and applauded. 

Milly's eyes half closed, and then laughed ; to the 
rest (those who were not talking in circles apart) 
the lieutenant boldly said, '* I can't make out head 
or tail of it." 

"I say, Hookem," said Mr. Tregellas, "you are 
so enthusiastic about literature, may I ask, did you 
ever venture on a book yourself !" 

Mr. Hookem affected a mysterious confusion, 
that was not uninteresting. 

"Well," said he, "Tregellas, to make a clean 
breast of it, I did once publish a libellxASj or little 
book ; it was in my young days, when George, the 
fourth of that name, was king." 

" And its name t" cried Mr. Tolpedden. 

"Well, I am not proud of it, though it was 
certainly elegantly brought out, and was thought 
a good deal of when it first appeared. It was 
entitled ^ The Art of Tying a Cravat ;' but I have 
now resolved to devote my whole energies to the 
task of freeing one of our greatest of Englishmen 
from the opprobrium so long unjustly cast upon 
him. Mr. Froude has proved that Henry VIII. 
was not a butcher and a tyrant, and that he mar- 
ried his numerous wives for the most patriotic 
reasons ; Mr. Dixon has also shown us that Lord 
Bacon was neither a time-server nor a moral 
coward." 



220 GREATHEART. 

" Who IS your hero, Mr. Hookem ?" asked the 
two eldest Miss Wavertons, breathlessly. 

" That brave Yorkshireman and gallant soldier, 
Guido Fawkes," replied the host, with dignity; 
"the indomitable fanatic who spent all his 
life investigating explosive compounds, and died 
on the brink of his greatest discovery, the victim 
of a sordid and narrow-minded world." 

Everyone laughed; and several persons called 
out, ^' What ! Guy Fawkes f ' as if they thought 
Mr. Hookem was joking. 

"Yes, I repeat," said Mr. Hookem, drawing 
himself up, " that grossly misunderstood discoverer, 
Guido Fawkes, that brave soldier in the Nether- 
lands, that wise diplomatist in Spain, was cruelly put 
to death for attempting to establish a great truth 
at the expense of the lives of a few unknovoi 
noblemen. Jackson, champagne to the ladies." 

Pop! pop! went the corks, like two duellists' 
pistols. 

" None of that popping stuff for me," said the 
lieutenant ; " I'd rather have a glass of good ale, 
if there's any going." 

" Jackson, ale to Lieutenant Tolpedden, when 
you've helped the ladies," 

The lunch cleared away, the sailors came round 
with small pails full of bait; cuttle fish, small dabs, 
and plaice, and glittering sand launces, and coils 
of lines armed with wire. The folding chairs 
were removed, and every one prepared for work. 
Milly Waverton and Lucy Tregellas clapped their 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 221 

hands with delight as Arthur began to bait their 
lines for conger with the arms of cuttle fish. 

" Oh ! how cruel !" cried Lucy ; " and do tell 
us, Mr. Tolpedden, what we shall catch ?" 

^'Perhaps a dog-fish, perhaps a blue shark, 
perhaps a skate as big as a wheelbarrow, or a 
conger, which is really a sort of degenerated sea- 
serpent." 

" Oh ! what fun !" cried Milly, dancing about ; 
"only think, Lilly, of catching a thing like a 
wheelbarrow ; but Mr. Tolpedden will help us if 
we catch a monster — won't you, Mr, Tolpedden ?" 

" I am ever at hand, Miss Waverton, to succour 
the distressed," cried Arthur, with mock heroism, 
and laughing. " Miss Tregellas, will you have a 
line for each hand or not ?" 

" Well, I think, Tolpedden, Lilly cannot pull out 
more than one shark at a time," said her father, 
as he came round to help with the lines preparing 
for the terrible Miss Trevena, who, nodding a 
stately thanks, instantly commenced fishing as if 
for her livelihood. 

It was at this moment that a boat was seen 
putting from the shore. 

Mr. Hookem looked through his opera-glass, 
and then wrung his hands in affected agony. 

" If I was to go to the top of Ohimborazo," he 
said, " even there proofs and revises would reach 
me — nay, if I went to the nearest fixed star in a 
balloon, there too a balloon laden with printers' 
devils would surely follow me." 



222 GB£ATH£ABT. 

It teas proofs, or rather a tele«:niph express, from 
Bodmin, with questions aboat a doabtful leader 
for the Saturday's For^^. Arthur could not help 
thinking that the Sultan was not altogether dis- 
pleased at the interruption, as he dived down into 
the cabin ; and, soon re-appearing with the answer, 
the men pulled back to land. 

It being necessaiy after this disturbance to 
change the fishing ground, the anchor was heaved 
up, and off again bore the Flying Flsh^ "Lord 
Camperdown's Yacht^ (as Mr. Hookem always 
described it, with special emphasis, for it was a 
borrowed one), and moored half a mile nearer 
Dunchine. 

It was pleasant to have any excuse, as every 
one agreed, to look out at the long line of cliffs, 
steeped in an enchanted azure atmosphere ; and 
the great mounds of rock, pyramidal or altar- 
shaped, against which the waves broke in playful 
anger, or leaped far over them in foam, part of 
which fell back in white cascades from dark ledge 
to ledge. It was pleasant to look down over the 
sloop's side and watch the transparent, emerald 
water break with a tranquil lipping ripple against 
the black-tarred planks. Far away the coast 
stretched, in sunny rise and fall, promontory 
and bay, pierced by caves, haunted by seals, or by 
shafts long ago forsaken by the miners ; while high 
above all rose Dunchine, that once famous strong- 
hold of King Arthur. 

The lieutenant was very important in superin- 



ft 



MB. hookem's pio-nio. 223 

tending the operations of tacking, and when all was 
ready for starting, roai'ed out : " Let her go be- 
fore it," as if he was captain of a ninety-gun ship. 

"Have you seen, Mr. Hookem," said Waver- 
ton, in his piping treble, "that infamous letter 
in the Bodmin paper, that some dissenting fellow 
has addressed to our excellent bishop ?" 

Mr. Hookem said that he had not, and called 
out for more long worms. 

"A most violent production, complaining of what 
the writer calls the Komanizing spirit of choral 
services and Church processions that our bishop en- 
courages, and actually ends by urging his lordship 
to go at once over to Kome. The man who wrote 
that, sir, ought to be driven from his pulpit." 

"I trust not, Mr, Waverton," said Trevena, 
with a good-natured smile, "for / wrote that 
letter." 

" Then all I can say, sir," said his excited oppo- 
nent, "such opinions are fatal to ecclesiastical 
discipline." 

" To that I am totally indifferent, provided they 
conduce to the increase of religious truth." 

Here Mr. Hookem interposed, by entreating 
every body, as the sloop was now getting to her 
moorings, to prepare lines and baits for the 
ladies. 

"We are now, Miss Tregellas," said Arthur, 
"just off that famous sand-bank, ^The Silver 
Pits,' where there are shoals of plaice and skate, 
and quantities of conger." 



224 GREATHEART. 

" Oh ! what fun ; but I hope we shant catch a 
shark." 

" Dum capimus capimur /" said Mr, Trevena, 
with a very artful glance at Milly Waverton, who 
insisted on knowing what the Latin words meant. 

" Nulla dies sine linea H exclaimed Mr. Hookem. 

" There again, Lilly," said Milly, to her friend, 
"isn't it too bad? Don't let them make their 
Latin jokes." 

But all this time I have forgotten the presence 
of the eloquent monologist, Fitzhugh, and the 
excitable Lucas, for it had been impossible to draw 
Maclean from his books. 

Fitzhugh, benevolently supercilious in his 
humorous, and perhaps rather owlish spectacles, 
was explaining to the eldest Miss Waverton his 
theory of aggressive Christianity ; while Lucas was 
expatiating to poor patient Mrs. Penrose on the 
glories of the last Bodmin Races, won by a tre- 
mendous rush by Watchbox, who beat Young 
Hopeful by a neck. 

"What's that I hear, Mr. Fitzhugh?" said 
Hookem. "What! you did not like our last 
article on ^ War Christianity V Why, it was by one 
of our best hands." 

" Not at all, Mr, Hookem," said Fitzhugh, pre- 
paring himself for battle by pressing his spectacles 
with the middle finger of his left hand, " by no 
means. I think that what we want in this money- 
grubbing age is war waged for higher motives 
than the mere extension of trade. Let us drive the 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 225 

Turk from the holy sepulchre that he pollutes ; 
let the name of Christians be feared in the Leba- 
non ; let us, like Cromwell ^" 

"I partly go with you," said Mr. Hookem; 
^^ but, pardon me, I must adjourn the debate, as I 
have just got a bite — it's a skate, I think. You see. 
Miss Tregellas, we use soft iron for these conger- 
hooks, in order the better to pull them out if the 
fish gorges them." 

" No," said the inexorable Miss Louisa Trevena, 
to one of the young artists, who was trying to 
amuse her, ^^ no, I do not think so. I know you 
men would rather be without us, that you might 
smoke your nasty pipes." 

" Now, Miss Trevena !" said one of the artists, 

" Stuff ! don't tell me, I know it ! John, I think 
it is rather rude of your attending to every one's 
fishing before mine." 

This was aimed at John, who was very busy 
preparing Milly Waverton's fishing-tackle. 

And now, the Flying Fish being moored snugly 
off the shoal, the fishing began in right earnest ; 
over went dozens of strong lines, guarded with 
wire, to resist the conger's teeth. 

"Ladies," said Mr. Hookem, "you will know 
what fish bites by its manner of pulling ; a skate 
will jerk away over the stones, and pull tre- 
mendously when he's half way up; the congers 
give a long, steady strain, but sometimes will rise 
with the hook, and not kick and flounder till they 
come to the surface." 

VOL. I. Q 



22G GREATHEART. 

** And what does the flounder dot" said Milly. 
At which everyone laughed, and the host shook 
his fist at her. 

There was a dead silence of expectation now, 
and soon up came the fish ; large, lumpish skate, 
with thorny tails, a small cod-fish or two, and 
plaice, brown and orange-spotted. Mr. Hookem 
was delighted, forgot his own sport so good- 
naturedly, and went round to bait other people's 
lines. 

'* Strange things come up to look at us, the 
monsters of the deep !" said Arthur, laughing as 
he helped Miss Tregellas to pull in a small spotted 
dog-fish, which was instantly tossed into the after- 
hold, to wallow there with its other comrades, and 
be examined at leisure. 

It was charming to see Miss Tregellas, in her 
little gilt-buttoned yachting-jacket, and straw hat 
with blue ribbon, enter so earnestly into the sport. 
She paid out her line and hauled it in with the 
alacrity of a veteran sailor. She hardly ever 
missed a fish, and became the envy of the whrfe 
party. As for Milly Waverton, she screamed and 
laughed so whenever anything larger than a 
dab appeared, that it required all Mr. Trevena 
could do to soothe her fears, and complete the 
capture of her victims, much to his sister's indig- 
nation, that lady indeed openly condemning all 
vulgarly high spirits. 

As for Mr. Waverton, he caught nothing but one 
small plaice ; but he was conststntly of opinion that 



MR. hookem's pic-NIC. 227 

he had " bites " of enormous fish. Mr. Tolpedden 
pursued his work steadily, and the lieutenant ex- 
ulted quietly in his experience and its consequent 
success. All at once, just as Mr. Hookem had 
caught a large halibut, that everybody was exam- 
ining, Mr. Waverton thought he felt a bite ; it was 
a very gentle vibration, but it made him turn pale 
and anxious, especially as no one was looking — all 
at once there came a tremendous rush, and out ran 
the line from the forked stick. 

*' If you've caught a merman," said Lucas, who 
was next him, ^' have him up, and we'll give him 
some stale champagne." 

" Don't laugh," said Waverton, his arm almost 
pulled off. " Oh, do somebody help — help !" 

Suddenly the pulling ceased. 

" He's gone !" cried Lucas — '* bet you a fiver 
he's gone !" 

And off he went to look at the halibut. 

Just at that moment a tremendous object rose 
from the water close to the terrified young clergy- 
mSn's line, and there it splashed and lashed like an 
enraged boa-constrictor. 

Waverton's blood was up ; and half alarmed, half 
excited, proud of the capture, and wishing to effect 
it alone, he put forth all his strength, setting his 
foot against the ship's gunwale, in order to get a 
better purchase. The fish yielded, and wallowed 
slowly up the ship's side; then, with a sudden 
spring, it leaped and coiled itself round the terrified 
fisherman, who, losing his balance, fell, grappling 

q2 



228 OREATHEABT. 

at the head of the conger that he convulsively 
held away from him. It was the Laocoon again, 
and only wanted the two sons to complete the irre- 
sistible tableau. 

There was a burst of irrestrainable laughter, 
then screams from the ladies and shrill cries from 
Miss Trevena, who flew on Lieutenant Tolpedden 
as if he had bribed the conger to commit this act 
of violence. 

" You wretches !" she cried ; " it'll bite his arm 
off!" 

Arthur was the first to see the danger ; to rush 
up, and tear back the monster, then, with one strong 
blow of a heavy knife on the spine, he made it fall 
disabled on the deck, where the sailors soon de- 
stroyed it. 

It was a huge beast, at least six feet long, and 
some twelve inches round the neck, and it weighed 
seventy pounds. Pale, half-fainting, and wet 
with brine and slime, its captor sat regarding it 
with languid horror. It was a greenish brown 
above, and a dirty white below, and looked, *as 
Mr. Hookem observed, like a younger son of the 
Great Sea Serpent. 

" Come down in the cabin, sir," said the boat- 
swain to Mr. Waverton, " and let us swab you 
down, for you're all over muck." 

Mr. Waverton went down, and re-appeared in 
ten minutes, clad in a roomy dust-coat of his host's, 
and cheered by a huge bumper of Amontillado, that 
made his eyes wink. He even assumed a mild air 



^ 



ON THE CLIFFS. 229 

of triumph as Mr, Hookem declared him the un- 
doubted hero of the day. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

ON THE CLIFFS. 

THE passengers on board "my friend Lord 
Camperdown's yacht the Flying Fish,^ had 
been all safely disembarked, thanks to the excel- 
lent supervision of their temporary sailing-master, 
Lieutenant Tolpedden, who had insisted on re- 
maining the last on board, like the heroic captain 
in stories of wrecks. 

The whole party stood on the little platform 
at Dunchine, examining the dead fish that had 
now been brought on shore, and lay in one vast 
epicurean hecatomb. 

" What a strange form of matter a fish is," said 
Mr. Tolpedden, turning over a flabby cable of 
conger with the end of his walking-stick. " The 
creatures always remind me of rough sketches of 
the later animals, and seem to belong to some earlier 
creation." 

" Nasty, ugly things !" said Miss Trevena. 

" That cod," said Mr. Hookem, with a gloating 
eye, and addressing the boatswain, "put up for Mr. 
Tregellas ; it will boil in firm and flaky, I would 
pledge my honour. Let Mr. Waverton have 



230 GREATHEART. 

three pair of those soles, and cut the conger in 
half for Mr. Tolpedden ; it will make soup fit for 
the Emperor of all the Russias. And now, 
Trudgeon, get the fires lit on the hills, where I told 
you, and broil some of the best soles and whiting ; 
and while the cloth is being laid, ladies and gentle- 
men, let us climb up and see the ruins of King 
Arthur's Castle." 

So up all the young people went — up a long 
winding, dangerous stair cut in the rock that led 
to the castle door. The ascent was perilous. 
'^ They must have eyes that scale Dunchine," says 
an old writer. One side was the perpendicular 
rock, on the other was an abyss; arms and 
hands were required to help the ladies — aid which 
the gentlemen were by no means reluctant to 
give. 

" By Jove ! Tolpedden we ought to be in hoods, 
with our pointed boots ; tied up with chains to our 
knees, our swords should clank from step to step," 
said one of the artists. "There should be Hippocras 
waiting for us in the castle hall, and the knights, 
hearing us approach, should come forth and meet 
us, and lead us to King Arthur and Queen Gui- 
never. 

"Good — that's good," said Mr.Hookem, "Dodge- 
son, youtalk pictures as well as paint them; but really, 
if King Arthur was as stout as I am, he would 
have had a lift put up here, like they have in cotton 
factories — it's very tough climbing," 

" What a glorious light on those cliffs !" Fisher 



ON THE CLIFFS. 231 

said, who was lingering behind ; " I think a 
scumble of Naples yellow would give that. Lord ! 
what duflFers we are when we come to Nature 1" 

" You've had too much sherry — you're melan- 
choly. I say, how Bradbrain has been carrying 
on with that little Mrs. Tolpedden — by George ! 
sir, it's a caution to snakes! And there's that 
young Tolpedden," — Arthur had by this time gone 
on — ** he's nuts on that Miss Tregellas, and there's 
no getting a word of her." 

"That Milly Waverton's a nice girl, if you 
like. Hewer !" 

" She is 80 ; and so that raufiF Trevena seems to 
think. Look at him up there at the door !" 

" Come along you fellows," said Fisher; " they're 
overhauling the chapel up there. I wish to good- 
ness that Hookem had got his dinner ready for us 
at landing ; that sea air has made me so hungry, 
I think I could eat a horse's leg oflF ! Wasn't that 
a lark with the conger and the young curate? 
Isn't that Miss Trevena a Gorgon ?" 

" I believe you, my boy. I say, I think I shall 
cut it early, and have a game of pool at Bos- 
castle," said Lucas. 

Alas ! for the ingratitude and baseness of human 
nature I Such was the under-current of detract- 
ing conversation. You cannot make men your 
friends with mere lobster salads and still champagne. 

As for Fitzhugh, his vanity had been hurt, and 
hurt vanity is slow to forgive. 

" What a howling snob this Hookem is !" he said 



232 GEEATHEART. 

to Lucas, as they toiled together up the rock stair- 
case; "how he gloats over his money and his 
grub — ugh !'* 

" Only think," said Lucas, *' what a day it is 
for that fight at Moulsey'between Bob Travers and 
the Spider. Yes, Hookem is rather cheeky — he 
pretends to set me right about horses, and talks 
about hunting as if he'd spent all his life in pigs- 
skin. I say, Fitzhugh, what a queer old buflFer 
Penrose is !" 

Mr. Bradbrain was monopolizing poor silly little 
Mrs. Tolpedden. I do not mean that he was al- 
ways by her side ; but still he seemed generally 
near her, always to be watching her, always ready 
to huny forward and displace some less showy 
conversationalist. 

He and Mrs. Tolpedden were the last to remain 
among the roofless ruins of the old castle chapel, 
at the top of the cliff, that stood mossy and for- 
lorn among the great tussocks of dead grass, and the 
brown cushions of sea-pink that rose above the 
old burial-place of Arthur^s knights ; while below 
the sea moaned its eternal requiem. 

They stood talking beside the old lichened altar 
stone, and showed no particular desire to join the 
laughing party, whose voices could be heard slowly 
receding towards the castle. 

Mr. Bradbrain was very eloquent about a car- 
nival he had once helped to celebrate at Mexico. 
He expatiated on the gorgeous dresses of the 
people as they paraded the great square, when the 



^ 



ON THE CLIFFS. 233 

little tapers began to twinkle in the twilight. He 
described the black hair and large luminous eyes 
of the ladies ; which, however, he artfully managed 
and pretended to confess he had seen transcended 
in England. He sketched pleasantly enough the 
grotesque masks that were worn, and the struggle 
to extinguish and re-light the tapers. He narrated 
how, in throwing up a handful of comfits at a win- 
dow, he threw up unconsciously among them a 
valuable diamond ring, that he never recovered, al- 
though he offered large rewards. 

Mrs. Tolpedden, fascinated as a humming-bird 
is by a cobra, felt like a child does when it sees 
dissolving views for the first time. The world had 
never struck her before as being so large, nor so 
varied. 

"And how is it, Mr. Bradbrain," she said, 
" come, tell me now, that, with all your power to 
please, you have never married ?" 

" Because I have never till lately found one I 
could really love," he replied, in a low, earnest 
whisper, that seemed to make the colour rise to 
her very forehead ; she made no reply. 

At this moment Milly Waverton came running 
up to them. 

" Oh ! Mrs. Tolpedden," she cried, and clapped 
her hands, " do come and save me from that Mr. 
Hookem ; he keeps teasing me so, and he will 
make me walk with that horrid, cross Miss 
Waverton, who is in poor Lieutenant Tolpedden's 
care." 



234 GBEATHEABT. 

By this time the discharge of guns from the 
offposite cliff, where two fires now blazed, and where 
a great Union Jack fluttered, indicated that dinner 
was ready. 

The guests were soon collected and seated, on 
bass mats and plaids, in a large circle round a 
cold collation fit for a duke. There were game 
pies, perfect fortresses of shining and embossed 
crust, and great columns, like Purbeck marble, of 
brawn, and great nests of wild plovers' eggs, and 
rows of cold pheasants and fowls, and piles of 
scarlet prawns, arranged like basket-work, and 
lobsters, beautiful in colour as cactus flowers ; 
and, above all, a great dish of smoking soles, ex- 
quisitely boiled by Pentaluna, Mr. Hookem's chief 
boatman, and dished up by Jackson himself. And 
at the side, in tubs, were rows of bottles, some in- 
vitingly tipped with silver, and jealously guarding 
their precious elixirs. 

As for loaves, they were as plentiful as boulders 
on the sea beach below; and a remarkable fact 
was, that considering it was a picnic, there was 
plenty of salt, and other condiments and pickles 
always at hand, as if they grew on the cliffs. 

Everybody seemed happy and pleasant. Even 
Fitzhugh's wound healed, even Lucas forgot for a 
time the Spider. Everything turned out well — 
the flsh was much enjoyed, and the great goose 
pie was worked like a mine. The lieutenant was 
chatty; Mr. Hookem superintended the cham- 
pagne, that lit up the talking as if it had been 



ON THE CLIFFS. 235 

laughing gas ; Milly Waverton teased people by 
proposing charades ; and Miss Tregellas, directly 
the custards were cleared away, tyrannized over 
everybody with a most tedious game of ^'Me- 
mory," which broke down from the utter want of 
concentration that everj'one felt. Even Miss 
Trevena relented over a second glass of cham- 
pagne. As for the elder Miss Wavertons, they 
were almost supernaturally gay and juvenile. 

" I have determined, Mr. Hookem, this Novem- 
ber," said Mr. Waverton, whose spirits had now 
quite rallied, and who leaped Curtius-like into a 
lull of the conversation, " to put an end to the 
offensive, ridiculous processions of Guy Fawkes. 
Our worthy bishop has written to the more re- 
liable of his clergy, to beg us to take that step. 
It will stop much ill-feeling, and tend to baflSe the 
machinations of the low dissenting part of our 
community." 

Here he looked hard at Mr. Trevena, whose 
face was just then radiant with good-nature, but 
who now awoke, like an aroused warrior, decidedly 
of the Church militant, for he at once disliked and 
despised his puny antagonist. 

" The bishop may write as much as he likes," 
he said, in rather a loud voice, " but he will only 
be obeyed in such matters by his toadies and 
time-servers, or by the young and the inex- 
perienced." 

N.B. — Mr. Trevena was four-and-thirty, Mr. 
Waverton was six-and-twenty. 



236 GBEATHEART. 

" At least," said Mr. Waverton, ^^ he does not 
expect obedience from men who allow ivy to grow 
inside their churches, and mushrooms to^spring up 
in the pew corners." 

*^ I am not one of those," replied his antagonist, 
striking fire, " who believe upholstery to be in- 
cluded in the creed." 

Mr. Waverton pushed back the soft thin dark 
hair from his forehead, turned very red, and rose, 
knocking down two wine-glasses. 

" Mr. Hookem," he said, " I only ask if I'm to 
be insulted under your roof?" 

There was a general laugh at this expression ; 
the angry man instantly called it in, corrected the 
proof, and said : 

" I mean at your table." 

Renewed laughter, 

Mr. Hookem, mollifying the disputants with a 
few soft words, and more champagne, turned the 
conversation very skilfully. 

" I hope you'll like our country, Mr. and Mrs. 
Tolpedden," said the Sultan. " We're rough and 
rude, but, 'pon my soul, I believe we're honest ! 
The country is wild, very wild, all moor and shore, 
block-cliff and gull's-nest, if I may be allowed for 
a moment to be poetical ; but there is beauty in 
the great stormy Atlantic, and the sea here is un- 
tiring in its restless energy." 

At this outburst of rhetoric the Miss Waver- 
• tons faced each other, and sighed "How beauti- 
ful !" 



ON THE CLIFFS. 237 

Mr. Tregellas said that he liked the Cornish 
people much for their independence and sturdi- 
ness, but he thought the great curse of the 
country was the greedy and gambling spirit of 
speculation to which mining led." 

"I thought there were no mines this side of 
Bodmin ?" said the editor. 

" Yes, there was mining here in my father^s time," 
said Mr. Tolpedden. " There is a shaft near En- 
dellion, in what they call ^ No Man's Land,' and 
there is another worked-out mine half a mile 
further along the shore." 

" Well," said Mr. Hookem, " for my own part, 
to return to my muttons, I like SuflFolk, my native 
country, best of all ; all about Great Mudcombe it 
is lovely. There I hope some day to settle. Jack- 
son, didn't I particularly say champagne, and you 
bring Moselle ?" 

It was one of the Sultan's peculiarities, this strong 
local attachment, of which he was rather proud, for 
he had come from Great Mudcombe originally, to 
become a printer's errand-boy in St. Martin's 
Lane. It was an amiable and venial weakness, 
though he did sometimes tire you with his hobby. 
" Poor old Suffolk I" he used to say, in his odd 
way, " there is no one but myself to give her a leg 
up. 

" By-the-bye, Tregellas," said Mr. Hookem, " I 
said a good thing the other day to that prig the 
rural dean ; lie came here to see my friend, the 
Honourable Mr. Dufton, M.P. for Biborough. 



238 GREATHEABT. 

He was rather shocked at Waverton's coming fish- 
ing with me, and said grandly, ' I devote my time 
to fishing for men I' Now, his church at St. Ger- 
mains never fills, as I know, so I replied, quietly, 
* I looked the other day in your creel, Mr. Dean, 
and there were not many fish in it !' Ha ! ha ! I 
think, as Dr. Samuel Johnson observed, I never 
saw a man look so small before — Ha ! ha !" 

The Sultan's laugh came from the chest, and 
was pleasant to hear. 

'' Miss Tregellas here is very anxious, Hookem, 
to hear your chief boatman tell one of his Cornish 
yarns, as you promised," said Mr. Trevena. 

^' Then she shall," said the host. 

Pentaluna, the chief boatman, being sent for, 
shortly appeared, scraped his foot, and removing 
his glazed hat, stroked down his hair to express 
general obeisance to the ladies. He refused to sit 
down, and, in fact, looked rather abashed. He 
was all uncertainty, too, what story to tell — whether 
"The Squire's Tame Conger," or ''The Perrin 
Cherrybim." 

"Oh! the conger! the conger! Pentaluna," 
said Mr. Hookem. "No one shall tell 'The 
Perrin Cherrybim' but myself, and here's Mr. 
Bradbrain coming after you with ' The Queen's 
Washing Day,' so do your best." 

The boatman laughed grimly. 

" Zackly so, sir." 

"Here, Jackson, give Pentaluna a glass of 
sherry." 



ON THE CLIFFS. 239 

Thus fortified, the boatman began, in a monoto- 
nous, sing-song, artificial voice, and with a stifiF 
action of the arms. 

" I s'pose you dedn't any of you know waun Eoby 
Dabb, with waun short leg ? But no matter ef you 
dedn't, for he's but hafe sarved ; and p'raps you 
dedn't knaw waun, that desprite ante-billor's Sam 
Treew^eek, who maad Eoby run the country ; but 
I's tell 'ee how a' ded ut. One day, as Sam was 
coming onder clift, he sees Eoby putting on hes 
clothes, close to a learge pool, and a learge c©ngflr 
'pon the sand by un, nigh 'pon dead. 

'' * Look here,' said Eoby, ^ what I've a-cotch'd 
at laest. I've ben more than an hour about ut, I 
have. He was in that learge pool, he was. And 
dear how fast he ded swim — and dear how slippery 
a was. At laest I datched 'ee by the gills, so I ded, 
and there a es. Esn't he a banger, Sampy V 

" ^ Eoby ! Eoby ! what hast a done — what hast 
a done V 

^' ^ Nothing, Sampy !' 

" ' Iss, thee hast, and thee'st a ruined man.' 

" ' How so f . 

" ^ How so ? Why, thee's better have killed a 
cheeld, or shut to fifty hares, thee hast. Thee'st 
be transported, Eoby.' 

" ' What have I done f 

" ' Done ? Why, that's the conger the squire 
do call his taame won ; and waun whom did daance 
and sing to the young ladies when they feed 'em. 
Why, a was worth scores of pounds, a was.' 



240 GRRATHEART. 

" ^ Whatever shall I do !' sobbed Eobj. ^ 1 took 
it fore a mere fourpenny waun.' 

" ^ Do ? Why, run, Eoby, run ; run for life — ^get 
up ovver clif t, and run. Run, tell thee disn't run no 
f urder ; then sleep, and run agen, and save thyself 
from transportation, if thee wish. Aw ! that beautiful 
blue back of he's, and such glaazing eyes, he had ; 
he'll never ax for mair agen, or smok' a pipe, never 
no more, a wam't. Run, Roby run I and when 
they ask for 'ee, I'll say thee'st faled into a shaft, 
ojr gone ower clif t, or something. Aw ! run, Roby, 
run!' 

"And sure enough Roby ran, and was never 
heard of for years; and when he com'd back 
Sampy towld 'un what a fool a was ; and how he 
took'd the cunger hum, and maade a clain-off 
dinner from 'un ; and that's what became of the 
squire's tame cunger, axing your pardon, ladies 
and gentlemen." 

Pentaluna's story was received with so much en- 
thusiasm, that envy, assuming the rosy face of Mr. 
Hookem, bade them wait till they had heard the 
" Perrin Cherrybim ;" and Mr. Bradbrain, boldly 
entering the lists with the born Cornishman, 
volunteered, if they would give him a minute or 
two, his rival recitation — " The Queen's Washing- 
day." 

" Now, ladies — Jackson, bring round the spark- 
ling Moselle, and be more attentive," said the 
editor, rising full glass in hand, and assuming a 
Sphynx-like air, "I want to puzzle you. T am 



ON THE CLIFFS. 241 

rather fond of derivations. Now, can you tell 
me why a full glass is called a bumper?" 

" I know the old derivation, * An bon pere^ " 
said the eldest Miss Waverton, who was a blue 
stocking, sparkling up ; '* the first toast at dinner 
before the Reformation being — *The Pope — the 
good Father I" 

" Pretty and ingenious, Miss Waverton, but I 
fear not correct." 

" I always held the name to express a mere ful- 
ness of sound," said Fitzhugh. 

** No, sir, no," said Hookem, who always snubbed 
Fitzhugh, because he affected omniscience, 
" bumper was originally homhardy an old word for 
a large round bottle. You'll find the word in the 
Bard. The passage is in the Tempest: * Yonder 
cloud is like a foul bombard, ready to shed its 
liquor.' " 

" Pooh !" said Fitzhugh, under breath to Arthur 
Tolpedden ; ** what connection is there between a 
full glass and a big bottle ? These etymologists 
are always discovering mare's nests." 

Mr. Bradbrain, who had retired to think, now 
reappeared, and coughed to indicate he was ready 
to begin his story — having first pulled down his 
shirt sleeves, and stretched out his right arm in a 
fashionable manner, that he no doubt thought ir- 
resistible. 

His story set out with describing the adventures 
of a Cornish captain, who went to London to per- 
suade the Admiralty to adopt some new means 
VOL. L R 



242 OREATHEART. 

of throwing a line over a wreck ; and who, mis- 
taking a royal footman for the king, was homoor- 
ed in his blander. 

The shrewd miner determined to posh his ad- 
vantage, and delighted with His Majestjr's affability, 
goes down to Windsor to wish him good-bye, and 
to persuade him to take some shares in the Wheal 
Squiddler. He finds the king in his parlour, and 
thus the naive story went on with considerable dry 
humour. 

" * How d'ye do V said he. * How d'ye do f ' 
said I. *What will 'ee have to drink?' said 
the King. * A mouthful of rum,' said I. ^ Zac- 
ly so,' said he. And with that he went to a cup- 
board, and took'd out a body of traade, sure 
enough — wine, and brandy, and rum, and gin, and 
biskies, and cakes and apples. Aw ! such a sight 
as 'tis. * Thraw to un,' said he ; and thraw to 'un 
we did, too, and got quite cheerful, we did, and 
sing'd a bit, boath on us. But the King's a poor 
singer, and a small drinker afore dinner ; and I 
reckon the Queen (that's the name as he's wife) 
es rather partickler, for she had only waun glass 
of brandy and trickle, and two glasses of rum, and 
that was all she had, 'cause twas afore dinner,' he 
said, ded the King." 

At this juncture Pentaluna had to be reproved 
for exuberant laughter, and the Rev. Mr. Waver- 
ton had become quite singularly hysterical, so that 
the tears ran down his eyes on to his plate. 

Mr. Bradbrain, looking round in a gratified and 



ON THE OLIFFS. 243 

triumphant way, as if he was collecting notes, re- 
sumed his story. 

"*When are ee' going hum!' said the King, 
* To-morrow,' said I. Aw I I thof t he wud have 
cried, I ded. * To-morrow?' said he — ^ to-morrow. 
Aw dear! that's a poor job; to-morrow I aw dear! 
— aw dear I Then you caen't have no dennar to- 
day,' said he, ' for the Queen waen't never have 
no company 'pon a washin' day, come who may ; 
and I believe,' said he, ^ 'tis a large wash to-day, 
too. Taake another glass of rum,' said he,' and so 
I ded. * Put some biskies in your pocket,' said he, 
^ for the cheldren,' and so I ded ; and then I had a 
drop of brandy and trickle, and I cum'd away. 
But the Queen es too purteckler by hafe, that's a 
fact, and she wadn't hear of no shares in the 
Wheal Squiddler." 

The applause was tremendous ; they all laughed 
till they cried. A sort of epidemic seemed to have 
seized the whole party. Even Miss Trevena 
had relapsed into youth and laughter. Only 
the narrator himself depreciated the story. 

"It's an old subject for fun," he said; "and 
resembles the Yorkshire song, ' The Coronation,' 
and plenty of other things ; but it is not the worst 
of its kind, I think. You see, I go about among 
the poor, professionally, and so I pick up their 
ways." 

" Capital 1 capital, indeed," said Mr. Hookem ; 
" now, pray don't apologise, Bradbrain, my boy — 
but take some sherry. What are you drink- 

r2 



244 GBEATHEART. 

ing? Here, Jackson, sherry to Mr. Bradbrain." 

The ladies, not forgetting Mrs. Tolpedden, 
were enthusiastic at the doctor's story, and the 
thoroughly Cornish manner and dialect he had 
assumed. 

The sunset by this time was burning upon the 
water, and casting a magic crimson light upon 
the cliff and ruin. Fisher was almost certain, as 
he said, that a glaze of rose madder would do it. 
Everyone turned round to look. The grey 
bars of cloud turned scarlet, and then fused into 
volcanic heat. Far above, the little plumage of 
cloudlets caught one by one the same momentary 
colour, and little tinges of golden tinsel broke out 
upon their edges. Last of all the east became 
suffused with the tints of a second daybreak. 
Then slowly the phantom splendours mouldered 
out, and passed into quick pearly greys as twilight's 
first little star came blossoming in the air with a 
pale sparkle. 

Miss Tregellas, gazing at that pageant, the 
last scene of all, standing poised on the edge of 
the cliff, her bright brow and enthusiastic eyes 
tinged with that supernatural colour, looked 
like a young sibyl or a prophetess, rousing the sea 
by her spells. Something of the kind Arthur 
Tolpedden had found an opportunity to say, when 
Mr. Hookem called out, 

^^ Take your seats again one moment, ladies and 
gentlemen, if you please, as I have an intellectual 
treat for you." 



ON THE CLIFFS. 245 

Here he drew a roUed-up magazine from his 
pocket, to Arthur's intense horror. 

The party sat down again in a picturesque circle, 
that Dodgeson instantly began to sketch. 

*' The poem I am now about to read," said the 
remorseless patron of Arthur's muse, in his 
grandest and most robust voice, ^'is founded on 
one of our most remarkable Cornish superstitions, 
^ The Merman's City,' and refers to Tintagel, one 
of our sea-side castles. Silence, if you please, Mr. 
Waverton." 

Arthur was in torture ; but the twilight sheltered 
him. Mr. Hookem went on — 

" King Arthur stood on Tintagel, 
And looked out on the west, 
Where the crimson sun was burning, 
Like a phoenix in his nest. 

The fern grew green and fretted thick 

Upon the castle wall, 
And on the outer rampart^s ledge 

Nodded the fox-glove tall. 

The gulls were whirling in the bay, 
Screaming their wild complaints, 

And on the sea-cliff churches porch 
Mouldered the silent saints. 

King Arthur, mailed in gold and steel. 

Stood gazing silently ; 
Upon his helm the sunset light 

Shone blood-red as the sea. 

Far out, absorbed in the great light 

That fused the west to gold. 
There rose a city fair and bright. 

With turrets manifold. 



246 ^ OREATHEART. 

' Out with the galleys !' Arthur cried, 

Still gazing eagerly, 
As the knights leaped downwards to the boats, 
And hurried to the sea. 

But they saw no more that city^s walls. 

That rose so fair and bright, 
Nor the golden roofs and stately towers 

Wrapt in enchanted light. 

Look ! yonder still the castle stands, 

Mournful among its graves, 
And from below there rises up 

The clamour of the waves." 

The applause was great, as Mr. Hookem rose, 
bowed with comic grandeur, and pointed out Mr. 
Arthur Tolpedden as the author. 

"It's vigorous," said his father, "picturesque, 
and not too long; but Arthur should try a more 
severe metre — the heroic syllable is better dis- 
cipline. Ballads were, after all, only street songs, 
and they lead to a shambling style." 

" Oh ! it's so beautiful 1" cried the ladies, in 
chorus. 

" Those verses of Tolpedden's were poor stuff," 
said Fitzhugh, in a whisper, to Mr. Waverton. 

Mr. Waverton only hiccuped, and said, 

" Yeshitwash," which could be hardly taken as 
answer. 

And now a round of small speeches began. Mr. 
Hookem, in eloquent terms, proposed " The ladies 
who have honoured us this day with their pre- 
sence, and delighted us with their society," and 
described how the vessel, in his imagination, had 



ON THE CLIFFS. 247 

appeared surrounded byflocksoflittleCupid archers, 
who had lulled the waves to music, &c., &c. 

Mr. Bradbrain returned thanks for the ladies, 
in equally flowing terms. They were the sun- 
shine, the flowers, the music of the earth, &c., &c. 
Without them earth would return to chaos, and 
life be a burden, &c., &c. They refined all amuse- 
ment, and gave increased zest to every pleasure, 
&c., &c. He summed up a most brilliant speech 
by eulogizing their host's generosity, kind-hearted- 
ness, and hospitality, and ended by proposing his 
health. 

More enthusiasm, and several glasses broken by 
chinking applause. 

" The Clergy and the Fine Arts," followed, and 
" Our Sailing Master;" the latter toast was bluntly, 
but pleasantly responded to by the lieutenant, who 
remarked that it was all plain sailing when the 
sea was like a mill-pond and the vessel was so well 
victualled. 

Then came ^'The Future Double Firsts" (mean- 
ing Arthur Tolpedden and Lucas). To this toast 
Mr. Lucas replied, after much pressing, and, 
being once on his legs, was kept up for some time 
by the goading of a sharp pin, held secretly by Mr. 
Fisher. 

He hoped that the two horses about to start for 
the University Stakes would go the pace for the 
'* great event," and, if they did not turn out High- 
flyers, would, at least, stand well at the winning 
post. He introduced many more such metaphors, at 



248 GREATHEABT. 

which 'Sir. Tregellas frowned, bit his lip, and 
shook his head. 

The last toast was proposed by Mr. Hookem. 
It was " The Younger Poets of England,** coupling 
with them the name of ^Ir. Arthur Tolpedden. 

There was a rustling among the ladies, and an 
expectant hush. Arthur made a short and modest 
speech. He said he was a mere esquire, who had 
not yet even won his spurs, and could boast no 
cognizance on his shield. But he remembered his 
father's motto, " Tenax Propositi /" and meant to 
go on, and perhaps do better things some day. 
He wanted to see old conventions broken up ; they 
had, he presumed to say, heard ahnost enough of 
knights and monks, and the middle ages 

Here Mr. Waverton shed tears, and moaned, 

" Shink of barefootedsh f riarsh ?" 

" He wanted to see expressed in verse," con- 
tinued the speaker, "the hopes, and joys, and 
sorrows of our own days." 

" Bravo T said Mr. Hookem, who, as he lived 
by the present, patronized the present. 

Arthur Tolpedden, then, apologizing for his 
presumption in hazarding such heterodox opinions, 
and thanking the company for so kindly coupling 
his name with such a toast, sat down, amidst loud 
cheering. 

The moon having now risen, it was time to 
embark for Endellion, and, once embarked, Mr. 
Hookem loudly proposed music. Out came Mr. 
Fisher's violin, and Mr. Hewer's cornet, and Lord 



ON THE CLIFFS. 249 

Camperdown's friend's flute, and the Miss Waver- 
tons kindly volunteered a lugubrious Russian hymn 
to the Virgin. The three gentlemen then struck 
up that fine glee, 

'^ Could a man be secure that his life would endure, 
For a thousand, a thousand long years f * 

Arthur helping with his fine baritone, and 
Messrs. Hookem, Bradbrain, and Tregellas, with 
their strong bass voices. 

Then the elder Miss Waverton, suddenly lasso- 
ing herself with a band of broad blue ribbon, broke 
forth with a notable Spanish song, with a " tra la" 
accompaniment of almost hysterical gaiety. 

Mr. Waverton proposed " Gregorianshants," 
but was quietly ignored. The fact is, such care 
had been taken to strengthen his nerves, that the 
champagne had got a little into his head. 

The lieutenant next volunteered the old song of 
"Tom Bowling," throwing considerable rough 
pathos into the concluding lines, 

^^ Although his body's under hatches, 
His soul is gone aloft/' 

By this time the vessel had reached Endellion, 
and the anchor was at once dropped. 

" Three jolly post-boys drinking at the ^Dragon,'" 
was received with much applause, and then followed 
a beautful regretful air, from La Traviata, by 
Mr. Bradbrain. 

The moonlight was mantling the sea, and 
fell in almost equal lustre on the cliffs ; some por- 



250 GREATHEART. 

tion of its light irradiated the faces of the singers 
and their audience on board the Flying Fish. 
Miss Tregellas seemed, to Arthur Tolpedden, like 
the ghost of Dante's Beatrice, as she sat there 
with Milly Waverton, now tired and quiet, resting 
her head on her lap. 

" Now, Arthur, we must have a song from you,*' 
cried Mr. Hookem, taking him by the collar. 
" Come, no excuses allowed ; don't be like the man 
in ^Horace!'" 

Arthur thought a moment, and fixed his eyes on 
the Mermaid Rock. 

" I have just set a fine old Scotch ballad," he 
said, " that I have condensed, to an old German 
tune, but I fear it '11 be far too long." 

Arthur launched boldly forth into the fine old 
Galloway ballad already familiar to us. The 
ballad described the mermaid sitting on the sea- 
side rock, shedding " her golden hair with a pearly 
comb," and how the young knight, on the eve of 
marriage, was tempted by her, and lulled into a 
magic sleep, during which she bore him to the sea, 
and so disappeared, exulting over her victim. 

" Oh ! how beautiful 1" cried MiUy Waverton 
to Miss Tregellas, as Arthur concluded ; " isn't it, 
Lucy — wild and charming I" 

"Very," said Lilly, thoughtfully, her eyes turned 
towards the shore. 

"There's a cold very! I call it very, very 
beautiful, Lilly 1" 

As the ladies stepped from the boat on to the 



ON THE CLIFFS. 251 

soft sand, for the disembarkation now began, Mr. 
Hewer was playing a retreat and other points 
of war on his cornet, seeking and wooing an echo ; 
the various traps and carriages were already 
visible on the upland road, and upward toiled the 
laughing party in merry groups. 

Arthur lingered behind till Miss Tregellas 
passed him, then, quickening his pace, he joined 
her. The slightest, faintest turn of the head 
showed him that she was conscious that he was 
close behind her. They were now close to the 
p}rramidical rock on which Arthur had seen the 
"beatific vision." The moonlight fell on it, 
and glorified it ; it seemed, to his excited imagi- 
nation, like a silver altar erected to Diana. 

Far above them Milly Waverton could be 

heard calling " Lucy, Lucy, isn't this beautf ul f 

Then a voice began to sing the air from the 

« Tempest," 

*^ Come unto these yellow sands, and then join hands, 
Curteied when you have and kissed — the wild waves 
whist !" 

" Mr. Tolpedden," said Miss Tregellas, with her 
clear, silvery voice, " will you carry my shawl for 
me, it drags so I" 

There was a dangerous silence. 

Then she added : 

" Will you sing me the first two verses of that 
curious old Scotch ballad I It is so very curious. 
I don't think, in all poetry, the mermaid was ever 
so well described." 



252 GREATHEABT. 

" With pleasure. Miss Tregellas. 

* There's a maid has sat by the salt sea-side. 
These ten long years and mair, 
And every first night o* the new moon 
She combs her yellow hair. 

And while she sheds the burning gold, 
Fu* sweet she sings o' hie, 
Till the fairest bird that's i* the wood 
Is charmed wi' her melodic.* 

You see," said Arthur, "this old poet, whose 
very name is forgotten, has made the mermaid a 
sort of siren, doomed to beguile and destroy 
men." 

" Should you really like to see a mermaid?" 

" I have seen one." 

**No. Oh! you're teasing me. You know 
there's no such thing. It must have been a seal — 
the fishermen say that seals sometimes look quite 
human when their heads bob above the waves." 

" The mermaid I saw," said Arthur, fixing his 
eyes on the rock, in a low earnest voice that made 
Miss Tregellas stop and look where her companion 
was looking, " sat there on that rock in the moon- 
shine, and sang a tune I shall never forget." 

There was silence. Then Miss Tregellas, stoop- 
ing to pick up a fragment of dead fern that scarce- 
ly seemed worth preserving, said in a voice with 
hardly its usual timbre — 

" Then it was you who frightened us so? Oh ! 
how could you fire that horrid pistol ? Well, I did 
wonder." 




ON THE CLIFFS. 253 

Arthur was just pouring forth an earnest 
apology for firing his pistol in the air, when a 
sturdy voice shouted — 

"Lucy! — ^you lazy Lucy; we're waiting for you !" 

" I mustn't stop and tell you now, Mr. Tolped- 
den," she said as they walked upward, "how 
terribly frightened the children were. We 
thought it was a drunken preventive man firing at 
us. We little thought to whom we owed the 
honour." 

She had now resumed her bewitching, mocking 
manner. 

" That's the way she makes slaves and Gibeonites 
of all of us," said Mr. Tregellas, as Arthur and 
Lucy reached the spot where the rest of the party, 
all but Lucas and the artists, were assembled. 
" She's little and lazy." 

" I am so sorry poor Mrs. Tregellas didn't come," 
said Mr. Hookem. " I really hope when you re- 
turn you'Jl find Clara better." 

" Oh 1 it's only a touch of the mumps — ^it's no- 
thing," said Mr. Tregellas, who hated a fuss about 
illness. 

" But there is so much diphtheria about," kindly 
suggested Miss Trevena. 

And now the hand-shaking began, and the 
collecting plaids and wrappers, and the adjusting 
shawls, and the thanks for the pleasant day, and 
the packing music and baskets in boots and wells 
of dog-carts, and the lighting cigars. 

"But where's Bernard?" said the eldest and 



254 GBEATHEABT. 

most practical Miss Waverton. "Who's seen 
dear Bernard r 

Somebody thought they had seen him sitting on 
a rock watching the tide. 

Arthur volunteered to go for him, and down he 
dashed with his usual energy and good-nature. 
He found the Rev. Bernard sitting on a rock, 
his feet in a salt pool, and very melancholy. He 
refused positively to return home while the Church 
was " f orlomsh and desholate." But he was event- 
ually coaxed by Arthur on to his feet, and led to 
the chaise, where his sisters awaited him impatient- 
ly and anxiously* 

"I shall drive home with Bradbrain," said 
Arthur to his father; "he wants to show me a 
new breech-loader he's got from London." 

" Nought never came to danger," said Mr. Tol- 
pedden laughing, as the lieutenant tucked in his 
wife, and slammed up the carriage-step. " Don't 
be late, Arthur." 

"Take a weed, Arthur," said Mr. Hookem, 
offering a cigar, as Arthur Tolpedden shook hands 
with the Tregellases, and the rest, and took his 
place in a smart dog-cart. 

"Bradbrain," said Arthur, when they were 
well under weigh, "I never did see anyone 
ilirt so outrageously as you did with my aunt to- 
day." 

"Well, it passes the time, you know," said 
Bradbrain, in a blasS voice, as he buttoned the 
apron of the dog-cart closer. " By-the-bye, isn't 



OLD roby's cottage. 255 

that female Tregellas charming f She only wants 
a little faster style." 

" She is charming, and so perfectly unconscious 
of being so ; but Milly Waverton is more sparkling 
— little eyes — more in the Marie Wilton manner." 
(The hypocrite !) 

"What a pity it is," said Bradbrain, after a 
considerable pause, during which he retied the 
lash of his whip, " that there's something so flighty 
about the Tregellases. People about here do say 
that some sister of his, you know, went rather 
queer in the top story ; but there's no believing 
half one hears." 

At that moment the hand of a corpse seemed 
to entangle itself with Arthur's, he shuddered 
involuntarily. 

"It has turned rather cool," said Bradbrain, 
tipping off the ash of his cigar with the little 
finger of his right hand. " What a blessing it is, 
Arthur, that we men have learned to carry about 
these little hot stoves in our mouths to keep us 
warm." 



CHAPTER XIV. 

OLD ROBy'S cottage. 

IT was early in the morning after the pic-nic 
that Mr. Bradbrain^ having heard, and 
derided the Dowser, whose visit and mysterious 



256 GREATHEART. 

proposal had been narrated to him by his sepul- 
chral partner, sallied oat to make a round of pro- 
fessional visits, in order to have the rest of the day 
free for a ^^ lark/' as Mr. Lucas denominated it, at 
the fair at St. Tudy's. 

He went on foot, hunting crop in hand, and 
" knocked off his business,** to use his own expres- 
sion, " in a brace of jiflSes." A gratifying case of 
brain fever at the tailor^s was going on well ; a bad 
leg at the Post-office could walk about a little ; the 
Income Tax Collector's dropsy was no worse ; and 
the scarlet fever amongst the Dissenting Minister's 
large family was spreading through the house as 
quickly as even a medical man could well hope for. 

He was about to return and order his horse to 
be saddled, when he remembered that Roby 
Rogers, an old miner down in Dunchine, had sent 
for him that very morning, the messenger reporting 
that he was breaking up. Now, everyone knows 
that doctors are like lawyers, and care as much for 
their poor as for their rich clients ; but charity in 
this case might perhaps have left Roby Rogers 
alone for one more day had not curiosity suggested 
that Roby was uncle to the Dowser, and might, in 
a moment of weakness, be perhaps tempted to dis- 
close his secret, if there was any secret — or at all 
events, he hoped, by some stealthy manoeuvre, to 
outflank and chase away that contemptible enemy 
the Dowser. To some minds scheming is a posi- 
tive pleasure, just as it is perhaps a pleasing to the 
mole to burrow after worms in the darkness. 




OLD roby's cottage. 257 

It was a fine autumn morning. There had 
been a slight frost in the night, and the white 
dust lay still on the grass and on the road, where- 
ever the shadows' still were. A tall holly bush, in 
the sunshine of Mr. Hookem's garden, tossed up 
its great bush of prickly glossy green leaves, 
studded thick with berries, scarlet as so many 
drops of sealing-wax. The little stream that ran 
to the sea was glazed over here and there with 
thin glassy sheets of ice ; and thin ice lay also in 
the ruts of the path, and shivered like crystal under 
Mr. Bradbrain's feet. 

The bright frosty air, or perhaps the prospect 
of a successful trick, had had an excellent effect 
on Mr. Bradbrain's spirits, which rose like barometer 
mercury in the sunshine. 

The old miner's cottage was a little stone hut 
half-way down the pathway leading to Dun- 
chine Cove. It was in fact the same little white- 
washed house, with the stone roof, at which the 
Tolpeddens had stopped a few days before, to 
inspect a beam of shipwrecked timber. A small 
black peat stack was built near a pig-sty and facing 
the road ; the entrance to the cottage being behind, 
facing a small paved court, which led by an ir- 
regular flight of stone steps down to a small cabbage 
garden. Under an elder-tree in one comer of the 
court clucked a grey hen, that was fussily an- 
nouncing the fact of a new egg having lately been 
laid. 

There were no signs of life about the house as 

VOL. L S 



258 OREATHEABT. 

far as flowers went, e:&cept an autumn rose, that dis* 
played two or three pale pink blossoms, that seemed 
mere mockeries of summer, over one of the win- 
dows. Below, near the door, there grew a rose- 
mary bush, whose stiff evergreen leaves defied the 
winter. A large yellow cat sat at the threshold, 
drowsy after a night's campaign upon the mice. 

Mr. Bradbrain knocked at the door, and being 
invited in a faint voice, at once accepted the invi- 
tation. 

In the corner of a large, open fireplace, a smoky 
cavern, watching a great black iron crock, which 
stood on a tripod over the embers of a gently 
smoking turf fire, sat the old miner, his hands on 
his knees, and his grey head bent forward. Be- 
hind him^ on a dresser, stood an earthenware pot 
of pilchards and a loaf of barley bread ; while the 
window-board displayed a half-dead geranium, 
stuck in a broken tea-pot. 

Mr. Bradbrain was as full of finesse as an election 
canvasser. He took off his glossy hat, tossed his 
gloves into it, laid down his whip as carefully as 
if it was glass, and rubbing his hands, seated himself 
cozily on a rickety chair opposite the invalid, as 
if he was settling down for a comfortable evening. 

" Well, Roby," he said, " and how do we find 
ourselves t<Miayr 

"In a bad shaape, my dear — all groans and 
pains, in screeches with my head and back, and no 
how ahywhere." 

" Let's feel your pulse I" 



OLD roby's cottage. 259 

Roby put his hand languidly out, with that quiet 
sense of enjoyment tliat your real invalid always 
has in medical ceremonial. 

Mr. Bradbrain felt the pulse with one hand, and 
held his gold hunting-watch in the other. When 
he had completed the operation, he smiled. 

" Well ?" said the old man, querulously. 

" You'll do very well," said the doctor, smiling 
away every thought of death ; " but have you no 
one — no one, Roby, to look after you ? Where's Un 
(Aunt) Jinny t I thought Sampy Sandoe, your 
stepson, was stopping wuth you t" 

" Un Jinny daren't come when Sampy's here." 

*' And where's the excellent Sampy t" 

" Down to the church town — ^gone to minister's, 
to see how the seek cheldren are. I am alone 
now, my dear— wife dead, cheldren dead, kinsfolk 
all dead, with the black slate stones keeping 'em 
down. I'm like that glass there," — here he pointed 
to a broken hour-glass on the mantelpiece, near 
which Mr. Bradbrain's quick eye observed a 
large stone of copper ore — " simly all but run out, 
and no sperits or life left even to keep this fire 
going, blow (I believe)." 

" Cheer Up I — cheer up, man, there's ten years 
of life in you yet." 

" Aw that, sir, goes for nothen — what deceit et 
is !" sighed Roby. 

"I'll send you some stuff to hearten you up, 
Roby." 

" Don't you b'lieve it, sir, my rope's nearly run 

s2 



260 OREATHEART. 

out, and there's no working it back again. It is 
not like a well-rope, zackly." 

"But why didn't you send for me, Uncle 
Eoby, you're on the club ?" said Mr. Bradbrain, 
removing a broken pitcher, with a rope -yam handle, 
that was dangerously near the fire, and affecting 
an air of intense consideration and sympathy. 

"There's norra doctor cares for poor men — 
norra doctor. I've sent up by Sampy twenty 
tunes to 'ee — always same answer, * Coming.' " 

Mr. Bradbrain's handsome wild eyes enlarged. 

" Why, I assure you, Roby, upon my honour — 
as a gentleman, Sampy has never left any message 
with me. He must have some motive in deceiving 
yoa." 

" Sampy, my dear, is not what he used to be — 
he's hard on me, and he don't simly like other folk 
near me ; but I don't think he'd tella lie, not I." 

''As I suspected," thought Bradbrain; "and 
now I must bring him to the point, for I smell a 
rat here, if there ever was a rat." 

He rose, and first looking about among the 
basins and teacups on the dresser, passed on to the 
mantelpiece, where two gull's eggs, a peacock's 
feather, a brass candlestick, and a plaister orna- 
ment formed the decorations round a smoke-dried 
red and blue picture of the Nativity. 

Mr. Bradbrain took up the lump of copper ore, 
and eyed it with the appreciation of a connoisseur. 

" You've got a specimen from a fine lode here, 
Koby. Where is this from ? I've speculated in 



OLD roby's cottage. 261 

my time, and know good copper as well as I do 
good calomel." 

The old man looked up, and his dim, watery, 
blood-shot eyes glittered with a faint phosphor- 
escence of cunning, as he looked up, and then 
stooped to throw a square black peat upon the fire. 

" Don't 'ee ax no questions, my dear, and I'll 
tell 'ee no lies. Though I'm old I still know a salt 
pilcher from a live one !" 

Then the old man rocked himself over the fire 
and groaned. 

" I'm a desmal and dreary man, doctor, and I 
get weakerer every day." 

" I thought I knew what was the matter with 
you, Roby," said Bradbrain, blandly, " and so I 
brought some medicine for you in my * pocket. 
Where do you keep the cold water?" 

" In that pitcher behind the door," pointing to a 
great earthenT^are jar, plaistered with pitch, and 
tied with cord; "if you want a glass, there's 
norra glass, take a tay-dish off the dresser. Mind ! 
that there blue waun es broke inside. The yellow 
waun will do, 1 reckon, and kind et is of 'ee, for I'm 
sick sore, and sorry. 'Tan't feet for a genleman like 
you to turn tender (waiter) to a poor knocked- 
to-pieces old man like I !" 

Bradbrain turned his back to Roby, and pour- 
ing a wine-glass full of water into the yellow 
saucer, let fall into it ten drops of a thick cordial, 
mixed with sal-volatiley from a case which he drew 
from his breast-pocket. 



262 GREATHEART. 

The old man drank it; almost instantly his 
eyes brightened, and his senses began to clear and 
concentrate. Bradbrain's attention had won the 
neglected old man. He drew his chair closer to 
the doctor's, and laid his hand familiarly on 
Bradbrain's knee. Then he looked at the door. 

"Doctor," he said, "my dear, I didn't thoft 
(thought) to tell 'ee anything when ye first came 
in, but sooner or later I must tell it, for Samp/s 
sake — ^for what one man can't do, three may." 

Bradbrain was all attention. At last he thought 
he had got the knife into the oyster. 

The old man went on, his eyes fixed on the 
turf-smoke, as if it helped to concentrate his 
thoughts on the past. I will paraphrase his narra- 
tive, in order not to tease my readers with too 
much of the quaint but somewhat unintelligible 
Cornish dialect. 

" You, who have been but twelve years in these 
parts, may not know that, forty-five year ago come 
next Bodmin Fair, Mr. Herbert Tolpedden (that's 
the father of the present squire) spent a great deal 
of money in looking for copper and tin ore about 
this country. I was one of his captains, till the 
mines began to run to horse, and not one of us 
who'd take the pitches. The squire, getting poor- 
tempered, stopped the engines and left the 
country. It was then I and my comrades had an 
offer to go to South America, to the famous Rio 
del Monte mines, as you may have heard of. Come 
nearer, my dear, for I can't speak loud. Well, 



OLD roby's cottage. 263 

off we went from Plymouth — ^kibbles, spades, whims, 
and all complete." 

At this critical moment Bradbrain's quick eyes 
observed a dark shadow cross the window ; the 
next instant the door opened, and Sampy Sandoe 
entered ; his face was pale and worn, his cadaver- 
ous eyes were red as a ferret's, and restless with sus- 
picion. As he held the door with one hand, 
and with the other tore open, half nervously, half 
angrily, the greasy breast of his dirty brown great- 
coat, he glared first at the old man, and then at 
Bradbrain. 

" We want no doctors here," he said ; " we want 
no blood-leeches here. Who sent for you, Mr. 
Bradbrain — who sent for you, sir?" 

"Roby himself sent for me," said Mr* Brad- 
brain, boldly, for he had instantly recovered his 
balance. "Mr. Sampson Sandoe, you are for- 
getting yourself." 

The Dowser had scarcely even by this time re- 
gained his usual equanimity. 

" Sampy," said the old man, " there's no harm 
done; don't be in such a taking. Sit down, Sampy, 
there's a dear I" 

The Dowser rapidly lapsed once more into the 
itinerant preacher. 

"Better is a pilcher with yarbs," he said, 
"where peace is, than a stalled ox and hatred 
therewith! Let there be no words between us, 
Mr. Bradbrain — ^no envy, hatred, or uncharitable- 
ness. What I meant was this heer, let Righteous- 



264 OREATHEABT. 

ness and Peace meet together, and let the banner 
over us be inscribed with the words * Brotherly 
Love r and ' Temperance for EverT Healing men is 
a power, Mr. Bradbrain, but that of discivering 
metal is a greater." 

" Sampy I Sampy I" moaned the old man^ who 
considered the Dowser^s jargon to be a series of 
aggravations. 

Mr. Bradbrain bore the warnings against 
quarrelling very creditably. All he did was to 
carefully adjust his gloves as if they were boxing 
gloves, to brush his hat with his arm, and to tap 
his corded trousers with his whip ; then with a 
careless " good-morning " to Sampy, and a more 
friendly parting with the old miner, who seemed 
cowed by his stepson, he took his leave.^ 

But it was not easy to daunt Mr. Bradbrain. 
He strode out of the garden with a jaunty air, 
stopped to admire a yellow crysanthemum at the 
gate, and humming an air from " Lurline," stepped 
smartly out on the path to St. Petrock's. There 
was a mischievous triumph in his eyes as he walked 
along. " There is a secret, then, after all ; but 
I've outflanked the rogue," he thought to himself, 
"though the canting fellow is as cunning as a 
weasel. Old Mordred will be glad to hear of 
this ; and we'll soon smooth Sampy down, for he 
evidently wants our help. By George ! I'm a good 
pilot fish to the old shark— curse him I" 

Then the current of his thoughts changed, and 
he kissed his gloved hand to a thorn-bush. It 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 265 

i?vas not lucky to be beloved by Mr. Bradbrain 
— woe betide the poor silly woman to whom that 
volatile kiss was tossed I 

" It -will be a waste day for me," he thought ; 
" but if 1 win five guineas at billiards from that 
fool Lucas, it will help to make it up." 

There was not a fine, pure, nor generous feeling 
left in that bad man's heart. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 

THERE were signs of the approaching fair 
when Arthur Tolpedden rode up to his tutor's 
gate, about ten o'clock in the morning after the 
picnic. 

A cart was just then passing the house laden 
with long painted poles, and bundles of dirty 
canvas. A dingy drum hung to the shafts, and 
the vehicle was drawn by a fighting-looking gipsy, 
who asked the way to St. Tudy's. This cart was 
followed by a house on wheels, over the half-hatch 
of which leant a brazen-looking gipsy woman, who 
was busy dressing up an effigy of Aunt Sally ; and 
this was succeeded by a jostling drove of small 
fiery Exmoor ponies, driven by two men with long 
rods, to which small red flags were attached; 
close after these came a smart van, labelled " The 



266 OBEATHEABT. 

Fljdng Cutter," conducted by two sporting-look- 
ing costermongers, with flat noses and villainous- 
clenched months. Fairs are not improving to a 
neighbourhood. They were all very well two 
centuries ago, when roads were few and bad, and 
railways unknown ; now they serve only to bring 
together thieves and cheats, gulls and fools. 

Arthur hurried in, for he was late, and already 
he heard a low hum in the study, that indicated 
that the preliminary reading had begun. In a 
moment he had quietly taken his place at the study 
table, and joined with the rest. 

Reading over, Mr. Tregellas announced that 
he had written that morning to the master of 
Baliol, to ask when his two pupils could go 
up. 

" Lucas and Fltzhugh, you have my permission," 
he said, " to go to this fair, as you both express the 
wish ; but only on condition that you return to 
our five o'clock dinner — mind, on no excuse later. 
As to Mr. Tolpedden, I have no right to dictate to 
him, as he is not residing under my roof." 

There were murmurs of approval from the two 
gentlemen. 

"As for Mr. Maclean, he very wisely prefers 
stopping at home, having no wish to fill his pockets 
with penny pin-cushions to see twopenny tragedies, 
or to buy gilt gingerbread." 

"MuiBF! — duffer!" muttered Lucas, to his enor- 
mous Lexicon. 

A knock came at the door. 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 267 

" If you please, sir, here's old Lawrence come 
about the oak paling." 

"Not a moment," groaned the worthy tutor. 
" Have your Terence ready by the time I return, 
Tolpedden ; pray, Lucas, stick to your Homer, 
and get it a little more correctly, so as not to have 
to look out quite every word — it wastes my time. 
Maclean, get your Herodotus — we must do that 
story of the ring before they go to the fair. Re- 
member matriculation." 

The moment the door was shut, chaos began. 

" Where do we three meet again, Tolpedden t" 
said Lucas. 

^ At the ^ Three Choughs,' at two. I have to 
call with a message from my father for the 
Trevenas." 

" We'll have a stunning day, I tell you — pool 
first, a brew of that glorious stuff, that ^Rum- 
fustian,' that Bradbrain makes; then a dog-cart 
to the fair, and a regular spree I We'll see life, 
my rosy tories I — we'll put them up to the time of 
day, my kicksy wicksy 1" 

" By Jove I sir," said Fitzhugh, " we'll go 
the whole hog — by Jupiter! sir, we'll open the 
natives' eyes ! — egad I sir, we'll civilize the Celtic 
aborigines in these parts! — we'll patronize the 
tragic muse, returned to her original Thespian 
rusticity and the vagrant waggon ; no longer, 
in purple robe and jewelled buskin, she waves 
the dagger incarnadined with the blood of ty- 
rants 1 ^" 



268 GREATHEART. 

" Oh ! for Heaven's sake shut up, Fitzhugh !" 
said Lucas ; " how can that fellow there sap, if 
you make such a blatant row as that? Old 
fellow, mind, I drive to-day — or we'll toss up, odd 
man out. Keep that spouting for Westminster 
and the Divorce Court. I say, that was very slow 
yesterday — no go in it — not the right style. I 
say, Fitzhugh, wasn't Bradbrain hard hit yesterday 
by a certain fair lady?" 

"Oh! Bradbrain," said Arthur, "is one of 
those butterfly fellows who are never happy unless 
they are fluttering about some woman. There's 
no harm in it. It is part of his professional work. 
I suppose people like it," 

At this juncture Mr. Tregellas entered and re- 
sumed his throne. While Fitzhugh was translat- 
ing his Homer, Arthur strolled into the garden. It 
might have been that the possibility of meeting 
Miss Tregellas had passed across his mind. On 
the lawn Mrs. Tregellas met him ; the children 
were all dancing and leaping around her, on their 
way to dress for a walk. 

"Good morning, Mr. Tolpedden," said that 
worthy lady. " Will you kindly go and explain a 
passage of Schiller to Lucy. She is down on the 
seat by the walnut tree. I was just coming for 
you." 

" I hope Clara is better ?" 

" Much better, thank you. She will be down 
to-morrow, I hope. And so you are going to this 
foolish fair ?" 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 269 

" I must go ; I want to buy a pony for my little 
nephew, Johnny," 

" Buy me a pony," said Herbert. 

" Herbert, Fm ashamed of you I" said his mother. 

" Play at Hiding Seek with me and Ethel, Mr. 
Tolpedden, do f 

" You'll play at nothing of the kind," said Mrs. 
Tregellas, hurrying Herbert away. 

When Arthur reached the strip of turf, the 
Campus Martins of St. Petrock's, there, on the 
seat under the little arbour, sat Miss Tregellas read- 
ing. 

There was no coquettish art about Lucy Tre- 
gellas ; she had not arranged her attitude, nor 
were her eyes cast down with studied Madonna 
plaintiveness. On the contrary, she rose when 
she saw Arthur approaching and frankly held out 
her hand. 

'^ Mr. Tolpedden," she said, " pardon my using 
Schiller as a pretext in order to ask a favour of you. 
A mermaid, you know, has a right to exercise power 
over ordinary mortals. I thought you would oblige 
me. The fact is this, Kitty has overheard Mr. 
Lucas talking about the fair. I am so afraid that 
he will get into some trouble, and make my father 
angry. He is very imprudent, Mr. Brad- 
brain leads him into gambling, and, I fear, drink- 
ing. Will you try and keep him quiet ? I don't 
like to ask Mr. Fitzhugh, he is so grand ; and — 
and — I'm afraid he would laugh at me, and I 
daren't tell papa." 



270 GREATHEABT. 

Arthur promised; all the time being terribly 
jealous of the interest Miss Tregellas seemed to 
take in Lucas. 

'^ And Mr. Fitzhugh's own safety does not in- 
terest you ?" 

'^ Not so much as Mr. Lucas's, because I know 
the eloquent gentleman will take good care of 
himself," replied Lucy, laughing ; " but you will 
do what I ask, won't you ?" 

** I promise you, Miss TregeUas ; who can 
resist the spell of the mermaid I" 

" Oh I don't tell papa about the mermaid, or he 
will laugh at me so, and say I deserved to be 
frightened for my folly." 

Arthur promised that he would not, and seeing 
Miss Tregellas stooping to pick some Russian 
violets, set to work, and, stooping, gathered a large 
dewy purple bunch, which he presented to her with 
a bow of feigned awe. 

" Will Her Majesty, the Queen of the Mer- 
maids, accept these poor flowers from one of the 
humblest of her subjects ?" 

Lucy laughed, thanked him, apologised for 
hurrying away, and ran back to her music. 

It was about half-past one when Arthur, having 
called on the Trevenas, arrived at the '* Three 
Choughs Inn," at Boscastle, and inquired for 
Mr. Bradbrain and his friends. 

A shout from the billiard-room announced the 
whereabouts of the party. The waiter passed 
him at the moment, strutting with a tray fulL 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 271 

of glasses and soda-water bottles before him. 

The billiard-room was lighted up, for the day 
was dark, and this room had only one window, and 
that looked out on a back alley. The fatal green 
cloth shone out luminous under the strong glare 
of six lights. Lucas and Bradbrain were busy 
playing, and Fitzhugh was haranguing and looking 
on with beaming spectacles. 

The slate showed two games for Lucas, and 
three for Bradbrain. The score marked for the 
current game was fourteen for Lucas and forty- 
two for Bradbrain. 

A roar of welcome heralded Tolpedden's arrival. 

" How are you getting on, Lucas ?" 

"Tol loll. I beat Bradbrain all to fits at first, 
but now he has begun to pick up. Please attend 
to the score, Fitzhugh, and pray remember Tm 
spot." 

"Double or quits on the next game, Lucas," 
said Bradbrain. 

" Done. I owe you ten — now if you win this — ^" 

" Then here goes. That's a very tidy break," 
said his adversary, making a sequence of cannons, 
and ending with a five stroke. 

" Game !" cried Fitzhugh. 

" You're deuced lucky, Bradbrain," said Lucas, 
grinding his cue into a hollowed piece of chalk till 
it squeaked as if in pain. 

Bradbrain played a good game ; the white and 
red balls seemed to gather or disperse at his wish ; 
they flew off in swift angles — they dashed into 



272 GREATHEABT. 

pockets — ^they tipped off in marvellons " screws." 
Even the sleepy marker was in raptores, and doled 
out the games with louder and quicker mechanism. 
There was a long shot to be made ; the red ball 
was about a foot from the right-hand comer 
pocket. Bradbrain was down at the left comer 
pocket. The stroke to get both in required a 
steady careful "follower," and once made, there 
was a losing hazard to make off Lucas's ball into 
the right-hand middle pocket. 

" A fiver you don't do it," said Lucas. 

" Done !" cried Bradbrain, chalking his cue, 
laying down his cigar, and arranging himself for 
extreme care. 

A long, rolling stroke ; in fell the red, after 
it toppled the white. 

" Good for our side I" said Bradbrain. " Bravo 
us!" 

There were now losing hazards made twice 
running. 

" Forty-eight ! — sixteen !" cried the marker. 

" It looks bad for you, you duffer," cried Fitz- 
hugh, to encourage his friend. 

*' I can't get a good cue," said Lucas, making a 
cannon. " Game's not lost yet I" 

" But now it is, old boy !" cried Bradbrain, with 
triumph, as he clipped the red into the right top 
pocket, and his own ball into the left-hand net. 

** Game !" cried the marker, rattling up the two 
score pegs. " Eighteen, game !" 

"Let's have another!" cried Lucas, weigh- 



THE FAIE AT ST. TUDY'S. 273 

ing a fresh cue in his hand ; " I want my re- 
venge !" 

" All right, for another five, I give you ten and 
break." 

" Done !" 

" Now don't play any more, you fellows," said 
Tolpedden. " We shan't have too much time for 
St Tud/s." 

"This is a free country, isn't it?" said Lucas, 
half-angrily. '*Who made you a ruler and a 
judge over us ? I've quite enough nagging from 
the little man. Come along, Brad, we don't get 
the snafiBe off every day !" 

" Don't you put your oar in, Tol," said Brad- 
brain, laughing. " If I want to pluck Lucas, and 
he like's it, I'll do it, don't you be afraid. Lucas, 
you owe me thirty, and here goes for another five." 

" Trap's at the door, sir," said a chambermaid, 
looking in. 

"Then let it wait, my beauty," exclaimed Brad- 
brain, eyeing the girl. "Fitzhugh, touch the bell 
for the materials ; we must have that champagne 
punch, I want a stimulant." 

The bell was rung. 

" To use the language of the classics," said Fitz- 
hugh, who was balancing a church-warden pipe 
on his forefinger, " ^ Rum, aqua, dulci miscetur 
acetum, et fiet ex tali foedere nobile Punch.' And 
here come the materials. Look alive ; waiter, 
where's the capillaire ?" 

The waiter, a mere lad, repeated the request in 

VOL. I. T 



274 OBEATHEABT. 

intense bewilderment, as his boiled gooseberry 
eyes passed over the contents of the waiter that 
he bore before him, laden with jngs, lemons, bottles, 
and spoons. 

" Begone, sirrah I" said Fitzhugh, with affected 
grandeur, " and send us up an older and a drier 
waiter/' 

Arthur laughed. 

" Why, one would think the waiter was a bottle 
of sherry !" 

'' He's not half such a good thing, mon chSri ! 
Come, Tolpedden, help us in brewing." 

And to work they went, for Tolpedden was, 
after all, only a son of Adam ! 

They pared two lemons very thin, grated the 
peel on lumps of sugar, scraping it off as it became 
yellow into a pint of old rum ; they then added a 
wine-glass of sherry, half a pint of brandy, and 
the juice of four lemons. 

"Ring again for that capillairey* said Brad- 
brain, as he lay swimming on the table, to reach a 
distant stroke ; " that ass has forgotten it." 

The landlord entered in a moment, bowing and 
apologizing. 

" Very sorry for delay, gentlemen ; waiter — 
young waiter ^" 

" To use the Greek language, he is an infernal 
fool, landlord," said Fitzhugh. " Hot water, please 
—mind, screeching hot." 

In came the water. The old China bowl gleamed 
red and blue. 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 275 

"Now for the champagne," cried Fitzhugh, 
unwiring a silver-headed bottle, and letting the 
cork fly dangerously near the billiard-room clock. 

In gushed the scented nectar. Arthur put on 
the air of a witch who has completed her incanta- 
tions, and chanted a fragment of "Macbeth," as 
he stirred round the smoking bowl, 

" Though his bark may not be lost, 
Yet it shall be tempest-tossed/* 

Then Fitzhugh, to cap him, shouted a passage 
of " Comus." 

" Behold this julep cordial here, 
That flames and dances in his crystal bounds, 
With spirits of balm and fragrant syrups mixt." 

"Here, you gamblers," said Arthur, handing 
full glasses to the players. 

" Not so bad," said Bradbrain, sipping. 

" Tol-lol 1" said Lucas, affecting the severe con- 
noisseur ; " but they've played old gooseberry with 
the champagne." 

Arthur extemporised — 

" Drink the punch, and think of life, 
Sweet and bitter still in strife ; 
Blend the spirit with the sweet, 
Weak things with the strong should meet ; 
When they happily unite, 
The bowl is brimming with delight !" 

In spite of the punch, Lucas again lost. Brad- 
brain made the whole game in four breaks. 

T 2 



276 GREATHEABT. 

Lucas was totally indiflferent. The punch sup- 
ported him under misfortune. 

" Won by flukes, by Jove, sir ! won entirely by 
flukes. Name your stroke, and I'll play you for 
another fiver; let's wind up with some Rum- 
fustian." 

"How do you make the stuff with the queer 
name?" said Arthur, determined to stop any 
further drinking, if possible. 

"Yolks of twelve eggs, quart of strong beer, 
bottle of sherry, half a pint of gin, nutmeg, lemon, 
cinnamon, and sugar." 

" Enough to kill a horse." 

" Well, it does make a fellow screwy, I tell ye. 
That's why I left the old man in Leicestershire ; 
I offered to fight him, and he wrote to my 
guardian, actually turned rusty, and gave me 
the sack. Did you ever hear such a thing!" 

Fitzhugh was grand and eloquent, but rather 
too diffuse in his monologues. 

"How we ransack heaven and earth for our 
pleasures. Here is the lemon of Italy, that land of 
volcanoes, physical and moral ; the rum and sugar 
of the tropics, inheriting the fire of the Indian sun ; 
the brandy of Bourdeaux, and the grape of beauti- 
ful Champagne, that has been nurtured in the blue 
air of Southern France. Delicious chemistry, ex- 
quisite nosegay of compounds, let me quaff thee ! 
Tolpedden, another ladleful." 

" Trap's ready, sir," said the ostler, opening the 
door. 



ft 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 277 

" We must really be off," said Arthur ; " here, 
ostler, here's a tumbler of punch for you; and 
ask for our bill." 

" Hang the fair !" said the impulsive Lucas ; 
^^ let's stop here, have a turn at blind hookey, and 
brew some Rumfustian." 

" Out upon cards 1" said Fitzhugh, egged on 
by Arthur ; " out on the black pips and the scarlet, 
red diamonds and black spades ! — out on the armed 
knaves and the eccentric queens ! — out on flushes, 
sequences, and see-saws I — out on sinks and caters, 
let us see life, my Trojans ! — let us view the 
motley scene, my merr}' Greeks, 

' For to-night we'll merry be, 
For to-night we'll merry be, 
To-morrow we'll be sober.' 

We will scratch pigs' backs and pinch fat 
cattle — ^let us witness ten minute tragedies, and 
observe the brawny Oomishmen wrestle — let us 
see the death-endangering riding in the ring, and 
listen to the baggy drum and the obtrusive trom- 
bone r 

" There is a good deal of the ancient Pistol about 
Fitzhugh, isn't there, Lucas !" said Arthur. 

"A deuced deal too much jaw," said Lucas, 
lighting his fourth cigar. ^^ Fitzhugh must have 
his jaw — I want brandy and soda." 

When they got to the door, after Lucas had 
taken his restorative draught, they found the trap, 
with the ostler mounted on the driver's seat. 



278 GREATHEART. 

" Now then, get down, you fellow !" said Brad- 
brain, an^ly. 

" Goin^ to drive, sir — master wishes it — horse 
rather frisky." 

" You be hanged ! " said Bradbrain ; ^^ my 
friend here drives. Get down, sir, or I'll pull you 
down !" 

The man treated with such unnecessary violence, 
grumbled and got down. They all leaped up, 
Lucas took the reins, and drove off at a furious 
pace, swerving round the corner at a dangerous 
speed. 

" The/re a wild lot, simly," thought the ostler, 
as he threw the striped red, yellow, and brown 
blanket over his left arm ; " but there's young Mr. 
Tolpedden — if there is any row about the bill, he'll 
see master right, I know. Lord ! there I shouldn't 
wonder if the two wheels are all that come home 
of that 'ere gig. My eye ! wasn't that a pretty 
tipple they gave me ! — couldn't I worry down a 
small washing-basin full of that? I wonder if 
there's any more left — zackly so. Perhaps Mary- 
would let me have a drop more — ^I blow (I believe) 
she will." 

It was a delicious November morning. The 
sky was clear and blue ; there were no clouds 
but two or three, and they were scarcely larger 
than white roses. The ivy leaves glittered in the 
sun ; the dead leaves blew playfully about the 
hedges, as if they had got a second lease of life ; 
the road was dry and hard, and the horses beat 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 279 

out pleasant music from it. What music can be 
beaten out of even simple things by health, youth, 
and good-nature ! 

Bradbrain sang a pretty Andalusian song, that, 
paraphrased, ran thus : — 

" I'm here at the grating, Pepita, 

The loose roses drop on my face crimson sweet : 
Your dragon duenna is gone to confession, 

In a moment joull hear the drum beat. 
That'll call all the priests to procession, — 

The crosses and candles are filling the street ; 
I'm here eager waiting, Pepita, 

If they stab me, 'twill be at your feet." 

Bradbrain threw a peculiar fervour into this pas- 
sionate song, which he translated for the benefit 
of his friends. 

" IsTLt the doctor a regular ladies' man ?" said 
Lucas. "Why not sing *The Cure,' or ^ Polly 
Perkins ?'— something with go in it, instead of 
that spoony stuff. Let's have *A Thoroughbred 
Oxford Man,' or * Campdown Races,' — let's be 
jolly — now, boys, all together — 

' Campdown race course two mile long. 

With a doodah 1 doodah ! 
I spent my money and I sang this song. 

Doodah ! doodah ! day ! 
I've bet my money on the bob-tailed nag. 

Who will bet on the bay?' 

" Chorus again. 

' I'll bet my money on the bob-tailed nag, 
Who will bet on the bay?' " 



280 OREATHEABT. 

The fair at St, Tad/s was held at a place that 
could hardly have been found anjwhere out of 
Cornwall. It was a wild, grassy moor, near the 
edge of a sea-cliff, not far from an old irregular 
Dmidical circle of grey lichened stones, known as 
" The Merry Maidens." These said maidens, ac- 
cording to the local legend, were certain foolish 
virgins, anterior even to King Arthur^s time, who 
had been turned into stones for having mocked at 
St, Tudy, one of the early missionaries to 
Britain, and having, in defiance of that good man, 
danced and revelled on the Sunday. On any 
other day of the year but the 28th of November, 
this moor would have been occupied by nobody 
but a few sea-gulls and rabbits — now it was busy 
enough; and if it was ever possible to count the 
merry maidens (local tradition said it was not), 
there were plenty of persons to do it now. 

Miners, fishermen, farm-labourers, pedlars, a- 
crobats, recruiting-sergeants, horse-dealers, show- 
men, were there, elbowing, cursing, cheating, 
treating, greeting each other, between the rows of 
dirty white tents, flimsy booths, show platforms, 
and merry-go-rounds. Above the din and clatter of 
hucksters, showmen, and drunken farmers, arose 
the bellow of the showmen's speaking-trumpets, 
the sullen bang of the drum at once threatening 
and inviting, the crack of the nutmen's rifles, and 
the blare of trombones. 

In one comer of the fair a dozen rough, 
excited, crimson-faced Somersetshire men, half 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDT^S. 281 

grooms, half poachers, dressed in stable jackets 
or short smocks, rode about like madmen, dash- 
ing long poles, with torn red flags at the end of 
them, in the eyes of fifty or a hundred fiery little 
Exmoor ponies, shaggy as Brownies, and restless 
and mischievous as goblins, that clustered together 
in one rearing, biting, neighing, kicking tumultuous 
writhing mass ; now breaking off across the moor in 
scuds of ten or a dozen, now falling back on their 
haunches, and doing battle with their fore feet, 
like so many professional pugilists, as one of the 
wild men who steered them dashed in with a 
halter to secure one of his rebellious cavalry regi- 
ment. 

"It really reminds me of a Spanish bull-fight 
that I saw in Rio," said Bradbrain— " the pica- 
dores were not bolder than those men. 'Pon my 
word, I think we shall have a stampedo soon of 
these little beasts." 

As the three friends stood (for they had left the 
trap in the care of a man outside the fair) to see 
the little shaggy wild creatures fret and gambol 
and toss their long manes, and thick, uncombed 
tails, and paw and kick, as the men dashed and 
charged in among them, Arthur observed a pony 
suitable for Johnny. 

It was a little reddish-brown, fiery pony, fright- 
ened and angry ; its hair all over its eyes. Di- 
rectly he looked at him a man darted upon it, and 
brought it out struggling and engagingly vicious. 
Arthur was treated as already a purchaser, and 



282 GBEATHEART. 

was entreated to look at the pony's teeth, coat, 
hocks, chest, barrel, and le^s. 

" Which are his hocks I" inquired Fitzhugh, 
adjusting his spectacles. 

" You duffer !" said Lucas, " you'll ask which is 
his head next." 

** Too rough a coat," said Arthur in subtle de- 
preciation. 

^* Don't judge a book, zur, by the cover," said 
the Exmoor man, with some readiness. 

Eventually the man came down from twenty to 
eight pounds, and received the earnest money ac- 
cording to the old custom, on which Fitzhugh 
delivered an eloquent harangue, as indeed he did 
on most subjects when he could find an oppor- 
tunity. 

A few minutes after he stopped and delivered a 
similar discourse before a huge boat-swing, laden 
with Cornish youth, noisy — screaming, happy, but 
rather unwell. 

"Observe these people, Tolpedden," he said, 
" seeking pleasure in a most unlikely place — the 
old delusion of blind and restless humanity — seek- 
ing and never finding, yet still deriving a pleasure 
from the search, if not from the discovery." 

" Move on, move on, gents," said the proprietor 
of this machine of torture ; " if you ain't got the 
needful to enjoy yourselves at the Royal West of 
England Swing, don't prevent them as has." 

"Come along, Fitz," said Arthur, "you're 
only throwing your philosophy before swine." 




THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 283 

A *^ knockmedown " proprietor, evidently from 
the "little village," with a bundle of bludgeons 
under his arm, had entered into treaty with Lucas, 
while Fitzhugh philosophised. 

"Now, my noble lords," the man bellowed, 
" three shies a penny ; one hit in twenty secures 
you property worth all the outlay. Three shies a- 
penny ! fortunate is the noble lord, and lucky is 
the sportsman. If you never von't risk, you never 
can't vin. Three shies a penny, my noble lords ! 
All right. Mister ; Sal, look alive with them there 
sticks ; and set up the coker-nuts, and the three 
pincushions." 

It was wonderful to see the enthusiastic Sal, a 
copper-coloured gipsy woman, dodge about, calm, 
rejoicing, amid a rain of bludgeons. Arthur split a 
cocoa-nut, and tipped off several wooden pears. 
Lucas filled his hat with pincushions, and then 
gave them away in a scramble. 

Fitzhugh was less fortunate. In vain he ad- 
justed his spectacles to an exact focus. He se- 
cured only one wooden apple, value one penny, 
and that after an outlay of two shillings ; but then 
he bruised several bystanders, and nearly killed a 
stray dog that ran across the line of fire. 

" Now for a tragedy," said Arthur, as they fol- 
lowed a crowd up the steps into a penny theatre 
to see " The Orphan of Samarcand, or The Tyrant 
of the Burning Sahara." The result was not 
gratifying, as it consisted entirely of single combats 
between men in chintz bed-gowns. 



284 GREATHEART. 

The rival speaking-trumpet next door promised 
better things. That establishment announced 
"The Colleen Bawn, or the Beautiful Maid of 
Killamey." That thrilling play was of course 
much condensed in order to render it actable in 
the rather short space of ten minutes. In fact, 
the whole play of poor Gerald GriflSn's consisted 
of one love scene, the attempt at murder, the 
celebrated header, and the final arrest and disclo- 
sure. 

The chief fun of the performance consisted in 
the undue prominence of the candle-snuffer, the 
fatness of the heroine, and the bluster and violence 
of a rather overdone Miles na Coppaleeuj whose 
face was pure crimson, and whose blue great-coat 
reached to his toes. This man's "humour," as 
Nym would have called it, consisted in knocking 
down everybody without any provocation, espe- 
cially poor sordid Oorrigan, who, in fact, led the 
life of a Pantaloon, without the compensating fun 
and thievery. Miles must have been the manager, 
for he had turned the whole play into a self-glori- 
fying monologue of brogue and bad jokes. 

Fitzhugh got melancholy, and discoursed on 
the drama of Greece; Lucas was outrageous, 
Bradbrain offensive and bullying. The former 
encored the candle-snuffer till he grew quite sulky, 
and would snuff no more. Then they shouted 
" Music 1" and applauded the fat heroine ironically, 
especially when she fell " thump " perceptibly in 
the header scene, and in the finale dashed off into 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDT's. 285 

an impetuous jig. liucas's cries of " Go it, old 
lady ! Hurrah ! Three cheers for the ten 
stunner I" brought forward the manager (Miles, 
of course), who offered to return the money to any 
person who was dissatisfied with the performance. 

" Oh ! yes, very likely ! Where is my penny !" 
cried Lucas. 

Shouts of "Shem!" "ShaameT "Shem!" 
" Turn him out !" 

" Who'll turn us out ?" cried Bradbrain, throw- 
ing himself into a fighting attitude. ^^ I'd like to 
see 'em do it 1" 

" I'm all there !" cried Lucas. 

" Let loose the dogs of war I" said Fitzhugh. 

" In peace there's nothing so becomes a man as 
modest stillness and humility," shouted the doctor. 

' But when the blast of war sounds in the ear, 
Then imitate the action of the tiger 1* ^^ 

" Don't have a row," said Arthur. " What is 
the use I" 

" Bonnet 'em !" said a voice. But as the audi- 
ence was now dispersing, no conflict took place for 
that time. 

"If that had been in San Francisco," said Brad- 
brain, who had a little of the bloodhound in him, 
" there would have been an inquest on somebody 
before night. By the Lord Harry 1 you should see 
how the knives and pistols begin to show when 
there's a row at a monte^table. Ha! I was a 
different fellow in my hot youth ! Yes ! I could 



286 GREATHEART. 

show my teeth then ! Now Tm a poor sneaking 
pill-maker, at every fool's beck and call !" 

" You don't mean to say, Bradbrain," inquired 
Lucas, with almost boyish horror, " that you ever 
used a pistol to a blackguard, when a fist would 
have done ?" 

"The less said about that the better!" said 
Bradbrain, turning his head away, and lighting a 
cigar with a mysterious smile. " The fact is, old 
man, I have a dash of the Creole tiger in my 
blood, and I can't forget injuries very quickly." 

Arthur had not before seen this side of his 
friend's character, and he tried to excuse it to him- 
self. 

" Bradbrain," he said, " want's to make himself 
out worse than he is. I don't believe he'd kill a 
fly if he could help it. We all, at times, like to 
be thought Laras and Corsairs." 

"There you're cursedly mistaken, Tolpedden. 

There's no d sentiment about me, unless I 

put it on for a purpose. I've got a rough side, 
like other men — here it is my business to be 
smooth. I live by my smooth side — once upon 
a time my rough used to come more into use." 

"Well, well, we won't quarrel about it," said 
Arthur. " There is a ruffianly old Adam some- 
where in the shadow of all of us ; but neither 
yours nor mine will ever come into view, I 
hope." 

" I hope so too," said Bradbrain. " Enough of 
that I Come, let us see the cads wrestling." 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 287 

The young doctor, like most parvenus, had an 
insolent horror of the poor. Men born in cities 
are apt to associate the poor with thieves, beggars, 
and a dangerous scum with whom they have 
nothing in common. The true citizen is more 
struck by the differences between himself and the 
poor (" the lower classes I" as he persists in calling 
them) than the resemblances. If such men as the 
Doctor governed, or if papers like the Forge Bitsiinthe 
power they covet, but will never possess, we should 
soon have an agrarian revolution ; for a time of re- 
volution is only a period when the inward mental 
resemblances between the rich and the poor strike 
men, who become mad at seeing the outward 
differences enforced by a selfish society. 

" Come, let's go and see the louts," said Lucas. 

" I expect my father will be here soon," said 
Arthur; '*he talked of taking a holiday, and 
riding here with Trevena." 

"What a quiet fellow your father is, Tol," said 
Bradbrain. " Why, he's as absorbed in work as 
old Mordred. One would think he never got 
ruffled." 

"A sign you don' know him," said Arthur. 
"My father is dust and ashes above, fire 
below, like a volcano. An old officer, who was 
with him in the Affghan war, told me he showed the 
most reckless and desperate courage. He had just 
lost his wife, my mother, in a decline, and they 
used to say, in the regiment, he was * dying to get 
killed.' Even when he was a clergyman he once kicked 



288 GBEATHEART. 

a doctor down-stairs for complaining of his inter- 
fering with his practice; they fought with 
pistols. Before that, when he was quite a young 
man, he fought a desperate duel with sabres about 
some love affair." 

" Nice material for a clergyman, who ought to 
turn his left cheek when you hit his right !" said 
Bradbrain, rather spitefully. "They say that 
fire-heat spoils cooks' tempers, but yonr father^s 
seems to have improved over his furnaces and 
sand-baths." 

By this time they had reached the wrestling- 
ground, a circle set apart with ropes, whither 
now the great mass of the crowd was hurrying, to 
see Cornwall wrestle Devon. 

Just as they elbowed their way into the crowd, 
the third pair of wrestlers had begun. Two little 
thin men, stripped to the jerseys, were butting, 
heads down, locked in each other^s grip, and 
swaying to and fro, waiting for an advantage. 

" JRobur et ces triplex — the English is a tough 
breed after all," said Fitzhugh, as suddenly the 
thinner and more wiry man shifted his grip, and 
in a moment his astonished adversary flew over 
his head and rolled on the grass, bruised, angry, 
and breathless. 

" He's a beauty, sir, he is," said an energetic old 
Cornish man close to them. "I never saw a 
neater ' flying mare ' in my bom days — ^he's like 
your soort." 

A roar of applause from an adjacent crowd 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY's. 289 

drew off half the bystanders, including Bradbrain 
and his two friends. 

They found a noisy crowd assembled round a 
fine athletic young Cornishman, a miner by his 
look, who stood erect, and with clenched fists 
challenged all the world in general, and St. 
Tudy's fair in particular. 

He was no mean antagonist, for his arms were 
like a tiger's fore-paws, thick, hard, and banded 
with ropy muscle; his brow was the true ath- 
lete's, bumping out to protect the endangered 
eyes ; his nose small and thick-set, was proof to all 
blows. 

" Come on, ye buffleheads!" he c^ied, ''won't 'ee? 
I fight for Boscastle, and the man that gets this 
out of my fist shall have it — it's worth twenty 
shillings, I tell 'ee — this is what I come to grass 
for!" 

As he said this, he opened his fist and showed a 
bran-new sovereign. 

" Now for the mill !" cried Bradbrain, with a 
cruel delight. 

Into the ring at once leaped a heavier and taller 
man, with arms swinging like a windmill. 

" Come on !" he cried ; " I'm for 'ee ! Bodmin 
for ever I Here I am, the fighting butcher, known 
all over Cornwall ! Come on, youngster I" 

" Beautiful counter !" cried Bradbrain, as the 
Boscastle champion drew the first blood, and his 
adversary staggered back against the ropes. " Ten 
to one on Boscastle I" cried Bradbrain. 

VOL. I. U 



290 GREATHEAKT. 

*^ Pound him !" " Strickun 1" cried the bystanders 
to their respective champions. 

*' Hurrah ! there goes the mulberry !" said Fitz- 
hugh, " the true ichor is the blood of heroes. It's 
a staunch breed the English — look how the dogs 
take their blows in the face !" 

"They're certainly gluttons for punishment," 
said Bradbrain, rubbing his hands, as the butcher 
fell for the fourth time, under a stroke that seemed 
to come from a steam-hammer rather than a human 
arm. 

" It makes one feel quite cruel," said Arthur, 
as the butcher reeled back, faint and drowsy with 
beating, to his^second's knee. 

His head drooped on his breast, out came the 
watch, up went the crimson sponge. 

The Boscastle hero, with his face, chest, and 
hands all gorj'-, was not a pleasant picture, let alone 
his puffed eyes and lips, and his swollen brows ; 
but he looked a very bull -dog, staunch and in- 
vincible, as he stood there tossing his red arms, hold- 
ing up the sovereign, and crying, 

" I'm ready for another ! — come on, any of 'ee !" 

The three friends strolled on, tired of waiting 
for the next fight. A tremendous din, uproar, 
and jangle of voices arose at that moment from a 
distant part of the fair. Presently from a sea of 
heads up went a hat, then some angry arms 
struck out above the heads ; there was a yell or 
two, and a dull sound of blows. Next came a 
scream of women, a flight of children, and a rush 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'g. 291 

at some obnoxious central figure, that seemed 
struggling against a mob of assailants, 

*^ What's the row ?" said Bradbrain, to a farmer, 
who just then emerged from the tumult, hot, his 
coat torn, and his mouth bleeding." 

"Row!" said the angry farmer; "why, it's 
only them London b\ifileheads, that want to duck 
a ranting passon (parson), because he's been cursing 
the tragedy plays — aw! Lord a marcy, I think 
they'll kill him, for they're dobbing him with 
stones !" 

" Strickun !" " Dob him !" " Duck him !" roared 
the mob, as they came, trailing along a black heap 
of something human, covered with mire and blood. 

" Knack hem in jowds 1" cried some cruel voices ; 
" it's all for gammut (fun)." 

Only a few brave, intrepid men were found to 
stem the tide, and cry, 

"Shaame!" "Let go the passon!" "What 
harm's the passon done ?" and then to jostle and 
push in to rescue him from his cruel persecutors, 
under whose hands he could be still heard from 
time to time to cry very faintly, groaning out 
some such perverted prophecies as "Curse ye! 
Meroz ! bitterly !" or, " Lift up your voice against 
those who wear women's apparel !" 

It was the fat heroine, whom he had supposed 
to be a man, that the itinerant preacher had de- 
nounced from the centre of the pit, and the low 
comedy manager it was who had hounded on this 
cruel mob of gipsies and costermongers. No Cornish • 

u 2 



292 , GREATHEART. 

men would have been found to initiate such bru- 
tality. 

" Bradbrain," said Arthur, his eyes dilating and 
his chest heaving, "I can't stand here and see 
these brutes trample this poor fellow to death. I 
shall make one trial at least to save his life from 
these blackguards." 

" Well, I suppose I must go in for it if you do," 
replied Bradbrain carelessly, as if he was not very 
zealous in the cause. 

" It'll be a regular lark, and I'll back you," said 
Lucas, stripping off his coat. 

" I don't seem to see it," said Fitzhugh, as his 
three friends rushed into the thickest of the fray, 
leaving their coats piled up and under his care. 

There was a moment's lull in the crowd as the 
human waves received the new comers. Then a 
furious, tigrish yell broke out, a dark ebb and 
flow round the fallen preacher showed where 
the fight was now waging. 

" They'll be broken into jowds," said the farmer. 

Fitzhugh's blood began to boil as the war in- 
creased. He first carefully deposited all the coats 
on the farmer's shoulders ; he next solemnly re- 
moved his spectacles, and handed thiem to the same 
bystander, then dashed off to the help of his friends, 
exclaiming — 

"A good man struggling with adversity is a 
sight beautiful in the sight of the gods." 

Nor was his help premature. Already Lucas 
was down, and Arthur and Bradbrain were 



THE FAIR AT ST. TUDY'S. 293 

Struggling against half a dozen furious gipsies, who 
were only impeded by their own eagerness to 
bruise and crush, and trample down their anta- 
gonists. 

In vain three or four of the Hydra's heads were 
felled ; on pressed the brute crowd, closer and 
closer. Already Bradbrain's mouth streamed 
with blood. Arthur, preparing for one last des- 
perate rush upon the manager and his swarthy 
friends, was gasping for breath, when the crowd 
before them swayed, opened, and broke, and in rode 
four horsemen, who laid about them fiercely with 
the butt ends of their heavy hunting whips, and 
drove forward to where Arthur stood over the 
preacher's body. Behind them came three or four 
young men with heavy oak sticks, who struck out 
right and left with much good will, and consider- 
able effect, shouting "Down with the cads ! — down 
with the cads I'' defying the stones and other missiles. 

" Why, it's my father," said Arthur, as the leader 
of the horsemen pulled up a powerful grey horse, 
and raised his hat which he had pulled over his 
eyes. 

^^Just in time, too," said Bradbrain. "By 
Jove ! Mr. Tolpedden, I felt very much in* 
clined to draw my knife on a gipsy fellow that 
cut at me with a tent pole ; but I'm glad I didn't, 
for a knowledge of anatomy is apt to make one's 
blow rather too sure." 

" I gave one or two their gruel," said Lucas, as 
he rose with a very palpable black-eye ; " but one 



294 GREATHEART. 

of them got home on my right peeper. Such is 
life ! Have you any brandy, Bradbrain f " 

" I am glad I came up," said Mr. Tolpedden to 
Arthur ; " just in the nick, too. What were they 
doing with that sop of clothes down there ? Lift 
it up, Arthur." 

The Gridiron Club, for to that august and 
talented body belonged Mr. Tolpedden's detach- 
ment of infantry, lifted the groaning man, and 
held his face upwards. 

" Why, father, it's tha Dowser !" said Arthur. 

"We mustn't leave the man here," said his 
father to the Cornish farmers he had gathered to 
the rescue of his son. " Put him on your horse, 
Mr. Vivian, if you please." 

" No ; he shall go in our trap," said Bradbrain, 
kindly feeling the Dowser's pulse. 

" I shall walk my pony home," said Arthur, " so 
he can have my seat. I suppose you men will be 
off soon— it's past four." 

Bradbrain, Lucas, and Fitzhugh were putting 
on their coats, shaking hands, and thanking the 
Gridiron Club. 

"We're off I" said Bradbrain, who had been 
whispering to Lucas. " The man '11 do, bless you, 
well enough, if one of you gentlemen give him a 
mouthful of brandy presently, when he comes to, 
and see him put to bed. Come, Lucas, you and 
Fitzhugh mustn't be late at Tregellases. As for 
the Dowser, he's more frightened than hurt. 
That extravasated blood on the eyelids is nothing, 



KING PIPPIN. 295 

gentlemen, I'm more hurt than he is — curse 
them !" 

As Arthur, leading his new purchase, walked 
home beside his father, chatting about the fight 
and the fair, he was feeling a quiet pleasure at the 
way in which he had attended to the wish of 
his fair petitioner in the morning — " dear Lilly," 
as he already presumed to call her in the sacred 
stillness of his own heart. 

Good, simple-hearted fellow ! he little knew that 
at that very moment his three companions were 
seated round a bowl of that detestable " Rumf us- 
tian," in the parlour of the "Three Choughs," 
and getting rapidly tipsy. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

KING PIPPIN. 

" IVT^VING house " is an event about as mo- 
lU. mentous now as a pilgrimage to the Holy 
Land must have been to our ancestors in the 
thirteenth century? " Three removes are as bad 
as a fire," says the proverb. Broken jugs^ cracked 
looking-glasses, scratched furniture, carpets that 
won't fit, and beds that prove too large for new 
rooms, are not the least of the annoyances attend- 
ant on our increased wealth and our luxurious 
civilization. 



296 GREATHEART. 

"Much money — much trouble," says the pro- 
verb. The Tolpeddens, not beino; ballasted very 
heavily with that Satanic metal called gold, escaped 
many of the troubles incidental to ponderous 
wealth. A house cannot, of course, be changed 
as easily as an Arab tent can, but the lieutenant, 
being active, energetic, and accustomed to rough 
it on a " sufficiently" small income, had transferred 
his household gods from Dorsetshire to Cornwall 
with considerable ease and rapidity; and, what is 
more, a few weeks after his arrival had insisted on 
leaving his brother's roof and sheltering his noisy 
family in a small cottage in the same village which 
a farmer, who had emigrated to Australia, had 
lately quitted. 

The energetic lieutenant had already sent 
Johnny to a day-school at Boscastle, and, what 
was quite as important in his eyes, had erected a 
flag-staff on the lawn, on which he hoisted signals 
to his brother. He had also knocked down a par- 
tition between his three ground-floor rooms, in 
order to have what he termed " a clear deck, fore 
and aft," where he might pace up and down after 
dinner, and on wet days. These changes and ad- 
ditions, together with the cultivation of his garden, 
had kept the lieutenant in an agreeable bustle, 
much to the delight of his good, but not over-wise 
little wife. 

The cottage was a sturdy little oblong stone 
chest, covered with thatch, and trellised with apri- 
cot trees. It is true that thatch is always untidy 



KING PIPPIN. 297 

and dangerous — that rats and sparrows burrow it 
into holes that let in the damp, and that birds 
tear out the straws and litter the lawn with them ; 
but then it is such a simple aud honest covering, 
warm to look at, pleasant in colour, so snug 
and so sheltering, that it will always compete 
with slate and tiles, to which it is in many practical 
points so inferior. 

The cottage had a pretty little green velvet 
carpet of lawn before it, and a large Portugal 
laurel, round as a dumpling, and fifteen feet high, 
a perfect bower pot of evergreen ; there was also 
a tall, clean-rinded beech tree, whose crisp, glazed 
leaves in summer dappled the sunshine on the grass 
very charmingly with patterns of moving shadow. 
The walk up to the front door was avenued with stan- 
dard roses, that the next June promised to toss their 
crimson plumes bravely in the air, in all the scorn- 
fulness of proud and self-conscious beauty, so that 
the house was not without personal attractions, 
and was not bald, prosaic, and dull as farmers' 
cottages too often are. 

There was a paddock and orchard and stable 
close to the garden, and from the high ground 
near the lieutenant could see the gable-ends of 
his brother's house rising through the pine trees a 
little lower in the valley. The garden itself was 
a pleasant little imitation, on a small scale, of Eden. 
It had its rows of snowy broccoli, in whose leaves 
the dew rolled into great pearly drops, clumps of 
sweet marjoram, and bosky thyme, and wrinkled 



298 



sage: and plots of those improTed thistles, arti- 
chokes, and^ abore all, a filbert walk, where the 
nuts crackled under voor feet as yon walked. 
There was a pond, too, over which drooped the 
sweeping, grey, sharp-Ieared branches of a willow. 
On a slope of tnrf at the side of the cottage, near 
a root house built of split fir trees, with the baik 
on, the lieutenant had hung a hammock between 
two old apple trees. It was a great net of South 
American grass string, about twelve feet long, 
and it swung in a fine swooping curve between 
two stalwart mossv branches. This hammock 
had been sent him by a friend, a merchant in Ni- 
caragua, where the lazy Indians spend half their 
lives swinging, eating, and sleeping. A stout 
^Mathew Walker" knot, combined with a 
^ French Shroud,'' had rendered the running rig- 
ging of grass cords perfectly safe, and yet easy to 
take down. 

A clear, fresh, sunny November afternoon had 
tempted the lieutenant to rig up his old sailor's 
bed, much to the delight of the children. The 
last rope had just been ^^ hauled taut," and the 
lieutenant, serene and satisfied, was swinging 
slowly, his head leaning up against one end, as he 
smoked a cigar of enormous size, that had been 
given him by Mr. Hookem. Near him, on the top 
of an almost leafless elm, sat a thrush singing 
positively as if it was spring. Twice already had 
the lieutenant cruelly fired an old horse pistol with 
which he had been practising at this bird; but 



KING PIPPIN. 299 

Still the bird sang on in impudent enjoyment of 
the blue sky and pale winter sunshine. How little 
it takes to make some simple hearts happy, when 
your wise and great men cry for whole kingdoms, 
new planets, or peerages, and still remain discon- 
tented ! 

The children were hunting out Russian violets 
under the marbly spotted leaves of the ancubas 
in the shrubbery, pretending to sell them to 
each other, and laughing, crying, quarrelling, 
and wrangling, after the manner of most young 
Adams and Eves. 

Mrs. Tolpedden sat on a camp-stool not far 
from her husband making some alterations in a 
little black silk mantle of Kate's. She had been 
discussing boys' schools with her obdurate husband. 
In the intervals of the argument she was reading 
poetry from a small volume bound in green silk. 
On the grass near her played Bobby. 

" Polly," said the lieutenant, suddenly " sheer- 
ing " round, in his hammock, and fixing his cold, 
clear eyes on his wife, who shut her book in 
rather an alarmed way as she looked up. " Polly, 
you haven't been yourself for the last few days. 
What is the matter with thee, mother ? You have 
not been so much with the children, and even my 
own Bobby there in the grass (don't pick those 
flowers, Bobby) has been quite left to Liddy and me. 
What makes you so silent, little woman ? Now, 
tell me, do you dislike our new quarters ? Come 
here, Bobby, and have a swing." 



300 GREATHEART. 

Bobby toddled up to the hammock, and was 
instantly snatched up, and covered with kisses by 
her father, 

" I have had a headache, Nel, for the last few 
days," replied Mrs. Tolpedden, with a sigh, as she 
slowly resumed her work, but without raising her 
head. " I suppose it's the change of air — that's 
all !" 

" Then I will go over this very afternoon to St. 
Petrock's, and tell Bradbrain to call — that's what 
ril do. A stitch in time saves nine. You women 
don't take half exercise enough. Why, I should 
pine away if I didn't have a cliff walk at least once 
a day. Come with me to St. Petrock's t" 

^' No, no, I can't, Nel," said Mrs. Tolpedden, 
anxiously, " for I've promised to go and call on the 
Wavertons." 

" Why, you were there on Tuesday ! Don't you 
know there's scarlet-fever in the village ?" 

" Oh I I have no fear about infection. I don't 
go into the cottages, you know, and I shan't take the 
children, you dear old goosey 1" (As she said this, the 
young wife rose, and leaning over the hammock, 
kissed her husband's honest, bald forehead, and 
patted his frosty cheek.) " Besides, I want to get 
some crochet patterns from Milly Waverton. Now, 
promise me truly not to send for Mr. Bradbrain I — 
promise me, Nel !" 

Hannibal split the heated Alps with deluges of 
vinegar. The more fool he, for one drop of oil 
would melt a dozen mountains in half the time! The 



KING PIPPIN. 301 

lieutenant was conquered with that single kiss, and 
ceasing his opposition, gave his promise to forego 
Mr. Bradbrain. 

At this moment the garden-gate opened, and in 
strode Mr. Henry Tolpedden, grave, stem, and 
collected. He had been working hard all the 
morning, and had come to have a chat, and to 
breathe a little fresh air and blow away the acid 
fumes of the laboratory. 

" Do you want any broccoli-plants, Nelt Why, 
sister, you're a perfect Penelope at needlework. I de- 
clare I believe you undo at night the sewing that 
you have done in the day, in order to keep up a 
character for supernatural industry, like the men 
in Halloway's shop, who are said to empty the 
boxes in the cellars that they have been* filling in 
the front warehouse windows. What's your book ? 
Oh I Byron !— the ' Corsair !' Fie ! I dislike that 
unhealthy, vain, and dangerous poet, who boasted 
of vices that he did not possess, and tried so hard 
to become a Satan among the dandies." 

Mrs. Tolpedden's face slightly crimsoned as she 
thrust the book into her pocket. 

" A friend," she said, timidly, " wanted me to 
read ^Parisina.' I never read Byron before. 
It's very beautiful ! There was no harm in what 
I've read." 

" A globule of arsenic will poison ; a cobra is very 
beautiful, so is fire, and so are the nightshade 
flowers. Don't read him, sister ; he was a bad, 
selfish, mean man. I once knew a very intimate 



302 OREATHEABT. 

friend of his, and from him I heard how unutter- 
ably bad he was. A bad man cannot write honest 
verse." 

*' Give me the book, Polly ; by Jove I Til bum 
it!" 

'* No, no, papa ; it belongs to a friend I" 

" Who's your friend, Polly?" 

" Don't you ask questions, Nel. I won't read if 
you don't like it — that's enoucrh I" 

" I hate this perpetual reading of people now-a- 
days, Harry; it sets them dreaming, leads them 
away from working the ship, and their proper, 
every-day duties. We get more ideas, I find, 
from talking than reading. The rubbagy mares' 
nests in the papers take up half my day alone, with- 
out any other business." 

" What I've come to talk about, Nel," said Mr. 
Henry Tolpedden, resting himself against the 
trunk of an apple-tree, and taking Bobby on his 
shoulder, '' is Johnny's school. I don't think it is quite 
the thing — too much Latin exercise, stupid mytho- 
logy, and nonsense verse-writing, in the upper 
classes. My Arthur had too much of that at 
Rugby, and what was the consequence f — he has 
had to educate himself, and now he turns poet and 
writer, never looks into a classic voluntarily, and 
Heaven knows what profession he'll take to. 
Education is all on the wrong tack. How could 
the monks who framed it know what the nine- 
teenth century would want ?" 

" I don't know anything about the monks, and I 



KING PIPPIN. 303 

don't want to know, Harry, so avast there ! Tm 
not going to send my King Pippin to a low com- 
mercial school, where he will forget the manners 
and traditions of a gentleman." 

"Thoroughness in Greek and Latin is better 
than shining in twenty imperfect sciences, that 
I admit; but I know what schools are. A boy 
comes home, and can neither read well, speak well, 
write well, nor do a sum well. He knows nothing 
of geography, or modern history, or the literature 
of his own country ; but he can tell you of the 
amours of Pan and Jupiter, and write useless non- 
sense hexameters. His Greek and Latin he for- 
gets in three years, all but a dozen Greek words, 
and a few stale parliamentary quotations from 
Horace; and so he begins life with positively 
less real useful knowledge tlian many a sailor, me- 
chanic, or farmer's bailiff." 

It was a remarkable thing that the soldier 
brother should be a Liberal reformer on this, as 
on other questions, and the smaller-brained man 
the Conservative. 

" It's all good training I The ship is there ; the 
rigging can be fastened up at any time 1" 

" Training I Yes, my good man, but a lad 
has no tim^ for education when he's once out in 
the world. The ship has no stores in the hold — it 
is unvictualled, and without guns I Nine out of 
ten men have no time for further self-education, and 
the tenth has no inclination for it." 

"It did for us." 



304 OREATHEART. 

^ Yes, and so did mail-coaches ; but we've rafl- 
ways now ! If s all oar pedantnr, and stupid dislike 
to healthy chan^. A boy reads Thucydides — ^why 
not FroLssart and Clarendon ? A boy writes hex- 
ameters — why not blank verse? A boy reads 
legends of Jupiter — why not le^nds of Thor, the 
god our ancestors worshipped ? A boy learns the 
windings of the Tigris — why not the windings of 
the Humber ? A boy learns to parse, and pick to 
pieces sentences of Virgil — ^why not those of Shake- 
speare ? A boy learns the Ionic and Doric dia- 
lects — why not the differences and origin of Wilt- 
shire and Yorkshire phrases ? Pshaw ! brother, I 
am sick of discussing the question ! Saxon and 
Celtic would be more valuable to most men than 
Greek and Latin, and German and French than the 
four put together." 

^^ But boys would not apply themselves to the 
liWng languages — so the Forge sskjsT 

^ Don't you believe it, Nel ; there's as much to 
study in the origin and progress of the English 
language, and more, too, than in all the Greek that 
exists. A boy should know every classical English 
writer, every change of dialect, the etymology of 
every word. Good gracious ! Nel, why could not all 
this be learnt as thoroughly and deeply as Greek 
roots or Latin idioms ? If all this was hammered 
into a boy at school, even against the grain, what 
a capital of practical knowledge he would have in 
after life — ^what an armoury to go to — what a 
granary to feed from !"' 



KING PIPPIN. 305 

"They certainly do neglect the sciences too 
much, Harry — there at least I'm with you. A 
boy should know more than the elements of che- 
mistry, natural history, and medicine — those things 
ought to be in the hold, and * next the skin,' as we 
sailors say. I did once think of sending Jack to 
a good school of your sort that there is at Don- 
nington, near Chichester, but it was so out of the 
way." 

" Why, here comes our Johnnyl" cried Mrs. Tol- 
pedden, as the garden door opened, and in rushed 
King Pippin, crying, his jacket torn, one eye 
blackened, and his lip bleeding. 

" You dreadful boy 1" said his • father, leaping 
at one bound out of the hammock; "oh I you 
dreadful, dreadful boy, what have you been about ? 
— here, somebody get me some small stuff, and I'll 
horse him 1" 

" Oh ! Johnny ! Johnny !" cried his mother, 
holding him by one hand, and with the other 
brushing back the hair from his face ; " and your 
lip is bleeding — are you hurt ?" 

" Don't be frightened, ma, I'm not hurt much ; 
it was all that bully Cotes — he's a West Indian, 
we call him ' Yellow Jack.' I and Dawson were 
playing at marbles, and up he comes, and calls 
out to little Pod Minor, who was going to join, 
* That's not fair, Pedden's taking you in ;' and I 
said, * You'd better not say that again,' and he did 
say it, so I pitched into him, and I gave him a 
punch in the eye, and then he kicked me, for he's 

VOL. I. X 



306 GBEATHEABT. 

a great black fellow four years older than I am, 
and Mr. Coultherd came up and caned me, and let 
Cotes go ; and all because he'd given him a pot 
of preserved ginger from his parcel that morning ; 
but I gave him a oner between the eyes, ma, and 
he says he'll lick me, but he can't. Ugh 1 Yellow 
Jack ! — he can't lick me, all the school say he can't 
lick me I But no one likes him, because he bullies 
the little boys, and is such a bad temper." 

" A young Harmodius — a born Aristogiton, 'pon 
my word. Nelson I" said Mr. Henry Tolpedden ; 
" you mustn't flog him for that — this was a resist- 
ance to oppression, and must rank in history with 
the deeds of William Tell, Wat Tyler, Brutus, 
and M. Gallenga I" 

"I've a good mind to seize you up, Johnny, my 
boy 1" said the delighted father, who felt it, how- 
ever, necessary to assume anger. 

" Oh I you mustn't hurt him, papa," said the 
interceding mother, kissing the belligerent; "he 
won't be naughty and fight any more." 

" If he does, I'll keelhaul him— by Jove 1 I'll 
keelhaul him, and then rub him down with a cat- 
of-nine tails — so mind that. Master Jack. Come 
here, and give me a kiss, and be a good boy, and 
don't fight unless some one hits you first. Come 
along, Harry, I'm going to measure out a cliff 
walk, that I can take regularly, to remind me of 
my old work ; and I want also to spin a yam with 
Jackson, my old boatman, the fellow that Arthur 
met. How late, Harry, that lad always stays now 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 307 

at the Tregellases ; do you know, I half suspect 
there is something in the wind. I wish it was near 
Valentine's Day, I'd be hanged if I would not 
send him a valentine. Well, I never really fell in 
love till I saw my little Polly here, and I pity the 
poor devil who never has. Love, take a trick at 
the wheel of his heart. Come, Harry. Good-bye, 
Polly darling ; and mind, poppet, throw away that 
rubbishing book of Baron's." 

Baron ! — Alas I for a poet's hopes of immor- 
tality ! 

For ten minutes after the garden-door closed 
upon the two brothers, Mrs. Tolpedden remained 
lost in thought, leaning with her forehead against 
the mossy trunk of an apple-tree. 

A little robin, singing its innocent little carol on 
one of the leafless boughs above her, must have 
awoke some painful thought, for she suddenly 
turned, stooped, kissed Johnny, and then burst into 
a passionate agony of tears. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

A MESMERIC LECTURER. 

WORTHY Mr. Bradbrain's semi-discovery of 
the Dowser's secret had led to very angry 
disputes between the impulsive doctor and his 
older and more wily partner. Belial the young, 
and Satan the old, had indeed all but quarrelled 

x2 



3C>> GREATHEART. 

about the affair. Bnulbrain was for instantlv 
getting hold of Sampy, or secretly bribing old 
Behoboam ; Mordred was for dehiy, inquiries, on- 
dermining, and intrigue. He had been bitten 
before by the Dowser, and he was not going to be 
caught again. If there was anything in it, they 
might by delay find some means of discovering the 
secret without the Dowser^s help ; and eren if the 
secret was a raluable one, and worth the pur- 
chase, it would be better, argued the old banker, 
to fight off, and affect indifference — as nothing 
brought a bargain sooner to a satisfactory com- 
pletion for the purchaser than a well-affected in- 
difference. 

^^You know how sanguine these searchers of 
metal always are,'* said Mordred, one morning 
at breakfast, to his partner; "ten thousand to 
one there's no metal after all, except that specimen 
lump you saw at the old f ooFs cottage — ^you're too 
hasty by half, Bradbrain. It was you, remember, 
who let us so neatly in for that four thousand 
pounds at Bedruth." 

^^ And you're as slow as an infernal old snail ; 
you know very well you lose five things out of 
six by your suspicion and that cautious dawdling 
that you call prudence. AVhere's that letter that 
came for me? I had forgotten it.". 

*^ Stonecot has it.** 

Bradbrain rang the bell savagely. 

A lifeless, pale butler, who looked like a chronic 
patient kept to practise new medicines upon, ap- 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 309 

peared, treadinfi; as noiselessly as if he wore velvet- 
soled shoes. 

" Bring me that letter that came last night. It 
is in the surgery, on the mantelpiece." 

Stonecot glided out, and presently glided in 
with the letter on a silver tray. 

" D — - the tray, you know I don't like all that 
foolery — keep that for Mr. Mordred." 

The butler bowed, without signs of a smile, and 
disappeared. 

Bradbrain, whose face was gashed in two places 
from the effects of the fight at St. Tudy's, a fact 
which had not improved his temper, tore open the 
letter, glanced at it, and then threw it into the fire. 

" Your beloved wife again, I presume," said Mr. 
Mordred, sneering, as he wiped his lips with a 
napkin, and rose from the breakfast-table with his 
usual pre-occupied composure. 

" Yes, curse her I whining for money, as usual, 
of course, and complaining of my neglect. The 
old story. She is always talking of going to 
Heaven and bliss. Why the deuce doesn't she 
make haste and go — I won't stop her, I give my 
Bible oath — a canting fool ! I'm sick of her, and 
all her canting relations, and I'll write and tell 
her so." 

" Going to Heaven might not be the handiest 
way of meeting you again." 

" I wish I'd the mixing of her medicines — I'd 
give her a tonic to start her off," said Bradbrain, 
grinding his teeth; "and look you here, Mordred," 



310 GREATHEART. 

(here he turned fiercely on the elder man,) I don't 
trouble myself about what became of your charm- 
ing wife or her rich sister, and I'll just trouble 
you not to sneer at me or my concerns, or it may 
be the worse for you." 

^' Why do you go to low fairs and get into rows, 
and then come back in such detestable tempers — 
what have I done? Do you never sneer at me ? 
I want you to go and see that sick girl at Camel- 
ford — will you go?" 

"No, and that's flat. I don't go out till my 
face is well. I'll see patients here, but I won't go 
beyond the door to please you or any man. If 
I was to go out, I should ride to the Tolpeddens — 
one of their servants is ill." 

"And has been so for some time, I should 
think," said Mordred drily, " from the number of 
times you have ridden that way lately. You see, 
it's no use hiding these things from me. Brad- 
brain. I can always read your hand, and draw 
your trumps too." 

" Yes, d — n you — who ever doubted your cun- 
ning? — why, you'd give a fox forty points in fifty 
up, and beat him then." 

" I don't understand your gambling terms, but 
I admit your superior amiability — a most obliging 
partner you are, I must say, especially when suflfer-^ 
ing from pugilistic encounters." 

Bradbrain made no answer to this taunt, but lit 
a cigar, put his hands into his pocket, and strolled 
growling into the surgery to measure out some 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 311 

quinine, and get his bruises painted by Stonecot. 

It was on this very morning, three days after 
the fair, that Mr. Sampy Sandoe, very bruised 
and slightly lame, hobbled up the steep High 
Street of Boscastle, in the direction of the post- 
office, humming to himself a lugubrious hymn, 
set to the tune of "I'm going into the Wilder- 
ness." The street was steep, so it took the mal- 
treated preacher some time in effecting the ascent, 
and cost him many groans. 

The post-office was at a small grocer's shop, 
situated at the corner of a short turning to the 
left of the main road. At the door — a half hatch, 
to which a bell was fastened — stood a tall, elderly, 
military-looking man. He was our old friend, M. 
Achille Ohatelet, inquiring for letters. The post- 
mistress handed him a long narrow letter on 
foreign paper. He bowed, then instantly tore 
open the seal, and walked away down the street, 
devouring its contents. 

Mrs. Davis's shop was a crowded, busy little 
place ; the roof was hung with bunches of candles, 
hams, and crockery ; the shelves were laden with 
soap, blue, spices, raisin boxes, and loaves of 
sugar. Bundles of brooms filled the corners of 
the room, and left barely space to pass into the 
little back-parlour, where a canary sang like a 
transmigrated prima donna. Behind the counter, 
where Mrs. Davis, a neat, good-natured, bustling 
little woman, stood, were compartments for letters, 
while the wall towards the window was hung with 



312 GREATHEABT. 

large lettered notices about changes in the time of 
posting letters for Belize, Borneo, and such out-of- 
the-way places — ^notices remarkable as showing the 
vastness of our Colonial empire, but not probably 
important to many of the inhabitants of that hum- 
ble Cornish town. 

On the litde counter, near the official-look- 
ing scales, some sheets of postage stamps, and 
several packages of Emden groats, lay a large 
posting biU, printed in black and red, which in- 
stantly caught the Dowser's eye. It ran thus: 

PHRENO-MESMERISM akd CLAIRYOYAXCE. 

THE FUTURE REYEALED AND THE PAST DISCLOSED. 

Mr. Horace Beaumont Belleville will have the 
honour to deliver a lecture on Spiritualism and Table 
Rapping in the Assembly Rooms, on Wednesday next, 
November 3. Admittance 2^., 1^, and 6<L Reserved 
Seats, 3^. 

Gilbert Mordred, Esq., has kindly promised to take 
the chair on the present occasion. The celebrated and 
world-known clairvoyante, Miss Juliana Beverley, will 
assist Mr. Horace Beaumont Belleville in his attempt 
to illustrate the wonders of the mesmeric state. 

There was something in this advertisement that 
seemed to rivet the Dowser to the spot, for Mrs. 
Davis had twice to ask him his name before he 
turned round to answer. 

" What name did you say ?" inquired the post- 
mistress, who was a new comer to Boscastle^ and 
knew Sandoe by report, but not by sight, as she 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 313 

shuffled a bundle of letters as if they were cards. 

" Sampson Sandoe ; there was a letter for me 
to be left till called for." 

"What, bless me! are you the Dowser, who 
discovers things with the divining rod I" 

"That is my business, marm. The Lord be 
thanked for all his goodness I I have been blessed 
in that work ; yes, I have. Blessed to the disco- 
very of much hidden vally ; and hope for a con- 
tinuance of that blessing. It's a marvellous 
work !" 

"Penrose — Trelyn — Sanders. I hope you 
weren't hurt much, Mr. Sandoe, by those cruel 
folk at the fair." 

" No ; the Lord delivered me from the mouth 
of the lions, thank ye, marm, and hallelooliah, be 
it said. They were pressing me sore, they were 
like wild beasts at Ephesus ; but young Squire 
Tolpedden rescued me out of their hands, sharply 
though they cried and roared for the space of a 
whole hour — ' Down with him ! Down with him ! 
even to the ground T But, I am thankful to say 
that my trial has been of use, as a warning and 
example; for Brother Jones, from Birmingham, 
preached on it yesterday at the Ebenezer, and took 
for his text, ^ They came about me like bees ' — a 
beautiful discourse, that did me good to hear." 

"That young Mr. Tolpedden's a fine brave 
young gentleman ; I love to have him ride up 
to our door — there's no pride about him. Tre- 
garth — Trelawney — Hawkins; no, Mr. Sandoe, 



314 GREATHEART. 

there's no letter for you. What do you want, my 
little girl T" 

"Two red herrings, and an ounce of Scotch 
snuff, please, Mrs. Davis, mem," said a little girl, 
whoso chin just rose over the counter. 

" Surely there must be a letter, Mrs. Davis t" 

Mrs. Davis ran them over again most obligingly, 
but with no better result. 

The Dowser groaned, and rubbed his chin 
thoughtfully. 

" Christian people," he said, " Mrs. Davis, have 
much to bear, I tell ye, in the valley of the sha- 
der. But he'll repent it — he'll repent it. Oh ! 
he's a backslider, and a scoffer, if ever there was. 
What! no letter? Ilis thoughts are only of this 
world !" 

As the Dowser, groaning and muttering these 
words, left the shop, a tall, stout, clean-shaven 
man leaned over the hatch, and inquired for 
letters with a sonorous voice and in a grand dra- 
matic manner. 

" Have you any letters or papers, madam, 
directed to Mr. Horace Beaumont Belleville, Post 
Office, Boscastle ?" 

Mrs. Davis handed him a copy of the Spiritual' 
isty and a letter with the postmark, 'New York/" 

" May I ask, madam," he said, adjusting a large 
sham turquoise scarf pin, "who that strange 
individual, so wild in his attire, is, who left the 
shop as I entered ? He looks as if he had been 
lately engaged in some pugilistic encounter. Yet 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 315 

his garb is, I should say, that of a preacher — 
whence this discrepancy ?" 

"That is Sampy Sandoe, the Dowser, sir," re- 
plied Mrs. Davis, as she shook out the snuff from 
a brass scoop. " He makes his living by discover- 
ing copper and tin for the miners with his divining 
rod. Some drunken folk at a fair the other day 
beat him because he began to preach against the 
strolling players." 

"The very man I was wanting," said Mr. Belle- 
ville. "Good morning, madam." 

A sharp three minutes* walk brought Mr. Belle- 
ville up to the Dowser. 

"He's evidently poor, that's in my favour," 
thought the lecturer, as he eyed from behind 
Sampy's greasy brown great-coat and dirty rope 
of a neckcloth. " The divining rod, too I Why, 
the fellow is one of the profession already ! He'll 
be useful to me to tell me the history of some of 
these Boscastle people. I'll pump him over some 

Clairvoyants always see best what they have re- 
solved to see best. A clairvoyant among strangers, 
and without zealous Mr. Bellevilles at their back, 
would give us but scanty glimpses of the past. 
Nature is capricious in her gifts; but still it is 
singular that she should generally choose her 
clairvoyants from the ranks of low actors and 
second-rate jugglers. Mr. Belleville was wise in 
helping Nature, for young sciences need fostering 
from the blighting winds of scoffing prejudice. 



316 GREATHEAKT. 

" I believe," said Mr. Belleville, stepping before 
the Dowser and removing his hat, "that I see be- 
fore me the Reverend Mr. Sandoe, the celebrated 
employer of that extraordinary Cornish phenome- 
non, the divining rod f 

" Zactly so, sir," replied Sampy, at once taking 
the lecturer's measure ; and planning how to use 
him. 

"I am indeed fortunate in meeting with 
so eminent a man. I, sir, am a lecturer in mes- 
meric science, and a student, a humble student, of 
all that tends to a more intimate acquaintance 
with the supernatural. We are not children, my 
friends, I am perpetually saying to my audience, 
and we must not be afraid of lifting a corner of 
that sable and inscrutable curtain that partly hides 
from us the mysteries of the unseen world. A 
century ago the moon was a mystery ; now we read 
its face like a map. A century ago we laughed 
at the thought of propulsion by steam. Very well, 
then '' 

^* Ha ! when I was a slave of Satan and the 
pomps and vanities," said the Dowser, " I used to 
go round the county with a lecturer on musmerism. 
He used to say my bump of veneration was the 
largest he had ever seen ; that was before I was 
convarted, mister. I was a sinner then, and 
awful bad, and hadn't the gift of finding metals." 

^' Then, my dear sir, you are one of us," said Mr. 
Belleville, shaking hands with his new friend, "and 
there ought to be no secrets between us. Come 



A MESMERIC LECTURER. 317 

to my hotel, do me the honour of sharing my 
humble meal, and afterwards, over a tumbler of 
pineapple rum, we will discuss the wonders of 
modern science. There was too much of artifice, 
and what almost might be called imposture, my 
dear sir, in our profession years ago. It is all 
altered now, but we are still only at the threshold. 
Mental phenomena are now better known and 
understood. Pardon me if I stop for a moment at 
my printer's, and make a slight alteration in my 
circular. You will excuse, I'm sure, the selfish 
pre-occupation of a man of business like myself." 

Sampy was not in the least able to follow the 
meaning of this harangue word by word, but he 
cunningly deciphered, and with electric quickness, 
the salient points that concerned his own interest. 
Who has not observed how a wooden-headed 
servant, with no more intelligence than an apo- 
plectic pig, will often work out correctly the most 
intricate subdivision of wages ? Self-interest is the 
best educator, after all I 

"This man," he at once decided, "wants to 
bribe me to tell him the secrets of the Boscastle 
people, for his clairvoyante to use. I shall get 
several good dinners — perhaps some money. If 
he stops long enough here, and does not stump me 
up enough, TU squeeze more out of the fellow by 
threatening to expose him. He shall w^ork out my 
purposes, too, for I won't move a step till he 
promises to make the clairvoyante whisper some- 
thing that'll serve my turn in Mr. Mordred's ears, 



318 GREATHEABT. 

for he'll be chairman. I know a trick worth any 
two of his, though he's a Londoner, and I'm only 
a stupid country Cornish man, under his thumb, 
as he thinks." 

That night, in the privacy of the best room at the 
" Three Choughs," Sampy unfolded all the scandals 
of Boscastle and neighbourhood to Mr. Belleville 
for his note-book, and, in return. Miss Juliana 
Beverley, the daughter of Mr. Belleville's pianist, 
and sister of his young assistant, smilingly com- 
mitted to memory the few mysterious words that 
she was to whisper, when in her clairvoyante state, 
into the chairman's ear. 

Thus roguery is every day bartered, and thus 
the fact that the gulls are caught by the foxes is 
fully accounted for. 



CHAPTER XVin. 

MORNING SERVICE. 

A RUSSIAN cathedral is a solemn place when 
the countless glowing lamps and starry 
candles light up the lapis lazuli pillars, and the 
altars of malachite. The worshippers beneath the 
golden dome, at the dread name of God, strike 
the pavement of porphyry with their abject fore- 
heads. Much more majestic than any priest of 
Rome are those grave Sclavonians, with the fair 
hair falling over their shoulders, as, in their robes 




MORNING SERVICE. 319 

of golden and jewelled cloth, they chant from the 
massive silver-bound books of the Gospels. More 
solemn, less theatrical and restless, than those of 
Kome, are tlie pomps of that Oriental church what 
time the priest paces before the altar, and is seen be- 
hind the pierced gilt screen, which glimmers 
through clouds of incense. But holier, purer 
still, and surely not less acceptable to God, is the 
tranquil service in a quiet English country church. 

In the town all outside a church seems Pagan 
and antagonistic, but in the country nature seems 
praying too with us. The robin on the mossy 
grave-stone, that slants against the window of the 
dsle, sings his little hymn that is never out of 
place, and the children hear it through the porous 
glass. In summer the swallow skims past the open 
door like some sinner's transmigrated, half-repent- 
ant soul. The very dandelion's globes of cobweb, 
that scatter in the breeze, and blow over the thres- 
hold, diffuse their silent sermons, and preach to us 
as they fly, from Time's old but never trite text. 
Everything is in accordance, nothing in disagree- 
ment with man's religious instinct. 

The church at St. Petrock's was a little square 
fortress of grey-lichened stone, sunk in the ground, 
as if exhausted with standing for so many centu- 
ries. You came upon it unexpectedly by a wind- 
ing road leading from a byway, and it stood in 
the pit of a little wooded valley, to which all sorts 
of secret and downward lanes converged, under 
beech-branches, hazel-boughs, and between coverts 



320 GREATHEART. 

of fern and bramble. From the valley below arose 
the perpetual sound of falling water^ that, like a 
great clepsydra, kept count of man's wasted hours. 
The tower rose from a little grassy platform, that 
scarcely left room for the black slate tomb-stones, 
and the bricked and turf -piled graves, and sand- 
banks, hung with strings of ivy, pressed it so 
closely round that there was scarcely room to walk 
outside and look in through the low, dim, greenish 
glass of the windows. There was something 
secretive and sad about the sites of the graves, and 
their tenants seemed more in place there than the 
living visitors. The little church might have been 
built in times of old Pagan persecutions, it seemed 
so like a hermit's cell that had grown into a 
church. It needed all the sun our English skies 
can boast of to render the place cheerful, to 
lighten up the green sponges of moss that cush- 
ioned the roof, and the great rank tussocks of 
grass that rioted over the broken brickwork of the 
older graves, and to make the service seem other- 
wise than the faint echo of some earlier faith. 

The congregation on the present November 
morning was unusually large, for by special com- 
pact by letter the Tregellases and Mr. Hookem 
had agreed to meet the Tolpeddens there, and hear 
a certain favoui'ite sermon of Mr. Trevena's. 

The worthy rector was not a rich man, and the 
patron being a non-resident, and a confirmed in- 
valid, diluting his miserable and puny existence at 
the German watering-places, spent as little as he 



MORNING SERVICE. 321 

could on his parish. Hence it was that, to the 
horror of the Wavertons, and all mere ceremonial- 
ists, the ivy grew in broad living tapestries on the 
chancel walls ; that the old oak seats, carved with 
rude emblems of the Passion, were honeycombed 
and crumbly as old Stilton cheese ; that some of 
the graceful early English pillars were green, 
shining, and dripping with damp ; and that the 
only monuments of the church were memorials 
of the captain of a privateer (1811), and an old 
wooden escutcheon of royal arms, as old as the act 
of uniformity. An impulsive fanatic like Mr. 
Waverton would have run into debt to rebuild the 
church ; but Mr. Trevena preferred paying his 
tradesmen, and letting the church wait for better 
days. His zeal was perhaps less conspicuous ; but 
his honesty and common sense were beyond dis- 
pute. 

The congregation was a very humble one — only 
a few labourers, a small tradesman or two, and a 
stray miner or fisherman from some solitary stone 
hut on the cliffs. It was the custom of those two 
or three who gathered together there to cluster round 
an old headless stone cross in the churchyard, and 
wait there, talking, till the clergyman appeared, 
with all sail set, floating along in his loose white 
surplice, and at that moment to dive into the 
church, just as frightened rabbits do into their 
burrows at the sight of an aggressive dog. Mr. 
Trevena was a parson who fairly drove his flock 
before him. 

VOL. I. Y 



322 GREATHEABT. 

The instant he entered the church, the old 
bent clerk ceased drag^g at the rope of the noisy 
bell, and mounted his desk eager for the fray ; 
at the same moment a small but select band, in- 
cluding one snorting bassoon, one intolerable trom- 
bone, two restless fiddles, and a pompous violon- 
cello, forming nearly one-third of the congregation^ 
commenced a short and appropriate overture, 
which, indeed, was the only part the performers 
condescended to take in the service, the rest of 
the time being past in turning over music-books, 
whispering, tuning, repairing strings, wiping 
slides, and other professional preparations. Mr. 
Trevena being a musical man, though opposed to 
the fuss and pedantry of choral services, had made 
great ,fr,m UZ,Z «^fe b^oni J, dded by 
congregational singing, but entirely in vain. 

At the first attempt to start a small night-club 
for practising psalmody, the church band had as- 
sembled in force, and performed the Hailstone 
Chorus outside his windows. Indeed, it was the 
universal opinion in the parish that the union of 
Church and State, and the paying of tithes, depend- 
ed entirely on the existence of the church orchestra. 

Yet Mr. Trevena, indifferent as he was to up- 
holstery and obtrusive forms, had introduced many 
decorous changes. For instance, when he first 
came into the parish, the old palsied clerk used 
actually, at a critical part of the service, to be 
carried, like a second Anchises, on the shoulders 
of his sturdy son, Tom, from the organ-loft to the 




MOBNING SERVICE. ^323 

desk ; and if by any chance Mr. Trevena grew 
impatient, and commenced the Litany before his 
clerk could get landed, he would from his son's back 
quaver forth his petulant and self-important 
" Good Lord deliver us !" to the astonishment and 
horror of chance strangers. 

Mr. Trevena had also insisted on the church 
door being kept locked during the week, for the 
following strange and unprecedented reason. The 
first Sunday he preached at St. Petrock's, the clerk's 
wife had intreated him not4;o deliver his sermon 
from the pulpit. On asking the reason of such an 
extraordinary request, Mrs. Mechin replied, 

" Why, sir, there's our hen pea-turkey a-sitting 
there simly on her nest, and it would spoil the 
brood if you disturb her, so dont'ee." 

As pretty little Mrs. Tolpedden entered the 
church, with Arthur, Miss Tregellas, and Milly 
Waverton, who had ridden over together, no less a 
glossy person than Mr. Bradbrain, not usually very 
remarkable for his devotion to morning or any 
other service, started up, and stepping out of his 
pew, hat in hand, waved Mrs. Tolpedden smilingly 
to his own seat. A malicious person (say the 
elderly Miss Trevena) would have almost con- 
jectured that the gallant doctor had expected the 
coming of the lady whom he ushered in with the 
swiftness and neatness of a drill movement. At the 
same moment, but in a less studied way, Mr. 
Hookem, stupendous in a buff Marsala waistcoat, 
and a drab great-coat, with brown velvet collar, 

y2 



324 GREATHEART. 

rose and made room for the two younger ladies, 
whose little hands he shook without speaking. 

As for Arthur, obeying a stern and imperative 
nod of Miss Trevena's, in a no less quiet, quick way, 
he accepted a seat in that inexorable lady's pew, 
not the less willingly because it commanded a side 
view of Miss Lily Tregellas. 

The service began with those beautiful short 
exhortations w^e all know so well ; and then com- 
menced the prayers that were written by those 
who now see God face to face, and move in the 
brightness round the great white throne. Then 
with his deep, full, transparent voice, Mr. Trevena 
read the psalms of the day, with all their passion- 
ate sorrowings and ecstatic triumphs ; then came for 
the first lesson the chapter of Gehazi's punishment, 
which was neither acted, nor slurred, nor intoned, 
nor hurried, but delivered with feeling, earnest- 
ness, force, and power. 

The only interruption to the reading was the 
occasional exclamations of the old clerk in the 
organ loft, who kept up a running fire of com- 
ment, undoubtedly ludicrous, but by no means 
meant to be irreverent, such as " Now, what do 
you think of that, Gehazi ?" and winding up loudly 
with " That's a big lie, Gehazi, and so I tell 'ee !" 
at which outburst Mrs. Tolpedden giggled slightly, 
and Mr. Bradbrain hid his face in a scented white 
cambric handkerchief. The ordinary congrega- 
tion was too much accustomed to the interruptions 
to regard them. Habit will do anything. Have 



MORNING SERVICE. 325 

not boy midshipmen been known to fall asleep at 
the very foot of their powder chests during the 
lulls of battle. 

It was of course very wrong of Arthur, but 
during the doleful hymns his fancy kept sometimes 
wandering. Now he fancied that the church was 
a large ship out at sea, and the little loops of win- 
dows were mere port-holes ; but still more fre- 
quently his eye glided stealthily to where that 
innocent and simple-hearted girl knelt, bending 
over her little scarlet-bound prayer-book, repeating 
so earnestly, with that soft, clear, frank voice of 
hers, the responses of the Communion Service, 
that prayed Heaven to keep her and guard her 
from murder, theft, and all the brood of hell. 
How he loved, or fancied he loved, the very globules 
of gold that trembled in those rosy, shell-shaped 
ears ; and then suddenly, when he marked the fair 
hair, paler and less golden where it was 
brushed back towards the temples, he felt that he 
would lose a finger for one thread of it, yes, even 
to invisibly smooth it with his hand ; and lastly 
he withdrew his eyes self-consciously, and in an 
unnecessary and almost guilty hurry, when twice 
Mrlly Waverton turned on him her quick, arch eyes, 
that seemed to mock, elf -like, at a discomposure 
that probably she did not by any means dis- 
cover. But never once that he clearly saw — 
never once did Miss Tregellas turn to where Ar- 
thur sat ; that threw him into tortures of doubt 
and misery, so quick are lovers in erecting 



326" GEEATHEAET. 

air-built Houses of Correction for themselves. 

The sermon came in due time, after a hymn 
and a preliminary rustle of arrangement among 
the school-children in the aisle. Mrs. Tolpedden 
tossed her red geranium-coloured ribbons co- 
quettishly into order ; Miss Trevena braced her- 
self to attention, in order to discover whether the 
sermon was not " a heel tap ;" Bradbrain crossed 
his arms with reckless patience, and fastened his 
eyes not far from the geranium ribbons ; and Mr. 
Hookem got into a comer, looked at his gold 
hunter watch, made a mental note of the 
time, and prepared to be critical, and yet com- 
fortable. The old clerk, in a deep pew, set in for 
steady hybernation, and felt prepared for anything, 
the longer the better, so his dinner did not 
spoil. 

Mr. Trevena walked calmly into his pulpit, 
leaving the door, perhaps unintentionally, open in a 
draughty and unpractical way, which set Mr. 
Hookem's teeth on edge, and gave him a lower 
opinion of the man. The sermon was a very 
good one— only twenty minutes. It was concise, 
vigorous, and drove home to the heart. The text 
related to the widow's son at Nain, comparing 
it to the raising of Lazarus, and the recovery from 
the dead of the little daughter of Jairus. In these 
three miracles the preacher found obvious types of 
the three great classes of sinners. It threw new 
light on Christ's miracles, to discover that they were 
all typicaL 



MORNING SERVICE. 327 

As they came out of church, Mr. Hookem slapped 
Mr. Trevena on the back. 

" I will say to you, Trevena," he said, " what an 
old farmer used always to say to our rector at 
Little Mudcombe, ^Thankee, parson, for good 
doctrine.' " 

" It was all St. Augustin," said the honest man, 
coolly ; " some of us Low Church people are too 
apt to snub the fathers ; so when I find Augustin 
treats a subject better than I can, I always use him." 

" And very wise, too, isn't it. Miss Waverton ? 
Why, what a charming effect the fresh breeze has 
had on you and Miss Tregellas to-day 1 Where is 
the worthy lieutenant, Arthur!" 

"My uncle insists on keeping to his parish 
church — it is one of his superstitions; and my 
father stays to keep him company. Of course you 
will come to this mesmeric lecture everyone is 
talking of ?— we are all coming." 

" Oh ! certainly," said Mr, Hookem ; " things 
one despises in Babylon assume an interest here. 
I want to see how the Cornish folk regard the 
pretentious humbug." 

Arthur ran on, to help the two young ladies 
to mount ; but to his extreme vexation, being in a 
hurry, they were already in their saddles, and 
starting. Milly Waverton smiled and waved her 
whip ; while Miss Tregellas turned, bowed coldly, 
but without looking directly at anyone. 

As he ran, half-angrily, to overtake Bradbrain 
and Mrs. Tolpedden, who were laughing and 



328 GREATHEART. 

chatting in the most pleasant way with Mr. 
Hookem and Mr. Trevena, an unpleasant thought 
struck him that something had gone wrong about 
St. Tudy's fair. 

" How did you get home the other night after 
the row ?" he said soundingly to Bradbrain on the 
first opening. 

"Well, to tell you the truth, that silly fellow 
Lucas did get awfully screwed, and I and Fitz- 
hugh had to carry him back. Those two owls 
would stop and brew some more of that infernal 
liquor. I know you are angry, Arthur, but really 
it wasn't my fault." 

Arthur saw in a moment that Lily considered 
that he had broken his promise ; and the pang and 
anguish of that thought convinced him, for the 
first time, that he was on the point of falling into 
love. 

" And a pretty faction fight you young gentle- 
men seem to have got into at St. Tudy's," said 
Mr. Hookem. 

" Well, I forgive them, because it was to protect 
the weak," said Mr. Trevena. "I have never 
struck a blow since I fought a big bargee in a town 
and gown row at Oxford in '47 ; but I think I'd 
have tried the logic of a closed fist on this occa- 

• 99 

sion. 

" You wouldn't hurt a fly," laughed Mrs, Tol- 
pedden — "you know you wouldn't ; would he, Mr, 
Bradbrain ?" 

"Not he." 



THE LECTURE. 329 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE LECTURE. 

THE little Assembly Room at St. Petrock's had 
as many phases as the moon. At Easter 
time it was tenanted by a stupid hypocritical orrery ; 
at Christmas it was enlivened by the annual ball, 
ventriloquists and jugglers. Geology explained 
in an hour and a half gave way to private theatri- 
cals, and other amusements quite as profitable as 
diluted science. 

Formerly persons had to digest their own food, 
now the lecturing sciolist gives you his pepsine 
lozenges, and digests it for you. If Plato lamented 
the introduction of books because they injured the 
scholar's memory, gracious heavens! what would 
the stem Athenian sage, in his intense earnestness, 
have said of our popular lectures ? 

The gaunt seedy room, that smelt of damp, 
was tolerably full — a few farmers and small trades- 
men, some townspeople ; the smaller gentry filled 
the first benches. The Tregellases were there, 
and the Tolpeddens, and Mr. Trevena; but not 
the Wavertons, they being just then intent on pre- 
paring a procession for St. Lucifer^s day. 

Mr. Hookem, too, was present, looming out very 
large, in a white drill waistcoat, and between Miss 
Tregellas and Mrs. Nelson Tolpedden sat Brad- 
brain, highly dressed, and highly contemptuous, 



330 GREATHEART. 

tapping his small bright boots with a riding-whip, 
or putting on his dog-skin gloves as usual as pug- 
naciously as if they were boxing-gloves. 

The small gas chandelier cast a rather pale and 
insufficient light through the cold room ; and the 
night being a damp and chilly one, the audience 
muffled up in thick shawls and great-coats, did not 
look by any means easy to amuse. The talking 
was loud and sceptical. The Boscastle people did 
not seem by any means likely to bely the old taunt 
of Froissart, who describes the English people as 
taking their pleasure in a gloomy way, after their 
manner. Mr. Hookem said to Arthur that the 
clairvoyante would perhaps see better if the gas 
burnt clearer, while Bradbrain whispered to Mrs. 
Tolpedden that the dim light was, no doubt, part 
of the trick of the thing. Then commenced a 
clatter of sticks and umbrella ferules, impatient at 
the delay of the lecturer. 

Roused by that, there suddenly glided on to the 
platform a pale, seedy man in evening dress, who 
sitting down at the piano in an injured, ill-paid 
sort of way, began mechanicaUy, and with the 
intensest indifference to play the overture to 
" Zampa," followed by the " Mocking-bird," and 
lighter melodies. 

The audience now began to buckle to for steady 
attention. Presently the door opened again, and 
in slided Mr. Mordred, corpse-like as ever, but 
smiling, in full dress, and trying to persuade Mr. 
Belleville, also in full dress, to precede him. 



THE LECTURE. 331 

" The governor seems to like it, doesn't he ?" 
whispered Bradbrain to Arthur, who had been try- 
ing in vain to draw Miss Tregellas into conversa- 
tion. The piano ceased. 

Mr. Bellville announced that Mr. Mordred, of 
St. Petrock's, had kindly consented to take the 
chair on that occasion, and see that there was no 
deception. Mr. Mordred expressed his pleasure 
to preside over such a large and intelligent audi- 
ence, and seated himself in a horribly conspicuous 
chair facing the footlights. 

The lecturer now advanced, and taking out a 
large gilt watch looked at it, replaced it, bowed, 
and began. He said that he was going to show 
them some experiments in phreno-mesmerism— ex- 
periments that he could perform but could not ex- 
plain. Spuntualism had, however, shown that 
matter can become invisible in spiritual hands, 
and that spirits can pass through the most solid 
matter, as easy as light passes through glass.. 
French mediums had also proved that spirits can 
converse with living persons by means of some 
combination of the fluids which belong to all 
bodies which surround us, and the especial fluids 
emanating from the bodies of the mediums. M. 
Hillaire, a sabot maker, of Sonnac, in the lower 
Charente, had walked in the air, discovered 
murderers, spoken to his father's spirit, and even 
received a heavy gold ring from St. Bernard him- 
self. 

Here the lieutenant took off his hat, and wiped 



332 GREATHEART. 

his forehead, for he felt giddy. Bradbrain laughed, 
and a cold, painful smile passed over Mordred's 
white face. 

" They might laugh, but he had no doubt in his 
own mind that those manifestations were intended 
to nurse men's faith, and crush the materialism of 
philosophers like Darwin and Buckle, and of bold 
theologians like Maurice and Colenso. The un- 
seen — ^if he might be allowed to say so — was once 
more asserting itself. They had learned to draw down 
lightning from a cloud, but did they disbelieve in 
lightning because they did not know why or how 
it was generated in the air?" 

"The duffer!" whispered Fitzhugh, who was 
there with Mr. Tregellas, " he does not know the 
very elements of modern science." 

" The crass ignorance of a fat-headed charlatan," 
replied Mr. Hookem, who sat next Fitzhugh, 

The lecturer proceeded. 

" Medical men, time-servers by nature, and too 
busy for either research or discovery, were the 
loudest in their sneers." 

"A hud sneer — that's new, at all events," 
thought Fitzhugh. 

" Yet he should just like to ask those gentlemen, 
with all their pill-making, sore-curing, grave-dig- 
ging (laughter), what they knew of disease? 
Did they know what death was, or what constituted 
life ? Surely life was something more than elec- 
tric action, or motive heat I A man's soul was, he 
supposed, something more inscrutable than a clock ! 



THE LECTURE. 333 

(Renewed laughter). Still, ignorant as they were 
of these great secrets, no one doubted that those 
medical gentlemen could cool a fever, as well as 
subdue an inflammation." 

" How do you like that ?" said Arthur to Brad- 
brain. 

*^ If he goes on much longer, I shall have to go 
and knock the dog down !" cried Bradbrain, as 
Mordred gave him a peculiar look. 

"Medicine was studied in too unideal a way. 
They wanted theorists to study the great phenomena 
of Life and Death, Health and Dfsease. That was 
the only way to discover a universal remedy — 
that dream of great thinkers for so many centu- 
ries. 

Here Mr. Mordred writhed uneasily in his chair, 
and protested against the possibility of such dis- 
coveries. Bradbrain ironically laughed and 
snorted. 

The lecturer, twining his gold watch chain 
round his forefinger, bowed and smiled deprecat- 
ingly, and apologized for opinions that might be 
too daring for a mixed audience. He would now 
commence his series of experiments. 

The last word was the cue to Miss Juliana, who 
instantly tripped on to the platform. She was a 
lank, ringletty child, with a London complexion, 
an enormous crimson sash, and a stiff white muslin 
dress. She ran up to Mr. Belleville with inno- 
cent and playful audacity, curtsied, and then struck 
a position of awe and humility. In a word, it was 



334 GBEATHEART. 

a seedy Mignon to what actors call a '^ heavy 
father.** 

The mesmeric sleep was produced with singular 
and convenient rapidity; a few passes of the 
manager^s jewelled hand, a few waves and shakes 
of fingers over her face, and off she too evidently 
was. 

" Why, I do believe she's asleep T said the lieu- 
tenant, who now sat leaning on his umbrella, pro- 
foundly interested. 

Mr. Belleville then lifted her pendent arms, and 
made angry passes down them. They grew stiff as 
wood, and Mr. Mordred moved them like pump- 
handles. The sleeping girl was lifted from her 
chair — ^Mr. Mordred with gravity pinched her, she 
did not move or cry out. A chair was placed on 
the little legs, now also cataleptic, and she bore the 
weight as if she was of solid iron. 

Loud cheers. The lieutenant hoped they would 
not hurt the child. 

" I shall now," said Mr. Belleville, triumphantly, 
for he felt he had his audience well m hand, 
^' I shall now proceed to show some of the more in- 
teresting phenomena of phreno-mesmerism-that 
is, ladies and gentlemen, mesmerism as illustrating 
the extraordinary science of phrenology." 

At this juncture the suffering pianist began a 
selection from " Traviata." 

" I will touch combativeness." 

As he did so the sleeping child arose, and with 
petulant cries began to violently scratch aud strike 



THE LECTURE. 335 

the manager. (Loud laughter). Mr. Bradbrain 
shouted ^^ Humbug I" and began to hiss, till Mrs. 
Tolpedden begged him to refrain. 

" Acquisitiveness I" and the child proceeded to 
search round the stage for money, and to collect 
the music-books and chairs into a heap. 

" Remarkable indeed I" said the lieutenant. 

And so the lecturer went on through all the 
passions, ending with veneration, on which organ 
being slightly rubbed, and Mr, Belleville's fingers 
applied to Miss Juliana's closed eyes, to rouse 
" Language," that young lady fell upon her knees, 
not only with an audible thump, but in an ex- 
quisite attitude, and with hands uplifted to heaven, 
sang the " Eock of Ages," and after that " The 
Evening Hymn," amid enthusiastic applause. 

" I really don't think I can stand this humbug 
much longer," said Bradbrain, with an angry groan, 
and an insolent, neighing laugh, as he stamped im- 
patiently on the floor. 

" Well, it is at least a very clever cheat," said 
Mr. Trevena. 

"I shall now," said the lecturer, as the jaded 
pianist commenced " The Last Rose of Summer," 
con moUa expreaaioney' "conclude my lecture 
with some of the more remarkable phenomena of 
clairvoyance." 

A burst of applause ran through the room. 

" I shall place this young lady in the comatose 
state, in which state she will answer questions 
relating to the past, present, or future when put to 



336 GBEATHEART. 

her through me. I must, however, first beg our 
honoured chairman to himself bandage her eyes 
most carefully, and in a manner to perfectly satisfy 
the most sceptical. I will then hand the young 
lady any card or letter that may be passed to me, 
and these she will read aloud. 

The audience applauded the frankness and bold- 
ness of the lecturer, as Mr. Mordred rose in his 
imperturbable way and bound the clairvoyante's 
eyes close and tight with two handkerchiefs, one 
silk and the other cambric. 

Unconscious of the science of secret telegraphy, 
the audience stormed their applause as the young 
prophetess read card after card, and even a paper 
of naval signals that Lieutenant Tolpedden handed 
up. 

" The last experiments have certainly been most 
convincing," said the chairman aloud, as he stood 
up and addressed the audience in his cold, mea- 
sured way. " But I will now, ladies and gentle- 
men, by the lecturer's permission and by your 
leave, try a final experiment of my own. I pro» 
pose to whisper to the lecturer a question of im- 
portance, which he will at once communicate in a 
low voice to the clairvovante. It relates to a matter 
known only to myself and three other persons in 
the world. I shall put this question in such a way 
that the answer, if correct, must proceed from 
some inscrutable spiritual instinct, and will, upon 
such answer being given, frankly own myself a 
complete convert to the new science." 



THE LECTURE. 337 

As he uttered these words, the chairman sat 
down, and covered his face with one hand for 
several minutes. He then rose and whispered a 
question into Mr. Belleville's ear, who at once 
passed it on to the motionless clairvoyante. 

"Now you'll see the little impostor in white 
muslin will come to total grief," said Fitzhugh to 
Arthur. 

There was an intense silence for some minutes, 
a silence of almost superstitious expectancy. At 
the end of that time the clairvoyante moved her 
hands anxiously in the air, as if trying to touch 
some one who stood near. Mr. Belleville looked 
at the audience triumphantly, and passed his hand 
through his curled hair. Then he approached on 
tiptoe, and received the Delphic whisper. Lastly, 
with an air of solemn victory, he stepped up to 
the chairman, leaned over him, and whispered the 
spirit's answer. 

Mr. Mordred's eyes stared ; he remained petri- 
fied with astonishment. Then he rose slowly, 
and advanced to the very edge of the platform. 
"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "this is some- 
thing beyond nature. I am now entirely convinced 
of the truth of clairvoyance, and beg to propose the 
thanks of the meeting to Mr. Belleville." 

While the cheers and stamping were still shaking 
the very walls of the Assembly Rooms at Boscastle, 
a man who had been listening at a window outside, 
patient in the cold and the darkness, glided off 

VOL. I. Z 



338 GREATHEART. 

before the doors . could open, and chuckled and 
rubbed his hands as he stole away like a ghost at 
the daybreak. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



LONDON: PRINTED BY MAODONALD AND TDOWELL, BLENHEIM HOIJSE. 




CHAPTER I. 

THE PERPETUAL CUEATE. 

TO examine a pile of coal and clothing club 
accounts^ to write notes, and at the same 
time to keep an eye on a screen of steaming sheets, 
the terrible record of a monthly wash, is quite as 
much as any man could be expected to do at one 
and the same time. 

But when a thick-set girl, sable with reckless 
industry, entered Mr. Trevena's room, bearing 
clumsily a large saucepan of soup for the poor, 
•which missus hoped Mr. Trevena would stir every 
time it began to boil, as the kitchen fire was occu- 
pied, the aforesaid gentleman rebelled, the more 
especially as he was then seated, busy, and chuckling 
over some notes he had made upon the bishop's 
late charge. It had just struck him that he would 
write a charge that might be the most good- 
natured but telling of satires, because it should be 
a charge such as charges should be, not such as 
they are, and the thought tickled the excellent 
but unworldly man. 

" Tell your missus," he said, " that I really can- 
not have a saucepan here — it takes all my time 

VOL. II. B 



GREATHEART. 



VOL. II. 



6 GREATHEAKT. 

to go and pick up fir-cones in the plantation." 

'^Are you all cold, children, and are you all 
hungry ?" A sudden idea had struck the eminently 
unpractical man. 

There was a chorus of " Yes, sir." Visions of 
cakes gleamed in edible mirage before the child- 
ren ; the little bright eyes stared and seemed to 
enlarge. ^' Very, sir, if you please, sir." 

A tea-cup stood on the mantelpiece. The sauce- 
pan of soup shook its lid, as if eager to be drank. 
Mr. Trevena, in a guilty sort of way, ladled out a 
cupful. 

" Here, children, take it in turns. Jinny, you 
first — ^girls before the boys — now then, Sally, 
Kitty — now you, Molly." 

The children drank the soup with delight. Mr. 
Trevena gave them no resting time, for fear of 
the return of his dreaded sister. Directly they 
had finished the warm collation, he hurried them 
off to the wood-house, where the gardener was to 
supply them with what they required for Guido's 
destruction. 

" And after all," thought Mr. Trevena, " and 
after all, it is only a little less soup for dinner." 

A little less indeed — about four large spoonfuls 
were all that remained. How unpractical Christian 
charity is. 

It was a bright, hard, cold morning; the sun 
was shining with a white light; and the holly 
trees, studded with scarlet drops, glistened in their 
green, burnished, and prickly panoply. A large log. 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 7 

smouldering into white ashes on the hearth, was 
chapped here and there with crimson rents. Out- 
side, on the lawn, the robin sang as he picked up 
the worm that good Nature had iced ready for his 
consumption. The worthy curate struck the log 
a violent, unchristian blow, that drove up showers 
of sparks, and settled down to add up the school 
accounts, finding a redundancy in which to the 
ampunt of £3 lis. 2^d!., he laughed aloud with 
good-humour, and, rubbing his hands in glee, 
woke the log up again with a blow that cracked 
the charred wood in two. 

As he turned his back to the window to perform 
this Coeur-de-lion feat, a light step passed the 
window, and a lively hearty blow of the knocker 
rang through the house. There was a bustle in 
the kitchen, instantly, as when a gale of wind 
breaks suddenly on a ship. In dashed Emily, and 
tore off the saucepan, to her astonishment much 
lighter than she expected. In dashed Orgies, and 
carried off the sheets, as easily as Sampson tore off 
the gates of Gaza. 

There was always this sort of strange scurry 
and unbolting when you made a call at the cottage. 

"Mr. Arthur Tolpedden, sir," said Emily, as 
she threw open the door. 

Arthur entered in his frank, hearty way, so fear- 
less, yet so full of deference to the feelings and pre- 
judices of others ; his eyes glowing with vigorous 
health, and his complexion such as only could be 
shown by one who had passed his youth chiefly in 



8 GREATHEART. 

the country. He took off his buckskin gloves, 
tossed them into his hat and shook hands warmly 
with his old friend. 

" Busy I see, Trevena," said Arthur, as he sat 
down at the fire and glanced at the MS. that lay 
on the desk before Mr. Trevena. 

"Yes," replied the author, his simple-hearted 
vanity blowing again into a flame, as he snatched 
up his papers. "I have been writing a charge for 
my friend the Bishop of Solent." 

"But there is no such diocese," said Arthur, 
somewhat amazed; "at least I never heard of 
it." 

" That is exactly it, Arthur," said Mr. Trevena, 
smiling, and rubbing his long prominent chin. " My 
Charge is a covert satire against many of our 
somewhat proud and selfish prelates. Listen, here's 
a rub — ' I lament that 2,000 of our brother clergy 
support themselves and families on less than £150 
a year. How are they to live like gentlemen 
on a pittance like that ? Their life is one long 
struggle with a hardening poverty. Their social 
position is not sufficiently above that of their 
flock, their children sink still lower in the social 
scale. The petty cares that harass our poorer 
clergy are, I may say, so many thorns in their 
path to heaven. When they should be teaching 
others the road to the cross, they are only planning 
how to escape penury for themselves. I therefore 
wish that Mr. Hookem's friend, Mr. Dufton Dig- 
weed, would bring a bill into Parliament — 



> » 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 9 

" 1 differ from you, Trevena," said Arthur. " I 
think the clerjgr are too much above the people at 
present. It was the friars and the Wesleyan 
preachers who really reached them." 

Trevena read down all opposition by continu- 
ing— 

*^ — a bill into Parliament to provide that all 

clergymen receiving less than £100 a year should 
be exempt from every kind of impost, whether 
income tax, poor rate, highway rate, or land tax." 

"An excellent plan, if you can persuade the 
Government that it is excellent. By-the-bye, are 
you going to Hookem's party ? " 

**Yes, my sister insists on my postponing the 
night-school, which is that evening, and her rule, 
as you know, is absolute. How is it that you are 
not reading with Tregellas this morning ?" 

**Mr. Tregellas has gone to the Ruri-Decanal 
at Bodmin, where thou ought to be, thou heretical 
and rebellious minister," said Arthur laughing. 

*^Well, Arthur, I am, as you know, rather a 
schismatic about bishops, and rural deans, too, and 
should like to see them once more net-making and 
tent-making, like their great predecessors." 

"Have you seen Waverton's appeal for his 
church, Trevena 1" said Arthur, drawing a local 
paper from his pocket. 

Mr. Trevena read aloud — 

" * Altar cross, altar vases, lights for sacrarium, 
frontals, alms-bags, hangings for the seasons.' 
Why, the man is mad! Don't you remember 



10 GREATHEART. 

how he flew out at me at Hookem's pic-nic. This 
is a glorification of ironmongery-jewelry. What 
are * hangings for the seasons?' Rubbish! the fellow 
is a fool I But what can we expect, when our 
bishops preach about clerical retreats. Look here 
what this bishop says." 

As Mr. Trevena said this, he drew a laven- 
der-coloured book from the mantelpiece, and 
jammed his finger down on a specially obnoxious 
passage. 

" * Withdraw yourselves for a while from your 
ordinary duties, and give yourselves alone, or in 
communion with others, to prayer, self-examina- 
tion, meditation, and other religious exercises.' 
Do you not see what all that leads to, Arthur f " 

Arthur replied he scarcely knew. 

" Then I'll tell you, To a monastery with its 
fretful, mischievous celibacy, its petty envies, its 
cowardly desertion of home duties, and all its 
ridiculous distortions of human nature." 

Tears of excitement sprang up in the good man's 
eyes as he uttered this denunciation, so to hide 
these he turned and made a lunge at the very 
reddest centre of the fire. 

Arthur turned the conversation by asking if 
Trevena had read the "Sea-Side Hexameters" he 
had sent him. 

Trevena, in a half guilty way, excavated under 
a pile of sermons, drew out at last the copy of 
the Cornhill Magazine that contained the verses of 
young Arthur, and began reading them. 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 11 

^* Many-footed and swift rush the trampling waves of the 

ocean, 
White-maned, fierce, ten deep, fleet as the steeds of the 

t)rairie; 
Wnite-maned, tameless, and wild as the raging hor«e of 

the Tartar ; 
Level in rank, unsaddled, unbridled, unridden by any, 
For none but the Angel of Death can bestride them or 

rein them. 
Their cry is the ceaseless howl of the suffering wretches 

in torment. 
Of Cain, Holof ernes, and Herod, Ananias, Sapphira, and 

Judas." 



"Good cadences," said Trevena; "but, after 
all, I think the Hexameter is a mistake, Arthur ; 
it has such a mechanical and wooden trot about it, 
it wearies me more, I think, even than the heroic 
stanza. Don't waste your talent about it. The 
perpetual promise of rhyme is most aggravating, 
my dear boy. Renounce it — it is like a bad farm, 
no tillage will make anything of it — it is an exotic, 
it won't grow in our cold climate. 

Arthur battled for his experiment. 

" These run better, I think," he said, evidently 
convinced that the fault lay in the reader. 



^* Aye for the planks of the ships the sea-worm and canker 

have fretted. 
Aye for the mast bedded deep in the labouring heaps of 

the sand-drift. 
Aye for the pennon of crimson, the slippery dark weed 

hath tangled. 
Aye for the cable untwisted, and loosened, and shredded, 

and soddened. 
Rough with the sea-shell, and crisp with the salt of the 

glittering crystals." 



12 GREATHBART. 

" Very clever, the tone of the lament. Well, I 
do not like thee, Doctor Fell." 

«AUI can say '' 

A knock at the door. 

" Come in — come in." 

"If you please, sir," said Emily, "here's old 
Penna come to ask you to lend him an old black 
coat to go to his son's funeral in, and missus says 
of course you won't do nothing of the kind." 

" Nonsense ! Let him have that old one with 
the new cuffs directly — ^it is in the right-hand 
drawer ; and tell him to take care of it. That's 
rather cool, though, of Penna," he said, turning to 
Arthur, as the door closed behind sable Emily. 

"Well, I think perhaps it is," said Arthur, 
laughing. " I'd see him further before Fd let him 
wear one of my coats !" 

"To follow Scripture, I ought, you know, 
Arthur, to give him my Inverness cape also ; but 
he shall wait for that till it gets a little older, my 
income not being very remarkable. But, bless me, 
if there's not Mrs. and Miss Tregellas stopping 
at the gate. 

And so it was ; a little pony-carriage had just 
dashed up to the door, and out of it were stepping 
two ladies and a little girl. In a moment or two 
their violet ribbons fluttered past the window. 
Then came a little natty knock. 

Arthur felt all at once conscious of the blood 
in his heart rising in some extraordinary sort of 
spring-tide, then a fire seemed to break out in his 



^P^^^I^r^^^9»C^ 



r^ 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 13 

cheeks^ but that his pride forced back, and he felt 
an eager but half-anxious curiosity to know how 
Lucy would receive him. 

Mr. Trevena went himself to the door, and 
ushered in the two ladies and Clara in his cheer* 
ful, kindly way, for there was no vinegar in his 
religion, he was a sincere and warm-hearted man, 
who did not waste time in unmeaning apologies. 
As they entered, Arthur stepped forward and 
shook hands with them both. 

There was a certain self-conscious deference in 
the way he shook Lucy's proffered hand. She, 
too, was cordial, natural, and frank as usual, 
but he saw in a moment that it was a manner 
meant for everyone, and by no means directed 
to him. Her eyes were clear, limpid, and brown 
as those of a wild dove, but there seemed no 
recognition in them. Her smile was cold, al- 
most repelling, and did not vary, whether it fell 
on him or Trevena. Could there be anger lurking 
under the sunlit ice of that unusual manner ? 

" Why, too," thought Arthur, " does she talk so 
little, and with such careless indifference, as if her 
mind was not with the words." 

Mrs. Tregellas, a clear-complexioned, bustling, 
pleasant matron, of seven-and-forty, looking bright 
with the cold weather, and removing her driving- 
gloves, launched into chat, in which Lucy contrived 
so to mingle as to prevent any divisions of conver- 
sation. 

" And the pig, how did it turn out ?" 



14 GREATHEART. 

" Oh I yes, liow did it turn out ?" 

"It died with fortitude," said Mr. Trevena, 
patting the palm of his hand with a paper cutter, 
"it made a goodly ending at the turn o' the 
tide. He weighed twice as much as his elder 
brother, and became, indeed, latterly, so fat, that 
old Pena had to sit up all night and feed him with 
a spoon !" 

The ladies looked at each other and laughed. 
Lucy in her own merry, silvery way, like a peal 
of faiiy bells. 

" Nothing in life became him so much as the 
leaving it. I told them not to tell me when they 
killed him, because he was a favourite of mine ; 
so when the butcher came I put wool in my 
ears, and walked to Minster to get out of the 
way." 

" It always seems Jike homicide," said Arthur, 
" when a pig's killed in a village." 

" So it does," said Lucy, with just one moment's 
glance at the speaker. 

" And so the Exhibition is closed at last, I see 
from the papers," said Mrs. Tregellas ; ^' and Lucy 
is the only one of us who saw it." 

"Were you pleased with it, Miss Tregellas?" 
said Arthur. 

" Yes, I was pleased ; but there was too much 
to see, and the best things, the pictures, were al- 
ways so crowded." 

"Our friends, the Barkers," said Mrs. Tre- 
gallas, say that when the organ played its last 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 1 5 

grand farewell, and it began to get dark, and 
Eimmel's scented fountain ceased, it was quite 
pathetic to see the lingering people, sorry to leave 
the scene of a whole summer^s enjoyment." 

" T don't believe much myself in exhibitions," 
said Trevena ; " they only change the direction of 
trade, they don't increase it. They are got up by 
vain men to gain pubUcity, and to offer opportu- 
nities for fussy displays, so the Forge says." 

" Which never said a sound good-natured thing 
yet, and never praises anyone but Lord Derby 
and Littlemore the poet." 

" You are quite right, Arthur," said Mrs. Tregel- 
las ; " isn't he, Lucy I" 

" I can't bear the Forge^^ said Lucy, refusing 
any direct accordance with Arthur's views, 

"Poor Prince Albert," said Mr. Trevena, 
" thought exhibitions would be marts for the inter- 
change of ideas," said Mr. Trevena ; " but I can 
trace no special practical benefit derived from 
them. Things worth buying need no exhibitors to 
bring them from the Continent." 

Mr. Trevena here rang the bell to send Emily 
for her missus. But Emily, upon receiving the 
order, opened her sable lips and delivered a short 
oracle. 

"If you please mum — sir — missus begs her 
compliments to Missus and Miss Tregellas, and is 
sorry that she is doing something that she cannot 
well leave, and hope they'll excuse her." 

Trevena shrugged his shoulders. 



16 GREATHEART. 

" That's the pig being salted," he said drily. 

" What Lilly and I really came for, Mr.Trevena," 
said Mrs. Tregellas, ** was to just take one look at 
your school." 

" Just one little peep," said Lucy. 

" And so you shall— of course you shall. Ar- 
thur, come, put on your hat and go with us. 
My eldest class, I must inform you, is absent 
collecting eleemosynary wood for Guy Fawkes's 
auto-da-fe; but the little things are all there. 
You High Church people don't burn Guys, do 
you?" 

" Oh 1 yes, we do," said Lucy, laughing ; " and 
a Pope too. There are no Roman Catholics near 
us to be hurt by that religious ceremonial." 

There was a delicious sense of gentle irony in 
the manner in which this was said. 

The road to the school, to Arthur^s secret, but 
intense delight, was so narrow that it compelled 
Lucy, but evidently against her will, to allow her 
mother, Clara, and Mr. Trevena to walk first, 
while she and Arthur followed, for a moment or 
two without speaking. 

At last, with a coldness too severely rigid to be 
real, Lucy said, 

" Do you compete for Mr. Hookem's silver cup, 
Mr. Tolpedden!" 

"Yes; and we meet at the ^ Merry Maidens' on 
Tuesday week. I hope we shall see you there." 

" I suppose papa will take us," said Lucy, with 
almost more indifference than the answer needed. 



THE PERPETUAL CURATE. 1 7 

Arthur could not bear this any longer. 

" Miss Tregellas," he said, in a low voice, " I 
am afraid I have done something to offend you?" 

Lucy was silent for a moment. 

" Nothing went wrong, 1 hope, about St. Tudy's 
fair r 

" Only this," Lucy uttered the words quietly, 
" that you did not keep your promise — but then, 
what are promises f " 

*^I did — not — keep — my promise !" said Arthur, 
astonished. 

Love looks at first so like his twin-brother, 
Friendship, that he can scarcely be distinguished 
apart. Both Arthur and Lily, as they talked, 
felt an interest in the conversation, but did not 
dare to consider from whence the interest arose. 
Yet Lucy could not conceal that she was hurt at 
the non-performance of the promise about the fair 
at St. Tudy; while Arthur's eagerness in self-de- 
fence would have betrayed his secret to any in- 
different person. 

" Indeed, Miss Tregellas, on my honour I left 
Bradbrain, Lucas, and Fitzhugh on their straight 
way home to your f ather^s house," 

" The pair arrived about midnight, and in a hor- 
rible state, singing, shouting, and defying my 
father. It was all mamma could do to induce him 
not to have them turned out of doors." 

" I am very sorry, and very astonished at Brad- 
brain ; I did not think he could ever forget that 
he was a gentleman " 

VOL. U. C 



18 OREATHEART. 

" Some one did tell papa that you encouraged 
them to remain." 

" Whoever said so, I deny it, Miss Tregellas," 
said Arthur, lingering at a turn in the road, in 
order to emphasize his sentence ; " whoever said so 
uttered an intentional lie. I left their party only 
when they had already started, or pretended to 
start, for St. Petrock's ; and I kept my promise to 
the letter, in all but the coming with them to the 
rectory door." 

Lucy looked up, and smiled — sunshine seemed 
again to brighten in her eyes. She seemed so glad 
at Arthur^s contradiction of the report, that she 
did not make any effort to show that she was 
pleased at the earnestness of his defence, and 
that she implicitly believed it. 

" I am glad, Mr. Tolpedden, that the story was 
not true. I found it hard to believe you regardless 
of a promise." 

" You could not think that I had broken it ?" 

" No, I did not for a long time — not even when 
papa became so angry, and complained of you and 
Mr. Bradbrain for not having prevented it ; but 
afterwards, when ^" 

Arthur was too generous a fellow to accuse 
Bradbrain of having led Lucas and Fitzhugh into 
the discreditable revel. 

^^ Who was it spread the report! Will you tell 
me I" 

" No. That I may not tell you, so do not ask 



me.^ 



THE CAPITULATION. 19 

» 

By this time they had reached the school-room 
door, and the conversation ceased. 

That afternoon, when Mr. Trevena returned 
home, his terrible sister opened the door for him. 
She was followed by Emily, who carried the almost 
empty soup-vessel, to which her mistress pointed. 
All Miss Trevena said was these few words in a 
hollow and prophetic voice, 

" John, this is most unfeeling conduct ! You'll 
never get salt to your bread ; no, not if you live for 
three hundred years !" 



CHAPTER II. 

THE CAPITULATION. 

THE morning after the mesmeric lecture was a 
hard frost — a black frost. The road was 
rough and wrinkled as the hide of an old elephant. 
The wind blew keen and cold over the frozen fields 
and shook down frosty fur ciystals from the 
branches of the trees. 

Mrs. Davis, of the ^oscastle post-office, was 
sorting the morning mail, when Sampy again pre- 
sented himself at the half door. Not this time in 
a slin k ing half -deprecating way, but with a bold 
sanctimoniousness peculiar to himself — a confidence 
was in his walk, and in every gesture. 

There was about Sampy just that air of quiet 
triumph with which a veteran gamekeeper goes to 

c2 



20 OBEATHEABT. 

a trap, with the certainty of finding in it the ver- 
min for which he had set the bait the night before. 
Yes ; Sampy was as sure of the bird in the bush 
$UB if it was the bird in the hand. 

The Dowser was no special favourite with Mrs. 
Davis, who was a strict Churchwoman, and had a 
hatred of mining speculations, by which her good 
husband had once been bitten. So she went on 
sorting the packs of letters, and tucking them into 
the little nest of pigeon-holes behind her. 

"Good momen, Missus Davis; how d'yefadgeys 
'twere now ? (how d'ye get on)" 

"Pure and brave, thankee, Mister Sandoe. 
What can I do for you t" 

" There's a letter for me, Mrs. Davis, if I'm not 
wrong." 

f' Yes, Mr, Sandoe, I think there is." 

As Mrs. Davis said this, she dashed at a distant 
pigeon-hole, and drew forth a dozen or so of local 
letters, directed to the Post-oflSce, Boscastle, and 
shuffled thein over with a practised hand. 

" Nojj Mr. Sandoe ; there's no letter for 'ee," 

Sandoe turned to go away, but reluctantly; 
before he reached the doojr he turned and came 
back. 

" Yes, MrQ. Davis,'' said he, " Pm a believer in 
special Providences, even for a poor sinner like 
me ; and there's something tells me, marm, that 
the rainbow did not shine over me this morn- 
ing for nothing. Please to look again, for I feel 
something working in me like balm, marm, and it 



THE CAPITULATION. 21 

tells me, plain and clear, that there is a letter." 

"Drat the manl" thought Mrs. Davis, as she 
again tipped letter by letter over with the fore- 
finger of her right hand, and holding them with 
the left. ^*Oppy — no; Spargo — Williams — no; 
Balmom — Treweras — no; Tremwith (that must 
be sent on) — Gowennap — no; Towan — Mussel- 
white — no; Chacewater — no, Mr. Sandoe; Ijut 
what's this little one that's slipped under the big 
envelope for Lady Rostrevor ! Why, deary me, 
if it is not for you 1" 

The Dowser clutched at it as a hawk clutches 
at the bird it is dissecting. His eyes turned up- 
wards — the purple side of his face grew of a deep 
liver colour. 

" Hallelooliah r he exclaimed, "let me erect 
here an Ebenezer. Mrs. Davis, I told you I had 
something telling me there was a letter, and here 
it is. Lord be praised for all things !" 

" Well, Mr. Sandoe might have thanked me for 
my trouble, I think — the prechen curmudgeon,'' 
said Mrs. Davis, as she watched the Dowser walk 
quickly down, without a word more, towards St« 
Petrock's, literally devouring the contents of the 
letter, the arrival of which had caused him such 
delight. " It was Mr. Mordred's writing, too," she 
thought. "I suppose it is his bill for attending poor 
old Roby ; but bills don't generally give one much 
pleasure. Drat the rogue I People sez he keeps alf 
the charity collections for hisself. He's as hoUoW 
as a clomen cat (plaister cast), sure 'nuff " 



22 GBEATHEAKT. 

Samp/s letter ran thus : 

" November 5, 1862. 

" My dear Mr. S andoe, 

" Pray call as soon as you can find it 
convenient, to talk over the mysterious speculation 
of which you gave me an inkling. I value your 
experience, and have much reliance on your great 
judgment in mining matters; my only wish is 
to secure myself, as a prudent man is bound to do, 
before he commits himself to any partnership 
bargain. 

" I remain, my dear Mr. Sandoe, 
"Faithfully yours, 

" Enoch Mordred. 

" Mr. Sampson Sandoe." 

" I have him in a cleft stick I" said Sampy to 
himself, grinding his teeth, "that I do naw; 
he's so full of trix, he'd chete the old Dewel 
hisself, ef ha cud ; but you shan't chete me — ^you 
shan't chete me, Mister Mordred, not till there's 
only half a dozen pilchards left to salt in all Corn- 
wall, even then I'd wrestle him, and gee which 
would go down on the planchen (floor) first, for 
I've not been through the wilderness for nothing, 
that I tell 'ee ; I've had the marks of your teeth 
in me before to-day, you old blood-sucker ! — and 
now it's my turn. I'll have money for the blood 
I've lost, and that's a good bargain, this side of the 
Tamar, any how." 

Mr. Horace Beaumont Belleville, the gifted 



THE CAPITULATION. 23 

Miss Juliana^ and the suffering serf of a pianist, 
were all gone; a slime of deceit and ignorant 
belief was the only trace they had left behind them. 
Sampy's artifice had been completely successful. 

Mr, Mordred was out on his round. Mr. Brad- 
brain, smart and glossy as ever, had tucked up 
his cuffs, and was busy preparing grey powder for 
a poor patient old woman, who sat with two or 
three other bandaged men and children, on a 
bench in the surgery, while an assistant, a hand- 
some, sly, pert-looking boy, in a waistcoat with 
serge sleeves, was bruising up some frothy salve 
in a large pestle and mortar, which stood close 
to a grooved pill-making machine, and an enor- 
mous bottle of opodeldoc. 

^* There, take that. Uncle Jan, night and morn- 
ing," he said, as he handed an old man a bottle of 
medicine. "Does your son work now on the 
Tucking Mills at Hallenbeagle ?" 

«Iss." 

"Very well, then, give him these pills for 
Captain Williams. And now, how are you, 
aunty?" 

" Dreadful bad, Mr. Bradbrain, all geddy and 
nohow, and all day and night my poor head do go 
^bezanzoonT ^bezanzoonT jest so. One day 
there's a lodgement, next day there's an ailment, 
third day a sourment, and so it do go on all 
the week, like an engine wheel; and awl plaze 
sure it never comes round right neither — it 
don't 1" 



2 1 OREATHEABT. 

Umdbruin woU understood the Cornish people, 
till iitiirdy, indopondent) and fond of equality, so 
wiiriii-liuurti;d, ilirowd, yet simple, brave, and 
lutiiL'tii, Hu joked with them, remembered their 
iumWy itiTuiri, and did not desert them to attend 

^^ l^'irHt or lost coor'' (spell of work), people said, 
*♦ therii'B no pride about hem." 

It wuM JuMt as Mr. Bradbrain had finished his 
tiittk, and was dividing the grey powder into little 
luiU|)H, imtji on its square of thin white paper, that 
a coufidtiut knock camo at the door, and in walked 
Haiu|)yi his snuff-coloured coat buttoned up 
Hpruci'lyi and his big plated spectacles (spurtacles 
tliuy aru called in Cornish) on — this last badge of 
distinction was Saropy's mode of marking the 
cliumx of careful dress and self-consequence. As 
for liis wliito rope of a neck-cloth, it was positively 
not more than three weeks from the washing- 
tub. 

How are *ee, soase (friends), Aunt Betty, Louis, 
Siah (Josiah), a blessing be upon this house, and 
all them as owns it. Morning, Mr. Bradbrain, and 
my respects to 'ee." 

*^ You people wait here," said Mr. Bradbrain, 
turning down his cuffs with that usual smart 
promptitude that distinguished him, "Tve got 
some business to transact. Mr. Sampy, come into 
the parlour with me." 

Bradbrain shut with care a glass door that led 
from the parlour into the green -house, and then 



THE CAPITULATION, 25 

placed an arm-chair near the fire for Sampy, with 
mach affectation of politeness. 

" Now out with it, Uncle Sampy ; let's be frank 
together/' he said, as he seated himself opposite 
the Dowser, one foot gaily on the hob ; " out with 
it. I am entitled to make terms for any bona fide 
offer you may make ; but you must remember we 
were once bitten by certain asbestos on Oraddock 
Moor, that turned out rubbishing actynolite, not 
worth the counting-house punch that we gave away," 

" Bygones should be bygones, Mr. Bradbrain. 
The Lord giveth, you know, and the Lord taketh 
away ! I tell 'ee it's a wall of pure copper this 
time, a holy blessed wall, et es ; the Lord revealed 
it to me, the blessed divining rod confirmed et, 
and the signs have been sent. Oh I Mr. Brad* 
brain, do not push from you the Lord's gifts. 
Those who have dismissed beggars from their doors 
have sometimes turned away angels unawares. 
Don't despise the day of small things — don't 'ee 1" 

"Bosh!" said Mr. Bradbrain, with his usual 
snorting, insolent laugh, as he rang the bell, and 
ordered the wine in. "No humbug or canting, 
Sampy, will make me sign your contract ; it won't 
do with this child, Sampy I What I want is facts, 
proof of money's worth, not the tricks with a haael- 
twig, that you gull half-drunk miners with. 
Where is this gold mine of yours t Come, take a 
glass of wine." 

" No wine for me, thankee, Mr. Bradbrain — Fm 
not a cheel van (little child), to have secrets 



26 GREATHEART. 

wormed out of me by liquor/' said Sampy, sternly, 
and in a more natural voice than usual. ^^ Tve got a 
good thing here, Mr. Bradbrain, and I want a good 
price for it I" 

*^But how are we to know it is a good thing, 
Sampy t" said Bradbrain, filling and tossing off a 
glass of wine with imperturbable sang-froid^ " how 
are we to know it, that's the rub, Sampy." 

" Sign me a contract, granting me one-third of 
the profits, no less — ^I won't bate a crown o't, if 
the secret died with me — the divining rod has told 
me, them as will soon be in Heaven have told 
me where the metal is, and I'm not going to part 
with the secret, and so I tell 'ee ; them as snares 
pilchards deserves more than the fins, Mr. Brad- 
brain." ♦ 

Bradbrain stooped forward and eyed Sampy, as 
he said this, as keenly as if he was a lunatic 
against whom a commission de lunatico was about 
to be instituted. He stooped so close that he 
could see himself reduced to a Liliputian seated in 
the centre of the pupils of Sampy's eyes. Having 
completed the examination, he threw himself back 
in his chair, tossed off another glass of sherry, and 
laughed with his usual neighing snort. 

"By all the canters that ever canted, and all 
the decanters that ever decanted too, if I don't 
really begin to think there is some secret worth 
having after all." 

" The blessed divining rod told me, the blue 
flame at night told me, the knockers told me, and 



THE CAPITULATION. 27 

the angels in Heaven have at last backed them all 
up. May I never rise from this seat alive, Mr. 
Bradbrain, if I haven't got the right tecket on this 
time 1 Now be just. You know I have led you 
and Mr. Mordred to money afore now." 

" Well, there was a thousand or two we picked 
out of Wheal Basset, Sampy, but we lost it all 
again, and more too, remember, at Gonamena, 
besides the cursed mull at Grambler and St. Day." 

"We ought to have trusted to the divining 
rod—" 

"Death and hell to the d — d divining rod," 
shouted Bradbrain, as he started up, his face suf- 
fusing with a yellow red blood and his eyes di- 
lating with passion, "keep the rod in pickle for 
your cheating mining captains aria poor blind 
London gulls, but don't thrust it down my throat ; 
and come, Dowser, let us be frank together — there's 
no cheating with us. Don't beat about the bush 
any more — ^you'll not get a shilling more out of us 
by it, so I tell you." 

"There's no bush here and no beating, Mr. 
Bradbrain," said Sampy, smiling craftily, and 
eyeing the broken toe of one of his boots. " The 
lode bears from 25 degrees to 50 degrees south 
by east, and Captain Thomas, of Dolcoath, says 
that's the best bearing known, and he's A 1 all 
over Cornwall; there's no horse here — it's a 
cliampion lode, I tell 'ee, there's no heave in it for 
a good mile. The gossan is rich brown and 
crumbly, and there's quartz and fluor spar in it, and 



28 GRBATHEART. 

they are as sure signs of good copper as gulls are of 
a shoal of mackerel. I tell ee if Cambrea brings in 
6.2893, this'U double it. There'll be lOOOZ. divi- 
dends to every 21, share, and it's easy working 
too. This lode won't dwindle or split into strings, 
please sure. I've tried the ore myself, and it will 
ticket at Redruth for as big a figure as any in 
the county, take it where you will. It's a 
champion lode,. I tell ee — proved champion, and 
I thank the Lord for it, as for all other mercies." 

^^Now, no preaching, none of your sickening 
cant, Sampy, or I shall begin to suspect it is all 
humbug, like that St. Day business, or the cursed 
Badger Dale." 

Sampy had poured forth his recapitulation of 
the virtues of the new mine with the intense unc- 
tion of an enthusiast, who is himself completely con- 
vinced. Even the purple quartering of his face (to 
speak heraldically)grew darker and more sanguineus 
under the excitement. Glowing with confidence, 
he now took the glass of wine proffered him by his 
astute companion, drank it slowly, and licked his 
lips as he put down the glass. 

"Creature comforts," he said; "but man's a 
weak vessel, and requires 'em good — halleloojah I 
The flesh is weak, and needs 'em good." 

Bradbrain looked hard into the fire for a mo- 
ment. Then he rubbed his chin, rose and left the 
room. He returned in a moment with a sheet of 
foolscap paper, a penny stamp, a pen and ink. 

" But I want guarantees, Sampy, my man." 



THE CAPITULATION. 29 

" Guarantees f — zoundkins ! what ! when I only 
ask for a third of what's found, nar better, nar 
wuss. No devisions until profits — ain't that fairt 
Before the Lord I tell ee it's a brau' keenly lode — 
a champion lode, and you'll be well able to spare a 
third — I can get other men to help me, I can," 

" Well, I agree," said Bradbrain, slowly, reluc- 
tantly, and thoughtfully ; " here, I have drawn up 
the conditions and signed them." 

Sampy read the deed over with an uncontrollable 
chuckle. 

" To have and to hold^^ he said ; " I like that to 
have and to hold. To have and to hold — that 
sounds right, that do. There shall be no May 
games with me ; I've been in the wilderness too 
long for that — I fought with wild beasts at Cam- 
borne too often for partnership trix — well here I 
put my name, Sampson Sandoe — now, that's bound 
fast. You and Mr. Mordred will some day or 
other be glad when I came, as the bringer of glad 
tidings." 

"And now, then, for the secret," said Bradbrain 
eagerly, as he leaned both arms forward on the 
table, and rested his chin upon them. 

Sampy coughed twice, as if the secret was hard 
to bring up. 

" You must know, Mr. Bradbrain, that my old 
step-father, Roby Trevose, used, years ago, to work 
at the mines in this very district. When they were 
abandoned he went off to South Ameriky, to the 
Bio del Monte, and there he remained for fifteen 



30 OREATHEART. 

years, while I was seeking metals with the divining 
rod, working as cappen at the Great Wheal 
Tor, and toiling in the brick fields of Egypt gene- 
rally. When my step-father returned, he and I 
and my wife went to live together at St. Just, but 
there the bulls of Bashan compassed me round." 

"I remember, Sarapy, something about the 
Burial Club row, and your wife's and wife's sister's 
death." 

"The wicked were extinguished as the fire in thorns; 
but they drove me into the wilderness again, for 
all that, before I trod 'em under foot. Well, then, 
we all came to St. Petrock's, and there one day 
the Lord directed my hand, in Roby's absence, out 
seal-shooting, to a paper in which a comrade of 
his, who had died at Rio Janierer, when he was in 
the South Ameriky, had written down the bear- 
ings and character of a rich copper lode, left un- 
touched by him and his mates, when the mines 
were given up in these parts. When Roby re- 
turned, and I confronted him with it, it frightened 
him ; he confessed the whole story, made a clean 
breast of it, and told me he had been only waiting, 
hoping to buy the land for ourselves, or to get some 
one to do it for us. From that time we used to often 
go at night and work at the place, and bring home 
lumps of copper, which I sold away at Camborne, 
as specimens, and sich like ^ traade.' We waited 
long and patiently, and now our reward cometh." 

" But whei:e is the mine ?" 

Sampy looked round him, as if the very chairs 



THE CAPITULATION. 81 

and fire-irons had ears ; then he whispered into 
Bradbrain's ear, 

" The Old MarCs working at EndellionJ^ 

« What ! on No Man's Land f— that's the Tol- 
peddens." 

« Yes." 

" Why, yon old duffer, you are selling the skin 
before the bear's killed I" 

" No, no ; I tell 'ee, it's easy to get it — ^they 
bank with Mr. Mordred. It is easily done — ^you 
both know how to tie a man fast with paper, you 
know how to draw shy birds into the snare of the 
fowler ; and at all events, you don't suffer, for I 
only get a third of what you gain." 

^^ I really don't see my way to it at present," 
said Bradbrain, gloomily ; *' Tolpedden is a proud, 
hard dog — ^he'U part with nothing; he owes us 
money, that he won't pay ; but that's only to show 
his self-importance, because Mordred's quick presS' 
ing style riJes him. As for the young fellow, 
there's no making him drink, or play at cards, or 
anything — he's a devilish deal too sharp and sus- 
picious for me to get over him easily ; now, if it 
had been that hair-brained fool Lucas, that would 
have been quite another pair of shoes. We've no 
great reason, Sampy, to trust you. Now, come, 
how did it happen, man, that no one but Roby 
knew the secret of the copper lode — now, come, 
man, how was that 1" 

" There was, there was, sir, many of the tri- 
buters as knew of it ; it had been a plan of theirs, 



32 GBEATHEABT. 

when old Squire Tolpedden began to get tired of the 
expense, to club together and keep the secret of 
the find to themselves, till the land could be got 
for next to nothing, if anything happened to the 
young squire, who was then fighting in India. 
But one by one the yellow fever took 'em all to 
himself, all but Boby and Billam Tremuan, who 
drank himself to death on his way back." 

But now, leaving these worthies contriving how 
best to outwit our good friends the Tolpeddens, 
we will follow Mr. Mordred on his voyage of dis- 
covery, after having first taken a glance at wrong- 
headed Mr. Waverton. 



CHAPTER in. 

THE FEAST OF ST. LUCIFER. 

MR. WAVERTON had dug out Saint Lucifer 
from the lowest strata of the Acta Sanctoruniy 
^here, to me an irreverent simile, that worthy 
had long lain imbedded, like a hard-boiled egg in 
a pigeon pie. 

Not that this saint, with the ambiguous name, 
had any special attractions for our young eccle- 
siologist, but then he served as a weapon to aim a 
blow against Guy Fawkes. Saint Lucifer was an 
anchorite of the fourth century, who astounded 
Mesopotamia with miracles. He healed three 
lepers, and cured several agues. Once, while 



THE FEAST OF ST. LIJCIFEB. 33 

standing in a Syrian garden^ with his arms raised 
above his head in adoration, a sparrow came and 
built a nest in his hand. The worthy saint, 
touched with a fine compassion, remained without 
moving, till the bird had hatched its young. 
Eventually the good but wrong-headed man, over- 
flowing with zeal, confronted the Roman pro- 
consul in full court, and as that official perversely 
refused to instantly embrace Christianity, St. 
Lucifer struck him a tremendous buffet, for 
which the good saint naturally enough suffered 
death half an hour afterwards. 

Mr. Waverton was one of those restless young 
ecclesiastics who, disliking the Church of England 
as cold and heartless, wander about in Vanity 
Fairs of semi-Papistical upholstery, in search of 
some impossible ideal, which ultimately leads them 
into the muddy pitfall of monkery, or the slough of 
spurious infallibility. 

It was about four o'clock on the fifth of No- 
vember, that Mr. Trevena was on his way to Camel- 
ford workhouse to see an old parishioner of his, 
who had been lately condemned to that enviable 
home for the aged English. He was in high 
spirits with the walk, and the prospect of a fra- 
grant and demonstrative Protestant bonfire in the 
evening. 

With his black wide-awake, his Inverness cape, 

and his stout stick, Mr. Trevena, as he strode 

along, ruminating over schemes of now impracticable 

philanthropy, was a pleasant object either for man 

VOL. II. D 



34 GBEATHEABT. 

or angel to contemplate. The sun was preparing 
to set, and, like Nelson at Trafalgar, had arrayed 
himself in his most gorgeous uniform for his parting 
scene. In some persons a pebble or a shadow 
is as good as a pyramid or a mountain, as a text 
for meditation. The sight of St. Tudy's from the 
hill above, presently lost, as he descended into a 
hollow, reminded Mr. Trevena of a passage in 
good old Thomas Fuller's honest contemplations. 

The passage of the pious and punning old divine 
runs thus : 

^^ Travelling on the plain, I discovered Salis- 
bury steeple many miles off; coming to a de- 
clivity, I lost the sight thereof, but climbing up 
the next hill, the steeple grew out of the ground 
again. Yea, I often found it and lost it, till, at 
last, I came safely to it, and took my lodging near 
it. It fareth thus with us whilst we are wayfaring 
to heaven. Mounted on the Pisgah top of some 
good meditation, we get a glimpse of our celestial 
Canaan. But when, either on the flat of an 
ordinary temper, or in the fall of an extraordinary 
temptation, we lose the view thereof. Thus in 
the sight of our soul; heaven is discovered, covered 
and recovered, till, though late, at last, though 
slowly, surely, we arrive at the haven of our 
happiness." 

It was while brooding over this quaint medita- 
tion that Mr. Trevena reached a turning of the 
road leading to the church, and halted to look 
down on it and upon the village that it over-towered. 



THE FEAST OF ST. LUCIFEB. 35 

Just at this moment a procession^ organized by 
Mr. Waverton, emerged from the church doors, 
and passed through the Lych Gate. As it came 
towards him Mr. Trevena drew back behind a tree 
to see it pass. 

Waverton was a man with more money than 
brains^ and could afford to indulge in these mis- 
chievous fantasies. The toadies and servile train 
that always surround a well-to-do clergyman, the 
agreeing clerk, the assenting pew-opener, the 
cringing schoolmaster, are all always ready volun- 
teers on these occasions. Mr. Trevena summed 
them all up at a glance. 

First came the elder school-children, awkward 
and lumbering, in little white surplices ; then the 
clerk and schoolmaster, carrying lighted wax 
candles, of all things in the world I In the centre 
paced foolish Mr. Waverton, with a violet cape 
over a sort of robe, which bore a huge worked cross, 
reaching from the nape of his neck almost to his 
boots. Then followed the pew-opener and sexton, 
carrying little white banners, on which was in- 
scribed, in fantastic Gothic letters worked in 
vermilion silk, " Sancte Lttciferey ora pro nobis /" 
Then followed two or three more choristers, singing 
an uncouth old chant ; and the procession wound 
its way into the village, twisting its varicolours 
like those jointed snake toys that children use. 

Mr. Trevena followed the galvanized relics of 
mediaBvalism till they were lost round a turning. 

"Pretty foolery," he said; *^as if we hadn't 

d2 



36 GREATHEART. 

enough saints in Cornwall without importing 
them r 

Just as he uttered these words, the bray and 
bang of a noisy village band, approaching from 
the direction of his own village, startled him, and 
at the same moment a shout, almost loud and harsh 
enough to be called a howl, made him hurry for- 
ward, the more especially that with it came a 
wrangle of angry voices, and sounds as of a scuffle 
or quarrel ; then 

" Remember, remember, the fifth of November, 
The gunpowder treason and plot, 
We see no reason why gunpowder treason 
Should ever be forgot," 

was shouted at the utmost pitch of some thirty 
stalwart voices. 

The simple fact to anticipate Mr. Trevena's 
intervention was this, the people of St. Tud/s 
being for the most part dissenters, and extremely 
opposed to their young rector's innovations, had 
gone to Endellion to join the Guy Fawkes proces- 
sion, which, by Sampy's advice, had then returned 
to St. Tudy's to discomfort Mr. Waverton ; un- 
luckily for that gentleman, the two hostile pro- 
cessions had met just opposite the " Wharncliffe 
Arms." 

Civil war seemed imminent, for already one of 
the banners had been torn down by a drunken 
miner, and one of the Guy Fawkes bearers had 
bitten the dust under a well-planted blow from the 
indignant sexton of St. Tudy's. 



THE FEAST OF ST. LUCIFER. 37 

The Guy Fawkes, dressed like a Pope, in an old 
dressing-gown, with three hats on his head, one 
upon the top of the other, pale tow-hair, to make 
it resemble Mr. Waverton, a pipe in the corner of 
his mouth, and a lanthorn in his hand, reclined in 
his chair like one of the drunken Dutchmen, in 
some coarse revel of Teniers ; his head hung pen- 
sively down, awaiting the result, as his bearers 
mobbed the procession, puffed out the lights, and 
mocked the alarmed children. 

^*It's the abomination of desolations allooded 
to by the prophet I" cried Sampy. " Down with 
the gastly bufflehead, with the Pope's red tremm- 
ings on 'em! Look at 'em!" 

" Dear, mussy I only look at 'em," said one of 
Sampy's abetters. " Lazy pattick, we'll have no 
Popish tricks here." 

" Gurt ugly droozenhead, with his may games," 
said a third. ^^ Knack him on the head with a 
cobbing hammer, I would, and good riddance of 
em. 

A mob soon effervesces into cruelty. The 
calm, pale, indignation of Mr. Waverton, as, con- 
temptuously, concealing his alarm, he ordered the 
procession forward, enraged the fanatics more even 
than resistance would have done. 

^^I are a man that as a man. Zackly like that, 
my dear," said the clerk, commencing an assault 
on Sampy, who fell back shouting — 

" Knack down the whole pair (company). We'll 
have no Papishery in St. Tudy's — nor Papishers 1" 



88 GREATHEART. 

"Break 'em in jowds (pieces) 1" cried the most 
truculent of Guy Fawkes' adherents. 

"Tear off bis Bablonian garments 1" cried 
Sampy. "He's a black sheep with the wrong 
brand on 'em. He's only fit for the burning !" 

"You're poor, misguided people," said Mr. 
Waverton, turning on them ; " but you will never 
prevent me doing what I think right. I love my 
Church, and I am ready to die for it !" 

" Play up the toon, and drown the bufflehead," 
cried Sampy; and the band began that ribald 
tune, " The Cure," in the loudest and most blat- 
ant manner ; the Endellion people joining in the 
chorus, 

^' He wears a cross around his neck, 
He well deserves a rope ; 
He calls Old Nick St. Lucifer, 
He is a perfect Pope !" 

Then they stamped the cadence, as they 

howled — 

" A Pope ! a Pope ! a Pope I a Pope ! 
A Pope ! a Pope 1 a Pope 1 
With all his Romish fooleries, 
He is a perfect Pope /" 

Mr. Waverton turned paler, and more nervous- 
ly angry than before. 

" I'll indict you in the Spiritual Court, every 
one of you," he said. " I declare TU have you all 
fined, so I warn you." 

"Dite away I warn away!" said Sampy, as 
he drew out a box of lucifers, and began to snap 



THE FEAST or ST. LUCIFEB. 39 

them one by one, in allusion to the Mesopotamian 
saint ; " it won't spoil our dinners." 

" Threatened men live long," said another great 
hairy fellow in a blue jersey, probably a fisherman ; 
"let's duck parson in the 'oss pond ;" and as he 
said this he advanced to seize the unfortunate en- 
thusiast by the gown, for Mr. Waverton stood 
there a miniature A'Beckett. 

" We'll warm him," cried a third, pushing 
several of the children against the remaining 
banner-bearer. 

It was at this crisis^ not a moment too late to 
avert the impendbg martTrdom of the modem 
A'Beckett, that Mr. Trevena appeared, a Deus 
worthy of the nodus, striding vigorously towards 
the scene of rival intolerance and mischief. 

A violent tapping at a window arrested 
him ; it was Miss Honoria and Miss Grace Wa- 
verton, aghast and pale with horror, their mouths 
fixed as for screaming, half angry, half terrified. 
They tapped to him sharply, imperiously, and yet 
piteously. Mr. Trevena took o£F his hat, and 
waved his hand, in token of his understanding 
their wish, and of his promise to instantly attend 
to it. 

But a more powerful appeal was still to be made 
to a champion, who, indeed, needed no fresh 
stimulant to exertion. The door of the house 
where the Miss Wavertons were ambushed flew 
open, and out darted two ladies. They were Miss 
Lucy Tregellas and Miss Milly Waverton, pale 



40 OREATHEART. 

with fright, flying like two princesses of Egypt 
before a dragon. 

"Oh! pray, pray, dear Mr. Trevena!" they 
cried with one voice, "do pray save him from 
these horrid creatures !" 

" There is no danger, my dear Miss Waverton, 
and my dear Miss Tregellas," he said, disengaging 
his arm from the little fingers of the frightened 
and bright-eyed suppliants. " I'll soon scare the 
fellows back ; bullies and ruffians are always 
cowards, and they consider me one of their own 
party." 

In a moment he was in the thick of the crowd, 
and standing by the side of the terrified Mr. Wa- 
verton, who had now quite lost his head. With 
one hand he pushed the chief assailant from him, 
with the other he waved back the crowd of Guido 
Fawkes's partisans, fixing his eyes specially on 
Sampy, who cowered beneath his fixed look. As 
for the choristers and banner-bearers, they had 
long since stolen away ; and Mr. Trevena had no 
one to back him, if his first appeal should prove 
unsuccessful. 

" People of Endellion," he said, " are you drunk 
or mad, that you come here to insult a poor un- 
offending minister of Christ, because he differs 
from you in opinion f You dissenters, who call 
yourselves martyrs because Government compels 
you to pay tithes to support God's worship in 
another way than your own, how can you come 
here to practise that intolerance of which you 



THE FEAST OF ST. LUCIFER. 41 

complain? What! are you burly miners and 
fishermen cowards enough to come here to threaten 
a weak young man who cannot resist yout 
Laugh at his mummeries, stay away from his pro- 
cessions, prevent your wives, sisters, and children 
being beguiled by such tinsel and gewgaws ; but 
do not raise your hand against him, for the man 
who does so becomes a criminal in the eyes of the 
law. It is cowardly and base to assail the weak 
and helpless ; and, in the fever of uncontrolled 
passion, who amongst us knows how soon he may 
become a murderer? To your tents, then, O 
Israel! Let each man worship afte]^ his own 
manner, so that he do not offend against morality, 
break the laws of England, or insult the national 
religion." 

One by one, during this sermon on Intolerance, 
the crowd melted away. When the last had slunk 
off, Mr. Trevena took Waverton's arm, and led him 
quietly home to receive the caresses and rebukes of 
his delighted sisters. That done, after shaking 
hands heartily all round, Mr. Trevena strode 
away. 

" I think, Bernard, we ought to have asked the 
man to stay luncheon," said the managing, business- 
like, and august Miss Honoria. 

"He is a shocking Low Churchman, and I 
cannot endure him," replied her grateful brother. 

" You all ought to be ashamed of yourselves for 
treating him so," said Milly, half crying, half 
laughing. 



I 

t 



42 aBF4ATHEART. 

The course of true love never did run 
smooth. 



CHAPTER IV. 

roby takes his secrets out of mr. 
mordred's reach. 

THE author sincerely hopes that he is not a snob. 
Neither does he wish to rail snobbishly at snobs. 
He has po desire in the world to expose with 
vulgar indication the small weaknesses and petty 
assumptions of needy people. Plated forks and 
greengrocers in livery, sham heraldry, profusely 
dispensed and unpleasantly obtruded on one, are 
matters of indifference to him, and do not seem to 
him positive proofs of innate wickedness or base- 
ness. Modem society is, in fact, in such a state of 
transition, not to mention checkmate, stoppage, and 
dead lock, that such small offences must needs 
exist. After all, they do not hurt any one very 
seriously. Each class is now so afraid of the other, 
and so meanly tenacious of its own privileges, 
that perhaps even greengrocers in livery, and 
gooseberry champagne, may pass as painful neces- 
sities. It is the fault of no one in particular that 
the professions are crowded and land hard to get. 
What is railed at as snobbery is often only poverty 
under another name. 



roby's secret. 43 

But still the author thinks he knows a snob 
when he sees him, has learned his dia/apiosis^ and 
hates him to his heart. A snob talks of great 
people he does not know, a snob wears vulgar 
jewelry, a snob affects more feeling than he has, a 
snob is ashamed of poor relations, a snob swaggers; 
and is ashamed to show good feeling ; a snob of the 
Mordred class — the tame vulture, the respectable 
hypocrite, may be known by several tokens — 
smooth-brushed black coat and woollen gloves are 
prominent symptoms ; kid gloves are probably too 
worldly for the Mordred family, woollen look 
humble, saving, practical, philanthropicj no plea- 
sant gleam or glint of colour relieved the raven 
darkness of Mr. Mordred's attire. He trampled on 
pride with a secret pride greater than that which 
he condemned. He railed at Pagans, and yet 
worshiped mammon's gilded calf. 

When the eminently worthy banker, doctor, and 
chairman at religious meetings left his house on 
the November morning before alluded to, he did 
not stop to see any patients in St. Petrock's, 
though a dropsy and two low fevers y^ere eager 
to see him, but made his way straight for the 
tabooed cottage of old Boby. 

It was a lowering morning; the air was brown 
and thick with snow, except to the north-east, where 
there was a brown yellow gleam, and here and there 
where blue patches peeped out from among the 
murky clouds, like glimpses of hope in the lot of a 
luckless man. The snow was coming down in 



44 GREATHEABT. 

those little feathery crystals that seem to rather 
rise than fall. The ground was already as white 
as if a miller's waggon had just passed, and the 
banker^s feet left dark marks, as if a portion of 
his shadow and his soul's blackness was left in each 
foot-print. 

Careless of the weather, as men are who have 
a strong absorbing passion working within them, 
^fr. Mordred, with the collar of his greatcoat 
pat up round his ears, walked at his best pace 
down the path leading to the cottage of the old 
miner. 

There by the stye, not far from the big beam of 
drift-wood, on which the half obliterated name of 
the IMtle Betsy could still be discerned, was an old 
woman kneeling scouring a large yellow pan, as 
regardless of the weather as a Red Indian Squaw. 
She was a shrivelled old crone, wearing no cap, but 
with her scanty grey hair strained off her wrinkled 
forehead, and twirled into a tight little knot at the 
back of her head. As she turned to beat in the 
ice with a rusty fragment of a poker in a pail that 
stood near her, she looked the very image of one of 
the Parcae, who had left her shears, wheel, or dis- 
tafif, for a moment's breath of fresh air in the upper 
world. 

To Mr. Mordred's reconnoitering eye. Aunty 
Pierce, for so the old nurse was called, was an 
outlying picket that showed him that he was ap- 
proaching an enemy's camp, and that great caution 
was required for the surprise. His first anxieties 



roby's secret. 45 

were as to the condition of Eoby and the where- 
abouts of Sampy. 

"Well, aunty," he said, "how is Eoby?" 

" Braave and bad, sir ; I think he's passin' away 
— I do. And his nose is so pecked — it es, and, he 
gabbles a parcel of nonsense." 

" I should like to see how the old man is to- 
day." 

" That you mustn't, my dear. * If any one 
says let me go up to un,' said Sampy to me, * don't 
say, iss, sure, but tell them you thenk 'em all the 
same, but Roby is better left alone." 

" Is Sampy at home ?" 

" No, Mr. Mordred, gone to St. Petrock's about 
some letter." 

" Nonsense about Sampy. I must see Eoby, or 
how can I sign his club paper. Just one moment, 
Mrs. Pierre." 

Before Aunty Pierce could decide what course 
to pursue, the prompt doctor had stepped past her 
and entered the forbidden cottage. 

The old man lay on his palette in an inner side 
room, moving uneasily in a feverish sleep, and 
muttering as he lay recollections of old days in 
the mine. He evidently fancied himself blast- 
ing rock in an adit level. 

" The powder's in," muttered the old man ; 
" ram down the tampin on the charge — zacky ; 
and bring the snoff lighted — take care, comrade, 
and don't f oach up against me. Not nuff padder — 
yes, there is, Billum, there's four fingers deep of 



46 GBEATHEAET. 

ut. Now, then," — then his mind wandered 
back to earlier smuggling times. ^^Billum," he 
said, '^ flash your pistol, my dear, there's the brig 
coming round St. Anne's Head. Don't go so 
close, or you'll fall over the cliflf, as your 
father did. Hurrah ! here she comes, like flying 
Isaac, stun sails and all set, we must be off 
for the tubs — I see 'em out there like a shoal of 
pilchards — ^be quicker with the boat, man, — now, 
all together." 

The creak of the door awoke the dying man, 
his glazing eyes turned feebly towards the new 
comer, as his bony hands plucked feverishly at the 
sheets. He evidently mistook Mr. Mordred for 
his step-son. 

" Sampy," he moaned, " dont'ee leave me, my 
dear, so. It's a cold, dirty night to begin the 
journey in. Who's that waving a sheet at the 
window! Dont'ee leave me, Sampy, there's a 
man with a black face keeps looking in at the 
door — ^'tis a poor consam when one gets old and 
hafe bUnd." 

Mr. Mordred stepped to the bed, and felt 
Roby's pulse ; with practised indifference he 
opened one of his eyes with his finger and thumb, 
and looked in at the light fast sinking in the 
socket. Then he let the eyelid fall again, and 
coldly shook his head, as if he had drawn an in- 
fallible conclusion, and began to coolly reconnoitre 
the room. 

A triangular comer cupboard seemed specially 



roby's seceet. 47 

to attract his attention. It contained three tea- 
cups, two empty medicine bottles, a jug with some 
greenish liquid in it, a chipped wine-glass, and a 
small pipkin. 

As he touched the jug and glass, the faint 
chink roused the old man. 

'^ Dont'ee give me more doctor^s stuff, Sampy, 
my dear," he gasped, resting for breath between 
each word; "it's all nought, and it strikes cold 
inwards — it does no good ; nothing now, my dear, 
will keep me from the journey." 

Mordred poured out a little of the liquid in the 
glass, tasted it, spit several times, and looked 
very hard at the jug, then drew from his pocket a 
small phial, about as long as a man's thumb, 
filled it from the jug, and corking up the bottle, 
replaced it in his pocket. 

Then with a quickness not common in so de- 
liberate a man, Mr. Mordred glided from the bed- 
room to the outer room, where Aunty Pierce was 
now busy at some washing. 

" How es he, poor soul ?" said the old woman ; 
"he'll not go till the turn-tide passes the big 
rock in the Cove. He won't be much to lay 
out when he does go — aw I he's such a bag of 
bones I " 

" He's sinking fast. Here, aunty, here's a 
shilling, go as fast as you can to St. Tudy's for 
some brandy, and here's twopence to get you some 
snuff." 

"But suppose any gentlefolks, Mr. Mordred, 



^ 



48 OBEATHEAKT. 

come to see Dunchine, and want the kay of the 
castle, there's money out of my pocket.** 

** If anyone does come, 1*11 give them the key, 
and pay your loss — ^now, quick, for Roby won*t 
live an hour if he doesn't have stimulant. I can 
scarcely feel his pulse.** 

** Aw ! dear, aw ! dear, then he is going at 
last, poor soul, angels about him. 1*11 be off — 
keep the fire up, if Roby wants his medicine, it*s 
in the comer cupboard of the bed. Aw ! how I 
wish Sampy was here !*' 

The instant the greedy, heartless old woman, 
who had attended death-beds till death had no 
longer any terror for her, had shuffled out of 
sight, Mordred darted into the inner room, and 
sitting down by the bedside, took hold of Roby*s 
cold thin hand. The sick man's mind partially 
wandered. 

*^ Let the bearers strike up a hymn,*' he said, 
*' while we rest the coffin here on Arthur's stone. 
Jose es a heavy man, and now we're near the 
mine." 

All at once Roby rose slightly in bed, and 
grasped hold of the doctor's two hands. 

" Sampy, Sarapy, I'm going fast, I mustn't wait 
till the hour^s over — Sampy, don't fritter away 
that mine at Endellion ; it's a brave lode if you 
can once get it from those Tolpeddens. I've kept 
that secret — but it was ill-gotten — ^it's been no use 
to me. Don't believe them when they tell you I 
hocussed Billum's drink in the ship, for I didn't ; 



boby's secret. 49 

he killed liimself with new rum, and so did Tom 
Pearce. Now it is all yours, Sampy — Pm the 
last of the gang that had it ; the rest are under 
ground at Tampico, or in the deep sea levels. It's 
all yours, Sampy — it's no use to me on my 
journey." 

With one last effort the old man groped feebly 
under his pillow, and drew out a dirty sheet of 
note-paper, the creases in which were all but cut 
through with repeated folding and unfolding. 

" Here," he said, " tak' it, Sampy ; here it is, 
with all the bearings marked out by Billum, and 
all the lode mapped out by Tom Pearce, ready for 
them as works it. Any cappen can find it from 
that paper." 

Mordred snatched at the paper, and read the 
first page with greedy and irrestrainable eager- 
ness. There are turns in cards when even the 
oldest players become excited. He discovered 
the secret, and read it with all the feverish haste 
of a Greek who had just received a Delphic 
oracle. 

He had reached the bottom of the first page, 
when a man darted into the room, and tore at it 
with a tigrish tenacity. 

The paper parted in two; the first sheet re- 
mained with the banker, the other fell into the 
hands of the new comer. It was Sampy returned, 
just in time to snatch half the secret, perhaps the 
most important half, from the hands of Mr. Mor- 
dred. 

VOL. II. E 



50 GREATHEART. 

Sampy, U>dd with anger, glanced at his half of 
the letter ; then a sour smile passed over his dark, 
pale, fanatical face. 

**Read — ^read it, Mr. Mordred," he said; 
** you're bravely welcome ! It'll only tell you what 
this deed your partner has just signed would have 
told you. And now a dying man has told you, 
perhaps you'll believe the lode's worth a partner- 
ship r 

As he said this, he took off his neckcloth, 
deposited his half of the paper in its recesses, and 
replaced it round his neck. Then he turned 
round angrily on the dying man. 

"You old lying viper — ^jou old sinful buflSe- 
head !" he said, kneeling on the bed. ** And so 
this is how you repay me for all ray care ! Oh I 
Satan '11 sift you like wheat, he will — oh ! he'll 
sift you! You're a backslider, you are, if ever 
there was one. After sixty years chapel and 
faithful ministry ; and summing it all up by tell- 
ing my secrets to other people I" 

As he poured forth these invectives, the old 
man raised himself slowly in the bed, stared in a 
troubled way first at Sampy and then at Mor- 
dred, gave a low cry of pain, waved back some 
imaginary being, or thing, with both hands, fell 
back on the bed ; one slight convulsion ; a faint 
movement of the hands, and the great change 
came. A gurgling sound in the throat, and the 
old miner had departed on his long journey. The 
eyes fixed, the jaw fell. 



roby's secret. 51 

As Mr. Mordred was stooping to throw the 
sheet over the dead man*s face, Bradbrain entered 
the room, and going to the bed, felt Roby's 
heart. The wonderful machinery of life had 
ceased to work, after seventy years of toil ; soul 
and body had parted after a long companion- 
ship. 

" He's wiped out," said the young doctor, with 
perfect sang-froid, "Mordred, you must hear 
Sampy's story about the lode. I've signed and 
sealed for you. 1 think it's all bond fide this time. 
It was deuced crafty of you coming to get it out 
of Roby ; but you were a little too late, old fellow. 
Come in the other room, and Sampy will talk it 
over with us." 

The three men left the room, now consecrated 
by the presence of death, and slammed the door 
behind them, as heartlessly as if they were merely 
three cattle-dealers retiring to discuss a bargain. 

Roby might have been a dead dog for all they 
cared about him. All that Bradbrain said, toss- 
ing his thumb over his left shoulder as he spoke, 
was, 

" His light is out." 

The three men sat down together by the round 
table, with the plan of the mine before them, and 
eagerly discussed their bargain. Three fingers 
met together upon the greasy sheet of note paper. 
As the two speculators warmed under the heat of 
Sampy's eloquence, the Dowser grew more and 
more enthusiastic. 

e2 



52 GEEATHEART. 

" I say it IS a brave keenly lode, a champion 
lode. There was never such gossan yet without 
a good underlay ; the copper will bring as much 
a ton as the Wheal Betsy ; and there is good pro- 
mise for tin, the Lord be thanked I I tell you the 
Lord has sent signs, and the blessed divining rod 
has told of it, too." 

" Oh ! hang the divining rod ! Now, shut up 
about that," said Bradbrain ; " there's humbug in 
the very name of it." 

" You shall see," said the Dowser, " that with 
faith one can move mountains." 

Sampy rose as he said this, and going to a 
corner of the room, came back in a moment with 
two dry hazel shoots, of about a year's growth, 
nearly three feet long, and tied together cross-wa^^s 
at the root ends. 

"The blessed rod," said Sampy, "may be of 
currant, oak, or pear tree ; but we generally down 
here chooses hazel twigs ; children are best for the 
blessed rod ; but we must do it here by ourselves. 
There's filings of iron, tin, lead, silver, chalk, coal, 
and bones, pegged in the top, and the rod's good 
to discover copper and any metal that it does not 
itself contain. If I puts it under my arm, it spoils 
the blessed rod for finding all but water. It's good 
now to find copper or gold, for there's no animal 
thread about it." 

" Try it, then," said Mordred drily. 

" What's the use of wasting time, Mordred, with 
a parcel of d humbug like this !" said Brad- 



roby's secret. 53 

brain, contemptuously. " Here's the proof I like ; 
this lump of copper on the mantel-piece. What 
took me was what that old fellow in the bed-room 
there said. Now, come, you infernal old canting 
cheat ; here's a sov. I put it down here, under 
my left foot. Sink me, if I don't give it you 
if I once see the rod turn down to it." 

"That's a fair challenge, Mr. Sandoe," said 
Mordred, as Bradbrain shouted with laughter. 

" Ebenezer !" groaned Sampy ; and taking the 
cross rods, he held them in the air at an eleva- 
tion of about seventy degrees, opening his hands, 
and raising the hazel-twigs with his middle finger 
only. "A copper lode," he said, "draws the 
blessed rod from iron, and gold draws it from 
copper. Lord be praised ! yes, I begin to feel it 
work." 

Already the rod was turning downwards, as if 
magnetically drawn. 

"Curse you 1 what do you take me fort" said 
Bradbrain, snatching the divining rod from the 
hands of the Dowser. " Do you think I am one 
of those psalm-singing fools you preach to f Do 
you really suppose I am going to lose a real shiner in 
that way ? No, not if I know it I Why, you old 
juggler, of course it works with you, because you 
know the trick of it ; it's like the shilling on the 
thread that tells the time; why, any fool could 
work it." 

" Oh ! man of little faith," groaned the Dowser, 
" try it yourself. The rod does not need my hands 



54 GREATHEART. 

to guide it. It's, the blessed angels as gave the rod 
to Moses that directs it. Try it !" 

"Now, fair pIay,Bradbrain, and no cheating," said 
Mordred. " There may be something more than 
juggling in this — it's a very old belief among the 
miners in Cornwall." 

" And who's going to cheat t" said Bradbrain, 
fiercely, as he turned back his large white shirt- 
cuffs, and, tossing back his jet-coloured hair, 
seized the rod bv its two handles, and held it 
firmly at the angle Sampy indicated, planting his 
left foot firmly on the piece of gold. 

For a moment or two the rod remained im- 
movable ; then it began to vibrate ; a minute more 
and it turned downward, as if forced to the ground 
by some strong unseen hand, till it pointed di- 
rectly to the concealed gold. Once in vain 
Bradbrain angrily forced it back. 

" It's the pulse affects it somehow, I know,*' he 
said; but the next moment down went the rod 
again, slowly, but irresistibly. 

Bradbrain threw the stick to the other end of 
the room in a rage. 

" Well, it licks me, I confess," he said ; ** but 
so do chiselling card-tricks, and yet I know they 
are not supernatural. There, pick up the sov., 
Sampy, and much good may it do you. Blast you ! 
you got the pull over me that time." 

Mordred expressed his astonishment at the suc- 
cessful experiment, as Sampy pocketed the money 
and sang a short hymn. 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 55 

The moment the two doctors were gone^ Sampy 
started with much resignation for St. Petrock's, to 
order the cheapest cofSn he could possibly procure 
for poor old Roby. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 

THE little dry diamond dust of the white frost 
had nearly all melted from the roads, except 
here and there, where the shadow's of the hedges and 
of the red-berried mountain ash-trees rested, cool 
and dark. The sky, a royal blue, was unspotted by 
a cloud, except one or two little drifts to the east, 
and those were no larger than the wings of a dove ; 
a soft mild wind shook the holly*boughs in the 
lieutenant's garden^ and made the ivy sparkle and 
thaw. 

King Pippin had been despatched to school in 
a Spartan way, very soon after daybreak, and the 
rest of the children were playing with Tom Bowl- 
ing, the parrot, whose wire cage had been swung 
from the lower branch of a mossy apple-tree, below 
which Billy, the ten*ier, leaped, snapped, and 
barked around Mrs. Tolpedden, who, while teach- 
ing Bobby to walk, aided by little Susan, looked 
as fresh as a primrose, and as bright as a violet 
after an April shower. 

A discharge of five guns had just announced to 



56 GREATHEART. 

a small part of Cornwall the birthday of Miss Kate 
Tolpedden, and the lieutenant was about to start , ^ - 

for Endellion, having promised Teddy and Kate 
a sail, as the day was so fine, and Walker, the 
Preventive man, had promised to lend them his 
boat. 

The air that November morning was full of 
pleasant autumn sounds. The wild pigeons were 
breathing out their long sweet tenor notes from 
the tops of the beech-trees; from the common 
came, every now and then, the burst of a gunshot, 
for Arthur was at rabbit-shooting among the furze; 
and from a distance the bells of St. Nectan were 
ringing for some rustic marriage with a pleasant 
silvery jangle that the sou'-west wind alternately 
softened or deepened as it collected or scattered 
the notes on their way to Tolpedden. The noisy, 
playful barking of Billy, and the clamorous laugh 
of the children, as they fed Tom Bowling wuth 
sections of brown winter apples, combined to 
swell the pleasant chorus. 

The lieutenant was busy planting standard roses. 
He had dug pits for them along the edge of the 
lawn, especially round the front door. He was one 
of those men who mope over anything but active 
out-door employment. He looked quite young and 
hearty as he tossed up the fine black mould, and 
shouted to Katy and Teddy to bring the iron sup- 
porting rods, to wheel the barrow nearer, or to 
fetch the rake from the outhouse. 

" Katy, you lazy little slut, look alive, and bring 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 57 

me another rose-tree, and Paul's list of the names. 
Now, Polly, darling, read them out one by one." 

Mrs. Tolpedden read them out in her pretty 
little affectionate way, and the lieutenant listened 
as an epicure would listen to a bill of fare. 

" G^ant des Batailles — brilliant crimson, shaded 
with purple, large, and very double." 

"Ha! that's good. I remember it, splendid 
bloomer. That's A 1, Polly. Teddy, leave that 
rose-tree alone, or I'll rap your knuckles." 

" General Jacqueminot — brilliant velvety red, 
large and double." 

*^ I know him ; but he's rather delicate — slow 
flowerer. Don't tease, Tom, I tell you." 

"ia Rose des Roses — blackish purple, dashed 
with scarlet. One of the best." 

And so they went on, till the lieutenant ex- 
claimed suddenly, 

" Susan, bring my Bobby here for me to kiss 
him. Belay there, avast heaving, Polly, we must 
be off now. Katy, get your hat on ; Teddy, go 
and take off your pin-before. Good-bye, Polly." 

Almost the very moment that the lieutenant had 
shut the garden-door behind him, a boy's keen, 
bright-eyed, crafty face thrust itself over the high 
box hedge. 

Susan gave a slight scream at this unexpected 
apparition ; but Mrs. Tolpedden, giving her Bobby 
to hold, instantly darted forward and seized with 
anxious delight a little pink three-cornered note 
that the boy, without speaking, held towards her. 



58 GREATHEART. 

As the little messenger's head went down below 
the horizon of the box hedge, Mrs. Tolpedden, 
turning her back on Bobby, Susan, and poor Tom 
the parrot, and followed only by Billy, whose 
caresses, however, she did not heed, tore open the 
note and devoured its contents. 

So absorbed was she, indeed. In the letter thus 
strangely conveyed, that she did not observe that 
Arthur had come in at the gate, and, gun in hand, 
was advancing towards her. When she saw him, 
she coloured deeply, and thrust the note into her 
pocket. 

" Why, auntie, if it had been February I de- 
clare I should think I had caught you reading a 
Valentine, Do you know I've just been blowing 
up that impudent boy of Bradbrain's for sneak*- 
ing about the stable looking for eggs. I don't 
like that boy. Has he been here I" 

Mrs. Tolpedden coloured deeper than before, 
and, to hide it, stooped down to pat Billy, who was 
dancing for joy, and shaking his head in absurd 
sneezes, as he raced round Arthur's legs. 

" Yes, he has been here, I wrote to Mr. Brad- 
brain about Bobby's throat, and to ask him 
whether I should give her a port-wine gargle ; but 
there's good news for you, Arthur." 

Perhaps Aunt Polly had a motive in changing 
the conversation — perhaps she wished really to 
please Arthur with the good news. Still more 
likely that, with true woman's curiosity, she wished 
to test the state of his heart, of which she had 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 59 

some not altoj^ether vague suspicions, for one need 
not be very old to know that the most cynical 
interpretations of a friend's action is not always 
the true one. Mrs. Tolpedden, to use an old 
Elizabethan simile, was like the lapwing, she was 
luring the pursuer from her young — she was 
luring Arthur from the detection of a dreaded 
secret. 

" What is this great news, aunt t M. Ohatelet's 
putting off my French lesson, or has Gipsy cast a 
shoe r 

" Better than that by far, Mr. Impudent. Miss 
Tregellas and Milly Waverton are going to drive 
over to have a lesson in billiards. They'll be here in 
half an hour, so go and get the table ready, Arthur, 
there's a dear. I did send Katy to tell Liddy to 
get the fire lit ; look me out a light mace, Sir 
Hal. I thought that would please you. Take 
care, young man — take care t" 

"Beware!" 

"You know Longfellow's song?" 

"Ohl there is no fear of me, aunt; I think 
I'm tolerably bullet proof — besides, Milly is half 
engaged to Trevena." 

" Oh ! you artful, wicked boy 1 Who said any- 
thing about Milly I Lilly's not engaged, is she ?" 

"I really am not acquainted with the exact 
state of Miss Lucy Tregellas's heart." 

" Oh ! there, go along, you wicked, deceitful 
fellow I I can see how the land lies !" 

The billiard-room at Mr. Henry Tolpedden's 



60 GREATHEART. 

was a green-house, opening from the dining-room. 
The slanting glass roof was trellised by a spread- 
ing black Hamburgh vine, to whose dry flexible 
branches a few yellow leaves still adhered. There 
was a pleasant little fireplace just under the clock, 
and a series of Bunbury's caricatures hung round 
the walls. 

When Lucy Tregellas and Milly Waverton 
arrived in the pony-carriage, and, joined by Airs. 
Tolpedden, entered this cheerful and luminous 
room, they found everything prepared for the 
game. The maces and cues were out of the rack, 
the red ball was spotted in its solitary grandeur at 
the top of the table, and Arthur was trying a 
specially difficult cannon. 

Lucy looked the very perfection of an English 
girl, in a well-made grey mohair dress, a plain 
white collar, and sleeves that, tightening towards 
the waist, terminated in the daintiest of little 
cuffs; while Milly, in dove colour, looked neat, 
pretty, and good-naturedly mischievous, as she 
always did, and served as an excellent foil to her 
prouder and more vigorously-minded friend. 

Kestless as butterflies, the two girls, in the 
gaiety and innocence of their hearts, skimmed 
round the room, practising various strokes, and 
trying for various pockets, laughing and chal- 
lenging each other. 

"Maces, indeed! — no, sir, no maces for us," 
said Milly, saucily ; " Vm not a child, Mr. Tol- 
pedden. There, Lucy, that's what I call a neat 



THE niLLIAIlD-nOOM. ♦)! 

losing hazard — now, then, for a cannon — oh I 
that's nothing — let me have that stroke again* 
How should I do this — shall I screw it V* 

" Hit your ball low, Lucy, on the right, and 
sharp," said Milly, grandly, " and it'll go in the 
middle pocket — bravo I — as I told you." 

" You will play us three," said Lucy to Arthur, 
as he pushed the markers and the scoring hand 
back to " Love-love ;" " Milly says we can give 
you ten. Spot the red ball, Milly — thanks." 

" I will try you ; but it's fearful odds. Never 
mind, a brave man struggling with adversity is a 
sight beloved by the gods. Aunt Polly, }ou 
break — I follow, then come Miss Tregellas and 
Milly. Goodness gracious ! a fluke to begin with 
— aunt I aunt!" 

" Fluke I — nonsense," said pretty Mrs. Toli)ed- 
den, as by a lucky accident she sent the red ball 
into the left hand, and the white into the right 
pocket. You're a nasty envious fellow — a five 
stroke, Lilly." 

" Five— love." 

" You're always thinking of love, Arthur," said 
wicked Aunt Polly, with a meaning look and arch 
smile at Lucy. "The game is five, ten — we 
foolishly gave you ten." 

" Well, I was foolish," said Arthur, as Mrs. 
Tolpedden achieved a dashing cannon, and then 
gave a miss, at which she " grisbetted," as Milly 
culled it. 

"It is now my innings," said Arthur, as he 



62 OREATHEART. 

effected three eannons one after the other with 
skilful precision. 

" Oh ! I do hope heUl miss, don't you, Milly f 
said Lucy, with one kind glance, that fell on 
Arthur soft as spring sunshine. 

" Oh ! so do I, awfully !" said Milly, clapping 
her hands, as Arthur got himself by accident into 
a comer top-pocket ; " he's sure to miss when 
he goes up the board." But to her mortification 
Arthur made a cannon, and at the same stroke 
placed the red into a beautiful position over the 
middle pocket. On he went, in his laughing and 
triumphant career, making a break of sixteen, and 
then gave an intentional miss. 

" Sixteen, five, is the score,'' cried Milly ; " now, 
then, Lilly, for all you know. Keep the but-end 
of the cue lower, and run away with the game from 
this tyrant." 

Arthur had now to instruct his adversaries. In 
what subtle ways love can show itself. It can 
giv« an inflection the thousandth part of a semi- 
tone, higher or lower. By a gesture that is, and 
yet is not, the same, it marks unconscious pre- 
ference. To the loved face, the lover's eyes turn 
first on entering a room, and they fix on it last in 
parting. The faintest shadow of hope, of pleasure, 
or of jealousy,, can they not be conveyed without a 
word in the million variations of love's marvellous 
deaf and dumb alphabet ? 

"High, to the right, and your ball will go 
in the right-hand pocket,'' said Arthur, as he 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 63 

leaned over and explained the mysteries of the 
side stroke ; " you see, I knew you would do it, 
your eye is so true — now, then, at the red." 

" What shall I do now ?" said Lilly, raising her 
eyebrows in the prettiest despair ; " I know I shall 
miss It. 

" High and following," said Arthur ; " a sort of 
pushing stroke — don't draw the cue back — there — 
very good — capital !" 

'* Oh ! that's delicious, Lilly — go on I" cried 
Milly; "do go on, make two or three more, 
there's a darling, and we shall beat him yet 1" 

" Now you must try a cannon. Miss Tregellas." 

" Don't trust him, dear Lilly," cried Mrs. Tol- 
pedden ; " he is telling you wrong on purpose." 

" Oh 1 no, he is not," said Lucy, flushed with 
triumph, as she rested in the very act of striking 
the spot ball, and looked full up into Arthur's face 
with eyes large, soft, and clear as those of a hare. 
I know not where to look for a more truthful 
simile. 

Arthur laughed, and shook back his hair. He 
looked so handsome as he drew himself up in his 
grey shooting-jacket. 

" Aunt Polly," he said, " that's too bad by half ; 
here have I been doing my best to make your 
side win, and now you run me down. Now, 
Miss Milly, for a round of brilliant flukes from 
you." 

" Flukes, indeed /" and Milly flounced from the 
window where she had been chalking her cue with 



64 GREATHEART. 

practised skill; "now we'll see what our side 
can do." 

"How is your brother to-day?" inquired 
Arthur. 

" Oh ! dear fellow, he was very much shaken ; 
but he is pulling up now — he's out to-day in the 
parish." 

" It was certainly unwise of him, venturing to 
put down Guy Fawkes. Our Cornish miners are 
a fanatical race, they have a horror of innovations ; 
and they're nearly all dissenters. It was very 
grand in Trevena braving them as he did." 

" Oh 1 yes, wasn't it ?" said Milly, her little 
eyes sparkling like those of a laughing bird — if 
birds ever do laugh. 

" I shall always love him for it," said Lilly. 

Arthur looked grave, and turned to score two 
for Milly's first cannon. 

" The mob was led on by a man they call the 
Dowser. He goes about, they say, pretending to 
discover mines with a thing he calls a divining 
rod." 

" I know the rascal," said Arthur vehemently. 
" I threatened to thrash him once for trespassing 
on the governor's land. Find ! — he'll never find 
anything but the way to the House of Correction." 

" Don't be too hard on the poor fellow, Arthur," 
said Mrs. Tolpedden, who was too good-natured 
to hurt even a robin wilfully ; " perhaps the man 
is a little wanting in the upper story." 

"Mamma is coming presently to drive to Bos- 



THE BILLIARD-ROOM. 65 

castle," said Lucy, ^^with me and Milly. Will 
you come, Mrs. Tolpedden ! — I'm sure Mr. Tol- 
pedden will drive you ?" 

" I shall be only too proud," said Arthur. 

" Are you practising for the cup, Mr. Tolped- 
den ?" said Lucy, as Arthur, the conqueror, called 
out — " Twenty-eight-wGAME I" much to Mill/s 
vexation, and cries of — " Oh I what cheating !" — 
" Won by a fluke — shame I" 

" I practise two or three times a week, in all 
weathers, and so does Bradbrain; but he is so 
crafty, he won't practise with me, for fear I should 
learn his dodges." 

"Oh! Don — Mr. Bradbrain, I mean, is not 
crafty, Arthur," said Mrs. Tolpedden, warmly. 

** Oh I of course you take Mr. Bradbrain's part," 
said Milly mischievously. " I hope it will be a 
nice party at Mr. Hookem's. I do hope, Lucy, 
there will be a dance." 

" There is sure to be, Milly," said Mrs. Tolped- 
den, with the dignity of superior age, and a little 
tartly because she did not like the tone of Mill/s 
banter. "I do like Mr. Hookem— don't you, 
Arthur r 

" I do indeed," replied Arthur ; " he is a little 
pompous and fond of display, but he is so hos- 
pitable, very amusing, and an excellent host, for 
he never lets things flag; but, come, one more 
game before luncheon. I and Miss Tregellas 
against you, aunt, and Miss Waverton, and I'll 
give you five-and-twenty." 

VOL. II. F 



66 GREATHEART. 

Just as Arthur turned to the scoring-board to 
arrange the odds, and call " Twenty, love," some- 
body passed the windows towards the front door, 
and knocked and rang. 

'* Who was that, girls !" said Mrs. Tolpedden, 
turning sharply round. 

"I really think it was ^Mr. Mordred," said 
Milly. 

" What on earth brings him here 1 My father 
can't bear that man," said Arthur ; " and just now 
he is awfully busy with some discovery in chemistry 
he's hoping to make." 

" Poor, dear man 1" said Aunt Polly, with pity 
scarcely called for. 



CHAPTER VI. 

* 

MR. MORDRED OPENS THE FIRST PARALLEL. 

MR. HENRY TOLPEDDEN was a man of 
an iron resolution, which his military liite 
had strengthened. You could see it in the firm 
grip of his mouth, when difficulties of even the 
smallest kind arose ; you could read it in his un- 
flinching eye, that, when stern, seemed to glow 
with a cold frosty light. Deep and ardent ambi- 
tion, that no chills of the world could slacken, no 
rains of disappointment could quench, burned in 
his breast. 

With no wife to wean him from study, and no 



THE FIRST PARALLEL OPENED. 67 

young children to educate, the student, in the soli- 
tude of his Cornish home, had set down at eight 
and forty to master the secrets of science. Al- 
ways from boyhood a devoted reader of chemical 
books, the idea had struck him in early life that 
great discoveries might be made by bringing to 
light those mysteries that the alchemist so carefully 
concealed in cabalistic language. 

A man of an eminently practical nature, not by 
any means disposed to waste life in day-dreams, 
and spurred on by an earnest fanaticism, Mr. 
Tolpedden had plunged into this labyrinth of old 
Arabic and mediaeval learning, armed only with 
the talisman of hope, and the safety-lamp of the 
love of truth. He had not ventured there as into an 
enchanted country, but as into a wilderness beyond 
which, he believed, lay a region full of treasure. 
He disdained the jargon of Paracelsus, and the gib- 
berish of the Bosicrucians ; but he did not disdain 
the vast industry of these men, or their marvellous 
discoveries. He could not despise men who had 
first made chemistry a science, and who had 
reorganized the theory of medicine. He had read 
the alchemic writers from the time of Bhazes 
and Avicenna down to the pretenders whom Boer- 
haave exposed, and he had ndt found them unwor- 
thy of study. 

Not that Mr. Tolpedden believed in the possi- 
bility of fixing mercury, or turning the baser metals 
into gold, but he did believe that Paracelsus and 
some of the profounder writers on alchemy had 

f2 



68 GREATHEABT. 

left behind them secrets that had since been xin^ 
heeded, although the clues to them still existed in 
the old foUos that Ashmole collected. Their 
centuries of research as to the constituent parts of 
metals, in hopes of finding a common base, had 
led, he found, to various discoveries that it needed 
only modem science to render valuable. 

A great scientific discoverer requires an active 
imagination, as well as a mathematical mind. Mr. 
Tolpedden had both requisites* Restlessly im- 
patient of all claims to finality, seeing incessant 
change and progress written on every work of 
nature, he toiled on in search of one of those great 
discoveries that the future has in store for all 
sciences — 'taking nothing for granted, tabulating his 
daily experiments, slowly concentrating his con- 
clusions around one hypothesis, that some day 
promised to become a truth. 

From breakfast time to lunch (nine to two) no 
one ventured to disturb Mr. Tolpedden's studies. 
It was the rule of the house, and enforced rigidly 
by old Liddy, that no one, except the business was 
of great and pressing importance, was shown into 
the study or laboratory between those sacred hours. 
Not that Mr. Tolpedden was a mere lamp-dried 
bookworm, with no affection, no sense of home 
duties, and no passion left but a gloomy egotism, 
selfish and absorbing. He was no morbid thinker, 
who had mistaken the field of one science for the 
whole world. He was not the man to inflict on 
himself ascetic tortures^ and to be laughed at in 



'i^mj^t^iimi^fWf 



THE FIRST PARALLEL OPENED, 69 



I <^x ys 



consequence as a fool even by his own servants. 

; >:l- fuff jjjg mind was perfectly healthy ; he did not in the 

e-.re^ « least resemble Bulwer's, or I should rather say 

::-:2:: an Sterne's, puzzle-headed sages ; on the contrary, he 

i;,^ ."3»- toQii^ hig full share of the domestic and county 

'zi::::^^ duties of a wealthy country gentleman of the nine- 

^* teenth century. He frequently appeared, hearty 

5 iE IT and sociable, at the covert side, with friends 

^:^- ^ upon the stubble, on the Grand Jury, in the 

:.V=&T : Board Room, and at the Petty Sessions. He took 

i=-"^ his fair share in society, both in giving and taking, 

i^Ai' but he did not lay himself out either as a sporting 

Lver- man, a politician, or a lady's man. His fine 

::r- common-sense discerned at a very early age the 

li^': absurdity of destroying one's brain to win a two- 

i? ::c' penny-halfpenny fame, or for the sake of a spoon- 

e if ful or^so more of learning, to condemn oneself to 

perpetual imprisonment. He saw the danger of 

? dwindling the body for the sake of strengthening 

js the mind, when body and mind should run together 

i' and pull equally in the same harness. He knew 

^ well what an absorbing and dangerous form of 

r; selfishness is that into which the student often 

falls. 

At his own hours he was, therefore, hermetically 
sealed from all intrusion, because, without a per- 
sistent sequence of thought, no result can ever be 
obtained from thinking. The rest of the day, like 
that model for all workers, Sir Walter Scott, he was 
easy of access. Liddy could come to him about 
the dinner; Handsome Thomas, the coachman, 



70 GREATHEART. 

about the horses; Penrose, the gardener, about 
the fruit-trees, or the melon-beds; Roberts, the 
gamekeeper, about the pheasants. After tea he 
made it a rule never to enter the laboratory except 
during times of special study. He read the TJmeSy 
the ForgSj or scientific books, and drew or chatted 
while Arthur read, wrote, worked at his Greek or 
German, or played at ecart^ with the lieutenant, 
or at draughts with Mrs. Tolpedden. 

In a large room, looking out upon the garden, 
and crowded with Leyden jars, galvanic piles, jars 
of spirits and ethers, bulbous glass vessels, siphons, 
lamps, and retorts, Mr. Tolpedden was dissolving 
boracic acid in alcohol, when a knock came at the 
door, and Fanny announced a visitor. 

Mr. Tolpedden, who had just procured a light 
green flame from a small cup in which the 
mixture was, and was now taking some spoonfuls 
of muriate of strontites from a deep glass bottle, 
did not look round, but growled. 

" If it is Barker," said he, " tell him I can't see 
him now, he must go to Mr. Chetwynd, at Bos- 
castle, he will arrange about the case." ♦ 

'^ It's not him, sir." 

"Then who in the name of goodness is itt 
Don't you see I'm busy ? Whoever it is, tell him 
to come again," 

"It's Mr. Mordred, sir, and he says he par- 
ticularly wishes to see you on very pressing busi- 
ness." 

Mn Tolpedden turned round, with his hand full 



THE FIRST PARALLEL OPENED. 71 

of phosphuret of lime and oxymuriate of potash. 

•* Mr. Mordred I" he said. " Who sent for the 
man ? I won't see him.'' 

" But he won't take a denial, sir. Liddy told 
him you never saw any one from nine to two. 
He said he would see you, positive like — wouldn't 
keep you long, but he would see you ; them was 
his words, zackly so." 

" Would — would he 1 Well, show him in. I'll 
soon see who will and who won't, the cheating 
hypocrite I" said Mr, Tolpedden, in no very patent 
voice. "Fresh from some religious meeting, I 
suppose ; he is always most mischievous then. I 
should like to know the antecedents of that fellow." 

The angry student went on with his experiments 
with the utmost sang-froid. He dropped some 
pills of a mixture into a taper ale-glass, which he 
then filled with water. 

At that moment the door opened again, and 
in came Mr. Mordred, bland and smiling, hat, 
black woollen gloves, and gold-mounted cane ef- 
fectively arranged in his left hand. Fanny, as 
she shut the door, made a grimace behind his back. 

" How do you do ! — delighted to find you in, 
my dear Mr. Tolpedden," said the banker, in his 
monotonous, icy voice ; " one moment's conversa- 
tion, you know, is better than fifty letters. I was 
sure you were too busy to answer my letter. I know 
how on6 puts off business matters— do not for a 
moment apologise. And how are the new arrivals 
and your son ?" 



y 



72 GEEATHEABT. 

Mr. Tolpedden made no reply, but calmly put a 
funnel into the ale-glass, and poured down it five 
or six drops of sulphuric acid. Flashes of quick 
fire instantly darted from the surface of the water, 
and the bottom of the glass was illuminated by a 
beautiful green light. 

As Mr. Mordred slid forward to shake hin hand, 
the experimenter drew back, coldly bowed, and 
pointed to' a chair. Mr. Mordred, to hide his 
vexation at this reception, advanced to the ale- 
glass and looked at the ilamc with quite an inno- 
cent delight. 

" Wonderful I wonderful I" he said ; " what 
progress science is making ! What an admirable 
paper that was of yours, Mr. Tolpedden, at the 
last British Institution — yon seem on the verge of 
certain, most important — nay, I may add, most 
profitable discoveries. What a remarkable expe- 
riment this seems that you're making?" 

Mr. Tolpedden's proud upper lip curled, till it 
looked that of that arch-sneerer, Byron. 

"This experiment 1" he said, pointing at the 
flame ; " oh ! yes, it's fit for children. I've been 
trying to discover some artificial light for Lady 
Rostrevor's next private theatricals — she asked me 
the other day at Bodmin." 

As he said this, Mr. Tolpedden, with irritating 
coolness, began mixing some crystals of the car- 
bonate of barytes with alcohol. All at once he 
put down the bottle of alcohol, and drew a chair 
to the opposite side of a table facing Mr. Mordred. 



THE FIRST PARALLEL OPENED. 73 

These impulsive, sliarp impulsive movements 
formed an intrinsic part of Tolpedden's cha- 
racter. 

" Mr. Mordred," he said, sternly, ** my time is, 
like your own, valuable. May I ask to what cause 
I am indebted for this unexpected visit ?" 

Mordred did not or would not see the sneer. 

" My dear sir," he said, gathering himself up 
for action, *^ pressing business induced this call, for 
which I must apologise." 

" To what business do you refer, sir?" said Mr. 
Tolpedden, sternly. 

"To the business referred to in the letter 
written by one of my clerks to you, my dear sir, 
some weeks since, by my order." 

No one could apply a caustic in a more gentle 
way than Mr. Mordred. 

Mr. Tolpedden took some light-coloured liquid, 
mixed with nitrate of lead ; he then introduced 
into it some bubbles of sulphnreted hydrogen gas. 
The lead was precipitated ; all the time he performed 
this experiment he continued talking. 

" Ha ! I remember," he said, somewhat super- 
ciliously, " something about the mortgage on my 
St. Juliot property 1 — the interest is somewhat in 
arrears. Why do you not see my lawyer, Mr^ 
Chetwynd, about these things ? — I leave them alj 
to him." 

" First, my dear sir, because he referred me to 
you; and secondly, because I did not wish to 
press the matter." 



74 GREATHEART. 

" Press the matter ! — what do you mean by that 
offensive expression I" 

"My dear sir, pray be patient. The richest 
noblemen in the land sometimes want ready money. 
I have known ladies of rank leave small debts un- 
paid for five years. It is no reproach." 

" Reproach, sir I I am not accustomed to this 
tone of conversation." 

"My dear Mr. Tolpedden, you are too in- 
flammable. I do not come here with any inten- 
tion of offending. My intention in coming here 
is '' 

"Well, sir?" 

" To propose to take, in exchange for the small 
sum owing to me, a piece of worthless, common 
land." 

"What land?" 

" A small piece of your own common land, a 
piece with a bad title — the surrender would prevent 
a chancery suit." 

"A chancery suit! — ^who, may I ask, has a 
claim to any portion of my estate?" 

" The corporation of Boscastle." 

" Indeed ! — one has to go far sometimes to learn 
news. Strange, too, that I never heard of this 
disputed claim! And may I also beg to know 
where this precarious land is f " 

"On the cliff near Endellion. I want it to 
extend my little farm in that direction, and am 
willing to allow a handsome price for it — more, 
indeed, than it would ever fetch in the market. 



THE FIRST PARALLEL OPENED. 75 

The corporation will not, I am informed, dispute 
the claim if it is in my hands." 

^'Butwillifit remains in mine — an artful threat! 
No, sir," said Mr. Tolpedden, firing up; "you 
forget you are not talking to an impoverished 
speculator, or a small bankrupt tradesman. I have 
no intention at present of depriving my son of a 
single yard of land — what my father left me, he 
shall inherit. I want no huxtering. It is not 
necessary for us yet to take to peddling or barter 
of any kind. It is very kind of you to propose the 
transfer, but " 

At this moment the door opened, and in rushed 
Teddy and Kate, driven before him by the lieu- 
tenant. 

"The lunch gong is just going, Harry," he said; 
" here, all hands 'bout ship. Beg pardon, didn't 
know you were engaged. Come along, Kate; 
Teddy, look alive, sir. Hookem's come to lun- 
cheon, Harry, and is talking away with ten-horse 
power." 

As the excellent old ofiicer drove out the chil- 
dren and shut the door behind him, the gong in 
the hall clashed and boomed out its brazen sum<- 
mons. 

Mr. Tolpedden rose and pushed back some cru- 
cibles and glasses that stood before him. 

"Mr. Mordred," he said sternly, every word 
coming from his lips cold, hard, and distinct as 
hail-drops, "I think, as you understand me, 
our interview may now close. You brought peace 



76 GREATHEART, 

and war ; I have chosen war, so war let it be. In 
a few days I will instruct my solicitors, Messrs. 
Fluker and Watson to pay the interest due to you. 
Good day, sir ; excuse my leaving you." 

Mr. Mordred rose with a galvanized solemnity, 
not unlike a benumbed serpent. He had not ex- 
pected such uncompromising defiance. He gathered 
together his fuzzy black gloves and his hat, as an 
undertaker collects the trappings of a completed 
funeral. 

"Mr. Tolpedden," he said, "I liad wished to 
avert this most unpleasant collision, but I must 
not, in doing my duty as a banker and man of 
business — I must not forget the duty I owe to the 
town of St. Petrock's, of which I am the Mayor. 
Depend upon it, this matter shall go into Chancerj'- 
without delay." 

Mr. Tolpedden rang the bell, and Fanny ap- 
peared. 

"As you like," he said; "good morning, Mr. 
Mordred." 

"May the Lord soften this man's heart," said the 
banker in a low voice, as he bowed and followed 
Fanny to the front door. 

"He's saying something against master," thought 
Fanny to herself as she closed the door, not un- 
willingly, upon the unwelcome and ominous visi- 
tor. 



THE GAUNTLET THROWN DOWN. 77 



CHAPTER VII. 

MR. TREVENA THROWS DOWN HIS GAUNTLET. 

THE clerical readers of the Bodmin Mercury of 
November 10, 1862, were electrified over their 
tea and toast to find in that fiimsy sheet, still damp 
from the press, a second, most audacious letter, 
addressed to the Bishop, dated " St. Petrock's," and 
signed "John Frederick Trevena." Toadying 
rural deans and courtly examining chaplains nearly 
fainted at the audacity and recklessness of a shame- 
less Low Churchman. Parasitical dwellers in the 

Close at could hardly believe their own eyes 

when they consulted the Clergy List and found that 
this Knox of Cornwall was only a perpetual curate ; 
as for that ungrateful the Eev. Mr. Bernard 
Waverton, he openly regretted that the Ecclesi- 
astical Court could not strip off Mr. Trevena's gown 
for such infamous treason against church disci- 
pline. Even the friends of the writer shrugged their 
shoulders, sipped their tea, and lamented the step 
as " unwise and wrong-headed." 

The simple-hearted letter was certainly not cal- 
culated to ensure preferment. It ran thus : — 

" St. Petrock's, near Boscastle, 
" November 8th, 1862. 

** My Lord, 

" I cannot forbear ofiFering some remarks 
on your late charge, but I trust that the spirit of 



78 GREATHEAET. 

peace may guide my pen, while I write what my 
conscience forbids me to keep silent. 

*' It is a fact that great numbers of the clergy 
and laity have, since 1840, left the Church of 
England and joined the Romish Church. 

"It is too evident that the Sacramental and 
Ceremonial system in our Church, which is carried 
out in some dioceses much more than in others, has 
promoted this lamentable result. 

" The processions on various occasions on open- 
ing churches, &c., in this diocese, appear every 
year to be more and more accompanied with out- 
ward pomp of banners and other things, too much 
like the custom of the Papal Church. 

"The encouragement also given to choral ser- 
vices in parish churches, which now assume quite 
a new feature in our Church, does away with the 
simplicity of our Protestant worship. 

" Your late Charge has greatly alarmed many of 
the clergy and laity in your diocese, more especially 
as its tendency has been considered to encourage 
the monastic system, which your recommendation 
of the * Retreats' for the clergy manifestly shows. 
Your words are, *The question has more than 
once been suggested to me whether I should de- 
vise any plan by which my clergy might thus have 
the benefit of such religious retirement, or, as it is 
more technically called, of a * Retreat,' and I feel, 
I own, that ere this I ought to have given some 
definite and favourable answer to such a question.' 

" This plan is understood to be, that clergymen 



THE GAUNTLET THROWN DOWN. 79 

are for a time to go to another clergyman's house, 
and that certain rules shall be carried out there, 
analogous to those encouraged in the monastic sys- 
tem. We have seen, at Leeds and other places, that 
the result has been to lead many clergymen to be 
perverts to the Boman Catholic Church. 

^^ Your remarks on the reunion of Christendom, 
it is much to be feared, may produce in the minds 
of many a disposition to swerve from the inflexible 
holding of all those sound principles brought out 
at the Reformation, and embodied in our Thirty- 
nine Articles ; remembering as we do that our 
Protestant Church was founded, under God, upon 
a renunciation of Rome. Your words are, *I 
think, also, that no one can have read the works 
of M. Renan without feeling that he, by his infidel 
encroachments on the inheritance which we share 
with the Church of France ' (when I heard the 
Charge it was the Gallican Church of France 
that was mentioned), * has, by creating a sympathy 
which attends upon a united resistance to a com- 
mon danger, contributed something towards re- 
moving the barriers which have long parted us 
from that celebrated communion." 

" My Lord, it is with the sincerest reluctance 
that I venture to address to your lordship even 
these few and simple words of remonstrance. Had 
I not the most heartfelt admiration of your zeal 
and of your Christian warmth of heart, I should 
have held my tongue, however painful the novel- 
ties you had forced upon the diocese. 



80 GEEATHEABT. 

''But fearful lest my silence, and that of my 
brother mmisters might be misconstraed into ap- 
proval of sach measores, and remembering still 
more those words of God, ' Touch not, taste not, 
handle not,' I cannot refrain, lest even the very 
stones cry out, from imploring you, in the name of 
Him who died for us upon the tree, to pause be- 
fore you try to lead us, your children in Christ, 
further from the fold; lest, my Lord, at that 
awful day, when the just are snnunoned before 
the great white throne, and him that sitteth there- 
on, some of those who were entrusted to your 
special care be found among the castaways. 

" I remain, 

" Your Lordship's faithful servant, 

" John Frederick: Trevena." 

Mr. Hookem read this letter with considerable 
admiration for the courage of the writer. But 
being himself a very Broad Churchman, and not, 
being, apart from social controversy, by any means 
interested in religious subjects, by which his own 
vanity and importance could not indeed in any 
way be fed, he dismissed the matter from his 
mind as soon as he had written to London for a 
sarcastic,_ hair-splitting article for the Forge xxpon 
the subject. This article, entitled "Extremes," 
went to show how absurd all fixed principles 
were, how untruthful and dangerous all violence, 
whether for black or white, really was ; and how 



MR. HOOKEM's farewell PARTY. 81 

foolish, in the eyes of the world, any desire for 
proselytisra appeared. 

The Trimmer^ of course, had a leader on the 
same subject — a good, classical, heavy article it 
was, written in an hour ; but weighty enough to 
have taken a year. Its writer, also, ridiculed 
fanatical excesses, jeered at mere Church furniture, 
and steering cautiously between the two sections ; 
appealed to the common sense of the large neutral 
party, to restrain, by ridicule and passive resist- 
ance, the injudicious zeal of certain bishops. 

The Trimmer was always singularly desirous to 
be with the majority. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

MR. HOOKEM's farewell PARTY. 

A FAIR in a village makes some stir, an elec- 
tion in a county town is noisy, a marriage in 
a small house is exciting, and the reading banns in 
a county church creates some anticipation. 

But the letting the animals out of Noah's Ark 
itself could not have been a more noisy or a more 
exciting business, or created more anticipation, than 
did the preparations for Mr. Hookem's farewell 
party at St. Petrock's, Most villages have some 
Lord Fitzboodle, or Squire Fitztoddle, near them, 
whose ways and doings they can criticise, whose 
stinginess they can ridicule, whose gameTpreserv- 

VOL. IL G 



82 GREATHEABT. 

ing they can satirise, whose hospitality they can 
blame or praise ; but St. Petrock's was a retired 
little place, in a strange, lonely county, and the in- 
habitants having nothing better about which to 
talk, chattered of their illustrious epicurean and 
expensive visitor, and that was just what he 
liked. 

Never had there been such feasting, at least so 
said the oldest inhabitant, Mrs. Tomkin, at the 
Alms-houses, and her statement was confirmed by 
old Penrose of Bosinna, who remembered Lord 
Whamcliffe's doings, and had reached a fabulous 
age, at least acccording to his own account. The 
country had been scoured for chickens as far as 
the " Cheese- Wring ;" emissaries had been sent for 
the largest prawns as far as Crockerton Cove. The 
finest turbot were to be procured from Port Isaac, 
and a village beyond St. Agnes Head. Lobsters 
of a special age were culled from the wells of 
the boats in Boscastle ; venison and truffles were 
sent for all the way from Exeter. The mounted 
messengers of the Sultan Editor, in fact, crossed 
and recrossed each other in all parts of the county, 
swift as weavers' shuttles. 

Mr. Hookem, though lavish with money, took a 
delight in planning all these reconnoiterings, and 
in getting them performed, not merely in the most 
expeditious, but in the cheapest possible way. His 
maxim was to get everything of the very best, but 
yet not to throw away a single farthing uselessly. 
He rejoiced in display, and revelled in pompous 



MR. HOOKEH's FABEWELL PARTY. 83 

hospitality ; but he was not fool enough to squan- 
der money purposelessly. He wished to return the 
kindness and attention shown him, and he also 
wished to make the return a splendid one ; but 
nevertheless he carefully calculated the cost, and 
we like him none the worse for it. It is so easy to 
be liberal with other people's money — so easy to 
preach popularly on charity, and yet to put nothing 
into the plate ; but not so easy to be generous and 
hospitable when we might be mean and saving. 

There was one great difficulty the entertainer 
had to encounter, and at first it did not seem possi- 
ble to overcome this, even by a lavish expenditure 
of money. The rooms over the post-office were 
snug, but they were small. Where in St. Petrock's, 
or where nearer than Boscastle, were there to be 
found rooms sufficiently large to dine, dance, and 
sup twenty or more people I Why, even Jackson 
did not know,although hismasterhad longago erased 
the word "impossible" from his limited dictionary. 

At Boscastle the editor might have at once 
hired the Assembly Sooms ; a few festoons of 
chintz and calico, some laurel-boughs, more gas- 
burners, and a bushel or two of muslin flowers, 
would soon have metamorphosed that mouldy 
apartment into a hall of dazzling light ; but then 
Boscastle was not St, Petroek's, nor was either 
place movable, like Bimam Wood, 

The nodus of difficulty had at last been cut through 
by Arthui^s quick,keen mind, not altogether unaided 
by Jackson's small but active brain» 



84 GREATHEART. 

It had suddenly occurred to young Tolpedden, 
who had felt that he had any amount of " tin " 
and energy, or " go," as he called it, to back the 
wildest proposal, that by hiring the chief inn at 
St. Petrock's for two days, clearing away settles, 
&c., and knocking down a few lath and piaster 
partitions, a large apartment might be secured for a 
dinner, dancing, and cards, setting apart a small 
parlour for the coffee, and for the ladies' retiring- 
room. 

Hookem was delighted ; he rejoiced, not only 
in having elbow-room for his hospitality, but also 
in the display and the surprise he could secure by 
such means. At it he went head-foremost, in his 
own robust and business-like way. He always 
tred to secure quickness and economy. He wanted 
to show the Cornish men how a Londoner could 
make a bargain, and yet how magnificent he could 
at the same time be. He was a hard-working man 
on the treadmill of the London press; but this 
was his holiday time, and he disported himself like 
a gambolling whale. 

A week had passed in these festive preparations, 
and now all was ready ; the last cart from Bodmin 
Eroad Station had been unpacked ; the last nail of 
the carpenter's work knocked in, the last garland 
of holly hung upon the walls. The bell might 
ring now when it chose for the music to strike up. 
The St. Petrock's people had already begun to 
congregate round the illuminated inn door, and 
discuss the guests with a bemuddled wonder. The 



MR. HOOKEM'S farewell PARTY. 85 

noise of hurried wheels began to sound in the 
distance. The turbots lay broad and white in the 
boiling fish-kettles ; the jellies were being turned 
out, golden, and quivering at what they had gone 
through. The candied fruit sparkled like Aladdin's 
jewels in the splendid dessert dishes. The newly- 
arrived waiters were gathered round a great 
silver dish, full of rose-water, and wondering if 
anybody was going to be christened. The first 
act of the play was, in fact, about to commence. 

Mr. Hookem had just tied with intense care the 
thinnest possible string of white cambric round 
his bull neck, when the first knock came. — (N. B. 
— ^The knocker had been put up for the occasion.) 
Mr. Hookem, too old a stager to be ever flurried, 
did not hurry, but with the mechanical exactness 
of instinct, slipped into his pocket his £60 gold 
hunter watch (Frodsham), dexterously buttoned his 
enormous white waistcoat, tossed some frangipani 
on his snowy handkerchief, and descended as from 
the cloudy top of Olympus into the drawing-room, 
at the end of which hung a broad red curtain, to 
screen off the dining-table. 

Worthy Mr. Trevena, and his stem sister, 
Mr. Bradbrain, Mr. Mordred, and the Penroses, 
were already there. The ladies were taking off 
their bonnets upstairs. It was delightful to see 
how Hookem's patent boots glided about, accom- 
panied by a somewhat globose body, and how he wel- 
comed and joked everyone, till perfect eleptrical 
good-humour and pleasant anticipation seemed to 



86 



fill the room thioogfa wlucli a Tapc»iser bad al- 
read T dissemiiiated a deHcioas perf nine. A gende 
aoond of jingliDa sDrer and tinkliDg glasses ooaed 
tbioagh the screen, like the toning ap for pleasant 
mosic. If the mind <hi1 j got its fair shaie, the 
bodj was safe for en jojment that erening. 
Rattle, b-attle! cmnsh, ratde! came more 
wheels. 

^Mr., Mrs., and l£ssTr^eIlas 7* shouted Jack- 
son, in troe Belgravian and heraldic manner; and 
jost as Mr. Hookem got to the entrance, in came 
the par^, Mr. Tregellas looking graxe and uncom- 
promising; Mrs. Tr^;ellas was pleased, and not 
qnite so preoccupied as ordinarily, for her she was 
nnnsoally dressy, for she displayed a scarlet satin 
scarf, trimmed with swansdown. As for Lilly) 
she looked more beautiful and bewitching than 
usuaL She wore a straw-colcoired barege (I men- 
tion this to pacify my female readers), cut low, 
and trimmed with blue ribbon, in all sorts of puffs 
and ruches ; and yet no more overdone than if the 
dress had been fashioned for a countess. Her 
hair, blonde dorSe, as enthusiastic hair-dressers, I 
believe, call such an angelic tint as Lilly's, was 
drawn back from her face and looped up at the 
back under a broad golden comb ; while her fair 
head was bound with a blue ribbon snood, a 
fashion that made her look something between a 
maid of Athens and Bums's Mary Morrison, yet, 
to tell the truth, far more beautiful than either. 

Behind the Tregellas party came the pupils^ 



MR. HOOKEM'S farewell PARTY. 87 

Fitzhugli, Maclean, and Lucas, all fashionable in 
dress, off-hand in manner, and determined to show the 
Sultan editor and the Cornish guests that this was 
by no means their first appearance in society. 

Lucy's quick eye had already cast somewhat 
anxious glances around the room, as if in search 
of some possible guest, when Jackson, intensely 
Belgravian, in canary-coloured plushes and cinna- 
mon-coloured livery, slid into the room, and shouted 
with fashionable indifference, '^ Mr. and the Miss 
Wavertons 1" 

A slight expression of disappointment came 
over Lucy's face as Mr. Waverton entered with 
his three sisters in full sail ; but her eye brightened 
as Milly darted towards her, and kissed her, 
and said under breath, " Oh 1 Lilly, you do look 
so lovely in that dear barege 1" As for Milly's 
sisters, they were perhaps a little overdone with 
flowers and clouds of muslin, and wreaths com- 
posed of sticky green leaves, and unknown flowers, 
after the manner of a certain age that, it must be 
allowed, often requires much garnishing. 

At last in came the Tolpeddens — Mr. Henry Tol- 
pedden earnest and thoughtful, taking in every- 
body in the room in a few quick glances ; the old 
lieutenant, hearty and brusque as usual ; his little 
wife gayer, laughing even more than customary, 
and not quite oblivious to Mr. Bradbrain having 
vacated a chair beside Lucy Tregellas, in the 
most gallant manner, on purpose to make room for 
her. As for Arthur, he looked as tall, and strong, 



88 GREATHEART, 

and handsome as ever, but far more graceful and 
slender; that was the e£Fect of dressing in 
black. He wore no ornaments, but some opal 
studs, and a watch-chain, massive, but not osten- 
tatiously thick ; no foppery of worked shirt fronts, 
or silk-lapelled coat, or advertised wealth, indi- 
cated a love of display. With perfect ease, and 
yet with the radiant face and the frank warmth of 
nineteen, he passed round the room, shaking 
hands, bowing, and interchanging inquiries. Quite 
naturally, as it seemed, when he reached Miss 
Tregellas, he remained in the group near her. 
No one could have perceived without a suspicious 
care that his bow to her was deeper or more ex- 
pressive than it had been to others, or chat he took 
her frankly-proffered hand with more pleasure 
than he had done that of Milly. 

Just as the last guest arrived, pouring forth end- 
less apologies for being late, Jackson announced 
dinner. For some minutes before Mr. Hookem 
had been sliding about the room, informing the 
gentlemen whom they were to take down to dinner. 
To Arthur Miss Tregellas was allotted, the lieu- 
tenant took down Miss HonoriaWaverton, an enthu- 
siastic though not youtlif ul creature, while the host 
himself offered his arm, in his Ellistonian manner, 
to Mrs. Tregellas. Mr. Bradbrain did not secure 
Mrs. Tolpedden, but he took in Miss Trevena, and 
to his delight and surprise found Mrs. Tolpedden, 
whose iiawetS seemed to charm him, on his left- 
hand side. As for Mr. Mordred, whom Mr. Tre- 



MR. HOOKEM's TAREWBLL PARTY. 89 

gellas had only deigned to acknowledge with the 
coldest and slightest of bows, he conducted to the 
banquet — to use a theatrical synonym for a 
dinner — Miss Richards, a showy, talkative, black- 
browed girl, who was staying with the Wavertons. 

And a very pleasant, merry, chatty dinner-party 
it was, now that the gentlemen had wedged their 
way into their places, and everybody had settled 
down into line of battle. 

" I can't apologize, Tolpedden, for doing away 
for once with the cold Russian dinner," said Mr. 
Hookem. "I like, myself, the old hearty carving; 
when friends are dining together, one can watch the 
tit- bits for them. It takes away my appetite not 
seeing the joint." 

^* Ah 1 I remember you wrote an ode against it 
last year, when you dined with us," said Mr. Tol- 
pedden. " You turned that ode of Horace, ' Per- 
sicos odi, puer, apparatus.' " 

" Let me see, how did it run ? 

^ I hate the Russian dinner, John, 
And fuss and chilly pomp detest ; 

Remove that mountiainous epergne, 
A rose or two were far the best, 

To grace our board, &c., &c.* 

and so on. But the ladies will scold me if I let 
the soup get cold while I repeat my doggerel. 
Miss Honoria Waverton — ^no soup I Now I must 
beg of you to taste this rabbit soup, it is made from 
a receipt, of which, as a professed epicure, I am 
especially proud. By-the-bye, Trevena, when are 



90 OBEATHEABT. 

you going to get a new peal of bells for St. Pet- 
rock's? I never did hear such organized dis- 
cordance as came forth from your belfry on Gay 
Fawkes' day. And talking aboat great church bells^ 
Trevena *" 

^' John^ Mr. Hookem is asking you a question 
about the St. Petrock's bells," said Miss Trevena, 
sharply, from across the table, where she was 
condescending to Lucas, who was secretly cursing 
his stars at having got next such a harridan. 

Mr. Trevena looked up rather guiltily, for he 
was entirely intent on a low-toned and apparently 
very interesting conversation that he was carrying on 
with Milly Waverton. 

" Eh t — ^what ? I beg your pardon. Yes, Mr. 
Hookem, I didn't hear you," he said, somewhat con- 
fusedly. But Arthur had already sprung good^ 
naturedly to the rescue* 

'^ A feDow-feeling makes us wondrous kind.*' 

'* You know what the old rector at St. Advent, 
Hookem, used to declare they said ?" suggested Ar- 
thur. " It was * Hang Tom Paine 1 Hang Tom 
PaineT" 

**Why, that's like two sets of village bells I 
used to know in Wiltshire, Arthur," replied Hookem. 
*^ One set of three used to say, * Who'll help we ? 
Who'll help wet' and the two bells in the next 
village used to reply gruffly, *We wool! We 
wooir But that charming modem poet, Little* 
more, has said all this better for us. 



MR. HOOEEM'S farewell PARTY. 91 

^ The Sabbath bells across the down, 

Are calling to each other now ; 
I hear them clamouring from the town, 
I hear them from the hill^s green brow. 

Rising and falling, loud, then faint, 
They chase the joy-song of the lark, 

As sharper, quicker, their deep plaint, 
Chides first the parson, then the clerk/ '' 

*^ I don't know that I admire Littlemore quite 
so much as you do, Hookem," said Mr. Tregellas. 
^^ It seems to me that he writes too much like im- 
provisation. Why * deep plaint,' for instance ?" 

** Good Heavens I just hear that, Miss Waver- 
ton; hear that, Arthur I Why Meep plaint f 
And this is the nineteenth century. (Jackson, see 
that the champagne and moselle are got ready, we 
shall want them in a moment.) Why, you heretic, 
doesn't the bell go quicker and sharper when it is 
time for the parson to arrive! And you a 
parson!" 

** Well, it certainly does ; but still I don't like 
the verses." 

"Hal the old Dr. Fell reason over again — a 
mere excuse for prejudice. Why, the beauty of 
Littlemore is that he turns the commonest things to 
poetry ; for instance, 

* I rip the stubborn envious wire 

That prisons in the bulbous cork, 
And lo ! as sudden as a fire. 
The scented foam is all at work. 



92 GREATHEART. 

Then, fountain-like, it bursting springs 

(A harmless pistol, boUetless), 
And out the yellow nectar flings 

Itfi floods of sparkling happiness.'" 

"Now, I think your are parodying him," said 
Fitzhugh, laughing. " No man could ever write 
such turgid nonsense as that upon the simple fact 
of opening a bottle of champagne/' 

" No I no ! no !^-couldn't possibly I" cried Brad- 
brain and Arthur together. 

" Well ! well I gentlemen," said Hookem, with 
a mock deprecation, in which fun and irony were 
mingled with adherence to a preconceived opinion, 
"it is not for me to resist such a strong majority, 
but you will perhaps allow me to retain my own 
Qpinion. It will be many years before we see a 
poet arise equal to Littlemore; yet with that 
great man's name I must couple that of Whet- 
stone." 

" And who is Whetstone 1" cried several voices. 

" The author of the * Babyloniad,' a poem from 
which I will read some quotations after dinner. 
Mr. Mordred, allow me to help you to a little bit 
more turbot. Jackson, hand Miss Tregellas the 
lobster sauce. The most extraordinary poem, I 
say, of this age. Talk of your Tennysons! — 
pshaw ! — ^Whetstone alone understands the wants 
of the nineteenth century, and boldly attempts to 
supply them. By-the-bye, Miss Tregellas, I hope 
you are not going to eclipse our Cornish sunshine 
by going to encounter the dangers of London 1" 



MB. HOOKEM's farewell PARTY. 93 

^^ I am not going to leave home again yet/' said 
Lacy. "Butwhy,Mr. Hookemt — what dangers t" 

" What dangers ! Why, no street's safe now 
from these abominable escaped convicts, these 
blood-thirsty garotters. The Hon. Mr. Digweed 
writes to me that the shops are full of watchmen's 
rattles, bowie knives, spiked sticks, life-preservers, 
and even silver whistles for ladies to give the alarm 
with." 

" Shocking I — horrible I" groaned the ladies. 

" The last news is that at six in the evening a 
medical student in Bloomsbury Street was actually 
attacked and robbed, and had his face beaten in 
by ruffians with a knuckle-duster. So much for 
lenity to convicts, so much for the new 
police !" 

" We shall have to fall back on Lynch law," 
said Bradbrain, half savagely, and between his 
teeth. 

" Yes ! to the yard-arm with them I" said the 
lieutenant, helping himself to potatoes. 

" Oh I don't be so horrid, Nel," said his wife, 
shuddering, and reprovingly looking across at her 
worthy husband from several seats higher up. 

^' The remedy is education," said Mr. Mordred, 
with calm authority. " We mast reach the be- 
nighted, heathenish people's children by education 
— religious education." 

^* Yes ; and in the meantime be garotted by the 
fathers," said Bradbrain, rather sneeringly. 

" I've resolved on my campaign," said the host. 



94 



who prided himself on promptitade in all emer- 
gencies; as he spoke, ^^ancing at his goests 
with a triumphant and ahnost superhuman self- 
approbation. ^I shall have a strong steel spike 
attached to my umbrella, which I shall cany 
habitually, especially in the eyening, on the way 
from my office, slanting oyer my right shoulder. 
This, I think, will stop the garotter^s arm, or if he 
doesn't see it in time it will deprive him of the 
sight of one or both of his eyes. 

**Ohr groaned Miss Tregellas, covering her 
face with her little hand, at which Arthur made 
her laugh by telling her, in a low voice, that no thief 
would possibly dare to attack the editor of the 
Forge. 

•*0h! pray don't — pray don't talk of these 
horrid things r supplicated Milly Waverton, her 
hands together. 

^Perhaps Mr. Hookem will oblige us with a 
lecture on the various modes of punishment by 
death," suggested Miss Trevena, as she drank her 
champagne spitefully, as if it was medicine. 

By this time the turbot had disappeared, and 
the venison and boiled turkey were now brought 
in. 

^^Carlyle has treated the matter very boldly," 
said Mr. Tolpedden, who had hitherto been rather 
di$trait and silent. '^ He is for employing convicts 
in road-making, drainage, the making of harbours, 
and the cultivation of moors — as he would also 
employ our idle soldiers ; but even this plan has 



MB. hookem's farewell pabty. 95 

difficulties. We are like a small army who have 
taken prisoners a larger force than our own, and 
we don't know what to do with them. The diffi- 
culty is, without a sort of quasi slavery to employ 
state workmen on private works." 

** But slavery is popular in England now," sug- 
gested Arthur, bitterly. " Certain races, you 
know, were destined to be ruled by others." 

" Undoubtedly they were," said Mr. Bradbrain. 
"The negro and the convict are unimprovable, 
and must therefore be conquered and restrained." 

" Oh ! you don't really think so ?" said Lucy, 
turning her eyes with a look of searching, but sad 
inquiry, and fixing them for a moment upon Ar- 
thur's face ; " oh I you cannot be so cruel as to 
think so r 

How unnecessarily vehement Artliur became in 
his own defence ! It was a delightful torture to 
be accused of inhumanity by such a judge — ^still 
more exquisite because it was preceded by pain, 
the pleasure of seeing in the beautiful eyes of such 
a judge the w^ritten verdict of acquittal. Is it 
any wonder, tell me, ye who have loved, that 
he wished that that trial might only cease to be 
followed by an endless acquittal. 

" Do you really believe, Miss Tregellas, that I 
could be cruel!" asked Arthur, in a voice 
tuned to that perfect, low, deep harmony that 
only love in one of its many stages of miraculous 
growth can elicit. It was the voice of the heart, 
not of the brain. It was not a self-confident 



96 GBEATHEART. 

interrogation, but he spoke with an earnest anxiety, 
that came from the soul, and expressed a fear, but 
not an unmanly fear, that was more chivalrous 
and more graceful than any audacity. No one 
heard the question, because it was said as Arthur 
bent forward to help the lady next him on the 
other side to some blanc-mange, and he spoke in a 
low, subdued tone. 

Lucy replied in a tone that in itself expressed 
conviction. 

" No, I do hope you would not — ^I think you would 
not." 

"By-the-bye, Hookem," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
" how do you get on with your Guy Fawkes book I 
Is your hero's complexion brightening, or do the 
spots still resist your scouring soap I — ^you must 
really call me in as your scientific adviser." 

"Champagne, sir?" said Jackson, who seemed 
to encourage all speakers by instantly filling their 
glasses all round, and who seemed hurt and 
discouraged when Mr. Tolpedden refused his 
proffer. 

" 1 have every hopes of rehabilitating that 
great man," replied Mr. Hookem, grandly, and 
quite seriously. " Bacon has been proved to be 
no time-server, and above bribes ; Kichard III. has 
been shown to be as straight as an arrow ; Mr, 
Froude has demonstrated that Henry VIII. di- 
vorced his wives for the most patriotic reasons ; 
Mr. Ruskin has explained that Turner was a cur- 
mudgeon on the soundest principles ; and now I 



MB. hookem's farewell pabtt. 97 

will vindicate the fame of this great scientific expe- 
rimenter. Sir, I tell you that those barrels in the 
Westminster cellar did not contain gunpowder." 

"Not gunpowder!" said Bradbrain; "why, 
what then, in the name of wonder?" 

" What, then I — why, a new description of ful- 
minating mercury, of such power that even a hand- 
ful would have uprooted London and destroyed 
whole armies." 

" Why, then, waste so much I" suggested Fitz- 
hugh, with a pinching and rather triumphant 
smile, for he had not yet forgiven the picnic. 

" Why t — why, to prove more thoroughly that 
war was now abolished, and to celebrate his own 
discovery and his own death with a royal salute ; 
a useless House of Commons sent to the moon was 
to be the price of such a stupendous invention." 

A feii^e-joie of laughter greeted this somewhat 
wild theory. 

" Well, but you know," said the tenacious Fitz- 
hugh, " the rascal had planned his escape, and had 
a boat ready at the water-stairs." 

" Mere scandal." 

" Well, but you will allow this, Mr. Hookem, 
that in his confession he avowed fanatical reasons, 
and said with brass enough for a Mutius Scaevola, 
*I meant to blow the Scottish beggars back to 
their native mountains !' " 

" Sir, I doubt it — I very much doubt it," re- 
plied the stubborn disputant ; " no, sir, that great, 
that immortal Yorkshireman I refer to, Fawkes, 

VOL. II. H 



98 GREATHEABT. 

Goido Fawkes, was not going on the brink of 
death to betray the great discovery, which he had 
consecrated to the cause of his church. His em- 
bassy in Madrid, his wars in the Netherlands, 
his midnight conferences in Butcher Row, his 
hidings in priests' lurking-places, were not to end 
in a cowardly and base surrender — (Jackson, 
Moselle to Mrs. Tregellas) ; — but depend upon it, 
sir, the secret did not perish — ^no, of course it was 
whispered to some subtle, faithful Jesuit, who 
bore it away and hid it in a religious house, 
and some day — fe ban temps viendra — though you 
and I do not live to see it, depend upon it the 
secret will come out into Heaven's sunshine." 

Mr. Hookem here took breath, and then took 
some wine. 

" There certainly lie hid in chemistry the germs 
of explosive compounds, and subtle poisons more 
terrible and deadly than any yet known," said Mr. 
Tolpedden; "that I must say for Hookem's 
theory — ^but of course he's joking." 

"Never more serious in my life, Tolpedden. 
Do let me help you to one slice more venison, 
Mrs. Tolpedden? — come, just to keep me com- 
pany." 

" By-the-bye, did you read of that curious dis- 
covery of another mine the other day in California, 
Mr. Hookem?" asked the bluest of the Miss 
Wavertons. 

" What, about the hunter falling and catching at 
a bush to save himself." 



MR. HOOKBM'S TAREWELL PARTY, * 99 

« Yes." 

" What was the story t" inquired Arthur. 

" Why, simply this— a hunter falling, caught at 
a bush on the mountain side ; it did not save him, 
and he fell still clutching it. When his companion 
found him in the ravine he was dead, but the bush 
was still in his hand, and to the roots there hung 
some spangles of silver ore. This of course led to 
a search higher up the crag, and there a silver 
mine has now been discovered." 

" A Yankee lie. Til bet a cool thousand," said 
Bradbrain, not altogether liking the turn the con- 
versation was taking. 

" Do Yankees lie more, then, than other 
people?" asked Mr. Waverton, in a thin, helpless 
voice. 

" Certainly they do, a good deal more," replied 
Bradbrain, severely ; " I ought to know — ^but they 
can't help it." 

" Oh 1" said Mrs. Tolpedden, " how can they do 
it t How very wrong 1" 

'^ The most truthful man I ever knew was a 
Yankee supercargo at Port-Royal," said the lieu- 
tenant, emphatically, 

" Then I dare say he found honesty profitable,'* 
suggested Bradbrain, amiably, ^^he perhaps took 
truth as a tonic to set him up for a second course 
of lying." 

" Oh ! mines," said Mr. Tolpedden, " have been 
discovered, as we well know, in the most remark- 
able ways. The divining rod is of course an im- 

h2 



100 • GREATHEART. 

posture, but mines have been found by children 
digging, by explosions, by Will-o'-the-wisps, by 
meteor lights, by rabbit burrows, even by breaking 
chance stones." 

Mordred and Bradbrain looked at each other — 
the one reddened with vexation, the other turned 
greenish pale from suspicion and fear. This Kne 
of conversation must be stopped, come what may. 

" Oh 1 if you once get at mining in a Cornish 
party," said Bradbrain with jovial effrontery, " it 
is all over with it." 

And here he assumed a comical despair, help- 
ing himself to some Neuchd^tel cheese that one 
of Jackson's satellites at that moment proffered 
him. 

" I think Bradbrain is right," said Mr. Tolped- 
den ; " I don't know much good mining talk ever 

« 

does, except to light up one's cupidity, and kill all 
other conversation." 

" I want to trespass on Mr. Bradbrain," said 
Miss Trevena, "if he will be good enough, for 
that excellent story he was telling at our house 
the other day of the Bodmin Election in the old 
times." 

" Oh I it was a mere nothing," said Bradbrain 
deprecatingly, with the true coquettishness of a 
professed teller of anecdotes. 

The ladies at once opened upon him a battery of 
requests, to which Le complied by laughing, placing 
his hand on his heart, and bowing in the direction 
of Mrs. Tolpedden. 



MR. HOOKEM'S farewell PARTY. 101 

" Oh 1 if that's it I can't refuse, can 1 1 Well, 
the story is briefly this ^" 

" Jackson, vnll you keep that door shut at my 
back?" thundered Mr. Hookem, nodding majestical 
approval, and instantly relapsing into a majestic 
and apologetic silence. 

" Is briefly this — ^Forty years ago, when bribes 
were still given at elections, and voters had not yet 
ceased to be corruptible, the little pocket borough 
of Bosinna — a village with about thirty inhabitants 
— ^became vacant. Two candidates came forward, 
one was Tory, the other of course a Whig (there 
were no Liberals then)—" 

"A pity there are now," muttered the lieu- 
tenant. 

" Lord WhamclifFe backed one. Lord Eostrevor 
the other. A short time before the election took 
place, the Tory candidate. Lord WhamclifFe, who 
was the great man of the place, began to build ten 
small stone cottages, in order to fill them craftily 
with fresh electors on his own side of the question. 
The roofs of the new tenements were just on, the 
floors down, the new inhabitants were ready to come 
in, and the vexed Whigs were pretty sure how the 
election must go. What was still more aggravating 
was, that but for these reinforcements the majority 
had been secured for Lord Eostrevor, at a consider- 
able outlay. All was despondency among the out- 
witted Whigs, till one night, three days before the 
election, there bore down on the village thirty 
miners from Truro. They had their gads, 



102 OREATHEABT. 

picks, and crows with them, and plenty of blasting 
powder. Well, there they came, and began dig- 
ging and scooping under the new cottages, looking 
for metal, as the captain said. Presently they blew 
a horn, telling everybody to keep within doors if 
he wished to be safe, as they had foand it neces- 
sary to begin blasting. Presently bang I in the air 
went every one of all the ten new cottages, and out 
ran the villagers, who began to smell a rat. Then 
the captain got on the mound where they chair 
the new members, and told them he was very sorry 
to say that the search for metal had been 
hitherto unsuccessful, but that they were now 
going to try the hill above the town. And so they 
did try, and lit a bonfire there, and let ofP blasts of 
powder, as much as to say, ^ See how we've bam- 
boozled you !' The Tories did all they could to 
make up for the march stolen on them; they bought 
farmers' houses worth £20 for £90 each, but it 
wouldn't do at any price, and at the election soon 
after, in came the Whig candidate by a majority of 
fifteen. An action was brought against Lord 
Rostrevor, and he had to pay some hundreds for 
the blown -up cottages, and that and the miners' 
pay cost something ; but he won the election for 
all that, and that's all he cared for." 

" How charmingly Mr. Bradbrain tells a story!" 
said Miss Waverton, across the table, quite loud, 
to Arthur, charitably hoping to annoy him by 
disappraising some one else. But Arthur baiiied her, 
for he was loud in his praise of his dashing friend. 



MB, hookem's fabewell pabty. 103 

By this time the table groaned under the cost- 
liest of desserts, and all sorts of wines, including 
even a bottle of princely Tokay from Prince 
Mettemich's own cellar. • 

"I never can make out Bradbrain's politics," 
said Mr. Hookem. " Can you, Mordred ?" 

Mordred, speaking slowly, as if it gave him 
actual pain, said he really could not, never could, 
thought he never should. 

" I am a Philosophical Liberal," said Bradbrain, 
in his audacious way. " Arthur knows my politics 
well enough; we often put on the gloves about 
politics. He's all for the poor ; Pm for extending 
the power of the middle classes ; they are the pith and 
marrow of England. Mrs. Tolpedden, you must — 
you really must, to oblige me, taste this Tokay." 

" Well, just a very, very little." 

" That is to say," said Mr. Tolpedden, " that he 
is for extending, as much as possible, the power 
of his own class. Well, that is, no doubt, the 
secret principle of most parties." 

" I am for widening the basis of the governing 
classes, and dividing with the aristocracy the 
profits of governing. Let the poor man wait and 
improve himself, and learn how to use a vote be- 
fore he gets one." 

" Didn't you sympathize with us in our escape 
from those dreadful people, Mr. Hookem 1" said 
Miss Honoria Waverton. ** Oh I poor Frederick, 
how it did shake his nerves !" 

Frederick sipped his wine, and denied the shock. 



104 GBEATHEABT. 

Mr. Hookem eyed him with thfe good-humoured 
mischief with which a man of the world observes 
an enthusiastic youngster ; he passed the decan- 
ters, and at the same moment begged Mr. Trevena 
to help Miss Milly Waverton to that mixed Chinese 
preserve opposite Mr. Tolpedden, which Mr. Tre- 
vena did, with many apologies. 

"I should have thought," said Mr. Hookem, 
" that your new Saint Lucifer would be a match 
for five thousand Ranters." 

Faint groans and laughter from the ladies ; but 
Mr. Waverton looked angrily at Mr. Trevena, who 
was laughing in his usual loud, hearty way. 

"He didn't come up to the scratchy did he?" 
said Lucas. "And yet one generally associates 
him with Guy Fawkes and the bonfire ! " 

"Pray don't," said Lucy, in a low voice, as 
Arthur was preparing to join in the attack ; "you 
see he takes it all in earnest." 

" I see no subject for joking in these things, 
Mr. Lucas," said Mr. Waverton, turning very red ; 
" and I trust ^" 

Mr. Hookem turned off the conversation by 
asking the lieutenant what he thought of Admiral 
Fitzro/s code of storm signals. 

"All very well for yachtsmen and pleasure- 
parties," replied the lieutenant, as he peeled an 
orange for the lady next him; "but Lord! old 
fishermen, who have to live by what they get out 
of the sea, can't afford to attend to storm-signals. 
They wouldn't get salt to their bread if they did. 



MR. HOOKEM's farewell PARTY. 105 

Bless you, they know when it's rough without a 
signal. They can't go without their dinner be- 
cause there's a sea on. If they can put the boat 
out, out the)'''ll go, cone or no cone, depend upon 
that, captain." 

*^My brother is a regular old Tory, isn't he, 
Tregellas?" said Mr. Henry Tolpedden. "He'd 
rather, I believe, see a dozen lives lost in the old 
way, than save one in the new." 

" Well, he is rather Chinese," replied Mr. Tre- 
gellas. 

"Oh! he can't bear changes," said Mrs. Tol- 
pedden. 

" No. If I could, I might perhaps some day 
want to change you, Polly," said the lieutenant, 
" so avast hauling there." 

" Talking of intrepidity," said Mr. Hookem, " I 
want, before the ladies leave us and take with them 
all the sunshine, to relate two stories of Cornish 
sagacity and courage." 

Mr. Hookem was one of those vain men, who, 
liking flattery themselves, imagine no one can 
enjoy an evening unless he is well flattered; 
and who, therefore, in hopes of a quid pro quoy 
make a point of administering periodical doses of 
flattery to their friends, as punctually as the serv- 
ing up of the coffee. There was mischief in his 
eye as he glanced round the table, and every one 
ceased talking at his good-humoured but pompous 
fiat. 

"But, first," he said, "let me ask about the Cup 



106 GREATHEART. 

Day. Does it stand for Wednesday next, Brad- 
brain!" 

*' Certainly, it will be advertised so to-morrow 
in the Bodmin Mercury T 

" And who's the best man — ^you Arthur, or Trel- 
lech I What do you say, Mr. Lucas, you practise 
with them ?" 

" Well, I don't know. Tolpedden is very steady, 
but Bradbrain is so awful dod^, he's up to all 
sorts of manoeuvres; besides, he goes alone to 
practise, in all weathers. Trellech is a good ave- 
rage shot, a tremendous fluker, and he knows 
the ground. It'll be a near go, I think." 

" I think, Mr. Lucas, you should translate your 
remarks for the sake of the ladies," said Mr. Tre- 
gellas, sarcastically. 

"Oh! young ladies of these days understand 
slang, unfortunately, only too well; don't they, 
Milly?" said Miss Trevena, spitefully. 

Milly's eyes glistened, but she made no reply ; 
for which her inseparable Lilly praised her when 
they got alone. 

" Well, now for my stories, as anecdote-telling 
seems the order of the day. I always like to see 
Comishmen stand out well. My first story relates 
to the sagacity and presence of mind of a young 
doctor " 

Bradbrain started, and set down the glass he had 
just raised to his lips, for he saw Arthur smiling, 
and guessed what was coming, but no one else saw 
it. 



MR. HOOKEM's farewell PARTY. 107 

" Jackson, you can go and get some more of the 
port — the blue seal ; and we'll ring when we want 
you. Well, ladies and gentlemen, to return to 
our muttons. The story is this : Dr. A., as I will 
name him, was called in some years ago to a young 
lady at Bodmin, who had an ulcerated sore throat, to 
which it was necessary to apply caustic. One day, 

when the family were all out, Dr. A came 

as usual. The caustic was in a quill ; to his hor- 
ror, when he drew it from his patient's throat, he 
found that it had dropped off the quill, and that 
the young lady had swallowed it. Imagine his 
horror, his sorrow, his regret. In a moment he 
foresaw death, then an inquest, exposure, blame, 
disgrace, loss of practice, ruin. But, quicker 
even that, he had gathered up his courage, and 
discovered a remedy. Like a flash of lightning he 
remembered that milk was an antidote to that cor- 
rosive poison. Instantly, without telling his 
patient of her danger, he dashed down- 
stairs, brought up a tumbler of the remedy, and 
gave it to the young girl to swallow. She did so, 
without questioning ; the milk instantly turned 
the caustic to a harmless white powder, and acting 
as a gentle emetic, the danger at once passed 
away." 

" Confounded plucky," said Lucas to Fitzhugh 
—"wasn't it!" 

"What noble presence of mindl" said Mrs. 
Tolpedden. "What was his name? — is he at 
Bodmin now f 



108 GREATHEART, 

" Admirable I" said Mrs. Tregellas. 

*^A fine trait of character, wasn't it, Brad- 
brain !" said Hookem, winking violently as he 
poised his glass of port wine knowingly, so that it 
shone a little ruby barrel of wine between his closed 
eye and the lamp. '^ You and Mordred don't seem 
to appreciate my anecdotes of medical presence of 
mind. Did you ever meet Dr. A ?" 

Bradbrain, who had been bending over a plate 
of filberts, looked up at this. There were spots of 
red on his cheek-bones — that was the nearest ap- 
proach to blushing he could ever make. 

" Now, Hookem," he said ; " this is really dis- 
graceful — this is too bad ! I appeal to you, Mr. 
Tolpedden — has a man a right to repeat a story 
told him in confidence ?" 

All eyes were turned in wonder and admi- 
ration on the self-betrayed hero, whose confusion 
seemed so natural and so becoming. 

"'Pon my word, when a story involves no 
secret, and, moreover, reflects so much credit on 
the hero of it," said Mr. Tolpedden, " I think that 
there is really no great harm done." 

The ladies uttered a simultaneous murmur of 
approval. 

"I thought my fair friends would acquit me 
of any breach of confidence," said the intrepid and 
unabashed Mr. Hookem. " I will now tell you how 
the same Dr. A., with equal sagacity, once cured 
a hypochondriacal old lady who believed that a 
small fishbone had lodged in her throat." 



MR. HOOKEM'S farewell PARTY. 109 

" Now, really, you and I will have to quarrel/* 
said Bradbrain, expostulating. 

^^ Nonsense, man ! I appeal to anyone present 
if the stories do not do you the greatest credit ? 
Well, Dr. A., or let me at once say boldly, Mr. 
Bradbrain, finding no arguments could convince 
his patient, resolved to cure her by appealing to 
her imagination. One day coming prepared, he pre- 
tended to search her throat with a pliers, and pre- 
sently held up before her a stiff bristle that he 
had previously drawn from a tooth-brush. The 
hypochondriacal old lady, delighted to see the evil 
not only proved but removed, was cured from 
that moment.' The enormous fee she paid the 
subtle doctor I leave him to tell you." 

" No, 'pon ray word, nothing very tremendous," 
said Bradbrain, laughing ; " by no means a bag 
of gold. Indeed, if I remember right, I had to 
put her, after all, in the County Court, for she 
disputed my small charge." 

" Yes, that she did, and in the most unchristian 
way," said Mr. Mordred. 

"But your second story, Mr. Hookem," said 
Fitzhugh. 

" Oh ! now another fellow's going to be victim- 
ised," said Bradbrain gaily, as Hookem glanced 
round the table, as if selecting a hero. 

" The story I am now going to tell was told me 
only last week by one of the Boscastle fishermen. 
Four year ago some lads of the neighbourhood here 
were out on the cliffs looking for sea-birds' eggs, as 



110 GREATHEART. 

they do, you know, in the spring, Arthur." 

It was Arthur^s turn to colour. 

" It's really too bad, Hookem," he said ; " it's 
worse than the rack — ^the thing isn't worth telling." 

"That our friends shall judge. Now, it's no 
use, Arthur, for I will tell it. No Cornish merit 
shall be hid at this table, if I can help it ; and, you 
see, there's your aunt, and Miss Tregellas, and 
Miss Waverton, all begging me to go on. Well, 
these boys set out one day to St. Anne's Head with 
ropes and baskets to get gulls' eggs. There were 
three of them, but only two ventured down — one 
a handsome, strong lad of sixteen, another a boy 
of twelve. The story runs not unlike an old one 
told of some St. Kilda men ; but it is, nevertheless, 
quite true. The two lads fastened the rope to an 
iron staple in a cleft above, and then went down, 
while the other one watched above. The eldest was 
lowest, the younger one higher up. There they 
were, swaying about, picking samphire and rock 
flowers, and filling the pouches they carried with 
great spotted eggs of the sea-fowl, when all at 
once there came a piercing cry, then another 
from above that made them look up " 

"Now pray don't," said Arthur, suddenly, his 
face glowing like fire ; " it is really too bad — pray 
don't !" — The tone of Arthur's voice was sufiicient 
to show he was in earnest. — " It's what every one 
would have done !" 

" Yes, I will I Isn't this a free country f I am 
not telling a story of anybody's cowardice, am I ?" 



MR. HOOKEM'S farewell PARTY. Ill 

" Oh ! yes, pray go on," cried Miss Tregellas, 
and several other ladies. 

" The eldest boy saw in a moment that the rope 
had fretted against the sharp edge of a turn in the 
rock, and hung only by two of its strands. It 
could not last two minutes with the weight thus 
Upon it. Without any talk or theatrical farewell, 
the brave fellow instantly resolved what to do ; he 
was the heaviest and the lowest down. There was 
five-and-twenty feet to fall, but below all was soft, 
deep, white sand ; he might escape, and when he 
fell the rope would be strong enough for the other. 
He instantly drew his knife, said * Good-bye, Tom,' 
to the astonished boy, whom he told to hold fast, 
threw away his knife, and dropped. By almost a 
miracle he was only stunned — he had one ankle 
sprained, but he received no other harm. Provi- 
dence protects the brave ; and that brave lad was, 
I am proud to say, my talented young friend, Mr. 
Arthur Tolpedden." 

There was a murmur of admiration. 

"Now that's really too bad," said Arthur. 
" Why, such things happen almost every year in 
the egg season. There was no great danger on the 
sand ; if it had been down Bude way, now, where 
the boulders begin, it would' have been very 
different." 

" Oh ! how very brave and good it was of you!" 
said Lilly, clapping her little hands, her eyes 
glowing with enthusiasm. 

" Oh ! it was, indeed I" chorused the two Miss 



112 6REATHEABT. 

Wavertons, radiant with enthusiasm and smiles. 

^' Do allow me to give you half ^ a glass more, 
Mrs. Tregellas f " said Mr. Hookem. 

" Not a drop, thank you — ^no, thank you." 

"Mrs. Tlregellas," said Miss Trevena, in a 
solemn and telegraphic way, and half rising, "I 
think — ^j''es ^" 

At the summons of that stern Pharisee, it 
was time for the ladies to retire. A rustling 
spread round the table, the conversation hushed, 
the gentlemen rose. Mr. Mordred put back his 
chair with the air of a man when a sermon is over. 

Arthur darted noiselessly to the door. 

" Now a total eclipse commences, and we poor, 
forlorn men must begin to smoke some glasses," 
said Mr. Hookem, in gallant despair, as he moved 
to allow that inexorable Nemesis, Miss Trevena, 
to pass. 

" Oh 1 you will do very well without us ! What 
good-for-nothing, false creatures these men really 
are, Mrs. Tregellas ! Perhaps a cigar may help 
you, Mr. Hookem, to bear our loss wdth some 
equanimity !" 

"It may console us — it may mitigate — but it 
will not remove the grief, my dear Miss Tre- 
vena." . 

That amiable evergreen lady gave a shrill, sour, 
sarcastic laugh, and said, 

" Come, dears, now; the wretches will soon make 
themselves comfortable. Oh ! never believe them 
— ^faithless creatures !" 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE, 113 

Arthur gave one glance at Lilly, as she glided 
past, like a good spirit ; but she did not return it, 
for she was looking back and laughing with Milly 
at the duel between Mr. Hookem and Proserpine, 
as he called his antagonist, Miss Trevena, because 
etiquette, as he said poetically, tore her from his 
sight. It seemed to Arthur like awaking from a 
beautiful dream to a wet day and hard work, clos- 
ing the door on Lucy Tregellas. 

Was he really sorry that his good deeds had 
been sung, in spite of himself, by Mr. Hookem ? 



CHAPTER IX. 

ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 

^^"VrOW, what are you drinking, Mr. Tolped- 
ly den ? Mordred, the port stands with you. 
Mr. Fitzhugh, I'll trouble you for one of those 
figs — thank you. Let's draw more together. Mr. 
Waverton, is that claret to your liking, or shall 
Jackson bring some winewith more body? — Ishould 
like you to taste my Chambertin — it's what Dig- 
weed always drinks, and he's the best judge in the 
Carlton. Trevena, try those filberts — they're all 
pink skins — I think they've more flavour. How 
do you like this port! — is it old enough, lieu- 
tenant !" 

Such was the volley of questions and exhorta- 
tions that the pompous but hospitable editor 

VOL. II. I 



114 OBEATHEABT. 

ponred forth the moment the gentlemen had 
resumed their seats, and the disgraceful divorce 
originated in less civilized times had been effected. 
Hookem, pleased at having led the conversa- 
tion so triumphantly, and, indeed, without a rival, 
good-naturedly rejoiced (for he was not a sensitive 
man) at the gratification that he felt sure he had 
afforded to Arthur and Bradbrain. 

In the fresh arrangement of seats, Lucas had 
taken a chair between Arthur and the old lieu- 
tenant. The fact was that that fast young gen- 
tleman, Mr. Tregellas's pupil, had a passion just 
now for yachting, and was anxious to ask the 
'veteran a question as to how a ship should be 
managed in a sudden squall. 

The lieutenant, chirpy over his port, was pleased 
at being consulted as an authority, and broke forth 
into long technical explanations, more fitted for 
an examining master at the Trinity House than 
an amateur yachtsman. 

" Brail up the mizen — man the clue garnets — 
let the main sheet fly, and smartly too, or you'U 
lose some canvas, youngster. Did you ever read 
Falconer!" 

'^Falconer! — who was he?" said Lucas, in a 
helpless way. 

" Why, a poet worth half the lubbers they keep 
cracking up — the only verse I could ever read, 
except the Olney Hymns and Dibdin — ^though, 
by-the-bye, yes, I did once begin Pope's ^ Homer,' 
when we were becalmed for four days off the 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 115 

Bahamas ; but I couldn't stand all those gods and 
goddesses, and the Lord knows who. Listen to 
this — 

♦ While the rent canvas flutter'd in the wind, 
Still on her flank the stoopinf^ bark inclin'd. 

** Bear up the helm a-weather !" Redmond cries. 
Swift as the word, the helm a-weather flies.' 

And so on, and so on. I forget the rest just 
now. But I know it ends splendidly. 

^ And while the lee clue garnets lowered away, 
Taught aft the sheet they tally and belay.' 

There's some grit now in that — it's true to nature 
— none of your penny valentine poetry, hearts and 
darts there, Arthur." 

" Well, it's perhaps a little technical for lands- 
men, uncle, I think — don't you, Lucas? And 
why Bodmond? — ^why not Johnson or Davis? 
Who ever knew a fellow in the ^ f oksal' called Bod- 
mond ?" 

"Tut! tutl that was the way in Falconer's 
time — ^poets then used to call things by any name 
but their own." 

"By-the-bye, I see you are talking about 
poetry," said Hookem, overpowering with his 
robust voice some feeble questions of the Bev. 
Mr. Waverton. " I must read you a pet passage 
or two from the Babyloniad, my favourite poem. 
I have it in my pocket. Perhaps, taken as a 
whole, this extraordinary performance is the most 
remarkable product of the mind of the nineteenth 

I2 



f 



116 OREATHEABT. 

century, because it has nulted for ODce true poetry 
with a high commercial purpose." 

Mr. Hookem had the true actoi^s power of 
keeping his countenance; but the grander his 
words were, on certain occasions, the more the 
repressed humbug seemed to ooze out of every 
pore of his face, Kke quicksilver through wash- 
leather. It was evident now in even his eyes that 
he was not thoroughly in earnest ; he was, though 
almost unconsciously, satirizing modem poetry by 
his exaggerated praise of this Mr. Whetstone. 
The simple-hearted lieutenant and Mr. Waverton, 
quijte unobservant of these subtleties, were listen- 
ing with as much reverent intentness as if Shak- 
spere had been of the company, and was going to 
read parts of his own " Hamlet." 

" Pass the wine, Waverton — it stops with you," 
said Hookem, as he drew a little book from his 
pocket. "My first quotation shall be a eulogy 
on Mr, Major, a friend and patron of the author's. 
How daringly he bursts into his subject — 

'• Though I like not doctors, yet my muse, I will engage her 
To write a glowing strain upon the immortal Major. 
From the Thames to the Indus, Atlantic to Pacific, 
All hail Joseph's Pleuro-Pneumonia Specific' 

Here's a bit equal to Shelley — 

*• My veBsel walks the redd'ning Alps of a sunset ocean, 
Laden with restorative drinks and synoyitic lotion.' 

Then here's a picture—^ 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 117 

* The pioneer of the wilderness in leafy bower rests, 
To look over for his thriving friends Major^s medicine chests ; 
The standard of Science and Philosophy my hero hath un- 
furled, 
The hot air baths in Westminster are the wonder of the 

world ; 
Hail all th^ grateful deeds of Major, who doth attain 
To the world^s approbation, at No. 5, Park Lane.'" 

Here the reader stopped, literally overwhelmed 
by the laughter of his auditors. Every one round 
the table was writhing in harmless agonies, and 
in every variety of contortion, except the lieu- 
tanant, his brother, and Mr. Mordred, who, amused 
in a graver way, alone preserved their composure. 

" Now the poet, fired by his theme," continued 
the Sultan Editor, ^^ urges his Pegasus to a brave 
gallop, and thus concludes — 

* My muse, with the great veterinary surgeon, 

Doth canter like a filly, 
And her way over living hosts doth urge on, 
At 6, Park Lane, Piccadilly.'" 

^^ What a consummate fool I" said Lucas. 

" I never did hear such stuff," said Mr. Tre- 
gellas ; " did you, Tolpedden t" 

"What a sublime fool!" exclaimed Fitzhugh. 
" Why, he's only a writer of poetic puffs. Still, 
there are certain gleams of sense now and then 
about the Dougal creature." 

" What a master of bathos !" said Arthur; " he 
should write the art of knowing what to avoid in 
poetry." 



118 OBEATHEABT. 

" Ah ! now you're too severe on your rival poet," 
said Mr. Hookem, banteringly; "but you must 
allow me, Arthur, to stick to the fact of his bein^ 
quite unapproachable. Hear him on Canadian 
forests. Why, he has accomplished what Dante 
would have shrunk from, though that sour Floren- 
tine did versify all the scholastic theology. Hear 
Whetstone again. Silence, if you please, for 
Whetstone — 

* Rapt in enchantment, waved on high the muse's miraculous 

wand, 
And straight before me all the woods seemed in their robes 

to stand; 
First 'mongst deciduous forests, and in extensive groves. 
Scattered in plenteous panoply, see Pintis Strobus moves, 
Acer saccharinum passed like the vision of a dawn 
On Eden, nature^s primal mom, with garden and with 

lawn ; 
F. pubescensy more scanty passed, but much the same sort 

hence is, 
This tree's full-oft confounded with F. Canadensis.^ ^^ 

" Oh ! pray don't read any more of that poacher 
on Parnassus," groaned Mr. Tregellas, when he 
recovered from his second spasm of laughter. 
" Tve laughed till I'm afraid to laugh any more — 
not to mention a glass Fve broken." 

" We all admit the imapproachability of Mr. 
Whetstone, Fm sure; he is certainly more amusing 
and shrewd than Mr. Tupper, and much manlier 
than your favourite Littlemore. He's quite safe 
for the Pantheon," said Arthur. 

"By-the-bye, Hookem," said Mr. Tolpedden, 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 119 

" I wanted to pull you over the coals for so con- 
stantly attacking the literary profession in the 
Forge. What's it fort — ^what does it mean? Is 
it to please your young amateur writers, who pre* 
tend to disregard profit? Were not Shakspere, 
Scott, Byron, and hosts of other great English 
writers, all authors by profession ? Fie, Hookem, 
it is unworthy of you ! You shouldn't let those 
novices of yours, either, sneer at Dickens, too, that 
great, large-hearted humourist, just because he is at 
times theatrical, and now and then sentimental. 
These young men should think how he has made 
England ring with hearty laughter for twenty 
years, what sick-beds he has cheered, what kind 
deeds he has stimulated, and with what pleasant 
and wild fancies he has peopled our imagina- 
tions. Then your fuss lately about style, trying 
to check all idiomatic vigour and originality by 
erecting a dull, formal standard, that any fool 
can nail his sentences to." 

This was Mr. Tolpedden's way, to store up his 
wrath and indignation till it overflowed in a per- 
fect tornado. He was quite in earnest, any one 
could see that by his bold straightforward gaze and 
kindling eye ; but there was no bad temper in his 
attack. 

"Upon my word, Tolpedden, you're giving it 
me right and left — ^you're at me fast and furious 
under my guard, before I can get a fist up.. 
Quarter, peccavi, quarter ! To the rescue, gallant 
gentlemen I Well, well, under the rose, I don't 



120 GBEATHEA.RT. 

know but what you may be right. The fact 
is, we find it pays to let our young terriers try 
their teeth on some tough old reputation ; it makes 
people angry, raises a dust, and sells the paper. 
As the coalheaver said, when his wife struck him, 
^ Let her go on, it amuses her, and it don't hurt 
me.' What author was ever hurt by talk f My 
dear friend, to hear your invectives, one would 
really think literary reputations were as brittle ba 
those barley-sugar castles you see in confectioners' 
windows. Mr. Dickens's fame is known to 
millions, wherever, indeed, the English language 
is spoken. The Forgers just severities reach some 
eight thousand of the number, and influence only 
some twenty of those. Pooh !" 

'^ What do you think, Mr. Hookem, of this pro- 
posed Tercentenary of Shakspere?" said Mr. 
Waverton, timidly, and sinking down after he had 
spoken, as if he wished to conceal himself behind 
his wine-glass. 

" Think r said Mr. Hookem, dilating himself 
till he looked like a balloon half inflated — ^* think ! 
why, that it's like giving an apple to the man 
who's got an orchard. Why not look up some 
great but neglected man whose fame needs trum- 
peting? To tell you the truth" — ^here Mr. Hook- 
em leant forward, and threw back his coat collars 
on each side — " I'm sick of this irrational Shak- 
spere worship ! Why doesn't some bold commenta- 
tor enumerate and eulogise his faults ?" 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 121 

^^ Faults !" said Arthur in astonishment, not un* 
mixed with horror. 

"Hookem! — Hookeml" groaned Mr. Tolped- 
den. 

" Now you're really going too far," said Mr. Tre- 
gellas. 

" You've no veneration," said Mr. Trevena. 

"Faults! of course I mean faults 1" stormed 
Mr. Hookem. " He's chock full of them, as we 
all know. No one wrote quicker or more reck- 
lessly. Look at his wearisome and small puns; 
his borrowed plots; his entangled sentences; his 
confused metaphors. No, sir, mark me, no writer 
is so great that he is not amenable to the court of 
criticism ; and, by Jove 1 sir, if Shakspere had 
written for the Forge^ I'd have slashed his copy 
pretty considerably, I tell you." 

It is probable that Mr. Hookem would not have 
betrayed these opinions had not wine somewhat 
relaxed his prudence. As it was, everyone laugh- 
ed at the notion of Shakspere writing for the 
Forge; and the laughter the editor chose, with 
characteristic vanity, to take as a compliment. 

At this moment Jackson appeared at the door, 
grave and sudden as an apparition, and said that 
coffee was ready in the drawing-room. Mr. Tre- 
gellas rose at the summons. 

"No; one more glass of sherry," said Hookem. 
" Bradbrain, be kind enough to ring the bell just 
behind you — thank you." 



-i 



122 OBEATHEART. 

The bell rang, and Jackson glided in like one 
of Dr. Faustus's familiars. 

" Jackson, a bottle of that best brown sherry. 
Nonsense about no more, Trevena — always end 
with a glass of sherry." 

When the party broke up, and was passing 
down the passage leading to the room where the 
ladies were, some one pulled Arthur by the arm. 
It was Lucas. 

" I say, old fellow," he sjud, " going to have a 
siQoke before I come in. The ostler here, such a 
knowing card, says he's got a dozen rats in a bam 
at the back, and two terriers all ready. They 
won't tjiiss us. Come along, and have a weed — 
I've got a new lot." 

" No, I really can't ; 'pon my word I can't. 
We shall come in smelling of smoke, and there's 
going to be a dance directly." 

^^ Oh ! hang the hop I I must have my smoke, 
I do believe, Tolpedden, you're getting spoons on 
the little man's daughter." 

" Nonsense !" 

" Well, I must have a weed ; besides, I told the 
fellow rd come, and Tve got money on. Shan't 
be long — good-bye. What a particular bloke you 
are 1" 

It is said to be a feature of the Bohemian mind 
that it always prefers any work but the present 
Such men as Lucas always dislike even amuse- 
ment, if it presupposes respectability and restraint. 
A barn with rats in it was to him a Paradise, to- 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 123 

ward which he was irresistibly drawn, like the 
ships of Sinbad to the rock of Magnet. Amongst 
the grooms and ostler-boys he would be regarded 
as a sporting authority almost infallible, and a 
"gent with lots of tin." 

A drawing-room, as it presents itself to the eye 
of the diner-out when he enters it to rejoin the 
ladies, is always a pleasant scene. It is like a 
harem peopled by intellectual beings,- instead of 
pink and white puppets. It is a section of the 
world of Mr. Tennyson's Princess. The groups 
are so prettily arranged, that they almost imply 
some overruling art, for they combine into pictures 
— the blondes and brunettes blend and contrast 
like light and dark roses in a bouquet. The atti- 
tudes are so gracefully unconscious ; the occupa- 
tions are so playfully trivial ; the employments so 
coquettishly industrious. 

In an instant Arthur selected from the groups 
the spot where Lilly sat on an ottoman ; at her 
feet, and leaning against her knees, was Milly 
Milverton, whose little dimpled, faintly-coloured 
face, with its little dark, half -shut eyes, was turned 
upwards with mischievous fondness. Near the 
inseparables were the two elder Miss Wavertons, 
chattering, in a playful and super-girlish way, 
round good old Mrs. Penrose, who was showing 
them a new stitch in crochet. Mrs. Tregellas was 
turning over a book of photographs ; while Miss 
Trevena, ever severe, had selected that strange 
and unsuitable moment to improve her mind with 



124 GBEATHEART. 

Tuppei's " Proverbial Philosophy/' while^ remark- 
able torelate,both her eyes were firmly closed^ though 
her hands still rested upon the inspired work. 

" What have you all been laughing at so, Mr. 
Hookem ?" cried several ladies almost in the same 
breath. 

" I told you they were not quite inconsolable,'' 
said Miss Trevena, waking up and instantly re- 
covering her steely composure. 

" What shouts of laughter, weren't there, Lilly?" 
cried Milly, leaping up from the footstool. 

*^ We have all been speculating on what it was," 
said Lucy ; ^^ do tell us, Mr. Hookem — ^was it a 
story?" 

" No, a poem — ^a most remarkable poem. Miss 
Tregellas. Ladies, you shall have a passing de- 
scription of the funeral of our good Prince Albert. 
The procession is put before us with ^startling 
truth.' " 

Mr. Hookem possessed a great stock of these 
critical conversationalisms, and he emphasized them 
with a grandeur and self-belief which was inimi- 
table. 

" Here are some lines worthy of Campbell : 

^ Valets, and liy'ried jagers, and bailiffiB, too, advanced ; 
Here moved the librarian (there^s a figure !), and there 

the rider — (the rider, observe) — pranc^d^ 
SoHcitor, commissioner (how simple and grand !), each 

in official robe, 
And hurriedly (that's fine I) behind them came — ^whose 

business is to probe 
Apothecaries and surgeons, physicians, men of skill, 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 125 

Amid the tramp of cavalry, amidst their dreary din, 

(dreary din ! — good !) 
Passed (now observe the word-painting of this group) 

the bedizened proxies of the wide ZoUverein,^ " 

The reader's auditors could no longer restrain 
themselves— one long, hearty, ringing burst of 
laughter drowned his voice with an inundation of 
uproarious mirth ; even the lieutenant joining, till 
he had to hold the piano to prevent falling. 

Mr. Hookem alone kept his countenance. 

"Why this mirth f he said; "I really don't see, 
except that the author of the Bahyloniad is so 
original and daring that he sometimes startles. 
A surprise is, we know, one of the sources of 
wit, and vat makes one laugh. Jackson, some 
more coffee. And what do you think, Mr. Waver- 
ton, of this audacious, spurious episcopal charge some 
heretic has just brought out ?" 

Mr. Waverton, who, in his usual stealthy way, 
had just slidden to a round table and taken up a 
volume of photographs of London actors, put it 
down as if the cover had burnt him. 

" I think," he said, " it is one of the most in- 
famous breaches of ecclesiastical discipline I have 
ever known." 

" Yes, we burnt our copy," said Miss Honoria 
Waverton, in her playful way. 

"Oh I indeed," said Mr. Hookem, with a meaning 
side-glance at Trevena ; " come, now, I like that — 
don't you, Trevena I" 

" Would it not have been better to have tried to 



126 • ORE ATHEABT. 

answer it?" said that gentleman blandly, looking 
up from a microscope of Mr. Bradbrain's, to which 
he had just applied his wrong eye. 

^^ It is an insult to the Church to condescend to 
answer such pitiful, ribald lampoons/' said Mr. 
Waverton, half suspicious of the avowed Low- 
Churchman. 

" I read it, and hardly thought it deserved the 
term ribald," retorted Mr. Trevena softly, and then 
moved off to refill Milly's empty cup. 

" Yesterday," said Mr. Hookem, as he sat down 
near Mrs. Tolpedden, and sipped his coffee, " I 
met a miner's funeral. They had placed the coffin 
on that big stone they call ' King Arthur^s resting- 
place,' on the road to Dunchine, and they were 
singing a hymn — ^'tis a fine Cornish custom." 

" Oh ! that must have been old Roby's funeral," 
said Arthur; "I heard he was dead. He was 
uncle to that curious, sneaking sort of itinerant 
preacher who goes about as a dowser." 

" What, the man with a face that the heralds 
would call party per pale, purple and argent 1 " 

"Yes, the same; he's a fellow who pretends, 
you know, to discover metal with the divining rod. 
He's a hypocritical scamp — ^we saved him from a 
ducking at the fair the other day." 

" Why, that' s the very son of perdition," said 
Mr. Trevena, who was helping himself to coffee 
from Jackson's tray, " who led on the mob that 
invaded Mr. Waverton's parish." 

Bradbrain, wishing to lead people away from the 



BOUND OAMES AND A DANOE. 127 

subject of Roby and Sampy, here called on Mr. 
Hookem for the Cornish story he had promised, Mrs. 
Tolpedden, as he said, being most anxious to under- 
stand the dialect of her adopted county. 

Theladies all clapped their hands, and surrounded 
Mr. Hookem, so that he looked like Falstaff 
when he was beleaguered by the fairies in Windsor 
Forest. 

He stirred round his coffee calmly, and eyed 
them with a benign dignity. 

"I only exact one condition,'* he said, "and that 
is, that my story be followed by a round game — 
Memory or Scandal ; then by a quiet rubber for 
those who like, and of course a dance, in which 
everyone must join. I am sure the young ladies 
won't object to a dance." 

"Object I" said Miss Trevena, sourly; "not 
they." 

" I should think not," said Milly, stoutly. 

" Jackson, before I begin, half a cup of coffee, 
if you please — no cream — have you put sugar? — 
very well, then, here is my story, in the true 
dialect ; and only just see, ladies and gentlemen, 
how Bradbrain, there, under the mask of putting 
down Mrs. Tolpedden's cup, is bursting with 
envy." 

"Not I," said Bradbrain; "I be bound Tve 
better things in my wallet." 

" Not you — don't you believe him, ladies fair. 
That's just his brag. The story is this. — Two miners 
went out one day poaching, but could not find a 



128 OREATHEABT. 

single hare. As they returned home, cold and 
tired, says Jem to Daniel, 

" * Dan, those who go out to shut are all liards, 
for there's no hitting a burd when he's flying, sim 
to me.' 

"^Yes, zackly so,' says Dan; *but as we're 
out to shut, let's try the churchyard 'fore go hum.' 
And Jem looked through some thistles, and tried to 
get his knee through. 

" ^ Aw I Dannel I Dannel !' he cried, as soon 
as he had looked, ^clucky down, and crib your 
flent. I've seed a bender ! — I've seed'n, his eyes 
are zackly like two watches. Be bould — pour 
some dry powder in the pan — dont'ee shake so, 
we'll shut ut, Dannel — the bird's so large, thee 
cussn'ot miss him. Aw, Dan, be boulder — rest 
un 'pon the hedge, my dear, hat off, you know, 
f oach the gun through the dishes, and stank upon 
my back, my son ; say your graace, mind your 
aim, shut your eyes, and fire away.' 

"The gun was fired, down came the owl, 
and down came Dan from Jemmy's back. Up 
ran Jemmy and Dan, and were horribly frightened 
when they found they had shot, they did not know 
what, and that they didn't know what it was with 
its huge shining eyes and large outstretched wings. 

" ^ Aw ! Jemmy, dear ! — aw ! Jemmy, dear I 
aw ! let us run — it did seem zackly like a bird ; 
but we've shut a cheretbeam — yes, tes so — ^he 
can't die, I tell 'ee, but he's got the shots in, and 
we've hurt him.' 



ROUND GAMES AND ADANGE. 129 

*^ ^ Yes, yes, zackly so, sure,' said Jemmy ; ^ I've 
see hes pictur' on the tombstones at St. Nectan's, 
hafe hanjale, hafe cat, but no legs. Aw ! we're 
gone, Dan, we're broken buddies ; but worn't he 
like a bird to shut to ? — and he won't speak, Dan, 
that's wust.' 

" Says Dan, then, trembling worse than ever, 

" ^ Ef we can get from this heer place, we must 
go to the passun, praps then we shan't be made spirits 
of. Aw I ef he wud say that we meant no hurt, 
and had never seed cherrybeams afore.' 

^* The parson heard their story, and being fond of 
fun, and a hater of poachers, he told them that, 
as penance for their crimes, they must go to the 
nearest pool, break the ice, and remain in the 
water till daybreak. 

" * If you obey my orders,' said he, * and never 
touch a gun again, I'll see if I can't get you let off 
the punishment.' 

" Off went their clothes, crack went the ice, 
and in went poor Dan and Jemmy. After an 
hour or so, the parson forgave tliem the penance, 
and out they came, dripping, shaking, and .shiver- 
ing like dogs who have been having a rough 
lesson in swimming. As they slunk home, a crowd 
collected, and raised some money for them, upon 
which Dan and Jem began to scream, 

" * Hurrah I passun says we sharCt be made 
spirits of J arter alU " 

Mr. Hookem's story was enthusiastically received ; 
everyone laughed at the qudntness and absurdity 

VOL. II. K 



130 OBEATHEART. 

of the miners' blunder. Worse, Mr. Tolpedden 
observed, than that of the cockney iivoman who, 
behig told that barley was all spun, said she knew 
it was, for she could see the ends of the threads 
hanging out of the ears. 

"After all," said Mr. Tregellas, "there's no 
disgrace in a man being ignorant of a matter out 
of his province — what time has a miner to study 
birds, or a poor Londoner to go and look at barley 
fields ? Do let us be tolerant." 

" Now, just observe Bradbrain, ladies and gen- 
tlemen," said Hookem, assuming the air of a mock 
showman, " and see the working of envy in the 
melancholy figure before you. He is going to 
utter some clever detraction." 

" You're really too bad, Hookem," said Brad- 
brain, turning round in laughing auger ; " I wasn't 
going to do anjrthing of the sort ; you know very 
well, that clever as Tregellas of Truro's story is, 
it can't hold a candle to mine of the swimming 
grinding-stone." 

" Tell us that !— oh ! tell us that," said Lilly, 
clasping her little flexible white hands in the 
prettiest supplication ; " I do so love stories of dear 
old Cornwall." 

" I like the dialect more and more," said Ar- 
thur; "it is simple-hearted and original, with- 
out being all over thorns, like the Yorkshire and 
Lancashire." 

" Gather the roses while ye may," said Hookem, 
bustling up^ and pushing back an ottoman. " Now, 



i 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 131 

lords and ladies, ladies and lords, what shall it be 
— speculation ? Give it a name." 

''For Heaven's sake, no! We've no counters 
or anything," said Bradbrain. 

" Memory 1 — let's play at memory I" said Milly, 
who was proud of that faculty. • 

" German scandal," said Lilly, " or both, one after 
the other." 

"Agreed," said Mr. Hookem. "Come, sit 
round." 

The long, irregular circle was soon made, and 
very pretty and Boccaccio-like it was ; the dif- 
ferent dresses variegating the wreath with pleasant 
dashes of colour. It was not un amusing to observe 
the faces of the different performers: some merry 
and unconscious ; some fixed and abstracted ; 
others shy and alarmed. The shy ones were those 
who knew nothing of the game, and did not know 
how they should take their part. As for Mr. 
Tolpedden, he looked rather stern, for he faced 
Mr. Mordred ; and it is not the pleasantest thing 
to join in a round game with a man who has just 
instituted a Chancery suit against you. 

Milly's eyes were half closed as usual, and inno- 
cently mischievous as ever. Mr. Mordred looked 
as if he was at a revival meeting, and wanted to 
get back to his ledgers. Mr. Trevena was good- 
naturedly ready to take his share. As for Arthur, 
he sat near Lilly, perfectly contented, and eager 
for any amusement. 

"I begin," said Mr. Hookem, knitting his 

k2 



132 GREATHEA.RT. 

brows, as he turned to the table, and wrote down 
a short confused story, which was to be passed 
round in whispers. Directly he had written it, he 
repeated it to Mrs. Tregellas, who happened to be 
next him. With amusing confusion, and evident 
mis-comprehension, that lady listened, and then, 
with uplifted hands, whispered it to Mrs. Pen- 
rose, who happened to sit next her ; lastly, rush- 
ing at pencil and paper, she attempted with all 
her might to collect her entangled and fast fleet- 
ing memory. The horror and laughing confusion 
ran round the circle, till it culminated in Milly, 
who burst out with — 

" Oh ! dear, Lilly, that can't be right. Here, 
somebody, quick, give me a pencil — a pencil 
directly, or I shan't have a word left." 

Arthur laughed, as he wrote down his report ; 
and as for the lieutenant, he exclaimed aloud — 

" Pshaw ! stuff and nonsense 1 Hookem never 
wrote that, I know." 

When the circle had done, Mr. Hookem rose 
and said he would now read the original report, 
and that after him each scandalmonger must 
read his or her version in rotation ; upon which 
everyone turning to everyone said — 

" I'm sure mine is not right." 

Mr. Hookem then read — 

"* Guy Fawkes, going over Westminster Bridge to 
burn the Houses of Parliament, met William 
Tell, Ivanhoe, and Adam Bede. To the first he 
said — ' I haven't powder enough ; ' to the second 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 133 

— * How do you like a good report V and to the 
third — * I shall do the trick to-morrow.' " 

" Oh 1 good gracious 1" cried Lilly ; " why, I 
have not three people." 

" I am sure, Miss Tregellas, you said Whitting- 
ton," was Arthur's indignant protest. 

" No ; I did not say Whittington." 

The second scandalmonger had left out Ivan- 
hoe ; the third had forgotten Adam Bede ; the fourth 
had made it London Bridge ; the fifth had turned 
"powder" into "soda;" the sixth had made "re- 
port" "shot;" the seventh had lost the third 
remark altogether ; so that by the time the story 
reached the last scandalmonger, Mr. Waverton, 
it had dwindled down to this, that — 

" Guy Fawkes met William, and said to him, 
*Do you want soda or shot, for I shall win by 
tricks in the morning." 

As each version ranged wider and wider from the 
truth, fresh peals of laughter broke out. The 
game was highly successful. 

" And I like it, because it inculcates a certain 
moral truth, too," Mr. Trevena remarked. 

Memory was all very well, but it was not near 
so good a game. Everyone in rotation had to 
give a name of some celebrated person, and then 
to repeat that and all the names given by his or her 
predecessors. The list went on very well till it 
got to about twenty ; then the competitors began 
to tail off. The list was a strange jumble : 

" CsBsar — Adam — Soult — Raphael — Jack Shep- 



134 OREATHEART. 

pard — ^Boncicault — ^Nero — ^Romeo Coates — ^Psal- 
manezer — Defoe — ^Ingelow — ^Rapert — Lefanu," — 
and so on. 

Every odd addition was welcomed with groans 
of vexation and shonts of delight. Whenever 
Lilly broke down, after a sturdy battle to recollect, 
Milly instantly gave her the first syllable of the 
right word, much to Miss Trevena's indignation. 

" It is too bad, really too bad, Miss Waverton," 
she kept exclaiming ; but still Milly would come 
to the rescue, after having rattled off some thirty 
names in the true order. 

Arthur beat her, however, at last, much to her 
playful vexation, by three names, in spite of all 
Lilly could do without directly telling her. 

And now, while the lieutenant, Mr. Hookem, 
Miss Trevena, and Mrs. Penrose, sat down to 
whist, the remainder of the party launched into a 
noisy, scrambling, ridiculous game of speculation. 
The lieutenant, who was somewhat rusty in his 
play, had that inexorable Nemesis, Miss Trevena, 
as his partner, and was put on his mettle. 

In vain he tried to remember just what cards 
were out, and whether the trump left was the 
twelfth or thirteenth. While he thought of this, 
he forgot that diamonds had been already trumped, 
led them, and lost the taming game 

"Two trebles against a single — six and six- 
pence,^' said Mr. Hookem, triumphantly, and in a 
loud voice, to his partner; "but why, my dear Mrs. 
Penrose, did you not return my clubs t" 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 135 

The lieutenant's face slightly elongated; he 
thought he had been playing for twopenny points, 
such as he was accustomed to at the club in 
Dorsetshire. Hookem's quick eye instantly de- 
tected the slight cloud rising on his face, so, 
while the cards were shuffling, he quietly rose and 
drew his antagonist apart. 

" My dear lieutenant," he said, " I quite forgot 
to tell you we usually play for halfcrown points ; 
but don't you throw away your money, we'll have 
Tolpedden in, he'll like a rubber better than that 
noisy game out there." 

*''But hold taut, Hookem, there's a good 
fellow," said the lieutenant ; " I have only got 
eighteen pence and a threepenny bit in my locker; 
hang it all, no, only one and a threepenny, all 
told." 

" Oh I never mind, don't mention it. I'll take 
your half when we next meet." 

The whist over, Mr. Hookem rang the bell, 
and ordered Jackson to bring in the Forge silver 
cup, the prize at the forthcommg rifle match. 

Jackson bore it in with his usual composure — it 
would have been just the same to him if it had been 
the head of John the Baptist. It was a cup worth 
twenty-five guineas, and bossy with bunches of 
burnished silver gi*apes. The handles were twisted 
vine-stalks, in excellent taste. Every one admired 
it, especially Lilly. 

" Arthur, you must win that," said Mr. Tolped- 
den, smiling gravely. 



136 GBEATHEART. 

" I shall try hard." 

" And so will I," said Bradbrain, between his 
teeth. 

" Oh 1 it is beautiful, indeed I" said Mrs. Tol- 
pedden, to whom Bradbrain was showing it ; " isn't 
it, Nel r 

" It's not bad," said the lieutenant, his praise 
taking the rough form of his brusque nature. 

" Now we must have some music. Mr. Waver- 
ton, your Beethoven Sonata, to begin with. I 
know you have no objection." 

Mr. Waverton played that sonata in a very fair 
and scholarly way, but without the true fire, and 
moreover rather noisily and mechanically. 

" And now Miss Tregellas has promised me," 
said Mr. Hookem, " a ballad — in the manner of 
Heine — is it nott" 

Arthur felt the blood deepen in colour upon his 
cheek, as he offered his hand to Lucy, and led her 
to the piano. 

She would not meet his inquiring eyes, but the 
slightest possible smile dimpling round her mouth, 
betrayed a consciousness that somebody's eyes 
were upon her. 

" It is really too bad, Mr. Hookem," she said, 
with pretty anger. " You know you promised me, 
first of all, to sing me that old German ballad of 
Gabriel Weissnicht's." 

" So I did ! —so I did 1" said the jovial Sultan ; 
*' and so I will ; but your song first, my fairest of 
cantatrices ; place aux damesy you know !" 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 137 

When a man is in love, or even nearly in love, 
it frets him to hear any one even assuming ac- 
quaintanceship with the goddess of his dreams; so 
Arthur looked grave, and turned to discuss Offen- 
bach's pleasant "Mariage aux Lanternes" with 
one of the elder Miss Wavertons. 

Lilly never sang better, for she was slightly 
piqued at the momentary deviation of Arthur's 
allegiance. No wiry or metallic notes, no shrill 
screaming, like a crazed canary bird, no feeble 
twittering, like a badly-taught bullfinch. No, she 
sang, to use a quaint Italian proverb, as if she had 
a nightingale hidden in her throat. From her 
beautiful mouth poured forth flocks of fairy sounds, 
full, pure melody, such as might have bubbled up 
in a composer^s mind in the rich, calm, satisfying 
stillness of some balmy summer evening, when 
nature rests like a Cleopatra in lazy luxury. 
There was about the simple song an atmosphere of 
spiritual calm, as of a July moonlight — a rippling 
progression, as innocent and playful as a brook in 
May time. There was no sense of stubborn 
diflBculties, painfully overcome, about Lill/s play- 
ing, no display of robust Boadicean arms. She 
played as if it was a joy and pleasure to her; 
she sang as if she could not help singing, to relieve 
the happiness of a pure young heart, overflowing 
with gratitude to God for the life and beauty he 
had given her. 

Such was something the tenor of Arthur's 
thoughts as he leant over the piano, and quick and 



138 GREATHEART. 

true as the electric telegraph, exactly at the right 
moment, he tnmed the pages of Lilly's music, the 
words of which were his own, and written for her 
at her own request. 

A murmur of applause spread through the 
room as Lilly finished her song. Not that poor 
"scrannel" compliment, heartless and hypocri- 
tical, which usually passes in drawing-rooms for 
applause on such occasions, but a real deep murmur 
of surprise and delight. 

How beautiful she looked as she rose from the 
piano ; a slight flush of colour was passing from 
her cheeks, it had arisen from the honest 
pleasure she had felt at pleasing ; and there was 
no grain of vanity or baser feeling lurking like 
a poisonous precipitate at the bottom. 

" Do you remember, Tolpedden, that charming 
line of Catullus f" said Trevena. 

" Ut flos in septis f " said Mr- Hookem to Arthur, 
glancing at Lilly as he spoke. 

"Now, what is that!" said the plajrful Miss 
Waverton. "Oh I those horrid creatures, Mrs. 
Tregellas, they will always talk Latin when they 
don't want us poor womenHo understand !" 

"Arthur will tell you," said Mr. Hookem, 
slily ; " don't blush, Arthur." 

" I really must not translate it ; but I assure you. 
Miss Waverton, it is averyharmlesscompliment,that 
Mr. Hookem's modesty alone prevents his express- 
ing in English." 

After a simple little duet ballad of the ordinary 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 139 

drawing-room description from the playful Miss 
Wavertons, Mr. Bradbrain sang a Spanish comic 
love-song, or, rather, a clever paraphrase of one 
written for him, as he said, by Mr. H. S. Leigh, a 
London literary friend of his. His chanson was 
a very happy rendering of a gay Castillian air, and 
was sung by Mr. Bradbrain in a robust and 
fervent manner. The words were these — 

^^ Pepita, my paragon, bright star of Arragon, 

Listen, dear, listen, ^tis Cristobal sings ; 
From my home that lies buried a short way from Lerida 

(Love and the diligence lending me wings). 
As swift as a falcon I fly to thy balcony 

(Hang this brondiitis ! I can^t sing a bar) ; 
Greet not with merriment Lovers first experiment ; 

Listen, Fepita, IVe brought my catarrh, 

Manuel, the matador ^ may, like a flat, adore 

Young Donna Julia ; I pity his choice, 
For they say that her governor lets neither lover nor 

Anyone else hear the sound of her voice. 
Brother Bartolom^, stoutish Apollo, may 

Run after Lies (you^U pardon this cough ?) ; 
And Isabel^s votary — Sanchez, the notary — 

Vainly — (That sneeze again ? Well, then, I'm off).'* 

♦ 

There being then a unanimous call for Mr. 
Hookemy that gentleman advanced to the piano, 
and in a Lablache manner, after the customary 
cough of all amateur singers, chanted in a mellow 
bass voice, the following version of one of Luther's 
favourite anecdotes, thrown into verse by the Sul- 
tan's own hand. It was a robust, chivalrous 



i 



140 GREATHEART. 

thought, and Hookem's self-assertive, defiant, 
wealthy manner suited it exactly. 

" THE THREE ELECTORS. 

" Three princes at the Diet met, 

The one was Pfalzgrave of the Rhine, 
The second, Lord of Saxony, 

The third was of the Nassau line ; 
And at the twelfth hour of the night, 

When deepest grew the revelry, 
Over the glasses and the dice. 

They came to words both loud and high. 

" First leaped the Pfalzgrave up, and said, 
' You see my country on the Rhine, 
Its castled crags, its miles on miles 

Of precious purple-laden vine. 
Its sloping meadows, seas of com, 

Its mills, its orchards on each hand, 
Its clustered villages and spires — 
Say, is not mine the fairest land ?' 

" But then the Lord of Saxony 

Rose and rebuked his brother knight, 
And cried, ' My brother, boast not so ! 

As sunshine is to the dark night. 
So are our Saxon hills'lo yours ; 

For ours with silver caverns shine, 
"While your mere slopes of stone and clay 

Glow only with the peasant's vine.' 

*^ Then Nassau, last, so calm and grave, 
Stirred not, but said, ^ I boast no mine, 
My hills know but the herdsman's huts, 
And wear no crown of fruited vine ; 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 141 

But where I dwell, I dwell at peace, 

In loneliest cabins dare to sleep ; 
My crown, hung on a tree, is safe, 

For me no trembling children weep/ 

** The nobles sat with bonnets slouched, 

A golden medal bound each plume, 
The flagons shone beneath the lights 

In that old panelled tavern-room ; 
And when Nassau had ceased to speak, 

The others rose with generous glee, 
And clasping hands, cried out aloud, 

^ His is the best of all the three I^ *^ 

And now the lieutenant, being implored by 
Lilly, commanded by his pretty little wife, 
and supplicated by Milly and her elder sisters, con- 
sented with many apologies to sing his one song, 
for which Mrs. Tolpedden was to play the accom- 
paniment. 

The lieutenant's deportment on the occasion was 
a study for Mesmer, and Bradbrain fired off many 
whispered jokes about it in quiet corners of the room. 
The excellent naval officer put his hands under 
the tails of his dress-coat, fixed his eyes steadily on 
the shade of one of the moderator lamps that lit 
the piano, as if it was a binnacle, and then sang in 
a not very musical or varied voice, but with much 
gesticulation of a measured and undemonstrative 
kind, the fine old sea-song written by Captain 
Thomson of Hull, 

^* The topsails shiver in the wind/^ 
" Thank you — thank you, uncle," said Arthur 



142 GR£ATHEART. 

heartily, for he was pleased at the quiet, natural 
seaman's feeling of the song, and he was pleased 
also because he knew the old lieutenant was 
pleased. 

" The young hypocrite I" said Bradbrain under 
breath to Fitzhugh, who was groaning on a dis- 
tant sofa at the music stopping all rational conver- 
sation. 

"The old duffer 1" echoed his fellow-conspi- 
rator, " not a note in his voice." 

" And now my young friend Arthur sings, and 
no excuse allowed," said, or rather vociferated, Mr. 
Hookem ; " and one of his own songs, too." 

The lieutenant drew a small silver chest from 
his pocket, rewarded himself with an enormous 
pinch of Bolengaro and Rappee, his favourite 
mixture, and welcomed it with a royal salute of Cy- 
clopean sneezes. 

Arthur had no false modesty ; he instantly sat down 
to the piano, and sang the last " production of his 
muse," to use a newspaper phrase. It had been 
suggested by some event in the village, for Arthur 
did not ransack air and sea for subjects that were 
to be found so close to his own door. 

^^ Three times for a man, three times 

(The sexton shuddering said), 
But the passing bell he^s tolling 

Sounds twice for a woman dead. 
Doom ! Doom I the bell is tolling 

Twice for a child that's dead. 

'Tis now the happy April time, 
And mossy banks grow blue 



ROUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 143 

With violets brightly peeping 

The little leaflets through, 
But little Bessie runs no more 

To pick them wet with dew. 

How warm the sunshine^s pouring 

Through the belfry overhead, 
How warm upon the heaped-up earth 

Where I have made her bed. 
I care not when they dig for me, 

Now my poor child is dead. 
'Tis three times, &c.^* 

" Braw 1 BRAVO 1" said Mr. Hookem ; " very 
charming I — very touching I And I declare if 
Miss Waverton's eyes have not got some of the 
violet dew upon them. Oh I the power of the 
poets I Well, there's nothing like a dance to raise 
the spirits. Come ; PU ring for Jackson and his 
gang to clear the decks, and send in the band." 

As Jackson entered, he glided to Arthur's side, 
and whispered to him that he was wanted outside 
for a moment. 

Arthur, putting on his white gloves, made his 
way rapidly past some men carrying violins, flutes, 
comets, and other encitements to rhythmical motion, 
to the bar parlour. 

There, to his horror, he found the wrong-headed 
Lucas, sitting in a dishevelled state, with soiled 
tie, torn coat, and dishevelled hair, drinking, 
certainly not his first glass of brandy and water. 
One eye was black and half closed, the other wan- 
dering and vacant. 



144 OREATHEART. 

"Why, what on earth is the matter, Lucas f 
What has happened?" 

" Shappened ? Noshin^s happened — row, jolly 
row shappened — ^thash what's shappened — ^great 
bully — re^'lar mill shappened — here, I shay, an- 
other brandy and shoda, d'ye hear — plenty of tin 
— don't make no mishtake — brandy and shoda — 
much dancing, Tol !" 

"What has happened, Jackson!" said Arthur 
to that plenipotentiary, who at that moment came 
to the bar to hurry a lingering violinist. 

"Dispute about rats, sir — butcher backed his 
white dog against Mr Lucas's black and tan — lost. 
Said there was cheating. Mr. Lucas went to turn 
him out — scrimmage — black eye. Now, mister 
(to the musician), we're all waiting for you. I'll 
show you the way to the ball-room — and you bring 
round a trap to take Mr. Lucas to St. Petrock's — 
d'ye hear, ostler, and quick!" 

"Fresh ash paint," said Lucas, "after little 
shleep — dresh come back — waltzh with that fine girl 

of Tregallassish — Httle man'U be crusty, but d 

him. Bye — bye. Now, then, whersh that trap? 
Don't I tell you another brandy and shoda ?" 

" Good-bye, Lucas, a good sleep'U do you good. 
Be as quick as you can, ostler, with that trap," 
said Arthur, and darted back into the ball-room, 
where the first quadrille had already begun. 

The moment it was over, Arthur was at Lillv's 
side to explain his apparent neglect, and to engage 
her for the first waltz. Mr. Hookem had been 



BOUND GAMES AND A DANCE. 145 

her partner, but he had abjured waltzing directly his 
weight had reached fifteen stone. All trouble fled 
before Arthur and Lilly as they whirled round the 
room. 

As for the lieutenant and Mrs. Penrose, Mr. 
Penrose and especially Miss Trevena, who de- 
nounced all rhythmical movements as sinful and 
forbidden in Scripture, they had settled down to a 
quiet rubber — twopenny points. 

Then came one of those skating polkas, next a 
furious valse h deux tempsj then a graceful 
Varsoviana, and lastly a laughing quadrille, in 
which Mr. Hookem reappeared, and executed all 
the steps, and bantered, and talked, and rolled 
about like a Dutch vessel tacking, and kept every- 
body in unmitigated good-humour. 

Whenever Arthur could get Lilly's hand he did, 
and love grew up that night in one heart at least, 
swift and fragile as a mushroom; at the sup- 
per the inexhaustible and indefatigable Sultan 
Editor laughed, talked, ate, and made speeches 
enough for four "people. 

When the ladies went to put on their wraps 
and opera cloaks and hoods, Arthur told Mr. Tre- 
gellas that Lucas had been obliged to go home, 
feeling rather unwell. 

Mr. Tregellas's sensible face gloomed. 

"Unhappy boy!" he said. "I see; another 
scrape. Oh ! he'll certainly go to the bad. I 
wiiSh he was gone to College I" 

"Yes, that's a wild dog," said Mr. Hookem, 

VOL. II. L 



146 GBEATHEART. 

with one of his careless Polyphemus laughs. *' Tre- 
vena, be kind enough to tell the Wavertons their 
carriage is come." 

" Ha ! A tutor^s life is no joke — is no joke, I 
can tell you," said Tregellas. "Come, my dear 
Lucy — come ; here's the carriage ; good-bye, 
Hookem, and thanks for a most delightful evening." 

As Arthur rode home that evening unusually 
silent, and half asleep, like the rest, in a corner of 
the brougham, a vision of fair women rose before 
his eyes. He thought of that early flame of his 
in Portman Square, Miss Langworthy, and her 
luminous violet eyes; then of that pretty rustic 
beauty he used to flirt with at the " Crown," at 
Bodmin ; then of his cousin, little Barbara Wat- 
kins ; then of that great dark-eyed girl, a ward of 
the Rostrevors, whom he had met at the covert- 
side ; and then he fell asleep. 

When he awoke the carriage was stopping at 
the lieutenant's garden-gate. Dawn was breaking, 
and leaning over the chrysolite and opal battlement 
of the eastern heaven, there gazed on him, through 
the holy light, the pure and loving face of one 
sentinel angel. The glory of daybreak was upon 
its brow; the first pale promise of sunrise irra- 
diated its features ; a supernatural halo shone 
like a celestial crown upon its flowing hair ; yet, 
strangely enough, the face was that of Lucy Tre- 
gellas. 

"Now, then, jump out first, Arthur," said his 
father, and that finally woke him. 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 147 



CHAPTER X. 

THE GLASS GOES DOWN CONSIDEIUBLY. 

MR. HENRY TOLPEDDEN was one of 
those iron men who shape their lives by an 
austere mechanism. However late at work, how- 
ever late at a party, Mr. Tolpedden rose at the 
same hour. 

The day after the party old Liddy knocked at 
his bed-room door as usual. It was exactly eight 
o'clock. He had then been up half an hour. 

" If you please, sir," she said, " Master Arthur's 
had his breakfast, and has ridden off to the 
* Merry Maidens,' to practise for an hour before 
he goes to Mr. Tregellas's. He was afraid it 
might be wet, or the wind would rise higher in the 
afternoon, so he said he'd make sure." 

" That's like Arthur — tenax proposUi^^ thought 
the father ; « he'll do." 

"Am I to light your fire in the study, sir !" 

" Yes." 

" Thought you would like to lie a little later, 
sir!" 

"No, Liddy, I am nearly dressed. Ring the 
prayer-bell at the half-hour." 

In three quarters of an hour Mr. Tolpedden 
was seated at breakfast, and ruminating over a 
passage in Paracelsus. 

It was a bright, clear, cold morning in Novera- 

l2 



148 OREATHEART. 

ber. The swallows were all gone ; the wind, loud 
and restless, mumbled ominously in the chimney, 
or whistled like a Banshee through the keyholes. 
The fire burnt clear and yellow, and the thin 
smoke went wavering up out of sight, continuous 
as a fountain. 

A great tall bunch of yellow and purple chrysan- 
themums tossed and shook at the windows, 
every now and then a rose branch beat and 
scratched petulantly against the glass. It was 
one of those days of early winter when an ominous 
sense of the coming desolation and penury of 
Nature fills- the air. The flowers were passing 
away, the dead leaves rustled over the ground like 
the flocks of ghosts on the banks of the Styx, 
hurrying at the sight of Charon and his black ferry- 
boat. The skeleton trees looked dark, grim, and 
metallic against the hard coloured sky. The birds 
were silent, all but the robin, and there w^as axK 
innocent sadness about his music. 

It is almost a thoughtful man's duty to be sad 
on such days of augury, when the very sunshine 
seems saddened, and when the year is growing 
old, and preparing itself for death. 

Mr. Tolpedden did not believe in presentiments. 
He considered them only the mind's anticipations 
of possible dangers, forgotten if they are falsified, 
regarded as almost supernatural if one in a lifetime 
comes true. 

Pshaw! the strange sequences of cards might 
as well be noted down as supernatural. 



THE GLAJSS GOES DOWN. 149 

And yet, whether from nervous depression after 
the excitement of the night before, or from want 
of his usual full meal of sleep, Mr. Tolpedden felt 
that morning especially open to the skyey influen- 
ces. The wind seemed to moan round the house 
like a prophet of evil, addressing itself to his 
special ear. The mournful flower tapped at the 
window, as if to warn him of some coming mis- 
chief. Then a thought shot across his mind, like 
lightning across a troubled sky. Suppose Arthur 
has had some accident with his gun. But that 
nervous thought of evil he beat down at once as a 
man would a wasp buzzing round his ear and 
troubling him, for there was nothing morbid about 
his mind. The Greeks, we are told, used to be 
most in dread of misfortune when they were at the 
height of success. Thoughtful men, who are 
always on the alert, are, in our own age, in like 
manner deeply conscious how often Providence 
heaves up the earth in sudden convulsions under 
our feet, or pours down upon us, in the midst of 
tranquil prosperity, an inexplicable fury of long 
hoarded lava. It is no wonder that men who have 
themselves suflPered in the shipwrecks of early life, 
shudder to see the glass go down, and the storm- 
cone go up. A very serious ground-swell of inde- 
finable apprehension moved through Mr. Tolped- 
den's mind as he sat facing the window, watching 
the frost on the gravel glisten and disappear in the 
sunlight as he sipped his tea, and balanced his tea- 
spoon meditatively on the edge of his cup. 



150 GBEATHBABT. 

"These tremors," he was saying to himself, 
*' might well be thought supernatural, and yet they 
are but the effect of so many grains of acid infused 
into my blood by yesterday's champagne at 
Hookem's, and can be dispelled by a spoonful of 
white earth, so base a material are they." 

" Out of temper too!" Here he rang sharply 
to have another egg boiled a minute longer than 
the last, so as to fix the white. Yet heart and 
brain are helpless to control ; and all the disturb- 
ing cause — one dinner — a, truffle, some ice pud- 
ding, and perhaps a maccaroni — from such poor 
earth is man— weak man— framed ! 

The arrival of a real friend is never so pleasant 
as at such moments of depression. He comes like 
the Deua ew machina in a Greek play, the only 
true solvent of the mental difficulty. 

At that very moment there were sounds of feet 
in the hall, and the lieutenant entered, bluff, 
brusque, honest as ever, and pleasantly invigorated 
by the cold wind. 

" Good morning, Harry," he said, thrusting out 
his small but fleshy hand. ^'Why, where'a the 
boy Arthur?" 

" Arthur's gone to the butts, Nel ; he's mad after 
that silver cup of Hookem's ; to use the uncouth 
slang of the present day, he says he'll have a 
regular go in for it, and he's afraid Bradbrain is 
going to run him close !" 

" Chip of the old block — ^holds on like a bulldog, 
when he's once got the grip ! Well, I've come 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 151 

here for two reasons, Harry : first, Polly's got a 
headache, and is going to have breakfast in bed, 
so I got mine earlier ; secondly, IVe come here to 
wait for the letter-bag, because I'm anxious, to tell 
you the truth, for an answer from Elphinstone 
about our second memorial to the Admiralty. I 
suppose Fanny's gone for it ?" 

" Oh ! yes, half an hour ago ; nothing stops her, 
she likes the canter." 

I do not know anything so delightful as to see 
two brothers who have arrived at middle life, and 
are still friends. How firmly rooted is such a 
friendship, which has become habit — how safe 
from envy, or any disturbing passion 1 

The lieutenant venerated his brother as a man 
possessed of knowledge which, to him, seemed 
almost supernatural ; while Mr. Henry Tolpedden 
esteemed the lieutenant as a brave, honest man 
who had been placed by ill-fortune in a station 
that had given but small scope for his courage, 
vigour, and self-denial. 

" Polly talks of sending for Bradbrain this after- 
noon, for Ned's got the mumps.** 

It was a simple bit of domestic news the lieu- 
tenant had uttered, as he turned to a mirror over 
the fireplace in a heedless way, to look at a place 
at the bottom of his chin where he had cut him- 
self that morning while shaving; yet a slight 
gloom passed over his brother's face as he spoke. 

"And why not, Mordredf" said Henry Tol- 
pedden, from between almost closed lips, as he 



152 GREATHEABT. 

viciously braised a lamp of sagar at the bottom of 
his tea-cup. 

" Why not, Mordred t — ^why, simply because 
Polly does not like Mordred ; Bradbrain is so fond 
of children, and he understands them better." 

" Oh !" How short and yet disagreeable an an- 
swer oh I is sometimes. 

" Why, that's too bad, Harry, disliking a man 
because his partner has threatened you with a 
Chancery suit. Why, this is a new tack of yours." ' 

Mr. Tolpedden was not a man very fond of 1 

being bantered, more especially when he was * 

serious. It might be an unamiable trait, and show 
a want of elasticity in his mind; but so it was, and 
I am bound to report it. 

" My reason, Nelson, was of quite a different 
kind." He said it curtly, and poured out as he 
spoke another cup of tea. 

"Well, well, cut the painter — Harry, we can 
agree to differ about small things. I like 
Bradbrain ; he is full of pluck, and has seen the 
world, from the main truck to the rudder bolts ; 
there's no humbug about him, let me tell you, not 
a bit. But, hallo I here's Fanny and the pony — 
now for the letters." 

Rattle, rap, rattle, rap, and Gipsy dashed by 
the windows to the kitchen door, Fanny urging 
her to a quick canter, like a bold young Cornish 
Amazon as she was. 

" You seem worried to-day, Harry ?" 

" Well, Nel, that visit of Mordred's the other 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 153 

day, and his threat of a Chancery suit, which I 
shall certainly fight, does hang about me a little, 
I own." 

A knock at the door — it was Liddy, with the 
letter-bag. 

*• The letters, if you please, sir. Good morning, 
Mr. Nelson." 

" Good morning, Liddy ; when are you coming 
to take tea at my place ?" . 

" Oh ! when you and your good lady please." 

" Very well, then, haul taut there, we please to- 
morrow; and mind, no shirking your mess," 

" Oh I no, sir, it's only too great an honour, and 
I shall be so glad to see the dear children all 
together," said Liddy, as she curtsied, in her 
good old-fashioned way, and closed the door behind 
her. 

The opening of the letter-bag is a great event in 
a retired country place. The citizen who hears 
letters fall through the slit in his door almost every 
hour, cannot conceive the pleasure a letter gives 
in such a place, where letters can come only once 
a day. Mr. Tolpedden rose, took a little brass 
key from off the nail behind the door, and un- 
fastened the padlock of the leather bag. Then he 
drew out the brass rod, and dived in his hand. 
There were two letters and a paper — one ofScial- 
looking letter was for the lieutenant. He burst it 
open in a rough confiding way, as if it must con- 
tain kindness. It contained a cold formal letter 
from the M. P. to whom he had applied, promising. 



154 GREATHEART. 

if he could, to get Mr. Henry Berkeley to bring 
the case before the House after his annual motion 
for the ballot. 

'^ That man will do nothing," said his brother, 
firmly, when he read the letter ; " he is all words 
and formalities. A man who writes that way, 
and a man who devotes much time to dress, I 
never rely on.'* 

" Let him hang and perish, then, that's what I 
say," said the lieutenant, in a sudden burst of 
angry voice like a gust of March wind, as he tossed 
the letter into the fire ; it instantly wafted into 
a flame, and blew up the chimney ; " if it doesn't 
come on. Til write to the Times and expose the 
whole affair — ^yes, and TU make the first lord shake 
in his shoes." 

*^ That I certainly would," replied his brother, 
with his grave, half-restrained smile ; " though I 
hope it'll do more than that, and get you and your 
brother officers the pension you have honestly 
earned ; but still, I don't like to see burning 
paper go up my chimney." 

The lieutenant made a tardy and apologetic 
dash with the shovel. 

"And what's your letter, Harry!" he said, turn- 
ing round with that delicious inconsequence which 
was one of the quaintest features of his character. 

" Well, mine has a trifle better news. It's from 
the principal of Baliol, in answer to Tregellas's 
note, to tell me Arthur can go up and matriculate 
next week — that's all right." 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 155 

"Knock the dog-shores away; launch him, 
Harry ; he's teak-built, well found, and ready for 
sea. By-the-bye, Harry, I want to talk to you 
seriously about one thing — I do, indeed." 

" What is it ?" said his brother carelessly, as he 
helped himself to toast; "I'm listening. Has 
Benbow bitten Johnny's finger ? — or Billy refused 
to kill a rat ? I don't think, Nel, I ever saw you 
look so serious." 

" Now, come, Harry, avast chaffing. I've been 
long intending to have a serious palaver with you 
about the state your accounts have got into — I 
have, indeed, no joking. You don't file your re- 
ceipts ; your bills run up— 'pon my word, Harry, 
you're exceeding your income. Thomas does what 
he likes about the oats." 

Mr. Henry Tolpedden looked over the edge of 
his tea-cup with a half ironic smile. 

"I know I'm rather careless about money 
matters ; but you have been a business man, you 
know. Well, my Lord Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer, if I do exceed my income, won't Arthur 
be a shining light at the bar, and support him- 
self at the bar within five years' time ? — and if my 
researches lead me, as I hope, to the discovery of 
some new metal, what need I care for a few hun- 
dreds ?" 

[ Oh ! sanguine father ! ] 

"Well, suppose they don't lead to itt The ship 
may get a return cargo, but then it may go to 
pieces on the Kentish Kiiock; that's why men 



156 OREATHEABT. 

insure, isn't it I Your income is out of the way 
of most probable dangers ; but a good store is no 
sore, as our purser used to say when he was teach- 
ing me single and double entry, while we lay at 
Kingston, Jamaica ; and that's my motto, too." 

" 1 tell 3'ou what it is, Nelson ; you busy men 
get miserable when you're out of work, and you 
want something to fill up your holidays— over- 
haul my bills by all means, if you like." 

The consent was certainly given, yet not in the 
most obliging way. . But the lieutenant, soft as was 
his heart, was tough as to outer skin, and cared not 
a jot. He had a duty to do, and he did not care 
what rubs he got. Perhaps he did not notice the 
somewhat contemptuous manner in which his 
brother spoke, as he tore off the wrapper of the 
yesterday's Timesy and began reading — his face 
hidden by a square acre of paper. First the 
^ obit.," of course, then the latest foreign news ; 
then a glance at the police courts ; then a glance 
at the money article. The lieutenant was all this 
time busy at the inner sheet containing the leaders. 
All at once his brother's eye caught sight of the 
following cold, business-like paragraph : — 

'*We regret to announce that this morning the 
Hertford and Central Bank^ in Old Jewry, stopped 
payment. Acceptances for a total of over 100,000^., 
lying in the hands of Messrs. Fitzakerly, are said to 
be utterly worthless. The City rumour is that if some 
securities obtained from Mr. Petworth at the time of 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 157 

the fusion of the two banks are not worthless, 40,0001,9 
or 60,000^., may be realised." 

Some men, if the axe had thus suddenly hewn 
down half their fortune, would have burst into an 
agony of hysteric rage ; weaker men might have 
fainted ; others would have broken forth into 
groans of despair. Tolpedden did none of these 
things ; no sudden burning fever rose into his 
blood ; no sweat of irresistible anguish broke forth 
in a cold dew upon his forehead, as upon that of a 
dying man ; his lips did not grow either white or 
livid. Ilis was a deep, intense, thoughtful nature 
— his was no morbid or thin-fibred organization. 
He merely let the paper fall upon his knees, and 
gazed silently at vacancy with a terrible calmness, 
as if the darkness of the future had been suddenly 
lit up by some cross flash of revelation lightning 
that had for a moment rendered it visible. Who 
may tell, in that moment of agony, what phan- 
toms of horror and despair may not have struggled 
through his dream ? Into one momentary drop of 
poisonous essence the Tempter sometimes distils 
the sufferings of years. Yet, the eyes did not 
deaden, nor their vigour relax ; no, an earthquake 
could not have shaken that man's courage. As a 
Federal soldier said of his officer the other day in 
battle, " a bullet in the heart could not stop him." 
The lips still did not loosen their shrewd, stern 
determined grip. 

That great trouble, more terrible to him for his 
son's sake than his own, had only roused his lion- 



158 OBEATHEABT. 

like vigour and defiance. The old ambition and 
pugnacity of his youth had returned in full flood ; 
he was ready once more to put on the old 
dinted steel, to do battle with the world unto the 
utterance, and to drive off the ugly spectres. Care 
and Sorrow, from those he loved. 

Ha ! friends, how many Andromedas are daily 
exposed to such sea-monsters, and how often are 
they rescued by warriors of whose chivalry and 
self-denying courage the world shall never know, 
men of whose heroism no Gazette takes record. 

Five minutes had passed, and in those five 
minutes what sharp teeth had gnawed at the great 
heart of this suffering man ! Suddenly the lieu- 
tenant looked up, and caught sight of his brother's 
face. 

"Good God! Harry," he cried, as he leaped 
to his feet, " are you ill ? — ^your face is all on the 
work — is it your heart. Hall — shall I ring the 
bell for Liddy ? — can I get you anything?" 

Henry Tolpedden did not instantly reply ; but 
he rose, folded up the fatal newspaper, and choked 
back a weight that seemed rising in his throat. 

"No, don't ring, Nel," he said; "it's no- 
thing — it's a pain I — ^I sometimes have at my 
hea^-a sort of-a sort of-cramp, but it's gone 
now — ^it's painful while it lasts, but the moment it's 
gone, I'm easy." 

Then with a great effort he took up the paper 
again and resumed his reading. It was easy to re- 
as8ui*e a man so simple and free from concealment 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 1 59 

as the lieutenant, who, indeed, had already risen, 
and turned to the window to take a professional 
look at the weather. 

" Cramp or no cramp, Harry," he said, without 
turning round, "I never saw you look like that 
before." 

" Well, I allow it is bad while it lasts." 

" Hurrah I here's Jack coming in at the gate. 
I told him to call for me, and I'd take him into 
school, as I want to go on to Boscastle. Good- 
bye, Harry." 

A moment after in burst Jack, that curly- 
headed little Tartar, rosy-hot with running, and his 
comforter flying behind him. 

" Oh I papa," he cried, " Benbow has bfeen and 
bitten Kate, when she was giving him sugar ; 
and do you know, Gipsy ran away from Fanny 
all round the paddock." 

" Good morning, Master Jack." 

*^ Good morning, Uncle Henry," said Jack, un- 
flinchingly. 

" Nelson, just come before you go and look at 
that barometer of mine in my study, and see 
if you can tell me what is the matter with the 
index." 

Off went the two brothers to the study, leaving 
Johnny alone in the breakfast-room. 

Now unfortunately the desire for knowledge 
was dangerously active that morning in Master 
Johnny's mind. It had for some time been his 
desire to examine in detail a large ostrich's egg. 






160 GREATHEAKT. 

that stood on the top of a Japanese jar on a 
cabinet near the window. That enormous, ivory- 
looking egg he had dreamed ^boat. It was a 
wonderful egg. It was like the roc's egg in the 
story of Sinbad. Was it full, and what was it 
full of ? — that's what he, above all things, desired 
to know. 

The opportunity was irresistible ; he dragged a 
chair to the foot of the cabinet, gave one frightened 
look at the half-open door, and leaped upon the 
chair. He was a resolute boy, and quite insensible 
to fear. There were no morbid scruples about 
him. He stood on tip-to;e; he could then just 
touch the egg — but still it was a little too high up 
for him. He made a rash, yet frightened jump at 
his treasure, just as a trout leaps up at a fly — he 
touched it, to his horror, and down it toppled — he 
tried to catch it, missed it, and down he and the 
egg fell, he unfortunately uppermost, crushing the 
egg into a dozen pieces. 

The noise of the fall of the chair, and the 
crash of the egg, brought in Jack's father and 
uncle, the one philosophically astonished, the 
other fiery red with anger. There lay Johnny 
bruised and ciying, the chair, which was one of 
those old high-backed ones of William and Mary's 
time, with a bit of its dark carving knocked off, 
and the egg broken, as if the young ostrich had 
just stepped out of the shell. 

" Well, I'm glad it isn't the jar," said the uncle. 

« Glad it isn't the jar !" roared the father. ** Oh 1 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 161 

you naughty bad boy I — come, sir, start up di- 
rectly ! — get under weigh this minute 1 — what did 
I tell you about never touching anything in your 
uncle's house ? Oh 1 we'll have a settlement about 
this, my man I Be off to school, sir, this very 
minute, and don't let me see your face till night 
time— come." 

His uncle tried to interpose between the Eoman 
father and the son; but the lieutenant, in his 
anger, spurned all attempts to mitigate the offender's 
punishment, and discharged a blow at Johnny's 
cheek, that instantly turned it crimson, and at the 
same time drove out a gushing flood of tears from 
either eye. He then pushed Johnny out at the 
front door, and was presently seen convoying him 
remorselessly to the garden-gate, where he sternly 
dismissed him with a valedictory blow. 

The Temple of Knowledge at Boscastle loomed 
to Johnny that morning through a very hazy 
horizon; the avenue of switchy birch-trees and 
pliant young bamboos that usually led up to it, in 
his mind, were dripping visibly with the hot tears 
of youth. Such moments are as bitter to some 
children as the hour of leaving Eden was to our 
first parents ; but Johnny was a tough boy, warm- 
hearted, but high-tempered and stubborn; he 
only felt that he had been struck, that he con- 
sidered more than atoned for the accident with the 
egg, which he could not help, so he took his way 
to school, tearful, yet angry, rather hoping for a 
fight with Pod Major, who had stolen his ally and 

YOL. U. M 



162 GBEATHEART. 

other marbles, and would not give them up, and 
whose tyranny had become insupportable. Then 
he wished he was old enough to go to sea, and he 
would run away. A mile further he found a 
comfortable frozen ditch, where he could extem* 
porize a slide, and on that he soon forgot his 
troubles. Children are like New Zealand warriors, 
the flesh closes over their wounds as if it was 
india-rubber. 

" I think you do wrong. Nelson, to hit Jack/' 
said Henry Tolpedden, as soon as his brother 
returned ; " those hasty blows irritate and harden 
high-spirited boys. You struck him, not to warn 
him, but because you were angry. If you'd re^ 
mained an hour, you'd have forgotten it." 

" 1 was brought up on harder biscuit than you 
were, Harry, and we use different charts. There 
are many ways of getting to the same port — ^you 
steer your way, I'll steer mine. Arthur mightn't 
have wanted it, but that boy is as tough as a bull- 
terrier, and he's better for a whopping." 

^' Like a woman, a spaniel, and a walnut-tree, I 
suppose I Well, gang your own gate ; but I know 
that when I was a boy a blow used to make me, for 
the time, turn with hatred against whoever gave it 
me — fatlier, or any one else. Well, I must go to 
my books. Good-bye, Nel. Try a reproving look 
now and then." 

*^ Good-bye, Harry. I'm off to town to see about 
some standard roses Monsieur Chatelet promised 
me, and I shall just see if that rascal of a boy isn't 



THE GLASS GOES DOWN. 163 

playing truant along the road ; he's always up to 
some mischief, the little villain I I shall have to 
buy a whip for him, I know, if he doesn't improve* 
Reproving look at that boy, indeed I why, he'd be 
drawing my face on the nursery wall half an 
hour after." 

Stern of eye, stiff, sturdy, and resolute, in his 
little Flushing jacket, off sailed the irascible lieu- 
tenant, Penang lawyer in hand, cigar at a red 
heat in his mouth, outwardly furious, his heart really 
as tender as a hot-house plant, only anxious to 
overtake the boy, scold him, and then kiss him. 
The best of us are poor contradictory creatures ; 
well for us if our failings lean to the right side. 
In the look his brother sent after the lieutenant 
all this was expressed, and with it a tenderness and 
love beyond even that of woman ; for it was the 
tenderness of a deep mind, and it was tempered by 
the pulses of a great heart. The judgment had 
rendered unchangeable an affection that the heart 
had long since adopted. 

" I cannot tell him to-day," he said, " I cannot 
tell him to-day ; and then Arthur 1 Oh I God of 
wisdom and of love, do not forsake me in this my 
hour of need." 



M 2 



164 GBEATHEART. 



CHAPTER XI. 

A FEATHEB CAN SHOW THE WAY THE WIND BLOWS. 

THE mind will not always obey marching orders. 
The faculties at times (we scarcely know 
why) straggle and pick up trifles we had rather 
have left alone. The march is slow, the sunshine 
fails to cheer the men, even the band's hveliest 
airs sometimes seem to turn to funeral marches. 

There was a draughty roar in the trees. The 
sunshine that morning came in and went out in a fit- 
ful, capricious way, as if it was only half friends 
with the earth. The sky, now a clear, cold blue, 
studded with fast-drifting garish white clouds, be- 
came in a moment of a murky rain-colour. It was 
a troubled day, lit by gleams of fallacious hope ; 
let Mr. Buskin say what he likes about the " sjrm- 
pathetic fallacy," how can we help investing 
dumb nature with human sympathies, and draw- 
ing auguries from her changes, when her blue 
ether tents over us, and the great productive earth 
is under our feet, and the sea threatens us, or 
smiles at us, and the trees shake their impotent 
arms at us, or wave us pleasant welcomes! 
Can it be possible that this living and blossom- 
ing world has no knowledge of its inmates, and no 
care for them? Have neither birds nor flowers 
any love for us, such as we have for them ? Does 



THE WAY THE WIND BLOWS. 165 

not the brook gaze at the fisherman, and the violets 
see the children that pick them ? 

Such were the random thoughts of the great 
chemist, as he sat amongst his phials, crucibles, 
and retorts, on which a passing sunbeam glittei*ed 
in spots and sparkles of light, as he tried to bring 
back his errant mind to the search for truth in 
some old alchemical riddle of Theophrastus Bom- 
bastus von Hohenheim, better known as that 
strange and unhappy mass of madness, vanity, 
learning, and deception, Paracelsus. But it was 
all in vain, neither sylph nor gnome could beguile 
him that morning to " the chase of the red man," 
as the attempt to discover a common base to all 
the metals used once fantastically to be called. 

First he took up a huge two-hour glass, and, 
turning it, watched its sand trickle down in a thin 
wavering thread, forming a little melting pyramid, 
that rose and lowered with busy haste — a type 
of the fluctuating hours whose flight it recorded. 
Then he caught up a prism, and watched its rain- 
bow colours. Still restless, he rose, and walked 
round the room, till he came to a large photograph 
of his son, that hung over the mantel-piece. He 
looked at that fixedly for some minutes, then 
heaved a deep sigh from the very depth of his 
heart, and, going into the hall, put on his hat and 
left the house. 

It was no use struggling any longer with that 
restless uneasiness, and he now owned him- 
self vanquished by that mercurial sloth that had 



166 GBEATHEART. 

visited him like an epidemic. Perhaps, too, some 
other and deeper cause of anxiety drove him forth 
that day from his books and from his furnaces. 

The path he took was not that to the sea^ 
Dunchine, or the Merry Maiden's Cliff, nor to 
Boscastle Road, to meet his brother ; he passed 
through the gate of the plantation, and skirting 
the orchard walked straight to his brother's house. 
He did not go in at the front door, but, using the 
license of a kinsman, he passed a side gate that 
opened from the garden, and entered the house. 
On reaching the parlour he knocked once, and 
instantly entered the room, without waiting for an 
invitation to come in. 

There, by the window, sat Mrs. Tolpedden; 
close to her, and bending over her, stood Mr. Brad- 
brain. They both seemed evidently sui'prised at 
the somewhat brusque entrance of Mr. Tolpedden ; 
but the young doctor had too much tact to show 
his surprise, and instantly placed his right hand on 
Mrs. Tolpedden's pulse, at the same time that he 
nodded welcome to her brother-in-law. 

" Feverish — decidedly feverish, my dear Mrs. 
Tolpedden, but a little tonic will remove all that ; 
and as for Ned, make your mind quite easy ; he'll 
be about in a day or two. And how are you, Mr* 
Tolpedden? We kept it up last night — didn't 
we ? That Mr. Hookem is a man to keep the ball 
rolling — eh ?" 

There was something excited, and ostentatiously 
cheerful and talkative, about Mr. Bradbrain's man- 



THE WAT THE WIND BLOWS. 167 

ner that by no means escaped the falcon eye of the 
last visitor. 

" My dear brother," said Mrs. Tolpedden, dart- 
ing from her seat in her vivacions and good* 
natnred way. " I am so glad to see you. We've 
been so anxious, do you know, about Neddy ; but 
Mr. Bradbrain is so kind and watchful, and he 
says we need not be uneasy." 

"I am sorry to find you suffering from the 
party, Mrs. Nelson ; I don't feel better for it 
myself. These late hours kill the next day, and, 
for my own part, I grudge two days for any one 
party, however pleasant." 

" You don't look at all well— does he, Mr. Brad- 
brain 1 Your eyes are heavy, and you are so 
pale." 

"Not up to the mark — over-working, I am 
afraid," said Bradbrain. " I must come some day 
to put my seal on those furnaces of yours, Mr. 
Tolpedden; and, as your medical adviser, order 
you out for periodical horse exercise, for students 
think—" 

^^ I just strolled in because I was too restless for 
work. I must apologise for intruding upon a pro- 
fessional visit. It is a selfish thing, coming to 
inflict one's idleness on other people." 

" Oh ! don't apologise, Henry — ^Mr. Tolpedden, 
I mean. We are always so glad to see you — ^pray 
don't use any ceremony with us I" 

" For Heaven's sake, don't apologise, my dear 
sir r said Mr. Bradbrain. Here he rose and hur« 



1 68 GBEATHEABT. 

ried to a large glass bowl, full of iron-grey chrysan- 
themums, mixed with China roses, which stood on 
a table at the window, "How charmingly you 
aiTange your flowers! Well, I must bid you 
adieu. Fm off to Portneweth, to lunch with the 
young artist fellows there, who are beginning to 
pack up. I suppose you won't bear a man com- 
pany ? I am going straight there." 

" You are very kind, but I must go to Boscastle 
and meet my brother, and I want to have a gossip 
with M. Ohatelet about Arthur's progress. I shall 
see you to-morrow, of course, at the ^ Merry 
Maidens?'" 

" Well, rather," said Bradbrain, somewhat con- 
ceitedly, as he beat together his thick white gloves 
till the powder sprang out of them in a startled 
cloud. " Yes ; I mean to have that cup. I shall 
have an hour's practice to-day, I think, after lun- 
cheon." 

" And what does my boy say to that ?" 

"Say? Why, he says there are two sides to 
most questions," said Mrs. Tolpedden, laughing. 
" Oh ! Mr. Bradbrain, don't you make too sure. 
The cup may come Tolpedden way, after all." 

" Nous verronsy my fair patient." 

There was an inflection about the tone in which 
the young doctor uttered these words that made 
Mr. Tolpedden contract his lips* Bradbrain saw 
the expression, and resolved to disarm it. So he 
turned round nimbly, and looked at a water- colour 
drawing of Dutch luggers in a breeze off the 



THE WAY THE WIND BLOWS. 169 

Texel, the work of the lieutenant. It was neatly 
done — the spars were touched in with technical 
accuracy and neatness; and the shallow^ green 
sea was washed up into vexatiously fretful waves. 

*'What nature sailors always throw into these 
things !" 

" It's beautiful, isn't it f " said the enthusiastic 
little wife. 

Mr. Tolpedden replied drily that sailors usually 
drew, he thought. 

"And when does Arthur go up to matricu- 
late?" 

" In about three weeks, I think." 

'* By-the-bye, Mr. Tolpedden, I've been this 
morning to look after Lucas. I neVer saw such a 
madcap of a fellow in my born days. There he 
was, quite recovered from the fight he had the 
night of Hookem's party, and busy pigeon shoot- 
ing for a wager with the village innkeeper." 

*^ I'm only sorry he's going up when Arthur is ; 
but I daresay they'll soon drift into different 
sets?" 

" Oh ! of course they will. Lucas will be a 
horsy man — Arthur one of your downright saps." 

" Well, Arthur is no milksop, or bookworm." 

"No, I never meant that for a moment; but 
he'll go in for a double-first, laurel crowns, and all 
that style of thing. I know a certain lady who 
will miss him here." 

" Oh ! Arthur is at an age when he falls iu love 
with everyone he sees; but such hallucinations 



170 GREATHEABT. 

with him are luckily as transitory as they are bril- 
Hant." 

" Oh ! doji't talk in that horrid, unfeeling way, 
Brother Henry!" said the little wife, as she 
daintily re-arranged the flowers the doctor had 
somewhat disordered ; " what do you know about 
young ladies' hearts ?" 

" How should I know anything, Mrs, Nelson I" 

"Well, it may be so; I don't know," said 
the doctor, " But I must now really tear myself 
away« Good-bye, Mrs. Tolpedden; your tonic 
shall come by the boy this evening." He held her 
hand in his as he said this, hoping that Mr, Tol- 
pedden would go first, but he did not. 

Till they were fairly on the road, Mr, Bradbrain 
did not speak — at last he said, 

" I was wishing to be alone with you, Mr, Tol- 
pedden, for a moment, just to assure you once 
more of my deep regret at this tiff between old 
Mordred and you. Mind, 1 wash my hands of the 
whole affair — it is entirely his doing — he is a 
stickler for his rights, and I never interfere in these 
matters, I should be sorry, indeed, if such a 
miserable, peddling business interrupted our friend- 
ship." 

"It will not interrupt it," was the laconic 
answer, "You and your partner remind me, 
Bradbrain, of the old Scotch families in '45, when 
the father used to keep Whig while the son turned 
Tory, so that whatever happened the family came 
the right side up," 



THE SILVER CUP* 171 

Bradbrain looked hard at the speaker for an 
instant, then he broke into a violent laugh. 

"Now, that's really too bad — ^'pon my word 
that's too bad by half, for in this case my feeling 
is rather for you, and is certainly entirely friendly. 
Mordred is a worthy man, and a clever man, but, 
between ourselves, he would sue his own father, if 
he owed him a five-pound note — that's his weak- 
ness. He was always restless for that bit of barren 
cliff; and when he once wants a thing, he never 
leaves the trail." 

At the cross-roads they parted. Between the 
turf banks and rampart walls of piled stone 
Mr. Tolpedden paced towards Boscastle, his head 
weighed down in thought. 

" No," he said, at the end of the first mile, as 
he clenched his fist and struck the air downwards 
by his side. "No, I don't like him — I'm sure 
there's mischief in that man ; but I'll watch him 
—I'll watch him." 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE SILVER OUP. 

IT was a fine day for the rifle-shooting. The 
great moors shone in the sun with their ruined 
churchyards of granite blocks, and their golden 
patches of furze blossom, and seemed to have for- 
gotten all the old battles of Briton and Saxon 



172 GREATHEAJRT. 

that had once taken place on their bounds. The 
last tinge of Celtic blood, if it lingered at all, 
lingered only on the tips of the roadside daisies. 
The clear blue sky was full of huge white-bosomed 
clouds, that passed northward in great fleets, fitted 
out for some angelic commerce, 

A great white tent, striped with crimson, had 
been pitched about half a mile from the edge of 
the cliff, and a thousand yards from the butts, 
where the iron targets, with the gong centres, 
now painting, shone black and white, like aces 
of clubs. The chief target was surrounded by prize- 
givers, officers, and adjutants, for the second prize 
had just been won by Captain Boscawen, and the 
connoisseurs were examining the winning shots and 
measuring their distances. The bugler had blown 
just ten minutes ago to cease firing. 

Instantly the great red flag blew from the butts 
the range was covered with country people, ladies, 
riflemen, miners, and itinerant vendors of nuts, 
ginger-beer, apples, and glazy, dangerous-looking 
pies. 

Over the judge's tent fluttered the colours of the 
10th North Cornish Kifles — the thirteen balls, with 
the motto, " one and all." A shout came from 
the tent — that was the shout when Lord Rostre- 
vor and Mr. Hookem handed Boscawen the silver 
claret jug that he had won ; and he drank from it 
to the health of the judges and the regiment, and 
more especially to his own, the San Creed Com- 
pany. There was all over the usually lonely moor 






THE SILVER CUP. 173 

a good-humoured buzz of excitement and pleasure. 
Those who shot were in a fever of expectation, 
and those whose friends were competing were 
equally anxious and interested from sympathy. 

Beyond the judge's seat were moored several 
lines of carriages, from which, amid beds of colour, 
looked forth rows of matronly, pretty, and 
laughing faces, radiant with delight. To one of 
these carriages a young rifle officer, whose dark 
grey uniform, brightened by the silver-bossed chain 
that looped from bis broad black cross-belt, made 
his way. He was a handsome, reckless-looking 
fellow, and assumed, very naturally, a barrack 
air of defiance and audacity. 

" Mr. Bradbrain, Mr. Bradbrain," said a voluble, 
high-toned voice, suddenly, from a large yellow 
barouche that was moored in one of the most 
favoured places, " can you tell us when Mr. Hook- 
em's cup is to be shot for, and can you also tell 
us where Lord Rostrevor is ? — we want to begin 
our luncheon, and we are waiting for him." 

The speaker was a tall, conspicuously-dressed, 
aristocratic person, with a large Roman nose — a nose, 
indeed, so Roman and so thin, that the sun shone 
crimson through its ridges. This lady was en- 
vironed by three daughters, with similar noses 
in various stages of growth. 

Bradbrain drew up, bowed very low, and made 
a smart military salute. 

" I will let Lord Rostrevor know immediately, 
your ladyship — he is in the tent, I believe. Cap- 



174 GBEATHEART. 

tain Peard," — ^here he caught hold of a rough* 
bearded rifleman who was just then passing — 
** Peard," he said, " run to the tent, and tell Lord 
Eostrevor her ladyship is waiting lunch." 

" What I is that creature really a captain, Mr. 
Bradbrain t" asked Miss Ada Rostrevor. 

" Oh ! no, he is only a mine captain," replied 
Bradbrain, smUing. 

In the meantime the Tregellases and Tolped- 
dens, moored in two contiguous carriages, were 
intent on refreshment. For company's sake the 
lieutenant had joined Mr. and Mrs. Tregellas ; 
and Lucy and Milly Waverton were seated next 
to Mrs. Tolpedden. Pigeon-pies were yielding up 
their treasures, their lids being hewn off by 
burglarious knives. Mr. Tolpedden was pouring 
out champagne for the ladies, the lieutenant was 
opening some bottled beer, and the united child- 
ren were noisy and happy. Suddenly they shouted 
in chorus, 

"Here comes Arthur 1 — here's Arthur 1" cried 
the children ; and irrestrainable Johnny let him- 
self down out of the carriage to meet him. 

Arthur looked very smart and soldier-like in 
the short grey tunic, with the scarlet cuffs, with 
his bayonet by his side, and his rifle slung behind 
him, as he advanced, led by Johnny. He laughed 
and shook hands all round, perhaps he pressed 
a certain lady's hand a little longer than the rest — 
who can say? 



THE SILVEB CUP. 175 

** When does your match begin^ Arthur?" said 
Mrs. Tolpedden. 

^' In a few minutes, aunt. I've just time for a 
sandwich and a glass of wine." 

" One glass of w^ine — half a dozen I" shouted the 
lieutenant. 

" No, no, uncle, it would make me unsteady." 

"What does the blue flag show?" cried Mrs. 
Tregellas. 

" A centre." 

"And the red?" 

"A bull's eye." 

" When the gong sounds, is that a bull's eye, 
then I" said Lucy, her eyes sparkling with interest. 

" No, that's a centre. Miss Tregellas." How 
full of chivalrous deference his manner to her was. 
"Now they're going through a few manoeuvres 
before they begin." 

Tantara, tantara, trala, trala, the bugle rang out 
at that moment the signal to fall in. 

" Fall in, Tolpedden," cried Bradbrain, rather 
pompously, as be passed the place where Arthur 
stood, having just before stopped to explain to Mrs. 
Tolpedden the way in which a rifle was sighted. 

It is difficult to say why a tone of voice should 
sometimes make simple words fall on us like so 
many drops of vitriol. How is it that a passing 
mental feeling can give them such corrosive power 1 
Arthur was nettled at the vanity of a man who 
could not resist showing off his momentary power 
even at the expense of a friend. 



176 GREATHEART. 

" Captain Boscawen has allowed us men who 
are going to shoot to fall out, because our hands 
would get unsteady," said Arthur, carelessly, as he 
tightened his belt and swung his bayonet round 
into position. 

A mounted adjutant dashed up at that moment, 
and saluting Bradbrain, requested his attendance 
in the tent, as the colonel would be obliged to him 
to number the men, and try the companies, while 
he came to lunch. 

Bradbrain scowled, bowed to the ladies, and 
went off, muttering to himself that Arthur was 
" a crafty beggar, and had got the pull of him, 
but it should be the last time, by Jove I" 

By this time the moor was more animated than 
ever. There was Mr. Mordred riding about on a 
black horse, coldly and formally bowing to friends 
and patients, and peering at the whole business in a 
melancholy, reproachful way, as if he was a foreign 
spy at a Government review. Deferential to the 
poor, servile to the rich, this herald of death was 
the one blot in the day's merriment and pleasant 
excitement. 

There, too, were the three young artists from 
Portneweth, in remarkable wide-awakes and basque 
hats, enjoying everything. Dodgeson, that gaunt 
humourist, was making a sketch for the Illustrated 
London News ; Hewer was retiring to lonely spots 
to watch the distant effects of breakers at Cape 
Gurnard ; and Fisher was making mental notes of 
attitudes and odd Cornish faces. 



THE SILVER CUP. 177 

M. Chatelet was there also, gravely enjoying 
his cigar and a day's respite from De Porquet and 
other grammatical tormentors, and chatting with 
the Wavertons, As for Mr. Tregellas's three 
pupils, they had left their tutor after the manner 
of private pupils, and were enjoying a quiet game 
of " Aunt Sally " in a distant field, Mr. Trevena, 
who was the chaplain of the regiment, had long 
ago discovered the whereabouts of Milly, and was 
explaining to that smiling young lady, officially, 
the intended manoeuvres, in spite of all his sister^s 
nudgings to come and bow to Lady Rostrevor, 

There, too, close to a tilt waggon, moored on 
the edge of the moor, behind the judges' tent, sur- 
rounded by a crowd of miners, who were tapping 
a large brown stone jar of ale, was Sampy, with his 
dismal heraldic face now rendered still more ghastly 
by a suit of greasy black, and an old bulgy hat, 
swathed in walls of rusty crape. He stood close to 
a blazing wood fire, at which some riflemen were 
toasting cheese on their pocket-knives, till it 
dripped like yellow lava into the flames. 

Tra la towo to wo, went the bugle, up jumped 
the riflemen. 

" Zackly so ! Why, comraades, tes the bugle, 
esn't it? Come, Titus, one and all, come, all 
you pelchard eaters?" were the cries that ran 
round, as the great hearty burly fellows crammed 
the burning cheese into their mouths, scrambled 
up their rifles, and hurried off at the double, 
laughing, shouting, and bantering each other. 
VOL. II. N 



178 GREATHEART. 

** Why, this is as bad as a seven hour coor at 
bal (mine), esn't it ?" cried one gadite (miner) to 
another, as they fell into the ranks, and grounded 
their arms ; Lieutenant Bradbrain, stem and 
murky, rode up, and the cry of " Fall in !" ran 
along the moor, where the buglemen were still 
blowing. 

During this time Lord Rostrevor, a reddish- 
faced man, with grey dragoon whiskers, and 
mounted on a great bony chestnut hunter, had 
cantered up to the family barouche (arms, three 
pilchards, hauriant argent, on a field or), motto, 
old Cornish, Faitheao Aboo, " I come in time !" 
His lordship was rather heated with sherry and a 
pressure of business — ^not usual with him — rather 
cross, moreover, at being so long kept from 
luncheon, and rather irritated at having probably to 
leave it again so soon. The colonel was by no means 
talkative, he snubbed his wife, and pooh-poohed 
his daughter; he ate, however, half a fowl, 
and drank nearly a bottle of champagne — ate and 
drank in a snorting, violent sort of way, secretly 
cursing all volunteers, and especially the 10th 
North Cornish, as an old Peninsular man was 
bound to do. 

In the meantime, Arthur lingered near his. 
magnet. The magnet certainly looked very attract- 
ive and charming in her little round hat tipped with 
a grebe wing, and a blue cloth paletot over a light 
grey dress. There was so much sunshine about 



THE SILVER CUP. 179 

her^ that she literally seemed to diffuse a glow of 
happiness all round her. 

Mr. Hookem was talking to the Tolpeddens in 
the next carriage ; jovial and noisy as ever, he 
looked well in his fawn-coloured paletfit and light 
cinnamon-coloured trousers. His broad, clever, 
audacious face, with a touch of the charlatan in it, 
literally beamed out under the broad brim of his 
white hat. He was unusually grand, for he had 
been discussing the Game Law question with Lord 
Rostrevor, who had four gamekeepers disabled in 
six months. 

The review had now begun. A glint of sun 
flashed from Bradbrain's drawn sword. Presently 
there was a " click, click, rattle, click," that was 
fixing bayonets, and the double row of sharp steel 
glittered like a diamond wall. 

The ladies all rose in the carriages ; there was 
a flutter of yellow and violet, and blue and pink 
ribbons, and a putting up of little parasols, no 
larger than camelias. Was it not natural that 
Arthur should give his hand to Lucy, whose little 
foot had got entangled with the wrappers at the 
bottom of the carriage. The children shouted, and 
Kate slapped Neddy for treading on her frock. 

" Why, they are forming fours," said Arthur to 
Lucy. " Now they are advancing in line. How 
even they are !" 

"The Cornish men are big-chested fellows," 
said his father, who had been unusually silent, but 
who had thawed a little since luncheon. " They 

n2 



180 GBEATHEABT. 

say a regiment of them occupies more ground than 
any other militia regiment in England. But the 
Cumberland regiments claim the same thing, and I 
suppose it's true of neither of them." 

**Now they're getting under weigh," said the 
lieutenant. " Look, Polly, look. Jack, and Teddy. 
Kate, put down that parasol. Now they're throw- 
ing out skirmishing parties." 

" What are they doing now I" said Lucy. " All 
running up to Mr. Bradbrain, who stands with his 
sword in the air ; they're clustering round him I 
What are they doing ? Why, now some of them 
are kneeling, and holding out their bayonets — 
there's quite a hedge of them I Oh I mamma, do 
look, isn't it a pretty sight I" 

Mamma took the transformations of the 10th 
Cornish with great equanimity. 

Arthur was delighted at Lucy's enthusiasm, for 
it was his own regiment she was admiring. 

" That's called a rallying square. Suppose the 
enemy's cavalry broke us, then we should form in 
those little porcupines all over the battle-field, and 
when the storms of grape and whirlwind of 
musketry lulled a little, our bugles would ring out, 
and we should shout, and mass together again, 
and, under flying colours, charge down once more 
upon the beggars." 

Arthur had got quite carried away by the en- 
thusiasm of his impromptu profession. His eyes 
kindled, his chest really seemed to dilate. He 
looked like a young Indian brave, who sees from 



THE SILVER OUP. 181 

his ambash a deer coming within reach of his 
arrows, 

" Why, I didn't know Arthur was such a fire- 
eater I" said the lieutenant. " Now they're tack- 
ing again. What are they up to now ?" 

" Now they are forming fours again, they are 
going to get in line and make a left wheel." 

" I've been having a talk with Rostrevor and 
the Dean," said Mr. Uookem to Mr. Tolpedden, 
" about those infamous letters signed ' Joe Manton ;' 
hang the Trimmer. Why, sir, as I have often said, 
the game-laws are invaluable to us ; for the resist- 
ing the temptation to poach is the finest moral 
training for our labourers." 

"That line of argument never struck me be- 
fore," said Tolpedden, drily, and then relapsed 
into unsocial silence. 

Uookem, in despair, turned to Arthur, and first 
complimenting Mrs. and Miss Tregellas on their 
encouragement of such patriotic demonstrations, 
said to Arthur, 

"Did you ever see finer fellows than these 
miners ? They remind me of those fine, vigorous 
lines of our friend Hawker^s, of Morwenstowe, 

* See where they move — a battle-shouldering kind, 
Massive in mould, but graceful, thorough men. 
Thence came their mastery in the field of war. 
Ha I one might drive battalions, one alone ! ' 

Is Arthur going to win our Forge Cup, you battle- 
shoulderer, Tregellas ?" 



182 GREATHEART. 

" I am sure I hope he will." 

And Lucy, too, looked as if she wished it, for 
her eyes were eloquent of hope. 

" I am sure, if kind words could make me win 
it, / should win it," said Arthur wannly, with a 
glance at Lucy that made her suddenly anxious to 
get her opera-glass into exact focus ; while Clara 
and Bertha pulled at her different ways, to draw 
her attention to different objects, and Hubert 
shouted out — 

" Oh ! Loo I — Loo ! here's the band going to 
strike up !" 

" Be quiet, children," said Mr. Tregellas, who 
was delighted. 

And so was everyone ; just as Lord Kostrevor 
appeared in front of the rank, the band struck up 
"Pretty Polly Perkins," and the men presented 
arms. 

" How do you know where to aim at different 
distances?" said Milly in her bird-like way, as 
Arthur held out his rifle to show the children the 
little slide for sighting. 

Arthur explained that the marksman looked 
through the black notch on to the knife-blade 
edge of the foresight, and so by raising or lower- 
ing it the eye obtained a fine or a coarse aim. 

" Isn't it very diflicult at those great distances, 
Mr. Tolpedden ?" said Lucy. 

" Oh ! it's awful ! The target grows smaller 
and smaller, till it at last looks no larger than a 
single window pane. It seems at first impossible 



THE SILVER CUP. 183 

to hit it. To see over the sight you have to hold 
your head stiffly up, and in the most uncomfort- 
able position. But look ! — look I Miss Tregellas— 
now they're going to march past." 

The riflemen looked in perspective no larger 
than boys, and Lord Rostrevor himself no bigger 
than a painted tin soldier. 

" See our company, the second," cried Arthur ; 
^^ firm as a wall, rifles all straight as a die I" 

*^ Are they going to fire, Cousin Arthur ?" in- 
quired Jack ; upon which Clara and Bertha, with 
delighted horror, hid their faces in their hands, and 
scuttled at the bottom of the carriage. 

Just at that moment up strided Mr. Trevena, 
distinguishable by his long chin, large, good- 
natured nose, and smiling, enthusiastic grey eyes. 
He was, as usual, in his Oxford mixture Inverness 
and careless black wide-awake, and he shook hands, 
and chatted with everyone ; but perhaps most 
of all with Milly, whose pale face lit up, and 
whose little eyes twinkled suspiciously at his ap- 
proach. 

" IVe just seen that old woman you used to send 
the soup to at San Creed," he said to Mrs. Tre- 
gellas ; '^ and she says her rheumatism is better, 
but that Martha is worse than ever. Hallo! 
children I how are you, boys and girls f Give me 
a kiss, Kate ! I'm going to pinch you, Hubert, 
for that new jacket. Come along, old fellow !" 

All this time the lieutenant was intently busy 
with an enormous howitzer of a telescope, with the 



184 OBEATHEABT. 

coloured flags of every nation on the outside, 
which he adjusted on the door of the carriage with 
a scientific and experienced air, much to the awe 
of the children. 

Presently up strolled arm-in-arm the three 
young artists, Dodgeson, Hewer, and Fisher, who 
took off their hats to the ladies, and shook hands 
all round. 

" Now, Mr. Dodgeson," said Mrs. Tregellas, with 
a judicial air, ^^ when am I and my eldest daugh- 
ter to come and see your sketches of the Logan, 
the Mount, and Brown Willy, that you promised 
to show us f " 

^' You are always welcome," replied the gallant 
Dodgeson, smiling grimly, and stroking his pointed 
beard. "Will you come to-morrow? We start 
to-day week." 

" I've also promised to go ever so long," said 
Arthur. " Shall I come and drive you and Miss 
Tregellas ? I shall be proud and delighted." 

" To-morrow is the Penny Reading, my dear," 
said Mr. Tregellas ; " and we dine early." 

"To-morrow we can't come. Thursday we 
could come. Would Thursday do for you, 
Arthur I" 

" Perfectly." 

" Thursday, then." 

" You'll find us living like Robinson Crusoes," 
said Hewer ; " and our bark is generally on the sea 
from about 3 p.m. We are now studying marine 
sunsets." 



THE SILVER CUP. 185 

"There goes the bugle," cried Arthur. "I 
must be off. Well, it stands for Thursday, you 
fellows. Good-bye, all." 

" Yes. God bless you 1 — use the straight 
powder I" cried Fisher, curling his red moustachios 
with his forefinger. 

Off dashed Arthur at the double, swinging his 
rifle closer at his back. For a moment Lucy felt 
nettled that he did not give her one parting look ; 
but love and ambition cannot occupy the heart at 
the same time. 

The men were just falling out. At that care- 
fully selected moment Mr. Mordred rode gloomily 
homeward, purposely passing Lord Rostrevor, who, 
as every one saw, drew up and bowed to him in a 
grand but familiar way, as he rode back to his 
carriage. 

That was a golden moment with the county 
banker. No one but himself knew that the old 
nobleman had mortgaged half his estates, and that 
his account at the Boscastle Bank was considerably 
overdrawn. Proud and blustering as he was, he 
was obliged to be civil to that taciturn corpse of a 
man. 

As a doctor, Mordred had the family secrets of 
half the people on the moor in his possession ; as 
a banker, he had the pecuniary secrets of half the 
others. To hold this secret power was his plea- 
sure. Let the fools, he said to himself, flaunt 
their equipages, their vain, fantastic, worldly dress^ 
their pampered horses, and their insolent footmen, 



186 OKEATHEART. 

I can bring them to me at one pull of the gol- 
den check-string. 

Before Arthur had run two hundred yards he met 
Boscawen hurrying to tell him that Captain Vivian 
was waiting. Boscawen was a very light curly- 
haired young county dandy, with uniform glossily 
new boots absurdly transparent, and one eye 
glazed over with a staring eye-glass. 

^^ Come along, old man/' he said to Arthur, in a 
voice rather muddled with pale sherry. "How 
those Trefussis girls are carrying on with that 
swell with the fiery whiskers ! I want you to lick 
Bradbrain, he ts so bumptious I He's been screw- 
ing himself up with brandy. It's all between you 
and him. Trelyn does very well by himself, but 
he funks shooting in public. Ha ! ha ! keep your 
pecker up — ^take some sherry." 

Boscawen's laugh was loud, but uncalled for. 

** Mind, Fve got a fiver on you." 

" I won't touch a drop — I like to keep my head 
cool." 

" As you like. I shoot better for sherry. Try 
some pop I" 

"TU take nothing." 

There were only four competitors — Arthur, 
Bradbrain, Trelyn (an old subtle farmer, who made 
a living of prize-shooting), and Polworth, a fat 
draper from Port Isaac. Their names were called 
by Captain Vivian, as they drew up in line, and 
grounded their rifles. There were to be twenty 
shots each, at four ranges, 200, 500, 700, and 



THE SILVER CUP. 187 

1,000 yards, to be shot in Government positions, 
the rifles to be loaded for the competitors or not, 
as they elected. 

Bradbrain had his saucy boy as a loader, and so 
had the fat, good-natured draper; Trelyn in- 
dulged in measuring funnels and wind-guages, 
and all such paraphernalia. Bradbrain was first 
in the rank ; he was silent, rather cross, determined, 
and audacious. He would not speak a word to 
anyone, but tightened his belt, and carefully ad- 
justed his sighting. His flrst shot was a ricochet ; 
he had flred too low, and the bullet struck the dust 
at the foot of the target. 

" A little too short," said Trelyn, critically. 

" Every fool could see that," was the reply of 
the sullen marksman. "Here, boy, load, and mind 
and don't bruise the bullets, or TU clout your head 
for you." 

They were standing to fire. It was all easy 
work at present. 

Tolpedden fired — up went the dark blue flag. 
It was a high centre right. He ought to have 
aimed a little more to the left, for the wind blew 
at intervals sharply from the west towards the sea, 
that could be heard moaning in its restless agony 
below. 

Whiz, ping, bang went Trelyn, just on the 
left corner of the target. 

Bang, miss, went Polworth, who then shouldered 
his rifle and wheeled round in a splendid military 
manner, and with perfect good-humour. 



188 OBRATHEABT. 

At the end of five shots, when the adjutant read 
out the score, it stood — 

Bradbrain .... 0, 3, 2, 3, 2. 

Tolpedden .... 2, 0, 0, 2, 1. 

Trelyn 0, 0, 1, 1, 1. 

Polworth .... 0, 0, 2, 0, 0. 

"Five hundred is my best distance," said Pol- 
worth, delighted with everything, because it adver- 
tised his business. 

"Licked you that lot," said Bradbrain, spite- 
fully, to Arthur, as he himself drove down a 
conical bullet, and new-capped his piece. 

" Can't quite get the range," said Trelyn, re- 
adjusting the wind-guage. 

"I shall do better from the knee," thought 
Arthur, as he silently braced up his courage, 
though a little vexed. 

" I am sorry to say Arthur's three behind," said 
Mr. Trevena, as he helped out the ladies, to whom 
we left him speaking ; " but he is sure to pull up, 
he is so steady. Bradbrain seems rather unequal 
and excited, the other two are nowhere. The 
sun's out again — that's a good omen." 

" Was that the dean you bowed to ?" said Mrs. 
Tregellas, as they all walked towards the marks- 
men. " He didn't seem very cordial, did he I" 

" No," said Mr. Trevena, rather wincing ; " he 
doesn't like my bishop's charge, I suppose — he was 
all smiles, I saw, to the Wavertons." 

Arthur loaded for the five hundred yards with 



THE SILVER CUP, 189 

great care ; he poured in the coarse-grained powder, 
the bullet just firmly pressed the powder, and no 
more; off went the burst cap, and on went a 
little burnished hat of copper; tap went the sliding 
bar, till it rested slantily on the very top of the 
sight-supports, whatever their technical name may 
be. Bradbrain was even more careful. 

The two combatants were all the while keenly 
criticised by a group of riflemen, among whom 
Sampy held forth. 

** It's all between them two, simly," said a burly 
corporal, who leant on his rifle muzzle with an 
air of authority. 

" Young Tolpedden '11 beat him," said a farmer, 
" at shutting or at riding — he don't cumstumble his 
comraad yet — ^Tolpedden, he knaws tin, he do." 

"He's a brave young slip of grace," said the 
corporal ; " look how he holds his rifle, as if his 
arms were tin-stampers." 

'* That's the chosen instrument — that's hem as 
saved me from wild beasts at Ephesus," said 
Sampy, " for which Hallelooliah and the Lord be 
praised, for I ain't forgot it." 

The grateful and enthusiastic itinerant preacher, 
as he spoke, advanced to shake hands with Arthur, 
who had just then fired, and had fallen to the rear 
to load. Arthur had only got a white, and was 
in no mood for talking to people he did not 
like. 

" Oh 1 all right, all right, my good man, you're 
quite welcome," he said, somewhat ungraciously ; 



190 GREATHEART. 

" here, boy, get back — don't crowd so, you people." 

Sampy shrunk back somewhat crest-fallen. His 
gratitude to a popular person had been a little 
ostentatious; but his mortification (for he was a 
vain man) was real enough. 

" Now, pray stand back — ^pray, do stand back," 
said Mr. Hookem, waving his stick hopeless- 
ly; '^give your comrades plenty of room to 
load, for Heaven's sake — we want perfect fair 
play." 

Whiz 1 went the bullets, with a crescendo pop, al- 
most like pellets from a gigantic pop-gun, and borne 
in jets of flame. Then came the ting-tang of the 
stricken target, from which the white dust could 
be seen flying, as the red, white, or blue flags 
started up over the wall that concealed the marker. 

" Banker !" cried a man in the crowd, as Pol- 
worth fired and there came in answer only a 
thin sound, as of a bullet that had sunk into a 
turf. 

"No, that's Mr. Mordred," laughed the un- 
daunted draper, kicking the white cartridge papers, 
that lay round where the shooting had been, as 
thick as chips in a carpenter's shop. 

This time Arthur was only two behind; and 
Polworth, laughing ruefully, retreated from the 
contest, saying, 

" That'll do for me," as he plunged down on 
the dry tawny grass, complacently, and pulled 
out a sandwich tin and a flask of sherry ; finally 
drawing out a huge cigar from a brown leather 



THE SILVER CUP. 191 

case, he licked it all over, just as a boa-constrictor 
moistens the victim he is about to swallow. 

As the red danger flag was hoisting, and while the 
mounted adjutant of Lord Rostrevor was canter- 
ing up to the butts to ascertain the whereabouts 
of the last shot of Arthur's, which had been 
incorrectly marked, up came Lucas, Fitzhugh, and 
Maclean, with vertebrated wooden dolls in their 
hats, that they had won at the " knock-me-downs." 

" Well, how are you getting on, old fellow ?" 
said Lucas ; " we've been having such a spree." 

^^ Well, I'm a little behind ; but I hope to pull 
on if the wind doesn't get up." 

" But it does get up, my hearty," said Brad- 
brain, tossing into the air a piece of cartridge 
paper, that whirled away swiftly to the left ; " and 
I'm best in high wind. I'll wipe your eye now, Tol- 
pedden, if that last one of yours is only a white, 
I'm now six a head, and you'll find it hard to pull 
that off in your last ten shots at the long ranges, 
too, and the wind rising." 

^^Hard, but not impossible," thought Arthur, 
who felt steady in nerve, and warming to his 
work, and whose blood was rather up at Brad- 
brain's irritating superciliousness ; ^' at least here 
goes one to it." 

" A centre — it was a centre I" shouted the ad- 
jutant, as he came cantering back. Lucas cheered, 
and up went the blue flag at the butts. 

" D " muttered Bradbrain, and scowled at 

Lucas rather malignantly. 



192 OBEATH£ART, 

^ Tve a good mind to punch that man's head," 
whispered Lucas, who wore a green patch on one 
eye, to Fitzhugh. 

^'Tolpedden is shooting very steady, but he's 
overweighted," said Boscawen to them, ^^I shaU 
lose my fiver as sure as eggs are eggs. Come 
and have some sherry." 

^ I don't care if I do," said Lucas. 

« Tm all there," said Fitzhugh. 

Trelyn, having had four misses running, now 
withdrew from the arena. 

**If I had only brought a Brinley Richards' 
wind-guage," he said, ^' I should have won the cup 
as clean as a whistle, and with this reflection he 
went off to some pool-shooting at another target. 

By the time Arthur had wiped the black damp 
off his lock-plate, and rubbed his gun down, the 
o£Scer gave the signal for commencing firing at the 
800 yards. 

Bradbrain laughed scornfully as the target in 
perspective began to look no larger than a playing 
card, and the wind got higher. It was dispiriting 
to look at the target over the notch of the back sight. 
The wind blew from left to right, so that it was now 
necessary to fire at the extreme left edge of the 
target to get the bullet in place at all. It was at 
such times that Bradbrain was usually most success- 
ful. 

" Put the steam on now, Tol," cried Lucas, who 
was squatting on the ground, his hands on his 
knees, and staring at the almost impossible target. 



THE SILVER CUP. 193 

Arthur gave a smile of quiet determination. 

" He's as firm as the Grindstone " (a rock off 
the coast), said Sampy to a cadaverous brother 
preacher. 

"I'll lay even money nowl" cried Polworth, 
radiant as Scott's Dandie Dinmont ; "young 
squire's so steady." 

Down went Bradbrain on his knee ; a long, sure 
aim ; no muscle moved ; he held his breath, and 
the trigger fell swiftly but imperceptibly. 

" There's a centre I" he cried, as he sprang on 
his feet, with eyes full of feverish triumph, and 
shading his eyes with his hand, glared at the white 
and black. 

But no gong clanged. No — "The schemes 
o' men and mice gang aft ajee." Up waved 
the white flag, half mockingly. It was 1, and 
the adjutant jotted it down without a word of 
encouragement. 

" Not so good," said Boscawen, biting off the 
end of a new cigar, as a chaffinch does a bud. 

"Let somebody mend it, then," replied Bradbrain. 

Arthur said nothing, but, watching the wind, 
dropped on his knee, and fired carefully at the 
extreme lower white edge of the target. 

" It was a centre ! Hurrah !" shouted Polworth 
and Co., as up went the blue flag. 

At the end of the five shots the score stood — 

Bradbrain . . • . 1, 2, 3, 2, 0. 
Tolpedden .... 3, 3, 2, 1, 2. 

VOL. II. 



194 GBEATHEABT. 

Tolpedden and Bradbrain were ties at last. 
Tolpedden's friends cheered. 

" Now for the thousand yards/' said the doctor, 
as he drew aside, grinding his large white teeth. 
" Give me some brandy — somebody I I'll lick the 
boy yet. He's getting tired ; his hand shook infer- 
nally at the last two shots. I'll have that cup, or 
I'll know the reason why, I tell ye." 

The target now looked so small, that Arthur 
turned round to Fitzhugh, who stood near to load 
for him, and compared it to having to shoot at the 
handle of a tea-pot at half a mile off. The wind 
had risen cold, gusty, and uncertain, and no shots 
were allowed. 

" The Enfield rifle is not a bit of good after 700 
yards," growled Trelyn. ^^They should have 
Armstrongs ; but it's as fair for one as the other. 
Bradbrain's funking." 

Three times Bradbrain took aim, and three times 
put down his rifle to dodge the wind. At last the jet 
of fire came, and the rifle spoke. The sun had 
gone in, and the butts looked very grey and bleak 
now, when no flag came blossoming up over the turf 
wall. 

"Duck's egg!" shouted Polworth, heedless of 
all remonstrance; for Bradbrain did not deal at 
his shop. 

" Wrong parabola," said Maclean the Colenso- 
ist. 

" Any fool could tell that, Maclean," said Brad- 
bram. " Perhaps you'll trouble your friend, who 



THE SILVER CUP. 195 

IS going to fire, now with the right one, for his hand 
shakes damnably." 

Arthur heard his own heart thumping, as he held 
his breath to pull the trigger. He aimed this time 
five feet from the edge of the target. It was too 
much ; the bullet missed, and struck the turf with 
the sound as if a log of wood had been cloven. 

" A miss, by George I and after that care ! That's 
right," shouted the doctor, with a neighing laugh 
that was as vulgar as it was irritating. 

The rivals were now thickly surrounded by 
anxious spectators, and all other sports on the 
moor, whether hurdle-leaping, or knock-me-downs, 
or Aunt Sallies, were for the time suspended ; 
at every shot there went up a hoarse murmur of 
hope or fear. 

" Bradbrain is so cheeky, I hope he'll be licked," 
said Lucas. 

" I am afraid Tolpedden's a little tired. There's 
a second miss ; that'll never do," said Fitzhugh. 

The next two shots were equal, so they were 
still ties. The excitement now was tremendous. 

"They've three more shots each," said Pol- 
worth. " Now, then, two to one on young Squire 
Tolpedden !" 

" Two to one on Tolpedden I" cried Boscawen. 

" Done, in tens !" cried another officer, who had 
strolled up from the pool-shooting with a capful of 
shillings he had won. 

" It'll be ties, simly,** said a miner — a rifleman. 

" It shan't be ties long," said Bradbrain, who 

02 



196 GREATHEABT. 

overheard him, as he loaded in a fury of excitement^ 
his eyes bloodshot, and his hands black with powder, 
^^ I warn yon, not if I know it ! No ; I am not 
going to have the thing dragging about for a day 
or two, not I. I mean to carry the cup home to- 
night, and make some punch in it for my old wo- 
man. Look here, I'll shoot any three of you for 
a twenty, to-morrow — it's all luck in this young 
fellow." 

^^ I like his pluck, comrades ; he's the right 
grit," said Polworth, winking, as he turned his 
back from him, and stuffed his tongue in an in- 
sufferable way into his left cheek. 

Bradbrain fired and got a white. 

Tolpedden fired and got a white. 

'^Now they've got the range," said Lucas. 
"Keep up your pecker, boys, and fire straight. 
Still ties." 

"And now they've got the level," said Fitz- 
hugh. 

Arthur, had he been a pagan, would have 
invoked his special deity. Mercury, god of Cunning 
and Art, or Minerva, the patroness of that objection- 
able lying rascal Ulysses; as it was, he evoked 
before him only a pure, bright face, crowned with 
golden brown hair, but from that vision a bene- 
diction of eternal sunshine seemed to spread with 
augury of victory. Much turned on the next shot, 
for it was too late now to retrieve even one bad or 
unlucky bullet. 

Bradbrain fired with skill and care, but a little 



THE SILVER CUP. 19"? 

in a hurry. How he swore to himself when 
the white flag went up, and the adjutant scored 
him only one. He was rather pale when he 
rose. 

" There, top that, you duffer 1" he said savagely, 
as he fell back. 

"It's a pity, Bradbrain," said Arthur, as he 
knelt down, " it's a pity you lose your temper about 
a harmless affair like this." 

Bradbrain made no answer, but loaded, eager 
as a hunter whose hut is beleaguered with wolves. 
Like wolves his passions were indeed ravening 
round his better nature. 

Arthur quickly knelt, and correcting his last 
shot by a hair^s breadth at the sighting, got a 
" two." He was now one a-head, and his partisans 
gave a hearty cheer, which was led on by the 
jovial draper. 

There were only two shots now left the cham- 
pions. Bradbrain's last shot had been in the 
extreme righthand corner. His great desire now 
was to fire lower to the left, and so to win by 
a centre. He tore off the end of his cartridge 
with the neat precision of long habit; into the 
barrel went every black speck of powderj down 
went the bullet like a leaden thimble in its greased 
case. He took a long, careful aim, but tlie sun 
was in his eyes, and the wind high. 

Whish, bang went the bullet. 

Bradbrain remained kneeling, fixed in the atti- 
tude of firing. Up went the white flag. 



198 GREATHEABT. 

'^ Never mind," he said, starting to his feet, 
" that ties us, and he's sure to miss this last time- 
curse his infernal luck !" 

Arthur dropped on his knee; as he did so, 
there was a breathless silence, for all depended on 
this last shot. The chance was not merely in his 
skill, but on the momentary sunshine and 
wind. For a moment the little square of white, 
dotted with black, appeared to dance before him. 
The spectators seemed to mock and gibber. Then 
bracing himself up, he took a full aim. At that 
moment a furious gust of wind tore across the 
moor, and shook his rifle-barrel out of line. 

For a moment after there was a lull for an 
instant — that instant Arthur seized. Just as the 
point of the foresight emerged above the low notch 
of the back sight, he fired. All be said, as he rose 
to his feet, was, 

" I think that is a good one." 

And so it was — ^very good. Up went the 
blue flag — no, the danger flag waved along the 
ground. 

" A ricochet, by all that's lucky," cried Brad- 
brain, stamping for joy. 

" No ! — hurrah ! — it's a f ourer. Tolpedden has 
won the cup," cried Polworth, as the dark blue 
flag started up, and waved in the air over the 
marker's mantlet. The man had only gone out 
to make sure of the exact spot where the bullet 
had struck, which happened to be near the edge of 
the innermost square. Arthur had won the cup 



THE SILVER CUP. 199 

by four points. He gave a sigh of relief, and 
sliing his rifle over his shoulder. 

Bradbrain dashed his gun on the ground. 

'^ If I had had the commonest American rifle 
with a fixed sight," he saidj **rd have got ten 
more points 1 Who can aim with a sighting an 
inch thick ? — hang and curse it !" then he sat down 
sullenly and wiped his gun clean. 

" The cup's yours, and well won, too," said the 
adjutant to Arthur. 

** We must chair him, I say, comraades 1" roared 
Polworth, dashing up with three sturdy rifle- 
men, who divested Arthur of his rifle, and 
lifted him up on their great shoulders, setting off 
at a smart trot through a lane instantly made for 
him through the crowd. Sampy and his friend, the 
three artists, Fitzhugh, Lucas, Maclean, and M. 
Chatelet followed, waving their hats, and shout- 
ing, " Hurrah 1 for the winner of the cup !" 

Just as the bearers approached the carriage 
where Arthur's father and the Tregellases were, 
they paused a moment, to allow Arthur to wave 
his shako at them, in return for the tumult of 
white handkerchiefs that welcomed his victory. 

There was his father, calmly proud and gravely 
glad; the lieutenant was waving his telescope, 
like a good-natured madman; the children, all 
under his command, were everyone waving some- 
thing — comforter, stick, cap, or handkerchief; 
Mrs. Tolpedden was in a flutter of delight ; Mrs. 
Tregellas placidly pleased, after her manner ; Tre- 



200 GEEATHEABT. 

gellas and Trevena were laughing and shouting 
approval ; the Wavertons (all but Milly, who wks 
crying with pleasure) saluted him in their own 
little precise way ; Miss Trevena was sternly appro- 
ving ; but above all he caught a glimpse of one 
radiant face (such a face as seems to bend towards 
us from the clouds of a summer sunset), serene and 
joyous as ever; and Lucy's eyes expressed a 
deeper pleasure (as it seemed to the credulous 
lover) than all the rest, and yet she waved no 
welcome. 

Then back the sturdy fellows in grey and 
scarlet trotted him, to the tent where Lord Ros- 
trevor sat on a raised chair, with the big shining 
cup before him, peering from folds of silver paper. 
The gallant colonel, inwardly tired and cross, had 
put on his election and covert-side face, and was 
bowing to everyone, even to the cup, when there 
lYas no one else to whom to bow. In thronged the 
men in grey, saluting as they entered ; in came 
Arthur, blushing as the colonel presented him the 
cup, in a woolly speech, full of grand hesitations, 
and pompous nothings. Arthur returned thanks 
in a clever, manly way, wishing all success and 
prosperity to the 10th Royal North Cornish Rifles. 

Up started Boscawen, with a bottle of sherry, 
and Polworth, knocking off the neck with his ram- 
rod, poured the wine into the cup. The men cheered 
as Arthur drank their health, graciously passing 
the cup to the colonel first, who circulated it round 
the tent. 



THE SILVER CUP. 201 

Then followed a rough impromptu cold meat 
supper, provided by a confectioner at Bodmin; 
at this Mr. Hookem was truly great, and proposed 
Arthur's health in a flowing speech. At the 
supper Bradbrain was silent and sullen, and retired 
early into a smaller tent, where, for want of room, 
some of his own friends were supping. 

" He's awfully cut up, Bradbrain is," said Bos- 
cawen to Arthur, as Bradbrain, with a "Good 
night all," left the tent. " He hates being out- 
done; he's been cursing you high and low to 
Vivian, and some of the other men, swearing 
you won by the merest fluke, and could not shoot 
a bit, and saying he should dispute the affair." 

As Arthur rode home on his chestnut Suf us, an 
hour or so after, he overtook Bradbrain, to his sur- 
prise, riding moodily towards St. Petrock's. 

"Why, Bradbrain," he said, touching his shoulder, 
"I thought you were home hours ago. I hope 
you don't take my winning in fair competition in 
dudgeon. You've beaten me before now." 

Bradbrain did not look round, as if he was sur- 
prised, but replied : 

" Well, I was riled, I tell you, at first. I'd made 
sure of licking you ; but I shall soon forget the 
rile, that's my way, it's soon over with me ; we 
both did our best. I always like to be A 1, if 
a fellow feels that, he's sure to get his snubs. I've 
been down to see a patient at Dunchine, that kept 
me. Good night; I don't feel inclined to talk." 

They shook bands and parted. 



202 OHEATHEABT. 

That same eveDingy when Arthm^s father 
reached Tolpedden, he found a sealed railway 
parcel, brought by express messenger from Bodmin, 
lying on his stndy table. It was an enclosnre from 
Mordred's lawyers, Messrs. Fox and Shakell, of 
Plymouth, enclosing a subpoena, and a letter in- 
forming him that a biU would be instantly filed 
against him by them, on behalf of the Mayor and 
Corporation of St. Petrock's, as the prelude to a 
Chancery Suit on the question of the right to a 
tract of land on the EIndellion cliffs, known by the 
name of ^^ No Man*s Land." 

The cruel and subtle enemy was slowly but 
surely drawing his lines of circumvallation closer 
round the beleaguered city. The sudden spring* 
ing of one of Fortune's mines now seemed to have 
thrown it open to Mordred's mercy. 



CHAPTER Xra. 

A PARLEY. 

MB. MORDBED was like a magician, who, 
haying drawn his circles, his trigons, his 
spheres, and stellar emblems, awaits within his talis- 
manic ring the evil spirits he has summoned from 
beneath. 

Having once set those great twin grinding wheels, 
Messrs. Fox and Shakell, at work, he knew the 
result as well as a manufacturer does who puts in 



A PARLEY. 203 

the pulp, and knows that whether he is present or 
not, out, in due time, will come the hot-pressed 
paper. That morning of the shooting for the cup 
his vulture eye had scented out in the Times the 
failure of the bank which had proved so ruinous 
to the Tolpeddens. With the promptitude of a 
great general, who sees the enemy's bayonets 
waver for an instant, he had instantly foreseen the 
importance to himself of such an accident. He 
was as eager to seize the advantage — that might 
be only momentary — as the leader of a storming 
party is to take advantage of the confusion pro- 
duced by a powder cask blowing up in the breach 
he has to mount. 

Certain now that his proud, stern adversary's 
surrender was a mere matter of time, he quietly 
rested behind his lines. The land, with its secret 
treasures, must now soon be his and Bradbrain's, 
for the Corporation of St. Petrock's were all either 
his own creatures, his debtors, or his dependents. 
He had already summoned Sampy to arrange for 
the purchase of the machinery and outfit of an old 
disused working called the Wheal Busy, near 
Port Isaac. The moment he had arranged the 
surrender of the land with Mr. Tolpedden, he and 
Sampy had arranged to meet (that very afternoon^ 
in fact) and arrange the prospectus, the advertise- 
ment, and the working of the new mine. Not a 
moment would be lost by him, for he was greedy 
for money, eager to humiliate Tolpedden, restless 
to win county position and obtain social and 



204 OBEATHEART. 

political power, and to erase all recollections of earlier 
peccadilloes, whether professional or commercial. 
That weak yaletudinarian was strong enough for 
schemes dark and hidden as the workings of a 
mole. He was rejoiced, in a saturnine way, at 
Bradbrain*s vexation at his defeat, because he 
hoped his feelings of annoyance might tend to 
alienate him from the Tolpeddens, and from a 
foolish, purposeless flirtation that threatened to 
alienate his partner from their joint interests. 

While Bradbrain was sullenly receiving a levee 
of poor patients in the surgery, Mordred stood at 
the window, waiting for the postman to bring him 
a letter from Tolpedden. 

There was quite a parliament of birds on the little 
shaven lawn. Two thrushes were unwinding coils 
of reticent earth-worms; several pert, knowing spar- 
rows were chattering about the state of the food-mar- 
ketnear one of the central round borders, not to men- 
tion a little wren, who was quiet and busy under the 
nearest box hedge. But for such things the banker 
had but little care. His one great thought was the 
postman, and his one anxiety whether or not he 
would bring a letter from Mr. Tolpedden. 

Suddenly the door opened, and Bradbrain looked 
in ; he held a draught in one hand in a phial 
which he was shaking, and did not look in the 
sweetest of tempers. 

" Mordred," he said sharply, " I wish, old fel- 
low, you could come and look at old Tregoze's 
tongue. I can't make out his symptoms, or whe- 



A PARLEY. 205 

ther the old boy isn't shamming — he's quite capable 
of it. He keeps saying he wants stimulants ; and 
there's that rascal Sampy, who was cheering so 
yesterday when that duffer won the cup — ^there 
he is preaching away about hour-glasses, and all 
that sort of thing. I thought it would look less 
suspicious to keep him till they were all gone, or 
shall I send him in to you ? — he keeps jawing so." 

" I shan't see any of them this morning, I told 
you so before," said Mordred ; *^ and I don't want 
Sampy till I see what that man at Tolpedden 
writes." 

"Ohl that's it, is it?" said Bradbrain, and 
snapped to the door, for Mordred's manner was 
dictatorial, and by no means pleasing. 

" He must write," said Mordred, looking at the 
clock over the fire-place, which just then struck 
the half -hour. Half -past nine, that was the post- 
man's time. At that very moment the postman, 
with the bag slung on his side, passed the garden 
gate. " He is going to defy me, that will delay us 
half a year," said the banker to himself, in his 
vexation. *'The children of this world are in 
their generation wiser than the children of light ; 
but he must hoist the white fiag. That failure must 
have crippled him too much for him to bear a 
Chancery suit. I know him ; he'll be all for rak- 
ing together, and saving for that Benjamin — that 
youngster of his. I know these country gentle- 
men, or I ought to know them." 

It was a fitful day ; dark and sunny by turns. 



206 OREATHEABT. 

not a day to encourage a sad man, or to suggest 
hope. Oreat rolling grey clouds darkened to 
almost a London gloom, and then yielded to 
a cold but dazzling sunlight ; a harsh wind 
drove the dead leaves into little waltzing, weird 
circles, and chased them round the dead dahlias, 
and the clumps of laurels, and gave them no res- 
pite till the luU came again, and the shadows 
once more spread like a dark vail over the grass. 

Mr. Mordred had for the sixth time at least 
turned round to compare his own watch with the 
ebony cased clock on the mantelpiece, when 
a heavy, crunching sound of horse's hoofs made 
him look round in a startled way. 

It was a tall, stalwart man, on a chestnut horse, 
that, breasting the great green gsite, had forced it 
roughly open, its feet churning the wet gravel as 
it came at a quick walk to the front door. At the 
foot of the four white steps that led to the entrance 
the rider swung himself off with almost a soldier's 
quickness, and twisting the reins round the railing, 
sprang up the steps. 

No one could easily forget that severe, thought- 
ful face. It was Mr. Tolpedden. For many a 
victim, and beside many a trap, had Mordred 
watched, but never for a lordlier victim than 
this ; now he had him. What mingled thoughts 
of hatred, avarice, falsehood and hypocrisy, fear 
and hope, darted athwart the banker's mind in 
that instant of time ! 

Should he treat him in a cold, hurt way, as a 



A PARLEY. 207 

man who had been injured and insulted?— or 
should he rather receive the almost bankrupt 
man with a grave, Christian sympathy, as if regret 
at his losses had driven away all harsher feelings. 

Yes ; that was the right way to play his hand ; 
for he had hidden reasons for retaining his hold 
over Tolpedden, whose discoveries in chemistry 
had roused at once the jealousy and cupidity of 
this bad man. 

How few people like to be surprised in their 
own house by unexpected visitors 1 How few 
are frank and pure enough to bear an unexpected 
scrutiny ! Some book must be put away from 
stricter people ; some letter slipped under the 
desk; some secret be thrown into respectable 
shadow. So it was that Mordred hastily took 
down a large Bible, opened it at the psalms, and 
near it threw the Hmesy turned down at the Money 
Article. Unconscious satire of his own mind — 
religion used to help him on 'Change ! 

Just as he had sat down and assumed a con- 
templative position, the melancholy, suffering-look- 
ing butler threw open the door, and announced Mr. 
Tolpedden. 

Mordred was a good actor — a life of deception 
requires good acting ; for the world's audience do 
more than hiss — they can ruin, outlaw, and pro- 
scribe. He rose with an air of the blandest 
astonishment, offered a chair, bowed respectfully, 
and held out his cold, thin hand. 

Mr. Tolpedden did not take the proffered hand, 



208 OSEATHEABT. 

but he sat down, and glanced at the paper lying 
on the table. 

The two men were strongly contrasted — one 
well-dressed, with his military, bold, stern air ; and 
the other valetudinarian, mean, servilely meek, and 
eminently secretive. 

" I need scarcely say that I come on business — 
nothing else, as you may be assured, would have 
brought me to this house," commenced the visitor. 

" I do not know why — ^yet I am aware of the 
prejudice, the unjust *^ 

" Unjust ! — was it not you, Mr. Mordred, who 
hoped to lead my father to alienate his Cornish 
estates from me, and who even tried two years 
ago to lead my own son into reckless and ruinous 
debt, snares from which his own good sense and 
principle alone preserved him ?" 

*'You pervert everjrthing — ^your heart may 
some day be softened — you will then " 

" I am not one of those who change— I am all 
granite when my opinion is once formed. I shall 
always regard you as I do now. You know, of 
course, what brought me here — ^I see you do, for 
the paper is open before you." 

Mordred bent his head to the wind, and looked 
as if he w*as standing by the side of a rich patient 
who was dying. 

"Yes," he said, slowly, "I could not fail to 
observe and lament over so painful and disastrous 
an occurrence. What can we do to aid you ?" 

Tolpedden eyed him with the simple-hearted 



A PARLEY. 209 

astonishment of a generous and unsuspicious man. 

" Aid me T he said ; " I want no aid, I only 
want time." 

" And time you shall have, of course, my dear 
sir; we business men are not the hard and grinding 
persons that we are falsely represented. You have 
overdrawn very slightly at present — a mere few 
hundreds ; let us make an advance — a loan. You 
have a son just going to college — there will in- 
evitably be expenses ^" 

*' Sir, I want no one to arrange my affairs for 
me. 

" Now, this outburst is not merely unkind — it is 
unchristian." 

" I want no definition of Christian duties from 
you. ' We have had business together before to- 
day, Mr. Mordred." 

" I could throw a very different colour over the 
transactions you complain of, were this a fitting 
place, and did I care to vindicate a character that 
is unsullied ; for I take God to witness this day 
between us, that I have no sin on my soul with 
respect to your affairs and your family." 

" A saving qualification," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
bitterly; "but pray keep your adjurations, Mr. 
Mordred, for religious meetings, where they will 
bring you, I dare say, a 'Hear, hear,' from a 
brother speaker at least ; it is no use our bandy- 
ing words. I come here to offer to you, on 
reasonable terms, the land I refused you the other 
day in my haste. I was then a rich man ; now — ^" 

VOL. 11. P 



210 OBEATHEABT. 

Mr. Mordred's complexion, I should have be- 
fore mentioned, was of a livid, bluish tint, occa- 
sioned, as his enemies cruelly reported, by a quan- 
tity of nitrate of silver he had taken twenty years 
before, when he was under arrest somewhere in 
Somersetshire, on suspicion of defrauding a local 
bank of which he was a director, in order to in- 
duce his prosecutors to believe that he was dying 
from heart disease, and for that reason to let the 
matter drop ; but this, like most scandals, was pro- 
bably only partly true. Even through this ghastly 
hue a faint hectic tinge of red arose; it ex- 
pressed excitement at this offer, but Mr. Tolpedden 
neither saw nor cared for the physiognomical 
change. He continued, 

" But I must first beg to know the cause of your 
anxiety for a mere useless field ? I have hitherto 
always made a rule never to allow a single acre of 
our patrimony to be alienated; and only neces- 
sity compels me, even now, to deviate from 
it." 

" The purpose involves a corporation secret. If 
I was to hint at a small station for the pil- 
chard signalmen, I should give some clue to it. I 
am a mere agent." 

" The other day, when you called on me, Mr. 
Mordred, you spoke of the field as necessary to 
enlarge an outlying farm; you hardly take the 
trouble even to make your story consistent. Ex- 
cuse my asking you to explain this discrepancy." 

'* My dear sir, much as I earnestly desire, even 



A PARLEY. 211 

through much contumely, to oblige you, I must 
firmly decline to disclose the secrets of our corpo- 
ration. Suffice it to say (and I hope this will re- 
move all suspicions from your mind) that we pro- 
pose to erect there — well, something which will be, 
I believe, a benefit to our coast, a blessing to our 
fishermen, and a service to the whole nation. Are 
you satisfied that no meaner motives actuated me 
— that my suppressio veri was almost a duty ?" 

" Yes, yes," said Mr. Tolpedden, in a low voice ; 
" trouble does make us suspicious. Perhaps I 
wrong you." He said this impatiently, as if not 
caring to express much regret. ** I want a high 
price for the field." 

" About that we shall not, I am sure, quarrel. 
Our corporation can afford to be generous in such 
matters. The field has been valued by the town 
surveyor at £500. We will give you £600." 

Tolpedden covered his mouth with his hand, 
and rested his elbows on the table for a moment or 
two. 

"I accept the terms," he said, looking up. 
" Give me the deed. I will write this afternoon to 
my solicitors at Bodmin, Messrs. Chetwynd, Strong, 
and Wrackem, to effect an immediate transfer." 

'^ How soon," said the banker, with a galvanized 
smile, painful to look at, and putting his hands to- 
gether in a devout way — " how soon business car- 
ried on in a Christian spirit comes to a pleasant and 
satisfactory conclusion I I am happy, sir, always 
to have dealings with Messrs. Chetwynd, Strong, 



V i 



212 GREATHEART. 

and Wrackem. They are Christian people, and 
devoted to the Missionary work." 

Tolpedden detested cant ; by that I mean reli- 
gious talk out of place, and religions phrases dese- 
crated by being obtruded Pharisaically, and for 
display. 

" Whether they are in favour of doing good 
abroad, and not at home, I do not know; all I 
know is that they are good and prompt lawyers. I 
do not consult my lawyers on theological questions. 
Is the deed prepared? I am accustomed to 
promptitude in business matters — ^let me sign it at 
once. It is bad enough to lose a limb, without having 
it haggled at for weeks. Is the deed ready I" 

^^ You attach too much importance to so slight a 
sacrifice, a sacrifice, too, not without its gracious 
compensations. The Lord is good to us ; he tem- 
pers the wind — ^he rules the storm." 

*^ Do not talk of slight sacrifices to me, sir ; I 
know best whether they are slight or not. I tell you 
it is like flaying me, to reduce my son's inheritance 
— it is worse than " 

Here the door opened, and Bradbrain thrust in 
his head. 

"Beg your pardon," he said, smiling; "how 
d'ye do? I see you are hard at business. I 
won't disturb you, but I want to talk to you, Mor- 
dred, about a case here presently." 

As the door closed upon the young doctor's false 
but handsome face — 

^< Might I take the liberty of asking," said Mr. 



A PARLEY. 213 

Mordred, stooping forward deprecatingly to stir 
the fire, " as a man of business, long connected 
with your family, and, whatever our differences 
may have been, still deeply interested in its wel- 
fare, to what extent your losses in this infamous 
bank affair will amount I You once informed me, 
in the way of business, that you had, I think it was 
many thousand pounds in the hands of that un- 
fortunate, and, I fear, I must add, dishonest firm." 

At other times Tolpedden would have burst into 
a pelting storm of sarcasm and contempt ; but 
sorrow had somewhat tamed his fierce nature. 

" Yes," he said, staring at the red coals as if he 
was watching a ship — his own ship — go down, 
" more than twenty thousand pounds gone. All 
gone but the few miserable pounds my lawyers 
will squeeze out of the cheats, years hence, per- 
haps." 

" Dear, dear, dear !" sighed Mordred, as he took 
up the Times, and read an extract from the money 
article. " The news this morning about the pros- 
pects of the unfortunate Bank are most unfavourable. 
The dividend, if any, will be very small. Several 
Cornish gentlemen will suffer deeply from the frauds 
of certain speculative directors." 

Mordred read these fatal words slowly, and with 
provoking calmness. 

" It's gone," said Tolpedden, with bitterness, and 
his head sunk for a moment as he spoke. ^^I 
thought it was. My curses on those villainous 
cheats 1 Oh I Arthur, my boy ! — my boy 1 Now^ 



214 GBEATHEABT. 

sir,'* — ^he rose sternly — ** it has, perhaps, given you 
some pleasure to see me in a moment of despondency. 
Give me the deed. The money I want is not for 
myself, it is for my son. He shall go to college, if 
I starve for it T 

" I pray heaven to touch your heart, Mr. Tol- 
pedden, and the hearts of those who may have 
planted these cruel suspicions in your breast. I 
am innocent of any intention of wounding your 
feelings. I would as soon trample on a bleeding 
and mutilated man." 

" Your comparison is somewhat insulting. How 
do you know what wealth I may not still possess?" 

"Far be it from me tp intrude into family 
secrets, which are beyond my province. My 
previous questions, however severely you may judge 
them, were the result of sincere sympathy." 

" I neither want your sympathy, nor that of any 
man living," said Mr. Tolpedden, buttoning his 
coat fiercely across his chest. "Come, sir, the 
deed — let us have it over." 

" The great chemical discoveries expected of you 
by the scientific world can be unknown to no 
educated person," said Mr. Mordred. " The dis- 
covery of a new incorrodible metal might be of more 
value to England than the discovery of a dozen 
new planets." 

" You flatter me," was the only reply Mr. Mor- 
dred's words elicited, though for once they seemed 
weighted bj^ real conviction. 

" The deed will be ready to-morrow," he said. 



A PAELEY. 215 

" I will hurry Messrs. Fox and Shackel's clerks, 
and the copy shall reach you to-night, by hand. 
Would you like the money now ?" 

" It is immaterial. Well, I think, yes. It will 
save another interview, for the clerk can bring the 
deed to me." 

"That is hardly kind," said Mordred, with a 
sickly and rather spiteful smile ; "hardly kind, or 
even fair, as between man and man. You wdll 
have to receive" (here he drew a paper with 
figures on it from his pocket) ^£252 IO5. l^d.y 
having overdrawn your account with us to the 
amount that will make up the £600 purchase 
money." 

Mr. Tolpedden stood as if he was turned to stone. 
His eye did not lose its fixity, but his blood 
seemed to cease flowing. Then he put forth his 
hand slowly and took up his banking-book that lay 
on the table. 

" Yes," he said, " it is so. Well, I am ready to 
sign the deed whenever the clerk brings it. Good 
morning, Mr. Mordred ; you can send the balance 
by your clerk at your leisure." 

A moment more he had swung the front-door 
behind him, and leaped upon his horse. 

" That man is proud as Satan," said Mordred 
to himself; "but I think I stung him once or 
twice. He has evidently got a few thousands left, 
or he would never keep it up so. I'd break him 
quite, but that I want to get a hold over those 
inventions of his, and that troublesome fellow 



216 OBEATHEAKT. 

Bradbrain would jib if I ran him too hard. 
£252 IO5. l^d, won't keep a youngster three years 
at Baliol, and he must come to me for money, for 
he's bent on bringing up that lad as a restless 
spendthrift, as he himself has been. Two profes- 
sions given up, and now turned amateur chemist. 
Proud fool, he'd better take care." 

He rang the bell ; in slided the pale, unhappy 
butler. 

" Send in Mr. Sandoe," was the bland order. 

In half an houi^more the prospectus of the new 
mine was well forward. 

A mournful ride home had Mr. Tolpedden — a 
cold shower in his face, and the dead leaves blow- 
ing disconsolately round him. 

"That sanctimonious rascal," he pondered, 
" thinks he will get some hold over my inventions. 
I see through him, as if his heart was made of glass. 
I may want his help, to get clear of these difficulties 
— I will make use of the scoundrel's cupidity. I 
can get free in two years with prudence ; and I'll 
bear with him for the present, for Arthur^s sake." 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 

IT was the morning after this interview that 
Bradbrain sat in his sanctum, waiting for an 
answer to a letter of his. 

The sanctum was not a lively room ; it was one 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 217 

of those little dark square corner places that archi- 
tects sometimes leave in building a house, as if it 
was that little troublesome angle of the puzzle that 
never can be got into the box. It looked out 
through a small window on a damp, paved garden 
walk, leading to the stables, and used by the 
poorer patients on their way to the surgery. There 
was a small, cold-looking book-case, with glass 
doors and green curtains. At one side of the 
window, and on the top of this, stood half a dozen 
dusty, unequal-sized bottles full of spirits of wine, 
and containing specimens. Over the fire-place 
were placed two or three guns locked in a brass 
rack, while in a corner of the room lay a bundle 
of South American spears, sticks, and whips; 
on the walls hung several of Landseer's dogs, 
and other sporting prints; While over the door 
were visible a huge pair of Mexican spurs, a 
lasso, and some horse trappings. 

Bradbrain was restless — ^there was an hour be- 
fore it was time to start on his rounds — it was too 
little time for a game of billiards at the chief inn, 
and too long for a cigar. He rose, stared at one 
of the guns, then took down a whip, bent it 
and tried it — ^he took a spill from the mantelpiece, 
and pleated it into various shapes; then he sat 
down in front of the fire, and planting a foot on 
either hob, rang the bell sharply; lastly, 
taking out a whisker-brush with a looking-glass 
back, he looked at his great shining white teeth in 
it complacently. 



218 OREATHEART. 

In glided Stonecot, the pale butler. 

" Stonecot, bring me a brandy and soda directly. 
Is that boy Dick returned yet ?" 

" Just returned, sir — in the kitchen, sir." 

" Send the idle rascal in." 

"Yes, sir; and, if you please, sir, here's a 
letter just sent from St. Petrock's — waiting for an 
answer." 

" Give it here." 

Bradbrain leaned back in his chair, and tore 
open the letter, as the door closed on the stealthy 
Stonecot. The note was from Arthur Tolpedden, 
and ran in this wise : 

" St. Petrock's, November 18th. 

" My dear Brad, 

"I came here this morning, to drive Mrs. 
and Miss Tregellas to see the Kobinson Crusoes, 
k la Raphael, at Portneweth ; to my great vexa- 
tion, I find their grey horse is gone lame last 
night, and the little man ridden off to Bodmin on 
the roan, to attend a church opening. In this 
dilemma could you lend us your chestnut mare ? 
She shall be taken as much care of as if she was 
solid gold. 

" Yours ever, 

" Arthur Tolpedden. 

" Donald Bradbrain, Esq." 

It must have been full ten minutes that Brad- 
brain remained with one hand on the mantelpiece, 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 219 

his head bent down and eyes fixed steadily on a 
tiger skin foot-stool that lay at his feet; all 
the time he kept the letter crunched in his hand — 
at the end of that time he looked up, drew out his 
whisker-brush again, and smiled, so that all his 
teeth glistened. 

Doctors tell you that the cobra's poison spreads 
so quickly through the human system, that even 
ligaments a moment after the bite cannot stop its 
upward progress to the heart. If you give a certain 
poison to rabbits, a few moments after its subtle 
crystals are found not only in the animal's brain, 
but even in the glassy humours of the eye. As 
quickly and terribly had the devilish promptings 
to a great crime already permeated through the 
passages leading to Bradbrain's stony and bad 
heart. No pang of conscience could now stop 
him, for he had long ceased to listen to that inner 
and divine voice. 

At that moment a little dark figure passed the 
window, the next instant there came a sharp tap 
at the door. 

" Come in," cried Bradbrain, as he took out a 
penknife, and began to carelessly trim his filbert 
nails. 

It was Dick, the London boy, looking more 
cunning, smart, and impudent than ever. He was 
red with running, and had a scratch on his left 
cheek, that was still bleeding. On his arm he 
carried a small basket, the lid of which was covered 
with oil-skin. He scraped his shoes on the mat, 



220 GREATHEART. 

and thrust one hand into the basket, while he 
waited for Bradbrain's questions. 

" Well, the letter ? — was it in the hole in the 
tree where I told you 1" 

"Yes, sir, but some leaves had fallen in and 
covered it up, and I was very nigh at first coming 
away without it." 

" It's well you didn't, or I'd have half flayed you. 
Come, where is it ? — ^hand it up." 

The boy dived into the basket, and, with a 
cunning smile, drew out a little three-cornered 
pink note. 

"Oh! don't it smell sweet, neither!" he said, 
familiarly, and half to himself, as he placed it in 
his master's eager hand. 

"There, now go and get .my horse ready, 
then put on Pepita's harness, and take her down 
to Mr. Tregellas's, but first come to me for a mes- 
sage. Stop, there's half-a^crown. I've just been 
round to the stable — Pepita is not the thing at all 
this morning, Dick. I don't like her eye, and her 
coat is rather starey. I must make her a bolus. 
Come back in ten minutes; now mind, ten minutes. 
Where did you get that scratch, Dick ?" 

" Why, that was that young Beswetherick, who's 
just come to the inn at Boscastle. He stopped me, 
and began larking and chaffing, and giving me his 
sauce, and wanted to look into my basket, but I 
didn't want him to see the three-corner, so I gave 
him one on the snuff-box, and then we had a bit 
of a spar." 



ri" 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 221 

Bradbrain laughed, and waved Dick away. The 
instant he was gone the Doctor tore open the letter, 
which he had first kissed a dozen times. 

The contents of that dangerous pink paper were 
these : 

" Dear Mr. Bradbrain, — Do not come to-day. 
They are suspicious." 

Bradbrain tossed the letter into the yellow pyra- 
mid of forked and living flame that went wavering 
up the chimney. The letter flew up the chimney 
instantly, like an exorcised devil, and floated back 
the next instant, driven by some downward and 
reactionary draught, a little black ghost of its 
former self, spangled with little golden sparks, 
that twinkled and went out. It was a type of that 
violent but foolish passion that beguiles both wise 
men and fools, and is the source of such joy, and 
of such ineffable misery. 

" Curses on them all I" he cried, " for a pack of 
pretentious fools, with their dismal respectabilities 
and their frozen-blooded virtues. If they were 
to shut Tiny in an hermetic case, they shouldn't 
keep me from her." 

« Brandy and soda, sir," said a rapid voice at his 
elbow. It was that detestable Stonecot, who had 
come in unobserved while he was muttering to 
himself, and now held a tray before him. 

*' That'll do; put it down," said Bradbrain, 
angrily, *' and leave the room. I'm busy about 
something else." 



222 GREATHEABT. 

He then, with one sharp blow against the 
mantel-piece, beat off the green neck of the soda- 
water bottle, and dashed its contents over the 
brandy, which he drank off at a draught. 

"I'm steadier now," he said, holding out his 
hand, as he darted into the surgery, and came 
upon master Dick, playing with the pill-maker, 
rolling out long sections of black paste, and cutting 
it up again into cross pieces. 

" You little devil's limb," said Bradbrain, knock- 
ing him off the stool with a backhanded slap, 
" haven't I told you dozens of times never to touch 
anything here? There, no more crying, here's 
some liquorice for you. Pepita will take anything 
from your hand — eh 1" 

" Yes, if you please, sir," said Dick, whimper- 
ing. " I always feeds her, and holds the measure 
for her." 

As he uttered these words, Bradbrain took down 
several bottles, and began bruising up an electuary. 

"That's cantharides," gasped the boy, in as- 
tonishment, as Bradbrain reached over for a little 
gilt-labelled bottle in a compartment close to his 
head. 

" Ah 1 bless me, so it is ; then give me the next 
one. Dick, go into the kitchen and ask Jane for a 
square lump of stale crumb." 

The instant Dick was gone Bradbrain poured 
out half a dozen shrivelled-up pieces of the greenish 
fly from the bottle Dick had protested against, 
dashed it back into its place, and then ground 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 223 

the fresh ingredients rapidly and fiercely into the 
electuary. 

" That boy's a devilish deal too sharp, I must 
get rid of him — he knows a deuced sight too much 
to suit me." 

Dick returned with the white square of bread, 
into the centre of which Bradbrain squeezed a large 
lump of the electuary, which he then plugged up 
with some sweet gum, and closed with a piece of 
bread, which he also gummed in. 

*' Now, Dick, Mr. Tolpedden is going to drive 
Pepita to-day to Portneweth ; you take the pony, 
and follow him — ^you have medicine to deliver there 
for old Mr. Penrose's servant — follow the party 
home, and when they reach St. Petrock's ride up 
and say that I hoped Mr. Tolpedden would drive 
the mare home himself, as I especially want to see 
him. While they are busy helping out the ladies, 
you make Pepita swallow this — remember, she 
mustn't on any account wait for it till she gets 
back to the stable, it must be given her with exer- 
cise, and mind let no one see you give it ; pre- 
tend it is part of your own bread and cheese, or I 
turn you away to-morrow. Tell no one at any 
time you have given it her. If you like to go 
on foot, you can come back with Mr. Tolpedden. 
If you do all that I wish, you and I will be good 
friends, and will get on well together ; I shall 
keep you in mind. You shan't want bread and 
cheese, whoever does." 

" All serene, sir," said Dicky, and away he went 



224 GBEATHEART. 

With Pepita, after Bradbrain had patted her, some- 
what regretfully. 

Bradbrain watched them as they went down the 
St. Petrock's road, and till they turned the corner. 

"Mr. Mordred, sir, has sent to say he wants 
you to make up his tonic directly, he feels very 
weak this morning," said Stonecot, who met Brad- 
brain at the back gate. 

" Old swindler !" thought Bradbrain to himself. 
"There he is concocting his plots with soapy 
Sampy, and he wants me to think his life shaky, 
and all that sort of thing. I don't believe, for my 
part, he ever touches the medicine, for fear I 
should work him some mischief. By George! 
we've a nice opinion of each other — 'pon my word 
we have. Old thief, he little knows what mischief 
I've been up to this morning. Poor Pepita !" 

Arthur met the boy half a mile from St. Pet- 
rock's, and was so impatient that he instantly 
mounted the mare, dashed off to the Tregellas's 
stables, put her in the chaise, and brought her 
round to the front. 

There, to his great annoyance, he found that 
Miss Trevena, who was there on a visit at the 
rectory, was going to escort Lucy in the place of 
Mrs. Tregellas, who was busy seeing some hams 
salted, and who argued that a similar absence on a 
former occasion had led to far too much salt prunel 
being used, to the infinite injury of the meat for- 
bidden by Mahomet, and favoured by Protestant- 
ism. 



THE DRITB TO POETNEWETH. 225 

Out came Lucy, very pretty and neat^ in an 
Havannah-brown dress, a fur-trimmed paletot, 
and a delectable little bonnet, hemming in the 
daintiest of good-natured faces, and out came Miss 
Trevena, stern as one of the spinster Parcse, carrying 
wrappers and plaids, and bent on taking her plea- 
sure as a confessed obtrusion, and in a stern and 
protesting way. 

Up bounded Lucy into the back seat (she was 
to ride in front coming back), and up ascended 
stiffly Miss Trevena. The children shouted appro- 
bation, and " Don't I wished," and got dangerously 
near the horse, and were eventually taken in by 
Kitty more or less in tears, but without serious in- 
juries ; a flick of the whip, a shout of joyous fare- 
well to Mr. Tregellas at the window, and the three 
were off. 

There are two sorts of spinsters — the philan- 
thropic and the sour. Those who do good to men, 
and those who seek to revenge their wrongs on the 
wretched race that has slighted them. Miss Tre- 
vena was of a mixed type ; the bittei>philanthropic 
— ^with high standards for other people, on which 
she perpetually suspended evil-doers, as scarecrows 
to warn their fellows. 

" Two is company, and three is none," she said, 
as soon as they were well started. " Now, tell me 
frankly, Mr. Tolpedden, don't you wish me miles 
away ?" 

There was something odious to a lover^s mind in 
this blurting out the possibility of pleasant flirta- 

VOL. II. Q 



226 GREATHEABT. 

tiouy but he could not be angry with Lilly, smiling 
at him as he turned. 

So, somewhat at the expense of truth, he assured. 
Miss Trevena that he was the happiest of men in 
her society. The Jesuits, when they wish to tell 
what they call a " religious lie," state a perverted 
truth, with certain mental reserves that they be- 
lieve venial. Arthur^s reserve in this case meant 
this : " Sombody must be with us, and it may as 
well be you, old Atropos, as anyone else; moreover, 
to stop disagreeable things, I shall continue un- 
ceasing compliments to you." 

Lucy came to Arthur's rescue, and dexterously 
turned the conversation. 

" Is it true, Mr. Tolpedden " (there was some- 
thing so naturally caressing in Lucy's manner that 
no one, however vain, could take it as shown only 
to himself) that your uncle, the lieutenant, has 
taken that civil Coast-Guard man as his factotum V 

" Yes, it's quite true, and a useful fellow he is. 
They get on capitally together. It is delicious to 
see the lieutenant in his hammock, with Bobby in 
his arms, issuing orders for the day. Walker has got 
a story about seeing a blue flame at night at En- 
dellion, which the fishermen say only rises when 
there is metal below." 

" I always feel inclined to believe those super- 
stitions. I know it is very silly of me," said 
Lucy. 

It was delightful all this time to hear Lilly cheer 
on Pepita by calling out her name in a murmur- 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 227 

ing, cooing, encouraging sort of way that was 
sweetest music to Arthur's ear. 

Just then they passed Bottreaux Church, a 
plain building with a square tower, a little way off 
the road, and only a field or so from the precipice 
of Willapark Point, and the abyss called the Black 
Pit. 

" Did you ever hear Mr. Hawker's lines on the 
Silent Tower?" asked Arthur of Miss Trevena. 

" Oh ! he is such a dreadful High Churchman. 
(Logic, thou art unknown to women.) Long- 
fellow is the only poet I care about, and Tenny- 
son — sweet Tennyson I" 

" For my own part, for manly vigour, variety of 
invention, I prefer Browning ; but he is so obscure 
and thorny, and wants the finish and harmony of 
the Laureate." 

"Oh! do repeat those beautiful lines of Mr. 
Hawker^s, about Forrabury Tower ; I am so fond of 
them," said Lucy piteously, leaning forward be- 
tween the speakers. 

Who could resist that pretty supplicant. 

Arthur launched boldly into the fine ballad, 
which, indeed, well deserves to be remembered. 

" The ship rode down, with courses free, 
The daughter of a distant sea ; 
Her sheet was loose, her anchor stored, 
The merry Bottreaux bells on board. 

* Come to thy God in time I' 
Rung out TintageFs chime. 
^ Youth, manhood, old age past, 
Come to thy God at last !^ 

Q2 



228 OREATHEART. 



tt 



The pilot heard his natiye bells 

Hang on the breeze in fitful swells. 

' Thank God V with reyerent brow he cried, 

( We make the shore with evening's tide.* 

^ Come to thy God in time V 
It was his marriage chime. 
^ Youth, manhood, old age past/ 
His bell must ring at last. 



^* *' Thank God, thou whining knave, on land, 
But thank at sea the steersman's hand,* 
The captain's yoice above the gale ; 
^ Thank the good ship and ready saQ.' 

* Come to thy Grod in time !* 
Sad grew the booming chime. 

* Come to thy God at hist I' 
Boomed he^vy on the blast. 

^^ Up rose that sea, as if it heard 
The mighty master's signal word. 
What thrills the captain's whitening lip ? 
The death groans of his sinking ship. 

^ Come to thy God in time I* 
Swung deep the funeral chime. 

* Grace, mercy, kind^e6S past, 
Come to thy God at last !' 

^^ Still, when the storm of Bottreausc waves 
Is waking in his weedy caves. 
Those bells, that sullen surges hide. 
Peal their deep tones beneath the tide. 

^ Come to thy God in time !' 
Thus saith the ocean chime. 
Storm, biUow, whirlwind past, 
'. gome to thy God at last!'" 



•A 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 229 

" Oh 1 it is beautiful 1 — so full of deep feeling ; 
the legend never should be touched again," said 
Lucy, clapping her little hands. 

^* It has some eloquent touches," said Miss Tre- 
vena, with a severity of judgment peculiar to that 
lady. 

It was a glorious November morning, the frost 
lay still in rough white bloom on the road-side grass, 
wherever the shadows still remained. In the sun- 
shine the frosted dew sparkled with trembling and 
melting jewelry. The cloud shadows ran before 
them, as if in frolic, as they drove on. 

The road was nearly parallel to the sea, and on 
the J^leak headlands the sun and shadow lay in their 
old harmony. The great ocean itself, all in a grey 
glitter, seemed breathing softly in its sleep ; here 
and there only a white feathered wave broke its 
tranquillity ; love, with its subtle alchemy, invest- 
ed with a new beauty every object upon which 
Arthur's eye rested. 

" Don't you find it very much pleasanter and 
quieter at the Kectory, Lucy," said Miss Tre- 
vena, with a judicial air, " now those noisy crej^- 
tures are gone home for the vacation f 

The noisy creatures were Mr, Tregellas's three 
pupils. 

" Well, we art quieter ; but still we rather miss 
them. Mr. Lucas is so full of spirits, Mr. Mac-* 
lean is so clever, and Mr. Fitzhugh's such a good 
talker." 

" Well, there's no accounting for taste — by-the- 



230 GBEATHEABT. 

bye, Mr. Tolpedden, they tell me that the corpora- 
tion of Boscastle have bought one of your father's 
fields in the cliff, to erect a watch-house for the 
men who give notice of the pilchards' coming. Is 
this so?" 

*^ My father never consults me on business. I 
have not heard anything of it. It sounds a foolish 
business. A man can surely stand on the cliff 
and wave a bush to guide fishing-boats without 
having a house built for him." 

" Why, I declare if there isn't that boy of Mor- 
dred's riding after us," said Arthur, turning and 
looking back. 

^ So it is," said Miss Trevena, sharply. " I sup- 
pose he has got some medicine to bring to Port- 
neweth — idle little monkey ! — there isn't a worse 
boy in the whole country — why didn't he ask us 
to take it ? — ^but there, those boys, they're all alike. 
Do you know, I actually caught him the other day 
pulling feathers out of one of our Guinea fowls." 

" Isn't it a beautiful drive t" said Lucy, to Miss 
Trevena, whose cloak she adjusted, for the hood 
bad blown aside. 

"Yes; but I ought to be at home — nothing 
goes on without me ; there's that Emily, a mere 
cipher, and if the house was to bum down, Mr. 
Trevena would do nothing — he is so unpractical ; 
as for that foolish charge, it has ruined him with 
the bishop, I feel sure." 

"Do you see much of the Wavertons now?" 
said Arthur, maliciously. 



THE DRIVE TO POETNEWETH. 231 

" No ; but they are making St. Tudy's, I believe, 
quite a popish place, with their .crosses, paintings, 
and nonsense — they're quite rude to me, and so 
ungrateful to John." 

" Not dear little Milly f " said Lucy, piteously. 

*'Ohl she's a little a£Fectionate foolish thing 
enough ; but the other sisters are abominably rude 
and ungrateful, after John almost saving their 
brother's life, too — but it is like all the world — 
they're all alike." 

The poor world gets a good many of these 
rubs— but it moves on. 

They were now approaching Portneweth. The 
road took a sudden turn to the left, and the little 
bay was visible below, in all its beauty. As they 
drove fast down the hill towards the village, a 
small sailing-boat suddenly came skimming towards 
the shore. All at once down went the sail, and 
out leaped Hewer on to the sand, his sketch-book 
and moist colour-box under his arm. 

Arthur shouted. Up he ran to them. He 
doffed his grey wide-awake to the ladies, and shook 
Arthur warmly by the hand. 

"Why, how's this!" he said. "Fisher told us 
you weren't coming till three o'clock, and now it's 
only one. Well, we are glad to see you, never- 
theless. I've been out sketching the Black Fit 
ever since nine o'clock — oh 1 we work hard, ladies, 
we men of colour — ^yes, we do." 

"Oh! let us see the sketch, Mr. Hewer," 
said Lucy ; " I do so love painting." 



232 GBEATHEABT. 

Fisher produced the sketch, " a mere wash in,'' 
he called it. It was spirited, with a free ran of 
sea -round, bleak, wet rocks, yeastj with froth, and 
a red spar floating to the silty beach, rainbow- 
coloured, with bubbly, sparkling spray. " Wants 
harmony and depth, a red-legged chough or so to 
carry the warm colour through." 

" Oh I I think it is perfect," said Lucy. 

By this time the ladies had alighted at the 
" Boscawen Arms," and from thence they walked 
to Fisher's and Dodgeson's lodgings, at a farmer^s 
house, just outside the village. They found 
Dodgeson, gaunt and quaint as ever, drawing a 
book illustration on a block of whitened box-wood. 
His model, an old fisherman, sat before him, stiff, 
and ruefully uncomfortable, in a new purple jersey, 
that fitted tight as a coat of mail. Fisher was stand- 
ing at an immense easel, painting a picture of 
" Dr. Johnson doing penance in the market-place." 
His palette, gay with a ring of brilliant crimsons, 
indigoes, and emerald greens, was on his thumb, 
which also retained a sheaf of brushes. The room 
was hung with sketches, caricatures in charcoal, 
and was. pleasantly littered with half-open port- 
folios, books of costume, newspapers, proofs, wood- 
blocks, tin tubes of colour, and bottles of oil and 
soapy-looking medium. Dodgeson had on a red 
fez, and Fisher a black Andalusian turban cap. 

They were delighted to see Arthur and his 
party. 

"There, old boy," said Dodgeson, paying and 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 233 

dismissing the model, '^now cut your lucky ; mind, 
we shall want you to-morrow, same hour. Now, 
then, ladies, make yourselves comfortable, while 
we clear the place, and get the lunch ready. Mrs. 
Polglase, please to come and lay the cloth, quick 
and bring the chops, and a gridiron." 

The room was soon cleared ; to work went 
the three men at cooking, all the time laughing, 
talking, and bantering, like giant-children, and 
pleasant, clever, good-natured, happy-go-lucky 
fellows as they were. 

" We're off to-morrow, you know," said Fisher, 
as he scraped his palette clean, apologizing to the 
ladies all the time, ^^ so I am so glad youVe come. 
Babylon calls to us — St. John's Wood beckons us 
—we must away." 

"Hear a solo on the viol-di-gambo, *Oome 
little airy spirit.' Mr. Fisher will oblige," said 
Dodgeson, with a grim smile, as he folded a block 
in thin blue paper, and stroked his beard. 

"Hookem was here an hour ago to wish us 
good-bye," said Hewer ; " he is off, too, to-morrow 
— perhaps we shall go together. Can't you fancy 
him. Miss Tregellas, conducting the removal of 
the luggage-waggons, like Sir Thomas Moore lead- 
ing the retreat to Corunna ?" 

Lucy laughed, and asked if they would be 
sorry to leave Portneweth. 

" Shan't we I" said Dodgeson, cleverly tossing a 
half-done chop on the gridiron. "Why, it's a 
regular little marine paradise, and we pull together 



234 OREATH£ABT. 

very welL Sach prawns, such lobsters, such 
sketching sach groaps of fishermen P 

" We had a great lark the other day, Tolpedden," 
said Fisher. ^^ There was an inundation in the 
High Street here— we were flooded — all afloat — ^had 
to make a raft to stand on and paint — ^half our 
traps drifted down the village — canvasses brought 
in from the post-office— oil bottles recovered at 
the * Boscawen Arms' — ^boys bringing in recovered 
property from the Crockerton Koad. That old 
fellow you saw is our factotum — ^goes messages, sits 
for his head, chops wood, rows, gets us prawns and 
haddock, hires us horses, takes us down mines. 
Hookem recommended him to us, and we find him 
a first-rate fellow. Now then, you duffer, don't 
you see you're burning that chop ? Hewer, B. A., 
cut Miss Tregellas some bread. Miss Trevena, let 
me offer you this seat near the fire." 

While the lunch was taking place, with much 
pleasant talk and joking, Bradbrain's emissary had 
reached the "Boscawen Arms." It suddenly 
entered into Dick's ill-conditioned mind that it 
would spoil all his day, and his chance of diniier 
at an aunt's who lived at Portneweth, if he hurried 
back to give Pepita the bolus at St. Petrock's. He 
had given his message to Mr. Tolpedden, and if 
he waited now, and saw them off, and then at the 
last moment gave the bolus, he should be free for 
an hour or two, and master would be as wise as 
ever. 

In about an hour Fisher came running to the 



THE DRIVE TO POETNEWETH. 235 

inn to order the horse to be put to. Dick helped 
the Qstler to do this, and followed the carriage out 
of the stables to the front door. As the ladies 
were being helped into the carriage^ and the ostler 
was being paid, Dick, who had been playing with 
Pepita's bit, suddenly drew out the square of bread 
and offered it to her unobserved. She took it quietly 
from the well-known hand ; one gulp, and it was 
gone. Then Dick, basket on arm, sauntered 
away — his work was done. 

"What are you idling about for, boyf* said 
Miss Trevena, sharply. 

" If you please, ma'am, Tve come with medi- 
cine, and IVe got to wait for some fish at Mrs, 
Polglase's." 

"Is Bradbrain's mare quiet in harness!" said 
Dodgeson, patting Pepita, who rather winced under 
his hand — ^it was unusual in her. 

" Quiet as a lamb. Gently, gently, old girl," 
said Arthur. "She knows she's going home. 
Miss Trevena, Miss Tregellas, are you all right t 
Good-bye, old fellows, take care of yourselves. I 
shall see you some day in London." 

** Good-bye — remember Abbey Koad." 

" Good-bye." 

" Have you got the prawns under the seat f " 

" Yes, thank you." 

" Good-bye — addio /" 

The men waved their caps, the ladies their 
hands, and off sprang Pepita at a somewhat fierce 
trot 



236 OBEATHBART. 

" How can you carry a loaded pistol t" said 
Lucy, now seated by Arthur's side. ^* Isn't it 
dangerous?" 

"Ohl it's dreadful to think of, isn't it!" said 
Miss Trevena. 

" I always carry a revolver, Miss Trevena, when 
I go to the coast, in case I should get a shot at a 
chough — it's such good practice." 

"It's very cruel, sir," said Lucy; "and you 
ought to be ashamed of it." 

By this time Pepita's pace had so quickened 
that it had almost grown to a canter. 

" How fast we are going — it seems quite dan- 
gerous," said Miss Trevena, looking forward in 
alarm. 

" I do really think there is something the matter, 
Mr. Tolpedden," said Lucy, as Pepita set his ears 
back, and snorting, struck out at a tremendous 
pace down hill. 

Arthur was quite calm. 

" Don't be alarmed," he said. 

" I think the throat lash presses on her, or the 
saddle galls her. Let us pull her up, and get 
down and alter it." 

" Oh ! pray don't, we shall all be killed 1 — don't 
get down 1" cried Miss Trevena, turning very pale, 
but still stem. 

"No, I see it is not safe — indeed it is not 
safe," said Lucy, hiding her face for a moment 
with her hands. " She is going faster now." 

"It is nothing. I'll stop her easily," said Ar- 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 237 

thuT ; " she is only frightened at something. See 
how wet her skin is, and how she trembles." 

Planting his feet firmly against the foot-board; and 
twisting the reins round his strong hands, Arthur 
dragged at the mare's mouth, till his grip relaxed 
from sheer exhaustion. But it was of no more 
avail than if he had set his strength against an 
express train ; the mare, her eyes swimming red 
with feverish fear, froth breaking from her nos- 
trils, and steam rising from her coat, kicked, 
plunged, and the next moment broke into a mad- 
dened gallop, furious, and irrestrainable, as if a 
thousand howling wolves were behind her. 

The speed, that tossed the carriage from side to 
side, was dangerous enough on the level, but 
imminent peril was before them, for at a turn of 
the road half a«mile off a deep ditch yawned on 
each side, and two blocks of granite narrowed the 
passage. There, if Fepita's speed did not slacken, 
certain death awaited them, in one tremendous 
crash, that would destroy all three as if a huge 
cannon-ball had been met full butt. 

Miss Trevena screamed, and would instantly 
have frantically leaped out, had not Lucy held her 
down with resolute despair. 

" We are really in danger?" she whispered to 
Arthur. 

" Yes, dearest," was the impassioned answer. 
Imminent danger seemed to excuse that phrase. ^^I 
cannot hold her in now — it is all over. Stop !" he 
cried, a sudden thought flashing in an instant 



238 OBEATHEABT. 

through his brain, " this may serve us," and he 
drew his revolver from his belt. 

Miss Trevena was too much paralyzed by fear 
to be roused even by this. Lucy was a brave girl ; 
she saw that Arthur kept his head, and she had 
entire confidence in him. She only turned away 
her face, and clung towards him, still retaining her 
grasp of the terrified woman who sat beside her. 
Arthur's lips were pressed close, as if they were 
steel; he cocked the revolver and spoke hur- 
riedly, 

" For God's sake hold fast, Lucy, when I fire, 
and hold that mad woman firm, too, for we shall 
have a spill for it even now. If I can only shoot 
the mare through the brain, I'll drop her before she 
smashes us against those stones. God preserve 
you, dearest I I don't care for myself. When I 
say nowy hold firm 1" 

Lucy made no reply, but pressed his arm with 
a soft pressure. There was the eloquence of a 
thousand orators in it. 

"Now I" 

Arthur fired ; there was a thin jet of fire, the 
bullet cut through Pepita's left ear. Then came 
a gush of blood, the mare slackened her speed for 
a moment, shook her head, and then burst into a 
gallop ten times more frenzied than before. 

Quick as thought, Arthur pulled again, with a 
sure and electric aim. The bullet of this second 
barrel entered just under Pepita's right eye, for it 
was fired slantingly. The mare gave one desperate 



THE DRIVE TO PORTNEWETH. 239 

leap forwards, then fell on her knees, and dropped 
dead in the road, as suddenly as if struck by 
lightning, so sure had been the aim. 

The tremendous shock, so instantaneous and 
convulsive, upset the chaise, and Arthur and the 
two ladies were dashed insensible to the ground. 



Lucy was the first to recover. Giddy and half- 
stunned, she rose on her knees and looked around 
her. There was Arthur, pale and insensible, his 
face smeared with blood from a wound in his right 
temple, lying across the dead mare, the reins still 
firmly twisted round his left hand, the pistol still 
clutched in his right. 

"He is dead I — great God of Heaven, he is 
dead !" she cried, as, throwing herself on her knees, 
she felt to see if his heart still beat. 

It beat only faintly, but still it beat ; thank God 
for that I With trembling haste she loosened his 
necktie, lifted his head, and staunched the wound 
on his brow with her handkerchief. At that mo- 
ment Miss Trevena staggered slowly to her feet ; 
she screamed when she saw Arthur still in- 
sensible. 

" Oh I he is dead I — he is dead !" cried Miss 
Trevena, and then groaned like a banshee, helpless 
and useless in her terror. 

"No, no, he is not dead I — ^he is not dead!" 
gasped Lucy, who retained her self-possession ; 
" run, run to that cottage we passed half a mile 



240 OREATHEABT. 

back, and bring help, while I bathe his face with 
some water from that pool by the mile-stone — 
quick, quick, if you have any heart, quick! — every 
moment is worth hours — he will die for want of 

help r 

Away sped Miss Trevena, while Lucy flew to 
the little pool by the great granite block, and 
scooping off the green scum, filled Arthur^s felt 
hat with water ; she then sprinkled his face, 
moistened his hands, and chafed his wrists, like an 
angel of love and mercy as she was. 

Oh ! the mortal agony of that moment, as she 
bent over that pale face, from which life seemed so 
fast ebbing. 

Suddenly the eyelids slowly lifted; the eyes 
looked forth listless, but smiling ; they were like 
those of a person who has awoke from some ghastly 
struggle with a nightmare. With a look of in- 
effable tenderness and gratitude, such as a dying 
soldier may give when a vision of home and lov! 
rises before him in his last delirium, he put his hand 
in hers, tried to press it, and gasped out the words, 

"Dearest, how I love — thank you — God have 
mercy — send to — ^" then he fell back again in a 
swoon. 

In the meantime. Miss Trevena — ^her hair down 
and bonnet torn off, while scuttling towards the 
distant cottage — had been suddenly confronted at 
a turn of the road by a burly gentleman, in a 
Reaming white waistcoat, who was trotting along 
on a sturdy cob. 



CAPTAIN SANDOE. 241 

* 

"Why, good heavens, Miss Trevena, is it you? 
— what is the matter t" was his exclamation as he 
pulled up his horse. 

It was Mr. Hookem. 

"Oh, for gracious heavens," she cried, "do 
gallop to that next cottage, my dear Mr. Hookem, 
and get help. Fm so faint. We've all been thrown 
by that dreadful horse, and young Arthur Tol- 
pedden's almost killed — if he isn't dead already." 

In a moment Hookem, without discussing the 
matter, had struck across the fields to the distant 
cottage, and in ten minutes more Arthur was 
lying on the miner's bed, while Hookem was gallop- 
ing to St. Petrock's for the doctor. 



CHAPTER XV. 

CAPTAIN SANDOE. 

A FEW days only after the accident, it was 
reported generally in the neighbourhood of 
St. Petrock's, St. Tud/s, St. Nectan's, and Port- 
neweth ; indeed, the rumour soon ran as far as 
Bodmin one way, and Port Isaac the other, that 
copper had been discovered in an old working in the 
field that Mr. Mordred had bought of the Corpora- 
tion of St. Petrock's, and which Mr. Tolpedden of 
Tolpedden had recently surrendered to them, to 
prevent incurring the expense of a Chancery suit, 
with which he had been threatened. 

VOL. II. R 



242 GBEATHEART. 

In a troglodyte country like Cornwall, where 
thousands of men spend half their lives under- 
ground searching for metals, such rumours become 
matters of engrossing interest, both in the miner's 
cottage and the nobleman's drawing-room. Gangs 
of miners all over the north of Cornwall could have 
been heard discussing the new topic daily as they 
walked home from their mines. The fishermen dis- 
cussed it as they set their lobster pots, or hauled at 
their nets; the small farmers and shopkeepers 
were eager to get shares in the new speculation; the 
gentry were anxious to obtain reliable reports of 
the state of the lode. 

The story set on foot by Mr. Mordred was, that 
the metal had be^n discovered by accident while 
sinking the foundation of a "hewer^* signal-station. 
Already, with the subtle promptitude of his nature, 
he had purchased the machinery and fittings of a 
disused mine near Port Isaac, the Wheal Busy, 
and had issued a glowing prospectus of the new 
undertaking, which he had christened the Wheal 
Fortune. 

The Tolpeddens had received the news with 
anger and distrust. They suspected some trick, 
but yet they doubted the intelligence. Cornish 
by descent, they had learned to mistrust the san- 
guine anticipations of mining speculators, and the 
records of the family bore no very favourable 
testimony to the Endellion mine, that had been as 
a quicksand to swallow thousands after thousands, 
till the death of Arthur^s grandfather stopped the 



CAPTAIN SANDOE. 243 

reckless experiments. "It is human errare," as 
Lucas used to say ; and Mr. Tolpedden, although 
of a wide and generous nature, was not sorry to 
see a mischievous scoundrel like the banker of St. 
Petrock's birdlimed by such speculations. 

The day week of the accident reported in our 
last chapter, two waggons, laden with huge rusty 
cog-wheels, whipsidery pulleys, disjointed fragments 
of steam-engines, and miners' gads and crowbars, 
and drawn by four strong horses each, drew up 
about noon at the door of the " Three Choughs," at 
Boscastle, the scene of Lucas's memorable brew- 
ing of the fatal Kumfustian. 

The drivers and their captain, a short, weazly 
man, in a brown great-coat, who was livid with cold, 
leaped down to take a glass together. 

The weazly man was our old friend Sampy 
Sandoe, now Captain Sandoe of the Wheal Fortune 
Mine, a man of authority, and one "who knew tin." 

" Tes cold on the downses, my dear," said Titus, 
one of the drivers, to the ostler, beating him- 
self under the arms, as if in self-mortification, 
'f How d/e f adgy, comraad I" 

" Bravely — ^bravely, thankee. What shall I get 
ye, gentlemen ?" 

" Rum," said Sampy, " hot with — 'tis a brave 
tidy stap we've come, Chrestian friends — and 
lemon, comraad. We've come in unity — ^blessed 
unity 1 Hallelooliah I And we're going to open 
a champion lode — pure copper from grass to 
centre, and all found by the blessed rod." 

r2 



244 6BEATHEABT. 

There was a ynlgar bragging exultation about 
Sampj that lent such vigour to his natiirally loud 
voice, that it brought out Mr. Paul, the landlord, 
and a friend, who were discussing a jug of spiced 
ale in the best parlour. The friend proved to be 
Walker, the lieutenant's /acto^um. 

"Why, hallo! Sampy, come in,** said Mr. Paul, 
*^ come in, gentlemen ; here's a good fire here. Loar, 
Jimmeny 1 whatever have 'ee got heer ? — stuff for 
the new mine — eh f The roads are slotteiy." 

In tumbled the men, led by Sampy. 

" How's young Mister Tolpedden t" said Sampy. 
"The Lord was very good in presarving hem. 
His lot fell on stony ground ; but he's a brave lad, 
and I owe him thanks for the day I fell among 
the Phelestines at St. Tudy's. Have they brought 
hem hum from St. Anne's Church town! Oh! 
dear, dear ! Well, that was an accident, and he 
shut en, too, bravely in the head, wasn't ut I" 

" Here's a gentleman as knows more about it 
than I do," said the landlord presenting Walker^ 
as if he was a candidate for election. 

" He was 'nation bad," said Walker modestly, 
and plunging his hands in his waistcoat pockets, 
" when they brought him home first, and squire 
and my master were half mad about it ; but when 
Mr. Bradbrain came to look he only found his left 
shoulder put out, and a deep cut in his temple; he's 
getting round now nicely, thankee ; he'll soon be 
on deck again." 

" Well, well," said Sampy, " I am glad of that, 



CAPTAIN 8AND0B. 245 

for he was a raddy lad, and of a fair countenance, 
and simly to me, like David, when he went out 
against Goliath. Might I ask the favour, Mr. 
Paul, of a little crumb of cheese for me and my 
mates?" 

The bread and cheese brought, with some rum 
and a smoking jug of hot water, the men drew 
closer to the fire. 

^^ So this is a good strong lode, and no horse in 
it, eh ?" said the landlord, incredulously, and with 
a smile at Walker. ^^I should like to see the 
gossan. I've lived long enough to hear of a good 
many lodes before this one, but there was always 
a cross course, or heave, or some traade, to suck up 
the shareholders' money, and so the thing tails off. 
It's an odd thing to me you men with the divining 
rods don't find something good for yourself. It's 
very good of them, isn't it, Mr. Walker, as they 
makes other people rich and yet remains poor 
themselves — very self-denying, ain't it? What I 
want to see is a Devon Great Consols again, with 
a three mile lode. There's some go in that, eh, 
Mr. Walker?" 

" They do say," said Walker, sullenly, ** that it 
wasn't all above-board about the purchase — ^that 
some land-shark got information about the copper, 
and set old Mordred to buy it /or the Corporation, 
and then turn it over to himself. If so, I say he's 
one of those pirates that hoist Bible and Crown till 
they have the grappling irons fixed, and then up 
goes the jolly Soger, with the skull and cross*bones." 



246 GBEATHEABT. 

"There's men,** said Sampj, **who go abont 
night and day sowing tares, which is evil reports ; 
they're like the foxes with fire-brands which 
Sampson sent among the standing com. They're 
no good — ^they'll be cast out, they will. They're 
going the wrong road, and they never won't find the 
right. They're down the wrong shaft, and they 
cast np only mire and dirt, like troubled water !" 

" Why, they played that trick, you know," said the 
landlord, "to Mr. Vivian, at the Ding Dong, and it 
was done also, you know, at the Wheal Betsy!" 

"Done here or done there — ^larboard tack or 
starboard tack — ^it's cheating," said Walker, angrily, 
" and next door to thieving. The man who'd do 
that would reb his own father ; and if I could lay 
my hands on him ^ 

" Augh ! skid the wheel 1" cried one of the 
drivers, who had long been chafing at the bantering 
tone of the landlord and his friend, feeling his 
dignity hurt, and the reputation of the new mine 
assailed. *^ There's no cheating in our mine," he 
said, beating his glass on the table till the rum and 
water splashed over, " and I'm ready to fight for 
it if any one wants to make a por about it — come!" 

" Set down," said Sampy, but the man was un- 
appeasable. 

" I won't hear them words," he said. " He's the 
worse for lying that says the Great Wheal Fortune 
won't hold up her head with Cook's Kitchen, Pol- 
berro, or any of them. If it wasn't so, don't 'ee see, 
I wouldn't lift a gad, or waste powder in it, for I 



CAPTAIN SANDOE. 247 

was brought up at the Bottalac, and I know tin as 
well as any man from here to the Mount. If I 
don't know a lode, captain, what did you take me 
on tribute for f 

Titus Teague was a good specimen of the 
narrow-minded partisan — ^his soul in arms, and 
eager for the fray I He had been drinking on the 
road, and was decidedly quah*elsome. 

Walker said nothing, but poked the fire. 

*^ The lode has made a shift," said Titus, malici- 
ously. ^^ Where's the man now as dare say the 
Wheal Fortune's a plant, and our promoter on'y 
digging a hole to catch Tim Doodle's money ?" 

The man was a bully, and thought he had in^ 
timidated the irascible Walker. 

" It's a blessed thing for brethren to dwell to- 
gether in unity!" said Sampy. "Take another 
glass of rum, Tity ?" 

" Somebody's been and rubbed Tity's hair wrong 
way I" said Zacky, another of the men ; at which 
all the rest laughed, and even Sampy joined in his 
rueful manner. 

"It's better to say nothing agin the Wheal 
Fortune when Titus cuts up rough," said another 
of Tity's friends, with a glance of contempt at 
Walker. 

This fired Walker, and up he leaped with clenched 
fists. 

" Lookee here," he said, going up to Titus, who 
turned blood red, pushed back his chair, and began 
to gird up his loins too, " I say the whole affair is 



248 OBEATHEABT. 

a d — cheat, and that old Mordred swindled my 
master^s brother out of it somehow or other; and if 
be wasn't a rogue he'd give it back ; no, I don't 
care a brass-pin. for you, or any of your gang; a 
word more, and I'll drop you on the planching." 

Up dashed all the miners like madmen ; down 
tumbled the chairs. 

^* Hit hem 1" " Fcibtch un through the dumes" 
(doors). "Knock his head off." "Give it him 
from the shoulder," they roared. 

Down went the table, the jug, and all the tum- 
blers, in a tremendous crash, as the two cx>m- 
batants grappled, after several blows as if from 
steam-hammers. 

" Ohrestion brethren, no fitun," cried Sampy, at 
a prudent distance from the combatants. 

" Police 1 police !" cried the landlord, tearing at 
the bell to summon the waiter. "They'll break 
everything. There's seven shillings gone already ! 
Police 1 police !" 

In less than five minutes. Walker, after inflict- 
ing considerable injury, and many contusions on 
Titus Teague, the doughty champion of the Great 
Wheal Fortune, was beaten, and jostled into the 
road, overpowered by numbers. 

"Now," said Titus, waving his ensanguined 
fists, "zackly so, who'll stand up now and say 
the Wheal Fortune's a plant. Thack man mistook 
his comraads, Captain Sandoe, didn't he, eh?" 

" Hallelooliah I" intoned Sampy. 

There was no other reply to Titus than that 



MR. GREATHEA.RT. 249 

which Mr. Dymock obtained when he rode in and 
challenged traitors, recusant Frenchmen, and Jaco- 
bites, at the Queen's coronation ; so the landlord 
groaned, took a comforting nip of sherry and 
bitters, and drank success to the Great Wheal 
Fortune, 



CHAPTER XVI. 

MR. GREATHEART. 

A FORTNIGHT after the accident Arthur 
was all but recovered. Though not able to 
walk far, he could ride out a short distance for 
exercise, and could paint, and read as usual, though 
still too weak to carry his gun, or to venture up to 
Oxford for his matriculation. 

So much better was he on the Wednesday week, 
that the Tregellases had consented, at Mr. Tolped- 
den's request, to let their children join the lieu- 
tenant's family on that day, to celebrate Bobby's 
birthday. 

The lieutenant, about eleven o'clock, an hour 
before the children had arrived, might have been 
found taking his morning promenade down the 
whole front of his three ground-floor rooms, and 
making observations from the window at any .^^craft" 
in the offing ; in other words, watching any passing 
cart or pedestrian, while he gave orders to Walker 



250 GBEATHEART. 

about any planting or proning that the garden that 
day needed. 

Mr.Tolpedden, over whom hung a deep gloom, the 
canses of which none of his family could explain, 
was hard at work in his study ; while Arthur was 
busy copying a family portrait, supposed to be by 
Van Loo, for a sketch of which Lucy Tregellas 
had expressed a wish. 

Presently the Tregellas children arrived, full of 
inquiries for Arthur from their father and mother, 
who, indeed, had never allowed a day to pass since 
the accident without sending over to inquire. 

The children were soon in full force out in the 
paddock, under escort of little Susan and Kitty, good 
old Liddy being Generalissimo. Their amusements 
consisted in taking rides by turns on Nettle, the 
little New Forest pony that Arthur had purchased 
at St. Tud/s Fair. But even wrangling for turns, 
pulling horse hairs out of Nettle's tail, falling off, and 
trotting grow monotonous; still Arthur's appear- 
ance gave these pleasures a fresh relish, for he took 
the children one by one before him on the saddle, 
and galloped them between the paddock and the 
orchard. 

Jack, sturdy, and rather fond of power, was a 
sort of colonel of the quieter children. Ned he 
ordered to and fro as his aide-de-camp* Kate 
obeyed the young despot under protest, Herbert and 
Leonard yielded to him rather from shyness than 
from goodwill, Clara and Bertha did as Kate did, 
because she was their hostess, and because they 



MB. GREATHEART. 251 

were allowed to carry about Billy, the lieutenant's 
pet terrier, and hug him till he was delightfully 
miserable, and this made them forget all Jack's 
abuses of power. 

While Kitty and Susan, very neat in their lilac 
prints, wore exchanging confidences, and discuss- 
ing the marked attentions shown by Thomas, Mr. 
Tolpedden's handsome coachman, to Fanny, the 
buxom housemaid, old Liddy was superintending 
the riding with anxiety and deUght, not unmixed 
with terror. She looked so comely and respect^ 
able in her large frilled, old-fashioned white 
cap, and grey ribbons, her clean white apron, 
and snuff-coloured, almost quakerly dress. So 
fond of children, and so devoted to her 
duties, that the incessant vexations and anxieties 
that would have been intolerable to a mere hire- 
ling, were to that good old body a labour of love, 
she was so single-hearted and faithful, that she 
had no greater pleasure than serving the family* 
All thoughts of self, or an independent home, had 
long since passed from her mind. When she 
wasn't watching the children, or directing the 
under-servants, she was darning; and when not 
darning, she was preserving. 

Every moment she uttered a faint scream, or 
an exclamation of warning, as some urchin 
rolled off laughing, or shrieked as Arthur jolted 
them into a faster trot. Master Jack, showing 
off before the visitors, was less obedient than 
usual. 



252 GREATHEABT. 

** Master John, don't tease Master Ned. — Oh I 
Mr. Arthur, pray don't go so fast! — ^Miss Clara, 
hold fast, or you'll be off. — Oh! pray don't let 
Miss Bobby drop ! — ^Master Herbert, don't go so 
near Nettle's legs. — ^Miss Bertha, don't let Billy 
bite that beautiful new frock." 

How the children enjoyed those scampering 
gallops over the dead leaves, and the races round 
the grey-mossed apple trees, and how, when their 
scarfs and ribbons fluttered out, they laughed 
and frolicked, happy as angels; while Billy, his 
hair all in a fuz with the wind, barked and 
scampered after them ; his brown Qyes laughing, 
as he ran and shared the fun. 

How, too (fickle as all mobs are), they left Ar- 
thur and Nettle, when Mrs. Tolpedden came trip- 
ping down the garden towards them, and took and 
tossed Bobby in her arms, while they surrounded 
her and pulled at her gown, and clapped their 
hands, and a moment after were all intent — ^the 
boys at leap-frog, and the girls at hide-and-seek 
— ^Liddy being arbitrator for them all. 

*^Why, Arthur, you look quite yourself this 
morning," said Mrs. Tolpedden, tangling her hand 
in her fondling innocent way in Nettle's mane as 
Arthur drew him up by her side. You'll soon be 
well now, Mr. Bradbrain says." 

" Well, my dear aunt, I do think I am nearly 
right again ; it was a nasty spill, but we pulled 
through, thank God. Now, I want you to put on 
your bonnet, and let me drive you to St. Petrock's 



MR. GREATHEART. 253 

to fetch Miss Tregellas. The children brought 
word that she would be ready by half-past twelve, 
and we can get back for luncheon." 

" I shall enjoy a drive, Arthur ; and we'll take 
Bobby. I must run now and tell Nel Tm going. 
But what does Fanny want I" 

Fanny, with a letter in her hand, came 
racing down the plantation that joined the two 
premises. 

" A letter for you, sir, from Mr. Mordred.'' 

"Mr. Mordred?" said Arthur, with surprise; 
" why, what the dickens does that brute of a fellow 
want;ithmer 

He tore open the letter spitefully, and read 
aloud, 

" Dear Mr. Tolpedden, 

^^ Unjustly as I have been treated by 
your father, and proud and unchristian as his con- 
duct has always been to me, even before our last 
most unpleasant interview, I cannot help writing, 
in justice to my partner, to assure you that he has 
not in any way participated in those business ar- 
rangements that I have been compelled to make, 
and which, so unexpectedly to myself, have led to 
profit. I, and I alone, have been the motive 
power in the speculations that a kind and over- 
ruling Providence has so graciously permitted to 
become successful. I write this without Mr. 
Bradbrain's knowledge ; in mere justice to a very 
clever and well-meaning young man, and for fear 



254 GREATHEABT. 

that he might suffer from the prejadice so un- 
justly heaped by your family upon 

" Yours ever faithfully, 

" Samuel Mordred. 

" Arthur Tolpedden, Esq.'' 

When Arthur had torn the hypocritical letter 
into bits, and tossed them down the wind, he looked 
up, and when he had looked up, to his surprise, 
bright tears of excitement had risen into his aunt's 
eyes. 

•* No," she said, " I will never believe that Mr. 
Bradbrain has- participated in any deceptions 
practised against us, even if there have been any." 

" Well, I do think myself there has been cheat- 
ing somewhere," said Arthur, surprised for a 
moment at his aunt's eagerness to vindicate the 
young doctor. 

While Mrs. Tolpedden ran to get ready for the 
drive, order dinner, and see if her husband would 
accompany them, Arthur strolled to the lawn, 
where Liddy was seated at the foot of a beech-tree. 
The old family nurse had all the children round 
her, and was telling them how she had been present 
when the Prince Begent first came to Brighton, 
where Jack's grandfather was then staying. From 
Lidd^s point of view the whole ceremonial re- 
volved round Mr. Tolpedden. In her simple and 
religious mind, the sight had been one of the most 
gorgeous ever witnessed by human eyes. After 
" Heaven " came " the family " in her creed, and 



MB. GREATHEAHT. 255 

religion and love for her master both entered into 
her feelings in connection with this great epoch 
of her life. The only two personages whose out- 
lines were at all clear in the story were the king 
and "master." 

" There," she went on, " was the king, my 
dears, and your grandfather. Miss Kate, and Lord 
Yarmouth — he had red whiskers, I remember; 
and Mr. Brummel, such a fine gentleman !" 

"What did grandpapa do?" said irrepressible 
Jack, but was silenced by universal consent. 

" And then all the volunteers marched past the 
king, and your grandpapa and they reminded me 
of the children of Israel going out to battle ; and 
as for the people, they were so thick, my dears, 
that you might really have walked on their heads 
for whole streets together. Master Ned, and it 
reminded me for all the world of the day of 
judgment, for I don't think there were ever so many 
souls collected before in one place; and there 
were generals, bishops, soldiers, and brass bands, 
and everything grand and splendid ; and the king 
and your grandfather. Master John, were in the 
very middle of it all, and it brought the tears into 
my eyes, it did, to see them, as I thought, where 
will half these people be twenty years hence ? And 
then I swooned away with the heat, for I was but 
a girl then, and they took me home, and I remem- 
ber they brought me to with cherry-brandy — by 
the same token they spoiled a new silver grey 
gown with it, and it was never worth five farthings 



256 GBEATHEART. 

(don't tease, Miss Bobby, Master John), after that ; 
and that's all my story. And now we'll go down 
to the house, and have some cake, and be good 
children, and quiet, because your uncle. Master 
John, is busy with his books." 

And after the cake, Mrs. Tolpedden being 
delayed by some breakage of crockery by Susan, 
who was rather awkward in handling fragile 
things, and by some intricate negotiations with the 
itinerant country butcher, Arthur volunteered to 
amuse the children by putting on an old family 
suit of armour that hung in the hall. 

It was a fine steel suit, and as it had been 
originally made for a young man, it fitted the 
young squire like a glove. He took care to go and 
put it on in a distant room, so that the children 
could not see him till the transformation was fully 
effected, for this increased the enchantment. He 
was good-natured enough, too, to take some pains 
in dressing — ^to stick a long wavy red feather in the 
steel cap, to tie over his left shoulder one of Mrs. 
Tolpedden's crimson scarfs, to sling on an old sword, 
to don his long hunting-boots, and finally, to crown 
all, to paint with Indian ink a huge Don Quixote 
moustachio, that curled, in the braggadocio Spanish 
n^anner, almost up to his eyes, and gave a dash of 
caricature to the whole costume. 

How the children shouted and danced with de- 
light when he strode into the parlour, where they 
were waiting for him with intense expectation I 
John screamed with laughter. Bertha, Clara, and 



MB. GBEATHEABT. 257 

Kate clapped their hands^ and cried " Beautiful I" 
Leonard and Herbert joined the clamour, while 
Bobby helped with inarticulate applause and by 
ecstatic kicking in Susan's arms. 

The children had been reading '^ The Pilgrim's 
Progress/' and their fancy ran just then entirely 
on the quaint allegories of Liddy's favourite book. 

^^ Let iis act the Interpreter's house/' said Jack, 
"Uncle Arthur shall be Greatheart, and Liddy 
must be Christiana." 

It was always must with Johnny. 

" Yes, yes !" cried all the rest. 

« And I'll be Mercy," said Kate. 

« No, I'll be Mercy/' said Clara. 

"Little ladies mustn't quarrel/' said Liddy, 
majestically. 

" I'll be the man with the rake," said Herbert, 
setting to work in that minor character. 

" And Fm the butcher killing the sheep," said 
Jack, seizing a footstool in order to properly sus- 
tain his character. 

" And Liddy must be the Interpreter, and call 
for me/' said Arthur. 

And so Liddy, well up in her part, for she 
knew the book almost by heart, called for her man 
Greatheart, bade him take sword, and helmet, and 
shield, and conduct her daughters to the house 
called Beautiful, where they should rest next. 

Then Arthur, assuming enormous importance, 
led them all in restless procession, singing from the 
book those quaint lines ; 

VOL. H. 8 



258 OBEATHEABT. 

" This place hath been our second stage/^ &c. 

"Now for the fight with the lions^ Arthur; 
kill Mr. Grim — ^Bloody-man," shouted Jack^ 
who had appointed himself prompter-general. 

" Mr. Greatheart is a strong man^ and is not 
afraid of a lion," read Liddy. 

Then all the children pretended to cower back 
as Arthur put on a gruff giant's voice, and cried : 

"This is not their way, neither shall they go 
therein. I am come to back the lions." 

Then Arthur pushed the children back, drew 
his sword, and cried : 

" It is the king's highway that we are in, and 
these women and children shall hold on their way." 

And then he fell to and slashed and cut and 
stabbed, and beat his breast-plate, till, first with a 
downright blow, he pretended to bring Grim on 
his knee, then broke his helmet, lastly cut off 
his arm, and left him for dead on the spot. 

And having thus settled Mr. Bloody-Man, he 
kissed the children all round, tossed Jack into the 
air, caught him, and finally ran off with Bobby on 
his shoulder, chased by all the children, 'who 
screamed and laughed till the old house rang 
again. 

Garrick himself never had such an ovation ; but 
then Garrick's audience was perhaps more critical. 

Just as they all darted out upon the lawn, the 
lieutenant and his wife came up arm-in-arm. 

" Why, Arthur," he said, " what on earth are 
you dressing up in that Tom-fool tin saucepan 



THE GREAT WHEAL FORTUNE. 259 

Stuff for T You're tiring yourself. If you don't 
obey the doctor I shall have to put you in irons." 

" I'm sure it's very good of Arthur taking so 
much trouble to please the children," said his aunt. 

" And, oh ! they have been pleased, ma'am !" 
said Liddy. " Haven't you, children ?" 

The ayes had it, and the vote of thanks was 
carried nem con. 

" If you please, marm, the carriage is ready," 
said Susan, at that moment. 

" I'll be ready in a jiffy/' said Arthur, as he ran 
off. 

" I do believe, Polly," said the lieutenant, ^* that 
Arthur is a little in love with Lucy Tregellas." 

"A little I a great deal, you silly dear," replied 
his wife, laughing, and tapping his frosty red cheek 
with her hand; " of course, and pray how did you 
find out that ?" 

" Never you mind, Polly ; but come and carry 
Bobby a bit — ^you haven't taken so much notice of 
her lately. Oh ! you may pout, but you haven't." 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE GREAT WHEAL FORTUNE. 

THE morning papers abounded with favourable 
notices of the new mine. Lord Rostrevor's 
name was down for fifty shares ; doctors, lawyers, 
clergymen, farmers, shop-keepers, were all eager 

s2 



260 OBEATHEABT. 

for shares in so promising a concern. Already a 
good deal of valuable copper ore had been raised, 
it was reported, from the ends of the old workings. 
The whole county began to be alive to the fact of 
a new and vigorous enterprise having been started, 
backed by the wealthy banker of St. Petrock's, 
and half the gentry of North OornwalL 

Mr. Tregellas had refused to take any shares, 
but the Wavertons had risked some hundreds. 
Miss Trevena, too, was unceasing in her efforts to 
tease and worry her unpractical brother to in- 
duce him to make his fortune. 

Hitherto Mr. Trevena had been obdurate. 

One morning his sister returned from a business 
visit to Messrs. Fox and Shakell, Mr. Mordred's 
lawyers, and instantly charged into the study where 
her brother was sitting reading. 

" What I back already 1" said the amiable man, 
looking up with dishevelled hair from an old folio ; 
"it's not dinner-time yet, is it, Fanny t — I'm 
getting my work done now, because I want to go 
and call on the Wavertons after dinner." 

" I should not go near that man," said Atropos, 
sitting down, and pulling off her black kid gloves 
in a severe way ; " he's going to Home as fast 
as he can, every one but you sees it. There 
isn't one of the lot I'd give a fig for but Milly, 
and she's a poor silly little foolish thing, without 
two ideas. 

" My dear ! my dear !" said Trevena, groaning, 
" don't be so prejudiced — ^you're too hard in your 



THE GBEAT WHEAL FORTUNE. 261 

judgments — we've all faults. And what did Fox 
and Shakell say ?" 

** Say T — why they talked of the Great Wheal 
Fortune of course, and wondered why you didn't 
buy some shares." 

" My dear Fanny, how often I've told you be- 
fore that I don't like to see clergymen mining; 
there's too much gambling in it, it is unhealthy for 
the men, it keeps the children from school, and 
the women from home — there, there, I don't like 
it, Fanny — that ought to be enough; and, be- 
sides, it wouldn't be decent in us to go and take 
shares in a mine that some people say those worthy 
people the Tolpeddens were cheated out of — I 
tell you, mining is all uncertainty and guess." 

" There are your scruples again, John — you seem 
determined never to be rich — always to live in this 
miserable muddle and hugger-mugger." 

*• But, my dear creature ^" 

" Stuff and nonsense with your dear creatures, 
when you won't move a foot to raise me and your- 
self ; you offend the bishops, and do all you 
can to ruin yourself, and expose us to poverty and 
mortifications. Everyone is buying shares — there's 
the Morrisons of St. Advent — there's ^" 

" But there's our church to restore." 

Trevena's mild nature began to waver before 
this fierce onslaught of indignant selfishness.. 
"Nagging" would wear away iron, much more 
a man's weak resolution* 



262 GBEATHEART. 

The assailant saw that the wall was crumbling, 
and she redoubled her fire. 

"Well, and couldn't that waitt — ^where's the 
hurry ? — who wants it done t — ^hasn't it done very 
well for years t Other people let churches wait — 
other people don^t worry themselves with scruples. 
Pray, John, do consider your own interests more 
— if you don't take care of yourself, who is to do 
it, I should like to knowt Your friends, the 
Wavertons, they didn't lose time in getting shares ; 
and if we made money, you know, the church could 
soon be done." 

This was artful of Miss Fanny Trevena. The 
last fort was all but taken ; Mr. Trevena visibly 
wavered, for he turned his head on one side, he 
put on his considering cap, he looked very hard at 
a large red coal that was spitting out at intervals 
violent puffs of gas. 

" There is something in that," he said slowly, 
letting the words drop reluctantly, one by one 
weighing them ; parting from them, in fact, as a 
miser parts from money that he is obliged to pay. 

" Of course there is," said the female tempter, 
more subtly still, and more conciliatingly, as if 
paying respect to the admission ; " of course there 
is, John" — (the John came out so tenderly) — 
" and if the Boscawens or Lord Rostrevor couldn't 
help, we could then do the best part of it ourselves, 
and raise the rest by shilling cards — ^you remem- 
ber, dear, what a turn the Prices got in that 
way." 



THE GREAT WHEAL FORTUNE. 263 

" They certainly did/' 

Poor amiable man, his resistance was melting 
as a snow-man does in a thaw. 

" It is our duty, you know, to get the means of 
being independent, and doing more good — we are 
bound hand and foot with our paltry two hundred 
a year. Why, Lord Rostrevor gives his French 
cook as much as that." 

"Don't say those sort of things, my dear, it 
pains me to hear you say things that even seem 
worldly — why should we envy any one T" 

" Envy a cook, indeed ! — no, I don't ; but I do 
say, John, that the bishops ought to be ashamed of 
themselves, and I have often heard you say so. But 
only think if we had £200 a year more ; why, you 
could publish your volume of sermons, and I 
could dress a little' more becoming my station." 

"Yes, I see all that; but is the speculation 
thoroughly safe f " 

" Safe!" Miss Trevena gave a little sour, sarcastic 
laugh ; " why, the copper is coming up in cartloads. 
Messrs. Fox and Shakell tell me there isn't such a 
mine this side Truro, except the Great Devon 
Consols, and the gossan here resembles that." 

" I hardly know even what gossan is, but it does 
certainly seem favourable. But ain't Fox and 
Shakell interested in puffing it ?" 

"Interested! Why, they've gone and taken 
a hundred shares, and you know what cautious 
people they are. John, if we don't get shares this 
week, we never shall, for there won't be any to have." 



264 OBEATHEABT. 

''I reallj don't know what to do," said Trevena, 
in a desponding voice, burying his head in his 
hands, and tumbling his hair as he planted his two 
elbows on the table; ^^it is hardlj right towards 
the Tolpeddens.** 

*^ Fiddlestick about the Tolpeddens ! What do 
they do for us? What would they do in our 
placer 

" Well, I suppose you'll have your own way 
after all, and I'd better surrender at discretion. 
Lay out one hundred pounds for each of us, and 
may Heaven bless the undertaking, if it deserves 
blessing ; but mind, mind it wasn't my wish." 

"I take the whole responsibility on myself," 
said Miss Trevena, rising, and re-tying her bonnet- 
strings sharply, as she rung the bell violently. ^^ If 
you would only take my advice oftener, John, you 
would soon be in a very different position." 

In peered Emily's sable face. 

^^ Emily, run and tell Jackson to put the horse 
in the pony-carriage again directly. I am obliged 
to go to Boscastle immediately on important busi- 
ness." 

Ten minutes later Miss Trevena, stem as Jeza- 
bel, was urging on her large Newfoundland dog of 
a pony on the hard grey seaward road leading to 
Boscastle. 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 265 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 

MR. TOLPEDDEN was a great enthusiast, 
but still he never lost his way in his Dream- 
land. 

Amid all the dark labyrinthine paradoxes of 
Paracelsus and Van Helmont, purposely translated 
into an almost undecipherable shorthand of alle- 
gory, and, not to speak profanely, esoteric jargon, 
sometimes rising into the most fantastic gibberish, 
he steadily pursued his way, seeking only for truth, 
and carrying in his hand the bright lamp of modem 
science. 

His was no vain or extravagant ambition. In 
spite of all the encouragement his chief German 
correspondent^ that great chemist Liebig, gave 
him, he never expected to be able to make gold or 
diamonds. His one common-sense aim was to 
re-discover some of those metals and compounds 
that he was certain his predecessor, Basil Valen- 
tine, &c., had discovered, and either neglected 
as mere toys, or thrown behind him as mere en- 
cumbrances to men in search of a great object. 
Many of the gases, phosphorus, alcohol, the use 
of mineral medicines, half the tinctures and so- 
lutions of modem doctors, were all, as he well^knew, 
the discoveries of the now too despised alchem- 
ists. He looked upon these fanatics as shrewd 



266 OBEATHEABT. 

indefatigable, self-denying workers, and the most 
daring and original experimenters the world had 
almost ever known. They were severe testers and 
searchers of nature, following the Baconian theory a 
century before Bacon was bom. They admitted of 
no finality in the science of chemistry. They put 
nature to the rack, and compelled her to disclose 
her secrets. They burned and crushed her till she 
uttered prophetic oracles. Their aims were some- 
tinies low, but the best men among them felt the 
true aspirations of genius. 

Mr. Tolpedden searched the old folios of the 
alchemists, as the Cornish miners search the work- 
ings of ^^ the old men," as they call the Romans, 
to press them further for the treasure that 
ancient skill or ancient patience failed to reach. 

Once among his crucibles, retorts, and alembics, 
once by the orange glare of his furnace, or busy 
with his microscopes, that gave him an almost 
spiritual power in the analysis of matter, he could 
forget his troubles, and pursue his eager chase of 
that Protean truth that had so long baffled him. 
Now and then only a pang shot through his heart 
when he thought of Arthur, and the impossibility 
of sending him to college, for another year at 
least. He had not yet had the moral courage to 
tell either him or the worthy lieutenant of his loss. 
He would have spared himself no pain, but he 
dreaded the moment when he must crush his son's 
happiness — for a time, at least — at a blow. He 
had also hoped, till that very moment, to borrow 



TEE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 267 

from his solicitors a sum sufficiently large to enable 
him still to cany out at once his scheme of a 
university education for Arthur. 

We are nearly all, even the best of us, gamblers 
in our hearts. The best Christian among us, 
though he knows the universe spins on according 
to fixed and unalterable laws, yet in moments of 
danger hopes for some lucky and exceptional acci- 
dent. Who, in moments of trouble, has not listen- 
ed with beating heart for the knock at the door, 
the avatar of the man who is to set every- 
thing right — pay the debt, remove the difficulty, 
buy the picture, or exorcise the man in possession ? 

It was with such superstitious hope and fear 
that Mr. Tolpedden had, ever since the fatal letter 
about the bank arrived, plunged deeper and deeper 
into the weedy labyrinths of alchemy, in hopes of 
bringing up some matchless pearl of a secret from 
the dark and muddy sea in which so much wisdom 
lies embedded, thick as treasure-vessels in the Good- 
win Sands. 

In what agonizing endeavours did he not waste 
the midnights, chasing through gases and flames, 
and all the elementary transmutations, the Protean 
truth that still avoided him. His hand seemed all 
but to grasp the key ; his foot all but to enter the 
inner sanctuary ; but still the darkness lay beyond, 
and the voice that spake to him out of that dark- 
ness refused to take any material form that chemic 
art could emprison, fuse, melt, or petrify. One 
link still was wanting; till that could be found 



268 GBEATHEABT. 

the discovery was bat a cload — a golden, bat still a 
transitory cload. 

Never was a father's mental saffering so pure 
and unselfish as that — never did an unrecorded 
martyr suffer at a fiercer flame of sorrow. They 
were not the self-lit fires of hurt pride that tor- 
tured him in his solitude. No ; what he felt was 
the anguish of a father who sees his son torn from 
him by a ruthless conscription — ^torn from honest 
ambitions and a nobler career. 

For two days past Arthur had been busy pack- 
ing for Oxford ; that morning his labours had cul- 
minated. There was such racing up and down 
stairs to collect books, and ^^ small traps," as 
the lieutenant called them, to oil and put 
away guns, quoits, cricket^bats, pistols, and 
fishing-rods, whips, easels, and paint-boxes. 
With all a boy's activity and animal spirits, 
Arthur joined the restless energy of his race. 
He had almost entirely got over his accident, 
and the excitement of leaving home had roused 
him to a fever of joyous bustle, that tired no one, 
but gave life to the whole house. 

What should and what should not go was dis- 
cussed with all the fickleness not unbecoming in a 
high-spirited youth on first leaving home. Patent 
bootjacks and worked slippers were tossed in on 
dress-shirts ; exercise-books, white waistcoats, new 
gloves, and dressing-gowns. Liddy was almost dis- 
tracted at the conflicting orders. 

The portmanteau already was like a pie that 



— ^1 



THE SECKET IS TOLD AT LAST. 269 

.., has been rummaged for tit-bits ; and still every mo- 

ment in went Lexicons, handkerchiefs, Greek plays, 
and other miscellaneous trifles, to help the confu- 
sion. 

^^ Gracious goodness, Mister Arthur," said Liddy, 
« pray give me the things in a little more order. 
You're spoilin' all your shirt fronts; and as for 
your collars, they'll be so crumpled they won't 
be fit to be seen, they won't, indeed. Now do'ee 
have patience." 

"Well, but, Liddy, these must go in," said 
Arthur, as he poured down four volumes of Tenny- 
son, a Gradus, and a Grote's History of Greece. 
" Stuff them in anywhere. You're packing as if I 
was going to India." 

" But they can't." 

" Yes, but they must." 

" Hallo ! there, skulkers in the main-top I" 
shouted the lieutenant up the stairs at that mo- 
ment. 

" Arthur, we're going to the plantation," cried 
his father, " to see how the men are getting on 
with felling ; and we want you to stroll with us. 
The children are not to come, your uncle says." 

" Now, Liddy, if you don't get in all those books, 
I'll kill you," said Arthur, as he raced downstairs, 
and joined the walking party. 

The lieutenant, like most idle men, was a great 
inventor of small business. He was always either 
making or filling up flower-beds, putting up rain 
guages, constructing gates, or altering hedges. 



270 GBEATHEABT. 

His present improyement was clearing a small 
riding in the plantation, between his own and his 
brother^s house. 

There was a belt of firs, drawn up like lancers, on 
a rising ground beyond Mr. Henry Tolpedden's 
orchard, and the new riding was to improve the rab- 
bit-shooting there. Walker was foreman, and he 
had two wood-cutters under him. The new path, 
they agreed, would give an excellent opportunity 
for quick shots, as the rabbits flashed across be- 
fore Arthur's beagles. 

It was a cold, clear November day, and the 
wind whistled among the brown rustling beech 
leaves, that still clung faithfully to the bleak smooth 
branches, and would cling till the sharp buds 
should open, and the pleated green leaves open out 
their fans. The purple brambles, too, still held 
their own, and battled with adversity in their 
rough sturdy way ; but the ferns were rusted red, 
the larches had withered, the chestnuts were 
under bare poles, and in shady places the last 
night's frost was still white and powdery upon them 
all. The rabbits cowered in their warm burrows, 
and wondered what was going on overhead. The 
hare, cowering out on the distant fallows, heard 
the axes ring and wondered. 

There were the men, hard at work, blow on 
blow, alternate, and the old firs nodded to their 
fall. Close by the three men, the woodcutter's 
children had lit a fire with resinous chips, and 
were roasting pig-nuts in the hot grey ashes. Far 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 271 

away a large red-headed woodpecker, undaunted 
by the disturbance, uttered his strange cry, not 
unlike the yelp of a puppy. 

A pleasant turpentine smell arose, as Arthur 
fell to with one of the axes and sent the white 
chips flying from the deep gash Walker and 
his men had already made in the biggest of the 
doomed trees. 

It pleased the lieutenant to suppose a storm, and 
Arthur cutting down a disabled mast. 

" Cheerily, my hearties — with a will, bosun !" 
he cried, with his boisterous voice ; " to the board 
with her, we must clear off the top hamper with 
the boarding-axes — ^now she goes 1" 

"Take care the butt doesn't start, sir," said 
Walker, as down, slowly, stately, and then 
quicker, with a crash, came the Scotch flr, its 
boughs splintering and rending as they reached the 
ground. 

" Never was a better cut," said one of the men. 

Arthur stooped down, and looked at the rings, 
that showed the symmetrical growth of layer after 
layer. The grossest flattery is, after all, not al- 
together insupportable. As Arthur leaned on 
his axe, he looked like a young Norseman fell- 
ing timber with which to build galleys. Then 
he flew at another tree that had been marked by 
a notch, and off sprang the bark and wedges of the 
wood. 

"Arthur," said his father, who had scarcely 
spoken a word since they left the house, " come to 



272 OREATHEABT. 

the fire out there, I've something rather particular 
to tell you; and, Nelson, I want you also to hear it." 

Talk of appropriate keys in music, who can 
pitch a tune with such exquisite instinct as the 
heart can, when it vrishes to express love, hope^ 
hatred, or fear? There was pathos in the tone 
with which Mr. Tolpedden spoke — a foreboding of 
impending evil, blended with no Uttle regret at 
having to communicate the news of such a calamity. 
Arthur did not, of course, read all this in the few 
simple words we have given ; but still some fore- 
shadowing of such evil came over him, as if a 
sudden cloud had dimmed the sun above his head. 

The lieutenant, always sturdy, unsuspicious, and 
never very elastic or nimble in mind, took in merely 
this simple fact, that his brother, who had for 
several days seemed rather out of spirits, had now 
something, probably unpleasant, the cause of 
his low spirits, to tell. He felt, he afterwards 
used to say, as he had done when the vessel 
he was on board refused to answer her helm, on a 
certain occasion, off the Cape. Arthur, sanguine, 
full of courage, and unaccustomed to misfortune, 
was roused by curiosity rather than fear. The 
older man shuddered, because he remembered mis- 
fortunes that had come fierce and sudden as white 
squalls, and yet had proved dangerous and cruel 
as the " Tiger Wind " of the Chinese seas, sweep- 
ing all by the board, and leaving his life a mere 
wreck upon the waters. 

When they reached the wood fire, the children 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 273 

« 

had left it, to go and pick up dry fir cones for 
their mother, who was collecting a bundle of twigs 
at the further end of the plantation. 

The three stood round the fire — the face of the 
one was worn and anxious ; the other two faces 
were full of an alarmed curiosity. 

" I thought I would come here," said Mr. Tol- 
pedden, "because we should be away from the 
children, and the servants could not even by acci- 
dent overhear us." 

" My dear father, I never saw you low before. 
What is it that has vexed you so f — Some attack 
on you, I suppose, for your proposals for a Radical 
reform in chemistry f You don't mean, do you, 
that that beast of a head-keeper at Rostrevor has 
been poisoning one of the dogs ? It isn't Billy ? — 
is it, pater ?" 

A sickly, unwilling smile spread over Mr. Tol- 
pedden's mouth, but his eyes were lustreless and 
sad as before. 

" Worse than that, Arthur, much worse " (here 
he threw a dead fir-branch on the ashes, and it 
cracklecj up instantly into a yellow flame.) " The 
— ^the — well, I suppose I must out with it, though 
it is like cutting off my right arm. Our bank has 
failed, and I've lost five-and-twenty thousand 
pounds, thanks to the detestable commercial dis- 
honesty of our times. From the wreck we may 
pick out a few hundreds, but that is all. I was a 
great coward, Arthur, a detestable- coward, not to 
have told you sooner, but it was only this morning 

VOL. II. T 



274 GREATHEART* 

I had a letter from Chetwynd, Strong, and Wrack- 
em, declining to advance me further money till the 
affair was wound up." 

" Our bank broken ?" exclaimed Arthur. 

" Good God, Harry 1" exclaimed the lieutenant, 
plunging both hands into his pockets, and looking 
to windward. " I declare I feel as I did the first 
day I went to sea. My head goes round. What'U 
Polly say ?" 

** Everything seems against us," continued Mr. 
Henry Tolpedden ; " and now this scoundrel of a 
Mordred has, by some low trick or other, contrived 
to cheat us out of * No Man's Land,' and directly 
he buys it he sets to work on this mine they talk of, 
which will, I hear, pay back the purchase-money 
in the first two months." 

Arthur clutched at a fir-branch that lay near 
him, and seized it as if it was a deadly weapon, 
his brows, too, contracted. 

" I'll go this very day and thrash that rascal," he 
said, " to pay him out for his contemptible cheat- 
ing. He shall never go about boasting what fools 
he made of the Tolpeddens." 

" Belay there ! — belay there ! Arthur," said the 
lieutenant, taking the bough from him as if he was 
taking a loaded pistol from a child's hand; "gently 
does it. Always give a shark a wide berth, I say ; 
there is nothing to be got from sharks but bites. 
They're no good dead or alive. At all events, 
Harry, when you've drawn your money out of his 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 275 

bank, you cut the tow-rope, and have done with 
the rascal." 

" That's one comfort — it's an ill wind that blows 
no ^ood 1 " said Arthur. 

His father sighed, a sigh that seemed to tear up 
his heart by the roots. 

" Worse luck, Arthur," he said ; " I had nothing 
in that bank. I had overdrawn ; the money the 
fellow paid me for the cliff field nearly all goes to 
repay what he had advanced. Since my father 
wasted half his estate on that accursed shaft at 
Endellion, misfortunes have never come upon us 
in such a pitiless storm." 

" But it is only taking in sail a bit, after all," 
said the lieutenant, scraping out his pipe with his 
penknife. " It is only living quiet for a year or 
two ; no parties, a horse less — ^you had more than 
you wanted before. It is the purser's business to 
cut down expenses, and make all square. The log 
must be kept, weekly observations taken, and we'll 
soon get you into smooth water again." 

" What do I care for a hunter or so f Turn off 
Thomas, and let the home farm," said Arthur. 

" It is not for myself, Arthur, that I care, my 
wants are few, it is for you; but I shall make 
shift — I'll sell the barouche, and I'll sell the farm 
out at Trebarwith ; I'll turn off Lizzy, and keep 
only Fanny and Liddy. We'll employ Walker be- 
tween us, Nel, for both gardens, and Arthur must 
be as economical as he can at Baliol, and try hard 
for a fellowship. If he gets a double first — and 

t2 



276 GREATHEART. 

he can, Tregellas tells me, if he chooses — ^a fig 
for the mine, the bank, and all our losses ! Come, 
Nel, come and look over last year's accounts, and 
consult with me where I can curtail. Arthur, if 
you're going to wish the Tregellases good-bye, 
you'd better go and lunch there, for they expect 
you. After all, bad as the news is, my dear boy, 
it might have been worse. Good-bye." 

Arthur made no reply, but instead of taking the 
path through the nut-walk that led to the stables, 
he struck across the end of the plantation, and 
leaping a low stone wall, made his way to a 
common, rough with furze-bushes, and strewn 
with granite-blocks. From a slope there he could 
see all the valley leading to St. Petrock's. 

The white morning mist had long ago Hfted, 
the distant hill-side farms were showing sharp 
and clear in outline, though each so small that it 
might have been balanced like a child's Koah's ark 
upon a giant's hand. There, too, was the little 
square grey tower of St. Tudy's, far away on the 
grey hill to the left. Below, through the 
ravine, darkened by hazel-trees and copse, flowed 
the brook that joined the sea at Boscastle. On an 
ash-tree near, a bird sang, anticipating the far-dis- 
tant spring. From the opposite hiU-side farm 
there came the clamour of children, to whom noise 
is sacred, because it is an emblem of future 
liberty. Walls of black houses, and miles of 
stony terraces, emprison, and seem sometimes to 
contract the mind. How often does a wide, free, 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 277 

open country lend the imagination wings, till 
there seems to open before it through the azure 
distance new and undiscovered w^orlds. 

But Arthur was in no mood for calm, poetical 
contemplation. His brain was in a ferment. 
There was a weight at his heart. 

Even love, pure and unselfish as his love for 
Lucy Tregellas was, was not at that moment ruling 
all his thoughts. Duty had stepped in and for the 
time expelled that Siren Seraph — an heroic resolve 
was urging him to action. One of those great 
struggles of temptation, which every man in his 
life has to undergo, was now raging within him. 
Must he then surrender all hopes of fame — all 
those social advantages that since a child he had 
been led to expect ? Must he proclaim himself to 
the TregellaseSj and all his friends, as a poor 
adventurer, who had only his brains on which 
to depend for his precarious bread. 

For a moment the selfish voice of his evil genius 
whispered, *^ No ; do as your father wishes." Then 
purer impulses came and chased swiftly away, 
with swords of flame and light, those baser and 
evil promptings. The blood throbbed warmer in 
his heart, it pulsed forth again in a fuller and 
more generous tide — then sprang forth holy tears 
of joy, such as those which a young mother sheds 
as she watches her first child's first sleep. 

Then in that wild and lonely place, beside the 
furze covert, he knelt to make his vow, and rais- 
ing his clasped hands to the blue sky, he implored 



278 GREATHEART. 

God's blessing, in simple and earnest words, on the 
self-sacrifice so bravely made, and so bravely to be 

carried out. 

• » « » ♦ » « 

When Arthur returned to the house, while 
Thomas was saddling Gipsy, he met Liddy crying 
in the passage ; and at the same moment, passing 
the open kitchen door, he saw Fanny resting her 
head on the dresser, and sobbing as if her heart 
would break. 

"Oh! dear, dear, Mister Arthur," groaned 
Liddy. ** Oh ! that ever I should have lived to 
hear what I have heard this day! It'll break 
your father^s heart, your going to Oxford to-mor* 
row." 

" Liddy," said Arthur, " where's my father I" 

"He's in the study. Mr. Nelson's just gone 
home. I know I saw the tears in his eyes. 
Thomas is to have warning to-night. Oh, dear ! — 
oh, dear ! * The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh 
away.' That's the only text that I can look to ; 
that, and ^ God tempereth the wind to the shorn 
lamb.' " 

And she burst into a flood of tears. 

Worthy old creature I she was not the first per- 
son who had mistaken Sterne's proverb for a true 
fragment of Holy Writ. 

Arthur knocked once, loudly and cheerfully, at 
the door of his father's study. 

" Come in," cried the well-known voice. 

Arthur entered; his father was working as 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 279 

calmly as if nothing had just happened more im- 
portant than a carriage horse losing a shoe. Sand 
baths, crucibles, and glass tubes were all round 
him. By his side a huge hour-glass, such as Time 
carries in an allegorical tapestry, shook down its 
thin wavering thread of recording sand. Arthur 
sat down ; his eyes, so full of calm resolves, and 
that sudden w^isdom that ages men in an hour, and 
that only misfortune brings, met those of his fa- 
ther ; and they half betrayed their secret, for Mr. 
Tolpedden instantly regarded him with an expres- 
sion of irrestrainable anxiety. 

" Arthur," he said with peculiar tenderness, as 
he laid down his pen, *^are you back already? 
Was the Magnet house, then, for once less at- 
tractive than usual?" 

" I've not been to St. Petrock's yet." 

"Not been yetl Why, since we parted, I've 
dismissed two servants, arranged to sell a farm, 
and been through half a dozen accounts with your 
uncle. You lazy fellow 1 Is your packing done ?" 

" Nearly done." 

" You get to Oxford, let me see, about Friday ; 
of course you'll go and see the Dawsons the day 
you're in London ?" 

« Yes." 

" Monosyllables. Why, what's the matter, Ar- 
thur ? There's something about your look I never 
saw before. You surely are not very sorry at leaving 
home ; it's only for a short time. You'll like Ox- 
ford. You must be particular, mind, about your set." 



280 GREATHEART. 

"I am not going to Oxford.** 

" Not going to Oxford ! — ^what do you mean f 
Arthur, you take that news about the Bank too 
much to heart, more than I thought you did. 
Why, you foolish fellow, we're a long way from 
ruin yet. I've been living beyond my means ; 
I'll now live below them. In three years, if yoa 
work, you're almost sure of a fellowship." 

" Pater, I shall not go to college. I have re- 
solved; do not urge me. Nothing shall induce 
me to prey upon your scanty means. I shall go to 
London, and paint and write — make money in 
some way ; there are many ways there of earning 
money. Hookem, or Hewer, and his lot will tell 
me how. All I want is £50 to keep me for a 
month or two, and to pay my lodgings and grub till 
I can see my way. I have made up my mind ; 
nothing can move me. You may refuse me the 
one thing, but you will not make me do the other." 

"But, Arthur, I have many ways of raising 
your money for college. Suppose even I sold a farm, 
it would only be paying ready money to secure a 
certain income to you for the future. Arthur, you 
never disobeyed me before. It has been the wish 
of my life to see you win high honours at Oxford. 
I have wasted my life by running after too many 
things, and in you I hoped to see myself, under better 
auspices, stepping in and carrying off the prize. Ha ! 
Arthur, you don't know what a trampling struggle 
for existence the life of a poor man of talent in 
London is! Are you prepared to work with 



THE SECRET IS TOLD AT LAST. 281 

desperate eagerness for less return than a journey- 
man tailor's wage? — to coin gay verses when your 
heart is sad, to paint quick daubs while some fine 
ideal is imprisoned in your brain to bear snubs from 
ignorant wealth, and mocking inane advice from 
purse-proud patrons ?" 

There was a deep pathos and entreaty in the 
father's voice, as he conjured up all the spectres that 
would beset the path of his son in his search for 
fame. But Arthur, in that hour of firm resolve, 
" set his face like a flint," for he knew that it was 
his good and not his evil influence that urged him. 
He was inflexible, and he knew that his father felt 
and understood the sternness of his resolution. 

"But, my dear, dear boy, do not be rash — 
remain for some days, till you assure yourself that 
this is no changeable resolve. Kemain till we can 
discuss how you can best push your fortunes. 
You cannot live by writing copies of magazine 
verses, however good. Perhaps Lord Kostrevor 
may get you a place in the War Office — ^he did 
once promise. You cannot begin painting, and then 
in six months send pictures to the Academy." 

" I have thought of all that ; but I can get some 
reviewing or newspaper work through Hookem : 
and after a year's hard work I could paint a tolerable 
portrait, that I'm sure. I go to-morrow morning, 
if I live. My dear father, encourage me — do not 
thwart me in what I know to be right. I will not 
stop another day, when my conscience tells me I 
ought to be helping you by hard work in London." 



282 OBEATHEABT, 

*'My dear boy," said his father, rising, and 
pressing his son's hand, " I always knew you for 
a brave, generous-hearted, high-spirited fellow, 
but I little thought you would bear up so well as 
you have, so cheerfully and fearlessly against so 
unexpected and cruel a misfortune as this." 

" Cruel misfortune, pater I" said Arthur, laugh - 
^^S y " y^> because it cripples you ; but not cruel 
if it saves me from becoming an idle fox-hunting 
fellow, and makes me a great poet or a famous 
painter. In some respects, perhaps, it's hard ; but 
never mind, I'll try and get some good out of it. 
But good-bye now, I must go and tell Liddy one 
or two rftore things about the packing, and then 
boot anc^addle to St. Petrock's." 

*' Thank God for sending me such a son," said 
Tolpedden, as Arthur ran out of the room ; " it is 
a blessing to overbalance the breaking of twenty 
banks. I cannot refuse to let him go, but it is 
hard 1" 

When Arthur reached his bed-room, he found 
a letter from Lucas waiting for him on the dress- 
ing-table. He gave just one sigh, as he looked at 
the circular post-mark, "Oxford," then he tore 
the envelope cheerfully open, and read, 

" My dear old man, 

" Such a lark Oxford is — ^boating? I 
believe you — ^best billiard-tables in England-S- 
hacks, tip-top — the bad wines here bang every- 
thing, but I've already introduced a better style of 



SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 283 

claret-cup — some of my port is the 1820 from 
Plumpton — ^govemor^s blue seal — sad fiery stuff 
here. We're longing to see you, and show you 
round — ^where are we now I — why, just going to 
Henley for a spree — mine is the fastest set out. 
Tat ta — ^go to Poole's, if you want clothes. 

" Yours ever, 

" Martin Lucas. 

"P.S. — Kind regards to all friends, and the 
little man and his lot particularly. Tell Bradbrain 
I'll send him the tenner I borrowed — he's the 
sort of fellow to give one a leg up." 



CHAPTER XIX. 

SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 

ARTHUR TOLPEDDEN had taken his fare- 
well of Bradbrain, M. Ohatelet, and the 
Tregellases. He was too proud to express his 
regret freely to his old tutor. Lucy was out, but 
the children gave him a clamorous farewell after 
their manner. Mrs. Tregellas was surprised at the 
suddenness of his departure for London, but for 
several secret reasons not altogether sorry at it ; and 
Mr. Tregellas, while deeply lamenting the misfor- 
tunes that had compelled him to abandon his hopes 
of University fame, warmly applauded the gene- 
rous and chivalrous impulse that had led to his 
decisipn. 



284 GREATHEAKT. 

" My dear Arthur," he said, as he followed him 
to the garden-gate, " you have the true spirit of 
the old knight-errants upon you; may you hew- 
down giants, and rescue forlorn princesses as 
bravely as you bore off the silver cup, and saved 
our Lucy's life. I had hoped to have seen you a 
double first — perhaps I may still. This cloud will 
soon pass — I think you all take too gloomy a 
view of the matter. The bank will no doubt pay 
a good dividend — ^I am so sorry Lucy has gone out, 
for I am sure she'll be sorry. I'll try and drive 
her over to-morrow, to see you before you go — 
but you leave for Bodmin so 4»arly, I am afraid." 

" Yes, before seven," said Arthur, with an almost 
irrestrainable sigh. 

"Good-bye, my dear fellow — God be with you I" 

" Good-bye." 

To go without seeing Lucy was the last drop of 
bitterness in Arthur's cup. That made the part- 
ing terrible indeed ; but yet he had resolved not 
to remain another day, and he dared not change 
his resolution. He dared not even appear to waver — 
a moment of hesitation and his father would seize 
it, to urge upon him all that he would lose by 
plunging into a career where success was doubtful, 
and where countless and almost insuperable ob- 
stacles had to be overcome. Did he not know 
from countless novels, and all sorts of miscellaneous 
reading, that London literary men were struggling, 
trampling, and butting like two rival herds of buf- 
faloes on a disputed prairie ? Had not thousands of 



SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 285 

men of genius gone to wreck upon that great 
yawning quicksand! Had not men with lion- 
hearts, and frames hardy as wnld beasts, staU 
wart as gladiators, men, too, . with brains quick as 
sensitive plants to catch impressions, and swift as 
printing-presses to reproduce them, lived beg- 
gared, and died half-starved outcasts, in their vain 
search for wealth, social position, and fame ? Was 
there in England any real respect for talent, any 
wish to discover and honour it, unless it were 
gilded and placed on the pedestal of gold, here- 
ditary or acquired? What amulet had he, in- 
experienced, unfortunate, to guide him safely 
through the labyrinth f What enchanted armour had 
he with which to face the spectres and dangers that 
awaited him in the great selfish, cruel city ? Why 
should the angels guard him, when already they 
had suffered so many to perish ? But once out in 
the open, with the wald, fresh, moorland air beat- 
ing on his face, all these cowardly and undermining 
fears melted at once before the fuller pulse of his 
old courage and the unquenched glow of his gene- 
rous resolve. The sword of Faith, was it not in 
his hand? — the breastplate of Hope was upon his 
breast — he wore upon his head the helmet of 
Truth, and over his heart hung the jewelled 
amulet of Love. At the first breathing of one 
secret prayer, all those gibbering goblins had 
vanished. 

So, in the old legends of St. Anthony of the 
Desert, all night the skeleton ostriches, toad dra- 



286 OREATHEART. 

gons, serpent bats, eyeless crocodiles, grimacing 
dwarfs, threatening witches, grinning sorcerers, 
and flame-winged devils howled, roared, blas- 
phemed, and shrieked round the old hermit as he 
pored over his huge breviary. But when daybreak 
spread its first rosy banner in the east, the good 
angels came, and the phantoms faded into vapour, 
and from the bright open gates of Paradise came 
soothing voices, and the music of the golden harps. 

Afraid of his own heart, Arthur began almost 
to rejoice that he had not had the pain of wishing 
Lucy farewell. It required a great courage to 
have to tell her of his being obliged to leave, 
still more to tell her that he had been obliged to 
abandon all his dreams of University fame. 

Had it been the eve of starting to matriculate, 
Arthur would have thought no more of leaving home 
than if he had been only starting to ride to covert. 
But now, launching into an unknown future, 
leaving one he loved to descend, as it were, a shaft 
of unknown depth, it seemed like an eternal 
parting, and his heart was moved to its centre. 

With what photographic force and clearness 
every object seemed to present itself as he took 
the path leading to the sea, resolved to have one 
last look at the old view from the cliffs at Dun- 
chine. How lonely and mournful now the gran- 
ite walls rose beside the treeless roads! How 
bleak the moorlands were, how desolate the black 
cliffs, that had been fatal to how many vessels, 
and yet to part with them, too, was like parting 



SUNSET AT mjNCHINE. 28? 

with old f riendsy for every crag and stone had been 
familiar to him from boyhood. 

Half mournfully, yet with every sinew braced 
for the coming effort, like a rider's for a dangerous 
leap, Arthur strode down the valley to where the 
tide was coming, in fast and foaming haste, up the 
little desolate bay of Dunchine, There, in the 
black, wave-eaten caves, the living breakers frothed 
and tossed. There, up to the black water line, 
the green deluge slowly rose; above, the sea- 
birds screamed, and whirled round the jagged 
headlands, against which the fresh, cold autumn 
wind beat in ceaseless anger. There, on the grass- 
covered hills to the right, facing the main, the 
sheep scrambled and fed ; but there was no human 
being within eye-shot. In the distance, far as the 
horizon, stretched the great tremulous grey sea, 
sunlit only in patches, everywhere else cold, sullen, 
and threatening ; one vast churchyard, tenanted by 
the long-forgotten dead. No fluttering sail specked 
the great desert plain. The only sound was the 
muffled roar of the breakers against the iron-bound 
shore, and the nearer splash of the little cascade of 
the valley, as it fell, whitening into foam, over the 
thick water-weeds that grew from the rock, under 
the crane that had once been used to load the Port 
Isaac vessels with slate. 

Skimming a slate at a distant sea-gull, and 
rolling in a block of stone to hear the sullen 
splash as it reached the water, Arthur dashed at the 
steps cut in the rock, and scaled them with a vigour 



288 GBEATHEABT. 

and carelessness that could have been acquired only 
by habit ; once, and once only, he sat down on a 
step to look back at the great spouts of foam that 
sprang up like sudden fountains when the ad- 
vancing wave met the outermost pickets of rocks. 

In long lines, eastward and westward, this cease- 
less attack was being urged and being repelled. 
It was as if, earth being besieged, angry 
Tritons were riding on every biUow. Some 
minds are daimted by such wild and grand scenes, 
but men of the true heroic temper feel their hearts 
expand and their pulse quicken at such moments. 
There Arthur sat on his "coign of vantage," 
thinking of the old princes of West Cornwall, of 
Arthur, the " flower of kings," and of the King 
Mark in the old romance of " Sir Tristrem," who 
loved this old sea fortress of the Britons. 

" Un chastel 
Qui moult par art e fort e bel, 
Ne cremoist asalt ne engin qui vaille, 
Sur la mer en Comouaille/' 

Then he saw sweep past him up those stairs the 
ancient kings, in their gold-broidered robes, and 
knights, whose steel-clad feet clashed upon the 
winding stairs on the rock-side, till starting from 
his reverie, like a guilty thing 

^^ Upon a fearful summons/* 

Arthur sprang up the remaining stairs, and through 
the old iron gate, singing that song so sweet to his 
ear, " Blue eyes of spring, the violets I" and think- 



SUNSET AT DUNOHINE. 289 

ing of that night when he saw the mermaid spread- 
ing her hair in the moonbeams. 

He passed the bastion, and the mournful slatestone 
ramparts, with their small, square arrow loops and 
their narrow, arched, thirteenth-century doorways, 
thinking of how, on the day of Hookem's pic-nic, 
he and Lucy bad looked at them together. That 
day had consecrated the place in his mind. Never 
before had the walls looked so lichenless and bare, 
so gloomy and monumental ; never had the slate 
shingles looked so corroded and so fretted by time. 
The very soil, in places grey and shingly with de- 
composed silt, seemed blasted into perpetual bar- 
renness. 

Up with quick foot Arthur leaped, bending his 
way to one of his favourite haunts, the little ruined 
chapel of the castle, whose four walls stand in 
almost the centre of the little peninsula of slate. 
He clambered up the worn tabular ledges of rock, 
where the sheep had made vestiges of a rude path ; 
he bounded over the great tussocks of coarse dry 
grass, and the little bulbous hillocks of sea-pinks. 
He passed those rude mounds where Sir Lancelot's 
companions in arms are supposed to sleep. He still 
kept singing the mystical words of Heine. On both 
sides of him the sea-spirits sent up their ceasdless 
moans of agony as he sang blythe and loud as a 
young Norseman on an exploring foray. 

For a moment, Arthur, aroused by a sudden 
glow upon the wall of the chapel, turned to the 
west, and saw, with all the rapture of a Par* 
VOL. II. V 



290 OBEATHEABT* 

see poet, that the sunset yvas fast blossoming 
there. 

A Shechinah of splendour was widening as he 
looked over the sea, A great lowering bulk of grey 
cloud that had long since betrayed by sullen gleams 
and partial revelations that it concealed a secret 
within its bosom, now displayed below its glistening 
tinsel edges the lower rim of a globe of burning 
pure purple fire, whose glow fused all around it, 
into luminous depths, and an ineffable glory of 
light. Then above and below its fan of rays, 
traversing dark or only partially lit clouds, there 
spread a rosy splendour that was re-echoed in the 
east, which flushed and tinged every little ran- 
dom and floating cloudlet, hitherto golden orange 
as the flesh of an apricot, bathing all the horizon 
in one surface of serene light, and concentrating 
to a focus of supreme lustre. 

Arthur gazed on the spectacle, lost in a calm 
delight. He regarded the pageant both as a poet 
and as a colorist. It effaced for the moment all 
small sorrows and fretting cares. 

Tolpedden turned to take a last look at the chapel 
— the place where he had once been with Lucy. 
The old haunt where he had so often spent hours 
sketching and brooding over old ballads. The 
path to the old corroded western doorway of the 
chapel lay away from the cliff. As he turned the 
corner, and carelessly entered the enclosure, some 
person who had been kneeling, unobserved by him 
at the first glance, in the shadow of the old stone 



SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 291 

altar, rose and turned her head, surprised to hear 
a footstep. 

Gracious Heavens! it was Lucy Tregellas! 
She essayed to speak, but no special words were 
audible, though her eyes smiled. In a moment 
Arthur was by her side, nor did she draw away 
her little hand when he pressed it between his. In 
a moment, as if by mutual agreement, they were 
sitting together on the shaft of a pillar that lay 
near the altar-stone. 

^^How glad I am, Lucy, to meet you — how 
lucky I am !" 

Here his voice faltered, for he remembered 
what he had to communicate. 

" I come here often," said she ; " it is such a 
beautiful old place — so solemn, so sacred, and 
it is dear to me for many reasons. I hope you are 
getting stronger, Mr. Tolpedden. Mamma thinks 
you really ought to go away for change of air." 

"Don't call me Mr. Tolpedden, Lucy," said 
Arthur, pressing the little warm hand that lay so 
meekly and passively in his, and at the same 
time looking up into the calm pure face that was so 
glorified in the sunset which turned the fair 
hair into waves of innocuous flame. " Do you re- 
member the last time you and I were alone to- 
gether, and what awoke me when I fainted after the 
mare had fallen dead?" 

As Arthur spoke almost imperceptibly, his right 
hand moved round her waist, while his left hand 
still retained its hold« 

u2 



2U2 OBEATHEABT. 

^^ Oh ! that terrible moment I Oh, yes I wasn't it 
dreadful r 

^^ I would risk ten snch spills for that moment 
of waking, Lucy. ILuffy dear, do you not remember 
what awoke me ?" 

Lucy's colour could be seen to deepen, even 
through the flush of sunset that dyed her face, as 
she turned towards the altar, and began counting 
the dog's-teeth mouldings below the ledger stone, 
as if unconsciously, with her little gloved hand. 

" I thought you were dead," she said in a low 
voice. " I was still half stunned. I did not know 
what I did. It is cruel to remind me of it." 

"Lilly, I have come to tell you news that per- 
haps will not be so painful for you to hear as it is 
to me to tell." 

Lilly turned and grasped his hand without 
knowing it; for his voice had altered its tone, and 
was sad as the night wind. In how many ways 
the heart betrays itself. If anyone less sceptical 
than a lover had needed stronger proofs of the 
state of Lilly's feelings than that kiss already 
alluded to, this anxiety ought to have satisfied 
him. But lovers are strange people, and are all 
but stone-blind, till Time couches them, and works 
his cruel disenchantments. 

"You have some dreadful news! Oh, do tell 
me, Arthur 1 Your voice quite trembles; you're 
not going abroad — what is it 1" 

" Lilly," he said, " my father^s happiness has 
been broken as if it had been glass. He has lost 



SUNSET AT DUNOHINE. 293 

more than twenty thousand pounds by an infamous 
London bank breaking. We are all but ruined. 
I am not going to Oxford. I am going to London 
to seek my fortune. In comparison with what I 
was when we last met, I am a beggar." 

The little hand squeezed his, that touch 
was more eloquent than whole folios of sympathy. 
Bright dewdrops of tears had sprung from Lucy's 
eyes, and were rolling down her cheeks. 

"To London!" she said in a low, faltering 
voice, as if she dreaded what he would next say. 

" Yes, to London, dearest, and to-morrow. I 
must and will get money to help my father. His 
discoveries must not be stopped, nor shall he bear 
privations while I am flaunting at college. There 
are, thank Ood, other roads to success beside the 
Oxford one." 

"But it is so sudden — so very sudden. We 
heard that you were going to dispute Mr. Mor- 
dred's right to this mine. They say he cheated 
your father out of it. With that restored, you would 
soon be rich." 

A thousand conflicting passions were writhing in 
Arthur's heart. The sudden thought of the still 
mysterious fraud roused him into a gust of rage, 
fierce but transitory. 

" I could crush that vile scoundrel like this stone," 
he said, leaping up, and dashing a fragment of 
Purbeck marble that lay near the altar at a 
tombstone, upon which it shattered; "that deed 
was as much robbery as if he had forced his way 



294 GREATHEABT. 

into our house at night with knife and crow-bar." 

Then he sat down cabniy. and took again the 
}nelding hand. 

^ Lillj,'' he said, ^you seem now like an angel 
sent from heaven to comfort me. Yon know I 
love you — will you love me?" His arm was 
round her again, his face close to hers, his eyes 
glowed with passionate entreaty. What simple 
words passion uses I 

Lilly trembled, but she did not withdraw her 
hand — how could she, when he held it so firm? 

" Lilly, you do love me ?" 

She was silent, and trembled more than before* 
Then through the silence came a single word, inef- 
fably holy, when it comes from such lips pure as 
those of the inhabitants of heaven. 

« Yes." 

With what rapture Arthur kissed her mouth, 
eyes, and her forehead, just where the hair grew 
paler and softer, and clasped her to his heart. 

" You do love me, then, Lilly?" 

*^ Yes, yes, dear Arthur, I do dearly love you." 

This was said with a murmur such as the dove 
makes in the beech-wood at nesting time, not 
louder nor less full of tenderness. 

" My sweet, my soul's delight !" What strange 
epithets of joy and love he lavished on her as he 
kissed her a thousand times. How can I enume- 
rate the epithets ? How can I picture the purity 
of that eternal and imperishable union of two 
hearts, of two minds^ of two natures. 



SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 295 

"I am to leave you, Lilly/' Arthur said, as they 
Stood by the altar, absorbed in that splendour, 
like two spirits newly beatified; "let us promise 
before God, before this altar, where He was 
once worshipped by men now in heaven, let us 
promise to be true to each other, to accept no other 
love, and to keep our hearts pure to a changeless 
faith." 

Hand-in-hand before that altar, they knelt and 
exchanged their holy vow, in all the fervid sin- 
cerity and deep passion of first love. The human 
heart knows but one spring — the love of later life 
Is cold, reasoning, and tame, beside such love as 
they felt. • 

Then they walked, clasped together, to the 
edge of the cliff. The rose colour still lingered 
in the east — here and there, over the grey sea, 
spread wavering, horizontal bars of fading crimson. 
High and higher rose the first star, with its sparkle 
clear and keen as that of some matchless diamond. 
Below a dark wave rolled landward, like some 
angry monster. Through the solemn silence of 
evening, the roar of the breakers sounded sadder 
and wilder than by day. 

A few moments only, and what a change had 
taken place in the hearts of the two lovers ! Life 
now was a calm, unbroken dream of all-absorb- 
ing happiness. They were now one — ^lif e, fortune, 
everything seemed poor and diminutive compared 
with the joy of that love, though they must part 
80 soon* There was no doubt now, no conceal* 



29ti GBEATHEABT. 

ment^ no agonies of jealous fear ; neither time, 
nor misfortune^ no^ nor death itself could 
efface that love, so unselfish, so pure, and so in- 
tense. To them Paradise was won back, and earth 
seemed to have but these two for its happy inmates. 
Destiny itself, dreadful destiny, was powerless to 
harm them now. 

" Lilly, dear Lilly/' said Arthur, as they walked 
on together, with that divine confidence that new 
love gives us. The big moon, now in her third 
quarter, rose over the sea, and turned its vast welt- 
ering flood to one broad surface of trembling silver, 
the cliffs to the shining bulwarks of an enchanted 
country ; " it was on such a night as this I first 
lost my heart to the sea-spirit of Endellion." 

" And do you know, Arthur," said Lilly, look- 
ing up into his face, ^' I too felt on that night as 
if some change had come over me." 

" My own, my dearest," was the reply, and it 
was sealed with the thousandth kiss, " Lilly, dar- 
ling, I have a secret to tell you." 

Lilly twined her two hands round the arm she 
leaned on. 

" Lilly, I like Bradbrain — he is a bold, generous 
fellow, and he takes to me — I am sure of it, from his 
manner when we parted ; besides, he was so sorry 
for that spill, and refused to take any money for 
the mare, though he had valued her so much." 

" I do not like him — I never liked him," said 
Lucy, and she shuddered as she spoke. 

<' I do think he despises Mordred for cheating 



SUNSET AT DUNCHINE. 297 

about that mine — I think he is to be depended 
upon ; but he has lived among wild people ; he is 
accustomed to a different code of morals^ and I fear 
he is trying, perhaps almost unconsciously to him- 
self, to wind his cobwebs round the heart of my 
dear little foolish aunt. Now, what I want you, 
darling, to do, is to watch him, and to put the dear 
little woman on her guard against Bradbrain's 
soft words and dangerous beguilements, I 
dare not tell my father my suspicions, Lilly ; and 
how could I have the heart to disturb my good 
old uncle's happiness. A word or two of alarm 
and distrust from you will nip the evil in the bud. 
I know you will do this, Lilly ; and you will write 
to me, darling — she will enclose your letters, I 
have asked her. Do not let her know that your 
suspicions are the result of mine." 

^' I will, Arthur. I had feared for some time 
that there was something between Mrs. Tolped- 
den and Mr. Bradbrain ; and you will write to me, 
too, Arthur, often f " 

" Very, very often, dear. You are mine now ! 
Another kiss to ratify the promise. There is 
some one calling to us, Lilly." 

There were shouts of " Lucy 1 Lucy!" from the 
path leading to the ruins, then sounds of 
boyish voices from beyond the castle. 

Lucy withdrew her arm, and her eyes assumed 
a startled expression. 

"It is George and Herbert, Arthur. I told 
them to come for me as soon as the moon rose. 



298 



Don't let the boys see you. I know it is veiy 
wrong to be ashamed to be seen with yon, but I do 
feel afraid papa would think we came here on 
purpose to meet. Good-bye, Arthur. It is veiy 
hard to part.** 

"Dearest! — dearest! farewell!" 

Arthur pressed her to his heart, their lips clung 
together in one long, deep, ardent kiss, such as 
martyrs condemned to death might take at their 
parting. She was gone. 

What wonder that when Arthur stepped again 
from behind the chapel, as the boys^ voices died 
away down the distant steps, a glory seemed to 
have passed from sea to air, and the very moon* 
beams seemed to shine with a colder and abated 
light. • 



CHAPTER XX. 

THE OREOIBON CLUB AT HOME. 

TROUBLES, when a man is still youngs are, 
after all, mere flying pains. It is not till he 
gets older that they turn to chronic aches and com- 
pound rheumatism. The parting at Bodmin Road 
Station was painful to Arthur. His father, 
as he saw, required all his self-command to re- 
strain the moisture in his eyes turning to visible 
drops, and the worthy lieutenant had to keep 
incessantly talking about the weather, and the 



THE GRIDIKON CLUB AT HOME. 299 

probability of his having to come to town to press 
his petition. 

But as soon as the train had fairly glided off, 
the wheels had settled down to their work, and the 
steam's agitation had subsided into methodical 
pulsations, the moving scene, the adventui'ousness 
of the expedition, not to speak of hunger, excite- 
ment, and the business arrangements of the journey, 
such as the changes of train, &c., had begun to 
exercise their irresistible influence, and by the time 
the great wooded hills and engine-houses of Corn- 
wall had begun to fade, like dissolving views, into 
the beautiful river scenery visible as you approach 
Plymouth, he had grown more calm and reconciled 
to his fate. At Torquay he actually fell asleep, 
and at Exeter he awoke to avenge his wrongs on a 
good dinner. 

Nature is very kind, and has balsams more or 
less eflScacious for most of our heart-wounds. The 
bustle of departure, the struggle, the legal and 
medical business of dying, even the arrangements 
necessary for funeral ceremonies afterwards, all serve 
to lessen the incitable pains of death and parting. 
The love of Lucy Tregellas, and the desire to help 
his father, were sovereign amulets against all base 
fears, and all morbid regrets. 

Arthur knew London pretty well, so it was a 
mere matter of course for him to take a bed at the 
" Tavistock " the night he arrived, and the next 
morning (December 4) to open the campaign by 
sallying out to Abbey Boad, St. John's Wood, to 



300 GBEATHEABT. 

search out Dodgeson's studio, and discuss his own 
chances of success as an artist. 

It was a pleasant, glistening morning, and the 
houses, receding down the streets into grey per- 
spective, looked cheerful enough. The Hansoms 
dashing recklessly by omnibuses, piled with 
hecatombs of City men coming into town, were 
fresh and interesting objects to the young knight- 
errant, as he cut across Tottenham Court Road, 
and made his vigorous way north-westward to the 
disforested suburb. 

Once past the ^'York and Albany,*' a short 
walk along the uniform road, and a turn to the left,' 
between rows of little trim villas, each with its 
bright little garden, brought him to Dodgeson's 
house in the Abbey Eoad. A smart little servant 
ushered him through the garden to the long de- 
tached room that served as Dodgson's studio. It 
looked out on ground destined for a square, but at 
present a jungle of docks, nettles, and dandelions. 

Dodgeson was at lunch at a small deal table, 
opposite him sat a truculent-looking man, evi- 
dently a professional model, who, attired in the 
scarlet robes and red hat of a cardinal, was just 
then stolidly intent on scooping the marrow out 
from the chink of a mutton-chop bone. 

A picture of " The Eve of St. Bartholomew " 
(a meeting of conspirators), stood on a straddling 
easel, close to a raised platform covered with faded 
red cloth. The buffet and tables were strewn with 
sticky bottles^ black and burnished copper-plates 



^^ 



no, »t 



THE GRIDIRON CLUB AT HOME. 301 

055 j^ for etching, tubes of paint, brushes, and wood blocks, 
with one side whitened ; the walls were hung with 
casts of heads, arms, legs, sketches, and char- 
coal drawings. The chairs were lumbered with 
.wheel-ruffs, rapiers, trunk-hose, and short cloaks ; 
and at one special table lay Dodgeson's palette, a 
rainbow of colours, among which shone out every 
sort of crimson, scarlet, and flamingo. It lay near 
the morning's copy of the Daily Telegraph. 

" Why, good gracious, Tolpeddeu, powers about 
us," said Dodgeson, leaping up, "who ever expected 
to see you in town, of all men I Well, old boy, 
how are you ? Here, look here, Holf ord. I shan't 
want you any more to-day ; you can go on to 
Mr. Oalderon as soon as youVe finished your beer 
— ^I know he wants you ; but mind, you must be 
here at ten, sharp, to-morrow. Here's your four 
shillings for the two hours." 

The cardinal nodded, and continued his anato- 
mical researches. 

" I think," he said, " I shall cut Mr. Oalderon 
for to-day, sir, and go and develop my biceps a 
little at skittles ; one must loaf now and then. I've 
got a friend, a barman at the ^ Fortune of War,' 
who lays money on me. Ten sharp, sir, I think 
you said !" 

" Ten, sharp." 

" All right, sir ; don't let me stop your talking 
with the gent. Your picture's coming together, 
sir, nicely." 

" That's the most cheeky individual going," said 



i^ 



302 GBEATHEABT. 

Dodgeson with his half-closed eyes, as the model 
unrobed himself, drained off his beer, and took his 
leave with great nonchalance^ carrying the tw^o 
pewter pots dangling on his finger; '^but he*s 
very useful for mediaeval heads, especially villains. 
His cheek-bones are so prominent, and he strips 
well for arms and legs. He's good at sparring, 
too. I do a little in that way with him and Hewer 
when my liver get's torpid." 

" Where is Hewer !" 

" The old boy's gone up the Thames to a yacht 
match." 

"And Fisher?" 

"Working away at his Academy picture — 
^ Swift stopped by Mohocks at Temple Bar.' Fine 
thing, sir — torchlight. Swift — grand figure — re- 
buking the scoundrels who are threatening him, 
A 1, sir. We'll go and see it presently. But 
what brought you up t — quite recovered from that 
awful spill ?" 

" Quite, thank you ; but what a fine tragic pic- 
ture this is of yours I I like the Cardinal, with his 
hand over his mouth, and his eyes peering from 
the ambush of shadow ; and I like this bold chival- 
rous fellow, too, in white, who is breaking his sword 
before the king. Well done, Dodgeson — that'll do." 

"Yes," said Dodgeson, "but it wants some- 
thing here ;" and he waved his hand all over the 
canvas. "More central light, you know, and 
these Huguenot women, passing to their prayer^ 
meeting, taunted by the sentinels, must be more 






THE JQRIDIRON CLUB AT HOME. 303 

back. How do you like the girl's face?" 

" Charming — those blue eyes are exquisitely 
put in." 

"Talking of girls, how is everyone down in 
Cornwain Hookem was here yesterday, sitting 
for that head of Branthorme in the corner. Blesd 
my soul, what a bumptious party that is ; but still I 
like him. He's full of his ' Expurgation of Guy 
Fawkes,' swears he was a great soldier, poet, 
hero, and the noblest of martyrs. Oh ! he goes in 
the whole hog for him, I can tell you." 

'* Ah ! these partisans and hired advocates, they 
whitewash everyone now. The blacker a man is, the 
better he shows the power of their detergent. They 
prove that Bacon had moral courage, that Foote 
was an honest man, and that Sterne and Dr. Dodd 
were pattern human beings." 

Dodgeson seized a wheel ruff from the chair, 
and threw it round Arthur's neck, then he placed a 
little round blue velvet cap bound with a cameo, and 
looped with a white feather, slantingly on Arthur's 
head, and receded to a distant corner to contem« 
plate him with rapture. 

" By Jove 1" he said, " it is just like a pale 
Rembrandt. I never saw anything come so stun- 
ning in all my life — light on one cheekbone, soft 
shadow over the eyes. Just give me five minutes 
sitting, and I'll catch the effect— head a little more 
to the left, thank you. By George 1 1 would have 
given £10 for this effect." 

" And how does the wood go on I" said Arthur, 



304 OREATHEABT. . 

patiently residing himself to a stiff and immov- 
able position on a raised chair. 

" Oh I toll loll— laid it by for a bit, now Tve 
done Goldsmith; they cat one's work very 
nnintelligently, and it hnrts one's eye for colour. 
This is the true thing I am on ; perhaps I shall get 
it engraved. I want £300 for it. It's a golden 
opportunity for you. Don't move, my dear fellow 
— ^my dear fellow ; Fm just putting in your left 
eye— don't dodge about so." 

" Putting in ? — ^the sun is just putting it out," 
said Arthur, laughing. 

Dodgeson darted to the blind and lowered it, 
then inconsequentiaUy nished to a great broad 
piece of gilded leather hanging bought in Yenice, 
and shook it. 

"Look at this," he said ; "real Venetian, given 
me by Sir Edwin last week for a black and tan 
pup he coveted; isn't the colour glorious for 
backgrounds ? So, you wretch, you won't give me 
a paltry £300 for this chef d!ceuvre f Very well ; 
you'll repent it, mark that. Gambart 'U make 
£600 out of it, besides exhibiting." 

"My dear Dodgeson," said Arthur bitterly, 
" you don't know how very little we are able to 
afford now — even three hundred pence for a picture. 
A bank has smashed in London, and my father is 
ruined." 

" You don't say so." 

" I do, indeed ; that is why I am in London. I 
have come to 45arn my bread." 



THE GRIDIRON CLUB AT HOME. 305 

Now this was making rather too much of it, 
and Dodgeson being a shrewd man, and an older 
man than Arthur, saw it at once, and smiled 
grimly. 

^'Come, come, old boy," he said, "not quite 
ruin, to have fifty pounds in your pocket, and 
brains enough in your head to coin more. Talk 
about bothers — everyone has them. Look at me. 
Here's this block " (in his odd way Dodgeson has 
sat down at a table and begun to work with a 
pencil at a wood-block), " I did it for Once a Week, 
three months ago, and back it comes this morn- 
ing with a civil note, telling me it would be too 
expensive in the cutting. Nice thing that ; and 
now I'm wasting time, like an idiot as I am, try- 
ing to alter it for CasseWs. But what are 
you going in for, art or literature — making tin 
somehow, I suppose t" 

" For both," said Arthur, bravely, as he rolled 
up a cigarette from Dodgeson's proffered book and 
india-rubber pouch, and arranged his chair snugly 
before the open door of Dodgeson's stove. 

" This is the best book published — Job's I" said 
Dodgeson, as he ruffled the white leaves of his 
cigarette-book. 

"And paid the publisher best, too," rejoined 
Arthur. 

" There is plenty of tin to be got at art," said 
Dodgeson, stroking his beard, "if you once get 
known; books to illustrate, etchings to sell, por- 
traits to paint, and so on ; but it takes time, let me 

VOL. II. X 



306 6BEATHEABT. 

tell you. You draw cleverly, bat you have still a 
great deal to learn before you draw correctly, or 
to satisfy those beasts, the critics, and that 
lot — ^most of whom, by-the-bye, know as much 
about art, really, as my shoe. You must draw 
the statue, and get into the academy, yon 
know, and all that sort of thing; or you can 
go to that first-rate place in Newman Street, and 
draw from the life at night. Then there's anatomy 
to get up, costume, &c. &c. — ^lots of things. You 
can't pull it oflf at once, you see." 

Arthur groaned, then spoke sanguinely. 

^' Of course there are difficulties," he said, look- 
ing into the fire ; "but I hope to pull through. I 
can do portraits, perhaps, first, and then creep on 
to an historical picture. I have a new notion of that 
scene Delacroix did from * Quentin Durward,* 
that one where the wild boar of Ardennes murders 
the old archbishop, and I've made some sketches 
for it." 

^' Awfully tough to work out. By-the-bye, 
how's Bradbrain f How infernally cut up he was 
when he heard about your spill. We were with 
him at the time; he turned ghastly pale; he really 
is a fine fellow, but the devil for play, and that 
sort of thing ; and, above all, how is that charming 
Miss Tregellas fellows said you were such awful 
spoons on ?" 

Arthur smiled, and his eyes sparkled. 

" Very well, thank you," he said ; " and as 
beautiful as a butterfly !" 



THE GRIDIBON CLUB AT HOME, 307 

** Is it true what Waverton told us, tbat Boscaw- 
en is going to cut you out in that quarter?" 

" Stuff 1" said Arthur, gravely. "I ought to 
know." 

" Now don't cut up rusty/' said Dodgeson, smil- 
ing, and looking up from his work, " We'll change 
the subject. Are you a Pre-Raphaelite — shall you 
go in for high finish, three months to a brick wall, 
and that sort of thing ?" 

" Well, to an extent ; but no raw metallic greens 
for me, no red-haired women, or cross-looking, 
ascetic, lean beauties, with protruding chins, all of 
one type — not if I know it I I don't myself like 
pictures all foreground, and, singularly enough, I 
prefer pretty to ugly women*" 

" You must choose your style," said Dodgeson, 
dipping his brush into a bottle of Chinese white 
that stood before him. "Go in either for rosy 
theatrical rustics, beautiful, and over-clean, 
Don Quixotes, men in armour, Venetians, or 
ladies of the harem, and that sort of thing. Get 
known to the dealers, cultivate old Flamboyant, 
who's, after all, not a bad style, though he's the 
biggest Jew I know } make friends with the critics, 
and get a patron." 

"I will begin this very night," said Arthur, ^'before 
my resolution cools. Y\\ go to the place at New- 
man Street, and to-morrow call Hookem, and see 
if I can get some work on the ForgeP 

" Do you think art and literature will go well 
together in harness?" said Dodgeson, putting up 

x2 



308 OREATHEABT. 

his eye-glass, and regarding Arthur with affection- 
ate cariosity. 

"/think so/* replied Arthur. " At all events I 
can put a saddle on whichever turns out the best 
horse. I must make money, and soon, too. Pve 
no time to lose. Good-bye, I shall look in to- 
morrrow, when I've got a lodging. Good-bye." 

London is a strong place to take by storm, 
how many die in the trenches when the siege has 
subsided into a blockade ! 



CHAPTER XXI. 

THE " FORGE." 

JT was the pious custom of the much-abused 
middle ages to launch a vessel with prayers 
and benedictions, waving of censers, and 
splashes of holy wine. How much more would 
such valedictory ceremonies become the leave- 
taking of a country youth about to seek his fortune 
in London ! Solitudes of Arctic Oceans, loneli- 
ness of mountains and of deserts, ye are mere 
shadows to the loneliness that may be felt in Lon- 
don! 

What ghastly first floors, what dismal apartments 
did Arthur not spend one whole day in reconnoiter- 
ingi What hard, subtle, false old widows with 
broad braids, dirty caps, and greasy mourning ! what 
drunken, scraggy old maids! what grinding, thievish. 



THE " fobge/' 309 

jaded old braces of sisters did he not encounter 
and disappoint! In the Temple, what strange 
burglars' dens, all passage and cupboard, did he 
not shudder at ; and in Grays' Inn what suicidal 
nests of dirty rooms, half of them all but window- 
less. 

At last he settled down to two clean second-floor 
rooms in Keppel Street, at the back of the British 
Museum. There, for a pound a week, he calcu- 
lated, he should be near the Beading Boom, and 
the Newman Street studio, and not many leagues 
away from the Sultan Editor, and the office of the 
Forge — ^his gold mine that was to be. 

Having, then, brought his portmanteau, and 
small traps from the "Tavistock" to No. 77, Arthur 
set out boldly for Catherine Street, where the 
Forge office was, eager, sanguine, f uU of the 
brightest dreams, and with the rainbow of Hope 
encircling him with its unfading triumphal arch. 

It was about three o'clock when he got there, 
and the clerk in the office below informed him, 
through the rails of a sort of prisoner's dock, that 
Mr. Hookem was in, but very busy, for it was the 
day before publishing day. 

"Name, sir," said the sharp clerk, turning to a 
long flexible hookah tube that hung from the wall at 
his back, and whistling up it like an alarmed 
smuggler. 

" Mr. Tolpedden," said Arthur, quite unabashed 
at even the smartest and most knowing of London 
clerks. 



810 GREATHEABT. 

In a minate or two there came down a subter- 
ranean voice, to which the clerk listened with head 
on one side, and the respect due to oracles. 

*^WiII you walk upstairs, sir? — ^first to the 
right," said the clerk, awe-struck at the instantan- 
eousness with which the levee had been granted, 
and pointing to a swing-glass door that led to a 
flight of stairs. 

At the top of the stairs stood no less than three 
dirty-faced printers* devils waiting for proofs and 
copy, and in the ante-room adjoining three fretful 
young contributors, nervous, angry, and impatient, 
were reading, or trjring to read, the morning papers. 

A few moments after Arthur had entered, one 
flap of a folding door flew open, in darted Mr. 
Hookem, and tore him away by one arm into 
the front room, in spite of all the frowns and irri- 
tation of the men who had been longest waiting. 

The room was well furnished, but the red-striped 
chairs were splashed with ink, and the walls 
were hung with files of proofs, and blocked up 
with shelves of reference volumes. The table was 
strewn with slips of MS., proofs, the ink still wet 
on the last slip, and files of Blue Books, very Ossas 
and Pelions of dulness. 

*^ Well, my dear fellow, how are you t" said the 
Editor, resuming his cane-backed throne. " Who 
ever expected to see you in Babylon ! What a 
game thing that was, to be sure, your shooting that 
mare of Bradbrain's 1 Delighted to see youl How 
are they all I" 



THE " FOBGE." 31 1 

" I fear I am making those gentlemen in the next 
room very envious." 

" Serve 'em right. Why don't they write what 
I like, and what I want, and not refine and split 
straws till there is no black or white left in the 
review. One man all extract, another all fad of 
his own, a third all personal abuse. Won't do — 
not the Forge tone. I won't have it. They shall 
cool their heels an hour yet. Up, I suppose, Ar- 
thur, for the opera or some ball? And how is 
that infernal mine going on? It was a nice 
affair, that was — rather near the wind that of my 
friend Mordred, if ever a thing was. 'Fore 
George 1 sir, yes. By-the-bye, I heard your fa- 
ther was hit rather hard by that swindling bank ?" 

" So we were, worse luck, that's what brings me 
to town. You will be surprised to hear that I 
have given up all thoughts of the University, and 
iam going to try my hand at art and literature." 

"Tut I tutl tutl tut!" chirruped the Editor, 
troubled but in a cheery way. " That's a bad look- 
out for you. What changes of fortune one sees ! 
Well, I suppose I must be godfather to you in this 
wicked world of London, and put you up to the 
way of doing it ; but you'll have to wait ; it can't 
be done in a day — must serve an apprenticeship." 

" Can you give me some work, Hookem ?" asked 
Arthur boldly, coming to the point. 

"Well, you see I'm not the only person in- 
terested; and ours is a peculiar, most peculiar 
paper. Now, the Trimmer is quite another thing* 



312 OBEATHEABT. 

You'd have to learn our style — we are very par- 
ticular about style. But why take to journalism, 
poor, wearisome, mill-horse, treadmill journalism ? 
Good gracious ! my dear fellow, don't throw away 
your brilliant talents on our light confectionary 
business — mere tartlets, sir, for the day's con- 
sumption. No, sir, write a book, and aim at im- 
mortality." 

"A book?" said Arthur, rather startled at the 
proposition ; *^ a book is a great undertaking." 

" Not at all — not at all — done successfully every 
day by the most ordinary people, who have simply 
no capital to go on, but tact, sir, tact, industry, and 
patience. You must watch the market." 

** But how can you lead the public if you live 
by following its momentary whims ?" asked Ar- 
thur. 

" Half lead and half follow, of course," said the 
editor, as he patted the gold hunter- watch in his left 
waistcoat-pocket. " My dear boy, you must write 
a book. There are subjects by the dozen — * The 
History of Scientific Discovery in England,' * The 
History of the Search for the North West Pas- 
sage,' ' The History of the Search for the Nile,'&c., 
&c. Mind, there must be no hurry. Take two 
years at least ; above all things, begin by making 
a hit — il ny a que Is premier pas qxd coute ; after 
that your way is easy — publishers seek you, and 
an edition will go off in a day ; miss the first time, 
and you'll be five years trying to retrieve your- 
self." 



THE "forge." 313 

Now this advice was shrewd aiid well-meant^ 
but it rather galled Arthur, because it was mixed 
with much that was selfish, hard, and incon- 
siderate. 

" But who is to keep me for two years," said 
the aspirant, somewhat bitterly, " while I produce 
this said immortal work ?" 

Mr. Hookem took a big cigar out of a case, and 
pricked it with his penknife. Having done that, 
be replied grandiosely, and in his most Johnsonian 
manner, 

" Sir, a man, if he chooses, can live on any- 
thing. When I first came to town, and began my 
most successful book, one that has gouQ through 
fourteen editions, and has been translated into six 
European languages — I refer to my work on ^ The 
Faults and Imperfections in the Writings of 
William Shakspere," — I lived anyhow. I worked 
all day in^ a newspaper ofiice, and at night toiled at 
my book. That's the way, sir. Claret is not ne- 
cessaiy to nurture the brain." 

Self-made men are generally pompous. They 
like to taste their success. Arthur did not relish 
this. He was quick-tempered, he felt angry, and he 
showed it. 

"I don't care about claret," he said; "but I 
must have bread and salt to maintain me, till I can 
write what is worth reading. Besides, I want im- 
mediate money, however little, to help my father. 
Can you get me some reviewing? — say books of 
poetry or history. I should try and be fair, and 



314 OBEATHEABT. 

^ve a clear, simple description of the contents of 
the book, with, now and then, when the case was 
obyioos, a common-sense verdict* I would not 
abuse nor sneer if I could help it ; and I would 
respect honest work, whoever and wherever it 
came from." 

^^ My dear young f riend,** said Hookem, leaning 
back in his arm-chair, and thrusting his thumbs 
into the arm-holes of his waistcoat, and raising bis 
eye-brows, " you do not know the world as well 
as I do. I tell you, to be able to have a dig at a 
book of the opposite clique is one of the greatest 
pleasures of a high literary position — ^it makes you 
at once feared and respected by the small yelpers 
and snappers. If a book is bad toned, or by a 
cad, never try and praise one part — to balance the 
running down in another. People don't like trim- 
mers, what they want is good sound black and 
white. We must have cliques, and I like the one 
to which I belong to be strong. You will fall 
into my ways of thinking some day. Cliques help 
one on mightily. I began my career with a small 
clique — ^I shall end them the head of the most pow- 
erful clique in London." 

Arthur was rather disgusted at the shameless 
trade-spirit and utter cynicism of the man. It all 
came home to Jiim now. 

" What induced you, by-the-bye, Hookem," h6 
said, to turn the conversation, "to write your 
Shakspere book ? — was it not rather invidious to 
assay gold merely to discover dross f " 



THE "forge." B15 

Hookem laughed with a grand and pitying sur- 
prise. 

" Nine-tenths of the modem authors who praised 
Shakspere," he said, "I knew did so only be- 
cause it is the fashion, and because he is foolishly 
supposed to be like the sky, out of the reach of 
all criticism. T knew they would like to see this 
insensate worship of one man's mind attacked in a 
powerful way, so I did it. I did it with the same 
reluctance with which I abandoned high Toryism 
to join the Forge^ when I first carried over my 
standard to the camp of the highest class of 
Liberals ; but still I did it, and with the utmost 
preparation, and I crossed the Bubicon, sir, without 
disordering my forces or losing a man." 

It was a feature of Mr. Hookem's way of talk- 
ing, that he gave a grand national and diplomatic 
air to his dirtiest and most reprehensible actions. 
To desert a principle, to forsake a political faith, 
for motives of self-interest, too, are not heroic 
actions ; but Mr. Hookem assumed the dignity of a 
Ourtius on the brink of the pit. 

" To prove my case," said Hookem, going to a 
shelf and taking down a superbly-bound book, 
glistening with gold, " Til show you what a duty I 
felt it to be to hold up the errors of our great 
writer, whose raging haste, involutions, quibbles, 
and knotty sentences, have done almost as much 
harm to our literature as his finer passages have 
done good. Take this passage, ^ The blanket of the 
dark.' Was ever such fustian known ? Ignorant 



316 GREATHEABT. 

readers should be told this is f astian, and be shown 
that no TOter is above criticism. Everywhere 
words close packed, air wanted between the lines. 
* A jungle/ sir, as I have said in page forty, * where 
the undergrowth dwindles for want of space.' Take 
it anywhere : 

^ Yet reason dares her no ; 
For my authority bears of a credent bulk, 
That no particuhir scandal once can touch 
But it confounds the breather.^ 

Then here's cant : 

^ Blow winds and crack your cheeks/ 

Cheeks, indeed I Then the idea of calling the 
lightning to ^ singe ' Lear's head. My goodness ! a 
grand image that. Pshaw ! sir, it must be weeded. 
Common sense insists on it, sir." 

Oh I sublimity of self-conceit I Hookem was 
imperial in his self-elected Dictatorship. 

" It no doubt," said Arthur, not without some 
effort, choking down his disgust, and trying to re- 
member only the energy and bonhomie of the man 
— " this no doubt serves to raise the standard of 
criticism ; but is it not rather an ungracious task?" 

"That's the common cry. But, sir, in doing a pub- 
lic duty, I despise cries, and I hope I always shall. 
If I merely wished to skulk away and avoid public 
duties, I should never have stepped forward as the 
rehabilitator of that great scientific discoverer, Mr^ 
Guido Fawkes ; the advocate of that martyr to the 



THE "forge." 317 

Baconian theory, that Empedocles of an ungrate- 
ful century, that hero of chemistry, that ^" 

" Copy, sir," said a black face, thrusting itself 
in at the door, with no prelude but a pert tap with 
one knuckle, "Men standing still, sir, and they 
want to lock up the first page." 

" Get away, you, sir !" shouted Hookem, as you 
would whip a stray dog back to the kennel, " and 
wait till I call you. Let them wait. This life is 
enough," he said, turning to Arthur with elevated 
hands, " to drive a man mad, what with authors, 
printers, compositors, and readers. I told a man 
to write a leader last night on the London police, 
and he sends me a thing beginning with an anec- 
dote of the Fljdng Highwayman, not a word 
about the habits of the force in it, so I had to graft 
it all over with allusions, like larding a fowl ; a 
nice occupation, truly, for a guider of public opin- 
ion. Three hours work. Another fellow produces 
an essay on Civil Law, stiff and buckramed enough 
for a supplementary chapter to Blackstone ; and 
then they call me t3rrannical and overbearing, be- 
cause I don't give them as much work as they 
want — stuck-up, amateur young fellows, too, who 
treat my guineas as if they went for mere pocket- 
money, pretending to despise every author who 
gives his life to literature, and is honestly proud of 
the money that is his inadequate reward for in- 
structing and amusing the world." 

" I am entirely with you in disliking the pre- 
tentious amateur in any profession," said Arthur. 



318 GBRATHEABT. 

^ Yoa would not care for a little rongh work as 
ao apprenticeship, I know ?** said the Editor, with 
a searching look at Arthur. '^The fact is, mj dear 
fellow, we cannot jost now afford veiy well to pay 
for articles that might not suit. We have had a 
new en^ne to buy — ^an awful pull ; but I can get 
you some hours' work a day, I think, at Blizard's, 
that would leave you time to read, write, and paint, 
and bring in a little pewter, too ! " 

Arthur flew at the proposal as he would have 
done at a bull-finch in fox-hunting. 

** You're very kind, Hookem," he said, warmly, 
" I don't care how rough the work is." 

^^Well, the work hasn't much romance in it; 
the place is in Chandos Street, Covent Garden, 
David and Blizard, a sort of newspaper factory, — 
supply leaders and digested paragraphs simul- 
taneously to nine country papers, all in stereotype. 
Good beginning — better than I got when I came 
first to London." 

"I am most grateful," said Arthur, eagerly. 

*^ Grateful! well, the thing hardly requires 
much gratitude," said Hookem, jovially; "but 
keep your heart up, Arthur, and go to work. 
There is no need to tell a young man of your 
sense that Home was not built in a day. The 
work at Blizard's will bring in two guineas a week, 
and that will keep the pot boiling for the present. 
There, you can train for your book. Good-bye. 
Excuse me now, for I'm up to my eyes in work." 

Tolpedden shook the Sultan Editor's hand 



THE "forge." 819 

warmly, and went his way, a brighter rainbow 
arch of Hope springing into the air as he entered 
St. Martin's Lane, and sought the murky den of 
knowledge tenanted by David and Blizard, a den 
where the demon of ignorance groaned and roared 
as the great rollers of the steam press unceasingly 
crushed and mangled him beneath their ponder- 
ous and irresistible weight. 



CHAPTER XXn. 

NEWS FROM HOME. 

TOLPEDDEN'S rooms in Keppel Street were 
all very well, only they were draughty and 
cold, and the fire always smoked, and the ser- 
vant came up with dirty hands, that spoiled your 
appetite for breakfast. 

And at night they were very well, too, only the 
bed-room looked down upon a mews, and every 
cab that returned, and dashed and rattled down the 
paved passage at the side of the house, seemed to 
drive through Arthur^s body, beginning at his toes 
and coming out at the back of his head. 

And the people of the house were also all very 
well, only the landlady used to go into ambiguous 
fits at the bottom of the stairs ; and the landlord 
was a foolish, meek little man, with many of the 
facial symptoms of inebriety, who never appeared 
but on these occasions; and the daughter was a 



320 OBEATHEABT. 

silly ringleted old maid, who always wore dirty 
white kid gloves. Still Arthur, in all the hope 
and buoyancy of early manhood, cared for none 
of these things, and drew and wrote, heedless of 
all annoyance, because there was always one bright, 
pure, loving face looking from the clouds, and 
smiling comfort. 

The fourth day of his being in London, Arthur, 
on his return from his night-work at Davis and 
Blizard's, where he was daily engaged till past 
midnight, found, to his joy, when he struck a 
light, a bulky letter lying for him on the slab in 
the hall, close to his bed-room candle. 

He tore it open, and read its contents there and 
then. 

The first was from his father. 

" My dearest Boy, 

" Need I tell you how we have missed 
you, how Jack mourns for you, how even Gipsy 
hangs her head, and Benbow screams sorrowfully? 
Still, I feel it would be selfish to lament your 
carrying out so generous and brave a resolution. 
I fear by this time you have begun to find out 
what a slippery ice-mountain the hill is on which 
the Temple of Fame, as well as that of Mammon, 
is built. Let no desire to help me lead you to 
sell your birthright of talent. Keep honest fame 
always in view, do no work that does not lead 
in some way or other to the result you wish to 
attain in Literature or Art, Take my advice, and 



NEWS FEOM HOME. 321 

do not try for both prizes. Life is short, and Art 
IS long. There is so much to do in both profes- 
sions, so many blunders to make, and to correct ; 
so many false paths to traverse before you can 
learn to avoid them; much self-knowledge to 
be acquired only by temporary reverses, defeats, 
and disappointments. It is given to few to attain 
success at once, 'royally (koniglich),' as Goethe 
used to say. A young man, you will find, has 
also to do much for mere bread, and to victual 
his forces, much that does not help, and even that 
delays the campaign. 

" But I am writing as if I was still a soldier. 

Let me now speak as a minister, in my other 

deserted profession. Take the sword of faith, 

fight and plough alternately, as the Israelites did. 

Remember the name the children gave you. You 

are Greatheart, and must not dare to flinch for even 

a moment with a coward fear. The world is a 

poltroon ; take it boldly and laughingly by the 

throat, and it will cringe at your feet. Beware 

of the rocks men split upon, and do not run after a 

dozen things at once, like a dog in a snow-storm. 

It IS a bitter thought to me sometimes, in moments 

of despondency, to think what narrow-brained fools 

but still men seeking with tenacity one success, have 

passed me in the race of life. 

"But enough of preaching; you have prac- 
tice, which IS better. The mine Mordred cheated 
us out of so infamously, after a most suspicious 
hUl has begun again to yield copper, and cheer 

Y 



322 OBEATHEART. 

the shareholders, amongst whom, I hear, are most 
of oar friends, except the Tregellases. For some 
reason or other, that I cannot divine, Tregellas has 
been rather cold in his manner towards me lately, 
and Lncj has only been to see yonr aunt once, 1 
think, since your departure. The captain is very 
busy just now rig^ng a little schooner for Johnny. 
He threatens to write. I am working hard at my 
chemistry. Sometimes I have gleams of hope, 
and then again I almost despair. There are, I 
feel sure, great secrets concealed in the allegories 
of Paracelsus ; but ^ the hatching of the Basilisk,' 
is, I fear, no easy task. 

" I remain, my dear Arthur, 

**' Your very loving father, 

" Henry Tolpedden. 

*' Arthur Tolpedden, Esq." 

The lieutenant's letter was brief, but character- 
istic. 

" My dear Arthur, 

"I suppose now you're getting 
well away, you're sheeting home, and hoisting up 
top-gallants and royals. Presently, I hope, you'll 
trim the yards, and make sail on her. I pray 
God the wind may be light, and the sea smooth. 
It is hard to run on the Kentish Knock, or the 
Gallopper, just as one is near harbour, like your 
father and myself. God keep you from all lee 
shores, world without end, amen ! We caught 



NEWS FBOM HOME. 323 

a rabbit (Walker and I) last night among the 
cabbages. Jack, Teddy, and Kate send love. 
Even Bobby misses you. Polly wants to write, so 
I mustn't say more. The carriage-horses sold 
pretty well. That beast Mordred bought them. I 
am rigging a taut little cobel for one of the boys. 

*^ Your loving uncle, 

" Nelson Tolpedden. 

** Arthur Tolpedden, Esq." 

Mrs. Tolpedden's letter was kind and simple- 
hearted. 

" My dear Arthur, 

" I miss you, and so do the dear 
children. Why go to that dreadful London and 
turn painter? I suppose you'll some day send us 
your own portrait painted by yourself. Do not 
be unhappy, but I must tell you that the Tre- 
gellases have been rather cold and formal lately, 
since our misfortunes. Lucy came the other day, 
and asked very kindly after you, but said nothing 
about writing. She is going away soon for a 
month. They do talk of Captain Boscawen ad- 
miring her, but, like a true, confiding lover, 
you will of course laugh at this report. Mr. Brad- 
brain is here to see Teddy, who has a cough, and 
he sends his kindest regards. I must conclude, 
for Walker is waiting for the post-bag. 

" Yours very affectionately, 

" Mary Tolpedden. 

" P.S.— All the children send their love." 



324 OBEATHEABT. 

Lucy's not writing — ^that shot a pang through 
Arthur's heart ; but he comforted himself by the 
thought that she only waited for a letter from 
him, and he reproached himself for having de- 
layed it. 



CHAPTER XXin. 

MB. TBEVENA AND THE BISHOP. 

ST. NECTAN'S was a '' peculiar," and Mr. Tre- 
yena's feudal suzerain was not the Bishop of 
Exeter, but the Bishop of Blank. 

Much to the horror of Miss Trevena, and some- 
what to his own alarm, the worthy man, a fort- 
night after Arthur's departure, received a formal 

letter from the Bishop of , requesting to see 

him on that day week. It was an expensive 
journey, but it could not be avoided. Perhaps 
even, he tried to believe, the bishop had written to 
offer him preferment. The Trevenas were not 
rich, and the first expenses of the Wheal Fortune 
had more than swallowed up all hope of a speedy 
dividend, sanguine as Miss Trevena still continued 
to be. 

" It's that horrid charge of yours — I know it is, 
John," was all the comfort the inexorable lady 
would afford. 

When Mr. Trevena had got out of the train, 
and found himself in the lime-tree walk leading to 



MR. TREVENA AND THE BISHOP. 325 

the Bishop's palace^ from the trim, quiet close of 

, he felt not unlike a school-boy going to an 

interview with the head-master. His somewhat 
seedy Inverness cape, and old black wide-awake, 
struck him all of a sudden with a shame and a 
dismay that he, however, instantly dismissed from 
his mind as cowardly and unbecoming. 

" So goes my last chance of preferment," he said 
to himself, as a dead leaf blew from a bough above 
his head, and rustled against his chest. " Well, 
never mind, what I wrote was for a good purpose, 
God knows; and there's the Wheal Fortune at 
my back, so it might be worse." 

Then, as he pulled the visitor's bell and turned 
his back, a nervous dilemma presented itself — 
should he ask if His Lordship was in, or if the 
Bishop of was at home ? 

Having decided on the former, Mr. Trevena was 
suddenly startled by finding that the door had been 
opened two or three minutes, and that a pert, 
sleek young footman was quietly and superciliously 
criticizing him. 

His lordship was at home, but engaged — would 
he send in his card! Unluckily Mr. Trevena 
never used cards, so he sent in his name. His 
lordship wished to see him, and would he walk into 
the library ? 

Mr. Trevena passed up the long hall, and was 
shown into a splendid room, as unlike the hut of 
an apostle as could well be. Trevena had never 
seen the bishop, and therefore bowed, as a tall, stiff, 



326 GBEATHEABT. 

middle-aged, jerky man, with red whiskers, who 
was reading at the window, turned, bowed, and 
pointed in a cold, repulsive way to a chair with its 
back to the door. 

" I have come, your lordship," he began, un- 
easily, for he felt how much mjght depend on that 
interview. 

^^You are mistaken, sir," said the gentleman 
with the cassock waistcoat ; " I am only his lord- 
ship's examining chaplain. I presumed you were 
Mr Penrose, of ^" 

" My name is Trevena — ^I really beg your par- 
don," stammered the curate. " I came by appoint- 
ment." 

" And I am very glad to see you, Mr. Trevena," 
said a voice at the door. 

It was the bishop; he advanced and held 
out one finger, to meet Mr. Trevena's brusque 
hand. 

" Mr. Starker, please to go into the cedar-room, 
and read those papers I was speaking to you 
about — ^I have a little business with Mr. Trevena 
here." 

The toady in the white neckcloth bowed to the 
ground and left the room. 

The bishop was a bland, courtly man — suave 
in his own way, but cold as ice, proud as a 
Seigneur de Coucy, a high of the high, and a 
tyrant over those who would not bend ; sincere, 
but fond of power, and determined to surrender no 
jot of position or prerogative. For the gentlemen 



MB. TREVESA AND THE BISHOP. 327 

Christians of his own way of thinking, the bishop 
was perfect ; bat it needed other men for the pest- 
house, the alley, the workhouse, the fever hospital, 
and the poor man's death-bed. The bishop was, 
in fact, merely an English nobleman, with a silk 
apron on, and would no more have borne advice or 
difference of opinion in a curate, than our friend 
Hookem would have done from one of his para- 
sites. 

With that accuracy and easy movement, as if 
learned at drill, so graceful and becoming in 
the English gentleman, the bishop thrust his 
white soft hand under a litter of sermons and pur- 
ple-covered pamphlets, at last drew out one, opened 
it, and began to read. 

" May I ask you, Mr. Trevena, if this satire is 
your writing, as I am told it is, and if these are 
your opinions? I wish to encourage my clergy to 
copy their Di^nne Master, and to go about and 
judge for myself, without listening to the reports 
and slanderous tattle of mischievous eavesdroppers. 
I wish to become personally acquainted with the 
life, character, and the parochial wants of the 
humblest curate in my diocese. Without this I must 
be to my clergy only as a distant absentee landlord, 
taking my rents, and returning no equivalent." 

'^ That is my writing, my lord — I cannot deny 
it," said Mr. Trevena, quietly, but not in a cowed 
way. 

" I am sorry to hear it. What are your opinions, 
may I ask, on predestination? I should like to 



328 OBEATHEABT. 

hear the opinions of so eminent a writer upon 
that important point/' 

What deadly poison may be kneaded up with 
honey! The bishop had hold of the tooth, the 
wrench must soon come. But, unfortunately for 
the bishop, when he was at Oxford, five-and- 
twenty years before, he had been as low as he wars 
now high. 

" My opinions on that point," said Mr. Trevena, 
gravely, and looking unflinchingly at the bishop, 
** are exactly those that your lordship so eloquently 
defended when I had the great pleasure of listen- 
ing to you at St. Mary's, the last year I was at 
Oxford." 

The bishop coloured. It was a palpable hit, 
the foil had left its chalk-mark on the very centre 
of the bishop's breast. 

"I find in this rather unwise satire of yours 
some very doubtful and detracting remarks on 
that sublime blending of theology and religion, 
the Athanasian Creed. Do you f — what is ? — how 
would you ? — in what light, I mean, do you hold, 
Mr. Trevena, this great intellectual protest of 
theology against error I" 

" That was the very point on which I have been 
so long anxious to consult your lordship, and to 
benefit by your profound scholarship." 

Talleyrand himself could not have invented a 
more graceful evasion, or a more subtle flattery, 
honest and sincere as it was. 

The bishop smiled all over his face, and launched 



MR. TRBVENA AND THE BISHOP. 329 

into a sea of theology. The creed refuted the 
errors of Arius, Sabellius, Nestorius, and ApoUi- 
naris — ^all the bishop said went to prove that the 
Church formularies were dogmatic. 

Trevena listened and doubted, but his manner 
was so frank, gentlemanly, and honestly flattering, 
that the bishop relented, and looked upon him as 
an easy conquest to Jesuitical logic. 

"You do not," said the bishop, smiling, "I 
know, agree with me on the question of Retreats. 
This I cannot complain of, though I think such 
periodical retirements would replenish the springs 
of our spiritual life, and strengthen our powers of 
sympathy with the objects of faith. I should like 
you to read what Bellarmine says on this point." 

"I should be only too delighted," said Mr. Tre- 
vena, " for I have but few books. Still, your lord- 
ship, I must confess that I have thought that weak 
men once there might feel reluctance to plunge 
again into the troubles of the world; and that, 
even if they did, their flocks would suffer more by 
their absence than their pastors could gain by their 
retirement." 

"I am of quite a different opinion," said the 
bishop, " I consider no state of life could be de- 
vised more adapted for the soul's health; but I 
rely on your candour to re-consider the arguments 
in favour of these institutions, and I think they 
will affect your mind, as they have certainly done 
mine." 

There was a moment's silence, and the bishop 

VOL. II. Z 



330 GBEATHEABT. 

touched the ebony handle of a bell. Instantly the 
door opened, and a footman appeared. At this 
apparently palpable hint, Mr. Trevena rose to take 
leave. 

"No, you must stay and have luncheon, Mr. 
Trevena," said the bishop. " I only rang to send 
some letters to the post." 

Mr. Trevena excused himself, with many thanks, 
on the plea that he should miss his train. 

" f hat is a business plea," said the bishop; ^^I 
cannot oppose. Good morning, then. God in his 
great goodness guide you to the right I Good 
morning. Linfoot, when you have shown Mr. 
Trevena out, tell Mr. Starker I am disengaged." 

The following night, at his own fireside, Mr. 
and Miss Trevena sat together discussing the in- 
terview. 

"John," said Miss Trevena, "for once in your 
life you showed some practical shrewdness. I do 
not quite despair of your preferment yet. You cer- 
tainly managed the bishop very cleverly." 



END or THE SECOND VOLUME. 



LONDON : PRINTSD BT ICAODONALD AND TU6WELL, BLENHEIM EOUSE. 




CHAPTER I. 

THE THREE PARTNERS. 

ONE January morning, about a month after 
Arthur's departure for London, Mr. Brad- 
brain sat on horseback on the path leading down 
to Endellion, looking at the mining operations be- 
low at the Wheal Fortune. 

The mine was situated in the centre of an 
amphitheatre of slaty rock, not far from the place 
where we described Arthur as seeing the mermaid, 
but hidden from it by a small headland. The 
orange-stained cliffs, smeared with earthy grey, 
were echoing with the crashing sound of the tin 
stampers, the great beam of the pumping-engine 
was moving up and down with its tireless force ; 
and the sea, at the base of the rocks, was already 
red and discoloured with the water drawn from 
the workings. 

There were no miners visible, except here and 
there a man ascending or descending the rude 
wooden ladders, that led from one shelf of rock to 
another ; or a boy sent by Captain Sampy on some 
errand to the nearest village. It was a fresh, 
wild winter morning, with a ruffling south-west 
wind, that drove the sea in rough, strong, and 

VOL. III. B 



2 GREATHEART. 

foaming. Out at sea one boat alone was trying 
in vain to pass the headland of Endellion, in a 
clumsy, sluggish, " Cousin Jacky " way, that pro- 
voked Bradbrain's indignation. 

All at once there came a gloved hand on his 
horse's neck, and looking round he saw to his sur- 
prise Mr. Mordred standing beside him. 

• ^' Why, you infernal old mole, how soft you 
came — how you glide about 1 I never heard you 
behind me. Well, what's your little game? — 
what have you come for?" 

"I've come to see Sampy — he keeps writing 
and worrying me about money, when there's none 
due to the man. The mine hasn't been doing 
well this last week ; I'm afraid we're getting to 
an elvan. I want to make Tolpedden sell us that 
other old working up there to the left, and then 
make a cross cut to join the two." 

" And how's old Miss Peard this morning ? — 
yield to treatment ? — how's chest ?" 

" She's going home fast, I fear — cough harder 
— pulse feeble. Tve been reading to her Isaiah 
xxiv., verse 10 to the end. 

" Well, the sooner the old cat goes the better — 
I don't see any good she is; and then young 
Davis '11 get the legacy he's worked so hard for." 

" She is but indifferently prepared." 

" That's her look-out. She has been seventy- 
five years getting ready. Do you remember how 
she slanged me for letting Gip kill her cat? I'd 
like to give her a little prussic — that would do har 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 3 

business for her, and help Nature in her excellent 
intention of removing the old carrion !" 

"Fie! fie! Bradbrain 1" 

" Oh I there's no cant about me, so I tell you 
— I speak the truth about people. She's not my 
patient — I hate the old devil." 

" By-the-bye, I saw the lieutenant this morn- 
ing — he came in for some sal-volatile for his wife. 
He says young Tolpedden, your old chum, is hard 
at work and doing well." 

"My old chum I — I like that 1 — the young co^c- 
comb I — he wants his comb cut, and I'll do it for 
him, if he crosses me again ! Don't you believe his 
brag. Lucas writes me that he called on him and 
found him sweating at a beggarly low printing- 
office — ^I owe that fellow one ^" 

"Still unconverted," said Mordred, with a 
groan and cough. " Why all this envy, hatred, 
and uncharitableness ? — ^take things quieter — this 
life is but a dream — ^we are all pilgrims." 

" Oh I don't practise your religious speeches on 
me," said Bradbrain, slapping his gloves against 
the pommel of his saddle; "keep them for the 
county paper, I don't want 'em — ^they're quite 
out of my way. You can hate, old boy, and bite, 
too, as well as any of us. I remember old Pollock's 
apoplexy — old Kill-'em-again — so don't humbug 
me with your penitential psalms." 

Mordred did not retort, but his face grew 
graver and more livid as he turned the conver- 
sation. 

b2 



4 OREATHEART. 

"I sometimes deeply regret, Bradbrain," he 
said, ^' that in an old mine like ours the men have 
so far to climb, one thousand feet at least, with 
fifteen pounds of tools on their back, and after six 
hours' work. Sir Charles Lemon, at our Philan- 
thropic Meeting on Tuesday, attributed much 
chest disease to this — four of our men came to me 
last week, as you know, for pleuritic and pulmonic 
stitches. We must see about a man-engine.*' 

"Yes, cost two thousand shiners," said Bradbrain, 
with a contemptuous stare ; " like to see you at it 
— not if I know it, old boy. Suppose they do get 
phthisis, let them come to us about it — ^I'll patch 
them up, if you cant. The beggars, what would 
they do in the winzes at the Consolidated at Eed- 
ruth ? — why, the lowest level there is three hun- 
dred fathoms." 

"Nothing seems to touch your heart," said 
Mordred regretfully, " and yet you venture to call 
me hard." 

" And so you are, a regular old mill-stone ! You 
rile me by putting on all these religious airs, 
when you know you care no more for the poor 
devils sweltering down there to fill your pockets 
than I do about the pilchards strewn on a field. 
Perhaps you'd like the mine lit with gas, and sofas 
sent down for the men. My gracious ! you should 
see the Indians in the South American places. 
Why, in the Emerald Mines I was telling you 
about, before Rundell and Bridges took them, they 
used up an Indian in three years." 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 5 

" Were you long at the mines ?" 

" Two years. I saved one man's life. Did I 
ever tell you about that V* 

" Not that I remember." 

" There was a fellow had got his arm torn by a 
wheel, and a brute of aSpaniard — afellow I wouldn't 
have trusted to cure a pig — insisted on taking it 
off. I was away, but they sent for me. I looked, 
and found I could save all but three fingers. 
* Get away,' I said, * you duffer I He's my Indian 
— ^he's not your Indian. He shan't have his arm 
off; and if you insist on it, Don Cuchillo, I'll 
fight you for it.' So the fellow caved in, and I 
saved the dog's arm." 

" You'll stay and see Sampy with me ?" 

"No, can't — can't, upon my life. Promised to 
be at the Tolpeddens' to lunch. Blow up Sampy 
yourself ; pigeon him out of his share in your own 
way, and comfort him with appropriate texts. I'll 
leave it all to you — you are too deep for me." 

"And you're much too wild for me," said 
Mordred gravely, slowly turning and looking 
Bradbrain full in the face. Bradbrain's eyes 
lowered before Mordred's. "You imperil our 
position, I tell you. Once more, I'll not have it. 
You know the hold I have over you, and I mean 
to keep it. Take care — take care, Bradbrain, 
how far you carry matters at Tolpedden, or you'll 
meet your match. The thing is talked about; 
I tell you the Tregellases are suspicious, and the 
thing is talked about. You'll get into a scrape, 



6 OREATHEABT. 

mark my words. You're on the broad way. You're 
sowing the wind; take care you don't reap the 
whirlwind, that's all I say." 

" My affairs are nothing to you," retorted Brad- 
brain, fiercely ; " if I like to go to the Tolpeddens' 
ten times a day, what's that to you f I don't in- 
terfere with your mining tricks and land swindles, 
and getting capital out of canting meetings. You 
leave me alone ; we are of use to each other in 
our own way, but we hunt different game." 

" Now don't adopt that strain," replied the more 
pacific partner. " We must go on in this matter 
hand-in-hand. It is for our mutual interest. 
Trust to me, this is a glorious enterprise — ^you know 
I am never sanguine." 

" Now I can go in harness with you, when you 
try the soft tack ; only leave me alone, and I'll give 
you carte blanche with Sampy," 

" Now you are more reasonable," said Mordred. 
" You must stop this fellow's complaints, and at 
once. We'll go, then, now, and see the forenoon 
core (gang) come up to grass, for Sampy will be 
there, and we can talk the matter over. It is better 
than his coming to us ; no one can hear us here. 
I wish we had that old working over there to the 
left; it would make the thing so complete, 
wouldn't it, and it would secure us from all 
chance of the lode being cut off." 

"'Pon my soul, old fellow," said Bradbrain, 
with more detestable insolence than usual, " look 
here. I think you're regularly bitten with this 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 7 

scheme. You'll be breaking all our gallipots 
some day, and turning captain of the Wheal 
Squiddler yourself. Suppose — now, just suppose 
— the metal tailed off all at once — a nice hole we 
should be in, then, with all that bank money to 
make up. Did that ever strike you? I never 
took you before for a sanguine man. That used 
to be your moindre dtfautr 

•^Impossible. Providence has been good to 
this favoured spot. The lode is a champion lode, 
and must run for miles, so the men tell me. 'Tis 
a great trunk of metal, with endless radiations, 
permeating right under the sea. We shall coin 
money. There may be faults, heaves, and small 
elvans; but the lode is traceable by the broil 
over our heads. That sort of gossan never played 
false." 

Bradbrain paused, pulled up his horse, and 
looked hard into his partner's livid face. 

" And wouldn't you devilish well like to get me 
out of the way, and have all the pickings to your- 
self. Only, you see, I am too strong for you, and 
know rather too many unpleasant secrets." 

Mordred was calm and conciliatory. 

" Now, don't you be foolishly suspicious. Brad- 
brain ; you and I have been always true to each 
other, and cannot work well alone. I, too, have 
my secrets, but they'll remain secrets, that also you 
know. We have tried each other before now." 

By this time the two men had reached the 
entrance of the Wheal Fortune Mine — an open- 



8 GREATHEART. 

ing in a high ledge of the cli£F^ reached by a broad 
road, hastily made out of the refuse from the mine, 
at some distance from the pumping-engine, but 
close to a temporary hut, used by the captain and 
agent as a counting-house, and within sound of 
the stamping-mill. 

On reaching this shed, the boards of which were 
still raw from the saw-mill, and not yet discolour- 
ed by the weather, Bradbrain threw himself from 
his horse, and beat at the door with the butt-end 
of his whip. 

The old woman whom we have already seen at 
old Roby's death- bed showed her head at an upper 
window. 

" Is Sampy in V 

**Naw; but he's coming to grass in a few 
menets, when the forenoon core come up ; yes, he 
es. 

Bradbrain tied his horse to a ring at the door, 
and lit a cigar with that insolent nonchalance that 
at times gave an air of swell-mob finery to his 
manner, then buttoned his cut-away " horsey' coat 
with a sort of spiteful assumption, as he leaned 
against his nag, with his face to the entrance of 
the mine ; while Mordred took out his pocket-book 
and made a few calculations on a call-paper, which 
required the eager shareholders to pay up five pounds 
per share by the 31st instant. 

" I don't like Sampy's style in the last report a 
bit," said Bradbrain, drawing a circular from his 
pocket, and reading it with marked contempt. 



THE THBEE PABTNEBS. 9 

" Not coloured enough to bird-lime the gulls. *Two 
fathoms worked in the grit and stone. When the 
level shall be driven fourteen fathoms further, we 
shall have a roof one hundred and sixty yards 
above the cross course/ Stuff 1 He ought to pitch 
into them the sort of ore that promises, the colour 
of the gossan, the dip the metal takes here and at 
the Bottalac, the fineness of the specimens to be 
seen at the agent's, and so on. Give it 'em strong 
— no humbugging, doubt, or perhapsing— cer- 
tainty, that's! what speculators like." 

" We must be truthful." 

" Oh I yes, of course, that's our way," said 
Bradbrain, sneeringly. "But here they come," 

There was a sound of voices, and the next 
moment there emerged from the darkness four or 
five tired men, in stained orange-coloured linen, 
and flannel jackets, with bits of candle flaring and 
guttering in front of their hats, and carrying 
bundles of gads and boring tools on their backs. 
One or two, worn out with climbing the ladders, 
threw themselves on the ground for a moment to 
recover themselves. Sampy was at the head of 
them, and blew out his candle as he came fa- 
miliarly up to his partners to shake hands. 

He was smeared with ochrous rust and mire, and 
splashed with the muddy water of the passages. His 
round hat was stiffened with clay, and his hands 
were greasy and black with powder. 

Bradbrain drew back and laughed. 

"No, not if I know it, Sampy," he said. "Wash 



10 GBEATHEART. 

your mawlies first, man ; they ain't fit for a gentle- 
man to touch just now." 

Mordred shook hands with a relaxing, flabby 
touch, as a penance, and then wiped the one finger 
that he used carefully with his white handker- 
chief. 

" What's underlying this morning, Sandoe T" he 
said. 

Sampy drew him away from the men, and 
nodded at the hut, to which they walked together. 
Once there, and the door shut, he replied^ as he 
put chairs for his two visitors, 

"The portion of Holy Scriptur as came this 
morning when I tried the lots, et was thes blessed 
one from Hisayah, *Say ye to the righteous it 
shall be well with hem, for he shall eat the fruit 
of hes doings.' Zackly so, my dear, so 'twas, and 
aunt '11 tell you so — ^warn't et, aunt? Oh! I 
forgot, she's deaf as a bumbledore that side." 

" Oh 1 no cant. What's the luck, Sampy, to- 
day?" asked Bradbrain, rolling his cigar in one 
comer of his mouth as he spoke. 

'* It's not the perfect day with us yet, Mister 
Bradbrain ; but we know what is often behind a 
frowning Providence. There is a small fault, and 
it turns all the tools, and won't yield an inch in 
two days. I could have brought up in one hand all 
that core you saw has done since six this morning. 
It's a hard dispensation, for there's a wall of ore 
behind it ; and, once on it, we're on it full butt, 
for the surface metal is all but gone now. Oh ! 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 11 

it's well not to be too proud, so soon we are 
brought down, and it's hid from us." 

"Hang it, that won't work," said Bradbrain, 
starting up. " I always notice, Mordred, the less 
ore there is, the more scriptural Sampy gets. Oh! 
he's full of faith, is that child, and that, at all 
events, looks well, for he's in with us, and he can't 
lick his fingers if our dish is empty. This child's 
off now. Tat-ta ! Push the work on fast, Sampy, 
and stuff your reports with promises. Tin is what 
I want, lots of it — ^go it, you beggar ! " 

Bradbrain slammed the door, leaped on his 
horse, and dashed up the path leading to the high 
road at a furious pace. The moment he was gone 
Sampy drew his chair close to the table, took off 
his hat, bent over, looked full in Mordred's face, 
said nothing, but made a gesture expressive of pay- 
ing money from one hand into the other. 

" What's the meaning of that foolery, Sampy ? 
This is a bad business, this fault. We are not in 
a position to spend much money without a good 
return. At present there have been no profits, 
and now there's more outgoing." 

"No profits? Only just hear that! Why, 
there's been three hundred pounds worth of ore, to 
my sartin knowledge, and good ore, too. Oh! 
Mr. Mordred, there is a foundation of rock, and 
one of sand, choose — choose the right one, my dear, 
or it '11 be bad for you I" 

" Nonsense ! Three hundred pounds of ore ! 
Yes, when it's sold. But it's got to go to Swan- 



12 GBEATHEART. 

sea first ; and this fault now will swallow np all the 
little profit there is. Oh! it's anxious work* I 
wish rd never ventured. Bradbrain warned me, 
but I would trust you." 

This was all the banker's cunning. He was 
only warding off Sampy's impending attack, by 
affected distrust. 

"This is hard to bear — this is indeed adispensation," 
said Sampy, putting his two hands together, finger 
to finger ; " there's a want of faith about it — ^you 
ask the men what they think of the stuff sealed up 
in that mine — why, we hear the knockers ; every 
night chor hears the knockers." 

"Stuff about the knockers — ^they may knock 
behind half a mile of granite, may not they I" 

Sampy groaned. 

" Then there was £362 for the engine and metal 
work, and one hundred for advertising and pre- 
liminary expenses. Nice margin it leaves, Sampy. 
If this fault lasts long, where your profits will come 
from I don't quite see. They were not to begin, re- 
member, till the first outlay had been returned. 
Where's the dividend to come from? — ^and if the 
shareholders don't increase, who's to pay for the 
working? Tell methat,Mr.Sandoe — be reasonable." 

" I remember the agreement, my dear," said 
Sampy ; " I've reason to remember it. The first 
expenses were limited to £300 — ^I know what 
the old engine cost, I remember, too, the fifty- 
fifth psalm, and what is said about the deceitful 
man ; but I made the rod for my own back. Mr. 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 13 

Mordred, you've been and lifted up the heel 
against me — you forget that I was the instrument 
in this providence — you forget that I was the in- 
strument, and you've broken the covenant ; but I 
don't — ^I don't — no, Hallelooliah, I don't." 

" I have not forgotten — there's been nothing to 
share, but false hopes, heavy expenses, and vast 
annoyances." 

"You'll remember it," said Sampy, bitterly, 
** when the Lord purges your dross, my dear, and 
takes away your tin. The time may come when 
you'll remember better — maybe, too, when you're in 
deep waters — that's the time for wakening up the 
memory." 

" This is a threat I" said Mordred, angrily, as he 
rose from his chair ; " you've had your wages, and 
you know it." 

" Wages ? — yes, thirty shellings for supervision, 
day and night — thirty shellings for a working 
partner— es that just ? — pratty, esn't it ? Will 
that weigh in the balances? — that's what I ask. 
Well, you'll pay for et, so I warn you, Mr. 
Mordred. You're more subtle than the serpent ; 
but the Lord's given me a sort of wesdom too. 
Aunty, bring the dinner. I'll recompense you, 
Mr. Mordred, though I am now but as a partridge 
upon the mountains." 

^^I've broken no covenant — angels and men 
may see all I've done, Mr. Sandoe. I try to be 
just to all men." 

" Aunty, I tell you bring dinner. Woe unto them 



14 GREATHEART. 

that call evil good, and good evil — that put dark- 
ness for light, and light for darkness I" 

Mr. Mordred was dumb with astonbhment. 
Could he believe his ears T What, a poor, itine- 
rant preacher, a low cheat, who lived by tricks 
with a divining rod, that might or might not be 
aided by natural phenomena, dare to defy a rich 
banker, without whose money and influence the 
Wheal Fortune was a mere rabbit-hole in the 
cliffs, and of no more value than the nest of a 
sand-martin ? Did he hope to extort money from 
him by fears or threats I Fool ! he did not know 
his man! People like Sampy always affected 
a secret power, but he was not to be made a dupe. 

"If you made a bad bargain, Sandoe," said 
Mordred, as the old woman entered, and put a 
hunch of yellow bacon on the table, and by its side 
a wet swab of unsavouiy greens, " it is not my 
fault — ^your secret was worth the reward I offered, 
and no more. Very few men of respectability 
would have trusted you at all, still fewer would 
have known how to get possession of the land as I 
did. You had the secret, and I had the earth — 
apart, each was useless, together, we get the crop. 
But if you thought I was going to give you a 
third, and pay for all the outfit myself, when I had 
all the risk, you were never so mistaken, and so 
let me tell you. If I had taken Mr. Bradbrain's 
advice, you would have been hawking your secret 
about now to cheats like Fox and Mason, and 
much you'd have got then, my man." 



THE THREE PARTNERS. 15 

All the time Mordred harangued and argued, 
still wishing in some degree to avoid a collision 
that might lead to scandal, Sampy was devouring 
his meal in sullen silence, and with nervous and 
angry haste. Suddenly he threw down his knife 
and fork, pushed back his chair, and rose. Striding 
to the mantelpiece, he clutched a black oily stump 
of a pipe, jammed some coarse tobacco into it, 
thrust it into the fire to light it, and puffed furi- 
ously for some minutes in perfect silence. 

*^ Now, don't you begin to see you're in the wrong, 
Sampy, breaking out like this I — exercise a Chris- 
tian and becoming patience, Sandoe," continued 
Mordred. " Those who win the crown have first 
to bear the cross." 

It was one of the hateful peculiarities of this 
man thus to pervert passages of the bible. 

Then, at last, Sampy insolently withdrew from 
his mouth his pipe, which had served as a sort of 
slow match to the hidden mine. At last the boughs 
fell, and the masked battery opened its fire, much 
to the horror and alarm of the deaf old woman, who 
stood at the fire holding a pot-lid in her hand, and 
looking over her shoulder at the inexplicable quarrel . 

"Look here, Mr. Mordred, tes like this," said 
Sampy ; " I've run down the game for you, and 
now you beat me off it as if I was a dog, who was 
to be sent back hungry to his kennel. I was to be 
a partner, and I hold myself one. I'm your equal 
now, and I'll have my money. Take care, Mr. Mor- 
dred, for I can smite this new fortune of yours 



16 OREATHEART. 

with barrenness^ and make you repent what you've 
done to me till the last day of your life. Take care, 
you've begun bad, but don't cheat me out of my 
third. Whatever I lose I'll proclaim on the house- 
top, if I go all the way to Port Cornwall, I tell 
you. I have been in the house of bondage, and 
have drunk the gall of bitterness ; but I warn you 
that there is gall in store for you, and lots of it, 
in that house of Pharaoh, and in the prison I occu- 
pied. I was bad to those Tolpeddens, and the stars 
fight agin me now for it." 

" You're in a nasty and most ungrateful mood, 
Sampy, and I fear have been setting a bad exam- 
ple, drinking down in the levels. You forget 
the difference of our positions, you altogether 
overrate the value of this mine. Your third is 
not refused, it will be yours when our expenses are 
paid ; if that payment is delayed, that is your mis- 
fortune, not my fault. At all events you get your 
wages as captain, and I get nothing, not a doit, 
only vexation, anxiety, abuse, and slander. Di- 
rectly the metal ceases, then I begin to be tor- 
mented by the shareholders. Is this a time for 
you to turn on me I Gracious Heavens I is not 
their interest and your interest my interest f Be 
charitable, for charity covereth a multitude of sins! 
Good day." 

Sampy turned to the fire ; he made no reply, as 
Mordred left the hut, but remained nose and knees 
over the fire. Then all at once he dashed down 
his chair and ran to the door. Mordred was 



THE PRINTING-OFFICE. 17 

already disappearing round the comer of the 
valley-path. 

"Take carel — take care! old Mr. Faceboth- 
ways !" he cried, shaking his fist after the banker. 
" Take care, Barabbas 1 take care, Ananias I or I'll 
peel you as one does an onion, and make you burst 
your heart with vexation. Hallelooliah I Amen!" 



CHAPTER 11. 

THE PBINTING-OFFICE. 

ARTHUR'S work at the printing-office was not 
very attractive to an ambitious man. In 
long, patient toil at ransacking country papers, 
in midnights spent in correcting tedious proofs, 
in hours devoted to condensing inquests and 
penny-a-liners' vapid narratives of London trage- 
dies, six weeks had now passed, only rendered 
tolerable by the hopes of hearing from Lucy, and 
moments stolen to read Froissart, Clarendon, or 
Shelley, much to the vexation of Mr. Davis, a fat, 
stolid, pompous, and blunder-headed old printer, who 
had not one idea beyond his business. 

The partner, Blizard, was a tall, wiry, vulgar, 
long-nosed man, with a cunning, Mephistophelian 
face, and who despised and governed Davis, and 
had some secret monetary hold over him, although 
nominally only the holder of a third share in the 
Chandos Street office. He was very jealous of 

VOL. III. C 



18 GREATHEAKT. 

Tolpedden^ and he and his creature, a little squab 
red-haired reporter, named Hudson, devoted 
themselves to thwarting him in every possible way. 
They sent him out to meetings where the work 
was hard, prevented him writing leaders, and sup- 
pressed what he wrote. All the resources of mean 
and petty natures were exhausted to malign and snub 
him, and disgust him with the work. They urged 
him to practise setting up type, because they knew 
the compositors would then regard him with hatred 
and suspicion. They forced him to practise short- 
hand reporting, that most difficult art, at times 
when he wished to be reading. They misrepre- 
sented him, they invented detracting stories of 
Davis, which they told that gentleman were 
Arthur's. In fact, they made his life miserable, 
and yet he dared not throw up the work, for fear 
of disgusting Mr. Hookem. So Greatheart bore it 
as brave men bear such miseries, sometimes wish- 
ing that they could, in preference, throw them- 
selves among hewing swords. The tyrant of Bok- 
hara had one torture more terrible than the rest. 
He stripped some of his victims, and threw them 
into pits full of hungry vermin, and there let them 
perish piecemeal. Misfortune had thrown Arthur 
into such a pit. 

One of Blizard's most subtle tricks to discredit 
Arthur with Davis, was to try and make him ap- 
pear utterly useless. This Arthur resisted with 
all the generous, frank impetuosity of his nature, 
dashing at proof-reading, practising composing. 



THE PBINTINGhOrriCE. 19 

arran^ng copy, and writing whatever nught be 
required. 

He was one night busy preparing for the last 
edition; up to his knees in newspapers that his 
active scissors had reduced to ribbons, while long 
slips^ barred with extracts, lay before him. The 
apprentices were every moment running in for 
copy. Now and then down the pipe came the 
voice of the foreman, entreating half a column 
more. 

Arthur had just sat down to the desk to 
write a short leader on the latest news of the 
American War, when Davis entered, church- 
warden-pipe in hand. 

" What are you doing, Tolpedden I" he asked 
pompously. 

" A short leader about America." 

" Oh I done your country pars (paragraphs) T" 

"Yes, sir. Waiting for Shee; he'll be down 
directly." 

Davis had a fussy way of puffing at his pipe. 
He poured outatumbler of muddy ale from a jug not 
unfrequently seen on the mantel-piece and drank 
a deep draught. 

" In my young days," he said, " young men in 
offices were not waited on by apprentices. We'd 
no upstarts then. None of your coxcombical airs, 
and your nonsense. I shall write that leader, sir, 
and spare you the trouble." 

"As you like, sir, but I did not come here to 
learn the work of an errand boy," said Arthur, 

C2 



20 OREATHEABT. 

proudly. *^ I should not have begtin the leader, but 
that time ran short, and the men wanted copy." 

" I never write so well, sir, as when Tm hurried," 
said the illustrious editor, pipe in mouth, as he sat 
down grandly, to write a crambo of distorted 
paragraphs, varied from a leader in the Trimmer^ and 
bolstered out with camying quotations from " our 
illustrious contemporary," which ensuredsome trivial 
recognition twice a year from the Trimmer. Poor, 
ignorant, conceited fool ! He had no opinions, so 
choked up was he with the thoughts of the logic* 
choppers and time-servers of the day. 

In ten minutes the editor looked roiind, and 
handed Arthur a slip of MS. 

" Give that to Johnson," he said roughly, " and 
tell him to put it in leaded brevier." 

The man hated Arthur, because he was a 
gentleman of education and spirit ; and he despised 
him, because he was incapable of retaliation. 

At that moment a boy in a dirty apron appeared 
at the door, and asked for copy. 

Arthur handed the slip to the boy. 

Davis frowned, and puffed at his pipe; then 
got up, and looked at the copy Arthur had ar- 
ranged for his inspection. 

" Pasted too far apart," he said; " and too much 
of it. Every paragraph should be re-written ; there 
must be no idleness here. I don't pay for idleness. 
We keep cats to catch mice. Done that Tower 
Hamlet meeting ? Blizard says it's at least twice too 
long. Personal feeling, I suppose, in the matter ?" 



THE PRINTING-OFFICE. 21 

" It was my interest to curtail it, sir." 

" Don't let's bandy words— ^on't you see I'm 
busy f Why don't you go up and help Mr. Bliz- 
ard ? " 

" For two reasons, Mr. Davis," replied Arthur ; 
" in the first place, Mr. Blizard prefers Hudson. 
In the second place, I shall be wanted up-stairs 
before they make up." 

"Won't it interfere with your more pleasant 
reading ?" said the editor, turning round pen in 
hand, and pipe in mouth. "I should be sorry, sir, 
to interfere with your studies." 

Arthur flew out ; everyone has his boiling-over 
point, and the stupid, vulgar malice of this blind 
leader of the blind was intolerable. 

" Mr. Davis," he said, " I work hard here, and 
never spend a moment in reading to the neglect 
of office work ; but I will not pretend to be at 
work when there is none to do. I never keep a 
revise waiting, and the men never stand still for 
copy on my account." 

Davis's silence proved that he remained uncon- 
vinced, for, like most fools, he was as obstinate as 
a mule. He did not like Tolpedden, indeed, even 
a man of sense could scarcely have resisted the 
poisonous slanders of Blizard; but Arthur was 
too valuable to lose. 

"You seem to have a prejudice against me," 
Arthur continued, " so I had better leave the 
office — and to-night." 

" No, sir — no. I have no such prejudice ; but I 



22 GBEATHEABT. 

hear that you calumniate me, sir, behind my 
back." 

Davis said this boldly and blusteringly. 

" He lies whoever spread such a report of me," 
said Arthur. " I have never mentioned your 
name, Mr. Davis, detractingly to anyone. Who 
told you t" 

" Never mind ; I was told," said Davis, turning 
his back on Tolpedden, sullenly ; and having now 
taken beer enough to bring himself down to the 
level of the readers of the Homcastle Intelligencer, 
he settled to his writing. 

" Fool," muttered Arthur, as he went upstairs — 
"obstinate idiot! without feeling, judgment, or 
imagination ; how can one reach him by common- 
sense arguments? A mean shuffler himself, he 
distrusts everyone, he does not know there is either 
generosity or candour in the world, and so deduces 
everything from the lowest motives. I cannot 
stand this much longer ; perhaps in time I should 
even become like these men." 

Tapping at the door of Blizard's room, in the 
next story, Arthur entered ; there was Blizard 
at his desk, a tin box of snuff by his side, as he sat 
under the glare of a gas lamp, looking over a 
bundle of long slips of thin paper, that rustled in 
the draught of the opening door. Files of ad- 
vertisements, slashed papers, and books of reference 
strewed the table. Opposite Blizard sat the little, 
mean, red-haired reporter, a malicious smile on his 
dissipated, pale, sordid face — he was reading copy. 



THE PRINTING-OFFICE. 23 

and a handle of auctioneers' advertisements lay on 
his lap. 

" Can I help you men 1" said Arthur, in his 
frank, good-natured way. 

" No, thank you," said Hudson, " we are just 
through." 

" You and the governor have a nice time of it," 
said Blizard, raising his Mephistophelian eye- 
brows ; " a very nice time of it." 

" Yes, they have a nice time of it," chimed in 
the toady, insolently, and reading on ; " also three 
messuages as dwelling-houses in the High Street, 
namely, one, four " 

" I've been working hard ever since six o'clock," 
said Arthur. "Mr. Hudson, I think you might 
stop reading while I'm speaking to Mr. Blizard — 
ttiey wanted four columns more copy at half-past 
seven." 

" More copy ?" sneered Hudson ; " only think of 
that 1" 

"Why, there's enough for two papers," said 
Blizard ; " the old story — ^half of it wasted — won't 
keep— have to be distributed. I say, young gen- 
tleman, do you want an order for the Adelphi ? — 
if you do, Hudson has got one to spare." 

"Thank you, Blizard," said Arthur, rather 
coldly; "I always prefer paying. It is insipid 
going to a theatre without paying ; besides, I dis- 
like obligations ; and people with orders are often 
thrust into bad places, and snubbed by box-keepers. 
You and Hudson go together." 



24 OREATHEART. 

^^ Just hear him. Couldn't you see at a glance, 
Hudson, he was a bit of a swell ? 

^^ * Orders are Heayen's first law— and ttuB confeflsed. 
Free boxes are hr better than the rest/ ^ 

" m run upstairs,'' said Arthur," ** to hurry the 
last proofs, and see how the imposing is getting 
on. 

A shout of derisive laughter from Blizard and 
Hudson followed him upstairs. 

" I shall have a row soon with those fellows," 
thought Arthur ; "they are getting impertinent," and 
he clenched his fist in a way ominous of injury 
to Mr. Blizard's ugly frontispiece. 

When Tolpedden pushed open the heavy swing 
door of the composing-room, he came upon a glare 
of light, aiid a hot and oppressive atmosphere. 
There was a great bustle and noise, for the men 
were just locking up the first sheets, that lay in their 
square iron frames, on the great stone table, ready 
for the machine. Thirty compositors, standing at 
their cases, were plying their nimble fingers. The 
boys were running about with " furniture " and 
copy, or were pulling proofs at the great hand-press 
that stood in one comer. In one comer the fore- 
man and one of the apprentices were reading 
proofs at a desk in a low mumbling voice, occasion- 
ally dashed with complaints of Blizard's hand- 
writing, or of the boy's carelessness. 

A printing-office is a quaint place, full of old 
Caxtonian customs. That stone block is the 



THE PRINTINO-OFFIOE. 25 

"chapel," where the men meet to discuss grie- 
vances, to fix fines, and to receive the entrance-fees 
of new comers; a black and smudged proof is 
still "a friar" there, and a colourless one a " nun." 

Arthur took .up a composing-stick, and began 
to practise composing, for he already knew in 
which compartment of the cases to find particu- 
lar letters, and the quickness of ranging them 
depends merely on habit and lightness of touch. 

" Don't move your hand round, sir, as if you 
were reaping," said the man next him, a shrewd, 
pale young fellow ; " it wastes time. You can't 
move the hand too straight to the letter and 
back." 

*' Get out of that, Joe," said a burly compositor, 
under breath, on the other side ; " Mr. Tolpedden 
isn't going to get his salt that way — whsA does it 
matter how he does it ? — if he amuses hisself . I 
only wish we were going to change berths^ — him 
and me, that's all." 

Now one by one the men finished their work, 
turned out their gas, and sat down under their cases 
to eat their suppers and chat, till the columns 
were ready for the corrector's bodkins. 

Then the rattle of furniture and quoins, and the 
noise of mallets and locking-up increased; soon 
there came the ring of the steel driving tools upon 
" the stone ; " and above all the cries, direc- 
tions, and chidings of the foreman, as if a captain 
in a storm. Then the rinse of lye-water and the 
brushing of the surface of the type. It was like 



26 OREATHEABT. 

the incantation scene^ when Zamiel is about to 
appear in a sudden flare of flame. 

Now a trap-door in the floor was opened, 
the pulleys creaked, and the ropes rumbled as 
the great iron frames of type were lowered so- 
lemnly and carefully to the machine-room on the 
basement. 

Then all over the house the boys began to shout 
and sing, so that the place became like a wood 
in spring-time. The doors slammed, and laughing 
men raced up and down stairs. 

Presently the engine began to pulsate, and the 
house vibrated from cellar to garret with the 
struggles of that mighty and untiring workman. 
Out, fast, fast, rolled the wet sheets from the 
cylinders, on thundered the wheels 1 Davis, Bliz- 
ard, and Johnson were gone half an hour ago. 
It was one o'clock. Arthur was now free. 

Sadly, slowly, he made his way up St. Martin's 
Lane into Oxford Street, and up Tottenham 
Court Boad, home, towards Keppel Street. The 
mews was now silent — few windows showed any 
light. Suddenly he looked up at No. 117, and to 
his astonishment his own windows were lit up. 
Could it be his father, or the dear old lieutenant I 
He should see them; he should hear news of 
Lucy. Love is selfish ; perhaps the last thought 
came first. 

On he ran. Li a moment he was on the steps, 
and thrusting a latch-key into the door. Then, 
without waiting to strike a light, he darted up- 



THE PRINTING-OFFICE. 27 

stairs in the dark. He flung open the door — a 
black wide-awake lay on the table. Some one was 
seated at the expiring fire, half asleep. The 
man leaped up, and turned his face ; it was Tre- 
yena. 

" Trevena, how are you f " 

'^Arthur, my dear boy, Pm so glad to see 
you!" 

" Welcome to my palace ! We'll toss you up 
a bed on the sofa. Had supper t" 

"The woman got me tea, thank you. Well, 
how are you ? Why, from what I heard of your 
letters, and your getting on in your career of 
journalism, T expected to find you at Apsley 
House, the 'Albany,' or some such tremendous 
place, at least." 

Arthur sighed in spite of himself. 

"Trevena," he said, "I sacrificed the truth a 
little, to cheer them up at home. I know it was 
wrong ; but I described the future rather than the 
present. My work is poor mechanical drudgery, 
and I don't like the people. It's dark with me 
now, my goal seems far off — very far off. I just 
get a living, that's all. But how are they all at 
the old place? — come, sit down, and we'll cook 
up the fire." 

"They are all well, and send best love," 
said Trevena, seating himself. "That rascal's 
mine seems dwindling to nothing, and yet my 
sister won't let me sell ; so I've come to town to 
sell a book of sermons, and to dispose of some 



28 OBEATHEART. 

MSS., to raise money for the calls. Fve brought 
you letters, Arthur ; here they are.'* 

Arthur took them with eagerness. They were 
from his father and aunt. 

The first letter contained the following pas- 
sages: — 

" We are all delighted to hear that you have 
obtained such a hold over journalism, and got a 
warm berth near the central fire. In time Hook- 
em will see your value, and enlist you for the 
Forge. Avoid the Trimmer^ because it is shift- 
ing and unprincipled. Let no temptation in- 
duce you to turn hireling, and sell your intellect 
for party purposes. Go on as you have begun — 
spend less than you earn— do your best, you must 
then soon reach independence, and that brings 
power. We have much reduced our expenses, and 
Liddy now does the cooking. Dear old creature ! 
she cried when she knew I was writing to you. 
Handsome Thomas I discharged, but he has taken 
rooms in the village, and declares he means to 
wait till our fortune turns. The lieutenant does 
all our gardening. Walker comes only three 
times a week to help. Mordred's mine is falling 
off, and there are great complaints of misrepresen- 
tation. People say it is some trick of his and 
Sampy Sandoe's. Sampy is his captain. I have 
still hopes of my alchemy ; but have had to put 
it by and study accounts lately. I am sorry to 
tell you, and you will be sorry to hear, that the 
Tregellases have absurdly taken offence at some- 



THE PRINTING-OFFICE. 29 

thing or other, and have ceased to call. I have 
neither said nor done anything, so I shall not be 
the first to make friends. I dislike fickle and 
touchy people ; and though I value Tregellas as 
a friend, and especially like your favourite Lucy, 
I shall certainly make no concession in this case. 
Have you lost your heart yet to any blue-stocking 
at any of your literary parties?" 

The news fell like a thunderbolt on Arthur. 
This, then, accounted for Lucy's silence. 

Mrs. Tolpedden's letter, after much prattle 
about the children, and about Mr. Bradbrain's at- 
tention to Ned's health, went on thus : 

" We have never seen Lucy but once since you 
left. It is most extraordinary. She came the 
day after you started, and told me she should 
bring a letter to be enclosed for you the next day. 
I never saw her prettier or more tender and ami- 
able. She kissed the cloth of gold crocuses you 
planted, and which will now soon flower. She 
has never been since. They pass us out driving, 
and just bow coldly. Only think of that ! Milly 
says that they accuse us of spreading some report 
about them ; and Mr. Bradbrain promises to ferret 
the matter out. I detest that stuck-up Mrs. Tre- 
gellas. They say she is going to send Lucy to 
Devonshire directly, and throw her in the way of 
the Boscawens. No doubt Lily has promised not 
to write to you. Some one must have been telling 
wicked, wicked stories about us. God forgive 
them! Jack and Ned send their loves. Kate 



30 OBEATHEART. 

sends a thoasand kisses, Bobby claps her hands, 
and sends kisses too. 

" I remain, dear Arthur, 

" Your ever affectionate aunt, 

" Mart Tolpedden. 

"P.S. — ^I am so glad Mr. Trevena is going to 
see you. We had no time to make up a hamper. 
He is such a dear odd creature, so amiable and 
unselfish, that it's meat and drink to him to do 
good. Uncle, of course, sends his love." 

Trevena's impromptu bed on the sofa was soon 
made up. 

That night Arthur had no sleep. The bad 
news tormented him, and his bed became a nest of 
scorpions. 



CHAPTER in. 

ANOTHER MOVE ON THE CHESS-BOARD. 

EYES since the metal had begun to run short 
in the Wheal Fortune, one idea, and one 
idea only, had been agitating the banker's busy 
brain. He had planned to repeat his old stratagem, 
and by threats of a second Chancery suit, to force 
Mr. Tolpedden to surrender to the Corporation 
(which meant to him) the rest of the Endellion 
cliff fields, in order to try and intercept the missing 
lode, either above or below. 



ANOTHER MOVE ON THE CHESS-BOARD. 31 

Hard, greedy, and cruel, it gave this man plea- 
sure to torment and rack an enemy. With his 
usual impious ejaculations, as of a man in the 
confidence of Heaven, Mordred thanked Divine 
Providence for having so planned it that it should 
be his enemy from whom he could thus obtain 
wealth by subtlety, and whom it thus became his 
duty to vex and to harm. '^ We hate those we 
have injured," says Tacitus; we hate them be- 
cause we fear their retaliation, and we try to justi- 
fy our conduct by our hatred. 

The Wheal Fortune had been stopped for a 
week, in order to admit of a fresh geological survey, 
which nobody, however, now thought would lead 
to any great result. The elvan had unexpectedly 
proved of great length and thickness, and so ex- 
pensive to pierce, that the '* 'tributers " had given 
up their work in disgust, Sampy alone continuing 
his labour for a day or two in the beguiling mine. 

From the shareholders there went up one unani- 
mous outcry of vexation and despair. Many 
farmers, crippled by their losses, like half- 
ruined gamblers, had hoped to retrieve their de- 
feats by one last desperate throw. Vague ru- 
mours were afloat — some said Mr. Mordred had 
known there was only a strip or two of copper left 
in the mine ; others declared that he had been 
taken in by one Sampy, a low cheat, who went about 
the country with a divining rod. A few sanguine 
persons, who respected Mordred as a professedly re- 
ligious man, still clung to the hopes of a great dis- 



32 GBEATHEART. 

covery to be made in the rear of the elvan. " How 
many Cornish mines/' said Mr. Penrose, "the 
chief of them, too, had tamed out well on the very 
eve of their abandonment !" 

The mine had ceased working about the end of 
March, 1863, One morning, early in April, Mr. 
Mordred seized his gloves and hat and sallied forth 
gravely and decorously, an hour earlier than usual, 
on his professional rounds. 

** Crikey !" said Bradbraiu's boy, who was watch- 
ing his elder master from a hole in the stable 
door, "how early the govemor^s out — why, I ain't 
cleaned the knives yet, and there's the wegetables 
to get in. He and master 'as been having a row 
again, I daresay— oh 1 don't they have jolly rows 
tool" 

Bradbrain, also, saw him over the surgery wire 
blinds. 

"Blast him!" he muttered; "he better take 
care if he interferes between me and little Polly. 
He's after some mischief now, I'll bet — doesn't the 
old dodger look exactly like a weasel after a 
wounded rabbit ? Oh I wouldn't he like to make 
cold meat of me, if he wasn't afraid. I always 
know him, when he reads prayers louder and 
longer than usual, coughs, shams Abraham, talks 
of his bad symptoms, gives me advice, curse him, 
and complains of pains in his heart ; he's bent 
on getting more land out of the Tolpeddens, and I 
shan't stop him, for a more devilish, wide-awake, 
chiselling, crafty old card I never met with even 



ANOTHER MOVE ON THE CHESS-BOARD. 33 

at the montk tables in Lima, and that's saying a 
good deal." 

" Here, you young blackguard," he said, as he 
stood at the door of the stable and called the boy, 
" take this," he handed to him a little yellow note, 
" put it in the usual place, bring anything you find 
there ; and take care you ain't seen, if you are 
ril scalp you." 

" Ain't half done the knives, sir ? and cook — " 
whimpered the boy. 

" You do as I tell you, or I'll go and get my 
hunting crop," was the only reply ; and Bradbrain 
strode away to prepare some almond emulsion, and 
half a dozen draughts. 

In the meantime his partner, cautious as Satan 
reconnoitering Eden, had made his way straight 
to the village post-oflSce, bent on no good, we may 
be well sure. 

At the turn of the road by the church, a ponv 
carriage passed him in the direction of Bodmin. 
There were two ladies in it, a gentleman driving, 
and several laughing children. It was the Tre- 
gellasses — Lucy looked pale and sad ; they bowed, 
Mr. Mordred took off his hat as they passed. 

" Off to Devonshire," said Mr. Mordred to him- 
self ; " they've quarrelled with the Tolpeddens, and 
they say Tregellas teases the girl to marry that ass 
of a young Boscawen — he's of a county family, 
and very rich, which is more than our friend 
young Mr. Tolpedden is — for they say he is turned 
common printer, somewhere in London — all that 

VOL. III. D 



34 GREATHEART. 

talk about literature never leads to much good. 

The post-office looked rather pretty, for the 
crocuses were out in a golden flush in the little 
garden in front, and the sunshine fell slanting 
across the open, half-hatch door, on the packets 
of Isle of Man starch, Horneyman's tea, crimson 
comforters, mouse-traps, "and other sweetmeats," in 
the lattice window, where the post-office announce- 
ments were. 

There was no one in the shop, but a blackbird was 
singing in its cage, hung among pendent jugs and 
candles, and a tabby cat purred on the counter 
close to the scales. Mr. Mordred was in no hurry, 
so he took a chair and waited, amusing himself 
with a theoretical game of bowls with two or three 
stray parched peas that were on the counter, much 
to the delight of a kitten, that chased and gam- 
bolled round the chair on which Mr. Mordred sat, 
his eyes intently fixed on the back-parlour, and on 
some ledgers that lay open on the table. 

It seemed a strange freak in a grave, elderly 
man, to give way to a fit of momentary curiosity ; 
yet so it was, that all at once Mordred rose on tip- 
toe, and .stepped nimbly to the half-open glass- 
door of the back-parlour. At that moment there 
came a brisk step down the stairs, and he retreated 
with guilty haste. 

It was Mrs. Davis, who, curtsying, and half- 
pleased, half-surprised, betook herself to her place 
of vantage behind the counter, and proceeded to 
weigh out salt butter from a greasy cask. 



ANOTHER MOVE ON THE CHESS-BOARD. 35 

Mr. Mordred took off his black woollen gloves 
as the signal of a quiet chat commencing, and 
glanced at a Bodmin paper that lay on the counter, 
for it was Saturday. 

" Brighton review, twenty thousand men to and 
fro in one day — wonderful ! We ought to be 
most thankful, Mrs. Davis, for that volunteer move- 
ment. Overuling Providence is discernible, surely, 
in such signs of the times. Nine men killed at 
the Botallac L Dear me ! — dear me 1 how thank- 
ful we ought to be, Mrs. Davis, that no accident 
has yet occurred in the Wheal Fortune." 

The postmistress was a smiling, clear-com- 
plexioned woman, with no more guile than a robin ; 
but she contrived to say, unconsciously, a rather 
cruel thing. 

"The mine isn't working, just now, sir, 
isitr 

Mordred did not like it* 

" No, no," he replied, fussily ; " but a survey is 
making, which we hope will lead to great things 
for you shareholders." 

"So I tell my good man, but he gets down- 
hearted about it." 

" And how is the worthy man ? I hope his arm 
is not worse for leaving off the splints ?" 

Mr. Davis was an over-social man, and had 
broken his arm returning from Bodmin Fair. 

Mrs. Davis was surprised at the doctor^s visit, 
for her husband had been fully three weeks out of 
his hands. 

d2 



36 GREATHEART. 

" He's nicely, he is, Mr. Mordred, and he's gone 
in the cart to Tolpedden. There's a sale of farm- 
ing stock there to-day." 

" I called partly to see how he was getting on, 
partly to ask him about some Scotch roses he 
promised me." 

" Now do walk into our little back-parlour — ^the 
office John calls it — it is all of a litter. But, aw dear! 
aw dear I" — hero Mrs. Davis made a dart at a 
pigeon-hole behind her, and pulled out a squar^ 
dirty letter, sealed with a thimble — " what a poor 
head I've got ; here's a letter for you, Mr. Mor- 
dred, as was forgot in the bag yesterday." 

Mr. Mordred took the letter, and following Mrs. 
Davis into the parlour, opened it, and read it to 
himself. It ran thus : 

" Mr. Mordred, 

" The children of this world — ^Halle- 
looliah I — are, in their generation, wiser than the 
children of light I You've taken no warning by 
what I said. You look on me as a broken vessel. 
Very well, take care that, when you have not on 
the wedding garment, I do not become exalted and 
running over with good things. In two days the 
warning time expires, and I squench out the beacon 
as stood on a hill. Zackly so, so et es. The Lord 
has blinded you as he ded Pharow and all his host. 
Take care he doesn't take off your wheels, and 
then you'll drive heavily, as he did at the sea, even 



ANOTHER MOVE ON THE CHESS-BOARD. 37 

the Read Sea, and the stars fight agin you in 
their crosses as they did with Sisera. 

" Yours in the Lord, 

" Sampson Sandoe. 

*'ToMr. Mordred. 

" P.S. The last warning ends at noon on Tues- 
day. Repent all of ye, lest ye be as a broken wall, 
yea, and as a tottering fence. The Lord is at 
hand. Watch, lest ye be found sleeping, and do not 
be called a child of wrath. There is £17. 25. 4^d. 
owing to me, mind that, and an honest man would 
pay it." 

" Stuff ! Pshaw I" said the banker, as he tore 
up the letter, and flung it in a shower over the 
table. Then he picked up the bits and burnt 
them. 

" And how is the rheumatism, Mrs. Davis ?" he 
said, considerately hoping some customer would 
arrive to call his patient suddenly away. 

" It takes me awful on the hip." 

Just then a child's scream burst forth in an 
upper story, and with a hasty apology off dashed 
the anxious mother. 

The door leading to the stairs slammed behind 
her. 

*'The very thing — a special providence — a 
special providence," said Mordred. "My old 
luck." 

In an instant he slided towards the ledgers, shut 



38 GREATHEART. 

the top one, looked at the backs of the two others, 
selected a third, lettered at the margin, and threw 
it open at the letter T. With the swiftness of 
habit he ran down the names with his finger. The 
books were the Income-tax books of the district, 
Mr. Davis being the collector, and they were made 
up to the current April. In a moment he found 
the entry for Tolpedden Parish, and then the 
place he sought, of which he made a rapid entry 
in his case book. 

"They lost £25,000, then, when the Bank 
broke," he thought, " and now he has only £4,000 
left ; he daren't fight me at law, and now I know 
that he is in my power. You'll have to give up 
those cliff fields, Mr. Tolpedden, however tight 
you'll try to hold them. I'll throw the thing into 
Chancery directly." 

Then opening the staircase door, he called to 
Mrs. Davis — 

" Good morning, Mrs. Davis. I must be off 
on my rounds; continue the liniment. I shall 
perhaps look in to-morrow, to pay for the ash-leaf 
kidneys I had in February." 

A mile from St. Petrock's Mr. Mordred met 
Mr. Waverton, whose conversion to Rome rumour 
now described as inevitable. Poor creature ! there 
he was, taking his constitutional walk, in regulated 
costume, after regulated diet, at a regulated hour 
and at a regulated pace. When the wind blew nor'- 
west, he walked sou'-west, with a respirator, and 
tacked home at a regulated angle. If the wind 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 39 

veered to south-west, he walked north-west, and 
held an umbrella before his mouth. 

Waverton detested Mordred as a leader of the 
dissenting faction, but he also called him in fre- 
quently, because Bradbrain laughed at his hypo- 
chondriacal fancies, and recommended boating, 
smoking, grog, hunting, and cricket. 

"Pulse very low," said the doctor, as he felt 
it. " Want bracing. I cannot really allow you 
to fast more than once a week, and you must not 
read too much. Try riding." 

« So Milly says." 

" Well, then, Milly is a sensible girl, and take 
her advice. Good-bye— don't worry yourself, and 
mind the quinine." 

" That man will turn monk, if his eyes are not 
soon opened," said Mordred, as he turned to look 
after his patient. 



CHAPTEE IV. 

TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 

ON a public day in the last week of March, Ar- 
thur Tolpedden, art-student, sat on a small 
hard wooden stool in one of the long rooms to the 
left as you enter the great entrance-hall of the 
British Museum. He held a drawing-board be- 
fore him, and was busy drawing the well-known 
bust of Clyte, that priceless gem of the Townley 



40 OREATHEABT. 

collection. The work was intended to serve as 
practice for the specimen drawing that it is neces- 
saiy to stipple before a joong artist can be ad- 
mitted as probationer to the schools of the Sojal 
Academy. Antique drawing requires intense care, 
a good eje, a light hand, and some knowledge of 
anatomj; and Arthor was absorbed in his occu- 
pation. 

It showed a moral courage not unfitting the 
Mr. Greatheart of John Bunyan's marvellous 
allegory, to sit there intent on study, and indif- 
ferent to all the chattering sight-seers, the 
noisy bumpkins, and the inquisitive children, who 
stared, pointed, jostled, and asked questions from 
10 a.m. till dusk. 

Fussy mothers of lower middle-class families, 
over-dressed ladies, not always very refined or con- 
siderate of other people's feelings, steered by him 
their bands of talkative daughters, who lingered to 
catch the eye of the handsome young artist, as he 
bent his fine features, now refined by thought and 
spiritualised by melancholy, over his work. Some- 
times enormous farmers, with crimson faces of 
Brobdingnag, and booted legs, worn out with the 
marvels of the place, and with brains muddled by 
some hours of unwonted mental exertion, rested 
themselves on the pedestals of the nearest statue, 
and gaped at him for half an hour together ; or 
mustered courage to ask him if it was a tidy profes- 
sion, a limner's. One clumsy inquirer discussed how 
much he gotfor "putting down that ere stone statty." 



-_ i*= 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 41 

Worst of all, ill-bred, rompino; children played 
hide-and-seek round him, or thrust their smudgy 
fingers on his most careful outlines. 

The British Museum is an exhibition especially 
beloved by schoolmasters, guardians, uncles, and 
godmothers, because there is no charge, and be- 
cause there is a good deal of it. It is the piice de 
resistance of the countryman's holiday; if it 
does not satisfy your country cousin, it at least 
tires him out, gives him a headache, and deprives 
him of even the wish to see anything more that day. 
Now and then seedy slaves of ushers led long files 
of City Road schools down the paved halls; 
the more reckless boys lurked behind to criticise 
Tolpedden's drawing, and jog against his elbow, 
or to tease him with foolish and impertinent ques- 
tions. 

Could ApoUyon himself have devised a more 
exquisite system of torture for a poor sensitive man, 
intent on a generous self-denying effort, and en- 
tangled in the dispiriting difficulties that grow 
jungle-thick round the gateways of all professions? 
Arthur writhed, but he bore these annoyances with 
fortitude, for he thought of Lucy and of his father. 

Now, indeed, he felt how much there was to 
learn in his art. Nine people out of ten can copy 
in pen and ink, sketch cabbagy trees, and houses 
out of the perpendicular, " fluke " a portrait, or 
caricature a little, but how few have the genius 
to invent— to create. The mere gifts of grouping 
and composition, of handling paint, of graduating 



42 GREATHEABT. 

colour, are rare enough ; how much more rare is 
the art of imagining a great picture, and less than 
a great picture Arthur did not care to do. Some 
men may learn every bone and muscle, they may 
have drawn the model well in ten thousand posi- 
tions, but still they cannot combine their knowledge 
into a whole. Then came over him bitter thoughts 
of the degradation of portrait-painting, of the lies 
that must be told to flatter vanity and please new 
or old money, of the mortification of perpetuating 
ignoble heads and disgusting features; and looming 
through these fears came also the hopeless sense of 
a sordid life wasted in a low pursuit, wasted on the 
low muddy plain, when he should have been scaling 
the slippery heights of Parnassus. Ha! what tears of 
blood the heart may weep, though the eyes remain 
dry and fevered. Around him as he toiled stretched 
the vast solitude and the warring selfishness of the 
huge but low-thoughted city. 

But all this time, staunch and true as ever to 
his ideal, he laboured on, his eyes fixed on that 
maiden's face, as on an idol that he worshipped. 
There was that lovely head, beautiful as a rose, 
weighed down with summer-rain, bent with a too 
early sorrow, inevitably progressing, cruel and un- 
appeasable as destiny. The mouth of Niobe, the 
chin of Diana, the neck of Hebe, the breast of 
Juno, and the hair of Venus. How divine, and 
yet how human I how womanly ! how tender ! 

'* A creature not too bright nor good, 
For human nature^s daily food ; 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 43 

For simple boxtowb, artless wiles, 

Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears and smiles." 

Every curve of that forehead^ every shadow of 
that eye, every wave and ripple of that rich diadem 
of hair was familiar to Arthur, for there was a copy 
of the cast in his father's library, and he had often 
drawn it, and thought, as he had drawn it, that it 
resembled Lucy in her thoughtful moments. Some- 
times he almost expected the graceful head would 
slowly rise, the eye turn and dilate into a smile. 
Had no one been there this new Pygmalion would 
have started up and kissed a thousand times those 
marble lips, that no life-blood had ever warmed, 
no love ever animated. 

Arthur was wrapped in these reveries, and 
dotting over a shadow half-mechanically, with 
the point of his crayon, when a hand touched him 
affectionately on the shoulder. 

He looked up. It was Trevena beaming at him. 

" Why, how hard at work you were I you did 
not hear me speak to you. Don't let me inter- 
rupt you, but it is four o'clock, and you told me 
four." 

"Fourl why, I thought it was onlyabout two,'* said 
Arthur, looking up. " Oh, I'm ready to go to the 
publisher's now, if you like. I'll put up my things 
directly." 

^^ Just come into the Assyrian room a moment. 
I've left an old college friend there with the bulls, 
Fred Blenerhasset, and a brother, who's just back 
from Australia — looks like a bushranger — re- 



I 



44 GR£ATH£ART. 

markable man — sheep farmer — full of energy. 
Blenerhasset — is a man of goodness — ^he lives only 
to do good, but very eccentric." 

Arthur put up his chalks and pencils, then 
accompanied his worthy friend. 

"All very pretty," said Trevena, waving his 
hand in a general manner at the avenues of 
statues ; " but not in my way. Tve been all the 
morning in the MS. rooms, looking at the early 
printed books. That's my parish. Blenerhasset 
is a great man at these Ragged Schools and Bag 
Brigades, he denies himself to help them. He is 
well off, but he spends it all on the scripture 
readers, and in helping poor clergymen's widows and 
orphans. Told me this morning he found it very 
expensive furnishing two different houses (he has 
two rooms — such places! — in two different parts of 
London), and to save crockery he has taken to use 
old preserve jars— one for cup, one for slop-bason, 
and so on — quite a humourist — insists on my 
bringing you to the * Children's Weekly Dinner 
Society' to-night." 

" The what ?" said Arthur, somewhat amused. 

"The ^Children's Weekly Dinner Society!'" 
said Trevena, with the utmost gravity and sincerity ; 
"and a most excellent thing, too. Doctors used 
to say that those poor London children, who never 
get meat, would receive quite a fillip by even one 
good dinner in the seven days. Cheers them, 
warms them, and gives a start to ill-fed con- 
stitutions. The dinner is to-day, somewhere in 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 45 

Gray's Inn Boad — ^TyndalFs Buildings, or some- 
where. I've been buying oranges for them. Dear 
children I isn't it good of Blenerhasset ?" 

Arthur and Trevena were just then descending 
the steps, for one of the curators had told them 
that their friends had left word that they were 
waiting outside. 

In Trevena's enthusiasm he waved a huge paper 
bag of oranges that he carried, and out through 
the bottom leaped a dozen or so, hopping down 
the steps with droll malice and mischievous ir- 
regularity. 

Some boys ran to pick them up, and Mr. Tre- 
vena, quite unabashed, and in the kindliest way, 
received them back one by one, aided by Arthur. 

Outside, Trevena found his friends ; a bearded, 
thick-set, tanned man, and a pleasant, smiling, 
slovenly clergyman, not unlike Trevena himself 
either in face or manner, only that he seemed more 
of the enthusiast, and had the enthusiast's smile 
and peculiar fixity of eye. Arthur was intro- 
duced. 

^* Well, Mr. Tolpedden, I hope we are to have the 
pleasure of seeing you to-night," said Blenerhasset, as 
they walked through towards the great gate ; ** it is 
a blessed work, and we need to have our hands 
strengthened." 

** I should like to see the kids grubbing myself," 
said the bushman ; '^ but I promised to meet some 
chums at the Alhambra." 

" I should really be very glad to come, Trevena," 



46 



said Arthur, ^ but I most be at Davis and BIizaid*s 
frmn seren till ten." 

" Well, you most pray for ns, then," said Mr. 
Blenerhasset. " All I can sar is, that I irould not 
miss the sight of the dear little babes in Christ my- 
self for thirty pounds.** 

'^ Xor I,** said TrevenaL, rubbing his hands. 

On parting with these friends, Arthur and Tre- 
vena made their way straight to Bemers Street, 
where Messrs. Lucre and Smallgood, the religious 
publishers, lived. 

The simple-hearted clergyman was full of spirits, 
and sanguine as a boy. He had a grievance, how- 
ever, to relate. 

''Arthur,^ he said, ^^when I came to London 
last Michaelmas, I went and answered an ad- 
vertisement I saw in the EccUsiastical Gazette — a 
bookseller in St. Gileses wanted to buy MS. ser- 
mons, I wanted money, and had some sermons to dis- 
pose of, so I went to the man and sold him afew — 
ei^tpence each— -dirt cheap^ of course; but he 
said sermons were drugs — he had had about a 
hundred of one clergyman's, if I remember 

right." 

^ Certainly not a bargain,** said Arthur, laugh- 
ing ; ^ but I suppose there are a good many ser- 
mons about?" 

** Well, yesterday I took up the paper, and saw 
the same rascal advertising MS. sermons by a 
bishop lately deceased. A thought struck me that 
I would go and look at these. I did so — he had 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 47 

forgotten my face, and I kept my wide-awake over 
my eyes. The first bundle he put into my hands 
was a parcel of my own sermons. Did you ever 
hear anything like it for villainy and deception ? 
Didn't I rate him I" 

" Was the rogue repentant ?" 

" No ; hard as the nether millstone — told me 
that any dodge was fair in trade, and that he'd 
lost money by the bargain. Sermons without a 
name, weren't worth a penny each, except now and 
then for young curates — he said mine went off 
rather better since he'd advertised. Then what do 
you think he had the audacity to propose ?" 

" Can't imagine — a partnership, or to sell you 
back your own sermons?" 

" No ; he asked me to write him an alphabetical 
volume of skeleton sermons, arranged under differ- 
ent heads." 

** A sort of crib for idle clergymen, I suppose?" 

" Yes — but here we are." 

They were received by Mr. Smallgood in the 
back parlour. Mr. Smallgood was a tall, bland, 
rather servile man, with no whiskers, and a clerical 
manner, produced by long habits of adapting him- 
self to clerical customers, which contrasted sadly 
with his tradesman's obsequiousness. 

" I wish to publish a small volume of sermons," 
said Trevena, nervously. ^' They are sermons that 
have been much liked in my parish, and, indeed, 
in several parishes in the north of Cornwall." 

" Indeed I" Mr. Smallgood bowed his " comely 



48 OREATHEABT. 

head" in a manner at once deferential and shrewd, 
" I feel quite sure, sir, they must have been." 

" Would your firm be willing to publish such a 
volume ? I am not extravagant in my expecta- 
tions." 

Mr. Smallgood waved his head, like a willow in 
a high wind. 

" Of course we should be only too glad ; and on 
terms agreeable to yourself. Is the MS. ready ?" 

" Oh I yes, quite ready." 

" Good, very good I — it rejoices me to feel there 
is some stand to be made by us against the present 
torrent of infidelity and frivolous literature. The 
bishop of Sierra Leone has just sent us a work to 
publish — we shall advertise you together." 

Trevena's colour rose with delight. 

" It may be useful," he said ; " the world is led 
by appearances." 

"It is indeed, my dear sir," said Mr. Small- 
good. " Shall we draw up the agreement at once 
for one thousand copies." 

" I am quite ready," said Trevena. " Perhaps 
I'd better sign it now," 

" Don't you think you'd better ascertain what 
he really means to give?" whispered Arthur, as 
Mr. Smallgood took a sheet of foolscap, and com- 
menced writing. " They're sharp beggars, you 
know." 

" No, no, plenty of time — it would be quite in- 
delicate just yet," murmured Trevena. " I only 
wish I'd said two thousand copies." 



TREVENA AND HIS TRIEND. 49 

Mr. Smallgood concluded his writing, and was 
about to hand the paper with a dry smile to Mr. 
Trevena. 

"Are not one thousand copies almost too large 
a number t" inquired Mr. Smallgood, softly, but still 
retaining hold of the agreement. 

" Not a bit — not a bit," said Trevena, fervently ; 
"there are several hundred clergymen in Corn- 
wall — ^they will each take one ; then there's Oxford 
and Exeter, besides my own friends and mis- 
cellaneous readers. No, not one less will do — the 
Forge is sure to notice it — that will sell two hun- 
dred alone." 

Mr. Trevena read the agreement, and his face 
lengthened. 

" May I ask," he said, " what half-profits and 
half-losses mean, Mr. Smallgood ?" 

" They mean," broke in Arthur, angrily, " that 
you receive half the profits if you gain, and if you 
lose you pay half the printing and advertising — 
perhaps some hundreds of pounds. Don't think 
of it." 

" Your friend is too hasty," said the bookseller, 
quietly, to Trevena. " I presume, sir, when you 
did me the honour of offering me your book, you 
anticipated profits, and not losses. Our business is 
not carried on for pleasure or fame." 

" I should certainly, I must candidly say, have 
preferred simply half-profits," said Trevena, with 
resignation ; " but I cannot object to the present 
arrangement, as I have confidence in my work." 

VOL. III. E 



50 OREATHEART. 

" Naturally," said Mr. Smallgood, " naturally." 

Arthur bit his lip with vexation. 

•" Of course we have our agency on each copy." 

" Of course," replied Mr. Trevena. " I pre- 
sume these payments need not be immediate, and, 
in fact, may come out of the profits I" 

" Three months is our usual time, in your case 
we should be happy to make it four." 

"A very frank, straightforward, upright man 
that," said Trevena, confidently, to Arthur, as 
they left the shop, bowed out by Mr. Smallgood 
and one of his men. 

Arthur was loath to discourage his worthy friend ; 
the only remark he made was, 

^' I hope you will not find that you have made a 
bad bargain. He's rather a hard man, I think, 
and you were a little too compliant." 

" My dear fellow, I shall make a certain hun- 
dred pounds out of it," said Trevena, in his san- 
guine way, " besides the fame ; and only think of 
the possible preferment it may procure me. On 
that I shall marry, and it will retrieve all the 
losses from that dreadful Wheal Fortune. By-the- 
bye, Arthur, I wanted to talk to you " — here he 
hesitated — " about Milly — dear girl I I do some- 
times think she has a liking for me, and then 
again *^ 



How blind true love is I Arthur knew well 
enough, as every one else did, that Milly loved 
Trevena. 

" I am sure she likes you," he said. 



TREVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 51 

" You really think so t" said the delighted lover. 
" Why do you think so t I do not see her often, 
my sister avoids her, and her brother has hardly 
been civil to me since that Guy Fawkes riot." 

"Why, because she seems to like being near 
you, and she seems to like to hear you praised, and, 
above all, she is just the affectionate, gentle, good- 
tempered little thing who would be likely to ad- 
mire such a worthy fellow as yourself." 

"Come, no flattering, Arthur," said Trevena, 
smiling. " You'll make me think too well of my- 
self. Milly is far too good for me. She ought to 
marry a duke ; besides, her brother will never give 
his consent, Fm sure, especially if he goes over to 
Popery, as they say he will. As for Fanny, I 
know she'll throw all the obstacles she can in the 
way ;" then the poor man groaned to think of all 
the locks that, as usual, impeded the course of true 
love. 

"The difficulties will perhaps disappeigr when 
the time comes," said Arthur ; " so don't think of 
them. If Milly really loves you, all will go well." 

" Your heart is lost, that I can see ; you seem so 
wise on these matters. Hal Lucy Tregellas — 
lucky young lady ! It is then true ?" 

" Don't mention her name," said Arthur ; " it 
makes me waver in all my good resolutions." 

He said no more. 

The two friends were now in Oxford Street. 
It was almost Aprils and the windows were gay as 
conservatories, with new ribbons, new bonnets of 

E 2 



52 GREATHEABT. 

all dyes and shades — carnation, Havannah brown, 
blue ; all the colours of a flower-bed. 

" I get very soon tired of London," said Tre- 
vena. " There are too many people and too many 
noises. I begin to long for the old sea-shore again, 
and the quiet walks in Tolpedden Valley. The — " 

^^ Don't talk of paradise to a man in purgatory, 
for sweet mercy's sake !" said Arthur, stopping to 
give emphasis to his request. " Here you are, one 
of the kindest-hearted men in England, and yet 
you have tortured me twice in the last ten minutes." 

Trevena confessed his fault, with kind sympathy, 
and stopped to buy a bunch of violets from a little 
girl at the comer of the Circus. Arthur stopped 
a moment to look at a milliner's shop. As he 
turned again, he caught one glimpse of a barouche 
that swept down Regent Street, and the back 
only of a young lady ^eated in it, beside an old and 
fashionably-dressed dowager. He caught, only for 
one second, a glimpse of the profile of the younger 
lady. Could it be possible it was Lucy Tregellas, 
gay and unconcerned, but paler in face than when 
he last saw her? No, it could not be; it must 
have been one of those chance resemblances that 
so often startle one in London. It came like a 
vision of hope, and yet the hope was mingled with 
agony. 

Arthur stood gazing after the carriage, till some 
one jostling against him awoke him from his 
reverie, and he found Trevena had left him a 
hundred yards behind. 



TRBVENA AND HIS FRIEND. 53 

On leaving Trevena, after having taken a chop 
with him, Arthur hurried to his lodgings to put on 
an older coat, and huny off for his night's work at 
Messrs. Davis and Blizard's. As he knocked at 
the door, the postman came up with letters. 

"Is there one for me — Arthur Tolpedden V* 

"Yes, sir, one," cried the man, and handed him 
one. 

It was an envelope directed by Mrs. Tolpedden 
— it contained a carte de visile, and merely these 
words, 

" At Lucy's request, sent to me when she left 
for Devonshire, with one for myself. We are all 
well. Love from all." 

The photograph was one of Lucy, and it seemed 
to smile at him as he looked. Was he foolish to cover 
itwith kisses? — was he foolish everafterwards to kiss 
it night and morning, and to regard it as a consecra- 
ted thing f Some mysterious cause, he was sure, 
had alone prevented Lucy writing. Once, and once 
only, a thought of that terrible warning of Brad- 
brain's flitted across Arthur^s mind, but he dis- 
missed it at once with horror. It wa^ a mere 
exaggerated rumour, not worthy regard. If she 
could not write, her love was still unchanged, and of 
that the little shadow of her was the certain proof. 
His heart burned with fresh courage now, be- 
cause hope and love shone above his head, through 
the twilight of transitory sorrow, bright, bright as 
the quenchless twin stars of evening. 



\ 



54 GREATHEABT. 



CHAPTER V. 



ANOUIS IN HEBBA. 



ONE bright morning in April, the lieutenant's 
children had not been gone more than ten 
minutes for their morning walk with old Liddy, 
before a knock came at the door. 

" T\Tiy, it's Mr. Bradbrain," said Mrs. Tolped- 
den, who was in the garden, with Susan, garden- 
ing ; " show him into the parlour." 

** How on earth did missus know it was him by 
the knock?" thought Susan, as she ran to the 
door. 

" Is Mrs. Tolpedden at home I" said Mr. Brad- 
brain, brushing a speck of dust o£F his fawn-coloured 
trousers with a white buck-skin glove. 

" Yes, if you please, sir." 

"The lieutenant's out rabbit-shooting in the 
valley?" 

" Yes, if you please, sir — this half-hour. That's 
odd," thought Susan again, "that doctor should 
always know what master is doing — suppose he had 
had the goutf" 

Susan was not accustomed to put ideas together, 
and compare them as if they were ribbons to be 
matched, so her vague thoughts did not grow into 
suspicions. 



ANGUIS IN HERB A. 55 

Susan showed Mr. Bradbrain into the little 
scantily-furnished parlour, which was strewn with 
Noah's arks, transparent slates, and other relics of 
the late tenants. At that moment Mrs. Tolpedden, 
fresher, prettier, and more radiant with happiness 
than ever, came tripping through the glass door 
that led into the garden. 

"Oh! how do you do, Mr. Bradbrain?" she 
said. " I think Ned is better — he is just gone out 
with Liddy." 

Mr. Bradbrain took off his gloves, and replied 
with some conventional form of regret at missing 
his patient. 

As Susan shut the door, Bradbrain's manner 
entirely changed, and he became a different 
person. lie was now no longer the friend, but the 
lover. He took her hand in his, and she did not 
withdraw it. Poor, silly little woman, already she 
was wavering in her affection to her husband, and 
trying to reconcile it with a new and a forbidden 
love. She was not boldly and at once repelling 
it as dangerous and unholy; she was trying to 
persuade herself it was only friendship, carried 
perhaps a little beyond its proper limits. Now he 
poured, for the first time, into her ear passionate 
protestations of changeless love. 

"Mr. Bradbrain," said Mrs. Tolpedden, "are 
you mad ? Have I ever said anything that could 
encourage you to this wild talk!" 

"Mary, how often I've told you I have loved 
you ever since that unlucky day we first met at 






56 GREATHEART. 

Bodmin — you know how earnestly and how pas- 
sionately I have felt that love that I tried in vain 
to crush in the bud !" 

" Foolish man/' said Mrs. Tolpedden, striking 
him playfully with some music she held in her 
hand, " haven't I told you over and over again that 
I will not see you if you venture to talk to me or 
write to me in that way ? Do you really think I 
do not love my husband and my children ? Come, 
make yourself useful, and instead of acting the 
despairing lover, come and walk with me down to 
the conservatory at my brother's house. Walker 
has promised me some primulas." 

Bradbrain was silent — it was not his purpose to 
make her too early see that she was in his power. 
He would further entangle her before she could 
herself know that she really loved him, and was 
inextricably plunged into the vortex of a guilty 
passion. It was a Satanic act, and he was an 
adept in it. While the poor innocent creature 
foolishly enjoyed a flirtation that she believed her- 
self strong enough to put an end to at any 
moment, he felt she was his. 

" Mary," he said, " pardon ^" 

"Sir, I will not be called Mary — my name, 
sir, is Mrs. Tolpedden, please to remember that in 
future*" 

This was said with so little severity, that Brad- 
brain only laughed and kissed her hand, as he fol- 
lowed her into the garden. 

They passed from the garden into the orchard, 



ANGUI8 IN HERB A. 57 

and walked side by side, dangerously silent, his 
eyes watching hers, as in pretended anger, con- 
stantly verging into laughter, she sometimes pre- 
ceded him, or sometimes paused to listen if she 
could hear the beagles in the valley. 

" My heart pains me sadly to-day," said Brad- 
brain, with a deep sigh. 

'* Perhaps it's a twinge of rheumatism," said 
Mrs. Tolpedden, laughing; "is it very bad I — 
poor fellow !" and she looked earnestly at the 
handsome dark face, and those dangerously large 
eyes. 

" Your words are cruel, but there is pity in your 
voice, Mary." 

" There again Mary — if you say that once more, 
sir, I shall leave you." 

"Well, then, I won't — I promise. I would not 
pain you for all the wealth of India; but how 
can I conceal that I love you — passionately love 
you T" 

"I forbid you, sir, to repeat that word love 
more than three times in any one visit. It is very 
wrong, and you know it. Now, promise me, on 
your knees, too, or I won't believe it. What 
would my husband say ?" 

Bradbrain fell laughingly on one knee, and 
seized the unresisting hand. 

" Mary," he said, " I cannot promise to root out 
a love that has long since grown into my very na- 
ture. Tell a madman to reflect — I have not reached 
the cold, calculating age." 



58 OREATHEART. 

Tears sprang into Mrs. Tolpedden's eyes, and 
she tore her hand away. 

"Mr. Bradbrain," she said, then she softened 
— " Donald, I will not listen to these wild speeches 
— ^you forget who I am. But it is my fault for 
listening to you so long. I will not — ^I will not 
be so insulted. It is cruel." 

In a moment Bradbrain's hand held hers. 

^JMary,"he said, in a tremulous voice, "I am almost 
mad ! I think, sometimes, this intense passion de- 
prives me of my senses. Forgive me. I would 
rather be a beggar to-morrow than give you a mo- 
ment's pain by anything I can say. But you do 
not know how hard — ^how terrible — it is to have 
to check a love that has taken such hold on the 
heart !" 

They were walking silently side by side down a 
path bordered on one side by hazels, under whose 
dancing catkin tassels the violets grew sweeter than 
elsewhere, when from a cross-path the lieutenant 
suddenly strode, his gun on his shoulder, one hand 
in the pocket of his green velveteen shooting- 
jacket. 

He stared when he saw them ; then broke into 
a dry, good-humoured laugh, and stopped like an 
old pointer. 

" Why, Polly and Bradbrain, I declare 1 heads 
to the wind ; going down to see my brother, I sup- 
pose, and not too welcome if he's at work. Who 
expected to meet you?" 

" What, done shooting already, Nel f — you lazy 



ANGUIS IN HERBA. 59 

thing r" said Mrs. Tolpedden, kissing him on the 
forehead. 

" Yes — ^no — pooh ! Forgot my wads, and had to 
put hack into harbour. So the wilful^ little hussy 
kept you to escort her, Bradbrain, when every 
moment of yours is valuable ? Just like her, for 
all the world !" 

"No such thing, sir," said Mrs. Tolpedden, 
damping her foot — " no such thing T* 

" You know it is, Polly ; one more kiss, and 
then I leave you to tease Bradbrain. Why, what 
a glorious colour you've got, Polly, this morning ! 
and so you would always have, if you took a cliff- 
walk every day, as I do. What a shame not 
bringing Bobby — poor dear old Bobby !" 

"Bobby is with Liddy." 

" Ha 1 you usen't to let her out of your sight. 
I really think you ain't so fond of her as you used 
to be." 

" That's very unkind, Nel," said Mrs. Tolped- 
den, pouting in her pretty, wilful way ; " and it 
isn't true." 

" Well, so it is unkind, and I know I oughtn't to 
have said it," replied the lieutenant kissing her. 
" Good-bye, darling ; I'll be off after the wadding. 
Tve only got two rabbits yet. I left Walker with 
the dogs. Good-bye, Bradbrain — ^give her some good 
advice about Teddy." 

As the lieutenant walked homeward, Mrs. Tol- 
pedden stopped to pick some violets on the edge of 
the wood. Bradbrain helped her. It was a danger- 



60 GREATHEART. 

ous occupation, for the hands met among the 
leaves, and the faces came sometimes nearer than 
they need have done^ as Bradbrain quoted the 
lines of Shakspere — 

*' Fair as the lids of Cytherea^s eyes, and sweeter than her 

breath;* 

• 

How the rose colour deepened in Mrs. Tolpedden's 
cheek as she listened to those honeyed words 1 

Then, heedless of time as children, they wan- 
dered on through the copse — ^Mrs. Tolpedden 
affecting an anger at Bradbrain's unconcealed 
admiration, that could not have deceived even the 
most timid of lovers ; so pure and all uncon- 
scious of wrong was she of the snares in her 
path. 

Bradbrain, as he walked, had linked a chain 
of violets, as children do daisies, and as they en- 
tered the shrubbery he tried to throw it over Mrs. 
Tolpedden's neck ; but she laughed, and broke it. 
Then he refastened it, and sang those words of 
Shelley's : 

" There was a little lawny islet, 
By anemone and violet, 
Like mosaic paven. 
Its roof was flowers and leaves. 
Which the summer's breath enweaves." 

"How beautiful!" said Mrs. Tolpedden. 
" Whose words are those ?" 

"Shelley's, darling. Your breath is like soft 
music, your words are 



AXGUIS IN HERB A. 61 

' The echoes of a voice which on my heart 
Sleep like a melody of early days/ '' 

" I never knew you were fond of poetry, Mr. 
Bradbrain." 

" Dearest, best, and brightest ! I love all beau- 
tiful things, because they remind me of you." 

" Oh I Donald, Donald, don't talk in that way." 

" Wear this chain, Mary, do, to please one who 
loves you so passionately." 

" I don't want your love, sir. My heart has, 
you know well, long been given away." 

Dangerous dalliance with evil! Sporting on 
the brink of a volcano! Every moment Brad- 
brain's power over her was increasing— every mo- 
ment she lingered there the unholy love was grow- 
ing more powerful to wean her from the purer 
affections of wife and mother. 

Just at that moment they stopped at a gate 
leading to the inner garden. The boughs of a 
huge laurel grew over it, and Mrs. Tolpedden 
could not pass under them without stooping. 
Bradbrain ran forward to lift them up, and seized 
that moment to throw the violet chain, fresh 
twined, over her head with a laugh of triumph. 

This time she did not cast it from her, but ar- 
ranging it afresh, said playfully, 

" I'll keep this, dear Donald, as a remembrance 
of our pleasant walk." 

Bradbrain seized her hand, and before she could 
pull it back had covered it with passionate kisses. 



62 GBEATHEABT. 

Almost before he again had let go her hand a 
voice said gravely, 

** Good morning, Mary. Good morning, Brad- 
brain/' 

They looked up guiltily. It was Mr. Henry Tol- 
pedden. Mr. Bradbrain felt he could not have 
seen him kiss his sister-in-law's hand, or have 
heard what be said, for he had emerged, bill-hook 
in hand, from a group of laurels near a dead fir 
tree, at least thirty yards off, hidden from them 
by a clump of arbutus and a tall dark column of 
lignum vitce^ which must have veiled them com- 
pletely. 

"Escorting Mrs. Tolpedden to your green- 
house," said Bradbrain gaily, though still slightly 
confused at the suddenness of the apparition. 
" Delightful morning. Glad to see you enjoying 
the fresh air — no day for work." 

"It seems not, indeed," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
drily, and with meaning. 

" Fm going to carry off some of your primulas, 
Henry," said Mrs. Tolpedden, with nervous 
eagerness to say something. 

" Ha ! the garden, I fear, begins to show the 
ill-fortune of its owner," said Mr. Tolpedden with a 
sigh. 

" Oh ! Fm sure it's very pretty," said Mrs. Tol- 
pedden, twining the violet necklace with her finger. 

" Is that for Bobby f " said her brother-in-law, 
with a strange suspicious and half-sarcastic look 
at the fiowers. 



ANGUIS IN HERBA. 63 

Mrs. Tolpedden hesitated, then she laughed, and 
said, 

"Yes — for one of the children." And she 
glanced at Bradbrain, who was striking an inof- 
fensive pebble with his stick. 

" Excuse me, my dear Mrs. Tolpedden ; but I 
really must be off on my rounds," said the doctor, 
as Mr. Tolpedden, who seemed determined not to 
leave them, began walking back with them towards 
the house. 

" And you won't stay lunch, then ? Mrs. Tol- 
pedden, I'm sure, will join in the entreaties." 

"Can't, Tolpedden, 'pon my soul — not a mo- 
ment. Tat ta ! Good-bye, Mrs. Tolpedden." 

" Good-bye, Mr. Bradbrain." 

Why did she not look at her visitor as she 
spoke ? 

As the doctor strode towards the house, in his 
gay, defiant, slangy way, Tolpedden took his sister- 
in-law's arm, and led her in a different direction. 
He remained silent ; there was a stem suspicion 
in his manner which she could not disguise from 
herself. 

" How did he find Teddy, Mary ?" 

" What, Mr. Bradbrain f Oh I he did not see 
him ; he was gone out." 

" That was unfortunate." 

" Yes, it was, very." 

" Very. I don't like reckless people like that ; 
he's a sad, scatter-brained fellow ; he never seems 
to name his hour." 



64 GREATHEART. 

" Oh, yes he does, Henry ; but doctors, you 
know, have many engagements. They *^ 

" Yes, and some evidently more pressing than 
others. He never forgets to come, I see, but he 
apparently often mistakes the hour. Did Nelsou 
have much chat with him ?" 

'^Nel was gone out shooting, but we met 
him." 

" Oh ! Nelson did not see him ? — so I thought." 

How fearless innocence is ! Perfect inno- 
cence would have boldly faced the inquirer, and 
bravely confronted the suspicions face to face. 
Mrs. Tolpedden looked on the ground, and did not 
once lift up her eyes. 

There was a painful silence. 

*' Mary," at last said Mr. Tolpedden, ^' I don't 
like that man ; he is bad ; he is false ; he has no 
heart ; he is said to be a selfish profligate. The 
less he comes to see Ned, or anyone else, the better. 
XiCt me caution you, Mary, as you love your hus- 
band and children, to see that fellow from this 
time forward as little as possible. We need not 
quarrel with him, my dear sister, but you must, 
and you shall avoid his society." 

Mrs. Tolpedden did not answer for some time ; 
but, as they entered the green-house, she said, 

" Henry, I think you do Mr. Bradbrain a very 
great injustice. You should not give way to such 
unjust suspicions. We've always found him a man 
of high principles, and I believe him to be one." 

" Devilish near nabbed, that time !" said Brad- 



THE PIANIST. 65 

brain, smiling to himself, as he shut the garden 
door softly behind him. " Was there ever such a 
pretty little winning creature as that on this earth ! 
But curse the old fool of a husband, and the Pha- 
risaical prig of a brother, too, I say," 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE PIANIST. 

ARTHUR had already, within five months, found 
how soon the dream-castles of youth melt in 
the air of London. He had discovered how im- 
possible it was to storm any profession, he had 
seen how long a blockade may last before the town 
yields, and the gates fly open. No success is 
taken for granted in London. There must be 
an apprenticeship in every profession, and genius 
has to bear his preliminary thraldom, like the 
mere rank and file. 

If he took to portrait-painting, the profits were 
almost certain ; but then there must first be long 
practice, and, last of all, a connection must be 
laboriously formed. If he took to literature, 
there were experiments to be made, failures to 
be retrieved, vexatious delays to be undergone ; 
and, above all, time had to be won in which to 
vnAte a careful and sound book. Now, it was all 
v^ well of Mr, Hookem to urge him to a first 
great success, but he wanted money with which to 
YOL. III. F 



66 GREATHEART. 

help his father, and give him leisure to pursue his 
discoveries in chemistry; and money he must 
have. 

Arthur's fifty pounds were now all but gone. A 
young man unaccustomed to hard fare and ex- 
treme economy, finds it difficult at first to realize 
the necessity of watching with jealousy every 
source of expenditure — ^to curtail amusements that 
have become habitual, to refuse loans that good- 
nature and friendship suggest. He tried some- 
times, but often in vain, to live in a humble and 
even sordid way, denying himself all pleasures, and 
working unceasingly. 

He was too proud to ask for help from home, so 
he contrived to eke out his resources by his 
miserable pittance from Davis and Blizard's, and 
by now and then selling a water-colour sketch. 
One day a new resource suggested itself. He 
read in the Times an advertisement headed "A 
pianist wanted, for evening parties, &c. Apply 
to Hummel and Tong, Regent Street. Terms, one 
guinea a night." 

He put on his hat, and off he dashed. He 
might, perhaps, now be able to conceal from his 
father a little longer his want of money, and even 
lay by something, so that he might run home for a 
week, perhaps see Lucy, hear all from her, and re- 
move the disagreement that had sprung up. 

It was a pleasant sunny April morning, about 
ten o'clock, and the shop-boys were sprinkling the 
pavement in patterns, or letting down the striped 



THE PIANIST. 67 

awnings. Slim young men, in their shirt-sleeves, 
were arranging silks in the windows, in pleasant 
contrasts of colour. All was life and bustle — even 
the street-boys' shrill whistle and shouts fell plea- 
santly on the ear. 

Arthur reached the shop of Messrs. Hummel 
and Tong, and looked in for a moment at the 
enormous ophicleides and saxophones, and the rows 
of neat silver-keyed flutes, and the illustrated songs, 
before he could muster up courage to enter. He 
was proud, and the occupation was not one speci- 
ally agreeable to his mind, for it would throw 
him among men of his own class, as a hired in- 
ferior. Then, ashamed of his own fears and 
scniples, he strode in carelessly, with rather the air 
of an affluent and habitual customer, than of a 
poor man seeking employment, A shopman came 
to him, a moustachioed shopman, tame and obse- 
quious. 

" What can we show you, sirt Instruments or 
music, sir ?" 

" I came about an advertisement for a pianist," 
said Arthur. 

" We can let you have one, sir. Is the party 
to-night r 

The man talked as if pianists were self-acting 
pianos. 

"/did not want a pianist," said Arthur. "I 
only wanted to procure an engagement as one.** 

"Oh!" said the man, changing his voice, and 
becoming familiar, for he himself had once been a 

F 2 



68 GREATHEART. 

pianist, "that's quite a different thing. I think 
our list is full, but Til ask Mr. Hummel, if you 
like." 

" Do, if you please, then," said Arthur, turning 
over the leaves of one of Gounod's songs that lay 
on the counter. 

Presently the man reappeared, following behind 
Mr. Hummel, a gross, pompous, over-dressed Jewish 
man, with staring, violent eyes, and great whiskers of 
the George the Fourth cut. An odour of brown sher- 
ry surrounded him, and he had evidently just risen 
from luncheou, for he was using a gold toothpick 
with insolent nonchalance. He stopped to touch 
the keys of a grand piano as he passed up the 
shop. There was not the slightest hurrj'' about his 
movements. He took everything (to use a pro- 
fessional metaphor) in very slow time. 

When he reached Arthur, by slow stages, admir- 
ing here a Broadwood, there a Collard, he smoothed 
the perch-back frill of his shirt, not that it 
wanted arrangement, but to show a coarse diamond 
ring on the little fubsy finger of his left hand. 

" Well, sir," he said, without directing his eyes 
on Tolpedden, " what is it we can do for you ? — 
what is it we can do for you ?" 

Pompous men love repetitions, they make an 
idea go so much further. 

" I wanted," said Arthur, strongly disposed to 
insult Mr. Hummel, " to procure an occasional en- 
gagement as a pianist at evening parties." 

'^ Oh I you do, sir ; and pray, sir, let me ask 



THE PIANIST. C9 

first, as a preliminary, are you competent for 
such an engagement? Can you play D' Albert's 
music at sight?" 

" I think I can. I have devoted much time to 
practice." 

^' Think you can, sir 1 You must be sure you 
can ; we must be sure you can, sir. We do not 
pay guineas to incompetent persons. Hummel and 
Tong have a character, sir, to maintain — ^yes, sir, 
a character*" 

'^ And I have one to lose," said Arthur, his blood 
at fever heat. " Give me some music, and hear 
me play! Have you Les Ravissante Quadrilles, 
Nordmann's ? I do not want to obtain any one's 
money under false pretences." 

** I should think not — ^you won't get mine. Mr. 
Turner, hand this gentleman the Palermo Quad- 
rilles ; let's hear his style. We want a light finger, 
sir, a full tone, and a brilliant touch. That's a 
piano on which the great Thalberg has played — 
yes, sir, the immortal hundred-fingered Thalberg. 
Stop that tuning, Mr. Turner, and see what that 
lady wants who's just come in." 

Arthur sat down, choked back his disgust, and 
dashed boldly at D' Albert's music. He then 
sprang at Coote's capital Great Eastern Polka, 
and concluded with the Genevifeve Waltz. He 
was fond of dance music, and performed the pieces 
without pause or blunder, with great spirit and in 
excellent time. 

Mr. Hummel deigned to smile languidly, and 



70 OREATHEABT. 

even In one instance beat time with his tooth« 
pick. 

" That's your style," he said ; " a little amateur- 
ish, but up to the mark. Can you manage an 
overture — *Fra Diavolo/ or ^Domino Noirt' — 
it does to start 'em — ^wake 'em up." 

Arthur played part of an overture with much 
expression. 

"That's your style— only wants a little more 
equality in the shakes. Mr. Turner, put this 
gentleman's name on our list." 

" Is there no immediate work to do t" said Ar- 
thur, a little anxiously, for he feared that his name 
would be shelved. 

" See, Mr. Turner," said the Anglo-German 
potentate, *'if there is anything down in the book 
for to-night-Levison and Hoffman are both en- 
gaged, I know, at Lady Brockleby's private con- 
cert." 

"Yes," said the man, referring to the book, 
" there is a dance at Mrs. De Castros, 7, Tudor 
Bead, St. John's Wood, 9.30. We promised to 
write to Oramer^s for a pianist. We have just 
sent up a grand to her for the evening." 

" Oh ! very well, you can go there, sir, and call 
to-morrow any time after ten for your money. 
Evening dress, mind, be punctual, and don't do 
like Levison, one of our men, did last week, and 
guzzle down too much champagne, especially if you 
ain't used to it." 

" I do not come here to receive advice about the 



THE PIANI8T. 71 

manners of gentlemen/' thought Arthur ; but he 
only replied, " I will be there, sir, at the time," 
and bowing, left the shop, elated at his good 
fortune. 

Punctually at a quarter past nine, Arthur, with 
a roll of the requisite music lent by Messrs. Hum- 
mel and Tong, was at the door of No. 7, Tudor 
Iload. 

He looked very handsome in his sombre even- 
ing dress, a mere thread of a white cambric tie 
round his robust neck ; his boots were perfect, and 
his gldves fitted admirably. The hall, lit with a 
gay Chinese lantern, was full of people taking o£F 
coats and hats, and giving them to two maid ser- 
vants, neat and smart as French grisettes, who had 
the care of the tickets. 

"32, sir, is your number," said the smiling 
maiden, handing Arthur his ticket. " Coffee, sir, 
in the next room." 

"What name, if you please, sir I" said the 
footman, as Tolpedden re-emerged into the hall. 

At that very moment some one pulled his arm. 
It was Dodgeson, tall and quaint as ever, his Gibus, 
like an accordion, under one arm, and a light grey 
wrapper thrown over another. 

" What, you here, Tol ?" he said ; " why, what a 
tremendous get up — I don't like these hops much. 
I ought to be at work. Stay for me, old fellow, 
and we'll make our bow together to the old bird — 
I shall go in for dancing, I think. You must 
come to Fisher's on the 7th — we're going to have 



72 GREATHEART. 

a supper after his pictures go in — such a lark — 
sparring and chanting." 

" Names, if you please," said the footman. 

*^Mr. Tolpedden and Mr. Dodgeson." 

" You shouldn't have given mine," said Arthur. 
" I'm not a guest, Dodgeson, I have only come 
here as a pianist — ^I am the slave, who is to play 
all night — you mustn't know me." 

" Stuff and nonsense — no chaff, Tol," said 
Dodgeson, stopping on the stairs, and eyeing him 
with an incredulous and grotesque humour, as he 
pulled his enormous curly moustachios and pointed 
beard of the Fran9oi8 Premier type. 

" It is so — really it's no chaff. To-night I am 
a musical serf, earning my guinea by hard work, 
and some mortification. I am a social leper — 
shun me, or you will become unclean. Look, 
there is the hostess nodding to you from the top 
of the stairs." 

Yes, there was that old young woman, Mrs, De 
Castro, all ringlets and arsenated green garland, 
nodding a welcome, and begging Mr. Dodgeson to 
ask the footman in the hall if the pianist had come 
yet. 

" Do you take me for a snob and cad ? " said 
Dodgeson to Arthur. " I shall come and have a jaw 
between every dance. What do I care f — ain't you 
a gentleman and my friend ? Does earning a 
guinea honourably disgrace anyone? I should 
rather think not ; and what is more, I'd cut any one 
who wouldn't do what I do, so I tell you, old man 1" 



THE PIANIST. 73 

At the top of the stairs Mrs. De Castro shook 
hands enthusiastically with Dodgeson. 

"Now, how very, very kind, Mr. Dodgeson," 
she said, " of you coming here, so engaged as you 
are too, aixd to a foolish, little, out-of-the-way 
suburban dance like this. Pray introduce me to 
your friend — and how kind, too, bringing a 
dancing friend. Oh ! you are an invaluable man !'* 

"My friend, Mr. Arthur Tolpedden," said 
Dodgeson, boldly, and without any very percep- 
tible flinching. 

" The pianist from Messrs. Hummel and Tong," 
said Arthur, laughing, but stoically. 

" Oh ! nonsense ; one of your wicked artist tricks, 
I know," said Mrs.De Castro, sweeping off to repeat 
the joke. " TU introduce him to a partner directly 
for the first dance." 

"If you do, Mrs. De Castro," said Arthur, 
following her in a hurry, " you will leave no one 
at the piano, that I can assure you, for I certainly 
came to officiate there ; and as for meeting Dodge- 
son, it was a mere accident." 

" Is it possible ?" said Mrs. De Castro, drawing 
herself up, and a little colder in manner. " Well, 
I never should ! Might I ask the gentleman, then, 
to begin an overture, as the people are now nearly 
all come, I think ? Thank you — if you please — ^any- 
thing of Verdi's. Mr. Dodgeson, let me introduce 
you to Miss Hawkins, that pretty blonde there by 
the window. Oh! nonsense, you must dance. 
Come, you'll catch cold at the door." 



74 GREATHEART. 

A good-natured social person was Mrs, De 
Castro, but she had not the courage to treat a 
hired pianist as a gentleman^ whatever might have 
been his education. 

Arthur sat down and plunged manfully into the 
overture to the " Trovatore." 

In about ten minutes Dodgeson came up, and 
leaning over his shoulder, said : 

" The old bird, Arthur, wants the Oomo Quad- 
rilles. Fire away, old fellow, you're in for it now. 
Justagoin' to begin ; walk up, ladies and gentle- 
men. Such a nobbby girl Tve got I — wish you 
were dancing too." 

It seemed like a dream to Arthur, as he kept his 
face steadily fixed on the music, and played vigor- 
ously till the hands clapped, the crowd again began 
to circulate, and the talk to quicken. 

" What a swell pianist," said one young Somer- 
set House man. 

" What airsthese vulgar musical people give them- 
selves," said a dowager to her daughter, a young 
lady in red nose and blue snood, who was watching 
Dodgeson and the blonde laughing and talking to 
Tolpedden. 

At a second signal from the fugleman Dodge- 
son, Arthur broke forth into the Genevifeve Waltz, 
and everybody began to spin round like the peo- 
ple in Wieland's ^' Oberon," when the magic flute 
sounded its irresistible incantations. It was a 
heavy-bodied people to discover such a fascinating 
dance. On poor Arthur played ; like the bees in 



THE PIANIST. 75 

Virgil (sic vos rum vobis)y he made honey that 
others ate. It was hard bonda^ to see an amuse- 
ment, and yet to be denied a share in it ; it was 
harder still to sit there unheeded, derided, for^t- 
ten, or despised. 

It was in the interval between the Venice Quad- 
rilles and the Great Eastern Polka, that Arthur 
sat with one hand unconsciously on the silent ivory 
keys, absorbed in his own thoughts. In that day- 
dream he forgot for a moment the whirling 
dancers, the talkative lions, the smart public-ofBce- 
men, the jaded old dandies about town, who were 
airing their small talk, the fussy dowagers, and 
even the pretty faces that flitted about the well-lit 
rooms ; his memory turned fondly to dear old Corn- 
wall. Again the scene at Endellion, and that still 
more hallowed spot by the ruined chapel, arose 
before his half-shut eyes. There by the door, 
where the old gentleman in the white waistcoat 
stood, now stretched a long line of moonlit cliffs ; at 
the foot of the yellow satin ottoman descended the 
dangerous path from the crags of Dunchine ; there 
by the passage leading to the card-room loomed 
the Mermaid's Bock. In an instant nimble fancy 
transformed the jarring babel of voices into the 
sullen moan of the Atlantic, and the murmur of 
the inner room into the whisper of the wandering 
wind on the wild western shore. 

All at once some one shook the pianist roughly 
by the arm, and broke into his reverie. It was 
Dodgeson, hot and angry, his hair flurried and 



76 OBEATHEABT. 

rough With annoyance. He was pulling up his 
shirt-sleeves fretfully. 

" Look here, Tol," he said, " that old guy is a 
regular snob. She won't see me here again in a 
hurry, I can tell her. I went to her just now, 
while I was getting an ice down-stairs for Fanny 
Power, that little blonde you saw, and asked her 
to let old Scrooper, who'd said he was all there to 
play the next quadrille for you ; and what do you 
think the old humbug said f " 

" Don't know, really ; but I wish, my dear old 
fellow, you would let me bear my lot in my own 
way. I am not a guest here, and I don't want to 
seem one. Well, what did she say, tell us ?" 

" Why, the old fool said that it was really im- 
possible — quite wrong; sorry to refuse me any- 
thing, only she really must this once — social preju- 
dices must be respected. She should never hear 
the last of it — oh ! dear me, no 1" 

Here the indignant and honest-hearted Dodge- 
son made such a hideous face in defiance and 
scorn of poor Mrs. De Castro, that Arthur had to 
caution him, and, to divert his mind, began to dis- 
cuss general subjects, such as how much could be 
got at " The Slaughter House" for "pot-boilers," 
how much the enterprising M. Joubert gave for 
sketches, also who would be the next associate, 
and so on. 

Arthur was all this time sitting playing a frag- 
ment from « Puritani," just to pass the time, while 
Dodgeson stood in a quaint attitude with his back 



THE PIANIST. 77 

to the wall of the ball-room, and facing the door. 

Suddenly Dodgeson stared violently at a group 
of ladies, new arrivals, that had just ascended the 
stairs, and had been confronted and grappled with 
by Mrs. De Castro, then, with an irrepressible 
exclamation, he rushed at them as violently as if 
he had been going to drive them down-stairs 
rather than merely to welcome them. Arthur saw 
nothing of this, but leaning on his hand, he 
returned to his dreams, as an opium-eater might 
have done who had been temporarily roused to 
some short-lived exertion. 

In less than five minutes Dodgeson returned 
with a lady on each arm ; Mrs. De Castro follow- 
ing in the rear in a reconnoitering way, and at a 
distance. 

" Tolpedden," said Dodgeson in a curious sort 
of voice, " here are two ladies who wish to be in- 
troduced to you." 

Arthur looked languidly up, cursing in his heart 
the good-natured fellow who would not leave him 
to brood alone over his day-dreams. He rose to 
his feet, slowly, but with the ease and calmness of 
a gentleman, and looked round. 

How the blood rushed to his heart ! For a mo- 
ment he had to hold the piano for support. There 
stood Lucy Tregellas, paler and more pensive than 
she used to be, but still with the same pure, frank 
gaze as of old. The snowy cloud of her ball- 
dress gave her beauty a refinement almost super- 
natural, as she glided along, the undisputed 



78 GEEATHEART. 

queen of the party ; her deep brown eyes, full 
as ever of innocent surprise and delight, were 
tempered by momentary glooms of sadness that 
she could not control. 

She turned pale when she saw Arthur; then 
instantly recovering herself, and radiant with a 
joy, that seemed to light her face as with a halo 
of beatitude, she held out her hand. How Arthur 
pressed it with that soft, magnetic pressure that 
lovers will imagine. Love has many a deaf and 
dumb alphabet, and not the least subtle and ex- 
pressive of them is the shaking-hands alphabet. 

There could be no display there of what each 
felt. No inquiries, no explanations, no reproaches, 
except those thousands of entreaties, denials, 
protestations, that shot, in quick signals from 
their eyes. The words were common-place — mere 
anxious inquiries as to success from Lucy — ^mere 
concealed reproaches from Arthur, questions as to 
where Lucy was stopping, and how long she would 
be in town. 

" And so you wont know me, Mr. Tolpedden ?" 
said Lucy's chaperouy who turned out to be no 
less than old Mrs. Penrose^ 

Arthur apologised, and shook hands cordially. 

" Ha ! we old people can't expect much notice," 
said the chatty old lady, smiling her admiration of 
Lucy, and her pleasure at meeting Arthur so 
unexpectedly. 

Then, in pure kindness of heart, she took Dodge- 
son aside, to allow the two obvious lovers to talk 



THE PIANIST. 79 

alone and enjoy that brief moment of pure delight. 

"Did you ever," she said to Dodgeson, "see 
Lucy look so pretty f That white silk body so 
becomes her, and the fern leaves, too, looping the 
white tulle« Oh dear, yes, she is a Lily, indeed — 
dear, modest little thing ! She was too proud, I 
can tell you, to wear my cameo bracelets, she 
would have her own Soman pearls, and, I do de« 
clare, she looks to perfection in them I Ha I Mr. 
Dodgeson, it is we old creatures who need the 
pearl-powder and the jewels. Youth and beauty 
want no diamonds." 

" Do you remember that jolly pic-nic at Endel- 
lion f " said Dodgeson in his blunt, pleasant way ; 
^^ that was something like. Please pardon me for 
a moment, Mrs. Penrose ; here's old Scrooper. I 
want him to play a quadrille, and let Arthur 
dance." 

"Why, on earth, should Arthur playt" said 
Mrs. Penrose ; but Dodgeson had already shot off, 
and was lost in the crowd. 

"The/re always strange impulsive creatures, 
these artists, so Fve been told," said the old lady. 
" Of course Arthur will dance with Lucy. It would 
be barbarous if he didn't. He's evidently in love 
with her. It was beginning as far back as the pic- 
nic, though no one saw it but me." 

All this time Arthur was in Paradise ; for he 
was gazing into Lucy's eyes, and asking her a 
thousand questions, not unmingled with some lover's 
reproaches. 



80 GREATHEABT. 

'^I could not write, dear Arthur," said Lucy, 
in a low voice — " I could not write, really, Arthur. 
Papa had accused your father of spreading Cruel 
reports against us." 

" It is untrue, Lucy," said Arthur passionately. 
" He is incapable of spreading falsehoods. Some 
enemy has done this. You cannot — you cannot 
believe it of him — ^so brave and generous as he 
is?" 

"I do not, Arthur; I never did. But my fa- 
ther has taken it to heart, and you know he is a 
proud man, very resolute when he takes a preju- 
dice ; and he would not let me go to the dear old 
house, and see dear Mrs. Tolpedden. Then mam- 
ma teased me about Fred Boscawen, and made 
me promise not to write a word to you, for she 
suspected everything : and then when it began to 
prey upon me, because I knew you would think I 
was unkind and cruel, she sent me to stay with 
the Hawkinses in Portman Square." 

" But, Lucy, I shall see you at the Penroses' ?" 

" Oh ! yes, dear Arthur, I shall be there all 
Thursday. Oh ! do come ; we shall be so happy ; 
shan't we ?" 

"Will I come, Lilly? — will the sun rise on Thurs- 
day? Do not these few moments redeem all I have 
suffered f romyour silence and my own misfortunes?" 

Lucy turned suddenly, and looking at her bou- 
quet, asked when the dancing was going to begin, 
at the same time placing her little white hand, so 
charmingly and confidingly, on Arthur^s left arm. 



THE PIANIST, 81 

to lead him off. Anyone could have guessed they 
were engaged. 

It needed all " Mr. Greatheart's " moral courage 
to bear up against this last trial. As his pride fell 
all but dead, his eyes seemed to lose their colour, 
and his whole face relaxed and narrowed. 

" Lucy," he said, " I am not here as a guest." 

"Not as a guest ? — oh, nonsense, Arthur I" 

" No ; I ought to have told you so before. I am 
only a poor wretch playing the piano for money." 

" For money 1" the words came in such a tearful 
echo. " Oh, dear Arthur, no — ^you must dance 
with me ?" 

Dear, brave girl, she would not see his mortifi- 
cation I She would not seem to see that it wa^ 
impossible for him to do that night as he liked. 
He so bold and so impetuous I There could surely 
be no trammels for him. She stood there irresolute 
and silent, her hand weighing on his arm. 

Just then up dashed Dodgeson, hotter, more 
angular, and more excitable than ever. He dragged 
with him a broad-faced, over-dressed, fat little man, 
who was patient in his clutch. 

"Come along, old man," he cried, "here's 
Scrooper, a good fellow, going to play a spell for 
you, Arthur — the old bird's no objection. You can 
do the trick, can't you, Scrooper t Now, go along, 
Arthur, you and Miss Tregellas, and we'll see to the 
playing — we'll pound away, won't we, Scrooper ?" 

" I believe you, my boy." 

Scrooper sang comic songs. 

VOL. III. G 



82 GREATHEART. 

"Come, why don't you go, Toll — get out of 
this. There's Mrs. De Castro telegraphing like 
fun for the Lancers. Fire away, Scrooper — now 
then. I'm engaged to Fanny Power for the next 
waltz — I'm a free nigger till then. Now, then, 
Scrooper, I give the time — take it from me." 

Scrooper was just tucking up his wristbands, 
and sitting down, with his chest out, and his 
prominent eyes fixed on the music, when Arthur 
stepped forward and resumed his place. 

^^ Good-bye, Lucy," he said, " till I'm off work 
again. Dodgeson is longing to dance with you. 
No, thank you, Mr, Scrooper — no, thank you, my 
dear fellow. Dodgeson," he said, drawing his 
friend apart, "I won't be a coward — I won't shirk 
my work, I was paid for it, and I'll do it." 

And with this brave resolve^ in which Lucy ac- 
quiesced by a look of admiration that would have 
roused the meanest of ancient knights to deeds of 
unrivalled daring, Arthur sat down at the piano, 
and accomplished his task with spirit and with 
almost professional vigour. 

Many were the pleasant moments snatched that 
night by Arthur, between the intervals of work, 
to tell Lucy the hopes and fears of his present 
life. Long before the gas in the chandeliers began 
to grow pale in the morning light, a tumultuous 
^' Sir Roger de Coverley " had closed his labours. 
Mrs. Penrose, in her kind, sensible way, took 
Lucy home. At the carriage door Arthur thanked 
Mrs, Penrose, as she hoped he would be sure 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 83 

not to forget Thursday, One last soft pressure 
of Lucy's hand, the wheels moved, something 
white fluttered from the carriage window, and they 
were gone. 



CHAPTER VIL 

THOU COMEST IN SUCH A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 

A PLEASANT fresh morning on the shore 
below the unlucky Wheal Fortune mine. 
The tide turning fast, and the waves just 
beginning to leave the long line of wet yellow 
sand, that dried the instant the water had oozed 
back through it, and leaving behind them spoils of 
pink-veined sea-weed, bright brown shells, and 
great black bladdery fan branches, torn from the 
forests of ocean. 

The lieutenant, out for his usual professional 
walk on deck, commemorative of more than twenty 
years of far other walks in the Coast Guard service, 
had persuaded his student brother to relinquish 
work for an hour at least, and to go out with him 
and the children, Mrs. Tolpedden being confined 
at home with a sick headache. 

There were the two brothers pacing up and 
down, with the fresh breeze in their faces, and the 
pleasant savour of the sea all around them. Bobby 
had not come, but Jack and Ned were clambering 
about from ruddy rock to rock ; while Kate, red 

G 2 



84 GREATHEABT. 

With excitement, was shouting to the boys at the 
pitch of her voice, and holding up an irritable 
live sand-crab, triumphantly, for their admiration. 

Mr. Henry Tolpedden was silent and abstracted. 
That very morning he had all but resolved to tell 
his brother his opinion of Bradbrain; but still 
he delayed, from very pity, to arouse suspicions that 
might after all be undeserved. 

Mary was a warm-hearted, thoughtless woman, 
he thought, the young wife of a man older than 
herself; she was indiscreet, but he was sure 
she was still innocent — he would watch that rascal 
closer — he did not think Bradbrain had been so 
often since he met him that day with his sister-in- 
law in the orchard. At all events he was sure he 
had no means of writing to her. 

How little the worthy lieutenant knew what 
was passing in his brother's mind, as he told the 
story of a wreck that he had been in when a boy, 
without much heeding his auditor. He had just 
shouted orders to Jack to come down from some 
dangerous altitude, and then went on with his 
"yarn." 

" WTien I was washed off the mast, Harry," he 
said, " the waves drove me on just as I might push 
Jack ; I felt something below me, then down I 
went, at last felt it near my hand, it was a 
rock, and I clung on with my eyelids, I can tell 
you. Then off I was washed, and beaten and 
rolled in among the boulders, rocks, and tide, till 
all of a sudden down went my feet on shingle, and 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 85 

I leaped forward, fell, and scrambled, till I got 
out of the full lick of the waves, and lay down for 
a moment to take breath. Now I saw the cliff, 
Harry, going up steep and dark above me, and I 
climbed and climbed till I reached a small ledge 
with grass, fell down flat on my face, and 
either fainted or fell asleep, I hardly know 
which. When I awoke, it was just break of day, 
and there was a little yellow flower of bird's-foot 
clover growing close to my face, and I knew 
I was on dry land ; and just then some church 
bell down in the valley behind me broke out, as if 
the angels were singing to comfort me. What 
did I do, Harry, but fall on my knees and 
thank God, who holds the seas in the hollow of 
his hand, for having saved me, as it were, out of 
the very jaws of death." 

At this moment there came a shriek from Kate, 
for Master Jack, that hopeless reprobate, was be- 
labouring her with a great swab of wet sea-weed. 
The lieutenant rushed off with raised bamboo, 
shouting, " If I only come after you, you good-for- 
nothing, ril beat you within an inch of your 
life 1" 

" That boy '11 be very good or very bad," said 
the lieutenant, when he returned, puffing, and out 
of breath, having failed to run down the enemy ; 
and off he goes to sea as soon as he is old enough 
to know a pump-brake from a marling-spike. He'll 
drive me mad, that boy will, what with his stealing 
the hen's eggs, getting thrown off Gipsy, running 




86 GREATHEART. 

over the flower-beds, and cutting the filbert-trees. 
But you're out of gear, Harry, this morning. What 
does the glass say — stormy weather t Or are you 
thinking over your air-pumps, pots and pans, and 
things, eh I What cheer, Harry, you don't look 
like one of the Good Fortunes crew this morning?" 

^* We haven't had much to cheer us lately, Nel," 
said his brother, looking round sorrowfully at the 
grim cliffs, furrowed here and there with old mine 
workings. " All my money gone at one wash of 
the sea, part of this very land stolen from us by a 
low canting villain, who now threatens to force the 
other from me because he knows I am helpless to 
dispute it, and can only throw hindrances in the 
way, for feax of the expenses of a Chancery suit. 
He has me in his grip, and he knows it." 

"But what on earth does the Cornish shark 
want with a bit of cliff like that ? It is n<J good 
for quarry or pasture. I do believe these Cornish 
fellows— though I'm Cornish, too, by blood, if it 
comes to that — are stark mad about mining. 
Hasn't the rogue burnt his fingers bad enough 
already? Why, isn't half the county a regular 
churchyard with the heaps of rubbish dug up to 
make pits to bury money in — hide fools' fortunes 
in — all old wrecks ?" 

^' I tell you it is engrained in them, Nel ; it is 
in the blood. Look at our father, he was as bad 
as the rest. Look at that Wheal Fortune to the 
right there, wasn't half his money poured down 
that hole? Why, he might a& well have taken 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 8T 

out a boat-full of the guineas, and then scuttled it 
in open sea." 

" Better, because the anxiety would have been 
sooner over, Harry. He would not have expected 
them to float up again then. It's the worst sort of 
gambling, this mining is, because it not only ruins 
the holder of the mine when he sinks, but all the 
small craft, too, that moor round him. I'd like to 
pass a law against it, if I were ever head bottle- 
washer." 

His brother laughed at the idea of a nation 
being governed by the old lieutenant. 

"It's always the same thing," continued the 
lieutenant, " wherever you go here. Some miner 
finds a bit of ore, traces it up to a lode, which he 
discovers, or thinks he discovers; then there's a 
fuss all over the country, a company is formed, and 
the poorer sorts of small tradesmen and farmers 
venture their savings. All goes well for a time — 
clear sailing and good reports — as for fine promises, 
thejr're always cheap. * Gossan good — sure to in- 
tercept a lode;' all that lingo. By-and-by they 
come to aU rock, no gossan now — ^hard weather 
sets in; then things go worse, and snap goes 
the whole venture — bang, like a copper cap I 
It's a complete wreck, and down the whole craft 
sinks in forty fathoms, nothing recoverable I" 

" A very complete chart of the whole business, 
Nelson. Undue hope and credulous covetousness 
for the gulls, mean deception and stealthy villainy 
for the hawks." 




88 GBEATHEABT. 

" Shall you fi^ht the ship, Harry, if the pirate 
tries to get this bit of rock here ?" 

" Fight the ship t of course I shall ! Am I to 
have all my land that is left squeezed from me 
acre by acre like this t He is trying to ruin us, 
but he shall find he has driven me to bay. He 
shall get not a pinch of earth more, if I mortgage 
my house to raise money to defend it." 

"What craft is that in the offing?" said the 
lieutenant, as a man suddenly emerged from a hole 
in the cliff, with a lantern, which he blew out as 
he descended a winding path that led to the 
beach. 

It was an old working called the Wheal Arthur 
from which the man had come, an old mine, begun 
by the father of the two Tolpeddens, and aban- 
doned long before even the Wheal Fortune had 
been initiated. It opened on a little platform of 
rock half-way up a small headland that ran down 
sheer into the sea, and formed one side of a little 
bay of rugged slaty cliffs beyond Endellion. 

A craggy weather-worn pair of shears still stood 
on the platform, above the sloping entrance to the 
shaft, and had evidently been used to lift timber, 
and there were portions of the steam-engine, the 
" thug " of whose piston had once sounded along 
the shore, sending false comfort to the hearts 
of listening shareholders. That shaft was but one 
of the many "tasters" pierced by the mining 
projectors of Cornwall. 

" Warn the skulker off the property," said the 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 89 

lieutenant^ irascibly. The cliff just then hid the 
man from them. 

" I daresay he's one of those rascals they call 
* searchers/ and he's ^ shroding,' trying to trace a 
boulder-stone to the lode on the cliff from which it 
came. Worthless, low, cheating fellows generally 
— always pretending to make some discovery. 
What a morning it is ! How I wish Arthur was 
here I I do think he's doing well in London, Nel, 
from all accounts." 

" No doubt of it. He'll be first class soon in 
painting ; and, in the meantime, he'll get a part- 
nership at Blizard's. Of course they will ; bound 
to do it. First Lieutenant, you know, then cap- 
tain. I say, Harry, here's the fellow again — ^let's 
overhaul him." 

The man had reached the shore, and was ad- 
vancing towards them. He was a short, thin man, 
who wore an old snuff-brown great-coat, and car- 
ried a small stick in his right hand, which he stuck 
here and there in the sand conjecturally as he 
walked slinkingly on, with one eye on the two 
brothers, and one on the cliffs. He paced slowly 
and apologetically at the very edge of the water, 
so that the less respectful waves washed up over 
his feet ; and as he advanced his eyes stole towards 
them with a sort of mean and thievish fear. He 
was now within eye-shot. 

" Why, it's that rascal that showed us the way 
the night I came," cried the lieutenant. "It's the 
man you called the Dowser. I'm sure of it." 



90 OBEATHEABT. 

" So it 18, Nelson/' said Mr. Henry Tolpedden^ 
who was a little short-sighted; "you see further 
than I do. What on earth does the rogue want 
with us, of all people in the world t Why, he wasr 
captain in Mordred's speculation — the rascal's chop*- 
fallen enough now." 

By this time the Dowser, for it was no less a 
person than that gifted man, now sadly threadbare 
and knee-worn, had approached the two brothers, 
and thrusting his lantern into a side-pocket, with 
all the alacrity of habit, had removed his rusty 
brown and contused hat, and stood bare-headed ; 
his livid face, half saUow, half purple, looking 
ghastly enough in the fresh daylight. 

*^ Good mom t'ee, Maester Tolpedden, and good 
mom, Lieutenant Tolpedden t'ee; tte Lord be 
about you in all your ways, and be a light to 
lighten ye. Hallelooliah !" 

"What do you want with us?" said Henry 
Tolpedden. "Ain't you the fellow that my son 
Arthur warned off our land, and who afterwards 
urged Mr. Mordred to throw money down the 
mine yonder, that turned out so well. Is this 
what your divining rod leads to ?" 

The Dowser stood contrite ; moving the hazel 
twig he held helplessly between his two hands. 

" I deserve it all," he said — " I deserve it all — 
coals of fire, I deserve it all, because I did not follow 
the road of my conscience, but went backsliding 
bravely out of the way. I knew the way, and yet 
I did not follow it. I sowed the wind, genlemen. 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 91 

and 1 ripped the whirlywind. 'Tes zackly so, as 
I said when I was driving the odit level at hafe 
tribute up at Wheal Mary Anne." 

*^rve no money in my locker," said the lieu- 
tenant. "Why don't you apply to the parish I 
Give me a shilling, Harry, and get rid of the beg- 
gar." 

'^IthinkTve got a shilling," said his brother, 
feeling in his pocket. 

"You missed your contract, genlemen — the 
Lord be thanked ! I want no money, and I never 
axed for none. I threw my bread on the waters, 
but I found it again after many* days, and there's 
some of it now in my pocket. No, thankee — not 
a doit, not a stiver." 

" So you and the skipper of the Wheal Fortune 
quarrelled I" said the lieutenant. 

^^ Yes, Mr. Tolpedden, for he was a child of 
wrath, and a man of sin ; so I left him to perish 
with the sons of perdition, and shook the dust off 
my feet, as a testimony agin hem. He was a bad 
behaved man, and I'll surely make him repent it." 

" Is that the divining rod, that has brought you 
and Mr. Mordred so much good fortune?" said 
Mr. Tolpedden, pointing sarcastically to the hazel 
stick that the Dowser carried. 

" Yes, that is the blessed rod," said the Dowser 
unabashed; "that never failed yet by day or 
night, and points to the champion lode, as sure as 
the compass points to the north star." 

"Why, you infernal unbaptised scoundrel!" 



92 GREATHEAET. 

said the lieutenant, starting forward ; " avast heav- 
ing ! Why, ain't you on a lee-shore at this very 
moment, and short of victual, because you got 
clean out of your reckoning ! Do you take us for 
green hands, you slabberdegallion !" 

" Gently, Nelson," said his brother ; " the man's 
really not worth your anger nor mine," 

As he said this, Henry Tolpedden observed that 
the Dowser's greenish eyes kept wandering depre- 
catingly and uneasily from his face to that of his 
brother, as much as to say, " If he was away, I 
could tell you something." 

*^ Nelson," he said, " I think the man wants to 
have a private talk with me. Just you go to 
the children, there's another row amongst them, 
I hear Kate shouting to you to arbitrate about 
a barter of shells, about which Jack has been 
evidently tyrannising. Come back in ten minutes 
or so, there's a good fellow. I'll soon send this 
cheat of a fellow packing." 

This was said in a whisper, and he drew the lieu- 
tenant aside to say it. 

The moment Nelson Tolpedden had turned his 
back, and was well out of hearing, the Dowser 
slunk nearer to Mr. Henry Tolpedden, and half 
lifted his hat. 

** The Lord has softened my heart," he began, 
" Maester Tolpedden. I was once in the gall of 
bettemess, and the bond of inequity — bad as the 
rest of them, but now I'm changed. Aw! yes, 
I am. Hallelooliah I Glory be to his name, for 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 93 

he doeth wonderful things! There was a time 
when rd 'ave walked haf e way to the Lizard to do 
you a bad turn, but now I'm brought down, and 
quite changed. Aw, yes 1" 

Mr. Tolpedden uttered an exclamation of im- 
patience. 

"Are you come to preach to me," he said, "and 
convert me to something like yourself, Mr. San- 
doe t My time is valuable — I have no great 
fondness myself for field preaching." 

The Dowser groaned, and his yellowish eyes 
moved painfully in their orbits. 

" I deserve it," he said ; " 'tis a deceitful world, 
and I know I've been in the wilderness with one 
who wishes you no good ; but I'm changed. Mr. 
Tolpedden, eleven 'eers last first of Aperl Tve 
had a secret that concerns you weighing on me — 
yes, my dear, weighing on me tons weight, a blaw 
(I believe)." 

" Pshaw 1" said Mr. Tolpedden, contemptuously, 
yet, in spite of himself, surprised by the earnest- 
ness of the man's manner; "well, what is this 
wonderful secret t — a new copper mine in my back 
garden, I suppose, found out by your divining 
rod?" 

" Don't revile the blessed rod, don't 'ee, please," 
said Sampy, piteously, " for I've learned the holi- 
ness of it, Maester Tolpedden ; yes, it's a favoured 
instrument, et es, Maester Tolpedden. I swear, 
Maester Tolpedden, by the great white throne, 
and Hem as sets thereon, by the elders in the 



94 GRBATHEAKT. 

white garments, and as I hope to be one day among 
them, that I am telling you the truth, or may the 
sea this minute rise and swallow me, as the 
whale did Jonah, or the cliff yonder fall on me, 
or the ground open and snap me up, as it did 
Korah, Dathan, Abiran, and all their crew, I'm 
a changed man, and I tell 'ee I want to do a good 
turn to the father of hem as saved me from wild 
beasts at St. Tud/s." 

"Well, now, what is this secret! You can't 
think to impose on me by more of such protestations; 
they're the usual tools fellows like you work with," 

"Eleven years ago," said Sampy, "I found a 
paper in an old box of my Uncle Koby's, my 
step-father, who I used to lev weth down at Dun- 
chine — ^I told hem of it, and frightened hem about 
some money he had owed me ever since he come 
to lev with me after my mother died ; as he got 
weakerer and owlderer, at last he told me that 
he and eight other tributers, who had worked in 
the Wheal Arthur up yonder, for your faether, 
had discovered a lode of copper, a champion lode, 
too, just the very month the mine stopped work- 
ing. They had agreed to keep the thing a secret, 
to paint over the signs of the metal with wet clay, 
and pretend it was necessary to mason up the 
entrance of that deep level, for fear the sea should 
break in, though the rock was really ten feet thick 
there. And so they ded, for the fear of the Lord 
wasn't in their hearts. And the week they 
finished the job, an agent came from Camborne, 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 95 

and offered to send them out to the Bio del Monte 
mines in America, free of cost, and at good wage ; 
SO Koby and they agreed to go, and wait there 
till they could return, when your father died, and 
get a pitch (bargain) down here by Endellion, 
But the Lord's hand was against them, and they 
all died in furren parts, or on their way back — all 
but Roby, and as you didn't get hurt in India, and 
he never could get you to sell the land, try as he 
would, the thing went on." 

"I certainly remember that man Roby wanting to 
buy the cliff fields here. But, then, why did you 
set Mr. Mordred on the Wheal Fortune I You 
said just now it was the Wheal Arthur where the 
metal was. You began at the wrong place." 

The Dowser smiled craftily. 

"The children of thes world are not always 
wiser than the children of light. Mr. Mordred got 
hold of Billum's paper when Roby was dying, but 
I tore the other hafe from him before he could 
read it. The first hafe mentioned the fend of 
ore that had been worked at the Wheal Fortune, 
worked out, all but a string or two, the paper went 
on to say; but he dedn't see them words — ^yet 
they were the prettyest (prettiest) and most useful 
words, for the second hafe went on to describe the 
exact place of the big lode, three feet thick, and 
solid as a brass pan, at Wheal Arthur. I had 
already been bargaining with hem, and I knew 
hem before to be false and slippery, as the old 
sarpint hemself, so I thought, you've digged a pit 



96 GREATHEABT. 

for me, Measter Mordred, but you shall fall into it 
yourself; and so he ded, for he cheated me out of 
all my wages, and refused my share of the part- 
nership, as I had hafe expected he would do, for 
he is a child of wrath, if ever there was one. Yes, 
that's the secret — a champion lode walled up there 
in the under sea level, sealed up like a body in a 
lead coffin, and there it would have remained till 
the day of judgment, but for me or Roby, for 
who'd have thought of unwalling a dangerous level 
in a worked-out mine? Oh! 'tis well the Lord 
softened my heart, or there it would have been, 
for I'd never have told Maester Mordred, not I, 
for he's given over to the destroyer, and it's bad to 
meddle with such as hem." 

"It's a strange story," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
thoughtfully, " and is not without some signs of 
truth about it, I must confess ; yet I want more 
proofs — I'm too old a Comishman, to be duped by 
stories like this. The mine shall be surveyed ; if 
the ore then appears, and promises well, it may 
perhaps be worked ; but Tve no great hopes of 
the thing, for your character as a false prophet, 
Mr. Sandoe, is notorious, and you're accustomed 
to forge stories like this as ground-bait for your 
dupes." 

"I have been a senner, Maester Tolpedden — I 
have been a senner, and I don't deny it. I fell 
away, but I'm changed — I'm not among the goats 
now; I swear that this is true — aw! dear, may 
I be driven into the lowest level of the bottomless 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 97 

pit, may my hands wither, my eyes shrivel up, 
may my tongue rot and my legs drop from me, 
if 1 didn't seethe masonry this very morning." 

"It will not convince me, Mr. Sandoe. It 
may be all a planned trick. There may be masonry 
in an old mine, and yet it may hide nothing.*' 

" Will you believe this f " said the Dowser, seiz- 
ing the hazel-rod with professional dexterity, and 
placing it at the required angle. Almost instantly 
it began to vibrate, and turned downward to the 
sand. " Norra waun," he said, " ever turned the 
rod faster than that. I tell 'ee, my dear, all 
the shore here is pure copper; the lode runs 
under sea, perhaps, for miles. Quartz and fel- 
spar show all through the level, as I saw an hour 
ago. There was a cross course, and then they 
came on the copper at right angles, bearing to- 
wards the sea again — like the Bottalac." 

Mr. Tolpedden shook his head. 

" A burnt child dreads the fire ! You forget," 
he said, " that our family was half-ruined by these 
two very mines. Even if we find masonry, and, 
on removing that, only mere threads or strings of 
copper, I shall not work it." 

" But the blessed rod, that's never false !" said 
the Dowser, handing his magician's rod to the in- 
credulous man he addressed. "Try it yourself. 
Tes the main lode, no leader, no branch- vein, and so 
Roby used to tell me. Why should I deceive you 
— what should I get if my news proved only false 
news after all? Try the blessed rod yourself. 

VOL. III. H 



98 GREATHBART, 

That '11 speak to you clearer than I can. It goes 
down like an engine-beam, nothing can stop it. It 
pulls my hand down. Try, it sir." 

Mr. Tolpedden took the rod sternly, snapped it 
over his knee, and threw the pieces into the sea. 

" If this is a trick, Sandoe," he said, " I'll have 
you sent to oakum-pickiiig as a common vagabond. 
And now your price for this secret?" 

Sandoe groaned, and looked at the floating hazel- 
sticks. 

"I've told you the story," he said, "Maester 
Tolpedden, and how I led Mr. Mordred to the 
wrong mine. I've told it you as fair as a blessed 
angel could tell it, and I can't tell no more. I've 
never seen the lode, not I. You must see it for 
yourself. Here's Roby's writing, and Billum's 
too." 

Sampy whipped off his dirty white neckcloth, and 
produced from the fold the half of the letter which 
Mordred had torn in two. 

Mr. Tolpedden sat down on a rock and perused 
it. 

"Well," he said, as he concluded, "it seems 
straightforward ; but perhaps Roby had some 
motive in deceiving you, even if you have none 
in deceiving me. You said, I think, that you for- 
gave him a debt on account of the secret ?" 

" Yes, I ded. Uncle Roby repeated the story 
to me word for word the day before he died ; and 
Uncle Roby was never no liard. No, there's a 
lode under the sea there, or may I never work an 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 99 

eight-hour's ihor at Bal agin. If I cheat you, 
make any fuss about it you like, flog me at the 
cart's tail, shut me in Bodmin gaol, drive me out of 
the country, for I should not be fit any longer 
then to be called one of the elect — aw dear, no I" 

"And what led you to tell me this? Could 
you not have got better terms by sharing with 
your old partner, who is now trying to cheat 
me out of this very bit of land. You owe me 
nothing, for I have always laughed at your divin- 
ing rod, your preaching, and your prophecies. I 
tell you frankly I have always set you down as a 
low cheat who was too idle to work." 

" I desarve it — I desarve it 1" said Sampy, de- 
precatingly. "When I was upon my gammuts 
(frolics) years ago at the Bottalac, the preacher 
denounced me in his sarmon as one of the lost, 
yes, lost I was then, but there came a light round 
me one day in the Bal, after hearing the Rev. 
Mr. Jones of Bromechem ; from that time I 
was a changed man, and this is a proof of it. 
Why did I tell you this secret ? Well, I tell you 
this secret because Mr. Mordred played me false, 
and because your son Arthur saved me from wild 
beasts at St. Tudy's. He saved the life of a great 
sinner, and I have tried to repay him as a Christian 
man should.'^ 

" And you of course expect," said Mr. Tolped- 
den, fixing his severe eyes on Sampy, " some large 
share of this find— a third perhaps— or some 
money down before we even look for the masonry 

H 2 



100 GREATHEART. 

that walls up this wonderful lode that is to make 
all our fortunes t" 

Mr. Tolpedden spoke with a sarcasm that em* 
bittered every word. 

But nothing moved Sampy. He only said : 

" The Lord soften all our hearts, Maester Tol- 
pedden, for the best of us is but vanity, and hard 
as the nether millstone. I mean what I say, and 
w hat I say is truth, before God and man ! I want 
no reward till the lode is found — which found it 
will be — and then only a place as cappen, or any 
small gratuity you like to give me for doing 
common justice, and repairing a bad business," 

" The mine shall be surveyed, Mr. Sandoe, that 
is all I promise you. I'm not going to throw away 
good money after bad; no gad shall enter that 
mine unless your story is found true to the very 
letter. So good morning, Mr, Sandoe ; this day 
week the surveyor will be here, you can bring 
Roby's letter and go with us." 

" Good morning, Maester Tolpedden, and God 
guard you and keep you — hallelooliah !" 

With these stock sayings of his, the itinerant 
preacher slunk away along the shore, as humble 
and servile as if he had been a man merely begging 
for a shilling, and had been contemptuously re- 
fused. And yet that man, by his own account, 
was the discloser of* a secret that was to enrich 
perhaps for ever the Tolpedden family. 

"I can't make the fellow out," thought Mr. 
Tolpedden ; " there is something in his manner 



A QUESTIONABLE SHAPE. 101 

vile and hypocritical, yet the man seems sincere 
and truthful ; but the surveyor will soon sift the 
story^ and unless I find sure copper, not a shilling 
do I spend." 

At this moment the lieutenant came up, driving 
before him all the children. 

" Well, Harry," said he, " what did the beggarly, 
skulking fellow want ?'* 

" Oh 1 who was that old man, uncle, in the brown 
coat f ' said Kate. 

" Another guy I — there goes another guy !" said 
the incorrigible Jack, shouting after Sampy. 

" Oh ! you dreadful boy," said his father ; 
" come here, or I'll flog you within an inch of your 
life." 

Mr. Henry Tolpedden repeated the story — the 
secret of Roby, its discovery by Sampy, the de- 
ception practised on Mordred, and his intention to 
spend a guinea or so, and no more, in sifting the 
strange story. 

" I expect," he said, " if we find anything, it 
will be a string of copper, some speckles of tin, 
or a lump or two of metal running into solid rock, 
where there has been a disturbing ^ heave,' that has 
sent the lode Heaven knows where. That is the 
lode men like this Dowser generally pitch upon." 

**It'8 all my eye, Harry, depend upon it," 
said the lieutenant, bluffly; "not worth heav- 
ing the lead to take soundings for, that's my 
opinion, Harry. That skulking fellow has found 
a bit of ore in some old working, and he wants you 



102 GREATHEART. 

to work it, under different excuses, in hopes 
you'll stumble at last upon some tin, and so give 
him employment before you find out your mistake. 
What that fellow wants is a rope's end, six dozen 
from the boatswain's mate, and I should like to 
give him them. Come along, children, we'll get 
home and see mother." 

^'And I want to get to work, too," said his 
brother, " so come along. Jack, and don't torment 
that crab any more. Give me your hand, Teddy. 
Now, then, Kate, old lady — no, not a moment 
longer." 

If the Dowser was an angel in disguise, sent to 
aid an unfortunate family, it must be confessed 
that he had come in a most questionable shape. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

SENDING-IN DAY. 

ON the Thursday after the party at Mrs. De 
Castro's, Arthur sallied forth about twelve 
o'clock to Montague Street, Portman Square, 
where Mrs. Penrose was staying. He was full of 
spirits at the thought of seeing Lucy, and the 
very pavement seemed to turn to gold under his 
feet. Seeing his own reflection in the faces of 
others, everyone he met appeared to him to be 
good-natured and smiling. The cabs shot by, 
that pleasant April morning, more dashing than 



SENDING-IN DAT. 103 

ever, the drivers seemed enjoying the speed 
of their horses, and those rivals with whom they 
raced shouted merrily to them as they passed 
by. 

Is there any lover who does not feel a trepida- 
tion when he rings the bell at the house where 
his "beautiful vision" lives! Arthur arranged 
a bunch of violets in his button-hole, as he rang 
the bell at the Penroses'. It was strange, he 
thought, that at that late hour the blinds should 
be nearly all down, but still no suspicion of evil 
crossed his mind. 

The door opened, and a grave maid-servant 
appeared. 

"Is Mrs. Penrose at home?" 

"No, sir — name, sir?" 

" Mr. Tolpedden." 

" If you please, sir, she's gone back to Corn- 
wall suddenly — she desired me to give you this 
note when you called." 

Arthur took the note, and read it as the door 
closed on his hopes. It contained the following : 

" Deab Mr. Tolpedden, 

" I am so sorry not to see you again. 
You will, I am sure, regret the cause of my leaving 
so suddenly. The fact is, Mr. Penrose is very ill 
with pleurisy, and Mr. Mordred sent for me, my 
poor dear husband being insensible when he wrote. 
Mr. Tregellas, who had been summoned up to town 
on some urgent business, brought me the terrible 



104 GBEATHEABT. 

news yesterday, and took Lucy away with him. It 
was a great disappointment for her — even an old 
woman could see that. Hoping to have you 
soon back again in Cornwall, believe me, dear 
Mr. Tolpedden, 

" Yours truly, 

" Grace Penrose. 

" Arthur Tolpedden, Esq." 

This was indeed a blow ; and at that moment 
some evil spirit flashed a terrible thought across the 
darkness of his mind. He remembered Bradbrain's 
warning — there was insanity in the Tregellases* 
family. This might account for Luc/s strange 
silence, and her wild, romantic manner; but he 
drove the thought instantly from him, as if it was 
a temptation to evil, and quickening his pace, bore 
away in a north-east direction for Dodgeson's studio, 
for a few hours* quiet, tranquillizing work. 

He found Dodgeson and Fisher both very busy, 
touching up their pictures, for it was the day pic- 
tures had to be sent into the Academy, and there 
was no time to be lost. 

In one comer, leaning against a Prie-Dieu 
chair, stood a truculent-looking model in orange- 
coloured velvet, cuirass, short cloak, sword, plumed 
hat, and quilled ruff. It was one of Dodgeson's 
St. Bartholomew Conspirators ; he had represented 
him as leaning over Charles IX, 

In an opposite comer stood a burly model in 
square-cut coat and cropped wig; that was 



SENDING-IN DAY. 105 

Fisher's Dr. Johnson Doing Penance. On an 
easel near stood one of Hewer^s sea-shore pieces — 
a bit of painful Pre-Raphaelite study, intensely 
true to nature, but wanting air and breadth, and 
rather timid and niggling in execution. 

The two artists received Arthur with a shout 
of welcome, as he sat down to draw from a 
statuette of Hercules that stood on a shelf. 

"Stipple away, old fellow!" said Dodgeson. 
" Did you ever see such a man as that for work ; 
he's a glutton at it. What a shame it is the Aca- 
demy making such a point of stippling! Why 
shouldn't a man get in by an original sketch, or a 
first-rate outline?" And here Dodgeson launched 
into a comic song. 

" Now, Chaxles the First grew worse and worse, 

And the people's cries got louder ; 
And as threats and fines wouldn^t stop then: mouths, 

He resolved to try gunpowder. 
" Then says Vane to Pym, * We can*t stand him, 

Nor his tyrannical band, oh I 
He's a cWld of wrath, and a son of sin, 
And there's blood on his lily-white hand, oh I' " 

"Who's the author of that wonderful song?" 
said Arthur. 

" My friend Cargill Brough," sang Dodgeson, 
" and the tune is the * Ratcatcher^s Daughter.' " 

" Well, what is there to be this time at the Aca- 
demy ?" said Arthur. " What's that prig Burford 
sending!" 

" Oh, a regular duffer — out of drawing, and all 



106 GREATHEABT. 

plum colour — isn't it, Fisher? I say just look at 
Hewer^s work there ; it's like mustard and cress- 
it's overdone, isn't it ? I don't think it'll get in. 
He's gone the round now, to see what's going in. 
Mark's first, then Faed Calderon, and so on. 
Our set first. Campbell, if you take snuff so often, 
how am I to paint your nose I" 

" I'm tired of standing, sir. Tve got the pins 
and needles in my leg." 

^* Very well, then, sit down, and take your beer. 
You models are more trouble than you're worth." 

" And you do the same, Holf ord," said Dodge- 
son to the conspirator, who forthwith descended, 
willingly enough, from his red platform, fra- 
ternised with Dr. Johnson, and discussed business 
over a pewter measure of half-and-half. 

" How do you like it?" said Dodgeson, as Arthur 
came round and looked at his picture. 

" Very much." 

" Don't you think it is a little heavy in colour ?" 

" Well, it might be better for a little more light 
from above across the tapestrj\" 

" Murder of the Innocents — ^good notion, eh ?" 

"Very." 

" Oh, he's a knowing old card, is Dodgeson !" 
said Fisher, with a look of crafty admiration at 
his colleague. 

" And now let's come and cut up Fisher," said 
Dodgeson laughing, and assuming the air of a 
critic. " Chiaroscuro defective ; no Raphaelesque 
or pyramidical composition— -colour spotty — faces 



SENDING-IN DAY. 107 

wanting expression — won't do — wrong tack — out 
of keeping — Dr. Johnson a dummy — farmers' 
faces caricatured— -outlines hard — too much Dr. 
Johnson. That's what Snelgrove will say in the 
Forger 

" And here's Dodgeson's picture, so the Trimmer 
will remark," said Fisher ; " cleverly grouped, but 
mere patches of colour — everything sacrificed to 
effect. A mere study of lamplight. Might be 
called Guy Fawkes and his companions. By-the- 
bye, Tolpedden, is Trevena gone ? What a deli- 
cious quaint fellow he is I" 

" He went yesterday," replied Arthur ; " he is 
part of the salt of the earth, if there is any salt in 
the earth." 

"And how is the lieutenant?" said Fisher. 
" What a fine old buffer he is ! and your father, 
and that girl you were spoons on 1" 

"All well," said Arthur, "when I last heard. 
When does the van come for the pictures, Fisher ?" 

"About four; we all go down in it. Hewer 
will be here soon to touch up the fourth leaf on 
his thirteenth right hand branch." 

" Bless my soul," said Fisher, pulling something 
from his pocket, " I quite forgot your letter, Tol- 
pedden. It came first post this morning. It's 
your father's h'andwriting " 

Arthur's letters were sometimes sent to Dodge- 
son's in order to reach him sooner. 

The letter was full of home news, and was de- 
sponding in tone. One passage ran thus — 



108 GREATHEART* 

** Mordred presses me hard, and is putting on 
every screw to squeeze the rest of No Man's Laud 
from us, but for what reason I know not. His Bill 
of Complaint has already been sealed with the 
seal of the court; and Chetwynd, Strong, and 
Wrackem have put in an appearance. Next week 
they promise me the plaintiffs interrogatories. 
How I shall find money to fight them, I don't 
know. Delights us to hear how well you are get- 
ting on. You must husband your £50 till June, 
then I will try to send you more, if you want 
it. Aunt Mary has not been herself lately. I 
think she vexes about the conduct of the Tregel- 
lases. Dear good little soul I she's not fit to bear 
trouble, and the lieutenant has no sympathy with 
undue sensibility. Jack was found the other day 
clambering about the roof, practising for a sailor, 
to the agony of his mother and old Liddy, and the 
rage of his father, who swears he shall go to sea 
in less than two years." 

Arthur was still intent on his letter when there 
came a ring at the bell; the next moment an 
old servant brought a card to Dodgeson. 

"Show him in," said Dodgeson; and in came the 
visitor. 

It was Lucas, extravagantly dressed, and lively 
and riotous as ever. He was delighted to see them 
all, especially Arthur. 

" Had a ripping time at Oxford," he said, as he 
bestrode a chair, and drew off his lavender kid 
gloves; "nothing but sprees. Won silver sculls 



8ENDING-IN DAT. lOd 

last week — cleared a fifty pigeon shooting at Hen- 
ley — put money on the Liverpool Steeple Chase — 
gone in for everything, from pitch and toss to 
manslaughter. Started card club — blind hookey, 
loo, and vingt-un every night — fan ? I believe you. 
Why don't you come up, Tolpedden ?" 

^* Wish I could," said Arthur, with a sigh — " no 
such luck; got to make money." 

" It must be doosed queer making your own tin. 
Made your book for the Great Event ?" 

" Not I ; no money to stake." 

"Nonsense — oh! you're chaffing. You coin 
money, you fellows. My eyes ! this is a picture. 
What's the go here ? Queen Elizabeth, of course. 
Well, you have a nice time of itl Ever spar, 
Dodgeson? — ^got any foils or single-stick? This 
bloke in the ruff here looks as if he could give one 
a swipe, if he got inside your guard. Let's have a 
turn. Where's Hewer ? — how's Hookem ?" 

Dodgeson answered the questions seriatim ; and 
then walked round to look at Arthur's work. 

" Come here, Fisher — come here ! Just look at 
Tol's sketch of Holford. Why, it's excellent ! 
That's your style; crafty fellow, pretending to 
stipple all the time. Oh! he'll do — ^he'U be at 
the top of the tree some day." 

Arthur^s sketch w^as in pen and ink, in Stothard's 
graceful manner, and was full of spirit. 

" I want you men," said Lucas, " to come and 
dine with me at the St. James's — six sharp, mind 
— no excuses — ^billiards afterwards ; and I want 



110 GREATHEART. 

you to join our drag for the Derby. Only two 
guineas each. Fortnum and Mason, and all that 
sort of thing, I stand to win on the favourite, so 
I treat, and won't hear of anyone paying." 

Fisher and Dodgeson accepted both invitations. 
Arthur declined the latter — ^to the dinner he pro- 
mised to come, if he might leave for Blizard's at 
half-past eight. 

That night, when Arthur left Blizard's, in a fit 
of ambition he tried to set down on paper his 
thoughts of a picture. It was that fine scene in 
" Quentin Durward," where the wild boar of Ar- 
dennes murders the Bishop of Li6ge, in the hall of 
his palace. Arthur had a vivid imagination, and 
eager for rapid distinction as he was, he struggled 
hard to reproduce his thought upon the canvas. 
Clearly, as in a mirror, he saw the long tables, 
strewn with goblets and flagons, and under the 
dais the wild boar glaring at the pale, helpless old 
man, who, in his Pontifical robes, was dragged 
before him. Clearly, too, he saw the long rows of 
loathsome and threatening faces, the tossing 
weapons, and the outstretched hands. 

He saw all this inwardly, but when he tried to 
put it on paper the result was a blurred and hope- 
less confusion. His new knowledge and his old 
power refused to harmonize. He tried to sketch 
the scene in his dashing way, but then there came 
in recollections of statuesque outlines and studio 
learning. The armour would not come accurately, 
he could not remember the folds the drapery ought 



THE DERBY. Ill 

» 

to have taken, and the perspective presented in- 
superable diiBculties. 

Then came into his mind desponding thoughts of 
the difficulties of both literature and art. There 
loomed up ghastly fears of failure ; should he ever 
see Lucy or Cornwall again! How could he 
have the courage to tell his father of his defeat! 

His overstrained mind yielded at last to the 
overwhelming burden. Wrapping his plaid round 
him, and covering his face, he threw himself on 
the sofa, till sleep came with its gracious anodyne 
for sorrow, and staunched the wounds of his 
despair. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE DERBY. 

THE surveyor who came to report on the Wheal 
Arthur, much to the astonishment of the 
Tolpeddens, and the triumph of Sampy, reported 
favourably. Masonry was found in the under- 
sea levelj and on that being removed, evident 
traces of a large and unexhausted lode became 
visible. 

It was determined to work the lode. The only 
question was where to get the money. Mr. Tol- 
pedden resolved on borrowing money from Messrs. 
Chetwynd, Strong, and Wrackem ; but this would 
occasion a delay. 



112 GREATHEART. 

The lieutenant^ with the quick unobtrusive 
generosity of his nature, now as sanguine about 
the mine as he had been at first contemptuous, at 
once resolved on a scheme of brave self-sacrifice. 
He planned, without telling even his i?vdfe, to run 
up to London, under pretence of seeing Arthur, 
and urging forward the petition for his pension, 
sell £500 worth of his small capital out of 
the Funds, and lend that to his brother to buy 
machinery for the mine. If the mine failed (but 
how could it fail ?) he would never, he felt sure, 
repent the venture for those he loved so much. It 
might, it would be the beginning of a great fortune. 

On his arrival in London, the day before the 
Derby, the lieutenant instantly drove to his broker, 
and obtaining the money which he had before 
written about, walked straight to Keppel Street 
to find Arthur. 

To his great disappointment Arthur had gone to 
Great Marlow sketching, with some of the Gridiron 
Club, and having got a holiday at Blizard's, he 
was not to be back till the Friday. 

On returning to his humble inn, " The Three 
Cups," in Aldersgate Street, the lieutenant ordered 
a steak and some stout, and called for the news- 
paper. Knowing little of London hitherto but 
the neighbourhood of the Docks, the place struck 
him as larger than usual, now that he had ventured 
deeper into it. 

Pleased at his own audacity, and at the success 
of his excursion to the metropolis, the lieutenant 



THE DERBY. 113 

called for the Timesy and looked down the adver- 
tisements. The first he came to was one announc- 
ing the excursion trains for the Derby Day. 

"Belay there 1" he said, half aloud. "I've a 
good mind to overhaul that Epsom race ; I've heard 
much of it, and I've got a day on hand." 

As soon as he had finished dinner, out he strolled 
into the inn yard, where two ostlers were hissing 
over the carcase of a huge yellow omnibus, which 
dripped with water like a new-stranded whale. 

" Where does that craft go to ?" asked the lieu- 
tenant. 

The second ostler did not answer, but squeeznig 
his sponge out into his pail deliberately, looked at 
ostler number one. 

" Where does that craft go to, messmate ?" asked 
the lieutenant again, and this time tartly. 

" Why, to Epsom, in course — am I right. Jack?" 
growled ostler number one. " Where should it 
go to ?" 

" Is there a place on the main-deck vacant ?" 

" Yes, sir," said a waiter, with a napkin over his 
left arm, who just then tripped into the court ; " yes, 
sir, one place on the top — gentleman poorly up- 
stairs in No. 6 as took his place — be kind enough 
to ask at the bar. Yes, sir — starts at nine — think 
it'll be a fine day, sir, for the ^ great event V Buck- 
stone is the winning horse, sir — put all your money 
on for Buckstone. This way to the bar, sir — Miss 
Maitland will give you the ticket — yes, sir." 

The lieutenant soon decided; he bought the ticket, 

VOL. III. I 



114 GllEATHEAET. 

took a glass of grog, according to custom, went to 
bed early, and rising before seven, after a hearty 
breakfast, took his place solemnly on the omnibus 
roof for a regular day's pleasure, in good humour 
with everyone, and delighted at his own daring. 

When the omnibus passed St. Paul's, about nine 
o'clock, the whole city had been astir for hours. 
Hansom cabs, curtained vans, costermongers' carts, 
brilliant traps, neat broughams, smart knowing 
gigs, were already filling all the streets leading to 
London Bridge. Green veils fluttered, the cab- 
man had his bouquet, the van conductor his cock- 
ade. It was the first act of one vast carnival. 
Mammon that day had few worshippers. Fortune 
was the goddess, and the rolling wheel was her 
emblem. All London, in fact, was in a simmer, 
from the chiWooms in Pall Mall to the poorest 
beer-shop in Whitechapel. 

People were rushing into shops at the last mo- 
ment in an excited way, to buy flowers, primrose- 
coloured gloves, lobsters, champagne, veils, post- 
horns, opera-glasses, and dust-coats. The betting- 
book, that was ere night to be torn to pieces in an 
agony of despair, was now dotted with hopeful 
figures. The winning horse neighed in his stall, a 
mere unit among its fellows. 

The suburban roads were crowded with spec- 
tators. The strings of carriages from the West- 
minster, Kennington, and Blackfriars Roads gradu- 
ally wove themselves into one long cable. Every turn- 
pike gate was a scene of gesticulating, wrangling, 



THE DERBY, 115 

and chaffing. The harness shone, the man with 
the cornet played the " Cure," in an exulting but 
inaccurate way, the people in the vans began to 
. prematurely tap huge stone jars of beer ; on went 
the motley saturnalia of noisy laughing Londoners, 
waving boughs and flags, and criticizing everyone 
they passed. 

Now the rank and file of pedestrians fell in ; 
sham negroes, enough to conquer central Africa, 
with banjoes and music-stands over their shoulders ; 
Aunt Sally proprietors, with bundles of sticks ; 
men with red pasteboard noses, who "chaffed" 
old gentlemen of Clapham, standing at their garden 
gates; men driving trucks full of sand-bags and 
cocoa-nuts; slouching roughs and mechanics on 
the tramp; Paddys with "correk cards," gin- 
ger-beer sellers and itinerant tradesmen of all 
kinds. 

Beyond Clapham, with its ponds, stubs of furze, 
and clumps of trees, the country really began; 
the great uninterrupted fresh green fields spread 
open, the ripe grass glittered with sprinkles of gold 
flowers, the air blew freer, the larks sang over- 
head, the thrushes fluted from the white thorn 
bushes, in spite of the ceaseless roll of wheels, the 
ribald shouts, the clack of whips, the songs and the 
cries of " Am I right, or any other man t" 

And now, at road-side public-houses, where 
vans halted, crimson-faced men stood with bundles 
of hay under their arms, and country children 
came to offer birds'-nests, oak-apples, and bunches 

i2 



116 GBEATHEABT. 

of blossoming thorn. On playground walls the 
" young gentlemen," in clean collars, were drawn 
up in the form of advertisements, and young ladies 
grouped on lawns were greeted with a fervour pecu- 
liar to the motley day. 

At Brixton the great fan-leafed chestnuts began 
to display their white cones of flower, the elms, 
ruflling dark with countless leaves, were glowing in 
the pleasant May sunshine. Pretty nursemaids 
smiled from the windows, trim tigers sat at the 
garden gates, pugnaciously, on promising-looking 
corded hampers, and the daintiest of servant-maids 
stole peeps, with innocent pertness, over the garden 
walls. 

On again went the jolting triple line of trucks 
and drags, and cabs and omuibusses, storming into 
the country like the camp-followers of some con- 
quering army; officers, actors, stock -brokers, artists, 
noblemen, prize-fighters, publicans, and thieves, all 
mixed together. The duke's son "chaffed" the 
costermonger, the costermonger tried to "rile" 
the son of the duke. On the Derby Day there is 
no distinction of ranks. 

More "correk cards," more banjo playing at 
road-side inns, more interchange of chaff, more 
veils and cockades, more rows, more comet-play- 
ing, more drinking, more squeaks of penny trum- 
pets, more cries of "Am I right, or any other man ?" 
and they get on the Downs, on the soft uneven 
turf roads and chalky cuttings. There were the 
long walls of moored carriages, and the stacks of 



THE DERBY. 117 

deserted cabs; and there was the Grand Stand, 
looking like a huge unroofed house, with only a 
few persons on it choosing seats. 

The lieutenant, and everybody else, got off the 
'bus, and made for the course, to get a good place 
for the first race. But there was a great jostling 
to thread; men shouting "3 to 1 on Marquis I" 
"7 to 2 against Buckstone I" — men trying to get 
past gesticulating policemen — to avoid Aunt Sallys 
— to skirt where the bludgeons flew thick and fast 
-—cocoa-nuts on high sticks to be shunned — spar- 
ring booths to pass — competitions for yellow wooden 
pears, and gilt pincushions to watch — archers to 
observe, and donkey-riders to laugh at. 

All this took so long, that by the time the bell 
had rung, and the policemen drawn in line had 
cleared the course, the lieutenant arrived at the 
ropes, in so crowded a place, that he could only 
notice everybody's hat taken off, hear a thud of 
hoofs, and see for a moment a whirl of horses pass 
on to the winning-post. 

An instant after there was a distant shout, and 
the crowd poured like a deluge over the broad 
green course. At that moment a " horsey " look- 
ing man, like a well-to-do London publican, with a 
good deal of gold curb chain, and a coat fastened by 
one button across the chest, trod by accident on the 
lieutenant's toe in the crowd. There was a neatly 
dressed young man, who looked like an upper- 
class shopman, with him, who carried a hunting- 
whip. 



118 6REATHEABT. 

There was a rush just at the time to a place 
near the carriages, where a policeman had collared 
a pickpocket, the accident was inevitable. The man 
lifted his hat, and apologised. 

** Asthe late Lord George Bentinck once observed 
at Newmarket to me," he said — * All men on the 
turf, and under the turf, are equal.'" 

The lieutenant did not see exactly what this 
had to do with having one's toe trodden on, but as 
it seemed a smart saying he laughed, and said it 
was of no consequence. Could the gentleman tell 
him the way to the refreshment-booth ? 

The eldest of the two showed him the way very 
civilly to the door of the chief booth. It was a 
noisy, tumultuous scene, and the worthy lieutenant, 
somewhat confused, sat down to some cold meat, in 
a corner, in a hurried manner. Just as he was 
finishing, he caught sight of the same two men hard 
at work at a cold fowl close to him. 

Instantly he saw him, the burly sporting man 
rose, and came towards him in a jovial excited 
manner, with a bottle of sherry in his hand. 

" Do me the honour of taking a glass, captain. 
Stranger here, sir ?" 

"No sherry, thank you. Wine's a thing I 
never take," said the lieutenant, rather pleased at 
the compliment. " No, I was never at the Derby 
before ; you'll perhaps hardly believe it." 

" Only think of that ! Did you ever hear of 
such a thing, Jem ?" he said, turning to his com- 
panion. 



THE DERBY. 119 

" Not as I knows of — bless me if I ever did ! 
Now, look here, Joe, I'll make it twenties on the 
Marquis, if you like. Pass the sherry, Joe ; here, 
waiter, cheese, and quick, or I'll spiflicate you !" 

" Buckstone will win, my lad," said the other ; 
" put the pot on for Buckstone." 

" The bell's ringing," said some one at the door ; 
and hastily paying, everyone rushed out. 

"Keep near us, and we'll put you through," 
said the burly man to the lieutenant, making way 
to a place nearly opposite the left-hand corner of 
the Grand Stand, the seats of which were fast fill- 
ing. 

The crowd scattered and retired, remonstrating 
before the steady advance of the line of policemen, 
A forlorn man and his wife raced across the course, 
but were stopped and driven back. A lost cur 
rushed madly down the course, pursued by the 
yells of ten thousand people. 

" That's the usual dog — seen him twenty years," 
said the smaller man. 

"That's a remarkable coincidence," said the 
lieutenant. 

" The dog's jolly green to come at all," said the 
bigger man, and winked at his friend. 

Now the weighing over, the thirty-four horses 
that were to start came out of the paddock for their 
canter. Down they came across the long green 
slip of turf, bare, except for the yellow patches of 
orange-peel, and the white sandwich papers blow- 
ing before the wind. 



1 20 GREATHEART. 

There was a stir and flutter in the crowd as 
when the breeze passes through tall moving grass. 
The horses dashed past. The crimson and yellow 
jackets puffed out in the sunshine as the horses 
swept by with careless vigour and great strides. 
The favourite led them all — his backers were loud 
and exulting. The burly man went nearly mad 
with excitement, and waved his hat. 

There was a good deal of bonneting going on 
among the crowd, and a good deal of pushing for 
good places ; but the burly man elbowed and 
shouted — "Make way for the gentlemen, you 
roughs — make way, or Til make it I" and the lieu- 
tenant was at last placed in front, much to his 
o»vn contentment, and the satisfaction of the burly 
man's sporting, friend. 

Mr. M^George, in his scarlet coat, was busy 
starting the horses. 

" They're off ! — they're off !" shouted thousands 
of voices. 

" Oh, no, they're not," said the lieutenant's new 
friend sarcastically ; " it's not so easy starting 
four-and-thirty horses." 

" They're off !" went the shout again. 

" Don't let go the ropes," said the taller to the 
lesser man. 

" Not if I know it." 

" Now they're off T' roared the mob again. 

" That's right this time." 

There is a peculiar pulsation when the real start 
takes place, that no one who knows the Derby well 



THE DERBY. 121 

can ever forget. There is a murmur that rises of 
deep satisfaction and it comes as an undercurrent 
to the shout. 

Only a second, the whole race is over in less 
than three minutes, and yet it seemed an hour be- 
fore the horses came over the hill, moving as slow, 
it appeared, as if they were mere toy-horses on a 
slide, drawn by a child. All at once the heads on 
the grand stand turned one way, and the white of 
the faces showed like a sudden transformation. 
That change expressed the deep emotion of a 
thousand hearts, the hopes and fears that could not 
be suppressed. 

There they came slashing along, twenty of the 
thirty. The favourite racing on with a clear lead, 
Argonaut, Neptunus, Caractacus, and the ruck 
close after him, fleet as the wind. Coming down 
the hill, and rounding the turn into the straight, 
there was a clear length of dark turf islanding 
Marquis from his pursuers. 

As the horses approached, the crowd surged 
forward on to the ropes ; the shouts of " Red 1" 
" Blue r « Yellow !" " Black !" rose louder than 
before. The burly man pressed forward on the 
lieutenant, and shouted " Blue ! Blue 1 Blue 1" 
till he got black in the face, while his companion 
with shriller violence screamed, " Red ! Red I 
RED !" 

The pace in racing appears tremendous only at 
the moment that the horses pass ; then they peem 
to flash across the vision swift as bullets. Four 



1 22 OBEATHEABT. 

horses were in a line — the Marquis, Caractacas, 
Buckstone, and Mr. Jackson's colt. The jockeys 
leaned forward, plied their whips like madmen, 
and worked their horses with a pull and hustle for 
the last tremendous rush. The Grand Stand went 
stark staring crazy, thousands of hands waved hats 
and sticks, the cries of "Blue I" and " Red!" warred 
together. The horses passed out of sight like 
flashes of lightning ; people were frenzied with ex- 
citement, A moment after up went the telegraph 
with the number of the winner. No. 17, and the 
cry of " Caractacus !" proclaimed the winner. 
Then, close after the last horse, the mob rushed 
in, like a deluging black sea that had burst the 
dykes, and the course was covered by shouting 
costermongers and contesting eddies of winners 
and losers. 

The instant the number went up, the burly man 
rammed his hat over his eyes, and exclaiming, 
" Ruined !— every penny ! Oh I my mother, my 
poor mother !" plunged into the thickest of the 
crowd, followed by his sympathizing but alarmed 
friend. 

That same instant a sudden alarm flashed across 
the lieutenant's mind. He felt in his side-pocket 
for his pocket-book, with the £500 in notes. It 
was gone 1 A suspicious-looking quiet man stood 
next him. He must be the thief. The lieu- 
tenant instantly collared him, crying " You rascal, 
you've been and picked my pocket !" The man 
denied, resisted, and threatened. The infuriated 



THE DEBBY, 123 

lieutenant knocked him down, and shouted "police" 
with all his might. Some roughs ran up to the 
rescue, surrounded the lieutenant, hustled him, 
knocked him down, and beat him. He shouted 
for help, rose, felled one of his antagonists, 
and attacked another. In dashed the police, with 
truncheons out, and hewed their way to the half- 
maddened lieutenant, whom they dragged off to 
their booth, together with three of the leading 
roughs. 

In the police-tent was the superintendent, a 
severe, grim Rhadamanthus, in a tightly-buttoned 
blue frock-coat, who sat stiffly at a table, writing 
out a folio charge sheet. 

"What do you charge these men with?'* he 
asked, turning sharply on the almost frantic lieu- 
tenant. 

"Charge! — charge them with robbing me of 
£500 in bank notes — £500 in good notes ! Put it 
down, ril have them hung at the yard-arm, every 
man Jack I Search them. I say, boatswain, I 
insist on their being searched — ^you'll find the notes 
on them. If I lost those notes, I should go mad. 
They were put by to save my family — ^they were 
not for myself. Search them — I insist on their 
being searched. They were all in it, and they 
struck me too ; put that down. If I don't get 
the notes back, I'll have them punished — mind 

that, by , sir, I'll have them flogged at 

the cart's tail, if I have to do it with my own 
hand ! " 



124 GBEATHEABT. 

*' Now then, what have you been up to ?*' said the 
superintendent, famiharly to the unabashed pri- 
soners. 

"Nothing, Mr. Davers," said one of the roughs; 
" we're only here for a spree, not for business. It 
was Billy Barlow and little Jemmy as took this 
old gent's money." 

" That's right," said the others. 

"Is this so, do you think, Roberts!" said the 
inspector to one of the policemen. 

" It is about it, I think, Mr. Davers." 

" Did you see any suspicious persons near you 
just before the robbery I" asked the inspector of 
the agonized lieutenant, who, with his hand plunged 
into the side-pockets of his Flushing jacket, w^as 
pacing up and down the tent in a paroxysm of grief 
and rage. 

" Yes, there was a burly talkative man, well 
dressed, with a white hat, cutaway coat, and gold 
curb chain, and a little man, with a whip. I saw 
them in the refreshment tent, and they asked me to 
have some sherry." 

"That's Billy and little Jemmy," said Roberts 
(P. C. 44), " that's them all the world over. He's 
all jaw, Billy is, and I seed him driving through 
the crowd just before the tussel began. They've 
got the notes. I'll bet a fiver on it." 

" Search these fellows," said the inspector, with 
an ominous twinkle of the eye. 

The roughs were searched, but no notes were 
found on them. 



THE DERBY. 125 

" Will you believe it now, Bobby I" said one of 
them. 

"It was Billy, then. I wish I could get the 
bracelets on that fellow," said the inspector. " Dis- 
charge these men. Roberts, give the gent a glass 
of water, he looks faint. Ask him his name?" 

" Tolpedden," gasped the lieutenant. " But why 
are those men let off? — ^I'll have justice! — I've 
been robbed of £500 ! — I'll have justice T' 

"It is two men named Barlow and Jackson 
who have robbed you," said the inspector ; " they 
are well-known hands. I'll send one of our de- 
tectives after them by the night train — they'll be 
off to Paris — I know their little game. We may 
perhaps get you back part of the money. Let me 
have the numbers of the notes, and we'll stop them. 
Where do you live ?" 

" In Cornwall. I did not take the numbers." 

" That's a bad job ; but never mind, we'll nab 
*em if we can. You should have taken the num- 
bers. You can go back to Cornwall, sir — leave 
your address — we shan't find them in London — 
they're too knowing for that. Good moniing, 
sir." 

The lieutenant reeled out of the tent, almost 
heart-broken. At the door a crowd of persons 
wanted to hear about the robbery. All at once 
some one caught him by the arm. It was Lucas. 

" Why, hallo, lieutenant, who'd have thought of 
seeing you here of all men ?" he said. " Don't you 
know me? What, you've been robbed by the 



126 GBEATHEABT. 

swell mob — never mind, there's more tin where that 
came from. I've lost £200 on the last race — 
make it up at the Oaks — this is a bad business. 
Come and have some champagne " (" pop " Lucas 
called it) " with me, Dodgeson, Hewer, and Fisher 
— they're all out there shooting for nuts — ^such a 
laik 1 Come along, old boy, don't be down-hearted. 
Here's a fiver, if you'd like to borrow it — Oh, cheer 
upl" 

The lieutenant's heart was too full to speak, 
but he grasped Lucas's hand, and took the proffered 
note. 

" God bless you, Lucas," he said ; " I'll take 
this — I hadn't a penny left to get back to Corn- 
wall — ^I can't face Arthur after this blow. I shall 
start back to-night — first train — good-bye. I shall 
send you the money by post. Don't tell poor 
Arthur, for God's sake !" 

The lieutenant found his omnibus putting to, 
and hid himself in one corner of it. The people 
began to move homeward ; the dolls in the hats, 
the waving boughs, the drunken humours, the 
noise, the chaff, the sights, all passed before him 
like a dream. He had but one thought, and that 
was the loss of his £500, that had been destined to 
start the Wheal Arthur. 



ARTHUR LEAVES BLIZARD's. 127 



CHAPTER X. 

ARTHUR LEAVES BLIZARD's ABRUPTLY. 

*' rpHERE was a man of your name was robbed 
JL yesterday of £500 at the Derby," said 
Hookem to Arthur, who had called on the Sultan 
editor for literary advice the day after the Derby, 
the same day in which he had returned from his 
sketching party at Marlow. The lieutenant had 
left no name, and Arthur had put down his visitor 
as some artist friend. 

^^I'm afraid there's no one of our name now 
who's got so much money," replied Arthur, laughing. 
**Will you believe it, Arthur," said Hookem, 
throwing himself back in his great chair, and 
towsling his hair in a perturbed way, ^^ those fools 
of publishers have refused to take my rehabilita- 
tion of Guy Fawkes — say it is too glaring a 
paradox — doubt my sincerity — yes, sir, actually 
doubt my sincerity — think the immortal creature 
was a low assassin, and talk bunkum about Pro- 
testantism, and that sort of thing. I'll have my 
revenge, sir. There is a Spanish proverb, * We're 
both carriers, we shall meet again on the same 
road.' I'll hold up their books to ridicule — they 
shall feel the power of the Forge^ as others have 
done. I'll publish Guy Fawkes at my own ex- 
pense—I'll stereotype it — ^I'U permeate the world 



128 GREATHEART. 

witfi it — ril advertise it even on the P>Taraids — I'll 
vindicate the fame of this martjrr of science, or 
die in the attempt. Do you see this ?" 

Mr. Hookem here shuffled among the letters on 
the table, and drew forth three folio sheets of MS. 
memoranda. 

" What is that 1" 

" What is it ? — why, no less than four hundred 
blunders,|entanglements, contusions, and rhythmical 
errors, discovered bv me in " Romeo and Juliet " 
alone. This idolatry of Shakspere must be put 
a stop to, sir — it is undermining our literature. 
I will publish an alphabetical list of errors, to 
bring his genius to its level. How do-you and 
Davis and Blizard get on ? — Pull together better 
I suppose now f — You must bear with the trades- 
man element, till you get your foot well on the 
ladder, and have some editorship offered." 

" We shall never pull together." 

" Oh ! yes, you wi]l." 

'^ Never — I can bear scant payment, but I 
can't endure the insolence of ignorant, purse-proud 
men." 

" We all have to pocket insults sometimes." 

" I'll not bear them from anyone," said Arthur ; 
*' especially from men like that." 

*' Ah ! you're young — ^you're not half broken in 
yet to our London life — it's a hard world ours — it 
must be humoured — Blizard's is a good beginning 
— a safe stepping-stone." 

" I'll never enter their door again. I went there 



ARTHUR LEAVES BLIZARD's. 129 

this morning, sat down to write a short leader on 
American affairs, that the foreman was waiting 
for. Davis and Blizard were both out — presently 
they came in together. * What is he doing now V 
shouted Davis. ^ Writing versus, I suppose,' said 
Blizard, sneeringly. * Writing a leader that was 
wanted/ I said quietly. * Oh ! we're no use now, 
Davis, not a bit,' said Blizard; ^t's all Tol- 
pedden here.' *Let me see that leader,' said 
Davis, insolently. I rose, Davis took my seat, 
elevated his eyebrows, and thrust out his lower 
lip, as full of malice and jealousy as he could be. 
Blizard looked over his shoulder, and whispered 
criticisms. At the second slip Davis drew his pen 
violently over a third of the page. * Verbiage,' 
he said, * bad style, too many metaphors.' * He's 
got plenty to learn, though he doesn't think so,' 
sneered Blizard. ^ I'll not have my work spoiled 
by an ignorant scribbler,' said I, snatching up the 
leader to finish it upstairs in the printing-office." 

" A want of due subordination." 

" Perhaps so, but my blood was up. Well, Davis 
blustered, and Blizard ran to the door, to prevent my 
going out. The latter even threatened to strike me, 
on which I knocked him down, tore up the leader, 
went downstairs, demanded my two guineas for last 
week's work, and told the clerk to give Mr. Blizard 
the balance to buy any brown paper and vinegar 
he might require." 

" A retreat and a victory," said Hookem laugh- 
ing boisterously. " So much for Blizard. Pegasus 

VOL. IIL K 



130 GREATHEART. 

won't go in harness, that's evident. You're too 
independent, I fear, for journalism. Why, you're 
a regular fire-eater, Arthur, I declare ! Well, you 
must now go in for a regular good novel — ^not 
sensation — not trigamy — not bigamy ; no throwing 
husbands down wells — no arson — not too much 
parson ; but a downright good novel, to take the 
town by storm — natural, strong, tender, humour^ 
ous — ^Miss Evans, Anthony TroUope, and Miss 
Bronte happily blended, without too much dialect 
or too little incident. I'll review it for you." 

" Not so easy to do a novel, Hookem," said Arthur 
good-humouredly. "I'd rather write poetry — I 
haven't seen life enough yet for a novel. Young 
men don't write good novels." 

" Can't live on poetry — an epic a year wouldn't 
do it. It's only meant for rich people. Live on 
prose, and write poetry at grand moments." 

" But amateur poetry is always slip-shod. No- 
thing keeps one up to the mark so much as writing 
for the critics." 

"True; but people will read the old poetry. 
They don't want new poetry, like muffins, every 
morning for breakfast." 

" It takes time to get on to the periodicals. If 
I write an essay, back it comes, with a note saying 
the subject has been treated before in No. 270. 
If I send a story, it is too long, or too short, or too 
sensational, or wanting in dramatic power. The 
editors exhaust on me their stock of critical 



ABTHUR LEAVES BLIZAHD's. 131 

phrases. They have their cliques, and don't seem 
to want outsiders." 

"We all begin so; sic itur ad astra. One 
can't get on without cliques. Every staff is a 
clique more or less. You'll have a clique when 
you get editor." 

"It does seem hard to have to bear with all 
these caprices and fancies. Here's a thing I've 
just had returned from the Evergreen. It's a 
poem founded on a Greek legend. I tried to 
make the verse Shelleyan and flowing, yet 
chaste and simple. The wretch writes that it is 
*cold and bald' — they've always these cant 
phrases." 

" Read it," said Hookem, grandly. "I've got a 
little time just now, till the proofs come in." 

Arthur read : — 

" BACCHUS AND THE WATER-THIEVES. 

" Journeying from Naxos, swiftly towards Crete, 

Leaving behind him now the Cyclades, 
Those island gems that necklace the blue sea 

With strings of pearl, and emerald Sporades, 
Bacchus, as the swift bark skimmed, dipped, and leaped, 
Beneath the fluttering canvas softly dept. 

*^ The god had left his panthers in fair Crete, 

His thyrsus-bearers and his corybants. 
His frolic satyrs and his Indian pomp, 

In vineyard caverns and in forest haunts ; 
And now alone, his beauteous limbs at rest, 
The cypress planks of a poor galley prest. 

k2 



132 GREATHEART. 

'• The boat by magic moved upon the wave, 

The sea-nymphs drew it thro' the deep unseen ; 
Great dolphins gambolled round the frothing keel, 

White sea-birds flew above the ripples green; 
While Iris from a bright cloud smiled to see 
That youthful god disdain the wrathful sea. 

^' Sudden from Lenmos, rising bleak and blue, 
Down sea- side crags the eager robbers came. 
Leaping to man their boats and seize the prize. 

Seeing the heedless craft, no fear or shame 
Restrained that rude, fierce horde ; a hundred oars 
At the same moment pushed off from those shores. 

^^ Waving their knives and darts, they leaped aboard, 
YeUing out war cries with a drunken glee ; 
Flashing their axes, and each crooked sword. 

In ravenous rage and murderous ecstasy. 
But still the youth upon the sunny prow 
Slept with one hand crossing his fair white brow. 

^^ Enraged to find no spices, wine, nor gold. 

With blows they woke him, and with laughter grim, 
Binding him to the mast with biting cords. 

That made the blood spring from each radiant limb. 
Then piling pine-knots, vowed to sacrifice 
To Vulcan this fair youth, their trembling prize. 

" ' Spare me I' he cried ; ' my mother sighs for me 
In Naxos, where my father, old and blind. 
Begs for his bread! O Fate ! thou mystery, 

That brought me to this woe. O seamen kind ! 
Spare a poor youth, so free from sin and blame, 
And do not givef me to that cruel flame !' 



ARTHUR LEAVES BLIZARD's. 133 

*' Now one relented ; but they stabbed that man, 
And threw him bleeding to the wistful sharks ; 
And then, mid cymbal clash and barbarous drum. 

Blew from the smouldering logs the crimson sparks ; 
Unbound the lad, and threw him on his knees. 
Singing their savage hymns to the hushed seas. 

*^ Then he raised up his hands unto the sun, 

And prayed in agony to Father Jove ; 
And lo! a strength divine came to his heart, 

And thunder answered him from far above. 
Now he stood luminous, a starry crown 
Glittering upon his brow and tresses brown. 

'^ And suddenly the rigging's knotted ropes 

Were changed to creeping tendrils of the vine, 
And from the mast the purple clusters hung, 

Every rich berry swollen with red wine ; 
The very bulwarks began next to grow. 
And long green shoots rose from the hold below. 

'^ The little curling horns of tendrils spread 

Round all the canvas, and continually 
Rose through each plank. Then those base, coward men, 

With one consent, leaped headlong in the sea, 
And changed to dolphins, hiding from the day, 
Pursued by sharks in terror broke away. 

*' Now in his floating vineyard Bacchus passed 

To longing Crete, and Iris graciously 
Arched him with rainbows, and a glory shone 

To welcome him o'er all the neighbouring sea. 
While in the distance angry lightnings played 
Wrathful on Lemnos, and that isle dismayed/' 



134 6REATH£ART. 

^^I think those classical things perhaps rather 
incline to the cold and icy/' said Hookem, thrust- 
ing his thumbs into the arm-holes of his waistcoat, 
in his grand Sir Robert Peel manner. "Look 
here, write more on the life that surrounds you — 
London scenes. Squeeze poetry out of omnibuses 
and railway carriages. The pubUc mind is large 
but shallow, it does not know much about the 
classics, or knights, or any high-faluting stuff of 
that kind. The great poets and painters have 
generally dealt with their own times — at least, so 
the critics say, and they ought to know. At all 
events, Hogarth did so, and Dante did so, and also 
that great, but too careless genius, William Shak- 
spere, of Stratford-on-Avon. Now look here, I 
took w^ Chamber 8^ 8 just now, and there I found these 
lines, which are to the point, for they take a com- 
mon street incident, and transform it into poetry •" 

Having delivered this oracle, Hookem took up 
a number of Chjamheris Journal^ and read the 
following : 

" LITTLE PEGGY. 

^^ Li a blind little alley, deep sunk in Saint Giles, 
Little Peggy's blind father lights up with the smiles 
Of Peggy, who, now that there's tidings of spring, 
With her warblings makes the whole alley to ring. 

" She answers the blackbird, the eating-house bird. 
Who loves her, and echoes her every word. 
Then binds up her violets, purple and sweet. 
And sallies out singing to Threadneedle Street. 



ARTHUR LEAVES BLIZARD's. 135 

^^ Her basket is full of the fresh country flowers, 
Those dear little tremblers that rise from March showers. 
It is not the rich that alone love the spring ; 
Its joy and its hope make the beggar-girl sing. 

" Oh ! dear little Peggy, they're longing for thee, 
In the second-floor back at that dim number three ; 
Then proffer your violets, purple and sweet, 
To yon banker, the Croesus of Threadneedle* Street. 

" He is childless, and buys for the sake of your smile. 
So innocent, loving, and free from all guile ; 
He flings down a shilling, and passes away : 
Oh I Heaven is smiling on Peggy to-day ! 

'•^ The omnibus rolls, and the cabs rattle on ; 
They may roll, they may rattle, but Peggy is gone, 
To bear back her spoil to that lane in Saint Giles, 
Her eyes full of hope, her face beaming with smiles. 

" How she blesses the spring, and the sunshine, and flowers, 
That rise when March comes with its wind and its showers ; 
The violets she'll kiss, oh ! they're purple and sweet, 
When she, singing, trips back to old Threadneedle Street. 

" The rich people talk of the spring, for it brings 
The flowers for their ball-rooms, the wild bird that sings; 
But the spring little Peggy regards with such glee, 
Is the spring that brings daddy his baccy and tea." 



"How do you like that? It is fresh and 
simple, although, between ourselves, all those 
flower-girls are well known as thieving, good-for- 
nothing huzzies ; but that's neither here nor there. 
There is a dash of Wordsworth in it, *At the 



136 GREATHEABT. 

comer of Wood Street/ and a soupgon of Tom 
Hood ; still there is no plagiarism. I do say 
that that's the style. People understand that. 
They've all seen girls selling spring flowers, and 
sentimental pity is pleasant, and costs nothing. 
Who cares for Bacchus 1" 

Arthur praised the anonymous verses, as kindly 
and natural. He smiled, too, because they hap- 
pened to be his own. — ^The Jupiterof the Forge yfSiS 
graciously pleased to be pleased. 

" Go on," he said. " You'll do — ^you'll do, go on ; 
there's the right grit in you. You have the true in- 
stinct of the century about you ; you do not stick 
mulishly to the old conventions, that held that no 
poetry, could exist in anything short of a classical 
epic — ^great mistake. But remember, whatever 
you do, begin with a great hit ; it's all-important. 
II tiy a que U premier pas qui coute /" 

Accepting this vague but comforting advice as a 
valediction, Arthur took his leave of the Sultan 
Editor. When he kno/aked at the door of his 
lodgings in Keppel Street, the servant who opened 
it placed in his hand a letter. 

Arthur ran up-stairs with it, lit his candle, and 
read it at once. It was from his father, and con- 
tained the following important news. 

*^ My dearest Boy, 

"By the strangest combination of 
circumstances, I have just discovered that an old 
mine on our property near Endellion still contains 



ABTHUB LEAVES BLIZARD's. 137 

copper sufficient to amply repay working. I hope 
it may retrieve the fortunes of our family. Come 
back directly, dear Arthur, and be a witness of 
our luck. The lieutenant, who went to London, 
and has just returned, ventured to the Derby, and 
was there unfortunately robbed of £500 of his 
savings, which the dear old fellow had generously 
intended to devote to buying machinery for the 
Wheal Arthur. You remember the old working 
close to the sea. It grieves me to the heart that I 
cannot at once repay him, but it shall come out of 
our first profits. I know you won't object to that. 
I am borrowing £1,000 to start with from a client 
of Messrs. Chetwynd, Strong, and Wrackem. We 
all long to see you. Aunt Mary and the children 
send best love. Come by the first train to-morrow, 
1 and your uncle will be at the station waiting for 
you. Imagine with what joy and gratitude I fell 
on my knees last night to thank God for this 
happy event, which restores me not only my 
fortune but my son. Arthur, you shall go to 
Oxford now. That villain Mordred is pressing me 
hard with a Chancery suit, but I hope the mine 
will enable me to defeat the rascal. 

" Your loving father, 

" Henry Tolpedden." 

Need I describe the rapture with which Arthur 
flew to the dusty cupboard in his bed-room, dragged 
out his old portmanteau, crammed it with clothes, 
and ringing the bell, gave notice of his intention of 



>/ 



138 GRBATHEART. 

Starting for Cornwall by the first train in the morn- 
ing. What floods of hope and joy filled his heart 
to overflowing! This was indeed a reward for 
months of self-denial and self-sacrifice. Now he 
should see Lucy again, and be able to claim her 
hand as an equal. 



CHAPTER XL 



TO AND FRO. 



THE morning after Arthur's return to "the 
rocky land," Mr. Tregellas and Mr. Trevena 
were " hob-nobbing " in the study of the former 
gentleman. 

It was near the end of May, and the open first- 
floor window commanded a pleasant view over the 
green velvet surface of the broad lawn, in the 
centre of which rose an immense hawthorn-tree, 
now a mountain of white scented blossom, the busy 
mart of a million bees. In the soft sunshine the 
hill of flowers looked like a well-powdered wig. 
To use a metaphor of Mr. Trevena's, the hum was 
like the first murmur of a cathedral organ, when 
the bellows are just set to work. 

There was a bright little fire in the grate, but 
the fresh morning air came in agreeably at the 
window, and seemed to ridicule the comforts of 
winter. 



TO AND TRO. 139 

It was a handsome room, walled with books, 
the colours of whose bindings were so rich and 
varied that they supplied tfie place of flowers. 
Mr. Tregellas was a student of out-of-the-way 
lore. Armenian myths, Rabbinical legends, and 
Druidical traditions, especially those relating to 
Cornwall. Open folios lay on the table, inter- 
mingled with ivory-carvings and illuminations, 
that bad been brought out to show Mr. Trevena, 
and to furnish subject for chat; in the centre 
of them all stood a bouquet of Lucy's manufacture, 
that gave a sense of elegance and woman's kindly 
thought to the whole scene. 

Mr. Trevena delighted in a quiet morning with 
the High Church rector, whose curious learning 
he venerated, and whose quiet strength of character, 
and knowledge of the world, be respected and 
admired. He had walked over to breakfast, and 
had now come up-stairs to read and talk till lunch. 

" And so you saw Arthur yesterday at Bodmin I" 
said Mr. Tregellas, laying down the "Anthony 
Wood " he was reading, and eyeing his excellent 
friend, who was deep in a volume of " Thomas k 
Kempis." 

" Yes, I never saw such a scene ; there he was, 
looking like an acrobat, supporting a pyramid of 
laughing, shouting children; and there was his dog 
Billy leaping and barking, and the very pony rest- 
less with delight. The lieutenant was as bad as 
any of them, the father was serenely happy, while 
little Mrs. Tolpedden stood holding up Bobby, and 



140 GREATHEABT. 

crying with joy, yet reproving Susan for crying 
too." 

" I do like that young fellow, and I cannot per- 
suade myself to believe that he could ever have 
told defamatory stories of me or mine. The person 
who told me so must have been mistaken." 

*' Was it not an enemy ?" 

" By no means — there's the diflBculty." 

^' Do not believe it," said Trevena, warmly ; "he 
is the very soul of honour. I would trust Arthur 
beyond all the world ; he is so frank, generous, 
and brave, he is incapable of deception." 

" When I look at him I cannot doubt him, and 
yet " 

"Trust no one, Tregellas, who defames him. I 
have no right to ask the name of your informer ; 
but I would trust no one who ran down Arthur. 
The fellow may have some motive — ^he may have 
been misinformed." 

" You are a warm advocate ; but the person who 
told me heard Arthur utter the most infamous and 
injurious falsehoods about my family." 

" I do not believe it, if an angel told you. Sift 
it further. You will find Arthur guiltless." 

" It may be so— -I hope it is," said Mr. Tregellas, 
thoughtfully, as, taking up a little red-bound 
quarto, he said, " Hawker of Morwenstow has got 
such a curious Armenian tradition here. He will 
have it that the Magi were the three sons of Noah 
raised from the dead to come to do homage for all 
mankind at the Cave of Bethlehem. They rose 



TO AND FRO. 141 

from their sleep on Ararat, led by the Southern 
Cross, that Pentacle of stars, with two for the tran- 
som and three for the stock." 

" I like those old legends," said Trevena, rub- 
bing his hands. " What was that you told me the 
other day, Tregellas, from the Rabbins about the 
Schechinah ?" 

'^ Oh I a beautiful thought. The Rabbins held 
that the Schechinah was a column of soft, fleecy 
cloud, which ever and anon took human shape, 
while within its breast the glory of the Presence 
sojourned, a^ in a tent." 

It was a delightful feature of Trevena's honest 
and child-like nature, that he was alternately 
thoughtful and inconsequential. If you tried to 
fix him to one subject, he was sure to leap away. 

"I like Hawker's lines on St. Nectan's Kieve," 
he said ; " how soft they flow I 

* It is from Nectan's mossy steep 
The foamy waters flash and leap ; 
It is where shrinking wild-flowers grow 
They love the nymph that dwells below. 

' But wherefore in this far-off dell 
The reliques of a human cell, 
Where the sad stream and lonely wind 
Bring man no tiding of his kind ?^ " 

"Yes, Hawker is a real poet, and his verses 

have the true Oomish flavour, as Highland honey 

tastes of heather. By-the-bye, didn't I tell 

.you, Trevena, how Mordred, our vice-chairman, 



142 OBEATHEABT. 

has been urging onr Bodmin Society to force Mr. 
Tolpedden to show bis experiments in search of 
metals in public? Pve been opposing any such 
efforts. Let him have time — he may have been 
a little too sanguine — what of that? — ^there is no 
deception in that.'' 

"Mordred hates Tolpedden — ^he told me on 
Tuesday his reported experiments were all tricks — 
all brag^ and should be exposed." 

** I wish you were reconciled to Tolpedden, Tr&- 
gellas.'' 

^^No one regrets our disagreement more than 
I do.'' 

" May I tell him so ?" 

" Yes." 

" Bravo ! I am glad to hear you say that — ^glad 
with all my heart By-the-bye, I've got some- 
thing important to tell you. You know that ser- 
mon I published^ thinking I should sell thousands — 
I sold just one hundred and forty-two. I had 
ordered one thousand to be printed. On Monday 
the bill came in, sixty-four pounds— a pretty thing 
for a poor clergyman nearly ruined by a mine 
failure. I was in despair. There was my excellent 
sister, who for two months had been reviling me 
for plunging into a speculation I could not keep 
her from, and now she abuses me for my vanity 
and folly in wasting money on profitless printing — 
I did not know where to turn for the money 
— dreamed of duns, gaol, and pleasant things like 
that. Yesterday came another letter from Mr. 



TO AND FRO. 143 

Smallgood^ dry^ business-like, but kind, begging 
to be pardoned for an innocent deception. Think- 
ing me too sanguine, he had only printed three 
hundred sermons, and I had only £20 4«. to pay 
— that's a good enough sort of man. Oh I a nice 
warning it has been for me. What a fool I 
was, to be sure I" 

" You might have fallen into worse hands." 

A knock came at the door ; Kitty put in her 
bead. 

" Mr. Waverton, sir, wants to see you on very 
particular business, and alone." 

" Show Mr. Waverton up." 

Trevena snatched up his wide-awake, and going 
close to Mr. Tregellas, assumed an air of ludicrous 
supplication. 

" Do," he said, " put in a word for me about 
dear Milly — ^I feel sure she would have me. Do, 
as a friend, bring round the conversation to it 
somehow — ^you know, you promised me, but don't 
say I asked you — for Heaven's sake don't let me 
seem to have asked you ; but I must be off — ^I don't 
want that fellow to see me." 

There was the confusion of the lover about 
Trevena — in fact, he bungled about so long, that 
just as he was effecting a precipitate retreat, he 
came full butt against Mr. Waverton, who was 
even more hot, excited, and nervous than himself. 
Waverton was the essence of Puseyitish decorum 
— cassock waistcoat, collarless coat. Trevena was 
rough and careless, and his Inverness cape was 



144 GREATHEABT. 

always awry. In the eyes of Waverton he was a 
worthy, but rough fellow, who ought to have been 
a farmer. 

Trevena shook hands with Waverton, and 
apologised. Waverton looked flurried, glanced 
anxiously at Tregellas, and just touched the ex- 
treme tips of Trevena's fingers. To tell l;he truth, 
Trevena gripped a friend's hand with bone-crush- 
ing force. 

The moment the door closed on Trevena, Wa- 
verton put down his hat nervously, and drew his 
chair close to Tregellas, who began to feel rather 
anxious to know what had happened. 

^^Pm afraid somethingdisagreeable has happened, 
Mr. Waverton t I trust your sisters are not ill?" 

"They're quite well, thank you — quite well. 
The business I've come upon is most pressing — 
most important — I am about to leave the heretical 
church of which I have been minister." 

" Leave the church 1" said Tregellas, with horror, 
fixing his shrewd grey eyes on the perturbed little 
pervert; "you don't surely mean that? — it hasn't 
come to that?" 

" Yes, indeed, it has, I regret to say. I am on 
i^y ."^^y ^ow to Father Hood, at Camelford, *to 
beg him to receive me into the communion." 

"On what grounds do you chiefly feel com- 
pelled to leave us?" said Tregellas, blandly, and with 
the air with which a mad doctor examines a hypo- 
chondriac. " Is it our disbelief of purgatory, or of 
transubstantiation, that jars most upon you ?" 



TO AND FRO. 145 

" Both ! both !" exclaimed Waverton, enthusi- 
astically ; " I lament our burial service, because it 
contains insufficient prayers for the dead ; I lament 
the poverty of our scant ritual ; I lament our ig- 
noring the real presence ; I lament the infamous 
theft of our church lands, and the confiscation of the 
monastic properties — I sigh for the quiet, tranquil 
belief of the old times." 

" So do I," said Mr. Tregellas ; " but who is to 
restore it ?" 

" I long for unity — for one universal church, to 
war against heresy and unbelief." 

" Who does not, my dear Waverton I But I fear 
you are seeking an ideal you will never find — 
certainly not under the rule of an old troubled 
man, whose whole life is one struggle for petty 
temporal power." 

" Then the absence of confession," said Waver- 
ton : " that admirable means of comforting wounded 
souls — no, Mr. Tregellas, I cannot any longer 
belong to a sectional heresy, when the universal 
church is stretching her arms towards me." 

" Then do you really swallow all the dogmas of 
Rome — the Pope's temporal power — the indul- 
gences — the praying souls out of purgatory — the 
invocation of saints — the worship of images — the 
idolatrous service to the Virgin ?" 

*< No — no ; there I must protest — not idolatrous. 
There is no worship of the Virgin ; but she is 
justly venerated as blessed among women. There 
is no worship of images — they are mere provoca- 

VOL. III. L 



146 GREATHEART. 

tives to faith. There is no invocation of saints ; 
but the saints are surely to be honoured, and their 
example held up by the preacher." 

" Ah ! you are far gone, my dear Waverton, I 
see. 1 know all the arguments that win converts 
to the old errors. Take care this step is not a 
premature one ; take care you do not repent it — it 
is too late, mind, when the step is taken. Have 
you well thought over the abandonment of the 
Church in which you were born ?" 

" I shall not repent it. I have taken the step 
advisedly. I have sacrificed all earthly considera- 
tions to it." 

Waverton assumed the air of a man volunteer- 
ing for a forlorn hope. There might have been 
just a grain of vanity alloying the sacrifice. 

Then Tregellas set himself to grapple hand-to- 
hand with the misguided man ; but all in vain — 
the poison had done its work — Father Hood's 
Jesuitisms had been only too efficacious. Waver- 
ton, flushed with the discussion, took a hurried de- 
parture, 

" God bless and guide you !" said Tregellas, as 
they parted at the door, and he looked with manly 
regret at the face of the enthusiast jaded with 
anxiety. " Better go at once than take the money 
of our Church, and remain in its ranks a cowardly 
traitor and rebel." 

In the garden Mr. Tregellas found Lucy play- 
ing at croquet with the children, and intent on all 
the mysteries of the game. 



TO AND FRO. 147 

" Why, papa," she said running to him, " you 
look as thoughtful as if all the Church and State 
were on your shoulders." 

" Well, Lily, a small bit of the Church is there 
just now, and I want to forget its weight; so 
come and let us walk to your favourite Endellion, 
and you shall sing me ' Those eyes of spring — the 
violets,' your pet song to drive dull care away ; 
and bring Clara with you, and let Herbert and 
Bertha follow." 



Mr. Tregellas was a High Churchman of a 
peculiar school — opposed to Dissent, but relentless 
against Rome. To him ceremonies were vital 
things — emblems of the profoundest inner truths, 
and of great importance for carrying Christianity 
into daily life. 

It was the neglect of these ceremonies that 
seemed to him to render Protestantism so often 
cold, lifeless, and worldly. He did not force 
others to practise such ceremonies, not wishing to 
turn his household or parish into organised 
hypocrites, but he himself was inexorable in their 
observance. 

It was Mr. Tregellas's daily custom, when the 
days were long enough, after an early dinner, to 
walk to his little retired church about an hour 
before sunset, and read aloud the prayers and 
lessons of the day. It was a venial eccentricity, 
solemnly performed, and not without its calming 

l2 



148 GREATHEART. 

and salutary effect on the mind. Shadowy congre- 
gations seemed to surround him there as he prayed, 
and saintly faces to gaze from above with a momn- 
ful pleasure. 

It was the evening of the very day of Waver- 
ton's .visit that Mr. Tregellas went to church, ac- 
cording to custom. It was a little later than usual, 
and sunset had already begun. The little valley 
was one great glow of light, and the golden outlines 
of the distant hills were standing out only a little 
deeper in colour than the luminous horizon against 
which they stood. The tall plumes of the grass 
flowers on the graves shone transparent in the 
glory that wrapped the " God's acre." The little 
grey church, the old crosses, and the burial 
mounds, were all hallowed by the Schechinah of 
the sunset. 

Gravely the rector passed between the rows of 
humble dead and entered the little quiet church, 
whose doors were kept open all day. Then, throw- 
ing on his white surplice, he began those prayers 
that holy men have consecrated by ages of use — 
the prayers that have relieved so many hearts, and 
soothed so many sorrows. The echoes were the 
only responses, except when some thrush on the 
yew tree in the churchyard fluted its gladsome 
psalm — ^joy and gratitude in every note. The 
Rector stood there like the last surviving priest of 
some desolated country. The world seemed far 
from him now, with all its jar and selfish tumult. 
The age was no longer an age of ceremonial — it was 



TO AND FRO. 149 

too busy and self-seeking to snatch an hour for 
the worship of God. Religion had become a reli- 
gion of action, not of meditation. 

Mr. Tregellas had just begun to read that beau- 
tiful chapter of Isaiah, the 53rd chapter. 

" Who hath believed our report? and to whom 
is the arm of the Lord revealed ?" 

He stood at the little carved lectern facing the 
west window, whose panes were fast turning to 
rubies, and whose stone-work was growing blood- 
red with the sunset. Mr. Tregellas had a deep 
sonorous voice, and he read the words in full, 
swelling cadences, that were never slurred and 
never huiTied. They rolled through the church 
and seemed to fill it with organ tones. 

He went on with the prophecy : 

" He is despised and rejected of men, a man of 
sorrows and acquainted with grief ; and we hid, as 
it were, our faces from him ; he was despised, and 
we esteemed him not. 

" Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried 
our sorrows ; yet we did esteem him stricken, 
smitten of God and afflicted." 

A sound of passing feet in the churchyard made 
him pause for a moment to listen. It was only 
some miner returning from the Wheal Arthur; 
the people were accustomed to hear him at that 
hour. 

He continued — 

"But he was wounded for our transgressions, 
he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastise- 



150 GREATHCART. 

ment of oar peace was upon bim^ and with his 
stripes we were healed.*^ 

The sound of feet came again, a man pre- 
sented himself in the doorway — a thin, pale, worn, 
man, his dress dusty, his face streaming with heat 
and excitement. It was Waverton ; he rushed in, 
and knelt at the Rector s feet. 

*^ My heart is breaking f' he cried, in a paroxysm 
of despair. " Oh, Mr. Tregellas, my brain is 
going ! I cannot leave the Church of my fathers. 
I am the most miserable and sinful of men. I 
have had no peace of conscience, not a moment, 
since I left the Communion." 

Tregellas led the poor weak pervert to a bench 
in the chancel, and as he sat beside him, he 
tried to calm him, and gently to lead him to ex- 
plain the causes of his relapse. 

" That priest," he said at last, with tears of ex- 
citement in his eyes, '' tried to persuade me to re- 
main in my own Church, to lead others more readily 
away ; he tried hard to persuade me that such de- 
ception was venial, and approved by God; he 
insisted on my belief in the Pope's infallibility, 
and other points that I had never thought to be 
dogmas of Kome. He required me to believe that 
certain condemnation awaited all the members of 
the Protestant Church ; he ^* 

" And you refused, of course, to accede to such 
errors!" 

" No ! — no ! I consented, but against my better 
conscience. I felt then that, after all, I had given 



TO AND FRO. 151 

but half my heart ; that I never could really be- 
lieve those articles of their creed ; that if I remain- 
ed in the English Church a traitor in disguise, I 
should die of self-detestation, of contempt for my- 
self, and of regret at yielding to such baseness." 

" Then you left him in disgust ?" 

" No ; then I yielded against my conscience — 
ashamed to go back, my pride fighting against my 
conscience. Then — then I felt — God alone will 
ever know how passionately, how bitterly ! — what 
broad margins of difference of opinion our wise 
and tolerant Church allows — what opportunities 
there are within its pale for revision and amend- 
ment. I thought some vessel of my brain must 
have burst at that moment ; but I was baptised, 
and the priest who had deceived me received me 
into the Church, whose creed I can never accept. 
I was weak, miserably weak, and God has punish- 
ed me for it. I bear about now in my heart the 
torments of Cain — the quenchless misery of the 
first murderer." 

" The priest lied — ^I see it all ; he had taught you 
that all the errors to which you had objected were 
exploded doctrines of darker ages. Ha ! my dear 
brother, I know these priests, they allow no change 
in an infallible Church. All that Luther struck 
at they still believe. But come, my dear Waver- 
ton, I know the only balm for your wound — let 
me receive you back into the fold from whence 
you have strayed. Remain in the false Church, 
to which only false romance and impulse has led 



152 GBEATHEABT. 

you, and your fall will be great indeed, for you 
will then sink into the whirlpool of Atheism. Come 
— in all essentials you are with us," 

"I am ready," said the almost heart-broken 
man. "I will return, no more to wander; but 
pray for me. I have sinned; but I may re- 
pent." 

Then Tregellas rose, and led Waverton to the 
altar; there kneeling on the steps the latter 
repeated after him, with trembling but earnest 
accents, a recantation of his grievous error. 

"Do you feel happier? — ^now that you are 
again a true member of the Catholic Church ?" 
said Mr. Tregellas, as they rose from their knees. 

" I do I — I do I" was the heartfelt reply. 

As they walked home together, Mr. Tregellas 
broached the subject on which Trevena had peti- 
tioned him. 

" Waverton," he said, " this day has been a day 
of mercy to you, for God has enabled you to re- 
trieve a great sin ; conclude it, then, with an act 
of generosity and kindness. Let poor Trevena 
have your good word when he claims Milly's hand. 
She loves him, I am sure. He is poor, but the 
world is before him, and he will work hard for such 
a prize. He loves her dearly, and he will be a 
good husband. He may differ from you, but he 
is a good man, if ever there was one." 

Waverton made no answer for a moment, then 
he said, 

" I should have liked Milly to marry some other 



THE mermaid's BOCK. 153 

person, but I will not stand in Treyena's way, if 
Milly really loves him." 

When they parted, Tregellas looked after the 
impulsive man with a feeling something akin to 
that of the Legate in Mr. Browning^s poem, who 
had seen two-and-thirty revolutions. 

"No one would have believed so sudden a 
change," he said, half aloud, as he pushed open 
his own garden gate, " if he had not been himself 
witness to it." 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE mermaid's ROCK. 

THE morning after his return Arthur devoted 
to inspecting his guns and rods, disport- 
ing with the children, chatting with old Liddy, 
and arranging plans with his father. The lieu- 
tenant had been called away to Truro for three 
days, to his great annoyance, to arrange with 
Sampy for the purchase of some old machinery for 
the Wheal Arthur. 

Riding very early, Arthur found time about ten 
o'clock, while the children were at their lessons, to 
run down to Endellion, and take a look at the be- 
loved spot, the grey rocks, the little cove of white 
sand, and the Mermaid's Throne. He carried his 
gun on his shoulder, in case of a chance shot 
at a rabbit on his way there, and singing the 



154 GREATHEART. 

" Young Recruit " lustily, he struck out smartly 
for the sea-shore, longing once more to feel the 
breath of the ocean, and see once more the great 
waves breaking against the long line of granite 
cliffs. 

What was his delight to see standing upon the 
rock, with her face to the sea, a figure that he in- 
stantly knew to be Lucy's! Stealing down the 
path in the cliff, he approached her as softly as a 
hunter would the deer he was stalking. 

He crept for a moment behind the rock. There 
she stood, watching the sea, that glittered in the 
morning sunshine, one hand veiling her eyes. 
Arthur called her by name, once softly, then 
louder. 

Lucy looked round astonished and alarmed, 
then, catching sight of Arthur, she uttered not one 
word, but trembling perceptibly, clung to a point 
of rock. In a moment Arthur was by her side, 
covering her with kisses. 

" Dearest 1 dearest ! sweetest !" he said as he 
seated her beside him, " my soul's darling ! how I 
have prayed for this hour during my dreary, sordid 
toil ! " 

" Have you thought of me, dear ?" said Lucy, 
as she looked fondly into Arthur's careworn face, 
and passing her hand over his hair, as he took off 
his wide-awake and laid it on his knee ; "did you not 
sometimes forget dear old Cornwall, and those who 
loved you there ?" 

" Could I forget you for a moment, Lily ? Do 



THE mermaid's ROCK. 155 

what I would to pet rid of your troublesome image, 
it peeped at me from every cloud, and from behind 
every picture that I tried to copy. I could not 
chase it away," 

" Cruel to try and chase it. And what triumphs 
we heard you had won, Arthur, with your poetry, 
your painting, and your writing, which people 
talked of so — we all heard of it." 

" Ha I Lucy," said Arthur, taking her hands 
between his, " you little know how poor and con- 
temptible I seemed in that great cruel city. Those 
reports were miserable deceptions, only sent to cheer 
them at home. Do all I could, I got only a sub- 
sistence. I went, eager as Hotspur, to pluck 
honour ^ from the bright-faced moon,' but I soon 
found it was hard climbing — awful hard, dearest, 
even with your face looking from the sky to 
cheer me on. It would have taken years for me 
to have made an income at painting — half my life 
to have won fame as a great painter — all my life 
to have become even a first-rate versifyer, much 
more a poet ; and if I had tried to be a mere 
honest, drudging journalist, even that would have 
taken all my life, and required also the sacrifice of 
the other two ambitions. It is only in novels, Lily, 
that the admirable Orichtons succeed in every- 
thing, and then they do not strive to earn money 
for home, or to eke out with £50 a*year." 

Lily looked grave, played for a moment with 
the red and black cockade of her hat; then she 
said, 



156 GKEATHEART. 

" Dear Arthur, how you must have sujffered 1 — 
with your proud spirit, too ! And what did Mr. 
Hookem do ?" 

" All he could do, Lily ; there is no royal road 
to success. Pompous, paradoxical, and dogmatic 
as he is, he is a kind, shrewd fellow, sometimes 
worldly and selfish, I admit, but who is not ? Ah ! 
Lily, how could you think I was attaining such suc- 
cess, when you yourself saw me toiling as a poor pi- 
anist at an evening party ?" 

" I thought it was only a freak of yours, and 
that what you said was to tease me. And oh ! 
what pain it gave me never to be able to write to 
you, Arthur, and not to be able to see you that day 
you called, when papa fetched me suddenly. But, 
dear, what good fortune this mine is, because it 
brings you back to us all. We shall never part 
again, my own love — shall we?" 

Arthur's answer to this question was not in words. 
It was in a simple, but a far more expressive and 
more eloquent way. 

" And this rascal Boscawen, Lily — where is he, 
that I may rid the world of any one who dares to 
think of you?" Arthur said this with humorous 
grandiloquence. " I'll do battle with him for the 
Mermaid Queen." 

" Dear Arthur, there is no danger of the poor, 
silly, good-natgared fellow, though mamma did pre- 
tend to like him so very much; he got tired of me, 
because I treated him so badly." 



THE merm^d's bock. 157 



" We are affianced, you know ; nothing can part 



US now." 



" Nothing but death, Arthur." 

** And not even that, Lily. Well, let Boscawen 
live, if it be your will — I will not waste a spear on 
his recreant carcase, dear Lady of the Sea. But 
there is one thing, Lucy, I want to ask you very 
particularly — will you tell me? There should be 
no secrets between us. Who was it who dared to 
accuse me to your father of spreading slander about 
your family ?" 

Lucy was silent ; she did not raise her head 
for a moment. 

" Lily, there should be no secret between us — 
I must know — I will know." 

" Promise me not to be very cruel and angry — 
do not look so terrible, Arthur." . 

Arthur kissed her eyes with passionate tender- 
ness, half coaxing, half insisting. 

" Whatever you tell me," he said, " I will re- 
ceive with patience, and as a secret. The name of 
the slanderer may be a clue useful to me, and 
it will help me to discover the motive of the 
slanderer." 

" You promise, sir," said Lucy, placing her hand 
on his shoulder, " on your honour — very well, I 
will tell you — it was Mr. Bradbrain." 

Arthur started. 

"Bradbrain! — and what did he accuse me of 
saying ?" 

" T had rather not say — oh ! spare me, Arthur, 



158 GREATHEART. 

for it offended my father deeply, and pained me, 
although I knew you could never have said it." 

" No, Lily, I must hear — I will meet him face 
to face, and accuse him of this — I'll brand him as 
an infamous liar before the whole town. Til " 

" You promised to be patient, sir, and you call 
this patience, you firebrand ! I will tell you all. 
He told my father that you had been saying every- 
where that there was insanity in our family, and 
that we were a mad lot, and all because my poor 
aunt's uncle's sister's husband died in France of 
madness, brought on by a fall from his horse." 

" The infamous liar !" broke forth Arthur ; 
" why, it was he himself who told me of madness, 
and cautioned me against your family, without 
telling me the true facts. That man is a liar, 
some day I shall tell him so to his face. That man 
hates me — alway did hate me. I ought to have 
known it at first, and laughed at his story when he 
told it me. Lucy, does that fellow go to the lieu- 
tenant's as often as he used to do.? — tell me 
whether he does ? I suspect him — he is vain and 
selfish, he has no heart — he is bad to the core — I 
see it all now." 

*^I do not think he does, Arthur. A coldness 
has sprung up between him and your poor father, 
and he is seldom at Tolpedden now. It is so cruel 
of mamma, she won't let me go and see dear Mrs. 
Tolpedden as I used to do — I do miss it so 
much." 

The two lovers sat silent for a moment, gazing 



THE mermaid's BOCK. 159 

at the sea, on whose tremulous surface the sun- 
shine seemed to sleep. Lucy held Arthur's hand 
in hers, as if he was some vision that would pass 
away, but for this detention. The blue sky was 
above them, calm, as if sympathising in their plea- 
sure ; the great sea below murmured, as if in its 
slumber, for it slowly had motmed itself to rest ; the 
sea-birds had settled like specks of froth upon the 
waves ; the cliffs were white in the sun ; a fish- 
ing-boat or two in the distance glided silently across 
the horizon, mere grey phantoms of boats. 

AH at once Lucy started up, as if from a 
dream. 

" Some one calls me from Fairy Land," she 
said, laughing ; " I have Clara's French to correct, 
and Bertha to heai' practice. We must part, Ar- 
thur — they will wonder what has become of me, 
mamma will be sending for me." 

"It is very cruel to leave me," said Arthur; 
" here am I like the prodigal son just come back, 
and you want to leave me directly we meet." 

" And you're very selfish and cruel, Arthur," said 
Lucy, patting his cheek with her soft white hand, 
" to wish to keep me, when I've got my little sister 
to attend to. Help me down, sir, directly." 

"I've a good mind to chain you, Lily, like 
Andromeda to the rock, and not rescue you till 
the sea-monster come |looming up dark and 
threatening from the deep. How should you like 
that, Lucy ?" 

Lucy held her hands behind her, and stood 



160 GREATHEABT. 

against the rock, like a real Andromeda, only 
laughing and dazzled, for the son was in her 
eyes. 

" I should feel no fear, Arthur," she said, " if 
you were by, for I know you would be victorious. 
No, I can get down alone — do let me get down 
alone. I know the path so well — IVe been here 
so often, thinking of the night you saw me when 
I was playing the mermaid, like a silly, vain crea- 
ture as I was." 

Get down alone — was it to be thought of? 
Arthur's arm was so useful round her waist, his 
hand so ready to grasp hers at dangerous steps — 
now a kiss, now a little anger at being detained, now 
a reconciliation to be effected, so the enchanted 
time went on. 

Slowly they took the slant path to the upper 
cliffs, pausing here and there to turn round and 
look at the great sea, with the mantling purple 
shadows, and the frothy edge, white as ermine, 
that bordered the azure robe of Amphitrite. 

As they turned the last comer of the path, they 
came full upon Mr. Tregellas, who was descending 
at that moment. Lucy's colour changed in a 
guilty way as she ran to her father ; even Arthur 
was a little confused, but always frank and bold, 
he instantly held out his hand. Mr. Tregellas, 
eyeing them both for a moment, but quite calmly, 
grasped the proffered hand warmly. 

" I am so glad to see you, my dear Arthur," he 
said, turning to go back with them. **Do you 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 161 

know, I almost felt I should meet you this morning. 
I am so glad that I happened to meet Lucy with you; 
how singular — ^how fortunate I I trust another of 
the troublesome family will not be de trop. En- 
dellion is one of my favourite places, too. I claim 
at least that portion of good taste. What a won- 
derful thing this mine of yours is! and how glad I am 
that Mordred, with all his cunning, stumbled on the 
wrong one I" 

All this was said with a quiet, harmless sarcasm, 
that betrayed too clearly how thoroughly the 
speaker saw the real state of things. 

Mrs. Tregellas received Arthur rather stiffly and 
coolly, but she grew somewhat more friendly before 
the visit terminated. As for the children, they were 
noisily enthusiastic. Arthur longed to remove from 
himself the odium it was now clear that Bradbrain 
had thrown upon him ; but in that short visit he 
found no opportunities. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 

LATE in the afternoon of the day in which 
Arthur had been to the Tregellases, he strolled 
out about seven o'clock, to try and shoot a rabbit or 
two. 

Throwing his gun over his shoulder, and whis- 
tling to Billy to follow, he plunged into the planta- 
tions that lay between his father's house and the 
VOL. III. M 



162 OREATHEAST. 

lieatenant's. It was one of his favourite strolls 
after sunset, and no walk could have brought back 
the old familiar places more rapidly to his mind. 

Keeping Billy rigidly "to heel," Arthur soon 
filled his bag, but as he wanted to leave a couple 
at the lieutenant's, he lingered for one last double 
shot. At first the young rabbits had come out and 
gambolled across the path, stopping every now and 
then to sit up in the taller grass and watch the in- 
truder, but when Arthur had discharged his gun 
once or twice, they began to grow shyer, and to peep 
from the burrow with wistful timidity. It re- 
quired a fresh exertion of sagacity in the man to 
match the animal, grown so rapidly wiser by mis- 
fortune. 

The meadow in which Arthur had been shooting 
was a field, speckled here and there with tall furze 
bushes, and running at the foot of a hanging 
wood, part of which had been cleared in the 
previous spring. It was a sloping track of young 
ash-trees, hazel, dog-wood, white-thorn, with here 
and there a pollard-oak cropping up. There were 
narrow paths cut through the underwood in many 
parts, for the purposes of rabbit-shooting. In 
spring this copse was a great haunt of the children, 
because it was then overrun with a rank growth of 
blue hyacinths, primroses, and wood-violets. In 
the autumn they scrambled about there, climbing 
for nuts. There King Pippin had seen snakes, 
hedgehogs, and moles, and had once actually found 
a jackdaw's nest. 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 163 

It was now June, and the trees were tangled 
with Ivies and honeysuckles, the western sky 
over the wood was flushed with a sunset colour 
that was reflected in the east. It was very quiet 
and still, the only sound was now and then 
the long, brooding note of the wood-pigeon as it 
settled down to sleep. 

Arthur, from his ambush behind a thorn-tree, had 
just covered with his gun a rabbit more audacious 
than its fellows, when he suddenly caught sight of a 
boy, with a covered basket on his arm, walking 
very fast along the path at the edge of the wood. 
He was coming from the direction of the valley of 
St. Petrock's, and going in the direction of Tolped- 
den. It was Bradbrain's boy Jackson ; he was a good 
deal grown, but Arthur remembered in a moment 
his cunning eye, and audacious manner, as he 
passed, whistling the " Cure " with infinite expres- 
sion and the intensest enjoyment. 

A secretive impulse he could not control in- 
duced Arthur to bring down his gun, and watch 
the doctor's boy, whose antics just then roused 
his strangest suspicions. 

After a waltz, in which the medicine-basket 
served for a partner, Jackson had taken oflF his 
regulation hat, and drawn a little note on pink 
paper from under the lining. This, just as he got 
near Arthur's ambush, he sniffed at with grotesque 
delight; then kissing it violently, and assuming 
a strut, undoubtedly imitative of that of Mr. Brad- 
brain,he replaced the note under the lining of his hat. 

m2 



164 6HEATHEART. 

Finally he raced off after a passing rabbit, shouting, 
and flapping the lid of his basket. 

In a moment Arthur threw his gun over his 
shoulder, and darted after him. He overtook him, 
much to the boy's surprise and alarm, at the very 
edge of the wood, just where the lane began that 
led up past the lieutenant's garden paling. 

" I want that letter, boy, that you had just now," 
said Arthur, angrily. 

** I ain't got a letter — ^'twas an old valentine of 
mine." 

"I know better. Give it me up, or Til thrash 

you." 

** Ain't got no letter," said the boy, sullenly. 

" You have." 

^^No, sir, I ain't." 

** Where were you going to ?" 

" To Crockerton Cove with a draught and pills 
for old Eozzy Paul." 

" You're a liar ! — ^you were going to Lieutenant 
Tolpedden's." 

Arthur snatched off the boy's laced hat, while 
he still parleyed, and drew the pink letter from the 
lining. It was a three-cornered note on scented 
paper. 

It had no direction. 

The boy began to whimper. 

" That ain't yours," he said, " it's master^s. I 
found it in the basket. I suppose it dropped there 
by accident. Give it me ; it ain't none of yours — 
give it me." 



THE GUA«DIAN ANGEL. 165 

He struggled for the letter, but Arthur pushed 
him to the ground; then, affecting a rage to frighten 
the secret out of the boy, he cocked his gun, and 
pointed it at him. 

" If you don't tell me all about this business," 
he said, " I'll blow your brains out this moment." 

The boy fell on his knees, and cried for 
mercy. Arthur's eyes were certainly rolling 
rather savagely, for he saw in a moment all the 
misery this little poisoned letter must contain." 

" I couldn't help it," he said, " master will make 
me carry 'em. It's for Mrs. Tolpedden. I put 
'em in a hole of the beech tree by the garden 
palings. It ain't the first I've carried by a long 
chalk. That's all I know — let me go." 

" You must come and show me exactly where 
you put it," said Arthur ; " and here's five shillings 
not to tell your master what has happened ; it will 
be all right if you only keep your tongue quiet." 

The boy promised ; Arthur opened the letter 
carefully ; it was not sealed. Jackson watched 
his face apprehensively as he read. 

Its contents were the following — 

" Cara Maria, 

*^ I shall be at the glass-door, leading on to 
the lawn at eleven to-night. I shall have a carriage 
ready at the turn of the lane. To-morrow we 
shall be free, and far from all who hate us. 

" Yours passionately till death, 

" Donald." 



166 GREATHEART. 

Arthur folded the letter again carefully, and 
pleated it down with his nail. His face was hard 
now, and his mouth compressed. 

" If you come back and remove this letter, or 
tell your master one word, I'll get the lieutenant 
to turn away your father to-morrow, he works 
at the Wheal Arthur, doesn't he ?" 

" Yes," the boy cried. 

" Very w^ell ; but if you keep quiet I'll send you 
through him what I promised you. Now come 
and put this letter in the tree." 

A few minutes brought them to the place. Ar- 
thur looked cautiously over the paling. There 
was no one visible; the children were not play- 
ing. Jack could be heard screaming in the par- 
lour — it was bed-time. Jackson clambered up 
and dropped the pink note in, as he w^as ordered. 

Arthur watched him turn down the lane, and 
pass across the valley, contrite and frightened. 
Then discharging his gun twice, so that the boy 
might think he was still shooting in the wood, and 
might discover him if he returned, he hurried 
home, and told his father that a fishing expedition 
with the pilchard boats would probably keep him all 
night. 

In vain Liddy pleaded the danger of catching 
cold. Arthur cut some bread and meat, took a small 
flask of brandy, and a wrapper, and went and hid 
them at the edge of the wood. Then he hurried 
again to the tree. First reconnoitring carefully, 
he sprang forward and thrust in his hand — the 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 167 

note was gone ! Then that unhappy woman was 
guilty, and must have consented to elope with her 
infamous lover. When Arthur thought of the 
lieutenant and his love for his young wife, and 
thought of her guilt, it seemed for the moment to 
destroy in his heart all his belief in woman's 
purity and virtue. 

Having prepared for his night's watch, Arthur 
strolled to the lieutenant's cottage, singing as he 
went, for fear of exciting any suspicions. He 
went round the house, and peeped in at the glass 
door leading on to the lawn. There was his aunt, 
in a further corner of the room, sitting with her 
three children, 'and with Bobby on her lap. 
They were saying their prayers to her, Bobby hav* 
ing been just snatched from bed in her nightgown 
for the occasion. What a happy scene ! and 
yet 

A moment more, and their little innocent voices 
joined in the Evening Hymn, then they stopped 
and broke into noisy acclamations as Arthur 
stepped into the room, and kissed Kate, and 
tossed Ned into the air, much to Mrs. Tolpedden's 
delight. 

*^ Why, Arthur," she said, " you've been out all 
day. It is too bad, considering how long it is 
since we've seen you. How kind bringing the 
rabbits 1" 

" Oh ! do take me out riding on Nettle to-mor- 
row I" said King Pippin. 

" And me on Gipsy," cried Kate. 



168 GREATHEART. 

*^ And you must come and hear Benbow talk/' 
said Jack ; " he says, ^ Bring in the grog ' — ^ splice 
the main-brace/ and all sorts of funny new things, 
that papa has taught him," said Jack. 

" And we want to go fishing," said Teddy. 

" Only just hear the children," said the delighted 
mother, kissing them all round, King Pippin fight- 
ing for a disproportionate share, with his usual 
noisy tyranny. 

'' There, go to bed, children — ^be quiet, Johnny !" 
said Mrs. Tolpedden ; ^^ but how low you seem, 
Arthur — I think you're vexing about the Tre- 
gellases — ^I do really." 

" Oh , no, aunt. Fve got a slight headache — 
it's only the change of air." 

" Let me get you some eau de Cologne I" 

The good-natured little woman ran out, and re- 
turning in a moment, bathed his temples with some 
of the fragrant spirit. 

In less than half an hour Arthur pleaded his 
pseudo-fishing expedition, feeling sadly ashamed 
of the deception as he said it, and, shaking hands 
with his aunt, left the cottage. 

The life of a spy and a detective must not be 
very attractive to a proud and brave man. Ar- 
thur's frank, straightforward nature disdained the 
artifice that he felt it his duty to practise. But 
had h^ gone at once to his aunt, shown her 
the letter, and accused her of her guilt, what 
would have been the result? She would have 
denied it all ; Bradbrain would have been alarmed, 



''B 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 169 

and finding some intimation of danger, sure to have 
been conveyed to him, would not have kept his 
engagement. 

But now Arthur hoped to show the unhappy 
woman the enormity of the step she had been in- 
duced to take, to confront her with her would-be 
seducer, and drive him from her for ever, even by 
force, if requisite. He would unmask the villain, 
and wring the heart of that weak, sinful woman 
with remonstrances earnest, bitter, and searching. 
He hoped, God blessing his efforts, to bring back 
that erring woman to the purity and to the loving 
heart from which, in an evil hour of temptation, 
she had wandered. 



The moon rose late that night, but while the 
after-glow of twilight still lingered in the west, 
passing from mellow red to soft melting yellow, 
then fading into colder grey and blue in the east, 
the stars came forth and shone through the dark 
elm leaves and the horizontal ledges of fir, and the 
shapely boughs of the beech-trees glittered with 
tremulous, vari-coloured sparkles that lit up all 
the soft sapphire depths of sky between them with 
a soft, uncertain whiteness. 

The lawn grew damp with the heavy dew, the 
bats ceased to flitter over the dark thatched roof, 
and to hover round the intruder, as if mischievously 
conscious that he was lurking in ambuscade ; the 
beetles ceased to drop from the lime-trees, or to 



170 6REATHEART. 

crawl with crackling, scratching sound over the 
dead leaves under the laurels in the shrubbery ; 
the moths ceased to move upon the night-flowers, 
and the last bird, after some restless chirping, 
settled down to sleep. 

Arthur's mind was so sensitive to impressions, 
and in such a state of tension, that the faintest 
sound within or without the cottage roused him. 
A snail falling from the peach-tree among the 
nasturtium flowers, was as audible to him as if a 
gun had gone off at his ear ; the very splash of a 
frog in the pond under the willows startled him as 
if it had been the splash of a murdered creature's 
body. It was a new position for him to be lurk* 
ing at night, watching a house as if he was a 
criminal. 

How slow the hours seemed to go 1 It was half- 
past nine when he had scaled the paling between 
the laurels and the unlucky beech-tree, and it seemed 
as if days had passed since he had bid there behind 
the great lignum vita bush. Once only a window 
had opened, and Jack shouted from it, but was 
instantly scolded by Susan, pulled in, and the 
window shut. 

Once Billy had darted out from the kitchen, 
and rushed down the garden, madly barking at 
imaginary thieves. Then the bolts had been 
drawn, and the house closed for the night. 
Arthur knew all the movements of the lieutenant's 
cottage, and all the habits of the inmates; he 
amused himself, anxious as he was, and important 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 171 

as was the object of his watch, by speculating on 
what was going on under the sheltering roof. 
The windows of the light-house, for it now shone 
from among its vines like a friendly beacon, were 
backgrounds to the occasional onibres chimoises of 
the inmates. First the children's shadows passed, 
then Susan's, visibly remonstrating and battling witli 
King Pippin ; that pretty trim shadow flitting from 
window to window was Mrs. Tolpedden's. 

Ten o'clock came, and the lights began to die 
out ; first the little side window on the basement, 
that was the kitchen ; then a little window lit up 
at the top story presently grew dark — Susan had 
gone to bed. Now the last light moved from 
the children's room to the parlour — that was Mrs. 
Tolpedden. Half an hour afterwards it passed 
into the room over the entrance, and presently 
went out. The house was asleep. 

Ha 1 would it had been ! Arthur's vigilance did 
QOt for a moment relax, but now, striking a fusee 
to see the time by his watch, he changed his posi- 
tion from behind the tall, dark pillar of lignum 
vitSB to a large Portugal laurel, whose circle of 
shadow, now the moon began to rise, furnished him 
with ample shelter. It seemed no more than half- 
an-hour, for drowsiness had begun to steal over 
his senses, when a slight rustle in the paling aroused 
him to full consciousness. Just then wheels 
sounded faintly in the distance at the turn of the 
road. 

Presently the paling creaked and shook, some 



172 GREATHEART. 

one vaulted over, and pushed through the laurels 
towards the house. Arthur looked, and, to his 
surprise, saw a light appear at the now unbarred 
parlour window. The next moment, a dark figure 
stole past him, and went towards the window, from 
which the tree stood about ten yards or so. It was 
Bradbrain — Arthur knew in a moment his long 
swinging strides. He laughed mockingly as he 
passed, and threw down on the grass the burning 
end of a cigarette. He tapped at the window — the 
half of the glass door opened noiselessly, and he 
stepped lightly in. 

Swiftly Arthur stole to the window, at one side 
of which the shutter still remained closed. He 
heard two voices. Bradbrain was urging Mrs. Tol- 
pedden to fly with him, and that moment. She was 
crying violently, she was begging him to leave her; 
she was praying for mercy. He used mysterious 
threats, mixed with passionate entreaties and wild 
adjurations. 

He twined his arms round her, he pressed his 
lips to hers, he drew her towards the window ; she 
half struggled, half yielded ; she was about to 
leave innocence, and hope and love, husband and 
children. The fascination of Satan was over her ; 
she was powerless under the strong, magnet will 
of that bad man. Hell yawned at her feet. 

At that moment a strong hand shook the glass 
door open, and, warm in the lamplight, there shone 
a well-known face. Mrs. Tolpedden uttered a 
half*suppressed shriek, as Arthur stepped roughly 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 173 

in ; Bradbrain drew back to the fire-place, as if 
seeking a weapon. 

"A check-mate — a positive check-mate," he 
said bitterly. " Snapped, by Jove ! Glad though 
it is not the old boy." 

" Bradbrain, you are a detestable villain. You 
shall pay for this." 

"Strong language — take care, young man, my 
temper is rather short." 

Arthur beckoned him into the garden. Brad- 
brain led the way, first kissing his hand to Mrs. 
Tolpedden, who lay half-fainting on the sofa, her 
face hidden in her hands. 

"Oh I Donald — Mr. Bradbrain!" she cried, 
suddenly starting to her feet, and seizing him by 
the arm, " tell Arthur that I am not guilty. Tell 
Arthur that it was you who forced me to this inter- 
view, and terrified me with those letters. Have 
mercy !" 

"I shall say nothing," said Bradbrain coldly, 
turning round from the door where he stood ; " who 
would believe me ? You brought this on yourself, 
my little woman ; this is some trap of yours, and 
you must take the consequences. Good-bye, 
cava mia, we shall soon meet again, and perhaps 
under pleasanter auspices." 

Arthur caught but a few of these words, which 
were uttered in a low quick voice as Bradbrain 
leaped out upon the lawn, and turned upon him 
fiercely. 

" Now, my fine fellow," he said, " if I was at 



174 6REATHEART. 

Rio I should get you pistolled or knifed, as sure as 
eggs are eggs, for this insolence ; but as that sort of 
thing might be misunderstood in this infernal old 
stick-in-the-mud country, we will agree to arrange 
our difficulties at a more convenient time. If you 
escape, you can marry that half-crazy Tregellas girl ; 
if you don't, I may perhaps go in for that interesting 
party myself, if she's tin enough, and when this row 
has blown over. Fisticuffs would be undignified. No, 
thank you. Au revoir^ mind. However you like, 
and whenever you like. For your own sake, for 
the old tar^s, and the little woman's, I'd keep this 
matter quiet if I were you." 

Before Arthur could rush at him and strike him 
to the ground, the impudent villain had sprung 
over the paling and leaped into the road. A mo- 
ment more there was a sound of wheels, and he 
had driven off. 

When Arthur returned to the parlour he found 
the unhappy woman sitting by the window, her 
face hidden in her hands. She did not look up 
when he entered. 

" Aunt — Aunt Mary," said Arthur, " I wish I 
could have died before I discovered this terrible 
secret." 

She looked up, her pale face covered with tears, 
her hair dishevelled ; she wrung her hands. 

" Think badly of me, Arthur," she said, " but do 
not think me guilty. I was heartless and wicked 
— I forgot the husband who loved me so tenderly, 
and the children I loved ; I was weak and vain 



THE GUARDIAN ANGEL. 175 

enough to listen to thisman'ssoft, dangerous speeches, 
and to write to him. Foolish letters of mine he 
used to force me to interviews, and to urge me to 
fly with him. He would not return my letters. I 
was in his power, but I had long ceased to love him 
as I once did, because of his hard, cruel nature. But 
I am not guilty of more than this. Oh I do not 
tell Nelson. It will kill him — it will kill him on 
the spot." 

"How can I conceal itt" said Arthur, "how 
can I be sure that you may not deceive me I You 
liave deceived him. Tour love for your children 
and for him had no power to make you tread this 
temptation under foot. I must see your true 
penitence, watch you daily, before I promise any- 
thing ; I must hear you swear never to speak to this 
wretch again. I must see you love my uncle 
dearer than before — I must see that the children 
become to you as they once were. If you try to do 
this, God will help you, and I will guard you from 
open shame." 

" Heaven bless and reward you I — angels guard 
and keep you I" said the weeping woman, covering 
his hands with kisses. " May I die an outcast and 
a beggar, forsaken and alone, if I do not forget my 
love for this man as if it had been a fever dream. 
I swear by — I swear by my hope in a gracious 
Saviour, I will promise as you wish ; but do not 
cast me out to shame, and do not kill my husband." 

" I will not promise yet ; but now leave me and 
go to your own room. To-morrow I will tell you 



176 ORBATHEART. 

what T mean to do. I sleep here, to guard the 
house. To-morrow, when I leave, I shall send 
Liddy, and tell her you are ill, and need a nurse. 
To-morrow your husband returns. I must tell my 
father then, and consult with Wra." 

With tears and passionate promises, that seemed 
to well up from the recesses of a bleeding and 
really penitent heart, the unhappy woman sought 
her room. At daybreak, before Susan was about, 
Arthur unclosed the shutters, and leaping out on 
the lawn, left the house, no longer, in his mind, 
the happy, innocent place it had seemed only two 
short hours before. It was still an Eden, but an 
Eden, alas ! to which the serpent had found an 
entrance. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

OBDURATE. 

THE day after the events in the last chapter, Mr. 
Tregellas sallied out early in the morning to 
call on Mr. Mordred. He had two motives in his 
visit, an exoteric and an esoteric motive. He had 
long observed a coldness and distrust springing up 
between the two partners, and he hoped to gain 
from the one some inkling of the slanders which 
he (Mr. Tregellas) now felt almost sure had been 
disseminated by the other, to the prejudice of 
Arthur Tolpedden. As he banked with Mr. Mor- 
dred, and there were unpleasant rumours preva- 



OBDURATE. 177 

lent about the bank at St. Petrock's, there were 
abundant excuses for his visit. 

On being shown in by the corpse-like butler, Stone- 
cott, he found Mr. Hordred in Bradbrain's sanctum, 
with two or three poor persons, sick miners and old 
women, whom he instantly dismissed with a 
few hurried words, and received his visitor with 
(for him) considerable warmth, first apologizing 
for taking a dose of tonic from a bottle on the 
mantel-piece. 

" My health is very indiflferent," he said, cough- 
ing painfully, as he replaced the medicine-glass. 
" We all do fade, as doth the leaf ! Ha! my dear 
sir, we have our warnings; I am not what I 
was — I feel death creeping nearer and nearer ; but 
it is His will, and I submit. I try to be prepared." 
Both Mr. Mordred and his visitor were anti- 
quarians, and Tregellas soon turned the conversa- 
tion on the legends of the wild country of the west, 

^^ Where the great vision of the guarded mount 
Looks towards Namanco^a and Bayona^s hold ;'' 

that country that a local poet apostrophised so 
finely as his 

" Native Cornwall, throned upon the hills. 
Thy moorland pathways, worh by angel feet ; 
Thy streams, that march in music to the sea. 
Mid ocean^s merry noise — his billowy laughj' 

" Do you know, Mordred," he said, " I've just 
found a curious passage in an old monkish writer, 
VOL. III. W 



178 GBEATHEART. 

quoted by Leiand, relating to Hawker^s place, 
Morwenna." 

" And what is it, may I ask I I know few of these 
old Cornish stories. Who was this Morwennaf' 

"She was the daughter of the Welsh king, 
Breachan, who founded the town of Brecon, and 
Gladwise was her mother. I tell you the story as the 
old gossip tells it. She came over to England 
and became the instructor in all goodness of the 
Princess Edith, the daughter of King Ethelwolf, 
whose sons were taught by Saint Swithun. Mor^ 
wenna came one day to King Ethelwolf, and 
cried, 'Largess, my lord, the king, largess for 
God !' ' Largess, my daughter,' said the prince, 
* be it whatsoever it may.' And she said there 
was a stately headland, that looked over to the 
Severn Sea, and was called Hethnacliflfs, or the 
Raven's Crag, and often in wild Wales she had 
seen the sun fall red on that rock, so she prayed 
the Saxon king that on that hill an altar might be 
raised among the stones. The king granted her 
request, they built a church there, it was called 
Morwenstow; and there it still stands, after ten 
centuries of storms." 

Tregellas's eye glowed with fervour as he re- 
peated this simple old story, and his cheek brighten- 
ed in colour. 

Mordred heard him through with a cold patience. 

" Don't you think," he said, " that perhaps these 
stories are dangerous, inasmuch as they lead the 
young to romantic recollections of the past, and 



OBDURATE. 179 

SO, by degrees, into the sloughs of Puseyism, and 
the abysses — the terrible abysses of Popery," 

There was always a good deal too much of the 
religious meeting about the banker ; but when he 
shook ojBf this cold formality and Pharisaism, he 
could be a sensible and pleasant companion. 

Mr. Tregellas laughed. 

" We do not agree in our appreciation of the 
past, I fear, Mr. Mordred. There is an old Per- 
sian proverb — ^ Many sorts of glasses, but one kind 
of water.' I venerate the good of all ages — viae- 
runt fortes. There were good men before the 
Reformation, I presume." 

"Doubtless. I wish to be charitable to all 
creeds ; but it is the tendency of these things I 
blame. They lead from the right path by slow 
and imperceptible degrees. Young ladies take to 
the poetry of religion wherever they find it ; but 
the truth, the truth, is less inviting." 

" When is our next scientific meeting at Truro 
to be, Mr. Secretary f " 

" On the 1st of August. We decided that at 
the meeting on Friday." 

" I hope you are not going to press Mr. Tol- 
pedden to a premature exhibition of his experi- 
ments 1" 

" We are indeed," said Mordred seriously, and 
handing a circular across the table. " Have you 
not seen this ? You ought to have had one yes- 
terday, only our boy has been so busy taking out 
medicine." 

n2 



180 6BEATHEART. 

'^ Yes^ and perhaps assignations, Mr. Mordred." 

Mr. Tregellas read alond — 

^^ On the 1st of August, at the Institution, 
Truro, H. Tolpedden, Esq., will exhibit his experi- 
ments on the discoveries of the Alchemists, and on 
the bases of metals." 

He looked up with a serious sadness, as he said, 

"Mr. Mordred, this is hardly fair. Mr. Tol- 
pedden's experiments are not yet completed. You 
are forcing him to expose his failures, his mere 
immature discoveries." 

" Why does he boast, then, of his embryo dis- 
coveries. It is a Christian man's duty to expose 
such impostors, and bring them to their level. 
That man has a motive in flaunting about these 
pseudo-discoveries of new metals." 

*^ What possible motive except a love of science 
and of truth ?" 

" What motive ? — why, a mean, restless vanity 
and ambition, Mr. Tregellas, and a wish to flourish 
these pretended discoveries in my face, in order to 
stop the Chancery suit that the interests of the 
Corporation compelled me to institute to recover 
our just rights. We did, as you know, recover 
one portion of the property so unjustly detained. 
We then instantly set to work to win back the 
value of the purchase-money; but we had been 
deceived, sir — ^we were unsuccessful. Providence 
was against us. It proved worthless in the 
balances — mere froth and emptiness." 

" I am not a business man," said Mr. Tregellas, 



OBDURATE. 181 

"and perhaps do not suflSciently enter into their 
feelings ; but your conduct, I must confess, ap- 
pears to me somewhat ungenerous. You revive 
an old claim that had been, at least, two hundred 
years dormant — you discover, I suppose, a flaw in 
the title, that gives you some leverage — ^you re- 
cover part of the land — you search for metal, and 
are disappointed, you then go to law again to 
squeeze out the remainder — roused by news of the 
extraordinary discovery that has rendered it valu- 
able. Is it uncharitable to suppose that you will, 
on acquring it this time also, purchase it from a 
Corporation, who dare not resist you. But, then, 
you business men, bankers or lawyers, are all alike 
— ^you are unaccountable. Excuse my frankness. 
The Tolpeddens, you know, are no longer friends 
of ours. I only speak from my feelings, and you 
business people do not listen much to those prompt- 
ings. Let us change the subject. I hope these 
rumours about the bank are, as I presume, utterly 

baseless r 

" Baseless as the morning cloud or as the early 
dew, sir. The bank never stood so well. Pray 
let me fetch you our books. The losses in the 
Wheal Fortune, perhaps still retrievable, have 
come out of our private capital. The bank stock 
has not been entrenched upon, and shall not be." 

" I have entire confidence in you as a banker — 
do not trouble about the books. If I had any 
fears, I should have withdrawn my money when 
the mine began first to fail, and people commenced 



182 GREATHEART. 

to talk of a run. It would be a little after the fair 
now. May I ask you a question in confidence ? 
It involves the happiness of persons who are dear, 
very dear to me." 

" Ask me anything, my dear sir, and I will an- 
swer you with candour. I am indebted to you for 
the confidence you place in me." 

" My question relates not to yourself, but to your 
partner," said Mr. Tregellas. 

A knock came at the door, and Jackson thrust 
in his head. 

" If you please, sir, James Penf old wants some 
more of his medicine." 

" Tell him to wait, or ask Mr. Bradbrain to see 
to him." 

" Mr. Bradbrain is gone out, sir, half an hour 
ago. 

"Very well, then, let the man wait." 

Mr. Tregellas continued. His heart was in the 
questions he was going to put. He could scarcely 
help showing his anxiety to the banker. 

" There have been some painful falsehoods, most 
unjust rumours, spread about the country relating 
to my family. I am anxious to discover who 
originated them. I first heard of them through 
your partner, Mr. Bradbrain — ^he reported them 
as told him by a person whose name it is unneces- 
sary for me now to mention." 

Mr. Mordred had been listening with great 
interest, but when the name of Bradbrain was 
uttered, he fell back in his chair, shut his eyes 



OBDURATE. 183 

and groaned deeply. Inhere was a hopelessness 
about the sigh that did not augur well for Mr. 
Bradbrain's reputation. 

Mr. Tregellas continued, 

" I have reason to think that those slanders were 
set in circulation by Mr. Bradbrain, and Mr. Brad- 
brain alone, but for what purpose I can only dimly 
divine." 

" That wilful young man, Mr. Tregellas," said 
Mr. Mordred, with sanctimonious bitterness, ^^ that 
erring man has been a thorn in the flesh to me 
for now seven years — his irregularities, and his un- 
godly violence of character, have alienated friends 
and increased the number of my enemies. He is 
a prodigal, he is a false swearer, he works evil 
continually, he despises those who try to do 
good. I have reason to know in this case that he 
originated these slanders, and then cruelly accused 
another of them — he boasted of it to me only 
yesterday. I will rid myself of him — I will not 
let my house be any longer polluted by his pre- 
sence. I had before resolved, and this has confirmed 
me. He shall go — we will divide our goods and 
part for ever." 

" Report says that Mr. Bradbrain's frequent 
visits to Lieutenant Tolpedden's house are for no 
good purpose. It is even said that he has tried to 
gain the affection of his young and heedless wife." 

" I have sometimes feared it is so," sighed Mr. 
Mordred. " I have warned him, I have entreated 
him, I have exhorted him, in season and out of 



1 84 GREATHEART. 

season, on this very matter. But he is violent and 
headstrong, and not to be led. But we will part — 
I will not be associated with a man who has 
wandered from the right paths^ and whose very 
name has now become a byword and a reproach." 

** I have no right to interfere or to give counsel 
in this matter ; but as a humble, yet*, as I hope, 
faithful minister of the gospel, I think it my duty to 
speak to you as my parishioner, when grievous 
faults exist, and not the less when they affect the 
happiness of my own household." 

" It is your bounden duty, my dear sir — do not 
apologise. I have tried to be candid with you, as 
you have been with me. I have owned my fears 
and my dislike ; I lament even more than you do 
Mr. Bradbrain's conduct with regard to these 
Tolpeddens ; but he shall cease to go there. I shall 
again insist on his discontinuing those more than 
suspicious visits, visits that have become a scandal, 
visits, to say the least, dangerous, and better 
avoided. We are neither of us especially friendly 
with the Tolpeddens, but it is a Christian act to 
avert evil." 

With more such frankand philanthropic speeches, 
denunciatory of Mr. Bradbrain, and tending to 
assert a general high standard of morality, Mr. 
Mordred bowed out his surprised visitor. 

When Jackson answered the bell, with a mis- 
chievous grin on his face, and the glass door had 
closed behind the rector, Mr. Mordred went to the 
mantel-piece and leaned his forehead for a minute 



OBDURATE. 185 

or two meditatively against the marble ledge. 

The more excuses, he thought, to quarrel with 
Bradbrain the better. His violence and tyranny 
had become insupportable ; he claimed too large a 
share of everything ; he kept too keen an eye on 
the accounts; he scandalized him by laughing 
openly at his religious pretensions ; he ruled the 
house, the servants were afraid of him, and, 
above all, he (Mordred) was afraid of him. 

He would at once strike a disabling blow at 
that nightmare of his ; he sat down at his knee- 
desk, drew out the last letter he had received from 
Bradbrain's deserted wife, complaining that she 
should soon be compelled to apply to the parish, 
and posted it, with a few lines of comment, to Mr. 
Tregellas. He always sealed important letters. 
He had just lit a wax taper, the seal was ready, 
the red wax flared in the flame^ when liis eyes 
happened to turn to the glass door, and there he 
saw a face distorted with anger, glaring at him 
through the pane. It was Bradbrain, he had over- 
heard all the conversation with Tregellas. 

Bradbrain burst open the door, slammed it behind 
him so fiercely that a top pane broke, and fell with a 
crash ; his heavy whip was in his hand, he had 
come in from riding. He beat it fiercely on the 
table, and struck the ink in a black pool over the 
floor. 

'* You old canting humbug I — ^you psalm-singing 
mean thief 1 — you old lying hypocrite !" he cried ; 
*' so this is the way you keep faith with your part- 



186 GREATHEAET. 

ners. If I hadn't some more tin to get out of you, 
I'd break this whip over your head, sack the safe 
by main force, and ride off to Bodmin this very 
day." 

** Take care — take care ! There is law in this 
country, if there was none in that from which you 
came," 

" Law? hang law ! I'd take your life for half a 
dollar, if that's all. Do you think I fear being 
scragged, when I could get revenge! Not I. I'll 
be down on your friend Sampy, for tricking us. 
m have my turn at young Tolpedden for an old 
debt or two, and I'll, last of all, have a fling at 
you, old boy, if you don't look out, as sure as 
there's tin in Cornwall." 

"Threatened men live long. I'm accustomed to 
bluster, and know it's value. You have no right, 
sir, to play eavesdropper in my house." 

" In your house 1 Who paid for it ? Now, look 
here, old Eighty-per-cent., if you don't dub up my 
last year's share in the bank profits before next 
Tuesday, I'll split about a thing or two, just to let 
the world see who and what you are, old blood- 
sucker. You Pharisaic beast, do you think 
I'm going to pay for your losses in that fool of a 
mine ? I'm not going to be cheated as you cheated 
Sampy, so don't think it, no, not if I have to 
sell you up, and break the bank, to get my 
due." 

" You have a bad heart, Bradbrain ; you have 
no gratitude. Who helped you when you came 



OBDURATE. 187 

back poor, and without character, a mere ruined 
gambler, from Riot" 

" Gratitude 1" Bradbrain snorted and neighed, 
he never laughed. "I like that! Gratitude? 
Yes, for putting you up to bank dodges and ac- 
commodation bills at Liverpool, and teaching you 
how to do the flats in the Cuban and Yankee 
ways. Do you think your texts and cant have 
any effect on me t I know you — ^you may run me 
down to the fools here, but I'll try and pay you 
out. I can take my own part. I know my way 
about, and, by the great devil himself, I swear I'll 
spoil your little games, if you try to cuckoo me out 
of the business Tve helped to make. On better 
consideration, I'll have some of those arrears now. 
You're d— d afraid of me, I see. Come, stump up. 
I'll have it, just to show you that I'm not scared by 
you, and to prove that you daren't resist me. Now, 
stump up; there's three quarters due. Come, 
look alive." 

Mordred shook, and his livid face darkened. 

" You are right," he said, " Bradbrain ; we have 
both power to injure each other. Let us live to- 
gether in unity. I cannot make up the sum now. 
All my spare cash has gone this morning to Chet- 
wynd. Strong, and Wrackem, for a loan." 

*^For a loan! — are you mad t — a loan without 
asking me f 

"Be patient — ^you shall hear. Providence is 
very good! Now, no bluster — ^you've tried it 
too often. Messrs. Ohetwynd, Strong, and Wrackem 



188 GREATHEABT. 

wanted to raise a thonsand pounds on some securi- 
ties for one of their clients. They applied to me, 
as a man of fortune, and to my extreme pleasure 
and surprise I discovered the person wanting the 
money to be no other than that proud rascal Tol- 
pedden. I advanced the loan, and the new mine, 
Bradbrain, is now in my power. Think of that ; 
depend on it, man, I will so entangle them, through 
the lawyers, and by new loans, that when I choose 
to shake the tree, the fruit shall fall ripe and ready 
into our hands. Congratulate me, Bradbrain, and 
learn to rely more in future upon my activity as a 
partner, even if I do sometimes resist your cease- 
less demands for money. There shall be no ar- 
rears when we have once spare money lying by, 
not likely to be instantly required for business 
purposes." 

Bradbrain's expression changed, his large wild 
eyes softened with cunning smiles. He stared at 
Mordred with affected surprise, and slapped his 
thigh with his hand till the white powder flew out 
of his thick gloves. 

" Oh, you remarkable old rogue," he said, " why, 
you beat Bannagher ! Demonio I you are as 
staunch on the trail of those d — d Tolpeddens as I 
am, but take care they don't baffle you. That old 
muddle-headed lieutenant, you may do him, but 
that sharp whelp of a son, and that old moon-struck 
father, with his chemical tricks, take care they don't 
circumvent you. The Chancery suit won't frighten 
old Tol a second time ; a burnt child dreads the 



OBDURATE. 189 

fire — he'll run it this time. If the mine pays, he 
has you, pays off your mortgage, and laughs in 
your face." 

"I'll drive him from the country. I'll crush 
him in Chancery. I'll torment him by foreclosing 
the mortgage at the very nick of time, when debts 
are accumulating, and before the mine has begun to 

pay-" 

" You're an amiable old Christian, you are I" 
said Bradbrain, admiringly, offering Mordred 
his hand; "and, by Jove, I respect you for it. 
You're a thoroughgoer — ^you can't hate the lot 
worse than I do. They've come twice in my way, 
and made cannons off me, and, by the Lord, I'll 
have my innings at them now. You worry them 
for tin, I for my own reasons. We shall go to- 
gether in harness well this time. Hallo! there's the 
gong for luncheon, come and have some sherry. 
Hew Agag in pieces, it's the Lord's will — that's 
about the size of it, eh t Ha I ha I haw I haw ! 
Well, you are a fine old stepper !" 

As Bradbrain strided, laughing boisterously, into 
the luncheon-room, he did not see the white com- 
pressed lips, and the snakish cold eyes with which 
the older man was intently regarding him. 



190 GREATHEABT. 



CHAPTER XV. 

ANOTHER BARK CLOUD. 

JN the morning after his too successful ambus* 
cade, Arthur resolved on his line of conduct. An 
hour's thought convinced him that he should not 
tell the lieutenant or his father of the terrible dis- 
covery till his aunt should show some wish to re- 
new the dangerous acquaintance. If she at once 
crushed the fatal passion, and resolved never to see 
Bradbrain again, the old love might be renewed, 
the secret kept, and all again go well. He felt 
convinced that she was not yet guilty of anything 
more than imprudence. Her heart was not yet 
fully alienated. A short interval, she would see the 
folly and her error, and forget the fascination of 
the would-be seducer. Her secret sorrow would 
be the best punishment for her past impru- 
dence. 

He wrote a hasty note to this effect, plain, stem, 
but not reproachful, and gave it to Liddy to hand 
to Mrs. Tolpedden, desiring her to stay with his 
aunt all day, as she complained, so Susan had told 
him, of feeling unwell with a nervous head- 
ache. 

Immediately after breakfast a fly came from 
Boscastle to take Arthur and his father to Bodmin, 
where the lieutenant was to arrive by a mid-day 
train. King Pippin and Kate went with them, 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 191 

Ned and Bobby being left with Mrs. Tolpedden, 
who was not yet visible. 

On the way Arthur was so silent that his father 
bantered him about it, as he began to discuss 
the lieutenant's loss, and the utter hopelessness of 
trying to recover the notes. 

They had just got down from the fly, and had 
entered the waiting-room, as it still wanted ten 
minutes to the time when the train was due, when 
Mr, Tregellas came towards them with his daughter 
leaning on his arm. 

He bowed to Mr. Tolpedden ; he did not offer 
his hand, but, leaving Lucy to chat with Arthulr 
(her cheek flushed slightly at seeing him), re- 
quested a moment's conversation with Mr, Tol- 
pedden, who shook hands with Lucy, while the 
children ran to see first the station-master working 
the telegraph, then the railway porter alter the 
signal, 

" Mr. Tolpedden," said the rector, when they got 
upon the platform, and in a retired part, " I have 
to sincerely apologise to you for the coldness that 
has sprung up between us, and for the estrange- 
ment arisen between our two families." 

Mr. Tregellas said this with such honest frank- 
ness, and with such evident confidence in the man 
to whom he spoke, that no generous person could 
have resisted such an overture. Mr. Tolpedden, 
proud and high tempered as he was, was not long 
in accepting a hand so offered. He took it and 
shook it warmly. 



192 GREATHEABT. 

** It was 'no fault of mine, Tregellas," he said, 
"that led to the estrangement. I thought we 
should have been friends for ever, so far as I went. 
It was unjust, I know, but in the first bitterness of 
my late misfortunes I felt almost Inclined to regard 
you as one of those summer friends who leave us 
like swallows when the frosts come." 

Mr. Tolpedden said this with no sentimental 
regret, but with a frank avowal, that seemed 
to leave no subject for future soreness un- 
touched. 

^^I am not a fickle fellow, Tolpedden, but 
I confess I was deeply hurt at some slanders about 
my family which were reported to me as having 
been disseminated by your son Arthur. Those 
slanders I have at last traced to their author, and 
I now apologise for attributing them to him." 

" Arthur," said Mr. Tolpedden, with a shrewd 
glance at his son and Lucy, who were pacing up 
and down entirely absorbed in their own conversa- 
tion, " does not just now look much like a person 
likely to slander any one belonging to you, but I 
have no doubt your suspicions of him seemed 
plausible to you at the time. May I ask the name 
of the retailer of these slanders?" 

Tregellas hesitated. 

" I will not press you," 

"I have no wish to conceal the man's name. It 
was Mr. Bradbrain." 

The soldier's spirit flashed up in Tolpedden's 
eyes. 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 193 

"I hate that man," he said between his teeth; 
"bad — bad. Twenty years ago, I would have called 
liim out; now I shall only shut my door at him, as 
a convicted slanderer. Tregellas, we are firm friends 
again. The broken bone grows stronger than be- 
fore. But here is your train and ours. Good- 
bye." 

The two trains hove in sight simultaneously, 
and, looming out from the horizon with noise and 
smoke, drew up together side by side. Lucy and 
Arthur parted, and Tregellas shook hands with the 
children, who shouted vociferously, as the lieu- 
tenant thrust his old head, and his well-known 
stick out of the window of fi second-class carriage, 
and cried, "Bring her t6; let go the anchor 
there !" 

The door opened, and out he came, with a 
lobster in one handkerchief, some prawns in 
another, and a small carpet bag slung over his 
back. He was in boisterous spirits, for the busi- 
ness had gone well. He was delighted to get back, 
and talk his robbery over with Arthur. 

The driver of the fly, young Beswetherick, drove 
gallantly round dangerous corners, and dow^n steep 
streets. 

The captain was in great talk. A superstitious 
Scotchman might have thought him "fay," for 
high spirits used to be thought ominous; of evil. 

" Trim the boat, Kate," he cried ; " you sit by me, 
and let Johnny go by Arthur — trim the boat, sir. 
But where tbe goodness is Polly? — where's mother, 

VOL. IIL 



194 GREATHEART. 

Katet She said she should come. Those were 
the sailing orders, weren't they, Kitty ?" 

" Yes, father, but mother had one of her bad 
headaches, and wasn't up when we left." 

*'And so all went well at Truro?" said Mr. 
Henry Tolpedden. 

"Like a house on fire. Travers said he had 
never seen such specimens of ore, not even from 
the Devon Consols. Offered to send the fresh 
kibbles and whims, and machinery for shares, or a 
bill at six months. 'But avast there,' said I; * we'll 
pay when we sell the first ton of ore.' Short credit, 
long friends, eh, Harry ? Why, Arthur, you are 
as glum — what sail's in sight now ? Why, what 
cheer, messmate, who's been and enlisted you in 
the Blue Devils? Any more news of that in- 
fernal banker, Harry ?" 

" He has pushed the Chancery suit on one step 
further, one screw closer, on us. We must meet 
him in court, I fear." 

'^ Fear!— why fear?— d d shark! We'll 

fight him, if I have to spend my last guinea. 
Well, Johnny, and how does the schooner get on 
—got her rigging up ?" 

" Oh ! I'm getting on, father. Cousin Arthur 
helped me with the shrouds and the catheads. We 
tried her yesterday in a wash-tub ; she sails so 
beautifully. We are going to call her the ' Flying 
Fish,' like Mr. Hookem's yacht, ain't we, Katy ?" 

Kate assented with enthusiasm. 

" I'm longing to turn captain at the mine, uncle," 



ANOTHEB DARK CLOUD. 195 

said Arthur, " and be of some use. Father wants 
me to go off to Oxford next term, but I won't 
think of it. I'll stay and see this rascal crushed, 
and the family re-established." 

" Which his name was Greatheart," cried the 
lieutenant, laughing, and clapping his nephew on 
the back. " The true grit, as he always was." 

" So he is Greatheart !" cried the children clap- 
ping their hands. 

" Mr. Greatheart, Bunyan calls him," said the 
father proudly. 

" By-the-bye, didn't I see you just now talking 
to those stuck-up Tregellases 1" said the lieutenant. 
" I thought they were too high and mighty to have 
anything to say to us since the bank broke. Lar- 
board, there I" This to the driver, who was mak- 
ing too close a shave to a sand-cart that was pass- 
ing. 

Arthur sprang forward in defence of the Tre- 
gellases. 

" They're not stuck-up, uncle," he said ; " there 
was a misunderstanding. They'd been told I 
had been slandering the family. Wouldn't that 
rile you ?" 

" Rile me I Why, I'd beat the dog to a mum- 
my 1 Starboard, there,* driver; don't you hear 
me f — now let her go. Well, I must say, I do like 
that girl of theirs. I never see her, but she re- 
minds me of a primrose with the dew on it, as the 
song says." 

'' Well done, Nelson ! why, you'll make Arthur 

02 



196 GREATHEART. 

jealous ; he's rather cruising in that direction, we 
tell him." 

" Ha ! she'll never equal Polly, though," said 
the lieutenant. " You should have seen her the 
day I led her to church ! Oh ! she was a pretty 
craft 1" 

Now the moorlands began to spread before them 
with their great scorched ranges of rushy grass 
and wasted churchyards of granite blocks ; and in 
the distance Brown Willy and his fellows rose in 
huge dark billows, like the petrified waves of some 
bygone deluge. 

The lieutenant over the luncheon, which Ar- 
thur had taken care to stow in the coach, and after 
a glass of excellent sherry, grew chirpier and 
pleasanter than ever. Even his loss seemed 
a mere trifle now, for it had melted into the golden 
haze that surrounded the Wheal Arthur in his 
imagination. 

" Hang the money !" he said. " Who could have 
thought that fellow was going to nail it, tho'. in 
that short time, and I having it close buttoned up 
in a breast-pocket, too. No one could be sharp 
enough for fellows like that, that's the fact. And 
after all, it was my own loss, and I don't care a 
pinch of snuff for it, if the mine turns out well. 
What, do we care, Arthur! we're all capitalists 

now, and can snap our fingers at the d ^ lawyers. 

Jack, don't wipe your fingers on my coat, Ar- 
thur, take some sherry* Harry, you let me do 
all the talking." 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 197 

" It was an extraordinary discovery," said Arthur. 

" A providential one," said his father ; " and that 
fellow Sampy, after all, has turned out sound — tired 
of cheating, I suppose, and glad to earn his bread in 
a safe way. All for Arthur's sake, as he says, for 
I always laughed at his divining tricks. Walker, 
too, does admirable as a grass captain." 

" Do you go down to the under-sea workings, 
uncle? " said Arthur to the lieutenant. 

The lieutenant's yellowish. East Indian eyes 
winked over the brim of his glass of sherry, and he 
shook himself together. 

"I believe you," he said; "why, I'm head 
bottle-washer there, ain't I, Harry t — and I don't 
let that rascal Sampy waste the men's time with 
too much psalm-singing ; egad, I see the ore broken 
up, I look to the engine, I work the surveyings, and 
I write the reports." 

"You should only see him, Arthur, start at 
7.15 A.M., hat hard as aboard, and short smock, all 
red and yellow — why, it was as much as I could 
do the first week to prevent him working with gad 
and pick." 

"Do let me go down the ladder, papal" said Jack. 

" And me too ?" supplicated Kate, seizing both 
her father's hands piteously. 

" My gracious ! — what next ? — ^you dare to go 
near the shafts 1 — why, if anything happened to 
you, don't you know it would kill your mother 
stone dead I Let me never hear a word more 
about it." 



198 GREATHEART. 

*'0h! you mustn't go down mines, Katy/* 
said Arthur, laughing ; " it's no work for young 
ladies." 

" But I can climb ladders," said the indomitable 
Jack. 

*^ Jack, be quiet — no mutiny, d'ye hear !" said 
the lieutenant, gravely, " or I'll wop you now, so I 
tell you !" 

The lieutenant's choler was soon roused, and 
equally soon abated. 

" Have you learned that stave of the * Shipwreck' 
yet, Kitty?" 

" Yes, father," said Kitty, demurely smoothing 
down the fingers of her gloves ; " I think so." 

" Say it off, then, there's a dear." 

Kitty put her hands behind her, as if no memory 
could be exercised without that precaution, and 
began, 

" While o'er the ship tiie gallant boatswain flies, 
Like a hoarse mastiff through the storm he cries/^ 

But the lieutenant's enthusiasm was most roused 
to beating time and other demonstrations of delight, 
as the reciter reached a more technical part — 

'"'• Now some to strike top-gaUant yards attend, 
Some travellers up the weather backstay send ; 
At each mast-head the top ropes others bend. 
The youngest sailors from the yards above 
Their parrels, lifts, and braces soon remove, 
Then tight an end to the travellers tied. 
Charged with their sails, they down the backstays slide." 

" There's poetry, Arthur, if you like," said the 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 199 

gallant enthusiast ; " better than all your Timp- 
son*s" (Tennyson, the lieutenant evidently meant). 

"Too much for me — it is more than I can 
follow, some of it," said Arthur ; " but the worthy 
poet at least deserves some credit for crowding in 
so much instruction, doesn't he, father ?" 

" He does indeed — he has triumphed over diffi- 
culties almost as much as Hookem's favourite, the 
author of the * Babyloniad,' who really revels in 
almost impossible subjects." 

The rest of the journey is soon described. 
Fierce sun, thicker dust, more moorland, a stone 
cross defaced and lonely, more hills, a white 
engine-house or two, away across wild fields ; then 
a great wall of wavering azure, and a cluster of 
houses at its base — that was the sea, the houses 
were Boscastle. The children fell asleep, each in 
a comer of the open fly. 

Arthur sat and thought over the meeting of the 
lieutenant and his wife, and rather dreaded being 
present. The roads and fields grew more familiar. 

The road wound on, nearer, nearer — over the 
common, then down the lane, past the mill-farm, 
down by the plantations and the orchards. 

"I make her out now, and without a glass," 
said the delighted lieutenant, rousing the children, 
as the little cottage came in sight through the fir- 
trees; "steady there with the helm — larboard, 
you lubber! — ^larboard, it is. Here we are — 
Harry, get the door open." 

It was about seven o'clock, and rapidly getting 



200 GREATHEART. 

dusk. A rough, rainy wind had sprung up, and 
the trees were tossing in a troubled way. A golden 
thread of moon was rising above the wood. There 
was no light in any window. 

" Polly's gone out for a turn." 

" Yes, she's gone in the village to see some poor 
people," cried Jack and Kate. 

The carriage drew up, but no one appeared. 
The lieutenant put his hand to his mouth and 
shouted, 

" What cheer there !— hallo ! there, Polly I" 

While the lieutenant still shouted, keeping 
one hand over the garden gate, Arthur and his 
father paid for the fly. 

" Stay and have some ale, my man," said Mr. 
Tolpedden to the driver, as the children ran up to 
the door. 

The lieutenant knocked at the door a good ring- 
ing, hearty knock, a loud, vigorous, hurrying 
knock. The door instantly opened, slowly and 
timidly, and Liddy appeared, crying, her apron to 
her eyes, her false hair turned round, so that the 
parting was over the left eye, her whole face 
wearing an expression of the most agonizing 
anxiety* At the same moment the voices of Teddy 
and Bobby could be heard upstairs, crying as some- 
body struck at a closed door. 

" Why, Liddy," cried the lieutenant, seizing heir 
by the arm, " woman, what's this ? — quick, tell me, 
where's your missus? WTiat are those children 
crying for? What is it all about?" 






ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 201 

"Why, what on earth is it, Liddyf" cried 
Arthur and Mr. Tolpedden, in a breath, while 
Jack and Katy clung to her apron, half -frightened 
at their father's alarmed voice. 

Liddy burst into tears. 

" I went out at four with the children, sir, as 
missus wished. When I came back, half an hour 
ago, I found her room door locked, and she will 
not answer. I picked up one of her gloves by the 
garden-gate. Oh ! what shall I do ? — what shall 
I do? Dear Mr. Arthur, do try and push the 
door open." 

Here Liddy showed strong tendencies to hys- 
terics. 

A ghastly expression of horror and alarm passed 
over the lieutenant's face, a dark yawning pit 
seemed to have opened before his very feet. 
Arthur saw in a moment what must have happened, 
and flew up-stairs, three steps at a time, followed 
by his father and the lieutenant. 

There was Neddy lying outside the door, crying, 
and Bobby thumping with her tiny fists at the wall. 
No one answered. Arthur knelt down and listened 
at the key-hole — there was no breathing. The 
lieutenant shook the door till the very wall trembled. 
The children ran to him crying about " mamma." 

''She is dead! — Polly is dead, or she would 
answer!" he shrieked, and dashed at the panel 
twice; the second time the lock tore from the 
wall, and the door fell inwards. In a moment the 
lieutenant, his brother, and Arthur were in the 



202 GREATHEABT. 

room ; but there was no one there. A shawl lay 
on the bed, a desk stood open on the drawers. 
The window-blind was down, Arthur pushed it 
on one side, and with a match from his pocket 
lit one of the toilette candles. The other children 
had followed ; Kate ran to the mantel-piece, and 
took a little pink note from a pin-cushion, on which 
it had been pinned. The note contained only these 
few words : 

" Do not tnr to follow me. It will be useless. 
I am the most unhappy of women. Nel, I love 
you as I ever did. Kiss the children for me. 
Do not jud^ hardly of me. I have been deceived. 
My agony, even while I write this, is my greatest 
punishment. I dare not see you." 

It took but an instant — Kate ran with the note 
to her father ; he read it, then, with a deep groan, 
he fell heavily face downwards on the floor. 



Two hours had passed — the lieutenant had 
slowly recovered from his fainting-fit, had even 
been able, with sorrowful face and bleeding heart, 
to hear Arthur's narrative of the detected in- 
trigue. 

" Oh ! Arthur, Arthur !" he said, his face rest- 
ing against the sofa, ^^ you should not have kept 
this from me for a moment. Better have killed 
me at once, than let me fall suddenly down this well 
shaft of misery. If God does not help me, in His 
great mercy, my brain will surely burst." (Here he 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 203 

leaped up, and seized a knife from the table). 
" Where is he ? — ^v^^here is this wretch, this cruel 
monster, who could take niy own dear little wife 
from me, and leave me here despised, crushed, and 
wretched ? I'll cut the life out of him. Til stab 
him at his own fireside. Cruel !— M^ruel ! She — " 

A reaction came ; dropping his knife, the poor 
broken-hearted man sank down again on a chair, 
and sobbed, bitterly. 

His brother and Arthur tried to comfort him. 
Arthur threw his arm round him, while the chil- 
dren and Liddy sat crying together. 

" She must be at the man's house," said Mr. 
Henry Tolpedden. " It is a fit of madness. We 
will go at once and demand her, or take her by 
force. She will repent of her folly. Maybe she 
is not yet guilty. He has persuaded, forced her 
to elope with him. Come, I've kept the fly ; we 
will go straight to St. Petrock's, and know the 
worst. Let us go, Arthur." 

" I am ready, father. Are you strong enough 
to go, uncle ?" said Arthur. " But don't you go ; 
let us fight it out with this scoundrel." 

" Yes, I must go," said the lieutenant. " I will 
go and know the worst. "Ohl Polly! Polly 1 
how could you run a knife into my heart, and not 
kill me at once? And the dear children — Kate, 
come and kiss me. Oh ! your poor motherl Yes, I 
am ready. I will know the worst, though it will kill 
me to see her. She shall not return. I will 
strike her to the earth. Oh! Polly! Polly! I 



I 



204 GREATHEART. 

never knew I loved you so much till now that you 
have left me." 



It was nine o'clock, the doctor and his part- 
ner were enjoying a hot supper, if Messrs. Brad- 
brain and Mordred could be said to enjoy anything 
when together. 

Bradbrain's temper, naturally fierce and over- 
bearing, had been quite intolerable since the evening 
Arthur had unmasked him. Mordred had met this 
violence by conciliation, and more than usual 
affectation of decrepitude and illness, seen through 
instantly, and loudly ridiculed, as such pretences 
always were, by his rough partner. 

*' Some excellent sly scheme of yours has gone 
awry, Bradbrain," said Mordred, as he helped him- 
self to wine. " I know it has, by the serenity of 
your temper, and your unusual Christian calmness 
of manner." 

" And some schemes of yours, you old canting 
weasel, are fast ripening to mischief," was the ami- 
able answer. "I can tell that by your oiliness 
and your additional texts. D— n it 1 don't keep 
sipping that wine, as if it was medicine. It makes 
me sick to see you- Oh, you are a nice one to 
preach to me 1" 

All this was said before the ghostly butler. 

The hatred between these two ill-assorted men 
had led them long since to renounce all concealment 
of their mutual antipathy. Each was only watch- 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 205 

ing how best to cuckoo and out- stratagem the 
other. The bank and the practice were there be- 
tween them — prizes for the most daring, or the 
most dexterous. 

The moment the butler removed the cloth, and 
left the room, Bradbrain rose from his chair, went 
round to where Mordred sat, and stared insolently 
into his face. 

"Take care of excitement, old boy," he said; 
"you've got far advanced pericarditis already. 
Your complexion shows that, and your eyes don't 
look well at all. Take care, or some fine day 
you'll be made a subject of at the infirmary, and I 
shall sweep the pool. Wouldn't that make you turn 
in your grave, old truepenny ?" 

" And you, let me give you a warning, if you 
take brandy as you've been doing these last two 
days, you'll have delirium tremens for the third 
time — ^your constitution is undermined already." 

" Del. trem. won't touch me with such brandy 
as you keep, old toad-in-the-hole ; so don't you be 
afraid. I can take care of myself. You must 
find some better way of saving your brandy than 
that — that notion, won't wash at all." 

"You're a ruflian, and not fit for a civilized 
country !" said Mordred, roused at last to unusual 
anger. " You are one of those bad ^" 

An uproar in the hall, a scuiBe, and a sound of 
angry voices, interrupted the agreeable conversa- 
tion. Mordred was ringing the bell for Stonecott, 
to ask what was the matter, when the door flew 



206 GREATHEART. 

open, and Stonecott backed in, followed by three 
men, who were insisting on being admitted, con- 
trary to the servant's wish. 

" Master's engaged," said Stonecott. " I tell 
you, gentlemen, we don't see people on business 
after eight o'clock." 

A rude hand seized his collar, and threw him 
back into the hall. 

'^I am come," said the lieutenant, striding 
ominously towards Bradbrain, "to demand my 
wife. Where is my wife ? — where has this villain 
taken her to ? Is she here ? I will see her !" 

He would have rushed on Bradbrain with his 
clubbed stick, but his brother and Arthur held 
him fast between them. 

" We have come to demand the woman," said 
Mr. Henry Tolpedden, " whom Mr. Bradbrain 
has seduced from her home." 

" What does this mean, Bradbrain t" said Mor- 
dred rising from his chair in righteous surprise. 

''How should I know? I haven't seen this 
man's wife. I haven't been out to-day, but with 
you — you know that very well. Let Stonecott 
say if any lady has called here to-day. Good 
Heavens ! why should I be accused ?" 

Bradbrain 98^ all this boldly, and with an 
angry frankness that seemed innocence itself. 

" Wh^^ should yon be accusedf^ said Arthur, 
fiercely, but still holding the lieutenant back. "How 
dare you ask that? — when I myself detected you 
in a clandestine interview with Mrs. Tolpedden 1" 



ANOTHER DARK CLOUD. 207 

" I am hurt — I am distressed, indeed, at this," 
said Mordred. " Mr. Bradbrain, is this lady con- 
cealed or not under this roof? I insist on know- 
nip. 

" She is not. I have not seen her for some 
time. I swear she is not 1 — have the servants 
up!" 

" Will you swear that she is not concealed here 
or elsewhere by you ? " said Mr. Henry Tolped- 
den. 

" Yes, let the fellow say that," stormed the lieu- 
tenant, trying to break away. 

« I do." 

" Liar ! — hear him — the fellow's lying. Dog — 
beast — let me get at him !" 

'^ Brother — Nelson, be quiet ; this violence does 
no good." 

" You will swear that you do not know where 
she is? — or that her present flight was not en- 
couraged by you ?" 

" I will swear it — I do swear it." 

" This is a solemn oath, and on an important 
occasion," said Mordred. " Will you swear that 
before a magistrate ?" 

" I will. I know nothing of this event." Brad- 
brain here lit a cigar. " Why should I ?" 

" Sir, we shall meet some day," said the lieu- 
tenant, " and I will then tell you what I think of 
you. I suppose, fellow, you're not afraid to meet 
me as one gentleman meets another ?" 

" Anywhere, and at your own time," said Brad- 



208 GREATHEART. 

brain, coolly taking some wine, and eyeing the 
lieutenant as if he was some strange beast. '' But 
duelling is rather dangerous work — ^bleed me in an 
action ; it is a better revenge. I tell you again, I 
know nothing about your wife, except that she is a 
doosed pretty woman. She must have run away 
with some other friend of yours. It's not my 
fault this time." 

" We must leave," said Henry Tolpedden ; " we 
are bound to believe the fellow's story. Good 
night, gentlemen, we shall go further in this 
matter." 

The lieutenant was half led, half pressed into 
the fly. 

He fell back in the corner, and, the excitement 
over, burst into an agony of tears. 

" Be a man," said his brother, as Arthur tried 
to compose him with the tenderness of a woman : 
" be a man again. Nelson, shake all love for 
this woman from your heart — tread it under foot 
like blighted fruit, bury it in the sea, forget her, 
she is unworthy of your kind and good heart. If 
this man has won her love, let him keep it — it is only 
fit for such a God-forsaken vagabond as that ; let 
her go and perish on a dunghill, or in the streets, 
as she deserves." 

"Do not judge her without some thought of 
mercy, father," said Arthur ; " remember our. 
Savioiir, and what he wrote upon the sand. Think 
how she must suffer before she can ever repent this 
Sin. 



THP COUNTING-HOUSE. 209 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 

OUTSIDE a long, rough-built shanty, used as a 
counting-house by the lieutenant when on 
duty at the now thriving Wheal Arthur, one July 
morning, a month after the mysterious flight of the 
unhappy Mrs. Tolpedden, sat a gang of miners 
smoking their pipes, and waiting for Captain Sampy 
and the twelve o'clock " chor." 

The men, dressed in their short miners' coats, 
were smoking just below an open window, at 
which a white blind flew and fluttered to keep out 
the fierce heat of the sun, and lying or sitting on 
the ground with their backs to the hut. The 
centre of the group was Tom Tremaine, a little wiry 
man, about forty, whose head and left eye were 
bound round with a blue handkerchief. 

All at once the blind was pushed back, and 
Walker, now a " grass captain," second in command 
to Sampy only, thrust out his head amolig the 
tribute men, who were there waiting for the bi- 
monthly auction, to be held at ^wo o'clock. A 
dozen rough heads turned, and twice as many wild 
dark eyes stared upwards, to see what the grass 
captain wanted. 

" Good mornin', cappun." 

"Good mornin', my dears. What I want is, 

VOL. III. P 



210 GREATHEART. 

for Tom Tremaine to tell us the story of how he 
lost his eye at the Wheal BuUer — he promised to 
tell me last survey, and never did. I can't get on 
with the accounts till Mr. Sandoe comes up to grass 
— I can hear it here." 

" Come out and take a seat, cappun," said Tity, 
the giant who long ago had assaulted Walker at the 
inn. 

" No, thankee, it's handier here — now then,Tom." 
" Zackly so, cappun ; but my story ain't much, 
but what it is, here you have it. Billum, that's the 
son of Dick Penrose, who faled owur clift a 
smuggling years ago, was with me driving the odit 
level at hafe tribute — well, we'd got a side 
hole bored all ready for the powder, and I was 
putting down the swabstick out of my hand. ' Get 
a snofF," said I to Billum, ^ while I chaarge.' I'd 
about four fingers deep of powder in the hole, and 
had begun a-ramning down the tampin, when 
ould Billum foaches up agen me with the candle 
in his hand, and in a moment, like a flash of 
lightning, t'was all bang and darkness, and away 
I went, dashed in rags. I was knacked back into 
th^ level, and when I begunned to wake like, I 
felt all whizzy and sleepy like, but I weren't killed 
at all. The first thing I tried to do was to get 
'pon my leages — but my hands were smartin', 
waun of my eyes was knacked out, and I was as 
deaf as a haddick. At last I heard 'em comin' 
down the shaft, and then I heard 'em spaik. 
^ Beest hurt, Tom V said waun of 'em ; * thou'st 



THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 211 

braave and bloody, Tom.' ^ Hurt !' said I, * why, 
I'm knacked in rags, and I'm as blind as a dumble- 
dorry ! But why ever dedn'ee bring a light weth 
'ee?' said I. * So we have,' said they; * why, there's 
three candles burning by thy side now.' * Then 
I'm blind,' said I ; * so let us go to grass, for I'm 
na good here, nor nowhere else.' Billum wasn't 
hurt, only bruised a little. They put me into a 
kibble, and Tom Pierce with me, to hould me 
study, for I couldn't see, and up we went to grass. 
And then they helped me into the sumpman's 
house, sawed up my skull, and doctored my eyes, 
but one was gone. I beared up all the pain, and 
tried to loff a bit, but I cudn't do it. Then, if 
you plaise, they wanted me to ride hum 'pon 
planks, ^ No, no,' said I, ^ I thankee all the same, 
I waen't frighten Grace into fits — (Grace, that 
was my wife,) so I waelked hum, and 'cause I 
couldn't do nothing up, I went to bed ; but how- 
somever, I got better in three months, and here I 
am. 

There was a murmur of sympathy as Tom Tre- 
maine finished his narrative. Everj' one there, 
down to the sumpman's boy, felt that the same 
thing might one day happen to him. 

" Ha! Tom," said Walker, leaning out of window, 
and patting the old miner on the back, " the patent 
fuse has stopped all those kind of things now — ^you 
ought to have been born a little later, messmate. 
Come in, Tity, into the counting-house here, I 

p2 



212 GREATHEART. 

want a word with you about the work in the low 
level." 

In lumbered Big Tity, and sat down clumsily 
on a chair opposite the sub-captain, and ex-coast- 
guard. 

" Where's Captain Sampy, Tity ?" 

"At the engine-house with Mr. Arthur; he's 
going to look at the whims and see about some im- 
provement in the ropes. He'll be here in about ten 
minutes. There's some ladies going down in the 
tram-waggon, and me and Kozzy have been trim- 
ming it up with a bass-mat, all tidy like." 

" That's the lady Mr. Arthur's going to be mar- 
ried to — ^Miss Tregellas ; she is a beauty." 

" How he do take to the mine, Mr. Arthur ; one 
would think he'd been a miner from generation to 
generation, Armen ; and as for the Lieutenant, 
he does his dialling as if he was working a 
ship." 

" How does the lode look, Tity ! " said Walker, 
arranging his sheet of figures half-made out re- 
ports, and tables of wages ; "no fear pf • cross 
course — no ugly heave to throw us all out of gear 
— ehf Not like Wheal Fortune — eh? No danger 
of getting too near the sea, I hope ? I sometimes 
think we's been driving rather too much south. I'm 
sure we ought to sink a shaft and find the other 
end of the lode — the land side of the lode." 

" Yes — and lose all the money we get out of the 
other. No, no, push on, but keep ten feet of good 
rock between vou and the sea. I tell 'ee, next 



THE COUNTING HOUSE. 213 

ticketing day, our ore*ll sell for ten pound a ten, for 
it's all but solid copper — it's a champion lode, and 
we'll run it half way to Wales before we get tired 
of it — run it, I tell 'ee, my dear, till we hear the 
cocks crow in China. Hang sinking other shaft — 
that's the way speckylators is never satisfied — like 
a dog in a snow-storm, running after everything 
and catching nothing. The pitches'll be let thes 
time, low as ever they were — the pebble won't take 
long throwing up." 

Throwing up a pebble is the Cornish mining 
captain's way of showing that the lot is knocked 
down to the lowest bidder, and that the bargain is 
concluded. 

" Sampy now is worth twice what he was," said 
Walker, "isn't he, Tity? He's not the lying 
loafer he once was — he works hard enough now, 
and does his duty, too, and Mr. Tolpedden trusts 
him, and so does Mr. Nelson, though the lieutenant 
doesn't like his canting ways. We shall swim in 
money in a year or so. Wheal Arthur is no re- 
lation to Wheal Fortune— is it, Tity?" 

" Not a bit on't — I never thought much of the 
Wheal Fortune after I once put a gad into it — 
too deep below the elvan — nothing but tailings, 
not worth the blasting powder — those were my 
words second day. I say. Walker — captain — how 
does the lieutenant bear up about his wife ? No 
news of her?" 

"No news. No, she's gone, but she's not 
worth thinking about. The lieutenant tries to 



214 GBEATHEABT. 

forget it, but he breaks down sometimes. It was 
a great blow to him, it was; he's never been quite the 
same man since." 

"ThathehasnV 

'* Ilere comes Captain Sampy," said Tity, look- 
ing but at the window, " I'll be oiBf — ^he's singing 
a hymn ; he always does that when the lode 
promises well." 

A moment after Sampy entered — no longer in 
his snuflFy coat, dirty wisp of white handker- 
chief, and crape-swaddled hat, but in good, hearty 
miner's linen jacket and stiff felt hat, stained with 
orange oxide and gossan, and smeared with wet red 
clay. 

^' Good momin' to 'ee, my dears," he said, as he 
took off his hat, and went up to con the great 
framed and coloured ground plan of the mine that 
hung flapping against the counting-house wall, " we 
must have a winze," he said half to himself, "in that 
fifth gallery. As I was going to the dressing 
floors this morning, who do you think I met, Mr. 
Walker ?" 

" Can't guess, Captain." 

" Whv, that Mr. Bradbrain. And what he said to 
me was this, and he looked like a mad dog when he 
said it, for when he saw me I was praising the last 
sample: — *Sampy,' says he, *you take care of your- 
self, my man — mining's risky work.' 'Tweren't 
nice the way he said them words, but he's always 
in the seat of the scornful ; they as walks in the 
narrow path are not to his mind, my dears, and 



THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 215 

that I tell 'ee — ^'tes so — no, he'll never get in that 
path, do what he will — never." 

Here Sampy got down a Bible from the shelf 
where it stood, half hidden by accounts, cash 
books, and notes for reports, and began to solace 
himself by some verses from Job, which he read 
with nasal unction. 

" Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a 
place for the gold where they find it. 

" Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is 
molten out of the stone. 

" As for the earth, out of it cometh bread, and 
under it is turned up, as it were, fire. 

" The stones of it are the place of sapphires, and 
it hath dust of gold." 

Then, as if fired by this pious exercise, the 
ranting preacher broke out into full force, and 
with a professional enthusiasm, almost amounting to 
insanity, he threw up the window to its full height, 
and shouting, "Number 74, *New Sabbath,*" 
loudly intoned the first verse of a ranting hymn. 

As soon as he had repeated the words, the men 
below, most of them, at least, leaped and scrambled 
upon their feet, and singing after him, roared out 
to inappropriate music. 

" In evil long I took delight, 

Unawed by shame or fear, 
Till a new object met my sight, 

And stopped my wild career. 
Oh the Lamb, the bleeding Lamb, 

The Lamb upon Calvary, 



216 GREATHEART. 

The Lamb that was slain, that liyeth again. 
To intercede for me." 

Sampy had jast began to read the second verse, 
^^ My conscience felt and owned my gnilt,*^ 

when a rough voice from outside shouted, 

"Belay, belay there, Sampy. There's time 
enough for that ; if you want to do that, go up 
on the cliff. Mr. Arthur and I have got work to 
do here." 

It was the lieutenant and Arthur, come to talk 
over some business till Mr. Tolpedden arrived with 
Mr. Tregellas and the ladies. 

The lieutenant took Walker's chair, and swept 
back the loose tracing-paper and sheets of figures. 

" I tell you, Arthur," he said, " we must have 
our 170 fathom rope all twenty yams to the strand. 
That sort of rope has the best hemp. There 
should be 1,305 threads in every 14-inch capstan 
rope." 

" We must make a new ground-plan to send to 
the brokers," said Arthur, who had already set to 
work with pencil and compasses. " I propose to 
make it five fathoms to an inch*" 

" Good !" said the lieutenant, " and check it by 
trigonometry. On Monday, too, we must try the real 
bearing of the new shaft in the sixty fathom level. 
I shall apply the instrument at some point in the 
level away from the pumps. You'll carry the light 
down the shaft as far as it can be seen. Then, 
after the graduated circle has been screwed fast, 



THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 217 

I shall apply the rack, and turn the sight till I cut 
the candle in the bottom of the shaft. We must 
mind and keep ten good feet of rock between us 
and the sea." , 

" I want you, uncle," said Arthur, "to do* this 
sum with me, to see if I have worked it right." 

" Hand it over." 

"Here it is : — ^ From the depth of thirty-six 
fathoms, four feet — '* " 

" Four feet ; yes." 

The lieutenant took it down. 

" In an engine shaft, A B, a cross cut was 
driven, which pierced a lode C, fourteen fathoms 
two feet from B." 

" From B ; all right." 

" The lode was found to make an angle of thirty 
degrees, inclining towards the shaft." 

" Shaft— yes." 

"Required the depth at which the shaft will 
intersect the lode, and the length of the lode from 
C to the point of intersection D." 

" All right. I'll work it out, Arthur." 

The lieutenant and Arthur went heads down at 
the sum. Arthur was the first to finish. He looked 
up at the lieutenant ; at that moment a great hot 
tear splashed on the last figure his uncle had written. 

Arthur said nothing. 

The lieutenant rose, and turned as if to con the 
great working plan on the wall ; but his shoulders 
shook, and he was silent. 

Arthur knew too well the bitter fit of grief that had 



218 GBEATHEART. 

come upon hinu He went on with his wini^y and 
presentiv the brave old fellow went on with his, 
but not a word was spoken. 

All at onoe thoe came the sound of well-known 
voices, and a little merry langh. Arthur sprang to 
the door. It was his father, Lncy, and Mr.Tregellas. 

** VLere, we are, lientenant, conic to tionble yon 
busy men,** said Mr. Tregellas. ** Lucy's mad to 
go down the workings." 

" Of course I am, papa," said Lucy, who looked 
more beautiful than ever. She was now conadered 
as affianced to Arthur, and called him by his 
Christian name. ^ Arthur, do show me that plan 
of the mine." 

Arthur explained to her how, from the perpen- 
dicular shaft, ran at right angles horizontal galle- 
ries, joined by small shafts or winzes, both for 
ventilation, and to raise the ore. Up the main shaft 
went a huge chain of pumps to drain the mine. 

'^ And what are all those men waiting for out- 
side, Arthur T* 

'^Tribute men, Lily dear, waiting for the auction. 
They take their contracts to-day. Up this shaft 
come the buckets that bring the metal, you see. 
The men in the levels will race to leap into them as 
they pass. It is dangerous, but it saves them an 
hour's climbing." 

^ What brave fellows T 

^ What reckless rascals !" said the lieutenant. 

^^It must be a wonderful scene down in the 
mine, Mr. Tolpedden,** said Lucy. 



THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 219 

"Dirty men with wheelbarrows," returned the 
unromantic old sailor ; " puddles, gunpowder, 
smoke, dripping candles, and muggy air. The men 
die yoimg." 

"Come, Lucy, you must change your dress," 
said Mr. Tregellas, "and put on a flannel bed- 
gown, and a hood, wooden shoes, &c." 

" Oh ! I needn't make a fright of myself like 
that, need I, Arthur I" replied Lucy, looking rue- 
fully at her bright gown, of the most delicate grey, 
and her forget-me-not-coloured bonnet-ribbons, 
which she rearranged with the lightest touch in the 
world. 

" You must be quick, Lucy," said her father. 
" Mr. Tolpedden tells me the men are waiting." 

"No, no, Lily," laughed Arthur, coaxingly, 
" they're only making fun of you. I've had the 
tram waggon fitted up for our distinguised 
visitors. I'll give you a mackintosh to put over 
your head instead of your bonnet, and another to 
wrap round you ; Mr. Tregellas must wear a 
miner's hat. You shall go down the Roslyn level, 
but you mustn't go up the galleries — ^they're so 
wet and dirty." 

In less than twenty minutes the party had col- 
lected on a platform of rock, hewn out of the sur- 
face of the cliff below the engine-house, a hundred 
feet above a little bay, where the waves were 
stained red with the refuse of the mine, and the 
washings of the tin ore — for the Wheal Arthur had 
now begun to yield that shy metal as well as copper. 



220 GREATHEART. 

Beyond the great blue plain of ocean glittered and 
trembled. It was near noon, the sun shone hot and 
fierce upon the amphitheatre of reddish slaty rocks 
above and below, and on the bridges, ladders, and 
plank platforms perched on various ledges of the 
cliff. 

There was the sound of a signal bell, and down 
out of some shed, like the self-moving car of Indra 
in the cumbrous Hindoo mythology, came a tram- 
waggon, fitted to sloping rails, that disappeared in 
tlie darkness of an opposite cavern. 

" Oh I how very dreadful 1" said Lucy. " I 
can't really go in that, papa." 

" I and Mr. Tolpedden go first, then you and Mr. 
Tregellas," said the lieutenant. " I have enough 
of it other days." 

The tram-waggon moved nearer, and Sampy 
from above shouted some directions to the engine 
man. In Arthur leaped, with his father, and lit 
their candles; ducking their heads down, and 
laughing, as the iron waggon moved off with them 
down into the black cavern. The roof, supported 
by stout crossbeams, grew darker and darker, till 
the light quite disappeared. There was Lucy in 
the sunshine far above, watching them as Beatrice 
watched Dante from Paradise. 

When the car returned, Sampy lit two candles, 
and thrust them into lumps of fresh clay, then 
he handed them to Lucy and her father ; down 
again glided the tram-waggon, with a noise of 
chains, and they left the hot sunlight, and the blue 



THE COUNTING-HOUSE. 221 

sea and sky, and the hot cliffs and the darkness 
received them, and clammy stone galleries, and 
dripping passages, echoing with the blows of gad 
and pickaxe, and noisy with the clang of pump- 
rods, and the jar of loaded buckets. 

Down, down it went — it seemed miles that it 
went rolling on its check chain down the grinding 
rails. The air grew denser and hotter, now and 
then, but only by glimpses, the bulk beamsof the roof, 
black and moist, showed through the partial light 
of the flaring candles. 

At last a bell sounded, and the waggon stopped 
with a gentle shock. A gang of swarthy men, 
with candles stuck in the front of their hats, came 
clustering round them like the demons in an opera. 
Then appeared the well-known faces of Arthur and 
his father. 

" Welcome, Miss Tregellas, to the Wheal Ar- 
thur," said Mr. Tolpedden ; '* such beauty has never 
before consecrated this temple of mammon." 

" Well, Lucy, and how do you like our under- 
ground life r said Arthur. 

" Oh I not at all, Arthur. It is dreadful — it is 
being buried alive, and knowing that you are buried. 
Suppose it all blew up, or the pumps stopped, and 
you were drawned. Oh ! papa, and Mr. Tolped- 
den, do make Arthur promise never to come down 
here again 1" 

" Why, you little coward, Lil}^, you used to be 
ipuch more plucky," said her feather. 

/* Qh I but it is so horrid. I can hardly breathe," 



222 GBSATHEABT. 

said the fair lo^cian. " I wish Milly was here. 
Do you know, Arthur, she wrote at the last minute 
to say that she couldn't come. She was so sorry — 
dear Milly !" 

" By-the-by, Tregellas," said Mr. Tolpedden, as 
Arthur explained the mine to Lucy, " I am going 
to have a sort of rehearsal on Thursday, before a 
few friends, of my alchemic experiments. I shall 
have to show them at Truro, and I want you and 
Lucy to come." 

" Hookem is coming round next week, Mr. Tre- 
gellas, in his yacht, from Plymouth," said Arthur. 
"I heard from Dodgeson yesterday; he, Fisher, 
and Hewer are to be with him. They go from 
here along the French coast to Barcelona. Dodge- 
son, who's fond of punning, says he's rather riuts 
on Barcelona." 



CHAPTER XVn. 

THE REHEARSAL. 

LIDDY, Fanny, and Lizzy, now all reinstated, 
were in a state of enormous bustle, curiosity, 
and excitement, for the guests had begun to arrive 
for the rehearsal of Mr. Tolpedden's chemical ex- 
periments. 

Lord Rostrevor,the Tregellases,the Trevenas,the 
Penroses,the Wavertons,and some half a dozen other 
families, were there. King Pippin, Kate, and Ted, 



-■ -. ,.*— ^>*. -> — ^' 



THE REHEARSAL. 223 

and even poor little, disconsolate, forsaken Bobby, 
were there, dressed up by good old Liddy. Three 
or four rows of chairs were already filled by the 
curious, the learned, the young, the fashionable, 
and the idle. The Tregellases' children frater- 
nized with the Tolpeddens', and were all in a 
simmer of intense expectation and wonderment. 

Mr. Tolpedden had long been known all over 
the north of Comwall for a celebrated amateur 
chemist, and the fame of his mining success had 
given an artificial lustre to his scientific discoveries. 
The wildest stories were indeed in circulation re- 
specting that gentleman's latest experiments. Some 
said that he had discovered a new metal of greater 
value than gold ; others declared that gold had 
been found in the Wheal Arthur, and these ex- 
periments were a mere cloak to hide the value of 
such a find. 

The lieutenant and Arthur having marshalled 
everyone into their places, sat down in front seats, 
where they could be at hand to assist the lecturer, 
Arthur was between Lucy and Milly, the latter of 
whom had a general sense of the danger of their 
being all blown up, and the lieutenant between 
Mr. and Mrs. Tregellas. 

The room was dark, for although it was only 
three o'clock of an August day, the blinds were 
down, and the shutters closed; the only light 
came from two moderator lamps, with green shades 
over them, that stood on the knee-desk in front of 
the lecturer, and which left faint outlines of the 



224 GREATHEART. 

glass bottles, electrical machines, and skeletons 
that filled Mr. Tolpedden's study, or, rather, 
laboratory. The light gloated on some strange- 
shaped glasses, and on a retoit that stood on a side- 
table, close to a little furnace, the fire in which 
blazed vigorously, as could be seen through the 
half open door. 

Mr. Tolpedden stood facing his audience, as 
calm and unrufile.d as if neither success nor mis- 
fortune could shake his equability. There was 
none of the eagerness of vanity in his manner, 
scarcely even a wish to please ; he seemed filled 
only by a desire to amuse his visitors, and yet to 
convince them by a newly discovered truth. 

Mr. Tolpedden began first to exhibit a few ex- 
periments of an ordinary description, to amuse the 
children and the more unlearned. 

" I will now," he said, " take a small piece of 
potassium, a substance discovered by Sir Humphrey 
Davy, and drop it on a piece of ice. You see it 
bursts into a brilliant flame. Ice is not usually 
considered an inflammable substaifce, but chemical 
power discovers new properties in everything. 

" I next take crystals of the nitrate of copper, 
I bruise and moisten them, and then roll them up 
in tin foil." In a moment the tin foil began to 
smoke, soon it took fire and exploded. 

"Now," said the lecturer, "I will show avery com- 
mon experiment, but still a curious one. I mix mu- 
riate of ammonia, nitrate of potash, and sulphate of 
soda, all in powder — I put this powder into a small 



THE REHEARSAL. 225 

cup of water, and immerse in it a thin glass 
tube, containing a little water. Now, Miss Wa- 
verton, touch it." 

" Why, it is frozen !" cried Milly and Lucy. 

"Exactly so — the chemist produces winter when 
he wishes it. I will lastly take this piece of red-hot 
charcoal from the furnace, and fasten it to a copper 
wire. I let it down into this jar of oxygen gas, 
and you see it burns with splendour, throwing 
out floods of brilliant sparks." 

The children shouted with delight. They wanted 
amusement, simply that. Mr. Trevena was as 
pleased as any of them, though Miss Fanny Tre- 
vena declared it seemed "impious," which she always 
said of anything that puzzled her. 

"One more experiment," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
assuming the public lecturer's manner, with a 
secret contempt for the "popular," that he with 
difficulty restrained, " and this, mind, is entirely 
for the children. Now, Kate and Clara, look. I 
pour some spirits of wine into a glass, and drop a 
shilling into it. Mr. Tregellas, be kind enough 
to open the shutters just an inch or two, and let 
the sunshine fall in across my table — thank you ; 
now let the light pass through the burning-glass 
I hold and direct it on to the shilling. In a 
moment or two it will set fire to the spirits." 

" Yes, there it goes," said King Pippin ; and so 
it did, in a white, quick flame. 

Mr. Tolpedden then pushed back the glass 
bottles, &c., which he had been using, and ad- 

VOL. III. Q 



220 OREATHEABT. 

dressed himself to the more serious business of the 
day. 

" Now the children may go," he said ; " their 
j)art is done. Take out Clara and Herbert — ^you. 
Jack and Kate, and introduce them to that won- 
derful cob-nut tree in the end walk — Liddy has 
got something good for you afterwards, I dare- 
say." 

The children very soon collected and trooped off 
in a rejoicing band, with a glorious disregard for 
chemistry. 

"I must now, ladies and gentlemen," said the 
lecturer, "be, I fear, rather tedious for ten minutes 
or so, in order to relate briefly and simply the origin 
of my discovery of a new metal. Thirty years ago, 
when I began to study chemistry at college, wish- 
ing to begin at the beginning, I studied the al- 
chemists, in order to trace the sources of the 
modem science. I had thought all seekers for the 
Philosopher's stone were idle and mischievous 
dreamers, at first deluged by greedy hopes, and 
ending by preying on mankind. I found them, on 
the contrary, to be profound thinkers, untiring 
workers, great discoverers, and true reformers ; men 
who had wedded the art of the Arabians to the 
mystic learning of the Cabbala, and had carried 
science forward by great strides. They discovered 
j)hosphorus, alcohol, and some of the gases. It 
was Paracelsus who reformed medicine, rejected 
the authority of Aristotle, and introduced, for the 
first time, the use of mineral medicines, especially 



THE BEHEARSAL. 227 

mercury and antimony, and he first gave opium 
boldly, as the Orientals had so long done. 

" It soon became impressed on me as a truth, 
that these persecuted men, disdaining everything 
short of the * Red Medicine " and the Philospher's 
Stone, had thrown aside many other inestimable 
discoveries, and having written them in cypher 
and allegory, had buried them deeper than ever 
plummet sounded in the great crabbed folios they 
left behind. I first spent several years in the 
mere perusal of these impracticable books. I read 
Basil Valentine, Paracelsus, Van Helmont, and 
many German, Arabian, and French writers; I sought 
in them a clue for the legends, in which the alche- 
mists had hidden, as I thought, their secrets of trans- 
mutation. At first the books appalled me ; scripture 
and classical mythology were their great sources 
for allegory. In everything they fancied they had 
discovered chemical secrets. The Hesperides Garden 
— the Dragon's teeth of Cadmus — were used by 
them to figure forth stages of distillation. 

" All these researches of mine, I should tell you 
were undertaken by me in entire humility an 
faith; I venerated these great workers, and be- 
lieved in them as discoverers. They had wrestled 
with the angel, and though they were not con- 
querors, they had forced from him a blessing. I 
did not deride or despise them, because they lived 
in a dark age, and had not discovered gas, steam, 
and printing, those useful inventions of which this 

q2 



228 GBEATHEART. 

tradesmen-age of ours is never weary of vaunting. 

" Then I tried to learn their way of thinking, 
feeling not only sure that they had discovered great 
secrets, but also that they had left those secrets 
behind them. The Bird of Hermes, that devours 
its own wings, and then turns into a stone ; the 
toad that, soaked in wine, changes into a red balsam ; 
the white and black men, who struggle with the 
Prince in the golden armour ; the Dragon who is 
cured of leprosy by bathing in a well of virgin's 
milk; the purifications 60 or 307, which are sacred 
numbers, filled my mind by night and day. 
Having obtained some slight clue to these entangling 
labyrinths, I then set to work resolutely at the 
Arabic and other names of the mysteries which 
abound in the writings of Paracelsus ; here I got on 
faster, and drew up in time a sort of cypher dic- 
tionary, which I improved and added to from day 
to day. I did not care so much to find out that by 
Adech he meant man's spiritual consciousness, 
and that Azoth was the universal medicine, Derses 
the occult power of growth in the earth, Evestrum, 
the prophetic spirit of the universe revealing itself 
through Nature — but I rejoiced in the more prac- 
tical knowledge that *the tail of the Fox' was 
minium of lead, the eagle sal ammonia, the bird 
mercury, the stag's horn part of the still, the green 
lion a preparation of vitriol, the dragon's gall quick- 
silver, the Philosopher's egg a crucible, and the vir- 
gin's milk corrosive sublimate. (Cheers). 

"I then spent three years trying to discover 



THE REHEARSAL. 229 

what these strange men meant by tracing all the 
elements to the three great principles — salt, sulphur, 
and mercury. This cost me much labour. At 
last I found out what they typified by the soul 
and body being formed of these three — the body 
being earth, the spirit water, and the soul fire. I 
will read you one of my notes on these primitive 
truths, to show you in what dark and devious ways 
I had to seek for the secrets I have discovered. 

" Here is the extract from my note-book, dated 
' Kome, April 4, 1840.' 

" From the four elements came the three prin- 
ciples, salt, sulphur, and mercury. By diminution 
these three produce two, which is man, soul and 
body ; these glorified become one — the body is 
earth, the spirit water, and the soul fire. Fire and 
water set in motion by the spheres, contend to- 
gether in the earth, but eventually leaving the 
earth behind, rise through its pores, and produce 
flowers and friiit, being assisted by the external 
solar fire. 

" Even death these daring thinkers ventured 
to weigh in their laboratory scales. Paradise, they 
said, was created of the pure, incorrupt balanced 
element, where man, of the same construction, 
enjoyed conditional immortality; sinning, he 
was driven out into the inferior and corruptible 
elementary world created for the beasts, where he 
required nutriment, was obliged to take it of the 
corrupt elements, and so was infected. By little 
and little came separation, which is death, for 



230 GREATHEART. 

what has been compounded must again dissolve and 
be separated. This punishment was the first 
judgment. But every putrefication is a refinement 
and a division of the pure and impure, so the 
new conjunction assumes a nobler shape. 

" But I must have mercy on my kind auditors, 
and proceed more rapidly. There was one passage 
in the Archidoxies of Paracelsus that had* alwavs 
seemed to me to contain some cardinal secret. It 
is a receipt for hatching a basilisk. (Laughter). 
Yes, I assure you the sage of Einsiedeln deliberately 
describes the various stages of distillation by 
which a certain elixir was to be prepared, first in 
sand-baths, then in the retort, till a certain red 
powder was produced." 

Here Mr. Tolpedden turned and stirred a cru- 
cible that had been heating for some time on the 
stove. 

" This powder was then to be placed in the cru- 
cible," continued Mr. Tolpedden, " till a change 
took place. But I need not enumerate all the 
stages by which at last the terrible basilisk was actu- 
ally to be hatched, and an animal produced that it 
was, after all, certain death to look at. (Laughter.) 

" Well, superficially, of course the whole receipt 
appeared to be a cheat and an absurdity ; but I 
soon found that this was a profound allegory, con- 
taining an inner truth, so I set myself to crack the 
outer shell, and at last succeeded. You naturally 
ask the result ; well, the result was my present dis- 
covery." (Loud cheers.) 



THE REHEARSAL. 231 

" I have now done with theories ; I have to show 
you the results of practice." 

Mr. Tolpedden here took thd crucible into his 
hand ; it was already cooled by its transition from 
the fire to the top of the stove. 

" What I have put in this crucible is of no con- 
sequence — that is my secret. It is a mixture of 
common earths, which have undergone a certain 
subtle electrifying process. I have mixed with them 
some materials of the simplest kind. The result is, 
as I believe, a new metal, with many of the proper- 
ties of bronze, but yellow like copper, ductile like 
gold, yet hard as steel, and quite incorrodible 
by weather or the acids. It may be useless, it 
may be invaluable." 

Mr. Tolpedden as he spoke broke the crucible, 
and there, at the bottom, was a small film of 
metal. He handed it round. Everyone ap- 
plauded. 

" I now," he said, " place this again in the cru- 
cible with six times its weight in mercury. I place 
it on the brazier, and submit it to that degree of 
heat we call the ^ lion's rage.' I put in a small 
quantity of gold, and increase the heat till a 
vapour rises from the crucible. I take the amal- 
gam, and throw it into water, which frees it of the 
mercury. I then mix this again with more of the 
pure metal. I deposit this in a crucible, covering 
it with charcoal, and adding a small quantity of a 
flux of borax. I use a still stronger heat, the 
^ furor Gehmnce! In the flux I put six drops of 



232 GREATHEART. 

my * Elixir Hermes.^ The result is my new metal, 
as I shall now show." 

Again he lifted the crucible, and ran the con- 
tents into a small mould. In a few minutes he 
tapped the mould, and there fell out a little button 
of a yellowish metal. 

The cheering was tremendous. 

" That concludes your period of torment," said 
the lecturer, smiling. "I leave it to scientific 
men, ladies and gentlemen, to decide on the value 
of my discovery. It may be as valuable as plati- 
num, or as useful as aluminium — it may be as 
worthless as the dross of lead, and useless as cor- 
roded tin ; but it is a discovery, and as such I re- 
port it to you. A reverence for my predecessors 
led me to this discovery, which I propose to honour 
by the name of VICTORIUM." 

The cheering was louder than before. As the 
meeting broke up a crowd of visitors collected 
round the lecturer^s desk to congratulate him. 

Lord Rostrevor, Mr. Tregellas, Mr. Trevena, 
Lucy and Milly were the loudest in their praises and 
thanks. 

"Oh, what a treat, Mr. Tolpedden, we have 
had !" cried the two Miss Wavertons, really by no 
means sorry that the affair was over. 

"It was so interesting!" said Lucy honestly. 

" Charming," said Milly. 

" Oh, yes, indeed, indeed it was," said Miss 
Trevena youthfully, and edging between her bro- 
ther and Milly all the time. 



J 



THE REHEARSAL. 233 

" Will you come and dine with us, Tolpedden ?" 
said Tre^ellas, " sans chemonie, at half-past six ? 
Arthur has promised, and so has the lieutenant. 
Excuse a short invitation/' 

" 1 cannot come, thank you, my dear Tregellas," 
said the lecturer. " I have my notes to prepare 
for the Institute, and I haven't a bit too much 
time. I shall work better alone ; I must grub on till 
midnight, for to-morrow I have some mine busi- 
ness to attend to ; and I must have an interview 
with my lawyers about that villain's Chancery 
suit. I have this morning's letters about it still 
unopened, and I shall have those to answer. Have 
I not opened a budget of excuses ? Never mind, 
you have two of our race — that's quite enough." 

"I had no idea you had carried your experi- 
ments so far," said Mr. Tregellas, taking Mr. 
Tolpedden by the arm, and leading him a little 
apart. "Why, that rascal, old Mordred, repre- 
sented your theories to me as mere empty chimeras." 

"Oh, I've heard what he said, so don't be 
afraid to tell me ; he called my experiments mere 
jugglers' tricks, and said he could do them better 
himself. I know his malice. He shall judge for 
himself next week at Truro, where he threatens to 
laugh my discovery to scorn. I don't hate many 
men, Tregellas, in the world, but I do hate that cold- 
blooded enemy of mine." 

" Have you any doubt of your power to make 
this metal in larger quantities ?" asked Mr. Trevena, 
in a bewildered way. 



234 GBEATHEART. 

" None ; but I have still to prove by repeated 
experiments whether any of its ingredients exist 
in the flux that I have used in the charcoal, or 
in anything but the sand I mix with the mer- 
cury." 

By this time the shutters of the room had been 
thrown open, aud the lamps extinguished, so that the 
clear full light shining on the audience, and on the 
glasses, the furnaces, and the crucibles, had turned 
the latter to the mere every-day apparatus of a 
chemist. 

The ladies' ribbons shone, pleasant greetings were 
exchanged, hands were shaken. Arthur was plung- 
ing first into one cluster of friends, then into 
another. Half the audience was totally ignorant 
of what it had seen, but still everybody was pleased. 
The lieutenant was conspicuous, entangled among 
those pretty blonde cousins of Mill/s, explaining to 
them the mysteries of mining, and happy in the new 
character of expositor. 

Gradually the audience began to migrate. Ar- 
thur saw Lucy, her mother, and the children into 
their pony-carriage, reconciled to part with Lily 
only by the hope of seeing her two hours later. 
One by one everybody found their hats, discussed 
some sandwiches and sherry, and rode, drove, or 
walked off. The wheels of the last carriage 
sounded upon the gravel, and the house once more 
relapsed into its old silence. 

It was nearly four o'clock, and Arthur^s party 
was at half -past six. 



THE REHEARSAL. 235 

Arthur had seen everybody off, and had just 
strolled out into the orchard to practise for half an 
hour with his pistol, when Liddy came towards him 
with a dismayed face. 

"Mr. Arthur," she said, "do'ee go into the 
study, there's a dear, your father is took bad, Tm 
sure he is ; he has never moved a limb since the 
visitors left. Do'ee, do'ee go. It's no use asking 
the lieutenant, poor dear man, for he's going for 
an hour to the mine." 

Arthur ran instantly, and found his father at his 
desk, with his face hidden in his hands. The 
shutters were again close, and the lamps lit. 

" Why, father," he cried, " what ! in the blues — 
and after such a triumph? I aw surprised. You've 
been overworking — ^rest a bit." 

" Triumph, Arthur I" said his father, looking 
up with a mournful face, and taking two letters 
from the desk near him. " Look here ! — these are 
the things that neutralize such triumphs !" 

Arthur took the letters, and ran them hastily 
down. The first letter was from Messrs. Chet- 
wynd, Strong, and Wrackem, the family solicitors, 
to announce that the Chancery cause about the 
mine was now ripe for hearing, and would be " set 
down " before the Vice-Chancellor that day week. 
The second was an official notice from Mordred, 
as Secretary of the Truro Institute, announcing 
that Mr. Tolpedden's lecture must be delivered on 
Thursday next. 

" See how close this scoundrel follows our trail. 



236 GREATHEART. 

Arthur. He is trying to drive me to desperation 
— but let him take care I" 

" We have money enough to fight in Chancery 
with," said Arthur, supposing his father to be 
merely nervously excited by over-work ; " and as 
for the lecture, what greater triumph can you de- 
sire ? We can soon break through these cobweb 
toils." 

" This wretch has got me, Arthur, in one of 
those inquisition rooms whose walls close in on the 
prisoner. Look here — ^this is his last piece of cruel 
malice — ^this is his chef-dceuvre. There is a letter 
from Messrs. Fox and Shakell, his solicitors, 
informing me that Mordred was the person 
who really advanced me the money on mort- 
gage, through Messrs. Chetwynd, Strong, and 
Wrackem, and that he is about to foreclose. 
Where am I to turn for immediate money, without 
selling two-thirds of the mine? We have the 
very plant still to pay for." 

There was a tone rf the most intense mental 
suffering in Mr. Tolpedden's voice as he said this. 
His very features appeared to contract, his 
body to shrink together, under the crushing sense 
of a coming and inevitable misfortune. 

" But, my dear father, you dwell almost morbidly 
on the dark side ; think of your great triumph — 
look at the great result of years of labour. That 
new metal may make us millionaires 1" 

Mr. Tolpedden looked up slowly at his son ; his 
eyes seemed suddenly sunken with long vigils ; his 



THE REHEARSAL. 237 

lips were white, and trembled ; his hand shook as 
he took up a crucible, and threw its contents in at 
the open furnace door, 

" Arthur," he said, mournfully, " I must now 
pay the retribution of a cowardly sin — I have to 
pay its penalty in bitter shame and degradation I 
If anything could make the confession more cruel, 
it is that I have to humiliate myself before 
my own son. Arthur, that discovery was a sham 
— a trick I I have been near, very near discovery, 
but as yet I have discovered nothing. I had hid 
powdered metal in the flux, in the sand, in the 
charcoal, and I had waxed up metal-dust in the 
iron rod with which I stirred the contents of the 
crucible. I am a mean, degraded impostor — de- 
spise me as I ought to be despised." 

Arthur was silent for a moment. Then the 
colour rose upon his cheeks and brow, as he 
leaped up and grasped his father's hand. 

" No, father," he said, passionately, " I do not 
despise you. I know youi* proud, high spirit, and 
your greatness of heart. I know what agony this 
deception must have cost you. You did it, I am 
sure, only in the hopes of deceiving this villain who is 
trying to hunt us into poverty. You have, perhaps, 
after all, but anticipated a real discovery by some 
few months. It is for my sake you have done this ; 
you did it to save the mine, you did it to try and 
dazzle this inexorable bloodsucker. It is not for 
me to blame you — it is not for me to counsel you ; 
your own good heart and brave spirit will teach 



238 OREATHEilBT. 

you what to do. Father, let me stop with you to- 
night, your nerves are unstrung — I shall cheer 
you. Let the mine go ; but do not sacrifice your 
truth and honour. I am young, I am strong, I will 
go out again and battle for fame and wealth. 
Fighting for you and Lucy, I must be victorious!" 

Now he was Greatheart indeed ! 

As Arthur spoke, his father seemed to grow 
again to his full stature. He shook his son's hand. 

'* Go, Arthur," he said, " to the Tregellases' ; 
you must not disappoint Lucy, and your poor uncle 
needs something to divert his thoughts. Leave 
me to grapple alone with these ugly devils, Pride 
and Cowardice, that haunt me. By God's help, I 
shall yet gain the victory ! You will find me here 
when you return ; you won't be late ? Tell Liddy 
to set some cold meat in the dining-room — ^I shall 
not want a regular dinner to-day. I'll eat when 
I am hungry. There is the lieutenant shouting— 
be off. Be sure I shall wrestle, and throw these 
temptations that had all but overcome me. I will 
write at once to the Chairman of the Institute, and 
tell him that my discoveries are still imperfect in 
several links, that I have detected important errors, 
and that I must, therefore, beg to postpone 
my lecture sine die. That is the whole truth ; 
when I've written that, I defy man and devil to 
any longer impugn my honour. Now, let Mor- 
dred discover what he likes, he may suspect decep- 
tion, but he will never know how near I have been 
to discovery." 



THE REHEARSAL. 239 

"Do, father, do what your own better nature 
prompts you to, and let' what will happen." 



The temptation had been a great one ; the arch- 
devil is cunning in the selection of his baits. Many 
of the alchemists, especially Paracelsus, had fallen 
into this snare. Pride and vanity led some to claim 
discoveries they had only hoped to make. The 
struggler for truth died with a He in his mouth. 
The lifetime of thought and seeking ended in 
jugglers' tricks and detected legerdemain. The 
possible Galileo of Einsiedeln himself turned moun- 
tebank, and died in an hospital — a bitter retribution 
for a great sin. Perhaps Bombastus had hoped to 
make the great discovery while he still lied, jug- 
gled, railed, and vaunted ; with that truth he hoped 
to atone for many falsehoods ; but the low purpose 
made the nature low, blinded the eyes, and dulled 
the understanding. The lies went on, but the 
saving truth never came to lead him from the 
self-made labyrinth, so he perished in his prime, 
half crazed, self-deceived, a by-word to his 
enemies, a scoff to fools, a text for moralists, 
scorned by his rivals, pitied by his friends, and 
laughed at by the world. It was a sorry end to 
a great man's life ; but those who sow the wind 
must reap the whirlwind, and that only. 

Temptations seldom come alone. Pride was 
conquered, but other evil thoughts now came and 



240 GREATHEART. 

peopled Tolpedden's heart. . That degradation 
and shame was avoided — that false pride was 
trodden under foot — ^that false glory was no longer 
claimed. Truth and humility were victorious ; but 
there came fresh influences, and they arose from 
Hell's lowest pit, invisible, but deadly. 

Darkness came, and brought the stars, still 
Tolpedden sat there by his furnace, pondering over 
his sorrows. How could he foil this subtle and 
most unrelenting enemy! The old passions of his 
worst nature rose again, as half-extinct volcanoes 
sometimes come to life. He thought of the revenges 
of which knowledge had furnished him the means. 
Were there not in that very room poisons so 
deadly that a few drops flung even on the dress of 
the man, if he could be beguiled into an interview, 
would deprive him of life, and yet leave no clue 
behind ? Could he not, if he could only meet him 
in a secret place, at one leap press to his mouth a 
bottle, the very vapour of which would kill him, 
without leaving a wound, and with all the outward 
signs of apoplexy f 

He dallied dangerously with these evil thoughts 
— old recollections of secret Italian poisoning came 
rushing through his mind — poisoned letters, that 
killed the readers — ^poisoned flowers, that stifled 
those who smelt them. 

Had he not reason, so he justified himself, for 
hating this man, who had unjustly dispossessed him 
of land, who was still strenuously seeking to 
wrest from him the last hope of enriching his son? 



T£[E REHEARSAL. 241 

Had hQ not treated him with contempt ? Had he 
not probably encouraged the seduction of his bro- 
ther's wife? Had he not threatened to expose 
him as an impostor before half Cornwall f Above 
all, had not this cruel and odious hypocrite once al- 
ready succeeded in bringing himself and his son to 
poverty ; and was he not now moving heaven and 
earth to do so again ? 

Why should he scruple to crush such a moral 
monster? — a creature so odious to God, so hurt- 
ful to man ? But why should he risk his own life, 
or bring himself under suspicion as a murderer, in 
effecting so venial a crime 1 

A sudden thought seized him. Full of his old 
fire and energy, he rose, and darting to a cor- 
ner of the room,' drew an air-gun from behind a 
pile of fishing-rods, sticks, and whips. In the 
shortest possible time he had loaded it, and dis- 
charged it noiselessly up the chimney. Then he 
loaded it a second time, and sat down to think. 

He thought of all Mordred's habits, as he 
had known them when they were friends. How 
on summer evenings he would sit reading alone till 
dusk, at a certain window looking out into a field 
behind the house, and after dark by his lamp at 
the same spot, without drawing down the window 
or the blind till almost midnight. What could be 
easier for Tolpedden than to hurry to that field with- 
in the hour, kill Mordred noiselessly on the spot 
with the air-gun, and then escape, before his death 
could be even known ? That bad man gone, the 

VOL. in. B 



242 OBEATHEABT. 

suit must cease, and the foreclosing of the mort- 
gage stop, even if the debt itself would not be 
finally cancelled. The crime would never be 
traced to him. The air-gun he would bring back 
and instantly melt in his furnace. One discharge 
of that noiseless weapon, the enemy of himself 
and his son would be powerless, and a great danger 
would be passed and over. 

Then came a temptation still more dark and 
Satanic. Murder was loathsome to his imagina- 
tion. If discovered, it brought death to him, dis- 
grace to the son for whom he risked the crime ; 
undiscovered, it left a wounded conscience and 
endless remorse. 

But there, on that top shelf, was the poison, the 
very vapour of which could kill. Why not end his 
own life that had grown so unendurable ? One 
breath, and all trouble would be over, Arthur would 
begin a less troubled career, marry, and forget his 
short-lived sorrow. The Chancery suit would be 
delayed, and there would be time for the mine to 
produce money sufficient to enable Arthur to de- 
fend it. The thought of instant relief for all 
that weight of care seemed irresistible. He ad- 
vanced — he got a chair — he took it down — he was 
about to lift the stopper, when a bright hand 
seemed, to his heated imagination, to suddenly 
pass before him, and dash the bottle into the open 
furnace. It was his better self that did it. 

A quick flame shot out its serpent tongues, and 
rose in a waft of burning light, that melted into the 



ITA VITA. 243 

air. It was the exorcised devil — the temptation 
had passed. 

Tolpedden fell upon his knees and prayed to 
God for strength, and strength came. While 
he still prayed, there came a loud, hearty knock 
at the door; then pleasant voices. As he rose 
to his feet, in leaped Arthur, and in strided the 
lieutenant. They had come home early on pur- 
pose to be with him, as he had seemed low and 
melancholy. 

The crisis had passed. The evil spirits of de- 
spair slunk back into their native hell. A friendly 
laugh soon kills them, a kind word and a bright 
smile will always drive them again to their hot do- 
minions. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

ITA VITA. 

HALF a dozen sumpmen — (men who attend to 
the machinery in the engine shaft) — were 
sitting round the entrance to the engine-house at 
the Wheal Arthur, waiting to relieve guard. 
Tommy Tremaine, the man with the one eye, had 
been discoursing upon mermaids; his auditors 
were lying round him in a circle, smoking their 
pipes, and overlooking the sea. Two hundred 
feet of slate cliff arose above the engine-house, arid 
the ledge where the men sat. 

Ii2 



244 OBEATHEABT. 

" There never was such a twenty-four inch cy- 
linder engine as that, not this side of Cornwall," 
said one of the men, oracularly. 

" We're on the head of another rich bunch of 
copper, my dears — tes zackly so," said the eldest 
of the sumpmen ; " and so Mr. Arthur told us this 
morning, when he came to grass. We shall have 
a sturt, Sampy says, within the year, that'll bring 
us a hundred pound a month." 

" When'll Captain Sampy and Tity be up I " 

" In about haf e an hour," said Tommy. " I'm 
waiting to see 'em about the new collar to the 
shaft ; it begins to wear. It weren't all new, ye 
know, when we came to the old working. They 
come up half an hour before the noon chor. Now 
riPtouch'apipe." 

" I say, Tom, go on 'bout the merrymaid," said 
the oracular sumpman ; " I do like dearly to hear 
'bout them merrymaids — so you saw 'em twice, did 
'ee ?" 

^' Naw, it was f aethur saw 'em twice — ^he was 
out once for wreck by night, down there by En- 
dellion, and it came to pass that as he crossed the 
duck-pool on the sand there, at low-water tide, 
he heerd music coming out of the sea. Well, he 
stole on behind a rock, like a coastguard man 
watching a boat, and got very near the noise. He 
couldn't umble-cum-stumble the words — they were 
Greek and Hebrew to him ; but the sound was for 
all the world like Bill Polworth's voice, when he 
used to sing second counter at St. Tudy's, Just 



ITA VITA. 245 

then, as he peeped over a bit of the sea-weedy rock, 
he saw a merryraaid swemmin' about the waves 
like a woman bathing, and singing all the time. 
Very sad and solemn, my father used to say, it 
was to hear, more like a funeral hymn than a 
Christmas carol, by far ; but it was so sweet that 
it was as much as he (an old man too, of sixty- 
seven, with a wife and a houseful of children at 
home) could do to hold back from plunging in 
after her." 

" Well, and now the second time," said the eager 
sumpmen. 

" The second time was down by Polostoc ; he 
had been looking out for spars, for a Spanish 
vessel had been breaking up in the Channel, well, 
he saw some one moving just at half tide mark, so 
he went on very softly, step by step, and there he 
saw a merrymaid, sitting on a rock, oh, the boot- 
fullest merrymaid that eye could behold, and she 
was twisting and twirling about her long hair, and 
dressing it like a girl getting ready to go to church 
with her sweetheart on the Sabbath day. Now 
faether made sure he should greep hold of her 
before she could see him, and he had got so near 
that a couple of paces more and he'd have caught 
her by the hair, as sure as tithe or tax, when, lo ! 
and behold, she looked back and glimpsed him, 
and in one moment she dived head foremost off 
the rock, then tumbled herself topsy-turvy about 
in the water, cast a look at faether, and grinned for 
all the world like a seal." 



246 GREATHEART. 

** And you think, do'ee, that weren't a seal ?" 
" No, that were a merrymaid, if ever a one there 
was." 

" Yes, that was a merrymaid," echoed the rest, 
undoubtingly. 

"Merrymaids I never seed," said a Stafford- 
shire man ; " but there used to be a good many 
witches about us in Staffordshire — we learned to 
know 'em by the eye like — a witch had always a 
filmy eye, or a double pupil, with two rings, or one 
eye larger than the other." 

The sumpmen listened, full of faith — even Tom, 
after his overwhelming story of the merrymaids. 

" I remember, as well as if t'was yesterday, the 
Monday I left Burton for these parts. I went to 
take leave of grandmother, there she was in bed, 
sitting up in a clean white frilled cap, smoking 
a long churchwarden's clay pipe, and she said to 
me, *Siah, never you have nowt to do with 
neckromancy, for it never comes to good — don't 
read any books of neckromancy, Siah,' said she ; 
and then to show me what gipsies and witches were, 
she told me a story of how the pigs at her f ather^s 
farm had once been bewitched. There came some 
gipsies — and they're as good as witches— one day 
and asked for some food, but grandmother's father 
sent them off bundling, and off they went, gris- 
betting and sulking like ; as they passed the pig- 
sties, they called out three times, ^ Cuss the pigs ! 
— cuss the pigs I — cuss the pigs I' and from that 
time them pigs sickened, pined, and drooped. And 



IT A VITA. 247 

when grandmother's father heard that, what did 
he do hut send after the gipsies, and offered them 
food and lodging, and the hest of best, so after some 
little cavilling back they came, smiling-like, and 
when they came to the pig-sties, they stooped over 
and said, ^ Bless the pigs I — bless the pigs I — bless 
the pigs r three times, and directly they said them 
words, up leaped the pigs, their tails curled again, 
and right they were from that moment." 

A murmur of admiration went round the circle, 
expressive of sympathy with all sufferers from 
witches, and supernatural power of an evil ten- 
dency^ 

"I don't know 'bout witches," said Tommy 
Tremaine, grandly, " but when I lived at St. Just, 
there was a wise woman there who used to sell 
charms, and wonderful good they were for the 
fits and the quinsy. I remember, when I was a 
boy, I'd been out bird-nesting, and had been 
bitten by an adder, so they took me to the wise 
woman, and she made a cross of hazel-wood, and 
laid it on the bite; then she said these words, blow- 
ing* them out as if they were the Ten Command- 
ments : 

* Underneath the hazelin mote, 
There's a Bragotty worm with a speckled throat, 
Nine double is he ; 

Now from nine double to eight double, 
And from eight double to seven double. 
And from seven doable to six double. 
And from six double to five double, 



248 QREATHEABT. 

And from five doable to four doable, 
And from foar double to three doable, 
And from three double to two double, 
And from two double to one double, 
Ajid from one double to no double, 
No double hath he!'" 

"Ha!" said the Staffordshire man, "that 'ud 
cure anything, that would." 

" I wonder," said Tremaine, looking up at the 
sky with his blind eye, "what that boy of Mr. 
Bradbrain's, the doctor's, wants always sniffing 
about the mine ; he don't want shares, boy don't ; 
but here he is every day nearly 1" 

" I saw him this morning," said one of the sump- 
men : " oh, he comes to see his father, who is down 
in the ocean level, with Uncle Job, and that lot." 

" I don't like that youngster," said Tremaine ; 
" he's too sharp for good ; but run, Sam Treweek, 
there's the signal. And there it is again and again^ 
Why, what's forward, Penhaluna? There's 
something wrong in the level, surely, some miss- 
ment (mistake), I tell 'ee, run, run, my dears." 

Up leaped the men as if a shell had burst among 
them. Treweek ran to the engine-house, and re- 
turned the signals. An instinct that some misfor- 
tune had happened ran through all like an electric 
shock. 

Clash! clash! clash! went the bell again, angrily, 
as a signal to put on the steam, and raise the 
tram-waggon quick. 

"There's something happened, sure as sure," 



ITA VITA. 24ft 

said Tommy Tremaine, as the waggon began to 
lift below a quarter of a mile away. 

" Yes, 'tes so— 'tes a case," said the men, who 
w^ere straining their eyes to catch the first glimpse 
of the waggon emerging from the darkness. Their 
deepest sympathies were roused. Some crawled 
down the tunnel and listened, with their ears to the 
rails, others ran to the ladders in the engine shaft, 
unable to bear the suspense. 

*^You, Penhaluna, go to Mr. Arthur and 
Captain Tolpedden," said Tremaine ; " they're in 
the counting-house, or at the dressing-flioors, they 
should know the news first." 

Away leaped Penhaluna ; he was one of those 
men who are always volunteers in such cases from 
sheer compliant good-nature. 

Up glided the tram-waggon, at last, out of the 
darkness, with an increasing glimmer, as the light 
of the miners' candles came gradually nearer. 
Out leaped six sturdy fellows, with two or three 
lighted candles among them, which, by mere force 
of habit, they instantly blew out, as they vaulted 
out of their iron case. They were grimed with 
rust and dirt, and smeared with the moist red mud 
of the lower levels. 

" Aw dear ! — aw dear I" cried three in a breathy 
"the second ladder's broke, and Cappen Sampy 
and Tity are knack'd in pieces." 

" They're knack'd in jowds, and their lems is 
broke, we tell 'ee," cried the other three. 

" Where are they I" cried Tremaine. 



250 OBEATHEABT. 

" They're brining *em up the engine-shaft, now, 
in kibbles ; we left Job and Zacky to bring 'em np 
gently. Aw dear ! — ^aw dear ! how Tity's groan- 
in'. As for Sampy, he's in jowds, he is, he don't 
speak. He'd been there an hour before we found 
hem. He told us somebody had cut the ladder, 
but I think his head's hurt." 

'^ Amos," said Tremaine, to one of the lads, who 
had come up, " you run to the floors, get on the 
first horse you find, and ride to St. Petrock's for 
Mr. Mordred and Mr. Bradbrain." 

Away ran the men to the engine-shaft, where 
half a dozen miners were watching the ascending 
kebbles, under the vigilant superintendence of the 
lieutenant, Arthur, and his father, who had hurried 
to the spot. 

" Here they are," cried Arthur. 

"Easy there with the kibble," said the lieu- 
tenant ; " belay there, see they come steady, ease 
them off, I say, you men, and don't let them touch 
the boarding." 

Up came the first kebble, and a short muscular 
man stepped out, carrying in his arms Sampy, pale 
and, motionless. He groaned as they laid him on 
the platform, writhed once or twice, tried to turn 
his head, but never opened his eyes." 

In the second kebble came a boy, supporting 
Tity, who had several ribs and his left arm broken. 
He was faint with pain, but when they helped him 
out, and gave him water, he had strength to explain 
the accident, resting often between the sentences. 



IT A VITA. 251 

"We had goate down," said the poor fellow, 
" above four fathoms on the second ladder, when 
away it went with us. Sampy fell at once clean 
down to t^e third sollar (platform), but I stick'd 
to the ladder. I knew there was twenty fathom 
of dry shaft to fall through, and then twenty 
fathom of waeter to drown me, if I wasn't 
dead before I comed to it. Bang I crash! — 
down, down I went. I felt my ribs and my arm 
break in jowds. At laest the ladder catch'd a 
hitch athwart the shaft, and there a-stopped a mo- 
ment; I begins to think upon my doom. I 
was hanging to the ladder with my right hand, 
and when I tried to put up my tother, too, I 
cudn't do it, for he was broke in pieces, and hang- 
ing down like a broken brake staff. I tried to 
drive my nails into the ladder staves, but my hand 
feeled dead, and I cudn't do it. I thoft of death, 
and I beginn'd \o pray, for the fust time. My 
hand began to slip. ' Marcy I marcy I marcy !' 
screeched I. Til die, thoft I, with that word. 
My hand slipp'd at laest, and the next moment, 
— what do'ee thenk, my dears? — my waun foot 
pitch'd upon a sollar, but my other leg was brok, so 
down I laid. My head was bleeding streams, and 
I was soon in a pool ov ut. I could hear Sampy 
groaning below me. I cudn't move. I cudn't 
even screech, for waikness. Aw I how thirsty I 
was, and fainty, too, and full thirty fathoms from 
grass. I lied in that shape more than an hour — 
it seemed a week. At last I was waked up out of 



252 GBEATHEABT. 

a deadness by Tom Eowse horllomg out, 'Bist 
dead, Tity?' That sprightened me up. 'No, 
not zackly so, Tom,' said I, Tm dash'd in 
pieces,' said I ; * but Fm alive yet.' Then they 
put me in the kibble, and by the grace and mercy 
of the Lord here I am, my dears." 

This was told in gasps, not by any means 
in the continuous form here given, but the pur- 
port was the same. — Arthur knelt down by Sam- 
py's side, and took his hand. Mr. Tolpedden knelt 
on the other side, and felt his pulse. 

" Poor Sampy !" he said ; " he cannot live an 
hour, lads. Send some one to St. Nectan's for Mr. 
Stockwell." 

" St. Petrock's — Mr. Mordred ?" suggested Tre- 
maine. 

'' No, to St. Nectan's — do you hear me ? I will 
have nothing to do with the St. Petrock's doctors." 

*^ Get two litters, and carry the poor fellows to 
the first cottage up the valley, where there will be 
beds for them," said Arthur ; " there is no place 
here. We shall meet Stockwell soonest that way." 

Miners are quick, intelligent men; they soon 
arranged some planks. Four men were then 
told off to each. As they moved Sampy, he open- 
ed his eyes languidly, and asked for Mr. Tolped- 
den. Arthur and his father went to him, and 
pressed his hand. 

"I'm dying, sir," he said faintly; "but I've 
been a true servant to you. I've been a faithful 
witness. I repented. I was a backslider once, 



ITA VITA. 253 

but I repented. Forgive me, Mr. Tolpedden. 
3Mr. Arthur, God bless you I Lord have mercy 
on me I Hallelooliah ! Amen." 

Then her fell back again, and became insensible. 

"I told 'ee Sampy was knack'd in jowds," 
groaned Tity from the adjacent litter; "and 
I'm not much better, but I'm a bit alive yet. Oh, 
Doctor, Doctor, do save my arm, or I shall never 
hold a gad again." 

"What's this, Harry, the men say about the 
ladder being cut ?" said the lieutenant. 

"They say, sir," said the Staffordshire man, 
'* that the ladder had been sawn near the top, and 
they found the bit that had been cut, like." 

"Don't you believe it," said the worthy but 
obstinate man. " Some of the rounds were worn 
out. They always invent these stories, the lub- 
bers, to excuse their own carelessness, that's about 
it. Now, move on with those litters; gently — 
step together." 

The mournful procession had got about a 
quarter of a mile from the Wheal Arthur, when 
the bearers of the first litter halted at a large block 
of granite that stood by the path among the furze. 
One of them lifted the handkerchief that covered 
Sampy's face, then replaced it, and raised his 
hand, so that those who followed might under- 
stand the signal for silence. 

The next moment the procession moved on, and 
some twenty voices burst forth with the well- 
known hymn : 



254 GREATHEART. 

'^ Brother, thou art gone before us, 

And thy saintly soul is flown. 
Where tears are wiped from every eye, 

And sorrow is unknown. 
From the burthen of the flesh. 

And from care and fear released ; 
Where the wicked cease from troubling. 

And the weary are to rest. 

^^ The toilsome way thou'st travell^ed o'er. 

And borne the heavy load ; 
But Christ has taught thy languid feet 

To reach His blest abode. 
ThouH sleeping now like Lazarus, 

Upon his father's breast, 
Where the wicked cease from troubling. 

And the weary are at rest." 

" What does all this singing mean ?" said the 
lieutenant, testily, as he strode forward, and over- 
took the second litter ; ^^ can't the fellows do the 
commonest thing without singing?" 

Tity rose in his litter, and burst into tears. 

" Captain," he said, " Sampy's dead ; I told'ee 
he was knacked into jow^ds." 

" Poor Sampy," said Arthur, " after all, there 
was some good in the fellow. We shouldn't have 
had the mine but for him." 

"Poor Sampy I" said Mr. Tolpedden ; "yes, he 
did what he could to redeem the past. At all 
events he was grateful to you, Arthur." 

"He kept the accounts well," said the lieu- 
tenant ; " but he ought to have seen to the ladder 
better." 



ITA VITA. 255 

Mr. Stockwell, the young doctor of St. Nec- 
tan's, was at the cottage in the valley by the time 
Tity, who had fainted, and Sampy's corpse were 
brought in. He was dressing Tity's hurts, when 
two men on horseback dashed up to the door; 
the next instant Mr. Bradbrain and Mr. Mordred 
entered the room, and forced their way to Tity's 
bed-side. 

Mr. Tolpedden advanced to meet the partners 
with a hard, stem face. 

*^ Gentlemen," he said, *^ the men sent for you 
by mistake, it was not my order — your presence is 
not required here. Tremaine, open the door for 
these gentlemen. Good morning, gentlemen; sorry 
to have wasted your time." 

Bradbrain turned red to the very eyes, his 
lips grew dry and white. Mordred was blue and 
livid as usual. The f onner said nothing, the latter 
remarked that Tity was one of his club patients, 
that it was therefore his duty to attend him, and 
that he looked on Mr. StockwelFs intrusion as 
most unprofessional. 

''The poor man," said Mr. Tolpedden, '* shall 
not be paid for by the club ; he shall be attended 
by my own doctor, and at my own expense, so 
your attendance, sir, may be dispensed with." 

There was a murmur of pleasure among the 
miners, who entirely disregarded the rage and 
mortification of the discomfited partners. 

As Bradbrain passed to the door, he whispered 
in Arthur's ear, 



256 OREATHEABT. 

*^ Another insult to add to the old account — 
when and where f — ^when and where I" 

** Whenever and wherever you like," whispered 
Arthur in reply; **you have but to write — ^it 
shall be kept quite secret — don't be afraid of in- 
terruption." 



CHAPTER XIX. 

HOOKEM BEDIVIVUS. 

THE day after Mr. Hookem's re-appearance on 
the Cornish coast, he dined at the Tregellases's 
with Dodgeson, Fisher, and Hewer, his fellow 
yachtsman. Their old friends, the Tolpeddens, 
Wavertons, Trevenas, and Penroses had all been 
invited to meet them. 

The Sultan looked grander, and was more auda- 
ciously paradoxical than ever ; he still ruled the 
world through the Forge^ and was agreeably 
conscious that he ruled it. He still inveighed 
against the Trimmer j and was as gallant and plea- 
santly epicurean as of old. A very exquisite pair 
of light gold spectacles now invested him with an 
air of even greater command, while the glitter of 
the glasses preserved his eyes from being studied, 
or his elaborate irony being detected. He still 
wore ultra-fashionable coats, a mass of gold curb 
chain, strong enough to support the bucket of a 
well; and still, as he delivered his orations, he 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 257 

tucked liis thumbs into the arm-holes of his vast 
white waistcoat, in the rather insolent manner of 
that great changeful man, the late Sir Robert 
Peel; he still delivered monologues, d«; omnibus rebus, 
and called them conversation ; he was still a dog- 
matic, overbearing humbug, and yet so good- 
natured, so obliging, so hospitable, so fond of 
children, so clever, that no one could dislike him. 
He won Lucy and Milly by delightful chat about 
great men wjiom he knew, and by club anecdotes 
of high personages ; he attracted Clara and Her- 
bert by wonderful presents; he delighted Mrs. 
Tregellas by extraordinary receipts, disclosures of 
ingenious means of economising, and extravagant 
praises of Lucy. He talked High Church to Wa- 
verton, philanthropy to Trevena, antiquarianism to 
Tregellas, science to Tolpedden, and poetry to 
Arthur. In brief, he was a delightful charlatan, 
full of tact, by no means a fool, and not so proud 
as to be indifferent to please. 

It being a pleasant warm autumn sunset, the 
guests had accepted Mr. Tregellas's proposal, and, 
till dinner was ready, had gone into the garden. 
A circle had formed round the great talker, while he 
stood under a huge beech and harangued. He had 
all the talking to himself, and yet he displayed such 
judgment that everyone felt engaged in the con- 
versation, no one seemed eclipsed — your turn came 
with him as surely as the turn to play comes round 
in whist. 

" I have not yet told you, Tregellas," he said, 
VOL. III. S 



258 QREATHEART. 

" of my astounding, my miraculous discovery, a 
discovery, Tolpedden, that has electrified the his- 
torical world, a discovery that my friend Dodge- 
son, I believe, means to immortalize on canvas. 
Isn't that so, Dodgeson 1" 

Dodgeson gave a painful sigh of assent. 

"This discovery, Arthur, will, I tell you, re- 
volutionise modern history. Mr. Froude has 
already shown, as you remarked just now, Mr. 
Waverton, very appositely, that Henry VIII. was 
really a benevolent, unselfish, large-hearted crea- 
ture ; Mr. Carlyle has proved, Mr. Fisher, in the 
most simple and lucid way, that Frederick the 
Great carried on all his wars for entirely un- 
selfish objects — ^but it was left for me to reha- 
bilitate the character of that immortal martyr — I 
of course refer, Mr. Hewer, to Guido Fawkes." 

" But the discovery, the discovery," cried Milly, 
mischievously tapping on his arm ; " I am so 
anxious to hear what it is." 

" The discovery is this, Miss Tregellas," said the 
radiant Sultan, turning round to the ladies, as if 
conscience-stricken at his neglect ; " I find from 
documents in the State Paper Ofiice, that certain 
writings were found in Guide's lodgings — these 
papers were handed over to Lord Bacon, and these 
papers, Mrs. Penrose, I am now prepared to prove 
by a long chain of subtle and irrefutable argu- 
ments, were no less than the essays afterwards so 
unjustly attributed to Lord Bacon." 

Mr. Tolpedden expressed his astonishment. 



POOKEM REDIVIVU8. 259 

**Yes, it is painful to cast more mud on the 
sullied fame of a great genius ; but truth compels, 
magna est Veritas et prcevalebit, which I would trans- 
late playfully thus, ^ Truth is no flea-bite !' I 
know that rpy friend of the Mausoleum has tried 
hard to vindicate Verulam ; but I still hold him 
a timid time-server, a bribe-taker, a faithless friend, 
and a vain and luxurious man, who was mean 
enough to appropriate the thoughts of a greater 
genius. Pshaw I" 

Mr. Hookem stopped to take breath, and gazed 
around him. The audience dissolved, and re- 
formed into fresh groups. 

Mr. Tolpedden and Mr. Hookem wandered off 
among the hazels, and held conference. 

" And do I actually see before me a millionaire?" 
said Hookem, turning round suddenly and con- 
fronting his graver friend. *' That, at least, is a 
pleasure I gain in revisiting well-beloved Corn- 
wall I" 

"Perhaps a millionaire," said Mr. Tolpedden, 
smiling, " perhaps not. You know fortunes come 
and go among us miners." 

" Ha ! you millionaires are always modest. 
There was old Ooutts, who once refused a guinea 
that was put in his hand, saying he was not in 
immediate want ; you're all alike. By-the-bye, how 
is it that your two doctors have been ostracized ? I 
used to like that dashing fellow Bradbrain, and 
that old demure Mordred was an excellent foil to 
him. Nothing wrong, I hope ?" 

Si 



2G0 QREATHEART. 

" Well, for a long time, Hookeni, there has been 
a cloud gathering over these gentlemen; suspicions, 
vague and dark, have now grown into certainties, 
liespectable-men have withdrawn their money from 
the bank. 1 have no great reason to speak well of 
them, for they disseminated lying reports of Ar- 
thur, and sowed discord between us and Tregellas. 
We still suspect Bradbrain of inducing the lieu- 
tenant's unhappy wife to leave her husband. How 
can I associate with such men ?" 

" Very true, very true," said Hookem, in that 
comfortable way in which men discuss the mis- 
fortunes of a friend, and pulling off a dead leaf 
from an espalier-tree as he walked on. ** Well, I 
never could have dreamed of such an occurrence. 
I used to think Mrs. Tolpedden one of the most 
innocent, affectionate little women I ever saw. It 
was quite a picture to see her skim like a butterfly 
round the lieutenant. I vow it almost drove 
this old bachelor you see before you violently into 
matrimony. I declare I used to quite look for- 
ward to seeing her enter Tregellas's church, lean- 
ing on his arm, and looking up coaxingly into his 
face, with little Jack coming after, leading on Kate 
and Ned. Well I well ! it is these things that 
harden a man, and shake one's belief in human 
nature." (Here Mr. Hookem adjusted his frail 
gold spectacles delicately, as if they were quad- 
rants or theodolites, with the middle finger of his. 
left hand.) " But let us be merciful in our judg- 
ment, as we get older, my dear Tolpedden. We 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 261 

ought by this time to know how hard it is to form 
a correct judgment. She may have been en- 
tangled by this handsome rascal in spite of her- 
self." 

"Don't mention her," said Tolpedden, almost 
savagely. " I detest her memory. I obliterate her 
name from my record. She has thrown away as 
pure, true, and honest a love as ever man felt, and 
all but broken my brother's heart. Do not mention 
her." 

^* I want to hear about this terrible accident at 
your mine, Tolpedden. I hear the most contra- 
dictory reports ; some say four are killed ; my land- 
lord at St. Nectan's an hour ago told me seven. 
Was it in blasting? How many were really 
killed?" 

" Only one — Captain Sandoe ; but another man 
is dreadfully hurt." 

" Why, how on earth did this melancholy thing 
happen — carelessness, I suppose ? Old story." 

"The miners say some one sawed the ladder 
through, for it broke as the men were going down 
to work. If so, it was a cruel bit of malice ; but 
such things have, I believe, happened before." 

" Horrible I What fiendish malice ! The captain, 
I suppose, was obnoxious to some of the men — too 
severe ?" 

" We can't account for it. No, the men liked 
Sandoe, and he was faithful to us. He was a man 
whom I used to consider a mere lying scamp ; he 
went about the country with a divining rod, pre- 



262 GKEATHEART. 

tending to discover metal ; Mordred got hold of 
him, and found that he knew of copper in the old 
workings here, so he disputed my title to part of 
the land, and compelled me to sell it; but he 
cheated Sampy, and the man, half in spite, half in 
gratitude to Arthur, for saving him from being 
torn to pieces by the mob at a fair near here, dis- 
closed the secret of the mine we're now working. 
Mordred's proved a blank. Poor Sampy, there 
was really some good in him." 

" Oh ! that was it. Ha ! very curious ! I had 
heard a confused story about it at St. Nectan's. 
Waverton told me. You should have a man- 
engine at your mine, as they have at the Dolcoath, 
It lifts the men and the ore at the same time, and 
saves all the toil of the ladders." 

"But it costs two thousand pounds — we can't 
aflford it," said Tolpedden, firmly but regretfully. 
" There is a terrible logical force in such commercial 
arguments. But how on earth, Hookem, may I 
ask, did you learn anything about mines? You 
seem ready on whatever subject one broaches." 

" Well, I had to study Forbes's works, and the 
Blue Books in general, some years ago for the 
ForgCy and Tve a tenacious memory. I had to go 
in for mining, and I went in for it, that's all. You 
have a great deal to do still for your miners. 
Miners die young — ventilation is bad. Fancy, 
after eight hours' hard work, climbing eighteen 
hundred feet by ladder, with fifteen pounds of 
blunted tools on your back. Would not you get 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 263 

pleuritic and pulmonic disease^ and get out of life 
as soon as possible f " 

" We will alter this at the Wheal Arthur as soon 
as we can move round, Hookem. Many of the 
evils you mention are, however, I fear inevitable. 
In old mines, where the ore lies so deep, the air 
must be bad, and the labour of ascent great." 

" We hear everywhere of the wealth of the 
mine, nothing like it this side the Botallac, so the 

mining papers say, and so the London brokers 
told me." 

" Come down and see it t" 

" Of course I will, and bring Dodgeson, Fisher, 
and Hewer ; they may get a hint or two there — 
for they're sharp fellows." 

" We're going to-morrow to have a great blast- 
ing in the deep sea level ; I and Arthur are against 
it, but the lieutenant, Tremuan, our new captain, 
and all the tributers, are for it. There's ten feet 
of solid rock between us and the sea — this wall 
contains four feet of almost pure copper, of the high- 
est standard. We're going to remove that before 
we push further under the sea. It is usual to leave 
such treasure for future use, ^ the eyes of the mine,' 
the men call them, but Tremuan says our best part 
is to come at least a hundred fathoms further south, 
so I have yielded to their experience." 

"And here was I actually treating the whole 
affair as a mare's nest, regretting your speculation, 
and coming down to propose to Arthur going out to 
Barbadoes to manage a sugar-house there for a 



264 GREATHEART. 

friend of mine. I computed that if he could only 
bear the climate, he would get rich enough in four 
years to come back and settle. A good idea of me 
offering a millionaire's son £800 a year in the West 
Indies — ha ! ha I" 

At that moment came shouts of "Mr. Great- 
heart, Mr. Greatheart !" from the children on the 
lawn, Clara's voice being even more uproarious 
than Kate's. 

" What do the children mean by ' Mr. Great- 
heart ?' — who is Mr. Greatheart ?" 

^' Oh ! " said Mr. Tolpedden, smiling, " that is 
their name for Arthur — they call him so because 
he used to put on an old suit of armour of ours, 
and act scenes from the ' Pilgrim's Progress,' to 
amuse them." 

" Have you still with you that wonderful old 
nurse?" 

" Oh ! yes, and good as gold she is. Since the 
unhappy woman fled she has been a mother to Kate 
and the rest." 

" Now, there is a picture," said Hookem as, at a 
turn of the path, they saw Lucy and Arthur be- 
fore them down a side walk. 

He had his arm round her waist, and their lips 
were alarmingly near together. 

She wore a bewitching muslin dress, of the 
palest apple-blossom colour, and her beautiful hair 
was bound by a snood of purple, pansy colour. 
Anything more dainty and graceful than the 
fiancee could scarcely be imagined, as she stooped 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 265 

to pick a China rose, and refused disdainfully all 
help from Arthur. 

Just then Mr. Tolpedden and Mr. Hookem came 
up. 

" Arthur's been teasing me," said Lucy to Mr. 
Tolpedden, " about not liking to put on the ugly 
mining-dress." 

" Yes, Lucy pretends she wasn't afraid of look- 
ing ugly."^ 

" Be quiet, sir." 

"I wish some one would scold me in that delight- 
ful way, Arthur," said Hookem. 

" Oh I you dreadful flatterer," said Arthur, "you 
know you don't wish anything of the kind, Hookem, 
and you are rejoicing at this very moment in your 
independence, isn't he, Lily? The cruel old 
bachelor ! " 

Leaving Hookem pleasantly wrangling with the 
betrothed lovers, Mr. Tolpedden went in search of 
Mr. Tregellas, whom he found teaching the chil- 
dren a peculiar stroke at croquet. He drew him 
apart. 

"Tregellas," he said, "we are old friends, so 
there need be no disguise between us. Arthur 
and Lucy look upon themselves as betrothed. Is it 
with your consent that your wife has abandoned 
all wish for young Boscawen as a son-in-law 1" 

" It was— she wishes Lucy to be happy, and to 
do as she likes." 

" Let us, then, fix the marriage-day ?" 

" With all my heart. This day month, if that 



266 GREATHEABT. 

will suit you and my wife. Shake hands on 
that." 

The friends shook hands. 

" The lover," said Tolpedden, " will be in rap- 
tures. He was sadly afraid that you would want 
him to wait till we had made a fortune. Let us 
come now and discuss it with Mrs. Tregellas." 

While this auspicious conference was being 
held, our old friend Trevena, as if impelled by 
some star that ruled the day, had found himself 
with Milly near a rustic seat at the very bottom 
of the garden. They sat down ; Milly, with a 
suspicious trembling, merely asked if it wasn't 
very near dinner I John took courage, and, by a 
tremendous effort of courage, seized Mill/s hand. 
It was a simple question he had been asked, and 
he made a most absurd and Quaker-like answer, 
for he stammered out a question, a very old question. 

" Milly, do you love me, Milly t Do you love 
me?" twice. 

Milly turned colour, looked down at Trevena's 
brown hand, that lay on hers, then pressed it, and 
said in the most simple and natural way, 

" Why, John, you know I do." 

Milly had told him so several hundred times, 
and yet he now pressed her in his arms, and kissed 
her with enthusiasm* and perfect delight. These 
lovers are so hard of belief ! 

As they rose to return to the house, whom should 
they meet at the turn of the first walk but Mr. 
Waverton, Clara, and Kate I 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 267 

Leaving Milly and the children, Trevena con- 
trived to detain Waverton in spite of all his efforts 
to escape ; he drew him apart. His heart was full 
and his courage roused even to ask a favour of a 
man he despised. 

" Mr. Waverton," he said, "I've come to ask 
the hand of your sister Milly. You have, I dare- 
say, become aware of the attachment that has 
sprung up between us; she has given me her consent, 
and — ^I told her that I should come to you." 

Waverton gulped down the news, for it went 
rather against him. 

"You have claims," he replied, after a pause, 
" on my gratitude, and I do not wish to disown 
them, Mr. Trevena ; nor will I positively refuse 
you my sister, but I must, I fear, postpone your 
marriage, resolutely, till you obtain a curacy or 
living of more than £100 a year. Your present cura- 
cy, St. Nectan's, is, I believe, only £100 a year ?" 

Trevena answered mournfully in the affirmative, 
and the gong just then sounding for dinner, the 
conversation ceased. 

At dinner Hookem was tremendous. He 
broached a theory for giving new tone and fresh 
life to modern English literature, an infallible 
cure for all debility, exhaustion, morbidity, or want 
of originality. 

He addressed the whole table while the cheese 
'was being put on. 

" My plan, Mrs. Tregellas," he said, " is stu- 
pendous, and yet it is within the comprehension 



268 GREATHEABT. 

of childhood. I would organize a society, Lieu- 
tenant Tolpedden, which would in time include 
every author gnd journalist in Great Britain. 
I would require each member to sign a solemn 
pledge not to write for one whole year. For one 
whole year, Miss Lucy Tregellas, we should lie 
fallow — we should spend the time striking root, 
and accumulating power. What, Miss Waverton, 
would be the inevitable result! — why, I say, a 
Niagara, a very Deluge of intellectual wealth — » 
plays, essays, leaders, travels, biographies, rehabili- 
tations, philosophies, discoveries, satires, epigrams, 
memoirs. What must be the result, Arthur? — what 
must be, I say, the result, Mrs. Penrose? — why, 
a new intellectual epoch, a mental revolution, a 
golden age of vigour and invention, and vast 
harvests such as the critic's sickle had never before 
touched." 

This vast proposal was received with a burst of 
irrestrainable laughter. The room shook again. 

"I have had for years, Hookem, a dream I 
fear quite as impracticable," said Mr. Tolpedden. 

"What is that?" said Hookem, with that grand 
indiflference which vain men of tact make to look 
like good-natured curiosity. The great talker, 
when tired, is hard to interest. " Some ale, if you 
please." 

" My plan is an organized and vigorous effort 
amongst the savans of Europe to introduce Latin 
as the universal language. It should be taught 
every child in every country, and colloquially, too, 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 269 

SO as not to be forgotten. Books of science and 
general interest should be printed in this language. 
The result would be that knowledge would be 
disseminated infinitely faster, and one great im- 
pediment to progress be for ever removed. Human 
wisdom would be no longer hid in private bins 
and cellars, but would flow into one central sea, 
open to all the world to visit, fathom, traverse, and 
explore. Discoveries could then be exchanged 
by eyery post, and every random thought struck 
out, even in the furthest province of Europe, 
would reach all those in every country who studied 
the same science." 

" Bravo I" said Hookem ; " we must get you to 
ventijate that remarkable idea in the Forge. The 
Trimmer is sure to reply, and then we shall join 
issue." 

Mr. Hookem seemed to intensely enjoy the fore- 
taste of this affray. 

When the children came in after dinner, Mr. 
Hookem was in his glory — he had Jack and Ned 
on his knees, and Kate and Clara by his side. He 
begged preserves for them, he procured them 
almonds and raisins, he told them stories, he cut 
them grotesque faces in orange peel. 

There sat Arthur and Lucy, profoundly happy. 
Trevena was ruefully contented, longing to tell 
Milly of her brother's decision, and distrustful of 
his sister Fanny's power to bear the tidings. If 
one had only power to turn any heart one chose 
into glass for the moment, and look into it as^into 



270 GREATHEART. 

a crystal bee-hive, what revelations one might obtain 
from even the guests at an ordinary dinner-party I 

There was the lieutenant, with a heart almost 
rent in two, talking seamanship to Dodgeson, 
Milly, and Fisher ; and there was Mr. Tolpedden, 
whom the devil of despair had tempted so per- 
tinaciously only a short time ago, discussing an- 
tiquarian topics with Miss Grace Waverton and 
Lucy. By-and-by they would leave the gay mas- 
querade, take off their masks, cast their dominoes 
aside, and return to the sorrows that held them 
captive, and let them out on these occasions only 
on a sort of brief " day rule." 

" By-the-bye, Hookem," said Mr. Tregellas, 
" what about Littlemore ? — any fresh instalment 
of the * Mother-in-law in the House t * " 

" To be sure," said the unmoved editor ; " his 
new volume opens with a glorious metaphor. Ob- 
serve the modem feeling of the lines. It is to 
explain why he comes again before the public. 

* So at a pic-nic I have seen 

The hamper opened with such care, 
And first from ^mid the salads green, 

A chicken comes and then a hare ; 
A ham, some jellies, stores of salt, 

And last, while all stand smiling by, 
From lower depths they draw with glee 

The crowning joy — a pigeon pie. 
So with my books, &c.' 

*' Charming, charming writer, who turns the 
humblest subject to poetry. Arthur, there's your 



HOOKEM REDIVIVUS. 271 

model — that's better than all your Red Cross 
Knights/' 

^^And the marvellous ^Babyloniad,'" said Arthur, 
laughing ; " how goes on that gifted and eminently 
practical man r 

^' He is going slowly up Oheapside," replied Hook- 
em ; " he has already done one hundred and fifty 
establishments^ and is now recording the triumphs 
of the cork-leg shops ; but I have just discovered a 
still greater genius — an omnibus conductor in 
Boston, a rhythmical savage, one Walt Whitman. 
His book, 'Leaves of Grass,' is sublime — in its 
catalogues of facts, its daring rhapsodies, its gran- 
deur, and its touches of vast scenery." 

Mrs. Tregellas rose, as a signal for the ladies to 
go, but Mr. Hookem rebelled. 

"No," he said, "Mrs. Tregellas, I will never 
consent to that infamous and unsociable custom. 
At all events, leave us as short a time as possible.'* 

When the ladies did actually go, Mr. Hookem 
propounded his notion of a perfect review. 

" There will never," he said, " be a satisfactory 
or fair review (personal grudges, of course, will al- 
ways be indulged in, more or less, according to the 
generosity or meanness of an editor's nature), till 
my plan, Mr. Tregellas, is adopted. I have long 
since found it impossible, lieutenant, to keep pace 
with the books of the season; they are either 
done soon, scamped, slurred, snubbed, and mis- 
understood, or they are allowed to grow stale, 
Arthur, and are then reasonably well done, 



272 GREATHEART. 

but too late. My well-matured proposal, Mr. 
Fisher, is this. — It is to ^ve a short resumS of 
every book of importance that comes out the week 
it is hatched; the week after, if the work de- 
mands it, a longer re^new, analytical and philoso- 
phical. I should not pay my contributors for 
quotations, and I should not allow my editor ever to 
write more than one article a week. The result 
would be, Mr. Dodgeson, perfection — as near per- 
fection, that is, as poor human nature can go." 

Arthur and his father applauded the scheme. 
The lieutenant had distinctly fallen asleep, and 
Dodgeson, Fisher, and Hewer were comparing 
their last year's rifle scores at Ealing. 

When Mr. Tregellas rose and led everybody 
into the drawing-room, one of the Miss Wavertons 
was singing. 

Mr. Hookem made his way to Lucy, and looked 
over her photograph-book. In the second page 
were some verses in her own handwriting. Mr. 
Hookem read them aloud to two or three auditors 
when the song was over. They were called — 

THE FADED PHOTOGRAPH. 

*' It was glossy and brown, and clear and bright, 
Oh, her large deep eyes, and her queenly brow, 
Her torrent of curls, and her proud, proud lip, 
They were true to the life — I can see them now. 

" Those great dark eyes were my magnet stars ; 
There was the lip so sweet and red ; 
There was the brow broad, white and pure ; 
And that was the way that she hung her head. 



HOOKEM EEDIVIVUS. 273 

*' Ten years ago, and now, like our love. 
It has faded as snow in the latter spring ; 
Through a dreamy cloud I still see her face, 
But day by day it is vanishing. 

" Alas ! it was bleached by the cruel sun, 
Blurred and spotted, and pale and faint, 
Till it looks like the ghost of our bygone love, 
Or the phantom face of some dying saint. 

" Tis strange that love, that is God's own gift, 
Should fade away like the summer rose, 
And this poor frail thing be left as a type 

Of that flower of the heart that should never close." 

Mr. Hookem read these lines with an air of 
proud defiance, and laid down the book when he 
had finished them with the satisfaction with which 
a clergyman concludes a long and sonorous second 
lesson. 

"There, Arthur," said he, "that's the sort of 
thing — that's the true modern style ; produce 
something in that way, and you're a made man, 
take my word for it. I tell you you must poetize 
modern incidents." 

Lucy smiled maliciously. 

" I don't like the man's manner," said Arthur 
blandly. 

" Don't like it I — why, it's the true nineteenth 
century feeling." 

" It is very wicked of Arthur, Mr. Hookem," 
said Lucy ; " they are his own. Arthur, it is very 
wrong of you, sir, and I'm very angry." 

"No, no, I was fair game," said Hookem, 
" and he had me." 

VOL. III. T 



274 GBEATHEART. 



CHAPTER XX. 

AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 

1^0 sunlight, soft and warm, on the cliffs of the 
JLi Wheal Arthur; no golden glitter on the 
long pile of spreading snow surf that creamed upon 
the glistening sand; no purple weltering cloud 
shadow, nor green wash of thin shallow water over 
shoal and reef ; no gently tossing plumes of froth- 
ing breakers cresting, half sportively over the 
shark's snout of the jutting headland. 

No! it was a grey, sullen, autumn day; the 
sea was fretting and lashing from point to point, 
all the way from Bude to Penzance, rolling up 
mountain-high over the reef-rocks and cliff-but- 
tresses, and breaking into snow, and pouring down 
in regretful deluges, that in a moment more turned 
again into angry, climbing surges, that renewed 
the assault with even greater fury than before. 
One long low, continuous roar spread from rock to 
rock, and the ocean bellowed from mile after mile 
of storming wave. The wind was rising fast, and 
threatening. The boulders on the shore, rolling 
and dragging downwards, kept up a moaning 
rumbling sound that was at once mournful and 
ominous. The Sea Devil, roused to evil, was 
evidently gathering his forces to the contest. 

In the deep sea level, a little before dusk, some 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 275 

ten men had collected, under the guidance of 
Captain Tremuan, the little man with the one eye, 
and, having completed their preparations for the 
great blast, were taking their meal before conclud- 
ing their labours. 

The men were sitting with their backs to the 
corner of the level, their candles stuck in lumps 
of clay opposite them; casting a sickly yellow 
light upon their begrimed faces. Their holland 
jackets were black with powder, and red wet with 
oxidised stains. Their picks and shovels, and 
sledges, and borers, and tamping bars, were lean- 
ing near them, against the slate-rock wall of the 
level. At a safe distance from their pipes, and 
round the corner, lay tin cartridges, horns of 
powder, rush-fuzes, and rolls of touch-paper. 

" We mustn't light a snuff, my dears, till Mr. 
Arthur and the lieutenant come down," said the 
captain. " That's what Walker told me last night 
— for when the blast is over they've got some 
London gentlemen, some of those young lim- 
ner chaps, who was last year boating about Portne- 
weth, coming down to see us." 

Just then the sea seemed to heave and roar over- 
head, in a paroxysm of rage, louder than before ; 
and those who listened could hear the long, rum- 
bling rattle of the boulders, as the waves drew 
them slowly back with the turning tide. 

« If I ever heard a man hailing his own name," 
said Zacky, " I heard Captain Sampy hailing 
his last night on the shore. I heard him call 

t2 



276 OREATHEART. 

* Sarapy Sandoe,' clear, three times out of the 
surf, just by the Garnet s Head." 

"That's only when a man's drowned, you 
bufflehead," said one of his companions ; " it's 
never been heard when a man's been killed on drv 
land. You'd got some beer in your head, my dear." 

" That's right," cried the rest ; and everyone 
laughed. 

The conversation turned next upon wrecking, 

and Tremuan volunteered a storv. 

» 

• " My father," said Tremuan, " when he wasn't 
wrecking, used to get wages by raising stone from 
a quarry near Portneweth. One day when he 
was working half-way down Tower Cliff, he heard 
a buzz and flap in the air, and looking up, he saw 
two old ravens flying round very near his head. 
They kept whirling round and croaking, as if they 
were trying to speak ; after some time, when he 
ceased to notice them, they went away, and father 
went on with his work. By-and-by, back came 
the ravens, flying round about him, as before, and 
all at once, what did they do but drop down two 
pieces of wreck candle just at father's feet ? So, 
when he saw that, he said to hisself, ' Hallo, 
Tremuan, there's wreck coming in on the beach.' 
So he packed his tools together in a corner, and 
went off to look for jetsam. He searched far and 
wide, but he didn't find a haporth. Next day he 
went back to his quarry to work, and there the 
crag had given way, and buried all his tools. If 
he had staid an hour longer at work, father 'oud 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 277 

have been crushed to death — zackly so, that's cer- 
tain. So you see, my dears, what knowledge the 
ravens must have had to have known how fond 
the old man was of wreck, and that dropping the 
candles was the only plan to start him out of 
danger. And kind creatures they was, too, to be so 
willing to save a poor fellow's life. Bere, my 
man, lend us a pipe of 'bacco." 

Bere, a Devonshire man, from Combe Martin, 
pinched off a pipeful of his tobacco, and handed it 
to the anecdotic captain. 

" When I was a boy," said Bere, " there was a 
furrin vessel as broke up at night off the bar at a 
village ten miles from us. My father was there, 
watching the vessel break up (the sea was too high 
for any boat to go out) ; and while he was looking, 
he saw something dark floating towards him, the 
moon just then peeping out a bit. Just as he 
got close down to the shore, he saw that it was a 
chest, with a tall yellow man astride on it. A 
great wave came and hid him for a moment, but 
the next minute washed the man and the chest 
clean ashore. The man did not move, but lay 
flat on his face. So my father thought he was 
dead, and ran to help him, or strip him, if he was 
past praying for, and no harm in that. But be- 
fore my father could touch him, up he jumped, 
and without a thank you, ran and dragged the 
chest in, and beat off the lid with a big stone. 
Before my father knew what he was after, out he 
whips a bottle of brandy, drinks a tumbler full 



278 GBEATHEABT. 

oat of it, and hands the bottle to mj father, with- 
out a word all the time. Whether the man was 
all right, or whether he was a male witch, as some 
thought, I don't know, bat he never spoke. Bat 
he came to a bad end, for the very next day, as he 
was sitting at the inn, he stabbed one of oar fisher- 
men who laughed at him, and being taken to Bide- 
ford Gaol was found the next day dead in his cell." 

This stoiy was being much commented on, when 
Tremunn started up, and looked at a huge silver 
watch that he drew from his pocket. 

" Now to work, my dears," he cried, drawing 
the strings of his dinner-bag; ^^it*s past six — antl 
Mr. Arthur was to be down in the tram-waggon 
about that time." 

While Tremuan was still preparing for the 
blast, Arthur and the lieutenant arrived. 

" What is the depth, captain t" said Arthur. 

"Four feet deep. We're going to use seven 
fingers of powder, but the rock's damp here, Mr. 
Arthur. The swab stick won't quite clear it — 
and we've had to use the tin cartridge." 

" Is the powder in ?" 

"Yes, sir." 

" Then in with the clay tampin," said the irri- 
table lieutenant, " or we shall be here all night. 
Take care of the lights, you boy there. How foul 
the air is, Arthur ; why, the candles will hardly 
burn." 

"Turn the candles down, my dears," said the 
captain. 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 279 

The men turned the candles horizontal, so that 
the tallow dropped into the flame. The only sound 
was the ramming in the soft rock on the powder, 
and the roll and roar of the sea overhead. 

"I should like to have for pocket money all the 
ore this blast brings away," said the captain, who was 
fixing the touch paper to a hollowed rush full of 
gunpowder. 

" Who'd ever have thought, Arthur," said the 
lieutenant, " that we should ever have been down in 
the hold in a place like this, 480 feet beyond low 
water mark, and the big Atlantic overhead. By 
George, it is iti a work, too. There's as dirty weather 
brewing as ever a Dutch skipper was out in. Oh ! 
they'll have it warm to-night off the Welsh coast 
— there'll be drift-wood for the old women to 
pick up to-morrow, I tell you, between here and 
St. Anne's Head." 

" There is no danger, and I feel no fear," said 
Arthur, " but this waiting for a blast always re- 
minds me of the sort of feeling which a sailor 
must have who is expecting the first broadside in a 
sea-fight. There go the boulders again — what a 
night it will be ! " 

"That's the drag back. Not pleasant when 
you're washed on shore, and clinging to a rock by 
your eyelids for dear life," said the lieutenant. 

"When will the gentlemen be down, if you 
please?" said Captain Tremuan, coming round 
with the swab stick in his hand ; " bring the snoff 
here now, Penhaluna." 



280 GREATHEART. 

" As soon as we give the signal," said Arthur ; 
" my father's with them. By-the-bye, is that ladder 
repaired yet, Captain I" 

" No, sir, carpenter's been away — we go up in 
the kibbles." 

" Hang these fellows," said the lieutenant, as the 
ramming of the tamping bars still went on, " they 
make as much fuss about firing a few handfuls of 
powder as if they were working a battery in a hot 
engagement." 

" Now they're ready, uncle," said Arthur. 

" Under cover, my dears," cried the captain ; 
" now light the match, Penhaluna." 

The men drew back behind the angle of rock — a 
dark mass. All the lights were out but three ; 
Penhaluna stepped forward, took down one, and 
disappeared in the darkness. 

" There never was such a bunch of ore," said 
the delighted captain, at his ease now the work was 
all done ; ^' the charge is well tamped, and it'll bring 
it down with a run." 

" The snoffs well lit," said Penhaluna, as,, he 
returned with the candle, "it'll go in three mi- 
nutes." 

There was a dead silence. The lieutenant 
chafed at the time. 

" It's another blunder," he said. 

As he spoke there came a crash that seemed to 
rend heaven and earth; a volcanic blaze of light burst 
from the darkness, a shower of rock beat and splashed 
against the wall of the level. It was as when the 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 281 

last wall of a besieged city is shaken by a mine 
and falls into a gulph of fire with jarring, thunder- 
ing, and tamultaous ruin. 

" I never heard a blast go like that before," said 
the astonished captain ; " it is noise enough for the 
blowing up a powder magazine." 

" There's something wrong," said Bere ; " I hear 
a sound of water !" 

They listened. 

There was indeed audible a strange gurgling 
splash, increasing almost to a roar. Then came 
the rage of resistless waters pouring through the 
rent wall of the mine. The sea was in. 

" The sea is in !" cried all the men with one 
voice. 

Then there was a rush to the engine shaft — a 
blind, selfish, cruel, trampling rush as the water 
came roaring down the level to where they 
stood. 

In a minute or two more the men stood 
clinging to the platform of the engine shaft, drip- 
ping and frightened. Arthur and the lieutenant 
were the last to come, half wading, half swimming, 
both still vigorous, calm, and resolute. They had no 
time to think of the future. 

" Call the men's names, captain," said the lieu- 
tenant. 

Tremuan called them. 

"Trecroben?" 

" Here." 

"Zacky?" 



282 OREATHELVBT. 

No answer. 

^^TrefusUr 

*' Here.^ 

<« Trevelyan t' 

"Here." 

"Trowanr 

No answer. 

« Penhaluna !" 

No answer. 

"Berer 

*^Yes." 

**Treveneckr 

<* Here;* 

"Rashleighr 

"Here." 

^^ Zacky, Trowan, and Penhaluna are miss- 
ing/' said the captain ; ^^ aw dear I aw dear ! who 
would have thought it !" 

"These poor fellows mustn't perish without an 
effort," said Arthur. "Who will volunteer with 
me to go back down the two last levels — ^they've 
missed their way. Here, give me a candle some- 
one, ril go." 

No one said a word. 

"Belay there," said the lieutenant; "Arthur, 
don't be so mad as to go back and face that flood — 
it*ll be as much as we shall do to escape even here. 
If the water comes to us before the kibbles can 
get down, we're dead men — for the second ladder's 
broken." 

But Arthur, a true knight in heart, had already 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 283 

plunged into the darkness, bent on his chivalrous 
search. 

He waded through the water, groped along the 
walls, avoiding the trap-holes, and shouting up 
the ladders, but all in vain, till the advancing 
flood washed him off his feet, and drove him back 
down the level, where he had left the men. 

He had heard nothing but one groan in the 
entrance to the second gallery. He returned faint 
and exhausted. He looked round, and to his 
horror he saw that the lieutenant was not there. 

" Where is my uncle ? — is he gone up with the 
kibble ?" he said to Tremuan, hastily. 

"No, sir," said Zacky; "there's no kibble 
come down yet — he went in search of you, within 
a minute after you left." 

" Will no one come with me to look for him ? — 
are you all cowards ?" 

"I'll come," said Bere; "I'm a widower — it 
don't matter much about me." 

" So will I, my dear," said Tremuan. 

Off dashed the three brave men, breasting to- 
gether the current, that now rose beyond their 
waists. Their search was unavailing —floating 
timber, that was all they could see on the turbid 
current by the dim light of their candles. Every 
moment the water rose higher and more threaten- 
ing. They shouted, but the only answer was a 
lonely mocking echo from the roofing of rock. 

At tlie corner of the second level they came to, 
the two men paused, and refused to go further, 



284 OREATHEART. 

for beyond them in the darkness the water could 
be heard rushing in faster and fiercer. 

"Go back, then," said Arthur; "I will die 
here. I'll not go back till I have found him, living 
or dead." 

" Aw dear ! aw dear !" said Tremenheere, pite- 
ously ; " to hear that. Why, my dear, your candle 
is all but burnt out — the water comes in fast — the 
levels are filling — if the whim rope breaks, or too 
many of them try and get into the kibble, we are 
all lost ; the lieutenant (rest his soul) is dead and 
gone — bear it like a man, and come with us. Oh ! 
think of your father, Mr. Arthur. Shall you and 
I, Rashleigh, make him come, comraade ?" 

" If you force me I shall struggle, and then we 
shall all drown together," said Arthur. 

The men hesitated, and turned to leave. 

Just then, from the level near which they 
stood, there came a faint groan, then a cry of 
" Heave a rope there, somebody I" Arthur held 
his candle downwards, to make it flare, and leaped 
down like a shark into the deeper water. A huge 
beam fell from the roof just where he disap- 
peared. 

" He's lost !" cried the two men. " God have 
mercy upon him !" 

While they stood watching the darkness, how- 
ever, a figure emerged with a splash, carrying an 
apparently lifeless man in his arms. It was 
Arthur. 

" Quick," he said, " help me back with him to 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 285 

the engine-shaft — that beam that fell, struck him 
on the head — the water is rising fast." 

The three men hurried along the level towards 
the engine-shaft, and rested for a moment with 
the body as they reached tlie last gallery. There 
came a roar and a rush of rolling water, dashing 
through a confined passage, and chafing at the 
restraint. 

" We're lost, my dears," said Captain Tremuan, 
still cool and collected as ever ; " it's all up — the 
sea's on us — we're cut off from the engine-shaft — 
don't you hear them shouting and struggling 
yonder, at the kibbles ? — aw dear ! they can't help 
us, and we shall die like drowned rats !" 

"No, still there's one hope yet, men," said Arthur; 
" hurry on — this level to the left leads to the 
tram gallery, and I trust in God the ladder there 
is not washed away." 

" He's got a head, he has," whispered Tremuan 
to Bere, as they dashed up the dark gallery, their 
last candle all but burned out. 

As they reached the entrance to the level, which 
led by a ladder and a trap-hole to the tram gallery 
above, the candle flickered and went out. 

" Aw dear I aw dear !" said Tremuan ; " and 
before we could find the ladder, too. The water's 
up to my knees, Mr. Arthur Aw dear ! how cold 
the lieutenant's hand gets !" The last portion of 
the red wick dropped and spluttered in the w^ater. 

" Feel for the ladder, men, quick, or we shall be 
lost!" cried Arthur, sternly, for his mind was 



286 GREATHEART. 

now clenched to great efforts, and the genius of 
heroism was on him. 

Tremuan groped hopelessly along the wall, 
groaning and sighing — his courage began to fail. 
The water was racing after them with cruel and 
irresistible haste. There was no help near. The 
engine-shaft was a point of safety, but from that 
they were inexorably and for ever cut off. While 
Time lasts, no human foot would ever again tread 
those passages that they had just left. 

Arthur was raging with impatience. 

" Hold his head, Bere, while I look. Tremuan, 
come here, I'll find the ladder — why, what a dolt 
thou art, man 1" 

Arthur felt along the wall with quick care, but he 
failed also. A thought struck him. He passed to 
the other side, in their haste they must have mis- 
taken the bearings ; but there was no ladder, no- 
where any sign of a ladder — ^they had evidently mis- 
taken the level — ^this was an unworked one. 

" Yes, it is gone," he said, in a low voice. "Lads, 
we must prepare for death, let us pray together. 
Death will be on us now in a few minutes. But one 
try more — those who help themselves God helps. 
Shout with me, shout with all your might, shout, 
men, for God's sake shout, or we're lost ! — for here 
comes the water 1" 

And they did shout ; such a bellow as the 
wounded Cyclops might have given — such a roar 
as Goliath's when the stone struck him. 

"I heard a shout far off," said Bere, and 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 287 

he roared again, enough to burst his lungs. 

" Yes, there was an answer," cried Arthur. 

"Aw dear! thank GodT cried Tremuan. 

There was indeed an answer, first from one, then 
two, then a dozen voices. They came nearer. 

" Who's there ?" shouted Penhaluna, down the 
trap-hole. 

"Mr. Arthur, Lieutenant Tolpedden, Captain 
Tremuan, and Jack Bere. Let down a rope, the 
ladder's gone." 

" Gone ! there never was one. You're in the 
dead level," cried Penhaluna, as a dozen candles 
glimmered over the hole. 

Down came the rope. In a moment it was 
round the waist of the lieutenant. 

"Haul up gently there, d'ye hear, the lieu- 
tenant's been hurt, he is in a faint," shouted 
Arthur. 

In a moment or two the three men, with the 
body, were in safety, thanking their delighted pre- 
servers; and in a moment more they had reached, by 
a passage or. two, the tram-road gallery, where 
some twenty dripping men weref collected, strug- 
gling round the tram, fighting who should first 
ascend, for there was a panic on them, and a 
selfish brutal fear had extinguished all better feel- 
ings. 

Arthur leaped forward, and drew his revolver 
from his side-pocket. It was soaked — he remem- 
bered that, but he knew also that the men were 
too excited to observe that. 



288 GREATHEART. 

" Shame on you, cowards ! cowards !" he critd. 
^^Here is a dying man, and his life depends on 
his reaching the air soon* Make way for him 
there ; I'll shoot the first man who touches the signal. 
I will be the last up ; I, Captain Tremuan, and 
Bere will wait last of all, but there sliall be room 
for the lieutenant, if I kill one of you for it." 

The three men forced their way forward and 
placed the swooning man in a comer of the tram. 
As it passed out of sight the miners gained a little 
courage, and fell into some sort of order. Last of 
all, through the rising waters, went up, from the 
very jaws of death, Greatheart and his brave 
backers. 

There was a deafening shout as they rose into 
the light; a hundred hands stretched towards them, 
lights flared, women screamed, wept, and tossed 
their arras, even children shrieked with an hysterical 
delirium of joy. Mr. Tolpedden and Mr. Hookem, 
and Dodgeson, Fisher, and Hewer, were the first 
to embrace Arthur, as he leaped out of the tram, 
and thanked God that he was safe. 

Mr. Tolpedden was not a demonstrative man, 
but large tears sprang from his eyes as he pressed his 
son to his heart. Then he turned, and gravely 
continued his exertions. 

" Every widow shall have a pension," he said to 
himself, "if I have to beg for it, for the men 
have died in my service." 

A tall young man bent over the lieuten- 
ant with a light. It was Mr. Stockwell, the 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 289 

young doctor of St. Nectan's. Walker helped 
mournfully. 

" Thank God for your safety," he said, coming 
up to Arthur, and shaking his hand warmly. 
" There are eleven poor fellows drowned." 

" And my uncle f ' said Arthur, eagerly. 

" He is badly hurt ; I fear his skull is fractured. 
We must move him directly to the nearest house, 
or it'll go hard with him. I can only just feel 
his heart beat. Now then, men, bear a hand 
here." 

As they bore off the wounded man to Mr. Tre- 
gellas's. Walker leaped off a horse, and came up to 
Arthur. He had been to St. Petrock's for Mor- 
dred and Bradbrain, who had refused to come. 
He handed Arthur a note, unseen by the excite^ 
crowd, who were following the body, embracing 
the survivors, or bewaihng the dead. 

Arthur snatched a candle from a miner, and 
read the hasty scrawl. It was from Bradbrain. It 
contained these words in red ink : 

" Let the old dog rot, for all I care. I've given 
up medicine. I thought the blasted old mine 
would burst up some day or other ; it's a bad job, 
though, for your set. If your courage isn't washed 
all out of you, meet me on Friday week, at four 
o'clock, at the * Merry Maidens.' Rifles. It was our 
way at Rio, and I rather like it. There ought to be 
a settlement now between us. Has the little woman 
turned up yet, to clear my character I There have 

VOL. III. U 



290 GREATHEABT. 

been a good many lies told about me, and I mean 
to wipe a few of them ont. 

" Donald Bradbbain." 

As Arthur crammed the ribald note into his 
pocket, and hurried after his father, who just then 
turned and shouted to him, Tremuan pushed his 
way to the edge of the black shaft, now seething 
and troubled, surrounded by the survivors, and a 
crowd of weeping women and children, now widows 
and orphans. He looked down as into a grave. 

^^ Bad luck to you," he said, flinging down his 
lighted candle into the darkness. ^^ I shall never 
set my heart on a mine again. There's mammon 
and the devil at the bottom of all of you. Your 
master was worth a hundred thousand pounds 
yesterday, and now he's only worth the value of 
an old engine, and some rusty buckets. Come, 
my dears, let's have a drop of something, Zacky, at 
the ^ Three Choughs,' and try and forget it. There's 
other mines, you know, in Cornwall." 



It was the Friday week after the catastrophe 
that Arthur knocked at the Tregellases' door a few 
minutes before breakfast. Lucy knew the knock, 
and ran to let him in. She looked bright and 
hopeful as ever. 

" Why, Arthur," she said, kissing him on the 
forehead, " how pale you look I What does the 
mine matter, dear ; it is gone, so let us forget it. 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 291 

Shall I love you the less because you are 
poor 1" 

" Your love makes me rich — ^nothing can take 
away that, Lily," said Arthur, repaying the kisses 
with interest, yet not quite in his usual gladsome 
way. " No misfortune, no, not death itself, can 
change that ; it is inalienable, it is for ever, no 
king has power over our love. 1 can never be poor 
or hopeless with that. How is dear old uncle ?" 

^* Better, dear Arthur — oh ! so much better. He 
was up yesterday, and he takes an interest in things 
now — he'll be able to get up to-morrow, so Mr. 
Stockwell says, who has been here already this morn- 
ing — but he is still very weak. The doctor says the 
accident was worse for taking him when depressed, 
and with a circulation lowered by trouble ; but that 
will pass, Arthur — he seems happier now ; you 
come again to-day, Arthur?" 

"No, dear Lucy, I have pressing business — ^busi- 
ness that may 1 see uncle ?" 

*' No, not till to-morrow. Papa wants to read to 
him to-day alone, to comfort him, for the old sor- 
row still preys upon him. We haven't dared tell 
him yet that the mine is quite lost. But how 
absent you seem, Arthur ; you've not a word to say 
about my new way of doing my hair." 

" Ohl it's beautiful," said Arthur, kissing Lucy's 
eyes. " Good-bye, dear, I won't wait, as they're 
not down yet — I shall come to-morrow at the same 
time if — to-morrow, Lily. Good-bye, dearest." 

Here much kissing. 

U 2 



292 GBEATHEABT. 

« 

'^There*s something so strange in Arthur's 
manner to-day/' thought Lucj as she watched him 
pass down the road; ''he never tamed to nod 
to me. There's something on his mind, Fm sure 
of it. Oh ! dear, dear Arthur, my poor love I fear 

is no antidote for his sorrow." 

• « « « « m * 

It was an hour after breakfast that a low tap 
came at the door of the lieutenant's room. 

A faint voice answered, " Come in." 

It was Mr. Tregellas, amiable, calm, and re- 
solute as ever. It was a bright October morning, 
the yellow boughs waved pleasantly and gently 
at the window, the green Venetian blinds threw a 
kind of deceptive spring glimmer on the white 
ceiling; the room was deliciously clean, and the 
very toilet-cloth was refreshing to look at, with its 
pure snowiness. The children's voices arose 
pleasantly from the garden. 

The lieutenant sat up in bed, and resting his 
bandaged head against the back rail, smiled at his 
visitor, in a patient and happy way. The calmness 
of convalescence and of weakness was upon him, 
like the influence of an anodjme. 

Mr. Tregellas came to his bedside, and took the 
old sailor's thin hand. 

*' Arthur's been," he said, " and was so glad to 
hear you were better." 

" Dear boy ! Yes, thank God, I am better; I'm 
making headway now. I shall get some sails up, 
I shall have a clean collar on to-morrow." 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 293 

^* You begin to relish a joke. Oh 1 you're better 
— God has been good to you." 

^' Yes — he has. Man's but a poor, weak craft 
without God's chart to steer by. How are the dear 
children ? Is Kate here ?" 

" They are well — Kate isn't here — she'll be here 
in the afternoon — Jack and Ned, too. I have good 
news for you." 

The lieutenant's eyes seemed to enlarge. 

*^What about them? — or — or — about her — about 
Polly — about my wife ? Oh 1 tell me — do tell me. 
Is it about her — about Polly f Don't mention the 
mine." 

" It is about something very dear to you ; not 
about the mine — something dearer. Are you strong 
enough to bear news — important news — very im- 
portant news f " 

"What is it? Don't keep tacking so, but go 
straight into harbour. For God's sake, what is it ? 
There's something odd, Tregellas, in your manner." 

"Take your tonic first. I shouldn't tell you 
if the doctor had not permitted me — wished me." 

The lieutenant clutched Mr. Tregellas's hand, 
as if to clutch and retain the news he might bear. 

Mr. Tregellas began. 

" Now, do not tremble. Your wife, we find, was 
not really guilty." 

" Not guilty ? Thank— thank God 1" 

Large tears sprung from the lieutenant's eyes. 

" Not guilty. She had been entangled by the 
ceaseless artifices of that heartless wretch. He in- 



294 OREATHEART. 

duced her bj flattery to write to him pretended 
love-letters — they were mere imitations — innocently 
borrowed from novels and plays she had read. 
When she refused him interviews, frightened at his 
audacity, he threatened her with these letters, came 
to her again, and secretly urged her elopement. 
In such an interview, bewildered and in despair, 
she was going she knew not where, when Arthur 
stepped in and saved her." 

The lieutenant listened, leaning on one elbow, 
and drinking in the words of hope. 

" Where, then — where is she, then f — ^where is 
Polly f " he said clutching Tregellas's arm ; " we 
have driven her away — we have cast her to shame 
and ruin — where is she ? — where is she ? Oh I let 
me see her once more before I die." 

" She is here," said Mr. Tregellas, as he stepped 
to the door and opened it; "she has been concealed 
with us ever since she left your house on that un- 
lucky evening." 

There came a light foot on the floor, a rustle of 
a gown, and the little wife was once more kneeling 
and clinging to her husband's neck, bathing his face 
in tears of joy, clinging to him as if she would never 
leave him, never part from that close embrace. 

Just then there came a knock. 

"That's the children," said Mr. Tregellas, look- 
ing out of window. 



THE MEBRY MAIDENS. 295 



CHAPTER XXL 

THE " MERRY MAIDENS." 

« 

<*TT7HEREis Mr. Bradbrain?" said Mordred 
T T angrily to his pale butler as he entered 
the house on the morning referred to in Bradbrain's 
letter to Arthur. 

" In his room, sir. Just going out." 

"Just going out? Why, are there no poor 
persons waiting, StonecottI" 

" Yes, sir, half-a-dozen — been waiting this 
hour." 

"What does he mean by that! You can go, 
Stonecott ; I will speak to Mr. Bradbrain. I'll stop 
this." 

As the angry partner entered Bradbrain's room, 
that gentleman was very coolly slinging on his rifle, 
and counting out some cartridges. He scarcely 
looked round as Mordred entered. 

Mordred closed the door, solemnly, and in a 
hurt way. 

" Bradbrain," he said, seriously, " this is really 
too bad even for the patience of a tried Christian 
— ^you get worse and worse, you neglect all busi- 
ness, you spend all your time in that low inn, drink- 
ing and gambling. I will not have this — we must 
separate. This is ruining us — the bank gets into dis- 
credit — our practice is really dwindling to nothing — 



296 GREATHEABT. 

I'll have no more connection -with a reckless spend- 
thrift like you !" 

Bradbrain turned round, and clicked the spring 
of his powder-horn in a defiant manner; then, 
going to the mantelpiece, he tossed off a quarter 
of a tumbler of cognac that stood there. 

" All right, old boy," he said ; " all right, the 
sooner the better— cut the tow rope, let the fire-ship 
slip off and the rotten old barge with Burmmachen 
ware go to the bottom — ^you go your way, I go 
mine — we shan't try the same way, depend, upon 
it. Cancer take all the patients, I say — kill them 
yourself, you know how to — ^it's only to give them 
your besj advice. If you are so anxious to part, 
give me the key of the safe, and let's share the 
money at once — ^I'm ready — I haven't such an 
affection for this cursed place, or this d — country 
— why should I have, eh, old Barebones ?" 

Mordred was livid with rage. 

" If you go out now," he said, " and leave the pa- 
tients, we part to-morrow. I will no longer be 
unequally yoked with unbelievers — ^I'll bear this 
insolence no longer, sir." 

^^ Off I go," said Bradbrain ; " I'm no child to 
be browbeaten, so take your change out of that." 
Here he rang the bell, and Jackson appeared. 
^' Jackson, bring my horse round. Now, shall we 
halve the tin ? — I'm ready. I should like to see 
the inside of that safe of yours. It's my belief 
you've boned all my share. I'll have no more jaw 
from you about that hanged wife of mine either, 
mind that." 



THE MERRY MAIDENS. 297 

" To-morrow you shall have it," said Mordred ; 
" the key, as you know, has gone to Bodmin to be 
repaired, and I can't open the safe without it." 

"The old story — the old story — always some 
excuse ; but look out, for I won't be fooled much 
longer, so I tell you. Let me have the shiners to- 
morrow, or by G — Til order a fly, blow the safe 
open with powder, and go off with the whole swag. 
You try to stop me, that's all, and I'll show you what 
congestion of the brain is, with the butt-end of my 
hunting-whip, so take care of yourself, old boy. 
Tat ta! I'm off for rifle practice — don't wait 
luncheon, Mordy, pray. I want a little recrea- 
tion." 

Bradbrain turned as he said this, and cast on 
Mordred such a look of concentrated hatred, that 
if the Evil Eye had been a true superstition, 
Mordred must have dropped down dead on the 
floor. He then slammed the door fiercely behind 
him, and strode out the back way, where he in- 
stantly mounted his Jiorse and rode off. 

The moment he was gone, Mordred rang the 
bell, and called the malign boy. 

" Jackson, has Mr. Bradbrain been in the sur- 
gery this morning?" 

" Only for a few minutes, sir, making up medi- 
cme. 

" Were you with him f " 

« Yes, sir." 

" Did he touch any bottles on the fourth shelf !" 

" No, sir." 



29^ GREATHEART. 

^ Fm going out for ten minutes, Jackson, let 
any one who calls wait.** 

Mr. Mordred pat on his hat and walked straight 
to the St. Petrock's police-station. What could he 
want there f " 

Bradbrain rode at a furious pace straight to the 
moor of the ^^ Merry Maidens," the same place 
where, long ago, the fair had been held where 
Arthur rescued Sampy. 

It was a dull, grey day, with still only a whitish 
light gleaming in the east, though it wanted but 
half an hour to sunset. The murky atmosphere 
threw a gloom over furze, heather, grey stones, 
sea, and cliff. 

From the barren, tawny surface of the moor, 
the circle of Druids' stones rose like ^gantic 
monuments of those slain British chieftains who 
are said to have fallen here by the sword of 
Athelstan. 

Bradbrain rode once swiftly round the circle of 
petrified maidens, and then leaping off his horse, 
tied it up to a large upright piece of stone at some 
distance from the rest — a stone to which the Druid 
priests are supposed to have fastened their human 
victims, while they went through their preliminary 
ceremonies. 

^^ He's not here," he said aloud, with his usual 
snorting, aggravating laugh ; " coward, Santo 
Demonio^ I never thought he'd come — ^there is no 
true grit in him." 

" You see, I'm pretty punctual," said a voice at 



THE MERRY MAIDENS. 299 

that moment^ and Arthur rose from behind a huge 
block of granite, against which he had been resting 
his back ; his rifle was across his knees, and he 
was adjusting the sights as he spoke. 

" Well, you are a cool card !" said Bradbrain ; 
"are you ready? I see you've got your cup- 
winner there — 1 really thought you would not 
come up to the scratch — did, indeed." 

" Bradbrain," said Arthur, " I do not want to 
fight with you — it can do neither of us good to 
take the other^s life. You have wronged me, but 
I have retrieved the mischief, and I have forgotten 
it. There is a rumour that you and your partner are 
going to leave this part of the country — we need 
not meet again. I have done you no wrong — ^I am 
a ruined man — let our loss be your revenge." 

" By George !" said Bradbrain, slapping his hand 
contemptuously on his thigh, *^ the fellow's going 
to turn dunghill after all — dunghill, by the living 
Jingo 1 You young bridegrooms are always rather 
shy of danger at billingand cooing time. Your crazy 
girl won't let you, I suppose — that's about the size 
of it, eh ? Then I'll try and make you — at least, I'll 
let the good people at home see that you and I have 
met. Here's my autograph for you, it will remind 
you of me, in case we do not meet again." 

Arthur stepped quickly aside, and the tremen- 
dous sledge-hammer blow aimed by Bradbrain at 
his face merely grazed his hair. The next in- 
stant his clenched fist dashed full on Bradbrain's 
left cheek bone, and struck him to the ground. 



300 OREATHEABT. 

" Take my signature, then," said Arthur ; '^ that 
will repay you for your good intentions — liar, 
seducer, slanderer ! Fight, beast 1" 

" You need not hurry me — I want no hurrying," 
said Bradbrain, springing to his feet, at a white 
heat of rage. " I'm only too happy, my dear fel- 
low. We'll fight at once, and with rifles, in the 
Texan way-^ne hundred and fifty yards. Come, 
are you ready?" 

"Tm ready," said Arthur, *^and loaded — ^take 
your place." 

" Will you fight on my conditions f " 

" On any conditions." 

" My conditions will suit you, then, for you're ro- 
mantic. They are the conditions a fool once 
made me agree to before we fought at Mobile; 
and by-the-bye, I took care that he carried them 
out to the letter, for, by G — d, sir, I shot him 
through the heart. I ordered a man this morning 
to bring a boat, and leave it on the beach below 
there ; you can see it, if you crane over. Which- 
ever of us falls must be put in that boat by the 
survivor, and set adrift — there is a plank half 
stove in on purpose. That will save trouble. You 
see I mean mischief. Bomantic, isn't it ? If I go 
down — ^I should like it — it would prevent you 
crowing. If you go down, it will give me time to 
post to Falmouth. Tv^ several reasons for wish- 
ing to get there. How frank we get when we 
mean mischief, don't we ? Come, toss for places.'* 

Bradbrain threw up a sovereign. 



THE MERRY MAIDENS. 301 

" My old luck ! — hang and rot it !" lie said, spit- 
ting on the ground, as Arthur won the choice of 
ground, and calmly proceeded to load. 

At that moment the sun, near setting, broke 
forth from behind a dark cloud with a strong, 
glittering light, full on Bradbrain's face, dazzling 
him, and sparkling treacherously on the sight of 
his rifle. 

" We fire," he said, " after counting five, and as 
soon as we get to our places. Measure the ground 
with me — ^I only want fair play. Wither the sun ! 
— the Devil himself surely sent it out just at this 
nick." 

Arthur loaded carefully, and capped. The two 
men then paced the ground. Bradbrain stood 
near the first of the "Merry Maidens," a tall 
obelisk, rough with grey moss. Arthur a hundred 
and fifty feet further west on the bare moor. 

Arthur took the most careful and exact aim; 
though he did not wish to kill the rascal who had 
wronged so deeply him and his family. He aimed at 
his legs — ^very low sighting, so as just, if possible, to 
rake him, as the gun pulled up, a little to the 
right, in the knee of what Bradbrain himself would 
have called the near leg ; he wished to scotch the 
viper, but not to kill him. 

As Arthur was counting, and before he could 
reach four, Bradbrain fired. It might not have 
been treachery, but it was sharp practice, to say 
the least, and very quick counting. A long thin 
jet of flame, a sharp "whit," detonating at the 



302 GREATHEABT. 

end, a hiss, and the bnllet struck the dry, scorched 
turf, three feet from Tolpedden, and there splinter- 
ing on a chance stone flew off to the left ; but for 
that stone the ricochet must have sprung up into 
his lungs or brain. 

Arthur instantly fired, without stopping to re- 
flect on his escape — a quick, steady shot. It 
missed, and Bradbrain advanced towards him. 

"Well done, youngster," he said; "you shoot 
better now than you did for the cup. Your bullet 
struck the ground only three inches from my 
right foot. If I had had it sprawling out, you'd 
have caught me a nice one in the ankle. I fired 
rather low, still I should have had you but for that 
cursed stone. I tried just to splash it up into you. 
I have tried it with standing shots at deer. I'll 
aim at your nob next time. But come, we'll have 
our next round downstairs on the sand — the sun 
spoils my shooting here; you won't object? I 
suppose you don't wan't to murder me in cold 
blood I Come." 

" I shall fire no more," said Arthur ; " I have 
given you your chance, and I've had mine. We 
are not likely to cross each other any more. Let 
us part." 

"Now, I like that," said Bradbrain, neighing, 
not laughing. " Didn't I tell you, my good fellow, 
I meant mischief I Do you think I never killed my 
man before — ^you don't know me 1 I'll make you 
fight again, if I have to take the butt end of my rifle. 
You see that colour on the sea down there, like 



THE MERET MAIDENS. 303 

the bottle in a chemist's window — ^that's what I 
want to get out of you, my man." * 

The sun had sunk lower, and from beneath long 
bars of lurid cloud it now cast a crimson lustre on 
the sea. 

Bradbrain must have been drinking hard, and 
for some days, for his eyes were suffused with 
blood, his cheek was hot and dry, and his lips were 
a flushed sallow. 

'^ Very well," said Arthur. " I am ready, if you 
will Tiave it. But I tell you again, I don't want 
to hurt you — see how your hand shakes." 

" I'll tap blood to-night, or get tapped. I feel 
kinder dangerous," said Bradbrain. " Bleeding is 

good for the horrors, and I've got them — d 

them ! I can allow for the shaking — I know your 
dodges. I'd have killed you that last shot, if I 
had been a trifle steadier. Come, it's getting dusk 
— we must economise our light. There's husbandry 
in heaven, you know, and Providence sets us a 
good example." 

Arthur followed this brutal, blasphemous mad- 
man, this hardened debauchee, and they went 
down to the beach. Bradbrain chose a place on 
the soft white sand, a sort of little bay between the 
slate rocks, and paced out the distance — the sand 
and the cliffs were dull red with the sunset ; the 
boat Bradbrain had mentioned lay there motionless 
by the rock. 

" Whether it is being all day yesterday cupping, 
and that sort of work," said Bradbrain, looking at 



804 GBEATHEAKT. 

the boat, "but everything to me looks red — sea, 
rock, sky, everything — is it really so ?" 

*' Where we stand is red — it'll be dark soon," 
replied Arthur, tearing off the cartridge paper, 
and loading carefully, so that not a grain of the 
coarse powder was spilled. He pressed down the 
leaden cone with dexterous care, chose a dry, clean, 
bright cap and pressed it well home. 

Bradbrain loaded with careless and savage haste, 
affecting to despise all precaution, and threw his 
rifle over his shoulder. 

" You fired rather soon last time," said Arthur, 
meaningly ; " next time let us fire as soon as we 
both reach the marked places." 

Bradbrain snorted out a laugh. 

" Ha I ha !" he said, " you get sharper, my young 
customer ; I said count five, but 1 never said how 
fast, did I, eh ?— ha ! ha !" 

Bradbrain's position was not far from a tall detached 
mass of granite, split and cleft in all directions, 
rounded by centuries of rain and storm, and about 
five feet high- Arthur stood at some distance from 
the cliff, and facing an opening in the rock. 

^TLast time," said Bradbrain, taking a deep draught 
at a pocket-fiask, as they turned to take their places. 
" You downy one, you fixed me up against a stone 
that marked my level, and brought your rifle well 
on me, but this time I have been cuter. Now, I bet 
you ril nick you for a fiver — will you take it? 
What a pity we didn't get a coffin ready for the 
man who's dropped — oh I it was a pity !" 



THE MERRT MAIDENS. 305 

Arthur made no reply, but walking sharply to 
the marked line, turned, took the same calm, 
steady aim as before, and fired. The instant he 
put up his rifle and touched the trigger, Brad- 
brain flung himself down with a leap behind the 
granite block on his left ; then rising quick as 
thought, and placing his rifle on the stone, he took 
deliberate, deadly aim, and fired. The bullet 
struck Arthur, he threw up his arms and fell upon 
his face on the sand. 

Bradbrain ran up to him with a yell of cruel, 
bitter triumph, looked for the wound and felt it. 

" Done the trick, by the Lord Harry !" he cried ; 
" knocked him over like a partridge — caught him 
in the ribs and through the lungs^-too much for 
him — dodged him, by George ! — Santo JDemonio ! 
I've got him now — no pulse — he'll be dead in an 
hour. Now, then, to fioat him. Come along, you pig!" 

In a moment or two, with delirious strength, 
Bradbrain dragged the wounded man over the 
sands and rocks, and through the shallow water, 
and tossed him into the boat. Leaping in after 
him, in a few minutes, he set up the mast, 
dragged the heavy square sail into its place, and 
tied the tiller fast. Then kicking the broken 
plank with his foot, he leaped out, and drove the 
boat down before him with tremendous effort, 
through the soft, dragging sand, till it began to 
lift, and the sail to fill. The wind blowing from the 
shore, seized it, and it began to move forward. 
Presently it got into deep water, dipped, skimmed, 

VOL. III. X 



306 GBEATHEABT. 

and flew before the breeze with a gurgling rush 
of the parting waves under the keel. 

Bradbrain watched it till it became a mere grey 
spot, and passed into the dusk. Then whirling 
both the rifles far into the sea, he darted up the 
path leading to the moor, where he had left his 
horse. 

" That'sathird account settled — nowfor the night 
express," he said, and with a laugh, he dug his spurs 
into his horse's side and rode at a furious gallop on 
the road to Bodmin. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

A MYSTERIOUS PERSON WHO WILL TAKE NO 
REFUSAL GALLS ON MR. MORDRED. 

WHEN Mr. Mordred returned from the police- 
station, he left word for the officer to follow 
him in ten minutes. This would prevent scandal. 

When he knocked at the door, Stonecott, the 
butler, opened it, stony and suffering as usual. 
The country people said he was kept to try medi- 
cines on. 

" If you please, sir," he said, " there's Jackson's 
father wants to see you — ^he's in the surgery." 

Mordred found the old miner pale, worn, and 
feverish, his eyes staring ; nervous derangement 
visible in every look and movement. 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSON. 307 

"Why, what's the matter, John?'' he said; 
" did that htisiness in the mine upset you ?" 

" Naw, naw, sir, hut IVe seen the Death Ship- 
sure as you stand there I saw the Death Ship last 
night in Endellion Bay." 

" Nonsense ! — what do you mean hy the Death 
Ship, man!" 

"Well, my dear, it sometimes appears before 
the death of people. I, Captain Tremuan, and 
Bere, were on the cliff last night touching a pipe, 
and talking over the mine and the Wheal Arthur, 
when we saw all at once a tall, dark, square-rigged 
craft loom through the haze, with black sails, and 
run in almost close to us. There was no one at 
the helm, no look out, no one heaving the lead — 
but there it lay for a good five minutes. All at 
once the sails began to shiver, then to fill ; it glided 
away like a shadow, and disappeared in an instant. 
We beat the sea all over, but could not make out 
a single sail ; then up we ran, all three of us, 
to St. Nectan's church town, and told the news 
there ; everyone said it was the Death Shipy and 
that it was bad news for some one who was wanted 
for no good. Aw dear ! aw dear I that I should 
have ever lived to watch the sea break into the 
Wheal Arthur, and to see the Death Ship !" 

" What time was this, may I ask ?" 

" Eleven o'clock, sir — aw dear 1 aw dear I how 
my head and limbs do ache !" 

Mordred felt the man's pulse, and then dropped 
his hand contemptuously. 

x2 



308 OREATHEART. 

"I tell you what it is, Jackson/' he said, 
*'youVe been drinking hard — this won't do — this 
sort of life won't bring a man peace at the last. 
Go into the kitchen, and Stonecott shall bring you 
some tonic — ^take it three times a day, and don't 
touch any drink. Your nerves are shaken — 
don't go about telling cock-and-bull stories like 
that, man. What you felt was incipient de- 
lirium tremens — stuff and nonsense about death- 
ships I " 

As the man shambled out of the room, Stone- 
cott entered. 

^^ Stonecott," said his saturnine master, ^^make 
up some steel and salvolatile for that old sot of a 
fellow, and send him off." 

Just then a low mysterious rap came to the 
door. Stonecott moved to go. 

" No," said Mordred, " I will go — I know who 
it is. 

It was the police-sergeant, a Wiltshire man^ 
named Hacket, a hard-boned, stolid, shrewd man, 
who regarded virtue with toleration, but still with ex- 
treme suspicion. He wore a blue frock-coat, carried a 
small cane, and looked ripe for business. Mordred 
showed him into the best room stealthily, and the 
man sat down uneasUy, putting his iron-bound hat 
between his huge booted feet, and resting on the 
very edge of his chair. 

^^ Is the party you has the complaint against ar- 
rived, sir?" 

^^ No, I expect him in about an hour." 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSON. 309 

**Wliat is your special complaint that I'm to 
take down against him f " 

"I am in danger of personal violence. He 
threatens me — he swears he will rob the house. I 
am in imminent danger, I tell you, from this man. 
Police-sergeant, he has for some time past been 
secretly experimenting with poisons on cats, 
pigeons, and dogs, and I have every reason to 
suppose that he is a man who would not hesitate 
to use such means of taking my life; I wish you 
to examine my servant as to these facts, and to 
search his desk and trunks. He has also robbed 
me ; he has been twice to my safe with false keys, 
and taken out four marked twenty-pound notes." 

" Have you the key of the safe Y* 

"No, it was sent yesterday to Bodmin to be 

altered." 

"Who took it!" 

" The boy Jackson." 

" Have you used any precautions against the 
suspected party's use of poisons or dangerous 
drugs r 

" Yes, I have removed and locked up. several, 
the others are still on the shelves, with marks in 
chalk, so that they cannot be taken down and re- 
placed without my knowing it. The fronts of the 
bottles rest against the mark. They are all on 
the fourth shelf in the surgery." 

" Has the party ever threatened to poison you f " 

" Yes, he has often — indirectly." 

" That will do, then. I will now, sir, go into 



t 



r 



^' Oftrx- 



^ ^ Tr.. 






,^ » 



'^'^•^.i 

. n.r -: 






^ 



' s 



^^ 



V, • 



iJN ^ 



IC i _ 



.-^ - . 



*. 



V '^- 



->» *. 



?KH. 



a^i-^w 



^■^i; 



X 



,s. 



^5r> 




^P— ^^BB^w— .», 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSON, 311 

•^ Oh ! yes you do, my man, about one or two 

ings. How about that hand-saw you were seen 

hide in the hedge near St. Nectan's the day of the 

icident ? Oh ! we'll brighten you up a bit in the 

reformatory. They like boys of your age there. 

^he governor's such a nice man — ^rather strict, per- 

laps, but that's no great account. There, don't 

"jlubber, be a good lad, tell all, and we'll see what 

*we can do. I suppose you obeyed orders about the 

ladder, eh ? No blubbering." 

" I did, please, sir, I did. Mr. Bradbrain swore 
he'd shoot me the first minute I told anything, or 
cheeked him, or broke his orders, or blabbed any- 
thing to the old gov'nor." 

" Come, no blubbering," said the sergeant, in a 
louder voice, " for I won't have it, now, so I tell 
ye. Get up, and show me the way up-stairs ; but 
stop a bit, I'll just step in and ask the old party first." 

The policeman, with a face full of knotted 
mysteries, went out into the passage, and tapped 
softly at the parlour door. 

" Come in," said a low voice. 

" Have you any objection, sir, to my examining 
the up-stairs room 1" 

" None in the world ; look at everything, but 
don't disarrange it. You have the case in writing, 
all my suspicions for the last month, and all the 
dangers I fear, are noted down ; do what you like, 
but make haste, for he'll be back to dinner in half 
an hour. Do not let me prejudice you against the 
person you know of. Let us be merciful, sergeant. 



\^^^. - 



312 OREATHEABT. 

even as our Father in heayen is mercifal.'^ 

" That boy Jackson's a bad lot." 

" Is he indeed — ^is he indeed? Then Til dismiss 
him." 

" All in good time, sir — ^but don't hurry, hurry- 
ing's always bad in these cases." 

The door closed softly again. 

The sergeant pointed to the stairs, and up went 
Jackson. Hacket followed, his ponderous feet 
making no more sound than if they had been soled 
with felt. There was the mystery of the Sphynx 
in his face, a grim resolution about his stony 
mouth and hard, protuberant eyebrows, as if he 
was expecting to surprise a nest of coiners. He 
hummed moodily, as he went up, an old street- 
song of fifty years ago, a quaint, melancholy bit 
of doggerel, which began with, 

^^ Napoleon is come from the wars of aQ fighting, 
He's gone to a place he ne'er can take delight in, 
He sits there and tells of the battles he has seen-a, 
But his heart is full of woe in the Isle of St. Helena/' 

"This is the young governor's door," said Jack- 
son, pointing to a bed-room door at the end of a 
landing. " Old govemor^s at other end." 

The sergeant pushed the door, and tried the 
handle tentatively. It was locked. 

" Bust it open, sir," said the zealous Jackson. 

The sergeant made no reply; he felt in his 
pocket for a large bunch of odd-shaped keys. He 
tried one, then another, the fourth key opened the 
door quickly and at once. 



A HT8TEBI0DS PERSON. 313 

There was the bed still unmade, the flre-place was 
full of the ashes of bamt papers. The sergeant 
lifted the soft tinder extremely carefully, took it to 
the light, and held it ap to notice some letters still 
visible on the curled black flakes. On the dress- 
ing-table cloth there was the stump of a cigar, 
which had charred a large hole in the white cloth 
and bnmt a scar in the table. There were some 
torn French prints in the table drawer. 

The sergeant tried the lid of a desk that stood 
on a side-table. It was unlocked ; he lifted it and 
looked in ; it was empty, all but a percussion cap 
or two and a fishing-hook. 

"Mizzled, by George!" was his only exclamation 
as he looked at the floor, on the ceiling, and then 
twice out of window in the direction of Bodmin. 

Then he suddenly ran to the fire-place, and 
scooped out the tinder with both hands. As he 
did so a calcined key fell on the hearth. 

" What does this open t" he said, turning sharp 
ronnd on Jackson, seizing him by the throat, and 
throwing bim on hb knees. 

"It's the key of the safe. Oh! don't — don't, sirl 
Oh ! you hurt me 1 I'll tell all ! That's the key 
of the safe, sir. Mr. Bradhrain made me give it hin 
up — I daren't tell guv'nor. He said if I to' 
he'd make cold meat of me before night, even 
he had to strangle me in my sleep." 

" You are two nice ones, you are. Well, 
this quiet for the present," 

The sergeant stooped and looked un^ 




'314 OREATHEART. 

drawers, the f ender, the bed ; then he shook the 
vallance of the bed, and felt with his hands all 
over the roof of the bed. Under the drawers he 
found rolled up in a comer a small empty bottle. 
This he put in his pocket. 

** Where's the bank safe?" he said, still holding 
Jackson fast ; " oh I you're a nice boy, you are. 
Now, come quick, or I'll shake it out of you." 

" Oh I don't — don't ; I'll tell everjrthing, mister. 
It's down behind the surgery door. Oh ! you hurt 
me, you do hurt me 1" 

They went down, and Jackson, pushing back 
the surgery door, showed the door of a green 
safe. The sergeant put the burnt key into the 
lock, and it opened at once. The shape of the key 
was uninjured. He opened the doors and drawers 
— the safe was empty ; not even a scrap of paper. 

" As I thought," he said. 

And he began to hum once more the doleful bal- 
lad about Napoleon — " The wars of all fighting — " 

Then he went back into the surgery and thought 
for a moment ; after which he went straight to the 
parlour door, and knocked softly. 

" Come in," said Mordred. 

The sergeant stepped in, and handed the banker 
the bottle he had found without a word. 

Mordred took the bottle and smelt it. 

" Gracious God ! it is Atropine ! A thousandth 
part of a grain of that kills in three seconds. That's 
what I fear with this bad man — that, sergeant, is 
what I continually fear." 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSON. 315 

" Itfa all right, sir, never you mind ; leave it in 
my hands, and I'll pull you through. There are one 
or two disagreeable things about this party before. 
r>o you, after using, seal the strings of the bottles 
containing the poisons t" 

"Yes, that ia ray invariable practice. I also 
keep a diary in which I insert the quantities bought, 
the doses given, their weight, and all particulars. 
You'll find the book in the comer of my surgery. 
Please to tell Jackson to order Stonecott to briBg up 
dinner in ten minutes." 

"Yes, sir ; don't you be tinder no alarm, sir. I 
shan't leave the house just yet." 

The door closed again. Hacket gave the order to 
Stonecott, then went back to the surgery, took up the 
medicine glasses one by one and sniffed at them. 

"Jackson, Mr. Mordred wants his dinner; take 
it in." 

Then the sergeant got a chair, stood up and 
carefully examined the poison shelf ; no bottle was 
displaced, but there was one with no wax on the 
string. It was labelled " Nicotine" in gilt letters on 
black ground, and contained a spoonful or so of 
a whitish yellow semi- crystalline substance. 

He stepped to the parlour where dinner was 
being laid. 

" "There's no bottle touched, air, on the particol 
shelf," he said, " but there's one with no wax 
the string. Have you used that lately T" 

Mr. Mordred did not reply for a moment, 
he Baid slowly, as if reflecting, 




316 GREATHEART. 

^'No; but there i^as one unsealed, I think, the last 
time I looked, a fortnight ago. Oh, that's nothing." 

Hacket returned to the surgery ruminating. 

" Jackson," he said to the boy, " did you ever 
see Mr. Mordred go to this shelf, or touch any of 
these bottles 1 And if so, when last I" 

" I saw him this morning," said the boy quietly, 
^* before Mr. Bradbrain was up. He took out a grain 
and mixed it with some yellow stuflf like sherry he 
bad in a glass. He did not know I saw him, 
but I was looking through a crack in the door." 

The sergeant whistled, ruminated again, and 
wrote a small addition sum on one of the blotting 
pads ; then he swung back on the high stool, and 
sent for the frightened butler. 

Stonecott came. 

"Who gets up the wine here and decants it, 
Stonecott?" 

"Mr. Bradbrain, sir." 

"Always?" 

"Always." 

" What's his liquor — his reg'lar daily tipple, I 
mean ?" 

" Always pale sherry, Mr. Mordred always port 
—never different." 

" Where are the decanters kept ?" 

" In the cellaret in the parlour." 

"Open?" 

"No, Mr. Mordred has one key and Mr. Brad- 
brain another." 



A MYSTERIOUS PERSON. 317 

**Did Mr, Bradbrain take any wine this morn- 
ing before he went out, Stonecott!" 

" No, sir, not to my knowledge," said Stonecott, 
almost paralyzed with fear, 

"Yes, sir, please, he did," said Jackson ; *'he sent 
me downstairs for the port wine, and I took it up 
into his bedroom when Mr. Mordred and Mn 
Stonecott were out. 

" You're sure it was port wine f " 

" Yes, sure ; I observed it because I had never 
seen him take port before." 

" Had he any bottle near him when you came 
up to take the decanter away t" 

" Yes ; a small bottle like the one you found." 

" And you told no one f " 

" No ; I made no account of it ; they're always 
pouring about medicines, both on 'em, all over*the 
house." 

The sergeant reflected, with his hand over his 
mouth; then he looked at the shelf where the danger* 
ous bottles were. 

Just then the cook shouted up the kitchen stairs 
for Stonecott to take in the joint. Stonecott 
turned to go, but Hacket pushed him back. 

" Stop," he said. " I'll go ; things look rather 
fishy. T must report about this bottle — don't half 
like the look of it." 

At that moment the parlour bell clashed out. 
It was not a common ring ; and there rose through 
the house a shriek also— a yell, as of a creature ixi 



318 ORE^THEAST. 

torture. Hell itself never rang with such an out- 
burst of pain and bitter anguish. 

The two men and the boy rushed to the room. 
They dashed open the door ; there stood Mordred 
leaning on the table by the fire, and near the bell. 
A broken wiue-glass was in his hand, the cold dew 
of death was already bursting out from his forehead, 
his eyes were dilated, and wild with agony and 
despair. 

"I'm poisoned I" he screamed. "Atro — atro— 
atropine — milk — antidote — quick — milk — milk — 

he did it — save !" He fell backwards as lie 

spoke, dragging the cloth and all on the table in 
one shattered ruin with him. His head struck the 
steel fender heavily as he fell. 

The sergeant ran round and listened at Mor- 
dred's heart. It had stopped for ever. The man 
so unfit to die had gone suddenly to his account. 

" It's a case !" said the policeman, as he 
dropped the dead man's hand, which was already 
cold as marble, " if I ever saw a case. You attend 
to the body, yon two. I must be off to Bodmin, 
sharp, and see if I can snap our gentleman at the 
station ; he's sure to make for that, I believe one 
party was as bad as the other party ; but the deuce 
is that Pm too late to catch the night express, but 
I'll telegraph. Hang him! but he planned it 
well, and he'll squeak for it, too. I should like to 
see what there is in the sherry wine — nothing too 
wholesome, I suspect." 




THE " FLTING-nSH." 319 



CHAPTER XXm. 

THE " FLYING FISH." 

THE Flying Fish was at her moorings, about a 
mile from Endellion. The Sultan Editor had 
been fishing with the lieutenant, now all but re- 
covered, and Fisher, Dodgeson, and Hewer. 
Dinner over, the Sultan and his friends leaned over 
the bulwarks, discussing some iced punch. The 
crew had got the little bark smartly under weigh, and 
turned her head for St. Tud/s, where they hoped 
to find Arthur, whose rifle they thought they had 
hejird once or twice in that direction. 

The young moon had just risen, and threw a 
little trembling waver of pearly and golden light 
upon the calm sea. 

The Sultan had broached a tremendous theory, 
but one not altogether new. 

" Wars should be carried on by private con- 
tract," he said, lighting his third cigar. "The 
Aifghan was a failure — ^the Crimean was too long 
and too expensive. Messrs. Brassey,.or Peto and 
Orissel, would do it for half the amount. Make 
guns, hire troops, transport stores, and take for- 
tresses, at a regular per-centage. How I wish 
Arthur was here, Dodgeson I This punch iis simply 
perfect. Oood heavens! what a dreadful thing 



320 QBEATHEART. 

it 18 about that mine I I dream about it, liea- 
tenaot — ^"pon my soul, I do." 

" Don't talk of it," said the lieutenant, sighing, 
" though happy aa I am now, I can afford to 
forget the mine ; but when I think of Arthur's 
proposal to start from the church door on his 
wedding-day, poor boy, and go to that cursed 
nest of yellow fever, the West Indies, to live for 
three years at an infernal hot sugar-factory, it 
makes my heart bleed — 'pon my word it does ; but 
he will go— there's no stopping him." 

" Tm sure it knocks me over," said Dodgeson ; 
" but he is the finest fellow — the pluckiest, 
finest fellow — I ever did set my eyes on. 
How he can have the courage to leave such 
a jolly girl, such a tramp of a girl as that, I don't 
know. I couldn't for all the sense of duty in the 
world. IsrCt he a brick, Hookem V 

" What, Arthur t" said Hookem, tapping off the 
long white ash of his cigar, " I believe you my 
boy ! He's the best^natured fellow with a brain 
of any size I ever saw. Here, Sailing-master 
Kobinson, brew some more punch like the last. 
What's this great picture of Wallis's, then, for 
next May, Fisher — ^the one that Stacy Marks 
writes you about — the swell one for the next exhibi- 
tion V 

" Oh, it's fine, though it's awfully gloomy," said 
FisheP; ''btit I suppose it'll come all right. It is 
called ' Easter Time at the Workhouse.' There is 
a large barred window looking out on a court with 




THE " FLYING-FISH." 321 

an apple-tree in bloom beyond, to the right. At 
the window there are some old men peering out 
— ^poor careworn, jaded old paupers — hopeless, 
moping, and heart-broken. I wonder if a Poor- 
law Commissioner will buy it." 

" What you men want," said Hookem, assuming 
his rhetorical Sir Robert Peel attitude, "is 
some one to rival that wonderful young Frenchman 
Gustave Dor6 on wood — ^his vast force, irresistible 
energy, lightning flashes of imagination, but 
'more taste and decency, and less caricature. By 
Heaven, sir, look at his whirlwinds of white 
plumes, his hurricanes of knights I How he lifts 
towers eighty feet higher than they ought to 
be, and makes men's heads fly about in his battle 
scenes like apples in an orchard in rough weather. 
That's the man, sir, for my money." 

" What an awfully jolly life this is of ours, we 
pirates of the deep!" said Dodgeson extending 
himself flat upon his back, and looking up at the 
sky with the peak of his beard. " Just look at 
the big cliffs stretching away to windward, and see 
the little star lights breaking out now from head- 
land to headland." 

All this time the lieutenant was watching, with 
the quiet delight of an invalid, the smart handling 
of the little vessel, and quoting to Hewer his 
favourite lines from Falconer. 

^' To topsails next they haste ; the bontlines gone. 
The cluelines through their wheePd machinery run. 

VOL. III. T 



322 GKEATHEAET. 

On citiier side below the Bheete are monn'd. 
Again the fluttering Buk their ekiite expand. 
Once more the topsails, though with humbler plume. 
Mounting aloft, their ancient poet resume." 

"That's poetry," stud the lieutenact emphati- 
cally. 

All of a sadden Fisher, who had been sweeping 
the horizon with an eRormous telescope, turned 
round and shouted — ' 

" Come here, you fellows! — come here,Hookem 1" 
he cried. " My eyes I what is this at our lee-bow t 
— it's a stray boat, by George I got adrift ; there's 
no one in it, and it's scudding like flying Isaac. 
Let's get ours out, and board it. It^ll do a service 
to some poor devil- on shore who can't afford to 
lose it ; and if it's only a lobster boat, and the fel- 
lows are asleep, we'll keep it and make them get 
some lobsters for us. Lower the boat, there T 

"Lower the boat, there, d'ye hearT' cried 
Hookem; and down the boat went man-of-war 
fashion — smart. 

"It is curious," said Dodgeson, kneeling and 
looking over the side of the vessel ; then letting 
himself down lazily into the boat. 

"I think I see something black under the sail, 
all along," said Hewer, as thej pnlled fast to in- 
tercept the prize. 

" Yes, so do I," said Fisher ; " it is a man, too, 
and asleep. Get the boot-hook ready, bosun." 

Hookem shouted from the vessel, as they came 
on it; Fbher leaped on board and hauled 



THE END OF THIS STRANGE HISTORY. 323 

down the sail. His friends waited with intense 
eagerness. He stooped down; the next moment 
his face rose over the gunwale, pale and scared. 

^^ Good God ! you fellows," he shouted, " d'ye 
know it's Arthur 1 Someone has shot him — he's 
bleeding — he's fainted. Here, men, tumble up, 
quick 1 Pull to land ; he'll die, if we can't get a 
doctor soon." 

In a moment eight stalwart burly men, with 
flashing oars, were urging the boat to land with 
the irresistible speed of steam. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE END OF ALL THIS STRANGE EVENTFUL 

HISTORY. 

THE spring had come round, with its soft rosy 
apple blossoms, its songs of birds, its sunshine, 
its boundless hope. 

On a certain morning, early in May, a large crim- 
son flag fluttered from the tower of St. Petrock's 
Church, and the three bells clattered out their 
simple harmonies, in response to their kinsmen bells 
of St. Nectan's. There was a cluster of miners and 
fishermen, headed by Captain Tremuan, Bere, and 
Walker ; the neat maid-servants, presided over by 
old Liddy, collected round the porch, and round 
the old stone cross, waiting for the appearance of 
a certain couple not unknown to us. A fly with 

y2 



324 OEEATSEABT. 

two grey horses stood at the churchyard gate ; the 
postilions bossed with white cockades, flicking 
their ready whips. 

The solemn service over, the last sacred vow 
taken, a Binall cluster of people had repaired to 
the small neat vestry ; and as they went, Arthur 
turned and kissed Lucy with a love that was too 
intense for words — a love that disdained conceal- 
ment. 

It was a grave and silent meeting, for all knew 
what was coming. Mrs. Tolpedden was shedding 
tears, fast as the Arabian tree its medicinal gums. 
Mr. Hookem shed tears too, but in a j^and way — 
pretending to treat them as the result of a severe 
cold in the eyes. 

Messrs. Dodgeson, Fisher, and Hewer were try- 
ing to sketch the crowd from the church windows, 
and weeping in sly comers — half ashamed of their 
grief. 

Arthur was firm, but he was suffering bitterly, 
or else why did his lower lip quiver as he took his 
farewell of Lucy, and drew her back into the 
church, to part from her there undisturbed t 

" Lucy," he said, " Lily, my wife, my own, 
half of my heart, kiss me, sweetest, dearest. We 
must part now — darling, be firmer. Good-bye — 
one more kiss — one long, long kiss, dearest. It is 
only three years, and I shall return to you, dearest. 
They will soon pass — it is nothing. You will write 
every mail, dear— one more kiss ! Oh, it is hard I 
— it is hard to part — it is worse than death ! Lucy, 




THE END OF THIS STRANGE HISTORY. 325 

pray to God to spare me, Lily — pray to God, as 
I shall." 

She looked up, and turned on him her dewy 
tearful, mournful eyes. She gave him one long 
look of such intense sorrow, and then flung her- 
self on his breast in a bitter agony of speechless 
grief. 

Slowly, and with a heart— oh ! how heavy ! — 
Arthur released her twining arms from his neck, 
and called to Milly to take care of her — his wife 
— his own. He stooped, threw his arms round 
her, he clasped her, and a few large, burning 
tears fell, as he pressed her face to his in one long, 
intense, and passionate kiss. Then he turned to go. 

Two strong, firm hands arrested him. It was 
his father, smiling through some few remaining 
tears, that proudly he shook from his large lion-like 
eyes as he spoke. 

*^ Arthur," he said, taking his son's hand, "I 
have proved you now to be Mr. Greatheart indeed! 
You are steel of the true temper — ^you only harden 
in the fire. The sacrifice, so difficult to make, and 
yet so willingly made, is unnecessary now. Thanks 
be to the giver of all gifts, six days ago I dis- 
covered the metal I have been so long in search of. 
Since that some great firms at Sheffield have offered 
me three thousand pounds a year for its use. You 
shall not go to the West Indies. We shall be all 
rich now. You shall go to college, pursue your 
cai*eer, and fame and happiness will be yours, for 
you deserve them 1" 



326 QREATHEABT. 

Was there ever auch a scene as when Arthur 
returned, and Lncy sprang from Milly's arms to 
meet him, having already heard of the glorions 
newst Did not Hookem, Dodgeson, Fisher, and 
Hewer shout till they got apoplectic in the face ! 
Did not the lieutenant sit down and burst into 
tears of joy, which Polly coiild only efface by in- 
cessant kissing t Was there a prouder and happier 
man in the world than Mr. Tolpeddeu ! Did not 
the Miss Wavertons arrange themselves in classical 
groups round Miss Trevena? Did not John Tre- 
vena squeeze Milly's hand in spite of all remon- 
strance, and did not Jack and Kate and Ned kiss 
Bobby, and then lead Clara and Herbert to im~ 
promptu altars, performing dances of joy, only 
allowable there under the circumstances t 

And when they all came out into the open air, 
did not the men, especially Thomas, the handsome 
coachman, and Walker, Tremuan, and Bere, shout 
till the very tower rocked, and Liddy, Fanny, Lizzy, 
Susan, and all the women cry and wave handker- 
chiefs till the carriages were out of sight on the Tol- 
peddeu road ? 



Let the cnrtain fall upon our little world ; why 
linger with a tedious epilogue t 

The day after Mr. Mordred died, a notice that 
his bank had ceased payment appeared on the 
office door, to the horror of the town. The sus- 
pension did not injure many persons, for it had 




THE END OF THIS STR. 

been long foreseen. Mr. Tre 
ing people of the neighbour! 
withdrawn their money. T 
were reimbursed by the sale c 
perty. As for the Chancerj 
dwindled away, and died a na 

At the inquest a verdict oi 
turned against Bradbrain, wl 
Southampton in an Italian vc 
andria. 

As for Jackson, Sergeant 
get him sentenced to a yeai 
hard labour, and two subsequei 
Reformatory. 

Within a week of the w( 
had the pleasure of informing 
that Lord Rostrevor had giver 
shire, close to Salisbury, W( 
year, upon which, in spite o 
monstrance from his sister, 
Milly took place very shortly 

The Forge still thrives, in 
tempts of the Trimmer to get 
it, to board it, to spring toi 
to generally sink it ; Arthur 
contributor. Dodgeson was tl 
of the academy, and Fisher an( 
the same honour soon ; Lucas 
property at a very satisf actor 
risingbarrister, making a gooc 
which he affects to despise ; i 




328 OREATHEABT. 

ing all his Colenso scruples^ isnowafashionable curate 
at a West-end chapel. Mr. Waverion is still single, 
but is more moderate in his ceremonials, and alto- 
gether a more consistent and rational being. 

And now a word about the arch-scoundrel Brad- 
brain. When his rooms were searched there was 
found on his book-shelves eight or ten numbers of 
the most scrofulous of the French novels, an Ency- 
clopaedia, with the leaf turned down at the article 
Poisons J and in one comer a bundle of scented letters, 
tied with blue ribbon, and directed to Lieutenant 
Tolpedden, with Mr. Bradbrairia kind regards. To 
be forwarded immediately. This dangerous parcel 
was handed privately by Hacket, to Mr. Tolpedden, 
who instantly burned it in secret. 

A month after Bradbrain's flight, the following 
paragraph appeared in the Times : 

"Distressing Ooourbenoe. — ^The schooner 
Albatrossj Captain Joyce, from Southampton to 
Alexandria, laden with rum, was destroyed by fire 
on the 11th ult., off the African coast. The fire 
was occasioned by a drunken passenger going down 
with a naked light into the spirit-room. Only 
three persons perished, the rest escaped in the 
boats. Two of those who were lost were invalids ; 
the third, a young surgeon — whose name has since 
been discovered to have been Bradbrain — who 
came aboard in Southampton Water under most 
suspicious circumstances, and who had drunk him- 
self almost into delirium tremens^ was missed before 
the boats had got four hundred yards from the 



THE END OF THIS STB : 

burning vessel ; he was then 
the poop, black against the &i 
help. Four men were sent b 
to bring him away by force, 1 i 
plosion took place, the vessel ' 
he was no more seen. The n ( 
the man fortunately escaped, i 
them up when their own was s ' 
tro88 was a Liverpool vessel, a : 

Mr. Tolpedden burned the [ 
read it, in order that Mrs. T : 
see the terrible paragraph des( : 
end of that depraved and lost : 

Bradbrain's bullet,, it was fc i 
axillary artery (reaching fron i 
ribs), but fortunately had inji i 

There are two more sento 
Pippin is to go to sea in two ; 
lieutenant got his pension af t( 
literary journals we see the no I 
ing publication : 

New Work bt Mr. 
THE REHABILITATION OF 

A liARTYR OF SCI 



A July sunset — Arthur anc 
cliff at Dunchine, near the rui 
and peaceful light fell upon tl 
a supernatural lustre. Their 




330 OBEATHEABT. 

together. The children gambolled round them, 
like 8o many Cupids round a masque of Hymen. 
At the chapel door sat the lieutenant and his 
brother. Mrs. Tolpedden played with Bobby 
round the old knights' graves. 

"Arthur, dear," said Lucy, "the storm is over — 
how happy we are now !" 

" Yes, Lily," said Arthur ; " but even before the 
storm was past there was always sunshine for me 
in your dear face." 



THE END. 

