  LADY EUREKA;
  OR,
  THE MYSTERY:
  A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.

  BY THE AUTHOR
  OF
  "MEPHISTOPHELES IN ENGLAND."

  IN THREE VOLUMES.
  VOL. I.

  LONDON:
  LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,
  PATERNOSTER-ROW.
  1840.




CONTENTS


        INTRODUCTION.
     I. THE CITY OF THE WORLD.
    II. ZABRA.
   III. A PHILANTHROPIST.
    IV. A FIRE AT SEA.
     V. PERILS OF EMIGRATION.
    VI. APPEARANCE OF THE AFRICAN COAST.
   VII. CAFFRETON, THE METROPOLIS OF SOUTHERN AFRICA.
  VIII. THE PIRATES.
    IX. CAPTAIN DEATH.
     X. THE PIRATE'S RETREAT.




INTRODUCTION.


"Guten Morgen, Wilhelm!" said I, as I entered the chamber of my fellow
student. "How are you this morning? You look better--your eyes are
brighter, and your cheek possesses more colour than usual."

"I am better, mein Freund," observed the youth, raising himself up
from the bed till his back rested upon the pillows. "But what have you
there?"

"A fresh supply of flowers for you, Wilhelm," I replied; "and I bought
them of the prettiest Mädchen I ever saw in the market place."

"Ich danke Ihnen für das Geschenk," murmured the grateful student.
"You know I love flowers better than any thing upon earth. They always
fill me with ideas of beauty and purity and splendour, above all
other earthly things; and I love them because they are so impartial
in bestowing their favours: they confer their fragrance and their
loveliness with equal liberality on all who venture within their
influence. Put them in the vase, mein freund, and let me again thank
you for so welcome a gift."

"And now let us converse, Wilhelm, if you feel strong enough;" I
exclaimed, as I took a seat by the bedside of the invalid. "Has the
physician been this morning? And what said he."

"He preceded you but a few minutes, mein freund," replied Wilhelm, "and
he said nothing. He shook his head, however, when he looked at me, which
I considered a bad sign."

"There's nothing in it, be assured," said I, earnestly.

"In the head, or in the sign?" inquired my fellow student, with a look
of mock gravity.

"In both," cried I, laughing; "in both, no doubt. But I am glad to see
you so cheerful. Your appearance this morning makes me entertain hopes
of your speedy recovery, and I can almost convince myself, that in a few
days we shall be together pursuing our studies and our ramblings, as we
have so often and so happily done."

"I have been entertaining a similar idea, mein freund," observed
Wilhelm; "I feel more cheerful than I have felt for a long time past;
and I was beginning to flatter myself into a belief, that the insidious
disease was about evacuating its territory. I shall roam among
the walls of old Göttingen again. I shall associate with my ancient
comrades--shall I not?"

"'Tis a consummation devoutly to be wished by others as well as myself,"
said I; "but how liked you the book I lent you?"

"'Tis a brilliant production," replied my friend; "and of that class of
works which affords me most pleasure. 'Give me the enjoyment of perusing
a succession of new works from the graceful pen of Crébillon, and
I shall have no other want,' said Gray. I exclaim, 'Give me the
gratification of reading the finest productions in the imaginative
literature of every civilised nation, and there will be little left for
me to wish for.' Nothing elevates and delights me so much as the best of
these works, especially if they be tinged with a tone of high romantic
feeling. What can be so charming as this mingling of the ideal and the
natural? What can take a firmer hold of the mind and of the heart?"

"They certainly do, when ably written, create very powerful
impressions;" I observed.

"I have read a considerable portion of the imaginative literature of
almost every European nation," said Wilhelm; "and an extraordinary power
of genius it evinces. The prose fictions of the present age produced
in Germany and England are wonderfully excellent and abundant. I think
the English exceed all others in the combination of judgment with
imagination, as seen in the best efforts of Scott, Bulwer, and Godwin.
After them come the Germans, and we can proudly boast of Göthe,
Lafontaine, Novalis, and Hoffmann. The French have much imagination and
very little judgment, as exhibited in the writings of Victor Hugo,
Mérimée, Paul de Kock, and Balzac, and are usually distinguished by
their sins against good taste. Of Italian imaginative literature, the
works I have met with that rise above mediocrity, are, 'I Promessi
Sposi,' of Manzoni, 'Ettore Fieramosca,' of Massino D'Azeglio, and
'Franco Allegri,' which do not soar very high. Of the modern fictions
of Spain, Portugal, and Holland, I know nothing; nor do I believe that
there is any thing to know; but I have seen one or two romantic novels
from Russia that possess considerable merit. What I object to in works
of this nature, written at the present time, is the too apparent
satisfaction of their authors in remaining in the beaten track. A vast
majority fill their volumes with characters that have been a thousand
times repeated, and with incidents and situations that are familiar to
every reader."

"What would you have them do?" I inquired.

"I would have them strike out a bolder class of subjects," replied the
student. "Instead of being satisfied with attempting illustrations of
historical periods, or of an existing state of society, suppose they
attempt to describe an imaginary time as well as imaginary characters.
If a man possess a powerful imagination, let him conceive the state
of the world a thousand years hence, or at any other time remote from
the present. I do not mean that he should merely delineate a state of
society, or of any section of society; I mean that he should take the
most important portions of the civilised world, and picture, as well
as he is able, the changes they may undergo, and the state of their
peoples, governments, religions, and philosophy."

"I am afraid that such a work would be considered too serious for the
novel reader;" I observed.

"Impossible, mein freund!" replied the student. "Always, in works of
imagination, the ideal and the matter of fact should be so blended as
to make an interesting and amusing whole; and it matters not whether
the time sought to be illustrated be of the past, of the present, or of
the future: each may be made equally laughable, equally pathetic, and
equally philosophical."

"But the idea is too comprehensive to be done well;" said I. "To draw
an imaginary state of the world in any thing like consonance with
probability, requires more than ordinary talent in the draughtsman; but
to add to it pictures of an imaginary state of its inhabitants, and
an imaginary state of their philosophy, presents difficulties which I
should think are not to be overcome."

"The imagination can conquer any difficulty;" exclaimed my companion.
"There is no power beneath heaven like imagination. It can dive into the
uttermost corners of the ocean, or ascend through the trackless fields
of air. It can fly where the eagle dare not move its wing, and amid
Alpine obstacles outclimb the chamois. It can pass the great desert at a
bound, and bear the four corners of the world in the hollow of its eye.
It seeth all things that nature showeth; and after disclosing these,
can show many things that nature never beheld. It pierces into the most
hidden things. It flingeth a shining light into the most utter darkness.
Locks, bolts, or bars, cannot keep it out--laws, walls and chains
cannot keep it in: it is the only thing belonging to human life that
is perfectly free. There is nothing imagination cannot do; no matter
whether it be good or evil, reasonable or absurd, to it all things are
alike easy. And as for wealth or power or dignity, or aught of which the
world thinks highly, where is the greatness, and where are the riches
that exceed those of the imagination? Mechanics are proud of their
engines, and think them wonderful: they are mere playthings compared
with the imagination. Cannot imagination make the sea dry land, and the
earth ocean? Archimedes boasted that he would move the world, could
he place it in a convenient situation. Let imagination put forth its
powers, and the world becomes obedient to its law, moves when required,
crumbles into dust, and is re-created with increased glory. Cannot it
break the rock like a reed, and snap the gnarled oak of many centuries
like a rotten thread? Cannot it build cities on the plain, and form
a garden in the wilderness? Cannot it people the solitude and confer
happiness on the desolate? Cannot it make the sands of the sea-shore
glittering with gold; and of the leaves of the forest create treasures
far outvaluing the riches of the earth and sea? And more than this, it
can make the dead live and the living die; it can raise the earthquake
and the pestilence; it can fight battles and win kingdoms; it can float
upon the whirlwind like a leaf upon the breeze; and pass through a
consuming fire unscathed by a single flame.

"These are the powers of the imagination; and what are its pleasures?
Let the most luxurious seeker after enjoyment take all the delights
reality will give him. Let him wrap himself up in roses; lie in baths of
milk; taste all that is delicious to the appetite; be loved by the most
lovely and the most loving of women; and pass not a minute in which
his soul is not lapped in ecstacy; and his enjoyments will bear no
comparison with those of the imagination. Imagination can concentrate in
a single moment the pleasures of a thousand years: it possesses all the
delights the world may produce, in addition to raptures more exquisite
of worlds of its own: it can create forms clothed with a beauty far
excelling the rarest of those who have glorified the earth with their
presence; its sunshine pales the light of heaven; its flowers alone can
bloom with a perpetual fragrance."

"Wilhelm, you must not excite yourself so;" said I, observing him fall
back exhausted against the pillow, from which he had raised himself, and
a violent fit of coughing follow.

"O du ewige Güte?" exclaimed the student, gasping for breath.

"Ah! I was afraid of this; you are too weak to allow yourself to be
carried away by the impetuosity of your feelings. Here! take some of
this drink. It will allay the irritation of the cough."

"I am better now--I am better, mein freund," murmured the grateful
Wilhelm; "and now let us resume our conversation."

"I am almost afraid, Wilhelm, for I see it excites you so much;" I
observed.

"It has passed away. It is nothing:" replied my companion.

"Supposing then, that the idea you mentioned was attempted to be worked
out to its full extent, how is it possible to convey any thing like a
natural picture of the state of existing nations at so remote a time?"
I inquired.

"By a reference to what is already known of the growth, maturity and
decay of nations," said the student. "Every thing has its age. The tree
cannot flourish beyond a certain time--nor can a country. Time passes
his scythe over the verdant world, and wherever it glides, the crop is
cut down; and after the field has been left wild a sufficient period,
the seed is again sown, the produce is again abundant, and the mower is
again at work. Thus it has been from the creation of the world; thus it
will be for everlasting. How long was the growth of Babylon, of Nineveh,
of Tyre and Sidon, of Thebes and Carthage? They had their season. Then
came Pompeii, Etruria, Athens, Rome, and Constantinople. How long did
they last? Then came Venice and Genoa, the Moorish kingdom of Grenada,
and the Arabian empire at Jerusalem; they had their day. After these
came the omnipotence of Popish Rome, the magnificence of Madrid, and the
splendour of Lisbon: they have departed. And now we have the glories
of London and Paris, and Berlin and Vienna, and these will exist their
period, and then gradually fall into decay. It must be evident to any
observer, that Spain and Portugal, once the two greatest nations in
Europe, in opulence, power, and intelligence, are descending to the
lowest degradation of poverty, insignificance, and ignorance. The Roman
empire in Italy, having passed into a number of independent states,
each of which has attained a considerable degree of greatness, lies
now prostrate at the foot of the great European powers. Greece, the
intellectual and the free, having for many centuries been plunged in
ignorance and slavery up to the lips, shews signs of a regeneration.
And the barbarians of the North are making rapid approaches towards
pre-eminence."

"But the superior civilisation we enjoy, must prevent our retrograding,"
said I. "Think of our steam-engines, our rail-roads, our wonderful
discoveries in science and mechanics, and our extraordinary advancement
in intelligence; we are rising, and we shall continue to rise."

"We cannot rise above the top, mein freund," observed my fellow student
with a smile; "and after that we must go down. There is a point beyond
which no nation advances, and to that point we are tending. As for our
superior civilisation, that remains to be proved. Boast as we may of our
machinery, we could neither raise such monuments as were frequent among
the Egyptians, or have we any tools that can make an impression upon
the stone out of which they were sculptured. The gunpowder upon the
discovery of which we pride ourselves, has not been so destructive as
the Greek fire, of the composition of which we know nothing. In art, we
are far from excelling the ancients, and in learning we are obliged to
acknowledge our obligations to them."

"But how far the intelligence of the multitude at the present day
exceeds that of any preceding time!" I observed.

"I am not convinced of that," replied Wilhelm. "With the exception of
Germany, particularly Prussia, the education of the people, has not
been attempted on a plan likely to confer on them much advantage, and
the only sure way of judging of a superiority of intelligence is by
comparing the state of the public morals in different countries. If it
can be proved that the Greeks or the Romans were a less moral people
than are the English or the French, then are the latter the most
intellectual; but if, taking the amount of population, it could be
ascertained that a less amount of crime was committed by the ancients,
then must the moderns be considered the least civilised."

"I am afraid the philosophical character of such a work would not be
appreciated by the general reader, who takes up a book merely for
amusement," said I.

"You are mistaken, mein freund," replied the student; "there is
nothing which may be made so amusing as philosophy. Every good book is
philosophical; and the idle reader is continually being made familiar
with philosophy without knowing it, just as the worthy gentleman in
Molière's comedy talked prose all his life, in perfect ignorance of
having done so."

"Well, I can only say, I should like exceedingly to read such a book,"
I observed.

"You see that ebony chest there, upon that pile of books;" said Wilhelm,
pointing in the direction to which he had alluded. "Take it. In it you
will find a MS. It is a work such as I have described to you, and I
wrote it at intervals, whenever I could find time for the employment."

"_You_ write such a work, Wilhelm!" exclaimed I with surprise. "I am
aware how much you have devoted yourself to study. I know that you have
completely ruined your health by your severe application in the pursuit
of knowledge; but I had no conception of your attempting a production of
such a character, upon a subject beset by so many difficulties."

"I have been ambitious," replied my companion. "I was desirous of
attempting something out of the common path--I yearned for literary
distinction. Take and read it, mein freund, and let me know if you think
it worthy of publication. I have endeavoured to make the story full of a
deep and pleasing interest. The characters introduced I have sought to
create in a sufficient variety, and of various shades, from the humblest
in intelligence to the most exalted. The incidents I have strived to
make striking and powerful, and vividly drawn; and the opinions you will
there find expressed, while I wished to make them natural and true, I
have been anxious that they should possess a claim to originality. It
has been my aim to combine wit, humour, pathos, and philosophy in such
a manner as I hope cannot fail of being thought at once amusing and
instructive, and if I live to see realised the aspirations I have
entertained, if I can but behold the work I have laboured to produce, in
popular estimation, I do not care how soon this feeble frame dissolves
into its parent dust. I must live to see that! mein freund; I _must_
live to see that!"

"I have not a doubt but what you will, Wilhelm;" I replied. "The genius
I know you to possess has only to exhibit itself fairly before the
public, to be considered a public property, and become an object of
general estimation. The learning you have laboured so diligently to
obtain, will then stand you in good service; and the liberality of your
sentiments, your deep love of virtuous principle, and your earnest
desire for the diffusion of truth, then cannot long remain without
exciting the admiration you covet."

He made no reply.

"Look!" I exclaimed. "There are Gerhard Kramer, and Hugo Messingen,
smoking their meerschaums out of the opposite window."

He did not move.

"Are you asleep, Wilhelm?" said I, advancing from the window to the
bedside, and gazing in the face of my now silent companion. His head was
sunk in the pillow, with his light hair falling in waving curls around
it. There lay the calm blue eyes, the fair smooth cheek, the delicate
moustache, and the mouth so exquisitely small, half open, giving a
glimpse of the white teeth within it.

"Are you asleep, Wilhelm?" I repeated, taking the hand that rested
outside the bed clothes.

He _was_ asleep: and from that sleep he never awoke. He now lies in the
left hand corner of Göttingen churchyard--a familiar place to me; for
while he was the most studious, he was the most amiable of all my fellow
students. He had become a martyr to his love of study, and the world
closed upon him just as he exhibited those signs of extraordinary
merit, which in time would have made him one of its most distinguished
ornaments. That his death was quite unexpected by himself was evident,
but in the progress of his illness he had drawn up a will, in which he
had made me his executor, and in it expressed his desire that I should
prepare his manuscript for the press. I have done so, and the result is
before the reader. I have left the first chapter as I found it, giving
notes to illustrate a few phrases that required explanation; but
imagining that these phrases, though perfectly characteristic, might
perplex the reader in his progress with the story, I made such
alterations in the rest of the MS. as I thought would bring the work
nearer to the taste of the time.




EUREKA;

A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.




CHAPTER I.

THE CITY OF THE WORLD.


More than usual activity was observable in the tiers of shipping of
various nations that crowded the port of Columbus. The sun shone with
extraordinary splendour, throwing a golden light over the broad waters
of the river that spread out as far as the eye could reach, bearing on
their bosom vessels of every description used in commerce or warfare
(some coming into port, others leaving it for a distant destination),
that were diminishing in size as they receded from the view, till
they assumed the appearance of a mere speck between the horizon and
the wave; and the spreading sails of those in the distance, and the
many-coloured flags streaming from the masts of those closer to the
shore, with their various builds, sizes, costume and characteristics of
their crews, and the variety of employments in which the latter were
engaged,--infused such a spirit of animation into the scene, that the
stranger would have found it impossible to have looked on without an
earnest and delighted attention. Nearer the shore boats were passing to
and fro--from the graceful Swan (1.) and rapid Fish, full of gay parties
of pleasure, to the gigantic Hippopotamus and slow Tortoise, bearing
burthens of various kinds of produce towards the wharfs that lined each
side of that noble river; and many other boats of different dimensions,
some impelled by oars, others by sails, and others by machinery, were
passing from ship to ship, from the ship to the shore, or from the
metropolis to the neighbouring villages.

If the appearances on the water were gratifying to the eye, those on the
land assumed a character equally cheerful, various, and magnificent.
Well might Columbus be styled THE CITY OF THE WORLD. In its dimensions,
in its splendour, in its riches, in the myriads of its inhabitants, and
in the multitudes of strangers who flocked from all parts of the globe
to witness its greatness or share in its traffic, it was worthy of being
considered an empire rather than a metropolis. Beyond those unrivalled
quays that stretched along each side of the river, connected by colossal
bridges, whose arches spanned from shore to shore with such an altitude
that under them the largest vessels might pass with ease, were seen the
proud palaces of the merchants--the lofty domes for the administration
of justice--the stupendous edifices for the conveniences of
commerce--the vast temples for the worship of the Deity--the imposing
halls for the diffusion of science--every description of dwelling
suitable to the wants of a free, industrious, enlightened, and
multitudinous population of various ranks, interspersed with noble
monuments in commemoration of admirable actions--exalted statues
personifying the highest degree of excellence--parks, fountains,
gardens, and public walks between rows of lofty trees; rising above
these, on the elevated land on which the city was erected, might be
observed, placed at considerable distances from each other, and adorned
with all the graces of architecture, the villas of the wealthy; and at
the very crown of the hill the obelisks, urns, and other monuments that
peered above its summit pointed out the cemetery of the city, and the
mausolea of its dead.

Through the numerous streets the tide of population seemed hurrying with
an anxious eagerness; and the vehicles of luxury and of industry were
passing each other in the broad thoroughfares, in a similar crowd and
with a similar haste. Here came the votary of pleasure, seeking only
the enjoyment of the present--there went the accumulator of wealth,
enjoying no delight save in the prospect of the future; and they were
passed by the plodding antiquary, living only in his associations
with the past. The toil-worn mechanic--the enthusiastic student--the
venerable sage--the solemn priest--the proud soldier--and the bustling
citizen, took their separate ways through the crowd, with an apparent
thoughtlessness of all things except their own immediate objects; and
thus had they gone on for ages, each pursuing his own course, and every
one heedless of the rest; and thus will they go on till the day of the
world is over, and the night cometh when no man shall see because of the
darkness.

At the foot of a flight of broad stone steps leading to the water from
a wharf on the quay near one of the bridges, a superior sort of ship's
boat was moored, where her crew, some resting on the benches, some
lounging on the steps, were grouped in conversation, evidently directing
their attention to a beautiful ship of small tonnage but perfect
symmetry that lay at anchor at a short distance, easily distinguished
from the numerous vessels in her neighbourhood by the smartness of her
rigging and the elegance of her build.

"Ay, ay, Boggle!" exclaimed a stout weatherbeaten-looking mariner,
to whom all his associates appeared to listen with great deference,
arising either from his superior age or station,--"she _is_ a smart
boat; as neat a one as ever floated. She'll swim better than a shark,
and faster than a dolphin; and I'll wager a month's pay to a mouldy
biscuit, that between this and the tother side o' the world we shan't
meet with her match."

"True enough, Hearty," said the person spoken to, a lumbering, stout,
short, and awkwardly-made man of about thirty, with a large head, and a
stupid yet good-natured countenance, which expressed an inclination to
act in the right way that was always marred by an extraordinary aptitude
to do wrong. "True enough. May I walk the deck till I split into
shivers, if I'm not convinced of every word you say! But every man as is
a man and thinks like a man should have a notion of his own on things in
general; therefore, Hearty, I don't believe it."

"Pooh!" exclaimed a younger sailor, addressing himself to the last
speaker, "what's the value o' your judgment against the notions of such
an old hand as Hearty? Why he must ha' sailed in a power o' different
crafts afore you were launched!"

"Exactly, Climberkin, exactly," replied Boggle eagerly--"that's my
opinion; it's true, there's not a doubt of it: but every man as is a
man----"

"Well, may I be scrunched into everlasting smash if I know where we're
bound--that's all," emphatically remarked another speaker in the group,
thrusting forward a thick head of sandy hair, with a countenance sharp
and meagre.

"Nor I," said another.

"Nor I," echoed several around him.

"Why you see how it is," answered Boggle, mysteriously; "there's a sort
o' a secret in it. It arn't for a fellow afore the mast to be 'quisitive
o' what's going on on the quarter-deck; but I likes to have right
notions o' things in general, as every man as is a man and thinks like
a man should. So having a pretty shrewd guess as how Scrumpydike, who's
al'ays alongside the captain, knowed more o' the matter than he'd a
mind to 'municate, I follows in his wake not a hundred years longer than
this very mornin'; and, quite palavering like, I hails him wi' 'I say,
Scrumpydike, my bo!' 'What cheer?' says he. 'P'raps you don't know
nothin' o' our sailing orders?' says I, quite social. 'P'raps I do,'
says he, in a manner as showed he did. I says nothin' more on _that_
subject then, cause I had a notion 'twould be no good; so I speaks him
civil, and axed him to liquidate wi' me upon summat comfortable, and we
went together into a snuggish sort o' a spiritual close by, and when I
got him pretty 'municative I thought he'd a told the most secret thing
as he knowed, cause he was letting down the cable in reg'lar style.
Now's the time, thought I; so I says to him, quite familiar, as I felt
sartain sure o' his telling, 'Scrumpydike, my bo!' says I, 'where be we
bound?'--And what d'ye think he said?" inquired the speaker, suddenly
addressing himself to his associates.

"What _did_ he say, Boggle?" anxiously inquired a young sailor, pressing
forward to hear the interesting communication.

"Tell us, Boggle, tell us!" cried the others eagerly.

"Why he turns round upon me his great yellow eyes, looking as if
he could ha' no secrets from a fellow who shared his earnings so
handsome--'cause I stood treat all the time, and he says to me, in a
slow whisper, just as a secret should be told----"

"Well, what did he say?" said Climberkin impatiently.

"'What's the odds?', says he."--The younger sailors laughed.

"And what _is_ the odds?" asked old Hearty earnestly. "Arn't we well
paid, well fed, well clothed? and haven't we plenty o' every thing we
want? So what's the odds where we sail? I don't care the twist o' a
rope's end whether we go to India, or China, or Algiers, to any of the
ports in Australia, or even to the most uncivilized settlements in
Europe; and no true sailor cares on what water he floats, as long as
he's aboard a good ship, meets wi' sociable mates, and is commanded by
good officers."

"I'll be spiflicated if every word Hearty says isn't true," remarked
Climberkin.

"And now I'll just tell you what I knows o' the matter," continued
Hearty, "which amounts to something more than Boggle could tell."

"Well, what is it?" inquired Boggle, as eager as the others to hear some
intelligence on the subject,--"you're smartish, clever, or I'm 'staken;
but though I must say my notion o' you is tip top, we're most on us
liable to a false reck'ning."

"You all know master Porphyry," said the old man, without attending to
the dubious compliment of the last speaker.

"Know him! to be sure we do," replied Climberkin hastily. "Haven't we
all sailed in his ships,--all but Scrumpydike there, who's asleep in the
boat? and don't we know as he's the richest merchant in Columbia, and
got ships laden with every sort o' precious merchandise, more than one
man ever had afore--sailing from port to port all over every sea that
runs. Know him! Why, who do we know, if we don't know a man as all the
world knows?"

"Ay, ay," remarked the other quietly, "that's him; they do say he's as
rich as the emperor. But all I know is, that while he's greatest among
the rich he's kindest among the poor. He seems never happy but when he's
founding some hospital,--setting afoot some charity, or doing some good,
some how or other: his name is honoured in all parts o' the world.
There's no merchant all over this here globe that hasn't heard of the
fame of master Porphyry: and in his own country he's like a prince,
scattering his bounties wherever he thinks they are likely to confer
a benefit; and every one respects him, every one wishes to think as
he does; and all are anxious to show their opinion of his integrity,
cleverness, and all that sort o' thing. Well, what's uncommon strange,
although he squanders his money about as if there was no end to it,
it seems only to 'cumulate the faster; and although the emperor has
signified his wish to honour him wi' lots o' distinctions many's the
great man would be proud enough to gain, he refuses them all, and says
he won't be nothing more nor plain master Porphyry. So master Porphyry
he remains; but for all that he's a greater man than all the princes,
dukes, and nobles we're likely to see in our time. Well, master
Porphyry's got a son, as smart a figure of a youth as ever you see'd
aboard ship; and after 'ducating him in all sorts o' learnin', till he's
fit to be launched in the great ocean o' life, he wishes him, nat'rul
enough, to go and see foreign parts, that he may get plenty o' notions
o' different kinds o' people, and countries, and governments, that when
he comes back he may be able to do credit to his father. So master
Porphyry gets a ship built o' purpose, and a lovelier vessel than the
Albatross it arn't possible to look on; and has her stored wi' every
kind o' valuable merchandise likely to sell to a profit at the ports
she may visit, and wi' all sorts o' necessaries and comforts for the
crew; has her manned wi' a prime set o' picked hands from his other
vessels,--engages a 'sperienced captain, and accompanied by the
most celebrated teacher o' learnin' he could meet with, to show all
the 'markable things as might be overhauled, and give the proper
'splanations about their breed, seed, and generation, I expects him
here every minute to go aboard; and 'mediately arter that, up wi' her
cleaver, out wi' her wings, and good bye to old Columbia." (2.)

"Now let me twist the rope a little," (3.) said Climberkin, while his
messmates continued to listen with the same interest they had shown all
the time Hearty had been speaking. "You see, mates," continued the young
sailor, apparently attempting to make the sleeves of his check shirt
roll above his elbows with more convenience, but more probably trying to
attract attention from the heightening colour of his cheek,--"you see,
mates, I've been sailing in convoy with a mighty smartish craft, who's a
sort o' cook's mate,--(now what are you jiggering at?" cried the speaker
sharply to a young fellow who had indulged himself with a grin,)--"who's
a sort of cook's mate in the noble family of Philadelphia; and she being
always among her messmates, hears a smartish lot o' notions 'cerning
her officers, which, when we've been yard-arm and yard-arm sailing in
company through the parks, or at anchor in the jollity houses, she
'municates to me by way o' divarsion: and she tells me as how master
Porphyry has a snuggery up the country, 'bout a cable's length from one
belonging to the noble Philadelphia, and that the two families were as
sociable as a shoal o' herrins. Philadelphia has a daughter, by all
accounts a reg'lar-built angelic; and master Porphyry having a son, an
equally smartish sort o' young chap, it was as sartain as a ship would
sail afore the wind, that they two while consortin' would pick up some
notions about gettin' afloat together; and as no signals o' a diff'rent
natur' were hung out by their commodores, they linked their hearts
pretty close, and never could see which way the wind blowed 'cept
when they were alongside o' each other. Well, somehow or other, there
came on a squall,--the powerful noble Philadelphia and the rich
merchant Porphyry parted company about politics: one took one side and
t'other took t'other, and they went on different tacks in no time.
Philadelphia, who's as proud as a port admiral, when he found as master
Porphyry wouldn't follow in his wake, blowed great guns, cut his cable;
and without letting his daughter the Lady Eureka have any 'munication
with her consort, he makes her set sail along wi' him, and the young
ones arn't been allowed to come in sight o' each other ever since. Well,
arter that, master Porphyry, who's as proud as an honest man should be,
wern't a going to strike his flag to nothin' o' the sort; so seeing as
his young'un looked cloudy weather, to 'leviate his disappointment he
thinks o' trying to make him forget the whole circumbendibus. So he
plans this here voyage."

The loud huzzas of an approaching multitude put an end to the
conversation; and Scrumpydike, who appeared to have been asleep, but
had listened attentively to every word that had been uttered, suddenly
started from his recumbent position in the boat, presenting a muscular
form, with a yellow, rough, and scowling face, sufficiently forbidding
in its appearance, yet possessing an odd sort of twist about the
corners of the mouth that much disguised its natural ferocity.

"Thunder and lightning!" (4.) shouted Scrumpydike, hastily regaining his
legs, "here they come!"

Some of the sailors ran up the stone steps leading to the foot of the
bridge, and there a noble and gratifying sight presented itself. The
whole length of the magnificent street of stately mansions approaching
the water seemed filled with a countless multitude of citizens, each
huzzaing with extraordinary zeal some persons in a procession that was
proceeding along the centre of the thoroughfare. Windows, housetops,
bridges, and boats were thronged with spectators; and all the vessels
in the river were dressed with flags, which, streaming from the masts
in a variety of pleasing colours and devices, gave an animated and
picturesque character to the scene.

"_There's_ master Porphyry!" exclaimed Hearty.

"Where?" inquired half a dozen voices at once.

"That stately-looking man on the tall grey horse who is bowing to
his fellow-citizens. Every body seems to have got a notion that the
merchant's son was going on his first voyage; so, you see, they're
resolved to show how much they respect the father, and all the city
turns out to a man (aye and to a woman too, as you may see at the
windows), and here they are throwing up their caps, waving their
handkerchiefs, and shouting like mad; the ladies scattering flowers upon
his head, and bands o' music playing all the way. And there's young
master Porphyry riding by his side, a fine handsome sort o' chap, and as
like his father as one whale's like another. And in the open carriage
behind them is the learned Professor Fortyfolios, who's written more
big books than any on us could carry; and opposite him's our Captain
Compass, and next him's little Log, the captain's clerk; and opposite
him's Doctor Tourniquet, our surgeon; and there's a lot more on 'em
followin' in different carriages, who ha' been promoted to a birth
aboard the Albatross. These dignified bodies in long robes, and some
on 'em wi' gold chains round their necks, are great magistrates and
merchants belonging to the city, and they look up to master Porphyry as
head on 'em all. But we must get to our oars, my mates, or else we shall
nap it pretty considerably." So saying he returned to the boat, quickly
followed by his companions, and they all began to be very busy preparing
for the comers.

The appearance of the procession as it neared the bridge was very
imposing; for, as far as the eye could see, were carriages and horsemen
bearing streaming banners, and decorated with ribbons and flowers; and
every spot that could command a view of the scene from the land or from
the water was crowded with animated spectators, shouting their good
wishes for the son and praises of the father. The chief attraction in
this grand spectacle, master Porphyry, was a man apparently between
forty and fifty years of age, of a commanding figure and noble
countenance. When he took off a sort of coronetted velvet cap that
shielded his head from the sun's rays, as he bowed his grateful
acknowledgments for the plaudits of his fellow-citizens, his high
forehead, eloquent eyes, and benevolent smile made his features assume
an expression more nearly approaching the highest degree of beauty,
intelligence, and philanthropy in a man advanced in life, than anything
it is possible to conceive; and the robe of honour which encompassed his
powerful limbs, denoting his office as the chief civic magistrate, gave
a majesty to his deportment that increased the effect of his personal
appearance.

The youth who rode by his side could not have numbered much more than
twenty years, and bore a great resemblance both in the form of his
limbs and in the expression of his countenance to master Porphyry; yet
while from a feeling of enthusiastic reverence for his parent he rode
bare-headed by his side, as he noticed the admiration his father excited
among the countless myriads who thronged their way, the fire that was
glowing in his eyes and the pride that was swelling at his heart gave
evidence of feelings to which the elder Porphyry was a stranger. The
youth sat on his steed, that pranced and curvetted with the same
high spirit in his blood as was possessed by his rider, showing that
elasticity of limb that marks the young and vigorous; and as the breeze
swept from his forehead the luxuriant curls of rich shining hair that
clustered upon his brows, while it fluttered in the folds of his
handsome tunic, the young men whose dreams had been of glory fancied
that they saw in his noble bearing the hero of their visions, and the
young women who had begun feeding their youthful minds with loving
idealities gazed in ecstasy upon his graceful figure, and recognised
in him the god of their idolatry. The impression created was evidently
gratifying to him; but it did not satisfy his desires. Oriel Porphyry
was ambitious--he aspired to be something greater than he was: he panted
for power as well as popularity. The shouts of the multitude seemed
music to his ears, but it was of too calm a character--it was not that
in which he could have taken most delight. He desired to act a more
imposing part than that of a merchant's son. It was a military age in
which he lived, when men had been raised to empire by a daring valour
and a dazzling splendour in their actions that made every heart drunk
with enthusiasm. Conquest had been the key to greatness, and a victory
had led to a throne. But the general peace which had lately commenced
seemed to shut out from him all hopes of the distinction he coveted; the
peaceful ways of traffic, in which his father had achieved an universal
renown, presented to him no attraction: and as he rode along he lamented
the apparent ingloriousness of his destiny.

The feelings of the merchant were of a far higher, better, kinder
character; for his was a mind not to be led away by the false glitter
of pride and ambition, and he entertained no sentiment that was not in
harmony with the philanthropy of his actions. His heart was full of
generous sympathy for his fellow-men; and till he alighted at the foot
of the bridge he thought only of how he could best advance the interests
of his country.

The father and son descended the stone stairs, at the bottom of which
the boatmen were waiting; and after all who were going to the ship had
entered the boat except the merchant's son, master Porphyry took him
affectionately by the hand, and thus addressed him:--

"Oriel Porphyry! I have desired that you should visit the most
remarkable nations of the world, that you might gain from close
observation of their people and government knowledge such as may the
better fit you for your duties as a citizen and as a man; that when I
have passed away from the fading splendours that surround me, I shall
know that I leave one worthy to fill the high place I have held in the
affections of my fellow-citizens. Take these papers," continued the
merchant, in a voice that appeared to tremble with emotion, as he
produced a sealed packet--"they contain the directions I desire you
to pursue, and some intelligence with which I wish you to become
acquainted: consult them when you have been out at sea about a week. I
shall find means of communicating with you as often as may be desirable;
and if there is any thing you require that yonder vessel does not
possess to render your voyage more comfortable, you have only to send
word by the first of my ships you may meet, and you will have it
supplied at the next port. All noble sentiments and benevolent wishes
attend you!"

"Father!" exclaimed the youth, falling on the neck and kissing the hand
of his parent, "I trust I shall never discredit the education I have
received, nor the parent from whom I sprung."

In a few minutes master Porphyry was standing on the brink of the water,
surrounded by the wealthiest merchants of Columbus, following with his
eyes the rapid course of the receding boat; while his son, throwing
himself back in his seat, indulged in the enjoyment of a thousand
conflicting emotions, from which he was not roused till he gained the
side of the Albatross.

While the machinery was set in motion to draw up the anchor, a small
boat was seen to dart from the numerous vessels of a similar class that
were floating on the river, and rapidly come alongside the ship. A young
handsome creole immediately leapt on board; and after giving orders
about some packages contained in the boat, advanced to that part of the
deck where Oriel Porphyry stood. The age of the new-comer did not seem
more than fifteen or sixteen. He was delicately formed, with features
whose expression lost something in its character among critics of manly
beauty by its feminine softness. On his head he wore a rich netted silk
cap, the gold tassel of which hung down towards his left shoulder; his
robe was a short tunic of embroidered cloth, bound by a broad silk sash.
An inner vest of rose-coloured silk, open at the breast, disclosed a
camese of the purest white; the lower part of his body was wrapt in a
sort of petticoat of thick linen made very full, below which appeared
leggings of rich silk, and small shoes trimmed with rosettes,--the usual
costume of the pages of Columbian ladies of rank. The merchant's son was
leaning against a mast, seemingly pondering over the fond remembrances
of a happier time; for his features had lost that glow of excitement
which a few minutes since his ambitious desires had created, and a
shadow of deep yet tranquil melancholy had passed over them,--when he
was roused from his reverie by the approach of the stranger.

"Master Oriel Porphyry!" said the page, taking off his cap and allowing
a profusion of dark ringlets to fall upon his shoulders, and then taking
from his vest a small sealed packet,--"Master Oriel Porphyry! The Lady
Eureka sends you this."

"Ha!" exclaimed the young merchant, gazing earnestly upon the features
before him as if they were immediately recognised; then finding the
recognition not reciprocal, he turned away with a deep expression of
disappointment: yet, while breaking the seal of the envelope, and before
he read the letter, he renewed his gaze two or three times, as if there
was an attraction in the page's handsome countenance he could not
withstand; but the large dark eyes that met his own were bent steadily
upon him with respectful attention; and, bewildered by the strange
disturbance of his thoughts, he at last attempted to read the letter.
It ran thus:--

  "DEAREST,

  "Accidentally I have become acquainted with your intended departure
  from Columbia, to dare the dangers of the waters, to risk a
  thousand perils, and, more than all, to be separated by a long
  and dreary boundary from a heart you have made so devotedly your
  own. Every attempt I have made to communicate with you, has been
  rendered of no avail. I believe you all I would have you be; but
  I am fearful your impetuous nature will hurry you into continual
  dangers, and, as I cannot myself watch over your safety, I would
  have near you some one on whose zeal, fidelity, and care I can
  place the utmost confidence. Zabra, whom you will readily recognise
  as a child of my father, has been brought up as my page; his
  Indian mother died in his infancy, but his education has not been
  neglected. You will find him both useful and entertaining, and may
  rely on his perfect devotion. Let him remain about you--let him be
  my representative--and let him serve to keep in your remembrance
  one whose soul clings to your footsteps,--who has no ambition but
  in possessing your exclusive affections, and knows no pride but
  that which is created by thinking herself, _your_

  EUREKA."

The letter was read many times, and with an increasing pleasure at
each re-perusal; and the bearer was received with such an abundance of
welcomes as must have convinced him his servitude would be very light.
But while his future master kept scanning his dusky physiognomy, as if
comparing his features with the brilliant beauty of her who had so long
been the glory of his existence, the page retained the same unmoved
demeanour which he had from the first evinced.

During these proceedings the anchor had been weighed, the sails trimmed,
and, amid the firing of cannon from the houses on each bank, and the
deafening shouts of the spectators, the Albatross majestically sailed
down the river, and having reached the ocean, soon lost sight of the
city of Columbus, its noble quays, its stately palaces, its generous
merchant, and its grateful citizens.


NOTES.

(1.) "The _graceful Swan_" and "rapid _Fish_" are probably intended
to be the names of pleasure boats, derived from the creatures they
were built to resemble; and the "gigantic _Hippopotamus_" and "slow
_Tortoise_" must be meant for the larger kind of barges and heavy
coasting vessels used in traffic.

(2.) "Up wi' her _cleaver_, out wi' her _wings_, and good bye to Old
_Columbia_." The anchor and sails of the vessel are no doubt here
alluded to; and the names Columbus and Columbia which are met with
throughout these pages, evidently distinguish the metropolis from the
empire.

(3.) "Now let me twist the rope a little." This sentence must be similar
in its meaning with the nautical phrase "spinning a yarn."

(4.) "Thunder and lightnin'!" It will be seen that the oaths commonly
used by the Columbians differ from those now in fashion; but this is
very natural, for it is well known that the common phrases of one
century are quite changed in another. We swear not as we did in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, and the oaths then in vogue were altogether
different from those which prevailed during the reign of William the
Conqueror.




CHAP. II.

ZABRA.


Zabra had not been many days on board, before he became a source of
wonder to the whole crew. A spirit flashed from his dark lustrous eyes,
that kept off every thing approaching the shape of sociality among
the persons by whom he was surrounded. He rarely spoke, except when
attending upon Oriel Porphyry; and then the proud expression of his
looks that made curiosity stand aloof, was changed into a glowing
animation, and the tongue which had seemed to disdain all converse
became eloquent with a resistless endeavour to delight. He had all the
external appearance of a graceful youth of sixteen, with a form tall,
elegant, and buoyant, whose heart had just received the invigorating
warmth of the first dawn of manly sentiments; but when the voice sent
its soft music to the ear, breathing the rich poetry of an ardent
imagination, the splendour of the language, its power and meaning, and
the energy with which it was supported, gave evidence of a mind much
nearer approaching the maturity of a masculine intellect, than the age
that has been mentioned could have possessed. He seemed as if he existed
only for the purpose for which he had been sent--as if he knew that
his occupation was watching over the safety of him to whom he had been
committed; and he appeared to enter into the service with a heart and
soul devoted to the object. His looks searched the inmost thoughts
of those upon whom they fell, as if to discover whether any sinister
intention against his lord and master was there harboured, and before
their piercing sight it was scarcely possible to stand unmoved; and
there was a mystery in his actions, when removed from the apparent
source of his solicitude, that still more made the wonderers marvel. He
sought a place where no one could intrude upon his privacy, and with a
harp, with which on these occasions he never failed to be accompanied,
so filled the air with unknown melodies, and unheard-of songs, that the
superstitious seamen, as they listened, imagined he was in communication
with beings of another world,--there was something so aërial, so soft,
and so sweet in the music he created.

"Scrunch me if I can make it out at all!" exclaimed Climberkin to a
group of sailors in the forecastle. "He ar'n't got a word to throw away
upon a dog; but if he looks at one, one doesn't feel at all inclined to
be 'quisitive. He was wand'rin' about the main deck as it was getting
duskish yesterday--and I, not keeping a good look out ahead, run foul o'
him afore I knowed who it was. As soon as I diskivered the craft, I was
just beginning a bit of a 'pology, when he fixes on me a look as cut
through me like a nor-wester, waves his arm in a most mysterus manner,
and glides away as softly as if he trod upon butter."

"As true as a fish swims, I've got the only prime notion of this here
mystery," said Boggle, with an air of considerable importance.

"No!" cried several voices incredulously.

"Ah! but I have though, or I'm the spawn of a toad-fish!" replied
Boggle. "And I'll tell you how I gripped it. You see I ar'n't a bit
afeard o' any 'dividual as is aboveboard in what he's arter; and I'm not
the chap likely to be flabbergasted in a fair fight;--so seeing as how
you were all in no little mystification about this youngster, I thought
to myself, says I, when he steers his course into your whereabouts,
'spose you show a civil flag at the mast-head, and ax arter his mother
and all the family; he nat'rally sees you knows manners, and 'mediately
returns the compliment. From this to that, and from that to t'other,
is as easy as catching sharks wi' pickled pork, when two civil fellows
lets go their jawing tackle; so you'll tell him your 'miniscences quite
confidential, and he'll be obligated to tell you his'n; and then having
overhauled his log-book pretty smartish, you can return to your mates
with the 'telligence. Well, I was walking along jest afore dinner,
when I seed master Zabra leaning against a mast, wi' folded arms, eyes
looking straight up to the clouds as was fleecing over the sky in all
sorts o' figurations, and his mahogany face seemin' quite fair by the
side o' the rollin' jet black curls as fell on each cheek down to his
shoulder. I seed in a moment he was no common sort o' cretur. If he
ar'n't a Indian prince, thinks I, I've no notion o' things in general.
Well, I was determined to know the rights on't, and was just about
recomembring the bit of a speech I was going to say about his mother and
the rest o' the family, when, as I came right afore him, he looks me
full in the face; and though I seed nothin' but the flash o' his two
eyes afore he flitted away to the other end o' the ship, they seemed so
'stonishingly curious that they held me to the ground as if I was nailed
to the deck, and the words I was going to say stuck in my throat like
lumps o' old Cucumber-Shin's puddin'."

"Kukumshin!" shouted the black cook, a very fat old negro, indignantly
thrusting his woolly poll in the middle of the group. "Dare to call me
Kukumshin! Me, Roly Poly Cook in ship Albatross, and free gennleman o'
colour--me Kukumshin! Pretty kettle o' fish!--Puddin' berry much too
good for sich a fellar. Stick in him troat too! Him nebber hab no time,
acause him bolt him like smoke, a fellar! Call me Kukumshin indeed!"

"I tell ye what it is, my mates," cried Hearty, inattentive to Roly
Poly's indignation. The group were all attention.

"A fellar!" exclaimed the cook, casting one of his blackest looks upon
the offender, and then waddling off to another part of the ship.

"In my time I've been many voyages to India and thereabouts," said the
old man; "and I knows it's the notion o' them people, that arter a
fellow's dead he comes to life again in another sort of a body. Now if
this here rigmarole's true, which every body there says is as sartain
as a stone 'ill sink, seeing that this youngster is more 'cute in
his notions than is usual at his time o' day, and appears a most
'straordinary sort o' a human, it's much more nat'ral to 'spose he's
been metamorphorosed from some of those Old Indian flos'phers who 's up
to ev'ry thing in natur', than that he should be a mere hobbledehoy, as
can't have any more gumption than what 'll serve him to carry a letter
or go on a message. But hush!" exclaimed the speaker as a beautiful
symphony full of passionate sentiment was borne upon the air. A soft
melodious voice soon mingled with the instrument, and these words were
sung with all the expression superior skill could bestow upon them:--

   "The wave rolls on from shore to shore,
      As from the first those billows roll'd;
    All study its mysterious lore,
      But none have yet its secrets told!
    So in the heart a flood flows on
      As free and boundless in its will;
    As long, the learnèd there have gone--
      Its secrets are unfathom'd still!

   "Unfathomed still, fond heart! remain,--
      Veil thy rich flood's most precious prize!
    Thy pearlèd worth--thy golden gain--
      Hide--hide from all too-curious eyes!
    For see! th' adventurous diver comes,
      Down in thy deeps he makes his stay;
    Through ev'ry hidden cave he roams--
      Then bears thy treasured stores away.

   "But why thy sterling splendours hide?--
      Why veil the worth thou dost possess?--
    Pour out thy bright exhaustless tide!
      Lay bare thy wealth!--and thee 't will bless.
    The riches that are hoarded up,
      In worthless hands at last must shrink;--
    And he who cares to fill the cup,
      Should fill for one who longs to drink!"

"There! that _is_ music," observed Climberkin in a whisper; "and it
makes my heart leap like a dolphin just taken out o' his element."

"All hands to take in sail!" shouted a stentorian voice from the
quarter-deck, and in an instant the group were engaged in active duty.

But the song had other listeners than the party just described. Oriel
Porphyry, after escaping from a weary lecture from the learned professor
Fortyfolios, who seemed laudably anxious to fulfil his duties to his
pupil, had been pacing the quarter-deck with long and hasty strides,
when he was roused from the ambitious reveries of his ardent imagination
by the mellow sounds of a harp at no great distance. In him, the voice,
the song, its sentiments, and their expression, recalled to his memory
the delicious beauty of her, from the wondrous lustre of whose gaze he
had drunk of that intoxicating stream which had bound his senses in a
wild and rapturous delirium. The dark eyes, radiant with the light of
the impassioned soul that floated in their depths, again raised on
him their sunny splendour; and the budding mouth, bearing the odorous
spirits of a thousand roses on its lips, once more appeared to teach
those smiling lessons that had been to him the fairest pages in the
book of knowledge. He listened, and his heart was filled with the sweet
influence of a happier time. The dreams of ambition were forgot--the
suggestions of pride were unthought of--fame, glory, power, the pomp of
greatness, the sway of empire, and the adulation of the governed, were
now as things for which he had no sympathy; and he thought only of the
time when the noble, gifted, young, and beautiful Eureka, regardless
of the loftiness of her exalted station, the opinions of her princely
family, or the sentiments of the world, ennobled him with the passionate
ecstacies of her enthusiastic nature, and first filled his youthful
brain with those heroic dreams which made him yearn after the glorious
influence of superiority.

During the continuance of the song he listened with breathless
attention, and the rich harmonies of the music kept him spell-bound
to the spot on which he stood; but as the last chords of the closing
symphony were struck, he stood by the side of the musician.

"I knew not, Zabra, that you were so well skilled in the science of
sweet sounds," said he.

Zabra had appeared so lost in his own meditations, that he had not
noticed master Porphyry's approach. His gaze was fixed; and as he bent
over his harp, allowing the long curls of his dark hair to mingle with
its strings, no attitude, and no expression of countenance, could more
plainly interpret the perfect state of self-abandonment in which he then
existed; but when he heard the voice of him by whom he was addressed, in
an instant his dark handsome features assumed a different expression,
and throwing back the shining tresses that shaded his face, he seemed a
creature all smiles, devotion, and enjoyment.

"Music has been to me the food of my existence," remarked the page: "on
its divine essence I was nurtured; and as the perfume forms a part of
the breeze on which it is borne, harmony has entered into my nature, and
is now my life, my strength, and my felicity."

"Where did you learn the song I have just heard?" inquired the
merchant's son.

"From the impulses of my own creative spirit," replied the other. "From
sympathies awakened into action by the strong power that creates and
controls them. See you the mighty tide that swells up into universal
motion, bearing by its own strength the burthen of resistless armaments
as if they were but reeds, and when it does put forth its power,
assuming such shapes and doing such things as make the marvel of every
age; and know you not that it is the operation of its attraction for
that fair world of light that dwelleth in the starry heaven, whose
glimpses of a glory not to be subdued enter into its innermost depths,
and stir its everlasting waves with passionate emotion?"

"Surely one so young cannot have felt the power of Love?" asked the
elder of the two, in a tone that betrayed the influence of which it
spoke.

"Who shall say when it shall come or when it shall depart?" said Zabra,
as the dusky hue of his cheek gave evidence of the warm blood that
filled his veins. "It is a presence that appeareth at all times when the
soul is fit to receive it. It cometh not at this time, nor at that--it
dwelleth not here, nor there; it filleth eternity of time, and infinity
of space. Look around you, over the vast circumference of boundless
nature--wherever there is life, wherever there is motion--wherever there
is an object that hath beauty in its form and fitness for its purpose,
it hath all its energies swayed by the thrilling impulses of that
almighty passion. The flower that liveth but a few days, trembles in the
warm embraces of the southern breeze; and the planet that smiled upon
the infancy of the world, in the unconquerable maturity of a thousand
ages, still enamoured, drinks in the beauty of the mountain stream. The
heart is ever young, as mine is; and as the mellowing sunbeam calls into
activity the principle of life in the insect's egg, the sunshine in
which I have basked, hath stirred the vital seed implanted within my
breast, and given it restless hopes and fond desires, and properties
and motives to an end, that are the wings with which it flutters in its
shell. The only thing in which I differ from the rest is that my Spring
hath preceded theirs. All have their seasons, but till the sun comes
the winter endures; and in me the frost hath been broken up, and the
current, freed from its icy chains, rushes through its channels in the
soft light of its first bright day, and makes a world of its own, full
of music and flowers."

"But how can you bear to be parted from the object with which your
sympathies are so closely united?" asked master Porphyry.

"We are inseparable," replied Zabra, as he fixed his eyes on the
inquirer, eloquent with animation. "Think you, you can part the melody
from the voice by which it is sung? The two cannot be severed; neither
can the spirit to which mine is linked be other than a part of myself. I
breathe its atmosphere--I enjoy its presence--I share in its delights.
Our bodies may be set asunder by a plank; but you may pile mountains
upon mountains, and worlds upon worlds between us, and yet our souls
will remain one and indivisible."

"How much your voice and gestures remind me of Eureka!" remarked the
merchant's son, regarding with increasing interest the romantic
enthusiasm of his companion.

"For what purpose than this was I sent?" asked the youth, as he
turned away from the gaze as if to examine some of the strings of his
instrument: then continued--"If you loved her with the same intense
devotion with which she regards you, you would not require to be
reminded; but, save in the color of our complexions, there is so perfect
a resemblance both in our appearance and in our natures, that I might
recall her image to any one who has seen her and seems likely to forget
her."

"You wrong me, Zabra!" cried the other vehemently, "if you imagine it
possible that I can forget her. It is she who hath filled these veins
with a quenchless fire that makes my whole frame glow with a desire for
lofty enterprise, to attain a renown, and acquire a greatness worthy of
the love with which I have been honoured. Since that proud day when I
first beheld in her lustrous eyes the light that created a new splendour
over the horizon of my happiness, I have been shaking the chains that
bound me to the world, and, while yearning to emancipate myself from its
oppressive thraldoms, have sought how I could best subdue it to my own
ambitious purposes. I worship the nobility of her nature, and would have
her behold in mine something worthy of its intimate association. I would
not have her descend from the lofty pedestal on which she is placed;
therefore am I eager to win my way to a like elevation--ay, and ascend
higher, if a loftier step there be--and there acknowledge the greatness
I have worshipped, and everlastingly unite it to my own."

"How little you know of her character, if you think she values any
thing except the spirit to which she is attached," observed the page.
"Did she care for the accidental difference of birth that distinguishes
you from her, you would never have known of her affection, because it
could never have existed. They who love the idle vanities of rank, set
their hearts upon a garment, a feather, a shining stone that is made to
adorn the person who possesses it; but it was not such artificial worth
that could attract Eureka. That she would feel proud of any distinction
you might by the force of your own merit acquire, is probable; but
knowing the qualities of your disposition, she holds them at their full
value, which could not be increased in the slightest degree by all the
honours you might gain. It was her observation of a tendency in you to
seek after the unattainable, that made her fearful it would lead you
into danger; and when she pressed me into this service, she bade me
warn you of the different perils it would produce. I warn you now. Take
heed of indulging in these ambitious dreams. You have the elements of
greatness in your character; they ought to content you; and what you
desire are but the shadows of what you have. There is another danger
which is equally imminent; and if you are as truly devoted to Eureka as
she hath ever been to you, you will pause before it reaches you.--Your
feverish pursuit after renown, or power, or whatever delusive meteor it
may be that dazzles your eyes, only tends to make you lose sight of that
one true, steady, and brilliant light that should be a glory in your
pathway."

"Never!" exclaimed his companion with fervour--"never can any ambitious
dream of mine lead me from that splendour out of which it was created.
My aspirations are a natural result of the lofty source from which they
spring. They are but the reflections of her excellence--and the signs
of her presence; and loving her, I could no more exist without desiring
to be great, than I could bask in the sun's rays without acquiring
warmth.--Besides, had I not this stimulus to exertion, by what means can
I hope to make her mine. To the merchant's son the Lord of Philadelphia
would deny his daughter; but with Oriel Porphyry, his equal in dignity
and superior in power, the honoured of all and the feared of many, he
would gladly seek an alliance."

"You think not of what Eureka's ideas may be on this subject?" inquired
Zabra.

"I think of them, but they cannot avail," said the other.

"They will avail!" replied the youth emphatically.

"How?" asked master Porphyry.

"Be assured of this," said his young companion, while again he seemed
more attentive to his harp than to his listener. "If, in a reasonable
time, the obstacles that retard your union still exist, she will point
out a way by which they may be honourably set aside, or acquiesce in any
plan with the same object in view, which you may propose."

"How know you this?" inquired the other hastily.

"I heard her say it," said the page.

"But before I return, her father may compel her to enter into other
arrangements."

"Eureka has a will which is not to be compelled--she will readily do
that which is right--but no power on earth could bend her inclinations
to an unjust purpose."

"And she may be surrounded by dangers--subject to every kind of
suffering, and forced to endure a thousand indignities from which I have
no power to rescue her," continued master Porphyry.

"She _is_ surrounded by dangers," said the youth with emphasis--"dangers
new and terrible to other minds; but of these she will think nothing,
and of what she may be obliged to endure she will be equally regardless,
as long as she is possessed with the conviction, that he for whom alone
she suffers is not unmindful of the sacrifices she has made."

"There is a strength in your words," said the merchant, laying his hand
upon the shoulder of his companion, "which there is no withstanding; and
your looks are even more eloquent than your language. How is it possible
that one apparently so young should have acquired that force of
expression, and depth of meaning, which breathes in every sentence you
express."

"I was taught early, and well," replied the other, as his frame trembled
slightly under the touch of his companion. "And as for my speech--truth
is always the most forcible. My external frame may appear light and
boyish; but size is no safe guide for the judgment. The ostrich never
leaves the earth along which it glides; but the eagle pierces the
unfathomable depths of air with an untiring wing, and floats with eye
undimmed within the scorching rays of the eternal sun."

"Zabra, your nature is superior to the garb you wear," said the elder,
as he kindly took the hand and gazed into the face of his more youthful
associate. "I cannot allow you to be thus. You must put away the page,
and endeavour to be the friend of Oriel Porphyry."

"By whatever title Oriel Porphyry can most love Zabra, that title Zabra
would most desire to be," replied the other.

"Then be it so," said his companion. "From henceforth you shall be my
associate--my friend--my brother. Any thing in the ship that can extend
your enjoyments shall be at your disposal, and you may command the
services of every living creature it contains. We will be together as
often as possible, and the greatest delight you can create, or I can
indulge in, will be for us to discourse of her in whose affection I
exist; that when I hear the magic music of your voice, and meet the deep
intelligence of your gaze, the resemblance may make me imagine that the
blissful times have again returned, when beneath the shadows of the
welcome trees we sat together till the noonday hours ran on unnoticed
to the twilight, and the twilight deepened into evening, and still our
hands were clasped with the same gentle pressure with which they first
met, and still our eyes looked into each other with the same unspeakable
meaning that was first created in their mutual glances."

Perhaps Oriel Porphyry would have said more, but at that moment his
companion withdrew his hand, and with looks full of an empassioned
tenderness, as he struck an accompaniment of harmonious chords, he sang
the following words:--

   "Sound, oh Harp! some sweet and cheerful lay,
      Soft as the breath of eve o'er mountain springs,
    Awhile the spirit of a brighter day
      Mingles its voice with thy rejoicing strings.
    With thy rejoicing strings, oh Soul of Song!
      Bind the fond air with spells rained free and fast;
    And as thy thrilling echoes roll along,
      We'll raise again THE RAPTURES OF THE PAST!

   "Sound, oh Harp! such harmony as dies
      Within the warm and rosy atmosphere,
    When gentle whispers, and delicious sighs,
      Send a delighting welcome to the ear.
    A welcome to the ear, oh Voice Divine!
      Which long as life, and kind as hope, shall last;
    That with the wealth of an exhaustless mine
      Stores in our hearts THE TREASURES OF THE PAST!

   "Sound, oh Harp! thy music once again,
      For now while I intrusive cares destroy,
    An impulse stirs within the heart and brain,
      Strong with the power of everlasting joy.
    Of everlasting joy, Prophetic Sound!
      (A bliss that cannot in the grave be cast;)
    For as thy trembling murmurs swell around,
      Still we embrace THE BLESSINGS OF THE PAST."

When the song concluded their hearts seemed filled with a mutual
sympathy which neither could express; and Master Porphyry throwing his
arm round the young musician, and bringing Zabra's arm round his own
waist, drew him to another part of the vessel without either exchanging
a word. In this attitude, the youthful pair would have formed an
admirable study for a painter. The tall and manly form of the merchant's
son, his clear complexion and noble countenance creating a perfect
contrast to the symmetrical, yet delicate, figure of his companion, and
the soft voluptuous character of his more dark but not less beautiful
features.

While these proceedings were going on, a scene of a very different
description was being acted in a low, dark, narrow cabin in a secluded
part of the ship. By the light of a small lamp that swung from the
roof, the diminutive form of Log the captain's clerk, with his little
conceited physiognomy, might be observed perched upon a high stool
engaged in writing, while the more burly figure, but not more
prepossessing countenance, of Scrumpydike, lay extended on some packages
near his feet.

"Scrunch me, if this ar'n't the most miserable sort o' life, I ever
knowed," remarked the latter, as he rested his chin upon his hands and
supported himself upon his elbows.

"Sad!" responded Log, who thinking that to speak much would lessen his
consequence, seldom allowed any thing beyond a monosyllable to escape
him, to which by repetitions and some slight additions he attempted to
give as much importance as if they contained volumes of meaning. "Sad,
sad, very sad, very sad upon my word, Mister Scrumpydike."

"There's nothin' doin'," continued the other. "I feel as queer as a dog
wi' his tail cut off, cause there's no 'portunity to do nothin'."

"Nothing, nothing, decidedly, actually, positively nothing, Mister
Scrumpydike," replied the little man.

"It's a tarnation hard case that a fellow's obligated to be honest
against his will," remarked the sailor despondingly.

"Hard, hard, very hard, very hard indeed, uncommonly hard, Mister
Scrumpydike," said the other, appearing to sympathise exceedingly in so
extraordinary a cause of complaint.

"But what's most cruel in this here unnat'ral state o' things is, that
there's sich lots o' beautiful prigging for any chap as is a mind to
make his-self handy," added his companion in the same pathetic tone.

"Cruel, cruel, most cruel, most unjustly, most unnaturally, most
deplorably cruel, Mister Scrumpydike," responded Log.

"Well, I only knows I shan't be able to stand this here molloncolly sort
o' fun much longer. May I be bolted by a shark if I ar'n't a getting
into the most 'bominable reg'lar habits as can be. You wouldn't s'pose
it possible, but I ar'n't 'propriated nothin' o' nobodies since I've
been aboard this here craft. I ar'n't the same sort o' cretur I was
afore. I ar'n't, indeed. I resists temptation, and commits lots o' other
'straordinary impossibilities. I does without divarsion:--I ar'n't
killed a fellow cretur for ever so long. And worser nor all, some o'
the bugaboos here act'ly thinks I ar'n't no greater a villain than
themselves, ar'n't it horrid?"

"Terrible, terrible, horribly terrible, upon my word, very horribly
terrible, Mister Scrumpydike."

Here the dialogue was interrupted by a knocking at the door which made
Scrumpydike jump upon his legs, and Log twist himself round upon his
stool, each looking, in a considerable degree, alarmed and anxious.
Presently the door opened cautiously, and Captain Compass entered the
cabin. His sallow complexion, high cheek bones, prominent nose, thick
lips, and restless grey eyes were surrounded by a thick mass of coarse
black hair, that spread from each side of his narrow forehead, down his
cheeks and under his chin, in a formidable pair of whiskers. His figure
was spare of flesh, but in the gauntness of body, length of arm, and
sinewy leg, there was evidently more than ordinary strength. His
appearance was not likely to excite for him much regard, but there was
a careless freedom in his manner, a frank boldness in his conversation,
and a pungent satire in his wit, that had made him an agreeable
companion to the merchant's son.

"All right, Scrumpy?" inquired Compass in a whisper, after closing the
door carefully after him.

"All right, cap'ain," replied Scrumpydike.

"Right, right, very right, perfectly right, right as a trivet, Captain
Compass," added Log.

"Scrunch me, if we shan't all be served with sauce we don't like, unless
we keep a smart look out ahead," observed the captain as he flung
himself upon a bale of goods.

"Why, what's in the wind now, cap'ain?" inquired Scrumpydike, with some
earnestness, while little Log remained silent with alarm.

"May I be peeled to shreds in a hurricane, if that dark looking son of a
savage, who came on board the day we sailed, doesn't suspect the game we
are playing," continued the captain.

"No!" exclaimed the other, as an expression of anxiety became visible in
his hard rough features; and the captain's clerk trembled on his stool
as if he was shaken by an ague.

"I was palavering young Porphyry as smooth as a rat's tail, after he had
been pretty well blown up with the long-winded sentences of that tedious
old porpoise Fortyfolios, and was going it at a smacking rate about the
pleasure of liberty and the enjoyments of a life of enterprise, the sort
of discourse, I have found out, he'll suck in as a fish drinks water,
when happening to turn my daylights a little a starboard, I beheld
that black thief Zabra watching me like a snake, and when I met the
full stare of his great goggling eyes they seemed to have the power of
piercing through and through right into the hold where all my secrets
are ballasted, so I, having a sudden fear that he was up to the course
I was steering, lost the helm of my discourse, and anchored in shallow
water, with a muddy bottom, in no time."

"Pooh!" responded Scrumpydike: "is that all? Leave him to me, and I'll
thank ye for the job."

"No, that mustn't be: we must avoid every thing likely to create the
least suspicion," replied the captain.

"I'll take care o' that," said the other: "I'll watch my 'portunity when
he's a hanging over the side o' the ship, as he does o' nights when
there ar'n't a human near enough to catch a glimpse o' his 'bominable
carcass, and then with my 'safe and sure' here," continued the fellow
as he drew a long knife a little way from its concealment in his vest,
"I'll make a sweep into his bread-room, and afore he can ax what it's
for, I'll heave him into a berth where he'll lie snug as a wet blanket
can make him."

"It wo'n't do, I tell you," remarked his associate.

"Nobody needn't know nothin' about it," added Scrumpydike.

"There is too much risk and not sufficient advantage to be gained by
it," said the captain. "Ah!" he continued, after a pause--"if I only
had some of the old hands now, scrunch me, if I wouldn't put matters to
rights, after a fashion the fellows here don't dream of."

"Wouldn't we? Breakers ahead! wouldn't we?" cried the other with
exultation. "But they've all cut their cables and gone adrift. There's
nothin' but misfortunes in this here world. It's a hard case for a
fellow who's sociably inclined to see his mates, as fine a set o'
villains as ever escaped hanging, partin' company without cuttin' each
other's throats or doin' any thing in a friendly way." A melancholy
pause succeeded this sentence.--"It was an ugly business that at Cape
Danger, warn't it, Mister Log?" at last asked the scoundrel of the
little man upon the stool.

"Ugly, ugly, very ugly, I may say uncommonly, deplorably, ferociously
ugly, Mister Scrumpydike," replied the captain's clerk.

"Well, it's no use lamenting the catastrophe now," observed the captain.
"All we've got to do is to get a new ship and a fresh set of hands. The
ship we've as good as got, but she can be of no use without a crew of
the right sort. To get such a set of fellows together will take some
time. We must either pick them up where we can, or try and make the
present crew adopt our views. This will be rather a ticklish business,
and requires very careful management, for the slightest knowledge of
our intentions among those not inclined to join us will wreck the whole
concern. Now, Scrumpy, you've got jawing tackle that will stand in any
weather."

"Ay, ay, cap'ain," cried the fellow with a grin: "may I be washed to
rags in a waterspout if I couldn't bamboozle the devil's grandmother."

"Well, you must sound these fellows, but do it cautiously--and try if
the inducement of plenty of plunder and a free life will be likely to
lead them to assist us in our bold undertaking. As for the boy Zabra,
although there appears something very mysterious about him, and he looks
as sharp as a sword-fish, I don't think it possible he can find me out.
Scorch my body to a cinder! but it would be a hard case if, after having
baffled so many big vessels, I should be sunk by such a bit of a craft
as that. However, I mus'n't stay here any longer or my absence may
create inquiry," observed the speaker as he proceeded to the door; then
looking at his associates said, "Remember what you have heard, and
steer your course accordingly," and with the same caution with which he
entered left the cabin.

"Well, ar'n't this enough to make a fellow ready to jump down his own
throat wi' vexation?" remarked Scrumpydike to his companion. "Here, I
was jest 'gratulating myself that spiflicating that young blackamoor
would be a tolerable bit o' a pastime to cheer up the dulness o' this
here molloncholy life, when he turns round upon me and says it ar'n't
to be at no price! I'd rather live in a whale's belly up to my nose in
blubber than endure this uncomfortable state o' feeling. Scrunch me if
I wouldn't. Don't you think now, Master Log, it's as bad a state o'
existence as is possible for a human to know on?"

"Bad, bad, shocking bad, particularly shocking bad, upon my word
very particularly shocking bad, Mister Scrumpydike," replied the
commiserating captain's clerk; and immediately afterwards the
dissatisfied villain walked away to join his unsuspicious messmates.




CHAP. III.

A PHILANTHROPIST.


A few days after the circumstances that have been related, Oriel
Porphyry, being alone, broke open the packet that had been given him
by his father, and on perusal found it to contain the following
communication:--

"It is time, my dear Oriel, that you should know something of your
father's history; that being made acquainted with the steps by which he
has acquired his reputation, you may seek the same path to honour with a
certainty that it cannot mislead; and the moment is equally opportune
for you to learn the true state of your country, which you cannot know
unless you can have the account from one who is neither desirous of
deceiving himself nor his associates, that when you are called upon to
take your place on the grand stage of the world, as you will be aware
what portion of the drama has preceded your appearance, you may
understand the tendency of the whole so well, as to be able to play your
part with power, with truth, with a just conception of the character, to
the satisfaction of yourself, and with the admiration of your audience.
I have observed, with considerable anxiety, that you possess a
disposition that does not conform itself readily to the spirit
of the times. You are impatient of restraint--you are anxious for
enterprise--you are yearning for distinction;--not that distinction
which rewards the exertions of the truly great, the just, the good, the
benevolent--which is the loving admiration of their fellow-creatures,
and comes in the delightful shape of blessings, and good wishes, and
the sight of social happiness--but the vain splendour of a false renown,
such as is often acquired by adventurers, impostors, conquerors, and
tyrants, and is made visible in the shrieks of wounded men, in the
adulation of slaves, in tears and curses, blood and flame, in the blast
of trumpets and the clang of chains. Your eyes are enamoured of the
glory with which the mighty invest themselves: to excite the wonder of
the fearful and the foolish, and assist in their subjection--thrones
and sceptres, robes of state, gaudy ceremonies, and idle distinctions,
dazzle your senses--you would wish them yours, seek for them, fight for
them, die for them: having obtained them, your sole gratification would
exist in exhibiting yourself surrounded by these delusive honours, or
in conferring some of minor importance upon such of your followers as
may make themselves most useful or agreeable: dying in seeking their
possession, you would render up your everlasting soul, to mingle with
the bright source from which it sprung, with the sole consolation that
you will be talked of by a multitude you could not enslave.

"The only unerring way of judging of the value of a thing is by the
happiness it produces. The degree of happiness that results to the
acquirer of this glory, of which you are so desirous, must indeed be
small, when we take into consideration the danger with which it is
obtained, the fear of losing it, and the struggles to maintain its
possession, which are its common accompaniments; and still less is the
quantity of happiness it creates among those at whose expense it must
exist--for there is no happiness in thraldom--in the debasement of human
nature to an idol--in the march of conquering hordes destroying as
they go--or in the bitter anguish of noble minds struggling in vain
to emancipate themselves from the tyranny under which they groan. The
only real happiness consists in the practice of benevolence, and the
only real glory is the admiration it excites. I have enjoyed a more
than ordinary share of happiness, because I have taken advantage of
opportunities for benefiting my fellow-creatures that were presented
to me in more than ordinary abundance, and I have acquired an unusual
degree of reputation for a private individual, in consequence of making
the most profitable use of these abundant opportunities for doing good.

"It was in the middle of the last reign, when the late emperor, after
ascending the steps of military greatness to a throne, was pursuing an
uninterrupted career of conquest throughout the vast continent of this
immense portion of the globe, when I, a youth like yourself, but with
far different feelings, left the mansion of my father, (who had lately
been ennobled, as it is called, for his services in the wars,) to escape
from a way of life it was desired I, being his eldest son, should
follow--a way of slaughter and tyranny, of blood, and shame, and guilt,
which was disgustingly repugnant to my disposition,--and disguised, and
under a fictitious name, seeking some more honourable occupation, I was
so fortunate as to enter into the service of the wealthiest merchant in
the city of Columbus. I became useful to him--he praised my industry and
integrity--I was admired by his daughter--she loved me for the praises
to which she had been a frequent and not unwilling listener. He was
generous and noble in his nature--she simple, modest, and kind. She was
your mother, Oriel, and after having been enriched with her beauty and
excellence, I became possessed of all the store of treasure, which had
gone on accumulating as it passed from father to son through several
generations of princely merchants.

"I had always done whatever trifling good the little power I had allowed
me to accomplish, and the sweetest gratifications I enjoyed arose from
these actions, and had always longed for the arrival of that time when
my sphere of usefulness might be equal to my desires; therefore when,
by the demise of my adopted father, I found myself the uncontrollable
master of funds almost exhaustless, to render the benefits I wished
them to produce as ample as possible, I studied every way which great
knowledge and extraordinary means could create to increase them,
that without diminishing my source of good I might have a liberal,
a continual, and increasing fund from which to realise my benevolent
intentions. With this object in view, and with the experience I had
acquired by many years of close application, I brought into operation
all my resources--my ships, continually increasing in number, traversed
every known sea, laden with the most desirable produce--and my agents,
always becoming more numerous, penetrated into every habitable region,
and opened new sources of traffic and fresh accumulations of wealth. The
consequence was, that I was enabled to live a life of the most active
benevolence. I purchased happiness by diffusing it around me. I founded
hospitals for the sick and asylums for the poor. I endeavoured to
lessen the growth of crime by increasing the means of intelligence,
and I attempted to strengthen the example of virtue by adding to the
recreative power of its advantages. I rewarded genius, I enriched worth,
I assisted industry, I fostered skill. I made disappointment forget her
name, and allowed misfortune to become a stranger in the places where I
was known.

"But at this period, in what state of feeling lived the emperor--he
whose state you would envy, and whose pride you would covet? He was
getting into the winter of his days, but the fire that burnt within
him was not to be subdued by its frost. His soul was like a volcano
in a region of snow. He was disturbed by the restless turmoil of his
own thoughts, that made his couch of down a bed of rock, his robe of
sovereignty a perpetual blister, and the acclamations of a fickle
multitude a piercing discord. In vain, when he found that all his
conquests had been achieved, and he consolidated them into one immense
empire, comprising the two Americas, over which he ruled alone and
absolute, he tried to calm the fever of his desires by building palaces
and churches, erecting triumphal arches and towering pillars--creating
convenient highways, majestic bridges, noble aqueducts, immense canals,
and unrivalled docks:--in vain he strived to have forests grow in the
place of weeds, and sought to have gardens of roses in deserts of
sand--he encouraged agriculture--he promoted manufactures--he protected
commerce--science was ennobled in his halls, and learning dwelt
in comfort in his colleges:--in vain he established institutions,
originated titles, conferred honours, and distributed wealth--the fire
that slumbered in his breast was not to be thus extinguished. He was
miserable for want of opportunities for action. His busy inclinations
allowed him no repose. There was no peace for his soul.

"The happiness I enjoyed became known to him--became familiar to
all--for with the true spirit of philanthropy, which knows no
distinction of creed or country, I endeavoured to confer my benefits
wherever they were most required; and the loving admiration with which
I found my name regarded in every part of the globe, and the abundant
pleasures I saw arise from my own exertions wherever they could be
applied, created in me a degree of happiness almost impossible to be
exceeded. He became aware of my extraordinary wealth, and was told of
the beneficial effects it was producing. The emperor sent me word that
a certain distinction waited my acceptance--with a proper humility I
declined the favour. Surprised at the refusal, and desirous of tempting
me into obligation, he caused it to be intimated to me that a higher
honour would, if desired, be granted--this, in the same manner, and with
as little consideration, I also refused. His astonishment increased, and
his inclination to shackle me with the trappings of his own grandeur
grew more intense. I was told that the highest honours to which a
subject could aspire might at a wish be mine; and I need scarcely add
that the offer met with the same result as its predecessors. No, my son!
as Oriel Porphyry I had acquired almost boundless riches, and had lived
in a state of happiness which left no desire ungratified--as Oriel
Porphyry I had obtained an influence over the hearts of my fellow-men,
compared to which the power of conquerors was an idle boast--and as
Oriel Porphyry I had created for myself a renown beside which the glory
of an emperor sunk into insignificance. What could be to me the baubles
he sought to confer--the sounding titles--or the pompous privileges?
They could not extend my usefulness a hair's breadth--they could not add
to my enjoyments the fraction of a grain.

"To say that the emperor was not offended by my repeated refusals
would be to give a more charitable interpretation to his feelings
than would be true; but my behaviour seemed to him something
so extraordinary--something so opposed to the spirit of his
experience--and something so utterly incomprehensible to his notions
of human nature--that he sent for me to be satisfied by his own eyes
that there existed in the world what he considered so remarkable a
phenomenon. He endeavoured to persuade me into a conviction that I did
wrong, in not accepting the advantages, as he was pleased to call them,
I might obtain; and I replied by describing the advantages that more
justly deserved the name I already possessed. I asked if he could give
me any thing of real value that was not at my disposal, and enumerated
every good I was enabled to bestow. He reflected, and the more he
reflected, the more he seemed to wonder. I do not remember the whole of
our conversation, but it was of sufficient interest to him to desire my
visit to be repeated.

"I saw the emperor frequently at his continual requests, and the more I
conversed with him the more he appeared gratified with my conversation.
I expressed my opinions fearlessly, and my boldness he excused--I
censured his government with freedom, and he listened without offence.
I suggested some valuable improvements, and my ideas were immediately
adopted; but our acquaintance did not end there. He was continually
entreating me to occupy a place in his council, from which I endeavoured
to be excused; but on reflection, seeing that it might confer upon me
opportunities I could not otherwise possess, for giving a more liberal
character to the government, by which means I might improve the
condition of the people, I at last consented, on the understanding that
it should confer on me no rank, no privileges, and no emoluments. I knew
that my country had once been a republic, and under that title had for
centuries enjoyed an unexampled degree of prosperity; but though I would
have preferred a government of a similar character, more perfect in its
influence, and more simple in its organisation, as a change in the state
of things could not evidently be made, without creating a degree of
confusion, strife, hatred, and unhappiness, the thought of which I could
not endure, it was my aim so to work and improve the machinery of the
state, that the public wants should be as completely satisfied as it
was possible for them to be. It matters little under what name a nation
is governed,--a monarchy, an oligarchy, and a republic are but different
names for the same thing; and a president, a doge, and an emperor, are
only different titles for the same office: they may all represent a
state of tyranny in the country, and their chiefs may become the most
despotic rulers of the people. The true value of a thing, as I have
previously said, is the quantity of happiness it can be made to produce;
and every system of government may, by proper administration, be made
productive of the greatest degree of happiness to the governed.

"At the head of the grand council of the empire I was in due time
installed; and while I there remained, was the originator of a multitude
of various measures, having for their object the public welfare. My
coadjutors I found to be men with whom I could but little sympathise,
because they had no sympathy for their fellows. They were proud, vain,
selfish, and intolerant. They imagined themselves governors instead
of ministers. They liked to rule better than to advise. They bowed in
abject servility to their superior, and strived to make those having
less power as slavish in their behaviour to themselves.

"It is not at all extraordinary that such dispositions should regard the
untitled merchant who presided at their deliberations, always exercised
his own judgment in preference to theirs, paid no deference to their
fancied superiority, and appeared on terms of equality even with their
emperor, as one unqualified for government, and solely kept in office
by the emperor's foolish partiality; and I was neither surprised or
offended, when I found them opposing the measures I brought forward;
treating my arguments with inattention, and my person with disrespect.
Finding that, under such circumstances, my services could be of no value
to the community, I was obliged to request the emperor to release me
from the responsibilities of my situation. He desired to know the
reasons for my resignation. I told him. I was entreated to remain; an
intimation was conveyed to the members of the council from him they
acknowledged as their master, and, when I returned to my duties, I
found them rivalling each other in obsequiousness to my will. That,
notwithstanding the readiness with which they embraced my views, they
hated me in their hearts, I regret to say, was too evident. But they
were little to be blamed. Had they known that, even in the idle rank
which they prized so highly, I was the equal of the noblest, and the
superior of the rest, they would have regarded me with more generous
feelings; but none knew when my father died, and my younger brother took
possession of the titles and estates of the family; that the rightful
heir, long lamented as dead, was living, in the person of an object of
secret disdain to his coadjutors; and that he was Oriel Porphyry, the
merchant.

"It may easily be imagined by you, from what I have related, that the
emperor had sympathies in his nature rarely met with in conquerors; but
by me they were first awakened. On one of our earliest interviews, when
the spirit that kept his desires in a ferment was still strong upon him,
he said,--

"'I want action--I want action. I cannot live except in the stir of
battle, and the pursuit of conquest. But my triumphs are completed--I
have nothing left to conquer.'

"Sire," said I, "the most valuable--the most difficult conquest remains
unachieved."

"'What have I to conquer?' he asked, eagerly.

"Yourself," I replied. I will do him the justice to say that he did not
lose sight of the suggestion. His mind became liberalised--his heart
expanded to the influence of sincere philanthropy--for the first time he
understood the nature of true happiness; and although from the effects
of a disease of long standing his reign, from this time, was brief, he
lived to effect some valuable reformations in the laws, and by their
results in ameliorating the condition of the people, provided, as far
as he had the power, a remedy for the mischiefs he had created.

"His successor was a weak, proud, vain young man, possessing a
disposition for tyranny--usually found in company with incapacity
holding power; and it is almost unnecessary to state that such a
character found plenty of bad advisers, and that I was speedily
obliged by their machinations to retire from all participation in the
government. Although my time had always been actively employed, I had
regarded the progress of your education with so much interest, that I
never failed to create opportunities for superintending your studies. I
witnessed the developement of your mind with increasing pleasure, and
found a continual gratification in the approaches you were making to the
perfect dignity of manhood. About this time we went to reside in the
neighbourhood of Philadelphia's noble mansion, because the scenery was
endeared to me by all the most pleasant of my early recollections, and
I encouraged your intimacy with our proud neighbours, in consequence
of an inclination I had long retained, which was created in me by many
powerful reasons with which you cannot now be made acquainted, for a
union between our families. Philadelphia seemed for a considerable time
with great cordiality to enter into my views; but as the government of
which he was a supporter were pursuing measures highly inimical to the
liberties of the people, and as he found I would not be brought into any
thing like an approval of such a policy, he began to look upon me with
less friendship--he thought it would hurt his loyalty to retain feelings
of sociality for one who opposed the measures of his sovereign, and
imagined it beneath the dignity of his nobility to encourage an alliance
with an untitled merchant. But he little knew that a word would make
me his equal in his own ideas of greatness; which, when uttered, would
at the same time reduce him to a state of insignificance to which, in
comparison, my plebeian condition would have appeared to him princely.

"From a friendly neighbour, Philadelphia became an implacable enemy. I
regretted, for the reasons to which I have alluded, that all idea of the
proposed union should be thus suddenly terminated; but I had noticed
in Eureka so powerful a romantic impulse in her nature, and observed
that its effect upon you was so productive of ambitious desires, that
I did not lament your separation, but in a very slight degree. The
disappointment under which I observed you suffer so acutely, and the
restless eagerness for a life of enterprise, I noticed becoming in you
daily less supportable, induced me to plan the voyage upon which you
are now proceeding. Engage yourself in careful observation of every
thing you meet worthy of notice--seek every opportunity for diffusing
happiness among those near you, by whom it may be required; and all
motive for exertion, that does not tend towards benevolence, all regret
for the past, and all desires for the future, will be forgotten in the
enjoyment of your own happiness."

"It cannot be," exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, as he concluded the preceding
sentence. "I honour my father's noble nature, and would do all in my
power to fulfil his benevolent intentions, but I cannot give up Eureka.
My ambition I will strive to conquer; but love is not so easily
subdued. What care I for the disdain of the proud Philadelphia? I see
signs in the times that are likely to bring about important changes, if
this state of things continues. The people are dissatisfied with their
rulers, and the emperor is endeavouring to make himself absolute. Every
day will increase the public discontent, and when the crisis arrives,
there will be nothing required but a leader, and down the whole rotten
fabric of despotism must tumble. I will wait the time; and then, my
father! we will see who is greatest in the land--the generous merchant
or the proud noble."




CHAP. IV.

A FIRE AT SEA.


The mid-day meal had concluded in the chief cabin, and its partakers
were grouped round a table in the centre of the apartment, assisting
with conversation the enjoyment of the wines and delicacies of which
they were partaking. The cabin was elegant in its decorations, but they
were marked by a more valuable quality than mere elegance: the pictures
and other ornaments, possessing features of peculiar interest to persons
engaged in traffic, for they represented, or were connected in some way
with the objects, the pleasures, and the advantages of commerce; some
weapons arranged in a picturesque manner, and placed amongst them by
Oriel Porphyry, were the only things there seen that did not partake of
the peaceful character of the appearance of the room.

"The only thing I can see in nature," said Captain Compass, as he sat
at one end of the table opposite Oriel Porphyry, re-filling his glass,
"and the only thing I think worth seeing is glory. May I sink to the
bottom of the sea in the next gale, if there's any thing else a fellow
should wish to possess. What do you say, master Porphyry?"

"Why, I must acknowledge it has extraordinary attractions," replied the
young merchant. "It is generally difficult to obtain,--its pursuit is
usually attended with much hazard, but then there is such an excitement
in the effort made to possess it, and such a splendour accompanying its
possession, that difficulties and dangers ought not to be considered by
those by whom it is sought."

"Exactly," responded the captain, with more than usual cordiality; "and
they only can obtain glory who express such sentiments."

"But it is uncertain as yet what definition you give to the idea you
call glory," remarked the oldest member of the party,--a man rather
above the medium height, and considerably beyond the middle age, with a
large head, nearly bald, prominent nose, and deep-set eyes, well shaded
by a pair of thick grisly eyebrows. His features were somewhat stern
in their expression, apparently more from the result of continual
reflection than from want of kindly feeling; and although they indicated
considerable mental power, a consciousness of superiority betrayed
itself quite as conspicuously. It may easily be imagined that this was
the learned Professor Fortyfolios. "The consideration of any abstract
idea," continued the professor, who, it will be observed, having been
a public lecturer in the university of Columbus, had acquired a more
important manner of expressing his sentiments than was usual in
conversation. "The consideration of any abstract idea, appears under
different circumstances in the minds of different individuals, but this
is as much the result of an habitual tendency to certain associations in
the person who considers the subject, as the consequence of the variety
of organisations that exist in society. Scarcely any two persons are
to be met with whose reflective faculties pursue the progress of
ratiocination exactly in the same manner,--because no two individuals
being exactly alike, and the mind being a portion of the self, partaking
of its individuality, as in a mirror, the shadow is a resemblance of the
features, each must receive its own separate impressions, and consider
them in its own peculiar manner. It follows, as a natural consequence,
that the thoughts of the speaker will partake of his individual
habitude, and that his conception of glory, or any other abstract idea,
will be coloured by his particular way of life."

"Well, I don't know in what latitude abstract ideas may be found," said
the captain, a little puzzled by the professor's explanation; "but I
think any body knows the landmarks of glory. If I saw a little ship
manned by a few brave spirits, fight a ship double its size, or may be
two ships or may be three, defended by a crew as superior in numbers;
and after raking her fore and aft, smashing every thing to splinters,
and cutting every thing to rags, pipe all hands to board, and sweep away
the enemy from their own decks into the sea, and after that sail away
with the prize, I should call _that_ glory."

"The action is glorious no doubt," observed Oriel Porphyry, "but it
does not realise my conception of glory. I imagine a man, in the truest
sense of the word, living in a country groaning under the despotism
of a tyrant, and having that spirit of freedom in his nature, which
must always accompany greatness; and that uncontrollable energy of
valour in his character, which is its element, pointing out to his
fellow-sufferers the cause of their slavery, stirring in their hearts an
unconquerable love of independence, and after gathering them together
by twos and threes, then by hundreds and thousands, and lastly, by
resistless multitudes, at their head attacking the hordes of armed
plunderers by whom their subjugation had been effected; driving
them from the tented field to the battlemented wall, and from the
battlemented wall to the grave; and when not a trace of tyranny remained
throughout the land, I imagine that man the liberator of his country,
and the emancipator of its people, honoured as he ought to be, and
possessed with the power with which their gratitude should invest him,
conducting the nation he had enfranchised to the highest degree of
prosperity and greatness--and I call _that_ glory."

"Then my notion of the same idea differs materially from those you
have given," said the professor. "In the first place, there are two
antagonist principles, from which all good and ill emanate--intelligence
and ignorance; and only according to the predominance of the former can
we judge of the extent of the excellence of any thing. As we know that
all which is beneficial proceeds from intelligence, and that without
intelligence nothing good can arise, and that without good there can
be no such thing as glory, it must be evident that he who produces
intelligence acquires the truest and greatest glory. The philosopher who
spends laborious days in amassing knowledge by observation and study,
which he distributes to the whole world, and whose labours continue to
the end of time to ennoble and refine mankind; in the fame with which
his name must be inseparably connected among all generations, and
wherever civilisation exists, realises, in my opinion, the _only_ true
idea of glory the human mind can conceive."

"I beg leave to differ from you all," cried a stout little man (whose
round, rosy face bore the perfect expression of good humour), sitting
opposite the professor, and whose professional conversation proclaimed
him to be Dr. Tourniquet, "I beg leave to differ from you all, don't you
see. I cannot imagine glory to belong to anything that does not tend
to alleviate the sufferings or remove the diseases of the human frame,
don't you see. Life is subject to a multitude of maladies--from the
cradle to the grave there is a constant succession of aches and pains,
and few escape without experiencing disorders more or less dreadful.
Now my idea is, that evil and good are but other names for pain and
pleasure, don't you see; that he who lessens the quantity of evil is
alone entitled to the name of benefactor, which brings with it the
greatest degree of glory it is possible to possess, don't you see; and
that, consequently, the man who devotes his life to procure others
the enjoyment of health--who boldly ventures among the most malignant
contagions to study their effects, and origins--who carefully examines
every morbid structure in the living and the dead, at the greatest
personal risk and inconvenience, till he becomes familiar with all its
appearances and discovers its creating cause; and by long study of the
properties of different medicinal substances, of external circumstances
that tend to produce health or disease, and by his intimate acquaintance
with the human body in every state in which it can be seen;--in my
opinion, that man, who by knowledge thus acquired, and thus applied,
through his example made public, being enabled to save or prolong the
lives of millions of his fellow-creatures, and multiply the blessings
of existence, in the admiration with which his name must always be
regarded, is the _only_ perfect conception of glory that can be
entertained, don't you see."

"Pooh, pooh!" exclaimed the captain, somewhat contemptuously. "What
glory can there be in giving a fellow a dose of physic?"

"Unless there be some ennobling sentiment in the mind, which is
developed in great actions such as I have described, glory cannot
exist," said Oriel Porphyry.

"Strife must always be a bad means to whatever end it may lead,"
observed his tutor; "and as nothing but ignorance can make men endeavour
to destroy each other, strife can never be productive of true glory."

"The amount of pain, resulting from battles either on sea or land, is
immense," remarked the doctor. "Gunshot wounds, fractures, contusions,
ruptures, laceration, inflammation, suppuration, mortification, and
death; and, therefore, he who creates so much pain, cannot, by his
actions, be said to achieve anything like glory, don't you see. As for
philosophy and its qualifications for being considered the only thing
that is most glorious, if the philosopher cannot set a broken bone, or
remove a disease, pain must exist in spite of such philosophy; and
therefore, the philosopher, who is enabled to prevent or remove pain,
has the best reason to glory in his philosophy, don't you see."

"But pain cannot, on many occasions, be either removed or prevented,"
replied the professor, seemingly preparing himself for an argument.
"Pain is frequently produced by accidents which cannot be foreseen, and
therefore cannot be prevented; and these frequently assume shapes on
which science is exerted in vain, and therefore they cannot be removed:
in these cases, where surgery and medicine are perfectly useless,
philosophy is triumphant; for it will enable the sufferer to be
regardless of his pain, and to look upon his dissolution with
indifference."

"What is the use of your philosophy to the insane?" asked the doctor,
who seemed to take considerable delight in opposing the professor.

"I should imagine it would be about as serviceable as your medical
treatment," retorted the other.

"Nothing of the kind," replied his antagonist with a chuckle of
triumphant congratulation. "A knowledge of the anatomy of the brain,
its functions, and operations, with sufficient information as to the
patient's history, general habits and mode of thinking, applied by an
experienced practitioner, may often effect a cure, don't you see."

"May often, but how often?" inquired Fortyfolios, with some appearance
of sarcasm. "To one restored to sanity, there will be found fifty
incurables--so where's your remedy?"

"To one philosopher there will be discovered a thousand fools, don't you
see--so where's your philosophy?" responded the other in a similar tone.

"Dr. Tourniquet," replied the professor with a look of offended dignity,
"I trust my philosophy will be found whenever it is required."

"Professor Fortyfolios," said the doctor, evidently desirous of pushing
matters with his antagonist as far as possible, "if you wait till it's
required, perhaps you may have to wait a long time, don't you see."

"No Sir, I don't see!" cried the now angry Professor with much warmth.
"And allow me to add, Dr. Tourniquet--allow me to add, I say----"

"The wine, if you please," cried Oriel Porphyry, who, with the captain,
had enjoyed the discussion till he thought it necessary to interfere.

"Ay, the wine, Professor Fortyfolios," repeated the doctor, with his
usual good humour. "It is the most admirable addition to your excellent
arguments you could have conceived; and, therefore, as a mark of sincere
respect for your superior learning, allow me to propose your health,
don't you see."

The professor recovered his dignity immediately. "I agree completely,"
said he, after having properly acknowledged the compliment he had
received, "I agree completely with the opinion of my accomplished
friend, as to the great degree of pain produced by warfare, and----"

"Froth and moonshine!" exclaimed the captain, interrupting him. "Why we
must all die some day or other, and it is quite as agreeable to strike
your colours to a bullet or a sword thrust, as to old age or the gout.
In my opinion, a fellow who lives past his strength, is like a ship that
isn't sea-worthy,--he ought to be destroyed as useless. As for fighting
being unnatural, it's the most natural thing in nature. In the sea, the
big fish destroy the little fish; in the air, the great birds prey upon
the smaller ones; and on the land, the more powerful animals devour
those of less strength. Every thing has to fight for its existence, and
so does man."

"But man alone preys upon his own species," remarked the professor.

"You're out of your reckoning there, most decidedly, Mister Professor,"
replied Captain Compass hastily: "cocks, quails, pheasants, bulls, deer,
dogs, and cats fight each other, as long as they've got a leg to stand
upon; and the sow devours her own farrow, and the rabbit her own litter,
without any sort of compunction."

"There can at least be no apology for the ferocity with which man in a
state of civilisation, pursues his fellow-creatures to the death, don't
you see," said the doctor.

"Ferocity!" exclaimed the captain fiercely. "Who are so ferocious as
philosophers?"

The professor and the doctor uttered a simultaneous exclamation of
surprise.

"Did you ever hear of fellows the most ready for fighting," continued
the other, "filling the veins of live animals with poison,--maiming
and torturing poor dumb creatures, in every way ingenuity could devise,
merely for the sake of experiment; and then, after having indulged
themselves with the sight of such cruelty, sitting down quietly to
describe in the most minute manner, the agonies they have inflicted?
No, it's only the philosopher does these things,--the philosopher, who
shudders at the idea of a man killing those who seek to kill him, but
counts how many seconds an unoffending animal is in dying, after having
its brain scooped out, or its heart torn from its breast. Scrunch me, if
I wouldn't at once be the man who kills whoever opposes him, a thousand
times, than such a cowardly, calculating, inhuman miscreant."

What the reply to these observations might have been, it is impossible
to say, as the party were disturbed just at that moment by a knock at
the cabin door, and entrance being given, in walked the ungracious
villain Scrumpydike.

"Well, what news?" inquired the captain.

"Ship a fire, Sir," said the man, composedly.

"The ship on fire!" loudly exclaimed all at once, as they suddenly rose
from their seats with different degrees of alarm expressed on their
several countenances.

"Yes Sir, ship a fire, about half a mile off," replied the sailor,
looking as if he would have laughed if he had dared at the consternation
he had created.

It was wonderful to observe the change which took place on hearing
the last announcement. The idea of being roasted alive, would be
sufficiently terrible to scare the stoutest heart; and on this occasion
even the bold spirit of Oriel Porphyry quailed at the sudden and
frightful danger. It is a mistake to imagine, that the brave never feel
an emotion of fear; dangers that they have contemplated, may be met
without the slightest feeling of dread; but a new danger, for which they
are unprepared, is sure to leave upon the bravest of the brave some
impression of affright. The alarm, however, that had been created was
but momentary, and as soon as it was erased, the whole party hastened
upon deck to observe the conflagration. Scrumpydike had been left alone;
so seeing the coast clear, and the table covered with tempting viands,
he hastily proceeded to cram his mouth with preserves and fruits; and
was just raising a bottle to his lips, to wash them down with a good
draught of exquisite wine, when he beheld in the shadow of the room,
what he thought to be, two flaming eyes, fixed upon him, flashing
glances of scorn and indignation: the bottle fell from his hands into
a thousand pieces, his forbidding features expressed the most intense
horror, and with a piercing yell he fled from the room trembling with
all the terrors of an evil and superstitious nature, and leaving Zabra
more than usually gratified by the impression he had made.

The night was dark as the grave. There was no moon, and no stars. One
immense cloud hung over the broad surface of the ocean, like a mighty
pall, and the constant gusts of wind that hurried with their melancholy
voices through the sails of the ship, might be supposed to be the lament
of nature at the funeral of the world. The waters swept up to the
vessel, like waves of boiling pitch. The air was burthened with an
impenetrable gloom. An intense blackness enveloped the whole untrackable
length of way over which the ship had passed. Looking back from the
vessel all was like the prospect of the dead. Looking upward, it seemed
as if the eyes of heaven had been put out, and that a deep and awful
blindness had blasted the vision of the universe. Save at a considerable
distance ahead, all was a chaos of darkness--a visible nothingness--an
infinite void; but when the eye looked in that direction, flames
appeared to shoot out of the pitchy sea, licking the darkness, and
writhing, darting, twisting through the smoke like serpents in the
agonies of death. As the light became stronger, part of the hull and
rigging of a ship could be discerned, and hurrying to and fro, minute
forms, readily discovered to be human figures, became visible. Now a
shower of blazing sparks rushed as from a volcano, up, up, high into
the gloomy cloud, piercing its black depths with their lurid beams, and
immediately the flame seemed dulled; a moment after, they burst out
again, with a fiercer fury, and with a doubled volume; fragments of
burning timber were hurled into the air with a giant's strength; flames
red, blue, and yellow, and vapours of every conceivable colour from
white to black, rose and fell, and mingled and separated, like an army
of many nations fighting for mastery; and now that the whole extent of
the vessel was evidently one mass of resistless fire, its fierce rays
were reflected over the vast surface of the surrounding ocean, making
visible dark figures, that looked like despairing men struggling in the
drowning waves, and scorching rafters hissing and smoking around them.
Presently when the glare of light was at the strongest, and the ship was
seen blazing to the water's edge, a sudden movement was observed, the
fire sunk into the wave beneath it,--a tall column of thick grey smoke
rose in its place, and in a moment all was again swallowed up in deep,
utter, and boundless darkness.

It appeared as if the contemplation of this spectacle had hitherto
kept every one on board the Albatross from any consideration for the
sufferers; but a suggestion having been made, immediately each person
seemed to exceed the other in anxiety to render them assistance.

"Burn a blue light at the mast head!" exclaimed the captain.

"Ay, ay, Sir," responded Hearty.

"Set up every stitch of canvass she'll bear," continued the captain.

"Ay, ay, Sir," repeated the other.

"Put her machine to the fullest speed!"

"Ay, ay, Sir!" was again the ready exclamation.

"And bear right down upon the spot where the flames were last seen."

"Ay, ay, Sir."

In a moment the deck, the sails, and rigging were enveloped in a bright
blue flame, that gave the vessel and its crew the appearance of the ship
of death freighted with spectres; and the Albatross was rushing through
the waves with the velocity of lightning.

"There seems great danger, while going at such extraordinary speed, of
passing over the people who may have escaped from the burning vessel,
don't you see," remarked Dr. Tourniquet.

"Never fear," replied the captain. "If they can't keep a sharp look out
it's their own fault; and if they don't hail us when they see us, they
can't blame us for the consequences."

"Ship, ahoy! Starboard your helm!" cried a voice; and immediately a
shriek of piercing agony arose from under the ship's bows as the swift
vessel passed right over a large boat crammed full of men.

"Ease her! Stop her!" exclaimed a dozen voices at once, as soon as the
accident was discovered.

"There! I told you how 't would be, don't you see," said the doctor.

"Out with the galley and pick 'em up!" shouted Captain Compass, surlily;
and the men hastened to obey the command.

"Take two or three blue lights with you, and stow them in the stern
sheets," he continued.

"Gently with her," cried Hearty, as he and some of his messmates lowered
the boat into the sea, and the first who leapt into her was Oriel
Porphyry.

"Now, boys, pull away!" exclaimed the young merchant, as he laid hold of
an oar, "and you shall be rewarded for every man you save."

The sailors, however, wanted no such stimulus. They exerted themselves
bravely, and were quickly in the midst of between twenty or thirty
swimmers, struggling in the waves and shouting for assistance. The light
in the boat not only showed to the drowning men the near approach of the
aid they required, but directed its crew to the places where they could
be of most service.

"Help! help!" screamed one, with the water gurgling in his throat.

"Save me, or I sink!" cried another, nearly exhausted by his struggles.

"Here! here! here!" shouted a dozen voices in different directions.
Among the most active in the rescue was Oriel Porphyry, who was so
fortunate as to save many who were on the very point of sinking; and
being well seconded, with great difficulty and at considerable risk they
succeeded in hauling into their boat fifteen, many of whom were more
dead than alive; but the rest they saw engulphed in the waters before
they could reach them.

"Hollo!" exclaimed Hearty, in a tone of wonder and disappointment, as
the crew were about to return. "Where's the ship?"

Not a vestige of the Albatross was visible, and nothing was seen before
or around them but impenetrable darkness.

"May I be food for fishes, if this arn't a pleasant look out," observed
Climberkin.

"Surely they'll burn a light," said Oriel Porphyry.

"I've my misgivings on that 'ere head," muttered Hearty.

"But how can we get back to the ship without?" inquired the merchant's
son.

"There'd be no difficulty about that, Sir," here remarked Boggle, "if
we knowed her whereabouts; but a man as is blind can't see, and nobody
can point out a thing in the dark if they has no notion where it is."

"You're a conjuror," replied Oriel.

"No, not _quite_ so clever as that, Sir," rejoined the man. "But I likes
to have a notion o' things in general, as every man as is a man, and
thinks like a man, should."

"Well, I wish, among your notions of things in general, you could find
one that will lead us to the ship," said master Porphyry. "I don't like
the idea of these poor fellows in their wet jackets passing the night
here, nor have I any great desire for remaining here myself."

"That's not the worst we've got to expect, Sir," said Hearty; "for if
the ship holds on her course, when we can see our way in the mornin',
she'll be far enough out o' sight, and here we shall be--nearly thirty
on us--crammed together in a open boat out at sea, where there's no land
within more nor five hundred miles on us; without never a compass, or a
bit o' biscuit, or a drop o' water."

"Surely, Captain Compass has forgotten we cannot find our way back
without seeing the vessel," said Oriel Porphyry, now beginning to feel
some anxiety for the fate of himself and his associates. "But we cannot
be much above a hundred yards from the ship. Shout as loud as you can,
and that will put them in mind of our existence."

"Ahoy!--Ahoy!--Ahoy!--Hoy!--Hoy! Oy!" Every one who was able shouted as
loud as he could, and then waited in perfect silence for a reply.

"Yeho!--Yeho!--Yeho! Yho!--Ho!--O!" was replied by voices at a short
distance.

"That's some on 'em," exclaimed Hearty, steering the boat towards the
place from whence the sounds came.

"Hulloo! Hulloo! Ulloo! Loo! Oo!" was heard in another direction.

"Well if this arn't a most considerable cruel puzzlement, I'll be
transmogrified," observed Boggle. The men again rested on their oars,
some with perplexity, others with superstitious fear.

"There's the Albatross!" cried they, joyfully, all at once, as a blue
flame was seen to rise in the midst of the darkness, and disclose the
well-known figure of their beautiful vessel, at rather more than a
hundred yards from them.

"Pull away, mates!" shouted Hearty; and the oarsmen, straining every
muscle, soon brought their boat alongside the ship.




CHAP. V.

PERILS OF EMIGRATION.


"Cheer up, my dolphins!" loudly exclaimed Climberkin to the men rescued
from drowning, whom he and his shipmates were endeavouring to make as
comfortable as possible after their fashion. "Cheer up, and wet your
gills with this--precious sight better stuff nor salt water, of which
sort o' liquidation I've a notion you were obligated last night to
drink more than was agreeable. Give us your fin, my flying fish!" he
continued, as in the most cordial manner he shook the hand of a fine
looking young man who sat near him. "A fellow don't deserve to be
called a naval if he ar'nt a got no 'miseration for another fellow in
misfortune. So here's to 'ee--and may you never have such tipple _above_
your gills, and all'ays keep the salt water _under_ your foot."

"None on us 'a heard the 'ticulars o' this here deplorable
'flagration," said Hearty, "and if it arn't too unpleasant to 'municate,
I should like to hear the whole circumbendibus."

"Perhaps none of my comrades, now present, are so well acquainted with
the circumstances of that unhappy affair as myself," remarked the young
man just alluded to; "and if you will allow me, I will not only relate
to you all concerning it that has come within my observation, but
combine the information with a narrative of my own life that possibly
may render it more interesting."

Consent having been readily and unanimously given, the stranger
proceeded to fulfil the intention he had communicated.

"I am a native of Malthusia, an extensive province far into the interior
of Australia, where my family, for many generations, had owned a small
estate; but as the difficulty of living in any state approaching
comfort, in a densely populated country, where consumption exceeds
supply, and the price of labour is reduced to limits within which life
can scarcely be supported, in consequence of the constant pressure of
competition, produced by the supply greatly exceeding the demand, became
so great, it was considered amongst us whether it would not be the most
advantageous thing that could be done under the circumstances, to leave
a land where we could not exist with the same respectability in which
our fathers had lived, and seek our fortunes in a new country, where
the means of subsistence were more easily procured, and the results of
labour more profitable to the industrious. The idea was debated long and
frequently before it was resolved upon. Children of the soil, whose most
pleasurable associations were connected with the land on which we had
been born, it could not be expected that we could easily tear asunder
the loving ties that connected us to our ancient home. My father was
getting into the vale of life, but possessed much of the strength of
man in his vigour; and myself and five other brothers were strong and
active, ingenious, laborious, and persevering. We were considered the
very persons for whom emigration would be most advantageous.

"But, besides the natural disinclination to leave the scene of every
pleasure I had known, I had a still stronger repugnance, which I found
it impossible to remove. May I claim your indulgence, while I speak of
one who made my native earth and sky a paradise of delights. She, of
whom I speak, Optima, the fair, the kind, the good, by the sweetness of
her disposition and the excellence of her behaviour, created in me that
perfect sympathy, which greater personal attractions and a less amount
of moral advantages, would have failed to have produced in a nature like
mine. From having lived in each other's society from childhood, and
our fortunes and prospects being as nearly as possible alike, we had
mutually indulged in the same fond hopes of an undivided existence,
and in our quiet walks by the hill side, and by the margin of the soft
flowing stream, and in the long delightful rests we took beneath the
shadow of the friendly trees, our little ambition was pictured in rosy
colours, and the landscape of our future seemed to glow with sunshine,
gladness, and beauty. At this time, having suddenly been made an orphan,
Optima became dependent upon an old querulous aunt, who having saved a
little property in the course of a long life, which she designed for her
niece, was desirous that she should marry some one of still more ample
means; and opposed our union with all the despotism she could exercise:
but we managed to meet as usual, though not quite so frequently.
Notwithstanding the efforts made to keep us asunder, and although in
consequence of the gratitude she felt towards her relative for the
protection she had received, she would not listen to my wishes for an
immediate union, for the purpose of joining the intended emigrants, she
bade me hope for better times, and assured me, with all the fervour of
her guileless spirit, that her affection must endure with her existence.

"Preparations were now made for the departure of my family for their
destination to a flourishing colony on the European continent, but I
finding it impossible to quit the scene that held all that was dear
to me, resolved to remain in Australia, supporting myself by the
application of an unceasing industry, till in company with my adored
Optima, I could join them in their new home. My brothers did not seem
to approve of my resolution, and endeavoured to induce me to change it;
but my father, who had more knowledge of human nature, understood my
motives, and left me to follow my own inclinations. I busied myself in
assisting in their arrangements, but I found my feelings far more active
than my endeavours. I strived to shut out from my mind all idea of
the loneliness in which I must live after the departure of my family,
and sought to banish the fear I sometimes experienced, that as then
the difficulty of seeing Optima would be increased, some unfortunate
accident would render our union impossible. Our interviews now became
exceedingly painful, my entreaties grew more urgent, my dread of the
consequences of her refusal more intense; but she only answered me
with tears; and at last, as the time drew near for quitting Malthusia,
our hearts became too full for utterance, and our congratulations at
meeting, and sorrows at parting, were alike silent.

"'Ardent!' said she to me on one occasion, after we had sat together a
long time without daring to speak, 'you must not think me unkind by thus
seeming to oppose your happiness. I do a violence to my own feelings,
indeed I do, Ardent, whenever I refuse your solicitations.'--Her sobs
for some time prevented her proceeding; at last she continued;--'But I
should be selfish, were I to allow myself to do as you would have me,
and act with a regardlessness of your interests, for which I should
never be able to forgive myself. My aunt, it is evident to all who see
her, is rapidly approaching her dissolution. She has been kind to me. I
wish not her last moments to be rendered miserable, by what in me would
appear to her ingratitude, and I am most anxious for your sake, dear
Ardent, that she should not, through any imprudence of mine, annul those
intentions in my favour she has so frequently expressed. Her property is
but small, but it will enable us to join your family, and with industry
and economy may produce for us a greater degree of comfort than without
it we can hope to obtain. Wait, Ardent; the time is not propitious now;
but if we are not impatient of our happiness, we shall soon be as happy
as we can desire.'

"I pressed her more closely to my breast--I blessed her in my heart, but
my voice seemed to have lost all power of expressing my emotions; no
longer I made use of entreaties. I was grateful, and resigned. The day
came on which the emigrants were to leave the seat of all their past
enjoyments. My brothers appeared careless of quitting the land of their
fathers. They were hard working, hard thinking men, who valued nothing
except for its utility, and looked upon the affection with which memory
regards the scenes of its pleasures, as romantic nonsense, only fit to
delight children. But my father could not so readily get rid of the
impressions he had cherished from his infancy; with him the departure
from his home seemed a banishment from his happiness. He visited the
lands his forefathers had owned, but which had long passed from their
descendants. He walked in the fields he had ploughed and drilled and
harrowed since he was a boy, and he looked upon the trees he had
planted, and the buildings he had raised, as if he was taking a last
farewell of a company of ancient friends. As he approached the cemetery
in which lay the bones of his ancestors, his manly form seemed to lose
half its strength--his ruddy cheek grew pale--his step became feeble,
his eye dim, and his heart faint; and as he bared his head that the cool
breeze might fan the thin white hairs that played about his forehead, he
was obliged to lean against a monument to support his sinking form. Here
rested in peace the wife of his bosom and the mother of his children;
and he felt as if he was about to desert her remains to be trampled on
by strangers. He thought of where _his_ grave would be, and in the agony
of his heart lamented that two who had never been divided in life should
in death be placed so far apart.

"I witnessed the sale of the land and stock; I assisted in packing up
the moveables; I was present when the neighbours came to bid farewell,
and to express their honest regrets; and after having beheld my family
turn their backs upon the habitation of their race, I hastened to
Optima, with the design of enjoying her sweet presence for the last
time, until I had parted with my father and my brothers at the nearest
sea-port. I came to the house of her relative and found it closed.
Having with some difficulty gained admittance, Optima rushed into my
arms, and wept upon my breast. It was not till a considerable time had
elapsed, that I ascertained what was the cause of her grief. Her aunt
had died the night previous.

"After a lapse of a few weeks Optima became mine. On the day of our
marriage she placed a packet in my hands, and speaking in a voice broken
with emotion, she said:--

"'I have a favour to ask you, and I know on such a day as this you
cannot deny me. Take this, dear Ardent, and make whatever use of it you
think proper. Your heart is yearning to join your relatives; be assured
that wherever you wish to go I desire to follow. I cannot be happy but
where your happiness may be best secured. I am indifferent to country
and to kindred,--I can acknowledge no relative but a husband, and can
know of no country except that in which I find his home. Whenever your
preparations are made, dear Ardent, I am ready.'

"I kissed off the tears that were trembling on her eyelids, and in
brief but eloquent language expressed the love with which my heart was
overflowing. The packet contained a sum of money amply sufficient for
our purposes. Having by letter previously apprised my family of these
circumstances, they delayed their departure; and after providing every
thing that was necessary for the wants of agricultural emigrants, we all
set sail from the populous seaport Kangarootown, in a magnificent ship
fitted up in the most splendid manner, and carrying more than three
hundred passengers."

"'No!' exclaimed half a dozen anxious listeners, starting up with horror
and surprise.

"'Tis true!" replied the young man, in a voice scarcely audible.

"The Lord ha' mercy on their miserable souls!" said Hearty.

"We had not been many days out at sea," continued the narrator, "and
were busily and cheerfully employed in forming plans for the future,
when one evening, as soon as we had all retired to our berths, the
gas with which the interior of the ship was lighted, through some
carelessness had been suffered to escape, and it having caught fire,
the first alarm the passengers received was from finding themselves
surrounded by flames. There were but two or three boats belonging to the
vessel, to which there was immediately a general rush. Without waiting
to secure any of my property, I instantly hurried on deck with Optima,
and was so fortunate as to secure her and myself a place in the largest
boat. I shouted to my father and my brothers to join us, but as soon
as we were full the rope was cut, and we pulled from the burning ship
with all the strength of desperate men. As the flames rose up into the
rigging we could see hundreds running backwards and forwards, bewildered
and stupified by fear. One after another jumped into the remaining
boats, into which they crowded so rapidly that their own weight at once
sunk them to the bottom. Others in their frenzy leapt into the sea--the
rest retreated from the flames as they advanced, shrieking their own
knell, till the fire beginning to scorch their flesh they fell over
into the waves, or letting go their grasp of the ropes up which they
had climbed, sunk yelling with agony into the midst of the raging fire.
I saw nothing of my brothers. I imagine they perished in the smaller
boats. But while observing the destruction of the ship, I beheld, high
up the tallest mast, the figure of an old man--his white hair scorched
upon his brows--his blood-shot eyes bursting from their sockets--his
trembling limbs clinging to the rigging, screaming for mercy and for
help. I knew the form--the voice pierced my brain. I would have leapt
into the sea with the wild but fruitless hope of hastening to his
rescue, but I was forcibly held to my seat; and Optima, who had not
changed her position since I placed her in the boat, with her face upon
my breast and her arms round my neck, clung to me trembling with terror.
In a moment afterwards the flaming vessel disappeared.

"We could scarcely congratulate ourselves upon our safety, for although
we had escaped being burnt to death, there seemed but little hope of our
being saved from drowning, or from starvation. There were thirty of us
closely packed together, not one of whom knew exactly how far we were
from land; few were clothed, and none had either provisions or water. My
feelings were of the most agonising description. I had seen my family
perish before my eyes without having the ability to render them the
slightest assistance--all their property and mine--all that the loving
kindness of Optima had enabled me to procure for our future wants, were
swallowed up in the devouring fire, and now I was left with her upon
the boundless ocean enjoying no other hope than that we should perish
together. Bitter as my reflections were, they grew almost insupportable
when I considered with what a dreadful fate the devotion of her I loved
would be rewarded. But she whose goodness had been thus cruelly turned
to evil seemed to think of nothing, and care for nothing, but for him
to whom she clung. At this instant when we were giving ourselves up to
despair, a light blazing from your ship proclaimed to us the joyful
intelligence that assistance was at hand. Then what a change came
upon us. The murmurs of complaint were turned to the loud shouts of
gladness; and so completely did we enter into the spirit of the moment,
that none noticed the rapid approach of the ship coming to our relief,
till she was just upon us.

"We are saved, dearest!" I whispered.

"Optima unclasped her arms, and took one of my hands in hers. Then came
the overwhelming crush of the great ship--a shout--a scream--and her
keel passed over us. The shock came so unexpected that none had time to
think of the danger, and we were gasping and struggling in the water
before we were aware of the accident. I made a snatch at what I thought
was the sinking form of Optima, but soon I found out the dreadful
mistake. It was a strong man, who being no swimmer caught hold of my
limbs with a desperate grasp that nothing but death could relax. In vain
I strove to shake him off--I struggled--I fought--I kicked in vain. He
held me as a serpent holds its prey. The thought of my beloved sinking
into the bowels of the great deep, deserted by him whose happiness she
had ever striven to secure, nerved my arms with a giant's strength, and
catching the drowning wretch by the throat, I squeezed the breath out
of his miserable body, hurled him from me as if he had been a loathsome
reptile, and then struck out into the sea, swimming in various
directions, shouting her name in every tone of agony--plunging, diving,
and beating the waters with the fierce energy of a madman. My heart sunk
within me--my strength was exhausted. I felt the terrible conviction,
that for me there was no hope--and resigned myself to the cold embraces
of the relentless wave. Of what afterwards occurred I know not, till I
found myself on board the Albatross, recovered from the jaws of death by
the kind and unceasing attention of her friendly crew. But do not think
me ungrateful, when, reflecting upon the dreadful loss I have endured,
and the wretched fate to which I have been left, I express a regret that
my life has been spared."

"Scrunch me, if I ar'nt springing a leak as no pump can stop!" exclaimed
Climberkin, as soon as the stranger had concluded his narrative, as
he wiped with his knuckles the big tears out of the corners of his
eyes;--an example which was followed by many of his shipmates.

"May I go to sea in a cockle shell, if ever I heard o' any thin' so
cruel molloncholy," said Boggle; "my eyes are like sieves catching
a thunder shower. But a fellow who can listen to such a tarnation
heart-twister as this here without runnin' out like a water spout, must
have the soul o' a nigger."

"Soul ob a nigger!" exclaimed the fat cook, furiously, while the drops
that ran down his black cheeks evinced his sympathy for the sufferings
he had heard.

"Soul ob a nigger!--What da debble you mean, you fellar! Tink a nigger
no heart--tink him hab no sensebillity, you fellar?" Then turning to the
stranger, he said, as well as his sobs would allow, "Roly Poly berry
much feel for you Sar, oo, oo!--Hard ting to lose him missee, Sar, oo,
oo!--Roly Poly in lub himself once, Sar.--Lubly cretur too, oo, oo!--She
had de dropsy, Sar.--Doctor nebber make her no better, so she turn her
nose against de wall and die like a lamb, oo, oo, oo!" And away the
poor fellow went, sobbing as if his heart would break.

"Well, whip me into eel skins, if I sees the fun o' givin' a fellow the
miserables!" exclaimed Scrumpydike, gulping down a deep draught of the
liquor before him; "I seed many a sight worser nor what you've been
telling on us, mister,--and ar'nt a thought it worth while to say
nothin' to nobody about it. There ar'nt no sort o' life as produces so
many wonderfuls as that o' a free mariner. Once upon a time I was taken
prisoner with some other chaps, and kept aboard one o' them darin'
crafts what goes bang at any thin' as comes in their track--and I seed
sich jollifications--sich junkettings--sich cargoes o' grog--and sich
chests o' money, as I never had afore a wink o' a notion on. There
they were, dancin' and singin', and rollin' in riches--caring for
nobody--doing whatever they had a mind--every one o' the crew a cap'ain,
and the cap'ain a prince; and whenever they had a brush, which was as
often as they fell in with anythin' worth havin', at it they went,
harem scarem--carryin' every thin' afore 'em--cuttin' down and blowin'
up, and sinkin' or seizin' the richest ships as sailed in them seas.
Scrunch me, if they did'nt seem as happy as periwinkles on a rock."

"No doubt," observed Boggle; "and I ar'nt afeard to say, as many a
honest naval would become a free mariner, if he had'nt the gumption to
reccomember he was consiserable sure o' a sartainty o' being hanged."

"Either hanged or drowned, or spiflicated in some other unnat'ral
manner," added Hearty; "and not without desarvin' on 't. None o' sich
scum ever died in a honest fashion. Now in the course o' my sperience, I
knowed a smartish lot consarnin' the notorious sea-sharks, Cap'ain Death
and his Lef'tenant Rifle, and----"

"Did you know 'em?" inquired Scrumpydike, eagerly, fixing a searching
look upon the old man.

"No, I did'nt exactly know 'em, but I knowed a good deal _on_ 'em; and
if ever I comes upon their tack, with a few other honest chaps as
knows how to give and take, if I don't leave my mark on some o' their
figure-heads, I ha' lost all notion o' hand-writing;" said Hearty.

"Well, you may chance to come alongside on 'em afore you're aware, and
then you'd best look out for squalls, old boy;" observed the other.

"I ar'nt afeard o' that. But as I was a sayin', these here varmint were
'sociated wi' a gang o' similar bloody-minded villains, and in a well
armed craft which they'd got hold on, by no partic'lar honesty I'll be
bound, they went a robbin' and plund'rin, and burnin' and massacr'in',
every ship as they came anigh, till at last flesh and blood couldn't
stand any sich howdacity--so two or three smartish vessels, full o'
chaps o' the right sort, steered into their haunts, and there they kept
cruising about in hopes o' coming to close quarters. But somehow or
other they hadn't no sich luck. At last, when they began to calc'late
as Cap'ain Death had given them the slip, one o' the ships diskivered
a strange sail--and she was narrowly watched, hoping she might prove
to contain the 'dentical set o' murd'rin' vagabonds they was arter.
Suspicions becoming pretty strong, signals were made to her consorts to
take a long sweep, so as to circumvent the villains so reg'larly as they
couldn't escape no how. But that 'ere Cap'ain Death was no goslin'. He
seed the canouvres they was a going about, hung out ev'ry bit o' canvass
he could carry, and cut his precious stick like winkin! Howsomdever,
he war'nt awake to the movement till they came rollin' up to him in a
manner quite lovely to look on; and then they showed that they was as
good hands at followin' as he was at runnin' away. The chase was carried
on for a matter o' six hours, in sich a style as made him look behind
oftener than he looked afore; and for all he went on this tack, and on
t'other tack, and tried all sorts o' games to get out o' the way, they
came so near as to be able to give him a pretty considerable taste o'
their quality. Well, as night began to set in, there came on one o' the
most thund'rin' storms as ever was--the wind blowed away as if it would
shiver its own bellows into saw-dust, and the sea came up mountains
high, in a manner it was more grand than pleasant to look on. The
vessels in chase, finding themselves close upon an ugly sort of a
coast, were obligated to keep out at sea as much as possible; but they
endeavoured to keep such a look out as would prevent the villains from
making themselves scarce afore morning. Well, when the mornin' broke all
as clear as if there'd never been no rumpus--our ship--for, mind ye, I
volunteered a purpose to have a rap at some on 'em--our ship and her
consorts, who'd rode out the gale with nothin' but the loss o' a few
spars, approached the shore for the purpose o' making secure o' Cap'ain
Death, but the very first thing they clapped their blessed eyes on, was
the ship they'd been in chase lyin' a perfect wreck among the breakers,
making it a right down positive stark staring fact that every mother's
son o' the gallows birds that belonged to her were feeding the crabs and
lobsters, and sich like."

"Then they were all drowned!" said Climberkin.

"Nothin's been heard o' any on 'em from that day to this;" replied
Hearty.

"But war'nt there a sort o' song which 'twas said the crew of the ship
used to sing?" enquired Climberkin.

"To be sure there was," cried Scrumpydike, who had for some time looked
more gloomy than usual; "I've heard it many's a time; and if you've a
mind to listen, though I ar'nt no great shakes o' a singing bird, I'll
give you the only original version as used to be sung by the free
mariners."

"I don't want to hear none o' such villainous ditties!" exclaimed
Hearty, as he left the circle.

"Who axed you, old Snapdragon?" responded the other, and presently with
more animation than music, sung the following words:--

       "Our ship sails on the wave,
          On the wave, on the wave,
    Our ship sails on the wave, Captain Death!
    For free mariners are we, and we ride the stormy sea,
        And our captain still shall be,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!
        Our captain still shall be Captain Death!

       "Our black flag proudly floats,
          Proudly floats, proudly floats,
    Our black flag proudly floats, Captain Death!
    And down upon the prey, we boldly bear away,
        And we quickly make them pay,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!
        We quickly make them pay, Captain Death!

       "We stifle ev'ry cry,
          Ev'ry cry, ev'ry cry,
    We stifle ev'ry cry, Captain Death!
    And then we spread our sails, that are filled with welcome gales:
        Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!'
        Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales, Captain Death!'

       "Bring out our golden store,
          Golden store, golden store;
    Bring out our golden store, Captain Death!
    And let's send the wine-cup round, to forget the dead and drown'd,
        And rejoice _we're_ safe and sound,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!
        And rejoice _we're_ safe and sound, Captain Death!

       "Thus pass our gallant lives,
          Gallant lives, gallant lives,
    Thus pass our gallant lives, Captain Death!
    And while the ocean flows, and the driving tempest blows,
        We'll live upon our foes,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!
        We'll live upon our foes, Captain Death!"




CHAP. VI.

APPEARANCE OF THE AFRICAN COAST.


Zabra had by this time become more familiar to the people of the
Albatross, with some of whom his kindness and generosity made him an
especial favourite. They had ceased to see any thing supernatural in his
large lustrous eyes,--and had forgot that there was any thing mysterious
in the dark colour of his complexion. His solitary wanderings about the
ship created neither fear nor surprise, and the rich harmonies of his
music were listened to with much more admiration than dread. Loop, a
boy belonging to the vessel, who was a sister's son of Hearty, had been
attacked with fever, and the attentions of Zabra, during his illness,
won not only the heart of the old man, but that of every one on board.
He procured for him every kind of nourishing food and refreshing
beverage, that the Doctor would allow; took care that he should possess
every comfort that the vessel contained; sung to him, played to him, and
stayed beside his hammock for hours and hours, seeking to while away the
tedious moments of indisposition. Oriel Porphyry having desired that he
should be treated by every one as if he was his brother, instead of his
attendant, Zabra found his slightest request always promptly attended
to; and, though his manner was somewhat proud, as he seemed to possess
abundant funds for every purpose, and gave liberally whenever he thought
it was requisite, scarcely any one in the ship ever hesitated in joining
in his praise.

The boy Loop got well, and he was not ungrateful. As for old Hearty,
nothing could exceed his devotion to his nephew's benefactor. To every
listener he could lay hold of, he narrated at length all that he knew
of the youth's history, since he came on board: the people, rescued
from the fire-ship, were in due time made familiar with every anecdote
concerning him with which the old man was acquainted; and to no one were
his details of more interest than to the young Australian, Ardent, who
sometimes appeared to forget his own sorrows while attentive to the
unpolished eloquence of the honest sailor. From this time Zabra became
an object of general interest. Even Captain Compass seemed to look upon
him with something like respect; Scrumpydike had ceased to entertain
against him any hostile intentions; and Log, the captain's clerk, was
heard to acquiesce in the opinion of his shipmates, with an affirmative
repeated with the usual supply of adjectives.

But to Oriel Porphyry the admirable qualities of his page became every
day more and more apparent. In the frequent conversations that took
place between them, he could not but observe the developement of a mind
of the highest order. It was not a mind impregnated with the heavy
spirit of bookish learning, but an intelligence of a lighter, a more
graceful, and a more original nature, replete with a sweet sympathy,
and a lofty enthusiasm for all that was noble, good and beautiful;
and throwing over the youthful figure and handsome countenance of its
possessor, a poetical and romantic character, that was both a wonder
and a charm to his companion. Zabra spoke of Eureka as if he had become
acquainted with her most hidden thoughts, and had been constituted their
interpreter; but of himself he never spoke. When Oriel seemed desirous
of learning something of his history, he appeared uneasy, and
immediately attempted to turn the conversation into another channel.
This was noticed; but the unwillingness of the young Creole to speak of
himself, Oriel attributed to the disinclination usually shown by natural
children to allude to their own illegitimacy, knowing the unreasonable
and cruel prejudices of society: therefore he ceased to desire from him
any information on the subject. Still, his youth,--the singular beauty
of his countenance, and the strange interest it often expressed, made
him imagine that there was some mystery connected with him.

As he treated Zabra with the utmost confidence, and appreciated the
intelligence he evinced, Oriel Porphyry communicated to him the contents
of his father's letter.

"Your father is a noble character," he exclaimed with fervour; "and the
proudest title of which you ought to boast, is that of being his son.
I never could have supposed that it was possible for such nobility
to reside in a spirit devoted to the mere money-getting purposes of
traffic, but I have been educated in an aristocratic school, and with
its lofty principles I have imbibed some of its illiberal prejudices.
I would _my_ father had been such a one--I should not have been the
fugitive I am."

"Express no regrets, Zabra. Let it be my pleasing task to see that your
fortunes are worthy of your merits;" said Oriel Porphyry, affectionately
taking in his the hand of his youthful companion. "And although I have
not much reason to think well of the proud Philadelphia, for his conduct
has not been such as would be likely to inspire me either with affection
or respect; when I think of his relationship to her whose genuine worth
it is impossible not to appreciate, I cannot regard the unfavourableness
of his disposition."

"Eureka is not unmindful of your kind feelings towards her;" observed
the other in a more tremulous voice than he had hitherto used. "It is
her desire to deserve your affections, that has supported her under many
trials. Her father is proud, but not so proud as Eureka. Yet there is an
impassable gulf between the pride of the two. He would sacrifice every
one around him for the immediate gratification of his own self-love:
she would sacrifice all selfish considerations that interfered with the
happiness of one she loved."

"And think you I cannot honour such goodness in the manner it deserves?"
asked the merchant's son. "Let him be what he will--let his pride be as
mean, and his ambition as selfish as it may, for the sake of Eureka I
will endeavour to forget his unworthiness. All I hope is, that he will
not attempt to force her inclinations to an alliance more pleasing to
him."

"He cannot force her inclinations--that he knows;" remarked Zabra. "He
has made the attempt for the first and last time; and Eureka is now
beyond his reach."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Oriel with astonishment.

"Ay!" he replied. "He thought the more completely to secure your
separation from her, to hurry her into a marriage with the wealthy and
powerful head of the princely house of Vermont; but the character of
such a man, had no other obstacle existed, would have been sufficient
to have produced in her feelings a repugnance which nothing could
overpower. As it was, she indignantly refused to become a sacrifice to
her father's ambition. Her sentiments, however, on the subject, were so
little regarded by him, that he made preparations to compel her to the
union."

"Ha!" exclaimed master Porphyry, "I could not have imagined such
despotism in a parent."

"Closely as she was watched," he continued, "Eureka managed to escape
from her confinement; and when she sent me to be the companion of your
fortunes, she had secured for herself the asylum she required."

"But where is she? Let me hasten to afford her the protection of which
she must be so much in want!" exclaimed the impetuous Oriel; then
reproachfully added, "Why, why did you not tell me this before?"

"I have obeyed my instructions;" replied the youth calmly. "It is
sufficient for you to know that now she is safe, and that she is in the
enjoyment of as much happiness as it is possible for her to obtain under
the circumstances. Her retreat can only be made known to you when all
the purposes of the present voyage are completed, and you return to
Columbus."

"But can I not communicate with her? will she not write to me?" eagerly
inquired the other.

"Be satisfied that it is impossible she should forget you, and endeavour
to prove to her without the aids of continual correspondence, that in
your affection the same durability exists."

"I will! I will!" cried Oriel; "I will do all she would have me. I will
follow the plan my father has laid out, even to the minutest details;
will try to find patience for its endurance by thinking of the blissful
result with which it will be crowned. We are now approaching the
southern coast of Africa," he continued after a pause of some duration,
which neither had attempted to interrupt; "and my immediate destination
Caffreton, the great mart of traffic in this part of the world is the
first point of my commercial voyage. My father has written me very full
instructions which I have carefully studied, and you will shortly see,
Zabra, how well I shall be able to play the merchant."

They had been standing together on the deck gazing upon the world of
waters before them during the preceding dialogue, and were now silently
observing the progress of some distant vessels, when they were joined by
the learned Professor Fortyfolios. Addressing Oriel, he said--

"That portion of land you observe yonder, rising out of the sea, is an
important Cape, well known in the annals of navigation, and was called
by the ancients the Cape of Good Hope. It used to be celebrated for
producing an inferior wine, called Cape Wine, which being cheap, as it
was worthless, was brought in considerable quantities for the purpose
either of adulterating wines of a higher value, or was palmed upon the
ignorant as the produce of a different vintage. The English, a people
with whose history you are doubtless familiar, though not wine growers,
were the greatest wine consumers of that period, and it was the immense
demand for this necessary of life among that people, which the wines of
Spain, Portugal, Sicily, Italy, France, Germany, and other countries,
could not sufficiently supply, that brought this Cape into notice. The
African wines are now remarkable for their admirable qualities. That it
was the search after new liquors that sent the English into this part of
the world chroniclers are not agreed, and that there were other wines
produced in the same locality much superior in flavour, I think is
more than probable, because I have found in the course of my reading,
eloquent commendation of an African wine, called Constantia, and I have
good reason for imagining that the deserts which the first voyagers
of that nation met with on some portions of the coast, when they
ascertained that a superior liquor was here procurable, originated the
English proverb 'Good wine needs no bush.' However, there can be no
doubt that the English planted a colony at this very Cape; gradually
drove the natives from their land as they increased in power and
numbers, till the whole continent from the Cape of Good Hope to
Alexandria, and from Abyssinia to Senegambia, acknowledged their sway,
and, in a great measure, spoke their language."

"Truly, those English were a great people!" remarked Oriel.

"They were so," said the Professor; "when we consider what they did, and
the means they had to do it, we must acknowledge that they deserve the
epithet, 'great.' At an early period of the world's history, England was
utterly unknown. In the times of Assyrian greatness, in the eras of
Babylon, of Jerusalem, and of Troy--and in the more brilliant ages of
the Greeks, the Romans, and the Carthaginians, such an island had never
been heard of--scarcely two thousand years had elapsed before this
speck upon the waters became the most powerful kingdom upon the earth.
She had possessions in every quarter of the globe; her conquering armies
had penetrated into the remotest regions, and her gallant navies had
triumphed in every sea. She had given a new people and a new language
to the vast continent of America; she had founded a new division of the
world in Australia; she had been acknowledged the mistress of the mighty
Indies; she had forced a path through deserts of perpetual ice, and
found a home in the scorching heat of the torrid zone. And by this time
what had become of the nations of a more remote antiquity? Of some, the
localities were not to be traced; others remained a heap of stones. The
Carthaginians were extinct--the free and noble Greeks had become slaves
or pirates--and the daring Romans, who boasted having conquered the
world, were an ignoble emasculated race, confined to a single city and
its suburbs, and governed by a despotic old woman in the shape of a
priest."

"The form of government under which the people of this continent
exists, is republican, I believe;" observed Master Porphyry.

"The whole is divided into a multitude of republics, some of which are
always at war with one another," replied his tutor; "and they show their
idea of liberty, of which they make the most preposterous boast, by
keeping up a system of slavery the most tyrannical and revolting that
can be imagined."

"Ay, ay," exclaimed Captain Compass, coming up and joining in the
conversation; "it's the way of the world. Hear your most famous spouter
about the blessings of freedom and all that sort of thing, and ten to
one if you don't find him ready to domineer over every body beneath him.
When I hear a fellow mighty fine in his notions of universal liberty, I
always feel pretty certain that he only wants the power to trample on
the independence of all who might stand in the way of his particular
enjoyments. But this is all natural enough; the feeble are monstrously
indignant at the exercise of power in the hands of their rulers; but
when by any accident they become powerful, they all at once see the
advantages of keeping down those who are down, and in a very short time
become just as despotic as those of whom they complained."

"What vessels are these, Captain?" inquired Oriel, pointing to several
ships, appearing at different distances in the open sea before them.

"Yonder vessel, whose tall masts are bending before the brisk breeze
that fills her sails, is an Algerine merchantman, and has most probably
a cargo of dancing masters, cooks, figurantes, and opera singers, which
are as much now the chief produce of the people to whom she belongs,
as they were a thousand years ago the principal exports of their
progenitors. That sombre thing, with the long funnel in the centre of
her deck, is very similar to the steamers of which the ancients were so
proud, before an improved propelling power was discovered. She belongs
to the Abyssinians--a people remarkably slow in adopting the inventions
of their more civilised neighbours; she trades from the sea of Babel
Mandeb to the Gulph of Guinea, sometimes touching at Madagascar, and
the neighbouring islands, and carries passengers, pigs, crockery, and
snuff. This rakish looking craft, flying afore the wind like a petrel in
a storm, is a free trader with a rich cargo of smuggled merchandise from
the continent to the Mauritius; and the big ship yonder, bearing down
upon us as if she'd sink every thing that stood in her way, is a man of
war belonging to the Liberians--a powerful nation of blacks. All these
small fry that are starting up from every point, are merely coasting
vessels--government packets,--fishing smacks--pilot boats,--pleasure
yachts, and other floaters of a similar nature."

"But what is this?" inquired Oriel, pointing to something of a very
strange appearance that was seen at the distance of about three quarters
of a mile, making way at a rapid rate towards the shore. They all gazed
in that direction, and a most extraordinary spectacle they beheld. At
first it seemed like a ball--but as it approached the ship it enlarged,
and every one who saw it knew it to be a balloon. How it came there,
floating on the waves by itself, many conjectured; but their surprise
at its appearance was wonderfully increased, when they observed a man,
with his body immersed in the waves, clinging to it, or more probably
attached to its fastenings. His peril he endeavoured to make known
by screams of the most piercing description; but it was not till the
miserable wretch was being rapidly borne past their vessel that the
people of the Albatross discovered the full extent of his danger. For at
least half a mile behind him the sea was a mass of white smoking foam,
which was created by nearly a hundred immense sharks following him with
eager speed, lashing the waves with their tails, leaping over each
other, plunging, snorting, and displaying the most ravenous desire to
catch him in their enormous jaws. Sometimes the balloon ascended a
little distance above the sea and then would rapidly descend, plunging
the unhappy aeronaut over his head in the salt water; but while the
sharks were all striving against each other to make a mouthful of his
limbs, it would again ascend, floating swiftly over the surface, bearing
its screaming appendant about a foot above his unrelenting pursuers,
who continued to follow him struggling furiously with each other, and
eagerly snapping at his limbs whenever they approached the surface of
the water. It was impossible to render him any assistance, although he
passed within a few yards of the ship, he was carried so swiftly along;
and on he went, shrieking with agony, now high above the waves--then
dashed in beneath them--then flying over the surface, with the horrid
expectation of being immediately devoured by the hungry pack by whom he
was pursued.

"Scrunch me, if that isn't the most cruel chase I ever saw," exclaimed
the captain.

"These sort of accidents are not at all extraordinary," observed
Fortyfolios, "and with such things must frequently occur. Balloons are
an old invention, and one the least useful for philosophical purposes
of any we have received from the ancients. Attempts have been made,
attended with success, to get one or several individuals borne by
them from an island to an adjoining continent, and from one part of a
continent to a part far remote; but as they have found it impossible to
control the current of wind met with in certain elevations, and as they
can seldom rely upon a current in any one direction lasting for any
length of time, they have been able to rise as high as they please, but
can never previously fix exactly upon the place of their descent; and it
has in many instances occurred, as in the one we have just now observed,
that after the aeronaut has made his ascent, a sudden wind takes him in
a direction contrary to what he designed, or various currents rising
unexpectedly at nearly the same time, he is shifted about to every
point of the compass; and when he is obliged to descend, he finds
himself floating over some unknown sea, or some wild uncultivated land,
hundreds of miles from human assistance, where he is left to endure
the conviction that he must either be drowned or starved. A balloon
is, in fact, a toy, with which one fool amuses many."

Nothing more was said on the subject, although the dangerous situation
of the poor fellow who had attached himself to the balloon was
anxiously watched as long as he remained in sight, and the imminent
peril in which he was seen: his heart-rending cries, and desperate
struggles, long left their unpleasant impression on the memory of all
who beheld him.

The bold outline of the coast they were approaching every hour became
more apparent: its singular mountain and other landmarks were seen,
pointed out, and commented on. Birds flew into the rigging--weeds
accumulated before the ship--and stray logs of timber, broken barrels,
and pieces of wreck, were continually floating past. The character of
the scenery now began to be clearly defined--the lowlands spreading out
far and wide into the interior, intersected by numerous railroads, and
the mountains holding up their proud heads covered with vegetation
nearly to their summits. The more the country became visible, the
greater was the evidence it exhibited of a high degree of cultivation,
a fruitful soil, and a numerous and industrious population; and as
buildings began to be made out, it was observable from their form,
numbers, and disposition, that manufactures was a primary object in the
estimation of the inhabitants.

"You will find these people a money-getting generation," said the
professor to his pupil: "their sole object appears to be to accumulate,
and their only idea of the respectability of a person is derived from
the proportion of substance he is worth. They never ask, is a man an
excellent husband, an exemplary father, or an admirable citizen?--is he
distinguished by the attention with which he fulfils his moral duties,
or celebrated by the right application of extraordinary talents? they
merely inquire how much money he has in his pockets. In fact, when they
speak at all of 'a good man,' they allude to some individual imagined to
be possessed of a certain amount of available property: money with them
is every thing. Respectability means money--reputation or credit means
money, and cleverness means money. Money, therefore, is the universal
virtue: they who have the most are honoured the most, and they who have
it not at all are considered by those who have it, although in ever so
small a proportion, as being separated from their fellow-creatures by
an impassable chasm, where all that is infamous is thought to dwell."

"And yet they are considered to be a very religious people," remarked
Oriel.

"None are more regular in going to church, none are greater respecters
of the ceremonies of worship, but of religion they are ignorant,"
replied Fortyfolios. "Nothing can be more certain than that it is
impossible that a pure morality or a sincere devotion can exist, when
the heart is filled with one engrossing desire--the accumulation of
capital--the very principle of which is selfishness--a feeling
incompatible with the social charities of true religion."

"But when did you ever find that any thing like true religion generally
existed?" inquired the captain, in a tone approaching sarcasm. "Since
the memory of man the faith of the majority has been unvaryingly
orthodox, and sticks, like a lobster to its shell, to the old proverb,
'Every one for himself, and the devil take the hindmost,'--and more
absurd conduct doesn't exist than some people exhibit, who, after
having made money a standard of excellence, condemn to infamy not only
those who are not possessed of it, but they who gain it by means not in
exact accordance with their notions of the way it should be obtained.
Scrunch me, if it don't make one ready to heave one's ballast overboard,
when I see the homage paid to a mean-spirited scoundrel, who by
chicanery, hypocrisy, avarice, and a horde of other contemptible vices,
robs his fellows of a pretty handsome share of plunder; and hear the
execrations heaped upon the bolder and better villain, who lays society
under contributions in a more open, manly, and daring manner. They
pretend to notions of honesty, too, that's the joke. Why a fish would
laugh at a thing so ridiculous. The government in their necessity
take from the people, and those who can't afford to pay they send to
prison--an individual in his necessity takes from another, and the very
government who set the example of appropriation punish the appropriator
as an offender. Then governments plunder each other, or rather the
people of each other; but when any of the people attempt to rob their
governments, they judge, hang, draw and quarter the poor wretches
without the slightest mercy. Honesty, forsooth! If the whole world were
asked what the meaning of the word was, every man would give a different
definition, and not only would each contradict the other, but every one
would contradict himself. Honesty appears to be of all shapes and all
sizes: it will suit all complexions--it will flavour every dish. Honesty
is every thing, and yet it is nothing. It is neither fish, flesh,
nor fowl--will neither sink nor swim--and is not to be touched, seen,
or tasted. Honesty is every where--the greatest rogue is honest to
his chosen associates--and yet it is no where, for the desire of
appropriation is universal. It is a sort of ghost that only exists in
the minds of the superstitious--a mirror that shows any reflection
thrown upon it--a sky that all over the world can take every variety of
colour. Some call it truth, and lay claim to its possession, although
their lives are a continual deceit; some call it justice, and fancy
themselves exceedingly just, although they would consign to eternal
perdition all not exactly of their way of thinking; and some call it
conscientiousness, and are satisfied with their own dealings, when,
at the same time, their first thought is for their own personal
gratification. But we are entering the bay, and these fellows require
looking after." So saying, he suddenly left the group, and began
shouting to the crew some orders about the ship.

"Captain Compass has singular notions," remarked the professor: "I
should not feel particularly comfortable if I thought he entertained
the opinions he expresses. There would be an end to all sense of moral
obligations if such ideas became general."

"Oh there is no harm in him," replied Oriel. "He is too frank, too
careless, too bold to have any evil intention. It has often appeared to
me, though, that the principle we call honesty does not exist either in
ourselves or in society to the extent we imagine; and believing such a
state of things an evil, I have often wished, but never been able, to
find a way in which it could be remedied."

"It is an evil, undoubtedly," here observed Doctor Tourniquet, who had
for some time been an attentive but silent listener--"and there is but
one way in which it can be completely removed."

"And how is that way to be found?" inquired Oriel Porphyry.

"The cause of this want of a definite unvarying character in our notion
of honesty," said the Doctor, "may be traced to the present and past
construction of society, where each individual has a separate interest,
exists in a state of competition with the others, and must always be
endeavouring to shape his own notions of right to his own exclusive
advantage: were property a fund in common from which each might be
allowed to take what he pleased--there being no individual interests,
the world would be one family, and there could be no dishonesty in
openly appropriating that to which he had an acknowledged right, don't
you see."

"Preposterous!" exclaimed Fortyfolios.

"An impossible state of things, I should think," added his pupil.

"Nothing more reasonable, and nothing more easy," replied the Doctor.
"Let every one in a community labour equally according to his physical
or mental powers--every kind of labour being productive will produce
every thing in abundance--this abundance having been produced must
supply every want--every want being gratified at the suggestion of the
inclination, there remains nothing to desire--and as all have an equal
right to appropriate as much as they require for the gratification of
their inclinations, by having equally, according to their abilities,
assisted in producing the abundance they enjoy, no desire in which they
might think fit to indulge could ever take the appearance of an act of
dishonesty, don't you see."

"Ridiculous!" exclaimed the professor.

"But how in the present state of society can you get such notions
adopted?" inquired Oriel.

"Either by educating children from the earliest age into the application
of these social principles, or by constituting communities apart from
the general mass, who will exist within themselves by the same manner
of life, till, as the advantages of such a state of society become
universally evident, it is adopted by the whole population," said the
Doctor.

"The thing has been tried times out of number," remarked Fortyfolios,
contemptuously, "and has always lingered a short time and then died,
with very little regret on the part of those for whose superior
happiness it was created. It is based upon an idea of equality, which
idea has no personal existence in nature. No matter how carefully the
young mind is schooled, there will always be some superiority somewhere.
In muscular energy, in mental power, in ingenuity, in quickness of
comprehension, and in the skilful adaptation of means to an end--even
in the natural desires and susceptibilities--even in acquired habits of
industry, and self-denial, in all societies, some will be found greater
than others, and these will endeavour to rise above the equality by
which they are surrounded; perhaps they will succeed, and then the
homogeneousness of the community is soon destroyed; perhaps they will
fail, and then their more exalted natures must be crushed down to the
Procrustean bed of their associates. Equality can only be a state of
general mediocrity. Could we imagine such a social organisation, what
would become of the worship of superior greatness that leads men to
become great? With what feelings would exist, could they exist under
such circumstances, those commanding intellects whose supremacy should
be acknowledged by all who love knowledge, and virtue, and humanity, at
finding themselves classed with the mere breaker of the clod, a creature
without an idea, whose only quality, that of strength and fitness for a
certain labour, he shares with brutes and with machines; who eats and
drinks, and sleeps and dies, and then makes room for another of the same
class? Must they also become hewers of wood and drawers of water for
the benefit of their fellows? With as much probability of a beneficial
result might an attempt be made to force the ploughman, the shepherd,
the mechanic, and the domestic servant, to become a sculptor, a
philologist, a musician, and a philosopher."

What Doctor Tourniquet might have replied, it is impossible now to
relate, as the Albatross at that moment was boarded by the port-officers
who came to examine the state of health of the ship and the cargo with
which she was laden; and as she was expected shortly to drop her anchor
among the shipping with which she was now surrounded, those who designed
to land proceeded to make the necessary preparations.




CHAP. VII.

CAFFRETON, THE METROPOLIS OF SOUTHERN AFRICA.


In a large heavy building on the banks of a canal in the city of
Caffreton, all seemed bustle and confusion: barges were at the water
side unloading, and at the land side were waggons being filled with
packages for conveyance into the interior by the rail-roads, and others
starting off heavily laden to supply the traders in the town and
neighbourhood. A considerable number of black slaves were actively
employed in assisting the goods from the barges to the stores, and
from the stores to the waggons; who jostled, shouted, and chattered
apparently with as much noise as they could make; two or three white
men were seen among them giving orders in a loud voice to their dark
associates, and seeing that their commands were promptly attended to.
Under a gloomy archway, which led from the street to the water side were
doors opposite each other. One of these, after passing through a long
warehouse filled with articles of merchandise of every description,
in the midst of which were several slaves of both sexes engaged in
weighing, measuring, and packing parcels of various sizes, led into a
counting house, in which about a dozen blacks, principally young ones,
much better dressed than those in the warehouse, were writing in large
books; and beyond this was a much smaller room, furnished with maps and
a few cumbrous books, wherein two men were seated opposite each other;
one a tall, thin, sharp visaged man about forty, whose features
expressed an extraordinary degree of fear and servility, was reading a
newspaper, and the other, who appeared considerably older, was short
and corpulent, had a dark complexion, and a look of mingled cunning and
fierceness, sat leaning back against a huge arm chair, with an open
ledger on the table before him.

"Foreign stock rising, eh!" inquired the latter.

"Yes, sir," replied the other, glancing his eye over the paper,
"particularly Columbian and Australian."

"How goes the share market?"

"Brisk, sir, in many things--Gondar Railroad at a premium--Congo Canal
at 125-3/8--Ashantee Salt Company, 105-1/2--Mocaranga Timber,
109--Biafra Gold Mines, 200."

"Capital!" exclaimed the elder, rubbing his hands together briskly, and
his forbidding features assuming an expression of intense gratification.
"I shall do well by my speculations there;--but how goes the Madagascar
Silkworm Company?"

"Down to 45, sir," replied the thin man.

"Bankrupt and jails! you scoundrel, it can't be," furiously exclaimed
the other.

"It is so here, sir," said his companion humbly.

"Then my eternal malediction rest on all silk worms. I've lost some
thousands. But you haven't said any thing about the Timbuctoo Beet-root
Sugar."

"Down to 22, sir."

"You rascal, you're trying to put me in a passion; you're inventing
that, because you know I've invested large sums in that affair. I'll
have you whipped like a slave if you don't tell me the truth."

"It is so here, sir," said the man trembling, and turning pale.

"Then the Caffreton Universal Intelligence is a universal liar!"
screamed the other in a rage. "Why, if it's true, I've lost all I gained
by the indigo and cochineal job. It's a bad business, Mr. Quagga.
There's cheating in it! There's ruination in it! I shall be laughed at
on 'Change. My solvency will be suspected--my credit diminish;--but go
on, Mr. Quagga--go on, I'm perfectly cool--I'm not going to put myself
out of temper by such a loss, don't think it. In the name of poverty,
why don't you go on, Mr. Quagga?" thundered out the principal.

"Wer--wer--wer--wer--what shall I read next sir?" inquired his servant
as plainly as his fright would allow.

"Read the arrivals, you stuttering, stupid blockhead," cried the
broker.

"Arrived in the bay, the Sultan from Cairo, Selim, master."

"Nothing for me."

"The Golden Horn, from Stamboul, Mahmoud, master:--twenty chests of
opium, consigned by Mandragora and Poppy."

"Send some one to see it warehoused in the docks."

"Yes, sir," said the clerk, respectfully.

"What next?"

"The Hellas, from Smyrna, Mavricordato, master."

"Nothing for me. Cargo of figs and raisins, from Drum and Company."

"The Albatross, from Columbus, Compass, master."

"Look to that, Quagga--look to that. She belongs to Master Porphyry, the
richest merchant in the whole world. Her cargo is of great value. By
last advices from my correspondent, expect some bales of rich
fabrics.--Go on, Quagga."

"There's a paragraph, here, sir, that seems to relate to that vessel."

"Read it, Quagga."

"'In the Albatross, arrived in our harbour, comes the only son of
the great merchant, Master Porphyry, whose name is in such high
estimation in every part of the civilised world for his wealth and his
philanthropy. It is said that he has come out on a commercial voyage,
and that it was Master Porphyry's desire that his son should visit
some of the most celebrated places of traffic in various parts of the
globe.'"

"Very good, except philanthropy, which is all humbug, you know, Quagga,"
observed the broker, "a bad spec--a dead loss.--We must look after
him"--and the face of the master seemed to glance more pleasantly upon
his servant.--"Well, what provincial news?" he asked, after a pause.

"'We regret to inform our readers, that the respectable banking house of
Mangel Wurzel, Carrots, and Co., at Lattakoo, have stopped payment.'"

"Stopped payment, you rascal!" shouted the broker, his face becoming
purple with rage. "How dare you tell me Mangel Wurzel and Co. have
stopped payment? It's all a conspiracy--a base invention--a lie--a
cheat! You know I've got all the payments made to me per the
Springbok--on account of that fine gang of Hottentots--in their wretched
paper. I'll have you hanged, you scoundrel, for deceiving me. I'll----"

Here the torrent of his indignation was interrupted by one of the young
slaves from the counting-house showing himself at the door.

"Well, you imp of darkness! what do you want?" he cried.

"Cap'ain Gumpas, sar, want to peak wi' you," said the young Hottentot.

"Who, scoundrel?"

"Cap'ain Gumpass, sar, ship Albatross."

"Admit him, instantly."

The slave disappeared, and so did the broker's passion.

In a moment afterwards the door opened, and a tall man, of rather
handsome exterior, whom it would have been impossible to have
recognised as the Captain Compass of the Albatross, had it not been
for a peculiar expression in the countenance--sarcastic, bold, and
treacherous--no one could mistake, entered the room. His whiskers had
disappeared, the colour of his hair had changed, and he looked a much
younger and better featured man than he appeared the day previous. As he
advanced, the broker seemed to gaze upon him with fear and wonder.

"Well, old Boor, is this the hail I'm to meet after such a long cruise?"
cried the captain.

Boor stared till his yellow eye-balls appeared starting out of his head.

"Dockets and bad bills!" at last he exclaimed, with a long breath,
"surely it can't be you!"

"But it is, though, old boy, and I'm afloat in the most slappish style,"
replied the other.

"But how did you escape, when----"

"No matter," said the captain, interrupting his companion. "I'm come to
have a little bit of a confabulation with you about a matter that will
enrich us both."

"This way, my good friend," hastily whispered the broker, leading his
associate cautiously to a little door at the further extremity of the
room, which opened into a smaller apartment, filled with iron safes,
papers, and books. "This way, captain--this way," added he; then turning
to his clerk, said, "Don't let me be interrupted, Quagga," as the door
opened and closed upon the pair: and there they remained in close
conference for a full hour, to the great mystification of the principal
clerk. When they returned, the features of the captain wore an air of
triumph, and the countenance of Boor expressed all the congratulation of
successful cunning.

"Every thing shall be managed according to your desire, captain," he
remarked.

"Be cautious," said the other.

"Depend upon that," responded his companion. "You had better go out at
this side door."

The captain was going out as directed, when he quickly asked, "When
shall I see you again?"

"To-morrow night," replied his associate.

"Agreed."

When his visiter had taken his departure, the broker seemed to have
forgotten the losses that had affected him so much a short time
previous. His unprepossessing countenance appeared lit up with a
continual smile of inward satisfaction, as he leaned back upon his
chair, occasionally resting his hands upon his capacious stomach, then
crossing his arms--then leaning his chin upon his hand as if in deep
reflection, uttering such ejaculations as "capital scheme"--"hazardous
though"--"daring villain"--"worth the risk," and others of a similar
nature--till the wondering Quagga, neither daring to move or to speak,
began to imagine that his tyrannical master had lost the use of his
senses. At that moment the door opened again, and the same slave made
his appearance.

"Ha, Beelzebub!" shouted Master Boor, "what now?"

"Massa Porfry, sar, and young gennleman ob colour wish to peak wi' you,"
said the youth.

"Admit them," he exclaimed. Then in a lower tone said, "Coloured
persons! what can he mean by bringing such vermin here?" However, though
considering the introduction of such a person an indignity, the game he
had to play induced him for the present to forget his prejudices, and he
met his visitors with every appearance of cordiality.

"Welcome to Caffreton, welcome to the sunny shores of Afrik;" he cried
as they advanced into the room. "The land of universal liberty.--Quagga,
tell those slaves if I hear them chattering again, I'll give them the
lash----!"

"Yes, sir!" said Quagga; and immediately delivered the message.

"The land of universal equality.--Quagga, you scoundrel! why don't you
get seats for the gentlemen----?"

"Yes, sir!" said Quagga; and instantly did as he was desired.

"And the land of universal freedom of conscience.--Quagga! tell Pipkin,
that if he doesn't choose to attend the same church as his master, I'll
thrash his soul out of his body."

"Yes, sir," said Quagga; and Pipkin received the brutal command.

Oriel Porphyry seemed in some degree amused by this exemplification of
liberty, equality, and freedom of conscience, but he said nothing; and
Zabra seemed intently observing the countenances of the clerk and his
master.

"I hope your worthy father is well, sir," continued Boor. "Health's a
precious commodity--cannot be too highly prized. Quagga! is Nimbo in the
warehouse yet?"

"No, sir; doctor says he can't stand," said the clerk.

"Then tell him if he don't come down I'll make him," said his master
with ferocious emphasis.

"Yes, sir;" replied the obedient Quagga.

"Your father does a deal of good, sir, with his charities," he resumed.
"Ah! charity's a fine thing!--an admirable thing! I do a wonderful deal
of good myself that way sometimes. I give the poor all the bad coin
that comes into my hands. I do a deal of good I assure you. Your father
enjoys a great reputation for integrity in his dealings. Nothing like
it, sir;--It is always at a premium. Hope you will tread in your
father's footsteps; and if you should have a desire for speculating, I
trust the credit I possess will induce you to place confidence in me. I
should recommend you to invest largely in the shares of the Madagascar
Silk Worm Company, and the Timbuctoo Beet-root Sugar Joint Stock
Association. I have some shares at my disposal, which, although they're
now very high in the market, to oblige the son of so respectable a man
as my correspondent, master Porphyry, I would let you have at a fair
price,--say the first at 95-7/8, and the other at 80."

"I am obliged to you," replied Oriel Porphyry; "but I have no desire to
speculate in such things at present."

"Very good--very good," said the broker, not at all disconcerted at
the failure of his schemes. "Caution is advisable in all mercantile
transactions, and I am the last person in the world to suggest any thing
to you, which I do not think would turn to your advantage. Perhaps you
have bullion to dispose of? If so, I could afford a very handsome per
centage, and exchange with you to a considerable amount in notes of one
of the most steady banks in the country--that of Mangel Wurzel, Carrots
and Co. at Lattakoo."

"I'm much obliged to you; but as my stay in this part of the world must
be brief, it would not be advisable to change my bullion into the paper
currency of the country;" said Oriel.

"True--true;" remarked master Boor, and a cloud did pass over his
gloomy countenance when he found he could not dispose of any of his
unprofitable speculations. "You are right. So you do not intend staying
here? Fine country. No kings--none of _that_ nonsense. Every man does
just as he likes, and cares for nobody.--Quagga! you rascal, I'll have
you flayed alive if you don't finish that intricate account with
Botherem, Blunder, and Bigfist, in an hour." The frightened clerk began
to write away with the speed of a steam-engine. "In no place in the
world is the right of opinion so much respected.--Quagga, you scoundrel!
I understand you spoke at the Universal Consolidated Democratic
Discussion Society, against the measure now before the legislature for
the tax on tenpenny nails. How dare you oppose my political sentiments!
This is insolence, sir--treason, anarchy, and rebellion! If ever I
hear you entertain an opinion different from mine again, I'll have you
inclosed within four stone walls and starve you upon a mouthful a day."

Quagga trembled like an aspen, and did not dare lift his eyes from the
book.

"Yes, sir, I repeat, this is the only country on the face of the globe,
where mankind enjoy a perfect state of civil and religious liberty. What
do they think of us, sir, in Columbia? Don't they envy us our noble
institutions, ey? Our excellent government--our enlightened people?"

"Why, those who ever do think of the African states--"

"Ever think of them!" cried the old fellow, with emphasis, interrupting
the speaker; "they must always think of them. They cannot help drawing
comparisons, sir, with their own wretched state; and they must
therefore be wonderfully desirous of sharing in the blessings we enjoy."

"I really never heard of such a desire existing in any part of the
country;" observed Oriel.

"Ah, sir, they live in a wretched state of despotism, and they dare not
express their sentiments;" replied the broker. "There cannot be anything
like public virtue amongst them--no political honesty--no notion of true
liberty. But how did you make the voyage, sir?"

"Admirably!" exclaimed the merchant's son. "The Albatross is one of the
most perfect vessels that was ever launched."

"Nothing like the African shipping, depend upon it--made of free timber,
sir?--beat all vessels at sailing, and last for ever. Skilful captain
that Compass, sir--known him long; knew his father--highly respectable.
You may place the greatest confidence in him, I assure you."

During the preceding sentences Zabra kept his eyes fixed upon the face
of the speaker, which he observing, turned his own gaze upon the person
so earnestly regarding him; but the piercing look that met his quite
disconcerted him. His complexion grew more livid; his look became
confused; he frowned and smiled by turns; he shifted his position, and
evinced by many other signs that he was anything but at ease under the
scrutiny to which he was subjected. At last, unable to endure it any
longer, he said, in a tone in which anger seemed struggling with
indifference. "Who is that person of colour, sir? it is not usual to
bring people of that class in company with free Africans."

"That young gentleman is my most esteemed and intimate friend;" replied
Oriel.

"Oh, I beg pardon; but it's not respectable to have such friends in a
free and enlightened country like the African States; and the 'young
gentleman'," said he, with contemptuous emphasis, "seems to look on me
as if he knew me intimately."

"I do know you intimately, sir;" remarked Zabra, bending on the old man
a stern and searching look.

"Well, this assurance beats any thing I ever saw. Why, I never met with
your coppery countenance before," said the broker, indignantly.

"You spoke the truth _there_," replied Zabra, still continuing to regard
him with the same earnestness; and the broker's attempts to conceal his
passion and his uneasiness became every moment more unsuccessful.

"He is thus to every one," observed Oriel Porphyry; "and he means no
offence. But let us proceed to business. According to your request,
my father has sent you a lot of fabrics of the choicest patterns and
materials, which I shall give you an order to remove from the docks upon
receiving payment in gold. You can examine them if necessary, whenever
it is convenient to you, when you will find them exactly of the
description you ordered. I am also commissioned to purchase, to any
amount, ivory, gold dust, gums, pearls and precious stones, ostrich
feathers, amber, and any other article of traffic of approved quality
that may suit the Columbian markets, or that may be turned to a
profitable account during my voyage. They can be paid for in money or
in goods--whichever should be most desirable."

"Good--good," remarked the broker, losing, in his attention to business,
all his angry feelings. "Ah! let me see. I think I shall be able to
treat with you for a considerable portion of your cargo; and, as a
particular friend, I should not advise you to go to any strange brokers;
they'll take you in, depend upon it."

"Why, I thought, in this free country, all your transactions were
distinguished by a degree of honesty superior to that of other nations;"
said Oriel.

"Yes, yes," hastily replied master Boor, considerably puzzled to account
for the discrepancy in his statements. "But every man will make a good
bargain, if he can."

"Then what offer are you inclined to make for a thousand bales of lace
and cambric goods, best quality?"

"Why, you see, master Porphyry, the truth is, the market here is a
little overstocked just now with those articles; they are a complete
drug."

"I have good reason to believe there is a great demand for them," said
Oriel.

"Nothing of the kind, master Porphyry. I wouldn't deceive you for the
world. But, although things are so heavy, I don't mind offering twenty
thousand dollars for them, either in money or goods."

"That is just half I am commissioned to take;" remarked the young
merchant, rising to go away. "And as we shall not be able to do business
on those terms, I must seek a more advantageous market."

"Don't be too hasty, sir. Reflect before you determine. The price I
offer is a good price; and it is impossible you can get one so high,
search Caffreton through and through." Perceiving his visitors were at
the door, he added--"Suppose we say five and twenty--a great risk--a
hazardous----"

"Good day to you, master Boor!" exclaimed Oriel, bending his head
proudly, and departed with his companion through the counting-house.
The old man scowled after his visitors, muttering to himself,--"I'll
have them at a less price, in spite of you."

About the same time two persons were seen walking cautiously through a
narrow unfrequented street in the suburbs of the town, connected with a
number of other thoroughfares of a like description, chiefly inhabited
by the lowest class of the black population. The tallest of the two, who
was a little in advance of his companion, whose short dumpy figure and
conceited physiognomy it was impossible to mistake, turned round, and
addressed his associate:--

"Come, master Log, show more sail. I'm spiflicated if we shall ever find
safe anchorage if you don't. I think I arn't forgotten the landmarks;
but, somehow, I've got into a little bit of a mystification about making
the proper tacks. This is it! No, it arn't! Ha! Now I see, as clean as a
cable. There's the sign o' the Ship, at the corner yonder. We goes right
ahead there; then we makes a tack; then we goes ahead again; then we
makes another tack; then I knows all the whereabouts. That's right,
arnt it, mister?"

"Right--right--very right--decidedly right--absolutely right: indeed, I
may say, positively right, mister Scrumpydike," responded the little
man, endeavouring to keep pace with his more bulky companion.

"Here comes another Hottentot;" said Scrumpydike, noticing an individual
of that race approaching them. "What a lot o' them black craft one meets
wi' steerin' about in these here seas; they puts one in mind o' a fleet
of colliers, creepin' along shore. But this nigger _is_ black, arnt he,
master Log?"

"Black, black,--monstrous black,--very monstrous black--upon my word
most diabolically black, mister Scrumpydike;" replied the captain's
clerk, puffing and blowing with the exertion he made to prolong his
walk.

"I say, won't them bugaboos afloat entertain something of a 'stonishment
when we commences the fun. Don't you think some on 'em 'll go mad?"
inquired the other.

"Mad, mad,--very mad, very mad, indeed,--pretty considerably wild,
stiff, stark, staring mad, mister Scrumpydike," rejoined his companion.

They had now reached one of the narrowest, darkest, and filthiest
streets in that quarter of the town; and by the expression of
satisfaction that gleamed on the coarse features of Scrumpydike, it was
evident that they were near the end of their journey. They proceeded
along this street till they came to a court through which they passed,
and entered a lane where there were no houses on one side, and very few,
and those far apart on the other. Keeping on the side where the houses
were, they followed the footpath, till they came to a ruined habitation
of the poorest class, little better than a mud kraal. The few windows it
possessed were broken and covered with dirt; its door was battered to a
fragment; the roof had fallen in, and the walls threatened to tumble.
Looking cautiously round to see if any persons were observing them, the
sailor removed the door to admit himself and his companion, and then
carefully replaced it; afterwards they picked their way over fragments
of stone and timber, through a moderate sized chamber, and descended a
long flight of steps till they came to a wall.

"Ship ahoy!" shouted Scrumpydike, putting his mouth near the wall.

"What cheer?" was answered in a low voice from within.

"Death and gold!" was the strange reply; immediately after which,
bolts were heard quickly drawn, and the wall, or rather a door made to
resemble the wall in which it was placed opened, and a stout, active man
of a fierce aspect, clad in coarse jacket and trowsers, without shoes
or cap, carrying a naked cutlass in his hand, and wearing several large
pistols in his belt, became visible by the light of a torch that burned
stuck upright in the ground beside him. Without another word Log and
Scrumpydike entered. The door was quickly closed, the bolts set, and
the man, taking up the torch, preceded them through a long passage or
cellar, till they were stopped by the brickwork.

"Ship ahoy!" shouted the man.

"What cheer?" was answered from within.

"Death and gold!" he replied. In an instant another door opened, the man
turned back, and the captain's clerk, and his companion were admitted
into a long subterranean chamber, in which the many torches that were
burning enabled them to distinguish the figures of about twenty men,
dressed like sailors, all variously armed, seated round a large table
covered with drinking vessels. Immediately Scrumpydike made his
appearance, the whole party set up a loud shout of welcome, and in
a moment they were all crowding round him, shaking hands, asking
questions, and offering him refreshment.

"Ha! let us stow in a cargo o' some sort or other," said the sailor,
seating himself before what appeared to be the remains of a roast kid,
and proceeding to help himself. "I've had a desperate long cruise here.
Come, master Log, bear a hand:" a command the captain's clerk was not
slow in executing. "And so you'd given me up, ey? never made a worser
recknin; scrunch me if I arnt a got more lives nor a cat. But the best
of the joke is," said he taking a hearty draught from a can of liquor
which was handed to him, and which example was immediately followed by
his companion; "the best o' the joke is--but you'll think I'm gammonin'
ye--I knows you will. The joke is--I've been livin' in the most
honestest way you ever heard on."

The whole party raised a shout of incredulity, and laughed in derision
at such an idea.

"I know'd how it would be--I was afear'd I should lose my precious
character," remarked the man gloomily; "but master Log can tell ye as
how I ha' been for a matter o' two or three months most abominably
honest,--arn't I master Log?"

"Honest--honest," replied the captain's clerk, moving the wine can
from his mouth a short distance; "shamefully honest--disgracefully
honest--indeed I may say villainously honest, master Scrumpydike."
The men stared with astonishment, and many still seemed to doubt his
assertion.

"Nobody can lament the unfortnit occurrence more nor I do," said
Scrumpydike; "but what's done can't be undone,--so clear the decks o'
this lumber--pipe all hands to grog, and I'll tell ye a sort o' summat
much more nat'ral and creditable."

The eatables were cleared off into an open pantry at the side, and fresh
flasks of liquor and drinking vessels were placed on the table. Some
of the men began to smoke from long pipes; others made for themselves
mixtures of the different beverages before them; and every one sat
himself down laughing and joking with the rest with the evident
intention of commencing a carouse. Log having procured a pipe almost as
big as himself, and a large jug of a strong potation he had carefully
prepared, sat smirking with secret satisfaction at his own comfort. His
pig-like eyes twinkled with self-conceit, and his pug nose seemed to
curl itself up with delight. Opposite to him, but not less at his ease,
sat Scrumpydike. He also had taken care of himself after a similar
fashion; and the humorous twist of his ugly countenance became every
minute more evident. The set by whom they were surrounded, were
remarkable for the daring and somewhat ferocious character of their
features, and the great variety of their costumes; and as they sat
enveloped in the smoke they were creating, bandying the ready jest, and
pushing about the intoxicating liquor, they presented to the eye a band
of as determined ruffians as the whole world could have produced.

"Have you all a mind for a job?" at last inquired Scrumpydike.

"Every one on us," replied a stout fellow with a red nose and a fierce
squint. "We've been laid up here for a month or more, waiting for a
'portunity to get afloat."

"Well, Billbo! you shall go aboard a prime craft afore another week's
out, or I'm less nor nobody."

"Hurra!" exclaimed the men joyfully.

"I can't tell ye the 'ticulars just now," he continued; "but I'll make
it all plain sailin' afore you goes. Push the stuff about; a ship at
anchor makes no way. Here's to ye, my trumps! wi' lots o' plunder and a
wide berth; and may we stick to one another while there's a plank left
for us to stand on."

"Hurra!" replied his associates with increased delight! and they all
seemed now to abandon themselves to riot and debauchery with additional
zest. Briskly were the liquor cans replenished, rapidly was the tobacco
consumed;--the laugh became louder, and occasionally an attempt at a
ribald song was made by some of the more musical members of the company.

"Well, scrunch me! if this arn't pleasant in the extreme," said the
individual addressed as Billbo; who, by the vacuity of his gaze, and
the unsteadiness of his body, was evidently far gone towards complete
intoxication. "I'm as happy as if I was a cap'ain. I'm happier nor any
body. I'm happier nor any body, afloat or ashore."

"You arn't more happier nor me!" shouted a big-headed fellow fiercely,
from the other end of the table, as he attempted to get upon his legs.

"I'm happier nor any body," repeated the man with the squint.

"I don't allow nobody to be more happier nor me," cried the other, as
he, after repeated efforts, attained the perpendicular.

"I'm happier nor any body," doggedly repeated Billbo.

"Then I'm spiflicated if I don't give you toko, 'cause you arn't no
business to be more happier nor me," rejoined his associate, attempting
to draw his cutlass.

"Silence, Loggerhead!" shouted Scrumpydike, in a voice of thunder
that made the captain's clerk start from his seat with affright. "No
squabbling, or you'll get a broadside from one as arn't fond o'
trifling."

"He says he's more happier nor me," exclaimed Loggerhead, in a most
lachrymose tone of voice.

"I'm happier nor any body," repeated the pertinacious Billbo, his eyes
squinting defiance upon his jealous antagonist.

"Silence, Billbo!" shouted Scrumpydike, "or I'll rake ye fore and aft."

"He arn't no right to be more happier nor me," cried Loggerhead, as the
tears swelled in his eyes at such an assumption of superior happiness.
"I'm very happy!" he added, in a manner the most miserable that can be
conceived. "Unkimmon happy. I'm as happy as a fellow can be in this here
molloncholy world;" and he began crying like a fretful child.

"I'm happier nor any body," muttered the other, sinking back upon the
floor.

"Let's have a song!" cried Scrumpydike.

"A song, a song," echoed as many of his associates as were able to
speak.

"A song, master Log," continued Scrumpydike, with the desire of
preventing a quarrel among his drunken companions. "Come, my prince o'
singing birds! Pipe away till all's blue. You're a reg'lar trump at
chaunting a good stave; a right-down warbler; a nightingale's a fool to
ye. Arn't it true, now?"

"True, true--very true--undeniably true--most undeniably true--most
undeniably true, indeed, mister Scrumpydike," cried the captain's clerk,
his gratified vanity visible even through the sleepy expression that
now characterised his countenance; and after a few preparatory hems,
considerable smirking, and a plentiful affectation of modesty, he sang,
in a voice that might have frightened an owl, the following verses:--

   "Woman and wine are my delight;
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!
    Woman and wine are my delight,
    From Monday morning till Saturday night;
    For they cheer the heart and gladden the sight,
      And make a man feel divine:
    From woman's glances all fondness flows,
    And wine rejoices wherever it goes,
    And both are a cure for all earthly woes,--
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!

   "I went a courting once on a time,
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!
    I went a courting once on a time,
    And I flattered my deary in prose and in rhyme;
    And though the stuff was not by any means prime,
      She vowed it was monstrous fine:
    But in wine's inspiration my praise had been clad,
    And whatever I said she could never think bad,
    For I always 'saw double' the charms that she had:
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!

   "I took to wine as a friend in need;
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!
    I took to wine as a friend in need,
    And have ever since found it a friend indeed,
    Which nothing on earth could be brought to exceed,
      Or made so completely mine:
    In Fortune's smile, and in Fortune's frown,
    It laid me up, and it laid me down;
    And went to my heart by a way of its own,
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!

   "Oh, woman and wine are capital things--
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!
    Woman and wine are capital things,
    In gladness or care to man's soul ever springs,
    To which each its own perfect felicity brings;
      And long may such pleasures combine:
    And he who would ever, by night or by day,
    In sorrow or joy, turn from either away,
    Should never in better men's company stay,
      Woman and wine! woman and wine!"

While his associates were wildly shouting, in a dozen different keys,
the burthen of the song, Log, in whom the exertion of singing had
destroyed the little sense he had remaining, as he was swinging his body
back, lost his balance, pitched head over heels off his seat, and then
rolled under the table, in a state of complete insensibility.




CHAP. VIII.

THE PIRATES.


"'Tis a lovely night!" observed Oriel Porphyry, as he stood upon the
deck of the Albatross, watching the fast receding shores of Africa.

"Indeed it is," said his companion. "The air is filled with beauty, and
there is an eloquent glory in the stars that speaks marvels of wisdom.
See how the rolling waves rush on, bathed with the trembling light from
above them--so do the multitudinous hearts within the world send forth
their tide, each illumined by glimpses of a heaven of its own. The
planets look down upon the waters, and from their mighty mirror drink in
the images of their own loveliness--just as the maiden venturing to gaze
into the glowing eyes of the youth of whom she is enamoured, sees in
their depths the reflection of her own beauty, and lingers delighted
within the influence of the charm she herself created. But what a
philanthropist is the world! A universal spirit of love exists around
us, and beneath its outstretched wings throbs the everlasting heart of
the universe, distributing through its rosy channels that refreshing
stream which is the life, the strength, the humanity of nature. What a
wonder is the world! All within the boundless circle of infinity, with a
harmony of soul-entrancing modulations, tune the same music to the ear.
Systems of worlds, and worlds of systems--each earth blessed with its
own sun, moon, and stars, that fill its atmosphere with gladness, and
its waters with delight, rejoicing in the abundance in which it rears
its countless offspring, that draw their verdure, their fragrance, and
their consummate grace, from the exhaustless nourishment of its breast,
rolls on in one unvarying course, carrying with it the fond desires of
youth, the proud ambition of manhood, and the peaceful speculations
of age; while, as the stream of Time progresses on its way to float
them into the shoreless ocean of Eternity, its own nature, keeping a
continual change in all things which have from it their existence, from
the beginning hath followed its particular path in the glad possession
of a perpetual youth. What a gladness is the world! There is not a
creature born of its most fruitful womb that is not taught to slake its
thirst and bathe its buoyant limbs in the fountain of delight that flows
for all. Smiles and flowers are about us from our infancy. The air
breathes of gladness. The clear firmament looks down on us in bliss.
The leaves that quiver in the breeze dance for joy, and the stream that
wandereth on its way singeth its own merry tune. The voice of song
murmurs a continual carol that stirs the hearts of the antique forest
trees, and the echoes of the mighty hills--in swelling tones the
vigorous wind joins in the thrilling harmony--and as the natural concert
rises into power, into its gladdening sounds the deep sea roars its
triumphant chorus."

"You are eloquent, Zabra!" remarked Oriel, gazing with wondering eyes
upon the handsome countenance of his companion, which appeared more than
usually excited.

"'T is a fit time, and a most fitting subject for eloquence," he
replied; "and if the soul hath such impulses, never were they more
likely to be called into action than on such an occasion, and with such
a theme as I have now. We are again upon the sea. That is sufficient
impetus for the thought. We have left the dwellings of men whose souls
were devoted to the mere scraping together wealth they would not use for
any benefit to their fellow-creatures, and could not expend with any
happiness to themselves."

"Ay, I am glad I have escaped from the place," said the young merchant.
"It has given me every thing but a favourable impression of the
pleasures of traffic. Each person I met seemed anxiously intent upon
cheating me; and, if I had not been carefully attentive to my father's
instructions, before I had left their filthy town I should have been
plundered of every bale of goods in my possession. As for Master Boor,
he is as fine a sample of deliberate roguery as I ever met with."

"He is worse than that, or I am much mistaken," remarked Zabra,
earnestly. "I have not been able to collect sufficient proof, but I
strongly suspect, from observation I have made, that he is connected
with your captain, whom he praised so much, in some deep-laid scheme of
treachery, of which you are to be the sufferer."

"Impossible!" exclaimed Oriel. "That Boor would cheat his own father,
I believe; but I don't think he would act the villain, except in the
general routine of business:--as for Compass, there's no harm in
him--the freedom of his language and the unprepossessing character of
his manners are likely to create an unfavourable impression in any
observer. Besides, he is alone in the ship, or nearly so. He is not
at all popular with the crew, and were he to attempt any thing, the
majority would rise in my favour. No, no, Zabra, your suspicions must
be groundless."

"Who are those strange men that have come on board?" asked his
companion, in a whisper.

"Those in long frocks and straw hats? They are some poor agricultural
labourers that have begged a free passage from the captain, which, at
his desire, I have granted."

"I have received information, through the boy Loop, from old Hearty,
whose fidelity I can depend on, that these men are not what they appear
to be; that they are evidently sailors, and, from their countenances
alone, I should imagine that they are here for no good purpose," said
Zabra.

"Ha!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, for the first time entertaining a
suspicion of the captain's intentions.

"Hush!" whispered Zabra, clutching his companion firmly at the arm,
while the expression of his features became intensely anxious.

"Heard you that?"

It was a stifled scream. While both listened in great excitement, it was
followed by a discharge of fire-arms, a clashing of weapons, shouts,
imprecations, and yells of agony; and immediately afterwards Hearty,
Boggle, Ardent, Climberkin, and about half a dozen others, rushed
upon deck, followed by Captain Compass, Scrumpydike, and the gang of
ruffians described in the last chapter, fighting furiously; and, though
streaming blood from many wounds, obstinately disputing every inch of
ground.

"I have no weapon, but I must find one!" cried the young merchant,
attempting to break from his companion.

"Move not for your life, Oriel," said his companion, earnestly, as he
held him more firmly. "You can only be slaughtered, without conferring
the slightest assistance, for see, the unequal struggle is over."

A loud cheer from the ruffians proclaimed the truth of Zabra's
intimation. The faithful few were either killed, or so wounded as to be
unable to continue the contest, and the victors were rejoicing at their
triumph. Oriel Porphyry was not allowed many moments to consider of what
he had best do, when Compass, Scrumpydike, and two or three of their
associates, came hastily towards the place where he stood, flourishing
their bloody weapons, and shouting their riotous hurras.

"Captain Compass!" exclaimed Oriel proudly, as the party advanced,
"what is the meaning of this bloodshed?"

"Beg your pardon, Master Porphyry," he replied, "I have the honour of
being Captain Death; ey, boys?" said he turning to his men, and the
appeal was answered by a noisy demonstration of applause. "Yes, I am
Captain Death, the most distinguished leader of the Free Mariners in
these seas; and I beg to inform you, that I now hold the ship and all it
contains for the benefit of myself and brave companions; ey, boys?" and
the inquiry met with a similar reply.

"And I begs to add to what the cap'ain says," observed Scrumpydike,
giving his ugly countenance a more ludicrous twist than ever, "that I'm
Leevetenant Rifle, very much at your sarvice, gennlemen; and if you has
the slightest 'clination to end your miserable lives, I'll do the job
handsome, and to show my respect for ye, wo'n't charge ye nothin'"--a
riotous roar of laughter followed.

"You need not be afraid, Master Gloomy," cried the captain, noticing
that Zabra trembled as he clung to Oriel Porphyry--"your pretty
countenance shan't be spoilt just yet, at any rate, if you behave
yourself; and as for you, Master Porphyry! your life shall be spared,
and those of your men who may have survived this conflict, on condition
that you follow my directions regarding your conduct; but the slightest
show of disobedience will be punished with instant death to yourself and
all who belong to you."

By this time Professor Fortyfolios and Doctor Tourniquet had hurried
upon deck, and with much appearance of apprehension had joined the
group.

"What is this dispute about, captain?" asked the professor, looking
fearfully upon the threatening faces he saw around him. "Let us argue
the matter coolly."

"The dispute is settled, Professor Fortyfolios, and these are my
arguments," said the pirate, pointing to the bloody weapons of his
companions. The professor was convinced without inquiry; and the
perspiration seemed to break out over his bald head as if he had taken
a shower bath.

"This looks very much like an act of piracy, don't you see," remarked
the incautious Tourniquet.

"So like, that there can be no difference," replied the pirate; "and you
look as if you had a great desire for a swing from the fore-yard arm,
or a plunge under the bows, don't you see. But you are too useful at
present, so look to the wounded, Doctor Tourniquet, or I'll have you
hanged before you can suspect any thing about it."

The doctor's ruddy features grew pale with fear, and he made his way to
his patients without loss of time.

"Master Porphyry, you had better go to your cabin," said the captain,
"and your shadow may go with you; but if I notice any treachery in
either, you shall not have time to say a prayer." The friends left the
deck together without a reply.

"And now, boys, hey for Madagascar; and as this job's done, you may
set your hearts afloat as much as you like." A cheer followed the
announcement--the liquor was soon in requisition; and the pirates
became so incapable of taking care of themselves, that if the defenders
of the ship who were alive had not been disabled by their wounds, the
Albatross might have been retaken the same evening.

The wounded men were lying where they had fallen when the doctor arrived
amongst them. In a moment his fear for himself disappeared in his
anxiety for the poor fellows who so much required his assistance.

"Here, Loop!" he cried as soon as he noticed the lad, unhurt,
endeavouring to support his wounded relative. "Run into my cabin, and
you will find on the table there a case of instruments, bring them here,
look in at the cook room as you return, and ask Roly Poly to let me have
a basin of warm water instantly, for I have immediate want for it, don't
you see." The boy, with tears in his eyes, left old Hearty to the care
of the surgeon, and hastened to obey his instructions.

"Well, old friend!" exclaimed he, taking the sailor by the hand, "where
are you hurt? Ah, I perceive--ugly gash in the face--don't you see--any
thing else?"

"Arm cut to the bone, and shot through the body," said the man faintly.

"Bad," replied the doctor; "but cheer up. I've put worse things than
that to rights, don't you see. There, let me take off your jacket. Don't
exert yourself: I'll do it. You've lost a good deal of blood, my friend,
and feel a little sickish or so. Never mind that. Now let me move your
shirt from the wound. Tut, tut," he exclaimed, as the man seemed to
shrink with pain when the linen was withdrawn from the lacerated flesh.
"You must learn to bear pain, don't you see. Wo'n't hurt you more than I
can help." He then minutely examined his patient's hurts. "Bad gun-shot
wound that; but the bullet's taken a more favourable direction than I
expected, don't you see. Ugly cut this in the arm; muscles cut through;
arteries severed; requires much attention. Gash in the face don't look
well, but is in no way alarming. So, old friend, cheer up; you're
wounded severely, but not mortally, don't you see."

"Don't care about it, sir," replied Hearty, in a more feeble voice than
usual. "Don't care if I had as many holes in me as a sieve; but to be
circumwented in this here 'bominable way by a set o' rascally pirates
arn't to be endured."

"Hush!" exclaimed Tourniquet, looking round him anxiously, to see if any
of the victors were within hearing. "You must be cautious of what you
say, don't you see."

"While I a got a breath o' wind in the canvass I'll tell 'em they're
a set o' murderin' thieves," cried the brave old fellow, with all his
remaining strength.

"Hush, I tell you!" said the alarmed doctor. "Do you want to have me
murdered as well as yourself? Keep your tongue still, or every soul of
us left alive in the ship will be massacred."

"Where's Master Porphyry?" asked the man, languidly.

"Safe," replied the surgeon.

"Glad on't. And Master Zabra, they arn't a done him no harm, the
villains?" he inquired anxiously.

"Both are unhurt," said Tourniquet, in a whisper; "and the only way you
can keep them so, is to remain as quiet as possible, and say nothing
to incense your conquerors; and who knows, but that after you have
recovered, you may have an opportunity of doing them some service, don't
you see."

"The very thought a'most sets me on my legs again," observed his
patient, clasping the doctor's hand affectionately.

"Hush," he exclaimed, "here comes Roly Poly and Loop, at last."

"Oh, massa!" cried the black, as he rubbed his sleepy eyes with one
hand, while carrying the basin of water with the other--"Sockin' doin's!
Sockin' doin's! Me was takin' bit of nap, and heard nuttin. But who'd o'
ebber tort ob such obstroplousness."

"Hold your tongue, Roly Poly," said the surgeon, as he proceeded to
cleanse, to dress, and bind up the wounds. "Hold your tongue, and bring
the basin nearer I can't reach it, don't you see."

"Yes, massa, me see berry well," replied the fat cook, heedless of the
injunction he had heard. "Sorry for poor Massa Hearty; him look done to
a turn, poor fellar. Him nebber eat no more puddin'; no more soup; no
more meat; no more nuttin, as Roly Poly cooks so boofliful. Sorry for
him."

"Hold your tongue, sir, directly," exclaimed the doctor, with more
emphasis.

"Yes, massa," responded Roly Poly, and in a moment afterwards
recommenced. "Massa Hearty, him berry good man. Him eat ebry thin' me
cook, and ax no 'pertinent questions. Nebber turn up him nose when him
find bacca in him soup, or lump o' soap in him puddin'. Sorry for him,
poor fellar."

"Will you hold your tongue, sir?" said Doctor Tourniquet, angrily, "and
help to carry the patient to his hammock. Talk to him on your peril,
sir. He requires rest, don't you see."

"Yes, massa," he replied, assisting to support the wounded man; but he
had not proceeded a yard before his voice was heard running on as fast
as ever. "Wo'n't say word more. Hate a fellar as can't hold him tongue
when him told. Al'ays talkee, talkee. Mornin' till night him foolis
tongue nebber hab no peace. He go talkee, talkee, to eb'ry body; foolis'
fellar! Poor man, him want rest; nebber mind, him not hold him tongue
bit more. Hate a fellar as can't hold him tongue when him told." And so
he continued till he left old Hearty in his hammock.

The next person the doctor approached was lying on his back motionless.
A brief inspection seemed sufficient. He shook his head and passed on
towards a man who was supporting his back against the mast. His face was
pale, and his look haggard, and he seemed trying with a handkerchief to
stop the blood that was oozing from his side.

"Not much hurt, I hope?" was Doctor Tourniquet's first inquiry.

"Why, sir, I likes to have particular notions o' things in general, as
every man as is a man, and thinks like a man, should have, and I must
say," said he, slowly and faintly, "as I've a notion, as I'm right down
reglarly spiflicated;" and immediately afterwards his head fell upon his
shoulder, his back glided from its support, and he fell flat upon the
deck.

"Bad look that," remarked the surgeon, kneeling down beside his patient,
whom he proceeded to examine. "Bad look--but 'tis only a swoon. He'll
recover presently, and in the mean time I'll look at the wound. Ah!
unpromising case. Dangerous thrust that; don't like it by any means,
but if he is tractable he may get over it. Well, my friend," exclaimed
Tourniquet, perceiving his patient open his eyes and look wildly about
him, "your case is not so desperate as you imagine; and if you are
attentive to what I tell you, it's very possible I shall be able to
make you safe and sound again, don't you see."

After doing what he thought necessary, he ordered him off to his
hammock, and proceeded to the others. Ardent was found suffering from
severe fracture of the skull; Climberkin had fainted from loss of
blood, having been wounded in nearly a dozen different places, but
none of them were dangerous; five others had received the same rough
treatment, who were expected to recover, and seven more were either dead
or dying. As Doctor Tourniquet was placing a bandage on the last of his
patients, he heard the pirates, who had been joining in a wild uproar
the whole of the time he had been engaged upon the wounded, shouting as
loud as they could bawl,--

             "We stifle ev'ry cry,
                  Ev'ry cry, ev'ry cry,
              We stifle ev'ry cry, Captain Death!
    And then we spread our sails, that are filled with welcome gales,
        Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales,
          Captain Death! Captain Death!'
        Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales, Captain Death!'"

The surgeon shuddered as he collected together his instruments, and with
a heart full of anxiety for the fate of himself and his companions
proceeded to his cabin.




CHAP. IX.

CAPTAIN DEATH.


The Albatross was within a day's sail of the shores of Madagascar, and
as both Oriel Porphyry, Zabra, the professor, and the doctor, appeared
desirous of giving their captors no cause of offence, they were better
treated than they expected to have been. Zabra, more than all the
others, seemed anxious to please the captain and his lieutenant; and
the kindness of his disposition and the beauty of his music in a short
time had such an influence upon their savage natures that their former
distrust was completely obliterated, and they entertained something like
a friendly feeling towards him. But Zabra had evidently some object in
the course he was pursuing. He allowed no opportunity to escape by which
he might win their confidence. He was continually doing some obliging
offices for their gratification. He seemed to take a pleasure in their
bold way of life, joined with them in its praise, and shared with them
in its enjoyments. He handled their weapons with an air of bravery, and
learned from them to shoot at a mark, and to cut and thrust with the
sword; and there was such a loftiness in the enthusiasm he manifested on
these occasions, that they invariably treated him with more respect than
any of his fellow captives. But a close observer might have noticed that
he often turned aside to conceal the disgust he entertained. When not
within the observation of the pirates, his dark eyes flashed with
indignation, and his beautiful mouth was compressed into an expression
of scorn. He looked proudly around him, as if his spirit was exalted
above the meaner natures with whom he was obliged to mingle. He loathed
their fellowship. He abhorred their ways. And often, when the feeling
of disdain with which he regarded these men seemed about to break
forth into open acknowledgment, a glance towards the place where Oriel
Porphyry stood, striving to control the contempt and hatred for the
whole crew of ruffians, of whom he was a prisoner, that kept darting
from his eyes, appeared sufficient to induce him to redouble his
exertions to please the pirate chiefs.

They were all in the cabin, with the addition of Scrumpydike, or as he
should now be styled, Lieutenant Rifle, and Log the captain's clerk,
the latter looking twice as important and twice as conceited as he used
to be. Zabra sat leaning on his harp, near Oriel Porphyry, apparently
absorbed in thought. The doctor and the professor were disputing upon
some metaphysical subject, as if they had forgotten all their fears, and
cared for nothing but triumphing over the other. The captain had been
talking with his lieutenant upon the progress of the ship. Oriel sat
proud and abstracted; and Log was intently engaged in eating and
drinking as much of the good things on the table as lay within his
reach.

"All's goin' on as smooth as a mackerel's back," said the
lieutenant--"every man knows his dooty, and looks arter it. There's no
flinchers among 'em; and every one feels in his nat'ral element, cause
there's no abominable honesty among 'em to corrupt their morals."

"So you must acknowledge that it's impossible there can be such a thing
as free-will, don't you see," said Dr. Tourniquet.

"I acknowledge nothing of the kind, doctor, I assure you," replied
Professor Fortyfolios. "The doctrine of necessity----"

"Hullo! is my nightingale silent?" cried the captain, unceremoniously
interrupting the logicians. "Have you piped all dry--not a song left,
nor a voice to sing it with? Is the harp dumb, or the singer sad, that
we haven't heard so much as the ghost of a tune!"

"Neither, noble captain," replied Zabra, dressing his handsome face in
his happiest smiles. "I wait your pleasure for a theme. Shall it be of
love, or of war--of the pleasures of wine, or the gladness of gold--a
song of the hunters amid the melodious forests--or of the mariner upon
the everlasting sea?"

"If I might be so bold as to speak for the cap'ain," said the
lieutenant, "I should say you might sing any thin' you has a mind--any
thin' in the univarsal globe, so as there's nothin' about honesty in
it--a thing as I've got a most vartuous abhorrence on. So chirrup away
as soon as you like. I loves to listen to your toons--they fills me wi'
a sort o' all overishness. Arn't it delightful, Master Log!"

"Delightful--delightful--very delightful--positively delightful--upon my
word very superlatively delightful, Mister Scrumpy--I mean Lieutenant
Rifle," mumbled the little man, as plainly as his mouth filled full of
preserves would allow.

"Let it be what is most agreeable to yourself," said the captain.
"But I would rather have something to stir one up a bit--a sort of
nor-easter--that will make one's timbers creak again: none of your
lack-a-daisical love and dove jimcracks--sink them--give us a song that
will make one feel as if one was standing on the tip of one's toes on
the tip-top of the world."

"You shall have what you desire, noble captain," replied Zabra; and,
after a stirring prelude on the harp, sang the following verses:--

       "I heard a voice upon the sea,
        That pierced the waters fierce and free,--
        The loud winds running wild with glee
            Brought it to me;
        I heard a voice the land-breeze bore,
        That thrilled the mountains to the core,
        And shouted out, from shore to shore,
            'WHO ARE THE FREE?'
    Reply, reply aloud, air, earth, and sea!
    Shout to the list'ning stars, 'WHO ARE THE FREE!'

       "The cities heard, but heard in vain;
        It stirred the hill, the vale, the plain;
        The forest monarch's young again,
            Seemed they to be;
        But all beneath the conscious sky,
        With trembling heart and quailing eye,
        Looked round and raised th' accusing cry,
            'WHERE ARE THE FREE?'
    Reply, reply aloud, air, earth, and sea!
    Shout to th' eternal sun, 'WHERE ARE THE FREE!'

       "I saw a gallant band at last,
        Upon the boundless waters cast,
        Daring the battle and the blast,
            Rocks and the sea;
        They heard the voice that pierced the tide;
        And all in one proud cause allied,
        With tones that shook the world, replied--
            'WE ARE THE FREE!'
    We have no masters on the earth or sea!
    Our home is with the wind--'WE ARE THE FREE!'"

Loud and long were the commendations with which the captain and
his lieutenant rewarded the singer. They had listened with as much
gratification as it was possible for them to receive from such a source,
and the bold glances that darted from their eyes, as the song proceeded,
showed how much they were excited. Even the conceited spirit of the
captain's clerk seemed moved. He winked his little eyes most valiantly,
and put as much bravery into his smirking countenance as it could be
brought to assume. Oriel Porphyry regarded the musician, for the first
time, with a look of distrust. To him there seemed an evident desire of
becoming on more friendly terms with the pirates than he thought could
be desired by an honest nature; and the ingratitude, as well as the
treachery of such conduct, made Zabra appear to him unworthy of any
kindly feeling. But when their eyes met, there was such an earnest
devotion in the gaze of Zabra, and so much sincerity of purpose, that he
resolved to defer passing a condemnation till he had more positive proof
of his unworthiness.

"After such a song as that, I feel a wonderful deal more social towards
you all," observed the captain; "and to show the confidence I would
place in you--as well as to pass away the time as agreeably as may
be--if there's no particular objection, I'll tell you my history from
first to last."

"Do, noble captain; your adventures must surely be of deep interest to
all who love the inspiring actions of a bold spirit," observed Zabra.
Oriel turned on him a searching look; but the lustrous eyes upon which
he gazed still seemed filled with the light of truth and affection; and
he knew not what to think.

"I was born a younger brother--the youngest of several," said the
Captain. "There was some property in the family, but it was all
carefully nursed for the heir, who was brought up in the enjoyment of
every indulgence, while the rest of us picked up our education, and our
existence, as we could. I was least cared for of all. From my boyhood I
was allowed to go where I pleased, so that I kept out of the way of my
parents and my elder brother; and I was left to do as I liked, as long
as my proceedings did not inconvenience those affectionate relatives. As
I soon perceived that I got nothing I required by asking for it, I ever
afterwards managed to acquire what I wanted without thinking it was
necessary to trouble any person upon the subject. Once I was discovered
acting in this necessary and philosophical manner, and I was considered
guilty of a crime, and most savagely punished. I cannot say that I was
made conscious of my offence, or that I was ever brought to acknowledge
the justice of its punishment; but I can most truly affirm, that the
whole proceeding created in me that hatred of tyranny which led me to be
what I am.

"Our house was by the sea-side, in a wild and unfrequented part of the
coast of Madagascar. It was a mansion of considerable extent, ancient,
but capable of being put to very good uses in the hands of a spirited
proprietor; and there were no houses near it, with the exception of a
few cottages on the cliff, belonging to some smugglers, with whom I had
long since made myself on very good terms. I was then about twelve years
of age, tall and strong, reckless and daring, perfectly uneducated, as
far as school learning is considered, but wiser than many of my elders
in that really useful knowledge that proceeds from observation. My
intimacy with the smugglers had taught me many things which I managed to
turn to advantage on several occasions--particularly notions affecting
the rights of property, and the legality of resisting the law. Smarting
from the effects of the treatment I had received, I hastily collected
whatever I considered most valuable, and without waiting to perform the
ceremonies of departure, I took the shortest way to the cliff, and was
the same evening sailing in a swift cutter far from my native shores.

"My companions early initiated me into all the mysteries of their craft.
I soon acquired a knowledge of landmarks--knew every creek and bay, and
sheltered inlet along the shore--was familiar with every part of the
vessel, its uses, and management--learned to understand the appearances
of coming storms--and could always tell the best time and place for
effecting a landing upon any required portion of the coast. I became an
active hand, exceedingly useful, quick, and vigilant; and shared in all
the dangers of my associates, their disappointments, and successes. My
boldness at all times, my readiness to labour, and the ability with
which I performed all I undertook, made me a general favourite; and the
captain, an old stern smuggler, rough in his humour, and rather despotic
in his sway, took me under his especial protection. I was chosen to
assist in many hazardous exploits, in which I was often a principal
figure; for my youth, disarming all suspicion in those who were on
the look-out to capture the contrabandists, gave me opportunities
for acquiring information as to their proceedings, which was quickly
communicated to my companions; and we have sometimes managed matters so
well as to be able to store our cargo in the very house in which our
most vigilant enemy resided. In this way I existed till I was about
seventeen, making voyages from the island to the continent, and along
various parts of the coast, acquiring a very creditable knowledge of
navigation, and gaining a considerable degree of information on many
other subjects; and then, for my services and approved fidelity, I was
promoted to be mate in the craft in which I had been sailing. I had
been in several desperate conflicts with the revenue officers, but had
been so fortunate as to escape with a few slight scratches; and the
excitement of these affrays had created in me an inclination to share in
more fierce encounters. However, on one occasion, we were unexpectedly
attacked by very superior numbers, and, although we defended ourselves
with an obstinacy that rendered the victory dearly bought, we were
over-powered; and when I recovered consciousness after falling on the
deck, as I imagined, mortally wounded, I found myself immured in a
gloomy dungeon, on a charge of smuggling and murder.

"I was accused of murder! I, who had merely slayed the slayers--who had
only fought in self-defence--who in a fray of three to one, had beaten
down some four or five of the hireling band by whom my associates were
being slaughtered, was loaded with chains, thrust into a loathsome
hole, and condemned to death, as guilty of the blackest of their
black catalogue of crimes! What miserable bunglers are lawyers and
governments! what wretched blunderers,--what empty fools! They create
the necessity for an act, punish with death a deed which could not be
avoided, and then boast of their wisdom and justice. Much parade, too,
they made about carrying their atrocious sentence into effect upon one
so young. They affected to be wonderfully pitiful,--the jury gave their
award in a tone of commiseration, and the judge pretended to be moved
to tears when he passed the sentence; and then, as many exaggerated
statements had been published of the determination with which I had
resisted being taken, many humane persons, as the world called them,
visited me in prison, and they brought me what they said were good
books, and talked to me about things they styled repentance and virtue,
and a few other fooleries. I listened with a patience that I have since
often thought extraordinary; but I imagined at the time that this
attempt at sympathy might lead to my liberation, and consequently they
always found me earnestly studying their books, and admirably attentive
to their discourses. But my hopes were disappointed; I was a fool not to
have known the hypocrites better. They could whine and cant, but they
had no mercy. However, from a quarter to which I had never looked for
assistance, help came when I least expected it.

"My jailer was a cold, stern, unfeeling brute; but he was a brute
by profession, and his disposition was his stock in trade. He had
originally been a housebreaker, or a mean villain of some kind; and
having betrayed his accomplices, he was rewarded by the miscreants whom
he served, with a place of trust. For him bolts and bars seemed to have
as much attraction as if he was a loadstone. His heart appeared only
to throb in the shadow of the thick walls; and of no music could he be
more fond than the clank of chains and the groans of the despairing
prisoners. Him I cursed every time we met: but he had a daughter--a
buxom, light-hearted little creature, whose eye was afloat in gladness,
and whose breast was freighted with gentle and generous feelings; her
olive complexion, azure eyes, and rich black curling hair, gave the most
charming expression to her face. She saw me from a window when I was
taking my solitary walk in the gloomy court-yard. My youthful appearance
attracted her attention. She inquired my history, and as there was
nothing in it of the dastard or the sneak--nothing she found ignoble
or revolting, she felt an interest for me which every day grew more
intense. She watched for the coming of the time when I was allowed to
enjoy my daily walks with increased anxiety; and knowing that I was
doomed to death, her eyes were filled with tears and her heart with
tenderness whenever she saw me. I was ignorant of the feelings I had
excited for several days after they had attained a power she found it
impossible to resist; for as my execution approached, I strode the
narrow court-yard, hemmed in by towering walls, with folded arms and
eyes upon the ground, muttering imprecations upon the whole human race;
and beheld not, and thought not of the kind creature that watched me so
anxiously: but one dull day, the last my judges had allowed me in this
world, I was engaged in making my accustomed perambulations, when I
was roused from my melancholy reverie by seeing a stone fall at my
feet I looked about me, but did not perceive whence it came. As I was
continuing my cheerless round, another stone was thrown close to the
place where I stood. I then made a more careful examination of the few
windows by which I could be overlooked, and at one, about forty or fifty
feet from the ground, I observed a female figure--whether she was young
or handsome I could not exactly determine, because I was unable to
distinguish her features, but I could have no doubt that she was an
angel when I beheld the end of a strong rope slowly descend that was
evidently falling from her hand. Before it was within reach, I had run
to grasp it within my eager hands. Soon I clutched it firmly--I felt
it was tightly fastened above; long experience in rope-climbing, and a
desperate desire to escape at any hazard, in a few seconds carried me up
to the open window, where I embraced my deliverer, whom I discovered to
be just the sort of smart-looking little craft I have described.

"'Pull up the rope,' she said anxiously, 'or you will be discovered.'

"I lost no time in hauling it into the room, where it was strongly
fastened to the bedstead;--from this it was immediately made loose and
stowed away into a box, and the window closed. The chamber in which
I found myself was a small bed-room, possessing all the neatness and
cleanliness in its appearance which distinguish the sleeping rooms of
girls in the first flush of womanhood. Against the wall was a bed with
linen of a pure white, enclosed in curtains of the same colour. At one
end of the room a simple toilet was arranged; utensils for washing were
standing in a corner--a row of books upon a little cabinet--a small
vase with a few flowers, two or three chairs, and a table, composed
the furniture.

"My arms were again round her waist, and I was showing my gratitude
after a fashion I thought would be most agreeable, when she raised
herself from my arms, smiling, blushing, and trembling, and fixing on
me a look full of sincerity, purity, and affection, said:

"'You may perhaps think me bold--over bold; but indeed I could not exist
under the idea that you were about to lose your life. I was determined
to make an effort to save you. I procured the rope from a manufactory
attached to the prison in which those sentenced to hard labour are
employed, and having well secured it here, watched my time to drop it
within your reach. I knew that you were left alone for a short time, and
I tried to attract your attention without exciting the suspicion of
any one. Having provided every thing that was necessary, and seeing my
opportunity, I endeavoured to make you look up--I coughed--I hemmed--but
you did not move from your position. I then threw down a stone; you
looked about you, and to my great disappointment and fear walked on
without observing me. My heart seemed to sink when I thought the
opportunity might be lost, and that on the morrow you would die. I again
threw a stone, and felt the sweetest pleasure I have ever known when I
saw that you observed me. Quickly and cautiously I let down the rope;
but when I saw you ascend, and knew that the slightest slip would send
you headlong against the hard stones so far beneath you, I trembled with
fear. You are now safe, and I am rejoiced. But the greatest caution will
be necessary, or your retreat will be discovered. By this time your
escape is known, and an active search is being made for you in every
direction. If you wish to retain your life you must do whatever I desire
you. Ha!' she exclaimed, as footsteps were heard approaching, 'they
come--get into that bed.' I hesitated about soiling the sheets with my
shoes. 'In with you instantly--there's not a moment to be lost.'

"While I snugly deposited myself under the bed-clothes, I observed her
rapidly put on a night-gown over the dress she wore, and a cap upon her
head, throw off her shoes, and whispering, 'Lie still, if you value your
life,' she jumped into the bed, placed my head in her lap as she sat
nearly upright leaning against the pillows, and arranged the clothes in
such a manner that no one could imagine that the bed contained any one
but herself.

"This had scarcely been done, before I heard the door open and some one
walk into the room.

"'Have you heard any one enter your window, Virgo?' asked a gruff voice
I readily recognised.

"'My window, father!' exclaimed my angel, in a tone of the utmost
astonishment. 'How is it possible any one can get near it?'

"'Don't know,' replied the old man surlily. 'But I left a prisoner a
short time ago in the yard, to let him stretch his legs for the last
time before we stretched his neck; I returned in a few minutes, and
there was not a glimpse of him to be seen. I defy a cat to get up the
wall. How he's managed to gi' me the slip I can't guess, unless he
jumped out o' the keyhole, or flew in at one o' the windows. But you
haven't heard no noise?'

"'Not the slightest!' said Virgo.

"'Strange--unkimmonly strange! How long ha' you been awake?' inquired
her father.

"'About an hour,' replied my angel. 'I felt a little better to-day, and
was thinking of getting up when you entered.'

"I heard the old man grope under the bed, and knew that he was exploring
every corner, grumbling and swearing at me at a rate it did my heart
good to hear.

"'Unkimmonly strange!' he exclaimed, 'and I shall get sent to the right
about if I can't tell how he's bolted.'

"Then I heard him draw aside the curtains, and I lay as still as a rock.

"'What do you want, father?' cried Virgo, very angrily. 'It's
ridiculous for you to imagine he can be here.'

"'Unkimmonly strange!' grumbled out the brute; and having satisfied
himself that his prisoner was not in the room, he shuffled out of it,
growling like a she bear deprived of her cubs. I could feel Virgo's
little heart beating violently as she listened to the retreating sounds.
Neither of us moved for several minutes. At last, convinced that the
coast was clear, I raised my head from the clothes, and observed her
face covered with blushes; but as soon as I moved she made a spring and
left me in the bed alone.

"'You must remain here till you hear me leave the room,' said she,
drawing the curtains round me; 'and when I lock the door, change the
clothes you have on for those you will find laid out for you.' I
promised obedience, and with a winning smile she left me to my own
reflections in a pretty considerable puzzlement concerning the whole
affair. Directly I knew she was gone, I jumped out of my snuggery,
and looked for the change of rigging she had mentioned. May I be
considerably spiflicated if it wasn't a woman's dress! I must say I felt
but little inclined to the thing; but, thinking that it might be the
only chance I had for getting out of prison, I stripped, and began
putting on the first thing that came to hand. It was a sort of shirt,
and yet it wasn't a shirt. It didn't look like the shirt of Jew, Turk,
or Christian. However, after a deal of manouvring, I slipped it on,
and the first thing I discovered was that both sleeves shortened sail
considerably, and though I tried to haul up the collar to my neck, I
found it wouldn't come above my shoulders any how, but hung down with an
ugly flap afore and abaft. Well, the next thing I put my head through
was something of a similar nature, only it came up a little higher and
fell down a little lower, and was braced up more tight about the body.
After that, I got hold of the strangest piece of stuff that ever I
overhawled. It was shaped something like a jacket without sleeves or
collar, buttons or button-holes, set round with a number of slight
stiffish spars, one of which was much broader in the beam than the
others, and there was a running line going through two rows of holes
that kept the thing pretty smartly together. I found out that there
were places for the arms to go in, and I managed to get it then over
my shoulders. Then I tugged away at the running line till I had got it
through all the holes, and by pulling and hauling, twisting and turning,
I made all fast; but the spars pinched me most confoundedly, and the big
one stood out astern of my back bone in the oddest manner possible. Then
there were a few more things into which I found my way more easily, and
when I was regularly rigged out, I took a look at myself at the glass;
and I will say, a more ridiculous craft never ventured afloat that what
I appeared to be.

"I was amusing myself with the figure I cut, when I heard a
footstep--the key turned in the lock, and Virgo entered, fastening the
door after her. As soon as she clapped eyes upon me, they began to
twinkle famously, and, without any ceremony, she opened upon me as
complete a laugh as ever I heard. And she had good reason, for I'd got
a hump on my back as big as a dromedary's, owing to my having put the
thing with the spars on stern foremost; and I'd managed to twist every
thing out of its proper place, because I was ignorant of the right way
of putting them on. Well, she made no more to do, but just took me to
pieces as if I'd been a baby, and put every thing to rights, laughing
all the time; yet as modest as any she creature that ever lived. Then
she made me wash my face; and afterwards she combed my hair, curled it,
and put a sort of turban on my head; and then, with a triumphant smile,
she bade me look in the glass. I did'nt know myself. I looked as
complete a girl as ever walked in petticoats. My complexion had been
rather browned by the sun, and my limbs had little of the feminine about
them; but notwithstanding these things I appeared more womanish than
previously I thought it possible I could have been made. As yet I had no
whiskers, and my beard did'nt give me any particular deal of trouble;
so that, on that score, there was little that could betray that I was
sailing under false colours.

"Virgo seemed to enjoy the change she had produced amazingly. She walked
about me with her eyes filled with pleasure, as if delighting in the
contemplation of her own work; while I, scarcely able to understand the
whole drift of the proceedings, looked a little bothered and mystified.

"Now if any of our people do see you," said she, cheerfully, "I do'nt
think it at all likely that they would suspect who you are."

"Well, there was I, a wild, daring, uncontrollable youth, living locked
up in the bed-room of an innocent little creature some years younger
than myself. She brought me every thing that she thought likely to
render my confinement more endurable, and endeavoured, by a thousand
affectionate ways, to make me forget that I was deprived of my liberty.
To get out of the prison, she told me, was impossible at present, as
every person entering and going out underwent strict examination; but I
had some idea that she said this to keep me where I was; and though I
loved her as well as I was able to love, for having saved my life, the
sort of existence I led was not one my spirit could long endure. I can
say, most solemnly, that she remained as pure in heart and mind as it
was possible for the purest to be. She allowed my caresses--she returned
them--but there was such a modesty in her spotless nature, that it
repelled the slightest exhibition of passion. At night she would leave
the room while I undressed, and, when I was in bed, she would come and
lay by my side upon the bed in her clothes, and, with her arms round
my neck, and her cheek upon mine, we went to sleep. When she made her
toilet, she would draw the curtains round me, kiss me, and tell me not
to move; and her innocence and gentleness seemed to exert upon me such
a spell, that I did'nt dare move an inch, or make the slightest attempt
to watch her proceedings. Extraordinary was the care with which this
guileless creature endeavoured to avoid a discovery. She watched over me
as if I was her treasure, and appeared as if she knew no enjoyment but
in my presence. I know not what she would have made of me in time,
for I was as a child in her hands; but I began to grow restless at
this imprisonment, and was seeking an opportunity to bring it to a
termination. This was brought about sooner than I expected, and, in a
manner, too, I did not at all anticipate.

"One day, while we were enjoying ourselves in our usual quiet manner, we
heard footsteps approaching the door. She had just time to throw some
work, upon which she had been employed, into my lap, and tell me to sew
away as well as I could, when the door opened, and her father entered.

"'Hullo, who's that young woman?' he inquired, rather surlily.

"'Oh! it's only a person come to help me on with some work, father,' his
daughter replied.

"'Oh!' he exclaimed, scrutinising my appearance very earnestly. Now, I
was never any great hands at hemming and stitching: I held the needle
like an oar, and pricked my fingers more than I did the stuff I was
required to sew.

"'Is she a good work-woman?' asked the old man, approaching nearer to
me, and watching my awkward labours with more attention than I desired.

"'Capital, father!' said my angel.

"'Humph!' he responded, in the same gruff tone.

"'Do good work-women usually hold the needle in the left hand?'

"'Oh, she works left-handed,' replied Virgo. Catch a woman off her guard
if you can, thought I.

"'Humph!' exclaimed the old fellow; and then, while I was busily engaged
in sewing my fingers together, and before I could have the slightest
idea of what he intended, he snatched the turban off my head.

"'Ah, ah! you young gallows-bird!' he cried, in a tone of exultation;
'I've found you, have I? I thought you couldn't have given me the slip
completely. But come along,' he added, as he clutched me forcibly by the
arm. 'You shall be hanged this time, be assured.'

"'Not if I can help it, old boy!' said I, as I tripped up his heels;
then, snatching a knife that lay at hand, I put my knee upon his chest,
and held the blade over his throat.

"'Call assistance, you hussey!' screamed the prostrate jailer to his
daughter, who seemed in an agony of terror.

"'If you speak another word, I'll cut your throat,' said I. 'And you,
Virgo, if you don't wish your father to be killed before your face,
which I shall be obliged to do to save myself, you will hand me some
rope, with which I can bind him in such a manner as will prevent his
giving the alarm before I have escaped.'

"'Oh, save him!' she exclaimed earnestly.

"'Quick, quick!' I cried. The rope was brought, and I tied the old boy
down, safe and sound, and gagged his mouth as he was muttering curses on
us both.

"'There is only one way of escaping from this place,' she observed
with considerable anxiety in her features, as she saw me preparing to
depart.

"'How? let me know it instantly, for I have not a moment to lose,' I
replied.

"'You will be stopped at the gate, unless I am with you,' she added,
gazing on me with tears in her eyes.

"'Well, come then, sweet one,' said I, hastily; 'you will lead a dog's
life of it, if you remain here; and I will do the best I can for you
when you are out of it.'

"She looked grateful and affectionate; instantly arranged my dress,
which had become disordered by the struggle; hastily collected a few
valuables; and, opening the door, we went out together. I have lived a
good many years since then, but I must acknowledge that I never lived so
happily as I did in the little bed-room of the jailer's daughter. I was
striding along the narrow passages of the prison, when she stopped me,
and told me that if I proceeded at that rate, I could not avoid being
discovered, and bade me, as near as I could, imitate her manner of
walking; so I immediately began to tread the ground as if I was picking
my way over cherry stones, and after threading a multitude of dreary
passages, we arrived at the gate, where, being in company with Virgo, I
excited no suspicion, and with merely a word or two of greeting from the
attendants, we passed into the street.

"I was now in the open air; I had at last escaped the stifling
atmosphere of a prison; and any one, having been used to the freedom of
the wide seas and the excitement of a life of enterprise, who has been
immured for months within stone walls, enduring the dreary monotony of
imprisonment, may imagine what were my feelings when I found myself
again in the enjoyment of my liberty; but what to do now I was free was
the next consideration. The dress I wore could not conceal me long,
especially when, as I knew must be the case, the manner of my escape
was made public; and as it would be unsafe for me to remain in the
neighbourhood, I saw that it might encumber my flight; and what to do
with Virgo was another puzzle: she who had risked so much for me I felt
ought not to be abandoned; but I knew it would be impossible for us
to remain together. I told her of this, but she begged so hard to be
allowed to remain with me, and seemed to despair so completely at the
thought of our separation, that I resolved at any rate that we should
not part company till all hope of remaining near each other with any
safety was destroyed.

"In this dilemma, I thought of a smuggler's widow, who carried on a
little bit of a trade in the outskirts of the town, to whom I had done
many a good turn out of regard for her husband, a brave-spirited fellow,
who was shot by my side, while defending a cargo from the greedy
clutches of the revenue rascals, and to her humble abode I bent my way.
Glad, indeed, was she to see me, when I made myself known to her. I
never knew a creature who appeared more delighted; and having told her
how I was situated, actively she sat about insuring my safety. The next
day, as I had anticipated, the particulars of my escape, with many
exaggerations, were published all over the country. A price was set upon
my head, and every hole and corner was searched, in the hope of finding
the fugitive. I never felt more satisfaction than when I cut the
petticoats. I was always kicking my shins against them. They hurt my
spirit, and almost stifled my manhood. I was now dressed in a suit
of sober brown, like a young apprentice, and I passed as the widow's
nephew; serving in her shop, and going about her errands, as knowingly
as if I had been a shop-boy all my life. For my sake the widow paid
every possible attention to Virgo, who seemed never easy but when I
was with her. The fear of discovery was always in her heart. She was
restless, anxious, and melancholy.

"After a few months of this kind of life I grew quite as tired of it
as I had been of my existence in the little bed-room of the gaoler's
daughter. I longed for the freedom of the open sea. I felt an
unconquerable desire to return to a life of enterprise. The chase,
I thought, must by this time have been given up in despair; and,
consequently, that now I might steer my course wherever I pleased. As I
was reflecting upon the most available means of satisfying my desires,
while alone pursuing some employment in the widow's little shop, who
should enter, to inquire his direction to a neighbouring street, but the
very last person I desired to see--Virgo's father.

"'No! surely! humph! ha! Yes, it must be. You rascal, I've found you, at
last,' exclaimed the old brute, as he approached, and seized me by the
collar. I had a wooden mallet in my hand at the moment; I gave it a
swing round, and the gaoler fell senseless at my feet. Without stopping
to acquaint any one with what I had done, I ran out of the house; and
bending my way to the water-side, I inquired if any ship was on the
point of sailing, and hearing that a merchant-vessel was waiting for a
few hands before she started, I presented myself on board, offered my
services, was engaged, and was sailing, far out of the reach of all
pursuit, the same evening.

"Our voyage was a long one. We were bound to China: the crew were a
medley of various nations picked up at random. The captain was proud
and tyrannical; ignorant of his duty, yet continually interfering with
those who were better seamen than himself. His mate was a mean-spirited
sycophant, who exceeded his superior in insolence and tyranny.
Punishments were frequent, and often without any thing like sufficient
cause; and the men became discontented, grumbled, and at last began
to threaten vengeance on their oppressors. To add to their causes of
complaint the provisions fell short, which was entirely owing to the
mismanagement of the captain--the men were placed on short allowance;
and their officers, instead of endeavouring to render the privation as
endurable as possible, by their arrogance and oppression seemed to seek
every opportunity of increasing their miseries. Secret meetings were
held in the ship--plans of resistance were discussed by the crew--and
every day made an open revolt among them more probable. Neither the
captain nor his mate appeared to entertain the least apprehension of
danger, for they did not alter their behaviour in the slightest degree.
In the conspiracies which had been agitated I had always been an
active hand--I counselled the boldest measures, and advised their
early adoption; but although my ability in seamanship was generally
acknowledged, they had no knowledge of my character, and wanted what
they called a more experienced leader. The mutiny broke out, however,
at last, before all our plans were ripe.

"I had committed some slight offence, so trifling, that men of any sense
would have passed it over; but I was seized upon by the despots, and
sentenced to a hundred lashes. I was rather a favourite with all, and a
loud murmur of discontent arose amongst the crew as soon as my sentence
became known; but their cries were unheeded. I was being lashed to the
grating, and both the tyrants were swearing at and threatening the men
for not showing more alacrity in proceeding with my punishment, when
the mate was felled to the deck with a handspike, and the captain was
whipped up in the arms of a tall negro and hurled overboard. All
who opposed would have met with similar treatment; but there was no
opposition, nor was there any commiseration for the fate of the men
who had been killed. I was speedily released from my disagreeable
situation, and then we commenced overhauling the cargo, which we found
valuable, and examining the stores, which were pronounced inadequate for
the wants of a long voyage. Many plans were agitated by which we might
govern our future conduct. Some were for sailing for Borneo, and there
disposing of the ship and cargo for the benefit of the crew; others were
for steering direct for Sumatra; there disposing of the cargo, and sail
from thence to enjoy ourselves with the proceeds in one or other of the
islands in the Indian Ocean. I advised, that as we were close upon the
Philippine islands, where we should meet with plenty of customers for
what we did not require, and could easily purchase from them whatever
we wanted, it was not advisable to risk a longer voyage. We could there
dispose of that portion of the cargo that found the readiest market,
have the ship disguised, and fitted with as many guns as she could
carry, and afterwards commence war against all the rich vessels we met
from the Pacific to the Indian Ocean.

"All the bold spirits among the crew applauded this proposal; but the
timorous dispositions saw in it too much danger, and gave it their
opposition; however, when it was found that the provisions would not
last a longer voyage, part of the plan was agreed upon, and the helm was
turned towards Mindanao. I was ambitious of being chosen captain, for
which office I knew myself better fitted than any of my companions,
but I was disappointed; and a man rather more than thirty, a native
of Mozambique, on the southern coast of Africa, was promoted to the
command, who was bold enough for a leader in an attack of boarders, but
had not the seamanship that could conduct a vessel through every variety
of danger. I concealed my disappointment as well as I could, determining
to wait my opportunity till I could put forth my claims in a way that
should insure their being properly acknowledged. I had some staunch
friends among my associates, and these were the bravest of the whole
crew. I saw that with a few more of the same kind nothing could prevent
the realisation of my ambition.

"We anchored in a noble bay in the island I have mentioned; and as I
was thought, even by the captain, to know more of the value of the
things than any of the others, I was sent ashore, in company with two
or three messmates considerably older than myself, to arrange about
the sale. We were dressed as merchants; and as no one appeared to have
any suspicion of our real characters, we soon negotiated, upon what
we thought very favourable terms, a sale of a great portion of our
merchandise. A division having been made of the proceeds, here most of
those upon whom I could not depend left us, a proceeding with which
I was exceedingly well satisfied; and my intentions were put into
execution with regard to the alterations required in the ship to make
her fit for piratical expeditions, that gratified me in a similar
degree.

"While our vessel was changing her appearance, I was leading a life
of indolent luxury. The part of the island near which we had anchored
abounded in the most delightful kind of scenery. Plains, rich with
vegetation--forests of gigantic trees, bending beneath their heavy crops
of tempting fruit--and a sky over head always looking down with a warm
delicious aspect--and there were other enjoyments in which I also had
an abundant share. I found hearts not less warm than their climate, and
looks not less glowing than their skies. To these pleasures I abandoned
myself with all the heedlessness of such a wild unbridled nature as mine
had always been. I revelled in a continual intoxication of the passions.
I was entranced in a perpetual dream of luxurious enjoyment. But madly
as I plunged into the dissipation with which I was surrounded, I never
was so happy as I was while I remained in the little bed-room of the
gaoler's daughter; and I have often found myself turning away from the
voluptuous beauties whose ready smiles I had purchased, to think of the
innocent love of the simple Virgo, who had shown to me such wonderful
disinterestedness in her devotion. But these thoughts were of little
avail, and why should they be otherwise? Man was made to enjoy the
pleasures within his reach, or why were those pleasures created to tempt
him with their near approximation? I did nothing more, therefore, in
giving loose to the passions that formed part of my nature, than was
natural, and the excesses into which they led were forced upon me as
things impossible to be avoided.

"It was in this island I first formed the acquaintance of Master Boor,
who was then a clerk in a merchant's counting-house. We met at some
place of licentious indulgence. A similarity of tastes soon made us
intimate--and a certain quickness of comprehension possessed by both
made each familiar with the character of the other. I found him a deep,
designing, low minded wretch, whose sole object was the accumulation
of money by any means that cunning could devise or cruelty execute.
He thought me an admirable agent to assist in carrying his plans into
execution, and believing that he would be particularly useful in my
pursuits, I lent myself in some measure to forward his designs. His
true disposition he had well concealed from the people by whom he was
surrounded, who placing unbounded confidence in his integrity, by
degrees gave up to him nearly the entire management of their business.
To him at all times I disposed of my plunder, and although I found
him an avaricious scoundrel, over-reaching me in every way, he was
too necessary to be quarrelled with. Chiefly by his assistance I got
intelligence of what desirable ships were on the neighbouring seas,
where they were to be found, and how the vessels of war protecting their
traffic were best to be avoided; and soon as ever our ship could be got
into proper trim for our purposes, we commenced a career of plunder
which in a few years made us the terror and scourge of that part of the
world.

"I had made myself so useful to the captain by this time, that he had
named me his second in command, and intrusted me with the principal
duties of the ship, with the idea of so concealing his own inefficiency;
but I was not to be satisfied with a second place, when I knew the first
was my right; and having now attained to the full maturity of manhood,
and having about me a numerous crew of brave fellows, the majority of
whom I knew were in my interest, I set about devising a plan by which my
ambitious ideas might be satisfied. The man was of a fiery temper when
roused, and hesitated not to commit any action to rid himself of an
enemy. I watched my opportunity, picked a quarrel with him:--he attacked
me with his usual violence, and after a short struggle I slew him on the
deck. It was a fair stand-up fight, and none of the men attempted to
interfere. After the body had been cast into the sea, I was unanimously
voted into the vacant command: some through fear, and some through
choice, desired that I should become their captain; but I cared not what
they thought, or what they felt. I resolved, now I had obtained the
superiority I wanted, to allow no obstacles that were likely to prevent
me from retaining it. It was a difficult thing to get a band of fierce
unruly men to obey the commands of one of themselves, but I knew that
the strong will only be ruled by the strongest, and that fear was the
surest chain to control the reckless; so I soon began to show them I
was not to be trifled with--I made them pay the most implicit obedience
to my commands--well rewarded those whom I found most tractable, and
punished with instant death all who attempted resistance. In this way I
created around me a set of daring spirits, ready to obey my slightest
wish, and willing to follow wherever I chose to lead.

"By this time Boor had become a partner in the house whose servant he
had previously been, and seemed to live in much estimation with his
coadjutors; but he had not been above a year in this promotion, when
both his partners died suddenly in a way best known to himself; and as
he produced a will, in which he was made sole heir to their property,
he took possession of the whole business, and went on with his usual
cunning and treachery, accumulating money as fast as he could. I
continued to live, sometimes enjoying myself like a prince on shore, at
other times, when afloat, striking terror wherever I went. But in that
part of the world, I found that this state of things could not last much
longer. The daring manner with which our proceedings were carried on,
the boldness with which we plundered, and the fierceness with which
we destroyed, while it created alarm among the merchants, forced the
governments to use something like activity in their measures for our
extermination. Ships of war were sent after us in every direction: we
were chased from sea to sea, and from coast to coast, with a rapidity
that allowed us no repose; and every day, at considerable disadvantages,
we were obliged to fight our way wherever we went, continually losing
some of the bravest of the crew, and not being allowed a single
opportunity of gaining any prizes. However, by the intelligence I
received from Boor, I managed to elude being taken; and as he found that
suspicions of his true character were afloat on the island, and that
arrangements were being made to take him into custody upon charges
he would have found it difficult to answer, he secretly and suddenly
disposed of the greater portion of his property; and by an arrangement
with me, he embarked on board my ship as soon as I could with safety
appear on the coast, when, without losing a moment's time, we steered
direct for the southern coast of Africa; and soon after my landing him
at his desire at Caffreton, he commenced business there as a broker of
merchandise, with a great portion of which he was supplied through me.

"I now began to feel rather desirous of knowing what had become of
Virgo; for in all the scenes of danger and of pleasure in which I
had since moved, I could not banish from my mind the cheerful, pure,
and devoted little creature, who had risked so much to preserve my
existence. Many years had passed by; I had become more stern and savage:
knowing that every man's hand was raised against me, I showed but little
mercy when any of the class to which I was opposed fell into my power;
but though I was continually the daring leader in scenes of bloodshed,
and in all animal gratifications upon every fitting opportunity
abandoned myself with no other thought than to get as much pleasure into
the moment as the moment could possess, I had frequently found myself
looking back to what always appeared my happiest hours, to the innocent
enjoyments I had known in the little bedroom of the gaoler's daughter;
and finding myself, comparatively speaking, so near Madagascar, and
knowing that I was so altered by time and climate that it was impossible
for me to be recognised by any of my old acquaintances, I resolved to
visit the old town, and try if I could discover the only being in the
world for whom I ever entertained any thing like affection. The external
character of the ship was always so mercantile, that the most knowing
seamen were deceived by her; and as whenever I entered a port I took
especial caution to make the men and every part of the vessel within
observation disguised in such a manner that no suspicion could be
entertained, I felt satisfied that from that quarter there was also no
occasion for apprehension.

"I found the old widow in her old place--she was the same as ever. I
was welcomed and wondered at as soon as I discovered to her who I was.
I found her, but the dear one I had sought I never found. When she
was told that I had left her, her heart seemed smitten with a sudden
melancholy--her cheerfulness departed for ever--and day after day she
pined till her smile was turned into darkness, and her pure spirit
floated among breakers, struck, struggled, and went down. The news
almost made me mad. I became as savage as a tiger; the last touch of
humanity seemed to have fled from my nature; and from that moment I
commenced an unrelenting warfare against my fellow-men. I was right.
They had no sympathies for me, and why should I have any for them? All
sought my destruction, and I destroyed all in return. But wherever I
looked around the world I observed the same fierce enmity prevailing.
All were waging war upon each other. The powerful crushed the weak--the
rich trampled on the poor--and the idle preyed upon the labour of the
industrious. It was well for them to boast of such things as justice and
mercy, and love and virtue, and charity and religion: I laughed at them
and their fine catalogue of hypocrisies. I saw the thin veil of spotless
lace with which they sought to conceal their own rottenness and filth. I
scorned their hollow professions; I hated their mean vices.

"I quickly left a place that had become detestable; and for the first
time since my boyhood I visited that part of the coast near which was
situated the dwelling of my family. Here I learned that my affectionate
parents had long since mingled with the dust, leaving their hopeful
heir, hated by all the neighbourhood for his detestable deeds and
tyrannical disposition, the inheritor of their property. Finding that
he had committed offences that deserved summary punishment, without
asking his permission I brought him to trial: his guilt was undeniable;
and I thought the ends of justice would be best accomplished if I
turned him over for punishment to the people whom he had so cruelly
wronged. What they did with him I do not exactly know, but I never
heard of him afterwards. I then took possession of the old house,--had
many alterations made in it, the more completely to fit it for my
purpose--managed the approaches so as to render it inaccessible to all
but friends, and used it as an asylum after my piratical expeditions. By
Boor's assistance I carried on the same game which had made me famous in
the Indian Seas, and with the same effect. The mere mentioning my name
struck terror into the hearts of merchant-captains and their crews--all
the feeble were frightened, and all the bold were in pursuit. But Boor
by this time had become rich, and fancying that his connection with me
was too hazardous to be continued any longer, after some fresh act of
daring upon my part, when the whole coast seemed up in arms against
me, as I ascertained, he gave secret information as to where I was
most likely to be found. An expedition of several well armed ships
was immediately fitted out, of which I had timely notice from another
quarter, and sought to avoid; but when I thought I had given them the
slip, and was bearing down upon what I imagined was a rich merchant
vessel, I discovered that I was approaching into the very net from which
I was most desirous of escaping; and was obliged to put up every stitch
of canvass, and make use of every manoeuvre in the hope of getting
away. My ship was a splendid sailer; but I found myself held in chase by
vessels whose powers were equal to hers, and I should have inevitably
been taken or killed in the struggle: but in the night a terrific storm
came on; and as I was creeping along-shore, with the hope of avoiding
the ships in chase, knowing that they would keep out at sea, she struck
on a rock, in a short time went to pieces, and of all the crew none were
saved but myself, my lieutenant, and my clerk.

"This catastrophe would have been enough to have damped the energies of
any man; but I was made of different stuff. I had got some money about
me, which I knew would be a letter of recommendation in any part of the
world; so when we got on shore we lived in some sort of style, and there
I fell in with one Captain Compass--a foolish, communicative creature,
from whom I learned that he was going to Columbus, with the intention
of endeavouring to get the command of one of the ships belonging to
Master Porphyry the rich merchant, to whom he had strong letters of
recommendation. By mutual consent we travelled together, and at the
first favourable moment I took charge of his letters, and my lieutenant
took charge of him. I lost no time in presenting myself with my
credentials to Master Porphyry, by whom I was placed in the command of
the Albatross--a vessel which, from the first moment I saw it, I had the
strongest inclination to appropriate. I found that nothing could be done
during the voyage to Africa; but upon my arrival at Caffreton I sought
my old associate Boor, by whom I had been given over as lost, but whom
the prospect of getting a rich cargo on the most advantageous terms
induced to assist me as far as he was able. When my arrangements were
completed, I called upon him, as he thought, to settle about the amount
to be paid, but as I knew to put into execution a plan I had devised to
punish him for his treachery. I was shown as usual into a little room
at the back of his office, in which I had noticed a large iron cupboard
wherein he secured his valuables. He kept haggling with me some time,
and at last the price was agreed upon, and he gave me the money. Before
he had the slightest suspicion of my intentions, I suddenly caught hold
of him by the throat till I had squeezed the breath out of his wretched
body: his struggles were feeble, and he hadn't time to utter a cry. I
quickly thrust the lifeless carcass into the iron cupboard, locked it,
put the key in my pocket, and walked away as if nothing had happened.

"Of what followed after I got on board, none of you here want being
told; and I have only to add to those who are now my prisoners, that
Master Porphyry I keep alive, because I consider it my interest to do
so, and tell him, that if he falls into my plans he will insure his own
safety and that of his companions; if he opposes them, he must expect to
meet with the fate of hundreds who have preceded him."

Oriel Porphyry looked proudly, and made no reply.

"Well, captain, that is the most interesting 'munication that ever
was--isn't it, Master Log?" inquired the lieutenant.

"Interesting--interesting!" exclaimed the captain's clerk, aroused from
his sleep, and rubbing his drowsy eyes--"most interesting--most cruelly
interesting--upon my word most ferociously interesting, Mister Scrum--I
mean Lieutenant Rifle."




CHAP. X.

THE PIRATE'S RETREAT.


The Albatross was creeping up the Mozambique channel, with her captain
at her helm, who showed an extraordinary degree of knowledge of the
coast, piloting the ship through narrow passages lined with breakers,
and surrounded by stupendous rocks, amid which the waves kept lashing
each other into foam on every side. Threading the mazes of this
intricate labyrinth, the ship was borne through a long opening between
huge masses of granite, in which it seemed utterly impossible for any
vessel to keep afloat, and then entered a snug little bay, perfectly
concealed from observation by passing ships by the surrounding rocks,
and there she cast anchor. Boats were let down, and the prisoners, well
guarded, were taken ashore. Upon landing, they found themselves upon
a clean shingly beach, leading to a soil of exceeding verdure, where
trees of immense proportions bowed their luxuriant heads to the passing
breeze; and parasitical and creeping plants, of wonderful variety and
beautiful appearance, twisted and twined among the rocks, and over the
gigantic trees. There the bread-fruit tree spread its welcome burden,
and the raven palm held out its green abundance. Further on, the
cocoa-nut bent down its branches, overladen with their grateful
fruit--while limes, oranges, tamarinds, and figs, on every side, offered
their refreshing stores. Among the flowering plants, the most remarkable
was the _anramatico_, whose bell-shaped flower contained nearly half a
gallon of water, always pure and fresh, and whose excellent fruit was
formed like a cup and cover. Among these, several flamingoes were
noticed, in their scarlet liveries, like sentinels upon duty--and troops
of gaudy paroquets were chattering among the branches of the trees.
There the green lizard ran along the bank, and the grey chameleon glided
among the boughs.

The party proceeded on through fields of maize, rice, sugar-canes,
yams, and bananas, into a thick forest of gloomy trees, from among
which they disturbed the wild hogs at their roots, and the monkeys in
their branches--occasionally they would meet with a porcupine, or a
babyroussa--and more than once they came upon a troop of bisons, or a
stray zebra, who were munching the green herbage. Flocks of pigeons were
flying wildly about, and innumerable singing birds were endeavouring to
create a living harmony in the forest. After proceeding in this manner
about a mile, the captain and his followers began to ascend a steep
rock, covered with every species of tropical verdure, and they passed,
with increasing difficulty, from precipice to precipice till they came
to an immense black chasm that yawned fearfully before them. Over this
there was no passing. Here the captain fired a pistol, and the report,
reverberating through the hollow rocks, was repeated with a thousand
echoes, that called up from the dreary depths of the abyss flights of
monstrous bats, several hawks, and two or three gigantic eagles, that
whirled round and round over the heads of the intruders, and then
disappeared in various directions. Immediately afterwards a troop of
armed men, of the dark olive complexion of the country, clad in loose
tunics, and lower garments reaching to the knee--with naked legs and
arms--were seen descending the rock on the other side; and, as soon as
they noticed the captain, they set up a cry of welcome, and danced and
shouted in joyful recognition.

They immediately threw a thick rope across the chasm, which was made
fast to a neighbouring tree--another rope was fastened within a foot of
it--over these, two strong hoops were sent across, connected with each
other, and affixed to a strong rope, and by resting the body within
these, and holding the ropes by the arms, each individual of the party
was dragged in safety to the other side of the rock. From thence they
proceeded along a narrow path cut in the rock, winding upwards to the
top, and then descended on the other side, where, at the foot of the
descent, they beheld a low, heavy, antique mansion, strongly built, and
almost hid among plantations of the raven palm. Here they were joined
by several more of the same sort of men as those by whom they had been
assisted over the chasm; and the delight they evinced at the return of
their master was equally noisy and wild as that previously shown by
their companions.

"Welcome, gentlemen," said the captain, turning to his prisoners,
"welcome to my humble abode. It does not look so imposing as the
mansions to which some of you have been accustomed, but I think you
will find in it every thing likely to make your captivity endurable."

"Your abode looks most invitingly, noble captain," observed Zabra,
apparently much delighted; "and if the interior accord with the promise
of what we see, I doubt much if either of us will have any desire to
quit its attractions."

Oriel Porphyry glanced angrily upon his friend, and again a suspicion
of treachery entered his mind; but his attention was soon directed into
another channel, when, upon entering the house, he found it fitted up
in the most sumptuous style of Eastern taste. The spacious rooms
were floored with marble, that threw a delicious coolness into the
atmosphere, and flowers growing out of beautiful vases filled the
air with fragrance. Here were ottomans and couches to attract the
indolent--and at the open windows the grapes hung in clusters to tempt
the thirsty. All the furniture was costly and elegant, and every room
breathed an air of luxurious enjoyment.

Here the pirate chief kept his prisoners closely watched, but allowed
them every comfort that his house afforded. The wounded men were
carefully attended to; and through the skill of Doctor Tourniquet, and
the benefit they derived from strolling about in the neighbourhood,
which they were allowed to do when well guarded, they became
convalescent. Zabra was more than ever in favour with the captain, and,
by the same attractions, gained the good will of every one of the wild
gang whom he commanded. They let him go where he pleased, and do as he
pleased; and he had excited so complete a confidence in his captors,
that they left him to roam about unguarded at all times, when the rest
were watched with the most jealous care. Not only was he allowed this
indulgence, but they showed him all the secrets of their retreat;
conducted him into subterranean caves, where piles of the most valuable
merchandise were stored, and led him into the vaults where their
ammunition and weapons, in great abundance, were laid up ready for use.
He also went several times with them from the house to the ship, till he
could find his way alone.

Oriel Porphyry was not long allowed to remain in ignorance of the
conditions upon which his life and the lives of his companions might be
preserved; and these were, that he should sail in the Albatross on his
destination, as if nothing had transpired--negotiate a sale of the
merchandise it contained--and betray into the captain's hands such of
his father's ships as he might meet with on his voyage. These proposals
were immediately spurned; but the entreaties of Doctor Tourniquet and
the professor, and his own consideration for the poor men whose safety
was in his hands, at last induced him to adopt a temporising policy. He
seemed to listen with some attention to the captain's propositions, and,
as the pirates thought, not unwillingly; but he was only waiting for an
opportunity to attempt some desperate struggle, by which the liberation
of himself and friends might be effected. This apparent acquiescence
gained for him a greater degree of liberty, and a less strict
surveillance, than he had previously known; and then, when they found
themselves entirely free from observation, Zabra and he often met
together, and had long and earnest conferences. Zabra, too, took every
opportunity to converse with Hearty and the others, who had recovered
from their wounds, and all seemed to listen to him with extraordinary
interest. These men had intimated to the captain, that they had no
objection to join his band on condition that they were not separated
from Master Porphyry; and as they associated with the pirates, with
every appearance of sociality and sincerity, the captain, though he did
not then allow their request, left them in a less guarded state than he
had previously done. Then Zabra's communications with them became more
frequent, and their conferences with one another appeared to increase in
interest.

One day, when the captain, and about half his band, had gone out
shooting wild hogs in the adjacent woods, the rest of the pirates, with
their prisoners, were mingled together, talking and joking, and amusing
themselves among the trees at the back of the house, and Hearty was
looking anxiously every now and then as if he was waiting for some one
to join his party. His companions also shared in the laugh, and in the
sport which was proceeding, but it seemed as if their thoughts were
otherwise employed. They were evidently inattentive to what was going
on around them. They evinced a restlessness--an anxiety--an impatience
not characteristic of men engaged in amusement; and now and then looks
passed between them in which there appeared more meaning than was
visible to the others. But the pirates heeded not these things. They
thought only of the sport in which they were occupied; and being
well armed, and much out-numbering their prisoners, who were without
weapons, they had not the slightest fear or expectation of their
attempting an escape. At last the boy Loop was observed turning the
corner of the house, carrying a heavy bundle on his head. As soon as he
was seen, Hearty and his companions hastily put their right arms into
the upper part of their vests, each produced a pistol, and in an instant
eight or ten of the pirates fell dead or wounded at their feet. With a
shout, the sailors rushed towards the boy Loop, whose bundle, containing
weapons, was soon appropriated, and then, amid yells and imprecations,
cheers and shouts, there commenced a war of extermination between the
two parties. The pirates were taken quite by surprise, and were put in
confusion by the fierceness and suddenness of the attack. They still
outnumbered their opponents, but while they gathered together, and were
seeking to revenge their fallen comrades, a discharge of fire-arms
in their rear from Oriel Porphyry, Zabra, Doctor Tourniquet, and
the professor, still more diminished their numbers, and still more
distracted their attention. They were not allowed a moment of inaction.
At once from both sides came the attack. Pistols were only discharged,
when it was almost impossible to miss; but the chief weapon was the
sword, and with this Hearty, Boggle, Climberkin, and Ardent, well backed
by their companions, and Oriel Porphyry, closely followed by Zabra,
Fortyfolios, and the doctor, cut down all who opposed them. The conflict
was fierce. Oriel Porphyry displayed an energy that nothing could
resist. He hewed his way through the thickest of his foes, and they fell
like reeds before his sword; while a stern scorn was breathing from his
handsome features, and his fine manly figure seemed to dilate with the
pride of conscious power. Close to his side came Zabra, whose exertions
were not so effective; but his object seemed more to be to defend Oriel
than to attack the pirates. Several times the arm that threatened the
destruction of the young merchant was rendered powerless by the ready
interference of his youthful friend, and the pistol levelled at his head
dropped harmless to the ground. It soon became a struggle of man to
man. Each singled out his opponent, and when he was disposed of, looked
out for another. In a few minutes the state of the parties had changed
exceedingly. A great number of the pirates had fallen, and the rest,
unable to withstand the fierceness of the encounter, appeared desirous
of making their escape. They were pressed so closely, that only three
out of the whole band got away, and each of these was severely wounded.

"Now, my brave fellows, we have not a moment to lose," exclaimed Oriel
Porphyry. "Zabra, you will lead the way. Climberkin, you are much hurt,
I'm afraid?"

"O, it's nothing, sir," replied the man cheerfully, although he
was bleeding from several deep gashes: "we've nearly all got a few
scratches; but I wouldn't have cared being cut to pieces, now I behold
these blood-thirsty villains so reg'larly done for."

"Well, we must get forward, or the others may be upon us. Let every one
look to his weapons, and be in readiness to use them. You go on, Zabra:
I will follow you in a few minutes."

The young merchant hastily re-entered the house, while the others
proceeded up the acclivity, and before they reached the top, he
joined them. "Hullo, my friends!" he cried, with a face glowing with
excitement: "just take one parting glance at this den of infamy, and
I will stake my existence it will give you pleasure."

They had scarcely turned round for the purpose of complying with this
request, when they observed flames issuing from the windows of the
house. In so dry a climate fire burnt rapidly, and very quickly the
whole place was a sheet of flame. While they were gazing, a loud noise
like an earthquake shook the ground upon which they stood, and they
beheld the house lifted up high into the air--the walls crack--the
timbers split into pieces--and in a moment the retreat of the pirates
was a mass of smoking ruins, and the air was darkened with a thick smoke
and a shower of ashes. The men gave three hearty cheers, and proceeded
merrily on their way. They descended the mountain till they came to
the chasm where the rude bridge they had previously used remained.
First, Hearty got within the hoops, and with the assistance of the
ropes dragged himself across: when the hoops were pulled back, each in
succession passed over; and the last was in the act of crossing as the
pirate chief and the rest of his followers appeared upon the summit
of the mountain. A yell of mingled ferocity and hatred arose as they
witnessed the escape of their prisoners; and with malignity in their
eyes and curses on their lips, they, as rapidly as possible, commenced
descending the rock with the intention of overtaking the fugitives.

"Cut the ropes! cut the ropes!" shouted Oriel, and in an instant the
swords of all the party were hacking at the thick twists of hemp; and
as the pirates descended on the other side they were severed, and the
ends fell into the abyss. A volley of pistol bullets and a chorus of
imprecations arose from the enraged and baffled villains, but they did
no mischief, and they were only answered by a triumphant cheer from the
crew of the Albatross. The fugitives now rapidly pursued their way till
they came to the sea shore, where they found two boats high and dry;
these were immediately launched into the sea, and pulling the oars
vigorously, they were soon by the side of the Albatross. There were not
above half a dozen of the pirates left in charge of the ship, but these
had noticed the approach of the boats, and seeing who they contained,
were prepared to give them a hostile reception. A gun was brought to
bear upon them--they saw it pointed--fired--and in the next moment the
shot whizzed over their heads. With another cheer of triumph the brave
fellows mounted the ship's side. Every obstacle was used to prevent
their boarding, and the few who were in the ship, from the determination
with which they defended it, seemed likely still to remain its masters.
At this instant, when Oriel and his party were unavailingly attempting
to make good a footing upon the deck, assistance came from a quarter
from whence any thing so welcome had never been anticipated.

Roly Poly was pursuing his avocations in the cook-house when he heard
the affray, and looking out observed exactly the state of the opposing
parties. By him the pirates had never been regarded with any thing like
affection. They had treated him with great disrespect. They esteemed
not his art, and spoke contemptuously of his skill. His resolve was soon
made, and as quickly executed. Dipping a mop in a copper of boiling
water, in which his cookery was going on, he hurried as fast as his fat
limbs could carry him upon deck.

"See how Roly Poly come to 'sist him friends," cried he, exultingly, as
he began to use his strange weapon among the pirates with a dexterity
that scattered them right and left. "Ha! you call my boofliful puddin'
'choke dog'--take dat you libellious vagabone," and with a forcible
sweep the scalding mop descended upon his face, sending him howling off
his heels. "Ha! you say my lumptious soup wishy-washy,--take dat, you
ignrant jackmorass!" and a resistless blow upon the ear levelled him
with his companion, yelling with pain; and thus he proceeded till he
had cleared a way for Oriel Porphyry and his coadjutors, who quickly
silenced all opposition. "I hab you now, you fellar!" shouted Roly
Poly, striding in triumph over one of his victims, and seemingly
intent upon ramming the scalding mop down the man's throat. "Like your
imprence, I tink, you fellar! to go for to say I boil sich nice puddin
I make, in nassy dishcloth!"

"Hubble, bubble, hubble, bloo!" said the choking wretch.

"Now I gib you puddin debblis nice, you fellar!" cried the fat cook,
ramming away with all his might.

"Hobble, a bobble, a gobble, a gloo!" were the only sounds that were
heard in reply.

"Dis nebber boil in nassy dishcloth, you fellar!"

"Grow, a row, a row, ow, oo, oo, oo!"

"Like your 'bominable imprence, you fellar!"

"Rug, a rug, a glug."

"Take debblis good care you nebber say no more sich diclus
impossumbilties. Ha! him dead as herrin' now," observed the unrelenting
negro; and then adding, "But serb him berry right--berry right,
indeed--a fellar!" he shouldered his mop, and turned on his heel.

"Up with the anchor, and get out to sea as fast as you can," exclaimed
Oriel Porphyry.

"If I might advise, sir," said Hearty, respectfully, "I should recommend
an unkimmon deal o' care in steerin through these shallows. I paid
'ticular notice when we entered this here rascally neighbourhood. I've a
notion them varmint never had sich a reglar spiflification since they
commenced their murderin rigs--and I'm sartan sure the ship'll be lost
if we don't look out pretty sharpish."

"Well, what is best to be done?" asked Oriel. "You, of all of us, are
best acquainted with these matters--what do you advise."

"Why I advises this," replied the old man: "I thinks it's best, under
all the 'cumstances o' the case, for a boat to be sent a little forrard
takin soundins, while I takes the helm and pilots the ship 'cordingly."

"Let it be done, then," said Master Porphyry; "and as I have the
greatest confidence in your skill and experience, and as I wish to show
in some appropriate manner how much I regard the fidelity and courage
you have evinced in my service, from this time I intrust the entire
management of the ship to you, allowing you to choose your own officers
from among those of your shipmates whom you think most fitted for the
duties you will require from them."

At this announcement a cheer of loud congratulation proceeded from
the delighted crew, among whom Hearty, by the inoffensiveness of
his conduct, his general kindness, and approved courage, had become
remarkably popular; but the old seaman appeared as if he did not know
what to make of so unexpected a piece of intelligence. His honest,
weather-beaten countenance assumed a variety of different expressions,
and his confusion for some time prevented his utterance. However, at
last, making an effort, he stammered, and as well as the state of his
feelings would allow,--

"Thank 'ee, sir. But though I desarves nuffin o' the sort, and ar'n't
hardly got gumption enough for the sitivation, I'll do all as I can as
long as there's a timber afloat in this here craft, or as long as ever I
can be of any sarvice to the owners."

Two men then went in a boat in advance of the ship, taking soundings as
they rowed along, the result of which they continued to cry out to
Hearty, who with firm hand and steady eye stood at the helm, skilfully
piloting the ship through the midst of the rocks. Notwithstanding the
caution that was used, she was aground more than once; but immediately
she touched, she was backed off the rock by the skilful seamanship of
the anxious sailors; and in this way she floated slowly along, threading
the intricacies of this dangerous navigation, till she passed from
amidst the breakers into the open sea. It was an arduous task, and one
full of peril to the Albatross and her gallant crew; and it was not
without considerable anxiety that Oriel Porphyry and his companions
watched the vessel's progress from the deck. They spoke not to each
other, but looked to the huge masses of granite that rose around
them--and listened to the cry of the men in the boat with an interest
that had swallowed up every other consideration. But when the ship
was seen safely clearing her way through the deep waters, leaving the
foaming breakers far in her rear, each looked upon his neighbour as if
congratulating him on his escape; and Hearty, when he gave the helm
into the hands of Boggle, received the sincere thanks of all whom by
his skill he had saved from destruction.

"Zabra, you seem ill! What ails you?" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, noticing
for the first time that the eyes of his young associate looked dim and
unsteady, and that he appeared as if unable, from weakness, to keep his
footing on the deck.

"Nothing, Oriel, nothing!" replied Zabra, faintly, as he caught hold of
the arm of his patron.

"Nay," cried the merchant's son, in tones of affectionate
solicitude--"you are wounded. I see the blood trickling through your
vest. How strange I should not have observed it before, and how wrong
of you not to have mentioned it. Doctor Tourniquet!" cried he to the
surgeon, who was discussing with the professor the philosophy of cause
and effect, "here is one who requires your immediate attention. I hope
there is nothing of much consequence, but whatever it may be, let it
receive all your skill."

Doctor Tourniquet hurried to his patient; but not without evincing much
concern in his good-natured countenance, when he noticed by whom he was
wanted.

"Not now, doctor, not now!" cried Zabra, hastily, and in evident
confusion, as Tourniquet was proceeding to examine the state of the
wound.

"But, my dear young friend," observed the surgeon, kindly, "unless you
let me take off part of your dress it is impossible that I can discover
the injury you have received, don't you see."

"Here! I will remove his tunic," said Oriel, eagerly coming forward to
assist the doctor.

"Oh no, no, no!" hastily exclaimed Zabra, retreating in alarm from the
proffered assistance. "I shall be better presently--that is--I am not
much hurt. It is nothing. It will get well without assistance."

"You must have your wound dressed, Zabra!" said Oriel Porphyry,
surprised that his young friend should exhibit such a disinclination to
intrust himself to the surgeon's treatment. "I dare say it will give you
but little pain, and will soon be over."

"I can say nothing on the subject till I have seen the wound, don't
you see," remarked the surgeon, in a slight degree offended at the
extraordinary want of confidence in his surgical skill evinced by his
patient.

"I am very faint," cried Zabra, looking bewildered around him, as he
leaned for support upon Master Porphyry--"very faint. I think I had
better descend to my berth, where the doctor can attend me."

"Very well," replied Oriel: "only you must let me assist you."

"Oh no, no!" exclaimed his young associate, eagerly. "Not now, Oriel.
The doctor's arm will be all the assistance I shall require. You can
come to me afterwards."

"You are a strange creature," observed the merchant's son. "But let it
be as you wish."

Doctor Tourniquet assisted his patient into a small cabin, into which
he had scarcely entered, before Zabra would have sunk on the floor in
a swoon, had not the surgeon observed his faintness, and prevented him
from falling. He then laid him gently on his back. The doctor never
before had had such an opportunity for noticing the rich and peculiar
beauty of the countenance before him. He gazed for several minutes
in undisguised admiration on the faultless features of his youthful
patient, with the full conviction that he had rarely, if ever, met with
any human face so attractive in its expression. The long black curls
which Zabra had allowed to grow till they nearly reached his shoulder
hung in shining clusters around his face and forehead; and the faint
bronze in his complexion appeared to heighten the grace in which the
features were modelled. Desirous of saving so much attraction to the
world, if it were endangered, he sought to examine the injury the youth
had received. It was a gun-shot wound in the shoulder. Doctor Tourniquet
was carefully unfastening and removing the upper part of his patient's
dress, for the purpose of getting at the wound, when he suddenly
started back, looking as if in the highest degree bewildered and
amazed--his ruddy countenance acquired an additional glow--and surprise
seemed to have had the power of taking away his breath; and after some
minutes' silent wondering, with eyes staring, and mouth opening wide, he
recovered sufficiently to be able to ejaculate a long drawn "whew!"


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

  LADY EUREKA;
  OR,
  THE MYSTERY:
  A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.

  BY THE AUTHOR
  OF
  "MEPHISTOPHELES IN ENGLAND."

  IN THREE VOLUMES.
  VOL. II.

  LONDON:
  LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,
  PATERNOSTER-ROW.
  1840.




CONTENTS


     I. A CONVERSATION UPON THE PAST, THE PRESENT, AND THE FUTURE.
    II. AUSTRALIAN CIVILISATION.
   III. POSTHUMOUS AND HIS MUSEUM.
    IV. A CONVERSAZIONE.
     V. THE PHILANTHROPIST IN TROUBLE.
    VI. CHINA, ITS LAWS, CUSTOMS, AND PEOPLE.
   VII. A CHINESE POET.
  VIII. THE MONSOON.
    IX. GAME LAWS IN INDIA.
     X. ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DANGER OF GOOD INTENTIONS.
    XI. ATHENIA.




EUREKA;

A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.




CHAPTER I.

A CONVERSATION UPON THE PAST, THE PRESENT, AND THE FUTURE.


"Now, doctor, you know my secret, and the whole of it," said Zabra, at
the conclusion of a long and interesting narrative he had communicated
to Dr. Tourniquet, upon one of his professional visits. "Let not a word
pass from your lips concerning what I have told you, for it would do me
irreparable mischief. Be in your behaviour to me exactly as you have
been. The slightest alteration would create suspicion, and that I am
most anxious to avoid. May I rely upon you?"

"Rely upon me!" cried the surgeon, while his good-natured countenance
was glowing with benevolence. "If you ever catch me saying a word, I'll
allow any body to make a preparation of me before I'm dead. I'd sooner
demonstrate upon my own skeleton, don't you see, than betray your
secret. By all that's good, you're an extraordinary creature--a more
extraordinary creature than ever I met with in the whole course of my
practice. I always thought there was something strange about you, don't
you see--a mystery I could not exactly understand--but now every thing
appears as simple as the first rudiments of medicine."

"You gratify me exceedingly by this assurance," observed the youth, "and
I am delighted by your ready acquiescence with my wishes. How can I best
express my gratitude?"

"Tush, tush--don't talk about that," replied the other kindly. "Knowing
what I do of you, I would do any thing in the world to serve you, don't
you see. Consider me from this time as your father, your brother, or
your friend, and whenever my advice or assistance can be useful, apply
to me, and I will do all in my power to forward your interests."

"You overpower me with your goodness," said his young companion,
returning the cordial pressure of the hand he had received. "Can I ever
repay----"

"Tush, tush, never mind repaying," hastily rejoined the doctor. "I
am well repaid by the pleasure it gives me to assist in your noble
intentions, don't you see. But if I may be allowed to give you a little
advice, I should strongly recommend you not to be so careless of your
life as you have been. You are not formed for fighting, don't you see.
You are not strong enough; but notwithstanding that, to my certain
knowledge you paid off many of the piratical rascals pretty handsomely,
and showed them to what profit you could apply the lessons they had
given you. When I think of you finishing some of the scoundrels so
dexterously as you did, I am filled with wonder. However, it is not
right. You stand no chance in the midst of a set of strong ferocious
men intent upon destroying all who oppose them. Your escape is a
miracle; but you should remember that you cannot be spared."

"Ah, doctor!" replied his patient, with a languid smile, "what made you
join in the conflict? Consider if _you_ had been killed, what would have
become of the wounded."

"True, true," responded Tourniquet; "I never gave that a thought. But I
had no time to think. I saw every one preparing to fight, and I knew we
should all be massacred if we didn't succeed. Although it was a sort of
trade to which I was quite unused, the examples I saw before me made me
valiant, and when I got fairly into the fray, I found myself obliged to
cut away as hard as I could, don't you see. Fortyfolios, too, didn't do
amiss. It's wonderful how the prospect of being cut to pieces, if one
don't fight, _makes_ a fellow fight. The professor went at it as if
he was at one of his old arguments; and I must say this for him, he
convinced his opponents then much more perfectly than he does in his
verbal disputes."

"He is not hurt, I hope?" inquired Zabra earnestly.

"No, but he had a narrow escape," replied the doctor. "A ball grazed
his ear, and a cutlass has scratched his ribs. I should have been sorry
if either had taken the effect intended; for although he is somewhat
dogmatical and intemperate in his manner of arguing, he possesses no
ordinary share of learning, don't you see."

"How are the rest of the wounded getting on?" asked his patient.

"Famously," said the surgeon cheerfully; "I think they are all doing
well. I may add, as well as it is possible for them to do. Two or three
of them have been severely used; on one I shall be obliged to perform
an operation. Climberkin's wounds are beginning to heal; Ardent has
returned to his duty. Many have received but trifling hurts, and Hearty,
Boggle, and Master Porphyry have escaped without a scratch. This is
rather surprising, considering that the old man Hearty--Captain Hearty
we must call him now, I suppose--fine old fellow! hacked his way through
the pirates with a cool, steady, determined courage that nothing could
withstand; and as for Oriel Porphyry, he fought like a hero. I never saw
such a change in any man, don't you see. He looked as if he'd been born
a conqueror, and for the first time in his life had ventured into his
right element. There was such a fire in his eyes, and such a grandeur
in his appearance. It was extraordinary. His very looks seemed to kill;
none could resist him."

"Is he not a noble creature?" said Zabra, his eyes again glowing with
all their accustomed animation.

"Indeed he is," replied Dr. Tourniquet, with emphasis: "I don't wonder
at your enthusiasm, don't you see. I shall begin to look upon him with
a similar admiration myself. I never could have supposed that the mere
appearance of daring valour was so grand and imposing; but there is
something of the cause of this in his tall manly figure, and handsome
countenance, don't you see."

"Hush! there is his footstep," exclaimed the youth earnestly, as he
arranged with his unwounded arm the bed-clothes closely around him.
"This place is too dark for him to see very accurately, which is what
I require. There! be feeling my pulse when he enters."

"How is he now, doctor," inquired Oriel Porphyry, advancing towards
the hammock near which the surgeon stood, seemingly intent upon his
professional duties.

"His pulse is getting more firm," said Dr. Tourniquet, assuming an
air of great seriousness, "and his wound is suppurating healthily. He
cannot be doing better. But you must apply to the patient for further
information, as I am obliged to go my rounds, don't you see." So saying,
the doctor departed.

"Are you better, Zabra?" affectionately asked Master Porphyry, seating
himself by the hammock of his wounded friend.

"Much better, Oriel," replied the youth, as he held out his hand to
clasp that of his patron. The merchant's son felt that the small hand
within his own was dry and hot, and that the flesh had lost much of the
roundness by which it had previously been distinguished.

"Your skin feels feverish," remarked his companion. "But not so much so,
I think, as it was yesterday; and your eyes look more brilliant. I shall
be delighted when you recover, not only because I miss the rich melody
of your voice, and the stirring eloquence of your conversation, but
because I know the confinement and inaction consequent upon this
indisposition can scarcely be endurable to such a nature as yours. But
when you do recover, which I hope will be speedily, I will take care you
shall not again run into such risks. Who could have supposed that you
were planning such an admirable scheme! I had not the slightest idea of
such a thing. Far from it, I thought, and I blame myself exceedingly
for having entertained a suspicion to your prejudice, that you had some
sinister intention in your behaviour to the pirates. It is only an act
of justice on my part to acknowledge that I have thought unworthily of
you, without a cause; but I am too well aware that such an avowal forms
an inadequate reparation, you must therefore allow me to express my
regrets for the injury I have done you, in a manner more in accordance
with my own sense of right. I am indebted to you not only for life and
liberty, but for all that render them in my case more than usually
endurable; for this I can never be sufficiently grateful: and when my
father comes to know, as know he soon shall, how much you assisted in
rescuing his ship from the pirates, and his son from their weapons, I
am quite sure that he will rather seek to increase than diminish the
measure by which I would show the extent of the obligation you have
rendered. But, besides this, I have a natural affection for you, which
has been created by a knowledge of your amiable disposition and noble
character; and I should wish you always to be with me, that I might as
much as possible profit by the example of your good qualities; therefore
you must submit to the necessity of sharing my fortune, and of becoming
in every respect the equal of myself."

"This cannot be, Oriel," said the other mildly. "Allow me still the
same opportunities I have enjoyed of watching over your safety; and if,
through my care and attention you are enabled to return unharmed to
Eureka, and your sentiments in my favour remain the same, and she
shows no disinclination to their indulgence, I will offer no further
opposition."

"This is very strange of you," remarked Oriel Porphyry. "Very strange: I
cannot account for it, except I imagine that there is a sort of pride in
your nature that cannot accommodate itself to any thing in the shape of
favours from another."

"It is not that," replied the youth languidly. "Indeed, it is not
that. Your kindness has made upon me so deep an impression, and your
friendship has become so intimately commingled with all my sympathies,
that now I should find it a difficult matter to exist without them. But
there are causes which I cannot explain, that prevent my accepting your
generous proposals, independently of which there is nothing in what I
have done that deserves such a return. Remember that my duty here is
to endeavour to preserve you from every danger by which you may be
threatened. I have accepted an office, and I am bound to fulfil its
duties. In the part I played to effect your escape out of the power
of those wretches, I only performed what I had engaged myself to do;
and although my efforts to deceive your captors were repugnant to my
feelings, I continued the deception because I saw that there was no way
of effecting your liberation, but by practising deceit. Again, I assure
you, that Eureka will amply reward me (if a reward be necessary) for any
service I may be so fortunate as to be able to render you."

"But why am not I to be allowed to acknowledge the obligation according
to my own sense of your merit?" asked his patron.

"Because it is Eureka's chief pleasure," replied Zabra, with a faltering
voice, "to reward after her own fashion those whom she employs to serve
him to whom she is devoted; and surely you would not wish to deprive
her of a gratification to the enjoyment of which she puts forth, as you
acknowledge, so good a title."

"Well, well, I must reserve my gratitude for her then, I suppose," said
Oriel Porphyry. "But, of course, you will remain with me as you have
hitherto done."

"Till there shall be no longer any occasion for my stay," responded
the other. "While you love Eureka, there will always appear to me to
be a necessity for my remaining with you; but when your love for her
disappears, there will be no longer occasion for my presence."

"Love her I always shall, for I always must; so if your stay with me
depends upon the duration of my affection for her, we are not likely to
separate in this life," observed the young merchant.

"I would I were certain of it," murmured his companion.

"Of nothing ought you to be more assured," replied Oriel. "Were I
entirely to forget the dazzling beauty of her features, there is
an earnestness of purpose in her character which will make itself
remembered at all times. The nobility of her sentiments I honoured, by
endeavouring to become worthy of her greatness, and the confidence with
which I was treated excited in me a desire to act in such a manner as
should give her no cause to withdraw it. In her person there appeared
to me the avatar of all things noble, fond, and beautiful, and I did
it homage with so earnest a devotion that my respect soon became an
idolatry. I had no enjoyment except in her presence; I could find no
excellence from which she was absent. I honoured her above all honour. I
regarded her as the best as well as the dearest of human beings. I was
eloquent in her praise, and devout in her worship; and thus from day
to day passed the joyous time, teeming with happiness, and prodigal of
honours, till there seemed in the eyes of each to be no wealth and no
distinction worthy to be desired, which the other did not possess. Truly
was Eureka all the world to me. An empire was in her love, and all
honourable things were in her gift."

Zabra had listened attentively, but nothing save a brighter glow in his
lustrous eyes expressed the interest he took in the conversation. He did
not attempt to interrupt the speaker, and when the last sentence was
concluded he made no reply.

"Can you add nothing in her praise, Zabra?" asked Oriel Porphyry, after
a pause of a few minutes.

"She requires no praise, Oriel, certainly none from me," replied the
youth. "Your applause is no doubt gratifying to her--for the heart
that truly loves cannot exist but in the estimation of the lover. But
there is an eulogy beyond mere praise, for which the devoted are ever
desirous--the strong and earnest love, whose voice is action, and whose
language is sympathy."

"And that does she possess," rejoined his companion earnestly. "My
sympathies are with her at all times, and at every place, and there is
no act that I perform in which I do not consider the interpretation I
would have it bear in her affections. I am afraid, Zabra, this encounter
with the pirates has stirred up again all those ambitious notions I have
fostered with the design of achieving a renown worthy of her greatness.
Certainly my first efforts in traffic, among such mean scoundrels as
Boor and his brethren, did not give me so exalted an opinion of my
father's profession as he and others possess. But any opportunity like
the one which has thus accidentally fallen in my way will throw my blood
into a ferment, and make my spirit yearn after a fair field in which to
develope its energies, as they now exist. Yes, I feel as if I could only
live in a life of enterprise. Inaction seems to chain me down into a
slavish bondage; but when the weapon is in my grasp, and the motive
within my soul, an atmosphere of freedom breathes around me, and I rise
above the herd into something nearer the superiority to which I aspire."

"From what I saw of you in our late affray, I cannot help acknowledging
your capability for a leader," said the youth. "You looked as if you
were born to conquer. Your bearing was such as would induce thousands to
follow in your footsteps--and your weapon flashed annihilation in your
path."

"Pooh! it was a paltry enemy," replied Oriel disdainfully, "and they
were easily crushed; but let me be at the head of armies; let my
battle-field be a kingdom, and my enemy a tyrant, and then I will show
of what spirit I am made."

"That cannot be, Oriel," added the other. "You must be satisfied with
what you are; and as that condition is sufficiently honourable in the
eyes of Eureka, you ought not to indulge in more ambitious aspirations.
The risk you run in this life of enterprise should also be considered.
Remember that you would hourly be in danger of immediate death, and if
that were to happen where would be your ambition, and where would be
Eureka's happiness? No! it is a subject of congratulation that there are
no armies for you to lead, and no tyrants for you to conquer."

"There I think you are mistaken," cried his companion eagerly. "If I do
not misinterpret the signs of the times, there is a spirit stirring in
Columbia which will soon make itself evident in appearances that will
not a little alarm its weak and despotic ruler. There is a cloud over
the face of the whole country, and it will not be long before it break
out into a mighty storm. Then let them look to themselves. It will come
with a rush that must sweep away every obstacle before it. The whole
of our complicated machinery of misgovernment will be broken up into
fragments so small, that no future tyrant shall be able to patch it
together again--and then will come the day of reckoning for the people.
The task-masters will themselves be brought to task, and have to con the
lessons they have set others. I only wish to live to see that day. I
only wish to put myself forward in the movement--and lead the way that
shall give freedom to my fellow-citizens. I am confident of the result.
No power on earth can resist a mass of men struggling to break the bonds
by which they have been fettered, when the impetus by which they are set
in motion is properly directed; and for their chief I know, I feel I
have all the necessary qualifications. Then I should be in my proper
place. Then would the energies which now render my nature restless and
dissatisfied have ample scope for their developement--and then, Zabra,
my friend and brother, you should behold me performing such actions as
shall more worthily excite your admiration, than the inglorious one of
destroying a few wretched pirates."

"You almost convince me of the desirableness of seeing your visions of
glory realised," remarked Zabra, with increased animation. "I did not
imagine it would be possible; but when I listen to you, I find myself
wishing you to play the noble part for which you are so well fitted: but
then the thought of the dangers to which you will be exposed fills me
with dread. I know that in you Eureka has concentrated all her hopes of
happiness; and when I reflect upon the perils of the sort of life you
are desirous of leading, I fear that it will end in no good to either
her or you. But we will talk of this again at a future time. In what
state have you found the ship and her cargo?"

"The ship is as much changed as it is possible for any vessel to be,"
replied the merchant's son. "I scarcely knew the Albatross again.
Externally she has not suffered, but her interior accommodations
have been completely altered. She has been pierced for thirty guns,
all of which are ready for immediate use--a powder magazine has been
formed out of one of the cabins, which is abundantly stored with
ammunition--weapons of every description are piled up in immense
chests--and provisions for a long voyage have been carefully provided.
The cargo has not been touched. It is evident to me, that that scoundrel
Compass, or Death, or whatever his name was, imagined that I would join
him in his nefarious scheme to entrap my father's vessels; and as he
knew he could not find so good a market for his plunder by any other
plan, he fancied that I could be induced to assist him in its disposal.
Propositions of this nature he made to me; and although every time he
spoke on the subject I felt an inclination to hack him into shreds,
seeing the uselessness of any attempt at resistance, I concealed my
indignation as well as I could, till you communicated to me your plan
for our deliverance. I saw that it could not fail of success, if
ordinary vigilance was used; and my hatred of the miscreants by whom I
was detained led me to play my part in the deception, which was attended
with all the result we anticipated. Your wound is the only drawback to
the delight I feel at our escape."

"Oh, think not of that!" exclaimed the youth warmly: "it will soon be
healed."

"I hope so," responded Oriel. "As for the captain of the gang, I am
only sorry that I had not an opportunity of acknowledging to him my
obligations. But I think I have spoiled his career of piracy, that is
one subject for congratulation. His retreat is destroyed--he has no
vessel--and one half of his men are as well provided for as if the
hangman had done his duty. But he was a bold villain. If what he has
said of himself be true, he was fitted for better things; and from
what I remarked in him, I conclude his narrative was true, at least a
considerable portion of it. It appeared to me as if he only affected the
vulgarity of his associates; for there were times when his conversation
rose into something much superior to his ordinary language. It is
evident that his intention was to put to sea almost immediately, and
commence a new career of plunder and violence--happily we have been
enabled to disappoint him; and I intend, at the first port we touch at,
to add to our crew a sufficient number of able-bodied seamen, as will
not only work the ship effectively during her voyage, but will defend
her with resolution in case she should be attacked. Although I have not
more inclination for a mercantile life than when I first came on board
this vessel, I will not, in any way, unless it be unavoidable, diverge
from the path my father wishes me to pursue, until I return, and then I
shall expect to be allowed to follow my own inclinations, and choose my
own road to distinction."

"It must be so, I suppose," remarked Zabra. "Any opposition on my part
would be fruitless--nay, if it were not for the dangers which you must
encounter in a life of active warfare, I should be among the first to
approve of your ambitious desires--I should love to see you the creator
of your own glory--I should delight in the honours you would achieve--I
should rejoice in your renown--but I must think of her whom I serve,
who, although she would equally admire your greatness, could not avoid
thinking of the perils of the path by which only it can be acquired, and
must live in a state of constant anxiety while you were pursuing your
dangerous career. You do not think sufficiently of her feelings. Why
can you not be satisfied with inheriting the fame and wealth of your
admirable father, and the happiness which must surely be your own as
long as you prove yourself anxious for its possession?"

"Why does the sun shine?--why does the tide ebb and flow?" said Oriel
hastily. "They follow the end for which they were made, and the same
absolute law compels me to make out the purposes for which I was
created. There is nothing so unreasonable as expecting one human being
to become like another whose nature is entirely opposite to his. I have
known inconsiderate persons say to one whose disposition is restless and
dissatisfied, and whose inclinations are violent and ungovernable,
'Look at such a one--he is content with his condition, and goes on his
own quiet way, creating no desire that cannot easily be indulged; why
cannot you be like him?'--as easily might the mountain torrent be made
like the stream of the valley. One flows on its own level course,
meeting with no obstruction, and the other, at every portion of its
path, is forced to dash itself against the unrelenting rocks that oppose
its progress. And how unjust is the manner in which each individual is
regarded! one is praised for continuing its unvarying tranquillity--and
the other is censured for the unceasing turmoil in which it exists.
This is preposterous. No more have such characters made their own
dispositions than the stream made the level land through which it flows,
or the torrent created the rocks over which it leaps. Dam up the gentle
rivulet with huge masses of stone, and see how quickly it will become as
much troubled as its unjustly abused associate of the mountain; and take
the rocks from the path of the torrent, and the quietude with which it
will pursue its course will rival the tranquillity of its over-lauded
brother of the valley. If there is any praise due at all it is to him
who struggles on against all impediments, and shows that his spirit is
not to be put down by the obstacles that retard his progress. Complain
of his being restless and dissatisfied--how can he be any thing else,
when his soul is kept in a constant fret by the worry of continual
opposition? Say that his inclinations are violent and ungovernable--can
it ever be otherwise, when they are daily accumulating in force, because
they are allowed no opportunity for indulgence? Nothing can be more
unjust to a man thus situated than to tell him to endeavour to be like
another, whose situation is as opposite to his as are the poles to one
another; and nothing can be more unwise than to complain of this man,
because his disposition does not resemble that of another, whose way of
life, and habits of thinking, and hopes and passions, are as different
to his as any two sets of things can possibly be made. As for me, I am
what I am--neither better nor worse. Let those who think me worse than
I am keep to themselves their evil thoughts, that the force of ill
opinion does not make me become what they unjustly imagine me to be; but
let those who think me better than I am proclaim to me their flattering
testimonials, that, knowing what excellences they fancy I possess, I
may use every exertion to deem myself worthy of their good opinion,
and at last succeed in obtaining the very qualities for which I was
undeservedly honoured by their too indulgent regard."

"Ah, Oriel!" replied his young companion affectionately, "you know it
would be difficult for any one who knows you well to imagine a quality
of good you have not made your own."

"If I listen to you, I must be content to remain what I am," said Oriel
Porphyry, as he rose to take his leave. "And as such a state of things
does not satisfy me, to prevent myself being spoiled for any better
purpose, I must, for the present, leave you--of course with my best
wishes for your speedy recovery."

"Thank you, Oriel, thank you!" exclaimed Zabra warmly, returning the
affectionate pressure of the hand he at that moment received, and
following, with his eyes overflowing with his friendly feelings, the
retreating form of his kind and generous patron.




CHAP. II.

AUSTRALIAN CIVILISATION.


Time had passed. The vessel had gone gallantly on her voyage, and was
now quietly riding at anchor in the port of Sydney, the magnificent
metropolis of the great empire of Australia. Oriel Porphyry had landed
to transact business with an individual of some note in that part of
the world. Posthumous was an extensive manufacturer, who had amassed an
immense fortune by a mechanical discovery he had purchased, by means of
which one machine was made to do the work of ten; and the funds at his
disposal he employed in forming a museum, which he intended leaving,
at his death, for the benefit of his country. His love of fame was
his ruling passion; and to acquire it he seemed inclined to make any
sacrifice. He accumulated every thing which he considered rare or
curious for his museum; but, as he was no judge of the value of
the collection he was forming, he often purchased things perfectly
worthless, merely because they were recommended to him as objects that
might be regarded with the greatest interest by posterity. To all who
visited him, his pride was to exhibit his collection; and, although none
were more ignorant of its real nature than himself, none could expatiate
so much at length upon its merits. He was a walking catalogue--a talking
index--a living table of contents; and he seemed as if he knew of no
pleasure that did not allow him to display his museum and gossip about
every specimen it contained.

Oriel and Zabra were walking together to the residence of the person
thus described, when the former, doubtful as to whether he was pursuing
the right direction, observing a man leaning against a post near a
crossing at a short distance, went up to him for the purpose of making
inquiries as to the exact locality of the place of which he was in
search. The man was a street sweeper. His broom was beside him; and he
was so intent upon a book he appeared to be studying, that Oriel noticed
its title. It was "Geometry for Beggars."

"Pray can you direct me to Botany Square?" inquired the young merchant.

"Botany Square is an ellipsis," replied the matter-of-fact sweeper; "but
if the transverse, conjugate, and abscissa are known, it is easy to find
the ordinate. To proceed to it from this point requires a right line to
where the next street appears at a right angle with it, whence, going
along any part of its superficies, you will approach where the sides of
three streets form an isosceles triangle; take the one side nearest to
you in its whole extent, which having found, describe the area of a
trapezium, whose diagonal is equal to twice its perpendiculars; and from
the centre continue a right line till you approach a trapezoid whose
sides are parallel; and from this, diverging in such a manner as to
construct a hyperbola, if straight lines be drawn from the centre
through the extremities of its conjugate axis, these will lead direct
to the ellipsis you are desirous of finding."

"Can you direct me to Botany Square?" again asked Oriel Porphyry,
puzzled to think whether the man was mad or did not understand his
question.

"Botany Square is an ellipsis, I tell you again," said the geometrician
rather sharply; "and Euclid himself could not have described to you a
more accurate method of finding it than that you have just heard from
me. Work the problem properly, and the result must be what you require.
All the parts are equal to the whole; the greater includes the less;
and of several equal parts all are alike: and these propositions are
not more true than is the answer I have given to your query; therefore
allow me to hope that you will, in consideration of the accuracy of my
analysis, find the perpendicular of your pocket, subtract from its base
any circle whose circumference is a known quantity, and place it within
the superficies of my hand."

"He's mad!" exclaimed Oriel, walking on.

"He's minus!" cried the beggar, and returned to his geometry.

The two pedestrians continued on their way, wondering not a little at
meeting with the strange character with whom they had just parted, when,
upon entering the next street, they observed a confused mass of people
running to and fro, shouting and making a most discordant uproar.

"Can you tell me the cause of this disturbance?" inquired Oriel
Porphyry, addressing a respectable looking mechanic who was hurrying
past him.

"The cause?" replied the stranger, immediately stopping in his career.
"The cause is always the phenomenon which precedes the effect.
Philosophers have disputed about the most appropriate definition of the
term; but in any system of transcendental ideas there must always be an
antecedency and a subsequency; and although they have been considered
synchronous in their existence, in my opinion the effect is to the cause
what the shadow is to the light--the shadow is not in the light, but is
produced by the operation of the light upon an object; so the effect
is not in the cause, but is produced by the action of the cause upon
an agent. Some metaphysicians conceive that the relation of cause and
effect should be considered as a synthetical judgment _à priori_--a
postulate of pure reason. In my opinion, this idea is open to many
objections; but I will avoid all argument on that point for the present,
and merely go into an analysis of the nature of causation. There are
three indispensable conditions to any philosophical theory of causation.
In the first place, there are two objects--the agent and the patient.
Secondly, there are three changes, which are--that of the agent, reason
of the effect; that of the patient, effect of the action; that which is
produced by the patient on the agent, and the effect of re-action. And,
thirdly, there are four distinct moments, which are--that which leads
to the action, that which commences with it, that of the re-action, and
that which immediately follows the re-action. And----"

"And pray, sir, what has all this to do with the disturbance about
which I inquired?" said the young merchant, as much puzzled with the
mechanic as he was by the beggar.

"You asked for the cause, and I am explaining to you all the phenomena
which a cause may produce," responded the other. "But I regret I cannot
stop to describe to you my original ideas on the subject. If you are
anxious to apply your mind to their investigation, you will find them
in the Philosophical Chimney-sweep's Penny Magazine; and if I can be
of service to you in any other way, you can always command me on the
shortest notice, and on the most reasonable terms." So saying, he placed
a card in Oriel's hand, and was very quickly out of sight. The card
was of a pink colour, was glazed and embossed; and on it was elegantly
engraved, "Leibnitz Kant Chummy, Chimney-sweep and Nightman to the Royal
Family, in all its branches." The two friends found quite as much wonder
as amusement in what they had heard.

"I had been told that these Australians were the most enlightened people
on the earth," remarked Oriel; "but I certainly never expected to be
mystified after this fashion by two individuals belonging to the very
lowest ranks, upon merely asking a simple question."

"Perhaps they are exceptions to the mass," replied Zabra; "and every one
else we meet we shall doubtless find as common-place as we require. Try
this old fish-woman: it will be extraordinary, indeed, if you meet with
either geometry or metaphysics in her."

Oriel approached a female whose sex was scarcely distinguishable, as
she squatted by a basket of fish, in a man's old great coat and hat.
She observed a stranger advancing towards her; and, believing him to
be a customer, she held up one of her fish so as to put all its good
qualities into the best situation for minute inspection.

"Fine and fresh--worthy to make a dinner for a prince!" she exclaimed.

"My good woman, can you tell me the attraction which brings all these
people together?" asked Oriel Porphyry.

In a moment the old hag put down her fish, and, with the seriousness of
a Socrates, replied, "There are three kinds of attraction; which are,
the mathematical, the mathematico-physical, and the physical attraction:
of which of these do you require a definition?"

"Confound the people, they're all alike!" exclaimed the young merchant;
but the old dame, without noticing the exclamation, continued:--

"Suppose A to be a glass of any comfortable liquor with which you may
feel inclined to treat me, and B my mouth, which is at all times very
desirous of a coalition with the same. When A moves towards B, it is
evident that B has the power directly or indirectly of drawing or
attracting A; and when you notice this, and measure the law of the
motion, and discover that A moves as if attracted towards B by some
simple law, you will easily be enabled to ascertain what will take place
if the motion continue. This is mathematical attraction. When it becomes
evident that A not only moves towards B, but that B is an agent in
the motion created, as, to satisfy the thirst or inclination of B,
A is attracted towards it, A always moving where there is thirst
or inclination, but never where neither exist, then this is called
mathematico-physical attraction. And when, by a power existing in B, A
is drawn towards it without any other exciting cause; thus, if nothing
else in the world existed but A and B in a state of rest, and A move
towards B by some influence which is as much a part of its nature as its
thirst or inclination, then would be created what is called physical
attraction. And now, for a trifle, I will give you the most convincing
demonstration of the _modus operandi_ of all these phenomena."

"Perdition seize your A and B, I say!" cried Oriel, as he hastily left
the old woman to her philosophy.

"An exemplification of repulsion!" muttered she, as she again commenced
endeavouring to dispose of her fish.

Oriel and his companion had entered a street of shops, in which they had
no sooner made their appearance than they were surrounded by a crowd
of tradespeople, bawling in their ears the excellence and cheapness of
their commodities, and endeavouring to pull or entice them into their
warehouses, the exteriors of which were covered with immense placards,
proclaiming the ruin of the sellers, and the advantages which in
consequence would accrue to the fortunate buyers.

"Full fifty per cent. under cost price!" cried one.

"A hundred per cent. below the cost, be assured!" shouted another.

"I must be ruined in a week, sir!" proclaimed a third, as if rejoicing
at the near approach of his destruction.

"I _am_ ruined!" screamed a fourth, in a tone of emphatic exultation.

"My family must starve!" exclaimed a fifth, without the slightest
expression of regret.

"My family _are_ starving!" confessed a sixth, as if it was a subject of
the greatest congratulation.

"I have seven children, sir!" whispered a little man, apparently as the
most enticing recommendation of his goods.

"I have a wife and ten!" bawled a companion, in a voice of triumph that
seemed to silence all competition.

"This way, sir!"

"No; this way!"

"The best goods!"

"The very best!"

"Mine are the cheapest!"

"Mine are much cheaper!"

And thus they went on shouting at and pulling the two young men
about, till they were obliged to seek refuge in one of the shops;
but immediately they entered the threshold, the whole body of eager
applicants for custom left the strangers to the care of their more
fortunate fellow-tradesman.

"Really you shopkeepers seem inclined to tear your customers to pieces,"
observed Oriel Porphyry with considerable indignation.

"Merely the effect of competition, sir," coolly replied the chapman,
spreading out his wares for inspection.

"Then it is a competition that must be exceedingly disagreeable to the
purchaser," said the young merchant.

"Can't be helped, sir," added the man in the same careless tone. "When
the supply exceeds the demand, the value of this overproduction must
greatly diminish; and every attempt will be made to produce, at any
loss, an increased consumption. How many pairs of these gloves would you
like to have, sir? You shall have them at a small advance beyond the
cost of their carriage from the place in which they were manufactured."

"But I have no cash about me," acknowledged Oriel, thinking it would be
sufficient to avoid a purchase that was not necessary.

"Not of the slightest consequence, sir. I will gladly give you credit to
any amount," said the obliging tradesman.

"Indeed! why I am a perfect stranger in the country," observed his
unwilling customer with much surprise.

"No matter, sir," added the other; "public credit must be supported;
all business transactions are done upon its responsibility. Ready money
is destructive of all the true interests of trade; for, as capital in
a state overcrowded in population can never be created in a supply
sufficient for the wants of the community, the surest way of preventing
those dangerous revolutions which so often affect the monied interests
of a great commercial nation is to trade entirely with fictitious
capital. This is credit, sir; and we use every means within our power
to create it to an extent sufficient to supply all our wants, and
to support it in all its sufficiency when it is established. The
manufacturer supplies the wholesale dealer; the wholesale dealer
provides the retail tradesman; and the retail tradesman carries on his
business with his customers upon the sure foundation of credit. Not a
coin is seen in the hands of either party from one year's end to the
other; and a man's wealth is known not by the mere exchangeable property
he possesses, but by the extent of the credit he is allowed. Political
economy is a wonderful science, sir; and the ancients were entirely
ignorant of its true principles. Shall I put you up a few dozen of
these stockings? the price, I assure you, does not pay for the raw
material."

"Well, well; as you seem desirous of ruining yourself, I do not see that
I ought to stand in your way; so you may let me have a dozen pairs of
the stockings and of the gloves," said Master Porphyry.

"Thank you, sir," replied the tradesman. "But as for ruin, sir, is it
not done for the public good? Think what a man having a wife and ten
children to support must feel when he knows that he has reduced them and
himself to absolute starvation for the advantage of the community--for
the greatest happiness of the greatest number, sir. Beautiful feeling,
sir; exquisite consolation; a perfect patriotism! He knows that he
becomes a martyr for his country. Think of that, sir! He is conscious of
being made a victim for the general advantage. Think of that, sir! And
while his skin and bones hang together, he feels the sweet solace that
he is allowed to make himself a sacrifice for the wants of those who
never heard of his name. Think of that, sir! Any other article, sir?"

"Not at present. It is wonderful to me how, in such a state of things,
men can be brought to enter into the pursuits of trade," observed his
customer.

"All the effect of competition, sir," answered the man quietly. "Fine
thing competition. We should none of us enjoy the satisfaction of being
ruined, if it was not for competition; and the beautiful principle of it
is, sir, that it makes a man consider that he is greatest honoured who
is soonest ruined; therefore we all run a race--and a very anxious race
it is, I assure you. We undersell each other--we dispose of our goods
at a certain loss--we even give them away--and happy is the man who is
ruined before his rivals. Admirable thing, competition! Where shall I
send them, sir?"

"Send them to Master Porphyry, on board the ship Albatross, now in the
harbour, and I will call and pay you before I depart," replied the young
merchant.

"Don't hurry yourself, sir," said the tradesman. "Don't hurry yourself,
I entreat. Nay, I should be just as well pleased were you to forget it
altogether, for then I shall be a step nearer to the honour I so much
covet--the distinction of being ruined before any other person in the
same line of business in my immediate neighbourhood. I am grateful
to you for your favours. Any thing you may require, sir--the most
extensive order you can give me I shall be happy to supply on the same
advantageous terms. Any thing you like to accept, sir, is at your
disposal. I implore you to have the generosity to assist in my ruin."

Zabra and his companion, at last, with great difficulty, got out of the
shop, and proceeded, unmolested, on their way, till they came to an
opening in the street, where several men seemed to be preaching from
little elevations, each to his own separate congregation, yet frequently
alluding to their coadjutors, in such terms as clearly proved that they
were rivals in the trade they had adopted.

"Come, my children, to me, and I will expound to you the law by which
alone you can be saved from everlasting punishment," exclaimed a fat
faced little old man to his audience. "Fly from the things of this
world--pay your teachers liberally--care not for eating or drinking, or
amusing yourselves with idle pleasures, and you shall live in eternal
happiness!"

"Fire and brimstone! Flame and torment! Prepare for these, my beloved
brethren!" shouted a lank fellow with a most hypocritical physiognomy.
"Ye who are the elect shall enjoy the good things, but scorching and
burning shall be the everlasting portion of those who are not of our
communion."

"Heed not the voices of ungodly men, to whom the evangelical grace has
not descended," cried a stern-visaged preacher. "Our way is a way of
mercy, a way of charity, and a way of peace. But rejoice, oh my hearers!
for the time is not afar off when we will smite the unbelievers from
shoulder to hip, till their name be utterly removed from the land."

"Hear a voice which none can understand, but which is sent to
enlighten the universe," screamed one, whose brilliant eyes and
wild expression of countenance seemed marked by the influence of
insanity--"Hu--ugh--hullabaloo--scrikey-smash--drido--snolk--hi ha
botherum--pickwickicksicceriggidiggy----"

"I tell thee, friend, thy way is the way of perdition, humph," exclaimed
another, with a nasal twang, and a clean sleek appearance. "Verily it is
the way of the bottomless pit. There is no virtue save under a beaver
with a broad brim, humph! and the spirit can only be found in vestments
of a formal cut, and of a drab colour, humph!"

"Leave those heretics, my children, who can only hurry you on the road
of iniquity, and enter the bosom of the true church," shouted a brawny
fellow in the dress of a mendicant. "Here is holy water, and here are
relics that have the power of saving your souls from purgatory."

"Abominations--abominations--the abominations of the scarlet one
of Babylon!" cried one opposite to him with looks of horror and
indignation. "Leave them, and I will sprinkle water upon you, which
will render you a sheep of our fold."

"Sprinkling is of no avail!" shrieked a melancholy fanatic. "Come
and be dipped--come and be dipped into the waters of everlasting
righteousness."

"Oh, Fader Aprahams!--Fader Aprahams!" said a dark visaged old man with
a long beard, as he smote his breast, and turned up his eyes to heaven.
"How long shall these obstacles remain in the way of thy chosen!"

"Down with the Jew!" bawled the rest in hideous chorus--"Down with the
unrelenting Jew! Our religion is one of universal love. Cut the Jew into
a thousand pieces, and cast him to the dogs!"

"Let us leave these miserable brawlers," exclaimed Oriel, hurrying
his companion from the spot. "Truly has my father said that the only
religion is philanthropy, and the only worship of God consists in doing
good to man. Nothing annoys me so much as observing a parcel of noisy
fellows sowing dissension around them on the hypocritical pretence of
teaching the surest means of saving sinners from perdition. Disputes
about religion, entered into by persons professing different forms of
faith, may be compared to the wranglings of a party of men concerning
the excellence of different roads in a country of the geography of which
all are ignorant."

"You should not judge of the whole class of teachers by such examples as
we have just passed," remarked Zabra. "That the general influence of the
clerical profession is beneficial has been denied by some narrow-minded
men, who, because there have been a few instances of unworthiness
obtaining distinction in the church, and of vicious propensities
disgracing a professed teacher of virtue, denounce the institution that
created them as unlikely to produce any real good to the community. But
who condemns a fruitful tree, because, while it bears a profitable crop,
a handful of blighted fruit may occasionally be found on its branches?
The clergy are but a section of the vast mass of the social fabric; and
it is as absurd for any one with a knowledge of human nature, to
expect that every individual member of its body should be led into the
profession by no other motive than the love of virtue, as to imagine
that every soldier should be brave and join the ranks only from a desire
for glory--or, that every lawyer should be honest, and embrace the law
exclusively to advocate the principles of justice. It is, certainly,
a natural expectation, that all who affect to show others the road
to heaven should travel that way themselves, and to satisfy this
expectation is the grand object of the institution of priesthood; but it
is as rare that the allurements of the world can be prevented producing
vicious effects upon those who are obliged to mingle in them, as it is
difficult to guard against the encroachments of a disease by those who
are forced to inhale an infectious atmosphere. The wonder should be, not
that any fall, but that so many escape. When we come to consider the
immense contributions to the general stock of intelligence afforded by
the clergy, which embrace every branch of human learning and scientific
acquirement--the active benevolence of at least a large majority--their
unceasing endeavours to instil into the hearts of the people the
refreshing influence of a pure system of morals--and the effect of their
individual respectability in commanding attention to the great object
for which they labour--illiberal indeed must he be who denies the
utility of an establishment productive of so much good. To despise a
sporting parson, a political priest, or a fashionable divine, is both
right and natural, and they must receive condemnation from all who know
how to appreciate the actions of a servant who serves any master but
his own; but while an acknowledgment must be regretfully made of the
existence of such hypocritical pretenders in the ranks of the church,
when we reflect upon the vast fund of real piety, of pure philanthropy,
and of sound learning it possesses, the influence of which cannot be
otherwise than beneficial in the highest degree, we should rejoice that
there is a class of men in existence that provides so liberally for the
moral wants of the people, which, both by the precept and example of
its worthiest members, affords such admirable means for counteracting
the evil effects likely to be produced by its inefficient or immoral
brethren. That the clergy produce good, it is impossible to deny; and
that they do not produce so much good as is desirable, arises more from
inaptitude in the community to be taught, than from want of ability in
the clergy to instruct."

"You deserve a rich benefice for your defence, Zabra," said Oriel
Porphyry, with a smile; "and I have no doubt if those sentiments
continue, and you embrace the profession, you will become one of the
highest dignitaries of the church. But what is this fellow talking about
so earnestly? More wonders, I suppose."

He was a man ill-clad and ill-looking, who carried a bundle of papers in
his hand, which he was trying to sell to the persons who were listening
attentively to some intelligence he was bawling in the street with all
the strength of his lungs.

"Extraordinary example of combustion!" shouted the fellow. "All the
materials of matter which made up the bodies of Cutandrun, the famous
inventor of infallible fire-escapes, and his family, have been placed in
a state of decomposition by the action of phlogiston upon his house and
stock. Here is a philosophical account, detailing the causes and effects
of the phenomena--giving a scientific analysis of the ashes found in
different situations--with an entirely new theory of the laws which
render combustion so destructive in its agency upon inflammable matter.
Only one penny."

"Well, that is certainly one way of describing a fire," observed Oriel
Porphyry. "But chemistry, I suppose, is as well understood here as other
branches of science appear to be. However, we must be proceeding, or we
shall never arrive at our destination. As I am very doubtful about the
right direction, I think we had better avail ourselves of one of these
vehicles."

The director of a small light carriage for two persons was then hailed;
and the two friends were about to enter it, when several boys, carrying
bundles of papers, ran up to them, and commenced vociferating with loud
voices entreaties to purchase their goods.

"Buy the Sydney Philosophical and Critical Quarterly Review. Only one
penny," cried one little urchin.

"Here's the Universal Encyclopædia of Useful Knowledge, only one
halfpenny," exclaimed a second.

"Neither are to be compared to these treatises by the Society for the
Diffusion of Science among the Insane, sir,--only one farthing!" bawled
a third.

"Away with you!" shouted Oriel Porphyry, as he sprang into the carriage,
followed by his companion.

"At what velocity shall I apply the power?" inquired the conductor very
civilly.

"Oh, moderate; and put me down at the house of Posthumous, in Botany
Square," said his customer.

"Yes, sir," replied the man.

"Here's an article on the ponderability of imponderable substances;
worth double the money for the whole review," cried one of the little
booksellers.

"Here's a treatise on----" but what it was on must remain unknown; for
both Zabra and his patron were far out of sight and hearing of their
tormentors before the last sentence was concluded; and, in a few
minutes, they found themselves opposite a stately mansion, which they
stopped some time to examine. It seemed an edifice of more modern date
than any near it on either side. A flight of broad steps led, under a
small portico supported by pillars which in thickness seemed to rival
their length, to an entrance by folding doors large enough to admit a
regiment of soldiers, over which was placed three draperied figures in
marble, sculptured as large as life, blowing trumpets towards three
points of the compass, and dropping each a wreath upon the bust of a man
with a foolish countenance, upon the base of which, in large letters,
was conspicuously placed the name "POSTHUMOUS." Small windows were on
each side, and above the door. Over the portico was placed a row of
caryatidæ, resembling opera dancers making a pirouette, that supported
an entablature, upon which a cumbrous attic was raised, forming an
elevation as heavy and incongruous as it is possible to conceive.




CHAP. III.

POSTHUMOUS AND HIS MUSEUM.


With considerable parade Oriel Porphyry and his companion were ushered
through long passages containing a variety of monstrous antiquities,
into a small room filled with books and curiosities, where, at a
curiously shaped table covered with a number of strange things, sat the
original of the bust over the door--a man much beyond the middle age,
with a short body, long legs and arms, broad shoulders, a clumsy head,
and a foolish face. He was dressed in a tawdry morning gown, and was
examining some articles of rarity brought him by several dealers, who
were waiting till he had made his purchases.

"You tell me that this is a very rare copy," said Posthumous, appearing
to regard with much attention a large book he held in his hand.

"The only copy in existence, sir, I assure you," replied the bookseller.
"It fetched thirty guineas at the sale of Bookworm's library."

"And you are quite convinced that it is the stupidest book that ever was
published?" inquired the collector.

"I have abundant testimonials to prove it, sir," rejoined the other.
"The fact is, that the work, when published, which was as much as a
thousand years ago, was so generally attacked by the reviewers for the
incomprehensible nonsense with which it was filled, that the author, in
a fit of shame, tried to buy up all the copies; and in this design he
succeeded, with the exception of the one you have, which had fortunately
fallen into the hands of a person celebrated for collecting works of a
similar nature. All the rest were destroyed."

"And how much do you want for it?" asked the buyer.

"As you are a particular customer, and as I am very desirous that it
should enrich the Posthumous Library, for which it is admirably adapted,
I shall only ask you twenty pounds," said the seller.

"'Tis mine--and there's the money!" exclaimed the former, as if
delighted with his purchase. "And you are quite sure it is decidedly
the stupidest book in existence?" he added.

"I am positive," replied the other.

"Inestimable treasure!" cried the collector, clasping the volume in an
ecstasy. "Now has the Posthumous Library a jewel which the whole world
could not rival. Have you anything else?"

"Here is an unique copy of a very rare work, called 'The Philosophy of
Flea-catching,' in sheets, clean and uncut. The learned Scribble-gossip
says that this volume has now become so scarce that there is only one
other copy extant, which is in the public library in India. This,
however, has one important advantage over the other, which renders it
of incalculably more value; for, if you notice, it has the Finis at the
end printed backwards."

"Wonderful!" muttered his patron, as he noticed the extraordinary
feature. "And what shall I pay you for it?"

"Only ten guineas, sir."

"There they are; and much reason will posterity have to congratulate
itself that I am the fortunate possessor of 'The Philosophy of
Flea-catching,' with the Finis printed backwards."

"Exactly so, sir, exactly. Your observations are always full of meaning.
I wish you good morning."

"Good morning, Catalogue, good morning--and mind you show me everything
rare that comes into your possession," cried Posthumous.

"Depend upon it, sir, you shall always have the first refusal," replied
Catalogue; and he took his departure.

"And what have you brought me wrapt up in that green baize, Marble?"
inquired the wealthy manufacturer, of a little shrivelled old man, who
had been waiting for an opportunity to exhibit the article he had for
sale.

"An antique--a real antique, sir!" said the little fellow, hastily
taking off the covering. "The bust of a beautiful lady of rank, from the
the chisel of the immortal Chantrey."

"Why she hasn't any nose!" exclaimed the virtuoso in a tone of
disappointment. "Her face is battered to pieces, and she has lost half
her shoulder."

"All the more valuable for that, sir," replied the man very coolly. "It
shows its antiquity. I could have brought you many things more handsome
to look upon, but so rare a piece of sculpture I have never yet had in
my possession. Look how exquisitely that neck is formed! Charming, sir.
Though not a feature is visible, the bust breathes an air of grace which
it is impossible to look on without admiring. Sawdust, the great timber
merchant, offered me fifty guineas for it to adorn his gallery, but
I remembered that my generous and enlightened patron Posthumous was
forming a museum, and, knowing that this was the very thing he
required, refused the offer."

"Very good of you, Marble. I detest that Sawdust; he has no taste,"
remarked the collector. "But are you sure this is an antique?"

"Am I sure of my existence, sir?" replied the little man, looking as
dignified as he could. "My judgment in these matters is infallible. But
as you do not seem to appreciate the merit of this beautiful example of
art, I shall take it to Sawdust."

"Not for the world, Marble!" exclaimed Posthumous, producing the money.
"Here's the price; but, I must say, I should have liked it all the
better if it had possessed something like a human countenance."

"Take my word for it, sir, that is not of the slightest consequence,"
said the man, as he pocketed the money. "The spirit of a great artist is
upon it, and that is all that a connoisseur should look to."

"And what have you there?" inquired the purchaser, perceiving that the
dealer was uncovering another specimen.

"A picture, sir--and _such_ a picture!" responded the man emphatically,
as he proceeded to place a small old oil painting in what he considered
the most advantageous light. "A _chef d'oeuvre_, sir; a work of one of
the old masters. An undoubted original. Don't you feel a sort of emotion
overpower you as you stand before it?"

"Why, I do feel rather queer; but I thought it was indigestion," replied
the connoisseur, closely examining the picture.

"Psha!" exclaimed the little man rather contemptuously. "You ought to
feel the all-pervading influence of superior genius. You are looking
upon a master-piece. Do you remark the harmony with which the colours
are blended in that wonderful production, the poetical treatment of the
subject, and the sweet repose that pervades the picture?"

"To tell you the truth," said the patron, looking a little puzzled, "I
have been examining it very closely, and I can see nothing at all."

"The effect of the great age of the picture, sir," responded the
dealer. "The influence of time has destroyed every vestige of colour
on the canvass; and it is impossible to make out a single feature in
the painting. But be assured, sir, it is a wonderful production--an
invaluable work of art. Emperors would be glad of such an addition to
their collections; and artists would travel over half the world to gaze
upon an example so unique. I have had many handsome offers for it, sir.
Sawdust bid very high. He knew its value, sir. But I resolved that it
should enrich the invaluable Posthumous collection of paintings; and I
therefore offer it to you at the low price of two hundred guineas."

"Humph! I'm obliged to you, Marble," remarked the manufacturer, still
poking his foolish face as close to the canvass as he could, and
apparently hesitating about making the purchase. "That fellow Sawdust
has no soul for these things. But what is it about, Marble? I should
like to know the subject. Tell me what it is about, Marble."

"Why, sir, it is about--as far as I and all the best judges can
ascertain--it is about the most ancient painting in the world," replied
the dealer.

"A very fine subject," said the connoisseur; "and now I do begin to
perceive a sort of a what's-a-name. But do you think posterity would
applaud my giving such a price for such a painting with such a subject?"

"They could not do otherwise than greatly applaud your fine
discrimination and admirable liberality," responded the little man
with all the enthusiasm of a picture-dealer.

"Then I must have it," remarked Posthumous, as he paid the money;
"posterity will reward my exertions."

"There is no doubt of it, sir. I wish you good morning," cried the man,
bustling out of the room with an air of peculiar satisfaction.

"Good morning to you, Marble," exclaimed the collector, still closely
examining the painting; "and if you have any thing rare, be sure to let
me know. But, if it be in sculpture, I should prefer seeing something
with a nose to it; and if it be a painting, although this is a capital
subject, I should like it to be a little more easily made out."

"I will endeavour to meet your wishes," said the dealer; and he made his
bow.

"Capital subject!" continued the connoisseur, still intently poring
over his puzzling purchase: "capital subject--but I don't see it very
clearly yet. There is a something there, and there is a something here;
but--hullo, gentlemen!" he exclaimed, noticing his visitors for the
first time. "I beg pardon; but I really did not know you were in the
room. Have you brought me any curiosities--any thing rare or antique?"

"This letter will explain to you our business," replied Oriel Porphyry,
handing a note across the table.

"Sit down, my good sir, sit down," cried the antiquarian; and, on his
visitors complying with his request, he proceeded slowly to read the
letter; and, during the period he took in its perusal, Oriel amused
himself with examining the extraordinary contents of the room in which
he was sitting. The chamber was low and dark, and every corner in it
was filled with books heaped up together, without the slightest attempt
at arrangement; some glittering with handsome bindings, new and
unsoiled; and others old and ragged, covered with dirt, and dark with
age. With these were pictures, some leaning against the wall, some upon
chairs, others one upon another upon the floor, surrounded by huge
fragments of stone, broken pieces of statuary, bronzes, ancient weapons,
specimens of pottery, and a variety of other antiquities. Here was a
full-length statue deprived of a leg, there an antique bust with half a
nose; in one place a vase gaping with a conspicuous fracture, in another
a sepulchral urn chipped out of all resemblance to what it once was. Of
all the varied contents of the room, there remained nothing that had
not in some manner been rendered useless, if at any time it had been
considered of value, or, if perfect, had the slightest pretensions to
be considered antique. But the most amusing piece of antiquity in this
collection was evidently the proprietor, whose face and head expressed
a more perfect appearance of want of intellect than the most skilful
sculptor could have produced. His nose was a bulging lump of flesh, that
looked like any thing but the thing for which it was intended; his eyes
were deep set in his head, and were continually gazing in a settled
stare of foolish wonder and delight; and his mouth, which was more than
usually large, when its possessor was not talking stood invitingly half
open, as if to ensnare all the flies in its neighbourhood. And with
these characteristics there was a pompous manner with which he said his
foolish nothings, that rendered the man more highly ridiculous.

"So you have come to purchase, instead of to sell," exclaimed he with
much astonishment. "I had rather you had brought me some rare antiques
to enrich my museum--the Posthumous Museum, as it is called. Do they
talk of it in Columbia?"

"I cannot say I ever heard it mentioned," said Oriel, endeavouring to
conceal a smile.

"Ah! posterity will do me honour; and it is for posterity I labour,"
added the manufacturer. "But I will give orders about what you require
by and by. In the meantime, you must take up your abode with me, that
you may be enabled to appreciate all the wonderful things I have
collected in my museum for the benefit of posterity, that, when you
return to your country, you may say how invaluable is the Posthumous
Museum, and how enlightened and liberal is he who has spent a large
fortune in collecting together its precious contents! I shall have a
conversazione this evening, when you will meet with some of the most
celebrated literati in this great empire; till then, I will endeavour to
amuse you by making you aware of the value of this unrivalled collection
of antiquities. In the first place, you behold this dagger," said he,
showing an ordinary weapon of that description. "Well, this is the
identical dagger that Macbeth saw in the air when he exclaimed, 'Is this
a dagger that I see before me?' and so on."

"But Macbeth merely imagined that he beheld such a weapon," observed
Oriel, amused at the credulity of his host.

"Exactly so; and this is the very weapon Macbeth imagined he beheld,"
replied the antiquarian. "It is undoubtedly genuine: I have documents
to prove it. This is the very seal with which Magna Charta signed
King John--no!--King John signed Runnemede--no, that's not it
either--Runnemede signed the Barons--I am not just sure I have it now,
but it must be one or the other. And this is the very seal;" and he
produced a seal about the size of a small lantern. "Here is an undoubted
Jew's harp--a great rarity. I don't know what Jew it belonged to; but
its genuineness is placed beyond suspicion."

"It bears no resemblance to the harps in present use, either in size or
appearance," remarked Zabra.

"A proof of its great antiquity," replied Posthumous. "You see it has
but one string. Now, it is upon record that, at a remote age, there was
a fiddler called Pagan Ninny. Whether he was called a pagan because he
was a ninny, or a ninny because he was a pagan, it is impossible to
prove; but certain it is that he played upon one string; and he played
so well, that instruments upon one string came into fashion both among
the Pagans and the Jews; and that is the reason why there is but one
string to this Jew's harp. You observe this cake of mineral substance,"
he continued, pointing to a small bluish mass. "There is a deep interest
attached to this specimen. I never look at it without feeling emotions
of--that is to say, emotions of a what's-a-name, with which every monied
man must sympathise. It is the remains of a great man--of a very great
man--of a man whose credit with the world was exceeded by none in his
day. It is the ashes of Abraham Newland!"

The manufacturer turned away, but whether to conceal a tear or to
produce another curiosity was doubtful; however he was only a few
seconds before he again approached his visitors, bearing a large
fragment of wood crumbling into decay. "But here, gentlemen," said
he, "here is an object that cannot fail to awaken--to awaken--that
is to say, it cannot fail to awaken, but what it ought to awaken
I do not exactly remember now; however, that is not of the slightest
consequence. You have, no doubt, read of England, a very ancient
island. Well, the inhabitants being very industrious did not
like being disturbed by their neighbours, an idle dishonest set
of rascals, who were continually coming upon their territory and
doing a great deal of damage; so to keep out these troublesome
marauders--marauders--marauders?--yes, that's the word, and having very
fine forests of timber in their country, they surrounded their island
with wooden walls; and this specimen, gentlemen, is an unquestionable
fragment of the wooden walls of old England, procured for me at great
expense by a traveller, who being in that part of the world found it in
the remains of a wall within a very short distance of the sea-coast. It
is the only antiquity of the kind in existence. None but the Posthumous
Museum can boast of such an invaluable relic of the ancient ages: for
posterity I acquired it, and for having become its fortunate possessor
posterity will not fail to do justice to my memory."

Posthumous continued to give descriptions of a great variety of similar
objects in the same fashion, till he approached some pictures, one of
which he selected with great care, and placed in a favourable light.

"Look at this picture, gentlemen!" he exclaimed, as his foolish face
endeavoured to express something like wonder and admiration. "Observe
the chiaro-scuro--the chiaro-scuro?--yes, that's the word, though I
don't exactly remember what it means. Admire the foreshortening--the
harmony--the repose--the expression, and all that. Fine
effect--admirable picture! The subject is Joshua commanding his son
to stand still. Excellent subject! The son was a very restless boy,
gentlemen, who required to be ruled with rather a high hand; so Mister
Joshua, a good sort of father too, by all accounts, was obliged to teach
him to be quiet in a manner boys don't in general admire. It is painted
by the immortal Snooks. Talk of Rubens, and Raphael, and Corregio, and
Titian, and others of the ancients,--they were never to be compared to
the immortal Snooks--the sublime, the incomparable, the illustrious
Snooks. He had such a miraculous--such an extraordinary--such an
unrivalled--I don't know what it was; but he had something, at any rate,
that was very fine, and gave a sort of wonderful incomprehensible--you
understand me--to such a degree, that seven-and-twenty cities have
carried on a most violent dispute about which had the honour of giving
him birth, and each erected a stupendous monument, having nothing else
upon it but this sublime inscription, 'HERE SNOOKS WAS BORN!' But when
he died, gentlemen, there was a regular scramble for his remains, and
one carried away an arm, another a leg, a third took possession of the
head, a fourth of the body, and many rejoiced in being so fortunate as
to be able to screw off a toe nail, or punch out one of his teeth; and
on the strength of this some forty different towns and cities have
raised most magnificent mausolea, bearing these excruciating words,
'HERE SNOOKS DIED!'"

"He must have enjoyed a great degree of fame indeed," remarked Oriel.

"Yes, sir," replied the connoisseur; "and although he has shared the
fate of many, who, though popular when living, get pulled to pieces
immediately they are dead, his reputation has only increased by it. Now,
gentlemen, let me show you this painting. It is a sea piece, you will
observe, and possesses all that amazing freshness and transparency,
and--and--what d'ye call 'em, which is considered so admirable by the
best judges. You may actually feel the moisture of the water, gentlemen,
if you stay long enough; and that is the reason I put my hat on whenever
I look at it, to prevent catching cold. Poor Tipple! his was a different
fate from that of the immortal Snooks. No one thought of disputing about
the honour of his birth or burial. He enjoyed no post mortem--post
mortem?--yes, that's it--he enjoyed no post mortem gratifications.
The nails were left upon his unhappy toes, and the teeth remained
undisturbed in his miserable jaws. But he was a great artist,--who could
paint water as he did? None! There was a sort of an indescribable,
inimitable--and--and a whatso'name in his water, that nobody else's
water ever looked like. You could see your face in it, Sir. But somehow
or other while he was--not a hewer of wood--but a drawer of water,
whether the sight of such a pure, sweet, refreshing beverage made him
continually thirsty, I'm not certain, but he drank, gentlemen, not his
own water, even when he drew it ever so mild, but strong waters, till
they overpowered his weak constitution, got into his upper story
by an hydraulic--hydraulic? Yes, that's the word--by an hydraulic
power of their own, till he created a deluge in his own body, without
the use of colours, which spoiled his palate, and made him obliged
to brush. Ah! Tipple was a great artist. There was a sort of a
truth, a nature, a thingembob about every thing he attempted, which
gave to all his paintings a certain, a--you understand, which is
perfectly delightful to look upon. He has not been appreciated by his
cotempop--contompo--contempo--confound it, I forget the word, but
however he was not appreciated by somebody. But perhaps, like me, he
looked to posterity; and although he has not created a Posthumous
museum, as some of his best productions form a portion of its invaluable
contents, it is very possible that when posterity does me justice it
will not forget the merits of Tipple."

After Posthumous had detailed at sufficient length his description of
the contents of his library, he led the two friends into a suite of
several rooms, not at all suitable for the purpose for which they had
been erected, in which objects in natural history were arranged, if
arrangement it might be called, for here were animals, vegetables,
minerals, and fossils, mingled together as if they belonged to the
same family, but the specimens, like those in the library, were every
one imperfect--they were all deficient in something or other, which
rendered them comparatively useless to the student and valueless to the
collector. This defect, however, was not observed by the owner, who
imagined that there was not a collection in the world that could boast
of so many unique specimens from the stores of nature and art, as the
Posthumous museum.

"You see, gentlemen, before you, the wonders of nature, from a tadpole
to an elephant!" exclaimed the manufacturer, in a tone of exultation.
"I have collected these--I have collected them for the benefit of
posterity, and not without considerable expense and labour, as you
may believe. But when a man is excited into action--yes, excited into
action--by an idea so comprehensive, so universal--so whatso'name, as
forming a museum for the benefit of posterity, he thinks not of the
trouble to which he may be put, or the money he may be out of pocket,
when he is endeavouring to develope--yes, that's it--endeavouring to
develope his own philosophical conceptions. Well--this is an--this is
a--this is an animal of some kind, but the name I do not at present
remember. You can at once perceive how much it differs from all other
animals: in the first place, it has four legs--two behind and two
before--an extraordinary coincidence--coincidence? Yes, that's the
word--and it possesses a tail, which, marvellous as it may seem, is
invariably placed upon the rump of the animal, and as nearly opposite to
its head as head and tail can be. Now you will notice the head. It has,
you see--two jaws, one above and the other below; and, though it may
appear strange, the upper jaw never sinks below the under jaw even if
the poor beast be ever so chap-fallen--and the under never rises above
the upper jaw. Very curious that. That animal, you will observe by the
teeth--I don't know how though, is carnivorous--carnivorous? Yes, that's
the word, which means that it eats nothing but grass. It's called by
zoologists one of the roomy--roomy--roomy--one of the roomy something,
but I'll be hanged if I can remember what--and I suppose it is because
it requires a sort of an expanse--an extensive, a--whatdyecallem, to
move about in. Now _this_ animal is a different species altogether. It
is what they call a--you understand. It has the same number of legs, the
same number of tails, and the same number of heads as the other animal,
and yet their natures are entirely, absolutely, and something else
which I've forgot, different. Isn't it wonderful? This is a grani--yes,
a granivorous quadruped, and consequently eats flesh, mutton chops, beef
steaks, or anything else of the same sort. You see these hoofs, how
admirably adapted they are for tearing their prey, much better than
knives and forks, when they, under the influence of a certain impulse
or instinct, or whatso'name, roam about the wilds looking after their
eatables. Wonderful, isn't it? Both these animals belong to the class
mammalia; yes--mammalia--a word that signifies that their mothers are
called mammies."

"You quite enlighten me on the subject," observed Oriel Porphyry,
endeavouring to suppress a laugh.

"Ay, Sir, I've studied it for a very long length of time," replied his
host. "I know it thoroughly, you may depend upon it. Now, Sir, here is a
fish. Fishes swim, you know, Sir."

"I was aware of that," remarked Oriel, as gravely as he could.

"But they don't swim when they're dead, Sir," rejoined the manufacturer,
as if desirous of making his auditors wonder at the extraordinary
fact. "Curious phenomenon--phenomenon? Yes, that's the word--curious
phenomenon that. Well, this fish is dead, and were you to try ever so,
you could not induce it to swim. You will observe that it has scales.
Now the animals we have just examined have no scales. Singular, isn't
it? That peculiarity in its organiza--organi--organ something, which
I have forgot, is a wise provision of nature--a sort of whatsoname to
prevent the fish from getting wet through when exposed to the continual
action of the watery element--yes, of the watery element. So these
scales are very important in its animal economy--ay, animal economy--and
you will remember, as a remarkable coincidence that completely proves
the value of these things, that Justice is always represented with
scales, Isn't it wonderful?"

"Wonderful!" replied both the young men in a breath.

"Now this is a reptile, you will observe," said Posthumous, pointing to
a small snake in a glass case. "This has scales, and yet it is not a
fish. Strange, isn't it? Here's the name. It is the _Bipède cannelé_.
The first word signifies that it's a biped, like man, though it's got
no legs; and the other word denotes that it's found in canals. Here
are some shells: this one is called _Coriocella nigra_, because it
always frequents the cellars of the blacks; and this is the _Velutina
capulöidea_, the first word of which means that it was discovered
by Veluti, a chonchologist--a chonchologist?--yes, a chonchologist,
celebrated in his day for the ardour with which he investigated--I mean
the spirit with which he penetrated--no, that's not it; but, at any
rate, it was a peculiar whatso'name with which he made his researches;
and what the other word implies I am not quite certain; but it appears
by the last syllables to mean some low idea which it isn't worth
inquiring into."

"And what are these things?" inquired Zabra, looking at a confused mass
of insects lying together in a case.

"Those are the Chalcididæ," replied the manufacturer, reading from a
paper affixed to it; "a family of hymenopterous insects, which the
heathens made sacred to their god Hymen, because they were very much
given to the marriage state; and this belongs to the section Pupivora,
because they are always found upon puppies. You will observe that they
have wings, and these wings are used for flying. But all insects have
not got wings, consequently some of them cannot fly. Wonderful, isn't
it? As I said before, it is a wise provision of nature to give them a
sort of a facility--a convenience--a thingembob, for the purpose of more
easily transporting them from place to place. Isn't it strange?"

"What bird is this?" asked Oriel, pointing to a stuffed specimen.

"Ha! now you will observe another extraordinary thing," exclaimed his
host. "This creature also possesses wings, and yet it is not an insect.
Marvellous coincidence! This is one of the Agami, so called because it
is considered excellent game; and has the scientific name of _Psophia
crepitans_, from its fondness of creeping upon sofas. You observe that
this animal has but two legs: the first animals we noticed had four,
and the fish had none; yet all of them, by that sort of natural a--you
understand, are enabled to go about wherever they like, and indulge
themselves in every kind of--something I don't remember, according to
their individual capacities--their individual capacities?--yes, their
individual capacities. Isn't it wonderful?"

"And pray what stones are these?" inquired Zabra, directing attention to
two or three large fragments of stone leaning against the wall.

"They are not stones, but fossils," replied Posthumous, trying to look
amazingly sagacious; "and the difference between a stone and a fossil is
a--the difference between a fossil and a stone. Isn't it strange?"

"Wonderful!" exclaimed his visitors.

"You see it is very hard," continued their companion, "and has the
skeleton of an animal long since extinct--extinct? yes, extinct--long
since extinct, plainly marked upon it. It is said that, once upon a
time, long before I can remember, there was a shower of rain came down,
that not only wetted every one to the skin, in spite of their umbrellas,
but actually drowned all the animals in the world, except those--yes,
except those who were not drowned. Well, the poor things when they
were dead couldn't move in the least; and, in course of time, by the
continual deposit of--of whatso'name upon their bodies, they became
squeezed into the earth round about them, and that becoming hard, they
became hard also. Now these are minerals. The earth, you know, is made
like a bread and butter pudding; a layer of bread and butter, then
a layer of currants, and so on; in what are called _strata_--yes,
_strata_, because they're always straight;--and sometimes they find
coal, and sometimes stone, and sometimes clay, and sometimes something
I don't remember, and sometimes something I have forgot; and all these
things are kept together in their proper places by a sort of--you
understand--which holds the world firmly together, so that people may
walk upon it without fear of its tumbling to pieces. Wonderful, isn't
it?"

In this way Posthumous proceeded describing to his visitors the contents
of his museum. Every object was noticed, and all relating to it he knew,
which appeared at all times more novel than authentic, was minutely
detailed, with a look and a manner marked by self-approbation and
stupidity, that were exceedingly amusing, till the hour arrived for
dinner; when he seemed, with considerable reluctance, to leave its many
attractions, and led the way into a dining-room, which was also crammed
with every species of antiquity he had considered sufficiently valuable
for his collection, where, with a mummy at his feet, and a statue
without a head at his elbow, he did the honours of hospitality, mingling
them with liberal allusions to the benefit he was intent upon doing
posterity.




CHAP. IV.

A CONVERSAZIONE.


It was evening, and every part of the Posthumous museum was brilliantly
lit up and filled with visitors. The manufacturer gave a conversazione,
and his rooms were filled with some of the most celebrated characters in
the world of wealth, fashion, and literature of Sydney. Some turned over
the leaves of books--others looked through portfolios of prints--some
examined the paintings--and others scrutinised the antiquities--a few
appeared intent upon studying the appearances of the different specimens
of natural history, and others seemed equally desirous of becoming
acquainted with the disposition of their companions. Some in little
circles were arguing upon various subjects, and in a room by themselves
were a more select party enjoying the performance of some excellent
music. Posthumous did not seem on terms of intimacy with many of his
guests, for they passed him with as much indifference as if he was some
one not worthy to be known; but he was remarkably attentive to Oriel and
his companion, describing, as they passed along, the different persons
that crowded his rooms, and only occasionally stopping in his remarks
to exchange a few words with some of his visitors with whom he knew he
might be familiar.

"You see that person before you in the brown and yellow thingembob, with
a long nose and a remarkable sort of a whatso'name in his appearance,"
said Posthumous. The two friends saw who was meant, but did not
recognise him by the description. "There, he's examining that Chinese
idol. He's a clever man--decidedly a clever man. He lived most part of
his life in China, because, he said, the country always suited him to a
T; and has written ever so many books about its geography and use of the
globes, habits, customs, laws, antiquities, and something else I don't
remember. He says their chronolo--chronology?--yes, chronology, that's
the word--he says their chronology is the most ancient in the world;
but I'll be bound to say that there's a more ancient chronology in my
museum, only I can't tell exactly where to lay my hands upon it. But a
very learned writer is Chopstick--very learned. It was he who discovered
that the tea-plant was originally cultivated in England, as he found
there a river called _Tees_, and ascertained that the ancient name of
the people was _Celtæ_, so called from their selling teas. That little
man in the snuff-coloured--you understand, knows more about antiquities
than any body in Australia. It was he who proved so clearly that our
city was originally built by Sir Philip Sydney, an architect who was
very partial to erecting arcades, so much so that he wrote a work about
them called Arcadia, and from him our metropolis has derived its name.
Talking of antiquities, do you know I met in a book the other day
something about a psychological--psychological? yes, that was the
word--something about a psychological curiosity; and although I have
offered any price for a psychological curiosity, I have not been able to
procure one. But let us hear what Dustofages is saying about that piece
of ancient brickwork. It has an inscription upon it which has puzzled me
completely."

Posthumous and his young visitors approached the table on which rested a
considerable piece of brickwork that had attracted the attention of the
little antiquarian.

"I am tolerably certain," said Dustofages with a grave face, to a few
anxious students of the art in which he was so famous, that thronged
near him, "I am tolerably certain that this inscription is in the
English language, and from its appearance I should pronounce it to be
cotemporaneous with the Georgian dynasty."

"Wonderful!" murmured Posthumous.

"The first three letters are evidently a T, an R, and a Y, which make
the word TRY," continued the antiquarian: "and the letters of the next
word, though nearly obliterated, taken together, form the name
WARRENS--and this ancient inscription, therefore, is 'Try Warrens'--but
what it means I am not so confident. Perhaps this Warrens was a
notorious offender whom the people wished to have tried and punished;
and therefore expressed their wishes in a conspicuous manner, that
the government might notice it, and _try Warrens_: this was a way the
populace then had of making their sentiments known to their rulers as
may be ascertained by an antique fragment in the Australian Museum, on
which is inscribed the words, 'Down with the Whigs!'"

"Extraordinary!" exclaimed Posthumous.

"But as in the whole course of my reading I have met with no allusion to
any notorious character of the name of Warrens," continued the little
man, "it is quite as probable that some obscure individual made the
inscription as a sort of memento to attract the attention of his
mistress, expressive of his love and fidelity--he wished her to _try
Warrens_. In the English anthology, from a very ancient poem, I met with
these lines, addressed by a lover to his mistress--

   "Try me, try me,
    Prove ere you deny me"--

which proves that lovers were desirous of being tried; and as so many
inscriptions exist in which the ancients showed their attachment to
their females by inscriptions on wood and stone, declaring their wishes,
there can be but little doubt that these words were placed here by some
enamoured youth who was desirous that a particular female, whose name
has not come down to us, should 'Try Warrens.'"

"Isn't it wonderful?" cried the delighted Posthumous, and without
waiting for an answer hurried his companions to another room. "How do
you do, Bluey?" he exclaimed, addressing a tall thin lady with a bilious
complexion, who appeared to be examining some minerals.

"Rather say, how does my will do," replied the lady, very gravely; "for
it is my will that does every thing. I must have the will to do, before
the action can be done. If you mean merely to inquire into the state of
the mere animal machine, I must reply, that of the chemical combinations
now in process, the acids overpower the alkalis, and produce an acetous
fermentation in the natural laboratory, that disturbs the sanatory
functions of my particular system, and tends to create new combinations
injurious in their action upon the animal fibre; but as I know that as
a sufficient proportion of the earthy salts, either in carbonates or
sulphates, held in solution, or in any other form that may be most
convenient, operating upon the acids, will counteract their unhealthy
tendency and render them inert, I do not care for the disorder of my
organic substances. It is not of sufficient importance to distract my
attention from the interesting study of chemical affinities."

"Well, I'm sorry you're so bad," remarked the inquirer, in a tone of
regret.

"Bad is the antagonist of good," said the lady, sharply; "and I beg to
say that I am not bad. Bad is evil--I am not evil--therefore I am not
bad. Bad is base--I am not base--therefore I am not bad. In fact, bad is
a very unphilosophical term to apply upon such an occasion. You should
have said that you regretted that there should exist any chemical
combinations in my system of natural processes that support life, which
are not characteristic of a state of health."

"At any rate, I hope you will soon get better," responded her host.

"Better is worse than bad," replied his guest with additional severity.
"To be better, implies an antecedent state of badness, and I tell you
again I am not bad, I have not been bad, and I do not intend to be bad."

"Well, good bye--good bye," he exclaimed, attempting to hurry away.

"There is no sense in the phrase 'good bye;' it means nothing," said the
lady hastily: "it is an abbreviation of 'good be with you.' Now, if you
mean to say that I am good, I deny it. I deny that I am either good or
bad; good and bad being qualities not existing in the object, for what
appears good to one may seem bad to another; but they arise in the idea
of the individual."

Posthumous and his companions were glad when they were out of hearing of
the lady, whose metaphysics and chemistry they could not appreciate in
the way she desired.

"Ah, do you see that tall man behind his whiskers?" inquired the
manufacturer, pointing to a person who answered to such a description.
"He has got a very remarkable, stately sort of whatso'name, hasn't he?
He's a member of the government, a great patron of literature and
science, and--and something I forget. He's been known to spend as much
as sixpence a week in the cheap publications; and many a miserable
starving author, who has sent him his works, he has actually enriched
with his good wishes. Great patron, isn't he? The person he's talking to
in the beautiful head of hair, is a political writer on the ministerial
side, who has a wonderful, incomprehensible--a--you understand, that's
very delightful. He writes about the glorious constitution, our
admirable government, and--and something with a fine name I don't
remember, in a style that's absolutely, completely, and downright
thingembob. That lady, that seems to be looking after her youth and
beauty, is the authoress of a work which has been very popular, called,
'The whole Duty of Man,' which is filled with long chapters upon short
commons or fasting, praying, sneezing, the cultivation of carrots and
virtue, the bringing up children and mustard and cress, and directions
about paying bills and visits. The young man, trying to admire himself
in the glass, is a novelist famous for the splendour of his imaginative
conceptions--yes, of his imaginative conceptions. His books are like the
rooms of a dealer in fashionable furniture; or-molu and mother-of-pearl,
rosewood and ivory, buhl and something I forget, meet one in every page;
and he writes about gold, and silver, and precious stones, as if he had
been an apprentice to a jeweller. Then his stories are always celebrated
for a certain pathetic whatso'name, which is much admired. Now let us go
into the music room."

The three associates passed through the crowd which filled the rooms to
the great danger of the more breakable antiquities, Posthumous stopping
occasionally to talk to one or welcome another, till they arrived in
the music room, where they took some refreshments as they entered. A
beautiful girl was accompanying herself while singing the following
words, to which all seemed to listen with the greatest attention:--

    The lunar tide began to flow,
    The tidal wave moved to and fro,
      Bright shone each constellation;
    Except where in th' horizon's space
    Some planets, with reluctant pace,
      Commenced their declination.

    Then Coma unto Stella came,
    To show to her his ardent flame,
      Apparent in aphelion;
    As had been done for many years,
    In their peculiar hemispheres,
      While placed in perihelion.

    "Ah, Stella!" said the glowing swain,
    "My flame to thee I bring again,
      In hopes thou wilt absorb it:
    My course, eccentric though it be,
    Moves near as it may come to thee
      In my peculiar orbit."

    "Away!" cried Stella, "come not here;
    Go, shine within another sphere,
      I feel not thy attraction;
    I have beheld thy parallax,
    And noticed thy erratic tracks,
      Thy action and reaction."

    A cloud on Coma's face appeared,
    And when its atmosphere was cleared,
      In rapid execution
    Of Stella's dark command, he set,
    And strove for ever to forget
      Her radiant revolution.

"Beautiful!" cried a dozen voices in a breath, as soon as the song was
concluded.

"So exquisitely pathetic!" murmured one.

"So perfectly natural!" exclaimed another.

"It is admirable; is it not, sir?" said a young lady with a remarkable
pair of languishing eyes, as she directed their eloquent gaze full upon
the handsome face of Oriel Porphyry.

"No doubt it is, madam, if you think so," replied the merchant's son,
with more politeness than sincerity.

"Ah! our opinions are the same--the effect of a mutual sympathy. How
charming!" observed the young beauty languidly. "Do you believe in the
theory of mutual sympathies?"

"I must confess I know nothing about it," acknowledged Oriel.

"Innocence exemplified!" exclaimed his companion, regarding him with
more evident admiration. "I will explain it to you. There exists in
every human creature in one sex a decided inclination towards some human
creature in the other sex, which is never developed till those two meet
together, and then it immediately becomes manifest. Now suppose, for
example, I possess a certain amicable feeling, which remains perfectly
unknown until I meet with you for the first time, when an immediate
consciousness tells me that my sympathy is excited."

"Wonderful, isn't it?" said Posthumous.

Oriel was at a loss what to reply; but Zabra's dark eyes appeared
flashing with indignation.

"Now, these sympathies ought to be indulged; or why are they created?"
asked the fair sophist. "If we observe nature, which is always the best
guide, we shall find all her impulses followed out to their purpose, to
the great increase of the pleasures of the individual. Nature never can
be wrong; therefore, if we follow nature, we shall always be right."

"Exactly so!" responded the manufacturer. "I remember seeing a puppy
running after his own tail, and he was delighted at the fun. Yes, follow
nature, certainly."

Oriel Porphyry with great difficulty refrained from laughing. Zabra, on
the contrary, looked upon the young lady with an expression of scorn
that made his countenance appear darker than ever.

"It was a conviction of the truth of this theory that made me write my
work on the philosophy of mutual communion," continued their companion,
"where you will find proved, by arguments that cannot be confuted, that
there is no happiness in the world except in love--that love is this
mutual sympathy between two individuals of the two sexes--and that this
sympathy should invariably be indulged as often as it exists."

"Well, I have always had something of the same notion about love,"
remarked Posthumous, gravely. "I consider love to be a sort of a very
beautiful, interesting--a--you understand, in one person, for a
peculiar, charming, delightful--a--whatsoname in another."

"I should imagine, from what I have observed, that the true nature
of love is perfectly unknown to either of you," observed Zabra, with
some asperity; "it only dwells in the breasts of those whose qualities
assimilate with its own. It is the principle of truth, of purity, and
of excellence; and whomsoever it touches it makes true, and pure, and
excellent in the eyes of the lover. There is wisdom in it; for wisdom
is ever an emanation of truth. There is beauty in it; for beauty is the
essential spirit of purity. And there is in it an omnipotent power; for
in excellence will always be found the greatest degree of greatness.
Love, being true, enlightens; being pure, sanctifies; and being
excellent, strengthens all by whom it is possessed. It is a virtue from
which all virtues proceed. It is the nobility of nature. It is the
humanity of life. Without it the sun would be black, and the heavens a
void; a strife would be among all things, and a devouring death consume
the universe. With it the power of a perfecting will fills the glad
heart; and in whatever corner of the earth there breathes the principle
of existence, love will enter into its most secret depths; infuse into
them a purpose hitherto unknown; fill them with a power to suffer and
to conquer that cannot be set aside, and render the individual, the
atmosphere he inhales, and all things he sees, touches, or hears, the
receptacle of a perfect felicity, that endures even unto the very
threshold of oblivion. It is this feeling, and this feeling alone, that
has created whatever is admirable around us; we admire, because we love;
and we love, only to produce a continuation of the qualities we have
admired."

Oriel regarded the animated countenance of his youthful companion with
his usual affection. The young lady gazed upon his beautiful features
with apparently more sympathy than his friend had excited; and
Posthumous opened his mouth, rubbed his eyes, and stared, and looked all
the wonder and admiration his foolish face was capable of expressing;
and when he did find language, which was not for some minutes after the
speaker had concluded, he exclaimed--

"Yes, sir, that's exactly what I said. It is nothing in the world more
than a simple, a--something I have forgot, arising entirely in the
organisation of the individual--organisation of the individual?--yes,
organisation of the individual, that produces a peculiar sort of feeling
in the a--whatsoname."




CHAP. V.

THE PHILANTHROPIST IN TROUBLE.


Oriel Porphyry made a considerable stay in Australia, visiting most of
the principal cities, the manufacturing and agricultural districts, in
fact, whatever part of the country was considered most worthy of notice;
bartering his merchandise, and making purchases of such articles of
traffic as might be advantageously disposed of during his voyage.
Before he left the country he received from his father the following
communication:--

"I hope by this time, my dear Oriel, you are completely reconciled to
the way of life I wish you to follow, and I am quite sure that the
longer you live the more cause you will have to rejoice at pursuing
a path so honourable. Every day I exist, I the more fervently
congratulate myself upon having forsaken the deceitful splendour of a
false ambition, for wherever I look around among those who belong to
that undeservedly honoured section of society I was forced to leave in
disgust, I observe so much of envy, inquietude, pride, folly, hatred,
ignorance, ambition, and tyranny, I wonder that such things the
prejudices of custom can regard with homage. I see the title of majesty
applied to an individual who is the very reverse of majestic; his
highness is diminutive; his grace awkward; a fellow, though he be a
notorious cheat, may still be a nobleman; and however unworthy or
ignorant be a person of rank, he is allowed to take precedence of
virtue, of intellect, and of every species of human excellence,
undistinguished by the title he possesses. I do not mean to assert that
a man is in any way the worse for having this sort of distinction, for I
have found many real noble men among our aristocracy; what I maintain
is, that they are in no way exalted by it. And when I compare the good
effected by this class with the good effected by those who do not
belong to it, the disproportion is so immense that I must always call
in question the advantage of maintaining a section of society in an
acknowledged state of superiority to the rest, who, to the rest, are of
so little utility.

"The next thing to be considered is--are they a happier race of
individuals than those whom they think beneath them? Most of them are in
the enjoyment of many luxuries; but luxury and happiness are far from
being synonymous: and when we come to look into the artificial state of
life in which these people exist, and notice their exclusiveness, their
rivalries, their ostentatious splendour, and their prodigal meannesses,
we can afford them only a low place on the scale of happiness--one
certainly much beneath that possessed by persons whom they are in the
habit of thinking their inferiors. Yet this is the sort of greatness,
Oriel, you seemed so desirous of possessing. That desire, I hope, has
given place to better and nobler aspirations. There is a wider field now
open to you; from which the landscape shows every attraction which ought
to allure you forward. Go on, Oriel, go on and prosper. Let me see you
a philanthropist, and I shall die content.

"There have been some stirring doings in Columbia since you left the
country. Our rulers seem desperately intent upon working their own
destruction. I regret this. I regret it for the sake of these
inconsiderate men--I regret it more for the sake of the community at
large, who, if they are driven into open opposition and strife, and
bloodshed ensue, must be the immediate sufferers. Public meetings have
been held in various parts of the empire, particularly in the northern
provinces, and resolutions reflecting very strongly upon the ministers
have been agreed to in the presence of immense multitudes of the people.
Some disturbances have taken place, which were put down only at the
sacrifice of several lives, and many of the most influential of the
public prints, notwithstanding the ruinous prosecutions, fines, and
imprisonments, with which all who advocated the cause of the people
are punished, denounced the measures of the government in a very bold
tone. The meetings in the metropolis were equally important, and their
proceedings were conducted with a similar degree of energy.

"As the highest municipal officer--as a legislator of considerable
experience, independent of my reputation as a private individual, I
naturally enjoyed much influence among my fellow-citizens. They looked
up to me for advice, and were always anxious for my countenance. It was
with great uneasiness that I observed the mischievous policy pursued by
the Emperor's advisers. I saw that its tendency was to fill the hearts
of the people with a spirit of resistance, that must eventually lead to
a fierce and relentless civil war, that might deluge the country with
blood, and destroy its prosperity by the withering blast of flame and
the sword. What to do in this fearful crisis was not a subject to be
dismissed without deep reflection. To its consideration I gave anxious
days and sleepless nights. I knew that, if the existing feeling
continued, a struggle would commence that could not easily be stopped;
it would continue while there was hope on one side, and power on the
other; and to the true patriot there can be nothing so horrible as the
prospect of a savage warfare around him, in which the children of the
same soil must be set to slaughter one another. On the other hand, it
was equally evident that, if the government were allowed to carry on
their despotic proceedings, every citizen would be obliged to give up
the privilege of his manhood, and become a slave; and I had so much of
the mighty impulses of freedom in my nature as would not allow me to
look tamely on, while the chains were riveting around my subjected
country.

"I saw that there was but one way to secure my fellow-countrymen
from the approaching degradation without having recourse to deeds of
violence. From my place in the legislature I continually described the
alarming state of the empire, and foretold the fearful consequences
which must result if ministers proceeded in the course they were
pursuing. With all the eloquence of which I was master, I implored them
to desist. I entreated that the obnoxious measures might be abandoned,
and offered to become security for the immediate return of the public
tranquillity if the desire I expressed was complied with. At the same
time, whenever I was called upon to direct or attend a popular assembly,
which was almost daily, I strongly advised the propriety of refraining
from violence. I recommended continual public meetings, in which the
voice of the nation might be spoken without intemperance; and that the
ministers might be made sufficiently aware of the state of opinion, I
advocated the policy of petitioning the legislature for redress, in firm
but respectful language, throughout every part of the united empire.
The government paid no attention to my labours. I was listened to with
inattention, and my arguments were treated with disdain. Proud in the
use of a slavish and corrupt majority, proud in the exercise of a power
they wished to render irresponsible, and proud in the possession of
an immense standing army, whose services they retained by profligate
expenditure of the public money, they attempted to stifle the voice of
opinion, by constant endeavours to prevent the meetings of the people,
and by treating their petitions with studied contempt.

"The effect these proceedings had upon me I leave you to imagine. I
never could have supposed any set of men could have been found so
indifferent to their own interests. But the emperor resolved to render
his power absolute, and his advisers had urged the necessity of pursuing
what they called strong measures, arguing that, if they stopped now at
the clamour that had been raised, it would be impossible for them to
resume their measures at any future time. In vain I preached patience
and resignation, peace and temperance. Prosecutions and persecutions
were going on in every direction. The presses that laboured to diffuse
among the people a knowledge of their true situation were seized and
destroyed, and the persons connected with them were incarcerated
in dungeons; private dwellings were invaded, on the most frivolous
pretexts, in search of imaginary conspiracies, and their inmates were
subjected to every kind of indignity--mulcted in heavy penalties, or
carried off from their homes and never more heard of; spies appeared to
lurk in every house; and no sooner was a public meeting announced than
measures were taken to prevent its being held, by filling the place with
heavily armed troops. My anxiety grew more intense every day. I saw the
storm must burst; I knew that the strife must begin; and when I beheld
the almost countless masses of military that filled the country, ready
to act on the first emergency, and knew that they would oppose men
undisciplined and imperfectly armed, I shuddered at the mere
anticipation of the consequences.

"Among those who took a part with me in opposing, in a constitutional
manner, the proceedings of the government, might be found many of the
most enlightened, the most admirable, and the most wealthy men in the
empire; men whose characters were unimpeachable, and whose property
formed an important stake in the country; and they were earnest in their
philanthropy, and sincere in their patriotism. They agreed with me in
opinion that peace ought to be preserved till they were absolutely
forced to take up arms. But there were others amongst us, young and
headstrong politicians, or crafty and deceitful spies, who appeared most
anxious to provoke an immediate collision. That the strife was about to
commence was the general impression, for many provided themselves with
arms, and others endeavoured to secure their property. This state of
things continued from day to day, creating the most tyrannical laws, and
making the indignation more general. All expected a blow to be struck;
but having no acknowledged leader, and no settled plan of action, none
were ready to strike. At last, as a final resource, I thought of once
more calling a public meeting; and to avoid its being prevented by the
government, as others had been, it was kept secret among known friends
till the last moment, when each communicated it to a separate circle
with such excellent effect, that the assembly was one of the most
crowded that had ever been held.

"It was my duty to open the business of the day. Much as I feared
the coming warfare, knowing that success could only be gained at the
expense of incalculable misery and suffering, I felt the painful truth
that the end justified the means, and endeavoured to prepare myself,
as well as my excited feelings would allow me, to take my share in the
approaching struggle. I abhor bloodshed; from my heart and soul I loathe
it. I would have sacrificed myself willingly to obtain justice for my
fellow-citizens; but justice seemed a thing only to be procured by
force. I addressed the meeting. I felt that the labours of a long life,
endured to create a more general happiness, were about to be risked in a
strife of brother against brother. All that I had endeavoured to avoid
would now become unavoidable--the reign of discord would commence--the
wounds I had healed would break out afresh--the good I had done would be
turned to evil--the felicity I had created would end in wretchedness.
With these convictions of the mind, the sympathies of the heart may
easily be imagined. I at first addressed the meeting as if mourning at
the funeral of my own hopes. I related all that had been endured, and
the eyes of my attentive auditors seemed to burn with indignation, and
their brows scowled with resentment. I described the patience with
which all had been endured, and their looks were restless and gloomy. I
detailed every instance of contempt with which that patience had been
regarded, and the breasts of the strong men heaved with passion, and
their glances were stern and fierce. I told them how much I lamented the
blindness and obstinacy of their rulers, and showed them the deep and
just cause I had for that regret; but having stated that all had been
attempted that the most patriotic philanthropist could have suggested to
escape unshackled from the evils with which we were threatened, I told
them that nothing now was to be done to preserve our liberties but to
maintain them by force of arms. Twenty thousand eager voices, joining in
one continued cheer, testified their readiness to follow the suggestion.
'A long life has been devoted to your service,' said I, 'whose greatest
pleasure has been created by the pleasures it has been enabled to
diffuse. I would much rather that the life had been prolonged to
continue its enjoyment in the same gladdening labour; but our rulers
have willed it otherwise. I cannot end my existence as hitherto it has
proceeded--not in the sweet indulgence of my friendly feelings towards
my species--not in the observance of the tranquil bliss they have
produced. No matter! I have ever been devoted to your service; my life
must end in pursuing the same duty. I will stand by you in the struggle
you must now commence; and all the power and wealth and influence I
possess shall aid you in obtaining its successful issue.' Cheers rent
the air--such cheers as, if they had heard them, and seen the immense
multitude from whom they proceeded, emulating each other in the
expression of their grateful enthusiasm, would have made our ministers
glad on any terms to undo the mischievous work they had executed.

"Many influential persons spoke to the same effect; and it was agreed
that as large a body of men as could be got together should go to the
emperor's palace, and desire the instant abrogation of the unpopular
edicts. If they met with force, it was to be resisted; and as soon as
the struggle became inevitable, the bells of the different churches were
to be rung to arms, and a simultaneous attack made on all the military
positions, so as to prevent the troops leaving their barracks while the
emperor's palace was stormed. This plan was no sooner agreed upon
than it was resolved to be put in immediate execution, to prevent
the government taking measures to prevent its success; and a general
rendezvous having been appointed, every man left the meeting with
the intention of preparing himself for the fray. I had returned home,
melancholy, I must acknowledge; for I could not reflect upon the dangers
to which the mass of my fellow-citizens would soon be exposed without
feelings of the deepest anguish; and I had scarcely crossed my own
threshold before I saw that the place was filled and surrounded by armed
men, by whom I was immediately seized, treated with every indignity,
dragged through the streets to a dungeon, and, after having been loaded
with heavy chains, there left to the contemplation of darkness and
filth.

"The promptness and secrecy of my seizure I had not expected, or I
should have been prepared for resistance; and now I had but little hope
of ever being of the slightest service to any individual; for if my
friends succeeded in their exertions, they knew not the place where I
was confined, and were not likely during my existence to discover it,
so that my prospect was but a cheerless one. It was some hours before I
could distinguish with any accuracy the features of my prison. At last,
when my eyes got used to the darkness, I noticed that it was a narrow
cell, built of huge masses of stone. On one side, at the top, was a
small grating of iron, through which sufficient light entered to make
the darkness evident. The door was of iron, and it opened inwardly. The
floor was of stone, damp and cold. It was about seven feet by five in
size, and about ten feet in height. The place seemed never to have been
cleansed: it was fouled with every abomination, and vermin, toads, and
other loathsome objects abounded within its walls. Disgusting as such a
place must be to one used to comfort and convenience, I began to grow
careless of its horrors, and thought only of the effect my incarceration
would have upon my fellow-citizens. It was not so secretly done as to
prevent all knowledge of the transaction, and the few to whom it was
known, I knew would lose no time in making their intelligence public.
There would then, I felt convinced, commence a desperate struggle; and
which ever side had the victory, it could not be gained but at the
expense of a degree of human suffering, the imagination of which filled
me with pain and fear.

"While engaged in these thoughts, I heard footsteps approaching--they
stopped at the door--the strong bolts were undrawn, and a man, muffled
up in a large cloak and high slouched hat, entered the cell. He stopped
before me. I thought he was going to put me to death. I could see
nothing of his face but two large dark eyes glaring upon me with a
malignity I should have thought it impossible any human being could
feel. He spoke, and I knew the voice. It was Philadelphia.

"'So ho, old plotter of treason!' he exclaimed exultingly, 'you are now
in safe keeping, I think. Nothing would serve your plebeian soul but to
hatch rebellion. You could leave your beggarly buying and selling to
plot the overthrow of the state. You thought, doubtless, it would be an
easy matter to exterminate the power of the government, and felt assured
you should have but little difficulty in seating yourself upon the
throne of the Emperor. Ha ha! A fine plot truly: and a most admirable
successor you would make to our gracious monarch. But I had due notice
of your infamous designs. I have watched you long, old traitor! and only
waited an opportunity for putting an end to your ambitious career. The
object I sought is accomplished. How like you this dungeon? it is not
exactly the palace you expected. And these chains, they are not so
comfortable as the robe of state with which you imagined your vulgar
limbs would be adorned?'

"Truly the dungeon is not agreeable, and the chains do feel rather
heavy," said I, mildly.

"'Be satisfied,' replied he in a tone of mockery; 'you will get used
to them, and they will last your time. I came to gratify myself by
observing how you bore this sudden change in your fortunes. You are
tired of lamenting your miserable fate; you have exhausted your
imprecations upon me and my coadjutors in the government; you--'

"Common sense forbid that I should curse myself or any one, for it could
do no one any good, and might do myself harm," said I.

"''Tis all hypocrisy!' exclaimed Philadelphia, 'your heart is now ready
to burst with vexation--your soul is full of hatred--your mind is intent
upon revenge.'

"Indeed you wrong me," I replied.

"'No doubt, I do,' he added with a sneer. 'You are very much wronged.
You are quite a martyr to your patriotic intentions. Never was man
so ill used. Perhaps you are not a traitor--possibly you are not a
rebel--it may be you did not treacherously plot the destruction of the
peace of my family, by aiding in the elopement of my daughter.'

"A traitor I certainly am not--a rebel I am not--and as for your
daughter's elopement, I know no more than public rumour has declared,
which was, that she left your house to avoid a marriage you were
attempting to bring about against her inclinations," I responded.

"''Tis a lie! 'Tis a low, vulgar, designing lie!' shouted the enraged
noble, as part of his cloak falling from his face disclosed his proud
features distorted by passion. 'You have been scheming to bring about an
alliance between Eureka and your son--a base hound, unfit to breathe in
her presence. Tell me where she is--tell me where you have secreted her;
and wherever she may be, I will tear her limb from limb, rather than
allow her to disgrace herself by any connection with your accursed
family.'

"I know not her asylum," said I. "But I acknowledge I did wish that our
children should be united."

"'And how dared you so presume?' fiercely inquired he. 'Could you not
have found among your own vile money-getting crew some fit companion
for your cub, that you must needs think of uniting him with a daughter
of one of the noblest families in the empire? The world is indeed in a
sorry condition if it can tolerate such things. But that you know where
she is concealed I am assured, and I will have the secret out of you,
if torture can force it from your custody. Your nerves shall be racked,
your flesh lacerated; you shall starve, and die, and rot in this hole.'

"I had been standing before him supporting my chains, as well as I
could, and listening unmoved to his angry speeches; but there now
appeared such a remorseless cruelty in his countenance, that I gazed in
astonishment, almost doubting the possibility that the lamb I had known
could have become so wolfish. To have told him my real name, I plainly
perceived, would only incense him the more. If he hated me at that
moment (and I grieved to think he should regard me with such unsocial
feelings), with such a disposition as he possessed, he would detest me
a thousandfold more, when he knew how much I could injure him. I can
safely say I had no such inclination; and had I been so inclined, which
I gladly affirm was not the case, being so entirely in his power, I saw
that any intimation of such intentions would only have the effect of
hastening my destruction, or of adding to my discomfort; I therefore
still retained my secret. He had folded his arms across his breast, and
was looking sternly upon my face.

"'Then you will not acquaint me with the place of Eureka's concealment?'
he demanded.

"'I could not acquaint you with it if I would, for it is unknown to me,'
I replied; 'and this I have already told you.'

"'I will crush it out of you,' he savagely muttered. 'Think not of ever
being carried alive out of this place. Dream not of rescue. I have taken
care that the swinish mob you were so desirous of leading shall be cut
to pieces by the soldiery wherever they appear in arms. Horse and
foot are ready to act at a moment's notice, and the most destructive
artillery command all the principal streets, and defend every important
building. I defy the whole city; and the first attempt at disturbance
shall be so punished, that the poor deluded fools who are left alive
will be very glad to gain the shelter of their homes. Anticipate no
assistance from that quarter. The short time you have to live will be
passed here, where you can see no human being, and no human being can
see you; where your shrieks cannot be heard, were you to split your
heart in the attempt. Enjoy yourself as you can; prolong your existence
_if_ you can; but, if you are wise, you will strive to escape the death
prepared for you by dashing your traitorous scull against the wall.'
Then fixing on me a threatening scowl, he strode out of the cell.

"'Who could have supposed this possible?' thought I: how strange it
seemed that the child I had known so innocent, and so affectionate,
should have become so guilty and ferocious a man. _Man!_ it libelled
human nature to call him by the name. He was a mere animal, and the
worst of animals; for he gave himself up to the indulgence of his
passions, and pride and prejudice, and ignorance and cruelty, and all
the tribe of evil influences which arose from an engrossing selfishness,
became the principal ingredients of his nature. How I regretted this! I
never yet saw a human being pursuing a path which led to misery, but I
regretted the blindness that made him so obstinately bent on punishing
himself: for I am quite certain that he who wilfully produces suffering
in another must eventually be made to experience the pain he has
created. No one can erect his own happiness upon so wretched a
foundation, without finding the superstructure give way, till it leave
him grovelling in the very wretchedness upon which he ventured to build.
I therefore regret that he should possess such evil inclinations, as
must make him a scourge to himself and others.

"Hours passed on; the evening approached; and, not having tasted food
since the morning, I naturally felt desirous of some refreshment. But
no one came near me. I began to listen for approaching footsteps; but I
heard nothing but a confused rumbling sound, which vibrated through
the prison. The desire for food increased during the night. I tried to
sleep; but the inconvenience of my chains, the coldness and filth of the
floor, and a sensation of gnawing at the stomach, made the enjoyment of
sleep impossible. I walked about; but the heavy irons hurt my legs, and
they soon fatigued me too much to be endured. I leaned against the wall
for support, as I began to feel faint and sick. 'Surely,' thought I,
'it is not intended that I should be left here to famish?' I could not
think so ill of any of my fellow creatures as to imagine that they
would designedly allow me to die the lingering and terrible death of
starvation. But no one approached my cell, and it was noon of the second
day. To the pangs of hunger were added the torments of thirst: my tongue
and throat became parched, and my skin dry as a cinder. Still I thought
that my jailors had forgotten me. Towards evening, the sufferings I
experienced were almost unendurable: I had pains in every limb; I felt
weak as a child, and my skin was burning hot. I endeavoured to think of
some plan by which I might draw my attention from the agony I endured;
and fancied that, if I could bring my mind to the contemplation of the
happiness I had been enabled to create, I should forget the worst part
of my sufferings. So I attempted to remember every instance in which I
had fortunately been the means of securing the enjoyments of some fellow
creature; and, going back as far as my memory could trace, I recalled
the recollection of a poor old blind man, whom, when a boy, I had met
sitting on a bank, weeping and moaning, with the dead body of his
faithful dog, the companion and guide of all his travels, in his lap. I
had with me a beautiful spaniel, of which I was particularly fond; and,
when I heard the poor man lamenting, in a tone that melted me to tears,
that the death of his dog had left him helpless and forlorn, I comforted
him as well as I could. I undid the string that was affixed to the dead
animal, and fastened it to the collar of my own little favourite; gave
him all the money I had about me, and promised to bury his old companion
very carefully in a corner of my garden. To say that he was grateful
would be to make use of too weak a term: his delight appeared to me
extraordinary. He wept more than ever; and the fervour of his blessing
is as fresh upon my ear, after the lapse of more than half a century, as
it was when first uttered. From this commencement I proceeded through
a long list of similar remembrances, each accompanied by a thousand
pleasurable associations, till I found myself regardless of the terrible
wants that had so long been preying on my vitals.

"I had noticed that the only sounds I had heard during my confinement
had seemed gradually to approach the building I inhabited. Louder and
louder they reverberated through the massive walls; and at last I was
enabled to distinguish the deep roar of artillery, that appeared to
shake the prison to its foundations. 'The struggle has commenced,'
thought I: 'blood is flowing like water; the relentless sword is
ploughing its way through the flesh of my fellow-citizens, and thousands
are being shattered and pierced by showers of murderous balls and
shells.' If the words of that fierce man were true, their chances of
success, I knew, could be but slight. 'They are being slaughtered like
sheep,' I cried; and every concussion produced by the report of the
thundering cannon made me shudder with fear. All night the conflict
proceeded. I had sunk exhausted upon the floor. I could remember
nothing; I could think of nothing. I was rapidly sinking into
insensibility, in the early part of the morning, when I became roused by
hearing the uproar of cannon and musketry, and the shouts of infuriated
men, so near, that I was convinced that the people had attacked the
prison. I felt the concussion of the artillery most distinctly, which
sounded as if the besiegers were battering down the walls; and the
continued burst of volleys of musketry was evidence of the spirit with
which the attack was carried on. About an hour passed without the
slightest cessation of the tumult,--and to me it was an age of agonising
suspense,--when the firing slackened; but whether the attacking party
had been beaten off, or had gained possession of the building, I knew
not. Some minutes, which seemed hours, passed; and I thought I could
distinguish voices approaching. In a moment, I heard them distinctly.

"'Where are you, my benefactor?' shouted one.

"'Speak to us, my preserver!' cried another.

"'Porphyry! Porphyry, our friend, we come to your rescue!' exclaimed
a dozen others; and I could hear them traversing the prison in every
direction in search of me. My heart was so full at the kindness of
these good men, that, had my strength been unimpaired, I could not have
uttered a word; and I allowed my deliverers to pass the door without
attempting to communicate to them the place of my concealment. A few
moments passed, and they again approached. My heart beat more rapidly.
I tried to husband all my remaining strength.

"'Porphyry! Porphyry!' shouted a hundred anxious voices.

"'Porphyry! Porphyry!' was echoed in every cell.

"'Here, my friends!' I exclaimed, as loudly as my feebleness would
allow.

"'That is him!' they all cried.

"'I know his voice among a thousand,' said one; 'and I am certain it
came from within this chamber.'

"'Down with the door!' shouted others.

"In a moment a thousand hammers seemed to be vigorously driven against
the door. The men cheered each other on in the labour: each exerted
all his force; and in a few seconds the heavy bolts were shivered to
splinters, and, with a piercing hurra! a crowd of eager friends burst
into the cell. As soon as they saw my condition, their hearts were
filled with commiseration.

"'It isn't a place to turn a dog in,' said one, indignantly.

"'The miscreants!' muttered another.

"'Look at these terrible chains!' cried a third.

"'The tyrants!' exclaimed several.

"'Let us carry him from this miserable hole; he is too weak to move,'
said a man whom I had befriended.

"'I will bear a hand: he rescued me from a prison!' exclaimed one.

"'And I: he saved me from ruin,' shouted another. And by these grateful
creatures I was carefully carried into the open air, with my chains
still about me, and in the wretched plight in which I had been found;
where, on being shown to the multitudes of armed citizens that thronged
the streets, I was received with shouts of triumph mingled with
imprecations on my oppressors; and, accompanied by an escort of a
hundred thousand men, I was conveyed in safety to my own house; my
chains were taken off; and the most skilful physicians being immediately
in attendance, I rapidly recovered to my usual state of health.

"I ascertained that, as soon as my seizure became known, the church
bells were rung to arms, the stones in the streets were torn up, and
barricades, which served to block up the thoroughfare from the advance
of horse, and as intrenchments from which a galling fire could be poured
upon the approaching troops, were formed across the streets. The first
day, although there was great slaughter on both sides, no important
advantage was gained by either party; and at night the soldiery remained
under arms, and the people were busily employed in preparing to renew
the conflict. Leaders were appointed of tens, of hundreds, and of
thousands; and the grand point of attack was the arsenal and the
ammunition magazines; while, at the same time, the military were kept
sufficiently employed at all the posts they occupied. After a most
obstinate resistance, the arsenal was carried; and the arms there found
soon obtained owners willing to use them. Ammunition was acquired in
a similar manner; and the result of these attacks gave to the popular
cause a vast accession of strength. The barracks of the military, and
the prison in which political offenders were incarcerated, were next
sought out. The object of the attack on the former was to harass the
soldiery as much as possible; and the aim of the latter was to find
out my concealment, for the purpose of effecting my liberation. It was
impossible to exceed the enthusiasm of the people when approaching the
places where they imagined I was confined. They shouted my name, and
rushed through the thickest fire with a valour that nothing could
resist. Many of the prisons were pulled down after a fruitless search
for the object they sought; and then they proceeded from these to
others, till the day was spent. It was found impossible to approach the
palace, as a chain of posts was established all round it, supported by
an immense strength of artillery and powerful bodies of horse and foot,
from which the citizens had been several times repulsed during the day;
but at night, when the tired soldiery were endeavouring to snatch
that repose which two days' constant fighting rendered necessary, a
simultaneous attack was made at every available point by a countless
myriad of armed citizens; and, although they obtained possession of many
pieces of cannon, after fighting desperately till daybreak, they found
themselves compelled to retreat, with very considerable loss. After
this, it was resolved to draw a line of strong intrenchments round this
chain of posts, so as to prevent any communication or supplies reaching
them from other parts of the city, or from the surrounding country, and
then to crush in detail the resistance that might be offered at other
positions; and this plan was being put in practice when my concealment
was discovered, and I was set at liberty.

"The knowledge of the treatment I had received, while it inflamed the
hearts of my countrymen, created for me even a more powerful sympathy
than I had previously excited. As soon as I was able to attend to what
was going forward, the leading men of the movement waited upon me, and
communicated all that had transpired since my imprisonment; and, after
assuring me that the enemy must surrender in a few days, or, if they
moved from their position, be cut to pieces, they stated that they
were commissioned by the people to offer me the chief authority of the
nation, under whatever name or character I should judge most beneficial
to the state. I need scarcely add that I refused the flattering gift.
I did more; I told them the many attempts the late Emperor had made to
force on me his distinctions, and their result. I told them that my
object had been to live as a private individual, endeavouring to effect
among my fellow men as much good as I had the power to create; that
I had lived happily as one of themselves, and, as one of themselves,
I wished happily to die. I told them that, as far as my advice and
assistance could tend to their advantage, they might always command
them. I endeavoured to prove to them the danger of changing the form
of government, without being prepared with a better; and strived to
convince them that it was much more to the interest of humanity, and to
the advantage of the citizens, not to drive to desperation the powerful
army still remaining, to which they were opposed; but, with the
superiority they possessed, to attempt to bring about an adjustment of
the quarrel between the government and the people, on such terms as
should leave the latter nothing to desire, and the former no power to
tyrannise.

"My suggestions were not received with the cordiality which they
deserved. The deputation talked of the merciless slaughter of the
citizens--the cruelty that had been exercised upon me--and the necessity
of making an example of the offenders. I answered, that it would only
be treading in the steps of our oppressors by desiring vengeance for
injuries--that those who had been wronged could receive no benefit by
the death of those who had injured them--that the evils the government
had committed could not be remedied by their destruction--and that
it was the most unwise policy a community could follow, to punish
an offence that had been committed by taking a life, for it made it
impossible that the offender should ever make amends to society for the
mischief done. 'Prevent as effectively as possible,' said I, 'the evil
doer from repeating a wrong, and let him, by the exercise of virtuous
inclinations among the community, outweigh the evil he has effected,
and you will do more good than has been done by punishment since the
creation of the world.'

"I regretted to observe a disinclination to follow my advice. The hearts
of my companions seemed filled with resentment, and their minds with
prejudice. Again they pressed on me the offers of the people, and again
I refused; and then they took their leave of me, expressing their
intention of acquainting the citizens with my resolution. I was most
anxiously desirous that the warfare should terminate; and, knowing that
the time was opportune for exacting the most favourable conditions
for the nation from the government, I was eager to bring about an
accommodation. The mass of my countrymen I found too much heated by
the conflict to listen with a proper feeling to the peaceful measures
it was my aim to accomplish. Arms were still in their hands, and the
blood of their friends still stained the public streets. I published my
sentiments among them in the most convincing form of which I was master;
and, in addition to the opinions I have already stated, I offered, if
they would intrust me with the office, to act as mediator, having
powers to effect an arrangement between the contending parties on such
conditions as would secure the liberties of the people on the most firm
and enlarged basis, and reduce the influence of the crown to an extent
which would not be dangerous to the community.

"Five days had elapsed since the contest commenced; and the troops were
hemmed in around the palace, deprived of sufficient provisions, and
harassed in every way that the valour and ingenuity of the citizens
could devise. The ministers had now become as humble as they had before
been intolerant. They attempted to bring about a reconciliation. They
offered largely, and promised more. There they were, in the midst of
sixty thousand picked men, trembling for the consequences of their own
misgovernment; for they saw that the whole country was in the hands of
the citizens, and that it would be impossible much longer to continue a
resistance. Hitherto all their efforts at accommodation had been treated
with studied indifference; but, having succeeded in procuring from the
people the office I desired, I immediately set about communicating with
the government the only terms upon which peace could be restored; and
these were, that the ministers by whom the Emperor had been advised in
his late measures should be banished from the court--never again to
exert any authority over the people--and that half their estates should
be confiscated to the relations of those who had perished in the
conflict--that the Emperor should grant a charter to the people, by
which all the privileges of freemen--right of opinion--liberty of
conscience--a perfect representation of the popular will--unshackled
trade--a liberal patronage of genius and industry--and the abolition of
oppressive taxes and undeserved pensions should be preserved to them
and their posterity for ever--that a standing army, beyond what was
necessary to maintain security from foreign invasion, should no longer
exist--and that no attempt should be made by the Crown either to punish
any citizen who had assisted in the late struggle, or to repossess
itself of the power which had been found so dangerous to the welfare of
the people.

"I suppose these conditions seemed hard; for some days elapsed, and
frequent attempts were made to have them rendered more agreeable. Not
only did I refuse to alter them in the slightest degree, but I at last
gave them four and twenty hours for consideration, at which time, if
they were not accepted, I stated that I should insist upon unconditional
surrender. Before the day was over, the conditions were agreed to--the
charter signed and sworn to by the Emperor, in the presence of an almost
countless multitude of citizens--the ministers, among whom, of course,
was that unpitying man, Philadelphia, were banished from the city;
half their estates were confiscated, and a new and more liberal
administration chosen in their place--and, as the intelligence extended
from one end of this mighty empire to the other, nothing was heard but
sounds of congratulation and gladness, of thankfulness for the past, and
hope for the future. All that I had desired was accomplished. The marks
of the recent strife were soon erased. The citizens, returning to their
social duties, ceased to think of the wounds they had received and
inflicted; and all the blessings of peace began to flow in their
accustomed channels. Had the struggle continued with the design of
overpowering all opposition, and changing the form of government, the
war would have been resumed in the provinces; might have been prolonged
from father to son in efforts to restore the fallen dynasty; and, as a
change, when attempted in a settled form of government, always produces
an unsettled state of the public mind, the country would have been
continually disturbed, and the happiness of the people rendered
exceedingly insecure.

"All Columbia are satisfied with my exertions: they acknowledge the
worth of what I have done. Even the Emperor seems desirous of paying me
attention; and, although I have not much faith in his sincerity, his
conduct serves to keep up the harmony which prevails. And, by my refusal
to accept power at the expense of the happiness of my fellow-citizens, I
have now the gratification of seeing the country prosperous, the people
enjoying a greater degree of liberty than they have known for centuries,
and the whole population vying with each other to show their estimation
of my services. There is one thing that gives me peculiar satisfaction;
and that is, your absence from the country at this eventful period. I
know that, had you been here, your impetuous spirit would have hurried
you into every wild and rash undertaking, and that you would have
effected more mischief in a day than I should ever have been enabled to
efface. Proceed with your voyage, Oriel, and when you return you will
have reason to rejoice at the change which has been produced during your
absence."

Oriel Porphyry had read the preceding communication with intense
interest; every moment stopping to regret that he should have been so
far away at a period so important.

"Oh, had I but been there!" he exclaimed at the conclusion. "Here is a
golden opportunity lost! The very moment for which I have so anxiously
looked has escaped me. The great battle has been fought, and I not in
the field. Surely, such a disappointment is enough to make one curse
one's destiny. My father's notions are too chimerical. He is good--ay,
the very best among the good; but his spirit is not young enough for the
age. He should have crushed the hydra when he had it at his feet. Had
I but been there! He will find, too late, that it is no use patching
things that are radically bad: they cannot be mended; they are worn
out, rotten, and useless. And that proud tyrant to have used him so
inhumanly! Had I but been there! What a field there was for exertion,
what splendid opportunities for daring valour! Perhaps a body of two
hundred thousand armed citizens, all eager, all desperate, wanting only
a leader to make them irresistible. Oh, this wretched fate, that kept me
here like an inactive slave, while glory is to be won by a mere effort!
And he was offered the supreme authority, and refused it? Noble, but
unwise. He could confer more good on the people in a year than this
thing, called an Emperor, can effect during the whole of his useless
existence. Now the time is gone. The renown after which I yearn, the
distinction and the power, would have been mine, had I been in the place
where it might have been acquired. Had I but been there! How long am
I to carry on this profitless existence? How long must I be forced to
stifle my own energies, and live, from day to day, in the same dull
round of inactivity? Must the wings of that spirit, that soars so far
above the unambitious herd, still continue to be pinioned, leaving me
to crawl upon the earth, following out the same ignoble purposes as
those around me? Oh, deplorable fate! The rock to which Prometheus was
chained, and the bird that pierced his vitals, are but types of the
barrenness of my prospects, and the disappointed hopes that prey upon my
peace. Oh, wretched destiny! The thirst with which Tantalus was devoured
was a blessing, compared with the curse with which I am tormented.
Eureka! Eureka! The greatness I have desired so earnestly, to make me
more worthy of your excellence, has been waiting for my eager grasp,
while I was far, far from its reach. Oh, had I but been there!"




CHAP. VI.

CHINA, ITS LAWS, CUSTOMS, AND PEOPLE.


The Albatross was just entering the Chinese sea, and making way in
gallant style through the heavy waves. Her crew were numerous, and of
picked men, chosen at the different ports at which the ship had touched
since her departure from the pirates' haunt on the Madagascar coast, by
the experienced judgment of Captain Hearty. Several promotions had taken
place among the old hands. Climberkin, who had distinguished himself on
many occasions as a brave and skilful seaman, became second in command.
Boggle, though liable to confuse his understanding with abstract
speculations, was always to be depended upon in an emergency, and was
honest, persevering, and well acquainted with the management of a
ship at sea, and he was made second lieutenant. Loop was created a
midshipman. Oriel Porphyry had offered to settle Ardent in comfortable
circumstances in his native country; but he stated that having lost all
that made dear to him the land of his birth, and having found so many
kind friends on board the Albatross, he should prefer remaining in the
vessel in any capacity in which he could be of service, and as he was
known to be well qualified for the office, to him were assigned the
duties of purser and captain's clerk. As for Roly Poly, the offer of an
empire would not have induced him to resign the custody of the roast and
boiled; and he therefore continued absolute and undisputed sovereign
of the cook-house. He seemed to be getting fatter every day. His back
appeared to bend beneath the load of flesh it carried, and his huge
black cheeks had become so large as to threaten to close up his eyes. To
gain his good opinion, nothing was necessary but to praise his cookery;
but as soon as any poor fellow attempted to find fault with the viands,
or the way in which they were dressed, the abuse he received for what
was considered his presumption and ignorance, made him glad to make his
peace with the indignant cook upon any terms. For all this Roly Poly
was held in much estimation by his shipmates. The important service he
rendered with his mop was not forgotten; and though he was continually
relating in a manner peculiarly his own, the way in which he had
served out "dat ignorant jackmorass who sulted him by telling diclus
impossumbilities," the story was invariably received with the same
hearty laugh and boisterous praise that marked the first hearing.

Although the manners of Captain Hearty and his officers were rather
unpolished, the education which was common to all Columbians, and the
experience they had gained in their profession, made them perfectly
qualified to fulfil the duties they had undertaken; and the ship was
as skilfully navigated, as if under the superintendence of the most
gentlemanly officers in the service. As has before been stated, the
commercial character of the Albatross had been changed by skilful hands
for one of a more threatening aspect, nor was the alteration at all
displeasing to the taste of Oriel. The only pleasure he seemed to enjoy
with any zest, was in seeing the men exercised at the guns, practising
at a mark, or engaged in improving themselves in the use of the
broadsword; and in these pursuits he would join with intense interest,
encouraging those who seemed anxious to excel, and rewarding those who
evinced the most skill. His satisfaction at the arming of the vessel
was increased when he considered the possibility of being attacked
by pirates in the different seas that lay in the ship's course, who
might easily, as Captain Death and his associates had done, have made
themselves masters of the Albatross; but who would now find it a matter
very difficult to be accomplished.

"Come Zabra, I am plagued to death by my own thoughts. Cheer me with a
song:" said Oriel Porphyry to his young friend as they sat together in
the cabin.

"That you shall have, Oriel," replied the handsome musician, as his hand
ran lightly over the chords of the harp; "and I will try to humour your
martial feelings to keep you in good temper with yourself. Listen to


"THE SONG OF THE HERO TO HIS SWORD.

  "'FOE SMITER! To the light thy blade I draw,
      To gaze enraptured on thy glitt'ring sheen:
    I see thee still, thou gem without a flaw!
      Sharp, strong, and shining, as thou'st ever been
    Since that proud day when first the spoilers came,
    Reddening my own fair land with blood and flame,
    With vig'rous arm I pluck'd thee from thy sheath,
    And made thee drink the crimson draught of death!

  "'DEATH DEALER! Here I have thee once again!
      I see thy fatal lightning flashing near,
    As round me rise the spirits of the slain,
      And the dark shadows, shudd'ring, disappear.
    Who ever stood unscathed before thy path?
    Who ever lived to babble of thy wrath?
    Annihilation must thy deeds proclaim,
    And conquest grant thy memory to fame!

  "'FAME WINNER! Let me grasp thee firmer yet;
      New fields are to be fought, new foes to dare;
    I must have glory ere the sun hath set;
      I yearn new triumphs, noble spoils to share.
    See where th' insulting enemy advance!
    And as they come, with dark and scornful glance,
    Waving thy brilliant steel I seek the fray,
    And pierce the quiv'ring flesh that stops my way!'"

"By all that's glorious, 'tis a noble strain!" exclaimed Oriel, while
his brilliant eyes flashed with excitement; "a strain fit to stir the
heart to noble deeds. I feel my soul thrilled with an heroic spirit that
would do battle even with the fierce enemy--Death! Give me a fair field
and a good cause--a band of warlike brothers moved by the same mighty
impulse as that by which I am now excited--and let us have fit weapons
and enough of them, and we would sweep the oppressors of the world from
the earth, like rotten reeds before a whirlwind. Wisely did the ancients
honour their bards above all human greatness. Well was it that they
gave them precedence and dignity and wealth in abundance--the gold
chain round the neck, and the seat of honour near the throne. If they
possessed but the power you have evinced, they were worthy of the first
place and the richest gifts: for they must have been the leading spirits
of the age--the movers of armies--the winners of triumph. What nature,
with the common energies of manhood, could resist such a stimulus?
Stone walls, the crushing iron, and the penetrating steel--would these
be as obstacles in its way? Straws! Had I lived in those days, the
leader of a warlike generation, and heard a song such as you have sung,
I should have felt inclined to have exalted the bard above my own
dignity, knowing that his influence upon the dispositions over which I
ruled could be rendered far more effective for the purposes that gave
me supremacy, than my own."

"I expected it would move you in some measure," said Zabra, gazing with
affectionate interest upon the flushed cheek of his patron.

"Move me! would a mælstrom move me?" cried the young merchant. "It seems
to have stirred the sluggish blood in every hidden vein and artery. My
brain throbs as if it would move up the scalp in which it is confined,
and the pulsations of my heart appear to have acquired the action of a
boiling torrent."

"I am afraid I have done mischief," observed the musician anxiously; "I
did not count upon producing so violent an effect. Let me undo the evil
I have created by singing to you some lyric of an opposite tendency."

"Where got you this power?" asked his companion, fixing a searching
glance upon the lustrous eyes before him. "By what means gained you
the rare art which you practise with such wondrous effect? Your's is no
common skill for the ignorant to admire; it is an influence which the
most tutored in worldly wisdom must feel and worship. You never could
have gained it while employed in the laborious idleness of a page. You
are too young to have acquired it by study. What mystery is this you
have gathered around you which gives you such a mastery over the
affections of your associates?"

A slight tremor passed over the graceful form of the young musician: his
eyes shrunk before the earnest gaze of Oriel Porphyry, and, shaded by
their long dark lashes, were fixed upon the floor.

"I will tell you;" said he at length. "Although great care was taken
with my education, from a very early age I was left much to my own
inclinations; and being gifted with an extraordinary love for knowledge,
and a rare facility in its acquirement, and a powerful tendency towards
that knowledge which was most ennobling, I rapidly obtained a degree
of intelligence which was rarely found even in a more mature period of
life. There were two particular objects of study to which I for years
dedicated an intense degree of attention: these were music and poetry.
Music was a source of the most exquisite gratification to me at all
times, and I applied diligently to make myself master of all its
difficulties. In this, after constant application, superintended
by the best masters, I succeeded, so as to be able to create at
pleasure any effect I was desirous of producing. In the study of
poetry I had no teachers, excepting the only teacher capable of giving
instruction--Nature. I went amid the stir of leaves in the heart of the
primeval forest; I stood beneath the dazzling glances of the countless
eyes of heaven; I looked down upon the waters of the great deep, till
I knew how to interpret its mighty voices; and the whisper of the wind
to the blushing flower became to me a lesson full of an exquisite and
impressive eloquence. There was not a sound in the air--a light upon
the skies--a splendour on the earth--or a motion in the sea, that did
not assist me in my study; for there were beauty and truth and power;
and these are the constituents of all natural poetry. But there was
something still wanting to breathe the spirit of life into the new
conceptions that had been created in my nature. This I found; and
from that time there has been a gladness in what I knew, and a purpose
in what I did. Now let me remove the too powerful impression I have
produced, by something more in accordance with my own sympathies. You
shall hear 'The Poet's Song to his Mistress.'"

A symphony, full of the most touching interest, preceded a melody so
impassioned, yet so sweet in its expression, and harmonised in so
rich and masterly a manner, that the young merchant had soon all his
faculties engaged in deep and earnest attention.

   "That I should love thee is not strange,
      For excellence doth love create;
    But that my love should die or change
      Can never be--'tis not in Fate:
    For as thy worth, in heaven's bright view,
      Must ever hold its glorious stature;
    Shall not that bliss which from it grew
      Partake of its immortal nature?

   "Nor can exist a taint of schism
      In these fond feelings thou hast made;
    For, like the colours in the prism,
      They cannot change, they never fade.
    Thus is it, then, sweet friend! my love
      From thy fond worth Time ne'er can sever;
    And must a natural goodness prove:
      Things made from gold are sterling ever."

At the conclusion of this song, which Zabra sang with a thrilling pathos
which must have reached the heart of his auditor, the two friends were
interrupted by a message from the captain, to acquaint Oriel that a
pilot had come on board to conduct the vessel up the river to Canton;
and that if he wished to observe the Chinese coast, there was now an
excellent opportunity. All thought of poetry and music seemed forgotten
for the time; for the musician and the young merchant immediately
hastened upon deck.

The Albatross was passing Macao, and steering her course towards
Whampoa; and a group were on the quarter-deck noticing the appearance of
the country, the junks and other strange vessels they were passing, and
making observations upon what they saw.

"We are approaching a people," said Fortyfolios, "who, if they are not
the most ancient that exist, lay claim to an antiquity of which few
could boast. They are the most extraordinary race on the globe, and the
most unchangeable in their habits. Though they preceded the rest of the
world in the march of civilisation; though they invented the arts of
printing, and of manufacturing silk fabrics and porcelain goods; though
they discovered the composition of gunpowder and the use of the magnetic
compass; they have never progressed beyond these advances. Thousands
of years have passed--nations that were not then in existence, in
intelligence have left them far behind--and still they remain exactly
as they were, and are not only indifferent to the improvements around
them, but look upon all other nations as barbarians unworthy of their
association. In vain have they been conquered: conquest could make no
change in their habits or opinions. Among the most celebrated of their
masters were the Manchews, a people doubtless so called from their
attachment to cannibalism, by whom they were held in subjection for
several centuries; and the English, who made a conquest of their empire
when in the zenith of their greatness. Their subjugation by the latter
was caused by their own pride and insolence. The Chinese were so
impressed with an opinion of their own superior greatness, that they
behaved to all foreigners who visited their shores for the purposes of
traffic with humiliating insolence. They were only allowed to trade
at one port, their merchandise was subjected to the most arbitrary
duties, and their merchants were treated with every kind of insult.
This was borne for a considerable period by the mercantile world, in
consideration of the importance of their commerce, and the impossibility
of finding their exports in other countries. But toleration only
increased the audacity of the Chinese authorities. They proceeded to
acts of violence: several vessels were plundered, and their crews were
murdered, or carried away, and never heard of after. At last the
English, having endured this treatment without being able to procure the
slightest redress, determined on retaliation. From their possessions in
India they invaded the Chinese territory with a powerful army, and at
the same time ravaged their coasts with a naval armament that destroyed
their shipping, plundered their towns, and laid their defences in ashes.
The Chinese, as cowardly as they had been insolent, though possessed
of an immense population and extraordinary resources, made but a feeble
resistance, and were glad to purchase peace upon any terms they could
make; but the English had discovered the weakness of their enemy, and
had not forgotten the oppressions they had endured, and did not desist
from the conflict till they had annexed the mighty empire of China to
their immense dominions in India."

"All very true," added Tourniquet. "They were ignorant, bigoted, and
slavish, but for all that they were the most prosperous nation under
the sun, don't you see."

"Their prosperity was occasioned by the laws by which they were
governed," said the professor. "Industry was encouraged. Agriculture was
pursued as the most honourable occupation, as one in which the emperor
delighted; and obedience was inculcated as the first duty of a citizen."

"But what was the spirit of their laws?" inquired Oriel Porphyry.

"Every father of a family was despotic in his own household: the emperor
was regarded by his subjects with the same reverence that a family
looked up to its domestic ruler; and an offence against the monarch was
punished in a similar manner as an offence against the parent;" replied
Fortyfolios.

"I can imagine no state of things so arbitrary and so contrary to common
sense, don't you see;" observed the doctor. "By such a law, whether a
man be a drunkard or a profligate, a fool or a knave, he has unlimited
supremacy over his offspring; he can punish with death when he pleases,
and the poor wretches who acknowledge his relationship, dare not murmur.
He is a father; and fatherhood, like charity, covereth a multitude of
sins. There is nothing so ridiculous as this notion. No individual in
the great family of nature is entitled to the slightest respect, unless
he is respectable in his conduct. All relationship is an accident. A
father has no right to the obedience of his child, because he is his
father: that can only be the most absurd of claims; for he produced the
child to please himself, and at the time could have no sympathy towards
an object that was not in existence."

"That cannot be disputed;" replied the professor. "But I must maintain,
that obedience in a child, to a reasonable extent, ought to exist as a
natural consequence of the care and anxiety of parentage."

"Granted, with the limitations;" said the surgeon. "When a father brings
up his child with a proper affection, affection from the offspring
ought to be expected; but in no case has the parent a right to implicit
obedience, unless he has so acted, and the law he wishes to make
absolute is such as will not affect the welfare of the child. In many
instances the son possesses more intelligence than the father; and
yet, if parental subjugation were allowed, the wise must be held in
subjection by the opinion of the ignorant."

"I should imagine such a form of government likely to be very ancient;"
observed Oriel.

"It is unquestionably of great antiquity, and derived from the
patriarchal ages, when the oldest member of the family held supreme
authority over the rest;" responded Fortyfolios.

"About as much as the ocean has originated from the drops of rain that
fell from the sky, don't you see;" added the doctor.

"I maintain that the progenitors of the Chinese were a nomadic race;"
said the professor rather sharply.

"Granted; and what then?" inquired the surgeon, in his usual
good-humoured manner.

"That they were a collection of single families," continued
Fortyfolios.

"So are all nations at the present time, don't you see;" remarked the
doctor.

"Not in the manner which existed at the age to which I allude;" rejoined
his antagonist. "Every man dwelt in his own tent, surrounded by his
children and his children's children, and wandered with his herds and
flocks, to wherever he could find them sufficient pasturage. He governed
as a monarch with power of life and death, and the rules he found
necessary to preserve his government he transmitted to his successor;
till, the family increasing, it was found necessary that they should
separate into distinct divisions, each having its own father or ruler,
and, residing for mutual protection near each other, they constituted
tribes. The rules, which the experience of the first father had found
necessary for maintaining his authority, had been conveyed with
modifications and additions through his successors, till they became
possessed by the elders of the tribe, in whom all wisdom and government
resided; until the increase of their numbers, and the want of sufficient
accommodation, induced them to invade the more desirable territory of
other tribes; and then it was that he who distinguished himself most
in this warfare obtained supremacy over the rest, and having conquered
other tribes, and rendered himself by his superior bravery the object of
fear and admiration, he became king of all the people who acknowledged
his rule, and governed them by the laws that had existed previously in
his own particular family or tribe."

"A very plausible hypothesis, but nothing more, don't you see;" replied
the doctor. "Doubtless all societies originated in one family, the
supreme head of which did what he thought fit; but I doubt much whether
he exercised such an authority as could sacrifice a life for an offence
real or imaginary; or created any code of laws for the government of
his relations. He did only what he thought necessary for the time;
and whether that constituted a precedent or not, it is not easy to
determine. The punishment which would be necessary at one time, might
not be thought necessary at another, don't you see. Where the judge is
absolute, and has no constitution to guide him, it is the mood in which
he may be when called upon to judge, that makes the sentence severe or
mild; and every judge, being independent of any higher authority, and
liable to act from prejudice or partiality, would create nothing but
inconsistent decisions, which could never be tolerated as a code
of laws. It is opinion that creates law. The heterogeneous mass of
absurdities that the few promulgate to hold the many in subjection would
not be tolerated except in a state of perfect slavery. Where there
is any intelligence among the people, and intelligence must make its
appearance sooner or later, every law that is found existing passes the
ordeal of public opinion, and if it be unwise or unjust, it will not be
regarded or its abrogation will be enforced. The multitude have a better
notion of the difference between right and wrong, than is generally
supposed; and nothing is so productive of a clearness of distinction in
these things among the people than a proper simplicity and applicability
of the laws by which they are governed. It is intelligence that produces
opinion, don't you see--and opinion that creates law--and law cannot
long exist in opposition to opinion."

While the disputants were intently engaged in their argument, Oriel
Porphyry and Zabra had walked to another part of the deck, where the
captain and his lieutenant were giving orders about the management of
the vessel.

"Fine old country, this, captain;" said the young merchant.

"Yes, sir," replied Hearty: "fine old country, certainly. They do say
it's as old as Methusalem; but I never was in sight o' that coast,
therefore can't say what difference there may be between 'em."

"You have been in this part of the world before, I should suppose?"
inquired Oriel.

"Many times," responded the old man: "I knows the place well. I've been
afloat ever since I was a small craft as could hardly steer without
capsizing; and there arn't many seas in the world as I haven't been
over. John Chinaman and I are 'ticular acquaintances, because I've seen
a good deal on him. He's rather smart in his own notions o' himself,
but he makes a good reefer when aboard, and he'll carry like a steam
engine when ashore. Often when I've landed at this port from one or
other o' your father's ships, I've seen him bearing sich loads as 'ould
make a horse's back bone unkimmen ticklish. We're enterin' the river
now; and after sailing a few points west of north, we shall be nigh upon
the first bar, from whence we must steer due west to Whampoa, where we
shall cast anchor. You'll have then to go about ten miles to the
Factories, to which you must proceed in boats."

"What strange looking ships these are;" remarked Zabra, pointing to
several vessels they were passing.

"Ay, they are very queer shaped craft," said the captain. "But John
Chinaman's no great shakes at ship-buildin', although he thinks he's
wonderful. Look at that heavy lumbering junk. She looks like a great
thick-headed old muff, as does'n't know his helm from his taffrail. The
Albatross would take the conceit out o' her in no time. And look at
these here outlandish looking barges--there's no sense in 'em."

"The country has rather an interesting character;" observed Oriel.

"It's all accordin' to taste," replied Hearty.

"These here islands o' sand ar'nt 'ticularly lovely to my thinking; and
I can't abide the ugliness o' the craft."

"In what manner do these people now behave to foreigners?" inquired
Zabra.

"Why it ar'nt quite so bad as what I've read on in ancient history;"
said the captain. "They've had a sick'ner for coming that sort o' fun;
but they coil up their noses pretty stiffish even now. They allow
travellers to wander about and examine their notables, which they did'nt
use to do; but I should recommend any fellow, who's more nor ordinary
'quisitive, to look out for squalls. I have heard say as people ha' been
missed who was axing their way through the country; and not a spar or a
bolt-rope on 'em ever heard on again."

"About five years ago I was in this here part o' the world," said
Climberkin, joining in the conversation; "and I had a very narrow escape
o' bein' done for in that fashion. I was bo'sun aboard the Whittington,
a reg'lar tip top merchantman, as Master Porphyry had in the China trade
at that time, and after a wearisome cruise I had been jollificating up
the country with a few mates, when I came alongside as smart a piece o'
China ware as ever I clapped my eyes on. Well, she did'nt understand
none o' my lingo, and I could'nt circumnavigate any o' her'n; but we
had signals flying at our eyes like winkin', and we pretty soon heaved
to, and were yard arm and yard arm, and looked at each other till
all was blue again. I discovered that she belonged to the crew o' a
man-tea-maker's 'stablishment, and got her livin' pretty comfortable,
by alays 'turnin' over a new leaf (though she never did nuffin wrong
to sinnify); and so I thought as how if that was the way o' sailin',
I might bring her to book wi' her own leave, without any botheration
whatsomdever. Just as I was making way in the business, I received a
'munication from one o' my mates, who was up to their lingo, that some
half a dozen o' the Chinamen with whom she 'sociated, were on a reg'lar
take in about my consortin' wi' her, and had entered into a 'spiracy
to nail down the hatches on my goings on. Me and my little frigate were
in the habit o' cruisin' in a grove o' prime timber, by the side o' a
rice field, and it was here-about's that the man-tea-makers thought o'
dishing me as strong as could be; but I took care that they should meet
wi' a mighty difference. After preparin' every thin' as was necessary,
I got my mates to lie in ambush, and began a courtin' a way in a style
as would make the jealousy rise out o' a dead nigger. I had'nt been
long at this here fun, when up comes the whole lot on 'em screechin'
like mad, and they bears down upon me threatenin' the most completest
spiflification as you can imagine. Their eyes flared up most immensely.
Their teeth seemed playing at knives to grind; and they whirled about
monstrous bludgeons that would have made no bones o' me, had I suffered
'em to scrape my acquaintance. My cretur struck her flag and down she
went; but before the teapots came to close quarters, I put my bo'sun's
whistle into play; and pulled out a pair of 'do-for-you's,' as my mates
coming up and showing the same signs o' welcome, surrounded the poor
devils in such a way as they could'nt move no how."

"And what did you do with your rivals?" inquired Oriel, considerably
amused by the lieutenant's narrative.

"Why, I'd al'ays heard it recommended to do as you'd be done by,"
replied Climberkin; "so we got the sticks from the Chinamen, and took
the flavour out on 'em in a manner as left 'em nuffin to complain of.
But we wern't satisfied with such an act o' justice. You must know that
each o' these tea-dealers has a tail to his head, from two to three feet
long, o' which he is as proud as is a peacock o' his tail, and shaves
all the rest o' his cranium as smooth as glass. Knowin' this, we'd
brought lots o' rosin and twine; and, while some o' our chaps made 'em
lump it if they didn't like it most considerably, we spliced them all
together from the small ends down'ards, for several inches, strong and
tight as a patent cable; then, seeing a tree close at hand with the
loveliest fork possible for our purpose, we hauled 'em up wi' ropes
over the branch till half on 'em hung on one side and half on the
tother, by nuffin in the world but their own precious tails. Didn't they
raise a bit of a shindy! Such howlin', such squallin'--such kickin',
such scratchin'--such a reg'lar rowdy-dow no set o' humans ever made
afore. And there we left 'em, as the ancient poet says, wi' each
partic'lar hair standin' on end, while we crowded all sail to our own
ship."

"It was rather too bad of you, lieutenant," said the merchant's son,
attempting unsuccessfully to look grave; "and I wonder you did not get
yourself into trouble in consequence."

"Why it did raise a smartish bit o' a bobbery," replied Climberkin; "but
we all kept so snug aboard, and sailed so soon arter, that not one on us
were diskivered."

"We shall anchor immediately," said the captain, returning to the group
he had left to speak to the pilot. "Is it your wish, sir, to go ashore?"

"I must be at Canton without delay," rejoined Oriel Porphyry.

"Man the galley, and get a boat's crew ready to proceed up the river,"
shouted Hearty to the second lieutenant.

"Ay, ay, sir," was the ready reply; and while the boat was lowered into
the sea, and all her appurtenances provided, Zabra and his patron made
their arrangements for landing on the Chinese territory.




CHAP. VII.

A CHINESE POET.


In an elegant room, the floor of which was covered with clean white
matting, while the furniture, consisting principally of a divan or sofa,
mirrors, pictures, couches, Japan tables, and large porcelain vases, was
of a superior description, cross-legged on the divan, eating sweetmeats
from a small silver saucer, richly chased, which he held in his hand,
sat a young man, of less than the ordinary stature, with a countenance
that seemed possessed of a perpetual melancholy. He was dressed with the
most studied effect. He wore a robe of dark rich silk, and over it a
vest of delicate blue satin, beautifully figured. Upon his head, which
was shaved, with the exception of a long lock of hair that hung from the
crown over the shoulder, was a small black cap of fine felt, with the
brim turned up, and the crown, of a conical shape, covered with a fringe
of scarlet silk, having a peculiar button in front. Below wide trowsers
were seen stockings of silk, remarkably thin, having their feet cased in
small slippers of embroidered satin; and round his waist was a girdle,
drawn very tight, to which was appended a small gold case, a purse, and
a pouch of silk. Opposite to him sat Oriel Porphyry and Zabra, in their
usual dresses, also eating sweetmeats from similar saucers.

"What an ineffable felicity I enjoy in being able to speak your
language," observed the young Chinese.

"I have no doubt you find it an advantage in your communication with
foreigners," replied the merchant's son.

"An advantage!" exclaimed the other rapturously. "By the great Fo,
'tis the most superlative of enjoyments. I bless the gods that my
mother was an Anglo-Indian, and that she conferred on me the exquisite
gratifications arising from proficiency in the use of her language.
My father passed a great portion of his life in India, and acquired a
facility in its pronunciation which is rarely obtained by a Chinese; so
that I was born with extraordinary advantages."

"You were fortunate, certainly," added Oriel.

"Fortunate! By the immaculate tail of Confucius, I was favoured beyond
all experience," cried his host.

There being nothing more to say on that subject, at least so the young
merchant thought, he inquired--"Your father, I suppose, will be here
shortly?"

"He is paying his devotions at the neighbouring temple. Long Chi enjoys
a religious reputation, and he loves the society of holy men. But I was
telling you of the indescribable happiness I possess in having acquired
a proficiency in my mother tongue," added Long Chi the younger. "I am
blest with a poetic genius."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Zabra, with some surprise.

"Wonderful as it may appear, the fact is what I have stated," replied
the young poet, putting down the silver saucer on a small japanned table
before him, and opening the pouch at his side, from which he took a
bundle of papers. "I may say that my compositions have attracted an
extraordinary degree of attention in the world of letters. They are
considered phenomena in literature, I assure you. Do not imagine I wish
to overrate their value. I should not think of such a thing for the
thousandth part of a moment; and to prove this to you, allow me to
enrapture you with some of my effusions."

"Certainly," said Oriel, expecting at least to be amused.

"The effort of a profound sublimity I am about to breathe into your
enlightened ears, you will have the intellectual discrimination to
observe, is a perfect specimen of the true Anglian pastoral," remarked
Long Chi. "It has been created by that etherial sense of delicious
enjoyment which your ancient poets called love. She for whose immaculate
glorification it was called into existence, is a combination of
miraculous excellencies--an incarnation of inconceivable perfections;
and therefore your superior sagacities must not deem it at all more than
ordinary extraordinary, if the merits of this indestructible conception
fill you with a ravishing amazement."

"From what you have said I should expect something particularly clever,"
observed Zabra, evidently considerably amused by the poet's phraseology.

"Clever!" exclaimed the young Chinese, with emphatic fervour. "By the
great Fo you will find it supernaturally perfect." Then arranging a
rumple in his vest, and taking a glance of satisfaction at the
reflection of his person in a large mirror beside him, with a slow and
careful enunciation of each word, and a peculiar wave of the hand to
mark the measure, the melancholy poet read the following verses:--

   "Have you seen my Fee Fo Fum,
    Tell me did she this way come?
    She it is of whom I speak
    Hath a pink on either cheek;
    In the middle of her face
    Is a flower of nameless grace,
    Which the name of nose hath known,
    And blooms the brightest when 'tis blown.
    And her eyes are garden plots
    Filled with young forget-me-nots,
    That by lovers' eyes are found
    Flow'ring all the seasons round.
    Shepherds did she this way come?
    Have you seen my Fee Fo Fum?

   "If below her nose you look,
    There's a little rosy nook;
    Two twin buds half open ask,
    Smiling, for some fondling task,
    While within, in each row,
    The lilies of the valley grow.
    Just beneath them both begins
    The blossom of the best of chins;
    Fair and round, and smooth as silk,
    And like a peach fresh bathed in milk.
    Shepherds, did she this way come?
    Have you seen my Fee Fo Fum?

   "Breast of mutton, breast of veal,
    All your merits now conceal;
    What can ye afford to taste
    Half so pleasant, half so chaste,
    As the dainty bits that lie
    Hid from epicurean eye?
    What to them compared are ye,
    Calipash and calipee?
    Go! the sweeter flesh I've known
    Wants no sauce to coax it down.
    Shepherds, did she this way come?
    Have you seen my Fee Fo Fum?

   "She of whom I'm in pursuit
    Hath to these a foot 'to boot;'
    Such a foot! 'tis like a rose,
    Budding out with five small toes.
    Calf's foot, likened as a treat,
    To a jelly it would beat:
    She hath two--but my regard
    Makes each foot excel a yard--
    Go any lengths it might reveal,
    Save when she turns upon her heel.
    Shepherds, did she this way come?
    Have you seen my Fee Fo Fum?"

"It certainly is a superlative composition," remarked Zabra, attempting
to conceal a laugh.

"I can safely say I never heard any thing like it," added Oriel in a
similar tone.

"I entertained an incipient conviction that you would find it
marvellously admirable," replied the poet, elevating his head, and
stroking his mustachios. "'Tis ineffably divine, is it not?"

"Beautiful!" exclaimed both, looking at each other with a smile of
peculiar meaning.

"Beautiful!" echoed Long Chi, raising his voice and eyebrows. "By the
invulnerable tail of Confucius, 'tis something for which a name cannot
be found. But exquisitely perfect as it may be, here is a production
that excels it in the very unapproachableness of its excellence."

While the two friends listened with admirable patience, the young
Chinese unfolded another paper, and read with the same gravity these
lines:--

   "When first we met 'twas in the spring,
    When dicky birds begin to sing,
    When nature dishes up her greens
    To make removes for rural scenes;
    And teaches, with unaltered brows,
    When trees take leaf, to make their boughs;
    Then first I met thee passing by,
    Then first I had thee--in my eye.

   "When next we met 'twas summer time,
    When trees, well loaded, seemed to prime;
    And other plants just taking root,
    Meaning no harm, began to shoot;
    When beans their hollow 'shells' would doff,
    And marrow fats were going off;
    Then first our hearts were growing warm,
    Then first I had thee--arm in arm.

   "'Twas autumn when we met again,
    When sunshine parched the peas and plain;
    When plums are blooming on the wall,
    And into flour would gladly fall;
    When apples are to fritters torn,
    And earth's square feet feel many a corn:
    Then first did I forget my fears,
    Then first I had thee--box my ears.

   "I saw thee last when winter, nice
    In eating, loves to have his ice;
    When 'cold without' comes near and far,
    And all his sweetmeats frosted are,
    To ballot when the white balls roll
    Unask'd for, hastening to the poll:
    Then first I 'broke the ice,' and then
    Was I the happiest of men."

"That exceeds the last certainly," said Oriel Porphyry, amused with the
perfect gravity with which the poet read his verses.

"It appears to me quite a new style of poetry," remarked Zabra, with as
much seriousness as he could assume.

"Unquestionably! it is novel in the novelest degree," replied Long Chi,
smiling with all the graciousness of gratified vanity. "I may with the
most complete justice lay claim to be the origin in which originated its
originality. I have studied sublimity. By the great Fo, I may say that;
and I have found the sublime in every individual natural thing that is
in nature; but in cookery and confectionary it predominates, as must be
evident to the inquisitive investigation of any man of taste. It is the
opinion of the most discriminative judges, that no writer of serious
poetry can compete with me."

"In that opinion every one must coincide," observed Zabra.

"There can be no question on the subject," added Oriel.

"Who shall say you are barbarians, when you exhibit such a superabundant
knowledge of the beautiful?" exclaimed the Chinese, with all the energy
he could assume. "I am immeasurably enraptured to notice such an
admirable judgment; and, as an additional proof of the satisfaction
I receive from your friendly attention, I will still, to a much more
infinite extent, delight your auditory nerves with one of the most
serious of my efforts in serious poetry. Mark the true sublime; mark it
well, and see how splendidly it agrees with the magnificent subject. It
is an ode to a sugarplum."

The poet unfolded another paper; and the young merchant shrugged up his
shoulders, as he heard its contents read with the same tone and manner
as its predecessors.

         "How shall I grasp a subject so immense?
            No power of human sense,
                Not all the vast
          Ideas within the Present and the Past--
    Not algebra's most unknown quantity could give the sum
            Of greatness in a sugar plum!

         "What with its sweetness can compete?
            How much it beats the beet!
                Shall manna dare,
          Wanting in manners, with it to compare?
    And honey's linked sweetness, long drawn out, is all a hum,
            'Tis nothing to a sugar plum!

         "Who can deny the sense of truth
            It gives the tongue of youth?
                It hath the praise
          Of being always candied in its ways,
    And stops the carping critic's mouth till he becometh dumb,
            Delighted with a sugar plum!

         "Comfit, come fit my mouth, and I
            In thy sweet praise will try
                My hand at feet,
          With anxious aim to make the metre meet,
    Till Arabic, or any other diff'rent sort of gum,
            Shall water for a sugar plum.

         "Muse, if thy musings can prevail,
            I'll at it tooth and nail;
                I have no nerves
          Of taste for syrups, jellies, or preserves;
    Oh, let them go to pot, say I, as so much worthless scum,
            They cannot make a sugar plum.

         "Bull's eyes may stick within the shop,
            And so may lollapop,
                Elecampane
          Unsucked within its bottles may remain;
    And barley sugar, brandy balls, or even balls of rum,
            I'd spurn to get a sugar plum.

         "Plums from the trees I do not find
            So plummy to my mind;
                Orleans or egg
          Unnoticed for my patronage may beg;
    And damsons may be da--; ah, I'm in a passion, I say mum,
            I'll swear not for a sugar plum."

"You excel yourself, sir," said Oriel Porphyry, with something of
sarcasm in the tone of his voice, arising, perhaps, from his becoming a
little out of patience.

"By the unsophisticated tail of Confucius, you may say that," replied
the poet with the same seriousness he had from the first evinced.
"Having, in so unutterable a manner, obtained the precedency of my
promiscuous cotemporaries, I had no alternative but to enter into
competition with myself. That I have to so wonderful an extent exceeded
my own super-excellence, therefore, cannot be considered strange; but,
as you are evidently gratified in a manner perfectly unparalleled by
the unimaginable superiority of my poetic genius, I will show my
consideration of your admirable sagacity by enrapturing you still more
completely by a more transcendental attempt at the sublime;" and the
young Chinese began unfolding another paper.

"Not now, I'm very much obliged to you," said Oriel, rising as if to
depart. "I have business of importance that requires my immediate
attendance; and, having waited for Long Chi so long, I am afraid I
cannot protract my visit."

"Not to be ravished by the immortal praises of the adorable Fee Fo Fum?"
exclaimed the melancholy poet in the utmost astonishment.

"I cannot allow myself that pleasure at present," said the merchant's
son, courteously, yet looking as if he was impatient to be gone.

"I've written an indestructible epos in fifty cantos, descriptive of all
her beauties, with a due regard of anatomy. I'll read you the whole of
it, if you will stay," added the lover.

"I'm infinitely thankful; but my time is precious," observed Oriel,
making rapid strides to the door.

"I will enrapture you with a thousand hexameters declaratory of my
incommunicable affections," shouted the prolific versifier.

"Good morning to you, Long Chi," exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, as he opened
the door, evidently very desirous of making his escape. He was on the
point of leaving the room, accompanied by Zabra, when he was stopped in
his progress by the appearance of a stout elderly Chinese, wearing the
appearance of profound gravity. No sooner had he entered, than the poet
shuffled his papers hastily into his pouch, jumped off the divan, and
approached the stranger with looks of veneration and awe.

"Father, here are the barbarians you expected," said he. The ceremony of
introduction was soon over; the two friends returned to their seats; and
old Long Chi, seating himself cross-legged on the divan, commenced a
conversation with his visitors, while his son remained standing beside
him in respectful attention. He was dressed in a fashion somewhat
similar to that of the younger Chinese; but the materials were not so
gay, nor were they formed with so much neatness; and he wore boots
of black satin instead of slippers, and a short cloak of fine cloth
trimmed with fur.

"I have been sacrificing at the temple, which has detained me longer
than I anticipated," said Long Chi the elder. "But religion is the first
concern of life. Nothing should stand in the way of religion. The Bonzes
are the only teachers of truth; and the worship of Fo is the only way
that leads to virtue."

Neither Zabra nor his patron attempted to dispute this doctrine.

"I have been reading, father," falteringly uttered the poet--"I have
been reading----"

"Hold your tongue, Long Chi," exclaimed his parent sharply.

"Father, I obey," murmured the obedient youth.

"Obedience is the first of virtues, and duty to parents the first of all
obedience," remarked the old man, with a tone that seemed to his son
more infallible than the sentence. "Children, obey your parents, saith
our religion; and if they are disobedient we give them a touch of the
bamboo." The poet at this moment looked remarkably grave. "Subjects,
obey your rulers, saith the law; and if we become unruly _we_ get a
touch of the bamboo." And the father looked as grave as his son.

"That is, I suppose, what is called being bamboo-zled," observed Oriel
Porphyry with a smile.

"It is no laughing matter to us, I can assure you," added the old man
feelingly; "but it is a fine thing for children. Our religion says,
Spare the bamboo, and spoil the child: and I'm attentive to religion."

"I wish it said, Spoil the bamboo, and----"

"Hold your tongue, Long Chi!" thundered out the parent.

"Father, I obey," tremblingly replied the son.

"The bastinado is the best thing in the world for children," continued
the elder, frowning upon his offspring. "We are obliged to provide for
their bodies, and it is but proper we should do what we can for their
soles. When a schism occurs in the family, I always punish it in that
way."

"Then it becomes a sole-cism," added the young man, sorrowfully.

The old Chinese snatched up a heavy bamboo cane with which he had been
walking, and swung it furiously round his head, with the intention of
dealing a severe blow upon the poet's shoulders, but the lover of
the adorable Fee Fo Fum jumped out of the way with more agility than
submission, and the blow chipped off a corner of the japanned table.

"Is this the way you show your obedience, you undutiful wretch?" shouted
Long Chi, as he jumped off the divan, in a rage after the offender.
"Where's your religion? Where's your duty to parents? Spare the bamboo
and spoil the child! Come and be bastinadoed, you ungrateful youth!"
So saying, he waddled after his son as rapidly as he could, making
desperate attempts to knock him down; but as Long Chi the younger not
only was not so dutiful as to wait to be bastinadoed, but jumped out of
the way of the blows as fast as they were aimed at him, Long Chi the
elder, much fatigued by his exertions, at last returned to the divan,
after having afforded infinite diversion to his visitors.

"I wonder the roof doesn't fall in and cover you, you unnatural
offspring!" exclaimed the father, shaking the bamboo at his son, who
stood trembling at a respectful distance; then wiping the perspiration
from his shaven crown, he added, addressing the young friends, and the
poet, by turns, "You are shocked, no doubt, at this instance of youthful
depravity--Oh the graceless scoundrel! to run away from his affectionate
father, who was going to beat him black and blue!--But I am happy to
say, that there are few children in China so indifferent to the mild
virtues of paternal government.--Come here, and let me knock your
undutiful head into a thousand pieces, you vagabond!--It is a sad thing,
I acknowledge, for the father of a family, who is anxious to bring up
a child in the way it should go, to find it so insensible of his
loving-kindness.--Oh, if I had you near enough, I'd smash you into a
custard, you graceless varlet!--but you see a parent's heart is always
overflowing with natural affection for his own flesh and blood.--By the
great Fo, I should be delighted to bastinado you within an inch of your
life!--Religion and morality, in these atheistical times, are thought
nothing of by some children.--Haven't I brought you up, you heathen! on
purpose to knock you down?--But this isn't the worst of it--they have
become rank republicans. They have no proper notion of law, order, or
government. When the father takes to his bamboo, the son takes to his
heels--abominable rebel!--and when one flies in a passion the other
flies in his face--unparalleled traitor!"

The entrance of servants, announcing that dinner was ready, put an end
to the altercation; and Long Chi the elder, with much suavity, pressed
his visitors to remain his guests for the remainder of the day; which
invitation Oriel Porphyry, imagining that he should be free from all
persecution from the rhyming propensities of his host's son, and
expecting some amusement from the peculiarities of the two, forgot his
engagements, and agreed to prolong his visit. Long Chi the elder then
took one hand of each of his guests in his own and proceeded with them
into a handsome apartment, furnished in a style similar to the one they
had left. In the centre was a small low table, having four seats or
cushions at its sides. The father and son sat opposite each other,
cross-legged: and their visitors sat as comfortably as they could,
facing each other, at the other sides of the table. Before each was
placed three elegant porcelain saucers, one containing soy, another a
small quantity of vinegar, and the other was empty; and, beside these,
were two little ivory sticks. The other part of the table was covered
with similar porcelain saucers, filled with various specimens of Chinese
cookery in fish, flesh, and fowl, cut small; and servants handed round
these with dishes of vegetables, such as cabbages, cucumbers, rice, and
cauliflowers; and pastry of many different kinds, as they were directed
by the host.

Both Oriel and Zabra watched with considerable surprise the two Chinese
take the little ivory sticks in the three first fingers of the right
hand, and, placing the head forward, and opening the mouth wide, dip
them in the saucers, catching up pieces of flesh, which they flavoured
with the vinegar, and dexterously flinging them into their mouths; and
repeating the process so rapidly, that the eye could scarcely follow
their movements. The guests attempted the same manoeuvres; but, as may
easily be imagined, they were not so successful: for one piece that went
into the mouth, a dozen went out; and, rapidly as the different saucers
were handed to them, by the desire of the master of the house, they
found that their appetites were not in any thing like the same degree
becoming satisfied. Pieces of silver paper were frequently placed near
them, with which they as frequently wiped their mouths and fingers, and
not before such an operation was required; for their awkward attempts at
imitating their entertainers occasioned them to deposit on their persons
a considerable portion of the gravy or sauces in which the meat was
dressed. Old Long Chi was indefatigable in endeavouring to make his
visiters taste the contents of every saucer upon the table; in which
effort they would gladly have seconded him, had their ability kept pace
with their inclinations; but, to their exceeding disappointment, they
found that the more they tried the less they swallowed; and, although
they dipped their sticks and bobbed their heads after the savoury viands
as they dropped from their treacherous hold, they had the mortification
of finding, when the saucers were cleared away, that they were left in
the enjoyment of quite as much appetite as they possessed when they
first sat down to dinner.

Several kinds of soups were now brought on table, in curious boat-shaped
vessels of porcelain; and with these, to the great gratification of the
guests, appeared ivory spoons. Every one of the soups was tasted; and
gladly would Oriel have made use of his spoon upon the more substantial
cookeries that had been carried away: but he saw no more of them; and,
the table having been cleared of the soups, fruits, and preserves, with
glasses of a spirit made from rice were handed round. At this time,
Long Chi the elder bent his head reverentially, and said, in a fervent
manner, and with an audible voice,

"Grant, O Fo, that the good things thou hast so bountifully provided for
us do not interfere with our digestion, or trouble us with apoplexy!"
and left the apartment to change his dress; soon after which the guests,
preceded by the younger Long Chi, returned to the saloon, where they
partook of tea and sweetmeats.

"Now that the old boy has gone," said the melancholy poet, as soon as
he had seated himself on the divan, "I will give you the felicitous
gratification of hearing the perusal of my great epic in praise of the
adorable Fee Fo Fum."

"Not for the world!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, with remarkable emphasis;
"I would not trouble you on any account."

"Trouble!" cried the lover, as he commenced searching in his pouch; "by
the inconceivable tail of Confucius, 'tis to me the most superlatively
exquisite of extraordinary gratifications; and, when you come to
entertain a proper consciousness of the inestimable treasures of
intellectual greatness, which I have lavished with so profuse a
liberality for the purpose of giving immortality to the unrivalled
attractions of the adorable Fee Fo Fum, you will acknowledge, with that
profound sagacity which you have already evinced by your commendation of
my incorruptible effusions, that the particular portions of the diurnal
revolution you have passed in obtaining an adequate knowledge of its
innumerable excellences, has appeared to you to proceed with such an
agreeable velocity, that you cannot, with any particular positiveness,
assert that you have, during that period, been in a state which is
vulgarly called existence."

"There is no doubt of it," replied Oriel, with considerable uneasiness,
as he observed his tormentor unfolding a paper for perusal; "but I can
only enjoy such things at certain periods; and at present I am positive
that the merits of your productions would be entirely lost upon me."

"By the great Fo, impossible!" exclaimed the poet. "In what corner of
the world hides the wretch so lost to every noble feeling--so lost to
every sense of excellence--so inhuman, unnatural, and preposterously
ignorant--as to listen to the incorruptible wisdom with which I can
enlighten him, and not become transported into the very heaven of
heavens?"

"You have already enlightened us to an extent as far as our limited
intellects allow us to be enlightened by such productions as those
you have read," observed Zabra, with an earnest attempt to be serious;
"and it would be only throwing away the talents you possess on persons
utterly incompetent to appreciate their merits, if you continue the
perusal of your effusions."

"All imaginary," said the persevering versifier; "and you will forget
it in your sense of the sublime which must be excited by hearing the
perusal of the following passage." Long Chi the younger had opened
his manuscript, had made a preparatory flourish of his hand, and had
commenced some description, with the ordinary exclamation, "Oh!" when,
happening to cast his eye towards the door, he encountered the frowning
visage of his father. His hand dropped from its elevation: he quickly
whipped his papers into his pouch, and jumped off the divan, with a
celerity particularly acceptable to Zabra and his companion.

Old Long Chi appeared in a dress much more splendid than the one he had
previously worn; and, gravely fixing himself in the seat his son had
vacated, he commenced a conversation upon the business and voyage of his
guests. Old Long Chi was a merchant of considerable experience and great
wealth, with whom Master Porphyry had long had commercial dealings. He
was remarkable for a profound gravity, a pair of moustachios the points
of which descended to his chin, and a tail of hair which was the
admiration of all his countrymen. Although he had passed the early part
of his life in India, and had married an Anglo-Indian, on his return,
like all Chinese, he continued the customs of his country, and gloried
in its fancied superiority over the rest of the world. He had always
been distinguished as a severe moralist. He seemed desirous of
acquiring the praise of the Bonzes for the regularity of his attendance
at the temples; and sought to be respected in society for the liberality
of his contributions towards religious objects. Oriel and he were a
considerable time agreeing about some merchandise that both had to
barter; during which the melancholy poet stood at a respectful distance,
looking at his parent, and then at the bamboo, with more dread than
affection; while Zabra amused himself by taking notice of the scene
before him.

"You have not seen much of our incomparable country, I suppose?"
inquired the old man as he sipped a strong infusion of the tea leaf from
a beautiful porcelain cup.

"I have only landed this morning," replied his guest.

"Ah! then you have much to see," added the other. "It is the most
ancient government under the sun; and such a government! such laws, such
institutions, and such a religion! The Emperor is quite a father to his
subjects."

"With the bamboo, father?" asked his son tremblingly.

"Hold you tongue, Long Chi!" bawled out the old man.

"Father, I obey!" murmured the youth submissively.

"Are the laws mild in their operation?" inquired Zabra.

"Remarkably so," replied Long Chi the elder. "When punishment is
inflicted, it is done on the most humane principles: you may get
bastinadoed till you faint with pain; and then you will get bastinadoed
till you recover."

"How very paternal!" exclaimed the young Long Chi emphatically.

"Silence, Long Chi!" shouted the old man.

"Father, I obey!" said his obedient son.

Both Zabra and his patron seemed much amused by this description of the
mildness of the Chinese laws; but, fearing, if he pressed the subject
much farther, the bamboo might come into operation in the domestic
sovereignty with a similar character, Oriel Porphyry said,--

"I was much surprised with the great variety of dishes that appeared at
dinner."

"Our preparations for the table are endless," responded his host. "In
our cookery books we have fifty different ways of dressing dogs' ears."

"I could find a way of dressing dogs' ears in any book," muttered the
melancholy poet at a distance.

"I'll give yours a dressing, you puppy! if you don't hold your tongue,"
bawled his father.

"Dogs' ears!" exclaimed Zabra in surprise: "we had none to-day, had we?"

"We had six different varieties, of each of which you partook," replied
the other.

"Bah!" said Oriel Porphyry, with a countenance expressing any thing but
pleasure.

"But that was not the only delicacy brought on table," continued the old
man. "You seemed particularly to enjoy a fricassee of the rats of Loo
Choo."

"Rats! we haven't been eating rats, surely?" demanded Zabra, as if
horrorstruck at the idea.

"And you swallowed nearly the whole of the soup made from the large
slugs of Japan!" he added.

"Ugh!" exclaimed both his visiters in a breath, looking in the highest
degree disgusted at the idea of such fare.

"It is dangerous," said the melancholy poet, gravely, "to load either
the stomach or your arms with slugs; especially----" He was not allowed
time to finish the sentence; for, seeing his father snatch up the
dreaded bamboo, and spring off the divan towards him, with a look
threatening utter extermination, he dived under a table, leaped over an
ottoman, dodged round several vases, and then rapidly made his exit out
at the door, closely pursued by his parent; and their visiters, fancying
that they had had quite enough of Chinese hospitality, hastened their
departure.

They were proceeding through the narrow streets of Canton, bounded by
the gloomy walls that shut out the houses from public view, experiencing
some very disagreeable sensations, when they heard a violent
altercation, and thought they distinguished voices familiar to them.
They listened.

"Oh! oh! oh! This is not arguing logically. Oh! oh! This is
demonstration without reason. Oh! oh! oh!" was heard amid a shower of
blows.

"Oh! oh! you're breaking my back--don't you see! Ah! murder! help!" was
shouted with similar accompaniments; and a door in the wall opening, out
ran Fortyfolios and Tourniquet, making a desperate outcry, and vainly
striving to save themselves from the thick sticks of half a dozen
infuriated Chinese, who were belabouring them without mercy. Oriel, as
soon as he saw the state of the case, rushed in amongst the attacking
party; quickly deprived one of his weapon, and laid about him with such
dexterity and vigour, that three out of the six were left senseless on
the ground, and the rest had vanished before the philosophers discovered
to whom they were indebted for their rescue.

"I am astonished that I should have found you in such a situation,"
remarked the young merchant to the professor and his companion, who,
with most rueful visages, were busily engaged in rubbing their legs,
shoulders, arms, and backs.

"Why, I will explain it to you as logically as I can," said Fortyfolios,
moving his features and body into an abundance of contortions. "Oh, this
pain! it certainly is a physical evil."

"That I deny!" eagerly exclaimed the other, writhing from the effects
of his beating. "Pain is a perception of the mind, and cannot exist
independently of mental perceptions--don't you see?"

"Impossible!" replied the professor, limping along as if every bone
in his body was broken. "I maintain that it is a sensation purely
corporeal, as there never yet was any pain where there was no body."

"You know nothing about it," sharply rejoined the doctor, cautiously
feeling with his hands to discover his fractures. "There is mental
anguish, in which the physical has no connection--don't you see?"

"But, gentlemen, what has this argument to do with the information I
required?" asked the young merchant.

"I was about to enter into the subject in a proper manner, when Doctor
Tourniquet interrupted me," observed Fortyfolios.

"I deny that!" eagerly exclaimed the surgeon.

"Doctor Tourniquet, you ought to be ashamed of yourself!" said the
professor, assuming all his dignity.

"I deny that!" repeated the pertinacious disputant.

"Doctor, you are more than usually disputative," remarked Zabra.

"I deny that!" continued he: and it now became evident to Oriel Porphyry
and his young friend, that both the professor and the doctor were
exhilarated into a state nearly approaching intoxication.

"Demonstration! demonstration! Give me accurate demonstration: I'll not
be convinced without it--don't you see?" said the surgeon.

"Argument is thrown away upon you: you are unreasonable, illogical, and
inconvincible," muttered the other.

"Prove it! prove it! Give me the proof positive--let me behold the proof
circumstantial," exclaimed his antagonist.

"Doctor Tourniquet, I beg you'll be silent," said the young merchant, in
a tone that admitted of no dispute; and the doctor seemed only anxious
to discover the extent of the hurts he had received. "And now, Professor
Fortyfolios," he continued, "you can proceed."

"To come to a proper understanding of the case, you must be made aware
that we left the Albatross on purpose to see whatever was worthy of
observation in the city," observed the professor; "and, as I possessed
a letter of introduction to a Columbian resident, there we first
proceeded. We were heartily welcomed, and treated with a national
hospitality; and were shown several remarkable things, of which the
world will hear at a fitting opportunity. In returning from a place
we had visited together, our friend suddenly left us to talk to some
acquaintance he saw at the end of the street; and we thought we saw
him go into a house, where we knocked. We were admitted; and I began
explaining to the fellows, by whom we were immediately surrounded,
that I desired to see my friend; but, without the slightest attempt at
argument, the unreasonable brutes commenced beating us with heavy
cudgels, till they were dispersed by your appearance."

"Let us see if I have killed these poor wretches," said Oriel, turning
back to the place where he had left the three prostrate Chinese; but, to
his great astonishment, and to the amazement of his companions, not a
trace of either of them was to be seen. The dead men had taken advantage
of their enemy being at a distance to scamper off from the field of
battle as fast as their legs could carry them; and when the conqueror
came to examine the destruction he had committed, he had the
mortification of discovering that his triumph might take same note of
"the missing," but the number of killed and wounded was not so easily
ascertained.




CHAP. VIII.

THE MONSOON.


After paying short visits to some of the principal ports in the
flourishing kingdoms of Borneo and Sumatra, the Albatross was gallantly
pursuing her voyage through the Strait of Malacca. There had been no
wind for several days, and the sky had continued without a cloud. There
was an oppressive sultriness in the atmosphere; and so great appeared
the heat of the sun's rays, that the pitch oozed out of the seams of the
vessel, and the timber became scorched and blistered. This continued,
with very little variation, till the ship, approaching the coast of
India, entered the Bay of Bengal. A little speck was first observed
upon the horizon, which gradually enlarged; and soon afterwards several
other dark vapours appearing on the heavens, rapidly increased in size,
till vast masses of clouds came from the north-east, thickening, and
darkening, and swallowing up the whole of the bright sky which had but a
short time since been visible. The sea, from a state of calm, suddenly
became stirred in all its depths: its billows rose into hills, the
hills into mountains; and the vast waves, as they acquired additional
magnitude, lashed each other with such a violence, that their tops were
crested with foam. Almost at the same moment came on powerful gusts of
wind, that kept continually increasing in force, till each drove the
mountainous waves before it, as if they were grains of dust, and swept
the Albatross over them with as much ease as if it were but a feather.
Her spars bent--her timbers creaked; and occasionally some part of the
rigging would be stripped off like dead leaves from a tree.

Floods of rain poured down, as if there was a sea in the sky that was
being emptied into the waters of the earth; and the lightning, flashing
in streaks of lurid fire, exhibited the black tempest gathering in the
clouds in all its terrors. Then came the thunder, booming in deafening
peals, that seemed to shake the world to its centre. The desperate wind
rushed on with all its might--then came the deluge--then flashed the
electric light--and then the thunder burst again with renewed fury. This
succession of forces was exerted upon the ship, without intermission,
the whole of the night, as she scudded rapidly along under close-reefed
foresail and maintop-sail; but, although it was evident to the oldest
sailors in the vessel, from the manner in which she behaved during the
tempest, that a more admirable boat had never been built, she suffered
very severely in many places. Several of the ports were stove in, the
gangways torn away, the quarter galleries crushed; ropes were snapped
like threads, and a few of the spars were splintered into fragments. The
water rushed in through the gaping ports, till the lee side of the main
deck was a complete pool, several feet in depth; and the monstrous waves
swept over the ship in such immense masses, that many of the crew every
moment expected that she would be overwhelmed.

Towards morning, the fury of the elements in some degree abated; but the
broken spars, and the torn rigging, had scarcely been repaired, before
the storm recommenced with renewed vigour. Nothing seemed capable of
withstanding its destructive violence. The wind howled, and the thunder
boomed, and the lightning flashed, and the big waves came rushing on
with more fury than ever. Every timber creaked, and the ship was leaking
at every seam. The exertions of the old captain had not ceased since the
commencement of the tempest. In the loudest roar of the storm, his voice
might be heard shouting his orders through a speaking-trumpet. He was
everywhere where he thought his presence was necessary; and, forgetting
his superiority in the necessities of the moment, he bore a hand in
the most laborious and dangerous duties. He was ably seconded by his
officers; and, although the crew had been harassed by constant exertion,
they cheerfully continued their efforts to work the vessel, and save
her from the violence with which she was assailed. To add to their
disquietude, they discovered that she had been forced a considerable
way from her course, and that there was an alarming depth of water in
the hold: the fore-mast bent like a mere twig; and every instant the
fore-topmast threatened to go by the board.

The engine was immediately set to work to reduce the leak; and, a
sufficient power having been applied, the water began to diminish. The
helm was now directed towards Bengal. The men laboured indefatigably to
repair the injuries the ship had sustained; and hopes were entertained
that, if the masts remained secure, the Albatross might ride out the
monsoon, and reach her destination in safety. Towards the afternoon,
there was a lull, and the men got both refreshment and repose. Oriel
Porphyry had not left the deck during the whole of the time the danger
was most imminent; and Zabra, as usual, had continued by his side. Both
seemed to take a sort of fearful interest in watching the progress of
the tempest; and, although the water dashed over them in torrents, and
they were frequently obliged to hold on with all their strength, to
prevent being swept away by the wind, they remained in nearly the same
position, observing the vivid flashes of light that played amid the
rigging, and looking into the black depths of the foaming ocean, as they
descended into the trough of some mighty wave. Neither spoke: at
least, rarely was a word uttered; and, if the friends had attempted to
converse, the uproar that raged around them would have prevented any
other sound from being heard. Several times Captain Hearty approached,
and earnestly advised them to go below, as they exposed themselves to
much unnecessary danger; but Zabra remained, with his head resting upon
the shoulder of his patron, and his hand clasped in Oriel's, as if he
knew of no protection where he was not; and the merchant's son, as
if pleased with the affection of his youthful friend, would not be
persuaded to leave the deck.

"Does any thing ail you, Zabra?" at last asked Master Porphyry, during
an intermission of the storm, noticing that his companion had made two
or three short hysteric sobs.

"No; I am well, I am quite well, Oriel," murmured the youth, as he
raised his head, and looked in the face of his associate.

"Why, your eyes are filled with tears, Zabra! How is this?" exclaimed
the other affectionately.

"I know not. A feeling has come over me, which I could not control,"
replied he in a whisper, as his delicate frame trembled with emotion. "I
was thinking--I was thinking that, if the ship was swallowed up in these
huge waves, that--that I should like--that I should like to die--that
I should like to die with you thus;" and, with many sobs, he flung his
arms round the neck of his patron, and let his head droop upon his
breast.

"And so you shall, Zabra, if such fate be ours," said Oriel Porphyry,
much moved by the devotion of his young friend. "But I see no reason to
despair yet. The gallant Albatross bears it bravely; and, unless we lose
the masts, or ship one of these overwhelming seas, we shall ride into
port by to-morrow, or the next day at latest. But this is childish of
you, Zabra, to give way to such feelings. You behaved not in this way
when we were fighting side by side amid the pirates. Come, come! be more
like yourself; and when the storm is over, which I hope will soon be,
you shall laugh at these apprehensions; and you shall sing me one of
your stirring songs, all about the glory and the freedom to be found
upon the mighty waters of the deep; and I shall be enraptured, and you
will rejoice."

Zabra raised his head, shook back the clustering curls that shadowed his
face, and looked earnestly upon his patron.

"I will do as you wish me," he replied. "I have been wrong in
disturbing your contemplations with my foolish fears: but, however
proud the heart may be,--however great, and brave, and noble be all its
tendencies,--there comes a time when all superiority and all valour are
lost in a sense of overpowering humility and apprehension. But, hark!
The elements are again let loose upon us. Hear how the wind howls, like
a lion roaring for his prey! And look at this mountain of water sweeping
up to ingulf us within its dark devouring jaws. Cling to the mast,
Oriel! cling to the mast! or you will be swept into the sea."

Oriel Porphyry held one arm tightly round the waist of Zabra: with the
other he grasped the mainmast, as the towering billow, forced onward
by a violent gust of wind, broke on the deck, carrying away two of the
sailors, who were inattentive to its advance, and pouring through every
opening into the lower parts of the ship.

"A man overboard!" was the immediate cry: but the vessel was proceeding
at so rapid a rate, that no effort could be made to save them. When the
fury of the tempest had abated, the two friends descended to the cabin;
where Oriel, observing that Zabra seemed ill and faint, wanted him
to take such refreshment as his exhausted frame needed, and tried to
strengthen the effect of his command by setting before him a good
example. A long fast, and the excitement of danger, continued for such
a period of time, required nourishment; and the young merchant seemed
desirous of showing his companion that his fatigues had not spoiled his
appetite; but though he pressed him frequently to partake liberally of
the different things he had ordered for him, he could not induce him to
follow his directions to any thing like the extent he desired. In fact,
Zabra appeared to have suffered too much from the state of feeling in
which he had existed during the recent tempest to be able to realise the
kind wishes of his patron.

"My dear Zabra you are not well," observed Oriel Porphyry, finding his
endeavours and example so little attended to. "You look perfectly
exhausted. Go to your hammock and endeavour to sleep off your fatigues.
If I do not see that you take proper care of yourself, I shall deserve
censure from Eureka. So if you do not wish to get me into trouble, you
will do as I desire you."

"She will not blame you," murmured his youthful associate, as he
proceeded to his little cabin.

"What an extraordinary creature he is!" he exclaimed, as soon as Zabra
had left him; and he was reflecting upon the cause of that mystery in
which the character of his youthful friend seemed enveloped, when he was
disturbed by the entrance of the two philosophers. Fortyfolios looked
somewhat paler than usual, nor did Tourniquet appear quite at his ease.
They had also suffered from the effects of the storm, though neither of
them had appeared on deck while it lasted.

"It is extraordinary to me, Dr. Tourniquet," said the professor gravely,
as he entered the cabin--"It is extraordinary to me that you will argue
from wrong premises."

"It is as extraordinary to me that you will argue to wrong conclusions,
don't you see," replied the surgeon good humouredly.

"What is the matter in dispute now, gentlemen?" inquired the young
merchant.

"We differ in our ideas concerning the true nature of happiness,"
responded Fortyfolios. "Now, I maintain that happiness consists in
virtue; for there can be no true happiness without the existence of
virtuous inclinations; and virtue is but another name for purity--a
state of being perfectly free from the pollution of vice."

"And I maintain a very different sort of thing altogether, don't you
see," replied the doctor. "But first of all let us examine the idea that
happiness consists in virtue--by which I suppose is meant that virtue
produces happiness. There are a thousand instances of virtuous people
being as miserable as a bear with his fur shaved off. One from
disappointed love--another from the death of a friend or relative,
and a third from constitutional irritability. One finds misery in the
past--another meets with it in the present--a third looks for it in the
future; and although all these are virtuous in the common acceptation of
the word, they are far from being happy, don't you see. But there is a
stronger case against the argument that virtue produces happiness in
the instance of----Suppose a noble spirited youth, or an amiable and
excellent girl, who may be, in thought or action, the beau ideals of
virtue, yet if they are disgraced in their own eyes by their near
relationship to individuals notorious for some degrading vice, their
very notions of virtue create in them a continual misery. They have done
no evil, yet they are ashamed of themselves--they have a most decided
inclination for sincerity; and yet, knowing that if the world knew of
their connection with vice, they would be considered to be vicious as a
natural consequence (for such is the unjust conduct of the world), they
are obliged to practise deception; and the practice of deception soon
becomes habitual--they deceive all around them. Their principles are
thus continually warring with their actions; and the dread of their
deceit being discovered, and the disgrace which attaches to them
becoming known, creates a state of misery not easily to be exceeded."

"But I cannot imagine such a state of things," remarked Oriel Porphyry.
"No child can be made answerable for the criminality of its relatives;
and a well educated mind will care little for an opinion by which it is
sought to be degraded, if that opinion is unjust."

"Certainly," observed the professor approvingly.

"We must take society as we find it, don't you see," added the doctor,
"with all its prejudices and all its injustice. If the circle in which
moves a youth of either sex, whose conduct is irreproachable and whose
motives are admirable, discover that the father of their young associate
was hanged for murder, or that the mother was noted for profligacy, they
will shrink from him as if he was as vile as his origin; but to the
young female this sort of connection bears with a most cruel severity.
There are many children born out of wedlock, of mothers of infamous
characters, which the father, who may be of a somewhat higher rank of
life, with a laudable anxiety for the welfare of his offspring, takes
from the mother and educates. Imagine a child thus originated, carefully
instructed in virtuous principles till she approaches the period of
womanhood, when, with the knowledge of her mother's infamy, she ventures
into a society in which her beauty and intelligence would render her one
of its best ornaments, she is acutely sensitive of her own disgraceful
position in the eyes of the world, and enters into companionship with
individuals of her own sex whom she is well aware would consider
themselves contaminated by her presence if they knew her secret; or
becomes beloved by a youth of the other sex, who, thinking her what she
appears to be, honours her above all human beings, with a continual
dread that the truth will be disclosed, and that she will be pointed
at, avoided, insulted, and abandoned by those now so eager to seek her
society. There is no state of misery so deplorable as this. In time, the
constant anxiety and fear in which she exists will affect her health,
and she gradually wastes away with the bitter consciousness that she is
the victim of a prejudice: although perfectly innocent, is punished as
if she was the vilest of criminals; and, although formed to diffuse
happiness around her, is obliged, from day to day, to endure the
crushing agonies of an unceasing misery. And this is an example of
virtue without happiness, don't you see."

"But possibly the dread of insult, or a sense of shame," continued the
doctor, "prevents her from entering the society in which she ought to
find an honourable place. She is confined to a narrow circle, out of
which she dare not step, and is obliged to associate with the worthless
of her own sex and the profligate of the other. Her companions are the
vulgar and the vile. They having no proper conception of the value of
either truth or virtue, and she looking on the world that has abandoned
her as unjust, and smarting under the wrong it inflicts, begins to
think them as much ill treated as herself, and believes that a false
interpretation has been given to their conduct. Gradually she parts with
her conviction of what is honourable. One by one she acquires the mean
and contemptible vices of her associates. She sees them dissimulate,
and practises deception. Falsehood becomes habitual. She loses all
self-respect. She becomes criminal, degraded, and depraved. In fact, by
an atrocious verdict, she is at first considered one of the very Pariahs
of society, don't you see, and is at last forced to be the vile thing
the world had thought her."

"The prejudice which so punishes is a disgrace to any civilised
community," exclaimed Oriel with warmth, "and the laws which press so
cruelly upon natural children are both impolitic and inhuman."

"They are undoubtedly severe," observed Fortyfolios; "but their severity
is caused by the detestation of society for vice."

"That I deny," eagerly replied Tourniquet. "Change the condition of the
child. Suppose it to be the offspring of a prince; and, although the
mother be a sink of iniquity, the girl will be eagerly sought after
by honourables and right honourables, most nobles, and others that
entertain the highest notions about virtue. So much for the community's
detestation of vice, don't you see. Now for my conception of the true
nature of happiness. I consider happiness, in the first place, to be
the result of a peculiar temperament. There must be a disposition to be
happy in the individual before any happiness can be created. In some
persons this disposition is so strong, that the most afflicting things
will scarcely, if at all, affect it; in others, the disposition is so
weak that it is continually overpowered by external circumstances; and
in others, the disposition is not to be traced, for it does not exist.
That virtue is necessary to a state of happiness there is no doubt;
but what is called virtue by different communities appears in so many
various shapes, that it requires a more catholic sense attached to it
than it possesses to make it universally understood. I consider virtue
to be a moderate indulgence in our inclinations when they do no injury
to the individual, to the object, and to any other person, with a
perfect and exclusive sympathy of an individual of one sex for an
individual of the other. Modesty is called a virtue, chastity is called
a virtue, and sobriety is called a virtue; but they are only distinct
features of the virtue I have described."

"That is clearly enough defined; and I should think could not be
disputed," remarked Oriel.

The professor said nothing.

"Now this virtue does not create happiness any more than does the
virtue of my learned friend," continued the doctor; "but in by far the
majority of instances it is necessary to its existence. The happiness
that arises from alleviating suffering has often been found in an
individual possessing no pretensions to virtue. But happiness itself is
pleasure. There is the pleasure of creating enjoyment in an object, and
there is the pleasure which succeeds it in the individual. There never
was happiness without pleasure; there ought not to be pleasure without
happiness. There is no pleasure like that of doing good; consequently,
there is no happiness like that of making others happy: and wherever
there is a disposition to be happy, it will exhibit itself in a desire
to create happiness in others; and wherever there is no disposition to
be happy, the individual will be just as careless of the happiness of
those around him as he is regardless of his own. That's my idea of
happiness, don't you see."

"And it appears to me a very rational one," observed the young merchant.
"But how does the disposition to happiness arise?"

"There are some very curious phenomena connected with the origin and
growth of these dispositions," replied the surgeon. "In the first
place, all dispositions are formed in the individual by the pressure of
external circumstances, no matter how or from whence directed: evil
dispositions and good, and they arise at different times and sometimes
in succession. When created, they set with a certain impetus in a
certain direction; and as in these the extremes meet, if another impetus
is given, they will proceed from bad to good to the same distance they
advanced from good to bad. This is the cause of individuals having been
notorious for vice becoming eminent for virtue. Water flowing from the
top of a mountain is capable by its own power of finding its level on a
mountain of a similar elevation; and the impetus of vice being carried
down a certain way ascends by the impetus of good a like height. This
accounts for the old proverb, 'The greater the sinner the greater the
saint;' that is to say, the force in one produces a like force in the
other. Again, the disposition to love has frequently been followed by
the disposition to hate, as nearly as possible to the same extent; and
the disposition to happiness may as frequently be succeeded by the
disposition to misery."

"But supposing the impetus to be carried down, it will want the
application of no other power to carry it up; and if carried up, will
unassisted carry itself down," remarked the professor.

"Not so," replied the doctor: "Evil is of a heavy nature; and when it
descends, clings to the soil at the bottom, unless it receive another
impetus: and good is of a light nature, that naturally rises, and when
it has attained its highest elevation would there remain, were it not
sent down with a similar force."

"The idea is ingenious, certainly," said the young merchant.

"And that is all the merit it possesses," observed Fortyfolios, whose
more orthodox notions could not tolerate such an hypothesis. "Were such
a theory generally adopted, its mischief would be incalculable. It would
loosen our sense of the moral obligations, and utterly destroy all the
established ideas of right and wrong."

"As for the moral obligations, don't you see," replied Tourniquet, "I
am perfectly convinced that it would place them on a much more secure
footing than they now possess; and if established notions on the subject
are erroneous, which I can prove them to be, the sooner they are knocked
on the head the better. I have already shown to you, in the instance
of the natural child, that the idea of virtue in the community is very
vague, unsettled, and unphilosophical, and creates more mischief than it
does good; and if we take the ideas of the same principle existing at
different times and in different communities, we shall find even this
confusion worse confounded. Things the most opposite to the true
character of virtue have been considered worthy of general adoption as
virtues. Thieving has existed as a virtue; drunkenness has existed as
a virtue; profligacy has existed as a virtue; murder has existed as a
virtue; and many others of the most abominable vices have, at various
intervals, with various people, been practised, avowed, and defended,
as if they were the most admirable of virtues. It is not many centuries
since the natives, on the coast of Guinea, and the inhabitants of other
countries, were taught to steal, and the cleverest thief was an object
of as much admiration among them as the most virtuous member of the
community; but there is no necessity to go to a state of barbarism for
an illustration of the honour with which dishonesty has been regarded;
for in all speculations, in all trading dealings, in all gambling
transactions, and in all appropriations of property acquired by one
party from another by a certain cunning or skill, of which the other
is not possessed, there is nothing else but stealing; and yet a person
acquiring property by such means is generally thought to be respectable,
and respectability is considered a virtue."

"I am afraid, if your argument be true, that there is but little real
honesty in the world," remarked Oriel.

"It is as I have stated," replied the doctor. "I have read of states
in which the man who could swallow some half a dozen bottles of wine,
and make his friends follow his example--in other words, a man who
practised habitual intoxication--had the reputation of being 'a good
fellow,' when amongst the same people goodness was considered virtue;
but even at the present day, in some parts of the world, intemperance
is regarded as a thing to be applauded rather than censured, although
it is not only a vice, but being the most direct channel to all other
vices ought to be held in detestation as the most vicious of evil
inclinations."

Oriel Porphyry thought of the scene he had witnessed at Canton; but he
smiled, and said nothing.

"With regard to the next of these vices which are considered as
virtues," continued the doctor, "there are few so destructive to
happiness. What is vulgarly called virtue in the government or
indulgence of the affections, in a majority of instances, should go by
an opposite name. It is upon record, that a certain king of Ashantee was
possessed of 3333 wives: other monarchs have been equally affectionate
towards their female subjects; and it is very rare, indeed, to find
these potentates, even with the wise king Solomon at their head,
possessing any pretensions to this identical virtue; and yet they have
been honoured more than the most virtuous character in their dominions.
But I maintain that all marriages against the inclination of one or both
parties, such as those formed for convenience, from state policy, or by
the authority of parents and guardians, is a state of absolute vice; and
yet the individuals so existing are regarded as if living in a state of
perfect virtue."

"Undoubtedly they live in a state of perfect virtue as long as they have
no vicious inclinations," said the professor.

"But it frequently happens that one of these parties has entertained
an inclination for another before marriage," replied Tourniquet. "An
inclination perfectly virtuous, but circumstances over which either
have no control, force them into a marriage, and then in the opinion of
the world that inclination (which is rarely destroyed) is considered
vicious, though perfectly virtuous in itself, and the state in which
the individual exists, against his or her inclination, is considered
virtuous, though perfectly vicious in itself, because it tends either
to destroy the virtuous inclination, or if that inclination is indulged
under those circumstances, it creates a state of things which is just
as far removed from virtue. The same species of vice is created by an
inclination after marriage--which is likely to occur when the marriage
has taken place without an inclination."

"At one time the punishment used to be very severe for endeavouring to
effect a marriage or a similar state of things against the inclination
of one of the parties," remarked the young merchant. "And I imagine that
if the mis-marriages to which you have alluded were punished after the
same fashion, both the public morals and the public happiness would be
much increased."

"No doubt of it, don't you see," responded the doctor. "And now for
an examination of the manner in which murder has been regarded. About
a thousand years since there was a religious community in India who
practised murder as a virtue. They were called Thugs, and after long
watching for an opportunity, with abundance of prayers and other holy
ceremonies, they fell upon their victims and strangled them with a cord.
Previous to this, there arose a military and religious order in Persia,
called Assassins, who stabbed or poisoned in secrecy and without shame;
and by both these communities murder was practised as the highest kind
of virtue. But they were not the only people who entertained similar
notions. The heathens murdered the Christians, and the Christians
slaughtered the heathens. The Catholics destroyed heretics, and heretics
waged a religious war upon one another. The Mahometans killed Jews or
Christians, or any other sect not professing their form of faith; and
the Jews, Christians, and others, retaliated to the best of their
ability; and under the name of religion nearly all religious sects have
murdered by wholesale, and, practising this inhuman vice, each party has
conceived that they were exhibiting the highest kind of virtue. But at
the present day, murder in a variety of shapes exists, and is regarded
as a virtue of a very high order. Even in an offender, the destruction
of human life is murder, unless, which is a very extreme case, it be
impossible for the security of society, to allow the offender to exist;
yet the sanguinary executions that disgrace the penal codes of many
communities, boasting a superior degree of civilisation, is called
justice, which is but another name for virtue. Killing a man in a duel
is murder. All warfare is murder; yet he who distinguishes himself most
in the destruction of those to whom he is opposed is honoured as being
peculiarly brave--and bravery is considered a virtue."

"Occasions arise when warfare is absolutely necessary," said Oriel
Porphyry; "and I cannot help the conviction, that the man who signalises
himself in the defence of his country, and in the destruction of his
enemies, is entitled to rank with the most virtuous characters."

"Certainly," observed Fortyfolios.

"With regard to wars being necessary, don't you see, in the present
state of the world they may be," replied the surgeon. "But in an
improved order of things they would not be required, for then the force
of opinion would be much more effective than the force of arms; and as
to the superior character of valour, although few can admire heroic
actions more than myself, I know that the courage by which they are
created is an impulse which may exist to the same extent in the
savage and in the brute. This is not necessary to virtue, for in some
organisations the want of physical energy renders the existence and the
exhibition of martial courage impossible; and it is not produced by
virtue, for it is often found existing in persons of the most vicious
inclinations. Now I think I have said enough to show the want of
clearness in the ideas of virtue that have existed and do exist in the
world, and the danger which must arise from attempting to build any
happiness upon so insecure a foundation."

"I differ with you _in toto_," exclaimed the professor, with more than
his usual seriousness. "And glad I am that such is the case; for your
heathenish theories are destructive of every religious principle that
the human mind possesses."

"Pish!" muttered the doctor.

"It is an argument, the tendency of which goes directly to level all
the existing distinctions between right and wrong, and to weaken the
influence of those sacred truths which have been professed by mankind
for so many generations," continued Fortyfolios.

"Bah!" exclaimed Tourniquet.

"You may profess what opinions you please," he added; "but the opinions
on which multitudes of people rest their expectations of future
happiness ought not to be disturbed by the contemplation of such vain
and idle speculations as those in which you indulge."

"Nonsense, don't you see," said the other.

"I tell you, Dr. Tourniquet, it is rank atheism," exclaimed the
professor, rather warmly.

"I tell you, Professor Fortyfolios, you're a goose," replied his
antagonist.

"As usual, gentlemen, your argument ends in a dispute," observed Oriel
Porphyry. "But you must excuse me for the present. I am really tired
out, and have been yawning in a manner that would have silenced any
disputants less eager than yourselves. I shall go to my berth, which
example I should advise you to follow; and let us hope that the terrible
monsoon will allow us some repose."

The philosophers took the advice that was offered; and in less than half
an hour all three were fast asleep in their hammocks.




CHAP. IX.

GAME LAWS IN INDIA.


"Pooh, pooh! Come and hunt. Come and hunt. There is no use in looking
after a parcel of buildings, and running to see sights: now you are in
this part of the country you ought to enjoy the pleasures it affords.
Come and hunt, man. Come and hunt."

This was said by a fine, stout, middle-aged man, dressed in a light jean
jacket and full lower garments of a similar fabric, with a very broad
brimmed hat of fine straw, which he was then putting on. Although
his complexion was sallow, his features were lively and intelligent;
and there was a bluff, free, careless manner with him that seemed
particularly agreeable to his companions. They were in a handsome
chamber with an open veranda, through which the slight breeze that
was stirring, entered; and the furniture, though rather faded, still
possessed an air of elegance. Wines, fruits, and sweetmeats were on a
large table in the centre, near which Oriel Porphyry and the speaker
stood. Zabra was leaning over the back of a cane-bottomed seat, watching
the motions of a lizard crawling up part of the framework of the
veranda. Fortyfolios was busily engaged endeavouring to beat off several
mosquitoes that seemed to have taken a fancy to his bald head; and Dr.
Tourniquet was examining the tusk of an elephant that lay, with several
skins, in a corner of the room.

"Ah, but, Sir Curry Rajah," replied the young merchant, "when you kindly
invited us to your country house, I told you our stay could be but
brief. The period I intended to pass with you has elapsed; and though
delighted with your hospitality, I must really be thinking of my
departure."

"Nonsense, nonsense!" exclaimed his host. "You wo'n't be thinking of any
thing of the kind. There is no business waiting for you. My people in
the city will take care that every thing you required shall be shipped
safely without loss of time; and, therefore, there can be no occasion
for your troubling your young brains about profit and loss for a day or
two at least. Come and hunt, I tell you. Come and hunt."

"Is there any good hunting in this part of the world, then?" inquired
Oriel.

"Hunting! The best hunting in the universe," replied Sir Curry Rajah.
"I've got the finest preserves in all India."

"And what game have you?" asked his visitor.

"Game?--Game of all kinds, and plenty of it; especially tigers,"
responded the other.

"Tigers!" exclaimed the young merchant in so loud a voice that his
companions started with surprise. "Why, what could induce you to
preserve such animals?"

"The sport, to be sure, man," replied Sir Curry; "and we are obliged to
be very strict in the application of our game laws; for the rascally
poachers will often destroy the game."

"I should think the game more likely to destroy the poachers," observed
his guest with a smile.

"That's their look out," said the other. "I only know it's a most
difficult thing to preserve tigers. My tenants shoot them if they happen
to attack their flocks; and the peasants combine to kill them, for
the purpose of procuring their skins. But our game laws punish the
scoundrels severely if they are caught in the fact--imprisonment and
hard labour for every offence, and very just these laws are. Why,
gentlemen would have no sport if they were to allow their game to be cut
up by every fellow who has a desire for sport, or thinks his life or the
lives of his cattle of more value than a tiger. I have been at great
expense with my preserves; for the animal has long been exceedingly
scarce: and I have improved the breed a great deal by importing some new
varieties. The cross which has ensued has altered the game wonderfully.
They are infinitely more savage, far more daring, and in speed and
cunning are not to be excelled. In fact, my tigers have a reputation
all over the country; and the ablest hunters are very glad to get a
day's sport with me, as they know they will meet with the best tigers
that are to be found any where."

"And how do you hunt them?" inquired Oriel.

"On elephants principally," replied Sir Curry. "The hunter sits upon
an elephant, with an air gun, fixed upon a swivel, before him. These
animals are well trained. I've got some of the finest elephants in the
world, thorough-bred--and they go into the preserve, and rouse the tiger
from his cover. If he goes off, the elephant follows; if he shows fight,
the hunter fires: and sometimes the game is not killed till fine sport
has been enjoyed--a man or two killed, and other exciting pleasures
enjoyed."

"And did these skins belong to animals of your killing?" inquired
Tourniquet, who had been an attentive listener to the conversation, as
he turned over two or three large tiger skins.

"Yes, I killed them, and fine sport they gave," said his host. "That
one you have in your hand belonged to a noble fellow. The day in which
he was killed was a memorable one. My late neighbour, Lord Muligatawny,
was very proud of his preserves, and used to boast he had the best
tigers in India. So to take the conceit out of his lordship, I invited
him to a hunt on my grounds. Well, he came on his elephant, for he
enjoyed the sport as much as any man, and we proceeded together with our
attendants to a jungle in which I knew the greatest quantity of game was
to be found. He and I kept close together, he boasting all the time of
the superiority of his preserves, till as we entered this particular
place, I thought it would be most advisable to be at a short distance
from him, so we separated, but without my losing sight of him. Now Lord
Muligatawny used a peculiar kind of snuff-box, and was a fierce looking
sort of man; and he used to say that no tiger could ever look him in the
face. He said the brute always bolted when he tried the experiment.
Well, we saw lots of game, and had some capital sport, but as we were
proceeding along in high spirits at our success, I started a magnificent
animal. I had a shot at him, but was not near enough to do him any
mischief. As the tiger was stealing off towards Lord Muligatawny, he
fired; but whether it was his mismanagement of the gun, or proceeded
from his elephant's suddenly backing at the approach of the tiger, I
cannot say; but certain it is Lord Muligatawny was tumbled off his
elephant, and in another moment the tiger was upon him. 'Now we shall
see if the tiger will bolt,' thought I; and he did bolt: but he bolted
with Lord Muligatawny! He grasped his lordship by the nape of his neck
at the time he was looking as fierce as a ferret, and flinging his body
over his shoulder, he was out of sight before any one could get a shot
at him."

"And what became of him?" inquired Oriel.

"That was the last we ever saw of Lord Muligatawny," replied Sir Curry.
"But about a week afterwards I was hunting in the neighbourhood, when,
after a capital run, and a desperate contest, I succeeded in killing one
of the finest tigers I ever saw. I had his body taken home to show him
to my friends, and upon opening him, among the best part of a sheep,
a dog's hind quarters, and a litter of sucking pigs, we found the
identical snuff-box of poor Lord Muligatawny, proving beyond the
possibility of a doubt that not only had the tiger bolted _with_ his
lordship, but that he had had the audacity to make a bolt _of_ him. But
come and hunt--come and hunt--I will show you some capital sport."

"Such as you showed Lord Muligatawny, I suppose," said the young
merchant, laughing.

"Oh no, there's no danger," replied his host; and then taking an air-gun
of a peculiar construction towards his visitor, added, "Now, look at
this weapon--one of the best of the kind ever made. This is fixed on a
swivel in the carriage in which you sit on the elephant; and you are
quite safe, and, if you are a tolerable marksman, are sure to wound your
game. Besides this, the hunter generally has a strong short sword, like
this," said he, producing a weapon of that description. "Very sharp and
very useful too, for if the tiger leaps on the elephant, which he will
frequently do, the hunter with a good blow at his head may settle his
business. Come and hunt, man, come and hunt."

"Confound these mosquitoes!" exclaimed the professor in a rage, vainly
endeavouring to drive the insects from about him, and making the most
ludicrous grimaces, as in spite of his exertions they succeeded in
biting the exposed part of his head. "These horrible things will torment
me to death. Ever since I have been in this deplorable country, my head
has been besieged by thousands of them. They don't let me rest a minute.
Ah! What a gripe! I shall go mad! They'll torment me to death; I can't
endure it, Sir Curry."

"You'll soon get used to it," said his host, quietly. "This is the way
they always use strangers. You are fresh meat to them. But come and
hunt--come and hunt; I'll have the elephants got ready for you
immediately, and it's a capital day for the sport."

"What say you, gentlemen? Shall we hunt the tiger?" asked Oriel
Porphyry.

"I would rather you would hunt the musquitoes," said Fortyfolios,
seriously.

"What say you, Zabra?"

"If you wish it, Oriel," replied the youth.

"I have not the slightest objection, don't you see," observed the
doctor.

"Then let it be, Sir Curry," said Oriel.

Orders were instantly given to the servants, a crowd of dark Hindoos,
in white turbans, short frocks fastened round the middle with a sash,
and with bare arms and legs, who lost no time in making the necessary
preparations.

Three elephants were caparisoned and led round to the front of the
house. Sir Curry mounted the largest, and Fortyfolios and Tourniquet,
after some trouble, managed to get firm sitting on another. While these
preparations were making, Zabra had been amusing himself by feeding the
remaining elephant with sweetmeats. She was a small but exceedingly
docile animal; and seemed to enjoy the sort of food with which she was
indulged with a particular gusto, swinging her body with a regular
oscillatory movement, and twisting her trunk up and down with ceaseless
activity. The order having been given her to kneel, the two friends
mounted; and, accompanied by a few attendants, skilful in the management
of the hunt, the party moved forward into an open park, in which several
blue-skinned buffaloes and humped bullocks, with here and there a few
deer, were seen endeavouring to find a cool place in the shadows of the
trees. The day was excessively hot; and the oppressive sultriness of
the atmosphere seemed to be felt by every living thing, except the
mosquitoes, who flew about in myriads, plaguing both man and beast. In
passing a large tank the cattle were frequently seen rushing into it,
where they would remain with nothing but their noses above the water,
in hopes of escaping from those tormenting insects; but Fortyfolios
appeared to be the especial object of their attacks, for his hands were
constantly employed in trying to drive them from his face. They passed
many clumps of lofty cocoa-nut trees, in which troops of monkeys were
skipping about from branch to branch, and chattering at the hunters
with more volubility than harmony; and, after proceeding along fields of
rice, indigo, and Indian corn, surrounded by hedges of aloes and bamboo,
they approached a marsh, watered by a branch of the Ganges, in which
several large crocodiles, troops of adjutants, and different species of
snakes were observed.

"There's plenty of game here, you see!" remarked Sir Curry to his
companions. "But it's wonderful the difficulty I have to preserve it;
poaching prevails to a great extent in spite of the severity of our game
laws."

No reply was made to the observation; and the party passed on,
making their way with great difficulty through a forest of banyans,
occasionally taking a shot at a stray jackal or a wandering vulture,
till they descended a steep declivity, overgrown with thick underwood,
over which trees of immense proportions spread their gigantic branches.

"Now we shall soon beat up the game," said Sir Curry: "we are entering a
famous preserve of tigers. About half a mile further in the jungle we
shall come to the very place where I lost poor Lord Muligatawny. Very
interesting spot."

Fortyfolios at least did not seem to care for the interest of the place,
and he regretted ever having left the safe quarters of Sir Curry Rajah's
country-house, to wander on the back of an elephant through marshes, and
forests, and jungles, infested with every species of venomous and savage
creatures.

"I cannot see what pleasure there can be in exposing one's life in
this way. It's the most foolish thing I ever heard of," said he to his
companion.

"The ancients were much greater fools, don't you see," replied
Tourniquet. "They would break their necks after a wretched fox."

"But the fox couldn't eat the hunter, and the tiger can," added the
other seriously.

"Then there is the greater necessity for killing the tiger, don't you
see," rejoined the doctor.

"But why not exterminate the breed? They must be very destructive to the
flocks and herds as well as to human beings who happen to fall in their
way; yet this man actually preserves them for the sake of the sport they
afford," said the professor, with unfeigned astonishment.

"Just so did the ancients with their foxes," replied his companion.
"They were very destructive to the poultry of the neighbouring farmers;
they were perfectly worthless; their skins were of no value, and their
flesh not eatable; yet they were carefully preserved for the sport they
afforded."

"A tiger!" exclaimed Sir Curry, who was a little in advance of the
party, as he pointed to some animal, the form of which could not be
clearly distinguished, stealing through the high grass and reeds with
which they were surrounded. Several shots were fired at him; but he
bounded away as if unhurt, and the elephants proceeded in pursuit.

"A tiger!" again shouted their host, and another was observed making
off in a contrary direction; but he escaped before a gun could be
discharged.

Oriel Porphyry began to feel a little excited, and took more interest
in the hunt than he had previously experienced.

"Oh!" exclaimed Fortyfolios, as loud as he could scream; and, upon
looking round to observe what was the matter, the hunters beheld a large
monkey, as the professor was passing underneath the branch of a tree,
swinging by his tail, dart down, and snatch the straw hat that
Fortyfolios wore to shield his head from the sun's rays, with which he
made an immediate retreat, grinning and chattering among his companions
as if congratulating himself on the cleverness by which he had acquired
the prize. The whole troop were immediately in commotion, scrambling
with one another for possession of the spoil; till the thief, finding he
was likely to lose the result of his dexterity, placed the hat on his
own head, and darted off, from branch to branch, with inconceivable
rapidity, pursued by the other monkeys with a chorus of yells absolutely
deafening.

Fortyfolios looked the very picture of mute despair when he found his
bald head exposed to the attacks of the relentless mosquitoes, and
was obliged to bind it with a handkerchief. His disquietude did not
decrease, when, a few paces farther on, his eyes fell upon the form of a
monstrous snake, twined round the stem of an immense tree, which, with
arched head, glaring eyes, and protruded sting, seemed about to spring
upon the unhappy professor.

"Plenty of game here, gentlemen; capital preserve," observed Sir Curry
very coolly.

"Heaven preserve me!" emphatically exclaimed Fortyfolios, trembling in
every joint.

Tourniquet fired at the monster, and he immediately glided away into the
deepest recesses of the jungle.

"A tiger!" shouted Sir Curry, as one made its appearance within a few
yards of his elephant. Oriel fired, and hit him. Sir Curry fired at the
same time, and lodged a bullet in his shoulder. The animal, smarting
with the pain and howling with rage, made a spring at Sir Curry, which
brought him within reach of his "tiger-slayer," as he called it; and a
ferocious blow, well directed, sent him with another howl to the feet of
the elephant, who kept him between her hind legs and her fore legs till
she had kicked him to death.

"Fine beast!" said Sir Curry Rajah, noticing its size; "but this place
is famous for such game. By the bye, this is the identical spot in which
I lost poor Lord Muligatawny. He was sitting on his elephant just where
sits our friend the professor----"

"Oh!" groaned Fortyfolios.

"When he fell into the jaws of the tiger."

The professor shuddered and looked very pale.

"A tiger!" shouted Sir Curry.

"Murder!" screamed Fortyfolios; and if Tourniquet had not laid hold of
him he would have tumbled off his seat.

"I'm surprised a man of your sense should show so much fear, don't you
see," observed the doctor.

"It is not fear, Doctor Tourniquet," replied the professor, endeavouring
to conceal his alarm with all the philosophy he possessed. "I do not
care about death, but I have a reasonable objection to being devoured.
As for the quality, impression, or emotion, which is usually called
fear, in a philosophical sense, I deny that in me it has ever had
existence."

"A tiger!" again shouted Sir Curry.

"Murder!" again screamed the professor; and he trembled so violently
that he caught hold of the framework of the seat to secure his position
on the elephant. The game now became very plentiful; and the hunt was
followed from one jungle through open vistas into another. Oriel entered
into the pursuit with ardour, but Zabra did not appear to join in it
with the least interest. He seemed to entertain the same objection to
being devoured as Fortyfolios, or else his anxiety for the safety of his
companion destroyed all pleasure in the chase. He became restless and
uneasy; but Oriel was so actively engaged in looking for and despatching
the game, that he did not notice the disquietude of his friend. They had
killed several tigers; and, having pursued a very large one out of the
jungle into an open valley, he there made a stand before a large banyan
tree. The hunters surrounded him, and he was crouching, lashing himself
with his tail, and preparing for a spring, as they approached. As soon
as they came within shooting distance, Oriel, Sir Curry, and Dr.
Tourniquet, fired; instantly, with a low half-stifled growl, the tiger
gave two or three prodigious bounds, and leaped upon the elephant upon
which Zabra was sitting; and immediately afterwards both were rolling
together among the long grass. The elephant, as soon as she observed
Zabra's danger, as if in gratitude for the attentions she had received
from him before starting for the hunt, turned round and ran at the tiger
as if with the intention of trampling him down. The young merchant, in
the anguish of the moment, at seeing his friend in the power of the
ferocious beast, had at first lost his presence of mind, but observing
that the elephant had succeeded in drawing the attention of the tiger
from his victim, he slipped off her back, and, with no other weapon
than his hunting sword, advanced to the place where the animal stood.
The elephant had made two or three rushes at the tiger, but had not
succeeded in getting him under her feet, and he was still crouching
beside the prostrate body of Zabra, when he observed the approach of
Oriel.

"Let me have a shot at him, Master Porphyry," exclaimed his host.

"You will be killed, don't you see, if you attack him with such a
useless weapon?" shouted Tourniquet. Oriel still advanced with his sword
firmly grasped, his arm raised, and his gaze fixed upon that of the
tiger. The savage beast curved his back and lashed his tail; his fur
became erect, and his eyes seemed flashing with an expression of the
most terrible ferocity. Oriel Porphyry still moved forward; and as the
tiger, with a low sharp growl, made a bound towards him, he leaped on
one side, and turning quickly round dealt a blow with all his force,
that severed the tendons of the animal's leg, as he reached the ground.
The brute howled with pain, and rushed with open mouth upon his
antagonist. The wound he had received prevented him from making a
spring, but he dashed furiously forward upon three legs, with looks
intent upon mischief.

At this instant, the elephant made a rush at the tiger, and tumbled him
over to a considerable distance. Oriel again advanced towards him; and
lashing himself into a fiercer rage, the wounded beast prepared to dig
his claws and teeth into the body of his pursuer; but the young merchant
avoided all the desperate attempts the savage creature made to fasten
upon him, and inflicted upon his head and legs several severe wounds;
then, watching his opportunity, he brought down the sword with all his
strength upon his skull, and the tiger fell dead at his feet.

When he turned round to hasten to Zabra's assistance, he found the
elephant trying to raise him from the ground with her trunk: and she
seemed as much concerned at the accident as any person there, and moved
him as gently, and looked in his face as anxiously, as the tenderest
nurse could have done.

"Bravely fought, Master Porphyry!" exclaimed Sir Curry. "I never saw
finer sport; and you have shown yourself one of the best hunters I ever
met with. You shall have the skin, for you've well deserved it."

"Are you much hurt, my dear Zabra?" he anxiously inquired, without
attending to his host's commendations, as he bent over the prostrate
body of his friend. A low groan was all the reply he received. "Dr.
Tourniquet!" shouted Oriel: but the doctor was standing at his side,
having hastened to the spot when he saw that his services were likely to
be required.

"See what can be done immediately," added the young merchant earnestly.
"I'm almost afraid the brute has killed him."

"It's not so bad as that, don't you see, for he breathes," observed the
surgeon.

"But his dress is all over blood; therefore he must have received some
dangerous wounds," added Oriel. "Here; I'll undo his vest; and then we
can see the extent of the injury he has received."

"Oh, no!" said the doctor, unceremoniously pushing him away.

"Doctor Tourniquet, you behave very strangely, I think," said the other,
seemingly much offended.

"I beg pardon, Master Porphyry," responded the doctor, apparently with
much confusion; "but it would be very dangerous to meddle with the
wounds now, don't you see."

"They surely ought to be dressed without loss of time," remarked the
young merchant.

"The patient has received a severe shock; and the state of the
atmosphere, and--and not having with me things necessary to dress the
wound, and--and many other things, make it advisable that the patient
should be put to bed before his hurts are examined," said the doctor,
attempting to hide his perplexity as well as he could.

"I must say, I think it very strange," observed Oriel, not being able
to account for the embarrassment under which the doctor was evidently
labouring.

"No harm done, I hope?" inquired Sir Curry, as he approached upon his
elephant. "I should be sorry to have another Lord Muligatawny affair."

"There's no knowing what harm has been done; for I really cannot get my
surgeon to ascertain," replied the young merchant.

"No! ah! that's strange," responded his host: "I always like to know the
worst. It's a great consolation."

"Let us get out of this horrid place, or we shall all be eaten up by
wild beasts," exclaimed Fortyfolios, who was sitting, disconsolate and
uneasy on the top of his elephant.

"Such a thing might be. I've known several persons whose ardour in
pursuit of game has made them food for tigers," remarked Sir Curry.
"Poor Lord Muligatawny was only one instance out of many."

"Oh!" groaned the professor.

"See, he revives!" exclaimed the doctor, directing attention to his
patient, whose eyes were gently unclosing.

"Zabra! my dear Zabra! are you better?" asked Oriel, as he supported his
young friend's head on his shoulder.

Zabra looked about him with a wild stare, till his eyes fell upon the
elephant, who had all the time been an attentive spectator of the scene,
and then, as if remembering what he had suffered, he gave a slight
convulsive shudder, and sunk back into the arms of his patron.

"The tiger is dead, Zabra!" exclaimed Oriel.

"I wish all tigers were dead," muttered Fortyfolios.

"I think we had better place the patient on yonder elephant, and I will
accompany him till we return from whence we set out, when he can have
his wounds dressed, don't you see," said Dr. Tourniquet, who had
recovered from his confusion.

"Yes, send him forward with some of my people," added Sir Curry Rajah;
"and you come with me, Master Porphyry, and I'll show you a preserve
where the tigers are as thick as monkeys on a cocoanut tree."

"I've had quite enough of tiger hunting, I thank you," replied Oriel
Porphyry, very seriously; then directing his attention to his young
friend, he exclaimed--"Zabra! are you better now?"

The youth opened his long eye-lashes, and gazed upon his patron, as
if recognising his voice, and then in a low whisper said, "Yes, I am
better, Oriel."

"Will you let Dr. Tourniquet examine your wounds, Zabra? We want to know
how much you are hurt."

"Oh no! oh no!" he replied hastily, "Not now, not now, Oriel. Not now."

"This is very strange," observed the young merchant, unable to find
a reason for an objection to a thing that seemed so requisite. "Very
strange--but you can let us know what injury you have received."

"My back and arms are lacerated," responded Zabra. "But they do not pain
me so much as they did. Dr. Tourniquet shall see to them when I return,
and perhaps you can allow him to remain with me in case I should want
his assistance before. You can then return with the professor."

Oriel Porphyry appeared surprised, but he gave orders to the
attendants, who had been unconcerned spectators of the scene; and,
having lifted Zabra upon the elephant, who seemed delighted to regain
his burthen, the whole party returned to the country house of Sir Curry
Rajah.




CHAP. X.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DANGER OF GOOD INTENTIONS.


"I tell you what it is, Boggle," said Climberkin to his friend, as they
were pacing the quarter-deck together, "You're al'ays getting yourself
into scrapes. You've got a notion as you can do things in the most tip
top manner, and you make a reg'lar mommock of every thin' you sets
about."

"All I knows o' the matter is, that I likes to ha' 'ticular notions o'
things in general, as every man as is a man, and thinks like a man,
should," replied the other. "But I arn't such a stoop as to allow every
body to come his handy dandy sugarcandy over me. I knows a marlin spike
from a gun carriage."

"But there was no 'casion for you to 'noy the cap'ain by comin' the
high and mighty over his nevey," observed Climberkin.

"Well, I did it for the best," responded his companion. "You see the
young chap arn't quite up to his dooty; so I thought, as I was his
superior officer, it was the most properest thing in natur for me to
tell him what's what. But I recomembered as young people has feelings,
and that it would be best to make my 'munication as pleasant as
possible; so the next time I comed alongside Mr. Midshipman Loop, I
says, quite delicately, says I, you're a lubberly young son of a sea
cow, as arn't fit to do nuffin but to count your fingers, or cut your
toe-nails. You're al'ays a skylarking arter some precious mischief or
another. No matter whether you're aloft among the reefers, or down
below, right-fol-de-dolin' at the mess, you're up to no sort o' good
whatsomdever. I arn't no patience wi' sich varmint; and if you don't
do your dooty in a less 'jectionable sort o' fashion, I'm pretty
considerably spiflicated if I don't make sich a report o' your
wagabondisings as shall make you catch more toko than you'll be able to
digest in a month. Well, instead of the fellow being grateful for the
handsome way in which I'd tried not to hurt none o' his feelins, he
looks at me w' as much water in his eyes as 'ould do to wash his face
in; and in a short time arterwards up comes the cap'ain, and gives me
sich a sittin' down as didn't leave me a leg to stand on."

"You'd been too hard upon the young un," observed Climberkin: "there was
no necessity for speaking so sharp."

"It's always the way I gets served out whenever I attempts to do a good
action," replied Boggle. "Nobody has better intentions nor I have; but,
somehow or another, whenever I've 'tempted to do a fellow a good turn,
the end on it is the treatment I meets wi' gives me sich a turn as puts
me into a perfect 'stonishment."

"You don't go the right way to work, Boggle--that's it, depend on't,"
replied his companion.

"The right way!" exclaimed Boggle. "Why, I've been this way, and that
way, and t'other way--backards and forards--right and left--upside down
and round the corners; and I should like to know what other way there
is in this here univarsal world? No; the thing is this: there's a plank
started some where. Natur don't go right wi' me. I've had a deal o'
'sperience in my time, and every 'dividual thing has been sarved up to
me wi' the same sauce."

"I should like to hear the long and the short o' your goin's on," said
Climberkin.

"Why, as to that, I've a notion the whole circumbendibus o' my history
is as good as a sermon," replied the other.

"Well, let's hear it then, Boggle, if you've no objection," added his
companion.

"Then here goes, if you'll sit down on this gun; for, though I've heard
o' a standin' joke, I should think a standin' story would be rather a
tiresome sort o' thing. It's no matter when or where I was launched,"
continued Boggle; "and about my parentage, its only necessary to say,
I had a father and a mother, like other folks. Well, in due time I was
bound a 'prentice to a ship's carpenter. I very early entertained a
desire to set people to rights as was goin' wrong. I thought there was
nuffin so pleasant as tryin' to do good, and I took hold of every
'portunity to benefit my fellow-creturs. Master was a punch-your-head
sort o' character, wi' one eye and a leg-o'-mutton fist; and missus was
a spirited little ooman, mighty famous in her way; but if you did get
in her way, she pretty soon made you get out of it. Well, when master
wasn't a punchin' my head, missus was a boxin' my ears; and when missus
wasn't a boxin' my ears, master was a punchin' my head; and when they
were tired o' sarvin' me out, they turned to and sarved each other out.
I led a lovely life, as you may suppose."

"A dog would ha' been better off, I should think," observed Climberkin.

"I had a heart overflowin' wi' the buttermilk o' human kindness,"
continued the lieutenant; "and I didn't like sich a state o' things, no
how. I entertained a notion that the only way to change this here strife
was to endeavour to create feelin's o' love betwixt the parties; but how
to get 'em to like each other, instead of to lick each other, was the
difficulty. 'If I can make 'em believe each other's affection, I shall
make a reg'lar Cupid and physic business of it,' thought I. But how
could I make 'em believe? Where was the proof? I had always heard as
jealousy was a proof o' love; so I determined to make 'em as jealous as
was possible. Well, I took a 'casion to hint to master as missus was
unkimmonly amiable to Brisket, the butcher over the way; and, although
Brisket, the butcher over the way, warn't no more a object o' love nor a
rhinoceros, I could see master's one eye flashin' about like a bundle o'
crackers in a kitchen fire; and he told me to watch their canouvres
and 'municate to him any thing as was likely to interfere wi' his
conjugalities; and, as a more nor ordinary mark o' his 'preciation o' my
regard for his matrimonial blessedness, he took me a punch o' the head
twice as hard as ever he'd given me afore."

"You had the luck of it!" remarked his companion.

"Then I went to missus, and, in the most delicatest manner as could be,
I gave her to suppose that there was a monstrous deal o' improperiety
going forard betwixt master and Mrs. Brisket, the butcher's wife over
the way; and, although Mrs. Brisket, the butcher's wife over the way,
was about as good looking as a toad-fish, missus seemed quite done
brown o' both sides; and, tellin' me to gi' her due notice o' their
clandasterous proceedin's, she fetched me a box o' the ear, as made the
inside o' my head seem turned into curds and whey. Well, I continued
this sort o' game till, if jealousy be a proof o' love, they ought to
ha' been convinced beyond a doubt, and, as a matter o' course, should
have been as lovin' as turtle-doves: but, 'straordinary to relate, he
punched her head, and she boxed his ears, more earnestly than ever, all
the time throwing out 'sinuations that stirred each other up into the
most tarnationest fury. One unfortunit day, when I was workin' away in
the shop, and they were workin' away in the same place, they suddenly
stopped their hands to make use o' their tongues.

"'I knows your goin's on over the way, you wretch,' squeaked missus.

"'And I knows _your_ goin's on over the way, you trollope,' bawled
master.

"'I'll kill that woman,' cried one.

"'And I'll murder Brisket!' said the other.

"'It's false, you villain! I defy you to prove your words. But you know
my suspicions are well founded,' exclaimed the wife.

"'It's false, you hussy! and you know it,' shouted the husband.

"'I had the intelligence from the best authority, sir.'

"'I had mine from a source that dared not deceive me, madam.'

"'Who told you?' was simultaneously asked by both; and 'Boggle!' was
the reply in almost the same breath. Immediately they turned upon me. I
could see master's eye lookin' at me as if he was about to walk down my
throat; and missus--but it's only necessary to say that I made a sudden
bolt between master's legs, managed to tumble him over her; and while
they were sprawlin' together, I was crossin' all manner o' streets,
at a pace that sent every body out o' my way. That was the end o' my
'prenticeship; and thus my good intentions were so 'bominably
frusterated."

"And what did you do then?" inquired Climberkin.

"I went to live wi' an uncle," replied Boggle. "He kept a
knife-and-forkery. Meat of all kinds, ready cooked, was waiting for the
hungry at any hour, with vegetables in season and out o' season; soups
of all sorts, and some of very strange sorts; with mustard, bread,
pepper, and salt. I continued at this business a considerable time, and
liked it much better nor the ship carpenterin'; and I gained a good many
'ticular notions o' things in general: indeed, I may say, without any
sinnivation against the sort o' meat we sold, as how I became a slap
bang judge o' horse-flesh. I still continued 'deavourin' to set things
right as was goin' t'other way; but the same sort o' fun al'ays happened
as when I 'tempted to make jealousy become a proof o' love: I got no
more gratitude nor would serve a flea to lie down upon. Well, it so
happened as our customers was frequently in the habit o' complainin' o'
dyspepsia. Every body had dyspepsia: long or short, little or big, fat
or lean, every mortal cretur talked o' nothin' else but his dyspepsia.
Some said it was all acause o' their diet, and they detarmined to make a
reg'lar change in their eatables; so havin' been used to nothin' else
but mutton and beef, they directly began to eat nothin' else but beef
and mutton. And some said it was one thing, and some said it was
another; and some said it was just exactly neither. Now, I knowed about
as much o' dyspepsia as I did o' the top o' the moon; but I seed as
there was a screw loose somewhere, and I was nat'rally anxious to put it
in proper order. So I got hold of a book as gived explanations in the
most popular incomprehensible manner about diet and regimen, and what
you should eat and what you shouldn't eat; and how much you might put in
your bread-room, and how much you might let alone; and there I met with
the whole complete circumbendibus about dyspepsia."

"And what was it?" inquired his companion.

"Why, I can't exactly say what it was," replied Boggle, "acause the
book didn't exactly tell me; but I found out as every fellow as had it
should be reg'lar as clock-work in his eatables, and should have no more
nor a sartain quantity at no time. So I began 'deavourin' to cure the
dyspepsia. I hadn't the power to make 'em reg'late their jaw tackle
accordin' to the book; but I took precious good care as every one should
have a sartain quantity. Whether a fellow could eat a horse, or hadn't
a appetite no more nor a blue bottle, I sarved 'em all wi' a sartain
quantity. Acause why? It was good for their dyspepsia. But they kicked
up such a bobbery! The big eaters got into a devourin' rage, and they
left the shop, swearing I was a tryin' to pick their pockets. Ungrateful
wretches! I was only a tryin' to cure their dyspepsia. And the little
eaters were so very few in comparison, that, if they had remained
satisfied wi' my treatment, their custom would have been of no sort o'
significance; but, acause I gived them more nor their money's worth,
they quitted the place, saying it was too cheap to be good, and that
I was only a wantin' to poisen 'em. Ignorant creturs! I was only a
wantin' to cure their dyspepsia! Well, my uncle was in a reg'lar take in
at the loss o' his business: it put him into as complete a botheration
as ever you seed. He was a man o' very few words, but was unkimmon handy
upon occasions; and, seein' or fancyin' summut wasn't correct, he
watched my goin's on; and one day he cotched me a sarving out a sartain
quantity to a fellow who didn't want quite so much. So he axed me what
I was arter; and I up and I told him all about the dyspepsia; and all
about my attemptin' to cure it; and all about my sarvin' out a sartain
quantity to every body as comed to the shop. Well, afore I'd got to the
end o' my story, my uncle, in the most unnat'ral way as could be, took
up a stick as was handy, and he sarved _me_ out wi' a sartain quantity,
till I was obligated to make all sail out o' the shop."

"Accordin' to my notions, it wasn't a bit more nor you deserved,"
remarked the unsympathising Climberkin.

"What, not for trying to cure the dyspepsia!" loudly exclaimed the
other.

"Not for trying to cure nothin'," was the reply. "But what became o' you
arter that?"

"Why, my friends thought my notions o' things in general not likely to
come to no good ashore, so they took it into their heads to send me
afloat," responded his companion. "My first voyage lasted long enough
to give me a tolerable smartish insight into the nautical; but I was
continually wantin' to set things right, and my good intentions were as
continually a sarving me out wi' a sartain quantity. Now, this might ha'
made any fellow but me tired o' tryin' to benefit his fellow-creturs:
but I wasn't a chap o' that sort; and I still went on, as sarcumstances
required, 'tempting to do lots o' good, and gettin' in return nothin'
but lots o' bad. Well, when I came ashore in my native place, I was
rather a hold-your-head-up sort o' young chap; and, havin' some money
to spend, I swaggered about the streets most consumedly, and fancied
as every gal I cotched sight on was thinkin' o' nothin' in natur' but
lookin' arter me. So I thought as a matter o' course I'd look arter
them. I just did. As I had 'ticular notions o' things in general, as
every man as is a man, and thinks like a man, should have, I thought
it would be cruel to the rest o' the she creturs if I confined my
attentions to one: consequently, I went a courtin' away like a
steam-engine to all as I could meet. I had 'em o' all sorts and sizes,
colours and complexions--scraggy or squab--longs or shorts--it made not
a bit o' difference--as long as they were inclined to be fond o' me, I
was inclined to be fond o' them. I had the best intentions--I thought o'
nothin' but makin' 'em happy; and the more happiness as I could make,
the more good I thought I was a doing. Well, somehow or other, things
began to look queer, and every one on 'em was a wantin' me to marry 'em.
Now, there was a law again a fellow marryin' more nor one wife; and I
knew as if I married one it would be unkimmonly unjust to the rest.
This my 'ticular notion o' things in general wouldn't allow. I still
entertained the best intentions; so thinkin' as if they knowed the
rights o' the case they would see the impossibility o' my agreein' to
their wishes, I, unbeknown to the others, invited every one to meet
me under a large tree, a little way out o' the town, in the branches
o' which I hid myself very snug, to diskiver the upshot. First one
came--then came another--and number one looked at number two in all
sorts o' ways. Then came a third, and the two looked at number three in
all sorts o' ways. Then came a fourth, a fifth, a sixth--ay, I may as
well acknowledge at once as how they came to a matter o' twenty; and
they all looked at one another in all sorts o' ways. At last, one on
'em, as I knowed to be a bit o' a spit-fire, spoke up.

"'Ladies,' says she, 'may I ask what brought you all here?'

"'I came to meet Boggle,' said one.

"'I came to meet Boggle,' said another.

"'I came to meet Boggle,' said all.

"'You came to meet Boggle, you hussy!' exclaimed every one in the whole
lot; and, in less than a jiffy, caps flew about, dresses were torn, and
there was the most considerable shindy that ever was known in this here
univarsal world. Now, I had the best intentions. I only thought o'
creatin' as much happiness as I could. I never had no suspicion as my
notions o' things in general could ha' led to such a revolution. And
when I seed 'em all one a top o' t' other, a pummelling, a scratching,
and screeching like so many wild cats, I was taken quite comical; and,
missing my hold upon the bough, I tumbled right down into the very midst
on 'em. Directly as they caught eyes o' me they left off fighting. 'I
shall settle the matter comfortably at last,' thought I. Miserable
Boggle that I was! how I did deceive myself! In the next moment they all
flew at me like a lot o' tigers, and they scratched me up, and they
scratched me down, and they scratched me sideways--they pulled every
hair out o' my head, and they tore my clothes into bits not big enough
to cover a pincushion; and they didn't leave my unfortunate body till
they thought they had killed me out and out."

"I should think that ought to have sickened you o' goin' a courtin',"
remarked Climberkin, unable to restrain his mirth.

"Sickened!" exclaimed the other; "the very sight o' a she cretur makes
me as good as done for. Why, I was obliged to be laid up in lavender for
a month. I became as tender as a chicken, and every bone I possessed
seemed to have been smashed into porridge. And this was all in return
for my 'deavourin' to make 'em happy! If this arn't a most ungrateful
world I'm a nigger!"

"And what followed this adventure?" inquired his companion.

"Oh, don't ask me!" replied Boggle, very gravely: "I haven't the heart
to go on. But it was all the same. Still from time to time I thought o'
setting things to rights; and on every 'portunity I was rewarded for my
good intentions wi' exactly a similar sort o' treatment."

"Here comes the governor!" said the other, as he noticed Oriel and his
party approaching; and the two young men hastily left their seats on the
gun-carriage to attend to their duty in the ship.

"What coast is this, captain," asked the young merchant, pointing to the
shore that lay at the distance of a few miles.

"That is the coast of Arabia," replied Hearty.

"A part of the world rendered particularly interesting to the
philosopher by the many important incidents which, from the early
history of the world, have there occurred," added the professor. "Here
the chariots of Pharaoh, pursuing the fugitive Jews, were ingulfed in
the waters of the Red Sea; and yonder is the land where, after their
escape, the children of Israel wandered during their weary pilgrimage."

"Yes, the religion of Moses may be said to have had its origin here;
and here, also, the religion of Mahomet was created, don't you see,"
remarked the doctor. "This is the land of Mecca and Medina: this is the
land which, during the darkness of the middle ages, evinced the first
dawn of civilisation that gave light to the world--the land of Arabian
literature--of Arabian chivalry--of Arabian science and art. I cannot
say that I honour the character of their prophet; and I detest the way
in which his religion was promulgated as I detest every religion or
every form of faith that may be called a religion, which has had its
foundation upon bloodshed, rapine, and persecution. But, looking to
the effects produced by the diffusion of the absurdities of the Koran
wherever the arms of the Mahometans could penetrate, I must say that it
has created more good than many religions which have since obtained more
consideration."

"What! shall the Barbarians who destroyed the Alexandrian library be
held up to admiration?" exclaimed Fortyfolios, indignantly. "Shall they
who desolated wherever they went, among those who would not acknowledge
their pretended prophet, be considered benefactors to their species? I
cannot think you are in earnest, Doctor Tourniquet."

"But I am in earnest, don't you see," replied the doctor. "I would take
and compare the state of Mahometanism in Arabia, with the state of
Christianity at the same time in any part of the world--suppose we say
from the commencement of the seventh century, during the rule of the
Abbaside caliphs, till as late as the reign of the Ommeyide caliphs in
Spain?"

"But we must look to the opposite shore for the land from which all
intelligence proceeded," observed the professor. "Egypt was the cradle
of the arts and sciences; and her advances in knowledge preceded those
of Arabia by many centuries."

"And, doubtless, the advances made in India and China preceded those of
Egypt by about the same time, don't you see," added the doctor. "If we
would seek the origin of philosophy, we must, of course, find it among
the first people; and there is every reason to suppose that the earliest
inhabitants of this globe were located in India."

"That is doubtful," replied Fortyfolios. "But the Egyptians are at
least entitled to the credit of having, at an early period, carried
the mechanical arts to purposes the magnitude of which have never been
exceeded; and the degree of excellence they attained in philosophy
and learning is sufficient to make us regard them with a profound
veneration."

"We can only judge of the tree by the fruit, don't you see," responded
Tourniquet. "All I know is, that the Egyptians distinguished themselves
by erecting the most magnificent fooleries that had ever been conceived.
Of what use were their pyramids--their colossal statues and stupendous
monuments--their gigantic idols--their vast temples, and elaborate
sculptures? Superior knowledge did exist certainly, for they were
the teachers of the Jews and of the Greeks; and, although the latter
surpassed their instructors, they have still a claim upon our
admiration. But the priests were the depositors of this knowledge, and
they wrapped it up in mystery so cleverly, that it was of no use to the
people, among whom it ought to have been distributed, and was of just
the same advantage to posterity when both priests and people were
crumbling into dust."

"Are we not approaching the grand water communication that carries the
Red Sea into the Mediterranean?" inquired Oriel Porphyry.

"Ah! there's some sense in that!" exclaimed the doctor. "It beats the
wonders of Thebes to nothing; and yet there could not have been more
labour employed upon it than must have been used to erect that vast
city."

"Under what circumstances did it originate?" asked the young merchant.

"After the Russians had made themselves masters of Constantinople," said
Fortyfolios, "the Turkish empire gradually dwindled into insignificance;
but the territory of their conquerors had become so immense, that it
was impossible, even at the expense of a military power scarcely ever
equalled, to keep it together. Symptoms of dissolution began to show
themselves. The native Russians, who had gradually risen from a state
of abject servitude to one in which a strong love of liberty became
its greatest characteristic, grew restless and dissatisfied with their
government, and were continually endeavouring to force it to become more
liberal. The frequent disturbances which arose in consequence kept the
country very unsettled; and there was a powerful party in the state,
that, being opposed to the policy of those in authority, aided in
creating the public disaffection. At this time, when the government
was fully employed by its own internal disorganisation, several of the
conquered provinces threw off their allegiance. Of these, the most
successful were Poland and Greece. There arose amongst the Greeks a man
of extraordinary valour, wisdom, and soldiership, who, from the petty
leader of an insurrection, had become the chief of the national armies;
and, having succeeded in driving the Russians from his country, was
unanimously elected its king. But the independence of Greece did not
satisfy the ambition of this conqueror. He knew that the military ardour
of his countrymen required to be constantly exercised; and, leaving his
kingdom to the wisdom of his counsellors, he led a mighty armament into
the enemy's possessions in Turkey. Battle after battle was here fought
with the same result. The heroic Greeks drove all before them; besieged
and took Constantinople, in which they planted a colony; conquered
their way through Asia Minor, and, entering the subjected province of
Persia, excited the inhabitants to revolt: nor did they desist from
their triumphant career till they had become masters of the walls of
Petersburgh. At the same time the Poles, having taken up arms, they not
only succeeded in relieving their country from the iron bondage in which
it had so long been enslaved, but, in concert with the Greeks, invaded
the lands of their conquerors, and in many a sanguinary battle revenged
the wrongs they had endured."

"Did the Greek conqueror stop when he had subdued the Russians?"
inquired Oriel Porphyry, who seemed to listen with intense interest.

"No conqueror will halt in his career while he imagines there is any
thing to subdue," replied Fortyfolios. "The devotion with which the
Greeks regarded their chief gave him absolute power over the lives and
liberties of his subjects, and they wanted no inducement to follow him
in the pursuit of glory. Wherever he led they crowded to his standard.
He had but to declare his wish and armies were at his command. At this
period Egypt was a fertile and flourishing kingdom. The English and
French had vainly endeavoured to subdue it. They had made conquests
and formed settlements: but when these two great empires decayed, the
conquests were given up, and the settlements abandoned. Since then,
under its own rulers, the people had advanced in prosperity, and had
become powerful among the surrounding nations. This country the Greeks
invaded. They met with desperate resistance; but after a frightful
destruction of human life, and making the prosperous kingdom a
wilderness, they succeeded in bringing the Egyptians into subjection,
and planted a colony near the mouths of the Nile. This new colony throve
rapidly; as after the death of the conqueror a long interval of peace
ensued, and the population increasing rapidly, thousands emigrated to
the shores of Egypt and of Turkey. In little more than a century the
colonies threw off the supremacy of the mother-country, and although
many attempts were made to force them to acknowledge their dependency,
they did not succeed, and now they have become free states, scarcely
inferior in importance to the great empires of Columbia and Australia;
while of the great European nations that flourished a thousand years
ago, Spain, Italy, and Portugal, are in a semi-barbarous condition;
France, after having tried a hundred different forms of government, is
split into a dozen little republics, each trying to destroy the other,
and all acknowledging the supremacy of the German empire, the most
powerful of the European states, having a territory stretching from the
Rhine to the Vistula and from the English channel to the Adriatic sea.
The state of England you will be better able to comprehend during the
visit you are about to make to its shores than any description I can
give you: but I must return to the Greek colony in Egypt. Its population
increased rapidly, and the intelligence of the people seemed to increase
with their numbers. They built many new cities, but by far the largest
and most magnificent of them is the city of Athenia, which was erected
on the borders of the lake Menzaleb. The colonists having turned their
attention to commerce, for many years had considered the advantages that
would accrue to their city if they could open a communication with the
Mediterranean on one side, and with the Gulf of Suez on the other. This
idea, if it were practicable, they saw would give them facilities of
traffic which no country could surpass; and all their thoughts were
anxiously turned towards the realisation of this splendid scheme. But
the project was so gigantic that the most skilful engineers pronounced
it impracticable. At last, one more bold than the rest published a plan
by which he said it might be accomplished, with an enormous capital, a
considerable interval of time, and the application of immense labour.
The plan was considered, and, after much discussion, approved of. Funds
were collected, a multitude of labourers were employed, and the work
commenced by cutting a broad channel through the Isthmus of Suez,
and from the Lake to the Mediterranean. In twenty years from its
commencement the waters mingled together, and in fifty years Athenia was
one of the busiest sea-ports, and one of the most magnificent cities in
the world."

"And its inhabitants are the wisest and the happiest people on the
globe, don't you see," added the doctor. "They allow no superstitious
follies to cramp the energies of their minds. They act and think as
become men and not slaves. Their laws are simple, few, and admirably
adapted to their wants. Their sociality is perfect, their morality
unrivalled, their intelligence exceeds that of any other people beneath
the sun. As for their form of faith, nothing can equal its philosophy,
for they maintain that philanthropy is the only religion, and that the
true worship of God is doing good to man."

"Those are the principles my father entertains," observed the young
merchant.

"They may truly be called a nation of philanthropists," continued the
surgeon. "There is philanthropy in their laws--there is philanthropy
in their government--there is philanthropy in their dealings one with
another. From the cradle to the grave the object of all is to teach good
or to practise it; and such things as hate, deceit, envy, avarice, and
all the black catalogue of vices that stain other nations are to them
unknown."

"They are a people worthy of being studied," said Oriel.

"Studied! they ought to be got by heart, by every nation on the face of
the globe, don't you see," replied Dr. Tourniquet. "There is nothing in
nature so refreshing to the sight. It makes one in love with humanity.
It dissolves all the freezing selfishness that the prejudices of
education have created upon our feelings, and allows us to enjoy the
sunshine and the gladness of a free and unalterable sympathy for all
our race. It is under such circumstances, and under such only, that man
becomes what he was created to be--a creature eminently happy, enjoying
moderately all his inclinations, pleased with the pleasures of others,
and liberally sharing his own: knowing neither fear, nor crime, nor
want, nor folly; suffering from few diseases, and those only the most
ordinary afflictions of existence; entertaining no idea of emulation
but that of endeavouring to exceed one another in doing good; having
no interest in any property apart from the interest of the community;
possessing no attachment to any object or place which is not shared
by those around him--and while looking neither to the past nor to the
future with either hope or fear, endeavouring to make the present
as beneficial to himself and others, as with a kind, a just, and a
reasonable way of life the present can be made. And this is what I call
a perfect state of society, don't you see."




CHAP. XI.

ATHENIA.


A party, consisting of the two philosophers, Oriel Porphyry, Zabra, and
a stranger, were proceeding in an elegant open carriage through the
crowded streets of Athenia. The stranger was a man of about fifty, of
noble mien, and lofty stature. There was a classic purity in the outline
of his face, that became more pleasing to the gazer from its being
accompanied by features of the most benevolent expression. A mild and
graceful spirit seemed shining in every look; and none could behold his
clear expansive forehead without feeling a conviction that he stood in
the presence of an intelligence of the highest order. A white turban was
carefully folded over his brows, covering the lower portion of a small
velvet cap that fitted close to the head. The upper part of his body
was robed in several vests, or short jackets, made of different stuffs,
in elegant patterns, each being of a different fabric and colour; and
beneath these an under garment, of remarkably fine linen, might be
observed. The waist was bound round with a rich silken sash, the ends
of which hung down on the left side; and below it, in very full folds,
descended to the knees a garment of a thick fabric, of a white colour
till near the skirt, where there appeared three narrow bands of light
blue: leggings of thin silk descended to the feet, which were cased in
shoes of fine leather; and an ample robe of embroidered purple cloth
hung loose from the shoulders.

"This is a magnificent street," remarked the young merchant, noticing a
line of palaces that stretched for a considerable distance on each side
of him.

"What noble porticoes--what lofty domes--what a beauty and harmony there
is in the arrangement of every building!" exclaimed Zabra. "Surely they
are inhabited by a race of princes."

"Of what are usually called princes, we know nothing," said the stranger
mildly. "This is the street of our great men. Here dwell our most
illustrious poets, philosophers, artists, and men of science."

"Can it be possible?" asked Fortyfolios. "How do they manage to acquire
such splendid dwellings?"

"When a citizen has shown by his works," resumed the stranger, "that he
possesses those intellectual powers that most ennoble human nature, the
public, out of gratitude for the gratifications they receive from his
superior intelligence, place him in a situation where he can be most
honoured, and where his own pleasures may correspond in degree with the
pleasures he is creating."

"Nothing can be more wise, don't you see," said the doctor; "and it has
been a disgrace to all civilised nations that their men of intellect,
the only nobles that any society can possess, have been so little cared
for, that few have ever enjoyed an adequate return for the labour and
the wealth they were bestowing upon their country. Rarely have they
been held in the estimation which their superiority in the only true
greatness which can distinguish humanity ought to command; and a vast
number have been left to battle with a selfish world, till, having
endured every species of suffering that can most afflict their sensitive
natures, steeped to the lips in poverty, weary and heartbroken, they lie
down in some obscure corner and die."

"We could not practise such injustice," observed the stranger; "and I am
surprised that any people should exist who know so little of their true
interests as to act in so unwise a manner. It is our object to enlighten
the community as much as may be possible; and knowing that the increase
of intelligence, when properly directed, is productive of a similar
increase of happiness, we naturally endeavour to testify to those who
are labouring to produce our felicity the interest we take in the
creation of theirs: we therefore consider them as benefactors, clothe
them with dignity, surround them with honour, allow them to have no want
ungratified, and convey within their reach every enjoyment that can make
their lives glide on without a care, a regret, or a disappointment. The
consequence has been, that the gifted, observing the estimation in which
excellence is held, strive with all their energies to become worthy of
the same distinction. From this cause our buildings have become the
finest in the world--our works of art have become the finest in the
world--the most wonderful discoveries exceed each other in every branch
of science--and in every department of philosophy some new and amazing
effort of genius is continually making itself manifest."

"What a desirable state of things!" exclaimed Oriel.

"But how do the people profit by their generosity?" inquired the
professor.

"Rather say by their gratitude," observed the stranger. "Knowledge is
imparted freely. There are free lectures, in which our great men make
public all the information that may most enlighten a community; books
are published on every subject, and distributed freely to those who
require them; and their authors, having no inclination ungratified,
and finding their greatest pleasure in diffusing the intelligence they
possess, employ their powers with nobler feelings than in other nation
the desire of money as an object of reward, or a means of existence, can
under any circumstances create; and the people, enjoying the wholesome
pleasures thus liberally conveyed to them, have neither inclination nor
time to contract vicious propensities, and follow the daily business of
life with pure hearts, and minds open to every ennobling impression."

"They must enjoy an extraordinary amount of happiness," observed Zabra.

"With what is usually called misery they are entirely ignorant,"
replied the stranger; "for as all their time is employed in the
right application of the means of enjoyment, they create no wrong;
consequently they cannot produce anything but happiness."

"Worthy Sophos!" exclaimed Fortyfolios. "In the streets through which we
have passed, although I have noticed every sort of warehouse and shop
for the purposes of trade, I have not seen any place for the sale of
intoxicating liquors; and among all the public buildings I have beheld,
I have not met with any thing which, from its appearance, I could
consider a prison."

"Intoxicating liquors we neither buy nor sell," replied Sophos. "The
pure beverage which nature has provided so liberally for our enjoyment,
confers upon us both health and pleasure; and although the indulgence of
every natural inclination is allowed, any intemperance in the enjoyment
of an appetite is punished with immediate and general disgrace; the
sensualist, the glutton, or the drunkard is avoided as unworthy to
associate with his fellow men, and the instances of such offences being
committed are so rare, that they are now looked upon as altogether
unnatural. As for prisons we do not want them; we have no use for them.
Such offences as crimes against life, or crimes against property;
crimes against the individual, or crimes against the state, are so few
that if we were to build a prison, we should find some difficulty in
getting in it a single inhabitant. We have long known that prisons do
not prevent crime. We are aware that wherever there have been the most
prisons, there have been the greatest number of criminals; and beholding
in the experience of ages the inutility of punishment as a preventive
to criminality, we came to the conclusion, that the only sure way of
preventing a man becoming a criminal, is to remove from his path all
temptations to crime. Every citizen having the free enjoyment of every
inclination, cannot possibly have a want that interferes with the
interests of the community; and we are exceedingly careful throughout
the educational course of life to prevent the existence of any
inclination that may be hurtful either to the individual or to the
society to which he belongs."

"Is this one of your religious edifices?" inquired Oriel, pointing to a
large building supported by elegant pillars, and having the appearance
of the highest degree of architectural excellence.

"It is, and it is not," replied Sophos, with a smile. "It is a religious
edifice, inasmuch as it is well calculated to assist in establishing
religious impressions, and it is used for the purpose of conveying moral
instruction to the hearts of those who enter its walls: and it is not a
religious edifice, because it is connected with no mystery, and is no
place for monks and priests, grovelling superstitions, and unmeaning
ceremonies. But you shall examine the interior." With these words he
ordered the carriage to be driven up to the gates, and the party
alighting, entered the edifice.

Having passed through lofty folding doors, they were ushered along a
vaulted hall of immense extent and admirable proportions. It was lighted
from the top by windows that spread around the whole circumference of
the dome in a series of circles, between which the roof was supported by
gigantic figures of white marble. The walls were painted in fresco,
with a variety of subjects executed in the first style of art, and the
object of every painting appeared to be to elevate the human mind into a
love of practical benevolence. Nothing barbarous, nothing cruel, nothing
unjust, nothing coarse, nothing that could create an unpleasant feeling,
had here been introduced; but all that was affectionate and true, and
pure and excellent, had been seized by the plastic genius of the artist,
and fixed in undying colours upon the wall.

In the different divisions that separated these pictures appeared short
moral maxims and philosophical sentences. Every religion seemed to have
furnished some portion of the instruction here conveyed. Near the truths
of Christianity might be observed the wisdom of Islamism; the Proverbs
of Solomon had a place by the side of the maxims of Zoroaster, and the
wisdom of Confucius was inscribed opposite the philosophy of Socrates.
Wherever the eye turned it caught something worthy of contemplation, and
whatever the mind contemplated it found impressive, unanswerable, and
impossible to be forgotten.

"What place do you call this?" inquired Oriel of his conductor.

"It is called the Hall of Wisdom and of Humanity," replied the stranger.
"And here, if the soul is fretted by pain or sorrow, or the heart yearns
for some refreshing influence, comes the citizen from the busy toils of
life, and gazing on these tokens of a benevolent power, and studying
these signs of a comprehensive intelligence, he finds that both his
heart and mind are strengthened--a love of excellence pervades all his
nature, and he passes back to the world with a cheerful spirit, giving
and partaking gladness."

"What are the principles of your religion?" asked Fortyfolios.

"The principles of our religion are the best principles of every
religion that has existed from the creation of the world," responded
Sophos. "We found every variety of faith could produce something
profitable. The worst religion has brought forth good men, good women,
and good citizens, and surrounded by the most degrading superstitions,
we invariably found some truth worthy of general appreciation. We also
found that the most enlightened religions produced bad men, bad women,
and bad citizens, and discovered amid the most wholesome truths they
endeavoured to inculcate, some pernicious superstition that destroyed
the efficacy of their doctrines. This led to a consideration of their
separate natures, and upon careful examination we discovered that from
the earliest ages, all people had been doing the same thing under
different names. They had personified two opposing principles--the
principle of good and the principle of evil, which they had worshipped.
In many religious systems the machinery was more complicated than in
others, but all were easily traced to the same source."

"Impossible!" exclaimed the professor.

"The names of God and Devil," continued Sophos, "are so obviously
modified from good and evil, and the attributes of each power are so
completely the attributes of each principle, that nothing more need be
said of their connection. They are the same things: as principles they
are the light and shadow of the moral world; as deities, the Alpha and
Omega of Christianity and Judaism. Vishnu the Preserver, and Siva the
Destroyer, the most important members of the Hindoo Pantheon--the
Ahrimanes and Ormuzd of Zoroaster, and the Fire Worshippers of
Persia--the Osiris and Typhon of the Egyptians--the Jupiter and Pluto of
the Greeks--and the great idols of every form of worship that had at any
time of the world existed, are but personifications of the opposing
principles good and evil."

"Not a doubt of it, don't you see," remarked Doctor Tourniquet.

"I do not believe anything of the kind," observed Fortyfolios: "it's
heathenish, abominable, and atheistical."

"Having made this analysis," continued the stranger, without attending
to the interruptions he had received, "we came to the determination of
making these principles our form of faith; that is to say, we made our
doctrines those of benevolence. Good was our God--Philanthropy was our
religion; and doing good became the way in which we endeavoured to
worship the Deity. The good principle is around us at all times while
we live, and creates our felicity, and produces the pleasures of those
around us; and death is the evil principle, which puts an end to the
happiness we were enjoying and creating."

"What is your form of government?" inquired Oriel.

"Our supreme head is called the Optimus, or the Best," replied Sophos.
"He is addressed by the title of our Benefactor the Optimus, and is
elevated to that dignity in consequence of his having distinguished
himself above his fellow-citizens by the superior excellence of his
wisdom and greatness of his philanthropy. He is assisted in the duties
of the government by an assembly of two hundred of the most experienced,
the wisest, and the best of his fellow-countrymen, who are called
Fathers; and from this assembly the people always choose their Optimus,
who reigns as long as his faculties permit him to exercise his judgment
for the benefit of the people, and his reign is called his Optimate.
Inferior in dignity to the assembly of Fathers, is a parliament of
five hundred, who are distinguished by the name of Brothers; and they
represent the interests of certain communities or disciples into
which our great family is divided. It must not be imagined from these
divisions and distinctions that there are any exclusive advantages or
separate interests amongst us. Any individual may obtain the highest
offices of the legislature by passing through the parliament of Brothers
and the assembly of Fathers, for which he must show himself well
qualified by knowledge, virtue, and benevolence. He gains neither
advantage nor profit--nothing but the esteem of his fellow-citizens; and
the people are classed into distinct communities of disciples, merely
that the interests of the whole shall receive a proper degree of
attention from the legislative."

"And do you find such a form of government answer the purpose for which
it was designed?" inquired Oriel.

"All," replied Sophos. "The laws are simple and few, and admirably
adapted to satisfy the wants of the people. We have no monopolies
to protect; we have no exclusive privileges to confer. There is no
legislative enactment passed which does not take into consideration the
happiness of each and all."

"It is wonderful to observe with how few laws a nation may be governed,"
said the doctor; "and it is equally surprising to notice with how many
laws a nation may be misgoverned, don't you see."

"Now let us enter the Hall of Public Benefactors," said the stranger;
and passing through a succession of elegant arches, he led the way to
another magnificent hall, similar in grandeur and beauty to the one
they had recently left. Statues, rather larger than life, were placed
in separate niches round the wall; and these statues represented
individuals who had rendered themselves illustrious by their virtues or
intelligence. In one place stood the figure of the immortal Howard; in
another that of the admirable Pestalozzi. Opposite these philanthropists
were the patriots Alfred, Leonidas, Sobieski, William Tell, and Hofer.
Here stood the impetuous Körner, and there the amiable Shelley. Jeremy
Bentham, Oberlin, Owen of Lanark, Sir Samuel Romilly, and Wilberforce
had places near Harvey, the discoverer of the circulation, Galileo,
Fenelon, Plato, Socrates, Newton, Bacon, and La Place; and Tasso, and
Petrarch, and Göthe, and Walter Scott, and Coleridge, and Wordsworth,
were seen by the side of Shakspeare, and Milton, and Cicero, and
Demosthenes, and Aristotle, and Plutarch. The most commanding
intellects, the noblest natures, the wisest, the best, and kindest of
human beings were here all represented in the plastic marble, and raised
high above the heads of those who were gazing upon them, as if to show
how elevated were such spirits above the common mass of mankind.

"Look! look!" exclaimed Zabra to his patron, with his eyes shining
with pleasure, pointing to a statue that was placed in one of the most
conspicuous situations in the chamber. Oriel looked in the required
direction, and, with a delight that kept him dumb, recognised the
statue of his father.

"Yes, the statue of your father has been considered worthy of a place
in the Hall of Public Benefactors," observed Sophos; "and even here,
in that nobleness of heart which all good men should honour, he will
scarcely meet with a superior. Master Porphyry has deserved well of
the world, and the world should honour him above the ambitious crowd
who strive for their notice. He has made of his great wealth a great
blessing. He has been a doer of good from his youth upward; and the love
which he has evinced for his fellow-creatures has been universal in its
object. Had he been born amongst us, or were his virtues transplanted
into our society, I have no doubt that upon the first occasion he would
be promoted to the rank of Optimus; but whether in Athenia or in
Columbus, or in whatever part of the world he may chance to be, there he
will be The Best, and there he will have sovereignty over all good men."

Oriel Porphyry listened with feelings of the most exquisite pleasure
to this eulogium, and he gazed, with a happiness in his eyes it was
long since he had experienced, upon the marble figure which had been
sculptured into a resemblance of his parent; but the delight of Zabra
seemed still more intense, and he turned from the statue to his friend,
and from his friend to the statue, as if he never could be tired of
gazing upon their noble countenances.

"It is here our great and good men come and meditate," continued the
stranger; "and, gazing upon the greatness and goodness they see around
them, standing in their places of honour, an impulse of emulation fills
their souls, their hearts are brimming over with generous sympathies,
and they return to the senate or the public hall with eloquence that
carries conviction to the hearer, and a purpose that can only be
satisfied by the production of some general and lasting benefit."

The party proceeded into other halls, some for public instruction,
others for social intercourse, and others for the deliberations of the
legislature, and in all they observed the same happy adaptation of the
means to the end, the same beautiful appearances, the same spirit of
benevolence, and the same admirable harmony in the disposition of the
different parts of the chamber, as they had noticed in the chambers
through which they had passed. After which they resumed their ride.

"There is nothing I have seen in my travels that has afforded me so much
pleasure as what I have observed during the brief stay I have made in
this city;" observed the young merchant.

"And as yet you have seen scarcely any thing of us, of our manners, or
of our institutions;" replied Sophos. "Let me now take you to a musical
entertainment given in the open air by an orchestra of at least a
thousand performers, and it will give you an opportunity of not only
hearing the best music performed in the most expressive manner, but of
mingling with the people of Athenia in their hours of relaxation and
amusement."

Permission having been readily granted, the carriage was driven off
to an open park, beautifully planted with noble trees and flowering
plants, (amongst which carriage ways and footpaths wound in graceful
sweeps), and possessing every variety of hill and dale, lake and rivulet
to increase its attractions.

"This is one of the public parks that have been planted to secure the
health and improve the pleasures of the citizens;" said the stranger.
"Here you see are thronging the young and the old, the philosopher and
the student, the statesman and the mechanic, all with happy faces, and
each intent that his neighbour shall share in his happiness."

"And who are yonder group of beautiful girls that seem so much delighted
with one another. It is strange that they should appear in a public
place without some male friends or relations;" observed Oriel.

"Not at all;" replied Sophos. "Who can look upon them without respect?
They want no protectors, for there is here no one who would even think
them harm. They are probably proceeding to the concert for the purpose
of joining in the choruses, and are the daughters of the noblest of our
citizens. We have made music a part of our system of education, and not
unwisely; for there is no source of gratification so capable of refining
and intellectualising the feelings. Each individual possesses the power
of distributing pleasure to the rest, and here, when they can escape
from the necessary labours of life, come all,--from the humblest to the
highest, from the most ignorant to the most enlightened, and tuning
their instruments and their voices into one grand harmonious concert,
they create such a powerful and delicious music as I should imagine it
would be impossible to excel."

The party had now arrived at the top of a hill, from which they had a
splendid view of the scene before them. Down to the very base of the
hill on which they stood, at least twenty thousand citizens, men, women,
and children, clad in a costume, varying in some degree from that worn
by Sophos, were reclining on the grass. Opposite to them was a hill of
smaller dimensions, upon which an immense orchestra was being arranged.
At the top, on each side, were a pair of gigantic drums, between which
were several smaller ones. Below these were the brass instruments,
then the flutes, bassoons, oboes and clarionets: the double basses and
violincellos flanked the violins, and outside the stringed instruments,
the choruses were stationed; a place was left at bottom for the
principal singers, in the centre of which stood the conductor, ready to
give the time of the performance.

The spectators had hitherto carried on a conversation each in his own
circle; but immediately the conductor's bâton was seen in motion, every
one was in an attitude of attention, and then among the whole mass
of listeners not a sound arose. The first piece performed was for
instruments only. It commenced with a movement remarkable for the
solemnity of its character and the richness of its harmonies, which
changed into a sweet and graceful subject in quicker time, wherein
several beautiful phrases were worked up by the musician in a variety
of pleasing shapes. The piece ended with a more lively movement,
introducing a magnificent fugue, in which the different instruments
followed each other with an effect astonishing for its grandeur and
beauty. To say it was well played, would convey only a feeble conception
of the excellence of the performance: it was played with that perfect
precision, and exquisite attention to the expression required in the
composition, which can only characterise the very best performances.
As soon as it was over there arose from the delighted multitude who
thronged the hill a loud and continued burst of applause, mingled with
exclamations expressive of the approbation of the listeners, and every
one seemed to turn to his neighbour to observe if he was as well
gratified as himself.

A song, or rather descriptive scene for a bass voice, with orchestral
accompaniments, followed, in which the poet and musician sought
to describe the temptations to evil, its committal, and its evil
consequences; and the piece ended with a most harrowing picture of
madness and death. After this there was a dramatic duet between a treble
and tenor, delineating the first appearance and confession of a mutual
affection. This was succeeded by a vocal air for a female voice, marked
by a simple and exquisite pathos that seemed to touch every heart; and
its subject was the despair of the heart, when, having for a long time
believed itself beloved, it awakes to the full conviction that it is
deceived. A grand chorus in praise of nature followed; and the effect
of so many hundred voices swelling out the harmonies, was grand in
the extreme; and the act concluded by a descriptive symphony for the
orchestra, full of sweet pastoral effect, and admirable instrumentation.

Each composition was performed in a manner as nearly approaching
perfection as was attainable, and this the audience seemed to
acknowledge by the liberality of their plaudits. Upon Zabra the effect
seemed to be extraordinary. He drank in every sound as if his life
depended upon its enjoyment, and he listened with a sense of pleasure
beaming in his features that nothing but the most intense gratification
could have created. The rest of the performance was of a similar degree
of merit, and the party left the hill impressed with the conviction
that they had seen and enjoyed more rational pleasure than they had ever
known at any public place of amusement.

"I would not have missed the exquisite delight I have received, on
any consideration;" remarked Zabra. "Enraptured as I am with music,
I have known nothing in my experience that bears a comparison with
the enjoyments of this day. And what could create more pleasure? It
would be sufficient, one would suppose, to be made familiar with the
skill of ordinary musicians; but you could take no interest in their
performances, they are drilled to do them, and they can do nothing else:
but here is a multitudinous family of musicians, hastening from the
loom, the study, the workshop, the laboratory and the warehouse, who
each has a distinct business to which he must devote his attention, to
join, from a desire to please his fellow-citizens, in the execution of
the most difficult and beautiful productions of the musical art; and
every one takes his part, caring not, however unimportant it may be,
so that he is allowed to share in producing the general happiness.
Of all the arts of civilised life there can be none so humanising in
its tendency, so refreshing in its influence; so pure, exalting, and
subduing in its effects as music. The man who is insensible to its
charms is afflicted with a most pitiable blindness. There can be no
harmony in his nature. His feelings must be in an unchangeable state
of discord. But point out any human creature sensitive to all musical
impressions, and I would affirm that you might mould him into any good
purpose. Music, as a means of educating the feelings, can never be
excelled. The experience of a hundred ages has proved its power as an
instrument for creating or subduing the passions; and yet never till now
have I seen any attempt made to try its beneficial effects on a large
scale, and by making good musicians, to endeavour to create good men."

There was no time for a reply to be made to these observations, as
the carriage stopped at the door of a handsome mansion, and the party
prepared to alight.

"I must introduce you into our social circle," said Sophos, as he led
the way into his dwelling; "and I hope you will be able to find in it
the same happiness that I have so long enjoyed."

They followed him through several apartments furnished with superior
taste, till they entered a room of more moderate proportions ornamented
with a variety of elegant decorations, in which two females were
reclining on an ottoman, with a handsome youth standing before them
reading from an open book. The females were the wife and daughter of
their host; and both possessed countenances of exceeding beauty: the
maternal dignity of the one contrasting admirably with the affectionate
playfulness of the other; and the youth was the betrothed of the
daughter. As soon as Sophos entered they hastened to meet him, and
welcomed him with their endearments. These being over he introduced his
guests to their notice, who received from them such marks of kindness
and attention as made them instantly at ease. After an interesting
conversation, describing what had been witnessed during their morning's
ride, the party were summoned to the dining-room, where they partook of
wholesome food of exquisite flavour, served up without ostentation or
extravagance, and partaken of without epicureanism or gluttony.

"Zoe," said Sophos to his daughter, "has nothing transpired since my
absence that is worthy of recital?"

"I have something to communicate to you, my father," replied the
beautiful girl, as she pushed back from her eyes the dark ringlets that
seemed to have fallen from the little velvet cap embroidered with gold
which was worn tight upon the upper part of her head; "but I know not
whether it would interest your guests."

"I will excuse you, Zoe, if it should not," observed the father.

"I had gone to perform my customary duties, as nurse, at the Hospital of
Invalids," said Zoe, "when my attentions were required by a youth who
was in a state of intense delirium. He raved, he shouted and wept;
he entreated with all the eloquence of frantic excitement; and then
upbraided with the unsocial energy of despair: but most conspicuous in
all his ravings was the name of Lusa, which appeared to belong to some
maiden by whom he was enamoured, who did not return his attachment. In
his delirium he mistook me for the object of his passion, and by turns
praised me as the kindest of all created beings, and upbraided me as
the most cruel of my sex. To such an extent did these paroxysms arrive,
that, unless some plan was put into operation which would lessen the
excitement under which he laboured, there appeared no hopes of saving
his life. I knew nothing of him or of his history; and I knew as little
of Lusa and of the cause which prevented their mutual happiness; but
there was no doubt that the indifference of the maiden had created the
malady which threatened the youth's life; and I felt convinced, that
if I could make him imagine that a mutual sympathy existed, a healthy
action would ensue, and a recovery follow. Being addressed as Lusa, I
thought it would be advisable, under the character thus imposed upon
me, to give the sufferer hopes of a more blissful termination to his
affections; and, therefore, I cautiously and kindly made him imagine
that the heart he thought so unrelenting had been subdued by a wish
to alleviate his sufferings. You will pardon me this deception, dear
father, as it was done to save a life which might be made valuable to
the community."

"There was nothing wrong in it, Zoe; and these are deceptions that not
only become necessary, but are not to be avoided without inhumanity,"
said the father.

"The youth listened to me as if there was the power of life and death
upon my lips," continued Zoe; "every word seemed to sink into his heart:
his frenzy became subdued; the feverish fire fled from his eyes--he grew
calm, and blessed me with a fervour impossible to be described. After
this he fell into a profound sleep. Then I found myself placed in a
difficult and distressing position. I knew, that when he woke, he would
discover the deception that had been practised upon him, and I feared
that the result would be a relapse, from which there could be no
recovery. While I was vainly endeavouring to conceive some plan by which
I might escape from the embarrassing situation in which I was placed, a
young and handsome female entered that portion of the hospital in which
my duties were performed. She approached me, and inquired after the
health of the patient committed to my charge. She did not tell me who
she was, and I imagined her to be a relative. I therefore acquainted her
with the exact state of the case; and related the way in which I had
discovered the origin of his malady. I described to her the distressing
situation in which I had placed myself by the deception I had practised,
as I knew, that on his awaking, he must discover how cruelly he had
been imposed upon. I had noticed during my recital that the maiden had
appeared confused, had looked distressed, anxious, and full of sympathy
for the sufferer; but I was not prepared for the avowal she made when I
had told her all I had to communicate. She was Lusa."

"And how did you manage to arrange the matter, my Zoe?" inquired Sophos.

"I immediately made an appeal to her sympathies," replied his daughter.
"I described to her the positive danger in which the youth was placed
by her indifference--and endeavoured to awaken her feelings to a sense
of the pleasures she would be storing for herself if she resolved upon
rescuing him from the perils by which he was threatened. She replied
that he was amiable and good, and had given her no cause for her
apparent unkindness; but that she had not loved him in return for
his affections, because he had excited in her no similar feeling; and,
that hearing of his danger, her heart had been filled with tenderness,
and that she had come to the hospital for the express purpose of
endeavouring to tranquillise his mind with happier thoughts. This
confession rejoiced me more than I can possibly express; and I bade her
take my place at his bedside, while I remained at a distance to notice
the effect her appearance would have upon him when he awoke. I had not
waited long before I observed his head move on the pillow. His eyes
looked clearer--his countenance calm and intelligent.

"'Is it a dream?' he said, as his gaze wandering round fell upon the
blushing face of his Lusa. The look with which she answered the question
seemed to have subdued him.

"'Lusa!' he murmured, as he gazed upon her with a kindling eye and
quivering lip. 'Lusa, my beloved! My soul is on my lips--let me bless
you! My hope, my guide, my consolation! the very breath of my being--the
aim and glory of my dreams! in all earnestness, in all sincerity, and in
all love, I bless you; and may the blessing I confer remain upon you,
gladden the atmosphere you breathe, and fill with beauty every scene
upon which you gaze!'

"Lusa's eyes were filled with tears; and bending her head down to his
face, her lips rested upon his. She then moved away her head to conceal
her tears; and, taking his hand in hers, she talked to him of hope
and happiness; and assured him that she would endeavour to return the
affection he had lavished on her so liberally. To this he made no reply.
She looked upon his face and saw that his eyes were fixed and glassy.
A scream brought me to her side; and, gazing in fear and pity, we
discovered that he was dead."

"How dreadful!" exclaimed Zabra.

"He died happy," observed Sophos, "and his life had been blameless:
there is nothing dreadful in such a dissolution. I should say that,
under such circumstances, Death was robbed of all his terrors. The heart
of the affectionate youth was too full; he died of excessive happiness;
his breath passed away in a blessing, and his soul took flight in a
caress. Is there any other way of passing from existence which, to a
lover, could afford so much and so true an enjoyment?"

"I should think not," here remarked Zoe's betrothed. "It appeared as
if all the happiness of his existence had been concentrated into one
moment, and that its intensity destroyed him."

"He was young," said the matron; "and in youth, when the soul is
attached to one object, though there be no return to the passion, and
no hope except what the lover creates, he will love the more, the
more despairing becomes his attachment. As the individual acquires
experience, he loves more wisely; or, perhaps, I might say, he becomes
more selfish: he thinks of himself much more than his passion; and an
instance of devotion without a return is rarely, if ever, met with
beyond the period of youth. Manhood is prouder--age more cautious; and
as life passes on, the impulses which might have been wakened by a
breath are not to be stirred even by a whirlwind."

"Whence go you when you leave our shores?" inquired Sophos of the young
merchant, as if desirous of changing the conversation.

"I pass from here to Constantinople; and from there, after touching at
some of the principal ports in Europe, I intend visiting the classic
shores of England;" replied Oriel.

"'Tis an interesting voyage," observed his host; "especially your
intended visit to the English shores: it is an ancient country, and to
the philanthropist is connected with many associations that make it
regarded with peculiar interest. The brightest page in her book of
honour records the efforts she made to extinguish the slave trade
throughout the world. It was a great boast of the Englishmen of those
days, that a slave, as soon as he set his foot upon the honoured land
of England, became a free man."

"And look at the efforts it made for the regeneration of every other
country;" added Fortyfolios. "For how long a period did it take the lead
in civilisation! Its learning enriched the whole world; its manufactures
produced clothing for almost every people by whom clothing was required;
and its mechanical improvements conferred wealth and power on every
nation that adopted them."

"But the picture to be true to nature requires a little shadow, don't
you see;" observed the doctor. "There are some accounts of cruelty, and
oppression, and bigotry, which ought to find a place in their history.
We must not forget the manner in which they acquired their possessions
in India; the tyranny and slaughter they introduced among the natives
of Southern Africa; the infamous system of slavery they encouraged in
the West Indies; and the destructive and unjust warfare they waged with
their colonists in America."

"Although I cannot defend the manner in which the English acquired new
territory abroad," said the professor; "when I compare it with the more
savage policy of the Spaniards, the Portuguese, the Dutch, the French,
and other nations who endeavoured to add to their possessions by
conquering distant lands and massacring the natives, I think England
comparatively blameless. Their behaviour to the Africans in the interior
of the Cape of Good Hope was produced by the colonists they found there,
not by the colonists they introduced there; the evils of West Indian
slavery ought to be forgotten in consideration of their constant
efforts to ameliorate the conditions of their own slaves, and the great
sacrifices they made to put down slavery in every part of the world; and
their treatment of their colonists in America should only be remembered
as the cause--the glorious cause--which created one of the most
important empires that ever existed upon the face of the globe."

"There are certainly a few blots upon the fame of this great people,"
remarked Sophos; "but the good they effected--a good which is enjoyed by
every portion of the civilised world at this moment--was attempted on so
grand a scale, and produced such magnificent results, that, in justice,
we ought not to look too narrowly upon their errors. And now, Zoe, as
the strangers are about to visit the shores of England, endeavour to
delight them, as you have done me, with that ancient song which appears
to be so great a favourite of yours."

"I will, O my father, if you will ask Alcibiades to join me; for it is
more fit for his voice than for mine;" replied Zoe.

"Alcibiades does not require an invitation, dear Zoe, for so delightful
a purpose;" said the youth, looking all that his words expressed.

With rich harmonious voices that blended together with exquisite effect,
and with a manner so expressive that it stirred the hearts of those
around them to feelings of the most intense gratification, the two
commenced the following song:--

   "Hurra for merry England, the island of the blest,
    Where gen'rous thoughts, and loving hopes, are nursed in ev'ry
        breast;
    Where valleys green, and mountains high, and rivers strong and
        deep,
    Are fill'd with blissful memories Time cannot set to sleep.
    Hurra for merry England! Confusion on her foe!
    And gladness shine upon her homes--for merry England ho!

   "Hurra for mighty England! the island of the brave!
    Whose conquering flag hath waved its pride o'er ev'ry shore and
        wave;
    From eastern hills arose the sun, he kiss'd the western streams,
    And still he found that English swords were flashing in his
        beams.
    Hurra for mighty England! Destruction on her foe!
    And triumph dwell within her hearts--for mighty England ho!

   "Hurra for noble England! the island of the free!
    Where coward souls and slavish minds were never known to be;
    Who, proudly as they look'd upon their own unfetter'd gains,
    Gave other lands their bravery, and dash'd away their chains.
    Hurra for noble England! Dishonour on her foe!
    And glory rest upon her lands--for noble England ho!"


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

  LADY EUREKA;
  OR,
  THE MYSTERY:
  A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.

  BY THE AUTHOR
  OF
  "MEPHISTOPHELES IN ENGLAND."

  IN THREE VOLUMES.
  VOL. III.

  LONDON:
  LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMANS,
  PATERNOSTER-ROW.
  1840.




  LONDON;
  Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE,
  New-Street-Square.




CONTENTS


     I. ROLY POLY'S SICKNESS, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.
    II. AN AUSTRALIAN COLONY IN SPAIN.
   III. OLD ENGLAND.
    IV. THE LAST OF THE ENGLISHMEN.
     V. AN ACCOUNT OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF OLD ENGLAND.
    VI. THE DEATH OF THE LAST OF THE ENGLISHMEN.
   VII. LILYA.
  VIII. LOVE MISPLACED.
    IX. A DISCOVERY.
     X. A FIGHT AT SEA.
    XI. THE DEATH OF CAPTAIN DEATH, AND THE MEETING OF THE SHIPS.
   XII. THE CONCLUSION.




EUREKA;

A PROPHECY OF THE FUTURE.




CHAPTER I.

ROLY POLY'S SICKNESS, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.


"Oh, massa, I so bad!" exclaimed the fat cook, as he waddled up to the
surgeon, with a most woeful expression of countenance.

"What's the matter with you, Roly Poly?" inquired Dr. Tourniquet.

"Sich a debble ob a pain, massa," continued the black.

"But where is it, man? where is it? Can't do you any good till I know
what's the matter with you, don't you see," said the surgeon.

"Debble ob a pain, massa, in my tomack," replied his patient, rubbing
his huge hand over his stomach, and heaving the most despairing of
sighs.

"Put out your tongue," exclaimed the doctor.

The fat cook extended a pair of enormous jaws, and protruded something
which resembled a scorched brick-bat.

"Ah! derangement of the digestive functions," remarked the practitioner,
after a brief inspection of the misshapen lump of flesh his patient had
exhibited. "What have you been eating?"

"Eatin, massa?" repeated Roly Poly, looking most ludicrously pathetic,
"can't eat nutting, massa, to tink of. Loss nappetite 'pletely.
Breakfast, me only eat pound and harp o' beef--berry little lump o' cold
puddin big as my two fistes," (which were the size of another person's
head), "two or tree red herrin--harp-a-dozen egg--lope o' bread, and
one, two quart o' cocoa. Nuttin more, me 'sure you, massa. Yes, me loss
nappetite 'pletely. Den for lunch, me eat pound and harp o' beef--berry
little lump o' cold puddin, big as my two fistes--two or tree red
herrin--and drop o' liquor wash it down, not more den harp a gallon,
nutting to tink of, massa. Den for dinner me eat pound and harp o'
beef--berry little lump o' hot puddin, big as my two fistes--plate or
two o' wedgeables--lope o' bread--small bit o' cheese, big as one o' my
two fistes--and drop o' liquor wash it down, not more nor harp a gallon.
Can't eat nuttin. Den for tea me eat pound and harp o' beef--berry
little lump o' cold puddin, big as my two fistes--two or tree red
herrin--harp-a-dozen egg--lope o' bread, and one, two quart o' cocoa.
Nuttin to tink of. Den for supper, me eat pound and harp o' beef--berry
little lump o' cold puddin, big as my two fistes--two or tree red
herrin, and two or tree roasted tatoroes--lope o' bread--small bit o'
cheese, big as one o' my two fistes--and drop o' liquor wash it down,
not more nor harp a gallon. Me eat nuttin, massa. Loss nappetite
'pletely."

"Why, you eat enough to satisfy a regiment," exclaimed Dr. Tourniquet.

"No, massa, me berry poor eater," replied the fat cook in a doleful
tone; "eat nuttin to sinnify. Ony pound and harp o' beef--berry little
lump o' cold puddin----"

"Yes, yes; I've heard all that," said the doctor, impatiently
interrupting him. "Your plethoric habit must be reduced, don't you see.
You must be bled and physicked, till we bring down that mountain of
flesh into something like a healthy size. You must eat no beef, no
pudding, no red herrings, no eggs, and no cheese; and drink neither
liquor nor cocoa. You must drink nothing but barley water, and eat
nothing but arrow-root; and run up and down the deck for half an hour,
half-a-dozen times a-day."

As the Doctor described the remedies he desired his patient to adopt,
Roly Poly's mouth gradually extended itself till it threatened to
approach his ears; and his eyes kept winking and staring as if in
complete consternation.

"Massa!" at last he loudly exclaimed, and seemed gradually becoming
more indignant. "What, starve poor nigger! reduce poor Roly Poly to a
natomy! No eat no pound and harp o' beef, no berry little lump o' cold
puddin big as my two fistes--no red herrin--no nuttin! You want to kill
poor Roly Poly, Sar! You want to 'prive de world o' de cook what makes
de booflifulest dishes as you nebber see, Sar! You want to make skeleton
o' poor nigger to put in glass-case, Sar! Nebber heard o' sich numanity!
sick barbararity--sich cruelty to anmals! Where de debble you spect to
go when you die?"

"Well, if you don't like to follow my prescriptions, it's no use coming
for my advice, don't you see," remarked the Doctor.

"Follow your scriptions?" replied his patient, losing all respect for
his companion in the intensity of his indignation. "Follow a shark's
grandmutter, Sar. What, eat nuttin but arrow-root? nassy slop!--pooty
joke indeed. Drink nuttin but barley water?--washy stuff! Tink you catch
me at it. Be bled and physicked, and run up and down deck six times a
day for harp an hour--what a preposterosterous impossumbility."

"You will get much worse if you don't, and possibly you may die, don't
you see," observed Tourniquet.

"Die, Massa!" cried the fat cook, looking horrified at the idea, and
rubbing his stomach with an increased energy. "Oh, sich a debble ob a
pain! Die Massa! Poor Roly Poly die? Sich a boofliful cook die! Quite
unnatral, Massa. Oh, sich a debble ob a pain! What become o' de poor
fellars who eat him nice puddins, and soups, and all dat? Nebber hab no
beckfast; nebber hab no lunch; nebber hab no dinner; nebber hab no tea;
nebber hab no supper; never hab no nuttin! What become o' ebry body?
What become o' ship? Same o' you say Roly Poly die! Nobody do nuttin
widout him; cook be most important ofcer in ship. Roly Poly be
booflifulest cook as nebber was. Same o' you say Roly Poly die!"

"Well you will find out the difference by-and-bye, don't you see," said
the Doctor; and, turning on his heel, he left his patient to his own
reflections.

"Him no more doctor dan a jackmorass," muttered the fat cook, as he
waddled to another part of the ship, making the most ludicrous grimaces,
and rubbing his stomach with an activity, that for him, was quite
surprising. On his way he met with Loop, the young midshipman, who had
lately distinguished himself by his love of mischief, and fondness for
tricks. The lad, with a very demure face, approached Roly Poly.

"How do you do, Roly Poly?" he inquired, looking into his face as if he
was wonderfully interested in the result of his question.

"Oh, sich a debble ob a pain!" replied the fat cook, with a most
melancholy visage, continuing the up and down motion of his hand.

"You look very ill, very ill indeed," observed the boy. "What an
extraordinary change! I should scarcely have known you. You must be in
a very dangerous state, Roly Poly. You ought to be in your hammock. You
ought to be making your will--you ought to be saying your prayers."

"Oo, oo, oo!" blubbered out the fat cook, lengthening his face as he
listened to the remarks of his companion. "You tink I die, Massa Loop?"

"I am much afraid you will be as dead as a herring before you can look
about you," replied Loop.

"Oo, oo, oo!" The other continued. "Doctor say I die: you say I die:
spose I must die. Oo, oo, oo!----"

"We are all mortal," observed the youth, with a grave countenance; "and
all, sooner or later, must leave this sublunary world. Cooks cannot be
spared any more than midshipmen."

"Oo, oo, oo!" cried Roly Poly.

"Is there any thing I can do for you?" anxiously inquired the
midshipman;--"any consolation I can afford, before your cold remains are
consigned to the deep."

"Oo, oo, oo!" continued the fat cook.

"You must have fortitude to bear the blow," said Loop, with a
countenance that would have done credit to a judge. "Let this be your
consolation, that although your body will be devoured by the first shark
that ventures in its way----"

"Oo, oo, oo, oo!" vehemently sobbed the sick man, interrupting the
sentence before it was half finished.

"You ought now to think of your sins," continued his tormentor. "It is
never too late to repent, you know; and I should earnestly advise you to
confess all the injuries you have done your fellow-creatures by imposing
upon their stomachs the villanous specimens of your cookery you have
from time to time set before them. Confess upon what pipe-clay and
train-oil system you made your puddings,--confess the abominable trash
you put together to manufacture into soups;--confess how many you have
poisoned with your atrocious cocoa--confess----"

It is possible that the young midshipman might have said much more,
but Roly Poly, who had listened to his injunctions at first with
astonishment, and next with rage, lost all consideration for his
approaching dissolution, and his yellow eyeballs flashed with fury.
"What de debble you mean you fellar!" thundered out the enraged cook,
approaching his companion, who wisely kept out of arms' reach. "What de
debble you mean ob pipe-clay and train-oil? What you mean ob bominable
trash--what you mean ob poison wid trocious cocoa? You mean to sult me,
Sar? You tink I put up wid your imprance, Sar? You spose I low one man
to peak sick horble tings o' nodder man."

"Man!" exclaimed the youth, as he edged away from his pursuer,--"You
don't call yourself a man, surely? You know you're nothing else but an
old blacking bottle, turned inside out."

"Blacka bottle!" shouted Roly Poly, while his face became livid with
rage, and he looked utter annihilation at his insulter, "Blacka bottle!
I blacka bottle you, I catch you!" and he waddled after the midshipman
as fast as his fat legs would carry him, intent upon vengeance.

Loop kept dodging him about from one place to another, saying the most
aggravating things he could think of, till the perspiration rolled
down the black cheeks of the infuriated cook, and he seemed completely
exhausted by his exertions. Roly Poly sat down at the foot of one of the
masts to rest himself, breathing all sorts of threatenings against his
tormentor; while the young midshipman, laughing at the success of his
trick, nimbly ascended the yards, and took up a position just over
the head of the victim of his mischief. The latter was congratulating
himself that he was left at peace, and was endeavouring to recover
the tranquillity of his temper, when he became conscious of something
dropping down upon him; putting his hand to his woolly head, he
discovered it was being covered with pitch, and, looking up, beheld
Master Loop snugly balanced aloft, amusing himself by pouring from an
old bucket some of the fluid that had polluted his person.

It would be in vain attempting to delineate the passion of the fat cook
at this discovery. Furious with rage, he caught up a small hand-spike
that lay near, and poised it in his hand with the intention of throwing
it at his tormentor. Loop saw what he was about to do, and immediately,
as rapidly as possible, moved from his position, and kept changing from
place to place, with a quickness that baffled the fat cook's aim; but
when he had ascended to a greater height, and was passing from one point
to another with a velocity that seemed impossible to be imitated, his
foot slipped, and with a scream that made all on deck aware of his
danger, he fell headlong into the sea.

The Albatross was proceeding at a moderate rate, and was about fifty
miles off the coast of Spain. Oriel Porphyry was conversing with Zabra
on the quarter-deck, when he noticed the accident. He, with others,
rushed to the side; and, observing where the boy descended, he
immediately threw off his upper garments, and plunged into the waves.
There was a strong sea running at the time, and it required the arm of
a powerful swimmer to force a way through the heaving billows. Upon
arriving at the surface, after his plunge, Oriel struck out for the
spot where the midshipman had fallen, but saw nothing of the object
of his search. He dived about in every direction; but was equally
unsuccessful. Anxious to endeavour to save the youth while a possibility
remained of his rescue, he continued his exertions; but he met with
nothing that could in the slightest degree, assist him in his object.
Not a trace of the boy was to be seen. Disappointed and weary, he
was about returning to the ship, when he caught the sound of a faint,
bubbling cry at no great distance from him, and turning his eyes in that
direction, he thought he could distinguish something like a human head
in the trough of an advancing wave. He swum rapidly in that direction;
and as he approached, saw it disappear from the surface. Down he dived
after it as rapidly as his skill would allow; but though he swept the
waters, far and near, with his arms, he touched nothing but the cold
salt water; and after remaining beneath the surface till his strength
and breath were nearly exhausted, he arose, dispirited and faint, into
the open air.

While the most painful reflections were created in his mind, by the
unsuccessful result of his labours, he suddenly observed a dark
substance rise within a few feet of him; he struck out towards it
in a moment, and grasping it firmly with his hand, to his deep and
inexpressible delight discovered it to be the body of the lost
midshipman. His face was pallid, his skin cold, and as Oriel found that
he made no reply to his hurried inquiries, he was much afraid that the
boy was either dead, or was in a state nearly approaching dissolution.

By this time the ship had been put about, and the sailors having been
made acquainted with the accident rushed with anxious faces to the side.
They watched with the deepest interest the young merchant gallantly
breasting the waves in search of their drowning favourite, and became
uneasy as they noticed the unprofitableness of his efforts. But none
regarded the progress of the swimmer with such intense excitement of
feeling as Zabra. He saw his patron pass from wave to wave--he observed
him dive into the dark waters, and waited for his re-appearance with
sensations impossible to be described. As the vessel was brought round
to the spot where Oriel Porphyry was pursuing his researches, he became
more earnest in his attention. He endeavoured to encourage him in
his efforts with his voice, and to strengthen him in his purpose by
his praise. The captain had not ascended to the deck, and he was
unacquainted with the accident: but as soon as he was made aware of it,
he hurried to the ship's side in an agony of apprehension, and it was
only the strong grasp of Boggle and Climberkin that prevented him from
plunging into the sea.

A loud cheer from the crew announced that the young merchant had
succeeded in finding the object of his solicitude, and anxiously every
eye turned towards the spot where he was seen supporting the boy with
one arm and cleaving his way through the waves with the other.

"A shark--a shark!" screamed Zabra; and to the horror of Oriel and
those who were observing him, a monstrous shark was seen coming rapidly
towards him. A cry of terror arose from the ship. Some shouted in hopes
of frightening away the ravenous animal--others to warn the young
merchant of his danger. Some ran to get fire arms, and Hearty, breaking
away from those who held him, suddenly hurried below the deck. The agony
of Zabra became insupportable. He screamed in all the piercing tones
of horror and despair, and his handsome features seemed convulsed with
fear. Still, as if there was a fascination in the object, he kept his
eyes upon the form of the shark. He watched its movements with a fearful
interest, and saw it near its intended victim with wild and frantic
terror.

Oriel Porphyry beheld the approach of the giant of the deep with
consternation and dread. He could not abandon his companion, who was
incapable of making the least exertion for his own safety, and he saw no
way of rescue for himself. He held the boy tighter, and dashed along the
waves with greater velocity in hopes of reaching the rope that was hung
out from the ship before the huge animal could come up with him. To the
attainment of this purpose he strained all his powers. Many friendly
voices cheered him on, and others strove all they could to frighten
away his remorseless enemy. But the shark kept on his way, unheeding the
frightful cries and showers of missiles with which he was assailed. His
fierce eyes were fixed upon his prey, and his monstrous jaws were gaping
for their food. The rope was almost within reach, but the destroyer was
nearer. Oriel Porphyry gave himself up for lost. It appeared evident to
all that he could not escape. The crew redoubled their cries and flung
every thing at hand at the monster without avail. Just as he was turning
on his side to make the fatal gripe, Hearty rushed upon the deck with a
long knife in his hand, and before any one was aware of his purpose, he
leaped over the side of the ship and descended into the water close to
the jaws of the shark, with a splash that completely distracted the
animal's attention, and allowed Oriel Porphyry unmolested to seize the
rope which the eager sailors held to assist him in regaining the vessel.
In a moment, with his lifeless burthen still grasped in his arm, he
was hawled upon the deck, and then placing him under the care of Dr.
Tourniquet, he was turning to notice the result of the Captain's
manoeuvre when he found himself seized by the friendly grasp of Zabra,
whose delight at his escape appeared to have taken away all power of
utterance.

But now an extraordinary scene presented itself upon the sea. The shark
had dived below the surface, when Hearty suddenly dashed down before
him; but on rising again, which he very shortly did, and on perceiving
his prey escape, he turned with increased ferocity towards the hardy
seaman, who was rejoicing at the success of his scheme. The old man
waited quietly till the shark turned to make a snap at him, then diving
quickly under his enormous belly, he plunged the knife up to the hilt in
his body, and rose up on the other side. The crew cheered vociferously
when they saw what their captain was about, and every one on board
watched the unequal combat with feelings of the most intense interest.
The ravenous monster, smarting with pain, again approached his opponent;
again he turned to gripe him within his jaws, and again the old man
diving under his belly, plunged his knife deep into his flesh. The
animal now became furious; he lashed the waves with his tail till they
became a mass of foam, and rapidly followed his brave antagonist, making
every effort to devour him; but the old man warily avoided all his
ferocious attempts, and at every blow of his arm crimsoned the water
with his blood. This fight continued for several minutes, till both the
combatants disappeared from the surface, when the anxious crew of the
Albatross began to fear that their brave old commander had fallen a
sacrifice to his exertions; but when they beheld the huge fish floating
on the water belly upwards, and heard the old man cry out for a rope, a
long and hearty cheer rose from the ship, and every one rushed to bear
a hand in assisting him on board.

He appeared covered with the blood of the slaughtered shark, and with
the weapon in his hand, of which he had made such good service. While he
was receiving the congratulations of his messmates, he inquired eagerly
after his young relative. Oriel, who had ascertained that he was doing
well, hastened to communicate the intelligence; and the old man as soon
as he beheld the preserver of his boy, eagerly grasped his hand, and
uttered his grateful thanks. Both soon afterwards left the deck to
change their apparel.

Among those who seemed most anxious for the recovery of the young
midshipman was Roly Poly, who, although exceedingly passionate, and
easily enraged, was a very good hearted sort of creature, and he quite
forgot the insults he had received--forgot even the terrible pains
that had a short time since so much alarmed him, when he witnessed the
dangers to which the boy had been exposed, and saw him brought lifeless
upon the deck. He assisted Dr. Tourniquet in using the usual means for
restoring suspended animation, and observed his recovery with a delight
equal to that of any one in the ship.

After Loop was able to walk about, Roly Poly addressed him with a great
deal of gravity upon the offence he had committed.

"Nebber you gain call me Blacka Bottle," said the fat cook. "Nebber
you say nuttin scandabalous bout de boofliful tings what I cook.
Nebber you say no preposterosterous impossumbilities. Horble ting,
massa Loop, to call Roly Poly Blacka Bottle--Horble ting to say nuttin
scandabalous--Horble ting to say preposterosterous impossumbilities."

"I'll never say any thing against you again, Roly Poly, as long as I
live," exclaimed the contrite midshipman: and thus ended the quarrel;
and ever afterwards they were the best friends in the ship.




CHAP. II.

AN AUSTRALIAN COLONY IN SPAIN.


"We are approaching the Colony to which you thought of emigrating,
are we not?" inquired Oriel Porphyry of the captain's clerk, who
stood beside him on the deck, and with whom he had been in earnest
conversation concerning the misfortunes of the young Australian.

An expression of pain and regret passed over Ardent's countenance.

"Yes it was here," he replied making a violent effort to conquer his
emotion. "We were destined to the penal settlement of New Sydney on the
Spanish coast, thriving accounts of which were in circulation in
Australia. My brothers were desirous of a location somewhere near the
banks of the Guadalquivir, as, although it was thinly settled, the land
was said to be of a very superior quality. My father was of the same
inclination. I had no other wish than to accompany them. Optima was
anxious for nothing but to be with me. But, alas! the devouring flame,
or the equally unrelenting flood has swallowed up all. I am a wanderer
and a beggar.--I have neither kin nor country."

"Say not so," replied the young merchant kindly. "I have not forgotten
the services you have rendered me, nor am I likely to pass them by
without notice. If you wish to settle at the colony, I will take care
you shall have the means of doing so with every hope of success; or if
you have no particular inclination towards any country, if you will
return with me to Columbia, you may depend upon meeting with many kind
friends, and may pass the rest of your life in comfort. I must touch at
New Sydney as I expect a letter from my father, from whom I have not for
some time had any communication, which makes me exceedingly anxious; and
if you hear of any desirable farm or plot of land, I wish you would let
me know."

"Your kindness is overpowering," said Ardent, much affected. "I have
done nothing to deserve it. I have already been rewarded in a manner far
exceeding my deserts. But while I can be of any service, I should like
to remain with you. I have no ties to bind me to any country--and where
I can be useful is where I should like to dwell."

"So it shall be then," added Oriel Porphyry. "Be satisfied that the
remainder of your life shall bear no comparison with what has preceded
it. We are now nearing the shore. I shall require your services as I
have some business to transact; therefore you will be good enough to
prepare to land with me immediately."

As the Albatross approached the coast, the buildings of a small seaport
became distinguishable. Some large houses faced the sea, and a battery
commanded the entrance to the port; but with the exception of one or
two streets running at right angles, the buildings straggled about
with very little pretensions to regularity. The country seemed thinly
inhabited, yet looked fertile and picturesque. Broad hills and valleys
and noble views were observable in the distance;--a wild and lofty rock
rose along the coast; and forests of noble trees were spread out in
various directions. There was no shipping in the bay, except a few small
craft; but the beach was crowded with spectators. It was observed that,
among the hundreds who were watching the progress of the ship from the
shore, there was only one female: the rest were men, and they were
apparently of all ages, but principally men in the prime of life and in
the full vigour of health. The appearance of only one woman surrounded
by such an assemblage of the other sex seemed so remarkable, that it
attracted the attention of all on board. As the ship entered the bay,
several boats were put off, and the crew of each seemed to strain every
nerve in endeavouring to get first alongside the vessel. In a few
minutes the Albatross was boarded by several different parties.

"How many women have you?" cried one; as soon as he reached the deck.

"Let me see your cargo of female emigrants," demanded another as he
bustled up to the captain.

"I want a wife!" shouted a third.

"We have no women here," exclaimed Hearty.

"No women!" cried they in full chorus, looking as disappointed as men
could be.

"None," replied the captain.

"What! have you brought us no wives?" asked one in a most doleful tone.

"Nothing of the kind," said Hearty.

"Tarnation!" exclaimed they; and they looked at each other with all the
eloquence of mute despair.

"A little un 'ill do for me!" squeaked out a dumpy sort of fellow, with
a red nose and a pepper-and-salt waistcoat.

"We've got neither little nor big!" responded the captain.

"Tarnation!" again exclaimed the bachelors; and, slowly and
despondingly, they prepared to leave the ship.

"Now ar'nt you got nothing feminine of no kind?" earnestly asked a
sharp-visaged, lanky-looking settler, who seemed very loth to leave the
ship. "If she's a nigger, I don't care."

"I tell you we've got no women at all!" said old Hearty, rather sharply.

"Tarnation!" muttered the disappointed colonists: and in a short time
after they had reached the land, there was scarcely a creature, with the
exception of the female already alluded to, to be seen on the beach.
They had been expecting a ship laden with female emigrants, and as they
were very much in want of wives, imagining the Albatross to be the much
wished for vessel, they had been excessively eager to behold the cargo.
The incident created considerable amusement among the voyagers. The
sailors were particularly merry upon the occasion; and the rueful
visages of the unfortunate colonists afforded many a hearty laugh.

Oriel had landed, and was walking along the beach, when he was startled
by a short, quick scream, and turning round, beheld the female who had
previously attracted his attention, rush into the arms of the captain's
clerk. He had noticed, on his approach to the shore, that this woman,
who from her dress appeared to be a domestic servant, seemed to regard
the persons in the boat with an anxious scrutiny; but imagining it to be
the effect of curiosity, it did not excite in him any remark. Ardent, at
this rencontre, seemed to be in a state of surprise and wonder that kept
him speechless. He gazed upon the prepossessing features of the fair
stranger as earnestly as if he had no other faculty than that of seeing.
The kind and anxious look that met his own--the arms that clasped his
neck so firmly, and the gentle voice that murmured his name, convinced
him of a fact of which he was almost incredulous. It was Optima.

"By what fortunate chance did you escape the death I felt assured that
you had met with?" inquired Ardent, after, at Oriel's request, he
had for the purpose of privacy retired to a chamber in one of the
neighbouring habitations.

"When I found the boat sinking, I clung to it," replied his companion;
"and when it again rose to the surface I floated on it. The blow which
it had received from the ship had propelled it a considerable distance,
and the force of the waves carried it still farther. The plunge I had
received, for some minutes took my breath away; and, although I held on
with all my strength to the boat, the heavy waves continually breaking
upon me, and the alarming position in which I found myself placed,
made me quite incapable of uttering a sound. As soon as I was able to
comprehend the extent of my danger, the thought that I was separated
from you, and the fear that you had perished in the sea, made my heart
sink within me. I clung instinctively to the floating vessel; but I had
no desire to live. I had seen enough of that dreadful conflagration
to fill me with terror; and I had not recovered from the feelings it
occasioned, when I was left alone, friendless, and about to be engulphed
in the waters. All around me was so dark that I could see nothing; but
the saltwater, as it dashed over me, scarcely allowed me to open my
eyes if I could have seen, and my strength was being rapidly exhausted.
I soon sunk into a state of stupor. How long this lasted I do not know;
but on recovery, I found myself in a cabin, receiving every attention
that my wants required; and, on inquiry, I found that I had been picked
up by the crew of a ship, which, attracted by the glare of the burning
vessel, had sent out a boat, in hopes of affording assistance to the
survivors."

"I was saved in a similar manner," remarked Ardent.

"When they had taken me into the boat they did not proceed any farther,"
continued Optima, "as they observed that another vessel had sent out
a boat's crew upon the same errand, and having no spare time at their
command, they left the other boat to pick up the survivors, and returned
with me to the ship. I discovered also that the vessel to which I had
been conveyed had left Sydney with emigrants for the very colony to
which we were proceeding. I told my story to my preservers, and many
who heard it were kind and compassionate. An offer was made me by
the wife of a settler to remain with her in the capacity of domestic
servant, which offer I accepted without hesitation. One thing was a
great consolation to me, and that was the conviction that you had been
saved. I knew that you were a strong swimmer, and as I had been told
that a party had been sent from the ship to rescue the crew of the boat
they had run down, I concluded that you were in safety."

"You were right, dear Optima!" said the captain's clerk; "I was taken
on board that ship, and have since held in it a responsible situation."

"Believing you to have been rescued, I continued to live, with the hope
that I should meet you again," continued Optima. "I arrived at the
colony. The persons whose protection I had accepted, settled at Sydney,
where the husband commenced business as a builder, in which he succeeded
beyond his expectations. I was very well treated, and labour being
exceedingly valuable in the colony, my exertions were rather profitable
to me. At that time I entertained the idea that as all our property was
consumed in the fire, you must be very much in want of a variety of
comforts to which you had been used; and as the expectation of my
meeting you again was never absent from me, I laboured diligently, and
saved all my earnings as a provision for our future support."

Ardent could only look his gratitude, and rapturously kiss the hand he
held in his own.

"It was such a pleasure to me, dear Ardent," resumed his companion, "to
count my gains as fast as they accumulated, and I kept saying to myself
'a little more and there will be enough to begin the world again with;'
and I thought how happy I should be able to make you, and I kept hoping
we should soon meet--and every day passed by in imagining what we should
do, and in enjoying a happiness of my own creating. Every time I heard
that a ship was in the bay, I came down to the beach in hopes of finding
you among the passengers. I scrutinised every one that left the vessel
so closely that I offended some and surprised others; but although I
met with repeated disappointments, I never left off expecting your
arrival. By this time I had saved about two hundred dollars, and whether
it became known, or whether the scarcity of females brought me into
such consideration, I do not know; but scarcely a day passed without my
receiving an offer of marriage."

"An offer of marriage!" exclaimed Ardent in surprise.

"Yes, dear Ardent," replied Optima. "The men seemed frantic after me. I
was not safe any where. If I went to pay a bill, it was sure to conclude
on the part of the tradesman with an offer of his hand and heart. If I
entered the market, no sooner had I made a purchase than I received a
proposal. I was besieged in all hours and at all places,--I may almost
say that I received a new suitor at the corner of every street. It was
in vain I told them I was married, and showed them my wedding ring. They
saw that I had no husband with me, and they were desirous of supplying
his place; and men even of a superior rank continually plagued me with
their proposals. It is scarcely necessary to say that I gave them all
a negative answer; but these were things that they did not appear to
understand, for the more frequently I refused, the more frequently they
again proposed. At last I was obliged to state how I was situated to the
lady with whom I was staying, and she spoke to her husband; and he took
measures that put an end to the persecution. And now, dear Ardent, that
my anticipations are realised, we will be so very happy--won't we?"

It is easier to imagine what was the answer than to describe it. It is
sufficient to say that Oriel Porphyry made a considerable addition to
the two hundred dollars which the devoted Optima had saved, that enabled
the young couple to take a promising farm up the country, with every
prospect of enjoying a life of continued happiness.

"It is very strange," remarked the young merchant to Zabra on his return
to the ship, "it is very strange that I have had no communication from
my father. I expected one at Athenia, but I received no intelligence. I
expected one at Constantinople--there I met with the same result; and I
then made sure of meeting with one at New Sydney, but was there equally
unsuccessful. It makes me very uneasy."

"Possibly he may have nothing of importance to write about," replied
Zabra. "Things at Columbia may remain in the same state as at his last
despatch."

"I doubt it. I doubt that the emperor will remain satisfied with his
prerogatives curtailed to the extent to which they have lately been
reduced," said Oriel Porphyry. "There is no sincerity in these men. They
will break any compact when it suits their convenience. They have no
notion of either honour or honesty: and the emperor is a weak, vain,
foolish man, proud, tyrannical, and deceitful. Such a man must be ever
scheming to regain his former power; and if he think it be practicable
he will not be particular as to the means he will employ for that
purpose. I am much afraid my father has fallen a sacrifice to his
patriotism."

"It cannot be," observed his companion. "They would not dare harm him."

"Dare!" echoed his patron. "What evil will not bad men dare? And did not
that proud upstart Philadelphia load his honourable limbs with chains
and thrust him into a loathsome dungeon to die the lingering death of
starvation? He dared do that, and I doubt much whether a worse villainy
could have been perpetrated. I hope to live to see the time when I shall
have an opportunity of bringing him to an account for these and other
atrocities. If my good sword be true, and my arm has lost none of its
power, I'll not leave his worthless body till I have relieved it of his
equally worthless soul."

"What!" exclaimed Zabra, with considerable excitement, "would you be
thus revengeful to the father of Eureka? You too, who a short time
since seemed ready to forgive him all his errors on account of his
relationship to her. What has changed you? Why would you follow the bad
examples of bad men? That he is not what he should be is too true; but
that is no reason why you should become his executioner. Do you think
that Eureka could regard you with affection when you came to her
stained with her father's blood? I am surprised that you should have
given utterance to such a sentiment."

"I knew not till lately the atrocities he had committed, and the savage
disposition he possessed," replied the young merchant; "and I can see no
more harm in killing such a monster than there is in destroying a mad
beast."

"How different then your feelings must be to those of your father,"
observed the other. "He knew what was due to humanity, and practised it,
and he was the person best entitled to call for vengeance, but he was
satisfied with justice. Professing the regard you do towards Eureka,
nothing could surprise me more than to hear you proclaim so inhuman a
wish."

"It is impossible for me to help feeling exasperated against him," said
Oriel. "Imagine for a moment yourself in my situation. Let your father
be as mine is, the kindest and noblest of his species; know that he who
never did harm to any living creature, but sought to create happiness
throughout the world--was fettered and reviled, and left lingering in
filth and darkness for three days, enduring all the pangs of famine;
and if you have a heart within your breast, and a soul that hates the
cowardly vices of despotism, you will feel as I do, and long for an
opportunity to punish your father's persecutor, in a manner worthy of
his crimes. I know that your relationship to the offender must stand in
the way of your seeing the justice of the punishment I would inflict:
but I am no hypocrite Zabra. I cannot disguise my detestation of such a
monster; and although next to Eureka and my father I honour you, even
your opposition would not make me change a sentiment so natural and
appropriate."

"Leave Philadelphia to his own feelings, which sooner or later will be
sufficient punishment," responded Zabra. "Touch him not if you value
the love of Eureka. She I know has little cause to feel much affection
for him, but bad as he is she never can be brought to look upon his
destroyer with any feeling save that of repugnance."

"If that be the case I hope he will keep out of my way," rejoined the
young merchant; "for I think I could endure anything rather than her
dislike; but the absence of intelligence from my father has certainly
made me suspicious. I am almost determined to return to Columbia without
proceeding to England."

"I do not think such a course advisable, Oriel," observed Zabra. "There
may be a thousand things that prevent your father's correspondence, or
he may have written, and the despatches may have been lost. If this be
the case, and there is a great probability that it is, he would be very
much vexed at your returning without having accomplished your voyage."

"Well, I will proceed, but I will only make a brief stay among the
antiquities of England, and then steer direct for Columbia," replied
Oriel Porphyry: "I have very strong doubts about things being exactly
right there. The accounts I have heard are of a contrary tendency; but
if the storm is to be, it will come unexpected. If any attempt be made
by the government to restore the old order of things, I hope they will
have the goodness to wait till my return before they commence their
proceedings. There is a powerful regiment of horse, composed of the
young citizens of Columbus, of which I have the command; I believe that
they are devoted to my will; and even with these, although they are not
above a thousand strong, I would make such a stand as would soon bring
around me all the brave spirits in the country: I only wish for an
opportunity to try the experiment."

"Will you never dismiss these delusive visions," said his young friend,
anxiously. "I thought that you were at last becoming reconciled to a
more useful and amiable way of life."

"You have been deceived, Zabra," observed Oriel; "I have been more
quiet, but not less ambitious. This passion for glory has become a part
of my nature; it is with me at all times. I think of it and dream of it.
It is the anticipation of finding the opportunity for greatness that
makes me able to endure the tedious inactivity of my present mode of
existence. I shall never be satisfied till I acquire the power for which
I yearn."

"What an unhappy nature yours must be then," replied Zabra. "You have
every hope of happiness within your reach; yet because it does not
come clothed in the gorgeous draperies in which you wish it to appear,
you seem desirous of dismissing it, as of not sufficient value to be
enjoyed. I had hoped that you had become wiser; I had hoped, too, that
you had been more solicitous for the happiness of Eureka. I am afraid
all my labour has been thrown away, and that I shall have to return to
her with the intelligence that your ambitious hopes have stifled every
feeling of affection."

"There you wrong me," exclaimed the young merchant, "you wrong me
exceedingly. My aspirations for greatness are never separate from my
hopes of Eureka; because the first are merely the result of the latter.
It is useless attempting to check the impulses which urge me on. I must
be what I am; and while my state of being, and the purposes which it
creates and would see fulfilled, cannot in any way dishonour Eureka,
nothing will convince me that they are to be condemned. From my own
knowledge of her character, I cannot imagine that she would regard
my efforts for advancement with the feeling which you have stated
she possesses. Her own greatness of soul must bring her to look with
commendation on another, who evinces a desire to obtain a similar
greatness: this ambition is a passion so entirely of her own creating,
that she cannot, with any justice, be displeased with its exhibition."

"How little you seem to know of the nature of her whose love you
possess," replied Zabra, in a low, tremulous voice; "no doubt, she
would feel gratified at any circumstance which would exalt you in the
estimation of your countrymen. The honour you might receive would be her
glory as much as yours, and the fame you might obtain would find none
more desirous of its security than herself. But it was not for these
things that she loved you. Ambition formed no part of the qualities that
called into existence her admiration--which, having acquired its full
growth, cannot be made more perfect by the greatness you covet; and
that admiration must continue as long as the qualities that called it
into operation exist. But knowing your desire to acquire renown, and
knowing the nature of that feeling is to swallow up all the more amiable
aspirations, and being aware that the only way to its acquirement is
through a thousand terrible dangers, she cannot help the conviction,
that she would rather possess your affection as you were, than live in
continual fear, to witness your superiority, as you may be."

"Let us say no more about it," said Oriel. "It is very evident that
neither can convince the other. I may be positive that I am going right,
and you may be positive that I am going wrong; but it is time spent to
no purpose, if we cannot be brought to change our opinions."

"Remember, I am only doing my duty," replied the youth. "I warn you,
because the path you desire to take is surrounded by dangers. If you are
determined on going on, I say, go on and prosper; but if you go on, and
fail, the bitter disappointment you will experience will not only render
yourself miserable, but must make equally unhappy her whose felicity
you appear so desirous of creating. If you must go on, Oriel, I say
again--go on, and prosper."




CHAP. III.

OLD ENGLAND.


"We are approaching the British Islands, are we not?" inquired Oriel
Porphyry.

"Yes, Sir, the land lies right ahead," replied the captain.

"There are several of these islands, I believe," added the young
merchant.

"There are a great number on 'em o' different sorts and sizes," said
Hearty; "but them as is most visited are England and Ireland."

"What is the meaning of the prefix to the word land in each of these
names?" asked Oriel of the professor.

"England or Ingle-land means the land of the fire side," replied
Fortyfolios. "Ingle is an old British word meaning the fire at which
the inhabitants of a house warmed themselves or cooked their food. The
natives have been from the earliest times, famous for their love of the
comforts of this fire, which was usually made of coal dug out of the
earth, that made a cheerful blaze in a room, and their attachment to
their ingles procured the island the name of Ingle-land, which, in
course of time was abbreviated into the name of England."

"I doubt that very much, don't you see," here observed Dr. Tourniquet;
"for in my opinion, England has a totally different derivation.
The aborigines of the island were principally fishermen, and very
appropriately had given to them the name of angle-ers, which means
people who fish. Each separate kingdom was called a kingdom of the
Angles, from the natives using an angle, and the whole island was called
Angle-land, or the land of the angle, which for shortness was soon
afterwards called England."

"'Tis nothing of the kind, Dr. Tourniquet," rejoined the professor
warmly. "I wonder you should have started such an absurd idea."

"It is quite as reasonable as yours at any rate, don't you see,"
remarked the doctor.

"It has no such pretension," said the other in a decided manner. "I
can prove that the fire or ingle was a national characteristic of the
people."

"And I can prove that fishing or angle-ing was a national characteristic
of the people," added his antagonist.

"Pooh!" exclaimed one, contemptuously.

"Pish!" cried the other.

"Ingle-land,"--resumed the professor.

"Angle-land,"--said the doctor, interrupting him.

"Now, Dr. Tourniquet, I beg I may not be interrupted by your ridiculous
blunders," observed Fortyfolios with considerable asperity, and a look
of dignity peculiar to himself.

"The blunder is on your side, don't you see," replied the surgeon, with
a chuckle of satisfaction exceedingly annoying to his companion.

"Never mind if it be Ingle-land or Angle-land," exclaimed Oriel
Porphyry. "All we know for certain is, that it is now called England.
But how do you account for the adoption of the other name?"

"Of the derivation of that word there can be no doubt--it explains
itself," said Fortyfolios. "Ireland means the land of ire. The natives
from time immemorial have been known to be excessively irascible. They
would quarrel upon the slightest cause, and fight from no cause at all.
They would fight when they were hungry, upon which occasion, as was very
natural, they fought for a belly-full. They would fight for liquor; they
would fight for fun; they would fight for love; they would fight to get
drunk, and then fight to get sober. The happiest men among them were
those who were most frequently beaten, and such persons were known to be
the best friends as were continually trying to knock out each other's
brains. These men consequently got the appropriate name of Ire-ishmen,
and the island was called Ire-land."

"There you're wrong again, don't you see," observed Tourniquet. "The
name Ire-land was derived from Higher-land, to express that the country
was more elevated in the estimation of the natives than any other part
of the globe. They entertained the most preposterous ideas about the
importance of their island. They stated that when the rest of the world
was sunk in barbarism, their Higher-land was the seat of intelligence,
and virtue, and superior bravery. They asserted that their soldiers
were the only soldiers that ever existed, and that their agricultural
labourers were 'the finest pisantry in the world.' But there was
certainly something very singular about them; and even their
brick-layers' labourers were odd men. The island was also called by the
natives The Emerald Island, I believe because it sometimes produced
Irish diamonds. The Green Isle was another of its names--and this was
derived from the greenness of the people. The men went by the name of
'the boys' long after the age at which other boys became men; and even
the oldest of the old men among them, when he breathed his last, was
said to die in a green old age."

"It is extraordinary to me, Dr. Tourniquet, that you will give utterance
to such fallacies," remarked the professor. "The facts are exactly as I
have stated them."

"The facts are exactly as I have stated them," said the other with
marked emphasis.

"Was there not a very celebrated character styled St. Patrick, who
flourished at one time among the Irish?" inquired the young merchant.

"Certainly there was," replied Fortyfolios. "Patrick, Pater Rick--or
Rick being the abbreviation of Richard--Father Richard, was a poor
monk----"

"That I deny!" eagerly exclaimed the doctor. "For, as it is stated in a
very ancient poem I have met with,

   'St. Patrick was a gintleman
    And born of dacent paple.'"

"That is no authority," resumed Fortyfolios. "I affirm that he was a
poor monk and----"

"I maintain that he was a gentleman," replied the other.

"I insist that you do not interrupt me, Dr. Tourniquet," exclaimed the
professor angrily. "He was an exceedingly pious and virtuous man,
and by his example and precepts did a great deal of good among his
countrymen."

"Yes," said the surgeon, gravely, "I have met with an authority that
says

   'He gave the frogs and toads a twist,
    And banished all the varmint.'

Now the usual reading of this couplet is that he drove the frogs and
toads out of the country; but if we look to the meaning of the word
twist, we shall find that it means an appetite: a man with a twist means
a man with a certain facility in swallowing anything eatable that comes
before him; and as we know that frogs at one time were considered a
great delicacy by the ancients, it is not unreasonable to imagine that
St. Patrick was a great epicure, and swallowed all the frogs and toads
in the island."

"Preposterous!" exclaimed Fortyfolios; "he was a saint whose prayers
had the efficacy of ridding the country of every venomous thing it
contained. But there is a remarkable legend connected with his history,
which I will relate to you as I found it in a very ancient poem
preserved in the Columbian Museum. It appears that he was one fast day
on a visit at a house, and he desired dinner might be brought to him;
but the family having already dined there was no fish, the usual food
for fast days, for his meal; in fact there was nothing eatable in the
larder but a leg of mutton. With great regret the people of the house
acquainted him with the real state of the case: but the good saint, with
a benevolent smile, as the poet describes, merely said,

   'Send my compliments down to the leg
    And bid it come hither a salmon.'"

"And what was the result?" inquired Oriel.

"To use the simple and expressive words of the poem," replied the
professor, with his usual gravity,

  "'And the leg most politely complied.'"

"You see those white cliffs just beginning to show 'emselves," said the
captain, pointing to the distant coast.

"I see them plainly," replied the young merchant.

"That's the coast of England, Sir," added Hearty. Oriel Porphyry gazed
on the classic shores that were rising before him with a deep and
peculiar interest. He had read so much, and he had heard so much of the
glory of the country he was approaching, and of the greatness of her
people, that the first sight of land awakened in him the most agreeable
associations. He thought of the splendour of her achievements--he
thought of the magnificence of her power--he thought of her illustrious
men--he thought of her noble efforts in the advance of intelligence--and
the white cliff upon which he was gazing appeared to him to be the most
interesting portion of the world.

"The appearance of the shore from the sea at one time conferred
on England the name of Albion," said the professor. "From _Alba_
white--from which word many other names were derived, particularly
_album_--a white book in great request at one time among the females of
the island, to teach them the art of spoiling paper for the benefit of
the stationers--and _albumen_, the white of an egg, a sort of food in
great request with the chicken-hearted. Some of the natives of Albion
carried their attachment to the name so far that they lived in a place
which they designated _the Albany_, and had a favourite place of resort
which they called 'Whites.' There was also a certain building situated
in _White_ Cross Street, to which they proceeded, to show their
nationality, by getting _white_-washed. The females were remarkable for
a partiality to white bread, white wine, and white linen, and the males
evinced an equal fondness for white bait, white waistcoats, and white
hands, and to such an extent did this favouritism for a particular
colour extend, that there was a neighbouring island, called the Isle of
White, to which the inhabitants of Albion made occasional journeys, for
the pleasure of destroying white ducks, or white muslin: and it was
usual for every generation to be christened in white, to be married in
white, and to be buried in white."

"What are these vessels approaching us in this threatening manner,"
inquired Oriel Porphyry, as he noticed several old crazy-looking boats
filled with men who were coming towards them with their crews, howling,
screeching, and yelling with all the strength of their lungs.

"I do not think they mean us any good," replied the captain: then
turning to some of the sailors standing scrutinising the appearance of
a strange fleet, evidently bearing down upon them, he exclaimed, "Get
the long gun ready, and give these fools a taste of grape if they
attempt to attack us."

"Ay, ay! Sir," replied one of the men; and every disposition was made
to repel any assault that might be attempted.

As they approached nearer, it was observed that these vessels were a
vast number of large open boats, some with sails, but most without,
and they were so crammed with men, that many of them were in danger
of sinking every minute. Their crews were clothed in ragged vestments
of every colour and description, and they were armed with old swords,
pistols, guns, pitchforks, and bludgeons, and these they displayed as
they advanced, shouting all the time in wild savage tones perfectly
deafening. A larger boat was in advance of the others, and in a
conspicuous situation in this vessel stood up a tall fierce-looking
man with his head bound round with a hay-band, and a tattered blanket
dropping from his shoulders. He brandished a rusty sword as he
approached, and gave orders to those who followed, which appeared to
meet with implicit obedience. When he came within gun-shot of the
Albatross, he turned round to his followers and addressed them.

"Boys," said he, pointing to the ship, "yonder's the furreners. It's
meself as 'ill take their big baste iv a ship if ye'll be all to the
fore. Divle a care ye may take ov their darty guns that their pointing
at yese--its made ov wood they are, and sorrow a harm they can do, bad
luck to 'em. Keep your powther dry, boys, and look to your flints, and
iv we don't kill and murther and throttle every mother's son ov 'em,
I'm not King Teddy O'Riley."

"Sheer off there, you ragamuffins," shouted the captain through a
speaking trumpet. "Sheer off, or I'll sink ev'ry soul of ye within
gun-range."

"Down wid the darty furreners!" screamed King Teddy O'Riley; a shower of
balls whistled past the captain, and on came the over-loaded boats, with
their crews yelling in the most frantic manner. There appeared to be at
least five or six hundred of them, and it was judged expedient to put
an immediate stop to their progress. The long gun was discharged, which
sunk the foremost boat, and killed the greater portion of its crew. The
rest hesitated when they beheld their monarch swept into the sea; and
a well-directed fire of musketry made them glad enough to commence a
retreat as fast as they could, screaming in hideous chorus as long as
they could be heard.

"Take a boat and see if you can save any of those rascals sprawling in
the water," exclaimed the captain to the midshipman Loop.

"Yes, Sir," was the reply; and the boat having been lowered, a party
proceeded to pick up the wounded and drowning. They succeeded in saving
several, among whom was their illustrious leader, King Teddy O'Riley,
who was brought upon deck, looking very much deprived of his dignity,
his coronet of hay-bands wet and dirty, and his blanket of state shrunk
out of all shape. He created considerable surprise among his captors,
and not without sufficient cause, for nothing could exceed the
eccentricity of his appearance. His hair was thick and long, and of a
dark-red colour. Large, bushy whiskers of the same tint surrounded his
cheeks. His nose was remarkably red, and his face seamed with the marks
of the small-pox. Below his cloak was a long coat, which did not appear
the more royal for being out at the elbows, and for having lost half its
skirt. His lower garments hung upon him like a bag, and they had the
legs rolled back up to the knees. A pair of old boots, exceedingly down
at heel, out of which the toes of his majesty were seen to peep in
spite of the straw with which they were lined, completed his costume.

"And who the deuce are you?" demanded the captain, after he had
sufficiently scrutinised the appearance of his prisoner.

"Faix and isn't it King Teddy O'Riley I am?" replied the man.

"And what part o' the world are you king of, I should like to know?"
asked Hearty in considerable surprise.

"Faix and ain't I king ov Blatherumskite?" said the other.

"And where, in the name o' all that's wonderful, is Blatherumskite?"
inquired the captain.

"And is it yourself that doesn't know where Blatherumskite is?"
exclaimed his majesty in seeming wonder. "Well the ignorance o' some
people is amazin! Not know Blatherumskite! Be the holy japers that bates
Bannagher, and Bannagher bate the divle. And Blatherumskite sich a jewel
ov a place! Why Blatherumskite's the finest kingdom and has the finest
paple under the sun. It's full ov commodities ov all sorts. It dales in
turpentine, brickdust, soft soap, and other swate mates--tracle, and
train oil, pepper and salt, and other hardware,--pigs, buttermilk,
paraties, and other kumbustibles. Not know Blatherumskite indade! Be
this and be that, you're as ignorant as a born brute."

"And what induced you to fire at me, Mr. King Teddy O'Riley?" demanded
the captain.

"Faix and wasn't it only just to kill ye we fired at ye?" replied the
king, with the utmost simplicity.

"It was, was it?" exclaimed Hearty; "and for what reason did you attack
the ship?"

"Wid no other rason in life than to take it," responded his majesty. "I
was jist a lading the boys to make a decint on England, wid the hope ov
being able to pick up a few thrifles, when we seed your ship. 'The top
ov the morning to ye,' says I, 'and if I don't be afther ransacking ye
intirely small blame to me there'll be.' And then we pulled away at the
divle's own rate, and a mighty dale ov divarsion the boys had about what
they'd do wid the big ship when they'd got her, when widout wid your
lave or by your lave, I was regularly kilt, smashed, and smothered into
the wather. And here I am."

"Well, King Teddy O'Riley, we must be under the necessity of hanging
you," observed the captain.

"Hang me!" shouted the man, in perfect amazement. "Hang a king!--hang
King Teddy O'Riley? Hang the King ov Blatherumskite? Why its rank
trason? Ye'll not be afther thinkin ov doin sich a rebellious action. I
shall feel obliged to ye if ye wont mintion it."

"And what would you have done with us if you had succeeded in your
ridiculous idea of taking the ship?" inquired Hearty.

"Faix and wouldn't we have kilt every sowl of yese, and taken the rest
prisoners?" replied his majesty.

"Then we cannot do better than follow your example," observed the
captain; then turning to some of his men, who appeared to enjoy the
scene with particular satisfaction, he exclaimed, "Get a rope ready at
the fore-yard arm that we may hang this fellow!" The sailors with great
alacrity made the necessary preparations.

"Be all the holy saints betwixt this and no where, ye'll not be
afther taking away the life ov a poor king!" exclaimed his majesty of
Blatherumskite, with the greatest earnestness and alarm. "What'll I do
now? Sure and I'm in a bad way! Sure and I'll be done for intirely! And
is it to be hanged I am?" continued he, looking woefully at the rope
that was dangling ready for immediate use. "Is King Teddy O'Riley
to be kilt afther sich a villainous fashion? Oh what a disgrace for
Blatherumskite! What a dishonour to a king. Oh what 'ill I do--what 'ill
I do?"

"Is the rope ready?" inquired Hearty.

"All right, Sir," said the boatswain.

"Then hoist him up," replied the captain. The men proceeded to fulfil
the command of their officer.

"Oh it's in a pretty way I am!" exclaimed the unfortunate monarch, with
tears in his eyes. "Be the holy japers, wouldn't I change places wid
any body as would like to be hanged in my place. It's yourself, Murphy
O'Blarney, that's the good subject," said the king, addressing one of
his companions with particular and impressive emphasis. "Sure, and ye've
got more pathriotism than to let the King ov Blatherumskite be hanged,
when it's your own loyal neck as would fit the rope so azy." Murphy
O'Blarney did not seem to hear. "Bad luck to the likes ov yese for
a thraitor," murmured his majesty. Then, turning to another of his
subjects, he said, "Larry Brogues, it's great confidence I place in
ye--ye're a jewel ov a man intirely; and if ye 'ill jist be afther doing
me the thrifling favour ov being hanged in my place, the best pig I have
shall be your's." Larry appeared as if he had lost all relish for pork.
"I always said ye were a base ribbel!" muttered the angry monarch,
turning from him to address a third. "Mick Killarney, a sinsible boy
you've showed yerself afore to-day, and little's the praise I take to
meself for not having rewarded ye according to your desarts; but if
ye'll show your superior desarnment, by letting the little bit ov a
rope be placed round your neck instead ov mine, it's meself that 'ill
make a man ov ye when I get back to Blatherumskite." Mick Killarney
turned the only eye he had in his head, to another part of the ship.
"There's more brains in the tail of a dead pig, than 'ill ever come
out ov yer thick skull, ye villain!" exclaimed King Teddy O'Riley in a
thundering rage: then he looked very pathetic, wiped his eyes with a
corner of his blanket, and began to chant, in the most miserable tones,
the following words:--

   "Who'll bile the paraties and pale 'em and ate 'em!
    Who'll drink all the butthermilk I used to swallow!
    Who'll hand round the whiskey, and take his own share too
          Wid mighty convanience.

   "Oh Teddy O'Riley your reign's put a stop to,
    Small blame to your sowl! you're a king now no longer,
    You're smashed all to smothers, and dished up and done for
          In a way most amazin.

   "Not brave Alexander, or Nebuchadnezzar,
    Who went out to grass wid the rest ov the cattle,
    Not Moses, or Boney, nor yet Cleopatra,
          Were treated so vilely.

   "Its meself that is up to me eyes in amazement
    To see you desaved and surrounded by villains,
    Who are wantin to place your poor neck in a halter
          Bad luck to their mothers!

   "Is it rope you're desirin? the divle a ha'porth.
    Is it hanged that you would be? not me then by Japers,
    Oh! there's sinse and there's rason in your own way ov thinkin,
          You're cliver intirely.

   "But sorrow a hope have ye got to indulge in,
    For there hangs the rope like a murtherin blaguard,
    Wid a knot at one end, and a noose at the other.
          Oh what 'ill I do now?"

Oriel Porphyry, who had laughed exceedingly at the whole scene, now
stepped forward, and, by his interference, saved his majesty's life.

"I always thought that Ireland formed a portion of the British
dominions," observed the young merchant.

"So it did," replied Fortyfolios, "and enjoyed an unexampled state of
prosperity; but the people were always dissatisfied and unreasonable;
and were ever accusing the government of the country by which they were
ruled of creating that social disorganisation which was the effect
of their own evil habits--and which had existed, as may be proved by
a reference to their own annals, as far back as it was possible to
refer--and, upon the first opportunity, they threw off their allegiance
to the British empire, and became, as they had previously been, a
separate kingdom. As might have been expected, internal strife now
appeared. As had formerly been the case, the country was cut up into a
party of petty monarchies, that were continually at war with each other.
These having gradually become smaller and more numerous, there is now a
king to every potato-garden, of which class of monarchs his majesty of
Blatherumskite is an example; and when these fellows are not striving
to exterminate each other, they make piratical excursions to the
neighbouring coast, and there create all the mischief in their power,
by robbing, plundering, killing, and burning."

"We are entering the Nore, now Sir," remarked the captain.

"The derivation of the word is exceedingly puzzling," remarked the
professor, "and I have met with no explanation that has satisfied me.
Some antiquarians trace it to Noah, but they bring forward nothing which
can be relied on in proof of this idea. I must say it is my opinion
that Noah was never in this part of the world. Others ascribe it to
the frequent use of the words 'Know her,'--as parties of pleasure used
frequently to start in steam-boats from the metropolis to this place,
and then return; and intimacies between the young males and the young
females who had never met previously, used to spring up during this
excursion, and the former used to reply when they were asked if they
knew an individual of the other sex, 'Know her? we met going towards the
sea,' and the words at last became so common that it gave name to the
place."

"You're wrong again, don't you see!" exclaimed the doctor. "But I'll
tell you how the place came by the name. In very ancient times a company
of individuals created a joint-stock association to work a copper mine
of great value which they said had been discovered on the neighbouring
coast, and the people, deluded by the great anticipations held out by
the schemers, invested large sums in the affair. The shaft was sunk and
the mine worked, and the anxious citizens were every day coming down in
crowds to learn the progress of the mine, but they invariably met with
one answer to all their queries, which was 'No Ore;' and this lasted
till the bubble burst. Since then the place was called 'No Ore,' which
ultimately dwindled into 'Nore.'"

"Preposterous!" cried Fortyfolios. "I wonder you can repeat such a
ridiculous conception."

"I'm positive that my 'No ore' is as good as your 'Noah' or 'Know her,'
don't you see," replied the doctor, good humouredly.

"Nothing of the kind, Dr. Tourniquet," said the other very gravely. "My
derivations are founded on well ascertained facts."

"And my derivation is founded on better ascertained facts," added the
surgeon.

"The coast here seems quite deserted," observed Oriel Porphyry. "I
do not see a habitation--nor a human creature--nor any species of
vessel--nor any sign of life whatever."

"Possibly the natives have deserted this part of the coast from its
liability to be visited by the Irish pirates," replied the professor.
"But what a change there must have been in the appearance of this
neighbourhood a few centuries back! Then vessels of every size and
nation might have been seen sailing in almost countless numbers down the
river to the Port of London, which was the mart of the world. Merchant
ships and ships of war, colliers, fishing-vessels, passage-boats and
pleasure-yachts were passing and re-passing each other at all hours of
the day. Then these masses of ruins which you are passing on each side
of the river, were filled with busy inhabitants engaged in the various
labours of traffic. Here ships were built, fitted out, victualled, and
stored, and when manned with a gallant crew, set sail to visit every
quarter of the globe, to dispose of their cargoes and to bring home the
produce of other countries. There was a battery to prevent the passage
of the enemy's ships in time of war. A little further on we come to a
fashionable watering place, in which the tired citizens forgot the toils
of business in the pursuit of pleasure. Towns and villages existed on
either side; some of considerable importance, with a numerous population
engaged in every species of manufacture and of laborious employment."

"The country possesses a most desolate appearance," remarked Zabra.

"The natural effect of the cause which produced it," responded the
professor. "Here all the horrors of war have been exhibited on the most
comprehensive scale, and what warfare left untouched time has since
destroyed. Nothing meets the eye but blackened buildings and tottering
walls. The country is a wilderness--the town a desert. A little time
since all was busy--all was fertile; and every nook and corner resounded
with the stir of the artisan at his craft, and the mirth of the idler at
his pleasure."

"What part of the island was this called?" inquired Oriel.

"These are the shores of Kent, so called from the ancient word Kenned,
known or famous," replied Fortyfolios. "It was called the garden of
England, and, if the accounts which describe it are to be depended on,
well did it deserve the title. It was one continued field of fruit, and
flowers, and grain. Forests of magnificent timber afforded materials for
the carpenter and the ship-builder--plantations of hops gave employment
to the cultivators, the merchants, and the brewers of malt liquors; and
orchards of cherries were in constant demand from one end of the island
to the other. Now the timber has either been cut down, or died of
natural decay--the hop gardens have given place to crops of luxuriant
weeds--and the sweet and luscious fruits have become wild and sour."

"Here is an extensive collection of ruins on the left--and it seems once
to have been an important place," observed the young merchant.

"It was so," said the professor. "There were the public dockyards, the
arsenal, a college for the education of youth to the profession of
war, manufactures on the most extensive scale of materials employed in
fitting out ships for the war or merchant service, and conveniences for
traffic or accumulation of all sorts of naval and military stores. There
were foundries for cannon--manufactories of cordage, shot, nails, and
ship biscuit--magazines for the safe deposit of gunpowder--yards for
ship-building, and warehouses for apparel: now you see nothing but the
bare walls rising up from the mass of ruins of which they are a portion.
In solitude the wild dog howls where all was human life and industry;
and with the boldness of long indulgence, the bats congregate in the
chambers of the merchants."

"Here are the remains of a more stately structure than any we have
hitherto passed--was it a palace?" inquired Oriel Porphyry.

"It was nothing more than a hospital for poor sailors, such as had been
maimed in the service of their country," replied Fortyfolios.

"Indeed!" exclaimed the young merchant, with considerable surprise.

"Nothing else, I assure you," added his tutor.

"The government were remarkably attentive to the wants of their seamen
then--they must have valued their services very high to have lodged them
in so sumptuous a building as this appears to have been," observed
Oriel.

"Their dwelling was at one time far more magnificent than the palace of
the King of England," continued the professor. "There was no edifice
erected for such a purpose to equal it in the whole world. There the
wounded sailor passed the rest of his life enjoying every comfort he
required. He had the range of a magnificent mansion, and an extensive
and beautiful park. Proper officers watched over his health, his diet
was strengthening and plentiful, and under the care of good and pious
men his moral wants were equally well attended to. In another part of
the river there used to be a building of similar extent that had been
erected for poor and wounded soldiers, and they were provided for in a
manner equally generous and considerate."

"These people were distinguished for their charities, I believe,"
remarked the young merchant.

"They were," replied Fortyfolios. "They had numberless hospitals in
which the poor, afflicted with disease, or hurt by accidents, were
promptly cared for, and skilfully treated. The ablest physicians, the
most experienced surgeons, and the most skilful nurses waited upon them;
and all that the necessities of their cases demanded was immediately
rendered. They had asylums for females who had strayed from the path of
virtue, where they were taught industrious and moral habits, and then
restored to society capable of taking a place with its most useful and
honourable members. They had houses of instruction to reclaim young
thieves, in which they received an excellent education, were taught
some useful trade, and then re-entered the community capable of passing
through the busy scenes of life with credit to themselves and others.
They had----."

"They had hospitals and asylums for every vice that disgraces humanity,
don't you see," said the doctor, interrupting the speaker with more
bitterness than was usual with him. "The vilest of the vile were
sheltered and preached to, and made comfortable and happy; but while
vice received every possible attention in fine buildings, with numerous
servants, virtue might crawl through the public streets and starve;
and while the rogue was carefully instructed in all things that were
excellent to save his wretched life and soul, the honest man, struggling
with adversity and sickness, was left to die and be damned. There was no
asylum for the virtuous woman; but the vilest prostitute had always a
ready home. Integrity and intelligence had to fight with famine alone
and unnoticed; but ignorance and dishonesty, profligacy and crime, were
sought after and generously provided for. In fact, under this miserable
state of things there existed a bonus upon vice. If the vile were
only vile enough, they were the objects of universal benevolence:
but to be poor without being vile--oh! it was considered something so
contemptible, that the charitable could not be brought to pay it the
slightest regard."

For a wonder Fortyfolios made no reply.

"This place is also of considerable importance to the scientific
inquirer," continued the professor; "for here was a famous observatory,
in which the most illustrious astronomers carried on their
investigations into the motions of the heavenly bodies, and the laws
which govern them. Many interesting discoveries were here made. From
here were calculated the distances of various parts of the world. The
neighbourhood was also distinguished by being a place of favorite resort
of the inhabitants of the metropolis; and even members of the government
used to indulge themselves occasionally with a trip to this once
delightful place, for the purpose of enjoying a delicacy in the shape of
a very small fish, a thousand of which would scarcely make a sufficient
meal."

"Here are many heaps of stones and fragments of brickwork. I should
suppose that they are the remains of a town of some kind," observed the
young merchant.

"They cover a space sufficiently extensive to make it probable," replied
Fortyfolios; "but they ought to be considered as a distant suburb of
the metropolis. They were chiefly inhabited by persons engaged in the
production or sale of naval stores, and boat-builders, fishermen, and
sailors employed in managing the craft upon the river. In some places
there are wharves for merchandise, in others for coals; here was a
factory for the produce of canvass, there an establishment of engineers
who sent steam vessels to every sea that flows. The river here used to
be crowded with shipping; so much so that the passage of the vessels
often became slow and dangerous. Here were ships from every commercial
nation on the globe, each laden with the produce of their country, and
each intent on returning with a cargo of English goods."

"What a gloomy looking building this must have been, if we may judge
from what remains of it!" remarked Zabra.

"That used to be a fortress and state prison," said the Professor.
"There were once confined persons accused of treason, and there they
remained previous to their execution. Some of the noblest and best
spirits of the time have been incarcerated in those old walls. The noble
Raleigh, the patriot Russell, the lovely Anna Boleyn, and numberless
others whose names have become a part of history. There also were kept
the regalia and--."

"And there also were kept the wild beasts," observed the doctor, good
humouredly, "and there is every reason for believing that the latter
managed to get at the regalia; for an ancient poem I have met with
says--

   "The lion and the unicorn
      Were fighting for the crown,
    And the lion beat the unicorn
      All about the town"--

no doubt to the great astonishment of the citizens."

"I am going to anchor now, sir," here exclaimed the captain, "as the
navigation o' the river beyond this arn't practicable for a vessel o'
such tonnage as the Albatross."

"Let it be done then," replied the young merchant; "and let an armed
party be got ready to accompany me on land, as I am desirous of
examining the antiquities of the place."

"Yes, sir," responded Hearty; and preparations were immediately made to
go ashore.

"You see before you the remains of a bridge," observed Fortyfolios,
pointing to several broken arches that appeared above the water; "it was
considered one of the finest examples of that kind of structure that
had ever been erected, and an old chronicler I lately perused gives an
elaborate account of the ceremonies that took place when it was first
opened to the public. On that occasion the king and queen went in state,
accompanied by their court, and all the great men were there, and the
great merchants, and thousands upon thousands of citizens. Now you
can behold nothing but the crumbling stone-work, green with age, and
instead of the music and shouts which accompanied the procession, we can
only hear the hoarse cry of the bittern from the neighbouring marshes,
and the fierce howl of the jackal from some ruined building."

"The boat's ready, sir!" said the captain; and shortly afterwards the
whole party proceeded in a boat to the shore.




CHAP. IV.

THE LAST OF THE ENGLISHMEN.


A large tent had been pitched in an open space among the ruins of the
ancient city. Before it stood Oriel Porphyry leaning on a gun, with
Zabra at his side, resting on his harp. At the distance of a few feet
Fortyfolios and Tourniquet were seated on a fallen pillar, disputing
about the character of a building, the remains of which lay before them.
The captain and the midshipman were conversing together by the side
of the tent, and grouped about were twenty or thirty sailors well
armed--some reclining on the ground, others leaning against a column,
and the rest congregated into little parties, engaged in talking over
the adventures of the day, or in passing their opinions upon the
neighbouring ruins.

On one side of the tent stood a great portion of a very elegant
structure, of considerable dimensions, and of a classical style of
architecture; on the other side stood the ruins of a building of about
the same size, with a handsome portico supported by several beautiful
pillars, upon which might be observed a female draperied figure much
mutilated. A short distance from between them there arose a tall column
with a bronze statue of a warrior, broken and disfigured, lying at its
base. Beyond the column was a flight of broken steps that led to an open
space overgrown with wild shrubs and weeds; and beyond these, and around
in every direction, nothing met the eye but confused heaps of stone and
brickwork, overgrown with rank herbage; and pillars, and walls, and
glassless windows.

"I am tired of this continual ruin," exclaimed Oriel Porphyry. "We
have travelled all the day and met nothing but broken pedestals, and
prostrate capitals; porches without pillars, and pillars without
porches; trembling porticoes, tottering walls, and roofless dwellings.
I never witnessed such a perfect desolation. The only living thing I
have seen was a wolf, who stared at me as if quite unused to a human
countenance, and never attempted to move till I sent the contents of my
gun at his head. Then, immediately I had fired, there flew around me
such flights of bats, ravens, vultures, and owls, and they created such
a din of screaming and hooting, that I was absolutely startled."

"See how the ivy clings to the wall, Oriel!" said Zabra to his patron,
as he pointed to a ruin beside them; "how it twines round the fluted
pillar, and hides the ornaments of the richly decorated capital. There
is poetry astir in those leaves--there is a music breathing in the
breeze that shakes them. There! see you the bird moving out its head
from their friendly shelter to notice our movements? She has her nest
there, Oriel: in that little circle are all her pleasures concentrated.
She has made her happiness in the very desolation of which you complain.
It is impossible to look around and say all is barren. There is not a
weed that grows but what is full of enjoyment for myriads of creatures
of which we take no note. Is there nothing in these stones which does
not awaken in you associations that ought to people them with the
countless multitudes that once found pleasure in this wilderness? I see
not the ruin. I notice not the silence. Memory looks through the vista
of departed time, and lo! all is splendour and beauty--and the deserted
porticoes echo with the voice of gladness. Let me sing to you, Oriel;
this is a glorious place for sweet sounds and antique memories, and I
will see to what use I can apply them."

The young musician, after a short, touching prelude, then sung, with the
deep expression that characterised all his attempts at minstrelsy, the
following words:--

   "To the home of the brave ones, the true and the kind,
      With a heart filled with hope I have been;
    And I thought of the gladness and peace I should find,
      And the smiles of delight I had seen.

   "But the dwelling was homeless, and roofless, and bare,
      'Twas a ruin that threatened to fall;
    And my sorrowing heart seemed to cling to despair,
      Like the ivy that clung to the wall.

   "Oh! where are the roses that clustered and spread
      Round the porch where my wishes were told?
    Alas! from the porch all the roses have fled,
      And the hands that once plucked them are cold.

   "Oh! where are the friends, the young, thoughtless, and gay,
      Who gave life to the garden and hall?
    All, all have departed--all, all passed away,
      Save the ivy that clings to the wall.

   "Be glad, my fond heart--there is hope for you yet,
      For these leaves have a comfort convey'd;
    There are moments and pleasures I ne'er can forget,
      Though both roses and friends have decayed.

   "Though this breast be a ruin where sorrow hath cast
      Desolations she cannot recal;
    Still mem'ry shall cling to the joys that are past,
      Like the ivy that clings to the wall."

"I tell you, Dr. Tourniquet, you're completely in error," exclaimed
Fortyfolios. "The meaning of the word United Service is evident, and
admits of no dispute. In old authors we frequently read of people 'going
to service,' and as often of a union of offices in the same person,
such as butler and steward, valet and footman, gardener and groom; and
there cannot be a doubt that this is what was called united service, and
that this building was dedicated to the purpose of finding situations
for such people."

"Dedicated to a fiddle-stick. Don't you see?" replied the doctor. "I
tell you it was a club that met there to play at cards, and that was the
reason that they had a king of clubs, and a queen of clubs, and a knave
of clubs, and ever so many other clubs; and as a qualification, all the
members were obliged to be club-footed, and they were governed by what
they called club law."

"'T was no such thing, Dr. Tourniquet, depend upon it," said the
professor. "I'm sure 't was the united service, because I have a book
in my library that mentions it as the United Service."

"And I'm sure it was a club, because I've got a book in my library that
mentions it as a club," responded the other.

"Then the building opposite was devoted to very different purposes,"
continued Fortyfolios. "It was called the Athenæum, the derivation of
which word I have never been able to discover. Perhaps it had its origin
in the Modern Athens, a place of some importance in the neighbourhood of
Blackwood's Magazine--once a famous depôt for combustibles, that blew up
occasionally with great damage. However, it was erected for the purpose
of bringing together all the intelligence of the country.

    'Together let us range the fields,
      Impearled with the morning dew,'

says an ancient poet, and there is no doubt that the lines were
addressed by one member of the Athenæum to another."

"And what good did they ever do by being brought together?" inquired
Tourniquet.

"That has never been ascertained," replied the other.

"For what purpose was this column erected?" asked the young merchant.

"It was erected to commemorate the victories of a certain Duke of
York," said the professor. "He distinguished himself greatly during the
wars of the rival houses of York and Lancaster. Besides being a great
general, his piety was so great that he became a bishop, and there are a
series of moral discourses extant, that took place between the Bishop
and the Bishop's Clarke, a person who was also very celebrated. It may
be said that this Duke of York enjoyed more credit in his day than any
of his predecessors; indeed he was in such general requisition that the
constant inquiries after him, gave rise to the saying, 'York, you're
wanted;' and it was to him that the people, after a disturbance which
he had pacified, said,--

   'Now is the winter of our discontent
    Made glorious summer by the son of York.'"

"I certainly feel the charm of association as much as any one," observed
Oriel to his companion; "but the gratification I find in treading shores
so celebrated by historic recollections is changed to a painful feeling
at beholding the wreck to which has been reduced the greatness I have
honoured. I should suppose, from what I have seen, that the whole land
is in a similar state as that portion of it which has come under my
observation. I can imagine nothing so deplorable. There appear to be no
living things in the island but wild animals. I can only account for
their being here, from my knowledge that, in former times, the natives
kept several large collections of them for show, and that these having
escaped, they spread themselves over the country."

At this moment Oriel's quick ear caught the sound of a low sharp growl
at no great distance from him, and turning round, beheld a large lion
crouching behind a heap of stones near the two philosophers, who were
disputing so vehemently that they had not the slightest idea of their
danger. The young merchant had just time to get his gun in readiness and
give the alarm to the sailors, when, with a fierce roar that came like
a peal of thunder upon the terrified disputants, the lion sprung upon
them, and knocked them both down. He stood majestically with one paw
upon the prostrate philosophers, looking defiance on Oriel and his
companions, as they cautiously approached him from all sides with their
muskets in their hands.

"Now, my friends," exclaimed the young merchant, "don't fire till
you come within good aiming distance--don't more than half fire at a
time--let the others reserve their fire, in case he makes a spring--be
steady, and aim at his head."

"Ay, ay, sir," was murmured by the captain; and every man held his
breath, cocked his gun, picked his way carefully over the stones, and
prepared himself for a struggle with his dangerous enemy. The lion saw
them advancing--shook his mane, lashed his tail, and, bending his head
to the ground, uttered a long and deafening roar.

"Now then, mind your aim," said the young merchant. About a dozen
discharged their pieces; and, with a piercing howl, the lion dashed
among his foes, knocking down some half-a-dozen of them, and scattering
the rest in all directions. Luckily, he had been too severely wounded
to do any more serious mischief. His roar was terrible; but the men
having again approached him, poured in a more deadly fire, and with a
vain attempt to reach them, he gave a savage growl, and fell covered
with wounds. Scarcely had this been done, before a distant roar was
heard by the victors.

"Make haste and reload, for, if I mistake not, we shall have the lioness
upon us in a few seconds," said Oriel Porphyry earnestly; and all
quickened their preparations, to be in readiness for another contest.
"Take up a position behind that ruin, for the lioness will first make to
the dead lion, and then she will attempt to turn her rage upon us. We
shall have her within gun range as soon as she comes to the lion, and
shall be in some sort of shelter when she begins her attack."

Scarcely had the position been taken and the arrangements made, when the
roar became more distinct; and, soon afterwards, the lioness was seen
rapidly approaching, with a series of prodigious leaps that quickly
brought her into the immediate neighbourhood of the party in ambush. She
instantly proceeded to the lion. At first, she patted him with her paw.
Finding he took no notice of that, she fawned upon him, and licked him
with her tongue, playfully bit his ear, and played with his mane.
Observing that he was still inattentive to her movements, she gently
turned him over; and then, noticing the wounds in his head and body, and
his incapability of replying to her caresses, she uttered a roar so loud
and piercing, that it made the old walls about her echo again. This
was replied to by a peal of musketry from the neighbouring ruin. In a
moment, with another deafening howl, she rushed towards the place whence
came the reports, and with one desperate bound, leaped to the window
behind which Oriel and his companions lay concealed upon a heap of
stones and rubbish. She had got her fore paws and head upon the ledge of
the window, when another shower of balls sent her reeling back. Howling
with rage she made the leap again; when a blow on the head from the
butt end of a gun, held by a stout seaman, made her loosen her hold,
and, with a savage growl, she fell to the ground. From there she next
crawled to the body of the lion, licking the upper part of his body,
and uttering the most wild and melancholy howls. She was evidently much
wounded; but she managed to crawl round him several times, drawing her
long tongue over his mane, and moving a paw, or his head, in hopes of
noticing some sign of recognition. At last, finding all her efforts
ineffectual, she emitted a roar that rivalled the loudest thunder,
lashed her body furiously with her tail, began tearing up the stones and
soil around her, and then, as if putting forth her strength for a last
effort, she made two or three prodigious leaps towards the adjoining
building. The bullets that met her in her way did not stop her progress,
for with one enormous bound she cleared the window, and came down in
the midst of the voyagers, dashing them about with a violence that gave
several of the men very severe contusions, and grasping one by the neck
so furiously that he would have inevitably been killed, had not Loop
stabbed her to the heart with a short sword he carried, while Hearty
gave her a desperate blow on the head with an immense fragment of stone.
Letting go the man she had got so firmly in her grasp, she turned upon
her assailants a look of the most savage ferocity, and then, with a
short howl of agony, fell back dead at their feet.

They had dragged the lioness out of the building, and several of the men
were busily engaged taking off the skins of the two animals, and the
rest were talking over the dangers they had escaped, when Zabra pointed
out to his patron the figures of an old man and a young female, who were
advancing up the broken steps that led to the base of the column. The
sight of human beings was so novel, that every one paid particular
attention to the individuals they now beheld. The man appeared to have
reached extreme old age, for his hair was white and long, and hung down
upon his neck and shoulders. His complexion was ruddy, but although the
face was covered with wrinkles and deeply marked furrows, there was
an animation in his eyes that showed that the fire of life was still
brilliantly burning. He was tall, and walked firmly, supporting himself
by a long staff. The skin of a lion hung from his neck over his manly
shoulders. The rest of his dress was composed of skins fastened by
thongs round his body and legs. A long sword was suspended at his side,
which, with a knife or dagger at his waist, seemed all the weapons he
possessed.

He was accompanied by a young girl, whose complexion had evidently
been browned by exposure to the sun, the effect of which gave a warmer
character to the quiet beauty of her features. Her eyes were of a soft,
deep, blue, beaming with tenderness and benevolence; and her hair, which
was silken in its texture, and very light in colour, fell in clustering
curls from her forehead to her neck. A sort of cape, made of feathers,
covered her shoulders; beneath which was a long garment reaching below
the knees, made of different skins neatly sewed together, and bound
round the waist with a belt of the same. Her arms and legs were bare,
and they were of the most exquisite symmetry, delicately and beautifully
formed. In one hand she carried a light spear, and the other she rested
upon the shoulder of her companion.

As soon as the young girl observed the voyagers, she started back with
an exclamation of fear, and clung to the arm of her elder companion,
who, noticing the cause of her alarm, immediately let fall his staff and
drew his sword. There was something remarkably imposing in the attitude
of the old man. He drew up his stately form to its full height; and as
he stood upon the defensive with his weapon firmly grasped in his right
hand, while with his left arm he clasped the young girl by the waist and
drew her behind him, there seemed a vigour in his silvery hairs, and
a fire in his sunken eyes, that neither youth or manhood could have
rivalled.

Oriel Porphyry, who looked upon them with peculiar interest, laid down
his arms and advanced towards them, accompanied only by Zabra, who was
also unarmed. Their approaches were closely regarded by the man, and
watched with curiosity by the female.

"Fear us not, old man, we will do you no harm," said the young merchant.

"Fear!" exclaimed the old man proudly, "I know it not."

"We are voyagers from a distant land, who have been induced to visit
your shores, from a desire to do honour to a country once so famous."

The old man, without making any reply, hastily returned his sword to
its scabbard, and then, with a countenance in which fearlessness and
kindness were blended, held out his right hand. The hand of Oriel
Porphyry was soon in its cordial and friendly grasp, and a compact of
sociality seemed immediately agreed to between both parties. "And you,
fair maid, need not be alarmed," said Zabra, approaching the maiden with
a look that might have inspired a savage with confidence. "You will meet
amongst us none but friends anxious to do you honour and service."
She shrunk back from his advances with a strong feeling of timidity
expressed in her features; yet continued to gaze on the handsome face
and graceful person of the speaker, as if they had for her an attraction
impossible to be resisted.

"The child is unused to strangers," observed her companion, as he
noticed the shy and wondering manner with which she regarded Zabra. "It
is long since she has seen a human being except myself. Be not afraid,
Lilya," he exclaimed, as he drew her towards him. "These are not
enemies. They are wanderers, like ourselves; but they have a home and
kindred--we have neither."

The cheerful countenance of the old man now became clouded with
melancholy, and he sighed as if there was a heaviness upon his heart
that could not be removed; but the timid Lilya still gazed upon the
features of the young musician, as if she found it impossible to remove
her eyes from their beauty. There was an extraordinary contrast between
her and her companion. She seemed just in the dawn of womanhood, with
delicate limbs, and looks all bashfulness and pleased surprise; while
he appeared on the extreme verge of old age--all bone and sinews, hard
and rough with exposure to the severities of time and climate. She
was evidently too young to be his daughter; but that there was some
relationship between them was evident, for even in the gentle loveliness
that distinguished her youthful face might be discerned faint traces of
resemblance to the ancient but noble example of manhood that stood by
her side.

"Your appearance has much interested me," said the young merchant,
gazing on the stranger's venerable appearance with affectionate respect;
"and I hope it will not be deemed intrusive or impertinent if I inquire
who it is I behold."

"You see before you the last of the Englishmen," said the old man,
looking proudly upon the inquirer.

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Oriel, regarding him with increased
admiration and a voluntary feeling of homage.

"The last of that powerful and illustrious race is now before you,"
he added, "and this is the child of my child's child. We are all that
remain of the great people who filled this island with their multitudes
and the world with their fame. Kindred and countrymen--all are gone;
their homes are the habitations of the wild cat and the vulture, and
even their very graves have been made desolate by the jackal and the
hyena."

"You appear to have attained a great age," remarked Zabra.

"Alas! I have outlived my country," replied the Englishman. "A hundred
and twenty years have passed since my existence commenced. Time has
forgotten me. I have been where the sword was ploughing deep furrows
around me far and near.--I have seen Death busy at his work amid the
youthful, the old, the innocent and the guilty.--I have noticed the
young trees grow up, put forth their bravery, and die.--I have beheld
mighty buildings crumble into dust.--I have known all things perish
before my eyes: yet I have remained untouched in the midst of the
desolation.--Three generations have passed away, and have left me to
gather consolation from their tombs."

"If the relation of what you have known and endured be not too painful,
I should much like to hear it," said the young merchant.

"If you have the patience to listen, all shall be told to you," replied
the old man. Then taking up his staff, he walked on to some fragments of
building that lay at a short distance, on which he sat with Lilya at his
feet. Oriel Porphyry, Zabra, Loop, the captain, Fortyfolios, and the
doctor sat or reclined in a circle round him, and beyond the circle, the
sailors stood leaning on their guns.




CHAP. V.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE DECLINE AND FALL OF OLD ENGLAND.


"It must be at least a century since the necessities of the kingdom
obliged me, for the first time, to attempt the trade of war," said the
Englishman. "There had been some dispute between the government and the
people, which was originally of little consequence, but the zeal of
furious partizans on each side gave it an importance which would not
otherwise have belonged to it. One said the safety of the people
depended on their success--another declared that the security of
the crown was involved in the question. One party were frantic for
liberty--another party, not so numerous, but far more influential,
were enthusiastic for loyalty. But words were soon given up for more
effective weapons. The Court, proud in their strength, prepared
themselves for a sanguinary conflict; and their antagonists, having
equal confidence in their numbers, followed their example with the same
alacrity. The whole country was astir with contention: families were
divided, and friends turned into foes. He who opposed the King was
denounced as a rebel; and he who differed with the people was declared
a traitor.

"Many disturbances had broken out before the parties took the field in
military array; but now the quarrel assumed a more serious aspect. Every
one armed himself, and hastened to join that cause which seemed to him
the best; and the most influential men on each side led these masses to
the battle. Though they were children of the same soil, and many had
relatives in the opposite ranks, nothing could equal the animosity with
which they engaged and the fury with which they fought. Never had they
against a foreign foe exhibited such fierceness. The battle raged
nearly the whole of the day with great slaughter on both sides. The
men of loyalty were less in number, but they were more experienced in
soldiership. The men of liberty had the most powerful army, but they
were deficient in military discipline and in martial appearance. They
fought with the most determined courage, resisting and making attacks,
attacking and defending positions, till, after a protracted struggle,
the latter succeeded in driving their opponents off the field.

"This was merely the commencement of hostilities. The crown party,
though defeated, were very soon in a condition to renew the contest; and
though this victory to the popular cause brought a great increase of
strength, it did not save its partizans from being defeated with immense
slaughter in the next battle that was fought. For several years a
destructive civil war raged with unexampled ferocity in every part of
the kingdom; sometimes one party being the strongest, sometimes the
other. Every individual capable of bearing arms was obliged to join
either the cause of the king or that of the people; and, as a great
diversity of opinion existed, brothers were set against brothers, and
fathers against sons, and thousands and tens of thousands of the bravest
of her citizens daily were cast into pits to feed the worms of the soil
of England. At last the popular cause triumphed, and the King became a
fugitive. Loud were the congratulations of the victors when no doubt
seemed to remain of their success; but they had little cause for their
joy--they had only changed a bad ruler for a worse.

"The triumphant party now sought out such of their fellow-citizens who
had most distinguished themselves by their hostility to their progress
during the late warfare; and they who did not succeed in escaping were
persecuted and exterminated in every way that vengeance could devise.
Blood continued to flow, and hatred and strife still existed. The
leading men among them had scarcely settled themselves in their
authority, before they began to differ concerning their notions of
government. Some were for one form and some for another, and each had
his own theory to support or his own ambition to gratify. The difference
soon increased to open hostility; and as each was supported by a
numerous band of partizans, each strove for the mastery with all the
cunning and boldness he possessed. Battles were again fought--victims
were again sacrificed. Party succeeded party; and as one overpowered the
other, the vanquished were sure to be massacred if they remained within
the power of their conquerors.

"But the cause of the king was considered the cause of all kings; and
while the different leaders of the people seemed intent only upon
exterminating each other, a powerful armament was being fitted out in a
neighbouring kingdom for the purpose of restoring the deposed monarch to
his possessions. The first intimation that the ruling government had of
this expedition was derived from its landing upon the coast; and the
necessity of an immediate union between all parties against the common
enemy became so evident, that they lost no time in settling their
differences, joining their disposable forces, and making preparations
to resist the approaches of their expelled sovereign. Numbers, who had
suffered from the oppressions of the many, now hastened to the king's
standard. The loyal came from their hiding places, and those who had
fled to the neighbouring continent hurried back again to share in
the struggle. The battle-cry of one was, 'God and the King'--that of
the other, 'God and the People;' and, with increased animosity, the
contending armies rushed to the conflict, till the whole country seemed
flowing with blood.

"At first the king was successful in almost every encounter with his
rebellious subjects. Battle after battle was fought, and still he kept
advancing and triumphing on his way. But the leaders of the people
did not despair. They carried on the contest with the same spirit
notwithstanding their defeats. The whole population rose in arms. No
sooner was one army dispersed than another was ready for action. Three
times the court party took possession of the capital, and were again
driven out. The contest was prolonged by the military genius of one
man, whose mind seemed exhaustless in resources. He had risen from
obscurity, and had gradually exalted himself from one command to another
during the civil war, till the whole forces on the side of the people
were at his disposal. Success appeared to attend all his efforts. As he
in his own person exhibited the most determined bravery, his followers
were stimulated to copy his example. The most daring attacks were
planned and executed, and the royalists began to lose all the advantages
they had previously gained. It was the intention of the popular general
to terminate the contest at a blow; and with this object in view he
concentrated all his forces, and unexpectedly brought them upon the
enemy's camp. The royalists were taken quite unprepared, and few escaped
to announce their defeat. The king, the nobles, the foreign troops, and
a great portion of their native allies perished in one indiscriminate
slaughter; and thus the hopes of the loyal were utterly annihilated for
the time.

"As every man was obliged to join one or the other party, I had my share
in these struggles for mastery. I had inherited a small patrimony in
one of the inland counties, and I had recently married a young and
beautiful relative, to whom I had been attached from my youth, when I
was first called upon to contribute my assistance towards bringing the
contest to a termination. I was an ardent lover of liberty. I was a
great advocate for republics, and I had long looked upon kings as
expensive and useless machines, which the people could easily spare. It
may easily be imagined, from my acknowledgement of these sentiments,
that I eagerly embraced the popular cause. I mixed myself up as little
as possible with the squabbles of partizans; but there were few more
sincere adherents to the principles I professed than myself. I was
present at nearly all the great engagements, received several wounds,
and gradually acquired rank and experience in the republican army.
My superior officers respected me, and the men under my command were
attentive and obedient.

"After the destruction of the royalists, the people were so frantic in
praise of their leader that he thought he might be allowed to assume
the sovereign power. He did so, amid the acclamations of the multitude;
and in six months after was assassinated. No sooner was his decease
known than there rose the same intrigues for supremacy that his master
mind had quelled. Party succeeded party, and government followed
government, in rapid succession; and the gibbet and the axe were in
constant requisition by whatever party happened to be in power. As if
it was determined that this unhappy nation should enjoy no respite from
its troubles, the son of the late king, assuming the royal dignity, had
succeeded in inducing a foreign power to grant such assistance as might
be required to reinstate him in the throne of his fathers. He landed on
the English coast with a large army of foreigners, and advanced in a
very imposing manner towards the ancient metropolis. The government had
no force sufficient to dispute his progress, and fancying itself unable
to struggle successfully against the army brought against it, it took
the dangerous resolution of inviting to its assistance the monarch of a
neighbouring and powerful kingdom. While this was being done the young
king marched forward, meeting with very little opposition till he came
within a few miles of the metropolitan city. There the leaders of the
people had taken up a strong position, and although they were inferior
to the royalists in number and soldiership, and had not yet received the
expected succours from the foreign power, they determined to dispute
the passage with the royalists. The battle was long and sanguinary. The
people, favoured by their position, quietly awaited the attack of their
opponents, and as they advanced, poured into their ranks a heavy and
destructive fire; but although they fought in the most steady and heroic
manner, the superiority of the enemy in numbers and discipline was too
great to be counteracted by the most steady courage. The republicans
were driven from their position, and defeated with great slaughter;
after which the young monarch marched into the ancient city, of which
he took possession. It was at first resolved to renew the fight in the
streets of the metropolis; but dissension and ill-will arose in their
councils, and nothing being resolved on, the popular army retreated
from the city, leaving it open to the advance of the royalists.

"The young king, fancying that all opposition had ceased, or that the
defeated party could not now offer him any molestation, passed his time
in getting up the idle ceremonies of a coronation; but the leaders of
the people were preparing to recommence the struggle. A powerful army
from the monarch who had promised them assistance, had landed, and such
good use did they make of their time, that the young king was obliged
to leave the metropolis in the very midst of his coronation. Then again
the horrors of civil war broke out with fresh fury. As each party
was assisted by foreign allies, the war was never left to languish.
Reinforcements were continually being poured into the kingdom, and the
ranks of the opposing armies, thus strengthened, were led against each
other, and fiercer and more relentless became the strife. Blood
flowed like water, and flesh was cut down like grass. Villages were
deserted--towns burnt--cities depopulated. Whether by design or
accident is not known, but it was found out that in all engagements the
inhabitants suffered infinitely more than their foreign auxiliaries. At
every battle the fields were strewn with their dead, while the loss of
their allies was but trifling.

"After the war had been protracted till there scarcely seemed materials
left in the kingdom to continue it, the king's party were completely
annihilated, and the foreign troops that had assisted them were glad to
make their escape out of the country. The allies which the leaders of
the people had called to their assistance, had been gradually augmented
until they had become an exceedingly numerous and powerful body, and
when the war was over, it was the anxious desire of the people to get
rid of them as soon as possible. But their friends were not so easily
to be disposed of. On different pretexts they protracted their stay
till they had obtained possession of nearly all the strong places in the
empire, and then they not only refused to depart, but commenced a war
of extermination on the people they came to protect. For this treachery
the inhabitants were but ill prepared. The greater portion of the
English army had been disbanded, and the rest were insignificant in
comparison with the new enemy against which they were called to act. The
consequence was, that for a considerable time the foreign army passed
from one part of the island to the other, burning and destroying
whatever they met with, without meeting any resistance.

"A force was hastily organised for the purpose of driving these
treacherous friends out of the country. The old and young of all parties
and opinions rushed to the national standard with the hope of freeing
their native land from foreign rule. A battle ensued. Nothing could
exceed the desperate bravery of my countrymen; but the discipline of
their enemy was not to be resisted. The people were slaughtered in
multitudes, and I, who commanded one of the wings of the army on that
occasion, was the only general officer who retreated from the field
with anything like a respectable body of men. We were attacked as we
retreated by a force greatly our superior; but I continued to show a
resolute front, beat off the assailants, and maintained a successful
fight. I succeeded in placing my men within the shelter of impregnable
walls.

"The people had by this time become sick of war. Thirty years of
continued bloodshed had done destructive work all over the country. The
population had been greatly reduced; agriculture had been neglected;
commerce was rapidly decaying; manufactures had been destroyed; all the
resources of industry had been annihilated; poverty, misery, and ruin
existed throughout the land. The people sued for peace. The enemy sent
back a message:--it was, 'England must be destroyed;' and still they
continued their relentless work of pillage, burning, and slaughter.
But the spirit of the nation was not utterly broken. They still waged
a defensive and offensive war whenever there was an opportunity of
doing so with advantage. Every small party of the enemy were cut off,
stragglers killed wherever met with, and their army harassed in every
way that hatred and ingenuity could devise. Bands of well-armed
Englishmen, from fifty to a thousand in number, under separate and
independent leaders, surprised positions, destroyed convoys, and cut
off supplies. A new plan of warfare was now attempted, which, although
destructive to the country, was found a most effective means of
expelling the invaders. This was, wherever the enemy approached, to burn
the dwellings, and to move or destroy every kind of provision.

"About this period, there appeared amongst the crowd of wretched beings
who congregated the cities, a new and malignant epidemic. How it first
originated was a mystery. It came, and none knew from what cause. Its
fatal character was soon proved. At first, the people died in tens
and twenties, then they perished by hundreds, and then thousands fell
victims to its malignity. The rich fled from their town houses into the
country, carrying with them the very infection from which they were
flying, and in a short time it penetrated into the most remote corner
of the kingdom. Where the population had not been extensive, there were
not left enough to bury the dead. In some rural districts they died,
and none knew of their decease. It attacked all constitutions with the
same violence: the old, the young, the strong and the weak, were its
continual victims. The rich were as much subject to its ravages as the
poor. There was no condition or class of society in which the disease
did not enter and carry off the majority of its members.

"The system which had been pursued, chiefly under my direction, against
the enemy, gave them considerable annoyance; but still the inhabitants
generally would have done anything to have purchased the blessings of
peace. Again was the boon sued for, and the reply was, 'You haughty
islanders have continued too long to lord it over the world. We have
been your victims many a time; but now you shall be ours--England must
be destroyed.' They might have triumphed over our hostility; they
might, by keeping up a communication with their ships, continue to have
supplies of provision and forage independent of the country; but they
saw that they could not escape the plague: and, after effecting all the
mischief they could produce, they hastened to their vessels, and sailed
from the pestilential shores they had come to conquer.

"I had not mingled in the sufferings of my country without having to
endure my own share. I had found my home burnt to the ground, and my
wife sacrificed in the flames. Three of my sons had died fighting by
my side. But worse suffering was now in store for me: the plague was
amongst us. I had used every precaution to prevent the infection
spreading among my relatives. I had retired to a dwelling up a steep
mountain in the west, and there I resided with my children and their
families. There were four of my sons, strong, robust men, well inured
to all the dangers of war; and there were their wives, all of healthy
constitutions, and their children, of different ages, every one full
of health and spirits. With these were my two daughters, with their
husbands and families, none of whom were touched by the slightest
illness. One morning I was congratulating them upon the beneficial
effect of my regulations to prevent the spread of the infection, and
the mothers looked at their children and the husbands on their wives,
and I gazed on all, with a delight we found to be unspeakable. In less
than a week I had buried them all but one."

Here the old man's voice sunk, and he appeared to be powerfully
agitated. No one attempted an observation; and after making a strong
effort to recover his self-possession, he continued.

"The survivor was a boy of ten years of age; he was one of the few whom
the plague had touched and spared. Me it had passed by harmless. But
the destruction caused by the pestilence exceeded all calculation. As
in my case, whole families were carried off, and districts entirely
depopulated. The pits that were dug to throw in the dead were quickly
filled, and none were strong enough to dig others. The dead cart stood
in the street with its load piled up; for both the driver and the horse
had been destroyed by the pestilence. Physicians and surgeons appeared
to have been the earliest of its victims. They came to visit their
patients, and they died by the bedside. All remedies were tried without
avail; all precautions were used, but they were equally useless. There
were different opinions existing as to its origin. The royalists said
that it was a punishment for the sins of the republicans; and the
republicans retorted by proclaiming that it was a judgment on the
profligacy of the royalists. Religious fanatics went running about the
deserted streets, with streaming hair and blood-shot eyes, shouting out,
in piercing tones, 'Wo! wo! the day of judgment is at hand!'"

This lasted for the better portion of a year; and, after putting the
boy in a place of safety, when the pestilence was over, as I journeyed
through the country to notice the effects it had produced, where I
had once known crowded thoroughfares, I passed along without meeting
a single inhabitant. The country appeared to have been completely
unpeopled; and in the city, the few persons I met with only made the
immense mortality which had existed appear more great. I inquired for
the government, and found that not a trace of it was in existence.
I asked for the army, and I was shown about a couple of hundred men.
I called a meeting of the citizens in the metropolis, and they all
came; and they filled a moderate sized room. I explained to them the
deplorable state into which the plague had reduced the country, and I
asked their counsel and assistance to form some sort of government to
manage its affairs. There was a melancholy silence for some minutes.
None attempted to speak. Their hearts seemed too full for utterance. At
last one of the citizens ventured to wish that I would do what I thought
best for the community; and I did do what I thought best. I travelled
through every part of this once populous island to notice with my own
eyes the exact state of the remaining population. Some cities I found
deserted; in others two-thirds of their buildings were untenanted; the
rank grass was growing in the public streets, and the gardens of the
rich were filled with nettles.

"But the measure of afflictions for this unhappy country had not yet
been filled up. No sooner had the pestilence abated, than another
enemy, scarcely less dreadful, made its appearance. The continued
ravages of war had prevented the tilling of the fields. No one would
attempt to sow, knowing how insecure would be his ownership of the
crop he might produce. There had been no grain, and no fruits, and no
vegetables; and the cattle had died of the plague, or had been destroyed
by the enemy. It was in vain attempting to get a supply from foreign
countries. Our commerce had been destroyed, for no nation would
hold communication with a people among whom raged so destructive a
pestilence. They avoided the shores of England as if death was on its
soil; and any vessel attempting to communicate with them, or to enter
one of their ports, was fired at and sunk. The consequence was, our
ships lay rotting in the docks, and their crews were either dead, or
had dispersed over the island, and were not to be found. The terrific
visitation of famine was now upon us. Every thing was eaten that the
human stomach could be brought to swallow. Things the most loathsome
to the taste, and offensive to the eyes, were readily and ravenously
devoured. Then the cheek sunk; the eye-ball fell; the flesh dwindled
away; and all crawled with half lifeless limbs in search of any
substance that might lessen the cravings of their appetites. But at last
every thing that was digestible disappeared, and the skeleton forms of
the sufferers were stretched stiffly on the place where they fell--some
in madness, some in despair, and all in agony and dread.

"There was no opportunity allowed me for legislating with any advantage.
I thought of every plan that afforded the slightest assistance towards
lessening the dreadful effects of the calamity which the whole country
was enduring; but I met with no one to second my exertions. The few who
retained the use of their faculties were feeble and emaciated. Famine
was in their gaunt limbs, and despair upon their aching hearts. No one
appeared inclined to pay the slightest attention to any thing but his
own sufferings. There was no authority but that of the strong, and they
who retained their physical power the longest, robbed the dying of such
slight nourishment as they had acquired. The rich would bring out their
treasures and offer them for a meal, and when some avaricious wretch was
found to make the exchange, one more strong than either would come by,
and wrest the food from the impoverished, and the wealth from the miser;
and both died within the hour. The breast of the mother became dry, and
the infant was abandoned to starve when it became an incumbrance to the
famished parent. Cats, dogs, rats, mice, and every kind of animal, no
matter how disgusting in its habits, had been greedily devoured; birds,
fish, and insects, that had previously been considered loathsome, were
sought after as delicacies; and weeds, roots, the leaves of trees,
offal, and even many things still more objectionable, became the daily
food of many who had been accustomed to the most luxurious fare.

"Finding that I could do no good among the scanty band of skeletons that
clung to a lingering existence, I determined on endeavouring to make my
way to the northern part of the island, where an industrious and hardy
race had managed to retain their independence and prosperity during the
wars, the pestilence, and the famine, that ravaged its southern portion.
My grandson was too young to walk great distances; so, when he was
tired, I placed him upon my shoulder, and thus we journeyed on our way.
Our food was acorns, berries, roots, and leaves. Sometimes I was enabled
to catch a fish, or a bird, or a small animal; but these were luxuries
seldom to be enjoyed. We passed several parties apparently intent upon
the same object as ourselves; but many were there of the groups who
laid themselves down on the road-side weary and famishing, and there
perished. Continually I came upon some individual made desperate by his
hunger, scratching up the earth with his hands in search of the worms
it contained, which, if found, were eaten with as much enjoyment as the
most delicious meats, and if the search was fruitless, the dry soil
was crammed into the mouth as a substitute. Very few of the travellers
could have reached the end of their journey, for we continued to pass
the dying and the dead as far as we proceeded. Sometimes a solitary
wretch would be found prostrate at the foot of a tree, the bark of which
he had evidently been gnawing; further on a family of children were
discovered, with their little bodies shrunk to the bone, and the parents
at a short distance, with their faces turned from them, as if they could
not look upon their sufferings; and in another place, a lover and his
mistress lay clasped in each other's fleshless arms.

"We were crossing an extensive and barren moor, when we came before
a group of dead bodies, among which, to my exceeding astonishment, I
beheld a child--a delicate girl of five or six years of age--busily
occupied in chasing a butterfly. The scene was so extraordinary that I
stood gazing on it for a considerable period before I could determine
what to do. The insect's gaudy wings kept fluttering over the lifeless
forms that were cold and stiff on the ground, sometimes alighting on
a hand, sometimes on a face; and the child, in an ecstasy of delight,
screaming, and laughing, and stretching out its little arms, pursued it
from place to place. What a time was this for reflection! Here was life
in the midst of death--the pursuit of pleasure among the most fatal and
least endurable examples of pain. It was a wonderful sight! The girl
seemed to know neither want nor sorrow; and continued her sport,
indifferent to the spectral shapes that lay extended at her feet. Their
ghastly stare, and gaunt visages, had no terrors for her. The hunt of
the butterfly occupied all her thoughts, and the hope of attaining
possession of its beautiful colours seemed the only desire entertained.
After watching her movements with indescribable interest for several
minutes, I advanced towards the child, and invited her to go with me. I
had considerable difficulty to get her to leave the butterfly; and when
I led her away from the spot, she chatted with infantile volubility, as
if there was nothing else but the butterfly in the world.

"I found the people of the northern provinces hospitable, and with them
I lived for nearly half a century. They escaped the ravages of the
pestilence by not allowing any infected persons from the neighbouring
counties, who crowded towards the borders, to enter into their
territory. None had presented themselves during the prevalence of the
famine but myself; and their own frugality saved them from the horrors
which had desolated England. They looked upon the southern portion of
the island as a doomed country, for although several parties from the
north had gone there for the purpose of forming settlements, they either
returned after a short stay, stating that neither cattle nor crops would
nourish on the land, or were never more heard of, and were supposed to
have fallen victims to the pirates who occasionally visited the coast. I
passed my time in educating the two children of whom I had taken charge,
and both made great progress under my instructions. The boy became
a fine, active, intelligent man, the girl an admirable example of
womankind; and as I found that their hearts were for each other, in due
time I had them made man and wife. I have outlived them and all their
progeny, with the exception of Lilya, whom, after the decease of her
family, I took with me to England, having at the time an ardent desire
to revisit its desolated shores.

"What I found England I need scarcely describe; you see it before you.
It was a complete ruin. A sad and miserable remnant of her people did
strive to till the land; but the soil refused to give sustenance to the
seed, and the cultivator could gather nothing but a harvest of weeds.
The earth was abandoned for the waters, and the farmers became
fishermen; but the sea and the river gave an inadequate supply. One by
one the inhabitants dropped off, till at last the only human creatures
within the country were myself and Lilya. We managed to subsist by
hunting and fishing. Our fare was not at all times very delicate, and
was seldom very plentiful; but we provided for ourselves tolerably
well. We were obliged to rely upon our own resources; for the savage
appearance of the island, and the belief that it was doomed to
destruction, prevented our being visited by any vessels from the
continent; and even the pirates from the neighbouring islands, having
found that the country contained nothing to tempt them to a visit,
turned their attention to more opulent regions. Lilya and I, therefore,
had the whole land to ourselves, and over it we held absolute
sovereignty. Even the savage monsters of the forest appeared to
acknowledge our supremacy, for none offered to molest us. We took our
way through deserted piles and fallen monuments; and if we disturbed
the lion in his lair, or the eagle in his eyrie, they made way for our
approach, and returned to their haunts when we were gone.

"Thus passed the time. Lilya grew up as you see--a child of the forest,
skilful in snaring game, and in preserving skins; affectionate in her
manner, gentle in her temper, and shy as a dove in her nest. As for me,
I was a wanderer over the lands of my forefathers. The stream, the vale,
the mountain, and the plain, were accustomed to my visits. I became a
denizen of the forest and the plain--a resident in the deserted cities.
I found a dwelling in the palace and the hut; and all places were my
home. I experienced a melancholy pleasure in beholding the scenes in
which the greatness of my country had once been exhibited. I walked
among the crumbling ruins of her once gorgeous halls. The sunken
roofs of her stately cathedrals for me were full of religious awe and
veneration; the dilapidated battlements of her ancient castles seemed
still to show the dauntless valour of the spirits by whom they had been
defended; and the moss and lichens that disfigured her public monuments
gave only a fresher interest to the worth they represented. From these
I gathered the memories of a better time, and the glories of the past
warmed my old heart with the vigour of a second youth. I lived over
again the departed age--I recalled to life the buried generations--I
contemplated the happiness which the grave had long since hid in her
bosom--and the discoloured stones around me seemed to echo the busy
goings on of an industrious population. Free hearts were throbbing
proudly around me, and the stillness of the desert along which I stalked
was made alive with the pleasures of the young, the noble, and the
brave.

"Gone is your glory, oh my country!" exclaimed the old man, in a more
feeble voice; "your greatness among the nations is put down; your
magnificence has dwindled to a heap of stones; your power has nothing by
which it may be known. If the stranger come in a few years, and inquire
for the city which was the wonder of the world, none shall tell him, for
both city and citizens will have crumbled into dust. If he ask for the
people whose name was a glory in every clime that exists, he shall find
no better reply than the echo of his own voice. He may wander over the
brave old island in search of places that history has made immortal,
without being able to discover a trace of their existence. The thistle
and the nettle will hide the graves of its illustrious; ravenous beasts
will prowl in its cities; and all that is noble and grand in its
localities will be crushed, swallowed, and lost in one devouring ruin;
and I, that am here as an ancient tree with gnarled trunk and brittle
boughs, that stands up as if unnoticed by the destroyer, when the rest
of the forest have mouldered into the soil, will then have perished and
passed away, and not even a remembrance of my name will be left upon the
land."

"Noble old man!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry with fervour, "there is no
one here who does not sympathise with your situation. I would endeavour
to console you, but I am afraid that your case is one beyond all
consolation. What can I do to render you assistance? Let me prevail
on you to leave this land, which has been so completely devoted to
destruction, and I will find you a more attractive home, and friends as
kind as those you have lost."

"Leave this land!" loudly cried the Englishman, apparently astonished
at the suggestion. "For a hundred and twenty years this island has been
the attraction of all my thoughts; my love for it arose from admiration
of its magnificence, and my heart still clings to it in its utter
annihilation. Do you think it would be possible for me, after having
made myself so familiar with its ruins, to find pleasure in the
prosperity of a far off country? No! to me the world hath nothing like
it. What are smiling landscapes? What are stately edifices? What are
fields busy with life, and cities astir with industry, if on a foreign
shore? Its homes are not my home--its graves are not the graves of my
people. But these tottering walls and depopulated lands are mine; I
hold them in undisputed possession; I have a claim on them which has
been long acknowledged; and they have a claim on me which I feel I must
speedily prepare to liquidate. No: leave me to the desolation in which
I dwell. It has become habitual--it has become necessary. I have long,
perhaps too long, been its inhabitant; but the hour comes when another
ruin must be added to those which now encumber the soil."

"And then what is to become of the gentle Lilya?" inquired the young
merchant.

"Ah! 'tis of that I am ever anxious," replied the old man, with a look
of affectionate solicitude towards his youthful relative. "The child is
full of amiable ways--she is artless and untutored: I cannot part with
her; and yet to leave her unprotected in this wilderness is a source of
constant disquietude to me."

"If you entrust her to me," added Oriel, "by the honour of manhood I
promise to behave to her as a brother; and I will place her under the
protection of a lady from whom she will receive every attention her
youth and unfriended situation requires."

"In her name I can promise all that she stands most in need of," said
Zabra.

"What say you, my Lilya?" inquired the Englishman. "Will you go with
the strangers? Will you leave this wretched country, and seek one where
happiness awaits you?"

"I will have no other country but yours, oh my protector!" exclaimed the
girl, as she flung herself into the old man's arms. "These strangers
are good; but they can never be so good as you have been: and these old
walls too--where shall I meet with such verdant moss, or such beautiful
ivy, as they possess? While you live, with you must my existence be
passed: and when you have ceased to lead me in my wanderings through the
silent forest or the deserted city, I care not where I go; for I shall
never again find the parent, the friend and guardian I shall have lost."

The Englishman pressed her more closely to his breast.




CHAP. VI.

THE DEATH OF THE LAST OF THE ENGLISHMEN.


"My life is drawing rapidly to its close," faltered the old man; "my
weary pilgrimage is nearly over. Farewell, ye solitary halls and
voiceless palaces! Farewell, ye grassy streets and ivied porticoes! The
eyes that have gazed upon ye in your splendour, and watched ye gradually
passing into ruin, will soon be darkened and closed. The heart that hath
drawn so many pleasures from your unfading braveries is fast sinking
into that state of nothingness to which you all hasten. City of the
silent! he who worshipped your prosperity, and loved your decay, must
now pass from amidst your ruined dwellings. Like your time-honoured
walls, I totter and tremble, and am ready to fall upon the earth that
supports me--the ivy seems twining up my unsteady limbs, and the moss
is spreading over my ancient heart. Farewell, ye untasted pastures, ye
uncultivated fields, ye gardens of weeds and orchards of brambles--the
wildness of your looks shall welcome me no more. Farewell, ye hoary
mountains and savage rocks, ye untrodden forests and unhonored
streams--the same iron hand that hath visited ye so heavily, as heavily
must fall on me. I pass from among ye, oh land of my fathers! Your earth
shall receive me to her breast!"

The old man lay on a green bank overgrown with wild flowers, while Oriel
and Zabra supported his head. Lilya was reclining at his side, with
one of his hands at her lips, and her face hid on his breast, and she
spoke only in convulsive sobs. Tourniquet stood near him feeling his
pulse, and the professor was close beside endeavouring to administer
consolation. At a short distance stood the captain and midshipman, with
part of the crew of the Albatross, apparently taking a deep interest in
the scene. They were congregated together near a shelving hillock in the
neighbourhood of an extensive marsh. Before them was an ancient arch of
marble, and beyond that, the ruins of a structure evidently once of very
great extent and magnificence, with many statues, some standing where
they had been placed, and others lying mutilated among the heaps of
stones that were piled up around the place for a considerable distance.
The sun was declining in the heavens, and the day was bright and warm.
Ruins, in different stages of decay, were observed as far as the eye
could reach in every direction, except towards the west, where an open
space showed the distant hills, over which the sun was hastening his
descent.

It was evident that the Englishman was dying. His venerable brow was
covered with a thick perspiration, and his fine countenance had become
more pallid and anxious than it had previously been. Yet his eyes beamed
as if they had lost none of their accustomed brilliancy, and his noble
form possessed the same dignity which had first attracted the attention
of the voyagers. He was still in possession of all his faculties,
and there was an energy in his manner, and an impressiveness in his
language, which proved that the spirit that had outlived so many
generations had lost none of its youthful vigour.

"Your pulse is getting more feeble, don't you see?" said the doctor,
with much sympathy for his patient; "and I regret to be obliged to agree
with you in stating that your hours are numbered. You have lived far
beyond the usual term of life, and it must be a great consolation to
you, in your present state, to know that you have lived all that time in
honour, and worth, and virtue."

"Be grateful to Providence that you have been so long spared," observed
Fortyfolios. "The age of man is threescore and ten, and this is but
rarely attained; and yet your existence has been prolonged to nearly
double that length of time. How much have you to be thankful for!
Consider the myriads of human beings who are cut off unprepared;--who
die in infancy, in early youth, or perfect manhood--who just begin to
taste the sweets of life, and then are hurried from its enjoyment.
Consider the advantages you have enjoyed over your fellow-countrymen,
who were destroyed by war, by pestilence, and famine. You have much
reason to congratulate yourself. You have been spared, doubtless, for
some admirable purpose which our finite reason cannot comprehend.
Reflect upon these things, and you will be enabled to meet the approach
of death without apprehension."

"What are your wishes concerning the disposal of Lilya?" inquired Oriel
Porphyry. "Remember that it is impossible that she can be left alone
upon this island with the slightest comfort to herself or pleasure
to others. The offer I made to you the other day I repeat. It is not
probable that her welfare can be secured more effectively in any other
way. Let me implore you then, as you value her future happiness, to take
advantage of my accidental arrival, and give me authority to bear her to
a secure and honourable asylum."

"It must be so, oh my Lilya," exclaimed the old man affectionately.
"When I have left you, this desolate place can be no proper home for
you. You must accompany these kind strangers to their own country. There
you will find that protection and care which is necessary to make you
pass through life with the esteem of your associates. Remember, oh my
Lilya, that if you wish the spirit of the old man who has been your
constant companion in all your journeyings to rest satisfied with his
afterlife, your conduct must be irreproachable, and you must endeavour
to keep your mind free from the approach of all degrading errors. The
world is open before you; but although you will find it fruitful in
every delicious produce--though it possess the most lovely landscapes,
and is peopled by multitudes of the good and generous, there is less
ruin in the desolation you see around you than exists in those fair and
fertile shores. I part with you with much regret--deeply does my heart
feel the separation--but it must be. The evil has no remedy. It ought
to be endured without a murmur. Go then, my Lilya, to the land of the
stranger, and my blessing shall be upon your footsteps, like an eternal
sunshine, wherever they may wander. But in whatever part of the world
you may make your sojourn, forget not that the land from whence you came
exceeded in glory and in excellence all other lands that have existed
since the creation of the world. Do it no dishonour. Show that you are
worthy to acknowledge the place of your nativity; and if you should hear
the idle, the ungenerous, and the thoughtless attempt to lower her fame,
or seek to question her superiority, stand up in her defence with all
the eloquence that truth inspires and patriotism makes perfect; and
speak of the good she has done, and the wonders she has achieved, and
then the most illiberal and unjust of your audience shall find their
erroneous impressions fade before your convincing eulogy, and with
a new and better spirit they shall say, 'Would that I had been an
Englishman!'"

Lilya answered only with her sobs, which now became quicker and more
vehement.

"It must be gratifying to you to know that your country has never been
enslaved," remarked the young merchant, earnestly. "While other lands
have been degraded by the vilest spirit of despotism, the energies of
the public men of England kept her unshackled."

"I stand on the grave of a mighty empire," replied the Englishman, "who
has erected monuments of her greatness in every quarter of the globe. I
am hurrying to the same sepulchre. In such a situation, more than in any
other, it is natural that I should speak the words of truth and honesty.
It is my conviction, then, that this country could never have fallen
from its greatness, except through its own internal dissensions. When
it enjoyed an unexampled state of prosperity, there existed men calling
themselves patriots, yet possessing no claim to such a title, who kept
the multitude in a restless and unsatisfied state, by their continual
abuse of its institutions, and frequent demands for change. If these
individuals could have been believed on their own testimony, they were
the most disinterested set of men that ever existed. They had no motive
except for the common good. They had no feeling separate from the
interests of the community. In my time there flourished few more ardent
lovers of liberty than myself; my inclination for freedom was a passion,
an enthusiasm, a dream. I seemed to see nothing but chains where a
fetter never existed, and found nothing but slavery in a state of
society that enjoyed a higher degree of independence than any in the
world. My connection with the popular party brought me much into contact
with the influencial patriots; and I found them the most selfish,
narrow-minded, bigotted men that ever disgraced a country: they had no
other desire but for their own aggrandisement. They fawned upon the
people till they became possessed of the power they coveted, and then
endeavoured to exert a more absolute authority than had ever been
exhibited by the government they superseded. Self was the great object
of all their exertions, and to selfish ends their fine speeches and
liberal promises always tended. They had no care for the multitude
except as steps for their own advancement. Freedom still appears to me
in the same alluring guise in which she first won me to follow in her
footsteps, and amid the solitude of this uncultivated wild I have
enjoyed more of her smiles than the most perfect form of government
could create; but my experience has convinced me that a vast population
must be well prepared for a change in their constitution, that promises
a considerable accession of liberty, as it is called, before it can be
enjoyed with safety to the commonwealth. Sudden changes never come to
any good. The whole frame-work of society is unhinged by them; opinions
are unsettled, the public confidence is withdrawn, the reverence for
the old is broken, and the new being untried, cannot be regarded with
the same respect as a state of things which has existed for centuries.
I have noticed this; and it proves that revolutions in systems of
government that have any lasting value should be introduced by the
gradual growth of public opinion, and that any system of government that
produces a certain quantity of benefit to the people, however faulty
it may be in other respects, is preferable to any other system of
government which has been untried, and the utility of which, therefore,
has not been ascertained. I am convinced that the dissolution of this
great empire originated in the dissatisfaction in the public mind for
the existing laws, which had been artfully created by numbers of mock
patriots, such as may be found in all states enjoying liberty of
opinion, for the purpose of realising schemes they had entertained for
their own advantage."

"But true patriotism may exist in a state, though the false may be
predominant, don't you see," remarked Tourniquet; "and it is too
sterling a thing to be set aside, because any constitution which governs
the many possesses some acknowledged merit. The real patriotism may
always be known from the false by its self-abandonment, and the true
patriot seeks no other advantage than the public good."

"In the history of nations of any celebrity," said Fortyfolios, "there
can be nothing more interesting to the student than to observe their
gradual rise, decline, and fall. They first arise out of an obscurity
so profound, that among earlier empires they were known, if known
at all, only as a few straggling savages. These multiply and become
enlightened, build cities and ships, cultivate the land and invent
manufactures, make war and obtain great triumphs; and as they advance in
civilisation their resources increase, their intelligence becomes more
general, and at last they acquire a superiority over the most important
nations at such a time existing in the world. This power they retain as
long as they are united, wise, and brave; but immediately a disunion
appears, a complete disorganisation takes place, every thing goes wrong,
and the whole fabric, so elaborately built up, tumbles to pieces. They
once more become reduced to wandering savages, and their country is
again a wilderness. All the earliest nations of antiquity have been
thus created, and thus have perished: and as Carthage, Egypt, Troy, and
numberless other states of equal importance in the youth of the world,
were dissolved till nothing remained of them but the name, so has
England, infinitely their superior, both in public intelligence and in
public glory, arrived at a dissolution as desolating and complete. The
subject of inquiry for the philosopher now is, whether kingdoms or
commonwealths, having returned to the state of barbarism from which they
advanced, will not at a proper period again progress in civilisation
till they once more arrive at the pre-eminence from which they had
fallen."

"The spirit of the future is upon me!" exclaimed the last of the
Englishmen, in an elevated tone of voice, and with his countenance lit
up with deep and powerful excitement. "The glory of the past rises from
its sepulchre with renewed life, and a power exceeding all experience.
Again the ruin rings with life, and the wilderness is a smiling garden,
fruitful in human happiness. The voices of industry now cheer every
corner of the solitary city, and the laugh of pleasure awakens the
gloomy recesses of the forest with an inspiring feeling of gladness.
Now are the broad waters of the abandoned river covered with shipping
of every maritime nation under the sun; and in every sea that flows
beneath the arching vault of the everlasting heavens, the dauntless
mariners of England dash along, triumphing over the tempest and the foe.
The magnificence, the bravery, the intelligence, the virtue, and the
might of former times now rise before my gaze, multiplied tenfold in
degree. I see the banners of a thousand victories; the shouts of freedom
and the glad pæans of triumph swell upon my ear; the pomp of stirring
music--the beauty of art in its noblest creations--the perfection of
unrivalled manufactures--the imposing array of palaces of streets and
streets of palaces, stupendous bridges, noble monuments, and stately
halls;--the throngs of the noble, the great, the good, the wise and the
industrious, with sumptuous equipages, numerous retinues, gay liveries,
or joyous faces, and happy hearts, become evident to my senses. I
see the felicitous influence of a wise government exercised upon a
flourishing and contented population countless as the stars. I see
societies, and families, and individuals, all sharing in the general
joy. I see wealth, abundance, skill, and industry, flowing in a
refreshing channel that fertilises the whole island. I behold thee, oh,
my country! the proudest of the nations, whose laws govern the seas, and
whose name is absolute on the dry land, rising from the darkness and the
desolation which now shrouds thy greatness, and with a prouder dignity,
and a fresher splendour, and a power more universal than to one nation
ever belonged resume thy ancient throne upon the waters, and commence a
reign which shall far exceed in glory all the glories by which it has
ever been preceded."

The old man fell back exhausted into the arms of Oriel and Zabra, and it
was at first feared that his spirit had departed; but in a few moments
respiration gently recommenced, the look of life beamed in his gaze, and
he returned to a state of consciousness.

"This will not last long, don't you see;" said the doctor to his
companions. "Though the intellectual powers have suffered but little,
the physical are nearly destroyed. He is but lingering on his journey.
His resting-place is close at hand."

"Let me see the sun;" exclaimed the Englishman, with the same
enthusiastic fervour he had previously exhibited, as he endeavoured
to turn himself in the required direction. His hearers lifted him up
gently, so that he could have a full view of that majestic luminary
as it was setting behind the western hills. "Let me again behold that
glorious orb whose uprisings and whose goings down I have witnessed
so long and proudly. Ha! There still spread the ruddy tints--the glow
of fire and gold is upon the skies once more;--there are the gorgeous
colours and radiant splendours that have so often shed their
magnificence upon our ancient island. Once again, O wondrous Oread, I
drink in delighted the sweet effulgence of your rays. They warm me, they
cheer me, they invigorate the flagging current still flowing through
my veins. How many times have I looked upon your rising and your
setting!--and on every fresh occasion have exclaimed how lovely! how
new! how wonderful! And now for the last time, I watch ye taking the
accustomed path, clothed in that panoply of state that knows of no
decay. Stay, stay a little in your course: your rising on the morrow
will not be for my enjoyment; for, with your setting, on me sets
the world. Stay, bright harbinger of gladness, your task is not yet
done;--there is a soul fondly hovering on your beams, that, as you fade,
must pass away. Slowly your glories dissolve into the cloud, and with
them the impulses of my existence disappear. The fires around you,
are becoming faint, and the flame that burns in this receptacle is
trembling, and flickering, and dying into darkness. Still I follow you
over the distant hills, now purpled with your beauty. Heaven and earth
are fading from my sight, and England, the land of my birth and grave,
of my long pilgrimage and devoted love, passeth from my view like a
cloud in the nighttime. Lilya! my blessing be upon you from now to
eternity. Friends, I submit her to your care with a thankfulness that
language cannot speak. I die with many consolations. I have no enemies
to forgive;--I have had none to sin against. I die in the religion of
my fathers, with glory to God and good will towards men. See, the last
streak of crimson over the hill, just above the fading disc of the
setting sun. Watch it--my spirit is hastening to share in its
splendours. See,--it lessens--it fades--'t is gone!"

The old man had extended his arm towards that part of the horizon to
which he wished to attract attention; and as the last words of the
preceding sentence were uttered, the disc of the sun disappeared over
the hills, the arm fell, the head dropped, and without a sigh, the
spirit of the last of the Englishmen had departed to its eternal rest.
Lilya, in an uncontrollable agony of grief, flung herself upon the
corpse; and there was scarcely a person present who was not deeply
affected.

"Is he quite dead?" whispered the young merchant, observing that
Tourniquet had his fingers upon his wrist.

"It's impossible to be more so, don't you see;" replied the surgeon, as
he dropped the lifeless arm by the side of the body.

"We had better give him christian burial before we leave the island;"
remarked Fortyfolios. "The wild beasts, it seems, are numerous about
here, and it would not be a friendly act to leave his body to be
devoured by them. I do not know whether there is any consecrated ground
near, but I should think in a city so celebrated for the number of its
churches, a burial-place cannot be far off."

"I will not have his remains mingle with the herd that choke up a
church-yard;" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry. "He shall have a more honourable
sepulchre. About a mile hence I noticed the colossal statue of some
distinguished hero. It is in a large park-like place, slightly elevated,
and at a considerable distance from any ruins. We will bury him at
its base: it is a grave such as his free spirit would have loved to
contemplate."

The young merchant instantly gave orders about the funeral, and while
the preparations were being made, he, assisted by Zabra, drew Lilya
from the body, which she could not be induced to leave without force.
The seamen had brought with them some pickaxes and shovels for the
purpose of digging for antiquities, and these were now to be called into
use for a more melancholy occasion. Every one being in readiness, twelve
sailors with muskets reversed, walked slowly two abreast: then came the
body, still in its dress of wild skins, wrapped up in the Columbian
flag, and carried by eight men upon four muskets crossed. After them
walked Lilya, supported by Oriel Porphyry and Zabra. They were followed
by Fortyfolios and Tourniquet, and the captain and the midshipman, and
the procession was closed by twelve seamen marching slowly, two abreast,
with arms reversed.

They passed along what appeared to be the remains of a road, for about
half a mile, when they came to a magnificent ancient triumphal arch,
a splendid example of architectural beauty, standing in excellent
preservation, with a colossal equestrian statue of a warrior trampling
under his horse's feet a group of warlike figures in different
costumes. An illegible inscription, supposed to be a list of victories
gained over the enemies of his country by the original of the statue,
was placed under the prostrate group, and beneath them in large
capitals that might be read at a great distance, was observed the word
"WELLINGTON." This admirable work of antiquity was divided into a
large central arch and two smaller ones, one on each side. They were
richly sculptured in bas relief, and adorned with every appropriate
architectural ornament.

Passing beneath this grand triumphal monument, the funeral train
observed another of a less imposing character just before them, which
was much dilapidated. To reach it, they had to walk through a field of
weeds and high grass, which at different places, showed signs of having
once been a fine broad public thoroughfare; and venturing under the
tottering walls of this arch, they entered an expansive field of docks
and nettles, wild flowers, and gigantic thistles. Ruins of considerable
buildings were observed on the right. Clumps of trees were scattered in
every direction, and about the centre, on a high mound, stood a colossal
bronze statue of an ancient warrior, supposed to be some illustrious
English general. It was a splendid specimen of sculpture, and appeared
to be of great antiquity.

Here it was intended should be consigned the remains of the heroic old
man, and the seamen having dug a deep grave at the foot of the statue,
he was deposited on the bank, where he lay wrapped up in the flag for a
few minutes to give to every one an opportunity of seeing him for the
last time. Lilya knelt down by the side of the dead body, kissed the
cold hand, and covered it with her tears. Many attempts were made to
tranquillise her grief, but without success. Every head was uncovered as
the professor read the funeral service, and even the hardy seaman seemed
much affected by the impressive character of the scene.

"The brevity of existence has been much insisted on," observed
Fortyfolios at the conclusion of the service; "and here is an example
of the prolongation of life far beyond the usual term, and prolonged
under circumstances remarkably rare and interesting. This human
antiquity bore all the marks of greatness which were first impressed
upon its nature, through the violent changes that shook to ruin the
society to which it belonged. He was brave, patriotic, noble, and
patient. He could draw hope from the materials of despair, and find
comfort in the midst of desolation. Let us not murmur, then, at the
small evils among which we exist, when we find such admirable endurance
of evils of the greatest magnitude. The love of country is a natural and
amiable virtue, but never has it sat so gracefully, and existed with
such disinterestedness, as in the character of this ancient Englishman.
He loved, not because such love was a common feeling which every object
around him might excite; but he loved as if he had calculated what
would be the amount of patriotism possessed by his countrymen had they
existed; and considering himself as the representative of the dead,
endeavoured to exhibit the total of their contributions; and this
exhibition seemed the more abundant, as the objects which should have
the most readily created it became the least capable of exciting it
into action. He was a great man, and may be looked upon as the last
production of a great country."

"As for the men who are vulgarly called great, don't you see," observed
the doctor, "your kings, your conquerors, and such poor cattle, they
shrink into their proper insignificance when compared to the last of the
Englishmen. How could they have endured the barren waste and wilderness
of ruins for any length of time! They could have found nothing to
appreciate in its solitude, they would have left its desolation in
disgust. Patriotism here was the most amiable of virtues. It was pure
and honest and excellent. It was full of truth and courage, and a power
that was invincible. Let us honour this old man: the grave will hold him
fast. We shall see nothing of the kind again. Let us then make the most
of his memory, for the estimation of such excellence will be always a
proof of the existence of a love of that which is best. The self-denials
of ascetics, and the mortifications of religious misanthropists, who,
shutting themselves up from the sweet influence of social intercourse,
hate their fellows and torture themselves; what are these compared with
that nobler, purer, better feeling which bound this old man to the grave
of his country, and made him find enjoyment and consolation in the
recollection of her immortal excellences? Let us honour him, for he is
an example of how much honour humanity may attain."

"I cannot unwillingly join in praise so well deserved," said Oriel
Porphyry; "the extraordinary energy of his heroic nature that made him
endure with so cheerful a spirit the evils under which generation after
generation sunk into utter hopelessness, is worthy of all the admiration
we can confer upon it. We will bury him in the earth he loved so well;
and although we raise no monument to glorify his actions, and although
to strangers he be indebted for the rites of sepulture, his sleep will
not be the less profound, nor his obsequies the less honourable.
Perhaps in some future age, when, as he hath prophesied, this ancient
nation shall arrive at a degree of prosperity and greatness far beyond
any thing it has hitherto attained, the people of the future imagining
that this monument has been erected over the mortal remains of some
heroic spirit of the early ages, shall throng in crowds to confer on it
the homage of their reverence; and the fame, though in error, will do
him justice, and posterity, though ignorant, will rightly apply their
admiration."

"Grieve not, sweet Lilya!" exclaimed Zabra, as he was endeavouring to
console the afflicted mourner; "he for whom you mourn mourns not; why,
therefore, should you be afflicted? His spirit is at peace with the
world; he treads no more among the ruins and weeds of this deserted
land; his home is where nature enjoys an unfading youth; where beauty
breathes from an unclouded atmosphere, and love dwells around him like
a perpetual blessing. Grieve not for the loss of the goodness which was
enshrined in his nature, it has gone to join the First Great Cause of
all good from which its goodness was derived. You see the wild flowers
that are scattered at our feet; they gather from the air and the soil
their fragrance and their loveliness, and these qualities they give back
to the air and the soil, when the freshness of their leaves is dried up,
and the soft hues in which we so much delight fade from their blossoms.
Whatever exists, exists in a state of continual giving and receiving. It
gains only to lose when what it has acquired can no longer be rendered
profitable to its owner. As the rivers run into the sea, glides all
humanity into the boundless ocean of the eternal; yet, fast as they
empty themselves as rapidly they flow from their sources, just as the
waters of life rush into the gulf of death, and though swallowed up with
inconceivable velocity, rise from their innumerable springs in greater
abundance. Grieve not, then, for grief is of no utility to either
the living or the dead. Consider yourself: in you are deposited the
materials of much happiness for yourself and others; endeavour to apply
them to the most advantage. Some fond youth may soon be looking on your
eyes, as gazes the devotee on the innermost sanctuary of his temple. In
you he will concentrate all his ideas of what is most admirable; to you
he will turn his thoughts; for you he will breathe his aspirations;
his dreams he will gladden with your smiles; his hopes he will make
brilliant in the lustre of your gaze. Are such things unworthy of your
contemplation? Leave off these regrets; quit this senseless clay which
answers not to your sympathy. Strive to become all, when living, he
would have wished you to be. Virtue and truth and wisdom invite you to
partake of their enjoyments, and if you attend to the better business of
life, under their instructive auspices, you may be assured of becoming
possessed of such happiness as it is felicitous even to imagine."

Lilya raised her eyes streaming with tears to the handsome countenance
of the speaker, and her face was lit up with an expression that for
the time obliterated all traces of sorrow. At this moment the body was
carefully deposited in the grave, over which the seamen fired a volley
of musketry, after which he was covered with the soil, and the party
returned to their tents. Here, immediately on Zabra's arrival, he
proceeded to his harp, and after a few chords full of melancholy and
tender feeling, sang the following lines:--

   "The last of his race now lies low,
      Lies low in the soil that gave bliss to his eyes,
    Though his country no joy could bestow,
      For in deserts he lived and 'mid ruin he dies;
    For him no dull trappings of woe,
      No dark hirelings of grief round his sepulchre rise,
    And he leaves not a friend or a foe,
      His merits to praise or his faults to despise.

   "The last of his race to his rest,
      To his rest in the grave hath gone silently down;
    With his sword girded on o'er his vest,
      And arrayed as in life from the foot to the crown.
    But say not his tomb is unblest,
      Or the name he hath left be unknown to renown,
    For the wild flow'r shall bloom o'er his breast,
      And his fame shall be echoed through village and town.

   "Though strangers his corse in the grave,
      In the grave they have chosen with honour shall place,
    Though the earth take the life which it gave,
      And the tooth of the worm shall the mortal efface,
    There shall dwell neither tyrant or slave,
      There shall live not a people so lost in disgrace,
    Who shall know not the land of the brave,
      And respect not the bones of the Last of his Race."

At the close of the song, Zabra felt a hand placed lightly on his
shoulder, and, turning round, beheld Lilya gazing on him with a look so
full of pleasure, that he felt almost inclined to doubt it was the same
creature who a short time since was so overpowered with affliction. "I
will go with you," said the timid girl, as a slight blush appeared on
either cheek; "I will go with you to your own country--if--that is--I
should like to go with you if you will take me."

The same evening they were all on board the Albatross, which immediately
set sail, and retraced her way through the river into the wide ocean.




CHAP. VII.

LILYA.


"I am getting very anxious about my father!" said Oriel Porphyry to his
young friend; "I am sure something must have happened, or I should have
found a communication from him at one or other of the different ports I
have touched at. Not a syllable of information have I been able to gain
from any of my father's ships I have spoken with, for most of them had
left Columbia about the same time as my last advices, and the others
were not aware of any thing important having transpired."

"We are going homewards now, Oriel, and if any thing has happened shall
soon be made aware of it;" observed Zabra. "Let us hope for the best. I
should not imagine, from the immense influence that he possesses, that
the government would attempt to injure him."

"They only want the power, I believe;" replied the young merchant.
"I know these sort of people too well to put much confidence in an
appearance of tranquillity that has been forced upon them. They must
hate my father. As the prime mover in the revolution which exhibited
their insignificance so palpably, they will look upon the merchant as a
person particularly odious, and no doubt would gladly get rid of him at
any cost or risk."

"I should think for their own interests they would let him alone;"
remarked his companion. "Experience ought to have taught them the danger
of meddling with so popular a character, and having suffered so severely
it is not like that they will renew the hazardous experiment."

"It is because they have suffered that they will be desirous of
revenging themselves upon one whom they consider as the cause of the
infliction;" said Oriel. "It would have appeared bad enough to them if
my father had been one of the most powerful of the aristocracy; but it
wounds them to the quick when they reflect that he is a plebeian--in
their ideas immeasurably beneath them--an individual of no ancient
family, without rank or dignity. With the feelings which a knowledge of
this fact must create it is impossible that they can rest satisfied with
their limited privileges and curtailed power. They will be continually
intriguing for his destruction."

"They dare not do it, Oriel," replied Zabra; "I feel assured they dare
not."

"I wish I could think so," said his patron; "but I have a little more
knowledge of the world than you, Zabra, and I know something more of
the disposition of such men. As long as he lives they will consider
themselves insecure. They can know no peace save in his death; and I am
convinced that they will use every exertion to accomplish it. I hope I
may be enabled to return in time to frustrate their intentions. I should
like nothing better than to expose their machinations, and to punish
them in an appropriate manner; and if the people exist in the same state
of feeling as when my father last wrote, I will show them something
they little expect to see. My father's friends are almost innumerable in
Columbus, and are always ready with hand and heart to serve him whenever
he will give the word, which he is always exceedingly loth to give;
and I think I may say that my friends in the metropolis are neither
despicable in number nor in influence, and are as eager to befriend me
in time of need; and I shall be quite as eager to accept their services.
I remember the times when I have been exercising my regiment, the
devotion that was displayed by both officers and men; but this I am well
aware was owing to their admiration of my father's virtues. Of them I am
secure. My fondness for military exercises made me labour to perfect in
discipline the troops I commanded, and they are now as effective a body
of men as ever entered a field of battle. They will perform good service
wherever they go. The national guard is another powerful engine to be
employed on such an occasion. In the metropolis alone they amount in
number to about twenty thousand; and they are devotedly attached to my
father. If there exist but a sufficient cause I know that I have only
to present myself amongst them, to induce them to follow me wherever I
choose to lead."

"I trust you will have no occasion for their services," said his
companion; "it is my belief that on our return we shall find every thing
in the most comfortable state, and all parties satisfied with each
other. Your military dreams will then be completely disappointed, and
you will be under the painful necessity of making up your mind to share
the well-earned honours of your father, and partake of a perfect state
of happiness with Eureka."

"Ah, Eureka!" exclaimed the young merchant with passionate emphasis;
"how rejoiced I shall be to return to her! I often find myself inquiring
into the possibility of a change in her disposition towards me."

"That can never be, Oriel;" observed the other.

"I have the fullest confidence in her fidelity, but sometimes I find
an apprehension intrude without knowing what produced it;" said his
companion. "There are no such self-tormentors as your true lovers; and
although I should be among the first to laugh at the suffering they give
themselves, I must acknowledge that on more than one occasion I have
endured a state of feeling which was any thing but satisfactory."

"By what was it occasioned?" inquired Zabra.

"Merely from my ignorance of the motives which have induced her to deny
me any communication with her till my return;" answered Oriel.

"You would not condemn her if you knew what made such a denial
necessary;" remarked his young friend.

"Very probably not: but the mischief of it is, I do _not_ know;"
said Master Porphyry. "Any thing in the shape of a mystery annoys me
amazingly, and this behaviour of hers appears to me most mysterious and
unaccountable. I think between lovers the most perfect sincerity should
exist. There should be no room left for doubt or suspicion. But in
the generality of attachments you will find much more deception than
sincerity. In the affections of youth there is an earnestness which is
the most natural and convincing that can be conceived; but as the heart
grows older, it gradually loses all this admirable freshness and purity,
and in a few short years it has recourse to artifices and disguises
without number. I detest deceit. I cannot imagine Eureka deceitful. I
hope never to find her so. To the truly devoted--to one who finds no
enjoyment like that which proceeds from honoring his adored as the
truest, the purest, and the best, there can be nothing so revolting
as the discovery that she whom he worships as one so pre-eminent in
goodness is the habitual practiser of contemptible deceits, hides
all her actions under a cloak of elaborate artifices, and lives in a
spider-like existence, spinning a dirty web to hide herself and betray
her victims."

"Eureka is of a very different character;" observed Zabra, who during
the preceding observations had appeared exceedingly confused. "She has
not deceived you in any thing which it was requisite for you to know.
She detests artifice as much as you do. But there are always some things
which the most sincere may find it necessary to conceal. The truth
cannot be spoken at _all_ times."

"You might just as well say that good money ought not to be passed at
all times;" said Oriel Porphyry. "That which is good ought to be good
upon all occasions, and truth is the very best of things in social
intercourse. It is the sterling coin of the affections; and she who uses
base counterfeits deserves the ignominy with which such vile cheating
should be punished. I have the very highest opinion of the female
character, and I desire always to think highly of womankind; but taking
the sex generally, I do sincerely think that they are amazingly fond
of disguising the truth as much as possible. It is a crooked policy--a
policy that in time poisons every better feeling a woman can possess.
Deception and a love of general admiration are her prevailing vices.
I am well aware that they are thought very innocent little foibles by
those who practise them, but on that account they are not the less
destructive to feminine excellence. Love is a passion of one for one
only. It ought to be excited by one object, and conferred on one object
alone. And thus exhibited, it is the purest, the most graceful, and the
most natural of human emotions. If either party introduce another as a
sharer in the affections, the whole feeling becomes tainted. What can be
more unjust to the lover who concentrates all his hopes on the exclusive
possession of the affections of the object of his fond idolatry, which
hopes have been called into existence by fond avowals and delicious
caresses, than for the woman whom he thus regards, to be just as
affectionate in her manner to a second, a third, a fourth, a fifth, and
a sixth? Some women seem to pride themselves on the number of their
admirers. What a miserable vanity it is! It is exactly the same feeling
with which an Eastern monarch used to regard the number of females in
his seraglio. Imagine the state of mind produced in a man of refined
intellect and delicacy of feeling at discovering that the lips he
thought sacred to his caresses were defiled by the caresses of another!
Or if she allow others merely to continue to profess to her their
ardent admiration, she evinces a neglect of the unalterable law of the
affections, which ought to be punished by contempt, scorn, and disgust."

"But no woman ought to be accountable for the admiration she may
excite;" observed Zabra. "The most virtuous woman may without the
slightest intention create an unhallowed passion in one of the opposite
sex."

"Women are remarkably quick sighted in every thing connected with the
affections;" replied the young merchant. "They can discover the earliest
signs of admiration, and every truly virtuous woman, if her sympathies
are pre-engaged, will endeavour to crush this feeling in the bud, and
show, by her displeasure and avoidance of the object, that he has
created no reciprocal emotion. If after such passion is declared she
continue to tolerate the attentions of her admirer, although she be
virtuous in other respects she has no conception of the nature of
perfect virtue. She is fostering an illicit feeling; she is encouraging
a passion she has no intention of indulging--a crime the most
destructive in its effects upon the happiness of the individual whose
passion she encourages; and as it is vicious in its tendency, because
it aims at indulgence at the expense of virtue, and as she assisted in
its developement instead of destroying it in its early growth, she is
answerable for all the consequences that may arise from its existence,
and has deserved the censure of being considered vicious in her
disposition. Toleration creates hope, and hope will love through all
difficulty; but no man, unless he be a fool or a knave, will love in
utter hopelessness."

"Surely these observations can have no relation to Eureka!" exclaimed
Zabra earnestly.

"Not the slightest;" replied his patron. "She is all I would wish her
to be; and the only cause of uneasiness she has given me during our
attachment is this mystery about the place of her concealment, and her
avoidance of any communication with me for so long a time."

"Your uneasiness will soon be removed, then, and the mystery will be
explained in a manner that will perfectly satisfy you;" said the youth.

"I hope so;" exclaimed his patron. "But I certainly do not like being
mystified by those in whom I take an interest. Mysteries, however, seem
most abundant around me just now. There is something very strange and
unaccountable in you, Zabra."

"Me! in me, Oriel?" replied his companion, in evident confusion. "What
can there be strange or unaccountable in me?"

"I have noticed many things in your behaviour exceedingly
extraordinary;" said the young merchant. "Your superiority to the
situation in which you were introduced to me has often made me imagine
that you are not what you assume to be."

"Not what I assume to be!" exclaimed Zabra in increased embarrassment.
"Is it possible I can be any thing else?"

"That is best known to yourself, and to her who sent you," replied
Oriel Porphyry; "but there certainly is a mystery about your character."

"A mystery! how strange you should imagine such a thing;" responded his
youthful companion, attempting to conceal his confusion.

"Then there's my father, he has _his_ mystery," continued his patron;
"it is some secret connected with that wretched aristocrat Philadelphia,
but what it is about he is not inclined to communicate."

"I have noticed it," said Zabra, recovering from his confusion; "and I
imagined it to be a knowledge of some circumstances connected with my
father's early life, the publication of which would do him very serious
injury."

"I cannot say what it is, but these things are very perplexing,"
observed the young merchant; "however, I hope to make my way through
them on my arrival at Columbia. How glad I shall be to see its glorious
shores again! Nothing is so likely to excite patriotism as exile; and
Columbia is a country worthy of one's patriotism; the first nation of
the world; its citizens have reason to be proud. I have beheld during
my voyage many lands and many people, but I have seen neither land or
people to be compared to Columbia and its inhabitants. I rejoice that I
am returning to them, and though I am glad that this voyage is nearly
at an end, I hope that my father will be gratified with my proceedings
during my absence; and then if Eureka's sentiments in my favour have
not undergone any change I shall have nothing to fear."

"Of Eureka's constancy you will soon be convinced;" said Zabra, in a
more subdued tone than he had previously used.

"I shall be delighted to find it so. But do you think that she would
have no objection to protect the gentle Lilya?" asked Oriel.

"None whatever;" replied his companion. "I am sure she will be much
gratified by your suggestion of such an arrangement. Lilya is timid and
perfectly ignorant of the world, yet she is docile and affectionate, and
with proper management I have no doubt she would become an amiable and
accomplished woman, qualified to adorn any rank in society."

"The creature is so shy that I can scarcely ever get a glimpse of her,"
observed his patron.

"She is almost always with me," said the other; "every thing appears to
be new to her on board the ship, and her pleasure at the novelties she
beholds is so genuine that it is delightful to see her. She requires a
companion, or she would feel quite alone amongst us; and I being about
her own age, she naturally feels more at ease with me than with any
other. Her diffidence is excessive; I cannot get her to associate with
any one except myself; but I have no doubt that in time she will gain
confidence, and join us in the cabin or on the quarter-deck with perfect
self-possession. She seems remarkably fond of music, and appears to
enjoy nothing so much as hearing me sing to her."

"Take care, Zabra;" said the young merchant, with a smile. "An ancient
poet has said that music is the food of love. The harmony of sweet
sounds, breathed around two such hearts as yours and Lilya's, will be
sure to put them in unison. If you go on in this way, existing in a
state of such intimate communion, it will be utterly impossible for
either of you to resist the soft influence of the tender passion, and
you have both of you arrived at a time of life when the disposition is
peculiarly susceptible to its impressions."

"There is no fear of such feelings being created, I assure you;" replied
Zabra.

"It seems to me very probable," observed Oriel; "your being so much
together is sufficient to produce such an effect. Besides, she is so
very pretty. What a depth of tenderness there exists in the soft blue
of her beautiful eyes! and her smile is positively exquisite. The rich
bloom of her complexion reminds me of some delicious fruit, it is so
warm, and soft, and tempting; and then the expression,--so innocent,
so artless, and so bashful, it is absolutely enchanting. I must not
forget her graceful figure, it is worthy of the highest eulogium for
being so delicately rounded. I am glad she has not thrown aside her
dress of skins and feathers, for, in my opinion, its simplicity and
picturesqueness would put fashion out of countenance. I never behold
her, whenever she does venture into my presence, but I imagine her to be
the Psyche of the heathen mythology, or some other amiable character in
that system of dreams:--the object of devotion to the immortal youth, or
the rosy cup-bearer to the gods. I assure you, I admire her very much."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Zabra, who had listened to these praises of Lilya in
evident uneasiness.

"Yes, she has interested me very deeply;" replied Oriel. "I am
charmed at the gentle being who has been so unexpectedly thrown on my
protection. I feel delighted at being able to gratify her unambitious
wishes; and when she comes shrinking into my presence, like a delicate
flower before the breeze, nothing pleases me so much as endeavouring to
assure her of her safety. And then the simple creature is so grateful,
and thanks me with such looks, that there is no resisting them."

Zabra's eyes gleamed restlessly, his lips became pale, and his cheeks
bloodless.

"I wish I could see her more frequently, and she would be somewhat
less reserved;" continued his patron. "It is so difficult to get her
to converse; yet her voice is so subdued and melodious that it is a
pleasure to hear her. It is seldom any thing beyond a murmur. She never
attempts to raise her voice into a more audible sound. She seems as
if she was afraid of hearing herself speak. After having been used to
the affectations and hypocrisies of female society, the artlessness
of Lilya's conduct and the purity of her nature becomes exceedingly
refreshing: I certainly do admire her very much."

Zabra, as if unable to conceal the emotions that were evidently
producing a most powerful effect upon him, with a look of indescribable
anguish hastily left the cabin.

"How strange!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, astonished at the sudden
departure of his young friend. "He must love her. I am certain from his
appearance while I was speaking in her praise, that he loves her, and
is jealous of the admiration I have expressed. How very strange!"

Zabra hastened to the quarter deck, where he sat himself down in a
retired corner, apparently in the most intense agony of mind. His dark
features were impressed with the workings of a violent passion; his
lustrous eyes shone with a brilliancy that was vivid and piercing to an
extraordinary degree; and his breast heaved with that full and rapid
pulsation of the heart which is the usual effect of great excitement.
Covering his face with his hands, he continued in that position for
several minutes. "That it should come to this!" he muttered in a voice
tremulous with emotion. "That it should come to this! What a reward
for all I have done and suffered! Oh agony insupportable!--Oh misery
scarcely to be endured! Where will the devoted heart meet with fidelity?
Where will the loving one, who feels and thinks and acts with no other
desire than for the happiness of the loved, meet with a like regard?
The dream is over--the delusion is passed--the hope which has led me on
seems utterly extinguished. But perhaps it may not be--I may be deceived
in my suspicions. It would look like injustice to condemn him without
a more perfect knowledge. I will observe them. But he said how much he
admired her; he said it to me!--Ah! it must be true."

Zabra was impatiently starting from his seat when he beheld Lilya
standing before him with every appearance of deep concern in her
countenance; he suddenly snatched her by the arm, drew her towards him,
and gazed in her face with a fierce and searching look.

"Why do you gaze on me thus?" inquired Lilya, shrinking from the stern
scrutiny to which she was being subjected. "Why is your look so dark? He
whom I used to call my father never looked thus on me, and you never so
regarded me before. Have I done any thing wrong, by which I could offend
you? How sorry I shall be if I have! Or are you ill? Let me endeavour
to make you better: I know where grow the healing herbs and the balmy
plants that are good for many different maladies. Let me gather them
and make you a drink such as may restore you to health; or shall I run
down the young leveret or snare the tender woodpigeon to procure you
delicate eating? Ah me! I forgot that I am not where either herbs or
plants, or leveret or woodpigeon are to be found, but on the wide waste
of sea, where neither green moss nor twining ivy, nor flowers, nor
trees, nor any leafy thing exists. But what can I do to make you
better?"

"Can I believe you?" asked her companion, relaxing in some degree in
the severity of his gaze.

"You can if you like, Zabra," replied the simple girl; "and I do not see
why anyone should not believe me, because I always speak the truth; and
why _you_ should not believe me seems so very strange. I always believe
you. I am sure you would not say any thing that was not true, and I
could not think of saying a word with an intention of deceiving you."

"You do not seem like one inclined to be treacherous;" observed the
youth.

"I never saw any one inclined to be treacherous, therefore I cannot say
whether I do or do not look in that way," said the girl; "but I am not
so inclined, that I am positive of, for I have nothing in the world
to be treacherous about, and it is impossible that I should ever be
treacherous to you. Now, Zabra, you look more like the good and kind
being I have known you to be. Ah! what a pleasure it is to listen to you
when you sing your delightful songs, or speak to me so persuasively of
virtue, and wisdom, and excellence, and all such admirable things. It
makes me forget how much I loved to watch the birds at their nests, and
the young kids at play; and hear the lark's song in the morning, and the
nightingale's at night. It makes me forget all my favourite haunts where
the choicest flowers used to grow. It makes me to forget all I once
found so pleasant to remember."

"You have noticed Oriel Porphyry, have you not?" inquired Zabra, fixing
on his companion a searching glance.

"Oh yes," replied Lilya eagerly; "he that is so noble looking. His eyes
are so bright, and his hair curls over his forehead so beautifully, and
he looks so kindly at me when I see him and talks to me so kindly, that
I like him very much."

"No doubt you do!" exclaimed the youth, with considerable bitterness.

"I have not been much with him, for I feel quite afraid of him;"
continued Lilya. "He seems to me so very grand and proud in his
appearance, that I dare scarcely look at him when we meet, and as for
speaking I have then neither voice nor words. But he appears so good.
He takes my hand in his, and he presses it so gently, and he says to
me such encouraging things, and he looks upon my face with so much
earnestness, that----"

"Oh it's palpable!" cried Zabra, hastily interrupting his companion,
and regarding her with a gloomy scowl.

"That I cannot help feeling that I like him very much; and, although
I am afraid to utter a sentence, he still continues his kindness, and
never lets my hand go from his. However, I must try to tell him how
grateful I am. It is very foolish of me, I believe, in not saying how I
feel towards him. But how you look at me, Zabra!" exclaimed Lilya, as
she noticed the dark and angry expression of her companion's features.
"Is it displeasing to you that I do not express the sentiments I
entertain? I will confess them. Are you angry because I do not like
him so well as I ought to do? I will like him ever so much more."

"Truly, you are obedient!" observed the other, with sarcastic emphasis;
"a pattern of one who is willing to please! There cannot be a question
about your dutifulness. Dupe, that I have been not to see your
artifices! But who could have supposed that, under such apparent
artlessness, there lurked so much treachery? Your deceit is well done.
None would suspect it. It is the most finished piece of falsehood that
ever was acted."

"Falsehood! Deceit! Treachery!" exclaimed Libya, astonished and alarmed
by the violence in the language and conduct of her companion. "What are
such things to me, Zabra? I know them not. They cannot be for me to
use. Oh, why do you look at me in so unkind a manner? They are not the
looks that make me happy. I see you are angry with me, and I know not
for why. I must have done some great wrong, or you would not behave to
me in a way so unlike what you have used me to. And, indeed, I did not
do it intentionally. I would not have offended you if I could have
avoided it. What shall I do? Tell me what I shall do to acquire your
forgiveness, and I will never repeat the offence again."

"And do you think that I will now believe these professions?" inquired
her companion, with considerable asperity. "Do you think, after having
been once deceived, I would allow myself to be the victim of the same
deception? Oh no! that can never be. You are discovered. I know you
thoroughly. Away with you, and let me no more be made miserable by your
presence."

"Alas! alas! what heinous wrong have I done?" exclaimed Lilya, as the
tears made their appearance on her cheeks. "I know not what it is--I
cannot imagine any thing, unless it be my behaviour to Oriel Porphyry,
that offended you. I acknowledge he deserved better treatment; but, if
it be your desire, I will immediately go and tell him all that I think
of him: and when he looks so kindly, and talks so kindly, and presses my
hand----"

"Away, vile hypocrite!" shouted Zabra, as with looks of indignation and
rage he pushed Lilya aside, and rushed from the place. She gazed after
him without uttering a word. Her spirit appeared quite overwhelmed; and
all the confidence she felt in his society completely deserted her. The
heart of the timid girl seemed filled with a sense of desolation she had
never before experienced, and she sat down in the seat he had vacated,
and wept. Here she remained, in the full consciousness of her
unprotected state, till the sound of approaching footsteps made her
hurriedly seek concealment in some obscure part of the ship.

"The Albatross is crossing the Atlantic in very brilliant style, I
think;" observed the young merchant.

"Yes, sir, she does spank along pretty smartly," replied the captain.
"But it's utterly impossible for a better bit o' timber to be found.
She's been tried in all sorts o' weathers, in all sorts o' seas; and no
matter whether we were doubling the Cape, or beating about in that ere
terrible monsoon in the Bay o' Bengal, she stood on her feet like a
trump, and answered to the helm as sensible as any born cretur."

"Our passage home will be brief and pleasant, I should imagine, from the
portion we have passed," remarked Oriel Porphyry.

"There's no knowin' sir," said old Hearty, seriously. "Sometimes it's
fair weather and sometimes it's foul, and sometimes it's a bit o' both.
The weather's the most unsartaintest thing in nature; it puzzles the
wisest on us. It's quite optional whether it has a mind to blow one way
or t'other, and sometimes it seems as if there was a reg'lar blow up wi'
ev'ry wind as blows, and they gets a skylarking wi' one another most
considerably."

"I am very anxious to return to Columbia with as little delay as
possible," observed the young merchant. "My not having received any
communication from my father, and my knowledge of the unsettled state of
the country, makes me fear that the government have got the upper hand
again, and that they have made my father the victim of their vengeance."

"They daren't harm him, sir," replied the old man; "they daren't harm a
hair o' his head; they knows of old how popular he is, and how popular
he desarves to be; and they must have a pretty considerable winkin' that
they'll be left among breakers if they 'tempts to steer that course. I
arn't no great politician, but it's as plain as a marlin spike to me,
that if they bore down upon master Porphyry after that fashion, they'd
get such a broadside from the people as 'ould sew 'em all up in their
hammocks in very little time."

"I hope I shall arrive before they can execute their evil intentions, if
such intentions they have," remarked Oriel. "In case I should require
their services, do you think I could depend on the crew of this ship?"

"On ev'ry mother's son of 'em," said the captain, with emphasis. "Ev'ry
man in the vessel's selected, and most ov 'em have sailed wi' me at
some time or other. There arn't a braver or more skilful crew afloat;
and if 'tis required that they shall bear a hand in defence o' master
Porphyry, I've got a notion there's nothin' they'd do wi' half so much
'lacrity. Master Porphyry ha' done so much good in his time that there's
scarcely a cretur livin' as has'nt through his friends or relations
profited by it in some degree, and it arn't in the natur o' a seaman not
to be grateful. As for me, when I've had never a shot in the locker,
master Porphyry, more nor once, has made me comfortable inside and out,
and sent me afloat, laden wi' summat else besides ballast; and if I
don't stand among the foremost in any shindy as you've a mind to kick
up, and don't sarve out the lubbers as would be tryin' to circumvent
your honourable old father, I'll give you leave to slice me into
pea-shells and dish me up into hogswash."

"I'm perfectly satisfied with your fidelity, captain," said the young
merchant, "and I am very much gratified by hearing that I can depend
upon the crew. There's no knowing what may happen, and you and your
men might render me service of the highest value. If the struggle
I anticipate is to be made, every brave man will be an important
acquisition."

"If we could only get together all the craft as master Porphyry
possesses, scrunch me! if we shouldn't be able to turn 'em inside out,
wi' as much ease as a fellow might take in a reef," exclaimed the old
man.

"That cannot be done without the sacrifice of more time than I can
spare," observed Oriel. "My great object is to arrive in the metropolis
before the government can find an opportunity for working out its
schemes, as I feel convinced that they only wait occasion to resume the
influence of which they were dispossessed. If I am in time to prevent
their intrigues, I will speedily take such measures as shall put it out
of their power to make any attempt of the kind; and if the mischief
should be done previous to my arrival, I will make such a stir in the
country as shall shake them out of their ill-got authority before they
have had time to exercise it."

"I maintain that the ancients greatly excel us!" exclaimed Fortyfolios
in a loud voice, as he approached the place where the captain and the
young merchant were conversing.

"And I maintain quite the reverse, don't you see," replied the doctor.

"Think of their universities, their schools, their royal academies
of painting and music, their royal societies for the advancement of
science, their extensive libraries, their galleries of art, and the
wonderful degree of perfection they attained in mechanics," said the
professor.

"As for their universities," observed Tourniquet, "they distinguished
themselves most by their bigoted attachment to prejudices that had long
been exploded in every other part of the community. They wasted a vast
deal of time and intellect in teaching all such knowledge as was most
unprofitable; and this was what they called a classical education. It
consisted in making the student devote the best portion of his life in
learning one or two languages which were never spoken by the living,
and in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred could not be of the slightest
advantage to the learner. A facility in the making of Latin verses,
which had no pretension to the name of poetry, was looked upon as
evidence of great merit; and he who could put together a few sentences
in Greek, unmarked by one original idea, was regarded as a genius which
his college ought to be proud of."

"Do you mean to affirm that the dead languages are not worthy of study?"
inquired Fortyfolios.

"I affirm nothing of the kind, don't you see," replied the doctor. "I
only maintain that the time devoted to their acquisition in the system
of education pursued by the ancients might have been more advantageously
employed. Both the teachers and the taught enslaved their minds with the
same shackles. What loads of paper have been spoiled by the labours of
some learned blockhead on the Greek particle, or by the annotations and
interpretations of some laborious trifles attempting to elucidate the
meaning of some obscure Latin writer. But there is a greater mischief
in this than the mere worthlessness of what it produces. The exclusive
attention which is required to gain a mastery over a dead language
stifles the affections and narrows the intellect. It makes men egotists
and bigots; ignorant, prejudiced, proud, and quarrelsome. What was
Bentley? what was Parr? what was Johnson? what was Porson? What were all
who distinguished themselves by such great talents in small things? Were
they temperate, or modest, or amiable? moderate in their enjoyments,
or inoffensive in their behaviour? Were they not the very reverse of
these?"

"They were great scholars," observed the professor.

"They were great fools, don't you see," said the other sharply. "A man
who offends against decency, who is quarrelsome and imperious, knows not
the respect he owes himself or the courtesies which are due to society;
and his actions, if they are not crimes, must certainly be follies.
As for his wisdom--as for the wisdom of the grammarian, or the mere
number of books comparatively useless, his is the knowledge of a man
who has lived all his life in the narrow circuit of a little village; he
may know every brick in every house, and may be familiar with the exact
state and quantity of every dunghill there to be met with: but take him
out into the open world, and he knows nothing but the prejudices of the
place from which he came."

"That does not prove that the learning of the ancients is unworthy of
study," remarked Fortyfolios.

"Who are the ancients?" inquired Tourniquet. "The English are our
ancients, the Romans were their ancients, the Greeks were the ancients
of the Romans, and the Egyptians were the ancients of the Greeks: the
Hindoos, or the Chinese, were the ancients of the Egyptians; and if we
could look to a more remote period, we should be sure to find a people
who also had their ancients. It is a very strange idea of the world to
expect to progress by always looking back, don't you see. The learning
of our predecessors may always be worthy of study if it be superior to
the learning in existence; but it has been the system of universities
and public schools to concentrate the attention of the studious upon the
learning of the ancients, to the neglect of a knowledge more available
and of far more practical utility."

"It is strange, then, that the public schools and universities of
the English should have produced so many illustrious men!" said the
professor.

"I maintain that their most illustrious men were not produced in the
public schools, don't you see," replied the doctor. "Of philosophers,
Bacon, Hume, Hobbes, Berkley, Shaftesbury, Dugald Stewart, and Hartley;
of men of science, Newton, Flamstead, Napier, Davy, Priestley, and
Black; of statesmen, Burleigh, Clarendon, Wolsey, Cromwell, Raleigh,
Temple, Burke, and Pitt; of divines, Tillotson, Chillingworth, More,
Jeremy Taylor, Selden, and Sherlock; of heroes, Hampden, Russell,
Marlborough, Clive, and Wolfe; and of poets, Shakspeare, Ben Jonson,
Spenser, Goldsmith, Pope, and Thomson; besides numberless others I
cannot now remember; attained their eminence without any assistance from
public schools."

"I suppose you equally condemn their royal societies and academies?"
inquired Fortyfolios.

"I do, so far as concerns their utility, don't you see," said
Tourniquet. "Did their royal societies ever produce a great man? What
eminent philosopher or distinguished man of science did they ever
create? And as for their royal academies, when you can point out to me
the great painters and great musicians they have given to the world, I
will acknowledge the benefit society has received from them, but not
till then."

"It is not to be expected that all institutions will perfectly answer
the end for which they were designed," remarked the professor. "The
object for which they were founded was wise and admirable, and to a
certain extent they realise that object. They collect together the
talent in the country, and then as much as possible make it known to
the public."

"They neglect much more talent than they collect, don't you see,"
replied the doctor; "and these being usually governed by a select few
who have no conception of such a thing as impartiality, he is considered
the greatest man amongst them who possesses the most patronage. But the
manner in which superior intelligence was regarded by the government of
England was exceedingly discouraging to men of genius. They would lavish
pensions upon profligates, spies, political apostates, the tools of
power, and the slaves of intrigue; but the man who strived to exercise
talents from which his country would derive a certain and lasting
advantage was left to struggle on without the slightest assistance. Any
person, however ignorant, if he could manage by prostituting his soul
to every kind of meanness and chicanery to scrape together a sufficient
sum of money, might aspire to the dignity of a title of honour; and
sometimes, but very rarely, the same title was conferred upon a
favourite painter or physician; minds of the highest order were obliged
to be satisfied without any such distinction. The pliant orator, the
successful soldier, and the ready lawyer were ennobled; but genius, and
virtue, and honour, and worth, such as were developed in the wisest and
best of men, were not thought worthy of a regard."

"Notwithstanding all this, the literature, and science, and art of
England flourished till it became the admiration of surrounding nations,
and excited the wonder of each succeeding generation," observed the
professor.

"Which proves that neither universities, nor public schools, nor royal
societies, nor academies, nor artificial distinctions, such as existed
in England, were of any advantage in increasing the intelligence of the
people, don't you see," added his companion. "All such institutions
might be rendered highly serviceable to the state; but the system upon
which they were conducted was so faulty, their government so illiberal,
and their influence so ineffective, that I cannot conscientiously afford
to give them any praise, as they existed among the ancients. As for
their extensive libraries, on what principle could a government defend
the policy of not only withholding from men of genius the patronage
they ought to afford them, but robbing every author of several copies
of every book he produced without the slightest recompence--merely for
the purpose of augmenting their libraries? The wealthiest state then
existing was guilty of this meanness. The philosopher might exist as
he could--starve--die--rot--in any obscure hole in which he could find
refuge, without attracting the least attention: but immediately his
works were published--no matter how expensive they were to him, or how
much labour and suffering they had cost him--down came a demand for
eleven copies for the public libraries, for which the author never in
any shape saw a consideration."

"But the author had proper protection for his publications," said
Fortyfolios.

"Nothing of the kind," replied the doctor; "the law of copyright, as it
was called, then in existence for the protection of authors in the sale
of their works, was the most bungling atrocity that ever originated in a
legislature. An author was allowed to possess his property, the product
of his own labour, _only_ for a certain time. Any man might leave to his
heir the land he had received from his father--any man was allowed to
bestow on his child the wealth that he possessed; but the children
of the man of genius could not inherit any right in the acknowledged
property of their parent. After the term had expired in which he was
allowed to possess his own--think of their generosity in allowing
this!--his labours might enrich any one who chose to make them
profitable, and he and his children, and his children's children, were
left to starve. The man who writes a book which acquires a certain value
by publication, has as much right to consider all the profits it may
produce as belonging to him and to his heirs for ever, as is the man who
becomes possessed of land or other property entitled to continue it in
the possession of his family from generation to generation: and it is
nothing better than an act of robbery for any government to deprive
either of a right to which they have so perfect a claim."

"But you have said nothing about the perfection to which they carried
their machinery," said the professor. "I think the ancients deserve our
thanks for their mechanical inventions."

"I cannot confer praise on any invention, however brilliant it may be,
that must come into operation at the expense of human sufferings, don't
you see," observed the other; "and all those machines which were brought
into use for the purpose of diminishing the amount of manual employment,
did produce a very great degree of human wretchedness. It may be very
satisfactory to some parties, to consider that the country becomes more
wealthy according to the increasing facility with which its manufactures
are sent to market; but the time must come, if this rapidity of creating
produce continue, when the supply must exceed the demand, and then
finding an inadequate market for its manufactures, the country must
become poor. But while this result is gradually brought about by
the manufacturers endeavouring to produce their goods by means of
machinery, at as little cost and with as great facility as it is
possible to attain, the thousands who gained their subsistence by the
labour which these machines have supplied, are left without a resource;
they must crawl out the remainder of their miserable lives as they can,
and are left to famish, to beg, or to steal. It is pleasant, perhaps, to
know that machinery allows you to purchase half a dozen pairs of shoes
at the price you formerly paid for one, but while every one can get
shoes for a trifle, they who make them can neither get shoes nor bread."

"Are you still arguing, gentlemen?" inquired Oriel Porphyry as he
returned from another part of the ship to which he had proceeded with
the captain on the approach of the philosophers. "There certainly must
be a great fascination in your method of reasoning, or you would either
be tired of talking, or want subjects to talk about. What has been the
matter in debate on this occasion?"

"We have been arguing upon the superiority of the ancients over the
moderns," replied the professor. "I maintained and do still maintain,
that the ancients far exceeded us in intelligence, in skill, and in
every thing which is a sign of superior civilisation. Their works of
learning are invaluable--their efforts in art not to be surpassed--their
discoveries in science have been the admiration of every succeeding
age."

"And what says the doctor to this?" inquired the young merchant.
Fortyfolios looked round, and discovered that his antagonist had left
the field.




CHAP. VIII.

LOVE MISPLACED.


Zabra's disposition appeared to have undergone a complete change. He
was no longer to be found in the cabin delighting every one with the
stirring eloquence of his language, or on the quarter-deck instructing
the gentle Lilya in the wonders of the ship. Instead of, as had hitherto
been the case, seeking the company of Oriel Porphyry as the greatest
enjoyment he possessed, he had for several days avoided every place
where they were likely to meet. He roamed about the vessel without
attempting to converse with either officers or crew, and if any one
ventured to address him, the proud look with which the speaker was
regarded, as the young creole turned away, was sufficiently repulsive to
prevent the experiment being repeated. Even those with whom he had used
to be on terms of intimacy, the captain and the young midshipman, were
passed by with the same gloomy look. Every one wondered at the change,
and all were ignorant of the cause.

Oriel more than once sought him for the purpose of inquiring the reason
of his strange conduct, with the intention of endeavouring to induce him
to return to his usual place, as his friend and companion; but the youth
fled from his approach so determinedly, and treated his messages with
such a studied neglect, that the young merchant, imagining that Zabra
was in one of his mysterious moods, at last abandoned all intention
of interfering, expecting that in a day or two he would become more
reasonable, and join in the cabin circle as usual. Oriel Porphyry had
observed so much in the behaviour of his friend that was extraordinary,
that he had ceased to be surprised by the strange way in which he
frequently acted. His conduct, therefore, in this instance, did not
excite in him any particular attention or remark. But no one appeared to
regard Zabra's unsocial manner with so deep an interest as Lilya. She
felt severely his estrangement from her society: all her pleasures
seemed to be completely annihilated by his absence. It was evident that
his kind attentions had not been lost upon her grateful disposition, for
she was too artless to disguise her feelings, and her sentiments in his
favour seemed too evident to be misinterpreted. His handsome features,
so warm and eloquent in their expression--his lustrous eyes, shining
with so soft a light--and his youthful figure, so buoyant and elastic,
had from the first awakened in her breast a feeling of surprise and
admiration that was both strange and delightful. A new world seemed
rising before her eyes. She entered into a different state of existence.
All around her breathed an atmosphere of happiness that made her
previous pleasures appear dull and cold; and then she found no enjoyment
except in being near him, and when he kindly endeavoured to lead her
mind to the contemplation of such subjects as were likely to interest,
to amuse, and instruct her simple nature, as the fire of youthful
enthusiasm shone in his brilliant gaze, and his intellectual countenance
kept changing its expression in accord with the different feelings which
the subject created, she held her breath, as if she thought that there
was something in what she saw that the least disturbance would destroy;
and hung upon his words as if there was a charm in their sound which,
once destroyed, could never be created again.

In the lessons with which he sought to enlighten her untutored
intellect, her feelings had participated. Her timid nature acquired
confidence in his presence. She more frequently sought than shrunk from
his society; and she forgot that she was alone upon the world without
a single connecting tie to associate her with its sympathies. It was
from such feelings as these that she was first disturbed by Zabra's
unaccountable and unkind behaviour. In vain she endeavoured to find a
reasonable cause for such conduct in any thing she had done; she knew
nothing in which she could have offended, except in not having appeared
sufficiently grateful to Oriel Porphyry; and this fault of hers
she reflected on so long, that she began to regard it as something
particularly heinous, and became daily more desirous of attempting, by
a different behaviour, to repair the wrong she had committed.

She strived as much as possible to get rid of her natural bashfulness,
and sought out the young merchant with the design of repairing her fault
in the best way she could. After considerable hesitation and frequent
desire to turn back as she proceeded, she ventured as far as the cabin
door; where, after waiting a considerable time, daring neither to go on,
or to return, she knocked gently. A voice kindly bid her come in, and
with a palpitating heart she opened the door and entered.

"Ah, Lilya!" exclaimed Oriel, who sat alone studying a book of military
exercises, "this is an unexpected pleasure." Then hastening towards her
with a smile of welcome, he led her blushing and trembling to the sofa.

"I hope you will not any longer be such a truant as you have proved
yourself," said the young merchant, kindly.

"Have I been a truant?" asked the timid girl.

"Yes you have, and a very sad truant too," replied Oriel Porphyry, with
a smile.

"How sorry I am!" murmured Lilya, looking deeply concerned, though she
knew not what wrong she had committed.

"Well, I will forgive you if you will promise not to repeat the
offence," said Oriel. "You must let me see you more frequently. It is
not kind of you to absent yourself from your best friends. Remember that
in me you will always find a friend ready to do any thing that is likely
to insure your happiness. Will you promise me, that you will not keep
away from me as you have done?"

"If you will forgive me, I will promise any thing that is proper for
me to do," replied the bashful maiden, appearing by her downcast eyes
afraid to look upon her companion.

"Of course I will forgive you," responded the other affectionately,
taking one of her hands in his. "There can be very little difficulty in
my doing that."

"But there is something else," said Lilya, trembling like a condemned
criminal.

"What else can there be?" inquired Oriel.

"Something else for you to forgive," replied the timid girl.

"Indeed, I was not aware of its existence," responded the young
merchant. "Tell me what it is. It will give me pleasure to forgive you."

"I have never told you how grateful I am for your kindness to me,"
murmured his fair companion in a voice scarcely audible. "But indeed I
feel it. I cannot help seeing how good you are, and--and--and I like you
very much for it."

"You are an admirable creature," exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, apparently
delighted with her unaffected simplicity; "and it will be a great source
of pleasure to me to be able to assist in creating your happiness. As
for gratitude, there is no necessity for that, at any rate, at present;
but when I have succeeded in insuring you all the blessings I wish you
to enjoy, you may be as grateful as you please."

"And you forgive me for my neglect?" asked Lilya, looking up to his face
imploringly, and then instantly casting her eyes to the ground.

"Forgive you!" cried her companion kindly, "you have committed no fault.
But if it be any satisfaction to you to receive my forgiveness, it is
readily granted; indeed, I feel so much pleasure in conferring it, that
I hope you will very soon either commit the same or a similar fault,
that I may be allowed the same enjoyment I now possess."

"No, I will not do so again, because that would be wrong," observed the
bashful maiden; "I should be unworthy of your kindness if, after you
had once been so good as to forgive me for a fault I had committed, I
committed the same fault again."

"In truth, you are a most admirable creature," exclaimed the young
merchant, with impressive emphasis. "But what can I do to make your
stay in the ship more endurable. Your being used to roam at will over
the wide fields and open valleys of your native land, must make this
voyage appear very tedious. I should like to vary its monotony for you
as much as possible. Have you a desire for any pleasure I can gratify?"

Lilya looked confused, the colour in her face disappeared and returned,
and she tried once or twice to raise her eyes from the ground to the
face of her companion; but as soon as she had elevated them about half
way, she let them fall, and seemed as if she had not courage to make
another effort.

"You don't answer me, Lilya," said Oriel Porphyry. "Do not be afraid of
asking for what you require. I wish your time to pass as pleasantly as I
can make it, and you will afford me gratification as well as yourself by
giving me an opportunity for increasing your enjoyments. Tell me what it
is you most wish to be done."

"I wish Zabra would be as he used to be," exclaimed the simple girl, and
an expression of sadness became visible upon her beautiful features.

"So do I," replied the young merchant; "but I have done every thing to
induce him to become so, without success. I cannot tell what it is that
makes him act so strangely; but he is a strange creature at all times,
and as I have allowed him to do as he pleases, I am afraid nothing I
could say or do would make him become more rational. He avoids every
attempt I have made to prevail upon him to take his place amongst us as
usual, and I have therefore no remedy now but patience."

"He never used to be so," murmured Lilya.

"He appears to have taken offence at something or somebody, but what the
cause is I do not pretend to know," said Oriel. "I am sure I have said
or done nothing at which he ought to have felt offence."

"I thought he was offended with me, because I did not tell you how
grateful I was for your kindness," observed his companion.

"I doubt that that is the cause," replied the other. "But it is my
opinion that, if any one can bring him back to his former behaviour, it
is yourself, Lilya."

"Me!" exclaimed the blushing maiden; "I bring him back to be what he
was! Oh I wish I could!"

"I think you have only to try and there is no doubt of success,"
remarked Oriel: "Go to him, be kind to him; tell him how much you are
afflicted by observing him abandon all his friends, and assure him how
happy it will make you to see him exerting himself in the same social
offices in which he used to take delight."

"Do you really think that would be of use?" inquired Lilya, as she
raised her eyes till they met those of her companion.

"There is not a doubt of it," replied he.

"Then I will go this moment," she exclaimed; and leaping from the sofa,
she hastened out of the cabin.

Zabra was alone bending over his harp and striking a series of
melancholy chords. He was so completely lost in his own reflections,
which evidently from the gloomy expression of his countenance were far
from being pleasant, that he did not observe the approach of Lilya. The
first notice he had of her vicinity was in feeling his hand timidly laid
hold of; and on turning his head round, he beheld her gazing on him
anxiously and kindly close at his side.

"What brought you here? Why do you follow me? Is there no place where
I can be secure from your intrusion?" were the quick inquiries of the
young musician, as with a stern look he snatched his hand from the hold
of the timid girl.

"Indeed I have no wish to offend you, Zabra," said Lilya, feeling quite
confounded with the unfriendly reception she had met with. "I come to
you, because I think you are unhappy."

"Who told you I was unhappy?" asked Zabra, sharply; "and what is my
unhappiness to you?"

"It is much, because it makes _me_ unhappy," replied the simple girl;
"and I thought you were unhappy, because you have abandoned all your
friends, and deprived me of the pleasure you used to confer."

"I did not abandon them till they showed themselves unworthy of my
companionship," said the youth proudly. "Do you think I can sit quietly
to become the victim of deceit and treachery? Do you imagine I can stand
tamely by while the heart I worship is ensnared by another? No! I cannot
endure it, and I will not. I wish to be alone."

"And will you not return to your place among the friends who delight in
your presence?" inquired the bashful maiden; "they are very anxious to
see you. And I--I should like you--I should very much like you to be
as you used to be; for then you were so kind, and talked to me so
delightfully, and appeared so very happy."

"I was very happy then," exclaimed her companion, in a voice tremulous
with emotion. "I loved and believed myself loved in return. But it is
all over now; I have been deceived. Go and leave me."

"And if you did love, Zabra," murmured Lilya without daring to move
her eyes from the ground, "if you are sure you loved--I think I'm
convinced--that is, I mean, that if you do love, you must be loved in
return."

"No, no! I saw it too plain," observed Zabra. "It's beyond a doubt; it
is evident--palpable--I cannot be mistaken. Why do you waste your time
here? Have I not told you I wish to be alone?"

"Oh! do not look upon me so sternly," exclaimed the gentle girl, with
tears in her eyes; "indeed I wish to make you happy. I will never offend
you. I will be all you desire. I will listen to you with the most
perfect attention, and carefully remember every thing you tell me. Come,
Zabra, come!" she continued, as she ventured tremblingly to lay hold of
his hand. "Let me lead you to the kind friends who are so desirous of
your presence; let me assure you that you are loved," she added, as she
raised the hand she held in her own to her lips, and pressed them softly
and quickly upon it, and then, as if alarmed by her own temerity, she
hastily dropped it and stood blushing and trembling by his side.

"No, no! I tell you no! I am not loved. I know it too well. Why do you
come to me with your affectionate words and fond endearments? Take them
to Oriel Porphyry; he can best appreciate them," said her companion.

"Well, I will if you wish it, Zabra," replied the simple girl. "I would
do any thing to please you."

"No doubt you would," exclaimed Zabra sarcastically.

"Yes I would, Zabra; and I will go this moment and do what you require
me:" and she had scarcely uttered the words before she hurriedly left
the presence of her companion.

Zabra sat alone at his harp, half doubting in his mind whether it was
simplicity or artifice that Lilya had exhibited; but as he remembered
what both had confessed, he felt the conviction that she was again
endeavouring to deceive him; and the miserable feeling thus created he
endeavoured to express in the following words:--

          "Be not deceived, fond heart,
            Be not deceived;
    Words are but sounds, and looks changing and vain;
          None are believed, fond heart,
            None are believed:
    When they delude, never trust them again.

         "Seek not for truths, sad heart,
            Seek not for truth;
    Truth's in the grave, and there only will stay;
          Maiden and youth, sad heart,
            Maiden and youth:
    Each will beguile and then each will betray.

         "Love is a dream, fond heart,
            Love is a dream;
    Clothed with delight for the heart and the eye;
          Bright though it seem, fond heart,
            Bright though it seem,
    Sleep not--you dream but to wake--and to die!"

"Mustn't allow you to sing such melancholy ditties, don't you see,"
exclaimed Dr. Tourniquet, standing before the young musician, where
he had been for several minutes. "They make every body miserable and
yourself too; and besides this they are very hurtful in their effects
upon the system. They are a sort of sedative that affect the head and
the heart at the same time--prevent eating, drinking, or sleeping with
any thing like a healthy state of feeling. Allow me the privilege of an
old friend to ask you what's the matter with you?"

"Alas! it is a malady beyond the reach of medicine!" exclaimed Zabra
mournfully.

"That's to be proved, don't you see," replied the doctor. "I have for
some days noticed you running into holes and corners away from all your
friends. It is both unreasonable and unsocial. I don't pretend to know
what has been the occasion of it; but as you have acquainted me with
your secret, I can make a shrewd guess. Ah! this love's a terrible
thing."

"After having been assured you were beloved," said the young musician;
"after having convinced your own heart that your affection was returned
with the same ardour with which it was given, to find doubt follow
doubt, till a certainty that you were not loved gradually forced itself
on your mind--this, this is terrible."

"But that cannot have been your case, don't you see," exclaimed
Tourniquet. "You cannot doubt--there's nothing for you to dread."

"It is too true. I have been deceived," replied Zabra, and his features
became overcast with a deeper melancholy. "All that I have done has been
unavailing; all that I have dared has been cast to the winds. To be the
sole possessor of one heart I thought would be a sufficient recompense
for all my past sufferings, and dangers, and difficulties; but now I
have discovered the unwelcome truth, that another has acquired the
ownership of what I strove so earnestly to gain. Oh shame on the
treachery that can allure a trusting soul into the conviction that its
sweet hopes are acknowledged and its fond dreams replied to! and then,
as a new face or a more beguiling nature comes upon the scene, will turn
to it with a fondness which should have been confined to the sincere
one, and leave all those hopes and dreams to be crushed under the
withering touch of despair!"

"I'll wager my professional skill you're mistaken, don't you see," said
the doctor. "But who do you imagine to be the guilty parties?"

"Oriel and Lilya," replied his young companion.

"It can't be, don't you see," remarked the other. "I'm a little older
than you are, and a better judge of character; and from the result of
my own observations, I feel certain that neither of them are capable
of such conduct. Oriel Porphyry is noble, and is more sincere in his
character than any man I ever met with; and Lilya is the most artless,
shy, unsophisticated creature that ever existed. You must be wrong,
don't you see."

"Both of them have acknowledged it to me," said Zabra; "both have
confessed to me their mutual regard. Yes, it is too true. It is placed
beyond the possibility of a doubt."

"Without meaning any offence to you, I can't believe it, don't you see,"
said the doctor good humouredly. "You have been deceiving yourself.
There is a little bit of jealousy in the case, depend upon it. And
though I maintain that jealousy is usually a very reasonable passion;
for it is impossible for one who has thought himself the owner of
the affections of another, to find a third party regarded as their
possessor, without feeling a considerable degree of indignation: I
think, in this instance, there is no cause for it."

"I wish I could think so! I most fervently wish I could think so!"
exclaimed the youth earnestly. "Nothing could gratify me so much as to
find my suspicions unfounded; but the facts are so clear that the most
credulous would be convinced."

"Ah! lovers are the worst people in the world to argue with, don't you
see," remarked Tourniquet with a smile. "They are always convinced of
something that no one else would entertain for a moment. They believe
without a proof, and deny without a cause. With all due respect for you,
I must say that love is the greatest folly upon earth. I don't mean to
say that I have not had my follies, don't you see; for I have had a very
fair share of them. I remember my first folly of the kind very well. I
had commenced my medical education under the auspices of an old uncle
of mine. He was exceedingly like all other uncles from the creation of
the world to the present time. He was obstinate, peevish, domineering,
and quarrelsome, and was blest with a daughter, as all uncles are that
have a nephew to reside with them. I was then a youth remarkable for the
pains I took in my clothes and in my personal appearance; in fact, my
dandyism was so conspicuous that I was ashamed to look a dog in the face
for fear he should acknowledge me as a puppy.

"All at once I thought it was highly necessary I should be in love,
don't you see; so I brushed up my bits of whiskers, held my head as high
as I could, and looked about me. My eyes quickly fell upon the charming
Papaverica. To be sure her hair was as much like a bundle of scorched
tow as it was possible to be; but of course I called it an auburn. Her
nose was a lump of flesh; but of what shape it would have puzzled a
geometrician to decide; yet I declared it was Grecian; and her mouth
_was_ a mouth--there was no mistaking it, and it gave an openness to
her countenance more than usually expressive; and of course I swore it
was like two cherries seeming parted. Then her body showed that she was
somebody. It might have been as thick as it was long, for its length was
nothing to brag of. As for her feet, Papaverica was not a girl to stand
upon trifles. But whatever her figure was like, I had no difficulty in
convincing her it was the very perfection of grace and beauty.

"I fell in love. Papaverica was medicine, surgery, and anatomy to me.
The pharmacopoeia was neglected, the vade mecum thrust on one side. I
forgot drugs and dressings, lancets and laudanum. I had no taste for
mixtures, and my soul was above pills. My thoughts were ever wandering
towards the charming Papaverica; and as it is not possible for the mind
to entertain two thoughts at the same time, my labours in making up the
medicines for my uncle's patients occasionally produced very strange
effects. Potions and lotions, cathartics and emetics, pills and squills,
were mixed together in what was not considered 'most admired disorder;'
for my uncle's stick spoke of any thing but admiration. But my blunders
were most conspicuous in writing the labels. In giving the directions
for a mixture I was sure to write 'Papaverica, when taken to be well
shaken'--for a draught, 'Papaverica to be taken at bedtime,'--and for
a lotion that had been repeated, 'Papaverica as before.'

"All this time we met, and made love after our fashion, don't you see.
Papaverica and I looked at each other till we couldn't see out of our
eyes, and sighed like paviers at work on a hard piece of ground. But
her father tried to put a stop to our proceedings; and if he caught
me talking to her, he gave me such a setting down, or more properly,
speaking, such a knocking down, as gave me cause to remember the
conversation.

"'Fathers have flinty hearts!' said the sympathising Papaverica.

"'And desperate thick sticks!' I exclaimed, with tears in my eyes, as
I rubbed my aching back against the door. However, this sort of thing
could not go on for ever. I was sent to pursue my studies at Columbus,
and I lost sight of Papaverica--I may add, for ever; for she soon
afterwards eloped with a strolling actor who had been vagabondising
in the neighbourhood, and who had won her heart by playing Romeo in a
cocked hat and leather breeches.

"My next folly was of a different kind. I was a young student as fond of
mischief as any of the fraternity to which I belonged. I was invited to
an evening party, where among the company, I noticed a young girl with a
laughing, dare-devil eye, and a person remarkably smart. I inquired her
name, and from a friend learned all the particulars of her history.
Observing that she was regarding me in a manner that told me that she
was quizzing me to her companions, I advanced, humming an air till I
came close before her.

"'Ah Floss!' said I, nodding familiarly. 'Is it you? Haven't seen you
this age. You look particularly charming; and how is your grandmother?
Shouldn't suppose you half so old as you are, to look at you. And
has the cat kittened? I always admire your style of dress--it's very
becoming. So the house dog's got well at last! Being an old friend of
the family, you must really make room for me beside you.--How is your
aunt's toothach?'

"The girl at first stared at my impudence, don't you see; but, finding I
proceeded with the same nonchalance, making all sorts of heterogeneous
remarks and inquiries, she laughed heartily, in which she was as
heartily joined by her companions, and we became intimate in a moment.
We joked and romped in the most provoking manner, and said the smartest
things of each other that could possibly be conceived. I found that she
lived with an aged grandmother and an old maiden aunt, in a small house
in a retired part of the town. I watched my opportunity when I saw
the two old women go out to take their evening walk, and gave such a
tremendous knock at the door that it made the windows rattle again. As
I expected my charmer opened the door, and in I marched as stately as
an emperor.

"'Halloo, sir, where are you going? This is like your impudence,
certainly!' said she, not knowing whether to be most offended or amused
at my behaviour.

"'I have come to honour you with a little of my superfluous time,
Floss,' I replied in an easy, condescending manner.

"'You have, have you? then I shall just thank you to make the best of
your way back again,' she rejoined as she followed me into the parlour.

"'I shall do nothing of the kind, Floss, till I please,' said I, as
observing some decanters of wine on the table I began very quietly to
help myself; 'and I have the pleasure to drink your health, Floss, and
a good husband to you--when you can get one.'

"'You impudent jackanapes!' she exclaimed, as she observed me toss off
a bumper. 'This exceeds every thing I ever heard of.'

"'I always strive to excel, Floss,' I replied, flinging myself at full
length on a sofa. But come here. Come to me like a good girl. I have
something to say to you.'

"'Go to you! I'll see you farther first!' she cried, looking as
disdainfully as she could.

"'Very well,' said I, rising and retreating a few paces: 'now come to
me--you see me further.'

"'I shan't do any thing of the kind, Mr. Impudence,' she exclaimed,
trying to hide her laughter.

"'Then if you wo'n't come to me, I shall be obliged to go to you, which
is a great hardship,' I observed as I advanced towards her.

"'If you come near me I'll scratch your eyes out!' cried Floss, looking
monstrously fierce; yet I could easily see by the corners of her mouth
that she was very much disposed to laugh, so I still approached.

"'If you touch me I'll box your ears!' she exclaimed, beginning to look
more serious.

"'Don't be alarmed, Floss; you wouldn't hurt a hair of my head, I know,'
said I, as I attempted to insinuate my arm round her waist. 'Ha, will
you?' she cried; and she gave me a slap of the face that made my teeth
rattle in my mouth like a box of cherry stones. I was not to be easily
driven from my purpose, so I attempted to make good my hold, but
immediately received a box on the ear that made me see all the colours
of the rainbow.

"'You haven't the heart to hurt a fly,' said I very coolly, while I
endeavoured to throw my left arm over her left shoulder, to get the
command of her arms; but in the execution of this manoeuvre, I received
a shower of blows that would have made a less eager lover than myself
glad enough to leave the field.

"'What means this behaviour, sir?' exclaimed my charmer, endeavouring to
look expressively angry, and struggling with me with all her might.

"'I mean to honour you so far as to kiss you, Floss,' I replied very
quietly, though smarting from the pain of the blows.

"'I'll scream--I'll raise the house--I'll cry murder--I'll----'

"'I'm remarkably fond of music,' said I, interrupting her; and in a
moment afterwards I had both her arms tightly pressed to her body, and
her face blushing and looking angry a few inches beneath my own.

"'I'll never let you see me again as long as I live--I'll hate
you--I'll----'

"Her mouth was stopped by mine, and every time she attempted to speak I
repeated the same interesting ceremony, which she struggled unavailingly
to prevent; but with this revenge I was not satisfied.

"'Let me go, sir; let me go this minute! You wretch, don't you see how
you're rumpling my collar! Let me go, I command you!'

"'Before I do that I shall first allow you the pleasure of kissing me,'
said I, with as much condescension as I could assume.

"'Kiss you!' cried Floss, looking as savage as an enraged turkey-cock;
'I'd see you hanged first!'

"'You'll not go till you do,' I replied, with all the coolness
imaginable.

"'Let me go, sir; your assurance is unbearable!' she exclaimed, making
violent but ineffectual efforts to release herself from my embrace.

"'You'll not go till you kiss me,' said I, as calmly as possible. A loud
knock at this moment was heard at the door.

"'Let me go, sir. Here's my grandmother and my aunt returned, and
they'll abuse me famously if they catch you here.'

"'You'll not go till you kiss me,' I repeated in exactly the same tone
of voice I had previously used. Another louder knock was now heard.

"'There then, you plague!' she cried as she hurriedly pressed her lips
to mine; 'and now let me go.'

"'Leave every thing to me, I'll manage the old ladies,' said I as I
allowed her to escape.

"'It's very strange, Floss, that you always will keep us at the door so
long when we knock,' mumbled the eldest of the two old ladies as well as
her want of teeth would allow her, as soon as the door was opened.

"'It's very strange,' remarked the other with stronger emphasis.

"'I've spoken to you so often about it, that I'm quite shocked at your
negligence,' mumbled the first.

"'I'm quite shocked at your negligence;' echoed the other.

"'Goodness, a man!' screamed out the eldest, throwing her arms back, and
nearly pitching off her balance as she entered the room.

"'Goodness, a man!' squeaked out the other in exactly the same tone, and
with exactly the same motion.

"'May I be allowed to know the cause which has conferred upon me
the honour of a visit from a perfect stranger, as it seems very
extraordinary,' said the mumbler, advancing towards me with stately
steps, and scrutinising me through her spectacles as if she would look
right through me.

"'It seems very extraordinary,' remarked the other emphatically, as she
also brought her spectacles to bear upon my person.

"'Have I the honour of speaking to the amiable and accomplished Mrs.
Parrot-cum-Poodle?" I inquired, advancing two steps with a grave and
respectful air, and making a bow to the ground.

"I am that humble individual," replied the ugliest of the two, making
a profound courtesy; and then turning to her companion, she said in a
whisper, "A very well spoken young man."

"A very well spoken young man," echoed the least ugliest.

"How much have I reason to be gratified with my good fortune;" I
observed, looking as delighted as I could. "I have travelled far to
procure it."

"Take a seat, my dear sir!" exclaimed the old one, with a look of
sympathy that did not make her look more agreeable.

"Take a seat, my dear sir!" repeated the other, in the same tone and
manner.

"Floss, why don't you give the gentleman a chair?" cried number one,
sharply.

"Floss, why don't you give the gentleman a chair?" cried number two in
a similar voice.

"I should prefer standing in the presence of ladies for whom I have
such perfect respect," said I, with another bow equally profound.

"Oh, you are too good!" mumbled the first, with something that was
intended to be a smile.

"Oh, you are too good!" muttered the other, after the same fashion.

"I have come all the way from the village of Parrot-cum-Poodle for the
express purpose of elucidating an important point in the pedigree of
the respectable and ancient family which still bears the name of that
distinguished place," said I, with the gravest face I had ever made use
of. "When the Parrot-cum-Poodles first intermarried with the Tabbies,
connected as the Tabbies previously were with the Macaws, one of the
collateral branches of the Parrot-cum-Poodle family; and the Macaws
having formed several alliances with the Pugs, I am desirous of knowing
what degree of consanguinity the Pugs bear to the present descendants
of the ancient race of the Parrot-cum-Poodles, because it is an inquiry
of exceeding interest, and one of the utmost value towards a right
understanding of the family genealogy. You must remember, that when the
branch of the Tabbies became extinct for want of heirs male, there was a
lineal descendant that could trace his pedigree in a direct line up to
the first inheritor of the ancient name of Parrot-cum-Poodle; but he
being abroad at the time when the title was declared extinct, knew
nothing of his legal claim to the honourable name of his ancestors, and
had a large family which were brought up in perfect ignorance of their
relationship with the Tabbies. One of these has lately married a remote
branch of the Pugs: now the descendants of this pair will stand in a
very extraordinary point of relationship to the Parrot-cum-Poodles; and
I should wish to know where any of these descendants are to be found."

"The oldest old lady had gradually opened her mouth as I proceeded to
show the labyrinth of the Parrot-cum-Poodle genealogy, till it was
extended as far as it could stretch, and she stared at me through her
spectacles with as complete a look of mystification as it was possible
to imagine, and was turning towards the youngest old lady when she met a
mouth equally wide, and eyes equally mystified on the point of turning
towards her with the same desire for explanation. All this time Floss
had stood behind them making the most desperate efforts to swallow her
pocket-handkerchief.

"However it is sufficient to say, that after having bothered the old
folks till they did not know whether they were standing on their head or
their heels, I took my departure; and so ended my second folly, for I
never saw Floss again. And now, having amused you, don't you see, which
is all I aimed at, I must insist upon your going to Oriel Porphyry, and
inquiring of him whether there exist any reason for your suspicions."

"I will try and do it," replied Zabra, in a more cheerful tone than he
had previously used; "and I hope it may be as you say."




CHAP. IX.

A DISCOVERY.


"And so you have no desire to live in the gay world of fashion, Lilya?"
inquired Oriel Porphyry, as they sat together on the sofa.

"I do not understand what fashion means," replied the simple girl.

"Fashion itself is merely the way in which a certain class of persons
dress, think, speak, and conduct themselves," said Oriel. "And the
world of fashion is this exclusive class, with all its gaieties, its
frivolities, its prejudices, its follies, and its crimes."

"If there is any thing wrong in it, I certainly should not like to live
there," observed Lilya.

"What, not to partake of its brilliant pleasures, of its balls, operas,
concerts, dinners, and fêtes?" asked the young merchant.

"The things you mention I know nothing of. Where do they grow?" inquired
his fair companion.

"They do not grow, Lilya," replied Oriel, with a smile; "they are the
amusements of the world of fashion. A ball is a collection of persons,
or rather the amusement of a collection of persons brought together
for the purpose of enjoying the diversion of dancing; and dancing is
a gliding motion of the feet, by which the body is moved in different
attitudes from one place to another."

"And do people amuse themselves in this way; or is it an amusement for
others to look upon?" asked Lilya.

"It is the amusement in which both sexes most delight," said the young
merchant. "They meet together in rooms such as this cabin, only much
larger, and much more gay, where music is provided; and directly the
music plays, they are all set in motion, and so continue till the dance
is over. Some dances consist in whirling round, others in bounding
forward, and a great number in gliding from place to place."

"I do not think a ball would amuse me; I should soon get tired of such
exertion, especially as I cannot perceive what causes the amusement,"
said Lilya.

"The amusement, I believe, is more generally created by the persons who
are brought together than by any quality in the dance," observed Oriel.
"But it is considered a graceful and agreeable way of passing the time;
and, to young people particularly, it appears to possess very great
attractions. It might be rendered a profitable exercise, but the heat
and glitter of a ball-room is not the place in which it can be made most
advantageous."

"I would rather run after the leveret, or chase the young deer for
exercise," observed the simple girl.

"Operas and concerts are places where fashionable people meet to hear
music," continued the young merchant. "It is rarely that the best music
is played there; but, generally, the best performers are there to be met
with."

"I would rather hear Zabra," exclaimed the bashful maiden, hanging down
her head as if afraid the acknowledgment might not have been proper.

"And so would I a thousand times," replied the young merchant,
emphatically. "For in him we might be sure of finding something like
nature, which is not to be hoped for at operas or concerts. As for
dinners and fêtes, they are merely for the purpose of allowing people to
eat and drink together, talk, stare, push, squeeze, and elbow."

"Then I have no desire for any of these," said Lilya. "I do not perceive
the pleasure they would confer. I would rather be what I am, than exist
in a state such as you have described."

"But that cannot be Lilya," observed Oriel, kindly. "I am going to put
you under the protection of a lady--of the lady whom I love, Lilya. She
is a beautiful, accomplished, and amiable woman, of high family, and
admirable disposition; and, as she is obliged to find friends and
acquaintances in the circle I have pointed out to your attention, you
must from the same source derive all your social enjoyments; and then
you will be clothed in silks and velvets, feathers and diamonds--will
not that delight you?"

"Do these fine things make the possessor happy?" asked his companion.

"To tell you the truth Lilya, I do not think they do," replied Oriel
Porphyry.

"Then I will have none of them," she exclaimed. "I know that I can be
happy in these humble skins that I have put together with my own hands;
but I know not that I can be happy in the gay things to which I am
unused; and I would rather retain what I possess, than give it up for
an uncertainty."

"But the Lady Eureka, with whom you will stay, makes use of these
things," said the young merchant; "and, unless you mean to offend your
best friends, you must do the same."

"I will wear them if my friends wish it," observed the simple girl;
"but I would rather not, because I should appear so awkward in them."

"I do not fear that," exclaimed the young merchant. "You will not be
allowed to wear them till you know in what manner they should be worn;
and that you should look, and act, and think, as becomes one who is the
Lady Eureka's friend. The most skilful masters in every department of
education will be provided for you; and every endeavour will be made to
render you as elegant, intellectual, and agreeable a woman as the world
of fashion can produce."

"Will Zabra be there?" inquired Lilya, timidly.

"Yes, I think so. I've no doubt he will," replied Oriel Porphyry.

"Then I should like to be there!" murmured his fair companion, with
marked emphasis on the pronoun. "And the Lady Eureka you speak of--do
you love her?

"Indeed I do, Lilya," replied the young merchant, earnestly; "and
you will find her worthy of being beloved. She is beautiful, good,
affectionate, and intelligent."

"And does she love you in return?" asked Lilya.

"It is my happiness to believe so," responded Oriel.

"How delightful it must be for both of you," exclaimed the simple girl,
with her face beaming with animation as she turned her soft blue eyes
full upon her companion.

"And you shall share in this delight, Lilya, if you prove yourself
worthy of it," said Oriel, kindly. "Eureka is distinguished for her
superior excellence; and she cannot love you unless you possess goodness
to recommend you to her. There is nothing in the world that a woman
ought so much to pride herself upon as the purity of her actions. She
ought not to allow any one even to suspect her of wrong; and if her
behaviour is free from mystery or deceit, she will never give cause for
suspicion. The first step towards the commission of great criminality in
a woman, is a carelessness in tolerating familiarities from more than
one, that are not considered any thing beyond trifling gallantries from
the one by whom she is truly loved; and from that one only can such
things be permitted, because in this instance they become the natural
signs of a sincere affection, that are peculiarly graceful and
refreshing in their influence: but as the wife confines all expressions
of affection to her husband, so ought the loved one to preserve all her
devotion for her lover. Their situations are exactly similar; and 't is
as great a crime for a woman to deceive her lover by allowing others to
share in her affections, as it is for a wife to betray her husband by a
violation of the marriage vow."

"I do not understand you," said Lilya, looking considerably puzzled and
bewildered.

"Ah! I forgot it was to you I was speaking," replied Oriel. "But what I
meant to express to you is, that if you wish to insure and preserve the
good opinion of those whose good opinion is most valuable to you, you
will show yourself particularly anxious to become distinguished for
excellence of conduct and goodness of disposition."

"Ah, that is just what Zabra has told me," exclaimed the blushing
maiden, "He used to be always talking to me in that way; and told me so
much that was proper for me to know, and looked so kind, and appeared
so attentive, that I was always delighted to hear him. But he no longer
talks to me in that manner. He is now harsh in his language, and stern
in his gaze; and he will scarcely look or speak to me."

"Have you not been able to induce him to return to us? I should have
thought your intreaties would have been complied with immediately," said
the young merchant.

"Alas, no!" replied Lilya, sorrowfully. "All my intreaties have been
disregarded."

"Then you must allow me to make you forget him till he comes to his
senses," said Oriel.

"No, I cannot forget him--I'm sure I cannot forget him--indeed, I cannot
forget him," exclaimed the artless girl.

"He scarcely deserves to be so well remembered," observed the young
merchant. "In fact I am beginning to feel angry with him for being so
obstinate."

"Oh, do not be angry with him!" exclaimed Lilya, earnestly; "you must
not be angry with him, for I am sure he is unhappy."

"Well, then, if I promise you not to be angry, you must allow me to be
as kind to you as you would wish him to be," said Oriel Porphyry. "For I
cannot suffer a creature so unoffending as you are to be made wretched
by such unreasonable conduct. I shall regard you as a favorite sister;
and I feel just as much interested in your happiness as if you were so
dearly related to me. I will not allow you to have a wish ungratified
that is harmless and natural. I will endeavour to afford you whatever
pleasure you most delight in, that I have the means of procuring; and I
will watch over you, and guard you from all evil, and shield you from
every danger."

"Oh, how good you are!" murmured the gentle girl, raising her beautiful
eyes, suffused with tears, to his face.

"And I shall expect in return for all this attention to your welfare,
that you will regard me with a sisterly affection," continued the other.
"You must be as kind to me as I will be to you. You must endeavour
always to appear cheerful and willing to be pleased. Every effort that
I make to render your life an enjoyment to you, you must respond to by
showing the gladness it ought to produce. You must be attentive to my
instructions, obedient to my wishes, be gratified with my attentions,
and satisfied with the exertions I shall make to insure your happiness."

"Indeed, I will!" exclaimed the timid maiden, affectionately clasping
the hand of Oriel in her own.

"It will be a most pure and exquisite pleasure to me to be allowed to
labour in such a good work as creating the felicity of so gentle and
innocent a creature," said the young merchant; his noble countenance
beaming with benevolence. "It will be a labour of which my father would
be proud; and to do as he would do must always appear to me to be the
highest degree of excellence. It will be delightful to be loved as a
brother, and to show a brother's care and anxiety and solicitude. It
will be admirable to be able to enjoy the sweet sympathies of a nature
such as yours, and to live in the enjoyment of an interchange of
endearments so purifying to the heart as ours will be. I must be
loved Lilya. I will be as kind to you and as careful of you as may be
necessary for your welfare; but I must be loved."

"And I will love you;" murmured his fair companion, trembling and
blushing she knew not for why--"I will love you as fondly as you wish. I
will love you kindly and affectionately. I will love you always. I will
be at all times every thing you most desire me to be. You shall never
find reason to be dissatisfied. I will not allow you to be unhappy: all
I do shall be done with the intention of giving you pleasure. My heart
is overflowing with your goodness; and, indeed--and, indeed I love you
very much." With these words she caught up the hand she had held in her
own; and eagerly, yet timidly, pressed it to her lips!

Oriel Porphyry was so charmed by the simplicity and genuine affection
expressed by the action, that he drew the bashful girl to his arms,
and pressed her lips to his own. This had scarcely been done, when, on
raising his eyes, he encountered the full and piercing gaze of Zabra.
He stood before them,--his dark features wearing an expression the most
wild and fearful--his breast heaving with passion, and his whole frame
trembling with the powerful excitement under which he laboured. Lilya,
with an exclamation of surprise, shrunk into the farthest corner of the
sofa, and covered her face with her hands. Oriel looked upon him with
astonishment, not unmixed with wonder; for the extraordinary beauty
of his countenance, shrouded by its clustering black curls, with the
intensity of the expression now impressed upon it, looked perfectly
sublime.

"Has it come to this?" muttered the youth, in a voice that seemed choked
with emotion. "Has it come to this? The last hope I have been allowed to
entertain is now utterly crushed. Nothing remains but the conviction of
my own misery, and of your baseness."

"Zabra!" exclaimed Oriel.

"What a reward is this you have given me!" continued the other, in the
same hoarse tones. "What a recompense for all I have done! Could you
think of no way of showing your appreciation of my devotion for you than
by destroying the dream of happiness I have entertained? Have I not been
faithful, and attached, and willing, and affectionate--as ready in the
hour of danger to defend as desirous in a time of pleasure to amuse? Did
I not share with you your anxieties, and rejoice with you in every thing
that gave you joy? And yet you have committed this treachery."

"Zabra!" again exclaimed his patron.

"In what have I failed to do you honour and worship?" still continued
his companion, slightly raising his voice as he proceeded. "In what have
I been deficient? Where have I offended? Have I not sought all times and
opportunities to fulfil your wishes before they could be expressed? Has
not my heart been ever anxious to assist in the realisation of your
best hopes? Is there any one thing you could have wished me to do that
I have not done? If I had been slack in my exertions--if I had been
careless in my services--if I had been heedless, thoughtless, or
inattentive in my behaviour, there might have been some cause for
depriving me of the affections which then I should have been unworthy to
possess:--but I have exceeded all previous examples in the exclusiveness
of my devotion. I have dared to do more than others could have
imagined--I have sought you out to watch over your safety--and have
served you with all honour, and care, and kindness. Why--why have you
used me thus?"

"Zabra, what madness is this?" exclaimed the young merchant, more
surprised than offended.

"And this is your love for Eureka!" continued the youth. "This is the
way in which you return an affection, so deep, so earnest, and so true
as her's has been? Have you lost all notion of justice, of virtue, and
of that sincerity which most ennobles manhood? Where is your sense of
shame? What manner of man are you, who, after you have been loved in
all earnestness, in all purity, in all exclusiveness, and with all that
self-abandonment which is most conspicuous in the love of woman, can
turn round upon the object by whom you have been so truly honoured, and
cast her hopes to the wind?"

"Zabra, you are proceeding beyond the limits of endurance; and I shall
be obliged to acquaint Eureka with your unreasonable and offensive
conduct," said Oriel.

"I--I AM EUREKA!" shouted the disguised page, in a voice that made both
her companions leap from their seats with looks of the most intense
astonishment, as, with flashing eyes, and words that seemed to breathe
of fire, she exclaimed,--"It was Eureka who left her father's house
to escape from an alliance into which she would have been forced had
she remained.--It was Eureka who forsook family and friends, and the
security and comforts of her own land, to share the dangers and watch
over the safety of one to whom she was so completely devoted.--It was
Eureka who quitted the dress and abandoned the prejudices of womanhood,
the more securely to devote her disinterested heart to the service
of her lover.--It was Eureka who dared with him the perils of the
sea--rescued him from the clutches of the pirate--stopped the blows
that were aimed at his life--shed her blood in his defence; and, in all
offices of kindness--in all times of danger and difficulty--in all
moments of tranquillity and desire of innocent enjoyment, thought only
of his security--cared only for his amusement, and was anxious only for
the perfect realisation of his happiness. It was Eureka who did these
things: and I--I am Eureka!"

Probably she might have continued the same eloquent and forcible
language; but the attention of herself and of her lover were attracted
towards their companion. Lilya had listened with the most breathless
interest to the avowal of the disguised Zabra; her eyes were fixed upon
the speaker in one continued stare--wild, ghastly, and unnatural: the
colour fled from her lips, the blood rushed from her face; her breast
heaved in quick, short, spasms, and something was seen rising and
swelling at her throat. An expression of unutterable anguish was
impressed upon her beautiful features; she made two or three choking
gasps, and tottering forward a few steps, fell at the feet of Eureka.

Oriel hurried to raise her from the ground; gently he lifted her head,
and exposed to view a face pale as marble; the delicate mouth, half
open, and the fair blue eyes fixed and sightless. As he attempted to
take her hand, the head fell back upon his shoulder.--She was dead.

"Eureka!" exclaimed the young merchant, in a voice husky with emotion,
as he supported the drooping corpse upon his arm, "you have wronged both
her and me. She would never have been regarded by me save as a sister;
and it was only with a brother's fondness that you saw me caress her. I
am deeply grateful to you for the devotion with which you have honoured
me; but when I look here,"--he continued, gazing on the lifeless form he
held, with feelings that almost deprived him of utterance,--"and find
a creature so perfectly innocent, so simple, so gentle, and so kind,
that has been made its victim, I am obliged to regret that it has been
purchased at so fearful a sacrifice."

He was answered only by hysteric sobs, that in a few minutes were
succeeded by violent convulsions: and Dr. Tourniquet entering the cabin
at this moment, Oriel hastily explained what had transpired; left her to
his care, and rushed upon deck.




CHAP. X.

A FIGHT AT SEA.


"A sail to leeward!" shouted the look-out man on the gangway.

"Give me my glass, Loop!" cried the Captain.

"What does she look like, Cap'ain," inquired Climberkin.

"I see nothin' yet but a tall spar, pointing pretty sharpish into the
sky," said Hearty. "Now I observe she has her royals set, and has an
unkimmon low hull. But take the glass yourself, and see what you can
make of her."

"She's schooner built, sir, with raking masts, carries a smartish number
o' guns, and is altogether as suspicious looking a craft as ever I
seed," observed the Lieutenant.

"Which way does she steer?" inquired the old man.

"She's bearin' right down upon us, sir," replied Climberkin; "and she
means mischief, or I'm pretty considerably mistaken."

"Call up all hands to quarters--throw open the ports, and let the guns
be shotted;" cried the captain. All was immediately bustle and confusion
in every part of the Albatross. Fore and aft the men with the utmost
alacrity, prepared to give the strange vessel a proper welcome in case
of an attack. Muskets, pikes, cutlasses, powder and shot, were handed up
from the hold with as much cheerfulness as if the crew were commencing
some favourite amusement. The officers were giving their orders, the men
busy at their preparations. Some threw off their jackets and tucked up
their sleeves to be the more free in their movements. The decks were
cleared: all things put away that could be an obstacle at such a time;
the guns run out, and every man was at his post ready for action.

The schooner bore down gallantly upon the Albatross, and certainly was a
very suspicious-looking vessel. A shot from one of her carronades came
booming along without doing any mischief.

"There's no mistaking that, captain;" said Oriel Porphyry, who had been
watching the proceedings around him with considerable interest.

"She's a pirate, sir, there's not a doubt on 't," observed the old man;
"but she'll find we are not to be caught napping; and as she's ventured
to begin the game, we'll just see who can play at it best. Give her a
taste of the long gun, Boggle."

"Ay, ay, sir;" replied the second lieutenant.

"I must bear a hand in this, Hearty;" said the young merchant, unable to
restrain his eagerness to join in the approaching fight.

"As you please, sir," rejoined the captain; "and as we know you are
a fighter, and one o' the right sort, we shall be very glad o' your
company. Here's a capital cutlass, which is much at your service."

"No, thank you; I'll go and get my own arms;" replied Oriel, and he
immediately left the deck.

A long brass thirty-two pounder under the management of an experienced
gunner was now got ready, and fired with such precision as to make the
splinters fly from her hull.

"Pitch the shot into her as often as you can load and fire;" cried the
captain.

"Ay, ay, sir;" said the man at the gun.

At this instant, a shot from the schooner brought down some of the
standing and running rigging of the Albatross, and severed the jaws of
the main-gaff. It was immediately answered by her long gun, which was
kept rapidly firing, and ploughed up the decks of the pirate at every
shot. During this, the Albatross by her superiority of sailing, kept
wearing round the schooner, raking her fore and aft with a most
destructive fire. They were now near enough to see that the decks of the
supposed pirate were covered with men, among whom the thirty-two pounder
had done considerable mischief. Finding that this sort of warfare was
telling against them, the pirates altered their course, made sail, and
ranged up within a cable's length of their opponent, displaying at the
same time in their ship a black flag soaring up to her main-peak. As
they approached, the sound of many voices came over the waters, and
the crew of the Albatross distinctly heard the pirates singing in full
chorus:--

       "Our ship sails on the wave,
            On the wave, on the wave,
        Our ship sails on the wave, Captain Death;
    For free mariners are we, and we ride the stormy sea,
        And our Captain still shall be
            Captain Death! Captain Death!
      Our Captain still shall be Captain Death!"

"It must be the miscreants we left on the island of Madagascar;" said
the young merchant. "I remember that murderous song well; but we'll
strive hard to spoil their singing."

"Scrunch me if we don't make 'em change their toon at any rate;"
exclaimed the old man. "There's nothin in life I've been so much wishin
for as a 'portunity to sarve out that ere double distilled willain
Scrumpydike, or Rifle, or whatever his name is."

"And you must leave the other scoundrel to me;" added Oriel Porphyry. "I
have an account to settle with him, and if I can get within reach, he
shall not escape."

The pirate ranged up on the quarter of the Albatross, pouring in her
broadside as she advanced, which was answered with all the guns that
could be brought to bear on that side of the ship, and then, by a
manoeuvre skilfully executed, the Albatross was made to wear round the
schooner, pouring in a volley of musketry, till she presented her other
side, from which another sweeping fire belched forth. The shot crashed
through the timbers of the pirate, committing dreadful slaughter upon
her closely packed deck, and when the smoke which enveloped her bows
cleared away, it was seen that her foretop-mast had gone, her sails had
been shot through in numerous places, and a considerable portion of
her rigging hung in ragged shreds. Three cheers from the crew of the
Albatross, and groans, and shouts and imprecations from the schooner,
evinced the effect the firing had in both ships.

The pirate bore up as if with the intention of running alongside to
board, and poured in her broadside as she advanced, which killed six or
seven men, and wounded several others; but her opponent waited till she
was within about three ships' length, and then gave her the contents
of all her available carronades. The mizen and mainmast of the pirate,
which had previously been wounded, now fell by the board. At this
instant the schooner fell foul of the Albatross on her larboard quarter,
and the pirates made several desperate attempts to board, but the crew
of the other ship kept up such a murderous discharge of musketry and
small arms from her tops as well as from her decks, that every attempt
was ineffectual, and the Albatross wearing off, discharged her larboard
quarter-deck guns, and such of the main-deck guns as could be brought to
bear, into the schooner's larboard bow.

The excitement on board the Albatross was now at its height. Every man
was at his post, and one spirit seemed to stir the whole. The wounded
were carried down to the surgeon as soon as their hurts were known, and
the dead thrown into the sea that they might not incommode the living.
Oriel Porphyry continued in one of the most exposed parts of the ship
encouraging the men, and firing a musket whenever the ships were near
enough for him to do so with any effect. Broadside after broadside
followed from the Albatross in rapid succession, sweeping the decks of
the schooner, and splitting her timbers into fragments. But the pirate
captain still made every exertion to board the merchant ship. His vessel
was scarcely manageable, and nearly half her crew were either killed
or wounded: but he bore up to his opponent with the same dauntless
resolution that had distinguished him throughout his career; he cheered
his men on to the fight; and continued to discharge every gun that could
be brought into play.

A quick and well-directed fire of musketry was kept up from the tops and
forecastle of the Albatross, and her quarter deck guns were discharged
with scarcely any intermission and with dreadful effect. The schooner
now fell on board the merchant ship on the starboard quarter, and the
pirates lashed her bowsprit to the stump of their mainmast; but the
lashings soon afterwards gave way, and the two vessels, yard-arm and
yard-arm, continued to pour into each other their sweeping broadsides,
very much to the advantage of the Albatross, who was crippling her
opponent at every discharge, and slaughtering her crew.

At this time the main-mast of the pirate fell over the side, and as the
smoke cleared away, she was seen with her ports jammed in, her decks
torn up in several places, her hull battered, and every part of her
wearing the appearance of a complete wreck. But Captain Death was not a
man to think of surrendering. When his vessel became short of hands, he
assisted in working a gun; and as soon as he could get the two ships
close alongside, he headed a party that lashed them together, and then,
followed by the remainder of his crew--men of all nations, of all
colours, and of every kind of costume, rushed upon the deck of the
Albatross.

The fight now became one of hand to hand. The pistol, the pike, and
the cutlass seemed the only weapons in requisition. The crew of the
Albatross hurried to the place where Captain Death, Lieutenant Rifle,
and their followers were hewing their way with the most desperate
valour. Oriel Porphyry, the captain, Climberkin, and Boggle headed
their party, cheering them on, and cutting down their opponents. Oriel
Porphyry was engaged with a gigantic negro, whose head he severed at a
blow, and then attacked a second and a third with the same spirit, and
with a similar effect. Old Hearty beheld his ancient enemy, first known
to him by the name of Scrumpydike, and frantic with the remembrance of
what he had once suffered at his hands, he rushed upon him, cutlass in
hand. A pistol was discharged at his head as he advanced which missed
its object, and the two were immediately engaged in hacking at each
other with all their strength and skill. The old man in strength was the
equal of his opponent, but he was his superior at the weapon, at which
he had been practising ever since their previous fight, with the desire
of having his revenge should they meet again. The struggle was a fierce
one, but it was brief. Hearty cut his opponent's sword-arm above the
elbow with such force that it severed the bone, and at the same moment
the young midshipman Loop run him through the body with a boarding-pike.
With a malignant scowl he fell dead on the deck.

Oriel Porphyry had endeavoured to come in contact with the pirate
captain, whom he observed at a short distance from him cutting down all
by whom he was opposed; but several times he was attacked by some other
of the gang whom he was obliged to dispose of before he could have the
slightest chance of getting at him. At last Captain Death saw his former
companion, and freeing himself from those with whom he was engaged, he
hurried towards him, waving his uplifted sword streaming with blood, and
shouting exclamations of rage and defiance.

"It is you I have sought far and near since you escaped me, but there's
no escape for you now;" muttered the pirate, as he rushed furiously
upon the young merchant, and strived by the force and rapidity of his
blows to bring the combat to a speedy termination. But he was engaged
with one of the most accomplished swordsmen in existence, with a
well-tried weapon, and a spirit burning to destroy the wretch with whom
he fought. He parried dexterously, and warded off with the greatest ease
the most furious blows that were aimed at him; and the blood flowing
from wounds in the captain's head and shoulder soon proved that he was
not content with acting merely on the defensive. During the struggle
these two got separated from the other combatants, and they stood in a
part of the deck unnoticed by the men engaged on either side. Death,
smarting from his wounds, pressed upon his antagonist with increasing
rage and violence; but the latter, knowing that the victory was in his
own hands, allowed the other to exhaust his strength in unavailing
blows; then when he found the pirate's exertions slacken, his sword
flashed about with a rapidity that baffled the eye, and seemed to draw
blood at every stroke. He followed him with a strength of arm that
appeared perfectly irresistible, beating down his defence, and striking
aside his blows; but just as he was hurrying forward to put a finishing
stroke to the contest, he tumbled over a dead body, and fell unarmed at
the feet of his foe.

"Ah, ha!" shouted the pirate chief, while a gleam of malignant
satisfaction shot from his eyes; "your doom is sealed." He swung round
his sabre to bring it with all his strength upon the head of his
defenceless antagonist, but before the blow had time to descend he heard
a slight shriek, a rush of feet, and the next moment received two pistol
bullets in his body. Oriel Porphyry regained his footing as Captain
Death fell staggering on the deck, and with a wild cry of exultation
Eureka rushed into his arms.

The pirates on the fall of their leader became dispirited; but knowing
what would be their reward if taken, they returned to their ship,
fighting desperately every inch of the way, and the strife was renewed
upon their own deck till every man of them was cut down. The crew
of the Albatross had upon the termination of the conflict dispersed
themselves over the schooner with the intention of securing whatever
valuables she might contain, when they were obliged to make a rapid
retreat to their own vessel, as the schooner was rapidly sinking, but
they did not depart without bringing with them a prisoner whom they had
found secreted in the hold. The lashings were immediately cut away, and
the Albatross had just time to sheer off, when the pirate filled and
went down.

"Well, master Log!" exclaimed Boggle to his trembling prisoner; "I likes
to ha' particular notions o' things in general, as every man as is a man
and thinks like a man should have, and I has a notion o' you as is werry
particular; arn't you a willain?"

"A villain--a villain--a great villain--a very great villain--indeed I
may say a pretty considerable, atrocious, abominable tarnation villain,
mister Boggle!" cried the other with a look that showed that he had been
entirely put out of conceit of himself.

"What you says true's parfectly right," said the second lieutenant;
"and I must pay you the compliment to acknowledge as how you shows a
deal o' gumption in your 'splanation o' your own character. Don't you
desarve to be spiflicated?"

"Spiflicated--spiflicated--well spiflicated--regularly spiflicated--I
must confess that I ought to be right down regularly spiflicated,
smothered, smashed, dished up and done for;" acknowledged the
unfortunate captain's clerk, with a most woeful physiognomy and a
sincerity of manner that carried conviction to his hearers.

"I likes to make ev'ry fellar comfortable arter his own fashion," said
Boggle, with the utmost gravity; and then addressing a sailor who was
grinning from ear to ear at a few paces distant, he cried, "I say,
Solemnchops! just rig a noose in the main top gallant halyards."

"I'll do it wi' pleasure for the gentleman, sir;" replied the man,
benevolently hastening to execute the command.

"Now, master Log, I begs to say as how I got no notion o' hurtin' any o'
your feelins," continued the lieutenant; "but I considers it necessary
for your health as you should be hanged. I knows unkimmon well as human
natur' is human natur', and in consequence o' that ere I comes to the
conclusion as it is the most properest thing as is for you to make
yourself agreeable to your friends wi' a dance upon nuffin. But afore I
leaves you in this here moloncholy perdickyment, I think 't will be but
friendly in me to hint to you as how you ought to die like a respectable
'dividual; arn't you rayther a miserable sinner?"

"A miserable sinner!--a miserable sinner! a very miserable sinner--a
very shocking miserable sinner, indeed I may say a very extraordinary
shocking miserable sinner, and no mistake;" cried the unhappy Log.

More dead than alive the trembling wretch had the noose placed round his
neck, and was run up to the halyards, accompanied by the consolations of
the friendly Boggle.

"Hullo! what are you about there? Let that man down directly!" shouted
the captain as he approached the scene, and the ex-captain's clerk
descended upon the deck with a velocity that sent all the breath out of
his body. "What's the meaning o' this?"

"Why, you see, sir," replied the second lieutenant, with his usual
gravity; "I can't say as Master Log be given to drinkin, but I sartainly
seed him just now unkimmonly elewated."




CHAP. XI.

THE DEATH OF CAPTAIN DEATH, AND THE MEETING OF THE SHIPS.


"There's no saving his life, don't you see;" remarked Tourniquet, who
had discovered that Captain Death was not quite dead, and had been
examining his wounds. "Every effort would be useless here, all skill
unavailing; and there are many others in imminent danger, to whom I
might be of service."

"Stop, he moves!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, as he stood gazing on the
changing features of the dying pirate.

Captain Death lay extended on his back on the deck where he had fallen.
His sword was still firmly grasped in his hand, and both his arms were
stretched out nearly at right angles with his body. The long silken cap
in which he used to confine his black hair had fallen off, and the hair
fell in disordered masses, clotted with blood, around his face. He had
allowed his beard and moustachios to grow, and they now added to the
natural ferocity of his countenance. His jacket, of the richest velvet,
was cut through in several places, and stiffened with gore, which had
run down and soiled the crimson shawl of embroidered silk he wore girded
round his waist, and had more conspicuously stained his lower garments
of linen. His face was livid, and his eyes blood-shot, and the
expression which was impressed upon them kept continually changing
from pain to rage, and from rage to hate. Occasionally some convulsive
movement of the muscles would more strongly distort his features, and
his body writhed and twisted as if in great agony. After a long fit of
violent shuddering, which shook every part of his body, his face assumed
a more tranquil expression, and his lips moved as if with an effort to
speak.

"Virgo!" he whispered; "'tis your father. He comes to drag me to the
halter. See how he glares at me! He laughs. He shows me his chains. No,
no, no! 'Tis not that savage old man. 'Tis not him. There is no one.
Come to me, my preserver, come to me; and let the refreshing purity of
your caresses drive away the evil thoughts which have made my nature so
abandoned and desperate. There is the little bed, with its clean white
curtains; there are the flowers. There, there! I see you all again,
reminding me of a state of innocence I was unworthy to share. Come, my
preserver, come!"

"He is delirious, don't you see;" observed the doctor.

"Do you think there is any possibility of his recovering?" inquired the
young merchant.

"Not the slightest; he won't live an hour;" replied Tourniquet.

"Hush!" exclaimed Oriel; "he speaks again."

"Virgo! 'tis time to rise. See how the rosy morning dawns upon the room!
Let me kiss you before you leave me: there! my soul is on my lips, and
I drink in a better life from yours. Draw around the curtains. My face
is on the pillow; I cannot see you, but my blessings follow you wherever
you go. Ah! you leave the room, and all is strife and hate and passion
within me."

"He's talking of that young creature that was so fond of him, don't you
see," said the doctor; "though for my part I can't comprehend what she
could see in him to like."

"There's no knowing," replied Oriel Porphyry; "the love of woman is a
mystery which none properly understand and few appreciate."

"She's dead!" exclaimed the pirate in a heart-broken voice; "she's dead!
the innocent, the good, the gentle, the fearless, the confiding one, who
would have plucked the rank weeds from my sinful nature, has perished
and left me none like her in the world. She died for me--for me, a
wretch unworthy to breathe in her presence. All is lost. There is no
goodness now remaining on the earth. She's dead! she's dead!"

"I did not think he had so much natural feeling in him;" said the young
merchant.

"There's nothing so evil but what has some good in it, don't you see;"
replied the surgeon.

The expression in the features of Captain Death now underwent a complete
change: it became fierce, daring, and revengeful. His body appeared
violently agitated, and his arms moved with convulsive twitches.

"Pipe all hands to quarters!" shouted the dying pirate with all
his remaining strength. "Make sail--clear away for fighting--run
out the guns and shot them.--She's a rich merchantman, and there's
enough in her to enrich us all. Pour out a broadside--there goes her
main-mast:--another, and her mizenmast goes by the board. Sweep her
quarter deck with our quarter deck guns, and pour down upon her a fire
of musketry from the tops. Board her by the bow-sprit. Now, boys, follow
me and cut down all." Here the features of the dying pirate became
absolutely terrific, and he made some desperate struggles to rise from
the ground, in which he at last succeeded; when, waving his sword round
his head, he sung in a piercing voice--

         "We stifle ev'ry cry,
              Ev'ry cry,--ev'ry cry--
      We stifle ev'ry cry, Captain Death!
    And then we spread our sails that are filled with welcome gales,
      Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales,'
          Captain Death! Captain Death!
    Singing, 'Dead men tell no tales,' Captain Death."

"Ah!" screamed the singer, while an expression of the most intense agony
distorted his features. He dropped the sword he had held; he drew both
his hands suddenly to his wounded side, and staggering back, gasping
frightfully for breath, he fell violently on his back.

"He's dead, don't you see;" said the doctor.

"A sail on the starboard quarter;" cried a man aloft.

"No more pirates, I hope;" exclaimed Fortyfolios, who had just ventured
on deck.

"It is not quite impossible, don't you see;" was the surgeon's
encouraging reply, and both almost immediately descended the hatchway,
one to look after his patients, and the other to look after himself.
Oriel Porphyry hastened to the captain, whom he found standing in the
waist, examining the distant vessel through a glass.

"Any more fighting preparing for us?" inquired the young merchant.

"Can't exactly say yet, sir, but it's best to be prepared;" replied old
Hearty, as he gave some orders to the men around him. "She looms large,
and looks as if she was arter standing right across our fore-foot. Now
she's alterin her course, and is comin with all sail set right down upon
us. Call all hands to quarters: Climberkin, let the guns be shotted,
and the dead bodies flung into the sea;--and yet I think she's a
merchantman. Scrunch me, if it arn't my old ship, the Whittington!"

"What, my father's vessel?" asked Oriel Porphyry.

"The very same!" cried the old man with delight. "I knows her better
nor any ship I ever sailed in. No doubt she wants to speak with us.
Bring her head up to the wind, helmsman! I wonder whether my old captain
is alive still? He was a right-down trump. But what a mazement he'll be
in to find me in command o' the Albatross."

"I know Captain Barter well. I've met him frequently at my father's
table, and a very gentlemanly, sensible man he is;" said the young
merchant. "I have no doubt he's brought me some communication from
Columbus."

"We shall soon see, sir, as we shall be alongside very shortly;"
observed Hearty.

"Is master Oriel Porphyry on board?" was shouted from the Whittington,
as the ships neared each other. Oriel caught up a speaking trumpet.

"Yes, Captain Barter, I am here;" he replied.

"I will come on board, sir, if you please, as soon as a boat is
lowered;" said the captain of the Whittington.

"Have you any communication for me from my father?" inquired Oriel.

"I have, sir; and 'tis of great consequence," replied the other.

Oriel Porphyry was now all anxiety and impatience to know the
intelligence he was promised. He hurried to the quarter-deck to receive
his visitor, and strode backwards and forwards with hasty steps till he
made his appearance. Now he thought that the news must be bad, and in a
moment after he imagined that it was good. One instant he anticipated
the death of his father, and in the next, hoped that he had been raised
by his fellow-citizens to the highest honours in the nation. And in this
way his mind continued changing its impressions for the better and for
the worse, till he had worked himself into a state of considerable
excitement, when Captain Barter advanced towards him.

He was an elderly man, of gentlemanly appearance; neat in his dress, and
polite in his deportment. His face was pale, and slightly marked with
wrinkles; and his features were mild and pleasing. His hair was gray,
and his body rather thin; but he was perfectly upright in his walk, and
his step was firm and manly.

"I regret I have unpleasant intelligence to communicate to you, sir,"
said Captain Barter, after they had exchanged the customary salutations.

"It is then as I suspected," exclaimed Oriel Porphyry, earnestly. "My
father is dead."

"No, sir, it is not so bad as that," replied the captain, as if
hesitating in making the communication.

"What is it then? let me know immediately. I am sure by your manner it
is something dreadful," cried the young merchant.

"Your father is a prisoner," said Captain Barter, with a look of sincere
commiseration.

"Have they dared?" exclaimed Oriel.

"But I am sorry to say it is worse than that, sir," added his companion.

"What! what is it? Do not keep me in suspense--I implore you to tell
me," cried the other.

"He is ordered for execution," said the captain.

"The miscreants!" muttered the young merchant. "But I knew it would
be so. I knew they would not rest satisfied with their privileges
curtailed. I knew they would seek the first opportunity to regain their
lost power. I was convinced that they would regard my father as their
enemy, and sacrifice him on the earliest occasion. But tell me how it
was brought about? I would know all."

"After the revolution, which effected those important changes in the
government of which you have been informed," said Captain Barter,
"nothing could have exceeded the appearance of good will which existed
in every part of the empire. The emperor seemed desirous of nothing so
much as gratifying the people; and his ministers appeared to emulate
each other in endeavouring to become popular. Public fêtes were given
in honour of the revolution, at which the emperor assisted in person;
and measures of the most liberal character were passed through the
legislature, without a division. All was harmony and social order.
The citizens congratulated each other on the improved state of the
country--the industrious classes found themselves provided with
sufficient employment, at a fair recompense--trade again became
brisk--commerce flourished; and abundance seemed to be generally
diffused over the whole surface of Columbia."

"A mere trick!" exclaimed Oriel Porphyry; "nothing but an artifice to
lull the people into a fancied security, I'll wager my existence."

"Just so, sir," replied the captain. "The leaders of the people had
now nothing to complain of. Every improvement was made before they had
time to offer a suggestion on the subject; and that being rendered
comparatively useless, they quickly lost their influence over their
fellow-citizens. Your father, observing how well things were proceeding,
withdrew himself from all participation in politics, considering that
his services were no longer required, and devoted himself to his
commercial pursuits, and to the realisation of those philanthropic
desires that have distinguished every portion of his existence. He
became again so completely the private citizen, that no person unaware
of the circumstances could have imagined that he had recently played so
important a part in the late changes. All the most influential of the
popular leaders gradually retired into private life in the same manner."

"I see the scheme," cried Oriel, eagerly. "The vile treachery becomes
manifest. How well 'twas planned. How artfully designed. Oh! these
planners and plotters are a brilliant set; they are too wise for us poor
citizens."

"So they proved, sir," continued the captain; "for while the things I
have related were being done, the government gradually and imperceptibly
concentrated a military force in the metropolis, by calling in portions
of the garrisons distributed over the empire; and these were well
supplied with all the necessaries of war, and liberally paid, and
officered by men upon whom the government could depend. Soon after this,
on the pretence that they were no longer necessary, the national guards
were disbanded and deprived of their arms. Suspicion was now created
among the sharp-sighted few; but the public generally did not appear to
have the slightest notion of the danger which threatened them. As the
object of the emperor and his party began to assume a more threatening
aspect, the leaders of the people took the alarm, and endeavoured to
awaken their fellow-citizens to a sense of their danger. In the course
of a few hours every one of them was securely lodged in a dungeon."

"And my father amongst them," exclaimed the young merchant.

"He appears to have been the chief object at which their malice was
directed," observed the captain. "At this time it was thought necessary
to throw off the mask. The old ministers were restored to their
forfeited privileges and possessions; and your father's implacable foe,
Philadelphia, was placed at the head of the government. An imposing
force of soldiery was kept continually under arms, to prevent any rising
of the populace; and seizures of concealed arms were made in every
direction. The people, deprived of their leaders and of their weapons,
felt themselves powerless. They saw too late the trap into which they
had fallen. They beheld the despotism that was approaching them, and
were unable to make the slightest effort to defend themselves from its
approaches. Domiciliary visits were now made, upon the most frivolous
pretexts, to the houses of the principal citizens; and papers and
arms were seized, and their owners, if they gave the slightest cause
of offence, were hurried to prison. Any one known or suspected of
entertaining hostile intentions was seized and incarcerated, and fined
in heavy penalties, or sent out of the country. The citizens were
confounded, and appeared utterly unable to make the slightest
resistance."

"Oh, I wish I had been there!" exclaimed Oriel, eagerly, "I would have
infused such a spirit into their natures as should have made them ready
to rush upon their oppressors with a certainty of success; and that
conviction should have insured their triumph. I would have made their
hearts astir with the love of freedom, till all obstacles in their way
should have been as straws in the path of the tempest. I would have made
them fight like lions--I would have made them conquer like men. But what
became of my father? you have not told me that. Tell me what became of
him?"

"While they were placing the citizens in a degree of subjection fit
for their purpose," replied Captain Barter, "with a monstrous deal of
unnecessary parade, they were making preparations for the trial of the
leaders of the people. The long-expected day came, and its proceedings
were watched with eager interest by the citizens, although they dared
not show the anxiety they felt. Master Porphyry, with his companions,
were arraigned as rebels and traitors, accused of murder and treason,
and reviled by the hired advocates of the crown in terms which only the
more exposed the badness of the cause they defended. Philadelphia was
president of the Chamber of Peers, by whom they were tried; and he took
every occasion to abuse, brow-beat, and threaten your father in language
the most intemperate that can be imagined; but your father replied in a
manner that would have conciliated a savage. His language was mild, his
bearing noble; and when he was called upon to make his defence, he made
one of the most eloquent speeches that had ever been heard within those
walls. He merely related what he had done, and what were his reasons for
so doing; exposed the errors of the government, and the mischiefs to
which they had led; recounted the share he had had in the revolution,
which had reduced the power of the crown and of the aristocracy to
reasonable limits, and the motives which induced him to use all his
influence in the contest: and his defence so utterly annihilated the
charges brought against him, that he must have been acquitted had he
been treated with any thing like justice; but his judges were his
accusers, and they sealed his doom before they entered upon his trial.
The prisoners were all found guilty. Some were sent into exile, some
imprisoned for life, some were heavily fined--and Master Porphyry was
condemned to be beheaded, and to have all his property confiscated to
the crown."

"The murderous and insatiate tyrants!" exclaimed the young merchant.

"When Philadelphia delivered the sentence," continued the captain, "he
appeared to take a malignant joy in having such an opportunity for
reviling your father--there was no name of opprobrium he did use: but
your honoured parent replied to him only with a look of wonder and pity;
and with a bow to his relentless judges, left the court in company with
his guards."

"Noble old man!" cried Oriel, earnestly.

"As soon as the people learned the result of the trial, they were in the
deepest affliction," added Captain Barter, "that the kind and excellent
philanthropist--the true and disinterested patriot, the glory of their
city, and the pride of the world--should perish on a scaffold, was more
than they could endure. But they had no leaders, and no weapons; and,
although they would have risen in a mass in his rescue, under the
circumstances of the case they saw that any attempt of the kind was
utterly hopeless. All eyes were then turned toward you. Your character
had already acquired their admiration; your relationship to Master
Porphyry excited their devotion; and, knowing that you had departed on
a voyage, the most powerful friends of your father met secretly for the
purpose of devising some plan by which they could make you acquainted
with your father's danger, and with their desire to assist in his
rescue. With this idea in view, all your father's vessels that could be
sent to sea, besides a vast number of ships belonging to other merchants
who had volunteered to give their assistance, sailed in quest of you.
From knowing something of the plan of voyage designed by your father I
imagined that about this time you would be crossing the Atlantic; so
here I have been sailing about for the last two days, and there are
nearly a hundred sail of merchant vessels in the same pursuit."

"A sail on the larboard bow!" shouted a man.

"That is one of them, I have no doubt, sir," observed Captain Barter.

"A sail on the starboard quarter!" shouted another.

"There is another, sir!" added the captain.

"A sail to leeward!" cried a third.

"We shall have them all about you soon, sir," said Captain Barter.

"There's a sail in every point o' the compass," cried Climberkin, as he
swept the horizon with his glass.

"I told you so, sir," continued the captain.

Climberkin was right. Wherever the eye could gaze the spars of a vessel
were seen rising from the wave; and, apparently, as soon as each ship
discovered the Albatross, she made all sail towards her. It was a
beautiful sight to see them approaching, most of them with every stitch
of canvass set--some bearing right down upon the Albatross, and others
making tacks; while the distant cheers of their crews, answered by the
crews of the Whittington and the Albatross, increased the stirring
character of the scene. As soon as they were near enough a boat was seen
putting off from each vessel; and, a few minutes after, the captains of
the different ships came on board the Albatross, and sat with Oriel
Porphyry in his cabin for several hours, in deep and earnest conference.
These had scarcely departed when others arrived. New vessels kept
continually approaching. As fast as one party left the ship others made
their appearance, and at last the Albatross was surrounded by an immense
fleet. All their commanders having at last communicated with Oriel
Porphyry, they crowded sail for Columbia.

"Captain," exclaimed the young merchant, after the last of his visitors
had departed, "are you sure of the crew?"

"To a man, sir," replied old Hearty. "There's such a stir in the ship as
never was afore. They are all impatient to be led against your enemies.
I never saw such enthusiusiasm in all my life."

"Keep them in that humour, captain," said Oriel Porphyry. "Let every man
have a good supply of ball cartridges, a musket, a pair of pistols, and
a cutlass."

"Yes, sir."

"And let a party be formed who can use the hatchet and crow-bar with
good effect."

"Yes, sir."

"And get the carpenter to make carriages for the larger guns, so that
they can be dragged by ropes upon the land; and let them be manned by
picked men."

"Yes, sir: and if we don't rescue your honourable father out o' the
clutches o' them ere lubbers, I'm spiflicated if we don't diskiver the
reason why."

"How far are we from port?" asked Oriel.

"About two days sail, sir," replied the captain.

"We shall be too late if the greatest despatch is not used," observed
the young merchant, earnestly. "I rely upon your using every effort that
your skill can suggest."

"I'll do every thing, sir, as a mortal cretur can do!" exclaimed the old
man. "I arn't the fellow to stand shilly-shally at such a time as this.
I'll look to every thing myself, and see about it immediately."

The captain had scarcely left the cabin, and Oriel had thrown himself
back in his seat, in deep and earnest meditation, when he was disturbed
by a knock at the door.

"Come in," he cried.

"May I enter, Oriel?" said Eureka, as she gently opened the door.

"Of course, dearest!" replied Oriel Porphyry, as he hastened towards
her, and led her into the cabin, with her hands clasped in his.

"You are kinder to me than I deserve, Oriel," murmured his fair
companion, with a look of gratitude from her lustrous eyes that he
found perfectly irresistible.

"Not at all, my Eureka!" said her lover, affectionately; "am I not
indebted to you for life and liberty, and all that render them valuable?
Do I not know how much you have dared and endured for my sake? And
do you think it possible, that with a knowledge of these things, I
can regard you with any other feeling than that of the most devoted
affection? No, Eureka, I must love you while I have life. But how
cleverly you continued the disguise. When I first saw you, I recognised
in the handsome page a resemblance to features it was impossible for me
not to notice; but your scheme was so admirably managed that I never
entertained the slightest suspicion of your true character."

"Nor up to the present moment has any one in the ship," replied Eureka.
"They only know me as Zabra, except that worthy creature, Tourniquet,
who discovered my secret when I was wounded, and I immediately made him
aware of my history and object in joining you, at which he was so much
delighted as to proffer his assistance in carrying on the deception; and
I should have been discovered but for him on more than one occasion."

"That accounts for his confusion at the tiger-hunt," observed Oriel;
"and for what I considered the mystery in your behaviour. But there is
nothing strange or unaccountable in it now. I only wonder at you. I am
amazed when I think of your risking so much for one who is so little
worthy of such extraordinary devotion."

"You will not love me the less for it, will you?" inquired Eureka,
gazing in his face with a look of thrilling tenderness.

"Love you less, Eureka!" exclaimed the young merchant; "that would be
ungrateful! While I have an appreciation of truth and excellence and
fidelity, and that wonderful intellectual power you have so often
exhibited, the admiration with which I regard you must approach
idolatry. You are a creature to be proud of."

"And yet I am afraid I shall lose you," said his companion, anxiously;
"I have just heard upon what errand you are hastening. It is full of
danger. It is beset by perils. But the cause is a proud one, and I do
not attempt to dissuade you from proceeding with it. Go on your career
of glory. Give your impetuous soul free scope for the developement of
its energies. Think not of me, except the thought can nerve your arm and
strengthen your resolution. Be as daring as your fearless nature prompts
you to be. With such an end in view as that you have before you, I can
allow myself no other sense, or impression, or emotion than that which
may accompany my earnest hopes for your success. I have come to a
resolution to forget my own selfish feelings. It is time I should. Your
advancement, your greatness, your fame, are the objects to which any
thoughts must now always incline. If you live to triumph over your
enemies, and to attain that eminence whereon you are so desirous of
being placed, and to which you will do so much honour, none will rejoice
more sincerely than she who has shown herself so anxious to insure your
happiness--if you die----"

"Eureka, my adored!" rapturously exclaimed Oriel, pressing her to his
breast, as he noticed that she was unable to proceed, "there is no fear
of such a result. Believe me you alarm yourself unnecessarily. I shall
succeed, I am assured of it: I shall succeed to have the proud enjoyment
of glorifying you with my pre-eminence. I feel convinced that if we can
only arrive in time, I shall rescue my father. Nothing shall stop me--I
will not be defeated: and if we should be too late for this great
object, which I see no reason to apprehend, I will not rest satisfied
till I have punished his murderers. I have no dread of death; but if I
should die, I shall die a death worthy of the lover of Eureka. I shall
die in endeavouring to rescue my country from its oppressors.--I shall
die in avenging the murder of one of the noblest and best of men."

"One word more, Oriel--one word more," said Eureka. "I have only to ask
you, as a testimony of your love for me, that, if in the coming conflict
you should meet my father, you will not kill him."

"He deserves little mercy at my hands," replied the young merchant. "But
your desire is natural, and I will comply with it. He must answer for
his crimes to the country they have disgraced. And now let us go on
deck, a little fresh air would do neither of us any harm; and when you
behold the noble fleet that has joined me in my enterprise, I hope that
all your apprehensions will vanish."

Among the crew of the Albatross the intelligence of the events which had
occurred in Columbia created an extraordinary sensation; and as soon
as it was known that Oriel Porphyry designed attempting his father's
rescue, every man in the ship volunteered to assist in the enterprise.
Never was such a general indignation produced as that which burst from
them when they learned the fate to which the government had doomed
Master Porphyry. A land fight was something new to them, but they did
not prepare themselves for it with less alacrity, nor were their tongues
less active than their limbs. Various opinions prevailed as to the
best method of bringing about a revolution; and as to the best form
of government which should replace the old one, there were as many
different notions as tongues to utter them. A group had gathered
together in the forecastle, where they had been engaged for some
time over an extra allowance of grog, discussing different political
subjects, when Boggle, who, notwithstanding his promotion, was amazingly
fond of associating with his old messmates, joined the disputants.

"I'll tell you what it is, my mates," said he, "government's tryin to
come their handy-dandy sugar-candy over us, and we arn't a goin to stand
nuffin o' the sort. Are we to be slaves?"

"Never," shouted a dozen voices simultaneously.

"Nebber," echoed Roly Poly, with equal energy, as he was gulping down
the contents of a huge black-jack of hot grog.

"Now I likes to have particular notions o' things in general as every
man as is a man, and thinks like a man, should," continued Boggle. "And
I must say as how it's my notion that there's never no occasion for no
government whatsomdever."

"Of course," remarked the boatswain, who would have thought it high
treason to have disagreed with his officer.

"Ob coorse," repeated Roly Poly, still pulling away at the black-jack.

"We don't want no rulers--there arn't no 'cessity for 'em;" said the
second lieutenant. "But if we must have kings--let every man be his own
king."

"Let every man be his own king," was echoed from one to another
throughout the circle.

"Let ebery man be his own king," repeated the fat cook.

"The whole circumbendibus comes to this," continued Boggle. "If so be as
how we're obligated to pay for what we don't want, it's hoptional on our
parts not to want what we're obligated to pay for."

"Certainly, sir," said the boatswain.

"Sartinly, sar," echoed Roly Poly, endeavouring to hold his head up, and
look as if he understood what was going forward.

"There's nuffin but oppression goin on fore and aft," said the orator.
"They grinds the faces o' the poor, and makes their bread o' the flour;
and therefore we must stand up for the liberty o' the subject."

"We must stand up for the liberty o' the subject, there's not a doubt
on't," remarked the boatswain, evidently without knowing what the
liberty of the subject expressed.

"De libty ob de subjack?" exclaimed the fat cook, vainly endeavouring
to steady his position. "I like de libty ob de black-jack best;" and
so saying, he waddled off after a very circuitous fashion, with the
black-jack under his arm.




CHAP. XII.

THE CONCLUSION.


The morning dawned slow and sullenly over the great metropolis of
Columbia; and its immense field of buildings seemed as gloomy as the
skies above them. All the shops were closed, as if in a time of general
mourning; and the citizens hurried along the streets with melancholy and
unsocial looks. Occasionally, two or three would stop at a corner of a
street and exchange a few eloquent words and gesticulations; but the
approach of some of the numerous bands of soldiers that continually
perambulated the streets separated them, and they continued on their
way. Everywhere the houses looked cheerless, as if they had been
deserted. The shutters were closed, the windows darkened, and not a sign
of life appeared about them. Such of the inhabitants as had ventured
out, appeared to be proceeding in one direction, communicating with one
another when they could do so without being observed by the troops. All
wore the same aspect--that of deep dejection; but, occasionally, a
close observer might have noticed a more fierce expression in their
countenances, as a muttered execration escaped from their lips.

They passed regiments of horse and foot at every commanding situation.
The whole city seemed to be filled with them; and their picquets
stationed at regular intervals, patroling every thoroughfare, prevented
any attempt at revolt on the part of the citizens. Still they proceeded
forward till they entered a spacious quadrangle, the whole space of
which, including all the avenues that approached it, was filled with
soldiers and citizens. Along the wall of a high gloomy building,
evidently from its construction a prison, there had been erected a
platform, covered with black cloth. Upon it appeared a block, and at a
short distance from it a coffin, both covered with black cloth. Around
the platform were a troop of horse; and others were posted along the
sides of the quadrangle, the inner space of which was filled with a
regiment of foot supported by several pieces of artillery.

At one corner of the principal entrance to the quadrangle was an ancient
stone structure, very strongly built, from the windows of which there
was a good view of the proceedings before the prison; at the opposite
corner was a similar edifice, and in their windows and on their roofs
crowds of anxious citizens had congregated. If any had come with an
intention of attempting a rescue, the disposition of the military was
sufficient to make them despair; and all they did was to throng as near
as possible to the place of execution, where they stood regarding the
scaffold and its defenders with scowling looks, and hearts eager for
vengeance.

The utmost decorum prevailed among the multitude. There was no talking
or laughing; and when Master Porphyry made his appearance upon the
scaffold every head was uncovered, and blessings loud and deep were
breathed from all. The philanthropist advanced to the block with a firm
step, and eyes as mild and kind as they had ever beamed. His look was
cheerful, and his bearing noble and manly. He wore the robe of honour,
which distinguished him as the chief magistrate of the city, as
if desirous of dying in possession of the dignity to which he had
been raised by the respect of his fellow-citizens. After bowing in
acknowledgment of the recognitions of the people, he looked unmoved upon
the coffin and the block; and with the executioner on one side, masked,
having a glittering axe in his hand, and with a priest on the other, who
kept addressing him with pious exhortations, to which he paid respectful
attention, he advanced to that part of the platform which overlooked the
surrounding multitude. Some murmurs and execrations had burst from the
spectators at sight of the executioner; but when it was noticed that
Master Porphyry was about to address them, the vast assembly were
instantly hushed to the most perfect silence.

"My countrymen!" exclaimed the philanthropist, in a clear unbroken
voice, "I do not in any way regret the fate that has been prepared for
me, except so far as it prevents me continuing those offices of social
kindness which made the happiness of my existence. To be without the
means of doing good is scarcely less desirable than to be in the
commission of evil; and it was a wise and charitable thing of my
persecutors, after having confiscated all my property, to take away a
life no longer of value to the community."--A low murmur escaped from
the crowd. "I may safely say, and I proudly say, I have lived for you;
and it is an equal gratification for me to be allowed to assert, that
I die for you."--Ten thousand blessings followed the delivery of this
sentence.

"My death, therefore, is not to be considered pitiable, if regarded in
that light. I am pleased that I have been thought worthy of this honour.
I am delighted that my oppressors have given me an opportunity of
leaving life with so much satisfaction to myself. Let me beg of you,
therefore, to refrain from any exhibition of regret for the manner of
my death--it is a very humane one; and my persecutors have shown me
a kindness in allowing me to be so disposed of.--I see nothing in it
terrible. I see nothing in it painful. I see nothing in it of shame or
dishonour. 'T is a blow, and it is over.--Had my oppressors wished, I
might have died suffering the most excruciating tortures. Had I lived,
probably I might have been the victim of some loathsome disease; or have
been deprived of my faculties--have become idiotic, or insane, or blind;
and at the last extremity have been deserted by friends, or left without
the means of serving those who most required assistance. How much better
is it for me to close my existence in this way, without pain, in the
full enjoyment of my reason, and surrounded by friends; and although
I am rendered incapable of continuing of use to you, the remembrance
of the pleasures I have enjoyed from a life of active benevolence is
sufficiently agreeable to overpower the regret I feel in having been
left to so unprofitable an end."--Again murmurs of applause broke from
all parts of the crowd.

"There is however a regret, which is powerful, and which I require all
my philosophy to endure.--I regret that I leave my country in a worse
condition than I found her.--I regret that the freedom for which I
strived so earnestly is passing away from her people.--I regret to see
a state of bondage in preparation for the free hearts around me, which
is likely to deprive them of all their noblest privileges. I was born
a free citizen, and a free citizen I will die. The galling chains of
abject servitude which are being forged for you shall never disgrace
my nature. Remember, oh, my countrymen, that freedom is your natural
inheritance; and although it would be madness to attempt its
repossession without sufficient means, never give up the desire of
liberty--wait the fitting time; and while you endure, forget not that
the graves of your fathers are disgraced, and the spirits of your
children are being dishonoured."--The citizens testified, by loud shouts
and eager exclamations, their assent to the sentiments expressed by the
philanthropist; and many were the fierce looks directed towards the
soldiery.

"If there is any man amongst you whom I have injured, I desire of him
most earnestly to tell me the wrong I have done, that I may repair it
before I die. I am quite certain that I have never done any one an
intentional injury; but if I have left undone any good which I might
have done, I consider that I have done an injustice, and would remedy it
before it be too late. Speak, my fellow-citizens; tell me what injuries
against you I have committed."--There was an eloquent silence, that
lasted for several minutes. Each man looked at his neighbour, and all
saw that the philanthropist had no accuser.

"There is one more subject to which I wish to draw your attention, and
it is the last," said Master Porphyry, in a voice less firm than had
distinguished the delivery of the preceding portion of his discourse.
"I have a son. My persecutors, while punishing me, have thought proper
to make my child a beggar;--_that_ I feel. He possesses many good
qualities--many good qualities likely to render him an excellent
citizen. Let me bequeath him to your care."--A simultaneous shout of
assent from the immense multitude proved that the appeal had not been
made in vain.

"And now that I have left nothing undone, and nothing untold, I must
take my leave of you."

"No, no!" was shouted by every voice.

"My dear friends, it must be," continued Master Porphyry; "I am taking
up the time of these good people; and although it is a pleasure for me
to linger among you, I must not purchase it at the expense of trouble to
others. I should leave you with a cheerful heart, if I had not upon me
the fear that there is much suffering preparing for you; and I should
die without an unkind feeling against any human creature, if I did not
possess at this time a natural indignation against your oppressors. For
myself I have no fear--those who have wronged me I forgive; but I have
the feelings of a man and a citizen, and I cannot forgive the enemies
of my country."--Groans and indignant exclamations here rose on every
side. "I implore you to desist from the exhibition of any acts of
violence with the hope of procuring my liberation. There is not a chance
of success. You will be slaughtered in crowds the first attempt of the
kind you may make. Let not my last moments be made wretched by seeing
your blood shed unavailingly. If I have done that which seems good in
your eyes, it was with the desire of gaining your love that I did it.
Have I succeeded?"--An universal shout of assent burst from all parts of
the crowd.

"Then I die with the proudest satisfaction I could enjoy under the
circumstances. I hope you will raise for me no useless monuments. I
desire that when I am dead my unprofitable body may meet with no funeral
honours. If I have done that which is honourable, honour me in your
remembrance. If I have done that which is good, teach your children to
do as I have done. With my best wishes for your happiness--with my most
earnest aspirations for your enfranchisement, I can now lay my head
upon the block. Grieve not because I die: you should rejoice that your
fellow-citizen can die without dishonour."

"We'll avenge you, our benefactor!" shouted a voice from the crowd.

"We'll be revenged on your murderers!" exclaimed another.

"Down with the tyrants!" cried a third. Similar exclamations followed,
and the masses of the people seemed in great commotion, pressing forward
towards the soldiery with groans, hisses, and execrations; but when the
different regiments made a movement forward and presented their arms
as if about to fire, the multitude fell back, and order was restored
amongst them.

"Think of your sins, unhappy man," said the priest, with a hypocritical
visage, who was one of those bigots who put on the garment, and know
nothing of the spirit, of religion;--"think of your sins, and repent,
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand."

"I would repent, good sir," replied Master Porphyry, mildly, "if I
thought I had any thing of which I could repent; or if I thought I
could do any good by repenting."

"Confess your sins against your God! confess, and be saved! There is
salvation for the worst of sinners," drawled out the other.

"I am not aware of having committed any sins," said the philanthropist;
"therefore I can have no confession to make."

"How have you served your Creator? What has been your religion?"
inquired his companion, sharply.

"I have considered that philanthropy was the only true religion, and I
have practised it," replied master Porphyry; "and I felt convinced that
the right way of worshipping God was by doing all the good in my power
to my fellow-creatures; and from that way I have never deviated."

"Atheistical, abominable, atrocious, heretical, and damnable!" exclaimed
the priest, with a look of horror. "You are in the hands of the devil.
The church renounces you. Flames and brimstone must be your portion;
wailing and gnashing of teeth your reward."

The philanthropist looked surprised; but turning to one of the
assistant executioners who stood at a short distance, he said, "I am
ready." The man instantly proceeded to disrobe him of his upper garment,
and arranged his dress so that the whole of his neck was bare.

"I would rather have died in that robe," observed he; "for I like not
parting with the honours that have been bestowed upon me. However, it
is gratifying to know that I have never disgraced it. It can give me
no distinction where I am going, therefore there let it lie."--His
countenance every moment appeared to become more benevolent in its
expression; and there was a nobility in his manner that commanded
respect from all around him.

"Kill me as quickly as you can, my good friend," said he to the
executioner; "but after you have killed me you may do what you please."

The citizens had watched with breathless interest the preparations for
Master Porphyry's execution; but when they beheld him kneel down before
the block, and saw the headsman raise his axe, a shudder seemed to pass
over the whole multitude. At this instant a proud-looking man, in a
military costume, appeared upon the scaffold; and, immediately he was
observed, a yell of execration arose from the quadrangle, and from every
place that could command a view of the platform. The officer stood up
his full height, and looked down upon the people with glances of scorn
and contempt. Groans, hisses, and curses became louder and more general.

"Death to the persecutor!" shouted one.

"Down with the oppressor!" cried another.

"Yell on ye wretched rabble!" exclaimed the object of their indignation,
his mustachios curling with a contemptuous sneer, and his eyes flashing
with malignity. "It matters not to me what is said by such vile hounds.
Yell on then, it does my heart good to hear ye; and ye know full well ye
dare not do any thing else." Then turning round to Master Porphyry, he
said, "I have come to testify my loyalty by beholding the death of a
traitor."

"There is no traitor here, Philadelphia," replied the philanthropist,
mildly, "unless it be yourself."

"Oh, the hated tyrant!" shouted some of the multitude.

"The curses of the people are upon thee, thou miserable slave!" cried
others.

"Down with him! Down with the despot! Down with the enslaver of his
country!" exclaimed the rest. At this instant a banner was raised near
the centre of the quadrangle, with the inscription upon it, in large
letters, of "PORPHYRY, OR DEATH!" It was the signal for an immediate
rush towards the scaffold. With one simultaneous cheer the vast
multitude hurried forwards, burst in upon the troops, and with frantic
rage began to struggle with them for the possession of their arms. A
volley of musketry from an opposite window at this moment killed the
executioners and several others, and the rest, with the exception of
Philadelphia and Master Porphyry, took to flight.

"Leap down here, my benefactor, and I will save you," shouted a voice
from beneath the platform.

"You shall not escape me a second time, my enemy," muttered the noble
as he drew his sword, and with a look of mingled hatred and ferocity
exclaimed, "Thus I punish a traitor!" as he drove the weapon through
the body of his companion.

The philanthropist gazed on his murderer, more in sorrow than in anger;
and the only words he uttered, before he dropped down dead on the
platform, were, "MY BROTHER!" The miserable fratricide seemed confounded
by the avowal; but little time was allowed him for reflection. Curses,
yells, screams, groans, and execrations burst from the assembled
citizens as they noticed the death of their chief magistrate; and
Philadelphia fell by his side, pierced by a hundred bullets. A shout
of triumph arose when they beheld the fall of the tyrant; and, as if
inspirited by the sight, they threw themselves upon the soldiery in
countless masses, and endeavoured to drag them from their horses, or
wrest their weapons out of their hands. In this manoeuvre, although it
was attended by immense loss of life, many succeeded; but the strength
and discipline of the troops at last prevailed, and the citizens were
forced out of the quadrangle; and when the artillery began to play upon
them they dispersed in all directions.

The soldiery were now forming ready to make a charge in case the people
should re-assemble, when from the stone buildings at the corner of the
avenue a most destructive fire of heavy cannon was opened upon them.
Every window in the neighbourhood was broken by the concussion, and the
havoc made in both the horse and foot regiments was excessive. The word
was given for the foot soldiers to endeavour to take these buildings by
assault, and they marched forward for that purpose; but directly they
came near enough, a continuous stream of bullets issued from every place
that could command a shot at them, and they fell back in confusion.
Again they advanced to the assault, pouring in a steady fire at the
windows; but these spaces were blocked up with sand-bags, allowing only
sufficient room for a ship's gun to be run in and out, and they were
defended by the crew of the Albatross, under the command of their
veteran captain. After fighting their way through all opposition,
assisted by detachments from the fleet, and by the citizens, they had
dragged the guns through the city, and when the people made their attack
upon the soldiers, they were preparing their batteries. The military
again came to the attack, amid the enthusiastic cheers of the brave
sailors; and although they persisted for a long time in endeavouring to
obtain possession of the buildings, they were repulsed and retreated in
disorder.

The artillery was then brought to bear upon the place, but scarcely
had it been placed in a proper position, before it was rendered
unserviceable by the destructive fire from the batteries; and the troops
finding that they were being mowed down without a chance of silencing
their opponents, charged up the avenue--the horse supported by the foot
regiments. Here they were met by a fire of musketry from the houses
on each side, and having passed a short distance amid showers of
heavy missiles, that were hurled down upon them from the tops of the
buildings by the enraged citizens, they came to a barrier hastily
erected of stones and earth, from which a murderous fire from three
thirty-two pounders opened upon them as they advanced, throwing the
cavalry into confusion, and causing them to retreat in disorder upon
the infantry.

Here they were joined by a strong reinforcement, consisting of several
thousand fresh troops, and a charge was made upon the barrier which,
after an obstinate resistance, was forced. They then proceeded onwards,
exposed to a destructive fire from the neighbouring houses; but they
had not advanced above a hundred yards, when they were thrown into a
complete derout by the hasty retreat of a regiment of horse, which fell
back upon them, scattering dismay and terror into their ranks. Shouts of
triumph were heard in the distance, accompanied by the fierce roar
of cannon, and the rattle of frequent volleys of musketry. While the
whole military force was on the point of endeavouring to find safety
in flight, they were joined by another large reinforcement, and the
cavalry having re-formed as soon as they beheld the new troops, they
moved forward in a body to where it was evident that a violent contest
was raging. They continued to meet parties both of horse and foot flying
from the scene of action; and these were received into their ranks.

Having passed through several streets, fighting at every step, they
advanced under a broad archway into an open park. Here a tremendous
battle was still going on. The two contending armies were placed
opposite each other, and had been engaged for several hours attacking
each other's positions, and defending their own. The army of the people
had taken up a position on a slope with a plantation of fine oak trees
on one side, and a deep but narrow rivulet on the other. Their centre
was composed of the national guards; their right wing consisted of a
body of several thousand sailors; and their left was a body of armed
citizens equally numerous, supported by several batteries, and a reserve
of cavalry. They were opposed by the flower of the emperor's troops;
but their superior discipline and military skill availed them nothing.
Although the citizens suffered severely from the attacks which were
made upon them, they increased in numbers every hour. Thousands joined
their ranks; new batteries were raised; and while the enemy was losing
strength, they were increasing their forces.

Oriel Porphyry, on his landing, made for the rendezvous which had been
agreed upon. Here he placed himself at the head of his own regiment of
dragoons; with which, assisted by the citizens from their houses, he
attacked several parties of the military that paraded the streets. The
national guards then began to make their appearance in great numbers;
and these having provided themselves with arms from the gun-shops while
the young merchant kept the imperial troops employed, soon collected
together and marched to his assistance. Finding himself in two or three
hours at the head of a body of nearly twenty thousand men, willing to
follow wherever he led, he left the street-fighting to the citizens, and
sending several detachments in different directions, so as, as much
as possible, to divide the attention of the military, he took up the
position that has been described, in the park, with the intention of
attacking a large body of troops there posted.

The battle began by a division of the imperial troops attempting to
force a bridge over the rivulet, which was defended by the sailors,
supported by several pieces of cannon. The attack was continued with
great spirit, reinforcements arriving almost every half hour; but it was
defended with equal bravery, and the soldiers were beaten back every
time with very great loss. Two regiments of cavalry then were sent
against it, but the bridge being narrow, only a few could attempt to
cross at a time, and these were brought down by the cannon and musketry
as soon as they made their appearance. The lower part of the bridge
became blocked up with dead bodies, and the cavalry, after repeated
efforts, were obliged to retreat, having lost nearly one third of their
number.

An attempt was now made on the wood by a strong party of infantry, while
the cavalry in great force made an attack upon the centre; but a strong
palisade had been raised among the trees, from which the citizens,
in almost perfect security, poured a deadly fire upon the advancing
columns, which thinned their ranks rapidly; and the national guards
having formed into square, as the cavalry advanced, received them
with such streams of bullets, that they staggered and fell back. They
repeated the attack several times, and always met with the same result.
While these proceedings had been going on, Oriel Porphyry had given
orders for the sailors to pass the bridge, whom he supported with his
cavalry, and they fell with irresistible impetuosity upon the left wing
of the enemy, which had been considerably weakened by its unsuccessful
attacks upon the bridge.

The young merchant dashed on at the head of his dragoons, exhibiting the
most daring valour. He had had three horses killed under him during the
battle, and had been wounded in several places, but he continued his
brilliant career, making both cavalry and infantry fly before him. The
left wing, after a brief resistance, gave way, and they were in full
retreat when they were met by the soldiers who had been on guard in the
quadrangle. Immediately they fled, he made a desperate attack upon the
enemy's rear, and the national guards making a charge at the same moment
all along their line, the imperial troops were thrown into inextricable
confusion, and the reinforcement which made its appearance only came in
time to be mixed up in the general rout. They were pursued from street
to street without the slightest cessation; and so general was the panic
that spread among them on their retreat, that they flung away their
arms, and dispersed in every direction.

A few days after the transactions just narrated the city seemed as
if dressed for a festival. The houses were decorated with garlands
of flowers, flags, and pieces of rich tapestry, and the windows and
house-tops were crowded with elegantly dressed females, and the citizens
in their holyday-dresses. Every face seemed breathing gladness, and
every eye beamed with delight. The long thoroughfares were thronged with
spectators, all of whom wore the same joyful expression of countenance;
they were waiting the expected return of Oriel Porphyry from his last
battle with the enslavers of his country, in which the emperor had been
slain, and his forces completely discomfited.

Distant shouts of triumph announced the approach of the young conqueror;
and every neck was stretched out, and every eye turned in the direction
from whence the sounds proceeded. The cheers of the excited citizens
became gradually more loud, and the impatience of the inhabitants of
the houses more conspicuous. At last the measured sound of military
music came upon the ear, and in a few minutes the whole force of the
metropolitan national guards marched by; every regiment with its band
playing and its ensigns waving; after them came a car, drawn by four
milk-white horses, on which lay the body of the philanthropist in his
robe of honour; it was followed by Oriel Porphyry, or, to give him his
proper title, the prince of Philadelphia, bare-headed, on a powerful
war-charger, who seemed by his prancings and curvettings, proud of the
noble burden he carried. Blessings were showered upon him from every
side; flowers descended on his head, and all hailed him as the deliverer
of his country. His handsome countenance and manly figure never appeared
impressed with such a nobility of character as when he bowed in
acknowledgment of the universal enthusiasm which was excited in his
favour. Eureka rode at his side, expressing by her beautiful countenance
the delight she experienced. His own regiment of cavalry came next,
and they were followed by the crew of the Albatross, and of the other
merchant vessels that had assisted him in the struggle. Nothing was
heard among the people but cheering and exclamations of praise; nothing
was seen but the waving of caps and handkerchiefs.

In the course of the same day Oriel Porphyry was declared emperor of the
Columbians; and when he ascended the throne of his country Eureka shared
in his glory.


THE END.
