JACK SCUDAMOEE'S DAUGHTEIL 



CHAPTER I. 

AN INTERESTING ADVENTURE. 

Arthur Calverley was born witli certain recom- 
mendations — ^prominent among which were a good 
social position and an honourable name. To bo 
sure he laboured imder the serious disadvantage 
of being a younger son, and, in consequence, of 
having little of importance to inherit — ^but then he 
belonged to one of " the governing families" — those 
favoured nurseries of statesmen, generals, prelates, 
admirals, judges, and high officials of every de- 
scription. 

Among his immediate connections he could 
boast of one Grovenior- General of India, two Lord- 

VOL. I. B 



2 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Lieutenants of Ireland, as many Speakers of the 
House of Commons, a Lord-Chancellor, a Field- 
Marshal, three Cabinet Ministers, at least half-a^ 
dozen Members of Parliament, and I know not 
how many Knights of the Bath and the Garter. 

With the education the boy received from 
the customary sources, he was taught the value 
of the examples which the fiimily picture-gallery 
afforded. In the careers of several of the colla- 
teral branches of his house he was shown what 
younger brothers were capable of doing for them- 
selves. Instances of self-help of a singularly sug- 
gestive character. 

There was his uncle, Lord Madras, who had 
gone to the East with two shirts and liis mother's 
blessing, and had returned a Nabob, to be raised 
to the Peerage and become Secretary of State for 
Foreign Affairs. There was his great-uncle, Sir 
Ealph Calverley, K.C.B., who being the younger 
son of a yomiger son, had no patrimony but his 
sword ; yet with that perhaps not very valuable 
weapon he contrived to carve for himself the repu- 



AN INTBRKSTING ADVENTUBK. 6 

tation of a successful general and an energetic co- 
lonial governor ; and when he died of the gout at 
Cheltenham, left a very pretty fortune to his heirs. 

There was his kinsman, the very Eeverend 
Jacob Calverley, D.D., who was not only so poorly 
provided with resources at college that he could 
scarcely pay his fees, but was so stupid that every 
body expected he would be plucked; neverthe- 
less he died the richest bishop in tlie three king- 
doms. Moreover, there was his fatlier's second 
cousin, Paul Calverley, for whom nothing better 
could be done than article him to a London lawyer; 
but before he was consigned to the family vault he 
had raised himself to the woolsack, and secured 
an earldom to his eldest son. 

In the home circle, as early as Arthur could re- 
member, these notables and a dozen others equally 
fortunate were constantly suggested to him as 
models. It was not only most forcibly impressed 
upon his plastic mind that tliey were worthy of 
imitation because they had been successftd in the 
several professions they had adopted, but in a much 



L 



4 JACK scitdamore's daughter. 

greater degree^ because they liad maintained the 
purity of the family blood. 

Those who had married had selected partners 
with high social pretensions. This was dwelt upon 
with immense satisfaction. Indeed, I do not know 
whether his cousin Tom Calverley, in the Guards^ 
who had eloped to Gretna Green with a duke's 
daughter, though he afterwards died in the rules 
of the King's Bench, was not thought more of tlian 
the Governor-General of India, who had been con- 
tented with a baron's niece. 

Arthur Calverley was therefore brought up with 
the very best notions as to marrying well, and they 
were inculcated a long time before they could be 
rendered available. In truth it was a favourite 
theme with his excellent mother, who being nearly 
related to a Welsh baronet lineally descended from 
the ancient kings of Wales, thought that she could 
not say too much to a child of hers on so momen- 
tous a topic. 

His first misfortune was to lose her at a par- 
ticularly impressionable age ; but though he was 



AN INTERESTING ADVENTURE. 5 

deprived of the advantage of her teaching, he never 
forgot her preoepts. Her affeetionate tuition — 
almost always, by tlie way, combined widi some 
precious indulgence — not only had a lasting effect, 
but was suggestive of the most pleasurable asso- 
ciations. 

• 

His father, the Right Honourable Sir Edward 
Calverley Calverley, Bart., G.C.B., was a diplo- 
matist of some repute, but died in a far-off capital 
wliile ftdHlling his ambassadorial duties, when Ar- 
thur was pursuing his studies at a public school in 
England. Owing to Sir Calverley having been 
constantly employed abroad almost from tlie boy's 
birth, the latter had enjoyed very little of his atton- 
tion, consequently his sorrow for the loss of such a 
parent was not so poignant as it otherwise would 
have been. 

He was soon made to understand that he was 
but slenderly provided for, and that if he wished to 
make a figure in the world, he must apply himself 
diligently to his books. He was sent by liis guar- 
dian to reside with a private tutor, a studious 



6 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

young clergyman living in a very out-of-the-way 
district in Cheshire ; while his elder brother, who 
succeeded to the title and estates, began a town 
career of extravagance, and seemed inclined to give 
himself little furdier concern on his account. 

I do not think that the Vicar of Delamere Parva 
W .^ ™y »riou, &^t i, « with Ms pupil, 
f(|f he was diligent and well disposed. He gave 
him scarcely any trouble, and as, besides his small 
parish to attend to, he was editing a new edition of 
^schylus, this was a recommendation of which the 
youth enjoyed the full advantage. Among other 
indulgences he was permitted to ride where he 
liked as soon as he had creditably got through his 
daily tasks ; and as he was gifted with an excellent 
memory, this stipulation was obsen^ed with unfail- 
ing punctuality. 

Belonging, as Arthur did, to one of the oldest 
county families, tliere was no difficulty in the way 
of making acquaintance with the neighbouring 
gentry in the course of liis rambles. This occa- 
sionally led to hiH remaining away from the vicar- 



AN INTBBESTING ADVXNTUBE. 7 

age two or three days ; but as^ on liis return, he 
invariably brought up all arrears to his instructor's 
perfect satisfiiction, as well as supplied the reverend 
gentleman with oomplimentary recognitions from 
his more influential neighbours, it was only on rare 
occasions that notice was taken of his absence. la 
short, tutor and pupil never got on better together. 

On one of these excursions, rather late in the 
afternoon of a genial autumn day, Arthur Calverley 
approached a celebrated monastic ruin situated in 
a picturesque part of Yale Delamere — so called 
£rom the mere (sheet of water) to be found there. 
It was fiu* from any turnpike-road, or public path* 
Originally the edifice must have covered a very 
large area, and had been one of the most magnifi« 
cent abbeys erected in the best period of Anglo- 
Norman architecture in England. 

Whatever were its attractions in its present 
state to the antiquary, the country people were not 
diq)06ed to acknowledge them. The fact is, it had 
got a bad name. There were all kinds of stories 
and traditions circulating in the neighbourhood 



8 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

about the jJace. Tlie abbot had committed a 
murder ; the monks had participated in the crime ; 
and the ghosts of the cowled community were 
doomed to haunt the sacred precincts they had 
desecrated by so atrocious a deed. The victim, a 
young lady of rank, who had come to the abbey 
on a religious errand, and whose fortune and 
estates the brotherhood subsequently appropriated, 
was said to appear in spectral guise at the altar of 
the ruined monastery mider which she had been 
buried ; by so doing to bear everlasting testimony 
against the criminals in the face of offended 
Heaven. 

Such was the monastic tradition. 

There was also a story of a band of robbers 
who had long made the abbey their rendezvous, 
whence they waylaid travellers ; murdered, robbed 
them, and made away with their bodies so secretly 
that nothing was ever heard of them after. 

Besides, there were equally authentic accomits 
of a gang of desperate smugglers who had been 
the terror of the whole country, hiding in the ruins 



AV INTKRKIiTmO ADVKKT(/&K. 9 

litul in tlu) noi^Iilxmriuf^ wckkU by duy^ atid mrvy* 
ing on tliair unlnwful oeouputionH in tlm dead of 
tlio niffht. 

Tlioro WAM not a fanner, niueh ItmN a farmer^M 
laUmrar for twimiy miloH round, wlu> would aj)- 
imimli Uio )>la<io afba* dimk, and tho nioMt oouraf;o« 
ouH jioaclwr would |(iv<» it a wido borth, whattjvor 
amount of gamo nu^ht bo ^ot in ilmt dirooiion. 
Ah for wonion <uit4irin|( tho ruinn ijvon in broad 
ilaylight, tbo idea wan onough to niab) tltoni tuni 
]mla with affright. 

It wan with a full knowlodgo of thin ovil repu- 
tation tlmt Arthur wan cuuitoring on ^^ Trunty " on 
tlio outHkirtM of tho wood, an tho broken walb, 
crumbling windowH, and maHnivo arolian of tluH 
rolio of the Middle Agen rowj before him — a^nuredly 
tiui moMt pieturetique ruin \ui Imd ever man ; and 
though lie liflji dinee mm\ many Himilar evidencen 
of tlie taste and fikill of our aneentorH, lie never 
belield one tlie appearance of which affected lum m 
deeply. 

Ho rode nlowly forward, to obnerve aw carefUlIy 



10 JACK SCUDAMORE's DAUaHTEB. 

as possible the elegance as well as the grandeur of 
the principal portion of the building — ^not without 
a sense of awe mingling largely with the feeling of 
admiration the scene inspured. There stood the 
graceful windows, of which ihe masomyof many 
was nearly perfect — particularly one of wonderful 
beauiy of design ; the rich columns with much of 
their intricate ornamentation almost as perfect as 
when fresh from the chisel. Elsewhere the fan- 
ciful corbels, bosses, and crocketts attracted his 
notice, as well as the quaint gargoyles, and the 
beautifrd though mutilated figures still remaining 
in their niches, of apostles, angels, and saints. 

As he came nearer, and saw through the open 
arches glimpses of the interior — of nave and chan- 
cel, of chantry and lady-chapel, and of the nume- 
rous compartments into which an ecclesiastical 
edifice built on such a scale must necessarily be 
divided, then caught a view of clustering tomb- 
stones, columns, crosses, and other memorials of 
the dead, — ^he felt the stillness and solitude which 
seemed to pervade the atmosphere, and the thril- 



AK IKTERESTiyG ADYENTUHE. 11 

ling tradition and the manrellons stories he had 
heard recurred to his mind. 

His fidthf ol companion and fellow-traveller sud- 
denly stood still with ears erect as if he either felt 
the genius loci or heard something of a suspicious 
nature. The youth was just about coming to the 
conclusion that tlie better part of curiosity as well 
as valour. was discretion, and was turning his 
horse's head to have a good start in time, when he 
was startled by sounds coming evidently from 
within the ruins. 

Khe had heard the yells of perturbed spirits, 
the ribald oaths of highwaymen, or the riotous 
mirth of smugglers, I do not think he would have 
been so very much surprised; for they would have 
been characteristic of the fearful tales he had been 
told — but there suddenly came upon his ear the 
most wonderful, the most melodious, the most 
touching burst of haimony to which he had ever 
listened. 

Indeed, he had never heard such music. He 
could compare it to nothing less divine than a choir 



12 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

of angels, for it was as solemn as it was sweet, and 
so eminently devotional, that he conld not help 
feeling exactly tlie same sense of dependence and 
veneration he had always experienced when saying 
his prayers in the solitude of his own chamber. 

What it was he heard, he had not the most re- 
mote idea; but he could not avoid a certain ming- 
ling of the supernatural with the speculations in 
which he indulged. He possessed courage as well 
as curiosiiy ; and feeling an ardent desire to pene- 
trate the mystery, he presently alighted, iastened 
the reins of his four-footed friend roimd a tliorn, 
and crept cautiously towards a window whence the 
soul-moving music appeared to have been wafted 
toward him. 

Suddenly it ceased. The air became as super- 
naturally still as it before had been supernaturally 
melodious. Arthur was close under the gracefid 
lanceolated window that appeared to have once 
lighted a side-chapel, dedicated to some saint, 
whose broken efl&gy stood before it. He held his 
breath, for in the profound quietude he thought 



AN INTERESTING ADVENTURE. 13 

lie distinguished a voice. He oonld not make 
out what was said, though a word here and there 
seemed jGuniliar to him, but the hmguage was un- 
questionably foreign. 

He stood irresolute, not daring to move for 
fear of discovery, yet impelled by an overpower- 
ing curiosity to ascertain what such strange somids 
in so very strange a place could mean. The frame* 
work of the window was far above his head, and 
the wall around and beneath covered with thick 
ivy. He had a great desl^'e to peer over the open 
masonry, but it was more easy to think of than to 
do. If he attempted to climb, the noise he would 
be sure to make would betray his whereabout, 
and the probable result did not appear encourag- 
ing. 

Again the combination of voices swelled out^ 
but apparently in greater volume than before, and 
with an earnestness that for a minute or two held 
his senses enthralled. He was a daring climber ; 
so, with an impulse he could not control, he seized 
the tough tendrils of a creeper, and with the aid of 



14 JACK scudahobe's daughter. 

projections in the wall, contrived to puU himself up 
till he stood in the centre of the open window. 

He looked do^^ upon a group of females, 
clothed, for the most part, in dark-flowing gar- 
ments. He could see their &ces, for they were 
singing, with eyes gazing upward, and hands 
clasped in an attitude of devotion. All had a fo- 
reign and unfamiliar look, except one, who stood 
apart. She was a woman a little past the prime of 
life, of noble stature, and of singularly pleasing 
features. He could not doubt that she was Eng- 
Ksh, any more than he could doubt that she was of 
high birth. 

They were all singing ; and now he could dis- 
tinguish that the language they sung so impres- 
sively was Latin. It became at once clear to him, 
extraordinary as seemed the fact, that he beheld a 
community of nuns engaged in the ordinary daily 
exercises of their church. If he had recognised 
the unearthly nature of the atrocious brotherhood, 
or had discovered that he had fallen into a veritable 
den of thieves and cut-throats, I doubt he would 



AN INTERESTING ABVENTURE. 15 

have felt the shock he experienced when he became 
aware that he had intruded upon the private devo- 
tions of a Homan Catholic sisterhood. 

He was not in the, slightest degree aware of 
there being any convent in the county, much less 
in the neighbourhood. Indeed, he had never seen 
a nun, although he had often looked at the engrav- 
ings in Dugdale, representing the principal monas- 
tic orders, and therefore had no difficulty in re- 
cognising the religious habit. But he could not 
account for such a community having assembled in 
the abbey ruins, and there going through their 
devotional exercises. He was amazed. It seemed 
so very mysterious that no one with whom he was 
acquainted should have heard of their existence. 

However astonished and mystified he might be 
by the unusual spectacle, he was conscious that 
there was but one thing proper for him to do — ^to 
retire as cautiously as he had intruded. He felt 
great repugnance to disturb those melodious de- 
votees, and therefore resolved at once to descend 
from his elevation. 



16 JACK 8CTJDAH0R£'S DAUGHTER. 

This resolution he promptly put in force ; but his 
good intentions were frustrated — ^probably by his 
haste in endeavouring to fulfil them — ^for treading 
on a loose stone^ it gave way, and he was suddenly 
precipitated upon the stone pavement below. 

When Artlmr Calverley again became conscious 
he had no idea either of how long he had remained 
insensible, or what had been done with him subse- 
quently to his terrible fall on the flags. The last 
sounds he had in his ears were female screams and 
shrieks — ^the last objects, female faces wearing the 
strongest expressions of horror and af&ight. 

As consciousness returned, he became aware 
that he lay on a narrow pallet in a small chamber 
almost bare of furniture. On the walls he could 
see nothing but a crucifix and a picture of the Vir- 
gin and Child, before which a taper was burning. 
On the floor there was a common chair and a rough 
table, on which lay two or three books and a long 
chain of beads ; the latter he knew to be a rosarv. 

He felt very stiff and bruised all over. There 



AN INTERESTINO ADVBNTURE. 17 

was a great pain down his left aim, which was eon- 
fined in a stiff wrapper, and suspended in a sling ; 
and he had a still more acute pain in his head, 
which was enveloped in a bandage. He lay in hia 
clothes, his boots only having been taken off; but the 
sleeve of his jacket had been slipt up the seam to 
the shoulder; and every care appeared to have been 
iaken to prevent his braised Umbs from suflering 
bv comin^: in contact with a hard substance. 

The light afforded by the taper was just suffi- 
cient to enable him to distinguish the objects around 
— ^that, and the pervading stillness, assured him it 
was night. Presently a glitter caught his eye ; and 
as he turned round, he became aware that a small 
casement of very narrow panes was a little above 
his head, on his right-hand side. A curious rat- 
tling soimd, evidently at a distance, attracted his 
attention at the same time. 

He raised himself by means of his sound arm, 

but not without considerable difficuliy, till his head 

was on a level with the window. He looked out 

into a cemetery — ^a wilderness of tall nettles, thistles, 
VOL. I. 



18 JACK SCUDAMOBE^S DAUGHTER. 

and rank grass, that half-concealed many of the 
mossy tombstones and broken monuments with 
which it was filled. The light, however, firom a 
crescent moon, that seemed to shine with unnsual 
brilliance in the clear starry vault above, fell upon 
every crumbling cross, broken pillar, and moulder- 
ing footstone, bringing out each object with start- 
ling vividness. 

The strange sounds he heard directed his atten- 
tion to a figure in a stooping posture, partly sunk 
in a hollow in a portion of the cemetery, where 
the weeds were thickest Presently he obser\ ed a 
tall gaunt form raise itself, and with long bare 
arms ply a pickaxe vigorously — ^then take a spade 
and throw on an adjoining mound the earth tliat 
had been loosened. 

On this person he could easily distinguish the 
habit of the nuns he had discovered from his dan- 
gerous post of observation. She wore a long dark 
gown, with a hood that enveloped her head ; her 
face and neck appeared to be bound with white 
linen. But what could she be doing at that horn'. 



AN INTERESTINa ADVENTURE. 19 

in SO dreadful a place? he mentally inquired, as 
he observed her long bony arms plying the pick, 
and then shovelling up the broken soil. Not the 
soil only,, for he could plainly discern several 
white objects among the dark mould, and these, 
with a thrill of dread, he recognised as human 
bones. 

It was evident that he looked upon the place of 
sepulture belonging to the ruined abbey; and he 
could not avoid coming to the conclusion that the 
solitary nun was digging a grave. With a strange 
fascination he continued to watch her labours, as 
she rapidly widened tlie hollow and increased the 
mound beside it, without heeding the bats wheel- 
ing above her, or the great owl that now and then 
swooped down close to her head. 

" Is she digging that grave for me?^^ he asked 
himself, with a nervous shudder he could not con- 
trol. He had been left unattended — ^probably given 
over, and a long state of unconsciousness might 
have created a conviction of his death. In the de- 
plorable prostration to which he was reduced, the 



20 JACK SCUDAMORS^S DAUGHTER. 

idea filled him witli a sickening sense of dread. A 
eonfvLsed feeling in the head, and an overpowering 
£untness came upon him simultaneously, and he 
sank back on his pallet in a swoon. 

In this condition he must have remained at 
least an hour. His first impression on recovery 
was derived &om a kind of wailing harmony, in- 

i 

expressibly melancholy. He seemed to be waking 
from a painftd dream, with the sounds and objects 
of the vision &ding from his perception. But the 
music became louder. He could distinguish human 
voices in combination, and they appeared to come 
from the cemetery below. 

He again raised himself, and opened a portion 
of the window large enough to allow of his putting 
out his head. Instantly the plaintive melody of a 
penitential psalm became distinctly audible — ^the 
moonlight was more brilliant than before ; and be- 
low he could plainly discern the community of re- 
ligieuses he had previously seen, slowly advancing 
in the direction of the open grave, by the side of 
which still stood the gaunt figure, leaning on a 



AN INTERESTING ADVENTURE. 21 

spade, with an expression in her rigid features he 
long afterwards remembered. 

The procession advanced singing, headed by the 
stately form he had remarked on his first sight of 
the sisterhood. She held an open book in her 
hand, and a profound sorrow mingled in her fine 
countenance with a holy resignation, as she lifted 
her eyes to heaven. She was followed by four of 
th6 sisters, bearing a sort of litter, on which re- 
clined a figure in the same habit — ^the face exposed, 
the arms crossed, and a crucifix reposing on the 
breast. The countenance looked of a pale bluish 
white in the moonlight. It was that of a corpse. 
Behind, two and two, came the rest of the nuns, 
singing their sorrowfiil chorus, with arms crossed 
and eyes uplifted. 

Presently the psalm ceased, and the momniers 
grouped round the new-made grave, the body rest- 
ing on boards placed over it. Then the leader read 
from the book in her hand what appeared to be tlie 
Service for the Dead. After which burst forth a 
joyftd hymn, as if to express the conviction of the 



22 JACK bcudahobb's daughtbb. 

Burvivors that th^r departed sister had passed 
out of the Gktes of Death into those of Eternal 
Life* 

Whilst this was being sung, ropes were thrown 
over the boards by several pairs of strong arms, 
and the corpse slowly descended into its narrow 
bed. 

Arthur Calverley hurriedly closed the casement, 
and regained his recumbent position, in a state of 
intense excitement and wonder* Could the scene 
he had witnessed be nothing more substantial than 
a dream ? he Continued to ask over and over again, 
as he foimd great difficulty in reconcih'ng himself 
to what was so very different from any thing he 
had met with in his experience. 

Those foreign faces and un&miliar habits of 
diis singular residence, and the solemn service so 
unexpectedly brought under his attention, assisted 
in creating a sense of awe not unmixed with dread. 
Wonderfiilly vivid was the impression the spectacle 
left upon his mind. The stem impassive look of 
the grave-digger — ^the sublime earnestness of the 



•AK 1NTXRE8TING ADVBMTUBK. 23 

reftder of the servioe— and the thrilling voiceB of 
the mourning sisters were never to be erased from 
his recollection. 

Presently he fell asleep, and did not wake till 
a flood of sunshine filled his little chamber, and the 
singing of innumerable birds his ears. How plea- 
sant seemed the voices of the rival thrushes— how 
inspuing the rich strain of the bkckbirds^how re- 
freshing the merry twitter of the sparrows and 
finches at that moment I 

He certainly felt better and stronger ; but his 
arm was still very stiff, and there was a dull pain 
in his head. He put up his hand to the bandage, 
and could feel leech-bites over a considerable por- 
tion of the forehead; and all around was exceed- 
ingly tender to the touch. 

He must liave liad a very bad fidl, and it was 
equally clear to him that his hurts had been most 
carefiilly attended to. But to whom had he been 
indebted for this timely service ? He felt an im- 
pression that the Christian ladies on whose privacy 
he had so tlioughtlessly intruded must have been 



24 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

both his surgeons and his nurses. He could not 
remember, however, having seen either of them 
about liim. 

A vivid recollection of the midnight fimeral 
made him spring up, forgetful of his bruised limb ; 
but though he received a terrible twinge, he eagerly 
opened the casement He looked out, ftdly ex- 
pecting to see the long bony arms of the grave- 
digger still at her solitary work, and to hear the 
melancholy psalm of the mourners, as they boro 
their departed sister to her last resting-place. 

But the scene was entirely changed. The bones 
of the dead monks, that had glistened so ghastly 
in the moonlight, had totally disappeared, and 
golden sunbeams threw a glory over the flowering 
thistles and other blossoms that flourished among 
the rank herbage. Presently he discerned a freshly- 
made mound, but it was already covered with 
flowers — mementos, probably, of the aflection of 
the sm'viving sisters — and a robin was singing lus- 
tily on a small white headstone, on which had been 
cut a cross and some initials ; while from the sur-- 



AN IKTSRBSTmO ADVSNTURS« . 25 

roimdiiig trees and walls there came a ohoms as 
julnlant as that which he had heard announce the 
advent of the blessed one into Paradise* 

The bahny air seemed to revive and the genial 
music to cheer him, so that he continned for some 
minutes gazing over the ruined cemetery with feel- 
ings totally different firom those with which he had 
watched the gaunt female figure in the dark habit 
rudely casting aside the mortal remains of the ori- 
ginal possessors of the monastery. 

At last he withdrew his head, leaving the win- 
dow open, and lay down to think over the strange 
events that had brought him into his present pecu- 
liar position. While thus employed, he fancied he 
could hear a sound as of some one talking. He got 
off his pallet, and advanced to the side of his cham- 
ber on which stood the rush chair. There he found 
a partition roughly put together of deal boards. He 
peeped through a crevice, and beheld below a ca- 
pacious vaulted room of irregular shape, and of a 
remarkably ancient and rather cheerless aspect 
It possessed a large projecting chimney, but there 



26 JACK SCUDAMORS'S DAUOHTSIU 

was no fire on the heartlL The floor was of red 
briok, and in the centre stood a long heavy table, 
with benches on each side, where sat the nuns in 
their dark habits in two rows opposite each other. 

He saw at a glance that it was the refectory of 
&e convent; for the sisters were silently making a 
simple meal of bread and firoii In a tall chair at 
the head of the table sat the lady superior. Arthur 
recognised her at once by her fine matronly fea* 
tures and peculiarly dignified appearance. Her look 
was that of a saint, fiill of the confidence which a 
devout faith inspires. 

At the other end of the table he saw a face 
still more strongly impressed upon his memory — 
the dark complexion, tlie high cheek-bones, the 
cold gloomy unsympathising expression of the 
midnight worker in the deserted graveyard. Sho 
was standing up reading aloud firom a book of 
legends of saints written in French. 

He looked from one to another, but all seemed 
to wear the same air of self- mortification and 
abstraction; each sister evidently attending more to 



AK INTSBXSTIKO ADYHSTUBK. 27 

the reading than to the repast In moat he oonld 
mark the influence of asoeticiam, if not of deep 
mental suffering ; but there was one countenance 
on which his gaze rested with a refreshing sense 
of relief — ^a young round £eu» with soft brown 
ejeS) that even with the formal dress, and sur- 
rounded by such profound solenmiiy, could not 
entirely conceal the natural instincts of youth. 

While gazing, the harsh voice of the reader 
ceased* The superior rose, the entire sisterhood 
following her example, and in a ricli clear voice 
she pronounced a grace in Latin. Then she sat 
down, each of the nuns in torn knelt before her, 
and, having received what appeared to be a bene- 
diction, walked with downcast eyes and slow steps 
out of the chamber. 

Arthur returned to his couch, marvelling at 
his position more than ever. It was quite clear 
that he was in the charge of these pious women, 
and he could not entertain a doubt that they had 
attended to his wants like good Samaritans. Still 
the strangeness of the situation struck him very 



28 JACK scudamore's daughteil 

forcibly. His powers of perception must yet have 
been much confiised, for he could not succeed in 
explaining satisfactorily to himself how the Abbey 
ruins could have become so tenanted. 

Whilst absorbed in a reverie, he heard an ex- 
clamation in French ; and looking quickly in the 
direction, discerned in the doorway the figure of 
the young nun, or rather pupil, whose appearance 
had so much attracted him a few minutes before. 

^' Le pauvre heretique !" she murmured. " The 
Blessed Virgin watch over himl I will say an 
Ave, that it may benefit his miserable soul." 

She crossed herself devoutly, and repeated the 
Latin prayer. Then exclaimed again, in French, 
" Alas, he is so young I" 

" I thank you, mademoiselle, for your great 
goodness to me," he replied in the same lan- 
guage. 

At the sound of his voice she started, and 
crossed herself repeatedly, betraying in her looks 
the deepest emotion. 

" Felicia 1" cried a loud voice fi-om below. 



AN IKTSRE8TIN0 ADVENTURK, 29 

"Mea culpa I" murmurod flie girl, Icwking 
contrite ; " I have broken my vow of nilonco. 
Moa culpa I mea culpa t" 

8ho then hurried away. 
. The youtli was not left long alone. Prenontly 
lie heard a firm tread advancing, and the majoHtic 
figure of the abbess entered the little cliambei*. 
She looked searchingly, and at first with Honu3 
severity, but by degrees a kinder expression be- 
came visible in her clear blue eyes. Tlie nearer 
she approached the more impresHod Arthur fult b}' 
her noble features. 

" You are better, Mr. Calvorley," she said to 
him in English, " Sister Giidule, who is an cx- 
jierienced doctross, has taken care of you since 
your accident. She has been lately much occu- 
pied by a sorrowful duty, but will very shortly \w 
disengaged,'' 

It seemed as strange as every thing else con- 
nected with his present position, that he should be 
known. As if the abbess divined Iris thoughts, 
she added : 



80 JACK SCUDAlfOBS'S DAUOHTKIL 

^^Your name was written in your pocket- 
book, which dropped as yon fell: by that I was 
able to ascertain that you were the son of one of 
the friends of my girlhood; and every tiling i^ras at 
once done for you that the emergency required. 
Thanks to the Lnmaoulate Virgin and to her thrice- 
blessed Son, for whose help we prayed, you have 
escaped a terrible death ; but I am quite at a loss 
to discover the motive which could have induced 
a young gentleman to run so great a risk." 

Arthur explained exactly how he had been led 
to climb to the ruined window, disclaiming any 
knowledge of the abbey being tenanted. She 
was pleased with his explanation, especially with 
his earnestness in assuring her that he had not 
the most remote intention of disturbing the devo- 
tions of the sisterhood. 

She did not seem surprised at his ignorance. 

"Though we have found a temporary re- 
fuge in this remote place," she said quietly, 
" only the few Catholics in the neighbourhood are 
aware that these ruins have been made habitable* 



AK IKTSRESTING ADYSNTURK. 31 

I must warn you," she added more gravely, 
"that your nurse Sister Gudule is under a vow 
of silence. I shall see you again, and you can 
say to me^ whatever you think proper. While 
you remain here, be careAil not to occasion an 
infringement of our rigid rules. When you have 
left us, my son, be still more carefrd not to betaiy 
the poor sisters who have saved your life." 

It was impossible to resist the quiet decision, 
yet graceful digniiy of her manner while thus 
speaking. She had left the room, however, be- 
fore Arthur could venture on a reply. So deep 
was the sense of respect she had excited, that he 
felt hurt and humbled that she should think 
necessary the caution she had given. He could 
not but be grateful to the good nuns for the care 
they had taken of him ; and a boyish sentiment of 
chivalry was too strongly implanted in his nature 
to allow of the confidence they had reposed in liim 
being abused. 

There was something too in the adventure that 
reconciled him to the suffering and injury it had 



S2 JACK sgudaMobe's daughter. 

brought with it. He was in a nunneiy I Sur- 
rounded by these holy recluses, of whom pre- 
viously he had entertained only a very dreamy 
and romantic idea. The motherly kindness of the 
superior had been totally different to his concep- 
tion of the character of an abbess : and to meet 
with a nun like the blooming tender Felicia, was 
a surprise indeed. 

He hoped that Sister Gudule, who had nursed 
him, might resemble her in some degree; but 
though he tried to recal the faces of the other 
sisters, he could not remember one any thing like 
so attractive. They were all foreign and hard- 
featured ; some were old, and the rest looked too 
sad and solemn for the youthful mind to care to 
dwell upon. 

Speculating on this interesting subject, he 
heard a footstep. He knew that it must be his 
female Samaritan. His pulsation began to in- 
crease with the anticipation of a syinpathising face 
bending over him, and a pair of gentle hands 
unfastening his bandages. A tall figure entered. 



AN INTERESTING ADVENTURE. 33 

Hie youth looked up eagerly, and gazed upon the 
hard stem features of the gravedigger. 

Associating her, as he could not help doing, 
with the bones of the dead monks he had seen her 
so carelessly knocking about, and observing more 
closely than he had done in the moonlight, her 
emaciated &ee and sunken eyes, there was no fear 
that he should make any attempt to induce her to 
disregard her vow of silence. 

He made no effort to speak, for he had not 
the slightest inclination to do so, all the time his 
nurse was examining the state of liis hurts; in- 
deed I do not think that he breathed &eely till 
the gaunt form had, after replacing the bandages, 
and pouring some medicine out of a bottle into a 
cup, stalked more like a ghost than a human 
being from the chamber. 

" And so, that is Sister Gudule," he thought, 
and shuddered. 



VOL. L 



CHAPTER IL 

A CLEBICAL PABTY. 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon was walking in 
the vicarage garden. He was a tall young man 
of fair complexion, watery gray eyes, and very 
light hair. His face was bare of whisker or 
beard, had a prominent thin long nose, a narrow 
receding forehead, and a mouth somewhat femi- 
nine in ita proportions. His general aspect was 
expressive of feebleness " sicklied o'er with the 
pale cast of thought," for he was of very studious 
habits ; and as he shut one eye and puckered up 
the other under a glass that closely fitted the 
orbit; moreover, as he wore his academical cap 
and gown over his well-worn clerical suit, and his 
long legs seemed to open as he went like a pair 
of compasses measuring an architectural drawing, 



A CLBRICAL PABTT. 35 

is appeuranoe was rather ringnlar than prepoe- 
sessiiig. 

Notwithstanding the want ofext&rgj expressed 
in his conntenanee, the vicar of Little Delamere 
was both industrious and ambitions. He had 
gained a prize in the last flower-show in the 
county-town for his china-asters, and occupied all 
Ms leisure and his scholarship in editing a Greek 
play. He had always been anxious to distinguish 
himself, with the great object of preferment ; and 
though the income of the vicarage was small, he 
hoped by taking pupils, and by the display of 
his miscellaneous talents, to raise himself into 
notice. 

EKtherto, however, his advantages had been 
confined to the publication of a pedantic letter in the 
county newspaper, but llie journal having an exclu- 
sive agricultural circulation, no one had read his 
communication ; the award of the munificent sum 
of ten-and-sixpence for his prize china-asters ; and 
the emolument derivable firom one pupil. 

Strange to say they did not content him ; and 



36 JACK SCUBAMORK^S DAUGHTER. 

having made a careftil calculation of tiie number 
of bishops who were presumed to owe their mitres 
to their classical attainments, the reverend gentle- 
man was now stalking down the gravel-path of 
the vicarage garden, his black gaiters strapped 
over his shoes, supremely indifferent to the attrac- 
tions of his floral i)ets, having a volume of ^ZBsohy- 
lus open in one hand, and striving to master the 
meaning of ai> extremely difficult passage. 

As ho was reciting the lines aloud, with decla- 
mation as eecenti'ic as his gesture, tlie sublimity 
of tlie great dramatist, to an ordinary looker-on, 
must have been lost in a {perception of the ridi- 
culous. Nevertheless, as the would-be editor ap- 
proached the end of the walk, a rich sonorous 
voice that contrasted strongly with tlie inhar- 
monious intonation that had been delivering the 
chorus, burst out into hearty praise. 

The Vicar looked mildly through his eye-glass 
in tlie direction whence the unexpected sounds 
proceeded, apparently ratlier foolishly confused at 
being so completely caught in the fact. He be- 



A CLKRK'AL PARTY, 37 

held a dark oomplexion awd a pair of flnnlunjit 
©yes under a widt^-awako, thon an atldetio figure 
in a light blouse, with a knnpsaok stitipiHHl on hi» 
baok) a tliiok iron-ahixl stitJc in hiH ungloved hand, 
wearing also stnmg anklo-hoots and cheek-trou- 
sers well oovertnl with dunt, Notwitlistanding 
tins lay costume, a oarefnlly-tied emvat hetmye<l 
the elerie. 

*^ Cajutdly delivered, Plynlynnnon I" eried tlie 
stranger, in apparent eestjvsy. ^^ The Eleusinian 
would have been oharme<l with you ; ay, glad to 
have listened to his whole trilogy, thus imprt^s- 
sively rendered, I have not the slightest doubt. 
Had he been so oinploye<l under eovor, his i>oor 
pato might have escaped tlie unlucky bonneter he 
got from the tortoise, you know.'* 

" GK)odnes8 gracious, Mr. Trinnner!" exclaimed 
the Viear, apparently much aatoni»hed, di*opi)ing 
his eye-glass, and coming forward with outstr(>tohed 
hand, " can it be you ?" 

"Wliy, you don't think nntui'O could have 
produced two Dick Trimmei's, do you ?'* was the 



38 JACK scudamorb's daughter. 

reply, n» the dusty traveller commenced a vigorous 
hftnd'sliaking. 

" Well — ^no, perhaps not But do you really 
think I did justice to those wonderful lines ?" 

" The old soldier could not have spoken them 
with more eftect; although, as we are told, he 
looked so fierce in his tragic humour that he 
firightened women and children. But you have 
a prodigious advantage over the actors of his 
time, my boy, of which I hope you are sufficiently 
sensible." 

" Oh, indeed ; I was not aware. Pray, what 

is it r 

" Tlieir terrible faces had but one expression. 
You have no occasion to wear a mask." 

" Did I look so very tragic, Mr. Trimmer?" 
" Dreadfiil ! and spoke equally so. Indeed, 
had I been Orestes, and had been abused in that 
style by the Eumenides, I must have knocked 
under. Flesh and blood couldn't have stood such 
a jobation. I should have meekly sung to the 
old girls : 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 39 

** Pray, goodies, please to moderate the rancour of yoar 

tongues; 
Why flash those sparks of fury from your eyes ?** 

He sang die couplet in a mellow voice and 
with impressive gesticulation; the Vicar, with a 
simper of satisfaction looking on, evidently pleased 
with the doubtful compliment. 

^' Come in and have some refreshment," he 
said. ^^ You seem to have had a long walk." 

"Only about thirty miles. But I want to 
look at the inside of your church before I place 
my legs under your hospitable mahogany." 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon at once 
opened the gate in the dwarf-paUng, and walked 
with his friend along a narrow path that led to 
the adjoining churchyard. Mr. Trimmer looked up 
at the tower, at the roof, at the windows and the 
walls, with a critical eye. 

"Nice place for jackdaws," he cried, as some 
birds were wheeling round the vane. " I shouldn't 
wonder if it were the favourite resort of a moping 
owl or two into the bargain." 



42 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

and there^s a crack by the side of that buttress, 
that threatens to tumble the entire shabby concern 
about your ears. It not only is not respectable, — 
it isn't safe. What on earth is your churchwarden 
made of, that he should sanction such a scandal ?^* 

"The churchwarden is a pig," replied the 
Vicar, evidently far from pleased with that ftmc- 
tionary. 

« A pig, is he ?» cried his friend, as they entered 
the vestry, where the same mouldy smell and 
damp atmosphere prevailed. " If I were his 
incumbent, I'd pig him. I'd smoke him into 
bacon in no time. I'd presently put him into 
such a pickle as should change the nature of his 
flesh from his chaps to his pettitoes." 

" He always answers my appeals and remon- 
strances, that the church has done very well as it 
is these fifly years, and that the parish is too poor 
to afford to I'epair it." 

" Oh, ho, the pig I As much as to say that the 
entire congregation is as swinish as himself. Are 
there no rich farmers or gentry hereabouts ?'* 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 43 

" Oh yes, some very well off." 

"Any persons of great social influence?" 

" Several. In the first place, there's the Duke 
of Porchester, at the castle. He does not live 
within the bounds of Delamere Parva, but he's 
our Lord-Lieutenant, and possesses immense in- 
fluence in the couniy, not only from his connexion 
with it, but because his grace holds high oflice in 
the state." 

"Gkwdl" 

" Then there's the Squire. He owns nearly all 
Delamere Magna ; indeed Delamere Chase extends 
to this as well as to the neighbouring parishes 
of Delamere Boyal, Birchington, Haresfoot, Fox- 
borough, Heathmere cum Tuttle, Coneyhatch, and 
Warrensfield ; nearly the whole of the vale in fact, 
which, though now smiling hamlets and rich psB- 
tures, in the Conqueror's time formed one prodi- 
gious forest" 

" Any body else ?" 

" Yes, there's Mrs. Protheroe, the sole repre- 
sentative of the once fine old family that now lie 



44 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

beneath those brasses you must have noticed in 
the chancel ; and Admiral Proudfoot, descendant 
of the Sir Percival Proudfoot, whose recumbent 
figure, with the hehnet and breastplate suspended 
over it, you stopped to examine in the west aisle." 

" I tell you what it is, my good fellow," replied 
the pedestrian, ns he put on his wide-awake in 
leaving the vestry-door, and adjusted his knap- 
sack, " you were always much too easy at college ; 
but here your reconciling yourself to this terrible 
state of things is a criminal weakness — a decided 
neglect of your own interests, as well as those of 
the honourable profession of which you are a 
member." 

" What can I do, Mr. Trimmer ?" asked the 
Vicar helplessly. 

'^ Every thing, Plynlymmon," was the sharp 
reply. " Have you represented the condition of 
your church to the Bishop ?" 

" Oh yes, long ago. His chaplain wrote to 
say that his lordship was suffering from a bad 
attack of gout, but promised to bring the matter 



, A CLERICAL PARTY. 45 

before his lordablp as soon as the doctors would 
allow of his lordship attending to business. Alter 
a considerable interval I wrote more urgently, 
and received the same answer, word for word." 

" You did, did you 1 Now, my good fellow, 
there is but one remedy for this monstrous evil, 
and you are bound to have recom'se to it. I know, 
were I in your shoes, I would not lose a moment 
in doing so." 

" What is it, Mr. Trimmer ? Pray tell me." 

" Agitate r 

The Vicai' repeated the word wonderingly, and 
stopped in liis walk, looking through his eye-glass 
at his friend, very much as if the latter had been 
suggesting the propriety of setting fire to his house. 

" Call in some eminent surveyor," the latter 
continued, " and get him to write a report of the 
unsafe condition of the building, and publish it in 
the county paper, with a rousing appeal to the 
county. Did not some local saint of the Middle 
Ages live hereabouts ?" 

" Yes, Hildebrand the Hermit. He had been 



46 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

a crusader, and retired from the world to live a 
life of meditation and prayer in the very spot 
where the altar now stands." 

" Get up all you can about Si Hildebrand for 
an article in the Gentleman^ s Magazine^ and close 
with a moving account of the state of the sacred 
edifice that was raised to do him honour." 

The Eeverend Basil Plynlymmon still stared at 
his friend. 

" Write boldly to the Lord-Lieutenant, to the 
Bishop, to the Squire, to the representatives of ilie 
families whose monuments are in the church, for 
subscriptions to restore the building to a fit state 
for the performance of divine worship." 

" Subscriptions, Mr. Trimmer !" cried the Vicar, 
apparently a little perplexed, if not rather fright- 
ened. 

^^ Write a pamphlet, preach sermons, make 
speeches, publish letters in the newspapers, appeal 
to every body, not in the county only, but anti- 
quarians, scholars, and zealous Protestants through- 
out the kingdom. Bother the benevolent, wony 



A CUBRIOAL PARTY. 47 

the riohy badger the piouM wherever you can get 
at tliem ; and take my word for it you will raino 
money enough not merely to restore but rebuild 
your church, witli pari^onage and mcIiooIm to match.*' 

^^ My dear Mr. Trimmer I** exclaimed the 
Vicar, taking a long breath. 

" You've got the finest opportunity for lioooni- 
ing celebrated that any clergyman could denire. 
It will turn out a prcciouM deal more profitable 
than editing Greek playn, I can tell you. Leave 
MmAiyluH alone, iny good follow. If you were in 
the habit of getting aM deeply into your cupM oh he 
did, you might perclmnce arrive at his fuddled 
sublimity, but I know you are too abstemious ever 
to roach his flights. Follow my advice^agitate I 
agitate I" 

<* 0, Mr. Trimmerl, '\ cried Basil, eagerly. " If 
you would only stay with mo a day or two, so as 
to put me in the way of conducting tliis important 
movement, I should be so very much obliged to 
you." 

The pedestrian smiled liis aequiesoenoe. 



48 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" Some of my clerical brethren in the neigh- 
bourhood are coming to dine with me to-day ; but 
afterwards we shall be entirely by ourselves. Do 
come." 

Mr. Trimmer cheerfiilly assented; and the 
college friends returned together to the vicarage : 
Basil Plynlymmon, unusually excited by the new 
idea liis mind was attempting to grasp, to the 
total oblivion of the particular work to which it 
liad been devoting its powers ; Bichard Trimmer, 
now and then scanning his companion's thoughtftd 
visage, divested of eye-glass, with a half-curious 
half-amused expression, as he strode beside him, 
quite content with liis prospect of rest and recrea- 
tion, after his long walk. 

^^ Mrs. Martha !" cried the former, putting his 
head into an apartment on the ground-floor of his 
house, whence issued a steam that betrayed its use ; 
** has Mr. Calverley returned?" 

An answer was given in the negative by a 
stout litde woman with a glowing fiice, who stopped 
some culinary preparation on whidi she had been 



\ 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 49 

intent, glancing inquisitively at her master's guest^ 
as he stopped at the open door. 

The Yicar withdrew, and led the way to a 
pleasant dressing-room, where the pedestrian was 
soon briskly employed making such changes in his 
toilet as the limited wardrobe in his knapsack per- 
mitted* 

^^ There be another parson T muttered Mrs. 
Martha to a stout little girl with a fiice as ruddy 
as her own, who was zealously assisting at the 
same dresser ; ^^ I hopes there'll be enough for 'em 
all — ^but I beant sure— some on 'em have sich un- 
common twist^s o' their own." 

This knowledge of the good appetite of her 
master's clerical guests seemed to give a new im- 
pulse to the active, though rather homely-looking 
cook and housekeeper, and she and her small as- 
sistant made increased exertions that the hospi- 
tality of the vicarage should suffice for the antici- 
pated demand upon ii 

It was at least two or three hours later in the 

day that a party of gentlemen uniformly dressed 
VOL. I. S 



60 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Ill black suits with wliite ties, were seated round 
a dining-table in the vicarage parlour, the wide 
window of which opened upon the garden already 
referred to. There wa.s an absence of pretension 
in the iumiture— indeed it was plain, heavy, and 
worn ; the most noticeable thing in it being a large 
bookcase, that appeared well filled with books, 
in bindings evidently adapted more for use than 
show. 

The apartment was of a good size ; on ordinary 
occasions, however, it did duty for two: a re- 
ception-room, the front division that contained 
the framed prints — a view of Oxford, another of 
Westminster Abbey, and two engraved portraits 
of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York : the 
other, " the study," held the bookcase surmounted 
by black busts of Shakspeare and Milton, and had 
its walls ornamented with maps of different sizes. 
The doors of separation were now thrown back, 
and made a comfortable dining-room. 

At least it seemed to be so appreciated by 
the individuals sitting round the table in the cen- 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 51 

tre. There could be no doubt that they had dined 
comfortably in it. The appetites referred to in so 
very homely a way by Mrs. Martlia, necessarily 
sharpened by a long walk, had been satisfied ; 
ample justice liad been done to a plain repast ; the 
table bad been cleared of what renudned ; and the 
clerical host at the head of the table, surrounded 
by his clerical guests, were left with full decanters 
and a modest dessert. 

They were the leading members of the Dela- 
mere Book-Club, whose custom it was to dine at 
each other's houses once a month. All except Mr. 
Richard Trimmer, who now, as professionally 
dressed as the rest, sat near his friend, appa- 
rently engaged in close observation of his new 
acquaintances. 

He had been introduced to each in due form, 
and had shaken hands with them in succession* 
The little curate of Delamere Magna, in the green 
spectacles ; the stout curate of Delamere Bojral, 
with a cast in his eye; the handsome curate of 
Birchington, with the fine head of hair ; the jo- 



52 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

vial, farmer-lookiiig old rector of Hiiresfoot ; the 
facetious young incumbent of Foxborongh; the 
morbidly shy curate of Heathmere cum Tuttle ; 
tlie gaunt, tall, loud-voiced pedant from Coney- 
hatch ; and the sporting parson from Warrensfield ; 
he liad mariced them all down in his memory, and 
was still qaietiy occupying himself with increasing 
liis memoranda. 

But though observant, Mr. Trimmer was &r 
from appearing reserved. He had joined so freely 
in the mild jokes that had circulated during the 
meal, that his neighbour Mr. Tiddlecup, the estab- 
lished jester of the group, began to fear a rival ; 
whilst his i7ts-a-ri9, with so obvious a grand talent 
fer silence, Mr. Bosset, found himself more than 
once ferced into hvsterical demonstrations of mirtlL 

After his survey of the guests Richard Trim- 
mer invariably rested his gaze upon the &ce of his 
host* He always found the same furrowed fere- 
head, and an expression even more absorbed than 
the one lie had worn when striving to &tihom the 
profoundest depths of the master of classic tragedy. 



A CLEBICAL PARTY. 53 

The Beverend Banil Plynlymmon, however, as hw 
observant friend was well aware, no longer directed 
liig thoughtM towards Grec^k plays; what was far 
less excusable, he thought almost as little about 
the more immediate claims u]jon his attention. 
His mind was wandering from his duties to the 
Delamere Book-Club— to a consideration of the 
much more important obligations he owed to him- 
selfl He saw a pros])cct of greatly improving his 
position, and already began to be eager to ai>- 
proach it. The question to be answered was, 
C50ald he venture to take the bold steps for his 
advancement tliat liad becai suggested to liim ? He 
thought he could. 

Conversation began to be more general; the 
decanters were passed round, the almonds and 
raisins distributed, nuts were being cracked and 
oranges pared. Tliose who were much in the habit 
of talking made themselves heard, and those who 
habitually listened formed the audience. 

There was a little learned criticism between 
Dr. Fusby , head-master of the Coneyhatch Gram- 



54 JACK scudamobb's daughter. 

mar-School, and Mr. BKnkingtoii, tutor to the 
young Marquis Dehtmere, and chaplain to his 
father the Duke of Porchester, which was car- 
ried on with much noise and many quotations. 
There was a lively discussion on psalmody, in 
Avhich little Jacob Griggs, the good-looking Ho- 
ratio Drelincourt, and the elderly Dr. Granger 
took part There were several puns perpetrated, 
accidentally to all appearance, by the Bev. Spen- 
cer Tiddlecup ; and there was an account of a run 
with Squire Scudamore's hounds from the highly 
imaginative mind of the Hon. and Rev. Adolphus 
de Courcy. But a report of these would not be 
either amusing or edifying. 

Suddenly the Vicar seemed to strive vigorously 
to shake off the sense of responsibility which his 
wandering specidations had brought upon him, 
and become sensible of the attention that was 
due to his guests. 

" What's going on at Oxford?" he inquired of 
his pedestrian friend. 

" 0, there's quite a new life breathed into the 



A CLERICAL PARTY, 55 

venerable place," replied Mr. Trimmer, looking 
intently at the beeswing in the glass of port wine 
he held up to the light. 

" Indeed 1" exclaimed the Vicar. " What is it 
all about?" 

^'You must know, if you are not already 
aware of this interesting tact, that several earnest- 
minded men in the Cliiu'ch, impressed with a pro- 
fomid conviction of the unworthy position and 
comparative inability of its ministry, are sti'iving, 
by short but powerful appeals to the understand- 
ing of Churchmen, to rouse them to imited ac- 
tion for the alteration of this unhappy state of 
things." 

The shy Mr. Bosset looked at the speaker with 
grave attention. 

* 

" In what direction, Mr. Trimmer ?" inquired 
his host. 

" They remind their readers of the great per- 
sonal influence enjoyed by the Roman Catholic 
priest, and insist that the Protestant clergyman 
should have the same advantages." 



56 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

"A consummation devoutly to be wished!'* 
observed the little curate of great Delamere ; 
^^but iar from easy of attainment, to the best 
of my belief.'* 

"The positions held by the two are only 
nominally the same," added the curate of Dela- 
mere BoyaL " Both are pastors, but their flocks 
are veiy differently trained." 

" Of course, of course," said the Vicar. 

" The argument is," continued Mr. Trimmer, 
"that care should be taken bv the Protestant 
pastor to assimilate the training of his flock as 
closely as possible to that which produces the 
better-ordered fold." 

The shy curate became still more attentive. 

"Moreover," he added, "our religious ser- 
vices have for a long time been performed, we 
are assured, in a negligent manner, without the 
slightest respect for the Rubric, and it is recom- 
mended that we should return to its strictest ob- 
servance.*' 

" Do they want us to adopt the Popish prac- 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 57 

tices swept away by the Reformation ?" demanded 
Dr. Fusby in his londest tones. 

" I am decidedly opposed to any thing of the 
kind," added the Vicar mildly. 

"They remind us," continued Mr. Trimmer, 
without seeming to heed these interruptions, 
" that the Church of England is not of Popish 
origin, for that our Christianity came in long 
before St Augustine, and was not imported from 
Bome; consequently that we cannot do better 
than fall back upon the ritual of the primitive 
Anglican Christians." 

Some of the auditory seemed struck with this 
argument; the shy curate evincing the deepest 
interest. 

"An ancient British Church no doubt ex- 
isted," observed Mr. Blinkington ; " but the prin- 
cipal portion of our ritual is of much later date." 

"There can be no question about it," said 
Dr. Fusby authoritatively. " Our faith was tho- 
roughly Romish till Henry the Eighth threw off 
the fetters of the Pope." 



58 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

"I have always opposed Popish practices," 
added the Vicar ; " but if the bishops before St, 
Augustine — " 

Then ensued a discussion upon Church anti- 
quities. The idea of a pre-Augustine Anglican 
Church was agreeable to the majority, particularly 
those most averse from Popery. 

But the conversation respecting the tenets 
advocated by the Tractarians did not end here. 
Questions were asked that elicited ftirther infor- 
mation respecting them; and more than one of 
the younger clergymen present expressed an in- 
tention of sending for the publications in which 
they had been set forth. 

The head-master of the Coneyhatch Grammar- 
School affected to treat the whole affair as a new 
development of Popery ; but among those not in- 
clined to adopt such an impression was the Rev. 
Basil Plynlymmon. No Protestant clergyman had 
been in the habit of preaching more strongly 
against ^^ the scarlet abomination ;" this antagon- 
ism, however, made him more eager to adopt the 



A CLERICAL PARTY. 59 

idea of an Anglo-Catholic Church ; and throughout 
the rest of the evening he was one of the most 
eager inquirers after the new doctrines and their 
authors. 

The party broke up early, as some of them had 
a long walk or a long ride home ; but there were 
few present on whom the communications of Mr. 
Trimmer did not exert a powerftd and lasting in- 
fluence. With the vicar this was peculiarly the 
case. Tlie previous suggestions of his college 
friend had given an impulse to his thoughts which 
had prepared his mind for the reception of the 
impressions that followed. 

Beady as he was to entertain the subject more 
thoroughly, he did not lose sight of his present 
responsibilities. He had no sooner closed the 
door on the last of his guests than he again de- 
manded of Mrs. Martha whether his pupil had 
returned. The answer he had before received was 
repeated. 

" I suppose he's at his micle's ; but he ought 
to have written to me. He's been away an entire 



60 JACK SCnODAMOBE'S DAUGHTER. 

weeL To-morrow I will send to the Grange to 
make inquiries." 

-Satisfying himself with this determination, he 
gave orders for fastening up the house, and then 
returned to the parlour. 

The confidential conference that followed lasted 
for several hours; indeed, did not conclude till 
long after midnight. It must have heen deeply 
interesdng to have detained a man so regular in 
his habits as the Vicar so late into the small 
hours. It was not less important, as the results 
proved. The Bev. Basil Plynlymmon from that 
date became an altered man. 

The mission of Mr. Bichard Trimmer was in a 
fair way of accomplishment 



CHAPTER IIL 

HONEST JACK SCUDAHORE. 

Day after day passed by, and Arthur Calver- 
ley was perfectly aware that he was progressing 
towards convalescence. He was as satisfied with 
his quarters as with his treatment. He had be- 
oome reconciled to the harsh physiognomy of 
Sister Gudule; for he was obliged to acknow* 
ledge that, despite the repellent expression of her 
face, there never was a more skilfiil or a more 
attentive nurse. The most nourishing viands were 
provided for him, though fiisting as well as other 
habits of self-denial rigidly prevailed among his 
pious entertainers. 

The superior visited him every day, and con- 
versed with him more kindly at each visit, evi- 
dently desirous of gratifying every reasonable 



62 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

wish he might express. She never again alluded 
to his mother; but tliere could be no doubt that 
the youth was treated by her with so much confi- 
dence in consequence of his near relationship to 
the friend of her youth. More than once he at- 
tempted to turn the conversation in this direction, 
but found that she carefiilly avoided all reference to 
worldly topics connected with her personal history. 
This reserve, natural as it was, served only to in- 
crease the mystery in which all that related to her 
and her interesting community seemed to be in- 
volved, consequently Arthur Calverley could do 
nothing but speculate, which in truth he did with 
as fruitful an imagination as ever was possessed by 
a youth of seventeen. 

The convent-pupil did not again approach him, 
but he found opportunities of seeing her every 
day; indeed many times a-day and night also, 
without her being aware of it. By going out of 
his chamber, which was Sister Gudule's cell, he 
was able to look into the oratory, where the nuns 
assembled to perform their devotional exercises, 



HONEST JACK SCUDAMOBE. 63 

and could always observe that fair young face 
beaming with the fervour of true piety, for it was 
easily distinguishable among the kneeling tlurong. 

He never missed an opportunity of witness- 
ing their self-inflicted penances, or their ordinary 
forms of worship; but his great gratification was 
to watch them at midnight, when the moon illu- 
mined the beautiful arches, and rendered viHible 
the multitude of grotesque carvings that projected 
from the surrounding darkness. Monstrous faces 
were thus made to look down on the absorbed 
worshippers, like demons maliciously watching and 
deriding their devotion. In particular there was a 
dragon's-head doing duty as a gargoyle, that might 
easily have been taken for the contorted visage 
of the great enemy of souls. 

The singing, which usually accompanied the 
midnight prayers of the good sisters, sounded 
peculiarly sweet, and the effect was heightened 
by the additional voices of two or three nightin- 
gales from the adjoining grove, that seemed to 
accept the swelling hymn as a challenge, and did 



64 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

iheir utmost in melodious rivalry. The combina- 
tion was singularly pleasant, indeed had something 
in it holy as well as pleasing, and young Calverley 
continued to listen while the performance lasted 
with as profound a religious sentiment as probably 
infliii»ioed either of the ntms, notwithstanding the 
incongruous association of the demoniac physio- 
gnomies that he could not help observing in the 
carved stone-work above them. 

When concentrating his attention on FeUcia 
he felt like a devotee gazing on the features of a 
glorified saint. Her gnu^eful figure in the habit 
of a pupil, as it fell into the attitudes of supplica- 
tion, thanksgiving, praise, or penitence, gave him 
the idea of a Bafiaelle chef^osuvre; but when he 
raised his eyes fi*om this exquisite natural altar- 
piece he was sure to encounter the grinning gar- 
goyle and the grotesque bosses, apparently derid- 
ing his admiration. 

One aflemoon he was at his post of observa- 
tion about the time of compline, when he heard 
a suppressed exclamation; and turning quickly 



HONEST JACK SCUDAMOBE. 65 

round, beheld the youthfid religieuse close to him, 
with tlie utmost embarraHsment and alarm visible 
in her ingenuous countenance. The two gazed on 
each other silently for a few seconds ; but short as 
was the time, it is impossible to express the inten- 
sity, the depth, the exquisiteness of the sensations 
one of them experienced* 

The girl sunk on her knees trembling, andy 
seizing her rosary, began hurriedly and excitedly 
to say her customary Latin prayers ; her look still 
fixed on the &ce of the handsome youth as if she 
could not take it away, her coimtenance flushed 
and anxious. To allay her evident alarm he knelt 
beside her, and repeated aloud the Credo she 
was murmuring abstractedly to herself, A ra- 
diant smile played like a gleam of smishine over 
her angelic features as she recognised this com** 
munion of worship. Sl^e turned her head. She 
stopped, and her lips parted as if about to speak. 

At this moment the clear commanding voice 
previously heard sounded from below. 

"Felicia!" . 

VOL. I. F 



66 JACK scudamobe'8 dauohteb. 

Like a stariled bird she rose at the summons^ 
directed a sweety pleased, half-tender glance to- 
wards her fellow-worshipper, and hurriedly flat- 
tered out of sight 

And so the time passed £u* from unpleasanti j* 
To Arthur there was a delightfid mystery in his 
residence, and he was not at all inclined to alter 
it But a change was coming sooner than he ex- 
pected, or wished 

One morning, shortly after matins, he was sit- 
ting on his bed reading a devotional book, when 
his attention was taken off the narrative of a very 
remarkable miracle by the sound of voices in con- 
versation. Above the head of his pallet was the 
deal partition which divided the cell of Sister 
Gudule from another, and close . against it must 
have sat or stood the superior, for it was her voice 
he recognised. 

*^ Dorothy is imfortunately a thorough woman 
of the world," she observed. " So she was during 
my association with her ; and so, unless the good 
God touches that temple of vanity, her heart, she 



HONEST JACK 8GUDAM0RE. 67 

is^ I am afraid, likely to remain. She has made 
an idol, you tell me, of her dead husband, whom 
she -worships with a reverence that should be due 
only to God and the Blessed Virgin/' 

Something was said in reply, in a man's voioe ; 
but the speaker was apparently too &r off, or spoke 
too low, to be heard distinctly. 

^' Yes ; her thoughts, her hopes, her recollec- 
tions begin and end at court," said the Abbess, 
'' in her intense state of worldliness she considers 
that there is nothing worthy of notice beyond its 
privileged circle. The royal family take the places 
of the heavenly hierarchy in her Paradise, and the 
members of the household those of the holy martyrs 
and saints. In truth, my poor sister is in a ter- 
rible condition, and I pray for her lost soul night 
and day. Protestant she may call herself, but 
Christian she certainly is not." 

Again Arthur could not make out the reply ; 
but the communication must have been a long one, 
for it was some time before he again heard the voioe 
with which lie was familiar. During this interval 



68 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

his mind was busy speculating on the strange oc^ 
currence of a man penetrating to this refiige for 
female recluses ; and he could attribute it only to 
their religious requirements. The stranger could 
be no other, he thought, than the appointed &ther 
confessor to the sisters. He immediately por^ 
trayed him as a venerable ecclesiastic of solemn 
Appearance and grave demeanour, qualified by a 
life of strict integrity to undertake so onerous a 
trust. The good priest must of course have come 
to receive the confessions of the pious community. 

Arthur Calverley wondered what faults the 
noble-looking superior could have committed since 
his last visit. What offence could the rigid Sister 
Gudule have to divulge, he asked himself. Could 
it be necessary that Felicia should have to declare 
her most secret thoughts and emotions to this man, 
was another and a more earnest query. He be- 
came painfully anxious to know more of this visi- 
tor. A feverish curiosity kept him a breathless 
listener. 

'^ I cannot reconcile myself to her being per- 



. HONEST JACK 8CUDAM0RE. ^9 

mitted to bring up that cliild|" V^eru the first words 
iJiat reached him. '' She will be educated as a 
Protestaut, wliich is of course an insurmountable 
objection with a good Catholic like myself; but 
tliere is also the grave evil in prospect of her being 
educated exclusively for the world. I am afraid 
that my poor sister has no religious principles of 
any sort, and therefore caimot teach any to her 
charge. It is really terrible to contemplate the 
evils that must result from my niece being com- 
mitted to her care. She might, I think, have 
been contented with making one of the cousins a 
heretic; the other ought, in common fairness, 
to have been delivered over to me, when she 
would have had the unspeakable advantage of 
a thoroughly religious training, associated with 
PeUoia." 

Tlie youth's heart beat more quickly at tliat 
name, and he became so agitated that the BreWary 
he had held dropped from his hand on to the floor. 
The voice stopped at once, and smik into an in- 
audible whisper. 



70 JACK sgudamobe's daughter. 

What could this strange conference be about, 
he thought The Abbess was not making a con- 
fession; the priest was not offering absolution. 
They were evidently talking of an elderly lady 
who had taken upon herself the charge of two 
girls, each apparently professing a fiiith differing 
from their own. 

There seemed to him something singularly 
mysterious in such a colloquy, carried on in such 
a place. Who could be " Dorothy?" who were her 
wards? and what had Felicia to do with them? 
These questions presented themselves in quick suc- 
cession, but of course remained imanswered. He 
knew nothing, and could suggest nothing by way 
of explanation. 

Where, he asked himself, could he look for 
information ? Not from the stem-featured Sister 
Gudule. Her vow of silence was an impassable 
obstacle, and her disposition he knew to be the 
reverse of communicative. Not from the tender, 
gracefrd Felicia. He could not dare to ask her*a 
worldly question, even should an opportunity pre- 



HOHBftT JACK SOUDAMORE. 71 

Kent itself. Not from tliat patrician-looking su- 
perior of the sisterhood. Not for worlds could 
he have risked her condemnation of his inquisi- 
tiveness. 

Had he any prospect of meeting the priest? 
Wba there the most remote ])0SHibility of the latter 
becoming sociable with him? Might not the 
reverend gentleman bo induced to tell him wliat 
he knew of these amiable reclusesy particularly of 
the pupil, and of her connection with the Pi*o- 
testant lady and the two Protestant girls tlio 
latter had undertaken to educate ? To his youth- 
ful mind tliis idea seemed not only rational but 
practicable. 

While surrondering his imagination to these 
suggestions, ho was startled by hearing Ids name. 
He listened intently. 

^^ He can now be removed witli safety ; and I 
am anxious, for several reasons, that this should 
be attempted at once. I tliink I have done enough 
tut him to prove my affection for his dead mother, 
and to Hatisiy the claims of Christian charity. I 



72 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

have no complamt to make against him beyond a 
pardonable curiositj- — ^indeed^ I have marked qua- 
lities in him tliat have won my respect. But 
Felieiar-" 

His youthful heart beat again tumultuously 
as he drew his head nearer to the partition, but 
the voice sunk into a whisper. He heard no 
more. 

It was quite clear to him that he was now to 
be got rid of with all convenient despatch ; and 
the information was by no means agreeable. Not- 
withstanding the narrowness of his cell, the me- 
lancholy prospect from the window, the stem 
severity of Sister Gudule, and her association with 
the terrible scene he had witnessed in the moon- 
lit cemeterj', he loved the place and all it con- 
tained. Every fragment of the grand ruin was 
endeared to him. He had a regard even for the 
grotesque heads in the carved stone-work, and 
had become quite reconciled to the demoniac 
diBgon that grinned .so horribly ftom the top^of 
the broken wall. 



HONBtfr JACK SCUDAMORE. 73 

The Hweet singing of the nuns, and tlie equally 
plaintive choral of their melodious sisters, the 
nightingales, how could he tear himself firom 
•them ? And then Felicia — agoing from her seemed 
turning his back on heaven- 
Such was his excitement at the pro8j)ect of 
quitting the temporary lodging the estimable lady 
superior had provided for him, while he so greatly 
needed careful nursing, that, could he have se- 
cured a continuance in his quarters, he would have 
declared himself a Catholic without the slightest 
hesitation. He felt assured, however, that such a 
change would be of no service to him in the only 
way he desired assistance. Luckily for him, he 
was in honourable hands that would not have per- 
mitted such a perversion from romantic motives. 

Wliile he was intent on tliese suggestions, the 
Abbess entered his chamber. He rose as usual 
to receive her with a reverential salutation, and 
looking into her noble fiice discerned more emo- 
tion than he had ever yet noticed there- Tlie 
calm serene gaze appeared troubled, the clear eye 



74 JACK 8CUDAM OBB^g DAUOHXEB. 

dim, and when nhe spoke her voice iaiembled with 
emotioii* 

^' My nony^ she fNiid^ with an eameat gamty 
in her look and manner he remembered kmg after- 
wards, ^^ fhe good Qod sent yon amongst ns poor 
recluses that we might show onrselves worthy of 
serving onr divine Lord and example; and the 
Blessed Virgin has helped ns, and enabled ns to 
fulfil what was both a dnfy and a tmst Yon 
will now go forth again into the world from which 
we are secluded ; I hope not without thankfiilness 
to that Providence which raised you up friends in 
your utmost need — not too, let me hope, without 
a gratcAil recollection of the poor sisters, wlio, 
under that Providence, were the means of helping 
you through a mortal struggle.'^ 

The youth knelt at her feet and kissed her 
hand* She placed the other on his head and 
uttered a benediction. 

^^ A friend is waiting to take you away,'^ she 
continued presently* ^^But before you depArt^ 
you must promise not to return on any pretext 



HOKEST JACK 80UDAM0BB. 75 

whatever, and to saj nothing respecting the exist- 
ence of our little conununity here." 

He gave the required promise with a fidl heart 
and a choking utterance. The Abbess embraced 
him like a mother, and then led him silently out 
of the celL 

As Arthur walked along the different portions 
of the abbey through which he was conducted, he 
glanced at the old familiar fiices in the carved work 
as upon friends he was leaving after much pleasant 
acquaintance. He felt; a consolation in knowing 
that he was about to be presented to the priest 
whose voice he had so recently heard in confer- 
ence with his companion, from whom he hoped 
to obtain much interesting information; but on 
reaching the great arched entrance, it is impos- 
sible to express liis surprise on finding there, 
as if waiting his approach, not a grave white- 
headed mild-featured ecclesiastic in a neat suit 
of black, but a ruddy-faced, stout-limbed Cheshire 
squire, in a green coat, buff waistcoat, leather 
small top-boots, and velvet hunting-cap. 



76 JACK «cudamobe's daughter. 

It was Jack Scudamore,— honest Ja(5k S<uida- 
more, as he was called all over the couiiti-y, — ^the 
iproprietor of Delamere Court — a master of homid.s, 
a breeder of race-*horses, and one of the greatest 
patrons of field-sports in the three kingdoms. 

He was sitting on a fine horse, lis only a 
thorough-bred sportsman can sit a thorough-bred 
animal, with the bridle of " Trusty" in one of his 
hands, Arthur looked amazed. Glancing at the 
youth with a half-solemn, half-comic look, he burst 
out into a cheery laugh. 

" Mount," said he, " there's a good cliap ; and 
don't stare as if you took me for a ghost. I'm 
solid flesh and blood, near fifteen stone ; and can 
beat all the light-weights in the saddle, and all 
ihe heavy-weights hereabouts in a fair tiu*n-up, 
single-stick, boxing, wrestling — ^whatever they like. 
By Jove ! if you ever catch a ghost as substantial 
as Jack Scudamore, you may make a fortune by 
showing him at fairs." 

Arthur looked around for the Abbess, but she 
had disappeared. The contrast of her appearance 



HONEST JACK SCUDAMOllE. 77 

to timt of his present associate^ and of her piou» 
conversation to his emphatic but somewhat too 
secular talk, struck him very forcibly. Indeed, 
he was so astonished, that he had not a word to 
say. He was, however, on the back of his fa- 
vom'ite in a moment, and was presently cantering, 
evidently well pleased, through a broad cartway 
in tlie neighbouring wood, by the side of the 
Squire's hunter. 

" You see, my lad," he said, pointing with his 
hunting-whip over his shoulder in the direction of 
the place they had just left, " those poor ladies, a 
few y(»ars ago, left their convent abroad ; and I 
was persuade<l to let them fit up the old abbey as 
a temporaiy shelter, the superior being a relation 
of mine. But there's a good deal of * no-popery* 
animosity in these parts, so we tliought it best 
to kee[) their residence there as much a secret as 
possible. By (Jeorge, sir, there's bigots in this 
very parish as wouldn't mind getting up a riot 
for the sple purpose of having their hiding-place 
burnt about their earSt'* 



78 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

Arthur warmly expressed his indignation^ and 
an assurance that their secret was safe in his 
hands. The idea at once presoited itself to him 
that here was the opportunity he had longed for^ 
to learn something reliable respecting those amiable 
recluses to whom he felt so deeply indebted. He 
thought too that he had a better chance of gain- 
ing the much-desired intelligence from a layman 
than from a priest. His new friend looked the per- 
sonification of perfect frankness and hearty good- 
humour ; the imaginary fiither confessor would of 
course have been reserved, probably would have 
regarded his inquiries with distrust. ,. 

Arthur glanced up at Jack Scudamore's honest 
English face, and felt his courage and his hopes 
increase. The fox -hunter laughed again his 
cheery laugh at the youth's earnest scrutiny. 

" I hope you'll know me when we next meet," 
he observed with hearty jocularity. " You look as 
closely at me as I do at a horse I want to buy. 
And what do you think of my points ? You don't 
take me for a screw, do you ?" 



B0KK6T JACK SCUDAMORK. 79 

The air of mock alarm wiih which this inquiry 
was put so tickled Arthur's faxuy^ that he could 
not repress his mirth; the other encouraged the 
joke with boisterous delight. 

^^ You think that I'm only fit for the knackers, 
eh?" he demanded ^^The high-mettled racer, 
Jack Scudamore, isn't able to draw a sand-cart ? 
Confound you! I'll let you know presently that 
I've blood and bone for any thing! I tell you 
what, sir: I'm engaged to ride a steeple-chaR<*, 
and you shall soon see the stuff I'm made of." 

The idea of a steeple-chase at once drove the 
good nuns out of the youth's head. He became 
eager and inquisitive, and showed all a boy's en- 
thusiasm for so exciting a race. 

" You see there's a young fellow called Dillon," 
he continued. ^^ Like most Irishmen, he fancies he 
knows something about horses, which poor dull 
John Bull has no notion of; and he's come down 
here with a famous steeple-chaser, Brian Boru, 
— an Irish horse, of course, — a^ well known at the 
Curragli of Kildare as I am in this county. Well, 



80 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

a few of us have agreed, for a thousand guineas, 
to ride across a certain line of country — by Jove ! 
sir, about the most trying mile or two that ever 
taxed the powers of horseflesh — against this won- 
derfiil fencer." 

Arthur's heart was in a flutter of excitement. 

" There's Lord Vernon's Peter Pindar, out of 
Sister to Smolensko ; Lord Bossborough^s Blacki' 
eyed Susan, that has won at least half-a-dozen 
cups in the North; the Duke of Porchester's 
famous chestnut-mare Phyllis, whose sire was tho 
Arabian Godolphin ; Sir Harry Chester's Con- 
juror, out of Coventry Bess; Tom Holyoake's 
Saucy Lass, that won, you know, the hurdle-raco 
at Durham." 

The youth knew nothing about it ; but pru- 
dently refrained from exposing his ignorance. 

" Lastly, there is my magnificent gray stal- 
lion Jupiter, brother to Thunderbolt, that won 
the Derby and the Oaks last season. There isn't 
better blood in the three kingdoms. I gave a 
deuce of a price for him when a yearling, and 



HONEST JACK SCUDAMORE. 81 

have had him trained under my own eye« Such 
power ! such action ! such speed I such ^ 
shape ! By Gteorge, sir, if he don't beat any 
Irish horse that ever was foaled, I'll eat him — 
shoes and all." 

Arthur joined in the hearty laugh that fol- 
lowed this declaration, and felt an increasing in* 
terest in an event of such sporting importance. 

^^ Well, sir, we have made up a purse of a 
thousand guineas to try the mettle of Brian Boru. 
Young Dillon is to ride him — ^indeed every owner 
is to ride his particular steed; and as they are 
among the best gentlemen jockeys in the county, 
I have no doubt that they will show our iGriend 
Paddy some pretty play," 

It is impossible to express the eager desire 
Arthur Calverley felt to see the impending 
struggle. It put every other idea completely 
out of his mind. 

^^ But the fences and the brooks he will have 

to cross," he continued, with a grin of the most 

intense satisfitction, ^^ the double hedges, the 
VOL. I. G 



82 JACK BCTJDAHORE^S DAUGHTER. 

shelving banks^ the high palings, and broad 
ditches he will be forced to go over neck or 
nothing, — ^by George, Paddy will have his work 
to do ! Why, sir, we start from Highbury Hol- 
low, over the millrstream at Momington Flats, 
into Sparsingham Lane, cross the old fosse at 
the Boman encampment, turn by the gap, and 
take the wall by the orchard into the Friar's 
Close, leap the river by the willow-bank, then go 
up the Lover's Mound, over the enclosure at the 
Seven Acres, and down the slope, and across the 
ditch and palings into the Parson's Field to the 
flag. If the Emerald Isle can show such a line of 
country as that, there may be the ghost of a 
chance for Brian Boru; for the Irish horse may 
have had some preparation for the work that has 
been cut out for him. But, my lad, it isn't pos- 
sible. I don't believe that there's such a suc- 
cession of leaps in any hunting coimtry in the 
world." 

They were skirting the edge of the Mere, and 
then turned off into a high-banked gi'een lane 



HONBST JACK 8CUDAM0RE. 83 

witli tall treeH on each Hide that united at top in a 
natural arch* It formed a singularly pleai^ant and 
refreshing picture ; and a small flock of sheep iu 
the centre with their smock-frocked shepherd and 
hifl shaggy dog approacliing^ added to its pic- 
turesque character. 

^^ Hallo, Giles!" cried the Squire, riding up 
before the man, as the latter respectfully doifed 
his coarse straw*liat. '^ Hast seen any body as ye 
came along ?'' 

"Ees, Squire; a iK)wer o' gentlefolk," replied 
tlxe shepherd eagerly. '^ They be all in the Hol- 
low; riding back'ards and forrards loike nuuL 
It seemed to I there was going to be a race 
loike." 

" I shouldn't wonder," said the Squire, wink- 
ing at his young friend. ^^ Come on, my lad. 
Don't let us be too late for the fun." 

They soon left the flock beliind, as well as 
their shepherd, scratching his head with open 
mouth as he stared after them ; and emerged upon 
a straggling })iece of waste land that shortly 



84 JACK scudahobe's dauohter. 

began to sink gradually into a narrow dell. Ar- 
thur caught sight of a group of animated eques- 
trians below, and Iiis heart began to beat more 
rapidly with excitement as he took in the more 
prominent features of the scene. Indeed a pic- 
ture so exciting he had never beheld* 

He could easily discern the gentlemen jockeys 
in their various-coloured vests and gay caps; 
there were also members of the Delamere Hunt 
in their scarlet coats, as well as other gentlemen 
and farmers of the neighbourhood in blue or green 
coats. They rode from one group to another, or 
tried the pace of their steeds, or their powers of 
leaping, and the sounds of their shouting and 
laughing floated merrily on the aii% 

As soon as the Squire was recognised, a hun- 
dred eager cries of welcome arose, and a good 
many of the throng' rode forward, apparently 
eager to be the first to shake him by the hand. 
Nothing could exceed the joyousness of spirit 
which pervaded the scene ; and the dash of reck- 
lessness that the miCjority of the best mounted 



HONEST JACK SCUDAMORE. 85 

exhibited as they urged their horses forward, 
gave it a wonderftd charm in the youth's eyes* 

" Jack,'* cried one of the oldest of the riders, 
though the vivacity in his clear gray eyes, and 
the hilarity expressed in his cheerftd coimte- 
nance, declared unmistakably that his heart was 
still young, — " Jack, old boy, I'm delighted to see 
you." 

They shook hands with such heartiness that the 
powder which the speaker wore in the abundant 
fashion of his youth flew out of his carefiilly-dressed 
head and feU in a shower over his shoulders. 

'^ I'm sorry if I've kept you w^aiting, Duke," 
was the reply. 

Arthur knew that he was looking upon the 
Duke of Porchester, the lord - lieutenant of the 
county, a distinguished patron of field - sports, 
and moreover a leading member of the govern- 
ment. He knew too that his grace was held in 
as high estimation for the courteous urbanity of 
his manners as for his political influence. 

" Arrah, then, there you are, honey !" shouted 



86 JACK 8CUI>AM0BE'8 DAUGHTER. 

one of the mont dashing of the jockeys, coming up 
smacking his whip with ihe most extravagant de* 
momrtrationfl of deUghl ^' Long life to ye ! It*8 
mighfy giad I am ye're come, Mr. Jack Scoda- 
more dear; for it's in a bit of a quandary Fm in, 
and I eanH see my way out of it, at all, at alL" 

^' The fiiet is, Sqture," observed a handsome 
aristocratic-looking man joining the group, with a 
laughing fiice, ^^ my yomig friend Dillon has, in 
his eagerness to maintain the reputation of Brian 
Bom, forgotten his owner ; so I have been obliged 
to come forward to claim that honour, and shall of 
course ride the horse in the race." 

" I don't see that we lose much by that, my 
lord," exclaimed the Sqtiire in his most cordial 
manner, grasping the hand of the acknowledged 
proprietor of the celebrated Irish horse, a member 
of the peerage of the same coimtr}', and well known 
on the turf. " Our greatest loss will be Mr. Dillon 
as a competitor." ^ 

^' And I do not see that tliat is imperative," 
observed the Duke, good-liumouredly. 



HOKJEST JACK SCUDAMORE. 87 

" Suppose we come to an agreement, Dnke, 
that one of ns should be permitted to resign his 
horse to Mr. Dillon ?" 

The suggestion was eagerly adopted by that 
gentleman, but by nobody else. It was evidently 
accepted as an exceedingly pleasant joke, and gave 
rise to an abundance of jocose bantering and peals 
of hearty laughter. But either no one felt inclined 
to trust his thoroughbred to young Dillon's jockey- 
ship, or could not be persuaded to give up his 
personal share in the forthcoming race. There 
was no response to the appeal. 

" K there is no objection to it, Mr. Dillon 
shall ride Phyllis,'' said the Duke. 

The idea wa^ welcomed with acclamation, and 
the popular lordJieutenant of tlie county had the 
satisfaction of seeing that he had won golden 
opinions in an influential circle, while gracefully 
withdrawing from a contest that could scarcely 
fail of being attended by a good deal of personal 
risk. The Duke of Porchester passed for a clever 
man. 



88 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

This alteration in the programme having been 
satisfactorily settled, snch of the competitors in the 
forthcoming steeple-chase as had not yet displayed 
their racing-costume threw off their coats and ap- 
peared in satin jackets of various colours, with caps 
to match. 

Arthur had ample opportunity for noticing both 
horses and riders as they took up their positions 
preliminary to the start 

Lord Vernon was a thin young man with a 
well-defined aquiline nose, and rather high cheek- 
bones. He rode a powei'fiil black horse. 

Lord Bossborough was about tlie same age. His 
face was round but inexpressive. An air of languid 
indifference seemed impi^essed upon it; but now and 
then a peculiar keen look in his dark eyes showed 
. that he took a more than ordinary interest in what 
was going on. He rode a roan mare that had at- 
tained considerable local celebriiy. 

Dillon attracted a good deal rf the youth*8 
attention; the confident, rollicking, droll, devil- 
may-care Irish adventurer was there beyond a 



&OKEBT JACK SCUDAUORS. 69 

doubt. He rode a chestnut mare of wide celebriiy 
in the county. 

Sir Harry Chester was only remarkable for 
the length of his legs, and the paleness of his com-* 
plexion. He was a dragoon-officer, but knew 
little of the service, and cared less ; he was an 
exquisite, much better known in St. James's 
Street than at the Horse Guards. He rode a 
bay gelding of promising appearance. 

Mr. Holyoake was nephew to the bishop of the 
diocese, and, as his rubicund physiognomy too 
plainly showed, was more familiar with the port- 
wine of the county than with its church establish- 
ment. The mare he rode was another Cheshire 
celebrity, but from the fineness of her shape better 
qualified for racing than leaping. 

Whatever merits these animds had, Arthur 
soon perceived that the opinions of the best 
judges were nearly equally divided between the 
Irish horse and^at of his friend tlie Squire. When 
the owner of Brian Boru rode forward, there was 
a buz of admiration from all the knowing ones in 



90 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

horse-flesh. He was a gelding of extraordinary 
size and strength, nnqnestionablj too of high 
spirit. Even when Jupiter came playftdly enr- 
yetting and caraoolling with his owner on his 
back, his magnificent figure failed to lessen the 
impression Brian Bom had created. Bets were 
now shouted out with the greatest possible anima- 
tion, and when accepted were rapidly written 
down in pocket-books. Seven to six were fireely 
offered by the fiiends of the Irish horse ; those of 
the Cheshire stallion were equally liberal in his 
favour ; seven to four were betted against Phyllis; 
eight to three against Peter Pindar and Black- 
eyed Susan; and six to four against Conqueror 
and Saucy Lass. 

The cries of the betting-men, the ribald oaths, 
ihe coarse jokes that were bandied about by the 
excited throng, formed a striking contrast to the 
tranquil solitude and holy purity of the retreat 
Arthur had just left; yet his youthftd love of 
sport was so strongly excited by the scene before 
him, that he completely forgot all he had seen 



HONEST JAOK 8CUDAM0RE. 91 

and heard so short a time before, that was most 
worthy of remembrance. Even the sweet fisuse of 
Felicia had passed from his recollection. 

At a signal all started, young Dillon taking 
the lead; but, alas, Phyllis did not clear the 
mill-stream, and her rider got such a ducking as 
ought to have cooled the courage even of an Irish- 
man. He had presently a companion in misfor- 
tune in Sir Harry Chester ; the rest got over well: 
Peter Pindar a little in advance ; Black-eyed 
Susan, Conqueror, and Saucy Lass following 
closely; and Brian Boru and Jupiter slightly in 
the rear. 

Trusty could not be restrained ; and though 
Arthur had been cautioned by the Squire not to 
join in the race with his arm scarcely set, he could 
as little be restrained as his horse. So off they 
started. He however had the prudence to follow 
a practicable line that other horsemen had se- 
lected. 

Along Sparsingham Lane Conqueror showed 
in front ; but he stumbled over tlie old fosse and 



S2 JACK SCUDAMORB'g DAUGHTER. 

threw his rider. In taking the wall down went 
Peter Pindar. Crossing the Friar's Close the 
Irish horse was seen pressing forward, closely 
waited on by the Cheshire stallion. At the river 
Black-eyed Susan • missed her footing and fell 
back ; it was cleared by Saucy Lass, Brian Boru, 
and Jupiter. 

The three now passed up the Lover's Mound, 
at the end of which they came to a terrible stiff 
bull-finch, which the mare refused. The tish 
horse went over in fine style ; Jupiter was equally 
successful, but about three lengths in the rear. 
Then ensued a tearing race between the two fa- 
vourites, through the seven-acre field and down 
the slope— Brian Boru still leading. 

The worst leap was to come — a stiff ox-fence, 
with a ditch. The Irish horse was seen going at 
it at a tremendous pace ; but whether his rider 
made him take it at too great a distance, or whe- 
ther he slipped when descending the slope, is not 
knowUr All that the closest observers saw was, 
that he fell in the ditch, throwing his rider on 



HONEST JACK BCUDAMORE. 93 

his head. Jupiter flew over his prostrate compe- 
titor, and, gallopping along the field beyond, won 
the race amid the deafening acclamations of the 
spectators, among whom Arthur was one of the 
most vociferous. 

There was one serious drawback to the intense 
satisfaction which the issue of this race gave tlio 
Squire and his delighted neighbours. This w.ns 
the fate of the noble owner of Brian Boru. TIip 
Viscount was picked up a corjise. Dillon's grief at 
the loss of his patron was uncontrgllable ; Arthui' 
was very much shocked, yet he was unaware how 
profound an influence over his career, his life, his 
happiness, that dreadful event was to exercise. 

Seeing the Squire absorbed in sorrow at tlio 
iate of his late competitor, Arthur thought it better 
if} ride to the vicarage without attempting to take 
leave. 



CHAPTER IV. 

A lobd-chamberlain's widow. 

Abthub Oaltbblst was enjoying a &vourite out- 
of-door recreation on a lovelj sununer afternoon 
—going with the tide over the sUent highway of 
the then silvery Thames, just dipping the bhdes 
of the oars to keep the boat in her course. It was 
quite as pleasant for a contemplative man's re- 
creation as the spori he had an opportunity of 
observing, as he passed punt after punt, poled in 
mid-stream, with a &t citizen in a straw -hat, 
nankeen-jacket, gaiters, and other business -h'ke 
habiliments, watching through his spectacles the 
motion of his float with as much anxiety as if 
he expected to hook a shark instead of a gudgeon. 
The river at this time was free from steamers, 
and its wave from the thousand pollutions with 



A LORD-CHAMBERLAIN^S WIDOW. 95 

which it 18 now poisoned ; the water was spark- 
ling, the fish plentiAil, and the banks picturesque. 
There was no exercise more refreshing and invi- 
gorating than a pull of an hour or two over its 
sparkUng current — especially to an idle young 
fellow beginning to feel the weariness of town 
dissipation. 

In the days to which I am referring there 
were no outriggers. The regular waterman's boat 
was employed by amateurs, only it was of lighter 
0(Histruction for a single rower, who liad recourse 
to the ordinary oars, if he prided himself, in tlie 
slightest degree, on his skill or his strength. A 
long pull, therefore, particularly if against tide, 
required considerable exertion; nevertheless, it 
was sought as a special enjoyment by all classes 
of lusty youth — ^from the apprentice at Wapping 
to the patrician school-boy at Westminster — even 
more generally than at present 

Many a load of joyous holiday-makers did the 
youth pa«8 returning to town, laughing, scream- 
ing, and singing, totally oblivious of the slight 



96 . MCK scudamore's daughter, 

margin between the deep water and the cranky 
gunwale; and many a gaily- painted wherry, 
rendered more conspicuoos by its group of smart 
parasols shading smarter bonnets, that a modem 
milliner would only condescend to look at as cari- 
catures, 

Arthur took his solitary way in a very lei- 
surely manner. He was not unmindftd of the 
pleasant features of the scene ; but the sense of 
securiiy that pervaded every thing around him 
brought with it a delicious feel of repose, and 
the flow of his thoughts became as tranquil as 
the river on which he floated. Yet he could not 
help being a little dissatisfied with himself at this 
tranquillity. He know that it was time for action, 
and that he was wasting in unprofitable pleasure 
ike energies that ought to be carrying him forward 
in the first stage of a noble career. 

He looked at his position more closely than he 
had hitherto thought necessary. What was he at 
best, he asked himself; the cadet of an ancient 
&mily , with but little to boast of in the present,— 



A lord-chamberlain'w widow. 97 

a very insecure foundation for the future he de- 
sired. He had quitted his tutor, and had been 
studying a year at a military college, preparing 
himself for the duties of a cavalry officer. A 
commission had been promised him; and in the 
interim he enjoyed his leisure in the indulgence of 
a favourite recreation. 

A breeze was now springing up, that began to 
stir the hitherto calm surface beneath him. It 
was any thing but welcome to the overladen boats 
slowly advancing with their freight of noisy re- 
vellers ; but the more heavy crafl, bearing piles 
of timber and other merchandise, were seen busily 
spreading their huge sails to obtain the advantage 

« 

of its influence. 

He was carelessly gliding along within a con- 
venient distance of the bank at Chiswick, when he 
observed a new wherry leaving a private landing, 
pushed out by a handsome boy in a glazed hat, 
white trousers and pink shirt-sleeves. Tlie boat car- 
ried one passenger — a girl at least a year younger 
than her companion, who sat in a gipsy hat 

VOL. I. H 



98 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

adorned with blue ribbons, out of which fell a 
shower of golden curls, that surrounded the love- 
liest &ee he had ever beheld — except one. 

In her close-fitting spencer and flowing skirt^ 
bound round the waist with a broad sash, she looked 
so delicate, gracefiil, and fiiiry-like, with a sense 
of dignity evidently struggling with a feeling of 
timidiiy in the bright glances she threw hurriedly 
around her, that lie could not but fix his attention 
on so very pleasing a picture. They were evi- 
dently brother and sister; and the boy was as 
proud of his charge as the girl of his guidance. 

As the boat came into deep water the young 
amateur waterman flung his pole in, sat down on 
his bench, threw out a pair of skulls, rapidly fixed 
them in the rowlocks, and, with a nod at his com- 
panion, a flash of triumph fi-om his bright eyes, 
and a very merry speech, proceeded to pull &om 
the shore. 

"Ah," thought Arthur, as he turned away 
from the chanmng spectacle to look after his 
own course, "a stolen pleasure; and the enjoy- 



A lord-chamberlain's widow. 99 



ment not the less for being dashed with apprehen- 



sion." 



He did not know which most to admire — the 
confidence of the one, or the modest dignity of the 
other. A laugh like a peal of silver bells was borne 
to him by the wind. Nothing could be sweeter 
than its tone ; and it was as Aill of happiness as of 
courage. " Long," said he, " may your young 
life be as joyous as at this moment I" 

Suddenly a chorus of men's shouts and wo- 
men's screams startled him out of his tranquillity. 
He turned round, with his oars uplifted. 

" Gracious God, she's gone !" cried a woman 
in a boat ftdl of holiday people, who seemed frantic 
with excitement. 

« She's sinking !" 

" Help I help I the boat's upset !" 

" They're both in the water !" 

" They'll be drowned I they'll be drowned !" 

These, with a score of similar exclamations, 
came from the excited people in a cutter that 
was passing Arthur Calverley, her six oars hav- v 



100 JACK sctjdamore's daughter. 

ing given her great speed notwithstanding the 
number of her passengers. A hurried glance 
showed Arthur the pretty boat bottom upwards, 
and the boy scrambling up the black sides of a 
heavy coal-barge with a huge brown sail, going 
before the wind. Of the girl nothing was visible 
but the straw-bonnet, and its gay strings floating 
on the tide. 

A few strong and rapid strokes brought his 
boat round in time for him to discern a pale fece 
gleaming through the green surface. Another 
burst of eager shouts and exclamations rang in 
his ears as the head rose into sight. He speedily 
shipped his oars, sprung to his feet, and made a 
plunge. He dived as the pale face was disappear- 
ing, and succeeded in obtaining a firm grip on the 
wet clothes. 

Presently he rose to the surface and looked 

about. His own boat was floating away; but 

others were approaching, drawn to the spot by 

the continuous shouting and screams. He lifted 

''his burthen into the first that came up, jumped 



A lord-chamberlain's widow. 101 

in immediately after, and bade tlie waterman row 
as quickly as possible to the landing from which 
he had seen the brother and sister take the water. 

What an awftd change had passed over his 
feelings within the last few moments — from the 
blissful calm that had been produced by the sight 
of life brimming over with the innocent and exqui- 
site sensations of happy, careloss childhood, to the 
immediate presence of the dark shadow which had 
shrouded what seemed to him one of the brightest 
objects in nature ! 

It would have been in vain for any one to have 
reminded him tliat tlio drowned child he held in 
his arms was nothing to him — was neither kin- 
dred, nor friend, nor even acquaintance ; that a 
few minutes before he had no knowledge what- 
ever of her reality ; and that he had not in- 
curred the slightest responsibility by her terribly 
sudden death. Tlioso few most eventful minutes 
had sufHced to establish acquaintance, friendship, 
kindred, as near as Ufe can ever be to death. 

Ho felt as though she had been all he had ever 



102 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

seen in nature that was worth knowing ; and the 
accusation that he had been indifferent to her dan- 
ger, — ^that he had never uttered one word of cau- 
tion that might have prevented the catastrophe, 
smote him with indescribable anguish. 

He looked down upon the pallid face, half con- 
cealed bj the mass of tangled hair that clung to 
it, and recalling the clustering curls, the silvery- 
laugh, and the intense sense of childish happiness 
that had so lately filled it with sunshine, he seemed 
overpowered by an agony of self-reproach. At 
that moment a something between a gasp and a 
sigh came from between the blue lips. 

" She ain't gone, sir," said the old boatman* 
*'I've seen many corpses taken out of the river 
in my time, and therefore knows when there's as 
much as a spark o' life left, and when it's all been 
drownded out If so be the young lady is properly 
looked to at once, take my word for 't, sir, she'll 
recover; but if them remedies be delayed, the 
poor little thing won't have a ghost of a chance." 

The boat grounded, and Arthur sprang up the 



A lord-chamberlaik's widow. 103 

steps with hiH burthen in his arms, oblivioufi of 
every thing but the vital necessity of speed. He 
found himself on a well-kept lawn, divided by 
flower-beds from a pretty green- verandahed house, 
built in what was then considered the ornate cot- 
tage style ; but he had neither time nor inclination 
to notice its architecture particularly; for as he 
rushed along the gravel- walk in frantic haste, there 
met him a group, principally of women, screaming 
and displaying every demonstration of the wildest 
terror, as they hurried from the house. 

A short gentlemanly man, witli sharp intel- 
ligent features, appeared to be the only person 
amongst them who had possession of his senses. 
Arthur could hear him giving orders, with as 
much presence of mind as authority. 

"Jane, get hot- water for a bath directly. 
Mrs. Jenkins, have a bed warmed ready for 
immediate use. Elizabeth, tell your mistress to 
send me stimulants and blankets as quickly as 
possible." 

But the women appeared to have lost their 



104 JACK scudamobb's daughteb. 

heads, and came flying towards the dripping 
youth with their cap ribbons streaming in the 
wind, crying and wringing their hands, evidently 
in the most helpless state of alarm. 

They wanted to take his burthen from him, 
but he quickly passed by them, and carried her 
towards the person whom he took to be the mas- 
ter of the house. The latter held out his arms to 
receive her, gazing upon the marhle features with 
anxious scrutiny; then repeated his orders in a 
more peremptory tone. This time Jane, Mrs. 
Jenkins, and Elizabeth heard them, and in a very 
flurried manner rushed away. 

A little within the porch Arthur could discern 
the figure of a venerable lady in spectacles, leaning 
upon a stick, apparently peering towards him. To 
her the servants now fled as frantically as they had 
a minute before directed their flight towards the 
stranger. 

The gentleman took the still-dripping child, 
and immediately followed in the same direction, 
Arthur was left standing on the path, his clothes 



A L0BD-CHAMB£BLAIN'S WIDOW* 105 

making a fast-growing pool on the gravel. Every 
one had disappeared into the house. In the ge- 
neral excitement, his being overlooked seemed na-t 
tural; still he felt that he had an interest in the 
life he had tried to save that onght to have been 
acknowledged. 

He longed for permission to wait and inqnire 
the result of the remedies that had been so prompt- 
ly directed ; but no one appearing at the door, ho 
very reluctantly turned away, with the intention 
of deferring his inquiries till a more convenient 
season'. 

He was in the act of rewarding the boatman 
who had carried liim ashore, as well as another who 
had brought in his boat, when a respectable-look- 
ing man, unquestionably an upper servant, sprung 
rapidly down the stairs. 

" If you please, sir," he said, almost out of 
breath, ^^ my lady's complimenia, and her ladyship 
hopes that you will do her the fevour to step in 
and change your clothes." 

The invitation appeared exceedingly welcome, 



106 JACK scudamore's daughtbb. 

not 80 much because Arthur Calverley was begin- 
ning to feel uncomfortable in his sloppy garments, 
as from his experiencing a very strong disinclina- 
tion to leave the place till he had learnt either the 
best or the worst of the adventure. So, after seeing 
his boat secured, he returned with the messenger. 

The man was fluent with his lady's apologies 
for having neglected such strong claims upon her 
attention. He led the way into ihe house over 
a comfortably carpeted passage, into a pleasant 
chamber on the ground-floor, fitted up with an- 
tique presses and chests, with a large looking- 
glass in a quaintly carved ebony frame, standing 
on a table covered with a damask cloth trimmed 
with ancient lace, on which were the usual toilet- 
articles, of a very old pattern. 

A steaming can of hot water had been placed 
conveniently near the washing-stand, and on a 
high-backed chair lay a pile of clothes and linen. 

"My lady bade me say," added the man, 
** that she hoped you would have the goodness to 
excuse the dress her ladyship has had put out for 



A LOaD-CHAMBBRLAIN'S WIDOW. 107 

you, as it is the only change at her disposal — and 
when I tell you, sir, that it belonged to her lady- 
ship's own deceased husband," he added confiden- 
tially, "and tliat she has never permitted any 
thing as was worn by his lordship to be touched 
by any body, domestics or even friends, you may 
flatter yourself, sir, on the high place you hold in 
my lady's estimation." Presently he took his 
departure, requesting that the bell should be rung 
whenever his services should be required. 

Arthur lost no time in divesting himself of his 
wet clothes, and indulging in an ablution as hot 
as he could bear it; then had recourse to the 
change that had been provided for him with such 
evident consideration. It is impossible to express 
the surprise he felt as he gradually clad himself 
in the covt-dress of some great state functionary, 
— ^the richly embroidered coat still retaining the 
star, apparently of some prized decoration, its 
possessor had been in the habit of wearing. 

The clothes did not fit him very badly, and 
were far firom uncomfortable after the soppy things 



108 JACK SCUDAMOBS'S DAUGHTER. 

that had been, a few minutes before, clinging m 
coldly to his flesh ; but as he regarded the reflec- 
tion in the great swing-gliws, Arthur could scarcely 
reconcile himself to the singulariiy of his appear- 
ance. 

In some perplexiiy of mind, he rang the bell, 
which was immediately answered by the same 
domestic, bringing on a salver a steaming goblet 
of spiced negus. 

" My lady begs that you will take this as hot 
as you can drink it, sir," he said. " Mrs. Jenkyns 
says that she has made it after her ladyship's own 
receipt, and with her humble service hopes it 
will do your honour good." 

Arthur expressed his acknowledgments, and 
lost no time in imbibing the fragrant beverage, 
which he soon foimd had a most cordial efieci 
As he sipped it, he could not refrain from making 
inquiries after the object of his earnest solici- 
tude. 

"The doctor's with her, sir, and hasn't left 
her a moment," the man replied. " Indeed, no- 



A lord-chamberlain's widow. 109 

body has yet come from the room except my lady, 
sir, who looks very sad, and only came out to give 
some directions to Mrs. Jenkyns. But Mrs. Jen- 
kyns says there's hope, and thinks we're all bound 
to you, sir, for trying to save our dear young 
mistress, whatever comes of it." 

Arthur felt very desirous of knowing who their 
dear young mistress was — ^neither was he without 
a strong feeling of curiosity respecting the elder 
lady; but a sense of delicacy made him refram 
from any direct inquiry. 

"And now, sir," said the butler, when he 
saw that Arthur had emptied the silver cup, " I 
have to state that my lady will do herself the 
honour of receiving you in the drawing-room." 

With a proper alacrity, Arthur Calverley fol- 
lowed his guide through the passages he had 
already traversed, and up a wide staircase, the 
bottom of which was supported by a pair of carved 
figures of negroes in yellow turbans, painted to 
resemble nature — and passing along a corridor, 
entered a handsome room decerated with tapestry- 



110 JACK SCUDAMOBE'S DAUGHTER. 

covered chairs and couches, with a profiiBion of 
marqueterie fiimiture. 

Presently the door was opened, and his name 
having been announced, Arthur Calverley entered 
an apartment furnished like the ante-room, with 
the addition of a series of Watteau subjects painted 
on the panels. Near one of the bay-windows that 
looked over the lawn he noticed the same vener- 
able lady he had dindy seen in the porch. Her 
head-dress was piled up and elaborately decorated 
in a way that had been out of date nearly half a 
century, and of Hie same obsolete fashion was her 
swelling hoop and the laced stomacher of her sub- 
stantial robe. She leant upon a stick with a china 
crook, raising herself &om her chair as her visitor 
advanced. He immediately made a low bow, which 
elicited a stately curtsey. She then sunk back 
into her seat. A sweet but rather unsteady voice 
bade him be seated ; and the possessor of it pointed 
to a couch near her. The youth bowed again, 
advanced to the place indicated, and accepted the 
proffered courtesy, ># 



A lord-ohamberlain's widow. Ill 

" I am happy to inform you that my dear 
grand-daughter is safe," she added, scrutinising 
his appearance, as he fancied, somewhat critically. 
"It was quite a providence that Dr. Cherriton 
happened to be in the house visiting me profes- 
sionally when you appeared on the lawn, so that 
under his direction immediate measures could be 
taken for the dear child's restoration. 

" The doctor assures me," she continued, striv- 
ing to steady her tones, " that his patient requires 
only a day or two of perfect quiet for her complete 
recovery. It is impossible to express to you my 
sense of obligation for the important service you 
have rendered myself and my beloved grand- 
da;ughter. I am afraid you must have thought 
me strangely remiss at first ; but I trust I shall 
be able to make ample amends for that apparent 
negligence." 

Arthur was going to protest against any such 
intimation being required, but the stately old lady 
had more to say, and he did not dare to interrupt 
her. ♦ 



112 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" My dear lord has been dead many years," 
she said, with an abrupt change of subject for 
which her visitor was quite unprepared. " He 
received his appointment a httle before the dear 
Prince of Wales came of age. This was in Au- 
gust; and in the same month of the following 
year the dear Duke of York had been bom ; in 
the same month, two years later, the dear Duke of 
Clarence ; and in August, eight years after that, 
the dear Princess AmeUa. I ofl»n said to the 
sweet Queen that it was very remarkable; and 
the sweet Queen acknowledged that it was very 
remarkable; but her gracious Majesty could not 
account for it. The dear good King could not 
account for it Even my lord could not account 
for it." 

" It was very remarkable indeed," replied 
Arthur. 

" Poor dear, I thought all was over when I 
caught the first glimpse of her pitiable pale face," 
she began again in a tremulous voice. ^' She 
looked so like death^ just as my lord looked when 



A lord-chambeblain'b widow. 113 

I saw him for the last time/' and a sob seemed to 
be struggling in her throat. 

'^ But then, you know, the dear Duke of Kent 
was boni in November; and so was the dear 
Princess Augusta ; and so was the dear Princess 
Sophia. And that was very remarkable also, as 
the sweet Queen always allowed. And my lord 
said it was very remarkable ; and so did the dear 
good King. But not one at court could account 
for it" 

Her visitor ventured to express the truism that 
such extraordinary coincidences might puzzle tlie 
wisest heads. 

'^ But when she opened her innocent eyes, and 
the death-like &ce began to appear more like her 
own pretty features, and when she recognised me 
and cried out ^^ grand-mamma !" 

Here a handkerchief was lifted with a trem- 
bling hand to eyes that were evidently sufiused, 
and she stopped suddenly. Arthur could not have 
expressed a common-place, if his life had depended 
on it, and sympathy he did no# dare attempt. 

VOL. I. I 



114 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

^' The dear Duke of Sussex honoured the month 
of February with his birth ; while the dear Duke 
of Cambridge preferred February ; the dear Prin- 
cess Mary, April ; the dear Princess Boyal, Sep- 
tember ; and the dear Duke of Cumberland, June : 
but not one of the thirteen royal children would 
have any thing to do with March, with July, or 
with October. 

" When I pointed this out to the sweet Queen, 
her gracious Majesty did me the honour to agree 
with me that it was very remarkable, and the dear 
good King condescended to be of the same opinion, 
and my dear lord of course — for the Lord Cham- 
berlain was too loyal to differ jv^ith his sovereign. 
And, in truth, all the household considered it very 
remarkable — ^particularly that four of the royal 
&mily should have been bom in August, and 
three in November." 

"I never knew a more remarkable circum- 
stance," observed Arthur Calverley. 

" Then it is impossible to express to you tlie 
state of my feelings*" the venerable lady resumed 



A lord-chamberiain's widow. 115 

again, with a pathetic tremble in her voice, " when 
the darling child began to make inquiries after her 
brother, and the good doctor was almost ready to 
shed tears at the thankfiilness she expressed when 
she was told of his safety." 

The handkerchief was again raised to the suf- 
fused eyelashes, under the spectacles, but very 
shortly withdrawn, and the clear pleasant look 
became brighter than ever. 

" I remember the very first evening I enjoyed 
the happiness of going to Banelagh, attended by 
my dear lord. As I took off my silk roquelaure 
and disclosed my gray tabbinet with the crimson 
stomacher, I met the sweet Queen and the dear 
good King, and we followed their Majesties into 
the rotunda. In the course of the concert the 
sweet Queen turned round to me, and said in a 
most gracious way, ^ Lady Dorothy, I am charmed 
to see you looking so well.' ^Yes, Charlotte,' 
added the dear good King, glancing at me with 
the greatest condescension; ^ Lady Dorothy looks 
wonderftdly well. I ofier my compliments to the 



116 JACK sgudamobe's daughter. 

Lord Chamberlam on the happj oocsision.' And 
my dear lord bowed and smiled, agreed vn& 
their Majesties that I had never looked better, 
and acknowledged himself to be the happiest of 
men. 

" The sweet Queen was quite right — as her 
Majesty always was — and so was the dear good 
King. My lord was convinced that my gray tab- 
binet with the crimson stomacher became me im- 
mensely. In &ct I am certain every body thought 
so who was at Banelagh that night, for I assure 
you I was prodigiously admired." 

Here the old lady produced from a concealed 
pocket an enameDed gold snuff-box, of an old 
French pattern, and opening it with evident sa* 
tisfaction, helped herself to its pungent contents. 
She then perpetrated a succession of little sneezes 
that very much agitated the feathers and ribands 
in her prodigious head-dress. 

" But the most touching scene of all," slie 
added, again recurring to her emotional manner, 
^^was when the darling child began to ask how 



A LORD-CHAMBERLAm'8 WIDOW. 117 

bIio had been rescued — ^for hIio was ho eager to 
learn every particular, that the ^ood doctor was 
obliged to tell her — and then her grateful expres- 
sions quite overpowered me." 

The handkerchief was once more ])laoed be- 
neath the gold rims of the spectacles. 

" Tlxe dear child would not be content when 
she heard tliat you were in the house," she con- 
tinued hurriedly, "till I promised to see you, 
and let you mow how sensible she is of the 
great service you had done her." 

The little S2)eech Arthur was about to make 
in reply was stopped by the sudden entrance of 
the physician. 

" My lady Countess," said ho, merely putting 
his head in at the door, " I have taken the liberty 
to intrude, to announce that your ladyshii)'8 grand- 
daughter is convalescent, and that my Lord Fitz- 
maurico has been brought back by Mr. Dillon 
quite safe, having suffered no injury beyond the 
spoiling of his clothes. 

" Tlianks, doctor ; a thousand thanks !" cried 



120 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

only connexion with the present that she seemed 
to care to talk about. 

There was sometliing irresistibly kind in her 
hospitaliiy, notwithstanding it characterised an 
age long gone by. The hostess pressed particular 
dishes on her guest, with the recommendation 
that they had been prepared under her superin- 
tendence; and directed a decanter to be handed 
to him with the announcement that it contained 
Malaga made from her own receipt. 

He contrived to bear in mind that as he had 
been honoured with the temporary possession of 
the late Lord-Chamberlain's state costume, he was 
bound to conform to it as closely as he could 5 
therefore liis behaviour was very carefully made to 
assume the same formal yet com'tly pattern. 

The most trying portion of this assumption was 
when he ventured to take wine with the dowager. 
The solemniiy infused into this act of social gal- 
lantly appeared perfectly successful. The blue 
eyes beamed with commendation through their 
crystal protectors, as the noble pile of feathers 



A LORD-OHAMBERLAIN^S WIDOW. 121 

and ribboDH diat surmounted her pleasant though 
ratlior antique face bent down in acknowledg- 
ment of the courtesy. 

In due time the dessert was placed on the 
table^ and they were left alone. 

" It was a custom of my dear lord," observed 
the Countess^ " which he never omitted, to drink 
die health of the royal family witli the first glass 
of wine after dinner." 

Lumodiately on this suggestion Arthur rose 
from his seat, and, striving to do justice to his 
embroidered coat, proposed the loyal toast. He 
had scarcely concluded when the door opened very 
quietly, and two young girls entered the room, 
first curtseying profoundly in the doorway. 

Arthur had time to note that one was dark- 
eyed and dark-haired, with rather plump features 
and person. Her complexion, singularly rich, gave 
her face a peculiar charm of freshness that con- 
trasted in a marked manner with the pallid fea- 
tures and extreme delicacy of her companion — 
her junior by at least a couple of years. Both 



122 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

were dressed in white frocks, with broad pink 
sashes, and both wore their hair in a mass of clus- 
tering curls ; but the golden tresses of the younger 
child were seen at a glance to lack the vigorous 
curl that characterised the purply-black locks of 
the other. 

" Come here, my dears I" cried the dowager 
Countess. 

At the word of command the two girls marched 
veiy upright and with a peculiar gravity of man- 
ner, and presently stood on each side of the old 
lady's chair. 

^' My grandchildren, >Mr. Calverley," she ob- 
served. 

He acknowledged the introduction with a ges- 
ture which he hoped would satisfy the demands of 
the occasion. His new acquaintances repeated their 
curtsey, neither, however, looking at the visitor. 

"Have you finished your tambour-work, my 
dear?" 

" Yes, if you please, grandmamma," replied 
the elder. 



A lord-chambeblain's widow. 123 

"Did you conquer that difficult passage in 
the Storm Rondo ?" 

" Yes, if you please, grandmamma." 

Similar questions produced the same answer, 
expressed very sweetly, but exactly in the same 
quiet undemonstrative tone. 

" The only child of my eldest daughter, who 
left her to my charge, in the fullest confidence that 
she would be as properly brought up as she her* 
self had been." 

Tlie dowager glanced from the young lady to 
her guest as she said this little speech, with a look 
of tranquil satisfaction, as midisturbed by any re- 
gret in the past as any misgiving for the future. 

" As the sweet Queen observed," she continued, 
" while doing me the honour to discuss the edu- 
cation of royal children, it is impossible to over- 
rate the importance of bringing-up yoimg people. 
The dear good King too always said it was the 
most important thing in the world ; and my lord 
was completely of the same opinion." 

" Tliere cannot be two opinions on such a sub- 



124 JACK BCUDAMORE^S DAUGHTER. 

ject," Arthur replied ; then ventured to add, " Tlie 
appearance of your hidjship^s youthfid relatives is 
sufficient to satisfy any one how conscientiously 
you have fiilfilled the duties coupled with so im- 
portant a charge." 

Neither of the young ladies took the slightest 
notice of the implied compliment or of the speaker. 
The student of the Storm Bondo was standing 
with her plump shoulders well forward, and her 
satin shoes in the most approved position, gazing 
at the ornamental work of the ceiling.. The deli- 
cate one was iar less stiff in her attitude ; but 
her pallid &ee seemed impressed with a sense of 
languor, and her eyes were fixed upon the carpet 

" Do you feel better, my dear ?" inquired the 
venerable lady, now turning to the younger of the 
two. 

" Yes, if you please, grandmamma," replied 
a low but very sweet voice. 

" Are you quite recovered, do you think ?" 

^^ Yes, if you please, grandmamma," was again 
the reply, almost in a whisper. 



A lord-chambkrlain's widow. 125 

'' The child of my nephew, Mr. Calverley," 
added his hostess, glancing benignantly through 
her bright glasses from the pale fiftce to his 
own. '^ She and her brother have been left or- 
phans ; and but for your timely interposition, the 
heedlessness of one must have been fatal to the 
other." 

It is impossible to express the earnestness with 
which Arthur gazed upon the fiice before him, 
trying in vain to recognise the sunny happy look 
that had attracted him a few brief hours before. 
The adventurous little voyager was timid almost 
tofamtness. She did not lift her eyes from the 
ground; but a sudden quiver about the comers 
of her beautiftdly-shaped mouth, and a transient 
flush upon her deUcate complexion, assured him of 
her gratitude. 

" The dear child implored so earnestly to be 
permitted to see you," continued the old lady, 
'^ that I could not find it in my heart to refuse 
her, though she had been so naughty in going into 
the boat without my knowledge. " 



126 JACK scudamorb's daughter. 

A shade of sorrow passed over the features of 
the interesting culprit. 

" But we all know how impossible it is to put 
old heads upon young shoulders. I cannot say I 
liave been always prudent myself. I remember 
when I was a girl and had been invited to my first 
ball by my aunt Lady Bab Dorincourt, after dan- 
cing with my dear lord till I was in a heat, in my 
white lutestring I left the ball-room and strolled 
into the garden with nothing round my neck but a 
eoral n4gUg4, I walked up and down the walks in 
the moonlight with my dear lord, and thought 
it very delightful ; but the next day I was laid up 
with an attack of quinsey, which confined me to my 
room for a month ; and my aunt Lady Bab Dorin- 
court said I had done a very wrong thing to go 
out in the moonlight afler dancing a saraband, 
three cotillons, and four strathspeys, Money Musk, 
and Sir Boger de Coverley. During my illness 
I was conscious that I had done a Yerv wrong 
thing, and was extremely sorry for my fault ; as 
young people who have risked their precious 



A lord-ohambeklain's widow. 127 

health by their thoughtlessness always ought to 
be." 

The mild reproof was evidently very severe to 
the fair transgressor ; for Arthur could see that she 
was struggUng to suppress deep emotion. 

" Here is a peach for you, my dears." 

Each of 4e young ladies in turn took the gift 
presented to her, made a profound curtsey, and 
said, " Tliank you, grandmamma," and then re- 
sumed her quiet attitude with the tempting fruit 
in her right hand, neither attempting to taste it. 

Presently the dowager finished her glass of 
elaret, which she had been sipping during inter- 
vals in the conversation, produced her enamelled 
snu£F-box, and again gave her tall head-dress a 
violent shake with the sneeze that soon afterwards 
followed. After returning the box to her pocket, 
she rose. " I hope that you will excuse my leav- 
ing you so early," she said ; " my ordinary hour 
of rest has arrived. The sweet Queen always 
liked me to keep good hours ; and the dear good 
King was invariably particular on this very im- 



128 JACK SCUDAIIOBE'8 DAU6HTEB. 

portant point His Majestf gradoudy considered 
it extremely important My dear lord, too, in* 
Biffted that nothing oonld be more important I 
wish you good evening, Mr. Calverley, and trust 
that you will make yourself quite at home, and 
repeat your visit as soon and as often as it may 

be agreeable/' 

ft 

Arthur hturied to the amiable old lady's side, 
and assisted her to the door, expressing every thing 
that his Hense of her goodness su^ested. She 
held out her hand, and he bowed over it with as 
sincere a courtesy as if he had been a real lord 
chamberlain of the old court, making his respect- 
ful adieua to his royal mistress. 

The two girls followed together step by step. As 
the elder passed Arthur, she momentarily glanced 
up to his face with some curiosity and more in- 
terest, curtseyed, and passed through the door he 
had kept open for her. The younger one also 
lifted up her eyes as she made the same graceful 
genuflection ; but tlie lookW grateftd feeling they 
expressed was retained in his memory for many a 



A lord-chambbblain's widow. 129 

subsequent year, not entirely for its unspeakable 
tenderness. As she left the room with that touch- 
ing look, a revelation came upon his mind that he 
could not resist, which fiUed him with wonder. 
He had met that look before. 



VOL. I. 



CHAPTER V. 

A STBOKG-VINDEI) WOKAK. 

Aloko the high road that winds through the Dela- 
mere vaUejr, here and there are to be fonnd noble- 
men's and gentlemen's seats, and amongst them 

9 

one or two mansions on a larger scale, with an im- 
posing lodge and a magnificent avenue ; but the one 
I am about to describe was approached merely by 
a circular carriage-drive, and was entirely screened 
by ornamental shrubs and trees planted before a 
sweep of lawn, in the centre of which stood a 
crumbling, weather-stained, moss-covered , stone 
pillar that had once done duty as a sun-diaL 

The house was a stone-built battlemented edi- 
fice, having a large frontage and a church-like 
door and windows ; but of one story only. It had 
something of the aspect of a Dissenters' chapel 
in a district where architectural ambition had 



▲ STBOKO-UnmZD WOliAN. 181 

not inspired the local carpenters or masons fvho 
call themselves builders; the little pointed-arched 
diamond-paned windows, and the dwarf battle- 
mentsy being just such a demonstration of the 
goihic as might be expected from such experi- 
mental architects. 

It had very much the prim look of a paste- 
board modeL Any one could see that it was not 
ancient ; and though a connoisseur might hesitate 
in pronouncing it modem, from not wishing to 
throw discredit on the constructive talent of his 
contemporaries, it was well known to have been 
built by a brewer of wide celebrity, who having 
amassed a large fortune, chose to change his pa- 
tronymic, that figured on every public-house in the 
county, for a name which had the advantage of 
sounding very genteel — indeed, was considered to 
be rather aristocratic. 

So the house was built entirely after the re- 
tired brewer's taste, and became known as ^^ Bra- 
bazon Lodge ;'' and Mr. and Miss Brabazon — ^the 
former a hale corpulent widower, the latter his 



132 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

only child and heiress — came to live in it Whe- 
ther it was that playing the conntiy gentleman did 
not agree with him, or his Inngs missed the whole- 
some steam to which they had been so long accns- 
tomed, is not known. But the entire neighbour- 
hood were well informed that within the first year 
of his coming amongst them, the apparently hale 
corpulent old gentleman had died suddenly of apo- 
plexy. * 

Lucretia Brabazon inherited all his wealth, 
with his claims to notice as one of the landed 
gentry. She had been petted not only by her 
father, but by all around her ; and the talent she 
really possessed, by injudicious flattery was made 
not only useless, but to a considerable extent mis- 
chievous. No expense had been spared on her 
education. AU that the best masters could do, 
with great natural capaciiy, had been done ; but 
self-wiU had been so fostered and encouraged, 
that when the young lady found herself sole mis- 
tn-ess of a very large income, her independence of 
all control began to show itself in a siyle that the 



A STBOKG-MINDED WOMAN. 133 

rest of the world chose to regard with marked 
condemnation. 

In dress, in opinion, in manners, she appeared 
totally different from all other females in a similar 
social position. She read books that no woman 
thought of looking into; she followed pursuits as 
uncongenial as possible to her sex ; and chose as- 
sociates that caused her to be shunned by every 
lady in the neighbourhood. 

After scandalising the comity by her vagaries, 
she took it into her head to travel, and was absent 
several years. Occasionally reports reached Eng- 
land of the most marvellous character respecting 
her. She had been met in the desert, living 
among the Bedouins, to all appearance as much an 
Arab as any of them. She had been seen scaling 
the heights of the Cordilleras, and winding over 
the pathless prairies of the South- American con- 
tinent. 

African explorers had found her in the dense 
jungle, at the head of a native party of hunters, 
pursuing the wild elephant and hippopotamus; 



134 JACK SCUDAUOBB^S DAUGHTER. 

jmd adyentaroas tanristB had come upon lier by 
the boiling Geysers of Iceland, and tiie fearfbl 
erevasses of Mont Bknc But wherever seen or 
heard of, nnder whatever circninstanoeB of daii« 
ger or difficulty, Lucretia Brabazon was snre to 
be qnite at home. 

Very wonderftd after-dinner stories were told 
of her, from the Lord Lieutenant's castle to the 
most modest hunting-lodge within thiriy miles of 
it; but when it became known that, after passing 
some time in the North-American states, she had 
returned to Brabazon liodge, the most extraor- 
dinary excitement was created all over ilie county, 
which increased from day to day, as startling 
accounts were circulated of the sort of establish- 
ment its eccentric mistress had brought there, and 
the very strange doings that there went on. 

No one, however, thought of calling ; the la- 
dies shuddered if the idea was presented to them ; 
the gentlemen laughed and put on a knowing look. 
It was evident that the social ceremony of leaving 
a card was not to be thought of. Nevertheless, 



A BTBOKG-HIMDSD WOMAK. 13S 

soarcelj a week was suffered to elapse after the 
young lady's arriyal had become an established 
feet, when a visitor presented himself at her door. 
He was the Vicar of Little Delamere. 
^ The house gave no sign of life^ as the reverend 
gentleman approached the sham-antique door, and 
rang the bell ; but at its summons he could hear 
voices and presently approaching footsteps. His 
surprise was great when the door opened; and 
instead of the customary man or maid-servant, he 
fomid himself confronted by a tall, saflow, sharp- 
featured, fierce-looking man, in a hunting suit of 
deer-skin, and a bowie-knife in his belt He did 
not, however, betray any sign of astonishment; 
but as if the renccmtre was a matter of course, 
pulled out his card-ca^, and gave a card into the 
man's hand, with a courteous expression of his 
desire to see Miss Brabazon. 

" Oh, the parson, eh ?" said the fellow, scruti- 
nising the visitor from his new hat to his well- 
fitting French boots. ^* I guess you are a bit out 
o' your reckoning coming here. Unless Sambo 



136 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

chooses to make tracks from Mumbo Jmnbo, and 
inclines to go ahead towards convarsion, I calcu- 
late there'll be no trade in your line. Mustapha's 
a Mussulman, and Mash-a-ca-boo as big a heathen 
as any of his tribe. As for me, I requires unj 
common little religious fixings, I do. Whether I 
lives with the Injuns, the Mormons, the Shakers, 
or the Papist Missionaries, I accepts just what my 
neighbom*s has to give me, and shakes off all such 
notions when I has no more occasion for 'em." 

The Beverend Basil Plynlymmon smiled blandly, 
and intimated that he merely called to pay a 
neighbourly visit on his parishioner, having only 
last night been made acquainted with her return. 

" Stranger, I was raised down east," replied 
the man, smoothing a black goatee that hung from 
his narrow chin, " and am pretty 'cute, I reckon. 
Ain't to be taken in with wooden nutmegs, no 
how — and if I has hired myself to a Britisher, it's 
because she can stump-up more dollars in a month 
than I could 'am in the woods or prairies in a 
year. So, passon, I tells you, you ain't a goin' 



A STBONG-MINDBD WOMAN. 137 

to take me in, at any price. Howsomever, if 
Miss Brabazon chooses to have a deal wi' you, I 
calculate I can't have no lawfiil objection. So, 
step in and wait, while I go and tell her as you're 
here." 

The Vicar entered a large hall, filled with the 
most ejctraordinary objecte he had ever seen in 
his life. It was apparently a museum of natural 
history. An enormous serpent seemed about to 
spring upon him from one place — a huge bear 
threatened to hug him to death in another — ^here 
was a stuffed American eagle, there a grinning 
African baboon; while elephants' tusks, spears, 
war-clubs, bows and arrows, guns and pistols, 
were arranged as trophies among dried specimens 
of tropical plants, insects, and reptiles. 

He had scarcely had time to notice these very 
singular decorations for a young lady's house, 
when the man who had left him returned. 

" You be in luck, passon," he said, beckoning 
the visitor forward. " Make tracks arter me." 

With his finger beside his nose, as they were 



188 JACK BCDDASOBB'8 datobteb. 

prooeediiig togetlier towards the end of the liall, 
lie added in a lofwer Toioe, ^^ Yoa can liqaoiHip 
wlien I calls at yaar shop. I am't too pnmd 
to take a brandy oock-tail wi' a passon." 

The Beverend Basil seemed affably to smile 
in aoqniesoenee^ as a door opened, and taking 
two or three steps forward, he fbnnd himself in 
a well-fiunished parlonr, in which, however, con- 
siderable confbsion was apparent, by the appear- 
ance of objects not at all^ harmony wiiii the 
rest There was a tiger-sldn spread on a conch, 
and a buffido's hide on the carpet; a rifle leaned 
against the comer nearest the fire-place, and a 
revolyer stood xxpoa the table. 

On a rocking-chair, reclining with folded 
arms, in a nondescript ooBtmne, consisting o£ a 
silken tonic, and Turkish tronsers of the same 
material, drawn in at the ankles, and smoking a 
cigarette, he beheld the flgore and face of a woman 
abont thiriy. Her complexion, tanned by a foreign 
snn, her hair cut short like a man's, and the bold 
defiant expression of the face, might have caused 



A STROHG-HIKPXD WOMAN. 189 

the reverend gentleman to doubt the sex of his 
parishioner^ had he not been in some way pre- 
pared for her strange appearance* 

He knew the person indolently moving up 
and down in the rockingKshair could be no other 
than Lucretia Brabazon, and bowed as he saw 
himself carefidly looked over. 

"You've come to see me, have you?" she 
demanded rather sharply. "A little more civil 
than the purse-proud aristocrats I have the mis- 
fortune to live amongst At least I have now 
come to live amongst — ^for I'm a true citizen of 
the world. I couldn't consent to be tied by the 
heels to a stupid place, and surrounded by un- 
interesting people, when there were magnificent 
mountains to climb, the boimdless Pampas to 
cross, interminable forests to penetrate, pathless 
wildernesses to explore, and stormy oceans to 
navigate." 

"Yes; I have heard that you have been a 
great traveller. Miss Brabazon," said the Vicar, 
obeying a sign from his hostess to seat himself. 



140 JACK scxtdamobe's dauohteb. 

" Aha I rather a remarkable thing for a woman 
to be, I suppose you think? In the estimation 
of you, and such as you, a woman can only be a 
drudge or a to^i" 

" Pardon me, that has never been my opinion," 

" What else is she in this country ? A help- 
less creature, bound hand and foot in the chains 
of &shion and custom — each following the other, 
like a flock of silly sheep, in every observance of 
dress, however absurd or extravagant, and regard- 
ing any sister who neglects the' puerile regula- 
tions they choose to style etiquette, as quite out 
of the pale of feminine sympathy. " 

The Bev. Basil Plynlymmon shrugged his 
shoulders and smiled. He did not feel himself 
at that moment called upon to be a champion 
of the sex. In the first place, he had no particular 
inclination for the office ; in the next, it formed 
no part of his present programme to oppose the 
ideas of his eccentric parishioner. Still it would 
not do for him to be known as a disbeliever in 
feminine perfection. "You muist allow," he 



A STRONG-MINDBD WOMAN. 141 

added, in a tone of gentle remonstrance, "the 
admirable qualities of your sex as wives and mo- 
thers." 

"Commonplace qualifications," retorted the 
lady disdainfully; "quite as general among the 
savage as among the civilised; indeed their ab- 
sence would place women considerably below the 
brute creation, with whom fidelity to their mates 
and love of offspring are powerful instincts." 

"It has been my privilege to know many 

ft 

estimable, many highly religious females," ob- 
served the reverend gentleman mildly. 

"Who were very amiable among their par- 
ticular friends, and went to church regularly," 
added his companion emphatically. "Very re- 
spectable examples, no doubt ; but you don't know 
that the amiability was put on with the pretty 
bonnet, because it was considered becoming, and 
that church is as excellent a place for the display 
of new dresses and millinery as for any of the 
Christian virtues." 

"Oh, you are too severe now. Miss Braba- 



142 JACK 8CUDAJI0SK*8 DAUOHTEB. 

zon/* exclaimed iSae Yicar, laughing thougli, as 
if rather amtused at hearing such notions expresaecL 

"I detest women r* cried that yonng lady 
warmly^ still rocking herself to and jGro, and 
smoking withoat the slightest expression of ex- 
citement in her rather plain and somewhat mas- 
coline fiice* ^'I never allow them to be about 
me. In an emergency they are fit for nothing ; 
in danger as helpless as babes. '^ 

The Vicar of Little Delamere had walked to 
Brabazon Lodge with the fullest determination 
not to be starded by any thing he might see or 
hear there ; but to the idea of a lady living with- 
out domestics of her own sex he could not easily 
reconcile himself He was half inclined to offer 
the services of his housekeeper. 

" What coidd I do with a fine lady's-maid," 
she continued, ^' among the savages of equatorial 
AjGrica, or amid the virgin forests of the tropics ? 
She would have been going into hysterics every 
five minutes. "No ; women are of no use in scenes 
of peril or difficulty; and EngKshwomen are tiie 



A STBONCMHDIBID WOUAK. 143 

most helpless, stupid, indolent, good-for-nothing 
portion of the sex. I hate Englishwomen I'' 

The Vicar laughed at this declaration, but 
would not mention Mrs. Martha at pres^it. 

" You oertainlj seem to be reiy strongly pre- 
judiced/' he observed ; '^ and probably stand alone 
in your opinions. But of course I must not quar- 
rel with your preference for men." 

"Who said I had any preference for men?" 
demanded Miss Brabazon, rather savagely. " Of 
two evils I choose the least. A man can be de- 
pended on to fire a rifle or a revolver, cut down a 
tree, navigate a vessel, and cany a burthen; at 
least I have learnt to rely upon Arabs, Hottentots, 
Indians, and other half-savage races that I have 
been forced to live amongst in the course of my 
rather extensive explorations. I select such fel- 
lows as I find I can depend upon, without distinc- 
tion of creed, colour, or country, with one excep- 
tion only, — ^nothing should induce me to have 
Englishmen about me ; I detest Englishmen !" 

The Vicar bowed with mock gravity, as if sen- 



144 JACK scudahobe's bauohteb. 

sible of the left-handed compliment to his nation- 
ality. He had been observing his &ir parishioner 
with increased attention. He could not, after a 
careftd study of her &ce, pronounce it handsome. 
The nose was neither Grrecian nor Boman — ^indeed 
it was ahnost a png — and the jaw was in a slight 
degree overhimg, gi^iiig the mouth a prominence 
which rendered the features when quiescent some- 
what vulgar in Hieir expression ; but the forehead 
was unquestionably fine, tiie eyes bright and clear, 
and the look when animated singularly fearless, as 
well as sincere. 

The lady in the mean time had not been iiiat- 
tentive to her visitor. Since his introduction to 
the reader his personal appearance had undergone 
considerable improvement The carelessness of 
person characteristic of the scholar had made way 
for studied neatness of dress. His straggling whis- 
kers had disappeared, and a cleanly-shaved sur- 
face displayed a clear complexion to advantage. 
The plain eye-glass had been banished, and a 
double gold one was suspended from his neck. 



A STBONO-MINDED WOMAN. 145 

His hair had evidentlj been dressed with af- 
fectionate solicitude. His clothes fitted without a 
wrinkle ; his tie was immaculate ; his gloves and 
his patent-leather boots did perfect justice to his 
well-formed hands and feet As he had a fine 
'set of teeth, his manner hearty and unafiected, 
and his age not more than that of his companion, 
it was not unlikely that he should make a fa- 
vourable impression on a lady of any discern- 
ment — ^notwithstanding her alleged detestation of 
her countrymen. 

" What could I have done with such creatures 
as Jeames or Mary-Jane in the heart of the 
Sahara, or climbing the terrible passes of the 
Andes?" she asked. " Unless pampered with the 
dainties they are accustomed to, they can't be got 
to stir a step. They would turn-up their noses at 
pemmican, and shudder at horse-flesL In the 
wigwam or the kraal they would cry out for the 
conveniences of a town house ; and when nothing 
can be got but buffalo-flesh and water, insist on 
mutton and beer. ' 

VOL. L L 



146 JACK soudahobb's daughter. 

^^ No, no, I required huntsmen and warriors ; 
as capable to cook as to kill for the table ; as ready 
to defend me against ferocious beasts as equally 
savage men : and when I met with one I could 
trust, I rarely found any difficulty in attaching 
him to my service." 

" But now that you have returned to civilisa- 
tion, Miss Brabazon ?" inquired the reverend gen- 
tleman. 

" I am not going to turn away those who have 
been faithful to me under many perils, Mr, Plyn- 
lymmon," replied his hostess determinedly. ^^ They 
are used to me, and I am used to them. Besides, 
to tell you the truth, I do not appreciate your civi- 
lisation, I like to dress in accordance with my 
notions of comfort and ease. When I was thread- 
ing the jungle, ftdl of thorny cactus and spinous 
plants of all kinds, I should like to know where 
my drapery would have been if I had worn the 
ordinary foolish female dress? Do you think I 
could have lassoed, much less rode a horse fresh 
from the carral, on an awkward side-saddle? I 



A STRONG-MmOKD WOMAN. 147 

was too wise to do any ihingso foolish. I wore 
pants and vest of deer-skin, and could cling to the 
bare back of a steed, however wild, as well as any 
girl on the prairies of South America or the 
steppes of Tartary." 

The Vicar could not help experiencing a feel- 
ing of surprise, though he did his best not to be- 
tray it. The lady, however, went on rocking and 
smoking, and looking at him unconcernedly. 

" TheVomen of the Eajst, whence your boasted 
civilisation arose," she continued, " refuse to en- 
cumber themselves with petticoats ; and in the New 
World at least there are evidences of a desire to 
be rid of them. I found strong-minded females 
among our Transatlantic cousins who had deter- 
mined to be independent of a slavish custom, and 
possessing a like mental strength, I readily fol- 
lowed their example." 

" The dress is very pretty, unquestionably," 
observed the reverend gentleman, not disposed to 
find fault 

" But inconsistent with clerical ideas of female 



148 JACK scudahobe's daughteb. 

deoommr' added the ladj, in a tone of scomfhl 
interrogation. 

The Yicar ihonght it ftr more appropriate at a 
maaqnerade than at church, bnt discreetlj withheld 
his opinion. 

^^ As if women of sense were to be bonnd to 
make their toflettes in strict conformiiy with male 
regnktions r said his fiir parishioner. "But what 
can men know of such things, clergymen more es- 
peciallj ? They had better reform their own absurd 
costume, their swallow-tailed coats and saucepan 
hats, for instance." 

The Beverend Basil Plynlymmon shrugged his 
shoulders and laughed. 

^^ But I have forgotten the duties of hospital- 
iiy,*' suddenly remarked his hostess ; " you'll take 
some refreshment. Here, Captain !'' 

The shout instantly brought into the apartment 
the man who had admitted the visitor, who, after 
receiving certain directions, disappeared as quickly 
as he had entered. 

^^You must know," said the lady, confiden- 



A STBONG-MIKDED WOICAN. 149 

tially, ^^ I picked up that gentleman in the neigh- 
bourhood of the Great Salt Lake, where he was 
living as a squatter, and was induced to engage 
him as guide and head of my establishment After 
exploring with him a large portion of the Ameri- 
can continent, I found no difficulty in persuading 
him to cross the Atlantic with me. Captain Hiram 
Whittler, I am quite aware, does not quite realise 
your idea of a lady's chamberlain." 

Tlie reverend gentleman laughed again. How- 
ever outrd looked his fair parishioner's domestic 
arrangements, he was determined not to question 
their propriety. 

^^ Here we arc, passon I" cried the individual 
thus introduced to him, bringing in a tray with 
glasses filled with some kind of beverage. ^^ Here's 
a tipple tliat shall slip down your throat like but- 
tered velvet" 

The Vicar had placed before him a tumbler 
filled with alternate layers of sugar, ice, and wine, 
and a straw was put into his hand ; but this en- 
ticing suction being totally new to him, he wisely 



150 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

delayed its enjoyment till he had seen the modus 
operandL 

He had not long to wait Miss Brabazon 
flnng the end of h^r cigarette into the grate^ and 
helping herself to the nearest tumbler, put ihe 
straw tobe into her mouth, and, inserting the 
other end into the beyerage, drew up a portion of 
the contents. Her visitor qnietly followed her 
example, and seemed pwticularly gratified wiih 
the result 

^^ Yon never liquored so pleasanHy afore, did 
yon now, passon?" inquired the Yankee ciytain. 
^^It wam't to be e2^)ected in such a used-np 
oomitry as yonm. But if you wante to right- 
down enjiey it, you should first have a good stand- 
up fight with a bar or a painter in the Bocky 
Mountains." 

The Yicar thought he could appreciate the 
beverage without the company of the bear or 
the panther, or tiie necessiiy of travelling out of 
the safe and more accessible area of his own 
parisL 



A STBONG-MINDXD WOMAN. 151 

There was a third tninbler, which, somewhat 
to the visitor's astonishment, the Captain seized 
upon, sat himself down, and began to suck at lihe 
a fisL At intervals he addressed himself to his 
nude companion in a tone of easy, almost patron- 
ising familiarity, asking questions with an amount 
of curiosity that seemed to increase with every 
answer. 

The reverend gentleman's patience was very 
mndi tried, the more so when he noticed that 
Miss Brabazon had lighted another cigarette and 
had resumed her rocking, with a mischievous ex- 
pression in her eyes that assured him she was 
enjoying the trial 

"Well, stranger," exclaimed the man with 
rough heartiness, " I guess as you're by no means 
a bad sort o' chap for a passon. Spose you goes a- 
head out o' this worn-out country and makes tracts 
for some o' the new states o' Undo Sam's territory 
— California, Texas, or Mexico, if you has a mind ; 
for it won't be long afore the latter will find a 
comer in the star-spangled banner. I calculate 



152 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

then jon may settle down comfortablj among the 
red-skins or the whites, whichever on 'em you 
thinks wants most religion ; and if ye am't scalped 
by the one, or gouged by the other, I haven't the 
least manner o' doubt you'll get on with 'em first- 
rate. 

^^Say it's a deal, passoni" added Captain 
Whittler, giving the clergyman a slap on the back 
that nearly knocked him out of his seat. 

" Not at present, thank you. Captain," he re- 
plied mildly, drawing his chair further away ; 
^'I've got duties to perform here that I cannot 
neglect" 

" Booties 1" cried the other, starting up has- 
tily ; " that reminds me of our tarnation nigger I 
Have Sambo made them beds, I wonder, or washed 
them taters, or put them pork-fixings on to bile ? 
I 'spect he ain't, 'cause he went down to the river 
to bathe, and nobody have set eyes on him since. 
I guess he'll get a cow-hiding if he ain't a con- 
siderable deal smarter. So I'll just look him up, 
passon." 



A STBONQ-MINDBD WOHAK. 153 

"Is that your maid, Miss Brabazon?" in- 
qnired the Yicar with affected seriousness, after 
the man had closed the door behind him. 

" No, the Captain is my housekeeper," was 

■ 

the reply. 

"Then Sambo, I suppose, ofBciates in the 
more confidential capacity ?" 

" No ; he is a bushman I picked up at the * 
Cape, and acts as a kind of general drudge." 

" 0, I understand." 

He felt a strong desire to inquire into the 
composition of the remainder of this strange es- 
tablishment ; but fancied that the look of its mis- 
tress did not favour the investigation. 

" Now, Mr. Plynlymmon," she demanded, 
"just tell me, without any circumlocution, what 
brought me the honour of your visit ? It's not of , 
the least use, you know, saying that you feel an' 
interest for me as one of your flock. I don't con- 
sider myself one of any flock. If Pm to be re- 
garded as a sheep, the rest of the fold might take, 
I'm afraid, a reasonable objection to my colour. 



154 JACK SGUBAMOBE'S DATJ6HTEB. 

The trath. is, as regards religion, I had better at 
<moe say Tux nothing in particular. A learned 
Babbi, who taught me Hebrew in Jerusalem, 
threw cold water on my desire to be a Jewess. In 
Jndea I could not help feeling the influence of 
every place I visited. The Israelites, too, are a 
fine old race, and their faith indisputably genuine. 
I don't wonder at any one having an inclination 
for a change, going to the fountain-head." 

The Vicar opened his eyes at the would-be 
Jewess, very wide indeed, but judiciously said 
nothing. 

" Then again, when I Was at Borne," she re- 
sumed, '' I tried to act as the Bomans do ; but 
though imlimited priestiy assistance was offered, I 
found I could not think as they did. I ascertained 
^ that some of my countrymen and countrywomen, 
who had entered the Eternal City about the same 
time, perhaps quite as good Protestants as the 
Archbishop of Canterbury, had left it more popish 
than the Pope himself But, somehow or other, 
my imagination refiised to be affected by grand 



A STBONG-HIRDED WOMAK. 155 

decorations and imposing spectades, music, pic* 
tores, or flowers. I acknowledged the great Bo- 
man pageants to be got up in a style that would 
have enriched the treasury of any theatre ; but I 
took my leave of the Holy Father without the 
slightest intention of worshipping that amiable old 
gentleman as Gkni's repres^atative upon eartL" 

The Vicar smHed approvingly. 

^^ I never fancied Mahomedanism. Even when 
I was at Stamboul, and enjoyed the society of the 
most learned Turks, I felt no inclination to adopt 
the Koran. The doubtfiil position in which the 
daughters of Islam are placed, in earth as well as 
in Paradise, may We had some influence upon 
me. Be this as it may, I regarded the Prophet 
wiili as much indifference as the Pope." 

The Vicar appUed hunself to the mint-julep, 
and was evidently in quite a delightftil £rame of 
mind. 

" I did not trouble myself much about such 
considerations, till I found myself in the metro- 
polis of the Mormons. Now, thou^ I could not 



156 JACK scudamobe's daughtsb. 

help looking at Joe Smith and Mahomet as birds 
of a feather — ^the American borrowing his plumage 
from the Arabian eagle — I could as little avoid 
reviewing the substantial advantages of such a reli- 
gion, when I was invitfed to be " sealed" to the head 
of the church. Happily for myself, I discovered 
that the Prophet had already twenty wives ; so I 
declined the proffered honour, with, I hope, a 
proper humihiy; and shortly after left the ciiy 
of the Salt Lake, less a Latter-day Saint than 
any thing." 

The Vicar laughed outright 

'' Since then I cannot say that my religious 
views have been very decided. For a time I paid 
some attention to the worship of the Parsees, as 
I thought the fame of Zoroaster made it worthy 
of careftd study. Then I listened to the Brahmins, 
and tried to get-up an interest in Hindoo pan- 
theism. Lastly I took a turn at Confticius, and 
strove to master the mysteries of Buddha. I 
found a heap of puerilities, more childish than 
the extravagances of Western heathenism, and 



A STBONG-MIKDED WOMAN. 157 

gladly turned my back upon the various phases 
of Oriental superstition. 

" If I took up with any thing in that way, I 
should prefer the classical type. There must have 
been something in the Olympian Pantheon, or it 
could not have had so long and firm a hold on 
the intelligence of Greece and Bome. For my 
part, I cannot help saying, that if any one were 
bold enough to return to the faith of our classi- 
cal fathers, I would join him in getting up an 
appropriate temple. What do you think now, Mr. 
Plynlymmon? Suppose I were to offer you the 
post of high-priest of Jupiter ?" 

The countenance of the Vicar of Delamere 
Parva had been growing more grave ; but at the 
question addressed to him it became very serious 
indeed; the expression, however, lasted only a 
moment. 

^^ Suppose I wait. Miss Brabazon, till a fitting 
temple is erected," he said, ^^ and there are suffi- 
cient worshippers to fill it In the mean time I 
hope that you will kindly assist me in the arduous 



158 JACK BCODAMOBX'B DAU€FHTEB. 

dnties I liave to perform as a minister of a ChriBr 
tian congregation.'* 

*^ Oh!" exclaimed the lady, with any thing but 
an enconragiEig expression, ^^yon want a sub- 
scription. What is it for ?" 

The rererend gentleman did not seem pre- 
pared for this straightforward way of coming to 
the point He began to dilate on the enormous 
expenses he had incurred in providing for ihe 
spiritual wante of the parish, and dwelt very mov- 
ingly on its present very pressing necessities. 

Miss Brabazon heard him out without inter- 
ruption. " I think you can do very well without 
bells," she said; "a key and a fiying-pan may 
be necessaiy to hive a swarm of bees ; but there 
can be no occasion to knock two pieces of metal 
together to induce people to assemble at a certain 
time in a certain building, when they can readily 
refer to clocks or watches for the recognised hour 
of meeting. I am a&aid that you are not doing 
much good by your system of education. When 
you assure me that the prisons are empty, I will 



A STBOKG-MmDED WOMAN. 159 

assist you to enlarge your sohools. As for the 
projected inSrmajy, I have always understood that 
there was a parish doctor; and^ unless an epi- 
demic should break out^ I see no use for another." 

The Vicar felt disconcerted at this rebuff; still 
he did not betray his feelings. Indeed, he was 
far from disheartened, and would not yet aban- 
don all hope of placing Miss Brabazon among his 
liberal patronesses. He rose as smilingly from 
his seat as if his errand had been successfully 
accomplished, and, while putting on his gloves, 
looked attentively on the portrait of a snub-nosed 
gentleman, in a handsome frame, that hung on 
the wall. 

" Very like Mr. Pitt — very like him indeed. 
I congratulate you on possessing so fine a portrait 
of that eminent statesman." 

Miss Brabazon did not reply ; but she stopped 
her rocking, and took the cigar from her mouth. 
The individual represented on the canvass was 
the once-popular brewer. His daughter seemed 
pleased. 



160 JACK BOUDAMOBE^S DAUGHTER. 

" There is another portrait of Mr. Pitt in the 
picture-gallery of Porchester Castle/' he added; 
'^but I do not think it is so good as this. I 
called there this morning to wait on the duchess, 
who, though a sad invalid, ordered me to be ad- 
mitted directly. I told her grace I was going 
to call upon you, after, witli her usual liberality, 
she had contributed to my charities. The excel- 
lent duchess acknowledged that she had heard a 
good deal about you, and should certainly leave 
a card at Brabazon Lodge as soon as her health 
would permit her to drive out" 

Miss Brabazon, though essentially a strong- 
minded woman, had one weakness ; — ^to be noticed 
by people of rank was peculiarly agreeable, per- 
haps because apparently unattainable. In trutli it 
was quite a new pleasure to hear of a duchess talk- 
ing about calling upon her ; for she was well aware 
that the ladies of the neighbourhood had done their 
best to ignore her existence. 

^^ The duchess is very amiable, I have heard,'' 
ahe observed in a much less confident voice. 



A STRONa-MINDBD WOMAN^ 161 

^*Her grace does on immense deal of good," 
replied tlie Vicar, " She lias assisted in all my 
benevolent projects; moreover, has obtained for 
me the valuable assistance of the duke, and of iJle 
distinguished people in the county. She will be 
disappointed, I am a&aid, at not finding your 
name in my list of supporters ; for on parting with 
me she said, ' Miss Brabazon is reputed to be pro- 
digiously eccentric; but she may have a very 
good heart for all that; I am sure that she will 
help you in your good work.' " 

Miss Brabazon sprang from her chair, and was 
at the side of the speaker before he had buttoned 
liis glove, a process he had taken a long time in 
endeavouring to accomplish. 

" Put my name down for whatever sum the 
duchess subscribes," she said hurriedly. 

The Vicar turned round with a smile of secret 
.satisfaction at the recompense his patience and tact 
had extracted, and was about to take the oiFered 
hand of his hostess, when suddenly a tremendous 
outcry, apparently in front of the house, startled 

VOL. I. M 



162 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

them botk Presentlj a short thick half-dad 
negro dashed by the window at the top of his 
speed, yelling with all his might A minute later 
he was followed by a pack of fox-hounds, tearing 
after him in fiill cry. 

Scarcely liad they passed when Miss Braba- 
2on, eagerly snatching up the revolver off the 
table, rushed out of the room, leaving her visitor 
transfixed bs it were to the spot, bewildered with 
amazement. A horrible tumult, made up of the 
most unearthly noises, drew liim to the window, 
and he then gazed upon a scene that made every 
nerve in his body thrill with terror. 

Two huntsmen in red coats were shouting at 
and whipping off the dogs, while their horses were 
scarcely manageable for fright A few yards off 
stood Miss Brabazon, holding back by a chain a 
puma, whose roar and attempts to get free were 
making an immense impression on all before him.. 
Immediately in the rear of the lady came Captain 
Hiram Whittler with a rifle ; a Bedouin, in turban 
and burnouse, followed, carrying a long tufted 



A STRONG-MINDED WOMAN. 163 

spear at tlie charge; a North- American Liclian, 
flourishing a tomahawk^ came next; and at his 
heels a Bushman, witli a short elephant-gmi ; all 
the men shouting and screaming in different lan- 
guages, in the most frantic state of excitement. 

" Skedaddle I" shouted the Yankee. " If that 
ar' painter gets loose, you and your dogs and osses 
will be chumped up like quashes in a hog-yard.'* 

But Dick Wilcox and Will Tupper plied their 
hea\y whips with so clear an appreciation of the 
danger, that despite of the rearing of their steeds, 
it was evident tliat the entire pack would soon be 
dear of the premises. 

" Off with you !" cried Miss Brabazon, pulling 
with all her might at the chain witli both hands. 
" The next time you come frightening my servants 
I will let this beast free." 

The red-coats did not attempt an explanation, 
though it would have proved them entirely blame- 
less. The pack was in the opposite meadow, when 
Sambo caught sight of them approaching, and in- 
judiciously took to his heels; they crossed the 



mf^mmtmmmm 



164 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

water, took up the scent, and pursued their novel 
game with an ardour that must very soon have 
produced a fatal result, had not the latter, by tre- 
mendous exertions, succeeded in finding shelter. 

The two whippers-in spurred on to prevent the 
horrible catastrophe that seemed imminent, and 
arrived just in time to make an effort to save the 
hounds, now threatened with destruction in their 
turn. 

Sambo and his friends continued to advance, 
shouting and screaming their indignation and de- 
sire of vengeance in their several tongues; the 
puma growled, the horses started, and the hounds 
yelped and barked as they disappeared into the 
shrubbery. In a few minutes the gates were 
closed against the intruders, and the other party 
returned triumphant to that part of the house 
whence they had emerged. 

The sight of that savage-looking animal had 
rather alarmed the Vicar. He did not at all like 
remaining in a dwelling which contained such an 
inmate ; nor did the appearance of the members of 



A STRONG-MINDED WOMAN. 165 

tills Btraiige household reconcile him to such aii 
associate. The puma might escape. As this idea 
presented itself, the visitor jmt on his hat, and 
opened the door cautiously. As all seemed quiet 
in the hall, he thought it quite unnecessary to wait 
to take leave of his hostess ; so sped on tiptoe to tlio 
outer door. After peeping out with the same cau-- 
tion, ho closed it softly behind him, and hastened 
along the gravel drive. 

Tlie reverend gentleman began to breathe more 
comfortably when he found himself clear of Bra- 
bazon Lodge. He hurried along the road in the 
direction of the Vicarage, marvelling greatly at 
what he had seen and heard during tliis memor- 
able visit. 

As he became assm'ed of his personal safety^ 
his ideas grew calmer, and ho began to speculate 
hopefully on his future relations with his very, 
very strange parishioner. He did not forget the 
promised liberal subscription ; indeed, it had made 
A strong and agreeable impression on his mind. 
She was evidently little better than a heathen ; but 



166 JACK bcubamore's daughteb. 

lie did not despair of making her accessible to good 
connseL Notwithstanding her repulsive menage^ 
he must somehow or other find means to cultivate 
her acquaintanca 

The Beverend Basil Plynlj-mmon did verjr m- 
dustriouslj cultivate the acquaintance of Miss Bra- 
httzon — ^with what result the reader will learn. 



CHAPTER VL 

PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 

A VERY pretty picture might have been found in 
the charming Uttle bower, then covered witli flow- 
ering clematis and honeysuckle, that stood screened 
from the river-view by a clump of laurels, on the 
east side of Rose Lawn ; and from within it could 
be seen very pleasant glimpses of the green veran- 
dahed cottage, with its myrtles, geraniums, and 
standard-roses arranged in ornamental vases before 
it, as well as a bright stretch of the Thames, with 
its ever-varying picturesque accessories. 

Two girls were reclining in the cool shelter of 
that leafy arbour. The elder, well grown, almost 
womanly, with a rich dark complexion, and shin- 
ing black hair carefully curved over her temples, 
and lustrous eyes shaded by long black lashes. 



168 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

rested her feet against one end of the rustic bench, 
while her back was supported by the other. 

Before her sat, on a low stool, a more delicate 
figure, with feir complexion, tender hazel eyes, 
and a profusion of soft rich curls flowing down to 
her ivory shoulders. She was gazing attentively, 
with a look full of girlish interest, upturned to the 
animated face of her companion, who, though she 
had a bound volume of Childe Harold in one hand, 
had allowed it to drop half-closed into her lap, 
while engaged in some commimication apparently 
of a peculiarly confidential character. 

Both were dressed in light smnmer moming- 
fi-ocks, their straw-hats laid aside with their para- 
sols, and their hands ungloved, as if resting afler 
a walk or ride. But if they were tired, such was 
not the case with their several pets, — a fox-hound 
pup and an Italian greyhomid, that continued to 
bound in and out of the arbour, racing down the 
gravel-walk, and tumbling over each other against 
the box-borders, as if they never could grow weary 
of such sport* 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 169 



• 



The air was rich with the odour of lavender, 
musk, mignonette, and heliotrope, clumps of which 
bloomed close at hand ; no spiall addition to the 
perfume being contributed by the myriad blossoms 
on the bower, tliat helped to screen its inmates 
from the sun. They were, of course, the young 
ladies of the Chiswick villa, introduced in a former 
chapter : the elder liad been staying a week with 
her fatlier; and her cousin, holding her disen- 
gaged hand, was listening to a confidential account 
of her visit. 

" Then he would take me into die new kennel 
he had built," said the former ; *^ and I was intro- 
duced in form to forty couple of the finest hoimds 
in the kingdom. Tliere was Towzer, and Chal- 
lenge, and Jowlor, and Bingwood, and Teaser, and 
Sweotlips, and Hose, and a great many more I can- 
not remember ; and the leaping and barking by 
which they expressed their delight in making my 
acquaintance, was something wonderfuL Beally, 
the first and second whip, Dick Wilcox and Will 
Tupper, and the huntsman Bogers, had enough to 



170 JACK SCUDAMORB^S DAUOHTKB. 

do to keep them o£ Dear papa was in ecstasies ; 
he declared that {bey knew I was a fox-hnnter^s 
danghter. The men assured me that this was the 
case, with such earnestness, that I was obliged to 
believe thenu And so I continued to throw bis* 
cnits and pat fheir noble heads, till I was hnrried 
offto the stable." 

^^ Taking a fimcy to the pup you bronght wiHi 
you?" added the other. 

^^ No, dear ; that was old Dawkins's present, as 
I came away. He coidd think of nothing more 
appropriate for his master's daughter, as a remem- 
brance ; so he presented ^ Bob,' as he called him, 
with a set speech, as I was stepping into the car* 
riage. Dear papa laughed as usual; said that 
Bob must be the envy of the whole pack; and so 
of course I brought him." 

" Gently there !" she cried sharply to the 
young hound, as the delicate little greyhound was 
rolled over on the grass by her stronger com- 
panion. ^^I am afraid you are too rough a 
playfellow for dear little Fidele ! Come here, sir." 



PKIVATB AND CONTIDBNTIAL. 171 



r 



The dog stopped his play^ looked towards his 
mistress, and then bounded to her side. 

" I then went to see the foals, and the colts and 
fillies in training," continued the speaker with in- 
creased animation. ^^ Oh, such pretty yearlings ! 
such loves of two-year olds I You would have 
been charmed with their sleek coats and their 
graceful limbs, their bright intelligent eyes and 
their spirited lively movements 1" 

" I know nothing about horses, darling," ob- 
served her companion quietly ; " but I have no 
doubt that I should be pleased with whatever 
pleased you." 

A gentle pressure of tlie hand and an affec- 
tionate look acknowledged this cousinly speech. 

" Dear papa would insist on my choosing for 
myself," resumed the other. "Notliing would 
content liim but my going into the paddock and 
inspecting all his young stock. It was famous 
fun to see him making the boys show Uie paces 
of the thoroughbreds, he pretending to be a 
horse-dealer and I a purchaser, asking a hatful of 



172 JACK scubamobe's daughteb. 

money for each in torn ; and then in his emphatic 
way swearing that he should lose h j the bargain ; 
Musters the trainer gravely hacking every thing he 
said; and the grooms and jockeys grinning their 
knowing heads off, as they brought their horses 
forward." 

"Your papa must have been very happy, 
darling." 

"Of course he was. He was happier still 
when I selected the most promising two-year old 
in the lot — a bright bay named * Firefly,' for 
which he had reAised a top price, and had backed 
him heavily to run against a chestnut filly of Lord 
Vernon's, called * Camilla,' that had won a race 
a few weeks before. Dawkins solemnly said there 
could be no mistake as to whose daughter I was ; 
and all the young monkeys of boys looked at me 
with a wondering admiration that was more amus- 
ing than their previous vain attempts to maintain 
their graviiy. 

" Well, nothing would satisfy papa but having 
a side-saddle put upon ^ Firefly ;' and as I had on 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 173 

my new blue habit I was easily prevailed into 
accepting him as a momit. Another horse having 
been brought for papa, he proposed that we should 
proceed to the Downs. Nothing loth, I rode witli 
him up from the valley on to the race-course, 
wliere, to my extreme surprise, I fomid the Duke 
of Porchester, Lord Vernon, Sir Harry Chester, 
Tom Holyoake, and all that set. Tlien it came 
out that papa had actually made a match that I 
should ride ^ Firefly,' while Lord Vernon rode 
* Camilla ;' and that the race was to come off then 
and there." 

" You ride a race ! Oh, Fanny." 

" I was a little taken aback at first ; but when 
I learned how large a sum papa had betted, and 
heard the Duke offer five to four that I should 
win, I became as excited as any of them, and 
eagerly rode into th^ enclosure to take my place 
at the starting-post. 

" When tlie word was given, off we went, the 
chestnut taking ^the lead. I managed to hang 
pretty close on her flanks^ so that she was never 



174 JACK sccdamore's daughter. 

much more than a length sJieacL Li this stale 
we tamed the comer, and commenced the retnm 
mile. The fill j still showed in front ; when I conkl 
hear shonts of encouragement as I came withm 
half a mile of the judge's stand, where our friends 
had clustered, and could see papa waving his hat, 
the most conspicuous of them alL 

'^ I was aware that the colt was gaining ground 
— so apparently was he. At a quarter of a mile 
there was not more than half a length between me 
and Lord Vernon, who was using the whip. I 
put mine between my teeih, leant forward, pat- 
ted Firefly on the neck, and urged him on with 
my voice. He made a rush, the Duke and papa 
cheered lustily as they waved their hats, and I 
shot by the winning-post, beating Lord Vernon 
by a neck." 

" Wasn't your papa glad?" 

" They were all glad ; indeed, one would have 
thought they were all mad, there was such a Wild 
scene of rejoicing and congratulation immediately 
I was declared the winner. As for dear papa, he 



PBIYATE AKD CONFIDENTIAL. 175 

was quite beside liimself with pride and joy as he 
Tode up to me, when I turned round, and kissed 
me with tears in his eyes. Then they gave me 
three cheers, and there was a general shaking of 
hands. The Dvke said a hundred civil things ; so, 
in fact, did every body ; and when papa acknow- 
ledged that I was the owner of Firefly, with all 
his engagements, there was a general production 
of betting -books, and odds were offered in his 
fiivour, as if each was more eager than the rest 
to stake his money." 

" How pleased you must have been, dar- 
ling !" 

'^ But the best of tlie fun happened when I 
returned home, and papa made a speech to tlio 
men, telling them how I had won the race. Tliose 
mischievous monkeys of boys came with eyes star- 
ing out of their knowing little faces ; and there 
was such huzzaing amongst them all, as made the 
horses quite skittish.*' 

" Did you lose your heart to any of the gentle- 
men ?" 



176 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

" Can't say I did. They were all very com- 
pUmentary, particularly my opponent. His lord- 
ship seemed as if he could not say enough in my 
j)raise ; Sir Harry squeezed my hand ; Tom Holy- 
oake affected the tender swain; the Duke gallantly 
swore that Diana wasn't fit to hold a candle to 
me; and Lord Vernon persisted in keeping on 
one side my horse, my &ther being on the other, 
and making eyes at me in the most ridiculous 
maimer possible." 

" Fanny !" 

" They were all very well, child," she added, 
more slowly, as she looked intently at her com- 
panion ; " but you would have been the first to 
acknowledge that there was not one of them to be 
compared with a certain person.^^ 

The fair face of the younger girl suddenly 
flushed crimson at hearing the last words em- 
phasised* 

"Oh, you tell-tale !" cried the other, laughing 
archly, " No young lady ought to confess a prefer- 
ence so readily, /wouldn't do so, on any account." 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 177 

" Darling Fanny I One must feel a regard for 
one's preserver, you know." 

"Tliat depends. Suppose, instead of a hand- 
some youth, he had been a very plain sort of com- 
mon-place, middle-aged man, you wouldn't insist 
on falling desperately in love with liim, would you, 
child?" 

" Perhaps not, dear." 

'^ If he had a pug-nose or a squint, or a humped 
back, for instance, you wouldn't blush so prettily 
the very moment he was referred to." 

"Did I blush, dear?" 

Tlie words were uttered in an exquisitely soft 
and tender voice. 

"Did I blush, dear?" 

Tlie elder cousin imitated them exactly ; then, 
catching the still rosy face in her hands, stooped 
her head and kissed it tenderly. 

"It doesn't matter, darling," she exclaimed, 

throwing her arms romid her companion's neck, 

" You know I'm a model of prudence." 

Geraldine made no reply; the bright head 
VOL. I. N 



178 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

nestled on the breast of her cousin, the dove-like 
eves glancing up appealingly, suffused with a con- 
sciousness of happiness that would have mdted 
a much harder heart than the loving impulsive 
one her own was beating against so rapidly. 

*^ It isn't wrong, dear, is it ?" she murmured. 
** Of course he cares nothing for me, for Fm a 
child, and perhaps I shaU never see him again, as 
he is so many thousand miles away, fighting those 
dreadfal people in India ; but I cannot help being 
gratefid. It was so very kind of him to risk his 
own life to save mine." 

** Verj' kind and gallant, dear, unquestionably. 
I was at the window watching you and Fitz, and 
saw the promptitude and boldness with which he 
plunged after you, while so many stupid people 
were content with hallooing and screeching ; and 
presently brought your poor dripping figure to the 
surface, looking so dreadfully like a corpse, I 
screamed with firight.** 

Greraldine shuddered, dosed her long lashes, 
and hid her bright fiice on her firiend's shoulder. 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 179 

" But, tlieu, after that fearftd tragedy came a 
comedy, the like of which I shall never see again 
in this world. Grandmamma and your gallant in 
tliat fine suit she allowed him to wear, looking 
and acting so prodigious courteous to each other, 
while wo poor little simpletons were allowed to 
stand still and wonder. Wasn't it very droll ?" 

The silken lashes opened, and the soft hazel 
eyes flashed out with a light that illumined the 
fair girlish face "w-ith inexpressible brightness. 

"But was he not handsome, dear?" she de- 
manded in a wliisper. 

" To be sure he was. Now, Bob !" cried the 
elder lady shaq^ly, as the Italian greyhound was 
knocked over in a mamier that seemed to have 
sent the breath out of her delicate body. " It's 
well for you I haven't got my riding-whip. Come 
here, directly !" 

Tliis diversion completely roused Greraldine, 
for she sat up, with one arm thrown round her 
cousin's waist. 

" I forgot to tell you," said the latter, " that 



180 JACK scudamoke's daughter. 

when I found papa in so good a humour, I made 
him promise that grandmamma and you should 
come and stay with me for two or three weeks; 
and I ordered a new pony-carriage that I may 
drive you about ; and Musters is to have one of 
the best-tempered colts broken-in expressly for 
you, for I mean to make you such a perfect 
horse-woman, that when a certain person re- 
turns — " 

A closer embrace stopped the sentence ab- 
ruptly, and the fair complexion was brighter than 
ever. 

" What a darling kind thoughtfiil mamma you 
are, Fanny," exclaimed the sensitive girl, as she 
shook back her silken curls, and gazed earnestly 
into the face of her cousm. " And your papa, too, 
how very good of liim to invite us." 

"I will tell you something that shall please 
you more, my pet," said the otlier as fondly. 
" My papa knows a certain person ; and when I 
told him how great an obligation he had laid us 
all imder, he burst out in his praise in language 



«■ 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 181 

a little too strong for his daughter to repeat, 
dear. Then he said he had heard from one of the 
family that ho had greatly distinguished himself in 
the last campaign, had been promoted, and was 
looked upon as an officer of great promise. Think 
of that, dear." 

It was evident that she did tliink of it. The 
soft brown eyes flashed with intense pleasure ; and 
the smile that played round the pouting red lips 
gleamed like sunlight on a tropical fruit. Suddenly 
a shadow of sadness passed over the glowing fa«e. 

" But suppose those horrid Sikhs — " she shud- 
dered, and seemed unable to express the imwel- 
come suggestion. 

" ' Fortune favours the bold,' my pet," replied 
the other, encouragingly. " We know how fear- 
less he is ; and such gallant knights invariably go 
through all kinds of danger, and become distin- 
guished generals, like Olive and Wellington and 
Napier." 

"Ah I" cried Geraldine, with evident des- 
pondence ; " if he should become very great, I 



182 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

cannot expect him to remember the little girl 
whose life he saved — and — " 

" Vho loves him so dearly," added her friend ; 
^^ and who is striving with all her dear little heart 
and soul to be worthy of his affection when he 
retmns to England. I know it all, dear; all 
your strenuous efforts to get on in your studies, 
all your anxiety to excel in accomplishments. 
Your every thought, every hope, is to become 
attractive in his eyes at your next meeting." 

^^ Dear Fanny!" exclaimed the ingenuous girl, 
as the tell-tale face was again hid on her shoulder. 

" Well, darling, there is nothing to be 
ashamed of," added her confidante. " I only 
hope that he may appreciate you as you deserve, 
for you certainly are the most amiable, most 
loveable, kindest, best little pet of a cousin that 
ever existed." 

Here a sudden squeak from the roughly-used 
Fidele, as she went rolling over the grass, caused 
another diversion, for both girls started up sud- 
denly, and the elder rushed towards the offender, 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 183 

apparently to inflict some puniHlimont. Ho thought 
it i)rudent to beat a hasty retreat. Eventually, 
however, he permitted himHelf to bo enticed to 
hit) former poHt, near Ihh mintreHH, and, having 
received a scolding, with dr()oj)ing stem and 
other Higns of canine i)onitonce, turned himHolf 
round and round till he foimd a rewting-placo to 
luH liking. 

The fair g08Hi2)« now Hat Hide by Hide on the seat. 

"But I haven't told you half the pleaRure I 
mean to afford you when you come to Hpend 
your holidays with mo," resumed the elder. 
"There's a new boat on the hike, on which I 
mean to row you about." 

Geraldino looked as if the idea suggested 
feelings of 2)ain rather than of pleasure. 

"But there's no fear of an immersion there, 
child," said the other. " Tliere will bo no 
thoughtless boy to get you upset by his awk- 
wardnoHB." 

" Poor Fitz !" exclaimed his sister ; " I wcm- 
der if he has joined his regiment" 



184 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

"Or, in more honest language, you wonder 
if he has joined his brother officer. Isn't that 
it, you sly puss? Well, well, I won't tease. 
We know that he reached Calcutta quite safe 
and well, and that he had started to join the 
anny. Lucretia Brabazon told me iliat she had 
received a letter from her cousin by the last 
mail, which informed her of your brother's ar- 
rival in India. By the way, I shall introduce 
you to Miss Brabazon. She is a great friend 
of mine, you must know, though she is rather 
a strange creature. Oh, there are lots of people 
I intend you to become acquainted with. There's 
the Eev. Basil Plynlymmon, who is building a 
new church. He is a very popular clergyman, 
and, as a further recommendation to you, I will 
let you know tlie important fact that he Avas- 
tutor to a certain person,'^'' 

" Fanny !" cried the younger girl, with a look 
of mingled pleasure and curiosity. 

" As soon as I became aware of tliis, I thought 
it my cousinly duty to make inqmries as to his. 



PRIVATE AKD CONFIDENTIAL. 185 

pupil's antecedents. Of course, I expected to hear 
all kinds of peccadilloes, but judge of my disap- 
pointment, when I heard the good man declare 
that the young gentleman was a model of steadi- 
ness and propriety." 

The young face again brightened up witli smiles 
and glances of intense gratification. 

" It would have been so pleasant, you know, to 
one's naturally mahcious feelings to have been able 
to report that he was a shocking bad character that 
you must have nothing to do with. Wouldn't it 
dear?" 

By way of reply, Geraldine threw her arms 
round her friend's neck," and kissed her. 

"But I may have an opportunity of being 
spitefiil yet," the other added, " for I ascertained 
that the worthy man had lately received a hand- 
some present from his former pupil. So, of com'se 
he has been bribed, and the model youth may have 
been quite a horrible wretch, my dear." 

" Faimy ! how can you say so ?" 



186 JACK scudamore'b dauohter. 

" But who 18 this coming?" 

The two girln nat up in an attitude that would 
liavo Hatisfied the most rigid Htickler for feminine 
decorum of deportment. One seized lier hat^ the 
other gravely examined her parasol ; both waited 
while the footsteps advanced It was only the par* 
lour-maid, a neat demure little damsel^ in a brown 
stuff dress^ sot off by a small white apron. Her 
hair seemed to be cut dose^ for nothing wm seen 
of it under the round cap with very unpretending 
ribbons she wore on her head. 

^^ A letter^ if you please." 

Botli girls started at the very mild announce- 
inent; the younger, however, being the nearest, 
stretched out her liand, as if by an uncontrollable 
impulse. As soon as slie caught sight of tlie super- 
scription, she bounded up from her seat, her face 
glowing with animation, and waving the letter 
round her tresses, began dancing about in the wild- 
est state of excitement. Tlie bearer, with a look 
showing that she understood ilie case perfectly, 
withdrew. 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 187 

" What in tlie world are you about, Geral- 
dine?" demanded her cousin. 

" A letter from Fitz ! A letter from Fitz !" 

She repeated tlie joyful intelligence over and 
over again, still waving the welcome missive tri- 
umphantly round her head, as she continued to 
bomid in front of the arbour ; in which exercise 
she was presently joined by the two pets, who 
barked in joyftd chorus to her exclamations of plea- 
sure. 

" You are all mad together, I think," cried her 
companion. '^ Do come and sit down and read 
your note, like a sensible girl. Who knows but 
what it may contain important inteUigence respect- 
ing a certain person?" 

Tlie suggestion brought tlie young lady instan- 
ter to seat herself on the bench beside her senior ; 
but she was evidently in a flutter of expectation 
and excitement. For a minute or so the two girls 
silently examined the writing, the post-mark, and 
the seal ; then it was carefiilly opened, the pages 
deliberately smoothed, and after adjusting their 



188 JACK scudamobe's daughter, 

flounces and sitting very close together, with faces 
becoming every moment more earnest and more 
grave, they addressed themselves to its perusal. 

" You read it, dear !" said Geraldine, passing it 
to her cousin. 

The other, apparently guessing the cause of 
the transfer, with increased gravity of manner 
prepared to fidfil the duty imposed on her ; her 
young kinswoman, with a fluttering heart and an 
anxious &ce, leaning on her shoulder and fixing 
her eyes upon the paper. 

" Head-Quarters of the Army, Camp ^ 

18—." 

The girls looked at each other with painful so- 
lemnity. TJie reader proceeded. 

" Dear little Kittens /" 

" Now that's too bad of Fitz !" cried the elder 
of the two, apparently with oflfended digniiy. 
" It's well for him that he's not present, or I'd 
kitten him with a vengeance. He ought to have 
known better." 

" He's only a boy, dear," said the other, 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 189. 

coaxiiigly, " aud he doesn't mean tlie least harm 
in the world. Do go on, there's a darling." 

" He ought to know that when a young lady's 
seventeen last birthday, she has a right to a more 
appropriate appellation than tliat of a juvenile cat." 

" Fitz I am sure will be very sorry when he 
learns that he has vexed you." 

" Oh, I'm not vexed at all." 

" There's a dear — and skip that — what does 
he say next ?" 

The offended young lady threw her head up, 
and, with a lofly look, smoothed the sheet on her 
lap, and proceeded to resume her readmg. 

" Bear little Kittens /" 

" You see I can bear it," she added, turning 
her handsome face to her companion ; " I can 
treat the indigniiy with that majestic indifference 
which becomes a woman of my age and experi- 



ence." 



" Darling Fanny, do go on." 
Thus adjured, the fair reader, without further 
remark, read as follows : 



190 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" Here we are at la«t, in sight of the enemy, af- 
ter a precious long journey in search of them. But 
it was uncommon jolly, all of it, and we intend 
walking into them like one o'clock. My regiment 
has been ordered to the front, and have had more 
than one brush with mounted Sikhs that cluster in 
our line of march in great force, and come sweep- 
ing down upon us with a tremendous bobbery, as 
if about to make mincemeat of us all ; but pre- 
sently they are seen riding helter-skelter away, 
half of their horses with empty saddles, our men 
in hot pursuit, cutting them down in grand siyle. 
Oh, it's the jolliest ftm !" 

The two girls looked into each other's faces, 
with aspects expressive of extreme astonishment, 
as if they found some difficulty in reahsing the 
idea of their former playfellow taking delight in 
scenes of such evident danger. The reading was 
resumed. 

" I've made lots of new friends. First, there's 
Jones of ours, and a deuced entertaining chap he 
is ; he has such lots of stories about tiger-himting 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 191 

Oil elopliants, and pig-sticking with spears, and 
racing after jackals ; and beautiful Banoes ready- 
to fall in love with a fellow ; and the most ravish- 
ing dancing-girls ever seen out of the Ai'abian 
Nights." 

*^ Not a proper companion for Fitz, I'm sure," 
said the reader gravely. 

" I should not think he was, dear. But go on, 
please." 

*^ Then there's Major Rafforty, who drinks 
oceans of brandy-pawnee and cats curry by tlie 
cart-load. A capital fellow at a song after a mess- 
dinner. To be sure, his face is precious red, and 
not the handsomer for ilie jolly nose in the middle 
of it ; yet it's evident he thinks himself an Apqllo, 
for he is always bragging like old boots of tlie 
luck he's had wiili the women, particularly dwell- 
ing upon a certain pretty widow — " 

" Skip that, dear I" said the younger cousin, 
interrupting the narrative. 

" Hum — ^hum — ^hum," muttered the fair reader, 
rapidly passing over a passage. "Then there's 



192 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Potter, and Dawkes, and Chilvers all in our regi- 
ment. Very nice fellows, but prodigiously given 
to cheroots and bitter ale, and to talking about 
looting cashmere shawls, gold bangles, peark and 
diamonds: m short, any pretiy ornament tliat 
comes in their way ; for looting, you must know, 
is plundermg when a fort or town is taken by 
assault." 

" Bless me, Geraldine !" exclaimed the elder, 
"what a strange set the poor boy has fallen 
amongst." 

" So it seems, dear. But pray go on." 

" How impatient you are, child. I daresay 
after all, there's nothing in the letter so very inter- 
esting." 

She continued the perusal. 

" Our colonel appears to be a very good sort of 
fellow enough, but is uncommon strict about duty 
and all that. Honey and sugar at mess, but at 
parade, by jingo, if any thing's amiss w^ith your 
horse or accoutrements, doesn't he walk into you ! 
It's no joke, I can tell you, if you get his monkey 



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 193 

up. I'm all right as yet, but Dawkes was in a 
precious scrape the other day, because the handle 
of his sabre came off when he drew at the word of 
command, Chilmers I think Iiad done it in a lark ; 
but as Dawkes didn't spht, the row blew over, and 
nobody came to grief." 

" Mischievous schoolboys, these brother officers 
of his," added the reader, with something like in- 
dignation. ^^But I'm surprised dear Fitz does 
not say any thing about — Oh, here it is." 

She resumed her reading, but with a much 
more careful and impressive manner. 

• " Captain Calverley was the first to welcome 
me on my arrival, and has been micommon kind 
and attentive ever since. I am in his troop, tliere- 
fore we are very much together. And isn't he 
fond of talking of his visits to the cottage! And 
didn't he look pleased when I told him grand- 
mamma was always mentioning him. Then he 
asked kindly after the two little girls, saying that 
they were the nicest Uttle things he had ever 



seen." 



VOL. I. o 



194 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

^'Little girls, dear?" repeated the yoiuig lady 
of seventeen ; " nice little tilings. Of course he 
thinks of ns as babies." 

Geraldine's heart was too full for utterance; 
but her flushed face betrayed her mortification. 

"Jones of ours," resumed the reader, ^^says 
he's no end of a brick, but that he's a tremendous 
lady-killer ; the women at all the balls and parties 
making a dead set at liim ; every pretty girl think- 
ing it quite a feather in her cap to be in love with 
the handsome captain." 

The flushed face began to grow pale ; even the 
voice of the reader betrayed uneasiness. 

" But he assured me that they hadn't the ghost 
of a chance, for that a Begum had taken a fancy to 
him, that they were to be married after the cam- 
paign, and that the Governor-General had pro- 
mised to give the bride away. She was rather 
coj)pery in colour." 

" Odious woman !" cried the indignant reader. 
" But then she had such heaps of tin ; her lord 
would never be able to spend the half of it." 



PRH^ATE AND CONFIDENTIAL. 195 

" I should not have supposed him mercenary," 
was tlien interpolated. 

The listener said nothing; but her face was 
very pale and grave. 

*^ I was engaged in a smart skirmish the otlier 
day. Indeed at one time I got quite separated and 
surrounded by a pack]of mounted devils whose sharp 
.crooked swords were flashing in my eyes in a man- 
ner very far from pleasant. I cut and thrust at them 
as fast as I could; but I gave myself up for lost, 
when, just in the nick of time, a, horseman dashed 
into the group ; my right-hand black fellow was 
sent out of his saddle, cut through his turban ; my 
left-hand black fellow tumbled backwards, run 
through the body; and the others wheeled off 
at a gallop. If my captain had not come to my 
assistance in this plucky way, there's not a 
doubt in the world that you, dear little kittens, 
would have been a brother and a cousin out of 
pocket." 

" I really am quite astonished, Geraldine, that 
Fitz should write in this unbecoming and thought- 



196 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

less way about his own death. It's positively 
shocking; and I shall scold him well when I write* 
But it was very gallant of Captain Calverley to 
have come to the poor boy's rescue, wasn't it, dar- 
ling?" 

"Yes, dear," replied her cousin in a voice 
scarcely audible. The other regarded her tenderly. 
Presently Greraldine added in the same subdued 
tone, " What is a Begum, Fanny?" 

" Oh, some horrible woman, not worth a mo- 
ment's attention. Let me see what else your 
brother has to communicate." 

" It's a trying kind of life out here, and as a 
great battle is said to be not far oflF,, the risks 
will become tenfold. I often think of the dear 
old quiet home, the good kind grandmamma, and 
xny pretty and affectionate playmates. It was a 
pleasant life. When I talk of it to Calverley he 
seems charmed, and wonder^ why I could give it 
up. By the way, he has just been appointed on 
the staff of our chief; and Jones of ours says that 
he is sure of promotion aft^r this. Of course in 



PBIVATK AND CONFIDENTIAL. 197 

timo ho will become a great general^ like Napier ; 
and ly too, I hope ; for I donH mean to throw 
away a chance of earning diutinction. You shan't 
be ashamed of me, my dear little kittens/' 

*^ What a provoking creature he is I" 
^^ If I fail in becoming a lady-killer, and in 
fascinating Begums as rich as Croosus — ^" 

'' Oh, I shall skip all this rubbish." 

** I hope to come back a general officer, witli 
rupees enough to j)ay off the mortgages on Fitz- 
niaurioo Court, and a fortune for my dear sister, 
such as would be sure to secure her a worthy 
husband. So no more at present, &c. &c." 

" I hope Fitz may not be disappointed. Hallo, 
here's a postscript I" 

"Jones of ours has confessed to me that all 
he said about the Captain being a lady-killer, and 
going to marry the Begum, is a pack of bosh. He 
assured me that Calverley was one of the most 
quiet, gentlemanly fellows in tlie service, and had 
never troubled himself about any of the women 
out here — European or native." 



198 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" There, my pet I" cried the elder cousin ex- 
ultantly ; " you may let your dear little heart rest 
in peace. There is no cause for tlie slightest ap- 
prehension." 

The feir young face, clothed in its brightest 
smiles, looked happy once more ; and, on a sug- 
gestion that grandmamma would like to hear the 
letter, she rose with alacrity, and the two girls, 
with arms round each other's waists, hurried into 
ilie house, forgetful of parasol or hat in the comer, 
oblivious of Childe Harold on the gromid, and 
regardless of the chasings and rollings over that 
poor little greyhound was experiencing on the 
lawn at the paws of the imchecked and perfectly 
independent Bob. 



f^mmmnmammmmmtmmm 



CHAPTER VII. 

AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 

LucRETiA Brabazon, like a great poet after the 
publication of a popular work, awoke one morning 
.and found herself famous. The hunting of Sambo 
Attained as wide a fame as Chevy Chase. It be- 
came not merely the one theme for breakfast-table 
talk, for morning visitors, for the cover-side, for 

luncheon, for after-dimier, and general gossip at 

♦ 

idl hours of the day, but took up imiumerable 
colmnns of provincial newspaper commentary. 

Morning afl:er morning her name figured in 
the " Local News," in the " Chit-chat," in the 

'' Correspondence," and in the " Fashionable Intel- 
ligence." There was a leading article about her 
at least once a-week, and she flourished in the 

" Poets'-corner," to the exclusion of all other 



200 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

subjects. Indeed, an enterprising printer in the 
couniy town got up a broad sheet illustrated witib 
a sensation woodcut of the unfortunate Bushman 
in the act of being torn to pieces by ravenous 
hounds, while the whipper-in was having his head 
divided by the jaws of the devouring puma. 

The colporteurs carried on a lively trade with 
tills authentic work, particularly on market-days ; 
but the press did not exhaust the interest of the 
subject. Li every house, throughout the length 
and breadth of Cheshire, the startling narratives 
of Dick Wilcox and Will Tupper had so gained 
in incident as they circulated, that the limited 
household at Brabazon Lodge became multiplied 
into hordes of savages of the most ferocious aspect 
and race ; and her one wild beast grew into a me- 
nagerie of the most frightftJ animals and reptiles 
ever exhibited. 

At " serious parties" Miss Brabazon became an 
object of absorbing attention ; the pious spinsters 
in the neighbouring villages had to vary their ac- 
customed invitations to " tea and tracts," and the 



. AN UNPBOTBCTED FEMALE. 201 

Bev. Basil Plynlymmon, in consequence of his 
moderate personal knowledge of that heroine, and 
his actual though slight acquaintance with her ex- 
traorduiary establishment, found himself elevated 
into the interesting notoriety of a returned mis- 
sionary. 

In truth, the thrilling narrative he was called 
upon to repeat at all general meetings of the De- 
lamere United Bible and Blanket Club, of the 
ferocious attack of the untameable panther on . 
Squire Scudamore's fox-hounds and whippers-in, 
was regarded, by his female listeners at least, as 
even more sweetly interesting than their long- 
established favourite tale, the account of the roast- 
ing and eating of the Rev. Jabez Muffington, by 
the horrid cannibals of Pungabatoo. 

Greatly, however, as tlie reverend gentleman's 
visit to his fair parisliioner had advanced his in- 
terests and his influence, he did not feel disposed 
to repeat it ; not from any dislike of that young 
lady personally — fiir from it, he always spoke of her 
with marked respect, touching gently upon certain 



202 JACK scudahobe'b daughteb. 

doctrinal errors which, as he mildly said, she had 
been so unfortunate as to adopt during her residence 
among people scarcely a shade better than hea- 
thens. But it was evident that he did not approve 
of the free-and-easy manners of the Texan cap- 
tain, that he did not like the aspect of his subor- 
dinates, and that he could not reconcile himself 
to die chance of an interview with ^' that dreadful 
puma." 

There was nothing, however, to prevent Ids 
writing to Miss Brabazon. In his own mind tliere 
existed no doubt that it was his boimden duty to 
endeavour to the uttermost to remove the very 
heterodox opinions he had heard her express ; and 
when this impression was confirmed by tlie judg- 
ment of a clerical friend who was very much m 
his confidence, and who, moreover, pointed out to 
him the pecuniary advantages tliat might arise 
from tlie establishment of a spiritual influence over 
a schismatic, with a large balance at her bankers, 
the Vicar of Little Delamere as resolutely set 
himself to work to carry on a controversy, as he 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 203 

had done a few years before, to edit a Greek 
plaj. 

Whether he was Ukely to meet with more suc- 
cess in one employment than he Iiad found in the 
other, may be gathered from the following extract 
from one of the replies he had received to his 
kindly expostulations, and, as he considered them, 
eloquent arguments : 

"It is just possible that I am very much in 
the dark regarding my way of life, but I intend 
to accept nobody's lantern, imless quite satisfied, 
not only that it contains a light, but one sufficient 
to show me the right path, to the end of my jour- 
ney. Of those wliich have been presented to me 
for this purpose, I liave found many empty, while 
others could boast only of a rushlight that al- 
ways spluttered in the socket when a bright and 
steady flame .would alone be of the slightest ser- 
vice. 

" Thanks for the trouble you have taken. 
If among the blind the one-eyed is a king, in 
the dense fog in which you find me, your taper, 



204 JACK scudamobe's dauohteb. 

I suppose, ought to be considered an illumination, 
But, if you please, I will wait for the sunshine. 
For those who are in earnest in search of the 
truth, there must come a time when they shall 
walk in broad dayhght. Neither taper nor torch^ 
lamp nor lantern ; no, nor gas-light of the greatest 
brilliancy and with the most approved burners, 
need then be had recourse to. 

" At present I have no fear of stumbling. I 
have passed the most precipitous mountain-chains ; 
surely I can be safe on the firm plateau of EngUsh 
conmoion-sense — even in the dark. I do not dis- 
credit yoiu* pretensions as a guide, but I think 
it liigli time that I should be able to walk alone ; 
notwitlistanding my claims as that conventional 
example of helplessness — ^an unprotected female. 

" I remember having a long argument with 
an intelligent Brahmin, but I &iled to convert 
him because I could not satisfactorily dispose of 
some of his objections to the creed I wished him 
to embrace. * You are,' he said, ' anxious to 
make it believed that you worship an almighty 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 205 

and all-pervading spirit, higher above humanity 
than are the stars above the earth, yet is your 
religion singularly mundane and carnal. You 
are satisfied that there is neither marrying nor 
giving in marriage in the heaven in which you 
all desire to find a place, yet you rely on such 
domestic influences as existed on earth, principally 
filial and maternal, for your chance of this beati- 
tude.' 

" It was in vain that I assured the worthy 
man such ideas were not adopted by the com- 
munity of which I was a member; but the worship 
of the Virgin and the Child has, in many parts of 
the East, become so thoroughly identified as the 
vital principle of Christianiiy, that I could not . 
convince him it could be absent from any Cliris- 
tian profession of faith. 

" You dwell a good deal on the idea of re- 
modelling the Church of England. I have not 
the slightest objection ; but why yoii should call 
yourself Anglo-Catholic I do not clearly mider^ 
stand* The English Catholic, according to my 



206 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

benighted notions, is called a Boman Catholic, 
because he adopts the religion of Borne ; but an 
English Protestant, who professes to be antagon^ 
istic to that fidth, has no right to such a title. I 
hope that there is no juggle in its adoption. I 
am in the dark, you know, and of course cannot 
be expected to see things clearly, but it seems to 
me as if you were about to realise a metaphor of 
one of your cleverest statesmen. Have you found 
the Papists bathing, and are you trying to walk 
off with their clothes ? 

*^ As you seem so desirous of going further 
back than St. Augustine, su])pose you retrograde 
a little forther. It will bring you to Bome, for 
which I cannot help fimcying you entertain a very 
strong interest. I think I threw out the hint 
before ; that is, the return to a classical faith. It 
existed to a considerable extent in Britain, you 
know, once. By all means let us have a revival 
as it flourished in the seven-hilled city, in the 
enlightened era of imperial Augustus. Then who 
so worthy to be Pontifex Maaimus as yourself? 



AN UKPROTECTED FEMALE, 207 

Consider that you will have the appointment, not 
only of the Flamens, but of the Vestal Virgins. 
What a preferment I Pope or primate is a poor 
curate in comparison. I recommend it to your 
serious consideration." 

Tlie Vicar of Delamere Parva pondered a good 
deal over this epistle. He was a little shocked, 
and a trifle puzzled. He scarcely knew what to 
think of the writer. He came at last to the safe 
conclusion, that she was very eccentric — even for 
a strong-minded woman. Nevertheless, having 
the qualiiy of perseverance dominant in his nature, 
he resolved not to give up his hope of making 
her a shining light in the Church — ^and a liberal 
contributor to its revenue. 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon was far 
from being the only gentleman who felt an inte- 
rest in Miss Brabazon. In society generally there 
existed an extraordinary amount of curiosity re- 
specting her, but in no circle was this so strong 
as in the Delamere Hunt. Ever since the hounds 
liad broken cover after poor Sambo, its members 



208 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

felt that an apology was due from them to her, 
for this outrage upon her servant. No one, how- 
ever, volunteered to be its bearer. Their know- 
ledge of the composition of the establishment at 
Brabazon Lodge was limited; but it evidently 
sufficed. There was no desire to mcrease it by 
a personal inspection. The idea of a deputation 
was orice started after a bowl of capital punch, 
but when it came to a selection of representatives, 
every one proposed his neighbour ; never was so 
much modesty and self-denial displayed by the 
club since its establishment. 

At last it was concluded amongst them, tliat 
one of their number would be quite enough, as 
the young lady might object to receive more gen- 
tlemen visitors, and with wonderful unanimity 
they pitched upon Tom Holyoake. In vain he 
tried to excuse himself; he was most moving in 
dwelling upon his own unfitness ; he was most 
liberal in his estimation of the superior qualifi- 
cations, for the office, of every one else. The club 
imanimously were of opinion that he was the right 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 209 

man in the right place. So there was no help 
for it 

Mr. Holyoake walked his horse slowly in the 
direction of Brabazon Lodge, with the impression 
dearly fixed upon his physiognomy that he was 
a victim to circumstances. He had heard that 
the person of an ambassador is inviolable, but en- 
tertained misgivings as to the treatment of am- 
bassadors by cannibals. In this mood he pushed 
open tlie gate, which, with the precaution of a 
fox-hunter, he placed back, so as to permit easy 
egress if he should find it necessary to make a 
start. At tlie first growl of the puma he had 
determined to put spurs to his horse, and gallop 
off as hard as ho could. 

He walked his hunter along the carriage- 
drive, looking warily about him. As soon as the 
house came in sight, he gave it a careful scrutiny. 
One of the parlour-windows was open, and at 
it he could see a Panama hat and a clotli jacket 
— a newspaper hid the fisice and the rest of the 

figure. 

VOL. I. p 



210 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" This must be the Texan captain," thought 
Tom Holyoake. 

" Hallo, Jolly-Nose I what brought y(m here ?" 
was demanded from the open window. 

"These yankees are so infernally cheeky," 
said the ambassador to himself. 

The fox-hunter had dnmk largely of port- wine. 
It had not only pretty frequently got into his head, 
but into his complexion — the crust, apparently, 
having chosen to monopolise a particular feature ; 
and nothing irritated its owner so much as the 
slightest reference to it. He felt aggravated, 
therefore, at the miceremonious allusion, but was 
conscious that the success of his embassy, perhaps 
his life, depended on his keeping his temper ; so 
he directed liis steed towards the open window, 
and put on the most cordial look at liis command. 

"I must conciliate this fellow," he thought; 
"It won't do to put him out I wonder where 
they keep that savage beast?" 

" What brought you here, I say ?" was re- 
peated more sharply. 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 211 

" My good fellow," cried the fox-hunter, in a 
peculiarly mild tone of voice ; " I've come on a 
particular mission to Miss Brabazon, and I'll mako 
it worth your while to procure me an interview 
with her.'* 

Mr. Holyoake looked cautiously about him, 
peering into the bushes on the lawn, as if expect- 
ing to find a wild Lidian crouching behind every 
tree. 

" Particular mission, eh?" was the reply, in a 
scomftd voice. 

" Tlie almighty dollar will do any thing with a 
yankee," thought the ambassador. "A crown- 
])iece or two would, I daresay, be equally effec- 
tive. At any rate I will try." 

He rode close to the window, and said in a 
low confidential tone, bending in his saddle : 

" It's important that I should see Miss Bra- 
bazon, if only for a few minutes. My name's 
Holyoake, of Mount Holyoake. I'm very well 
known in this county. Do me the favour to 
accept this to drink my health, and i)lease to let 



212 JACK scudahore's daughter. 

Mias Brabazon know that I am waiting to speak 
to her." 

A hand was held out; the silver dropped into 
it, and immediately disappeared, 

" Say your errand," said the same voice ; 
" rta Miss Brabazon." 

Tom Holyoake was taken very much aback at 
this unexpected declaration, and did not regain 
his composure when he saw a laughing face 
raised from the newspaper, the feminine charac- 
ter of which was beyond dispute. 

^* Nowtlien, out^dth it, Mr. Holyoake. What's 
your particular mission ? I hope that you have not 
been bribing me without good and sufficient cause." 
Tom Holyoake took off his hat and bowed 
with a face rather more fiill of colour than usual 
Ho then, with no small amoimt of hesitation, cir- 
cumlocution, and repetition, expressed the apology 
of tlie club, of which he acknowledged himself an 
unworthy member, for the unpremeditated and 
much regretted mistake of their hounds. 

Lucretia Brabazon had had time to examine 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 213 

her visitor, and could not &il to observe the eager 
glances he flung around him whilst making his 
statement. She felt much inclined to laugh, but 
knew tliat it was incumbent on her to meet the 
civility of the* fox-hunters in a proper spirit. She 
therefore expressed her satisfaction in lady-like 
terms with the apology, and appeared willing to 
believe that poor Sambo had been hunted entirely 
through his own imprudence in running away 
before hounds in fiill cry ; and for the subsequent 
hue and cry after him the gentlemen of the hunt 
could not help their pack, nor could the pack 
help themselves. 

" Of course it was all a mistake," she admitted 
in perfect good humour. " Still I hope that it 
won't occur again. And as your hounds are so in- 
different as to what game they follow, who knows 
but that they may give chase to me, should they 
catch sight of me in the fields." 

Tom Holyoake assured her that such an event 
was impossible — ^the whole field would as one man 
rush forward to prevent it. He began now to in- 



214 JACK scudamobe'b daughter. 

fa»e a little gallantry into Iiih assertions, though 
there was still a certain nervousness in his manner 
that betrayed his uneasiness* 

" I am conmiissioned to inform you, ma'am,'* 
he continued, " of the general desire of the hunt 
tlmt you should honour them vrith your charming 
presence at the next meet at Durdham Thicket, on 
Monday, at twelve. Should you not be provided 
with a suitable horse, the Squire will be mast 
happy to mount you ; and Lord Bossborough said 
that he would be delighted to drive you to the 
meet in liis phaeton." 

The strong-minded woman seemed by no means 
insensible to the compliment that had been con- 
veyed to her, and at once accepted the invitation, 
though she declined both the Squire's and Lord 
Bossborough's proposals. The ambassador then 
considered that he had accomplished his mission ; 
and the impatient pawings of the gravel and in- 
creasing restlessness of his hmiter suggested the 
vicinity of some concealed danger. He therefore 
began to think it high time to make his adieux. 



AK UNPBOTECTBD FEMALE. 215 

Miss Brabazon, however, thoroughly aware of 
his apprehensions, contrived to detain him, 

^^ If you wait a Uttle longer, Mr. Holyoake,'* 
she presently observed, quite demurely, ^' you will 
see my pet. ^Cruncher' we call him, from the 
rapid manner in which he disposes of the bones of 
his victims. He is just about to be led out for his 
constitutional." 

" Cruncher !" muttered the fox-hunter, scarce- 
ly above liis breath, his port-wine complexion pa- 
ling its ineffectual fires. "Thank you, ma'am; 
I have a particular engagement. Much pressed 
for time at present. I wish you good morning, 
ma'am." 

Tom again took off his hat and bowed, and the 
next minute was galloping out of the gate. He 
did not hear the laugh with which Miss Brabazon 
returned to the perusal of her newspaper. She 
was pleased as well as amused. 

On the appointed day and at the appointed 
hour, that strong-minded lady made her appear- 
ance at Durdham Thicket, not without decided 



216 JACK scudamore's datjghtbr. 

gratification, but a little to the disappointment of 
the large cavalcade that the rumonr of her ex- 
pected presence had assembled. The fact was, 
very singular stories of her siyle of riding during 
part of her South American explorations had got 
abroad, and many of her neighbours had antici- 
pated a peculiar exhibition of equestrianism. 

Miss Brabazon cantered into the circle in a 
habit, with hat and veil, upon a well-bred lady's 
horse, and sitting on a side-saddle, instead of 
rushing into it on a wild mustang, in the tho- 
rough Amazonian fashion they had looked for; 
and she received the cordial greetings of the 
master of the homids with perfect self-posses- 
sion. She conversed in a lively but unaffected 
manner with Squire Scudamore, and with cer- 
tain of his friends to whom she was introduced. 
She was quite at her ease; but there was no 
evidence of the intense *^ fastness" the specta- 
tors had been led to expect, except in her style 
of riding, which excited the admiration of the 
whole field. 



AN UNPBOTSOTED FBMALB. 217 

At the close of the day's sporty Miss Brabazon^ 
with the brush in her liat^ returned home, highly 
gratified with her amusement Bhe had reason to 
be still more jJoased with the favourable impres- 
sion she had created. She had made the acquaint- 
ance of more than one lady-equostrian ; and al- 
though there was a certain degree of reserve in 
their manner, it was no more than a stranger in 
her oxce2)tional circumstances ought to expect. 

There could be no doubt that from this time 
the general opinion roK2)ecting her became modified. 
It is quite true that none of the county matrons 
left their cards at Brabazon Lodge, but this may 
have arisen more from well-grounded apprehen- 
sions of its dreadful establishment and terrific me- 
nagerie, than from any social objections. A mes- 
sage was sent her from tlie considerate Duchess 
that induced her to relax considerably in her 
defiance of custom, and though she seemed to 
laugh at the expostulations of the Vicar, they were 
seldom entirely witliout effect 

She attended otlicr meets, and every time gained 



21ft JACK scudamose's daughteb. 

groancl in the good opinion of the field ; bnt she 
never would aljow any of the gentlemen of the 
hunt to be her escort home, and resolutely de- 
clined their visits. Tom Holyoake took credit to 
himself for having done a daring thing, in accom- 
plishing his mission ; and a few of the more adven- 
turom of his associates were qnite willing to mn 
the same risk; nevertheless, they reoei^'ed the 
check with which their advances were met, with 
wonderM equanimity. They were satisfied that 
they could not tolerate a household of savages, 
and the very name of "Cruncher" sufEced to 
extinguish all ideas of gallantry. 

Lucretia Brabazon therefore was still left, when 
at home, to the enjoyment of her own society, and 
notwithstanding that she was imquestionably a very 
strong-minded woman, with this she became satia- 
ted. Her chief employment was to sit at the win- 
dow and watch the rabbits and birds that came on 
the lawn around the broken sun-dial, and ran in 
and out of the shrubbery. Sometimes a snake 
would come gliding through the herbage; occa- 



AN UNPBOTECTED FEMALE. 219 

sioually a green lizarcl would dart across the sun- 
ahiue ; a shrew-mouse would now and then show 
its pointed snout among the leaves, and once or 
twice she discovered a blood-thirsty stoat, cau- 
tiously stalking its timid prey. 

One day whilst thus occupied with a formid- 
able volume of German metaphysics on her lap, 
she was agreeably surprised by the sudden ap- 
pearance of an elegant low carriage, drawn by 
two beautiftd white ponies. Two very lovely girls 
were in the front seat, the elder driving ; and a 
small groom or tiger, in a well-known livery, 
witli folded arms, sat behind. 

Directly Miss Brabazon caught sight of the fair 
driver, down tumbled Hegel on the floor, and up 
sprang the solitary student with an exclamation 
of genuine delight. She rushed to the street- 
door, just in time to see tlie two girls leap 
lightly to the gromid, and the boy-groom catch 
the reins,' jump into tlie seat they had vacated, 
and trot the ponies along the carriage-drive to 
the other gate. 



220 JACK bcudamobe's daughteb. 

^^ And so you hove absolutely had ibe coonige 
to dare the dangers of my denT' she cried^ 
addrewing her first lady.T«itor«, with a look in 
which there was as much admiratioii as pleasure. 

^^ My cousin/' said the elder, introducing her 
companion with the least possible ceremony. ^^ I 
promised Greraldine the gratification of becoming 
known to you ; we have been brought up together, 
and I wish very much that all my Mends should 
be hers." 

Miss Brabazon regarded the fair £ace that met 
her gaze with genuine interest Its ingenuous 
expression, mingled with the girlish curiosity and 
dread which the strange objects in the hall excited, 
formed a study for a painter. She expressed her 
acknowledgments warmly, then led her visitors 
to each of the objects of natural history most 
worthy of notice, and described how it had been 
obtained. As every narrative was necessarily an 
adventure in which she had figured as the heroine, 
the astonishment the appearance of the stuffed 
specimen created was increased by the knowledge 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 221 

of the extreme personal risk undergone by the 
narrator, while agisting in ite destruction. 

The elder of the two, thongh exhibiting less 
surprise, was equally impressed with the peril of 
the encounter. 

"My dear Miss Brabazon," she observed, 
^* though a fox-himter*s daughter, and not quite 
unused to danger, I don't think I could have ven- 
tured to join you in such exploits. As for Gteral- 
dine, what would you say, dear, to attacking that 
grisly bear ?" she asked. 

" Oh, Fanny !" was the reply, with a start and 
look of aflright. " I don't think I could face that 
terrible beast, unless — ^" 

" Unless what, my dear ?" inquired her new 
fnend, kindly. 

*^ Unless some one I loved were in danger." 

Fanny Scudamore looked as if she understood 
the state of the case completely, and said nothing. 
Miss Brabazon regarded the youthful speaker more 
intently. 

" A sufficient cause for fearlessness, even in the 



222 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

most timid nature," she replied* ** I suppose that 
was my reason for appearing so masculine," she 
added laughingly. " Some one I loved was in dan* 
ger." 

The quick glance of the two girls was full of 
feminine interest. " I mean myself," was added. 

They joined heartily in her mirth. 

" In all my hazardous adventures," she con- 
tinued in the same lively manner, " however para- 
doxical it may seem, I really had a paramount re- 
gard for number one ; and I suppose this sufficed 
to keep me from coming to grief." 

She now led the way into the parlour — ^the same 
room in which she had received the Vicar of Dela- 
mere Parva — and her visitors were soon seated and 
gossiping with her, apparently as much at tlieir 
ease, as if they had never heard of her barbarous 
attendants, and had forgotten the existence of the 
terrible ^^ Crusher." 

To say the truth, though, like the hunting- 
field at Durdham Thicket, the young ladies were a 
little disappointed. Miss Brabazon had thrown 



AN UNPROTECTBD FEMALE. 223 

aside the Panama hat, and though her hair was still 
unfemininely short, it had been carefully brushed, 
parted in the centre, and smoothed over the brows. 
The most objectionable portion of her costume, too, 
had totally disappeared. In short, though not so 
elegantly attired as her visitors, whose toilettes 
were, as might have been expected from their age 
and social position, studiously fashionable, she was 
unexceptionably clad. 

The elder telegraphed a look to her cousin, 
when she thought herself unobserved, to which 
the latter replied in the same manner ; but neitlier 
telegram was lost upon their observant hostess. 

" Your visit has been somewhat unfortunately 
timed, my dears," observed Miss Brabazon. " I 
cannot show you my pet, who, notwithstanding his 
terrible reputation, is perfectly harmless. He was 
caught when a cub, and has been my playfellow 
ever since ; but as I learnt that the knowledge 
of my having a dangerous wild beast, as my in- 
offensive puma was represented, deterred persons 
from calling on me I very much wished to see, with 



224 JACK scudakobe's daughter. 

great reluctance I s^it lum to the ponoprietor of a 
traTeDing menagerie, who happened to be at a 
neighbonring fiur. Since then all m j people hare 
become so dissatisfied, that I have found it ne- 
cessaiy to gire them jfonds to paj their passage 
home." 

^^ Goodness gradons, Miss Brabazon/^ cried 
the elder of the consins, leaping firom her seat, 
^^ those wretches cannot have left jon in the house, 
without a creature to care for you I" 
" I am quite alone !" was the reply, 
*^ Come along, Gteraldine," said Fanny. '^ Papa 
will set this shamefid business all right, Fm 



sure." 



It was in vain that the deserted lady tried to 
detain her impetaous friend by assurances of her 
perfect indifference to her position, and of her ability 
to defend as well as to wait on herself. Both girls 
had all their feminine sympathies awakened, and 
rivalled each other in their eagerness to procure Miss 
Brabazon immediate assistance. They promised 
to come to her every day, when they found that 



AN UNPROTECTED FEMALE. 225 

die Bteadily declined accompanying thorn to Dola- 
more Court 

Tlie idea of a lady loft alone in her liouso by 
her domestics seemed very terrible in their eyes. 
Had they known what a good riddance it was to 
the whole neighbourhood, they would more easily 
have reconciled themselves to their friend's fate. 

As they appeared at the door, the two i)onios 
eamo trotting down the drive. Then ensued hand- 
shaking and kissing with great fervour. At last 
the young ladies regained their seats, but evidently 
in a flutter of excitement. 

" If cousin Potter were in England," said 
Miss Brabazon, ^^ I could now make some use of 
him ; but you see he is in India with his regiment. 
I have just had a letter from him, in which he 
gives an account of the great battle that had been 
fought with the Ameers of Scinde the day before 
the departure of the mail." 

Fanny Scudamore, with the reins in her 

hand, was about starting the ponies, when she 

checked them. Gteraldine turned suddenly pale. 
VOL. I. Q 



226 JACK SCUDAJfOBS's DAUGHTER. 

^^ A batde did yon say ?*' fidtered the fonner. 
** Did he mention any of his brother oflBcers?" 

^^ Oh, several. In particnlar, a Captain Cal- 
verley, who he says greatly distingnished himsel£" 

Geraldine's face flushed. 

" He did not get hnrt, I hope," the considerate 
kinswoman again fidtered ont 

^^He is not among the killed or wounded. 
But one young officer of the same regiment, he 
says, was di^adfiiDy hmi. He describes him as 
quite a boy, though he proved himself a most 
gallant soldier. He fell when charging a battery." 

" Good-by, Miss Brabazon," exclaimed Fanny 
in a husky voice, as the ponies went off at a trot. 

Geraldine's handkerchief covered her face. 

'^ Poor dear Rtz I" murmured her cousin. 

Both girls cried all the way to Delamere Court 
Not a word more was spoken during the drive. 
The idea of their playfellow crushed and mangled, 
choked their utterance. 

The visit, though attended with such a painfiil 
result to them, exercised [a very pleasant influence 



AN UNPKOTECTED FEMALE. 227 

on the position of their new friend Honest Jack 
Scudamore was highly indignant when he heard 
from his daughter how his neighbour had been 
treated, and at once despatched trustworthy mem- 
bers of his own extensive establishment to endea- 
vour, as he said, to make the poor lady com- 
fortable. 

When the news spread, offers of assistance 
came from many quarters ; indeed the next day 
Brabazon Lodge wfw besieged by morning callers 
of both sexes, not merely to leave cards, but to 
express the most neighbourly feelings. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

CHTSWICK REVISITED. 

About twelve months have elapsed since the eon- 
elusion of the last chapter. The conquest and 
annexation of Scinde had been completed, and 
some of the English regiments which had assisted 
in that glorious campaign had returned home. 

It was in the warm twilight of a bright July 
day that a wherry, occupied by one rower, was 
proceeding along the Tliames by the Middlesex 
bank, with vigorous pulls denoting a powerful pair 
of arms, but leisurely, as if the occupant was in 
no hurry to reach his destination. His moustache 
proclaimed him a military man, — ^that appendage 
then being rarely adopted by civilians, — ^but the 
pea-jacket, light waistcoat, and straw-hat on the 
seat behind him, the coloured shirt and white 



CHISWICK REVISITED. 229 

trousers he wore, were unquestionable evidences 
of the amateur oarsman. 

He was a handsome young man, with a frank 
soldier-like bearing, his complexion somewhat em- 
browned apparently by recent residence in a warm 
climate. It was clear, however, from the manner 
in which he handled his oars, that he was no tyro 
at this exercise. 

As he glided past Chiswick, he stopped rowing 
opposite one of the prettiest villas, and contem- 
plated it for some time with considerable interest. 
The green-verandahed cottage and richly-flowered 
lawn showed no sign of life, and with an expression 
of disappointment he was about to give a fresh 
impulse to the wherry, when his attention was 
attracted by a low musical laugh. 

Turning his head quickly, he observed a light 
pleasure-boat approaching, rowed by two very 
elegant girls. Behind them sat a youth, with the 
rudder-lines in his left hand, the sleeve of his 
right arm being empty and fastened to his breast, 
and the deUcacy visible in his face betraying tlie 



230 JACK bcubahore's daughter. 

trnmistakable impress of a protracted struggle for 
Ufe. 

He looked earnestly at the figure in the other 
boat. 

" By Jove, it's Calverley 1" he cried with boy- 
ish heartiness and exultation. ^ ' Tm deuced glad to 
see you again, old fellow ! Of course you've come 
to beat-up our quarters. No one could be more 
welcome. You needn't stare so at the girls; 
they're your old acquaintances, cousin Fanny and 
my sister GeraJdine." 

There was much cordial handshaking as the 
boats came alongside, and an interchange of ex- 
pressions of warm gratification at the unexpected 
meeting. The girls appeared startled; but the 
surprise of Captain Calverley at the change that 
had taken place in th^ appearance was still more 
evident He gazed from one to the other admir- 
ingly, trying in vain to identify them with " the 
nice little things" of a few years before. 

" You see, old fellow," observed Lord B^- 
maurice apologetically, "the girls have been in 



CHISWIGK BSVISITED. 231 

the habit of rowing me about in a niceish sort of 
a lake at my uncle Scudamore's ; and they per- 
suaded me to-night, as there was scarcely amy one 
on the river, to go for an hour with them, as they 
know I like it" 

Captain Calverley expressed his approval, in- 
deed launched out in enthusiastic terms on the 
healthiness of the recreation. In his own private 
opinion he thought his young comrade amazingly 
fortunate in being able to secure such an attractive 
pair of rowers; but refirained from saying any 
thing likely to suggest the helplessness which had 
pressed them into his service. 

Fanny Scudamore's vivacity he thought very 
charming; Greraldine's greater reserve, however, 
exercised an influence upon him scarcely less 
powerfiiL There was something too in her girl- 
ish loveUness so expressive — a combination of 
health, innocence, and grace — that he could not 
help regarding her with almost as much interest 
as admiration. 

As the boats approached the bank, he shipped 



232 JACK SCUDAMOBX'S DAUGHTER. 

his oars and hurried on the garments he had put 
aside. There was a boat-honse in a little creek by 
the landing-steps; he remembered it welL He 
remembered too the place he had just passed 
over^ where he had plunged after the sinking 
child, and could scarcely realise the idea that the 
corpse-like Uttle face he had then snatched from 
the grave had changed into the blooming beauty 
before him. She also remembered the incident ; 
and the recollection gave additional tenderness to 
the expression of her features. 

" That's right, Captain ; moor her in the old 
place," cried the disabled Comet. "Of course you 
are coming with us, you know. I want to hear 
what's become of all those fellows I knew in India. 
Precious jolly we were too; especially at mess." 

Captain Calverley fastened the boat and leapt 
ashore. He was immediately followed by his 
young comrade. He turned to oflfer assistance 
to the ladies ; but as the one stepped lightly after 
her brother, the other dexterously secured the 
rope to the staple. He offered his hand ; she just 



CHISWICK BEVISITED. 233 

touched it, as she laughingly sprang to the side of 
her cousin. He remarked the sense of happiness 
that flashed out of those brilliant eyes, and lit up 
that Hebe-lil^ aspect, though quite unaware of 
the cause. 

They now walked together up the gravel-path, 
— decidedly a joyous party. At least the questions 
and exclamations of Lord Fitzmaurice, the lively 
observations of Fanny Scudamore, and the replies 
of the Captain, were delivered in a tone the joy- 
ousness of which could not' be doubted. 

But the heart of Geraldine seemed too foil to 
take part in such demonstrations. Her thoughts 
and feelings were in a tumult of pleasurable ex- 
citement. She was striving to recover her self- 
possession, and her cousin was loyally doing all 
she could to prevent her embarrassment from at- 
tracting notice. 

The girls gave their hats and mantles to the 
little parlour-maid as they entered the house ; 
the gentlemen having left their hats in the haU, 
they proceeded to the drawing-room. The visitor 



234 JACK scddamobb's daughteb. 



TewBSj reoogsmed, the peculiar fiiniitiire. The 
partraifc of the depauied Lord-Chamberlain did 
not appear to have been in the least distorbed: 
there too, in her aocostomed place, sat his rdict^ 
her costame unaltered ; but the £ur fiice had be- 
come more wrinkled, the kind bine eyes more 
dim; while ihe »li«lriTig of the taU head-dress be- 
trajed increased infirmiiy. 

He crossed the room towards her, snrronnded 
bjr his yonng friends. 

^^ Captain Cahrerlej has called to see yon, 
grandmamma," cried Fanny Scndamore, ad- 
vancing close to the old lady. 

Her visitor made the profound old-&shioned 
bow that had formerly been so snccessM ; but the 
dowager did not rise. She looked at him through 
her spectacles as if she did not see him. 

"Of course, it's very pleasant on the water 
such a day as this," she replied. "At least, it 
always was so in fine weather, especially when I 
was in waiting. My dear lord used to say ihat 
a smnmer aftiCTnoon on the Thami 



CHISWICK BEVISITED. 23$ 

Here the speaker paused a moment^ then 
continued^ 

"And the sweet Queen graciously acknow- 
ledged that my sarsnet saque was — ^well, well, we 
shall never see such a delightM time as that was 
at court And his most gracious majesty always 
said that my Pompadour robe — ^" * 

There was another pause, apparently also from 
defect of memory, 

" This is my friend Captain Calverley," sung 
out Lord Fitzmaurice. 

"Oh, a friend of Captain Calverleyl" the 
wrinkled features lighting up with animation. 
"Any friend of Captain Calverley is welcome — 
very welcome indeed. He was exceedingly well 
behaved, — what gentlemen of the court used to 
be. I assure you my dear lord was very par- 
ticular who were admitted to their majesties ; and 
when the sweet Queen held a drawing-room, I 
was of course — ^" 

The Countess broke off again, and looked 
about her. 



236 JACK SCUDAMOBB's DAC6HTEB. 

Miss Scudamore now tried to make her mider- 
stand who was her Tiaitor. 

^^ YeSy my dear, oertainlj ; nodung moie na- 
tural," was tlie reply. ^^ Indeed, I shoold be very 
glad to see Captain Calveriey. I admired him ex- 
tremely. Didn't the sweet Queen say that he was 
very like the Lord-C!hamberlain? Or was it tihe 
charming Princess Boyal, when we were walking 
on the slopes that day ? let me see — ^*' 

The pause was repeated. 

The young officer could not help feeling pained 
at beholding the effects of time in his old friend, 
and was getting anxious for an excuse to put an 
end to the scene; but the three young people 
commenced a simultaneous attack on their rela- 
tive, and at last made her conscious of his identity. 

The change wa« very striking. At first she 
stared at him through her glasses, when he took 
her extended hand, as if she found considerable 
difficulty in reconciling his present unpretending 
costume and appearance with the boirowed splen- 
dour of liis introduction ; but every thing having 



CHISWICK BEVISITED. 237 

at last been explained, the flutter of her spirits 

manifested her extreme satis&ction, and he was 
honoured with a seat pkeed close to her own, for 

the convenience of conversation. 

Not that he was called upon for more exertion 
in that direction than on the previous interview ; 
for, excepting a brief assent from himself, and an 
occasional attempt from one or other of her grand- 
children to assist her memory, she had the talking 
all to herself. 

In truth, she was wonderfully loquacious, — 
now and then somewhat incoherent, in con- 
sequence either of abrupt transitions of events, or 
confusion of persons about whom she thought 
proper to converse. Her visitor found it difficult 
sometimes to follow her disjointed recollections of 
favourite dresses, and important ceremonials, of 
particular members of the royal family, and what 
they had said to her under various remarkable 
circumstances ; of distinguished personages about 
the court, and the peculiar homage they invari- 
ably paid her ; and, more than all, of that long- 



238 JACK BCCTDAMOBX'S DAUGHTER. 

departed officer of the royal houfiehold, whose de- 
Totion to her and to his royal nwater formed fl.e 
alpha and omega of her stately reminiscences. 

While this was going on, Arthur conld not help 
admiring the group before him : the picturesque 
relict of the Lord -Chamberlain, in her person 
rigidly maintaining the decorations that had won 
her honour and digniiy in a former g^ieraticm, 
having on each side, affectionately hanging over 
her, her beautiful grand-daughters, their several 
toilettes contrasting as forcibly with that of their 
aged kinswoman as did their fresh young faces 
with her shrunken colourless visage. 

Lord Fitzmaurice had drawn a chair to tibe 
other side, and seemed to listen with equal respect 
and affection to her singular revelations. They 
would have been deemed trifling by most perscHis ; 
by many they might have been considered unintel- 
ligible; but it was evident that they had a value and 
a meaning for the fond hearts that were clustered 
around her chair. 

^^Dear grandmamma, I don't think I ever 



CHISWICK SEYJfilTED. 239 

saw you in such good spirits," cried Fanny Scuda* 
more. 

" Captain Calverley's visit has done you a 
great deal of good, dear grandmamma," observed 
her cousin in the same high key. 

^^ We must have him constantly amongst us, if 
his presence benefits you as much as this," added 
the young Viscount 

"Eh, what?" exclaimed the dowager, turning 
quickly firom one to the other. " Oh, yes. Captain 
Calverley is in very good spirits. The gentlemen 
of the old court were remarkable for good spirits. 
The dear good king was never dull, and was 
always ready to encourage any proper amusement. 
And my dear lord too had excellent spirits. The 
household were particularly merry at Christmas- 
time, and the sweet Queen helped us to play at for- 
feits and hunt-the-slipper, and other harmless re- 
creations. I remember so well," she continued 
vivaciously, " we were playing at blindman's-buff 
in the throne-room at St. James's, and I had just 
been caught by my dear lord, who placed the 



240 JACK 8CUDAM0BE'S DAUGHTER. 

handkerchief very careftilly over my eyes, so as 
not to disarrange my head-dress. After I had 
had a good deal of rushing ahout, I caught some- 
body, 'and it was a gentleman. All cried out for 
me to name my prisoner, and of course I couldn't 
be certain. I thought it was my dear lord, as I 
knew he would prefer my catching him; and I 
made some jocular remarks about my always 
being sure to find what belonged to me, when 
through a fold in the silken bandage I contrived 
to take a peep at his face, and, lo and behold! 
who should it be but the dear good King." 

All her audience laughed very merrily. 

" I felt mightily conftised, though, my dears, 
when I was obliged to name his most gracious 
majesty, and, the handkerchief being taken off, 
saw how amused every body was, and the sweet 
Queen most of all ; but the dear good King put me 
at my ease in a moment, and he said — " 

There was a sudden stop. 

" His majesiy paid you a compliment, dear 
grandmamma," cried Fanny Scudamore. 



CHIBWIOK REVISITED. 241 

" The King said ftometliing to you, dear grand- 
mamma, very gallant, of course/' shouted Geral- 
dine at the other ear. 

" It wasn't fair to have pooped, though, grand- 
mamma," cried her brother; "and perhaps his 
majesty said so." 

" Eh, what? Well, I cannot remember what 
it was ; but the last day of my waiting, my dear 
lord said to me — but tliis was in the summer-time, 
in August, aft(»r the last of the royal birthdays ; 
for there were four birthdays of the royal family 
in that one month, which the sweet Queen gra- 
ciously ac^knowlodged to nie was very remarkable, 
— and wo went to Weymouth, as my dear lord 
had announced ; and the darling Princess Amelia, 
who was the youngest, and was really wonder- 
fully amiable to all iho household, i)articularly to 
mo, did me the honour tr) assure me, when I 
was eating i)rawns ono morning at my breakfast, 
thai>— " 

" Tliat her royal highness was very fond of 
prawns; was that it, grandmamma?" demanded 

VOL. I. R 



242 JACK fiCUDAMOSE's BAUGHTEB. 

the elder of her gnmd-daiighters, with a&di(»iate 
readiness, as soon as the dear voice stopped. 

^^ Perhaps the princess had just come from her 
bath," kindlj suggested the other in the same 
elevated voice. 

" Didn't the Princess AmeUa very much enjoy 
being at the seaside?" shouted the Viscount. 

"Eh, what? To be sure, my dears. Every 
thing was arranged by the Lord-Chamberlain and 
the dear good King, and there was nothing my 
dear lord was so particular about as dress. The 
sweet Queen too was very particular about dress. 
The darling Princesses were all clothed handsomely, 
but neatly. Their royal highnesses' hoops were 
confined to a certain circumference, and the red 
heels of their shoes never permitted to exceed a 
certain height. There was a stated allowance 
for feathers and ribbons, for patches and pow- 
der, which the royal hairdresser and the royal 
wardrobe-women were obliged to bear in mind. 
It was really very amusing once," she continued, 
beginning to laugh as she took up her snuiOf- 



OfllBWIOK BBYISITED. 243 

box. "It was the dear good King's birthday, 
and all the royal &inily had new clothes, of course, 
and were sure to appear as elegant and grand as 
their royal highnesses' dressers could make them. 
And, would you believe it, my dears, the darling 
Princess Sophia came into the circle with her 
back-hair in an old puff-bag, and the white tiffany 
mixed with her royal highness's slab curls quite 
soiled. The sweet Queen observed it— for her most 
.gracious majesty always kept a sharp eye upon 
their royal highnesses — ^yet would not take any 
direct notice before the company; but the dear 
good King, as soon a« he detected the impropriety, 
declared in his most gracious majesty's usual gay, 
cheerful, affectionate, sharp, abrupt manner, * Eh 1 

what's this Sophy ' '* 

The bon-^mot was arrested as well as the speech, 
and the venerable face again expressed the embar- 
rassment that accompanied these failures of me- 
mory. Her grand-children once more tried to 
prompt her, but having no clue to the royal joke, 
the amusing portion of the anecdote was irretriev- 



244 JACK scudahore's daughteb. 

ably lost Soon afterwards the Conntess retired 
for the night ; but not without addressing a cordial 
invitation to her visitor to come and see her often. 
The young ladies retired with her, but were 
not absent long. They consigned her to her cus- 
tomary female attendant when they had led her 
to her chamber, and after many caresses ran io 
their own room, made certain alterations in their 
toilettes, with abundance of comments too confi- 
dential to be repeated, and then retm'ned to the 
drawing-room. 

What a memorable evening that was in the 
after recollection of every one of that group ! 
How particularly delighted seemed the handsome 
cavalry-officer to find himself again in those plea- 
sant quai4ers! How wonderfully "jolly," to use 
Iiis own phrase, appeared his maimed comrade to 
renew their intimacy ! How exquisite seemed the 
gratification which the younger of the girls expe- 
rienced in realising a hope that had been so long 
and so fondlv entertained; and how earnest was 
tlie elder that her cousin's accomplishments and 



IJ ■ " JHH 



CHISWICK REVISITED. 245 

amiability should receive as much attention as her 
beauty ! It was charming to see the way she in- 
duced her to sing touching German songs, to play 
exquisite airs on the harp, and to converse in 
French and Italian on subjects she thoroughly 
understood. Equally pleasant was the interest 
with which she displayed her cousin's portfolio of 
sketches, to the admiring amateur. 

As for him — ^he seemed as if he could scarcely 
believe the evidence of his senses. But how was 
it possible for him to recognise the silent unde- 
monstrative student of the Storm Hondo, and in- 
dustrious little worker at tlie tambour-frame, in 
the radiant blooming woman, omnipotent in the 
possession of a thousand feminine fascinations! 
The change was marvellous. Nor was he insensi- 
ble of the devotion she displayed to her cousin. 
This unselfish tenderness of nature was rare to 
him. An elder sister would scarcely have dis- 
played such oblivion of her own claims to admira- 
tion. 

He was not aware, when they were first asso* 



246 JACK scudamobb's daughteb. 

« 

dated^ how -pcmertoBy the oomdition of die one 
motherless child had appealed to the heart of the 
other motherless diild, whose few years of seni- 
oritj in her own mind invested her with a' kind 
of matronty superiority, in which the first acqni. 
esced with tme child-like dependence; and diat 
this attadunent had grown with their growth, and 
strengthened with their strength. 

Captain Calverley did not OTerlook Geraldine's 
attractions. He observed that she was fiiirer in 
complexion, and more delicate in features; her 
figm'e was as tall as that of her consin, though not 
so fidL In his eyes, her robe of pure white 
satin, flowered with silver, and trimmed with lace, 
became her wonderfiilly. She wore her silken 
hair in ringlets, with a half-blown rose on the 
right side ; a gold comb supporting an open plait, 
placed gracefiilly at the bacL Fanny Scuda- 
more wore her hair in bands, whidi agreed weQ 
with the classical character of her features ; and a 
small circlet of gold and precious stones bound her 
dark glossy head just above the brow. 



CHISWIOK BEYI8ITBD. 247 

Later in the evening, as he sat opposite his 
yoong comrade, with the ladies on each side of 
him, illumined by a blaze of light that came from 
a gilt candelabra in the centre of the table, when 
he tamed to each, he found it difficult to decide 
which was really the more beautiful of the two. 

The party did not break up till a late hour — 
indeed, the housekeeper having improvised sleep- 
ing accommodation for Captain Calverley, his 
friend put no restraint upon his desire to gossip ; 
and long after the young ladies had left them, 
a lively conversation was maintained, in which 
Anglo-Indian subjects mingled largely with anec- 
dote of " Jones of ours," Lieutenant Potter, 
Miyor BafFerty, Dawkes, and Chilvers, and others. 

To these, with tlieir cheroots and "brandy- 
pawnee," the reader will no doubt easily reconcile 
himself to leave the two officers, while admitted 
into a neat little bedroom on the upper-floor of 
the cottage, where sat the two girls in long night- 
dresses, before a large toilet-glass, brushing their 
back-hair, and talking in a low confidential tone. 



248 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Buch as might be expected from young ladies 
conversing considerably after midnight in a well- 
regulated household on particularly private af- 
fairs. 

From their smiling fiiees, and the frequent 
little laughs that seemed to effervesce out of their 
conversation, there could be no doubt that both 
were very well pleased. They were discussing 
their visitor, apparently in as amiable a humour 
with him as with themselves. In Ihis, one seemed 
to take much the larger share — ^the less communi- 
cativeness of the other, however, was fiir from 
proceeding from want of interest in the subject. 

" Yes ; I think him very much improved, 
dear," observed the elder. " Indeed, however 
nice he was when we first saw him, he is now 
absolutely handsome. He has quite a love of a 
moustache, and his whiskers are divine I" 

" Don't you think, Fanny, that his eyes are — " 

" So you confess to examining a gentleman's 
eyes, do you ?" exclaimed the first, archly. " Oh, 
you sly puss ! And you seemed afraid to look at 



t^mm 



CHISWICK BEVISITED. 249 

him. For all tiiat, I do really believe you have 
studied every feature in his face." 

" Oh, Fanny I" 

"You are quite as well aware as I am, that 
Captain Calverley's eyes are very expressive ; 
that his smile is supremely charming ; that his hair 
waves beautifully ; that, in short, you never saw a 
countenance worthy to be compared with it, and 
don't believe such another is to be found. Eh, 
my pet ?" 

" I don't know, dear." 

"Of course not And you don't know that 
he has a handsome foot and a well-shaped hand ; 
that his figure is &ultless, and his manner sin- 
gularly fascinating ?" 

" If I knew it ever so, I don't see what good 
it would be to me more than to any one else. 
He is sure to be admired wherever he goes." 

Fanny Scudamore laughed. Presently she 
put down the ivory-backed brush she had been 
using, caught her cousin's head between her hands, 
and held it nearer to the glass. 



CHISWICK BSVIBITED. 351 

that he may have for the winning. Mind that 
more than aU." 

" Oh, Fanny dear I How can I ?" 

" Nothing more easy, I assure yon. You 
have only to be what yon always are, good as 
gold, and he cannot fail to appreciate you at your 
full worth." 

Greraldine paused in her work. She was evi- 
dently not quite so confident of her own power 
as her afiectionate cousin. Nevertheless, the idea 
filled her innocent heart with a sense of happiness 
that expressed itself in her look, as she fiirtively 
scanned the lovely image in the mirror. 

" But if he shouldn't care for me !" she said, 
with a solemniiy that showed her apprehension 
of such a contingency. 

'^ Nonsense, child. It is natural that he should 
feel a more than conunon interest in you. It 
would be a pretiy thing, indeed, if a. gentleman, 
after he had saved the life of a young lady, were 
to regard her with indifference. Such an outrage 
never was heard of." 



252 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Presently the toilet-axrangements seemed to 
be settled, and the brushes were returned to their 
proper places on the table. 

" Now then, dear, " said the elder, as she 
turned her chair round, with a more serious ex- 
pression in her handsome face than had yet been 
seen there. 

Geraldine placed her chair against the wall; 
then came and knelt at her cousin's feet, her eyes 
up-lifted to hers, her . hands clasped and held by 
those of her cousin, and began in a sweet, simple, 
yet most reverential manner to repeat the prayers 
the latter had taught her when she came to Rose 
Lawn in her early childhood. Tlie elder child 
had taken this duty upon her when her companion 
and pupil could barely lisp the words ; and ever 
since the custom had been observed with the same 
matronly tenderness by the one, and the same 
childish trustfulness by the other. 

The Lord's Prayer was followed by the Be- 
lief; the Belief by a hymn; then one of the beau- 
tiful Collects was succeeded by a short prayer that 



CHISWICK REVISITED. 253 

was both a general blessing and an earnest thanks- 
giving. Notliing could be more simple, nothing 
more sincere, than the manner in which this long- 
established custom was performed. It was im- 
possible to say which countenance wore the more 
touching expression while it lasted, and a more 
impressive picture of devotion and reliance than 
the two girls then presented could not be ima- 
gined. 

When this was over there was a mutual em- 
brace, witli a seal of perfect affection. Tlien they 
both sought the modest little French bed they 
had shared during so many pleasant innocent 
years, and were soon enjoying the slumbers of the 
pure and good — ^happy in their intense enjoyment 
of tlie present ; happier, a thousand times hapi^ier, 
in their profomid ignorance of the future. 



CHAPTER rX. 

DELAXERE COXJBT. 

Abthub Calterlet ahordj afterwards reoeiyed 
an inyitatioii to Delamere Court, whicli he veiy 
gladly accepted ; for if there was one person among 
the friends of his youth whom he ardently de- 
sired to see again, it was ^^ honest Jack Scada- 
more." 

He had more than one reason for wishing to 
revisit his native connty; for although seyeral 
of his most flonrishing connexions, on his retom 
to England with a high reputation and excellent 
prospects of promotion, had recognised his rela- 
tionship with the usual social &vour3 a£Porded by 
the governing families to their promising cadets, 
there were others in Cheshire by whom he desired 
to be remembered. 



DELAMSBB OOUBT. 255 

The invitation was eminently characteristio ; 
but a passage or two of the Squire's letter must 
suffioe: 

<< My girl tells me that she has recently seen 
much of an old friend of hers and of mine, and 
I don't see why the pleasure she has found in 
meeting him again should not be shared by her 
dad; so I must try and persuade you to leave 
the empty idlers about town, with whom you are 
obliged to associate, and come and join a set of 
the best fellows in the kingdom. Instead of 
lounging listlessly about Bond Street, you shall 
be mounted on one of the best horses in my 
stables, and see the noblest sport that has ever 
been enjoyed since the days of Ninu*od. 

" By George, sir, let me tell you that there 
are no such foxes as can be drawn from my 
coverts ; no such hounds for hunting them as 
you will find in my kennels; no such riders 
across country as my neighbours and associates 
in tho Delamere Hunt; and no such horses for 
speed and bottom as you may behold at every 



256 JACK SCUBAMOBE'S DAU6HTEB. 

meet during the season. My own stad was never 
in greater force. I can offer you the choice of 
Happy-go-luclgr, out of Desdemona, whose sire 
was Tippitiwitchet, a capital fencer; or Little 
Pickle, own brother to Will-o'-the-Wisp, wiD 
carry you well ; or Boadicea, sister to the 
Black Joke, out of Messalina, a mare of immense 
power. There are half a dozen more almost 
as good, that will go at any thing. Come and 
choose for yourself. 

" The Duke is down here ; so is my lord ; so 
is Sir Harry ; in short, nearly all the crack riders 
of the old hunt, with some new fellows who have 
lately joined. A different sort to your dandy 
idlers, all perfume and starch, who hang about 
Long's and White's. You wiU find my friends 
uncommon pleasant company. By Jove, sir, 
there is not one amongst them who wouldn't 
treat you as a brother for my sake. There 
hasn't been much doing here of late. Old Par- 
son Tootles joined the meet last week at War- 
rington Level ; his horse bolted with him at the 



DELAMEBE COUBT. 257 

bursty and left him in the middle of the brook 
at Snagsborough Bottom. Harry Juniper had a 
turn-up with a gipsy at Mapleton races, for cheat- 
ing him at prick the garter, and beat the rascal to 
8 standstill. A main of cocks was fought in a 
bam near the cross-roads at Chilcote ; and Tom 
Stapleton's bird won. The widow Wagshot, who 
kept * The Traveller's Eest' by Warrington Cop 
pice, has married Lord Vernon's gamekeeper; 
and Toby Winkles, who was the best horse-doc- 
tor and cow-leech for thirty miles round, coming 
home drunk one dark night, tumbled into the 
mill-stream, and was drowned. By the way, my 
girl told me the obligation we are all under to you 
for your gallant rescue of my niece a few years 
back. It is not likely to be forgotten by any of 
us — certainly not by yom* old acquaintance Jack 
Scudamore. Confound you, sir I If you don't 
come and give him an opportunity of expressing 
his thanks, he'll start the whole hunt for London, 
and carry you off to Delamere Court before you 

can say Jack Robinson. I will, by George I" 
VOL. I. S 



258 JACK SCUDAMORS'S DAUOHTEB. 

Of coarse there was no resisting this ; so in a 
few days the Captain fonnd himself a guest at 
Delamere Court, with the hearty old Squire more 
hearty than ever ; and the whole household^ fixmi 
the fat housekeeper to the smallest of the stable-- 
boys, rivalling each other in helping to make his 
visit agreeable to him. 

The mansion was a large straggling one, of 
modern construction — ^that is to say, not more 
than a century old — ^intended to be in the Italian 
style, but it was what was so considered at the 
commencement of the reign of Greorge III. What 
part of Italy could have laid claim to its invention, 
it would have been difficult to say. It certainly 
was not Roman, nor Florentine, nor Venetian. 
What architect had originated it, it was quite as 
difficult to decide. From Vitruvius to Palladio, 
and from Palladio to our own time, there was not 
one who would not modestly have disclaimed the 
honour. 

There, however, it was — an imposing edifice, 
certainly, though not quite in the sense the Eng- 



DELAMERE COUBT. 259 

lish Palladio intended ; imposing in its door, in its 
windows, and in its chinmeys ; more imposing in 
its tall pillars and sta{)endous dome. These looked 
well at a distance — ^looked better at a great dis- 
tance ; indeed, as it had been erected on elevated 
ground, the greater the distance the more archi*^ 
tectural enchantment was lent to the view. 

The friends of the proprietor were not critics ; 
and tluroughout the neighbourhood the estimation 
in which the place was held as a building might 
have been traced in its common api>ellation, '^ the 
great house." Every body knew it, rich and 
poor ; and no one ever entered its hospitable wails 
who had felt more disposed to find fault witli its 
architect than with the strong ale, or the excel- 
lent claret for which it had always been famous. 

When Arthur Calverley jumj^ed out of his 
chaise, and received tlie Squire's energetic wel- 
come at the principal entrance, he forgot the 
faults of the structure; indeed, he would liave 
done so had the place been as obnoxious to cen- 
sure as certain edifices lately constructed at South 



260 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

Kensington ; and as he shook his young friend by 
the hand, he seemed to shake oat of liim all &culiy 
in fault-finding. Under the influence of his heaity 
laugh and cheery exclamations, the proportion of 
the rooms the visitor entered seemed as perfect as 
their heavy fiimiture was old-&sliioned. 

He had scarcely time to notice the pictures, 
but soon became aware that the animal painters 
were there in great force. Dogs and horses, dead 
game, and cows in a meadow, hunting and shoot- 
ing scenes, clever works by Stubbs, Moreland, 
Blake, and Davis, were suspended from the walls ; 
and foxes in a glass case, and stuffed game-birds, 
were every where interspersed with racing-cups, 
and the ordinary trophy of the chase. 

But the most observable object in the house 
was his host. He had grown stouter; his hair 
was tliinning on the forehead ; but his eye was as 
bright, his cheek as rosy, and his voice as mellow 
as ever, as he strode on in his green hunting-coat, 
buff waistcoat, leather breeches, and top-boots — 
a costume from which he never varied for any 



BELAMEBE COURT. 261 

thing or any body — ^with his inseparable com- 
panion Jowler, a large fox-hound that had grown 
either too &t or too old for the chase. 

As soon as the young oj£cer had had some re- 
freshment, he was shown every thing in and about 
the house that was most worthy of attention. The 
several racing-cups were brought imder his notice 
with no slight degree of exultation ; but this was 
exliibited only while insisting on the merits of the 
holies that had won them. Paintings of favourite 
dogs and horses were dwelt upon with tlie same 
pride, not unfrequently leading to the relation of 
iinecdotes of their sagacity and com'age, or of in- 
•cidents of the chase, given with a vivacity and 
•emphatic expression of certain words tliat couM 
not fail of impressing them upon the memory. 

Then they went to the stables and the pad- 
docks, and the visitor was introduced to the 
widely-celebrated stud. It well deserved its fame. 
Li racehorses and hunters it contained some of 
the finest in the world. Captain Calverley saw 
at a glance that such an establishment could only 



262 JACK scudahore's daughter. 

be maintained at great expense, for the number 
of trainers, jockeys, and stablemen seemed pro-*- 
digious; but the most admirable order prevailed. 
• What was even more pleasing than the signs 
of good, as well as liberal, management he ob- 
served every where, were the evidences of attadi- 
ment towards the owner and master. 

As soon as his voice was heard, out rushed 
every sen'ant, from the highest in authoriiy to 
tlie meanest helper, displaying the most earnest 
alacrity to be of service, and evidently delighted 
at his presence. He had a kind or encouraging 
word for all; called each familiarly Jack, Tom,, 
Harry, Bob, or Dick, and asked after their wives, 
or mothers as kindly as if they had been his 
nearest blood-relations. When the Captain saw 
every face glowing with pride and affection, as 
he thus addressed them, he ceased to wonder at 
his friend's success in the stable. 

Every horse too seemed to welcome his ap- 
proach, and, when he called them severally by 
name, would turn round to him in the box, or- 



DELAMEBE COURT. 263 

trot towards him in the paddock, and evince their 
recognition by the most cordial equine demonstra- 
tions. In tlie kennel his friends were still more 
lively ; indeed, it was surprising to see the mu- 
tual good understanding that prevailed between 
them and him, while tlie gray old huntsman Tom 
Rogers, who did the honours of the place, stood 
by, bare-headed, heartily enjoying the scene, al- 
though he must have seen it repeated times out 
of number. 

The visitor was formally introduced to all the 
principal officials in this extensive establishment 
-breeder, huuteman, whipper-in, jockey, steward, 
and butler ; and at once cheerfully recognised as 
a friend of tlieir master, to whom it would be their 
greatest gratification to show every possible atten- 
tion. All seemed to possess the same comfortable 
aspect ; indeed, tliis prevailing expression of jol- 
lity gave them a sort of family likeness. 

The most memorable of these pleasant cere- 
monials occmTod when the Captain was ushered 
into the housekeeper's-room, and there presented 



264 JACK scudahore's daughter. 

by his host to an exceedingly well-dressed, well- 
fed, well-mannered dame, who had the domestic 
management of the house. He never forgot the 
dignified curtsey with which she received him, 
the aftable smile that illumed her most cherubic 
<;heeks, nor the mellow laugh that shook her 
ample proportions, when the Squire intimated, 
at the close of his little speech, that his friend 
had come expressly to taste her cherry-boimce. 

In a very little time a brimming glass of that 
far-famed cordial was presented to both. Arthur 
Calverley shared in the honour of drinking the 
old lady's health, and in the enjoyment of her 
exceedingly jovial acknowledgment of the distinc- 
tion conferred upon her. The Squire's satisfaction 
at the scene was intense, as he, with ^ sly sense 
of the humorous in his glance, recommended the 
Captain to cultivate her acquaintance out of re- 
gard for her highly domesticated qualities. Again 
resounded the mellow laugh through the ample 
room — ^the broad shoulders rose and fell in rapid 
jerks, and the expansive face glowed like the 



DELAMEBE COUBT. 265 

rising sun in harvest-time, while she repeated 
her respectful curteey, as she opened the door for 
their departure. 

Arthur passed the rest of the day alone with 
Mr. Scudamore, gaining much pleasant informa- 
tion respecting the new friends he was about to 
make ; for a hunt-breakfast was to come oflP in 
the morning, the meet having been arranged to 
take place in tlie neighbourhood of the house, close 
to a covert where a fox was sure to be found. 

He was roused by Tom Sogers by times, and 
having equipped himself in a new Melton-Mow- 
bray turn-out, which he had procured for the oc- 
casion, soon made his way to a large breakfest- 
room, opening on a closely-mown lawn, which 
lay between the mansion and a noble sweep of 
park, that spread out as far as the eye could 
reach. It was broken by masses of foliage here 
and there, clothed in their richest autumnal tints, 
made by belts of magnificent timber, planta- 
tions, groves, and avenues of oak, chestnut, syca- 
more, and lime. 



266 JACK SCUDAMOBE'S DAU6HTEB. 

Already he could see grooms holding splendid 
hunters, or walking them about, and a line of 
horsemen in red or green coats could be discerned 
cantering towards the house, over ihe turf or along 
the carriage-road. Jack Scudamore was at the 
door, bare-headed, but, save his velvet-cap, in 
his ordinary himting-suit, with his cheery voice 
welcoming every comer; and the interchange of 
jovial hails, joyous recognitions, hilarious shouts, 
and earnest hand-shakings, among the members 
of the Delamere Hunt, gave to the scene an aspect 
of extraordinary animation. 

Presently they came thronging into the break- 
fast-room in the highest spirits, peals of laughter 
drowning the buz of many cheerftd voices all elo- 
quent with good-fellowship ; the ruddy face of the 
host glowing like a sun amongst them, and his 
meUow tones, as rich in welcome as in mirth, 
could be heard provoking the joyous burst that 
kept resounding through the room. 

Captain Calverley was introduced to the lead- 
ing members of the fraternity; and though the 



DSLAMEBS COUBT. 267 

fashion of the ceremony was not exactly what 
tOMai-bred etiquette sanctioned, its heartiness re- 
commended it more strongly than any more formal 
introduction could have done. As honest Jack 
Scudamore's friend, the visitor's claim to be their 
friend was recognised wiihout the least hesitation. 
He was not only at home amongst them : he was 
one of themselves. 

Arthur never forgot that break&st. The gods 
may have existed in Elysium, — I do not like to 
dispute such a classical fact ; but that they ever en- 
joyed themselves half as much as did Jack Scuda- 
more's guests, even Dr. Smith cannot make me 
beUeve. Besides, there is no authority I can rely 
u[)on which asserts that either Hebe* or Qtmy- 
mede brought to table such devilled kidneys, such 
broiled bones, such venison-cutlets, such partridge- 
pie, besides more than a dozen equally-enticing 
hot delicacies that were placed before the mem- 
bers of the Delamere Hunt. As for the huge 
round of beef, the juicy ham, the fiit capons, the 
eollard head, and the score of equally -tempting 



268 JACK SCUDAHORE^S DAU6HTEB. 

cold meats on the sideboard, which the butler 
and steward were carving as if for their lives, 
nothing half so solid was ever seen in Olympus. 

Then for liquors there were tea, coflfee, and 
chocolate, either of which would have beat nectar 
and ambrosia out of tiie field. That tliey were 
at least twice as good as either, was as undeniable 
as tlie fact, that they were dispensed by a cup- 
bearer who was more than twice as big as her 
male and female prototypes; for Mrs. Lavender, 
whose person was invested with the distinguishing 
marks of a prize housekeeper, superintended the 
breakfast-equipage at a side-table, assisted by an 
ample staff of footmen and maids. 

There was another member of the establish- 
ment who seemed equally busy. This was Daw- 
kins. The old fellow stood in a comer filling 
tankards with claret and ale — the greatest demand 
being for the latter; and no such tipple as the 
Squire's malt could have been known to the gods, 
let the classical scholars say what they will. Had 
Jupiter ever had a barrel of it in his cellar. Mars, 



DELAMERE COURT. 269 

Mercury, Vulcan, and all their immortal con/rh*es 
who figure in a certain j)as8age m the Latin gram- 
mar, would have been a much jollier set of fellows 
than they are made to appear there. 

The rattle of cups and small-talk, the clatter 
of knives, forks, and sporting jokes, the stir of 
forty not only feeding but laughing like one, 
came to an end at last The cry now was "to 
horse 1" and with increased hilarious energy the 
whole party thronged out ; some through the win- 
dows on to the lawn, some by the door, to mount 
their hunters or hacks, and join the meet. Some 
lingered for " more last words ;" but they were 
evidently of a totally different character from those 
so liberally produced by the pious Mr. Baxter, for 
they invariably elicited what, north of the Tweed, 
is known as a guffaw, often accompanied by an 
equally vigorous slap on the back ; and then nar- 
rator and hearer made a rush for their caps and 
hunting-whips into the hall. 

The mounting and riding to cover was a no 
less joyous scene. Such shouting and laugliing 



270 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

of the riders ; such prancmg, sidling, and rearing 
of the high-mettled steeds ; all the former in strict 
hunting-costmne as adopted in Cheshire, and 
looking afi foU of manly energy as of good- 
hnmour ; and the grooms in attendance had 
quite enough to do to escape heing ridden down, 
the horses seemed so fresh and the gentlemen 
so heedless. 

Arthur Calverley had selected a fine roan geld- 
ing named Little Pickle, and found him ready 
with Tom Bogers in attendance. How the old 
huntsman had contrived to get his break&st he 
could not then have surmised, for there certainly 
had not been time for satisfying even the most 
moderate appetite ; but he knew subsequently that 
a good pull at the black-jack generally formed his 
morning meaL 

It was evident to the young officer that he had 
been confided to the old fellow's care ; for after a 
hurried examination of girth and bit, and confi- 
dential directions as to the management of Little 
Pickle, he desired the Captain to keep him in 



DELAMEBE COURT. 271 

sight, and follow him as closely as he could. This 
he readay promised. 

He could observe that, notwithstanding tlieir 
apparent preoccupation, the members of the hunt 
were watching his d4but with a good deal of that 
kind of interest hunting-men usually take in the 
first essay in the field of a stranger ; and as liis 
steed thought proper to go through a good many 
violent equine demonstrations as soon as he had 
leapt into the saddle, he found himself obliged to 
display all his knowledge of equitation. The 
result, however, seemed satisfactory to all parties. 
Little Pickle presently cantered off in the required 
direction ; and the more curious of the rider's new 
acquaintances went their way also, apparently as 
well contented. 

At the cover side Arthur foimd his host among 
the hounds, calling several to him by name, and 
encouraging them by commendations that seemed 
thoroughly understood and appreciated. As he saw 
them disappear, in the brushwood, he could not but 
acknowledge that they well deserved their reputation. 

The noisy banter and hilarious shouting among 



272 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

his associates ceased at once, and the same atten- 
tion and decorum they now displayed prevailed 
amongst the farmers and farm-labourers that the 
inspiring spectacle had attracted. All were lis- 
tening for the first evidence of a find, and all 
were tolerably quiet; indeed the least indication 
of noise was checked by a monitory sign fi'om the 
Squire, which eifected its object completely. 

Except with Little Pickle. His rider could 
not get him to stand still. He would bound about, 
and kept showing so decided a desire to begin the 
chase by himself, that the Captain had very great 
difficulty in holding him in. In vain the master 
of hounds held up his finger. Arthur did his 
best to restrain his horse's impatience ; but with- 
out success. At last he carried him right away 
fi'om the assembled horsemen, who were evidently 
enjoying this exhibition of spirit. While he was 
turning him round, Arthur heard the inspiring 
cry of the hounds, and the view-halloo of the 
huntsman, and saw the rush of the field. The 
fox was breaking cover. 



DELAMERE COURT. 273 

Though his steed was in the rear at tlie start, 
from the speed with which he followed he enter- 
tained no fear of being thrown out. He looked 
for Tom Rogers ; but not a vestige of that worthy 
was to be seen. He looked for the Squire ; he too 
was invisible. There was nothing for it but to 
try and get up with them. It was, however, very 
humiliating to find himself the last of a large 
field, in whose good opinion he earnestly desired 
to establish himself; particularly as he could see 
some of them occasionally turning their heads 
round and grinning. 

But fortune favours the bold. He took as 
direct a line as he could, and presently found 
himself in advance of the more prudent riders, 
who preferred practicable gaps or open gates to 
break-neck leaps. Little Pickle evidently cared 
about as much for their example as for their com- 
pany, and followed the track of the most daring. 

He took liis timber admirably, though the 
fences were generally liigh and the banks steep, 
and he was an uncommon good goer. In truth, so 

VOL. I. T 



274 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

rapid was his pace, that the young cavahy-ofBcer 
liad not passed through many fields before he be- 
held the pack in ftdl cry, with the dite of tie 
hunt following gallantly over hedge and ditch, — 
Btill, however, too far oflF for him to recognise 
them personally, particularly as, with the excep- 
tion of those who looked back, he could not see 
their features. 

However, he was satisfied that he was fairly 
establishing a reputation as a rider to hounds, 
and notwithstanding that those in advance prided 
themselves on riding the best horses in the county, 
he was evidently gaining gromid. Presently he was 
able to recognise the Squire, well up, riding by the 
side of his friend the Duke of Porchester, and fol- 
lowed by nearly all the field, making for a bridge 
a little to the lefl of the line the hoimds had taken. 
Some three or four thought proper to continue 
their course, and after them went Little Pickle. 

Arthur could now plainly see them looking 
back and laughing, evidently taking his following 
them as an excellent joke ; nevertheless he held on 



DELAMERE COURT* 275 

his couTBe, every minute lessening the distance 
between them. Presently he became aware that a 
formidable obstacle lay in the way of his further 
progress. What looked at first like a mere rill 
widened as he approached to a broad brook, which 
the bridge spanned a quarter of a mile fturther up; 
and there he could see several of the hunt had 
halted and were watching his proceedings. 

He had entered the meadow through which it 
flowed just in time to observe those who preceded 
him take the leap. Lord Vernon's horse was the 
first ; but he apparently did not hke the look of it, 
for he either checked Iiimself or slipped as he ap- 
proached the margin, and threw his rider over his 
head into the water. Lord Bossborough's horse 
now went at it ; but his leap was too short, and he 
came with a terrible splash into the deepest part of 
the stream. Tlien came Sir Harry Chester. His 
horse's fore-feet touched the bank on the other 
side; but as he could not get a secure footing, 
he tumbled backwards witli his rider among the 
weeds. 



276 JACK SCUDAMORS'S DAUGHTEB. 

AH iihree were struggling in the brook, looking 
very pitiful objecte, when Litde Pickle came with 
a tremendous rush to the brink, made a spring like 
a deer, and carried his rider clear over. As the 
latter rode away, he could not resist the tempta- 
tion to glance back, and repay with compound in- 
terest the grins with which he had been favoured. 

In a few minutes he found himself in advance 
of the field with Dick Wilcox and Will Tupper, be- 
fore him the hounds close packed together, sound- 
ing their inspiriting cry in full chorus, tumbling 
into the next field, a very large one, and sly Rey- 
nard stealing along the hedge at its forther extre- 
mity, making towards a flock of sheep huddled in 
the comer. 

This ruse, however, did not avail him. The 
Southdowns were shy of his company, for they 
fled at his approach, exhibiting the usual signs of 
sheepish terror ; so he contented himself with leap- 
ing a gap in the hedge, and making strong run- 
ning for a wood that lay at the extremity of the 
lane on the other side. But the pace he had gone, 



DELAMEBE COUBT, 277 

or the fleetness of his pursuers^ prevented this, for 
he was ran into in the lane and killed. 

Dick Wilcox had just given the Captain the 
brush when the Duke and the Squire came up. 
Both were cordial in their congratulations; but 
Jack Scudamore^s voice seemed more joyous than 
ever as he hailed his young friend with a look of 
radiant delight as a true fox-hunter, while shaking 
him by the hand — ^a ceremony Arthur had to go 
through with all the hunt as they individually 
made their appearance. 

He had another mount here. Little Pickle 
having done enough for the day, he was taken 
in charge by a groom, arid the Captain presently 
found himself upon Happy-go-lucky, a hunter of 
at least equal reputation. Others of the hunt got 
their second horse here ; and as they found another 
fox in the wood, in less than an hour the pack were 
again in ftdl cry. 

But I need not go into any £urther details of 
that day's sport Let it suffice to say that they 
killed three times ; and that when they turned their 



278 JACK scudamore's daughter, 

course homewards, Arthur Calverley liad become 
quite a popular man with the Delamere Hunt, to 
the intense gratification not only of honest Jack 
Scudamore, but of his equally well-pleased patron 
and tutor, Tom Rogers. 

The members of the hunt reassembled round 
the Squire's hospitable board a little after sunset. 
The dinner was substantial rather than elegant; 
the giver of the feast had no taste for French 
cookery, but prided himself on the real fox-hunt- 
er's fare he set before his friends, such as haunches 
of venison, saddles of mutton, sirloins of beef, poul- 
try and game, puddings and pies ; so that if the 
table did not groan under its load, it was simply 
because of its very solid construction. 

However unfashionable the dinner may have 
appeared, none of the guests seemed inclined to 
find fault with it. Indeed, the jolliiy and good-* 
humour that had prevailed at breakfast were now 
redoubled, talking and laughing going on ap- 
parently very little impeded by the eating and 
drinking. 



DELAMERB COURT. 279 

Arthur Calverley was made to sit at the right 
hand of his jovial host, and the chair at the other 
end of the long table was well-filled by the popular 
lord-lieutenant of the county. It was assuredly 
a holiday with the Duke when he could escape 
firom his ministerial labours in town, and join his 
hunting-friends in Cheshire, and it was enjoyed 
with all the abandon of a schoolboy. Tlie young 
Captain was too far off to hear what liis grace 
said ; but the frequent peals of laughter from his 
immediate neighbours, and the expression of his 
dignified patrician features, ought to have con- 
vinced any one of the pleasure he took in the 
-entertainment 

It was not, however, till after the cloth had 
been removed, that the social spirit of the com- 
pany was thoroughly developed. As tlie claret 
flowed, the gossip, the jest, the anecdote, the nar- 
rative flowed with it. Every one seemed ready to 
•contribute something to the table-talk. It was al- 
most always of a sporting character, rarely had any 
novelty to recommend it, and each talker suffered 



280 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

under the disadvantage of sliaring the attention of 
the company with half-a-^ozen others ; neverthe-' 
less the talk invariably elicited a generous recog- 
nition of its claims on the notice of those to whom 
it had been addressed. 

Here and there arose attempts at what is 
known at such meetings as "chaffing." For in- 
stance, Tom Holyoake's rubicund features were 
made to assume an additional glow during a fire 
of inquiries as to the progress of his intimacy with 
the fair tenant of Brabazon Lodge ; and Sir Harry 
Chester was " roasted" in a similar manner be- 
cause he had been seen suspiciously riding out of 
one of the Lodge-gates. Then followed much ex- 
aggerated gossip about the sayings and doings of 
tliat remarkable lady, which ended with lively re- 
collections of the hunting of poor Sambo, — ^by aU 
accounte " the most stunning run" of the season. 

The conviviality was presently increased by a. 
little singing.. Tlie Squire, at the earnest request 
of his guests, setting the example with a spirited 
performance of a wellrknown hunting-lyric, which^ 



DELAMEBE COURT* 281 

although heard there times out of number^ was re-* 
ceived with as much applause as if it had been 
a novelty to all. Bacchanalian and hunting songs 
followed in tolerably quick succession. Tea-total^ 
ism was not in vogue in these days ; and there- 
fore the invitations in the former to drown aU 
care or pain in the bowl seemed as natural as 
the " Heigho^ tantivy I hark forward, hark for- 
ward, tantivy 1" of the latter. 

Fort followed claret, . and the guests were be- 
coming more eloquent as well. as more musical, 
when Tom Holloway deposited, a huge bowl of 
punch before his master, whisking it round with 
a fox's brush amid a general clapping of hands 
and other lively demonstrations. The glasses were 
soon filled and appropriated, and then toast suc- 
ceeded toast. Some, to the uninitiated, might 
have appeared enigmatical; but there could be 
little question that they contained the elements of 
good-fellowship, as applause and laughter recog- 
nised their claims to general acceptance. 

Wlien three or four glasses of this favourite 



282 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

beverage had been swallowed, several members of 
the hunt began to show a somewhat excitable 
state of mmd and body. Some got on their chairs 
to make speeches ; others stood up to recite " Tom 
Moodj," holding fast by the table with one hand ; 
two vocalists volunteered their services simul- 
taneously, and bawled away in happy ignorance 
of the efforts of the other ; while the Duke, having 
proposed the health of " Honest Jack Scudamore," 
the rest had jumped on their seats, with one 
foot on the table, and, waving their empty glasses 
round their heads, were shouting nine times nine. 

Just as the host was about to rise, a pair of 
delicate white hands were passed over his eyes, a 
soft &ir cheek was laid lovingly against his own, 
and an inexpressibly tender voice murmm*ed into 
his ear: 

" Guess my name !" 

The astonishment of the company at beholding 
the sudden apparition of a young lady in a riding- 
habit was expressed not only in their looks but in 
their silence; for the Duke, as soon as he had 



DELAMERE COURT. 283 

perceived her, had bent forward with a loud 
" Hush I" with his forefinger on his lip. The cheer 
died a nnturd dcatli, so did tlie oratory, and so did 
the singing. 

The Squire seemed more completely taken by 
surprise tlxan any one. He evidently could not 
speak. 

" Guess my name I" repeated the soft whisper, 
which now every one heard distinctly. 

" Fanny, for a thousand I" he at last shouted. 

The loud applause that burst from his guests 
as each carefully strove to gain tlie floor, in a 
perpendicular, not in a horizontal, position, would 
have assured him of the correctness of his guess, 
if a pair of arms had not been thrown lovingly 
round his neck, afler a veil had been raised from 
the hat, and disclosed tlie lovely features of his 
daughter. 

Artliur Calverley was not the least astonished 
of the group round that hospitable table. He had 
left Miss Scudamore at Chiswick only a few days 
before, and had not entertained the most remote 



284 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

idea, when accepting her father's invitation, that 
he should have the pleasure of meeting her in 
Cheshire. 

" Well, my lass," cried the delighted Squire, 
as he clasped her round the waist and drew her 
closer to him, "what, in the name of all that's 
wonderful, brought you here ?" 

" Saladin brought me here, papa !" she replied 
with an arch laugh. 

" What I the Duke's Arab ?" he demanded in 
a tone and with a look of the utmost surprise. 

" Yes, papa. Grandmamma is on a visit to 
the Duchess ; and I so very much wished to see 
you, papa, that I begged permission to ride to 
Delamere Court I looked into the stables, and 
took a fancy to the only new horse I found there ; 
got a side-saddle put upon him ; and attended by 
young Tom Wilcox, rode across coimtry without 
drawing bridle." 

" Saladin has never carried a habit," observed 
the Duke, a litiJe alarm mingling with his admi- 
ration. « And I found liim so difficult to manage. 



DELAMEBE COURT, 285 

that I should not be in a hurry to mount him a 
second time.". 

The members of the hunt looked from one to 
another in pleased surprise. 

^^ And the distance from the^Castle is five-and- 
twenty miles as the crow flies/' added their host. 
"By George, about as stiff a line of country as can 
be found in all England I" 

There was a murmur of applause romid the 
table. Each of the orators looked as if he should 
like to make a speech, only he had not the proper 
words at command. 

" I daresay it was extremely naughty of me," 
she now said deprecatingly. " But you know, 
darling papa, it is so very long since I saw you 
last" 

The excuse was all-powerfid, and, accompa- 
nied by an irresistible smile, was considered so 
satisfactory that the fond father could not offer so 
much as a word of remonstrance. 

" I shall go at once and change my habit," she 
added, as she released herself from her &ther's 



286 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

embrace. "And those gentlemen who may wish 
for tea, will find it ready for them in half an hour 
in the drawing-room." 

As she said this she looked towards Artbnr 
Calverley. More than a dozen chairs were va- 
cated while she was crossing the room, but he was 
first at the door. He opened it for her, and re- 
ceived for his recompense a smile that either of 
his rivals would have readily risked his life to have 
obtained. 

On returning to his seat he found the Duke 
proposing the health of Miss Scudamore in lan- 
guage that made the Squire's face glow with pride. 
His grace was cheered to the echo by the rest of 
the guests, who were evidently the young lady's 
admirers to a man. 

Arthur knew that his fiiend took a pride in 
his hounds ; he knew that he took a pride in his 
horses ; he was equally well aware that he was 
proud of his fine house and fine estate ; but he 
now learnt that hounds, horses, mansion, and lands 
were in his eyes of no account in comparison with 



DELAMKRE COURT. 287 

his daughter. This was evident in the gratification 
he felt while noticing the enthusiasm with which 
every member of the hunt once more balanced 
himself on his chair and the table, and drank 
the toast with the full complement of hunting- 
honours.. 

About half an hour after this, Arthur Calverley 
contrived to find his way to the drawing-room, where 
he discovered Miss Scudamore, in evening dress, 
seated near the tea-equipage, caressing the old 
fox-hound Jowlen She sprung forward to meet 
him, holding out both hands, and smiling and 
blushing with a face eloquent with welcome. He 
did not expect that he should be permitted to 
enjoy her society long, imless tlie Delamere Hunt 
were either too thorough-going fox-hunters to care 
for tea, or should prudently refrain firom exhibiting 
their condition in the drawing-room. 

If the truth must be told, Tom Holyoake, who 
prided himself upon his gallantry in consequence 
of his heroic adventure at Brabazon Lodge, ven- 
tured to move a resolution for an adjournment up- 



288 JACK scudamobe'b bauohteb. 

stairs; but the noisy communiiy were so divided in 
opinion as to the desirability of presenting them- 
selves to their host's charming daughter, that the 
Duke laughingly proposed, and was seconded by 
that now very heavy dragoon Sir Harry Cliester, 
with increased hilarity, that the test of their fit- 
ness for a lady's society should be their correct 
pronunciation of the phrase, "The country is truly 
rural." 

Up jumped Tom Holyoake and Lord Vernon 
to enforce the test; but, from the jovial Squire to 
the stately Lord-lieutenant, there was so general a 
desire manifested to make the country "too-ral- 
loo-ral," that after innumerable peals of laughter 
they decided on remaining where they were. 

Arthur Calverley and Fanny Scudamore there- 
fore were not interrupted. 



CHAPTER X. 

ALL IN THE WRONG. 

There must be something very dangerous in 
Italian and German vocal music, when sung by 
two young people of dijfferent sexes in a large 
drawing-room, entirely by themselves; especially 
when the gentleman is as handsome^ gallant, and 
accomplished as a Captain of a crack cavaky regi- 
ment ought to be ; and the lady, only a very few 
years his jimior, is not only singularly beautiful 
and warm-hearted, but particularly anxious to 
please. 

JBut what could be more natural than tliat 
Arthur Calverley and his host's daughter should 
go to the piano, after they had exhausted every 

topic of interest, as well as "the cup that cheers 
VOL. I. u 



290 JACK SCUDAHORE^S DAU6HTEB. 

but not inebriates." As it was now evident from 
the noine below that the fi)x-hnnters were not 
likely to accept her invitation, Fanny sent the tea 
equipage away, and then was quite willing to 
entertain her one gallant to the utmost of her 
power. 

They therefore had proceeded to the piano to- 
gether, and she readily complied wiih his veiy 
natural request to sing. She possessed a rich 
voice, and sang with taste and expression. The 
music she selected was of a perfectly harmless 
character, admired productions of Bossini and 
Mozart No young lady could be blamed for 
singing them to her other's guest, thus entirely 
thrown upon her hands for amusement More- 
over, was not he the preserver of her darling 
Geraldine— and was she not bound for her dear 
sake to do her utmost to please him ? 

Of course, in her turn, she aaked him to sing. 
And delighted as well as surprised was she to hear 
the melodious tenor that presently filled the room. 
What harm could there be in her fether's guest 



ALL IN THE WRONG. 291 

singing to her delicious inorceau^ from one or 
two popular operas? None in the world. Jt 
would be a pleasure too, when she saw her cousin, 
to dweU on this delight&l gift of her cavalier. 
So Captain Calverley was permitted to sing the 
tender airs of the great maestros of that day, with 
as much sentiment as skill, to the great enjoyment 
of his fair accompanyist. 

Nor could there be any harm in their trying 
a duet together — not the least in the world. To 
be sure La ci darem la mano was rather affection- 
ate, but it was selected because the music was 
easy, not because the words were tender or other- 
wise. Of course no one regards the language in 
an Italian duet. People sing the notes without 
troubling themselves about the meaning of the 
words. 

Nevertheless, Mozart's easy duo was as per- 
fect a vocal success as if it had been sung by the 
lovers in Don Giovanni, instead of by two ordi- 
nary acquaintances in an ordinary drawing-room. 
Tlieir exquisite voices harmonised beautifully : 



292 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

both sang with refinement as well as tenderness, 
and each was intensely charmed by the effect 

Similar productions were attempted ; but with 
no more reference to their difficulty than to their 
language. What can be the harm of calling one 
another ^ my idol' and *niy soul' in singing ! It's 
only Italian. Singers are not in earnest. It's 
nonsense to fancy it can be wrong. 

So to herself reasoned the impulsive and im- 
pressionable Fanny Scudamore, as she continued 
the performance of one musical interpretetion of 
passion after another. Nevertheless, these admi- 
rably sung productions exercised a marked effect 
upon the intimacy of the two young people. At 
first they had ceremoniously addressed each other 
as Miss Scudamore and Captain Calverley, but 
after the first hom: at the piano, they had become 
" Fanny" and " Arthur." Nothing could be more 
natural. 

They seemed to grow tired of duets, and now 
songs were had recourse to. It so happened that 
those selected were lyrics of the most decided ten- 



jB'^iai"!.- 



ALL IN THE WRONG. 293 

demess. The Captain sang " Maid of Athens," 
in a manner that made the heart of his beautiful 
companion thrill with rapture. The handsome 
cavahy officer put all the expression of which his 
fine voice was capable, into the expressive lines of 
Byron. 

While the singer was turning over the leaves 
of the music-book, and entreating for " a particu- 
lar favourite," Fanny was making a strong effort 
to maintain her self-possession. She seemed in 
liigh spirits, talked and laughed with more than 
her customary vivacity, glanced more frequently 
at the handsome face bending over her, — ^lier bril- 
liant eyes apparently growing softer in their glow. 

The Captain was evidently feeling more inter- 
ested either in the music, in his own share of tlie 
performance, or in tliat of liis charming colleague. 
He not only simg, but spoke and looked with 
increased effect There seemed to be a peculiar 
persuasiveness in his entreaties, as well as a won- 
derful power of appeal in his gaze. 

No doubt he conducted liimself as all hand- 



294 JACK scxjdamore's daughter. 

some and accomplished Captains do under pre- 
cisely similar circmnstances, — ^he was only follow- 
ing the policy of the rising generation of Calver- 
leys, — making the most of his opportunities. He 
was as well aware that Jack Scudamore's daughter 
was the best match in the county, as that she 
l^ossessed the most attractive face and person he 
had ever beheld. It was impossible to deny, too, 
that she was uncommonly amiable. How could 
he help bringing his moustache now and then dan- 
gerously near her peach-like cheek ? 

At last he fomid his ' particular favourite,' and 
again came the soft entreaty and the pleading 
glance. Fanny looked at the title-page; it was 
a tender German love-song, of which she herself 
was very fond. It is quite true that she ought to 
have declined ; but what young lady of nineteen, 
when alone with a handsome young officer, pos- 
sessing a love of a moustache, and divine whiskers, 
with eyes peculiarly penetrating, and a voice im- 
pressive in every tone, is as prudent as she ought 
to be ? Perhaps Fanny was too good-natured to 



ALL IK THE WBONG. 295 

refuse now, having complied so often; besides, 
what harm could there be in singing German 
words, any more than Italian ? It was all make- 
beUeve. Of course it did not mean any thing. 

She sang the liebealvedy but somehow or other 
her intonation became less firm at particular pas- 
sages; her voice faltered at the more passionate 
dedarations, and despite of aU her efforts to main- 
tain a discreet indifference, she felt an increasing 
consciousness of the pleasure the sentiment af- 
forded her. The melody had been harmonised, 
and Arthur took the second. They sang together, 

" Du, du liegst mir im Herzen, 
Du, du liegst mir im Simi, 
Du, du machst mir viel Schmerzen, 
Weisst ja, gut ich dir bin." 

They sang all the verses again and again; each 
time the sounds fiUed her heart with a sweeter 
sense of enjoyment ; each time they thrilled her 
soul with a more delicious ecstasy. Both seemed 
to have become oblivious of any thing save the 
exquisite pleasure of the moment, abandoning 



296 JACK scudamore's daughter, 

themselves to the spell which the tender melody 
and tlie loving words exercised over their feel- 
ings. 

They had not noticed that the noisy ehoroses 
below had grown less and less clamorous — ^that 
^^He's a Jolly Good Fellow!" had become ex- 
tremely intermittent, and ^^We won't go home 
till morning" had utterly broken down. The two 
handsome faces had got so near each other that 
the love of a moustache more than once seemed 
about to leap from one pair of eloquent lips to the 
other. 

Indeed the singers were so thoroughly ab- 
sorbed by their own sensations, that they did not 
hear a knocking at the door ; nor were they aware 
that any one had entered the room till the hilari- 
ous voice of the very stout housekeeper startled 
them, apparently very much indeed. 

"Well, to be sure!" cried Mrs. Lavender, 
her portly person exhibiting unmistakable signs of 
pleasure, as she placed a small tray on the table ; 
" how very fond you must be of music to remain 



ALL IN TiBE WBONG. 297 

at it so late I why, the gentlemen down-stairs 
have left ever so long, and the Squire has gone to 
bed." 

Fanny sprung from the music-stool looking a 
little embarrassed, and her partner in the trans- 
gression, as he faced the good-natured intruder, 
did not seem near so much at his ease as when he 
had been charging the enemy. Both perhaps 
would have been less disturbed, had they been 
aware that the very matronly-looking personage 
before them had taken particular pains that no 
one should interrupt their tSte^a-tete. 

" Now, my dear Miss Frances !" she continued 
in a tone half coaxing, half of remonstrance, " you 
really must have some spiced negus and a biscuit 
or two after so much singing ; Captain Calverley, 
too, must be famished. Here are some sand- 
wiches and stout, which is a capital restorative 
for gentlemen, you know. Captain. Set a good 
example, and draw a chair here for my dear 
young lady; she looks quite fiitigued, I declare." 

The gallant captain evinced the greatest alacrity 



298 JACK scttdahobe's dauohteb. 

in obeying the kindly suggestion, ungaUanily wish* 
ing the kind suggester at the bottom of tiie Bed 
Sea ; but " the dear young hidy," was not so in- 
clined. With rather a dreamy look she went up 
to him, placed her hand in his, and wished him 
good night ; then smiling her thanks as she uttered 
the same wish to the considerate attendant, she 
left the room. That good lady's ample silk skirts 
immediately rustled after her, and the handsome 
guest found himsetf left to his refireshment and his 
reflections. 

But, though Captain Calverley was just a little 
put out by the interruption that had taken place 
in his evening's entertainment, he was by no 
means dissatisfied with it, still less so with him- 
self. He was ftilly sensible that, at present at 
least, '^ his lines had been cast in pleasant places," 
and, like a true Calverley, was able thoroughly to 
appreciate his bonne fortune. So he ate and he 
dnmk and he thought in as agreeable a state of 
mind as of appetite, then retired for the night, or 
rather the rest of the morning, and slept the sleep 



ALL IN THE WBONO. 299 

of the soldier sensible of having got into supremely 
excellent quarters. 

The slumbers of Fanny Scudamore were very 
diiferent in character; nevertheless, when she rose, 
it was with certain highly creditable resolutions. 
With these she met Arthur in the breakfast-room, 
in her father's presence, and received his atten- 
tions, not only then, but throughout the day. The 
jovial Squire, fresh as a hirk, notwithstanding his 
copious indulgences overnight urith his hunting 
friends, and evidently as much enjoying the pre- 
sence of his daughter as the society of his guest, 
exerted himself to the utmost to make tlie visit 
pleasant to both. The members of the hunt had 
returned to their several homes, and he could, 
therefore, devote himself exclusively to the enter- 
taimnent of thie young people, which he did in that 
heariy fashion for which he was famed far and wide. 

The handsome cavalry officer, therefore, rode 
about, inspecting improvements on the extensive 
estate, or looking at the stud, the hounds, and 
every thing else in the establishment the master 



300 JACK soudamobe's dauqhter. 

was in the habit of daily superintending, and 
he now enjoyed the pleasure of witnessing the 
devotion with which that large household regarded 
their master's daughter. This, there could be no 
doubt, was observed with intense gratification by 
the proud and happy father, for it was continually 
evident in his glowing features, cheery voice, and 
joyous laugh. 

As for her, the most exacting matron, the 
most rigid chapei^ine, could not have found fault 
witli her conduct The beau sabreur was treated 
with the courtesy due to a guest her father de- 
lighted to honour, but with no fiirther considera- 
tion. She laughed, she talked, she smiled, it is 
true ; but so she would have done had Sir Harry, 
or the Duke, Tom Holyoake, or my Lord Ross- 
borough, cavaliers young or old, married or single, 
rode by her side. She was fulfilling her good re- 
solutions. 

In the evening, the pleasant party retired to the 
drawing-room for tea, where, as she had always 
done when at home, Fanny played and sang her 



ALL IK THE WRONG. 301 

father's favourite airs. Although the gallant officer 
would go to the piano to turn over the leaves, 
he seemed quite satisfied with listening to the old- 
fasliioned ballads and obsolete ditties which were 
now selected. Nay, he seemed charmed with 
tlie liveliness of " Over the hills and far away," 
touched with the pathetic history of " The miller's 
lovely daughter," and quite enjoyed the pleasant 
associations of " Auld Langsyne." 

Moreover, when called uj%n by his host to 
contribute to his entertainment, he not only sang 
a special favourite of his, Walter Scott's " Hunts- 
man's rest," but joined as readily in those very- 
familiar duets, " Life let us cherish," and " Away 
with melancholy." He prudently ignored " The 
Maid of Athens." Neither attempted tender Ita- 
lian arias, or joined in the amorous duos of Mozart 
or Bossini. As for the dangerous liebealiedy it was 
evidently totally forgotten. 

The Squire was very much pleased. He could 
appreciate good sinjging, and the rich voice and 
capital stylg of his young friend were, he w*s 



302 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

well aware, fiir in advance of the post-prandiary 
exhibitions of iiis hunting friends. In short, he 
was so delighted, that when bed -time came he 
was quite reluctant to terminate that very pleasant 
evening. He even acknowledged that he did not 
know which he had liked best of the two singers ; 
a great compUment to one, for there was nothing 
in ihe world that afforded the Squire half the grati- 
fication as listening to his favourite songs sung by 
his daughter. 

Fanny Scudamore was, without doubt, quite 
as well pleased. She frilly appreciated the care 
Arthur had taken to gratify her father's taste, and 
accompanied him, listened to him, or joined with 
him in those unexceptionable performances with 
more real enjoyment than she had experienced in 
the fervid compositions sung during the preceding 
evening. She was also in a much better humour 
with herself, less excitable, less flinried ; and when 
she made her adieux, did not feel an overwhelming 
sense of having participated in an indulgence that 
was both deleterious and surreptitious. 



ALL IN THE WBONG. 303 

The next day there were many guests at Dela- 
mere Court^ and Fanny was much occupied with 
the ladies of the party, one of whom was her 
friend Lucretia Brabazon, to whom particular at- 
tention was due. There was also the Beverend 
Basil Plynlymmon, whose good opinion she was 
equally desirous to secure ; for she had ascertained 
that with the young ladies as well as the matrons 
of tlie neighbourhood he was growing very po- 
pular. 

Therefore she was constantly either witli Miss 
Brabazon, listening to the startling disclosures of 
her inner life, which that very strong-minded 
woman thought proper to confide to her, or re- 
ceiving the no less important confidences of the 
Vicar as to certain changes he intended to intro- 
duce into the services of the Church, in strict 
accordance with the rubric; or as to his views 
of parochial ministration, which were equally novel 
to her. The young lady appeared becomingly 
edified, and promised zealous cooperation in his 
schools and charities. 



304 JACK, scudamore's daughteb. 

Nevertheless the meeting between the reverend 
gentleman and his former pupil interested her a 
great deal more than his ideas of Cliureh Reform 
had done ; and after witnessing Arthur's cordial 
recognition of his old tutor, and surprise in his 
improved appearance, she surrendered herself to 
the extravagances of her friend from Brabazon 
Lodge. 

Lucretia had become quite a county celebrity, 
no riunion of its notables being considered complete 
without her. As soon as it had become known 
that her house had been cleared of its objectionable 
inmates, her female neighbours had flocked to the 
once dreaded gates in such numbers that the pres- 
sure of their skirts might have done some damage 
to the specimens in the museum, had not a certain 
feminine feeling kept one and all at a respectful 
distance. The proprietress, notwithstanding her 
previous emphatic denunciation of her sex, par- 
ticularly of her countrywomen, evinced so touch 
amiability as a hostess, as well as skill as a show- 
woman, that not to have visjited Brabazon Lodge — 



ALL IN THE WRONa 305 

not to be able to retail the marvellous Hayings and 
doings of its remarkable tenant, began to be looked 
npon as disentitling the individual to provincial 
consideration. 

The good housewives not only supplied her 
with excellent servants, but added so much do- 
mestic advice that her mhmge became as creditable 
as it had previously been tlie reVerse ; while the 
fashionables invited her to all their gatherings, and 
seemed never so pleased as when the now " dear 
eccentric creature" ventiu'ed to display more than 
ordinary strangeness of speech, of dress, and of 
demeanour. For though the strong-minded wo- 
man had thought it as well to conform to estab- 
lished feminine usages in many things, she broke 
out occasionally into an independence of public 
opinion that appeared to set public opinion wild 
with excitement and delight* 

Her dress was certainly feminine. Lucretia 
had dispensed with the transatlantic development 
of strong-mindedness which she had adopted on 
her return to England; but her costume was 

VOL. I. X 



306 JACK scudajiobe's dauohteb. 

generallj singtdary sometimes startling. Whmi 
riding, she was always to be recognised by a 
habit of the same colour &s the coat worn by the 
gentlemen of the Delamere Hnnt, her head in a 
Spanish hat with a drooping feather; and thns 
accoutred, she constantly appeared Ki fetes ehunh- 
petres^ as well as hunt-breakfasts. At evening 
parties she generally chose to be classical, and 
astonished her admirers by looking as if she had 
just walked off a Pompeian rase, or a Qreek 
pediment. 

On the present occasion the Squire had invited 
a few of his neighbours to meet his daughter ; and 
as it was a dinner and evening party, eveiy one 
came in Ml toilette. 

Arthur could not at first conceal his astonish- 
ment when introduced by Fanny Scudamore to 
her friend. He had never before come in con- 
tact with so remarkable a character. He ob- 
served her singular garments — ^he scrutinised her 
strange head-dress, politeness only restraining his 
sense of the ludicrous at the wonderM exhibition ; 



ALL IN THE WRONG. 307 

but far more startling to that gallant officer than 
her apparel^ was her speech. 

" Oh, ho, Captain Calverley ; is it ?" she ex- 
claimed, as she looked him full in the face. 
"Cousin Potter has often mentioned you to 
me." 

Arthur bowed, and expressed his obligations. 
His words were accompanied with a smile, for 
Potter's name recalled to his mind certain mess- 
room jokes about the lieutenant and his lady- 
love, of whom the said lieutenant often spoke 
very fervently, which Captain Calverley could 
not have ventured to repeat to his new acquaint- 
ance. 

Miss Brabazon set down the smile to her own 
account, and proceeded to make a further favour- 
able impression by dilating on the breed of Indian 
chargers, in which she displayed a knowledge of 
horse-flesh that absolutely astounded the cavalry 
officer, who had studied the subject more from 
the barrack-yard than from the race-course. They 
had an animated conversation, to which Mr. Scuda- 



308 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

more and his daughter were attentive Usteners, 
though from totally difFering causes. 

The Squire, as a breeder of horses, could not 
help being interested in the subject Fanny, 
though a thorough-bred had long been an object 
of the greatest possible admiration to her, was 
beginning to tiunk that there was a nobler animal 
in the creation, and listened with most interest 
when a favourable example of the species took 
part in the discussion. 

" My dear," said the clever Lucretia confi- 
dentially to her friend, as they left the gentlemen, 
" that's a very handsome man — the limbs of an 
Antinous, and the head of an Apollo. Had he 
lived in the reign of the Emperor Augustus^ the 
Boman beauties would have been mad after him." 
Fanny was quite content tliat those ladies 
should have escaped such a contingency; but the 
commendation of her cavalier made a deep impres- 
sion on her mind. It was fisir from being the 
only flattering opinion she heard pronounced on 
the gallant captain. All her fair friends were 



ALL IN THE WRONG. 309 

more or less entliusiastic in his praise, ivhile her 
male friends, if they said less about his fine figure 
and handsome face, were quite as cordial in their 
estimate of his gallantry. As for her father, hef 
seemed never tired of questioning him respecting 
tlie battles in which his regiment had so greatly 
distinguished itself. 

Though it afforded her intense pleasiu'e to see 
the estimation in which Arthur Calverley was 
held, she was still more glad when her father's 
guests took their departure. Every day she more 
and more appreciated the gratification of bemg 
alone with him, particularly in tlie gardens and 
pleasure-grounds attached to the house, when the 
Squire was engaged elsewhere ; and there she had 
ample 'opportimity of noticing how vastly superior 
he was in mental as well as in personal resources 
to her father's hunting friends. 

She compared him with Tom Holyoake, Sir 
Harry Cliester, and other bachelor members of 
the Hunt who had been most attentive to her, 
but it was Hyperion to a good many satyrs — his 



310 JACK SCUDAHOBB'S DAUGHTEB. 

elegance, intelligence, and refinement gave ^ 
OYerwhelming advantages over the jcXfyy haid- 
drinking fox -hunters, most of whom had long 
passed their youth. 

At last the time approached for his departure, 
and Fanny contrived that no company should be 
invited for the previous day. She passed it in 
riding and walking with him to all their favourite 
resorts ; and the Squire, experiencing a sUght 
attack of gout, remained in his easy-chair. She 
enjoyed much delightful conversation ; in which, 
however, she took less than her usual share. They 
had at first had a great deal to say about dear 
Geraldine and her pleasant home; but latterly, 
her name had ceased to be spoken by either. In- 
deed, Arthur's interest in Bose Lawn and its 
inmates appeared to have passed away. At any 
rate, he now gave no evidence of its existence. 

Like other Calverleys, he was perfectly sen- 
sible of his good fortune. He would have been 
far more obtuse than promising cavalry officers 
are generally, if he had not seen it. Jack Scuda^. 



ALL m THE WRONG. 311 

more's daughter, with only her personal attrac- 
tions, ought to have suiRced to fill his landscape 
with sunshine ; hut as the heiress of Delamere 
Court, all his well-married connections must ac- 
knowledge that his prospect was dazzlingly brilliant 

He could not help recalling the parting advico 
of his kinsman, Lord Madras. " It is high time, 
my boy, for you to think of putting your advan- 
tages out at interest in a first-rate matrimonial 
investment. The Calverleys, you know, have 
been singularly fortunate in such speculations." 

And then the Bishop's widow — ^how could he 
forget her pious exliortations to show his grati- 
tude to Providence for the favours so bounteously 
conferred upon him, by marrying only where 
Divine beneficence was still more strikingly mani- 
fested. Lastly came his dear mother's prudent 
counsels. He felt convinced that he should satisfy 
all their desires. Indeed, he was assured that 
the most fortunate of the Calverleys would be 
obliged to acknowledge that his choice of a wife 
had done them no discredit. 



312 JACK SCUDAMOfiE's DAUGHTER. 

Li this humour, on the evening previous to 
hitt return to town, Arthur once more found him- 
self Btanding at the piano, turning over the leaves^ 
listening to Fanny's baUads, singing to her acoom- 
paiiiment, or joining in duets, the Squire reclin- 
ing in his easy-chair, his pain&l foot resting 
against a gout-stool, calluig for the old-fashioned 
tunes associated with the most pleasant period of 
liis pleasant life, and praising every performance 
with a heartiness that seemed to stimulate the 
vocalists to increased exertions. 

They had sung together, " Time has not 
thinned my flowing hair," " All's well," and 
several other equally miexceptionable arrange- 
ments for two voices, and were looking over a 
music-book for a similar production. 

" By the way, Fanny," cried the Squire, 
" can't you sing me that pretty thing you and 
Geraldine sang so often when she was here last ?" 

Had a bomb-shell exploded at the feet of the 
beautiftd pianiate^ it would scarcely have excited 
Jier more than did tliis apparently harmless speech. 



ALL IN THB WitOKG. 313 

In the first place, the sudden mention of her 
cousin's name thrilled her nature with the most 
pnin&l emotions; in the next, the composition 
referred to recalled feeUngs that almost over- 
powered her, in her present highly-excitable state. 

Arthur was surprised at the disinclination his 
amiable colleague exhibited to comply with her 
father's request ; but his astonishment greatly in- 
creased when more urgent solicitations induced 
her to bring forth the identical liebealied tliey had 
sung witli so much expression the first night they 
were together in the drawing-room. 

Fanny tried hard to shake off the feeling that 
came insidiously over her, creeping through her 
system like a subtle vapour tliat was mastering 
her senses ; bnt she could not help a tremor tliat 
shook her frame as she commenced the opening 
symphony, nor could she keep her voice quite 
steady as she commenced the stirring phrases of 
the love-song. 

She sang in English, because her father did 
not care to hear words he could not understand — 



314 JACK scudamore's dauobteiu 

a terrible ordeal to her — ^for these were the words 
of the opening verse, 

Thou, thou reign'st in this bosom ; 

There, there hast thou thy throne ; 
Thou, thou know'st that I love thee ; 

Am I not fondly thine own ? 

What made the trial worse to her a thousand 
times^ was, her &ther insisted on Arthur joining 
in the duet; and together they sang every elo- 
quent verse, his tones growing more dangerously 
emphatic as he proceeded. 

She was glad when it was over, and yet was 
sorry; for every passionate word that fell upon 
her ear thrilled her soul with an ecstasy she had 
never known before. Her trials, however, had 
only commenced. The Squire was delighted, and 
cried out lustily for a repetition. Arthur looked 
at her appealingly, but did not venture others ise 
to express his sentiments, Fanny, with a heart 
much too full to speak, turned back the leaves and 
recommenced the symphony. 

She sung with undiminished consciousness of 



ALL IN THE WRONa 315 

the situation, but with less fear. She could make 
no farther struggle. She surrendered herself to 
the delicious enjoyment of loving and being loved, 
and poured out her soul in those passionate decla- 
rations till the last dangerous refrain was about to 
commence. 

Whether it was that the Squire had become 
cloyed with the lusciousness of this last perform- 
ance, or was tired of the music, or could no longer 
withstand the influence of bedtime, certain it is 
that he must have felt a sense of weariness soon 
after the commencement of the encore^ for he 
closed his eyes. A few minutes later, heavy 
breathing, followed by louder evidence of his mi-» 
consciousness, proclaimed his condition to the 
more watchfal of the singers. The other was sen- 
sible only of her own ecstatic happiness. 

She saw that handsome face bending over her, 
the bright eyes expressing ineffable tenderness, 
proclaiming to her throbbing heart the intensiiy 
of his love. Nearer and nearer it came, till the 
sofl wavy hair of that noble head almost touched 



316 JACK scubamobe's daughter. 

her hot cheek. Her bosom heaved tumultuous- 
ly; and the long silken lashes closed over orbs 
that dared no longer look up. Presently she 
felt the silken moustache pressed upon her lips^ 
and had not either the will or the power to 
resist. 

How long it rested there she could not tell ; it 
may have been but a few seconds ; it was to her 
an age — an age of unutterable bliss. As soon as 
the spell was removed, she rose from the music- 
stool, and gUded from the room in a state of semi* 
consciousness, as in a mesmeric sleep. 

When she found herself seated in the secure 
privacy of her own chamber, she tried to recall 
tlie incidents of the past few days — of the past 
few hours— of the past few minutes — ^that had so 
deeply affected her. She remembered the words, 
looks, the tones that had filled her with a new life. 
Tlie declaration of the love-song, i?M, du liegst 
mir im Herzen, "Am I not fondly thine own?" 
came upon her soul with the assurance of a reve- 
lation ; and the burning caress with which it con- 



ALL IN THE WRONG, 317 

diided had stamped upon it a seal that should ever 
testify to its truth* 

Suddenly in the intense enjoyment of her hap- 
piness^ a vision rose before her — a fair, girlish 
fece, as full of beauty as of innocence, in whose 
dove-like eyes floated the spirit of a child-like 
trust. In a moment the flushed coimtenance be- 
came deadly pale, an expression of unutterable 
agony took possession of those lovely features; 
and, spasmodically covering her face with her 
hands, she exclaimed, in tones tremulous with 
remorse, " God, what have I done 1" 



END OF VOL. L 

JACK SCUDAMORE'S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER I. 

JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 

Every town and hamlet in the vale of Delamere had 
turned out its able-bodied population — as in almost 
all popular gatherings, the infirm and the juvenile 
contributing a considerable per-centage. For the 
grisly-headed labourer, no matter how bad was his 
special enemy, "the rheumatis," seized his ragged 
wide-awake and knotted stick, and trudged from 
his cozy chimney-corner— when the flaxen-crop- 
ped urchin, his grandson, rushed in from birding 
in the bean-field, crying out, " The circus folk be 
a-gooing to pervarm on Banbury Down !" — his 
leather-gaiters, hob-nailed ankle-boots, and brown 

VOL. II. B 



2 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

smock-frock were the next minute seen vaulting 
over the stile in the lane that led to the path over 
the fields, in which an irregular procession of lads 
in their holiday suits, with lasses in their Sunday 
finery, was joyously proceeding. 

Matrons, with infant charges in their arms, 
hurried after their lords and masters. Even crip- 
pled old dames hobbled slowly on the same road, 
as anxious as their juniors to witness the promised 
spectacle. 

Along the roads and lanes rattled tradesmen's 
carts and farmers' gigs — then came caravans 
and wagons,, crammed with shouting school-chil- 
dren, waving their coloured pocket-handkerchiefs 
with frantic delight. Past them dashed the vehi- 
cles of the gentry; sporting gentlemen in dog- 
carts, with grinning "tigers" dos-h-do8; military 
officers driving curricle or phaeton, with horses of 
the most showy description, and grooms apparently 
to match ; corpulent chairmen of quarter sessions, 
in open carriages, with blooming wives and daugh- 
ters; quiet-looking clergymen, in equally quiet- 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 3 

looking buggies, drawn by the very safest and ap- 
parently the very slowest of horses; and park- 
phaetons with dashing thorough-breds, charioteered 
by hopeful heirs in the most fashionable driving 
costume, smoking cigars of the choicest brand, and 
airing young ladies whose jewellery and millinery 
were pretty sure to be held in much higher esti- 
mation than their reputations. 

Mixed with these were scores of equestrians — 
"young Rapids" — chiefly in white cords, and blue 
or green cut-aways, who trotted or galloped beside 
and before all vehicles containing tolerably hand- 
some women, with an intense conviction that they 
were not likely to pass unobserved. With them 
were mingled many of their seniors, their ordinary 
business-aspect disappearing under a sense of un- 
wonted enjoyment : the miller and the maltster, the 
factor and the brewer, the village doctor and the 
town attorney, the duke's steward and my lord's 
bailiff, had mounted their easy-going cobs, and ex- 
changing noisy gratulations, were proceeding to the 
scene of attraction. 



4 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Gipsies on donkeys, hucksters in their carts, 
were hurrying to the same destination, shouting to 
timid ladies driving skittish ponies in pretty wa- 
gonettes, and venturing free-and-easy salutations 
to comfortable old couples sitting demurely in 
dingy rattle-traps, drawn by a fat cart-horse at a 
funeral pace. 

Great was the commotion on the road, when a 
well-appointed team, bearing ihe family of one of 
the county magnates, dashed by — especially when 
a barouche and four, preceded by out-riders in the 
Porchester livery, proclaimed the presence of the 
popular Lord-Lieutenant. There was almost as 
much hurra-ing when honest Jack Scudamore 
was recognised, riding by the side of his beautiful 
daughter, and the best judges could not decide 
which had the best nag. 

Uproarious was the shouting produced by young 
Lord Delamere's four panting grays, drawing his 
well-appointed drag ; but wonderful was the excite- 
ment created by the appearance of a tandem, drawn 
by thorough-bred bays, driven by a lady, and still 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 5 

more marvellous, attended by a female groom. 
Yes ; notwithstanding that she wore a white box- 
coat with many capes, buttoned up to her throat, 
and a man's hat, no one could doubt the sex of the 
owner of the small gloved hands that held the pa- 
rasol whip and the " ribbons." With the white 
handle of her whip she exchanged the compliments 
of the road with her male acquaintances, nodding 
her head familiarly, without endangering the posi- 
tion of the flower hanging at her mouth. The face 
was as well known as the plump features of the girl 
who sat in the orthodox flunkey attitude, with 
folded arms, on the lower seat. 

Shouts of laughter and jocose observations fol- 
lowed their course ; for the former was recognised 
as Miss Lucretia Brabazon, and the latter as her 
maid, Patty Clark. 

" That beeats cock-foighting !" cried one freck- 
led-faced chawbacon to another, opening his enor- 
mous jaws with a loud rustic laugh. " Whoever 
seed the loike o' thatten ? Eh, meate ?" 

" Haw ! haw !" echoed the other, raising his 



6 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

little carter's hat as he scratched his carroty 
locks. " What be she gooing to doo next, I 
wonder? Volk zay madame ha' took to oss- 
racin, and has nought but meedens in the stable, 
cause she can't abide no men, — and that thissen 
be her 'head grum. Well, it be a queer start, 
that's zartain !" 

Giles was quite correct. The owner of Bra- 
bazon Lodge had recently purchased a small por- 
tion of Jack Scudamore's racing-stock, and, much 
to the scandal of her clerical friend, had an- 
nounced her intention of running one or two at 
the approaching county races. It became known at 
the same time that as she " hated men," she would 
employ only females in her establishment; in 
pursuance of which resolution she invariably rode 
out with a female attendant in a blue riding- 
habit, with red collar and cuffs (the Brabazon 
livery) and a man's hat, edged with and sur- 
rounded by a band of gold lace. 

Li this way she made her appearance as a 
patroness of the turf, and was ready with her 



JIXKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 7 

betting-book in hand at all meetings, to give or 
take odds with any one, to the immense delight of 
the knowing ones, particularly of the gentlemen 
of the Delamere Hunt, with whom she was a 
special favourite. 

The talk about her had become more startling 
than ever. No strong-minded woman had at- 
tained a tithe of the fame she enjoyed. Her 
stables and her trainers were objects of extra- 
ordinary comment, — neither man nor boy being 
employed, only girls; and though it was said 
that they used side-saddles and habits in public, 
the wildest rumours were afloat as to their 
" horseyness" in manners and apparel when in- 
doors. 

Patty had come from the rectory on the emi- 
gration of Miss Brabazon's travelling establish- 
ment, and had at once been taken into favour. 
Being the daughter of a deceased stud-groom at 
Delamere Court, at an early age she had learnt 
a good many stable accomplishments ; so that her 
mistress, in carrying out her new vagary, found 



8 jack scudamore's daughter. 

her services so valuable, that she seldom went to 
public places without her. 

The consequence of this was, Patty Clark was 
almost as much talked about as her eccentric em- 
ployer. Among male domestics — especially those 
engaged in the care of horses — she was looked 
upon as a living wonder. As the tandem passed, 
they stared at her impassive face and unconcerned 
manner with open mouth and eyes, as if they 
could scarcely make up their minds to the reality 
of the phenomenon. 

The cavalcade proceeded more slowly up the 
ascent that led on to the Down, where a pro- 
digious array of flags, tents, and caravans indi- 
cated the position of the performers ; and a fast- 
increasing circle of spectators and vehicles, that 
of the audience. Here, too, were the usual ad- 
dition to a rustic gathering, — booths and stalls 
for the sale of " the delicacies of the season," — 
of which gingerbread-nuts and ginger-beer were 
in the usual liberal supply. 

The centre of attraction, however, was the 



jnrcs's IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 9 

area enclosed by the crowd, wherein a procession 
of figures on horseback was seen slowly moving 
round, two and two, preceded by a brass-band, 
playing with tremendous energy. The riders dis- 
played various very showy costumes, though it 
was not easy to state their age or nationality ; the 
steeds were of all hues, in which cream-colour 
and piebald predominated. The musicians wore 
an indescribable cross between the dress of a fire- 
man and a beef-eater. 

Helmets occasionally mingled with Spanish 
hats and plumes; but there was seen amongst 
them an individual in jack-boots, buckskins, and 
an embroidered jacket and waistcoat, who wore a 
forage-cap with a gold-lace band. Then there 
was a lady in a blue-and-silver riding-habit and 
round hat ; another in a rustic garb with a gipsy- 
hat ; and a very little girl in white muslin and a 
wreath of roses, who rode on the smallest pony 
ever seen. 

But though the gentlemen looked very heroic, 
and the ladies extremely interesting, and the very 



10 JACK SCUDAMOKE's DAUGHTER. 

little girl smiled in the prettiest way possible, the 
popular curiosity was concentrated on the group 
that came last in the procession. In the centre 
was a low gilt chariot, in which sat a portly florid- 
faced man, in a wide straw-hat, green-velvet 
coat, pantaloons with gold-lace down the seams, 
and Hessian boots with bullion tassels. With a 
bountiful display of shirt-frill, across a gay waist- 
coat he wore a massive gold-chain, and on his fat 
hand a large diamond ring. 

But it was not this worthy's get-up, so regard- 
less of expense, that astonished the rustics half so 
much as the strange members of the group to 
which he belonged. His triumphal car was drawn 
by a quadruped of singularly ferocious aspect that 
looked something between a lion and a tiger. It 
was led by a short thick-set negro of aspect almost 
as savage ; while on each side the red and gold 
chariot stalked a Bed Indian, lavishly adorned with 
paint, feathers, scalps, teeth, tattooing, and other 
insignia of war, wearing mocassins and blanket, 
and armed with spears. 



JDTCfi'g IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 11 

This was wonderfully sensational to the rustic 
mind; ploughboys and carters, thatchers and 
mowers, hedgers and ditchers, gaped with mingled 
awe and astonishment at this thrilling tableau. 
They absolutely forgot Jinks, the proprietor of the 
circus, in the absorbing feeling with which they 
regarded his savage accessories. That great man 
was obliged to doff his head-covering to his amazed 
patrons before he could elicit the usual reception. 
The crowd then seemed satisfied that it was Jinks, 
and the result was a burst of applause which ex- 
ceeded any thing of the kind that highly popular 
servant of the public had ever received before. 

The diamond ring was preaaed with the fat 
palm it decorated against the flowery waistcoat, 
and Jinks's brown wig, made as natural as life, 
was seen to move forward and downward upon his 
shirt-frill, in grateful acknowledgment of his re- 
ception. 

Then his terrible-looking steed opened his enor- 
mous jaws, disclosing most formidable tusks ; the 
negro grinned and showed a set of teeth almost as 



12 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

carnivorous ; and his two associates set up a ring- 
ing war-whoop, and brandished their spears with 
a cannibal expression of countenance that made 
the nearest to the ropes which marked out the 
enclosure, feel an inclination to run away that 
they could only with difficulty restrain. 

Lucretia Brabazon did not arrive on the ground 
till the mounted guard of honour that closed the 
procession were passing out of sight under an 
awning and long tent, whence it had emerged. 
Her appearance created almost as much excite- 
ment as did that of the proprietor of the circus ; 
but she unconcernedly drove into a vacant corner, 
nodding and exchanging salutations with her friends, 
with a coolness that astonished the best whips 
amongst them. Patty jumping down, ran to the 
head of the leader, and placed him in a proper posi- 
tion, with a degree of professional skill that was 
envied by the most experienced groom present. 

The brass-band, that had remained in the 
centre of the ring, now struck up a lively air, and 
a white horse, bearing a young lady dressed as a 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS, 13 

Swiss peasant, bounded into the arena, followed 
by the gentleman in the gold-and-green uniform, 
smacking a long whip. Standing on the back of 
her steed as he went round the circle, and grace- 
fully playing a pair of castanets, the young lady 
danced the Cachuca, much to the gratification of 
her innumerable admirers. 

Then a youth rode in on a black horse, in 
Highland kilt and plaid, philibeg and tartan stock- 
ings, and went through an abundance of panto- 
mime, as well as evolutions with hoops and flags, 
ending with a Bpirited performance of the High- 
land fling. During this the band played with a 
rapidity that nearly took away their breath ; while 
the smack of the long whip, held by the personage 
in green-and-gold, rained incessantly on the horse's 
heels. 

This performance was brought to a sudden 
close by the unexpected tumbling over the ropes 
of a drunken rustic in a short smock-frock and 
queer little felt-hat. He staggered up to the per- 
former, amidst vociferous shouts of "Turn him 



14 jack scudamore's daughter. 

out I" from those outside the ring, and signs of 
consternation from those within. The gentleman 
with the jack-boots stalked towards him in a highly 
indignant manner; bnt the intruder, fearless of 
the whip, having declared his determination to 
have a ride, caught hold of the reins. 

The shouters outside became more vociferous 
to have him expelled. The gentleman with the 
jack-boots humanely warned him that he would 
break his neck ; but elicited only a laugh of deri- 
sion. The performer sprung to the ground; in 
the same instant the horse started, and the coun- 
tryman made a clumsy attempt to get into his 
place. Laughs and jeers from the crowd accom- 
panied him, as he clung to the steed as it pro- 
ceeded on its customary round. At last the fellow 
contrived to stand on the saddle, though many a 
lurch made the highly-amused spectators antici- 
pate a speedy roll on the sawdust 

He seemed to feel that his garments incom- 
moded him, or else entertained some insane idea 
that it was bedtime ; for he divested himself of his 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 15 

smock-frock, then of his cravat, then of his waist- 
coat. Presently, very much to the surprise of the 
lookers-on, he went round the circus, leaning this 
way and that way, with nothing on but his shirt. 

The female portion of the audience had men- 
tally come to the decision that they had seen 
enough, when the gentleman in jack -boots 
smacked his whip, the band struck up a lively 
air, the horse increased his pace, shirt, hat, and 
wig were whisked off his rider, and the rustic 
stood upright in white satin and spangles, in the 
attitude of an Apollo ; while a burst of applause 
broke from the crowd that testified their delight 
at the clever deception. 

The next novelty was the tumbling-in of the 
clown. Although he was dressed in the ordinary 
costume, and painted red and white, in the time- 
honoured clownish fashion, there could be no 
doubt that he was a negro. A black clown 
was a vara avis in the circus ; and when it was 
discovered that he could tumble like an accom- 
plished acrobat, perform all sorts of grotesque 



16 jack scudamore's daughter, 

contortions, and utter the most absurd jokes, there 
could no longer be a doubt of his popularity. 

After the audience had been sufficiently amused 
by a dialogue between the Ethiopian Grimaldi, as 
he was styled in the bills, and Mr. Merriman, the 
superintendent of the arena, — which, though ex- 
travagantly appreciated on Banbury Down, I do 
not think worth repeating here, — the latter threw 
aside his whip, and, taking a box and a bag from 
an attendant, went, accompanied by the clown, 
to the verge of the circle. Here, shaking up the 
contents of the latter, he opened it, and held it out 
to the nearest spectator. 

There was one feature in the entertainment, as 
announced in the wonderful blue-and-red placards 
that had appeared during the week on all the dead 
walls to be found in a circumference of at least 
ten miles, which had contributed largely to bring 
together the bulk of its population. This was the 
announcement of a lottery, not only with no blanks, 
but with prizes the most attractive that could have 
been offered to rustic speculators. 



jinkb'b imperial circus. 1 7 

Therefore, when the gentleman in the jac;k- 
hoots presented himself with "the lucky-bag" 
extended for the exclusive advantage of the en- 
lightened patrons of Jinks's " Imj>erial Circus," 
the number of shillings invested in experimental 
" dips" seemed beyond calculation. Big and lit- 
tle, rich and poor, every one scorned eager to try 
his or her fortune. Such a mass of silver was 
exchanged for tickets drawn from their leather 
receptacle, tliat the bearer of the box in which 
the coin was deposited screwed his paste-coloured 
features into the most ridiculous contortions, as 
though unable to endure the weight. 

Whilo this was going on, with abundance of 
humorous commentary between Mr. Merriman, 
the clown, and their customers, another portion 
of the performance was proceeding. This was 
an exhibition of vaulting and posturing, which 
tho best judges declared excelled every thing 
of tho kind they had ever beheld. Such feats, 
however marvellous, must bo well known to my 
reader*. 

VOL. II. c 



18 jack scudamore's daughter. 

When this was over, a novelty in equestrianism 
was presented that seemed to astonish the spec- 
tators more than all that had preceded it This 
was the appearance of two Indians as Aztec war- 
riors on barebacked steeds, armed with tomahawks 
and bows and arrows, each dressed in tiger-skins, 
with a crest of gandy feathers ; in short, their 
copper skins were set off with a truly savage 
magnificence. 

Their steeds rushed on, apparently as swift as 
the wind, with their riders, now seated in the 
ordinary fashion, now lying their lengths, now 
standing up, brandishing tomahawks, directing 
arrows at an approaching foe, hanging down to 
pick up the weapon they had thrown at an ene- 
my, and yelling their warcry with a din that re- 
sounded far above the clamour of the brass-band, 
which was going fortissimo and prestissimo to an 
extent no one could have conceived possible. 

Lucretia Brabazon, from her elevated position, 
had witnessed the various performances with a 
fair amount of amusement ; but her greatest plea- 



JDTKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 19 

sure was derived from a conversation she car- 
ried on with various gentlemen on horseback or 
in carriages, who were within talking distance. 
She was evidently in the highest spirits ; and the 
laughing around her drew many a curious out- 
sider to that part of the Down. 

Every now and then she was seen to take from 
a breast-pocket an oblong little book, and with a 
pencil to write therein; but the lookers-on here 
did not see most of the game — indeed, were quite 
in the dark as to the purport of these hurried 
inscriptions, which, there could be no doubt, were 
regarded with as much interest by the gentle- 
men about her as by herself. So they tried to 
get nearer. 

Little Patty Clark was standing at the head 
of the leader, quite as much an object of attention 
as her mistress ; but in her circle there reigned a 
profound silence. The wearers of brown smalls 
and gaiters, of white cords and tops, of plush with 
stockings and shoes, of heavy ankle-boots and 
coarse corduroys, seemed alike tongue-tied. They 



V 



20 jack scudamore's daughter. 

nudged each other, winked, nodded, kept their 
mouths and their eyes equally wide open — but 
there was a spell upon their organs of speech. 

They gazed upon the natty hat with the gold- 
band, upon the stand-up collar and silk-tie fas- 
tened with a horseshoe-pin, and upon the curious 
livery with the Brabazon crest on the gilt but- 
tons, as if these objects were invested with a 
supernatural fascination, 

A superannuated helper in a sleeved waistcoat, 
and thick overalls covering very bandy legs, after 
staring his eyes nearly out of his shock head, at 
last turned away with a heavy sigh, and crushed 

his napless white hat upon his wrinkled fore- 

< 

head. 

9 

Patty appeared quite indifferent to the excite- 
ment she had created. She did not seem to see 
the gaping rustics, or the bewildered jockeys, 
grooms, trainers, and stable-boys. She kept her 
eye upon the horse, whose head was a little above 
her own — sometimes patted it, sometimes addressed 
it — raising her glance occasionally towards her 



. jinkb'b imperial giro us. 21 

mistress, but never allowing it to dwell upon the 
astonished faces around hor. 

There wan another change in the Circus. The 
performer was now a mounted Bedouin, in turban 
and burnous, with tufted spear in hand, flying 
over die desert as if pursuod by a hostile tribo. 
He went through a good deal of pantomime of a 
warlike character, till he appeared to havo dis- 
tanced his enemies, when his spear changed to a 
pipe-stick, and he sat cross-legged smoking his 
chibouque as his Arab lay down on the sawdust. 

Suddenly a noise was heard — the chief vairitod 
into the Turkish saddle, and drawing his sabre, 
cut and slashed away before and behind with tre- 
mendous energy, as if surrounded by bloodthirsty 
foes, shouting vociferously in Arabic; his stood 
tearing along at a tremendous pace, snorting and 
shaking his long mane and tail, as if fully appre- 
ciating his master's danger. 

Tliis animated scone excited immense applause. 
Miss Brabazon joined loudly in the bravos that 
came from hor male friends. She had seen the 



22 jack scudamore's daughter. 

equitation of the Arabs, and pronounced this an 
excellent imitation* She was willing to admit that 
Jinks's troupe were capital actors — indeed, she ac- 
knowledged that she had once a man in her service 
— a genuine Bedouin — and she doubted* though 
he was a first-rate horseman, that he could have 
made a similar performance equally effective. 

There now only remained the distribution of 
the prizes, which the gentleman in the jack-boots 
proceeded to read out from a list he held in his 
hand — a breathless interest pervading the entire 
assembly. 

" One cow and calf," " a mare and foal," " a 
sow and litter of pigs," " a carriage, harness, and 
pair of ponies," were the chief; and they fell to 
different individuals. Each resided a long way 
off; nevertheless, directly their names were men- 
tioned, the worthy farmer, clergyman, school- 
master, or parish clerk, stepped forward and re- 
ceived an order for the delivery of his treasure — 
with which he presently disappeared in extraor- 
dinary good humour, and was never seen again. 



JINKfl'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS, 23 

A few " gown-pieces " fell to persons far heir 
ter known, and their names elicited shouts of ac- 
clamation ; but the bulk of the prizes seemed to 
consist of rather trumpery cotton handkerchiefs. 
These fell chiefly to the humbler spectators, and 
the recipients in turn became objects of popular 
applause. This put them in good humour; so that 
every one appeared contented with his or her rather 
questionable good fortune. 

While the distribution was going on, the laugh- 
ing around the tandem became louder than ever 
— especially when a gown-piece was announced 
as the prize of Sir Harry Chester, that now dis- 
mounted dragoon evidently not knowing what to 
do with his acquisition. It was only a printed 
cotton, and the pattern apparently was not to the 
taste of either the Squire or Lord Vernon; for 
though it was offered to them in the handsomest 
way, both were profuse of thanks, but could not 
think of depriving their friend of so valuable a 
possession. 

About this period a smart young fellow of the 



24 jack scudamore's daughter. 

jockey class pushed his way through the gaping 
throng that encircled Fatty Clark. She recog- 
nised him with a nod. 

"Has your governor entered the black colt 
for the Delamere Maiden Stakes?" he asked in 
an undertone. 

"Yes, Dick," was the reply. "She's been 
taking the odds against him." 

"What about the filly?" was the next ques- 
tion. 

" She's to run for the Sweepstakes. Nancy 
Green and I tried the two in a gallop this morn- 
mg." 

"Which is fastest?" 

Patty gave a knowing shake of her head. " We 
don't let out the secrets of the stable, Dick," 
was said with marked emphasis on the pronoun. 

The jockey laughed. Those within hearing 
looked from one to another with countenances 
expressive of superlative admiration. 

" I wouldn't mind risking a crown on that 
colt, Patty. Master bred him, and I've known 



JINKS's IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 25 

him from a foal HeX one of the likeliest two- 
year-olds I've seen this many a day," 

" We don't want to be told that, Dick." 

Again a glance of intense satisfaction was tele- 
graphed from one to another. 

" Nancy Grreen and I have agreed to take 
seven to four against him," was added carelessly, 
to the increasing astonishment of the highly in- 
terested audience. 

Dick now gave a knowing shake of his head. 

" I should like to do a little business," he said 
presently. " I'll bet you five to four against the 

filly." 

" What in ?" was demanded. 

u Oh, shillings if you like." 

" We never bet less than half-crowns," was 
the reply. 

a Very well ; I'm willing. Say five to four 
in half-crowns against the filly winning the Sweep- 
stakes." 

" Done !" cried Patty ; and, to the inexpres- 
sible amazement of the lookers-on, she pulled a 



26 jack scudamore's daughter, 

little book from her pocket, and hurriedly wrote 
down the bet. 

" Patty I" shouted a voice from the box-seat 
of a four-in-hand. 

She looked up, and instantly put her fore- 
finger to the gold-laced rim of her hat It was 
the Marquis of Delamere who had called her. 

" Tour animals are uncommon well groomed," 
observed his lordship, looking at them critically 
through his eyeglass. 
" Yes, my lord." 

All the gentlemen on the drag seemed to think 
they were bound to echo their noble friend's 
opinion, some of them looking critically at the 
horses, others at their groom. Both underwent 
the inspection with the same indifference. 

" That liarness, too, looks prodigious welL" 

The forefinger was again thrown up, and the 
respectful acknowledgment of the compliment re- 
peated. 

The gentlemen on the roof of the drag perpe- 
trated their echoes and continued their scrutiny. 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIBOU0, 27 

They affected the more attention as they believed 
that Delamere was about to " take a rise" out of 
" that queer Miss Brabazon." The young Marquis, 
however, did not feel himself equal to it 

" Ton my life, now !" he exclaimed, turning to 
that lady languidly, " you do the thing in first- 
rate style. But that groom of yours is really the 
neatest part of the turn-out" 

" Exactly what I intended, Lord Delamere," 
was the reply. 

She nodded to her attendant, which the latter 
at once understood ; for, grasping the rein of the 
leader, she drew him quietly out of the throng of 
equipages ; the whip smacked as soon as he was 
clear, and as he started off on a trot to the road 
down the hill, Patty with a quick run placed her 
foot on the step and swung herself into her seat 

" There 1" cried one of the hitherto tongue- 
tied circle to his neighbour, " I told yer she wore 
taps." 

The astounding fact of a woman wearing top- 
boots, which had that moment been made manifest 



28 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

to all near enough to see, came as a climax 
to the series of marvels they had just witnessed. 
To them it heralded a social revolution, the very 
idea of which seemed so completely to take their 
breath away, that when a cheer was got up to 
mark Miss Brabazon's departure, they had no power 
to join in it 

A few minutes later the entire assemblage 
broke up, and, apparently vastly edified with their 
day's amusement, returned to their several homes. 

It was at a rather late hour in the following 
morning that Mr. Jinks sat in what he called his 
" snuggery," taking his breakfast. The place so 
styled was a miniature house upon wheels, with a 
smart green door and a bright brass knocker; 
moreover having windows with Venetian blinds 
and festooned curtains, that made it from without 
quite a genteel residence. 

The Imperial Circus, of which he was the sole 
proprietor, had been sent on, after the perform- 
ances of the previous day, to a large market- 
town about twenty miles distant ; and as the pro- 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 29 

gress of its caravans was slow, he knew very well 
that he could follow at his leisure. So, having seen 
every thing carefully packed, and every body con- 
veniently placed for transit, he mounted the steps 
of his small mansion, opened the brass-knockered 
door, and, in a nicely-carpeted, comfortably-fur- 
nished room, presently made himself as thoroughly 
at home as if he had been in the pleasantest street 
of a cheerful city, instead of on one of the bleakest 
and loneliest parts of Cheshire. 

To tell the exact truth, he made himself so very 
comfortable that night, he did not leave his snug 
bedroom — on the other side of that snug parlour 
— till some hours beyond his usual time of begin- 
ning the day. Nevertheless, he commenced the 
meal which had been liberally prepared for him 
with an excellent appetite. It was obvious from 
his look and manner that Mr. Jinks was a pro- 
sperous man ; moreover that he was far from dis- 
satisfied either with himself or his belongings. 

His reflections as he broke his egg, and his 
meditations as he swallowed his coffee, were de- 



30 jack scudamore's daughter. 

cidedly characteristic of a contented spirit. He 
knew that Jinks's Imperial Circus was a thriving 
concern. He was equally well aware that Jinks 
was the sole cause of its prosperity. And why 
was it so ? he would ask himself. Because Jinks 
knew what he was about, was the reply. 

As the carefully-boiled eggs, the nicely-but- 
tered toast, and the fragrant beverage disappeared 
into his decidedly extensive corporation, he in- 
dulged in a train of thought which, as it will as- 
sist the reader in forming a proper estimate of the 
man, and will help a little in the development of 
this story, I shall venture to repeat. 

" That panther-car is a decided success, and is 
peculiar to Jinks's Imperial Circus. The Aztec 
Warriors, too, are also a great success. No si- 
milar establishment in the three kingdoms can 
show any thing of the kind. Then there's the 
Bedouin Sheik — he's quite a star. Nothing half 
so telling was ever before exhibited. As for the 
Ethiopian Grimaldi, it's wonderful how the people 
have taken to him. It was a lucky hour for me 



JINKS's IMPERIAL CIRCUS, 31 

when I fell in with that fellow Whittler, and agreed 
to take them and have them trained for the Impe- 
rial Circus. He certainly got them up surprisingly 
well, and is very useful in the ring. Capital, too, 
he is in representing the winners of the great 
prizes. That's a prodigious success." 

Here Mr. Jinks looked complacently on a box 
that lay in a corner of the room. No doubt it 
held the result of the previous day's performance. 

As he poured a fresh supply from the steaming 
coffee-pot, the current of thought began to flow 
afresh 

" But Whittler is a Yankee. Now, I don't know 
why, but I never could like a Yankee. They are 
such an over-reaching set; have such precious 
artful dodges, and are always a taking-in some- 
body. Not as Whittler is likely to do me. I'm 
Yorkshire born and bred. A Yankee must get 
up uncommon early to take in a Yorkshireman. 
Jinks knows what he's about, and he won't trust 
that fellow Whittler a bit more than he can help. 
The money is made as safe as the bank." 



32 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Again Mr. Jinks cast a glance of peculiar sa- 
tisfaction at the box in the corner. 

At this moment another door, leading into the 
kitchen of the miniature residence, was rudely 
flung open, and a youth, his bur streaming with 
perspiration, his face in a red heat, his clothes 
splashed from head to foot, staggered in. In this 
state of excitement and pickle it was impossible to 
recognise the Apollo of the preceding day. 

"0 guv'nor!" he cried out, panting for 
breath. 

Jinks started from his seat with a look of 
amazement and inquiry. 

" guv'nor !" repeated the travel-stained star 
rider of the troupe. 

" What's the matter, Mr. Gubbins ?" 

" The Aztec Warriors— " 

" Dear me ! I hope they are not very much 
hurt" 

" The Bedouin Sheik—" 

u He too ! He will be a loss certainly." 

" The Ethiopian Grimaldi— " 



JINKS'S IMPERIAL CIRCUS. 33 

" Poor mail ! I shall never again get so po- 
pular a clown." 

" Mr. Whittler— " 

" This is dreadful. What, in the name of mis- 
chief, has happened ?" 

" guv'nor, they've bolted!" 
"Bolted!" repeated the circus proprietor, as 
if scarcely understanding the intelligence. 

"Yes, guv'nor. They were riding the best 
horses, and all at once started as hard as they 
could tear on the road to Birkenhead. So I took 
the trotting-pony , and made the best of my way 
here." 

Mr. Jinks slapped his forehead with his hand ; 
and his rough Yorkshire face expressed a near 
approach to apoplexy. Suddenly he rushed to 
the box already referred to, and with a force he 
had never possessed before, burst it open. He 
uttered a cry ; he tottered back ; he fell into the 
arms of the attentive Gubbins. 
It was full of stones. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER II. 

TO DOVER AND BACK. 

Never did the most bustling, thriving, and well- 
conducted of the Cinque Ports appear so bustling, 

« 

so thriving, or so orderly, as on a certain morning 
in a particular year in which the current of this 
story has now arrived. From the newly-built 
pier to the ancient castle, from the closely-packed 
barracks on the heights to the straggling cottages 
in the suburbs, from the busy ship-chandlers on 
the quays to the fashionable drapery establish- 
ments in Snargate Street, there flowed along the 
pavement like a tide a fast-increasing throng of 
soldiers, sailors, officers of the army and navy, 
captains and mates of merchantmen, porters, 
tradesmen, ladies, hawkers, mechanics, and all 
the other ingredients of a seaport population; 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 35 

while the narrow streets were as well filled with 
wagons, carts, hackney-coaches, carriages, bar- 
rows, and trucks, many heavily laden with mer- 
chandise or luggage, and making the best of their 
way apparently from the Custom-house quay to 
the principal inns in the town. 

Every body in Dover seemed to be in a hurry 
on that particular morning. The young ladies in 
their gay toilettes rushed out of the Circulating 
Library with the last novel of Bulwer, or the last 
poem of Tennyson, evidently intensely eager to 
become acquainted with its attractive pages; the 
elder ladies, becomingly shawled and bonneted, 
with more gravity were hurrying from shop to 
shop as if apprehensive that the day's dinner 
might be lost by delay ; the elder gentlemen visi- 
tors were proceeding in hot haste towards the 
pier, generally glass in hand, to inspect the new 
arrivals from the Continent as the packets came 
in ; and the younger gentlemen, generally affect-> 
ing a marine costume, in straw-hats, pea-jackets, 
and white trousers, were diligently inspecting the 



36 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

shipping in the basins, displaying immense nau- 
tical knowledge in the remarks respecting them 
they interchanged. 

People were thronging in and out of the Cus- 
tom-house like bees about a hive, while in the 
dock the vessels that were loading or unloading, 
preparing to put to sea, or stripping for the pur- 
pose of undergoing repairs, seemed to require 
such a constant ascending and descending of 
amphibious-looking masses of well-worn tarpaulin 
and patched and tarry sail-cloth, bearing burthens 
of most awkward dimensions, that the landsmen 
could not help wondering whence such uncouth 
objects came. They were the dock-labourers, and 
monopolised the heaviest and dirtiest work going 
on in the port. 

Loud were the sounds proceeding from heavy 
hammers, from gangs of men at work aloft or on 
deck, from shouting captains and vociferous mates ; 
and. strong was the smell of paint, of tar, of bilge- 
water, and grease ; but the enthusiastic admirers 
of marine studies seemed to like the music and 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 37 

the perfume, for they stood watching the scene 
with a good deal of interest ; and the oaths in 
Dutch that came from the busy decks of the Vander- 
hilder of Amsterdam, seemed quite as edifying as 
the screaming exclamations and imprecations in- 
terchanged by the crews of the Marie of Marseilles 
and the Santa Trinita of Cadiz, the bowsprit of 
the French ship having run down the bulwarks 
of the Spaniard, as one was entering, the other 
leaving the harbour. 

Near the pier all sorts of conveyances were in 
waiting ; conspicuous amongst them was a hand- 
some new travelling-carriage with smart hammer- 
cloth and bright panels, on which an imposing 
coat of arms, surmounted by an earl's coronet, 
had been carefully emblazoned — the same crest 
being repeated on the silver harness which at- 
tached two pairs of grays, that the postillions in 
their gay jackets and caps, clean leathers and top- 
boots, could with difficulty restrain. 

The vehicle contained only one person — an 
elderly gentleman of particularly bland and cheer- 



38 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

fill aspect, whose neatly-frilled shirt and spotless 
white cravat excited quite as much consideration 
from a group of young officers belonging to the 
garrison, who stood at a little distance scrutinising 
the spectacle, as did his courtly demeanour and 
aristocratic equipage. 

With the usual facility of idlers, they discussed 
his history, his character, and his errand. Ensign 
Tootles, who prided himself on knowing a thing 
or two — he had not left school six months, and 
was singularly backward for a youth of seven- 
teen — confidently pronounced him the peer whose 
quartering were emblazoned on the carriage. 
Dr. Muffington, the assistant-surgeon in the same 
regiment, who was a few years the subaltern's 
senior, as sagaciously declared the object of their 
regard to be a happy father waiting to welcome 
his heiress and her bridegroom on their return to 
England from their bridal tour. 

Lieutenant Poppet, who, as he had just at- 
tained his majority, thought it incumbent on him 
to have an opinion of his own, decided that " his 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 39 

lordship" had come there to receive his eldest son 
and his tutor, after the two had done the grand 
tour, and carry them to his country-seat. 

Captain de Spruce, however, who affected a 
miraculous knowledge of fashionable life, and was 
regarded as an oracle by the juniors, pooh-poohed 
all these ideas. He looked mysterious, hinted 
something very ambiguous about state affairs, 
and, in an undertone, decided that the occupant 
of the carriage was a certain noble lord, who held 
a high post in the government, and that his busi- 
ness there was to carry to town some person of 
distinction coming over from the Czar, or the 
Emperor of Austria, or at* least the King of 
Prussia, on a secret mission of the utmost im- 
portance. 

The group accepted this dictum implicitly — 
some even recognised the features of the dis- 
tinguished statesman, innocently wondering why 
the likeness had not struck them before. He, 
however, continued to gaze about him, as indif- 
ferent to the observation of his neighbours as to 



40 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

their speculations. Now he glanced towards the 
heights, now he looked over the harbour, now he 
dwelt upon the lofty slope indissolubly connected 
with the fame of the great English dramatist, by 
whom it lias been so vividly described. 

There was a thoughtful earnest look in those 
singularly clear, shrewd, penetrating eyes, that 
seemed to be somewhat at variance with the ex- 
pression of bonhomie that played about the round, 
sleek, good-humoured face. It was not the look 
of a mere spectator — it intimated that, though 
the vision took in the fortifications, the shipping, 
the cliff— in short every thing visible seaward or 
landward in that ancient British port, the thoughts 
were far away, absorbed with interests compared 
with which the picturesque attractions around him 
were as dross to refined gold. 

Dover at this time presented a rather different 
aspect to the Dover of the present day. Though 
the principal port in communication with the Con- 
tinent, its harbour was confined and inconvenient. 
It could neither boast of an Admiralty Pier, a 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 41 

railway, nor any of the great improvements and 
defences which modern engineering science has 
of late years thrown around it Still, its grand 
old castle, its noble cliff, and many other time- 
honoured landmarks and memorable associations 
made it one of the most noticeable places in Eng- 
land — a place in which no Englishman could find 
himself without experiencing an intense nationality 
when thinking how often it has formed a stage on 
which important scenes in the drama of his coun- 
try's greatness had been rehearsed. 

Arthur Calverley happened to be passing from 
the Custom-house quay on this particular morning, 
having promised to meet Geraldine and Lord Fitz- 
maurice: they who had been trying the healing in- 
fluence of a celebrated German Spa, and were then 
crossing the Channel ; and his attention had been 
attracted to the well-appointed equipage and its 
highly-respectable occupant. Something in the 
quarterings on the panels seemed familiar to him, 
and he stopped to examine them. The supporters, 
too, those rampant griffins, were certainly old ac- 



42 jack scudamore's daughter. 

quaintances; bat he could not distinctly remem- 
ber where he had seen them. 

" Here she comes !" cried Captain de Spruce ; 
and immediately his brother-officers, indeed all 
the spectators, gazed out at sea with great intent- 
ness in the direction of a steamer that was making 
the harbour. At the same moment the carriage- 
door opened, an elderly gentleman in a paletot, 
a travelling-cap, and fashionably-cut clothes of 
black cloth, sprung out, and made his way 
briskly to the pier. 

Arthur followed to the pier-head, where many 
persons had assembled, apparently to witness the 
debarkation of the passengers on board the ap- 
proaching packet 

The Captain presently lost sight of him amongst 
them; but, making his way forward, gained a 
position from which he had a good view of the 
deck of the boat as she glided up to the stairs. 
It was the Calais packet, and was piled with 
merchandise, and crowded with passengers. The 
latter were a motley collection, composed of 



TO DOVEB AND BACK. 43 

tourists who bad been " doing" the Rhine, 
fashionables who had exhausted the gaieties of 
Brussels, students who had acquired some learn- 
ing and a good deal of dissipation at Gottingen 
or Heidelberg, artists with portfolios bulging with 
studies of picturesque scenery and mediaeval 
architecture, gamblers rich with the spoils of 
Hamburg and Baden-Baden, picture-dealers with 
extensive collections of Dutch and Flemish mas- 
ters of doubtful authenticity, young military 
critics fresh from the field of Waterloo with 
opinions- highly condemnatory of the great em- 
peror's tactics and rather qualified approbation of 
his conqueror, and invalids of every age and con- 
dition who had been trying the virtues of the 
various " Brunnens" with a result more evident 
on their purses than their constitutions. 

Captain Calverley could not distinguish his 
friends ; and as he was scanning the group among 
which he had expected to find them, he observed 
a lady of stately figure, handsomely dressed in a 
pelisse trimmed with ermine, talking in a very 



44 jack- scudamoke's daughter. 

animated manner to the maimed Cornet. He 
could not see her face, it was concealed by the 
fold of a white lace veil that fell from one of 
those large bonnets then fashionable. 

Perhaps it may have been her kindly words, 
some expression of womanly sympathy, excited by 
the empty sleeve of the young Cornet of hussars, 
that made his eyes glow so brightly. Be this as 
it may, certain it is the young hero felt proud and 
happy in the honour her notice conferred upon 
him. 

Suddenly the sunshine seemed to pass- from his 
delicate features, and they became impressed with 
a feeling of something closely resembling disap- 
pointment. Arthur looked to ascertain what had 
brought about this change, when he noticed the 
gentleman whom he had followed from the tra- 
velling-carriage, advancing towards the wearer of 
the ermine pelisse, cap in hand, bowing with im- 
pressive courtesy, and in a very lively manner 
welcoming her to England. The lady, with at 
least equal grace, and almost as much vivacity, 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 45 

held out her hand as he approached, and returned 
hi* greeting with a like cordiality. 

A lively conversation ensued. Presently, as 
though in answer to some question, a tall thin figure 
— a female in a dark dress closely veiled — glided 
forward, as if to be presented to the stranger, to 
whom she bent a humble, apparently a reverential 
curtsey, seemed to listen respectfully to something 
he said to her; then/ with the same sense of humil- 
ity in her lowly genuflexion, glided again into the 
background. 

There could be no doubt, in Arthur's mind, 
that the gentlewoman who had first attracted his 
attention was a person of high social position, and 
that her silent companion was a confidential do- 
mestic : but who the gallant old gentleman was, 
he could not so easily satisfy himself. 

He now descended the steps to go on board. 
While pushing his way through the throng of 
passengers eager to land, most of them laughing 
and conversing with long-parted friends, he found 
himself clotfe to the group I have just named — the 



46 jack scudamore's daughter. 

lady and gentleman in advance, talking as gaily 
as their exultant neighbours, the dark attendant 
in the rear, still solemn, gloomy, and reserved. 
Her features were behind a thick black veil, 
therefore he could not distinguish them. 

The former were apparently absorbed in their 
conversation, and having their faces close to each 
other, Arthur had passed them unnoticed. The 
imperfect view he had of the lady, merely assured 
him that she had reached a somewhat advanced 
matronly age. Her face being turned from him, 
he was able to observe only the fairness of her 
complexion, and the silvery whiteness of a small 
curl that had obtruded from beneath a lace cap. 
The countenance of her companion he had no 
opportunity of noticing. 

Had he been in the slightest degree conscious 
of the powerful influence these persons would 
exert over his future, he would of course have 
paid them more attention, and could not have 
failed to recognise in the returning travellers two 
persons whose individuality had been too strongly 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 47 

impressed upon his mind, when in its most im- 
pressionable state, ever to be erased from it this 
side the grave. Their disguise was so perfect, 
so many years had elapsed since they had met, 
while few things could have been more impro- 
bable than their re-appearance under circum- 
stances so extremely dissimilar as those by which 
they were now surrounded, that nothing was more 
natural than that he should have hurried after his 
friend without giving either of the strangers, as 
he considered them, another thought 

He presently found his young comrade and 
his sister in the cabin, giving directions about 
their luggage. Their greeting was most cordial ; 
and Arthur was delighted to see that both had 
benefited by their trip. During a very pleasant 
gossip, he succeeded in transferring them to the 
Ship Hotel; and having led them into a comfortable 
private room, he left them to make arrangements 
for post-horses and to order refreshments. 

He wandered into the assembly-room, which 
was entirely deserted; indeed, in consequence of 



48 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

the arrival of a foreign potentate, the whole staff of 
the establishment seemed to be in close attendance 
on his imperial highness and his numerous suite. 
Not a waiter or a chambermaid was to be seen. 

* 

Arthur strolled, therefore, into the large room, 
to amuse himself by examining its decorations, till 
some one should appear who could attend to his 
wants. The framed prints were duly examined, 
familiar though they were. The Woodman, The 
escaped Lioness attacking the Horses of the Mail- 
coach, The Rustic gazing admiringly at a fat Sow 
and a Litter of Pigs, View of Dover Castle, A 
Series of Hunting-scenes, The Battle of Trafalgar, 
The Death of General Wolfe, — all were carefully 
scrutinised. 

Presently he found himself before a large fold- 
ing-screen, placed away in a corner of the 
long-room. It was covered with caricatures and 
humorous prints, and he entertained himself for 
some time with the farcical creations of Rowland- 
son and Gillray. Ascertaining that the other side 
was similarly ornamented, he squeezed himself be- 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 49 

tween the comer and the wall, and was soon as 
much amused with the drolleries he found there. 
Many of the actors in them, royal, noble, and 
fashionable, he easily recognised. 

He was not, however, so much absorbed in his 
amusement as to be unable to hear the door of the 
room creak. It was opened, closed, and then 
locked. Involuntarily he stood still. He heard 
footsteps advancing, presently they came close to 
the screen, and stopped. 

" I have brought you here," was said in 
French and in a man's voice, " to be secure from 
interruption. I wish to impress upon your mind 
the necessity of forgetting your identity in the 
important service you have been selected to per- 
form." 

" Yes, monseigneur," was replied in the same 
language, in a female voice, the accent singularly 
harsh. 

Arthur began to feel embarrassed in no slight 
degree. Here was a revelation impending, with 
which he ought to have nothing to do. Appa- 

VOL. II. X 



50 jack scudahore's daughter. 

rentlj a foreign nobleman, perhaps his serene 
highness who had so recently arrived, had entered 
the apartment, for the purpose of making a con- 
fidential communication, under the impression that 
he had secured perfect privacy. 

Before he could make up his mind to declare 
his vicinity the dialogue was resumed, if dialogue 
it could be called — for the first speaker seemed to 
leave nothing for his companion to do but to utter 
a brief and very humble acquiescence. In conse- 
quence of his voice dropping frequently into an 
indistinct whisper, Arthur could not always catch 
his meaning, but heard enough of the sentence to 
excite his curiosity exceedingly; for it assured him 
that the grand duke, or whoever he was, was 
directing the woman to act as his agent in some 
business that required careful disguise and pro- 
found deception. 

Content with the conviction that it was no 
affair of his, and that a betrayal of his position 
might be attended with awkward consequences, 
he remained quiet. The whispering continued, 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 51 

but frequently in a most tantalising manner. In- 
variably, however, the earnest directions of tho 
great man elicited from his female agent the same 
readiness to follow them. 

As far as Arthur could guess at what escaped 
his ear, to fill up the imperfect sentence, some 
treachery was in contemplation against an English 
family of distinction — indeed, he sometimes fancied 
against many families 5 but their names, as well 
as the nature of the danger by which they were 
menaced, he could not ascertain. 

The very vagueness of the mischief made the 
affair to him doubly exciting. What could be the 
plot, and who could be the plotters ? He became 
more and more eager to know ; but dared not stir. 
What followed, which he heard distinctly, aston- 
ished him most of all. 

"And now, Madame," said the man, "for the 
present I dismiss you, in the full confidence of a 
conscientious fulfilment of your new duties." 

"Your blessing, Monseigneur," was the, to 
him, extraordinary reply. 



52 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Arthur heard the commencement of a Latin be- 
nediction pronounced with great fervour. It struck 
him that he might seize this opportunity for ob- 
taining a sight of these conspirators. So, quickly 
mounting a chair close to the screen, he looked down 
over the top. He observed the broad back of a 
gentleman, and the top of a white head stooping 
over the kneeling figure of a woman in a dark 
dress ; her hands clasped, her head bowed forward 
in an attitude of absorbed devotion. 

He could not see the features of either; but 
there was no difficulty in his identifying them by 
their dress with two of the three persons whom he 
had seen on the deck of the Calais packet 

While intently scrutinising their appearance, 
the benediction ceased; the woman rose to her 
feet ; and he saw a face too deeply engraven on his 
memory not to be recognised in a moment. 

It was the same hard, gloomy, rugged physio- 
gnomy Arthur had first beheld lit up by the spec- 
tral moonlight when he gazed out of the window 
of his little chamber in the Abbey ruins down upon 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 53 

the cemetery, and discerned, besides tliat terrible 
face, a pair of bare gaunt arms digging a grave 
he then feared was intended for himself. 

Yes, it was the same; only harder, darker, 
more stony and cold than ever. It fascinated him 
now a* it fascinated him then ; and he continued 
to gaze, feeling as if turning to stone under the 
influence of the Medusa-like aspect, till a fearful 
scream, and her sudden fall at the feet of her com- 
panion, assured the Captain that he had been dis- 
covered. He turned round hurriedly, and leapt 
down. A door was behind him. He passed 
rapidly through it into an ante-room. Here he 
was somewhat startled by observing Geraldine 
clasped in the affectionate embrace of the elderly 
lady in the ermine cloak. Indeed, so absorbed 
were they in this affectionate greeting or farewell, 
whichever it might be, that his intrusion was not 
noticed. 

Softly opening another door, he entered a pass- 
age near a staircase, which conducted him to an- 
other that led to the back entrance of the hotel 



54 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Servants were hurrying to and fro, but no one 
paid him any attention ; and he presently found 
himself in a busy narrow street, his mind in a 
whirl of excitement at what he had seen and 
heard. 

Arthur passed rapidly through the throng, dis- 
regardful of every thing but the tumult of thoughts 

« 

and feelings this extraordinary incident had cre- 
ated. Presently he breathed more freely. He was 
now in the open country beyond the town ; a 
retired spot on the elevated downs, where the 
breezy air cooled his hot temples; and resting 
on the soft green turf, he surrendered himself to 
a retrospection, which, though long uncared for, 
fading before the influence of newer interests, 
came before him now with the vividness of objects 
presented to a revived life. 

Arthur seemed again to look upon the pictur- 
esque vista of receding arches and graceful win- 
dows, with the tranquil moonlight mellowing the 
tints of the ancient carving, and enveloping with a 
solemn majesty those grand masses of masonry ; 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 55 

among which were grouped the dark-robed sisters, 
whose melodious devotions were wafted up to him 
charged with a spiritual sweetness that suggested 
an angelic source — an idea the intermittent gushes 
of the rival nightingales assisted in strength- 
ening. 

He again beheld the seraphic face that had 
once filled his youthful imagination with visions of 
purity and grace, as the saint-like figure knelt be- 
fore him ; as the dove-like eyes, overflowing with 
ineffable tenderness, bent timidly to the ground ; 
as the thrilling voice murmured, soft as an angel's 
whisper, the prayer thatf mingled confidingly with 
his own. 

How fiu-ed the ambition of his nlanhood? 
What had come of the arduous struggles for so- 
cial elevation, in the absorbing reality of which 
he had lost sight of that hallowed romance? 
Where, too, was that more practical devotion 
which had been founded on a similarity, that 
promised ihe perfectibility of earth with the sanc- 
tity of Heaven ? Lost, like the quiet tone of life's 



56 jack scudamore's daughter. 

every-day horizon in the golden glory of a re- 
turning sunrise. The actual faded from him, as 
a desert landscape before the weary pilgrim ; and 
the impossible filled its place with sparkling foun- 
tains that could never quench human thirst, and 
verdant groves that could never refresh mortal 
eye. 

Arthur's excitement at last subsided, and the 
mirage passed away, leaving him with a sense of 
shame for having surrendered his mind to such 
influences. Why should he set his soul upon the 
impracticable? Why should the unattainable be 
the object of his aspirations, longings, and dreams? 
All such thoughts and feelings were as visionary, 
he was forced to acknowledge, as the speculations 
of a monomaniac 

Years had passed since he had seen that divine 
apparition, and the rigour of a severe monastic life, 
in all likelihood, while investing the convent-pupil 
with the beauty of holiness, had divested her of the 
divinity of beauty. There was a terrible proba- 
bility, too, that so tender a plant might have faded 



TO DOVER AND BACK, 57 

in the chill atmosphere of the cloister ; and he 
shuddered as he recalled the image of the gloomy- 
sister plying her mattock in the solemn night, with 
the bats and the owls wheeling round her cowled 
head, and the penitential choral swelling upon the 
midnight air. 

He rose, but though he shook off the feverish 
dream that had so disturbed his nature, and re- 
called the healthier influence which had superseded 
those morbid impressions that had been its source, 
there existed so intimate a connexion between the 
two, that some link would constantly arise to bring 
him back to the prior state of feeling. The re- 
collection of Fanny Scudaraore now seemed to fill 
all his soul with a rosy sunlight — her glowing 
beauty, the passionate tenderness of the liebeslied 
they had sung together ; more than all, the stolen 
but permitted caress, drove from his mind what 
he felt he ought to consider only as a boyish 
dream. 

Presently he found himself dwelling admir- 
ingly on Geraldine's tenderness and simplicity ; the 



58 JACK SCUDAMOBE'8 daughter. 

image on his mind, however, seemed but the re- 
flection in a mirror, of a familiar excellence. The 
thrilling mnsic of her voice he permitted to take 
possession of his heart ; bnt he heard it as the echo 
of a blissful harmony that had once filled his entire 
being. 

Arthur endeavoured to recal the mysterious dia- 
logue he had so recently overheard ; but the first 
phrase brought back another secret conversation, 
of which he had as strangely become an auditor, 
in the most memorable adventure of his youth. So 
confusedly did the two communications mingle, 
that he could not define their meaning with reli- 
able exactness. All he could gather from them 
was, that Geraldine was menaced by a mysterious 
danger, and a conviction followed that he was 
bound to watch over her safety. 

Hie real triumphed over the ideal so far, that 
Arthur determined at once to seek out the man 
who was evidently playing an important part in a 
drama, the object of which he did not comprehend, 
and obtain from him, if possible, a knowledge of 



TO DOVER AND BACK. 59 

his intentions, at least no far as thoy might affect 
]>ersons dear to him, as associated with his past or 
present life. 

Arthur hurried back to the hotel ; but as he 
approached, he beheld a travelling-carriage 
leaving the door. His eager inquiries elicited 
the unwelcome information that the elderly lady 
and her attendant had departed, under the escort 
of the gentleman who had brought them from tho 
packet. 

On returning to his friends, ho could not avoid 
noticing an unusual reserve in their demeanour. 
Something evidently deeply affected their spirits. 
They had lost all their vivacity. The youthful 
impulsiveness of the gay-hearted Cornet, and tho 
tender joyousness of his sister, had entirely 
vanished. 

Arthur arranged every thing for their speedy 
arrival in town, though his mind was filled with 
apprehensions and misgivings. Ho could not help 
connecting this change in the manner of his friends 
with tho sudden appearance of Sister Gudule. 



60 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

What could be the meaning of that strange woman 
coming to such a place, and having that mysterious 
conference with such a man? He asked again and 
again ; but never got a reply* 



CHAPTER III. 

PORCHESTER HOUSE. 

u A first-rate run, Captain ; without a chock 
from breaking cover at Pylchberry Copse to run- 
ning into him at the foot of Highdown Hill — 
thirty miles at the very least, not a yard less. 
Zounds, sir! men were men in those days, and 
rode to hounds, over every thing, neck or nothing, 
sir. Thit's your sort I Not like your modern 
milksops, all Macassar oil and milk fleur 9 who 
crane at a bullfinch, and dismount to open a gate 
a lame dog would go over at a trot." 

Arthur did not know whether he was included 
in this contemptible category; but as he had no 
intention of quarrelling with Jack Scudamoro at 
hifl own hospitable table in town, he let the old 



62 JACK SCUDAM ORE'S DAUGHTER. 

fox-hunter make bis odious comparison without so 
much as a word of dissent. 

But who could look at his honest broad red 
face, and shiny bald cranium fringed with silvery 
hair, and notice the hearty good-will and down- 
right honesty of purpose that flashed ont of his 
pleasant brae eyes, and think for a moment of 
quarrelling? 

Nobody ever differed with Jack Scudamore. 
The good fellows of his numerous acquaintance 
would as soon think of maint aining a dispute with 
a hogshead of claret — which his expansive corpora- 
tion seemed striving to resemble— as one with the 
ex-master of the Delamere Hunt ; for, alas ! that 
fearless as jovial master of hounds had grown too 
corpulent for hunting, and, when free from his 
frequent torment, was obliged to run his runs over 
and over again to the friends who were willing to 
enjoy his punch with his loquacity. 

" But, uncle," observed Lord Pitzmaurice 
mildly, from the other end of the table, "if you 
were to see the fellows at Melton Mowbray, I am 



PORCHESTER HOUSE. 63 

sure you would acknowledge that they did the 
thing in very good style." 

" What you may call a good style, Fitz," re- 
plied the old gentleman ; " a style, my boy, as safe 
*s a three-legged stool." 

And his fat chin manifested its triple folds, and 
his capacious mouth expanded to utter a sonorous 
laugh, the joviality of which it was impossible to 
resist. 

" You should have been with me," he added 
exultantly, " the day of the find at Pylchberry 
Copse. There you would have seen the proper 
style, if you like. I was on Boanoake, sire of 
Hieover, who won the Dorrington Steeplechase 
two years later. There never was a better horse 
to ride across country. He'd go at any tiling. 
2To brook was too wide for him, no fence too high. 
JZounds, sir! he'd have gone at a hayrick if I'd 
put him at it." 

As the last assertion was addressed to Captain 
Calverley, he felt bound to express his admiration 
for so very valuable a hunter. 



64 jack scudamore's daughter. 

" Reynard seemed inclined to take such un- 
common good care of his brush," resumed the old 
sportsman, " that the hounds were kept at so long 
a scent as sufficed to tell them the way he had 
gone. And yet the pace was tremendous. It was 
besides as trying a line as could be found in the 
whole county. Ditches, walls, double hedges, banks, 
five-barred gates, and high ox-fences in number 
enough to pump the wind out of the best horse- 
flesh ever saddled. I never knew so many falls ; 
I never saw so many horses brought to a stand- 
still in a single field. My Lord Vernon had a 
mare called Cleopatra. She won the Hunters* 
Stakes at Kingscote Races only a month before. 
Zounds, sir! she broke down in a meadow little 
more than five miles from the start." 

Arthur ventured to express a proper amount of 
sympathy for the noble owner. 

" She cost a hatful of money, Captain, only 
the preceding week, and was led home not worth a 
five-pound note. But then my friend Sir Harry 
Chester," he added, as his guest betrayed aston- 



PORCHESTER HOUSE. 65 

ishment, "he was worse off; for lie rode his famous 
gelding Bob. Such a fencer ! Sir Harry backed 
Bob for a hundred guineas against the Duke of 
Porchester's Arab, Saladin, to run a measured 
mile on the downs, and won by a length. Yet 
Bob, going over a quickset, tumbled into a quarry 
and broke his owner's collar-bone." 

The gallant Captain tried to divide his commis- 
eration in a sportsmanlike maimer between Bob 
and Sir Harry. 

"Parson Wilbraham, who never was thrown' 
before, was flung into a turnip-field in the first 
burst ; and Major Moppetts, of the militia, broke 
his arm in tumbling over a five-barred gate that 
led into the lane where he had a second horse in 
waiting. Old Driver, the lawyer, was nearly 
drowned in the river, into which his cob fell back- 
wards ; and Dr. Wigglesby was run away with by 
his steed as the fox was breaking cover, and was 
left struggling in the marsh at Sockington Hollow 
till some men from the farm on the hill beyond, 
managed to drag him out." 

VOL. II. f 



66 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" But how did you get on, uncle ?" inquired 
the Viscount. 

" Pretty fair, my boy ; pretty fair. I chapged 
Boanoake for Tippoo Saib at the Three Bridges. 
Tippoo was a gray gelding of prodigious power 
and endurance, with a tremendous stride; so I 
got over the ground in first-rate style, and was 
shortly pretty well up with the hounds, that I 
could see mounting a hill in my front. As I 
was taking a stiffish leap, I flew right over young 
Tilbury — son of Sir Marmaduke Tilbury of Til- 
bury Manor — who had been thrown a few minutes 
before, going over that identical fence, and had not 
yet quite recovered from the shock. ' Sharp run 
this, Mr. Tilbury !' said I ; but before the young 
chap could exercise his somewhat-scattered wits, 
I was far out of hearing. 

" You see, Captain, one has hardly time to be 
civil when riding after hounds at a break-neck pace. 
If your neighbour has touched the grass, all that 
can be expected from you is, to keep your horse 
from trampling on him. If the scent is good, and 



P0BCHE8TEB HOUSE. 67 

you are well up, your neighbour must need** liolp 
himself, or wait till the more backward of the hunt 
can come to hi* aasistanco." 

Captain Calverley readily acknowledged that 
first come (to grief) wan rarely first served in the 
hunting-field. 

"As I was hurried away, I knew that the 
same fate would happen to me should I be thrown. 
Zounds, sir ! in tlie very next field Tippoo slipjjed, 
then stopped short, while about to take his leap, 
and threw me clean over his head. 

" ' Hullo, Jack, is that you V criod my Lord 
Vernon, while I was sitting up, examining the 
state of my limbs. My lord was now on his fa* 
mous horse Em]>eror, and was pressing on for a 
front place. I had barely time to see him passing 
through a gap that opened upon a steep bank that 
descended into a green lane, when he was out of 
sight. 

u i Sharp run this, Mr. Scudamore!' exclaimed 
another voice passing over me, just as I had come to 
the conclusion that I was not particularly hurt 



68 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Zounds, sir ! it was young Tilbury ; and to make 
the matter more aggravating, lie had caught and 
was riding my horse. 

" 6 Stop, stop !' I shouted, and sprang up with 
an alacrity which proved that I possessed the full 
use of my limbs. I shouted to the winds. Tippoo's 
stride took him into the green lane before I had 
ran a dozen yards." 

"Uncommon cool of young Tilbury," remarked 
Lord Fitzmaurice. 

His friend expressed a similar opinion. 

" Cool ! zounds, sir, it was about the coolest 
thing I had ever seen done in the hunting-field. 
But I was determined to be even with him. I saw 
Jiis horse at a distance, and after a little trouble 
managed to mount him. Then rode about half a 
mile, where my third horse had been placed. He 
was Brother to Highflyer who won the Doncaster 
St. Leger of that season — an animal of amazing 
speed and bottom. I was soon gaining ground 
upon the pack which were in full cry, with their 
fox not very far in advance. The huntsman and 



PORCHESTEB HOUSE. 69 

-whipper-in were following, and only two other 
gentlemen riders were before me. Zounds, sir! 
I presently recognised the hindmost as young 
Tilbury." 

Captain Calverley warmly expressed his satis- 
faction* 

" I instantly gave chase ; and as Brother to 
Highflyer was quite fresh, the distance between 
him and Tippoo gradually diminished. As I was 
coming up hand over hand, Tippoo's rider turned 
his head round. By George, sir, nothing could 
exceed his astonishment when he beheld me. He 
was approaching a gate, and seemed suddenly to 
lose his head, for he checked Tippoo when taking 
the spring. The consequence was, the top bar was 
broken off, Tippoo's knees badly cut, and his rider 
thrown. 

" ' The price of that horse is five hundred 
guineas, Mr. Tilbury,' I said to him quietly, as 
he was picking himself up ; c my steward shall 
call on you for the amount.' 

" Without waiting to observe his discomfiture, 



70 jack scudamore's daughteb. 

I hurried forward, and in a few minutes had the 
satisfaction of passing Lord Vernon just as his 
horse had fallen dead-lame. A little later the 
hounds ran into their fox, and I brought his 
brush home to add to the numerous trophies of 
the same kind that adorn the walls of my dining- 
room." 

Captain Calverley had listened to the old sports- 
man's narrative with quite as much interest as he 
had given to many a similar tale years before, 
when his enthusiasm for his favourite pursuit had 
won his favour. 

How natural seemed the graphic picture once 
more presented to him ! How genial sounded the 
mellow voice that had so often made the great 
dining-hall at Delamere Court ring with its " Hark 
forward, hark forward, tantivy !" its " Tally-ho !" 
and many another jovial refrain indissolubly con- 
nected with British field-sports and good-fellow- 
ship ! And how familiar seemed the emphatic ex- 
pletives in which the narrator brought attention 
to the more impressive facts of his story — a habit 



PORCHESTEB HOUSE. 71 

which was carried to a much greater extent by 
his fox-hunting contemporaries* 

And now here was honest Jack Scudamore, 
the pride of the most sporting county in England, 
the master of the best pack of fox-hounds in the 
three kingdoms, so far out of his element as to be 
playing host in a small dining-room in May Fair, 
instead of being surrounded by a noisy throng of 
brother sportsmen, devoting his stirring recitals to 
the entertainment of two London idlers — a class of 
bipeds he had tdways most heartily despised. 

The cause of this change of scene was partly 
due to the necessity of having a London establish- 
ment, for the purpose of seeing his heiress properly 
introduced to the great world. So after an absence 
from the modern Babylon of nearly a quarter of a 
century, the reckless roysterer of a former gene- 
ration returned to his old haunts, steadied by the 
anxieties of a parent. There was another reason 
for his transferring his home to London. 

Though Jack Scudamore could no longer lead 
his brother fox-hunters in the field, they discovered 



72 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

that he could represent them in Parliament; and 
before he could make up his mind to check the 
tide of popularity the idea had set in motion, it 
made him one of the members for the county. 
As he had always been an ardent politician, the 
honour was by no means disagreeable to him ; but 
he did not find it easy to reconcile himself to the 
charge it entailed. 

" It's a hard thing, Captain," he said to his 
guest confidentially, " to have to give up the sad- 
dle ; but the fact is, no horse can be found master 
of my weight, at any rate to take me to hounds. 
But to give up the hunting-field and all my old 
Cheshire friends and neighbours; to be tied to a 
petticoat in this horrible smoky place ; to find one- 
self, as it were, just as closely tied to a minister ; 
moreover, to have to attend wearisome debates in 
the stifling atmosphere of the House of Commons 
— zounds, sir! I wish myself back at Delamere 
Court fifty times a day !" 

" But every one must make some sacrifice in 
the course of his life, uncle," observed his kinsman*. 



P0RCHE8TER HOUSE. 73 

"All, that's all very well, my boy," replied 
the old sportsman ; " that is, it's all very well for 
London idlers. They haven't got much to sacri- 
fice, I'm thinking, for I know the sort of life they 
lead ; but when you come to hear that the foxes 
in your covers were never so plentiful nor so 
stanch, it's hard, on a fine hunting-day, to be 
moped in a carriage in these dreadful narrow 
streets, or at night stuck in a doorway, in a 
mob of dolls and monkeys that pass for people of 
fashion nowadays." 

" Well, you need not go to the ball, uncle, 
to-night," said Lord Fitzmaurice, joining in the 
laugh the old sportsman's unfavourable idea of 
London idling had excited; "the Captain and 
myself will be quite sufficient escort for the girls." 

" Glad to hear it, my boy," he replied ; " you 
may take charge of them and welcome. If you 
should see Porchester, don't forget to tell him I'm 
in town." 

It was far from the first time that Captain 
Calverley had heard the name of that very dis- 



74 JACK scudamore'b daughter. 

tinguished member of the Government, but it 
made no impression on his mind* He had no 
idea of the powerful influence it was destined to 
exert over his career. 

" Why don't you get into Parliament, Cap* 
tain? 1 ' inquired his host. " I've gained the M.P. 
affix/ 9 he added, "and desire to see some of my 
friends with the same distinction ; though between 
you and I and the post, I begin to feel very like 
an old hound driven along with a certain ornament 
dangling against his heels, that besides being any 
thing but an addition to his comfort, brings on 
him more public notice than he is in the humour 
to enjoy." 

He laughed the cheery laugh so familiar to the 
Delamere Hunt, and both his hearers joined in 
his mirth. 

" I've heard a good deal about you from some 
of your well-wishers," he added, still addressing 
him; "and, knowing something of you myself, I 
can't help thinking that you're much better suited 
for parliamentary life than I am — a precious 



P0BCHE8TER HOUSE, 75 

sight better, I should say. You have only to 
say the word, Captain, and I'll speak to Por- 
chester; and between us, by George, sir, you 
shall be in St Stephen's in a week." 

Captain Calverley had hardly time to express 
his acknowledgments, when a message was brought 
in that the ladies were waiting ; and, having fin- 
ished their coffee and shaken hands with their 
cordial host, he and Lord Fitzmaurice proceeded 
to the drawing-room, where they found Geraldine 
and Fanny Scudamore, their attractions set off 
and increased by the most careful of full-dress 
toilettes. 

As they were late, even for the Duke of Por- 
chester's fashionable entertainments, little was said 
by either till after they had entered the carriage, 
and then the conversation was of that mildly- 
entertaining type that will not bear repetition — 
innocuous nothings apparently kept always in 
readiness for use in certain social contingencies. 

Captain Calverley, though a model of gal- 
lantry, could not have been particularly com- 



,76 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

municatlve just then, for his thoughts were 
tinged with an interest that he felt hound to 
conceal. He had heard of the Duke of Por- 
Chester's admiration of his comrade's beautiful 
sister, and had reason to believe that his grace 
had thrown open his magnificent mansion much 
more with the idea of gratifying her than of pleas- 
ing his numerous guests* So he handed her into 
the vehicle that took them to Cavendish Square, 
and, when they there arrived, beheld her ascend 
the grand staircase with her cousin, to join the 
Duke's sister, the Marchioness of Fulbroke, who 
had helped him in doing the honours of his town- 
house since the decease of the last Duchess, with 
a confusion of feelings he would have found it 
impossible to describe. 

To most sensible people arrived at a certain 
age, a ball must appear a commonplace affair; 
to the thorough utilitarian, a ballroom will pre- 
sent any thing rather than an instructive spec- 
tacle ; but Captain Calverley did not consider 
himself too old, nor was he too sensible, to despise 



PORCHESTKK HOUSE. 77 

the attractions that met his gaze as he entered 
the well-decorated, well-filled suite of apartments 
in Porchester House, in which had assembled all 
that was most worthy of admiration and honour 
in English society. The scene was as brilliant 
as Almack's, — the company quite as select; in- 
deed, preoccupied though his mind was, he could 
not help regarding the tableau as singularly 
bright 

Lord Fitzmaurice drew on himself a good 
deal of attention : whether for his fair youthful 
face, his coronet, or his empty sleeve, can- 
not be stated; all that is known for certain is 
that he was generally observed by the female 
moiety of that brilliant assemblage. Many a 
faultless figure bent slightly forward as he 
passed, and many a radiant pair of eyes glanced 
with eager interest over the owner's ivory fan. 
In most instances I am willing to believe that 
it was merely an allowable form of hero-wor- 
ship; in some, such demonstrations may have 
been caused by other motives, which regarded 



78 jack scudamore's daughter. 

rather the future husband than the present 
hero* 

If such views were entertained, they certainly 
were not shared by their object He looked much 
in the humour of the philosophic Prince of Den- 
mark, when, as he affirmed, man contented not 
him, nor woman either. He was aware that his 
cousin, whom he had long admired, did not fa- 
vour his suit His clear complexion was tinged 
with a settled melancholy, that only gave way td a 
more cheerful expression when he recognised any 
one of the lovely faces that were smiling upon 
him, or returned the friendly greeting with which 
he was accosted by a brother officer. 

Now and then he would linger a moment in 
the midst of a favoured group, freely exchanging 
the ordinary badinage ; then glide away, perfectly 
regardless of the fluttering hearts that wished 
so very much to detain him in their neigh- 
bourhood. Presently he led his comrade towards 
the Marchioness of Fulbroke, to whom the Cap* 
tain was not entirely unknown, and he had no 



F0RCHE8TKR HOUSE. 79 

reason to be (Unsatisfied witli his reception. A 
very stately matron was the Marchioness, and 
she evidently felt the full weight of the family 
dignity. 

The Duke was at a little distance, with rather 
nn ostentatious gallantry conversing with the 
beautiful cousins. In his official dress he ap- 
peared an elegant man, certainly; but was as 
much below the medium height as he was above 
the medium age. His grace had been a widower 
at least a year ; but, though he had buried three 
wives, it was said that he was again a candidate 
for matrimony. The rumour perhaps accounted 
for the large assemblage of ladies among the 
Duke's guests. 

He received Arthur Calverley with the cour- 
tesy with which long habit had made him familiar, 
and then resumed his conversation with the ladies. 
Arthur could not see that he paid Geraldine more 
attention than he paid her cousin ; but it was quite 
evident that he would not allow either to consider 
herself neglected in his presence. 



80 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Captain Calverley was hurried away by Lord 
Fitzmaurice to the other end of the room, to be in- 
troduced to an old friend ; and before he could get 
away, the Duke had opened the ball with Geral- 
dine, and the heiress had found a partner in his 
brother-in-law and colleague, the Marquis of Ful- 
broke, whose portly person and large face he had 
the satisfaction of observing going through the 
figure of a quadrille with as solemn a decorum as 
though he were listening to an ultimatum, or 
drawing up a protocol. 

Lord Fitzmaurice joined the set, but evidently 
took his partner at random* Arthur did not assist 
in that dance, nor in the next, in which the Duke 
and his brother-in-law exchanged partners, ab- 
solutely preferring a conversation with the stately 
Marchioness and a select circle of magnificent 
matrons, into which he had been drawn ; but when 
he found that both the cabinet-ministers had led 
their partners to their seats, with no intention of 
renewing their performances — indeed, had with- 
drawn to a little distance to hear some informa- 



PORCHESTER HOUSE, 81 

tion, apparently of more than ordinary political in- 
terest, from one of the foreign ambassadors — he 
seized the opportunity to approach the younger of 
the fair cousins. Without a word she arose, and, 
placing her arm in his, allowed him to lead her 
back to the dancers. 

Never had Geraldine appeared more beautiful 
than when, with a smile and blush that seemed to 
rival each other in the modest grafce they gave her 
pure nun-like face, she evinced her pleasure at his 
presence, and floated lightly along in her tasteful 
ball-dress, with an exquisite wreath of pale roses 
in her hair. As she stood by his side, he could 
not help indulging in a long retrospect to com- 
pare her with the prim, precise, half-pleased, half- 
frightened child, who had ventured to look for a 
moment her gratitude to her preserver, even in 
the presence of the rigid yet picturesque old grand- 
mamma, whom she loved quite as much as she 
feared. 

The handsome Captain liked to think of her 
thus. I do not know what the charm was ; but 

VOL. II. G 



7 



82 jack scudamoke's daughter. 

the quaint elements of that singular picture of the 
past, in which she was so charming a figure, con* 
stantly recurred to him. 

Notwithstanding the spontaneous act of con- 
fidence she had just exhibited, Arthur could not 
help noticing an evident reticence in her manner, 
a restraint that almost amounted to reluctance, as 
if she were under the influence of some latent ap- 
prehension that maintained subjection over her 
natural feelings. Could this be caused, he thought, 
by her knowledge that her marriage with the Duke 
of Porchester was arranged, and because she knew 
that she was about to indulge in a social pleasure 
that must be the finale of what she probably had 
considered an agreeable intercourse ? 

As he looked down upon her bright young 
face, he regretted that her fate should bring her 
such overwhelming dignity as must belong to the 
fourth mistress of that stately Porchester House. 
But what could he do ? She deserved a brilliant 
destiny, and this it was not in his power to offer. 
Though he felt the inappreciable value of what 



P0BCHE8TER HOUSE. 83 

was passing to another, in that spirit of true devo- 
tion which admits not of a particle of selfishness, 
he endeavoured to reconcile himself to her loss. 

At such a time, and under such impressions, 
it was scarcely possible for him to avoid betraying 
a peculiar interest in his attentions to so charming 
a partner. Her beauty was of so peculiarly femi- 
nine a type ; its expression was so pure, so noble, 
and so true; and brought, as he was, for the 
first time with her in that apparent confiden- 
tial intimacy which the dance sanctions, how 
could he help experiencing an intense appreciation 
of the prize that mocked him by its easiness of 
approach ? 

As if Geraldine understood the feeling she had 
inspired, she seemed to relax in her restraint after 
the dance had commenced. Her glance became 
kinder ; her voice, in the few words that they oc- 
casionally exchanged, seemed unusually soft and 
thrilling; and more than once she answered his 
remarks with a smile that lingered on the lovely 
fece like a sunset over an Italian landscape. 



84 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

She gave him her hand, when the figure re- 
quired it, with a winning grace that made resig- 
nation almost impossible ; and she appeared to 
follow him with her mild tender eyes with a 
pathetic sweetness of expression that filled his 
heart with the divine pity it seemed to breathe. 

Arthur glided about as in a dream, pursuing 
a spirit that led his footsteps and held his senses 
captive, strangely bewildered and confused, and 
only recalled to a sense of the actual world by 
some kind words she addressed to him in the 
pauses at the end of each dance. 

Finally came the grand ronde, with her hand 
once more cheerfully placed in his ; and again he 
repeated the figure, in which they continued to 
regard each other as though passing through an 
ordeal that brought burning ploughshares to the 
heart instead of to the feet. 

The quadrille was over. As they walked 
away, her arm again resting on his, they seemed 
equally oppressed with their feelings. He felt 
overpowered with a languor that had crept over 



PORCHESTER HOUSE. 86 

Lis senses like an opiate. It was clear to him tliat 
he must accept the present delightful demonstra- 
tion as a farewell, — a farewell like that recorded 
by Shenstone: 

" So sweetly she said her adieu, 

That I thought she had bade me return/' 

While he was in this peculiar frame of mind, 
passing among the throng of joyous spirits in 
search of Lord Fitzmaurice, quite unexpectedly 
the Duke of Porchester presented himself, and, as 
he understood, claimed Geraldine's hand. She 
withdrew it from her partner's arm, and placed it 
in that of the Duke. They walked away. Arthur 
was immediately sensible of a reaction that made 
every nerve in his body tingle with suppressed 
feeling. 

He soon afterwards met the Viscount and his 
cousin, chatting together in the highest spirits. 
Arthur joined with a kind of reckless enjoyment 
.he had never before experienced in their light- 
hearted conversation. Presently Lord Fitzmaurice 



86 jack scudamore's daughter. 

left them to speak to a schoolfellow he discerned 
passing out of the room. In her also he observed 
an unusual reserve. Her manner was totally dif* 
ferent to that which had rendered her beauty so 
alluring when they sung together that dangerous 
liebeslied. 

"Ah!" thought the gallant cavalry-officer, 
" she has not forgiven my audacity. But how 
the deuce could I have helped it !" 

He strove earnestly to amuse her. His sallies 
were favourably received. Presently she had re- 
covered her customary liveliness. To those around 
they must have appeared the happiest couple 
present 

A waltz was commenced by the orchestra; 
and finding her disengaged, the gallant Captain 
the next minute was whirling with her round the 
room. 

She entered into the spirit of the dance with 
such thorough abandonment, and with so exqui- 
site a grace, that it was impossible for her gra- 



PORCHESTEB HOUSE. 87 

tilled partner to conceal his enjoyment The 
heiress, with her Juno-like figure and dazzling 
beauty, clinging to him with eyes fixed on his, 
radiant with pleasure, might have turned a cooler 
head. 

The pleasure Arthur had experienced led to 
no imprudence on his part beyond a too-evident 
satisfaction in the graceful exercise to which he 
had surrendered himself; nor was there any thing 
more blamable in the conduct of his attractive 
partner ; but when the waltz ended, the conviction 
was forced upon him that he had unwittingly 
committed some grave offence. 

Prominent among the lookers-on he observed 
Lord Fitzmaurice and his sister standing together 
at a little distance from the dancers. They had 
evidently been watching the waltzers. The face 
of the first was clouded with a gloom that gave 
an angry expression to his pale, almost boyish, 
countenance his comrade had never seen there 
before. The features of the other were inex- 
pressibly sad. Both turned away as the music 



88 jack scudamore's daughter. 

ceased, and he saw them no more thai even- 
ing. 

As he was leading Miss Scodamoie out of 
the dancing-room, he was again encountered by 
the bine ribbon and white head of his host, who 
seemed fated on this night to mar all this young 
soldier's pleasures; for, having stated that the 
Marchioness had sent him for her, Arthur had 
no alternative but to resign his partner, as he 
had before resigned her cousin. 

He met some friends shortly afterwards, in 
whose society he remained dancing jind convers- 
ing till an opportunity offered for rejoining his 
own party. He then found that the cousins had 
been escorted to the supper-room by the two gal- 
lant statesmen, and there surrounded by the most 
distinguished of the Duke's guests, were unap- 
proachable. He could not see Lord Fitzmaurice. 

Shortly afterwards, in any thing but a plea- 
sant state of mind, Arthur left Porchester House, 
with the intention of calling on his fox-hunting 
friend in the morning, to see if any thing could 



PORCHESTER HOUSE. 89 

be made of his proffered assistance to get him into 
Parliament ; for he felt that he wanted something 
of the exciting nature of a contested election to 
divert his attention from unprofitable speculations 
and regrete. 



CHAPTER IV. 

ST. HILDEBRAKD. 

It was a great day for the parish of Delamere 
Parva. It was the anniversary of the birth of 
that sainted hermit, who, under the auspices of 
its zealous Vicar, had given a name to the new 
church, and a life of equal local fame to the reli- 
gious library. It was "the Feast of St Hilde- 
brand." 

St. Hildebrand's bells were ringing a merry 
peal, to the great gratification of the pious-minded 
of the congregation, who lived furthest from the 
belfry — to the intense annoyance of others, " the 
weaker brethren," whose dwellings were close to 
it — particularly of Jacob Cobb, a retired maltster, 
whose neat brick -house, covered with monthly 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 91 

roses the best part of the year, was immediately 
underneath. 

Jacob Cobb hated their clang ; but though ho 
was an influential man in the neighbourhood, he 
found himself powerless to stop it. When his 
daughter lay ill of brain-fever, soon after these 
noisy additions to the new structure had been 
hung, his complaint merely elicited a suggestion 
to put cotton in the patient's ears — which did not 
make him more tolerant of the nuisance. 

But what could Jacob Cobb expect? Was 
he not " that pig of a churchwarden," whose 
representations to the Bishop had put a check 
upon certain novelties in the ornamentation of the 
new church which the zealous Vicar had intended 
to introduce; and was he not known to be the 
writer of the letters in the Dehmere Guardian, 
that had accused him of popish practices? So 
the ringers were encouraged to show their skill 

on all saints'-days and holidays, on every Lord's- 

« 

day, besides assembling for practice twice or thrice 
a-week. 



92 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Of course, it being the feast of the hermit, 
his bells had been ringing from an early hour, 
going through their most approved evolutions,—* 
grandsires, triple -bob -majors, and other grand 
achievements in the art, — in a style that ought to 
have driven the pig of a churchwarden either 
stone-deaf or raving mad. 

Suddenly the jubilant peal ceased: two or 
three now struck up a more religious round ; they 
were ringing for church. The familiar summons 
to morning service ljad scarcely commenced, when, 
from a low quaint stone structure near the sacred 
edifice, a procession of boys moved out in their 
Sunday suits, while from the other wing issued a 
similar number of girls in an equally neat uni- 
form. They were marshalled by their teachers; 
and, prayer-book in hand, slowly filed into the 
church by a side-entrance. 

From the centre of the same building now 
issued a few old men and women, coarsely but 
neatly clothed, who slowly made their way to 
the same door. They were followed by other 



ST. HILDEBRAKD. 93 

poor parishioners, who received coals, blankets, 
soup; bread, and physic — on condition of regular 
attendance at every service. They therefore found 
it to their interests to be the most punctual por- 
tion of the congregation. 

Lastly came the rate-payers, who represented 
the parish, with their families, a very large ma- 
jority being females. The zealous Vicar had ac- 
complished a great deal. He had obtained extra- 
ordinary influence over the ladies of Delamere 
Parva. No preacher in the county possessed so 
many worked slippers, embroidered book-markers, 
or illuminated inscriptions. He was uncommonly 
well off in church-furniture where ornate needle- 
work was required, and had abundant assistance 
in the choir, in the school, and in the infirmary. 
Old ladies and young ladies vied with each other 
in making themselves useful to the reverend gen- 
tleman, as well as in wearing the largest set of 
jet-beads and the most conspicuous crosses. 

Ill-natured people attributed this to the bacher 
lorship of the Vicar ; but probably it had more to do 



94 JACK 8CCDAMOSE'8 DAUGHTER. 

with the lack of amusement in the neighbourhood. 
Husbands and brothers were constantly employed 
in agricultural or sporting occupations; and if 
they went to church on a Sunday, seemed under 
the impression that this duty sufficed for the week. 
The wives and sisters took quite a different view 
of their religious obligations. 

It was astonishing to mark the diffusion of 
architectural taste, as displayed by some even of the 
youngest members of this ftir flock, as they ap- 
proached die most noticeable features in the new 
church. Every young lady, fresh from boarding- 
school, seemed to have an enthusiastic apprecia- 
tion for the grim heads that poked out from the 
strangest pfflories. 

It appeared as if, on this important occasion, 
some influence had been exercised by them on 
the young gentlemen of their acquaintance ; for 
few of them were to be seen without such a com- 
panion. The farmers' and the tradesmen's daugh- 
ters eame in toilettes that might have sufficed for 
peeresses in their own right, redolent of fashion- 



ST. HILDEBRAOT. 95 

able perfumery; and the gentlewomen by birth 
in dresses that were only distinguishable from the 
others by being less pretentious and better made. 

Each belle, however, had made it a point to 
come with her beau, every one in his smartest tie 
and his best hat, his newest gloves on his hands, 
and his whitest pocket-handkeroliief peeping out 
of his breast-coat pocket. It must not be sup- 
posed that the young ladies of Little Delamere 
took advantage of this association, for flirting. 
Even the most rustic of them knew better than to 
do that 

They were folly aware that it was not exactly 
Sunday ; but then dear Mr. Plynly mmon had as- 
sured them that the Feast of St. Hildebrand was to 
be kept as the very holiest of institutions. He was 
the special saint of Little Delamere, the particular 
patron of its church ; therefore all Anglo-Catholics 
in the parish, all real Christians in fact, were 
bound to keep his anniversary in especial honour. 

On this account it was tliat the three Misses 
Thornicroft, and the two Misses Bolsover, and the 



96 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

one Miss Hawthorn, with the other interesting 
feminine broods then representing the young 
ladyhood of that favoured district, had appropri, 
ated the most respectable-looking of the young 
men of the district, including Fred Styles, the 
surgeon's apprentice, and Harry Sradshaw, the 
attorney's articled clerk, and seemed intent on 
nothing so much as making them acquainted with 
the most interesting miracles that had been per- 
formed by their sainted hermit, as related in the 
charming little volume written by their beloved 
pastor. 

So. group after group, and couple after couple, 
were seen to proceed in the same direction, talk- 
ing and listening with equal earnestness, till they 
disappeared through the antique-looking porch at 
the front entrance. 

Unquestionably there were some of the ap- 
proaching congregation who were neither young 
ladies nor young gentlemen. In the first place, 
there were matrons who had turned their backs on 
their youth for an uncertain number of decades; 



ST. HILDEBBAND. 97 

mothers of families, aware of their serious respon- 
sibilities, widows, wives, and spinsters, who had 
come to the conclusion that their spiritual obliga- 
tions overruled their social ones. Nevertheless, 
very few of them were found superior to the 
claims of fashion, — from Mrs. Protheroe in a sky- 
blue moire-antique and Cashmere shawl, to Miss 
Euphemia Proudfoot in her delicate green silk and 
lace jacket, — they all looked as if they had studied 
the illustrations of " Les Modes de Paris," quite 
as much as " The Life and Times of St. Hilde- 
brand." 

In the next place, but only here and there one, 
there were fathers of families, or seniors of the 
male community, who were led either by curiosity 
or interest to attend that particular service. Pro- 
minent among them was a respectable-looking 
elderly man of florid complexion, wearing a white 
hat that did not quite conceal his iron-gray hair, 
a dark cloth shooting-jacket with large pockets, 
buttoned upon a velvet waistcoat, and brown ker- 
seymere trowsefs, over the lower portion of which 

VOL. II. H 



98 jack scudamore's daughter. 

a pair of high Wellington boots had been drawn. 
He carried his gloves in one hand, and a thick 
walking-stick in the other. His limbs, however, 
if bulk could be taken as a sign of strength, 
scarcely needed such support. Yet he rested on 
his stick as he took what seemed a critical survey 
of the new building; certainly not with an air 
of enthusiasm; indeed as his eyes rested upon the 
heads introduced at the termination of the arches, 
unquestionably he wore an irreverent look. 

" What the dickins could a chap want thrusting 
his ugly head among them stones ?" he mentally 
inquired. " If the rest o' his body were inside, I 
could come pretty nigh to understand it ; because 
he might have been a leaning out when that arch 
sunk; but there be nothin' left on him, but his 
big shaven crown, inside or out; and he looks 
as though he didn't care twopence what's come 
of his limbs ! Well, if this be to show us what 
was done in them medi-evil times — precious evil 
them times must have been, I'm thinking.'' 

As an excuse for this verbal blunder, I must 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 99 

inform the reader that the speaker was a pig ! At 
least he had long been so in the consideration of 
the Rev. Basil Plynlymmon. That stout ruddy 
comfortable-looking person was the churchwarden 
of Delamere Parva — a thorn in the side of the 
zealous Vicar, for he not only very stupidly and 
ignorantly had opposed several of his Anglo-Catho- 
lic improvements, but had influenced many of the 
oldest and most respectable of the parishioners to 
adopt his piggish views. 

Whilst Jacob Cobb was thus absurdly specula- 
ting on the origin of an architectural ornament, 
he was not aware that a stranger was approaching 
him. 

"A very handsome church this, for so small 
a parish," the latter observed. 

The churchwarden turned, and beheld a gentle- 
manly-looking man of middle age, with a large 
cleanly shaved face, and projecting bushy black 
eye-brows, though his hair was nearly white. He 
had a very grave expression of countenance, and 
his complexion was that of a man used to late 



100 jack scudamobe's daughter, ' 

hours and hard study. He was dressed in black, 
with long black overcoat 

The churchwarden took off his hat, for though 
he was a pig, he had more than a pig's notion of 
courtesy and good breeding. As he glanced over 
the stranger, he came to the conclusion that he 
was the Wesleyan minister, for whom the new 
chapel was being built at the other end of the 
village. For reasons of his own, though he had 
always hated Dissenters, he determined to be 
friendly; specially when the stranger returned 
his courtesy, by raising his hat, with a good na- 
tured smile, that contrasted favourably in the eyes 
of the churchwarden with the stern supercilious- 
ness of his Vicar, when meeting him. 

" Why, yes, sir, it be handsome, I daresay," 
Mr. Cobb replied ; with, however, rather a doubt- 
ful look at the building. " Wonderful fine for so 
small a place as Little Delamere; but the old 
church where my family worshipped for genera- 
tions, were a thousand times more agreeable to 
me to look on." 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 101 

" No doubt, no doubt; a very proper feeling, 
Mr. Cobb," was the reply, in a kind tone. 

" When I think of the time when my dear 
mother used to lead me by the hand into the 
old pew," continued the churchwarden, " and 
found out the places for me in the prayer-book, 
and know that the familiar objects on which she 
used to gaze with so profound a veneration are 
entirely gone, while all kinds of queer gimcracks 
are put in their places, to tell you the plain truth, 
sir, I can't admire it nohow." 

"Nothing more natural, Mr. Cobb," said the 
other, with the same kindly look and manner, evi- 
dently not in the slightest degree surprised that 
a pig should have feelings so like a Christian. 
" But all things in this lower world are subject 
to change, as no doubt you are well aware, Mr. 
Cobb. A building, however endeared to us by 
the recollections of childhood, cannot be made to 
last for ever. Heaven alone is eternal." 

The churchwarden felt a conviction, earnest 
churchman though he was, that if his new ac- 



102 jack kcitdamobe's daughter. 

quaintance preached as impressively an he talked, 
the little chapel would soon have a foil congrega- 
tion. 

u But let us go in, Mr. Cobb," wa» added, in 
a tone almost of entreaty ; " I have come ex- 
pressly to liave tlie privilege of joining in your 
service." 

The churchwarden wa* too good a church- 
man to licsitate about complying with such a 
request, so he at once led the way into the 
quaintly-ornamented porch. Both took off their 
liats, and reverently entered the building. The 
entire congregation appeared to be assembled in 
two divisions, — the women on one side, the men 
on the other, — seated on low benches, with a 
broad opening in the centre. 

The churchwarden led tlie way to a back seat, 
where his new acquaintance placed himself in a 
dark corner, behind one of the fantastic projec- 
tions with which the building was ornamented. 
Simultaneously both seemed to repeat a short 
prayer, and then sat down. 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 103 

Mr. Cobb was not surprised at the apparent 
curiosity of his companion. No doubt, to a Dis- 
senter, the accumulation of Popish ornaments 
must be strange indeed. In the stained glass, 
in the stone carvings, in the reading-desk, in 
the pulpit, in the screen, in tho chancel, — in 
truth, in a score of other places, there were 
symbols and objects only to be found, he be- 
lieved, in Roman Catholic places of worship. 

Then, instead of the modest communion-table, 
such as satisfied tho religious feelings of the fol- 
lowers of the earnest, but simple-minded Wesley, 
there was an altar covered with a richly-embroid- 
ered cloth, a large cross, a pair of tall gilt candle- 
sticks with great wax candles, and a profusion of 
flowers and tapers. 

Above was an altarpiece by a famous pre- 
Raphaelite, representing the hermit at his devo- 
tions, clothed in a monk's gown and hood, and 
looking dreadfully gaunt and cadaverous. A robin 
was singing at the opening of the cave, whose 
plumage was regarded as a masterpiece of art ; 



104 jack scudamobe'b daughter. 

but other enthusiasts gave higher praise to the 
exquisite finish of the saint's toenails. 

The frame was covered with an inscription in 
red letters ; but as they were in a Gothic cha- 
racter, the churchwarden had never been able to 
decipher them. Bound it was a kind of triumphal 
arch of flowers and evergreens, similar decorations 
ornamenting the doors of the chancel, the win- 
dows, and all the church furniture. This was, of 
course, in honour of St. Hildebrand, and had been 
done by those amiable young ladies who were most 
zealous in the service of the zealous Vicar. 

Scarcely had the stranger taken a careful sur- 
vey of these novelties when the organ began to 
sound, and from the front door entered a proces- 
sion of choristers, acolytes, and clergymen. The 
congregation stood up while their minister and his 
assistants passed between the two divisions, sing- 
ing with much apparent fervour. The majority 
were in surplices ; but there were others wearing 
vestments of a peculiarly rich fabric, and one or 
two bore banners of silk painted and embroid- 



ST. HHDEBRAND. 105 

erecL They marched into the chancel, where 
they finished their hymn ; the banners were sus- 
pended on each side of the altar ; and choir and 
priests having taken their respective places, the 
morning service commenced. 

From time to time the churchwarden turned 
to watch the effect of certain portions of the ritual 
on his dissenting acquaintance: the intoning of 
the curate, — a special abomination in his ears; 
the acolytes in their smart robes, swaying their 
censers to and fro ; the gaudy vestments of the 
Vicar, and his extraordinary gesticulations be- 
fore the altar; — but the solemn, thoughtful face 
gave no sign either of impatience or displeasure. 
There was an earnest scrutiny beneath those over- 
hanging brows — that was all. 

Perhaps the Wesleyan minister, he thought, 
did 'not like to exhibit any hostile feeling against 
a brother clergyman in his own church. He was 
certainly very attentive to what was going on ; 
even joined in the responses as heartily as himself. 
Altogether his conduct was extremely liberal for 



106 jack sccdamoke's daughter. 

a Dissenter ; especially when the offertory was 
being collected, for he absolutely dropped a piece 
of gold into the bag. 

At the conclusion of the anthem the Vicar en- 
tered the pulpit This was always a trying time 
for the churchwarden. Not only because the 
reverend gentleman would preach in his surplice 
instead of his gown, as his predecessors had done 
as far back as he could remember, but the new 
pulpit was a low, curious-looking thing, totally 
unlike the old one, and, as the preacher stood 
up, unavoidably suggested the irreverend simile 
of a jack-in-the-box. 

But the stranger was sitting, regarding the 
Vicar with the same thoughtful, penetrating gaze 
he had maintained throughout ; if any thing, the 
look was more thoughtful and searching than 
before. 

"Ah!" said Jacob Cobb to himself, "he 
wants to be able to judge what sort of a sermon 
the Vicar can preach. Them Wesleyan minis- 
ters, I've heard, are often powerful in that line. 



ST. HILDIBRAND. 107 

I doubt, though, he'll hear much that he'll care to 
remember." 

The Beverend Basil Plynlymmon gave out his 
text to an extremely attentive congregation, of 
which the stranger certainly formed one. What 
followed was merely a discourse on the merits of 
the Saint whom they had assembled to honour, 
especially dilating on his devotion and self-denial. 
This led into a panegyric on the superiority of the 
Anglo-Catholic era ; the preacher dwelling on the 
advantages of adopting a Christianity after that 
pure and unselfish pattern, in preference to what 
he stigmatised as the latitudinarianism which dis- 
graced the bulk of professing Christians of what 
was called the Church of England. 

He referred with mingled acrimony and hu- 
mour to the present state of Protestantism, and 
was particularly sarcastic on the divisions of the 
Beformed Church, of which he ventured to call 
himself an unworthy member ; then he dilated on 
the efforts that had for some time been made by 
a chosen band of its ministers to effect a change 



108 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

in the practice and ritual of the Church, as it 
existed in England, in the truly religious times 
of the blessed St Hildebrand. Intense com- 
mendation was bestowed upon Dr. Pusey, and 
the names of Wilberforce, Manning, and Newman 
were mentioned as deserving especial honour. 

The preacher, after entering upon a somewhat 
exaggerated statement of his own labours to main- 
tain what he was pleased to call the integrity of 
the rubric, commenced a highly-coloured narra- 
tive of the advantages he had been able to confer 
upon the parish. He laid great stress upon the 
beauty of the new church, the excellence of the 
bells, greater stress upon the attractiveness of the 
service ; then, with a slight and pitying reference 
to certain of " the weaker brethren" who had be- 
come needlessly alarmed by witnessing such im- 
provements, he dwelt with fervour upon the help 
he had received from his affectionate congrega- 
tion, specially eulogising their liberal contribu- 
tions to the offertory and other funds set aside for 
church purposes. 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 109 

Lastly, lie appealed to them in still stronger 
language, for increased contributions to enable 
him to carry out his views for a perfect restora- 
tion of the true Anglo-Catholic Church, hinting 
mysteriously at the advent of more marvellous 
changes that should make all the faithful believe 
in a restoration of the blessings which had so 
wonderfully distinguished the God-loving era of 
the blessed St. Hildebrand. 

From his dark corner the sharp glance of 
the churchwarden's new acquaintance maintained 
for some minutes a pretty close scrutiny of the 
preacher; but whether it was that the counten- 
ance or the figure in the low pulpit did not offer 
any thing worth longer contemplation, or that 
what he heard had as little interest for him as 
what he saw, he presently turned his bushy eye- 
brows towards the occupants of the benches. 

He took the female side first, and could not 
help noticing the assumption of absorbed attention 
which marked that part of the congregation ; in- 
deed, the air of ecstatic admiration impressed upon 



110 JACK SCUDAMOBE'S DAUGHTER. 

the countenances of some of the younger ladies as 
they listened to platitude after platitude of the dis- 
course, absolutely provoked a smile on the stern 
physiognomy of the observer. 

He glanced to the other side. The young gen- 
tlemen might be less ecstatic, but their demeanour 
was highly creditable. Only a few suffered their 
eyes to stray in the direction of their companions 
in their walk to church. Here and there might 
be observed a face with an expression of weariness 
or dissatisfaction ; but it is more than probable 
that the owner was not quite so powerfully influ- 
enced, either by female attractions or by Puseyite 
experiments, as his neighbours. 

The churchwarden and the stranger, being the 
nearest the door, were the first out of church; the 
latter leading the way down a lane that led into 
the high-road at a brisk pace, as if he did not care 
to wait either for the congregation or the preacher. 
The expression of his countenance was rather more 
severe in its seriousness than before. 

" Well sir, that beant the sort o' sermon yoiCd 



ST. HILDEBRAND. Ill 

preach, I'd bet a sixpence/ 9 exclaimed the other 
heartily. 

" You're right, Mr. Cobb," was the reply. 

" Thought as much. Now I promise you this, 
though I be the churchwarden of Delamere Parva, 
when you opens that little chapel t'other end o' 
the village, I'll be among the first to go and hear 
you." 

"What chapel, Mr. Cobb?" inquired the 
stranger, turning round and looking him full in 
the face. 

" Why, the Wesleyan Chapel, to be sure." 

At this instant they came into the turnpike- 
road ; and the first object that attracted the church- 
warden's attention was a travelling chariot-and- 
four standing near the foot-path, the postilions in 
purple livery, and a mitre on the panels. As his 
companion approached, the former touched their 
caps. Jacob Cobb was both amazed and confused, 
and betrayed his embarrassment in his counte- 
nance. 

" Mr. Cobb," said the stranger gravely, as he 



112 jack scudamore's daughtek. 

laid hold of the silver handle of the door. " I re- 
ceived your letter." 

u Yes, my lord," said the churchwarden, hastily 
doffing his hat. 

" And I came here expressly to have an oppor- 
tunity of ascertaining the grounds of your com- 
plaint. 99 

" Yes, my lord." 

" I shall cause a communication to be made to 
the Bev. Basil Plynlymmon which may probably 
have a wholesome effect ; but I do not see any 
cause for my more direct interference with your 
Vicar at present. Good-day, Mr. Cobb." 

" Good-day, my lord." 

The churchwarden bowed low as the Bight 
Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of the dio- 
cese, stepped into his carriage. The next minute 
the door closed and the horses started off, as the 
congregation began to approach. 

Jacob Cobb had made an astounding blunder. 
He had mistaken the wealthiest and most orthodox 
of the prelates of the Church of England for an ob- 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 113 

seure Dissenter. Could any thing be more stupid ? 
But what else could be expected from a pig ? 

The Feast of St. Hildebrand was over. There 
had been a private meeting in the vestry, where 
the zealous Vicar, in a sublime state of amiability, 
received his fair supporters and their contribu- 
tions. It was quite a levee, indeed a very crowded 
one ; and if the smart dresses and radiant looks of 
the more enthusiastic devotees were lost upon the 
Beyerend Basil Plynlymmon, their pecuniary offer- 
ings were not Deeply touching were the thanks 
they elicited, as the very thin and rather hard- 
worked curate wrote them down in a book for pub- 
lication, taking special care to inquire in what fund 
they were to be placed ; for there were at least half- 
a-dozen : one for enlarging the church, another for 
St. Hildebrand's College, a third for the Sunday 
schools, a fourth for the religious and sick poor, a 
fifth for the St. Hildebrand Mission to the Heathen, 
and a sixth for augmenting the Vicar's insufficient 
stipend. 

VOL. II. I 



114 jack scudamore's daughter. 

The wealthier ladies of the neighbourhood con- 
tributed liberally to all these funds; the others 
taxed their resources to the utmost, they were so 
proud to see their names in the little printed books 
which the Vicar periodically circulated to stimulate 
the liberality of his parishioners; and the young 
ladies whose means were limited not only gave 
up their little pocket-money, but practised a most 
rigid self-denial to have the power of helping in the 
good work. The poorest had her reward. Pretty 
little Alice Hawthorn, when she surrendered the 
treasured half-crown her grandmother had given 
her on her birthday, revelled in the gushing con- 
viction that dear Mr. Plynlymmon cared more for 
it than he did for the cheque which that odious 
upstart old frump the rich widow of Admiral 
Proudfoot had so ostentatiously placed in his 
hands. 

Very tender was the address which he deli- 
vered to all and sundry of his fair friends at the 
termination of these impressive proceedings. In 
the middle of it, he shook out the very softest 



ST. HILDEBRAND* 115 

cambric handkerchief, and wiped his eyes (when 
he had had much to be thankful for, he always 
shed tears). The tender-hearted spectators consi- 
dered this portion of the beautiful ceremony worth 
more than all they had paid for it, and were sure to 
weep in sympathy. Moreover, when they dispersed, 
every one went away with the pleasant assurance 
that she had been specially referred to in those " ex- 
quisitely grateful, and sweetly beautiful sentences." 

The procession of the school-children was over, 
with their banners and crosses, as well as their' tea- 
party, with the young lady-teachers assisting in 
the distribution of seed-cake and weak bohea; 
this concluded with another address from their 
reverend patron and director, which was quite as 
effective as that delivered in the morning. And 
every one of the delighted amateur governesses 
went away, perfectly satisfied that in the parting 
shake of the hand with which she had been fa- 
voured, there was a tender pressure that marked 
peculiar regard. 

The dinner at the vicarage was over, in which 



116 jack scudamore's daughter. 

the Reverend Basil Plynlymmon, with the best 
assistance of the still active Mrs. Martha, enter- 
tained his clerical assistants, some of whom had 
come a considerable distance to share in the la- 
bours of the day, and fully realised Mrs. Martha's 
estimate of the clerical appetite ; and all the guests 
had departed except one, who sat in the dining- 
room, now styled "the] refectory," at a long table 
covered with empty glasses and decanters, close 
to, and apparently in confidential communication 
with his host 

Although time had somewhat thinned the stran- 
ger's flowing hair, especially at the crown of his 
head, and slightly marked him with his iron hand, 
particularly with a certain stoop in the shoulders, 
he was unquestionably the pedestrian with his 
knapsack who had so materially changed the di- 
rection of his college friend's career, as described 
in an early chapter of this faithful history. Ap- 
parently, too, his pedestrian powers were unim- 
paired, though they had lately been exercised in 
more ambitious journeys. He was an Alpine tra- « 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 117 

veller ; ho had ascended Mont Blano ; he was fre- 
quently in Italy : his last journey was from Rome. 

» 

Mr. Trimmer looked considerably darker in 
complexion; his glance, too, had more that ever 
that peculiar searching, mocking expression, it had 
worn when praising the would-bo editor's declama- 
tory powers ; but his general appearance was still 
thoroughly gentlemanlike. 

" You have found this much better than edit- 
ing Greek plays; eh, Plynlymmon?" inquired 
his friend; "to say nothing of having escaped a 
long printer's bill, and a continuous roasting from 
all the classical critics in the kingdom." 

" Why, yes," replied the Vicar, complacently 
caressing his chin with one hand. " I doubt I 
should have got on so well with iEschylus." 

" You see I was not a false prophet ; I knew 
where your capacity lay. I told you that you had 
only to take advantage of your opportunity." 

" Yes, Mr. Trimmer, you did ; I am free to con- 
fess as much. But it demanded almost superhuman 
powers to succeed in such an undertaking." 



118 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

His friend looked into his face and smiled. 

" You seem to have played your part uncom- 

« 

xnonly well, especially with the women. That re- 
quired tact, no doubt." 

" Marvellous tact, Mr. Trimmer. You can 
have no idea of the difficulty of managing 
them." 

" Oh !" cried the other, in a peculiar way, and 
with a peculiar look. 

"The Duchess was a great loss," added the 
Vicar with a sigh. " The name of her grace was 
even of more value to me than her contributions, 
liberal though they were." 

" I suppose so. But how about your strong- 
minded woman ? Is she still a stumbling-block ?" 

" Dreadful. If it were not for the very hand- 
some assistance afforded by her frequent cheques, 
I really should, I think, long since have given her 
up as incorrigible." 

" You don't say so ! But never despair, my 
dear friend. Rome, you know, wasn't built in a 
day ! and the more difficult, the more honourable 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 119 

the achievement. What has she done lately so 
very scandalous ?" 

The Vicar drew from the breast of his coat a 
pocket-book, which he opened ; and from a num- 
ber of letters addressed in a female hand, which 
Mr. Trimmer's searching glance fell upon with a 
singularly mischievous expression, he selected one ; 
put back the bulging pocket-book, opened the let- 
ter he had selected, and handed it to his friend. 

" Think of her audacity in writing to me in 
such a style, Eead, Mr. Trimmer, read !" 

That gentleman read as follows : 

" I can't come to your feast ; but enclose an 
order on my bankers for fifty pounds." 

"That's not so bad a beginning, Plynlyun 
mon ?" 

"Go on, Mr. Trimmer; go on," replied the 
Vicar hastily, and with rather a disturbed look. 
The reader continued. 

" But you must not think from this that I care 
about hermits or saints either. I think them at 
best a lazy lot, who have shirked their proper 



120 jack scudamore's daughter. 

duties, and fled the temptations of the world, to 
get out of harm's way. I know nothing about 
your St. Hildebrand ; but I'll bet you ten pounds 
to a crown he was a humbug /" 

The Vicar groaned, with a decidedly indignant 
expression of countenance. 

" Think of such a term applied to the only me- 
dieval saint, born in Delamere Parva !" 

Mr. Trimmer looked sympathisingly, but read 
on. 

" The reason I cannot attend your religious 
demonstration is that Banbury Races occur on 
the same day. I must be in the ring, as I have 
two young horses to run ; and I intend to back 
them both heavily. Now, I'll put you up to a 
good tiling. i Tippetywitchet' is safe to win I 
You may lay a hat-full of money on him. Don't 
be afraid. He'll turn out a safer card than your 
precious St. Hildebrand, by an awful long chalk !"" 

The Vicar groaned again, and lifted up his 
eyes. 

" Then there's * Pot 8 o's.' The odds are seven. 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 121 

to four against him. Take them in thousands. 
You'll never have such another chance. Remem- 
ber ' Pot 8 o V for the handicap, and lay it on thick. 
Win all the tin you can by this hint ; but be very 
particular to keep it dark. If you've betted on the 
favourite for the Cup, hedge. Take my word for it, 
he is uncommonly like your friend the Hermit — 
an out-and-out screw." 

The Vicar groaned louder than before, and 
threw up his hands with a glance of virtuous 
horror. 

"Very improper language indeed," observed 
Mr. Trimmer, though apparently under some con- 
straint. " But let me finish." 

"The girl I took at your recommendation, 
Patty Clark, has turned out a brick. She is now 
my trainer. Nancy Green is also clever in the 
stable. But I want you to find me a light-weight 
for a jockey. Pray look into your schools, and 
select me a likely-looking one, accustomed to 
horses. Mind, she mustn't drink, and I don't 
allow swearing. She must be rising ten, and 



122 jack scudamore's daughter. 

warranted sound. I want a girl quick, lively, 
up to every thing, down at nothing ; faultless in 
temper; a fearless rider, and a feather-weight. 
Don't send me a muff! Please to look sharp 
about it. Remember, you may bet on 'Tip- 
petywitchet' whatever you like ; and as regards 
i Pot 8 o's,' take the odds to any amount. Now's 
your chance to make a precious sight better book 
than a certain Life and Times. Indeed, it's my 
humble opinion that your blessed saint, one of 
these odd days, will turn out a regular sell ! 

" Faithfully yours, 

" LUCRETIA BRABAZON. 

" P.S. I'll bet you five to four that you'll get 
pulled up by the Bishop before the end of the 
month." 

The Vicar burst out into a scornful laugh, as 
he took back the epistle, and carefully replaced it 
amongst what may be presumed to have been his 
parochial archives. 

" A very extraordinary woman," exclaimed 



ST. HILDEBRAND. 123 

Mr. Trimmer ; " I hope that she's not a fair sample 
of your female parishioners." 

" No, indeed !" replied his friend. " There's 
no one like her in my flock— or any where else — I 
think" 

" By-the-way," he presently added, with a 
kind of half-earnest, half-jocose expression in his 
features ; " what do they say about me in Borne ?" 

" Hush !" said Mr. Trimmer ; and he rose from 
his seat, cautiously went to the door, opened it 
and listened ; then with increased gravity returned 
to his seat. " Your people have gone to bed, I 
think." 

" Long ago," was the reply. 

The Vicar regarded his companion with real 
earnestness, and the latter returned his gaze with 
a solemnity of aspect that heralded an important 
communication. Then ensued a conversation of 
so strictly secret a nature, that it would be a 
shameful betrayal of private confidence to repeat 
any portion of it. The reader, however, if dis- 
appointed by this very proper reserve on the part 



124 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

of the author, is assured that the result of this 
highly-private and confidential conference will ap- 
pear in the course of the narrative. 

About an hour later, both retired to their re- 
spective chambers, each perfectly satisfied with the 
part he had played in the day's proceedings. 



CHAPTER V, 

GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 

Fa^ny and Geraldine knew that their union of 
feeling, that their endearing protection and de- 
pendence, that their long affection and entire 
trust, were at an end. The motherless girl who, 
by the influence of her seniority, had so fondly 
and truly acted as a mother by the younger or- 
phan, had become her rival* 

After encouraging and nurturing the child's 
gratitude to the preserver of her life, till the par- 
tiality grew into a girl's devotion, and the devotion 
had developed into the one passionate impulse of a 
woman's life, she had won from her the affection 
which her grateful heart had, year after year of 
dreamy hopes and delicious aspirations, so ear- 
nestly desired to gain. She had been awakened 



126 jack scudamore's daughter. 

from the exquisite dream of an innocently joyous 
life, into utter darkness ! 

It was not so much the sense of her desolation, 
or the bitterness of her disappointment which af- 
fected her so strongly, as the knowledge that she 
owed them both to one with whom she had en- 
joyed such perfect confidence for the best portion 
of her hitherto pleasant existence ; who had lived 
with her in the dearest and closest relationship, as 
mother, as sister, as cousin, as friend, — always in- 
dulgent, ever considerate, — from first to last pro- 
foundly interested in her happiness, and never for 
a moment suggesting the possibility of interference 
with the current of those bright thoughts which 
kept that felicity in perpetual verdure. 

There was something in Fanny's letters to 
Greraldine, that had at first excited a feeling of 
uneasiness. She was not alarmed when informed 
of her being at Delamere Court with Arthur. No 
apprehensions were raised by her praises of the 
handsome captain. She delighted in such testi- 
mony in favour of the beau ideal of her girlish 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 127 

imagination. She may have envied her cousin 
the privilege of being so much in his society, but 
loved her too trustfully to doubt her for a single 
instant. 

It was the sudden cessation of these commen- 
dations that first disturbed the equilibrium of her 
thoughts. Arthur was still with Fanny ; neverthe- 
less, there was scarcely any reference to him in 
her correspondence. The delightful tide of confi- 
dential gossip had ceased, and she received in its 
place, accounts of Lord Vernon, of Sir Harry, of 
Tom Holyoake ; notices of horses and dogs, with 
reports of the Duke's first appearance out of 
mourning, and of Lucretia Brabazon's growing 
intimacy with the Vicar, and affectionate remi- 
niscences of " Cousin Potter." 

Geraldine was at first perplexed by this unac- 
countable omission. Fanny must have been well 
aware how much she desired to hear every thing 
that could be told her about Arthur — that other 
people, however worthy of notice, were dwarfed 
into insignificance when he appeared amongst 



130 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

and therefore bound to take advantage of 'his 
opportunities ? And raider such provocation, 
where do you find a young officer in a crack regi- 
ment in her Majesty's service doing otherwise ? 

He was perfectly conscious of the favourable 
impression he had created, and meant to follow 
up his advantage on their next meeting. It was 
the extraordinary dialogue he had overheard in 
the assembly-room, and the astounding recog- 
nition he had there made, that had produced the 
signs of distraction Geraldine had noticed. Her 
own subsequent reserve had caused him to re- 
strain his natural inclination to render himself 
agreeable. 

Of course my fair readers are unanimous in 
their condemnation of Fanny Scudamore. I have 
no doubt they consider her exceedingly forward, 
and in no slight degree treacherous. They would 
have acted so very differently themselves under 
such circumstances. They would never have sung 
dangerous liebtslieder when alone with so hand- 
some and accomplished a cavalier. Of course 



GOLD IK THE CRUCIBLE. 131 

not As for quietly suffering the audaoious liberty 
he had dared to take, one and all would have 
looked him into stone, had his moustache — how- 
ever great a lovo it might have boon — approaohod 
Within twelve legal inches of thoir lips. 

Then her regard for her cousin — what had be- 
come of it ? 

Jack Soudamore's daughter, howover, was not 
quite " the wretch" she may appear to the moro 
perfect of her sex. Her excuse was, that for years 
previously she had been so doeply interested in 
Arthur Calverley, that when he became known to 
her as a perfect realisation of her most glowing 
ideas of the lover and the horo, and began to do- 
vote himself to her with a tenderness that oould 
not bo mistaken, heart, brain, and soul suocumbod 
to the dangerous influenoe. 

She thought of tho absont Gcraldino, and 
made resolutions "to listen not to the voioo of 
the charmer, charmed he novor so wisely." Ho 
charmed again, and hor good resolutions were 
soattorod to the winds. 



I 



132 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Under the dreadful impression that she was 
about to part — perhaps for ever — with the object 
of her secret yet nnrestrainable idolatry, Fanny 
had been made to sing that terribly dangerous 
love-song — every word of which, whether in Ger- 
man or English, for days and nights before, had 
been haunting her with greater temptation than 
ever troubled St Anthony; every syllable and 
note had brought with it an insidious poison that 
made her conscience torpid, and her senses deli- 
rious. In singing " Am I not fondly thine own," 
her heart felt as a flower expanding in the sun- 
beams ; in receiving the stolen caress, as if nou- 
rished by the blessed dew of heaven. - 

Then came returning consciousness, and an 
agony of remorse, followed by stronger and bet- 
ter resolutions. She would not take from her 
darling Geraldine all the sunshine of her pure 
young life. She could not plunge that bright 
blameless soul into an eclipse she knew would be- 
come darker than the stormiest night. She could 
never be at once so false and cruel as to abuse 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 133 

the confidence of that most trusting nature, and 
secretly win from her the one object of her guile- 
less heart. 

Then came a thousand sweet recollections of 
their common happiness when they worked, stu- # 
died, strolled, or sat in a quiet corner and gos- 
sipped together ; and the one loved theme was that 
youthful Bayard, who, they insisted, was more 
admirable than Crichton, and more heroic than 
Coeur-de-Lion, who, moreover, they determined 
was to become a greater commander than Alex- 
ander the Great. 

Then Geraldine remembered that in all the 
Chateaux en Espagne, which the enamoured girl 
had built up in her golden future, she, her be- 
loved Fanny, was always to be with her, still the 
dearest mamma in the world, the most loving of 
sisters, and the most faithful of friends. If Arthur 
were to raise himself to be the first person in the 
State (and he was to be that, at least), her darling 
cousin should be as great as herself; if he were 
to become a king, she should marry the very 



134 JACK scudahobe's daughter. 

handsomest prince in his dominions. Could she 
now have the heart to destroy these fairy illusions 
— the Fata Morgana of the dear child's sunny 
horizon — that affectionate, unselfish, true-hearted, 
•most trusting of confidantes* she who had prided 
herself on being her faithful friend and loving 
counsellor, year after year of their joint-explora- 
tion of this dreamland of girlish love? No! she 
replied to these mental questionings ; whatever it 
cost her, she would never be so base. 

Just then the intention of her father's numer- 
ous friends to return him for the county was 
manifested. Fanny threw herself into the move- 
ment with all the impulsiveness of her disposition, 
and, conjointly with Lucretia Brabazon — who dis- 
tdnguished herself more than ever on this conge- 
nial occasion — entered heart and soul into the 
exciting contest Its absorbing interest, and ac- 
tive employment, allowed her little opportunity 
for brooding over her feelings for Captain Cal- 
verley ; nevertheless, once or twice in the solitude 
of her chamber, and the indulgence of her secret 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 135 

thoughts, she could not help feeling a conviction 
that it was very hard to be obliged to surrender 
to another the only man she had ever loved. 

Then came a flood of tender reminiscences, on 
which floated the passionate declarations that had 
been sung to her with a voice whose thrilling 
melody fell upon her ear to the exclusion of all 
consciousness of every other sound. Again and 
again recurred the assurance of that Evangelist 
of Love, as expressed in the German lyric, 

" So, so wie ich dich liebe, 

So, so liebe auch mich, 
Die, die zartlichen Triebe 

FuhT ich ja ewig fur dich ! 
Ja ! ja ! fuhT ich ja ewig fiir dich 1" 

Again and again was repeated that gospel of pas- 
sion, as declared in the English paraphrase : 

" Then, then, e'en as /love thee, 
Say, say wilt thou love me ? 
Thoughts, thoughts tender and true, love, 

Say wilt thou cherish you me ? 
Yes I yea I am I not fondly thine own, T* 

Poor Fanny ! with such words in her memory, 



136 jack scudamore's daughter. 

in her heart, in her soul, the struggle was indeed 
very hard. 

Father and daughter went to town; and in 
the joy of her first meeting with Geraldine after 
the longest separation they had had, Fanny for- 
got herself and her own feelings. Perhaps it was 
the sense of their real estrangement that induced 
her to be more than ever affectionate to her cousin. 
Certain it is that the doubts and misgivings of the 
latter were chased away by a return of the ten- 
derness and confidence which had made her young 
life a moral Arcadia. 

They met Arthur at the dinner that preceded 
the ball, and as he was equally attentive to them, 
and equally delighted to see them, the unselfisl 
Geraldine was quite content. Fanny contrived to 
appear content also ; in truth she put considerable 
restraint upon herself, in his presence, and looked 
at him as little as possible. 

She behaved admirably up to the moment that 
he led her to join in the waltz. When those lus- 
trous eyes dwelt upon her again, as the handsome 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 137 

face closely approached her own, when she felt his 
arm encircle her waist, and began to whirl round 
in the voluptuous movement, a reaction set in 
she found it utterly impossible to restrain. 

The emotions that had overpowered her at their 
last memorable meeting returned with additional 
force; the looks that were bent down upon her 
as she surrendered herself unresistingly to his 
guidance were the same that had before so tho- 
roughly subdued her nature ; even the music 
breathed the same tender sentiment as the never- 
to-be-forgotten liebeslied. 

Poor Fanny! She forgot every thing but 
the ecstasy of a loving heart. All her good re- 
solutions vanished into air; she could not with- 
stand the intoxicating influence of that dangerous 
dance with the man she loved, any more than she 
had been able to resist the dangerous lyric. Each 
made the same entrancing declaration ; in every 
phrase of the delicious waltz-tune she heard the 
same passionate refrain, "Yes, am I not fondly 
thine own ?" 



138 jack scudamobb's daughter. 

What could she do but look the happiness she 
felt? And as she could not but see that her part- 
ner gazed with the most fervid expression, how 
could she avoid enjoying that happiness thoroughly ? 
The impulse was irresistible ; the tide of passion 
had set in and swept with it all minor interests, all 
prudent considerations, all conscientious obstacles. 
Geraldine was overlooked ; there was no denying 
so obvious a fact : the friends had become rivals ! 

Fanny was unnaturally excited during the rest 
of that evening. At supper she was so brilliant 
as to fascinate all the gentlemen who had the 
much-coveted privilege of being near her. Geral- 
dine on the contrary was evidently more reserved 
than usual. 

(* their retnm-ride the viv*% of the former 
displayed itself in a flow of animated comment on 
the ball, and the persons she had met Very 
little was said by her companions; and at last, 
finding no response in either, Fanny leant back 
in the carriage and gave herself up to the sweet 
indulgence of her own thoughts. 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 139 

She was quite satisfied Arthur loved her ; and 
as it was equally clear that he did not love G-eral- 
dine, it was useless for the latter to think of him. 
It was no fault of hers that he preferred her, and 
she could not in the least help having fallen in 
love with him. She had done all she could to 
resist her impressions in his favour, out of regard 
for her dear cousin, but had found it impossible to 
resist any longer. 

Geraldine must be reasonable. She must 
know that a man can only love one woman at 
a time; and that however much she may have 
cared for Arthur, as nothing can be more evident 
than that he does not care for her, it must be 
equally foolish and wrong to go on devoting her 
thoughts to him. 

Perhaps dear Geraldine was too much a child 
to fix the affections of a man who had enjoyed 
such opportunities of seeing the world ; and there 
was plenty of time for her to meet with some one 
better suited to her. She should take an early 
opportunity of explaining every thing, and had 



140 JACK SCUDAMOBS'S DAUGHTER. 

no doubt that her cousin would at once reconcile 
herself to what could not be helped. 

With such reasoning, Fanny Scudamore satis-* 
fied her conscience, and then thought over the 
evidence that had sufficed to convince her that 
Arthur only waited an opportunity to declare him- 
self her lover. She recalled her first musical Ute- 
a-tSte; she dwelt on the last. What could be 
more convincing than that stolen caress? He 
had never attempted any thing of the kind with 
Geraldine; he had never taken such delightful 
walks and rides with her alone ; he had never 
uttered to her any of the tender speeches which 
he had then and there expressed; he had never 
sung to her such passionate love-songs; he had 
never gazed on her with such thrilling looks; 
moreover she had never rested in his arms, while 
exquisite music interpreted the feelings with which 
his glances told her she was regarded. 

So she allowed her dreamy self-contented 
thoughts to glide along this pleasant groove ; and 
when she returned home, and learnt that her 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 141 

father had long since retired to his chamber, 
prepared to follow his example, in tho best pos- 
sible spirits, without in tho slightest degree no- 
ticing tho somewhat sullen "good-night" of one 
of her companions, and tho unnatural silence of 
the other. 

The two girls entered their dressing-room in 
a mood apparently totally different from that with 
which they had so long been in the habit of pro- 
paring for their night's rest. Hie time-honoured 
season of confidential gossip was no longer heeded. 
Fanny tried for a time to get her cousin into con- 
versation by affecting to chat unconcernedly about 
what they had both seen and heard ; but Geral- 
dine occupied herself with tho business of unfasten- 
ing and disrobing, and gave very short replies. 

As of old, they sat brushing-out their luxuriant 
back-hair, but at two toilet-tables; their hearts, 
alas ! further apart than their mirrors. Tho elder 
had decided not to bring on the one important 
discussion then. Geraldino was to go back to 
Rose Lawn after breakfast; and she could not 



142 jack sgudamoke's daughter. 

think of distressing her by unpleasant explana- 
tions. 

Had they been in their own well-remembered 
chamber, every object would have reminded her of 
the endearing reliance flu* had so long been main- 
tained by them. The framed samplers they had 
worked together; the chalk-drawings in which 
both had assisted ; the neat shelf of books they had 
read or studied for years of delightful companion- 
ship, recreation, and confidence. But the room 
was that of an ordinary furnished house in May- 
fair, and contained nothing suggestive of the past 
Eden in which their happiness had been so per- 
fect. So Fanny, desisting from all attempts at 
sociality, easily glided into a newer Paradise, 
where the Adam exclusively was her own. 

Once more she was moving through the flowery 
paths of memory, redolent of passion-flowers, of 
pensees, of forget-me-nots, and of numerous other 
equally suggestive decorations indigenous in the 
garden of the soul. Smiles and glances illumined 
them with a tropical sunshine ; and melodies and 



GOLD IN THE CBUCIBLE. 143 

words, which sounded more musical than Apollo's 
lute, filled the atmosphere. 

Was it possible to forget phrases that recurred 
with all the force of an enchantment? There was 
a spell in every tender word, in every thrilling 
tone, that subjected all her senses. What loving 
heart could resist such sentiments ? 

" Darf, darf , darf ich dir trauen, 
Dir, dir, mit leichten 8inn, 
Du, da kannst auf mich bauen; 
Weisst ja, wie gut ich dir bin !" 

Or, in the English version : 

" Speak, speak, Love, I implore thee ! 
Say, say, ' Hope may be thine !' 
Thou, thou knowst that I love thee ; 
Say but thou wilt be mine 1" 

Fanny had mentally just finished the eloquent 

m 

refrain, " Yes ! yes ! am I not fondly thine own ?" 
and, entirely absorbed in the exquisite waking 
dream, her hand, holding the brush she had been 
mechanically drawing through her long dark 
tresses, was suspended over her well-shaped head, 



144 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

and a smile of ineffable sweetness was playing 
round her beautiful mouth, when a voice and a 
touch dissipated the Alnaschar delusion. 

" Fanny !" cried Geraldine, who was kneeling 
at her cousin's feet, and looking up into her flushed 
face could read there confirmation of her worst 
suspicions. 

" Fanny J" she cried more sharply. 

The dreamer awoke, looked down, and shud- 
dered. She had carefully avoided gazing at her 
cousin; and now the accusing face spoke a re- 
proach that seemed to strike every nerve. It was 
not that of a weeping Niobe, of a deserted Psyche, 
or of an agonised Dido. It was of a higher and 
a purer feminine iype. It was that of an angel 
mourning over a lost soul. 

Fanny tried to turn away her conscience- 
stricken countenance ; but the eyes that appealed 
so touchingly, held her own gaze fixed as in a vice. 
Her beautiful face now seemed to harden and 
grow dark, as if her heart were turning to stone, 
against the attack of that sad though uncomplain- 



GOLD IN THE OBtJCIBLB. 145 

ing look. She could have endured any amount of* 
reproach, but against that pallid death-like sorrow 
she became dilmb and helpless. 

She made no resistance, uttered no word ; me- 
chanically she turned round in her chair, and took 
the uplifted palms of the kneeling girl in her own, 
and, with features that seemed to have been turned 
to marble, held back from the ghastly face as if it 
were a corpse of which she knew herself the mur- 
derer. 

Low and tremulous was the voice that re- 
peated the Lord's Prayer. One passage was more 
distinct in its delivery than the rest. It was — 

" Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them 
that trespass against us." 

Fanny felt a choking sensation, and began to 
breathe with difficulty. But she could not take 
her gaze from those sad but terribly accusing 
eyes. In the same position she listened to the 
childish prayers and hymns, every word a penance 
that became more difficult to endure. At last 
came the benediction on all near and dear to both. 

VOL. II. L 



146 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

Towards the conclusion the voice became tremu- 
lous, but was inexpressibly sweet and fervent. 

" God bless cousin Fanny, and make her happy 
aU the days of her Hfe" 

Two or three heavy drops fell upon the uplifted 
hands. The benediction continued in a more pa- 
thetic tone : 

" Grant, Almighty Father, the prayer of a 
desolate orphan for every blessing Thy unspeak- 
able love can bestow, on one who was a mother 
to the motherless, the kindest of guardians, and 
the truest of friends. May all her dearest wishes 
be gratified, and her fondest expectations accom- 
plished. May her loving heart never know the 
misery of disappointment May-" 

Down on the face of the kneeling girl poured 
a heavy shower, the bosom of the penitent heaved 
with violent spasms, and in an agony of convul- 
sive sobs she threw her arms round her cousin's 
neck. 

"Dear Fanny," the latter murmured gently, 
" don't fret, there's a dear. I've nearly got over 



GOLD m THE CRUCIBLE. 147 

it, though indeed it was very hard to bear from 
you." 

Fanny now burst into violent hysterics. She 
wrung her hands, she threw her arms about 
wildly, passionate sobbing choked her utterance, 
a torrent of tears deluged her cheeks. 

" Darling, you must bo calm," exclaimed Ge- 
raldine, trying to restrain her violence. " I don't 
blame you, dear. Indeed I don't. I ought to 
have known that he was sure to like you the best 
You couldn't help it, of course. And Arthur is 
not to blame either. No doubt he thinks me a 
child. And you are so charming, how could he 
avoid loving you ! I don't care about it, dear, — at 
least not much." 

The anguish in her soul was more truly ex- 
pressed by her tearful eyes than by her self- 
denying words. This, however, was entirely lost 
upon her companion, who was now quite insen- 
sible. 

Geraldine kissed and cried over the inanimate 
face, lavishing the most tender epithets upon the 



148 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

pale lips and stiffening figure ; but not finding any 
improvement in her appearance, she quietly un- 
folded her arms, and let the body drop to the 
floor, with the head and its dark silken treasures 
resting upon a footstool. Then she glided to the 
ewer, returning in a moment to 8 prinkle the be- 
loved face with water. 

She did not like to alarm the household, all 
of whom must be, she knew, by this time in bed, 
yet was dreadfully frightened, for her cousin had 
never had such a fit before. An instinctive de- 
licacy, too, told her that Fanny's condition ought 
to be kept secret So in fear and trembling, yet 
with the most affectionate solicitude, she applied 
the ordinary remedy for a swoon, and watched its 
effect. 

The sprinkling had been repeated, and signs 
of returning consciousness were beginning to ap- 
pear. Geraldine poured water into a tumbler, 
placed it on the toilet-table close at hand, then sat 
down on the floor and vigorously chafed the hands 
of the still rigid and unconscious patient. Pre- 



GOLD TS THE CRUCIBLE, 149 

sently, finding them become more flexible, she sat 
on the chair and raised the recumbent figure 
into a sitting position in her arms, and with 
innumerable endearments and the very tenderest 
expressions, placed the glass of water to her 
lips. 

A little was swallowed, and then the eyes 
opened with a dreamy stare. 

" Thank God, dear, you are getting better I" 
exclaimed Geraldine fervently. " Now take a 
good draught, there's a darling Fanny; then I will 
bathe your temples with eau de Cologne, and you 
shall be quite well, and never be so naughty as to 
frighten me in this dreadful way again." 

Fanny did as she was desired, and after a 
heavy sigh, submitted to the cooling lotion with a 
look that showed she was scarcely yet mistress of 
herself. 

" I am so glad you are better," exclaimed the 
attentive nurse, fondly kissing her charge, evi- 
dently totally oblivious of the wreck of her own 
happiness. " I will never distress you again, dear. 



150 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

I am quite content that you shall be as happy with 
Arthur as you can wish to be. For indeed, in- 
deed, I feel that I could much easier lose him 
than I could lose you, darling mamma, whom I 
have loved so many years, and who was always 
so very good to me. It was very wrong of me to 
feel so miserable ; but it is all over now, dear. I 
shall soon be quite cheerful; and you will love 
your poor Geraldine again, won't you, darling 
mamma?" 

Fanny's eyes opened very wide ; she smoothed 
back her dark tresses with both hands ; and gazed 
with a smile of almost divine tenderness into the 
pale pleading face now so close to her own ; then 
threw her arms round her neck, and pressed her 
lips to the dear eloquent little mouth. 

She did not speak a word of reply as she put 
up her hair, but there was a look in those now 
brilliant eyes that spoke a determination no lan- 
guage could have expressed so forcibly. Yes, she 
had entered into more good resolutions, but this 
time with a tenacity of purpose that would lead her 



GOLD IN THE CRUCIBLE. 151 

unfalteringly through the valley of the shadow of 
death- 
Fanny and Geraldine slept in each other's 
arms as of old. They were no longer rivals. 



CHAPTER VI. 

FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 

" Geraldine is gone with her brother to pay a 
visit to some friends who have just come from 
the neighbourhood of Maurice Court/ 9 said Miss 
Scudamore, as Captain Calverley entered the 
drawing-room in May Fair, the morning after 
the ball at Porchester House. " My father, too, 
has gone to call upon his old friend the Duke. 
I expect them in every minute, so you may as 
well stay. Unless you consider me so very dis- 
agreeable a companion that you prefer proceeding 
in search of more acceptable society." 

Arthur looked at the heiress ; a gracious smile 
lit up her queen-like beauty as she extended her 
hand to him, rising from a seat at an embroidery- 
frame, on which she was finishing a gorgeous 



FATHEB AND DAUGHTER, 153 

and elaborate piece of work that would have 
been a credit to Miss Linwood, and bore irresis- 
tible testimony of her progress in the accomplish- 
ments of her ancient instructress. 

She was evidently, he thought, in the same 
gracious mood that had charmed him so much 
the preceding evening; and though in a much 
less brilliant toilette, did not look the less fascin- 
ating. 

He made a gallant speech as a matter of 
course, as he bowed over the plump fingers he 
was permitted to hold. She hastily turned away 
her head, and reseated herself; and when he 
again caught sight of her face, there was a glow 
upon her complexion he had not noticed on his 
entrance. 

" By the way," she said, as she resumed her 
work, " Geraldine and I looked for you every 
where last night, after supper, without success." 

Arthur endeavoured to excuse his early de- 
parture, by stating that he had a business appoint- 
ment in the morning at the Foreign Office ; then 



154 jack bcudamobb's daughter. 

drawing a chair near her vehret-stool, improvised 
a eulogium on her work. This was safe ground, 
he considered. Indeed, he began to feel a little 
bewildered by her manner towards him. In per- 
son, in feature, she was the same ; but the impul- 
sive companion of those memorable evenings at 
the piano, the impassioned singer of the eloquent 
Uebe&lied, had disappeared. The handsome cavalry- 
officer, with the instinct of a true Calverley, felt 
assured that the present interview was not the 
opportunity he had so much desired; therefore 
prudently deferred his declaration, contenting him- 
self with gallantries that were not too suggestive. 

Miss Scudamore appeared gratified by his 
compliments; her eyes shone with more than 
their usual brilliancy, as she laughingly referred 
to his immense knowledge of feminine art 

"But how did you think Geraldine looked 
last night?" she said suddenly, and with a good 
deal of earnestness. " It was her first ball, you 
know ; and I am sure that even dear grandmamma, 
would have been satisfied with her appearance. 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 155 

Didn't yon think her very charming now, Captain 
Calverley? Every one did in the room ; the Dnke 
particularly." 

The fervent admiration he so much desired 
to express was suppressed when the sentence 
terminated. He was no longer called " Arthur." 
This struck him forcibly. As if rendered con- 
scions that he was treading on delicate ground, 
he satisfied himself by uttering a somewhat com- 
monplace remark. 

His beautiful companion looked, he thought, 
disappointed. " If you knew her as I have known 
her," she said presently, " you would be quite as 
partial to her as I am. But, in my opinion, it is 
scarcely possible for any one to appreciate her 
sufficiently ; she is so thoroughly good. Geraldine 
was always the favourite with dear grandmamma ; 
but I had no right to complain, for I knew she 
was better than I was. She deserved to be every 
body's favourite. I don't wonder, therefore, that 
she should be such a favourite with the Duke." 

Again the rising eulogium was nipped in the 



156 jack scudamore's daughter. 

bad, and he answered the charming enthusiast 
with a mere compliment. 

"I am inclined to think with dear grand- 
mamma," said the heiress, scarcely repressing her 
vexation, u that the race of gentlemen have de- 
generated since her youthful days ; and that there 
never has been one at court fit to hold a candle 
to my grandpapa," 

Captain Calverley endeavoured to controvert 
this sweeping assertion ; but his defence of his 
contemporaries did not quite produce the effect he 
desired. 

" As Mr. Burke very justly said," she added, 
with increased animation, "the age of chivalry 
has gone ; and, as I say, the age of gallantry has 
departed after it. We have long since heard of 
the last of adventurous knights who would gladly 
attempt impossible things for the love of their liege 
ladies ; and Sir Walter Raleigh was, I think, the 
only gallant who sacrificed a handsome garment to 
keep his mistress dry-shod." 

The handsome Captain again attempted the 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 157 

advocacy of the present generation of gentlemen, 
and rather zealously too, for he felt that though 
the censure was general, it was intended to have a 
particular application; but in what lie had been 
remiss, he could not for the life of him guess, and 
had no time to think. 

After all, he might be the right man in the 
right place; and this unexpected change in the 
more than half-won heiress a feminine device to 
pique him into a reliable demonstration of feeling 
in her favour. Probably the unresisted caress and 
the too manifest enjoyment of the waltz had been 
reviewed with some self-disapproval, and the dear 
creature had resolved to be cold and circumspect. 
In such cases plot must be met with counterplot. 
He would try a device in his turn. 

After a good deal of pleasant badinage had 
passed on both sides, and there could be no ques- 
tion that the heiress was in a most amiable hu- 
mour, the gallant Captain, began to be a little less 
lively in his sallies; the natural consequence of 
being impressed with the seriousness of the step 



158 jack scudamobb's daughter. 

he was about to take. He hesitated, and became 
confused, as if a sense of the great stake he had at 
issue filled his mind. He glanced at his com- 
panion ; she was pursuing her work with greater 
attention to it than she had hitherto shown. 

"Now, Miss Scudamore," said he, "I must 
beg your kind consideration of a statement I find 
it absolutely necessary that I should seize this un- 
looked-for opportunity of finding you alone for 
making, without another moment's delay. 9 ' 

She did not move her eyes from her work; 
but their expression grew suddenly more serious. 

"I have been long known to you. I could 
dwell with the deepest sense of pleasure on those 
gratifying proofe of your regard with which you 
have been pleased to honour me from time to 
time, since that to me most fortunate hour when I 
first received evidence of the flattering interest I 
had awakened in the hearts of the amiable inmates 
of that charming cottage. But it would take 
much longer than this interview would permit to 
describe the influence of those precious tokens of 



FATHBB AND DAUGHTER. 159 

feminine kindness. Let it suffice to say that it 
has induced me to attempt to carve out for myself 
a career which should prove me not entirely un- 
worthy of such favour." 

He paused. The heiress seemed embarrassed. 
The needle stood still in her pliant fingers; and 
her eyes, with a kind of dreamy expression, were 
fixed upon the trembling thread of silk that con- 
nected it with the canvas. 

He resumed. 

" My feelings cannot have remained to this 
time altogether unknown to you, Miss Scudamore ; 
and though I acknowledge their presumption, 
though I confess that even with the advantages I 
have contrived to gain, since this devotion first ab- 
sorbed all the best, the highest principles of my 
nature, I am far from being in a position to claim 
the distinction to which I have so ambitiously as- 
pired, I will boldly lay before you the state of my 
affections, and, with the most implicit trust in 
your goodness, implore you — " 

He had taken an unresisting hand, and could 



160 JACK scubamore's daughter. 

not fail to observe that a powerful struggle was 
going on in the breast of his attentive listener* 
This declaration was intended for Geraldine, she 
felt sure ; and the thought that she might assist in 
making the dear child happy triumphed over every 
other consideration* 

" If you could afford me," he added, "even the 
slightest prospect that this one absorbing pursuit 
of my life was not likely to prove an empty dream, 
you would make me the proudest, as well as the 
happiest, of men." 

"I see no reason why you should despair," 
she said softly and tremulously. "With such 
earnest devotion any woman ought to be satis- 
fied" 

Arthur did not wait for any further approval : 
in a transport of gratitude he kissed the hand she 
had allowed him to retain ; indeed, I do not know 
into what extravagances he might have been led 
under the influence of the pleasurable excitement 
he experienced, had he not heard approaching 
footsteps. The handle of the door turned. He 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 161 

hastily dropped the fair hand, and pushed back 

his seat The heiress resumed her employment 

* 

with manifest embarrassment, as Lord Fitzmaurice 
and her father entered. 

The former stopped suddenly on the threshold, 
regarding both with rather a searching scrutiny. 
He did not seem altogether pleased. Presently, 
however, he addressed his old comrade in his 
usual friendly way, as he threw himself listlessly 
on a couch. 

For a moment or two the honest red face of 
Jack Scudamore seemed clouded, nevertheless his 
welcome was in his usual boisterous fashion. 

" Glad you're come, Captain," he cried, grasp- 
ing his hand vigorously. " I've heard news that 
the member for Delamere has been taken danger- 
ously ill — indeed, the poor fellow is as good as 
run to earth — and I've just been arranging with 
Porchester that you shall take his place. Tou see, 
I want some one willing to do my duty as well as 
his own — younger and abler for the work. I find 

I haven't the wind, or the spirit, or something. 
VOL. II. M 



162 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Zounds, sir, I can't go the pace — that's the long 
and the short of it I" 

Captain Calverley warmly expressed his thanks 
for tliis mark of his friendly regard. 

" You will have all the Porchester interest as 
well as mine," he said ; " but the Whigs will be 
sure to start their man, so you may expect to be 
hard pressed Be first in the field, Captain, go 
over every thing. Neck or nothing — that's your 
sort in a contested election as well as in the 
hunting-field. I know you can do it," he cried, 
slapping his young Mend on the shoulder, " and 
will back you to win — but you must secure a good 
start ; and as you will be mounted by the govern- 
ment, by George, sir, it must be your own fault 
if you don't distance your competitor in the race." 

Arthur expressed his readiness to follow his 
advice in every thing, which evidently pleased him. 
His broad face seemed to increase in ruddiness, 
and his clear blue eyes shone with double vivacity. 

" I envy you, you dog," he exclaimed in ap- 
parent vexation, "your health, and strength, and 



FATHEB AND DAUGHTER. 163 

ability to do the work cut out for you. But I 
remember the time," he added, quickly brighten- 
ing up, " when I had quite as much go in me. 
Every body knew in Delamere Vale what Jack 
Scudamore was good for ; I was up to every thing 
and down at nothing. Could box, and wrestle, and 
ride with the best man in the county. Did you 
ever hear how I won the race with Blaek Bess, 
against Billy Thorndyke on his famous horse ' The 
Tinker' ?" 

The Captain avowed that he had never heard 
of that achievement. 

" I thought as much," replied the old fox- 
hunter, with his hearty laugh. " You idlers about 
town, of course, never hear of such things. Billy 
bragged almost as much about his horse as he did 
about himself. The Tinker could beat any thing 
that ever was foaled, and his owner could thresh 
the best man that ever walked in shoe-leather. I 
laid him a cool hundred to run him a two-mile 
heat on Banbury Downs, on a mare I'd bred 
myself, by Highflyer out of sister to Eclipse. I 



164 jack scudamore's daughter. 

waited on him, Captain, about half the distance, 
keeping well up to his horse's flanks, and then 
increased the pace. We were soon neck and 
neck in spite of his strenuous exertions to keep 
the lead. In five minutes I was a length in front, 
while Billy was threshing away at The Tinker, as 
if determined to take the hide off his ribs. I jerked 
the reins a little, and Black Bess went in with a 
rush that brought her in first by about half a dozen 
lengths. 

" Billy Thorndyke was terribly out of temper," 
he added ; " for half the county were on the 
Downs, and insinuated that I hadn't won fairly, 
which put my blood up. From angry words we 
came to blows. He challenged me to fight there 
and then, and, as I wasn't inclined to look small 
before my neighbours and friends, a ring was 
presently formed, and we set-to with right good 
will. Zounds, sir, in half an hour Billy was 
obliged to acknowledge me the better man, and 
I got the name of the Cock of the County from 
that time forth." 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 165 

The Captain expressed his admiration of his 
friend's prowess, who then laughingly walked 
across the room to his daughter, with whom he 
held what seemed a confidential conversation, 
while the two young men interchanged a few 
social commonplaces. Presently he returned, and 
urged the Captain to lose no time in getting to 
the scene of action. He gave him full instruc- 
tions as to his proceedings and heartily wished 
him success. 

An hour or so after Arthur had quitted the 
house of Jack Scudamore, he and his daughter 
were left alone in the drawing-room. 

"Fanny," he said to her suddenly; "how 
do you and Fitz get on together ?" 

" Oh, much as we have always done, papa," 
was the unembarrassed reply. 

" Not lovers, eh ?" 

" Not to my knowledge." 

" Humph !" cried the fox-hunter, with a much 
graver expression in his face than commonly 
rested there. "1 thought there might be some 



166 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

engagement between you, you two having lived 
so much together." 

" Nothing of the sort, papa. . I like Fitz very 
well, and he likes me, I daresay, much in the same 
way. He has always been kind and amiable, and 
we have got on as pleasantly as possible together." 

"But you entertain no thoughts of him as a 
husband, eh, Fanny?" 

" Certainly not !" 

This was said with a decision that admitted 
of no dispute. Still the Squire did not seem satis- 
fied. His broad red face looked gloomy, as he 
flung himself back in the arm-chair, with his 
hands thrust deep into his pockets, apparently a 
little puzzled as well as annoyed. 

Miss Scudamore remained standing by the 
mirror over the chimney-piece, listlessly furling 
and unfurling her fan. 

" Then there's my friend Captain Calverley," 
he added, after a short pause, and looking her 
straight in the face. She started slightly. 

" What about him, papa?" she said, quietly. 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 167 

" He seems very much at home with you 
girls, Fanny. Has been a good deal at the 
cottage, hasn't he? Made himself particularly 
agreeable, I suppose. Admires you, I daresay," 

" He has never told me so." 

Her manner was still very quiet; but there 
was an intonation in her voice, when these words 
were uttered, that might have betrayed to a more 
experienced observer of female characteristics than 
the Cheshire Squire, that the subject was of more 
interest to her than she oared to express. 

Jack Scudamore fidgetted in his chair, and 
looked embarrassed. He had evidently something 
on his mind that he did not at all know how to 
express. His beautiful daughter was perhaps 
aware of this, but did not seem inclined to af- 
ford any assistance. The fan was opened and 
closed, opened and closed again; her look be- 
came dreamy and pre-occupied. 

"I tell you what it is, my girl," cried the 
Squire, with a desperate earnestness, that made 
him more rod in the face than ever. " If there's 



168 jack scudamore's daughter. 

one thing in the world that I am more proud 
of than all else I possess, it is yourself!" 

Miss Scudamore's face lit up with a sudden 
brightness, that rendered it doubly attractive. 

" Yes," lie continued, " I was uncommon 
glad when my horse Jupiter won the Derby and 
the Oaks in one year. By George, I was more 
pleased than • I can tell you ; and Jupiter, you 
know, being brother to Ganymede, who won the 
Doncaster St. Leger the year preceding, made me 
regard it as a greater triumph. There was not a 
man in the couniy I envied. Yet I do not know 
how it is, but I feel prouder of being your father, 
Fanny, dear, than ever I was with being the owner 
of Jupiter and Ganymede." 

She looked down upon her father with eyes that 
were evidently gathering moisture. 

" Don't you remember your last visit to Dela- 
mere Court?" said the old gentleman, with what 
seemed a forced vivacity. " How delighted all the 
Hunt were with you ; how enthusiastic they were 
about the fearless way you rode to hounds — how 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 169 

charmed with the matchless grace with which you 
did the honours of my table, and how they raved 
about your beauty and accomplishments? By 
George, I did not envy the greatest man in Che- 
shire." 

" Yes, I remember, papa ; they were all ex- 
tremely kind, and I was very happy to see how 
pleased you were." 

She gazed brightly and affectionately on his 
frank though fast-ageing features, and his silvery 
hair. 

" Pleased I" he echoed, slapping his knee with 
his palm. " By George, there could be no mistake 
about that. Lord Vernon rode up to me at the 
meet, and publicly congratulated me on being the 
father of so lovely a girl ; and all the fellows clus- 
tered about me to shake hands. Sir Harry Ches- 
ter, when you came in at the death, offered to bot 
a hundred guineas that your match wasn't to be 
found in the county. Tom Holyoake, at the Hunt 
dinner, rolled under the table after proposing your 
health for at least the twentieth time ; and many 



170 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

of the fellows who got on the chairs to join in the 
demonstration* the toast excited, fell to the floor, 
from whence they did not rise till they had slept 
themselves sober. Finally, four of the soberest of 
the lot insisted on carrying me in triumph in my 
chair round the dining-room, amid a chorus of 
shouts and cheers loud enough to awaken the dead; 
and I narrowly escaped getting my neck broken 
by one of the bearers stumbling against the side- 
board. Zounds, Fanny! if every one of the Hunt 
wasn't as proud of you as I was." 

Miss Scudamore, with a sunny smile that made 
the tears in her eyes glisten like brilliants, threw 
down her fan, moved across the hearth-rug, sat on 
a* stool close to her father's feet, took one of his 
hands in hers, and resting her cheek against it on 
his knee, gazed up affectionately into his face. 

Honest Jack Scudamore was apparently a little 
confused by this movement ; there was a slight 
twitch at the corners of his mouth, and his eyes 
winked rapidly. He remained silent a moment or 
two, and looked irresolute. The fact was, he was 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER* 171 

about to take the most formidable leap he had 
ever attempted* and was far from confident of the 
powers of his steed. 

Presently he seemed to call up all his energies 
for a dash. 

" Ah I but the proudest time of all, Fanny," he 
said hurriedly and anxiously, " was on the night of 
the ball at Porchester Castle, that was given in your 
honour, and the Duke, having before all that bril- 
liant company then assembled complimented me 
on your appearance, in a speech that made me 
envied by every father in the room, opened the 
ball with you; and your beauty and your grace 
enraptured the entire assemblage. By George, I 
was as happy as I was proud 1" 

The beautiful face was bent down, and the 
warm lips pressed the old fox-hunter's hard rough 
hand as tenderly as if it had been an infant's. 
The only answering demonstration was a tighter 
grasp of the ivory fingers the hard rough hand 
contained. 

" My fervent blessings on that dear old grand- 



172 jack scudamore's daughter. 

mother of yours," exclaimed Jack Scudamorc, 
warmly, "for making you so admirable as to 
attract every one who comes near you, and so 
good as to lover the poor old father who is so very 
proud of you, better than the finest of the many 
fine young fellows who throng around you in the 
hope of obtaining a smile." 

" Dear good grandmamma," cried a half-chok- 
ing voice ; "she taught me to pray to God to grant 
you the truest enjoyments of life !" 

" And they were showered on me in prodigal 
abundance when I received a True Woman in 
the motherless child I had trusted to her guid- 



ance." 



A fonder pressure of the hand followed this 
sentence. The emotion of both kept them silent 
till the old fox-hunter became aware that the 
terrible leap had yet to be taken. He spurred his 
steed, and gathered himself up resolutely for a 
spring. 

" You see, Fanny, my pet, the Duke and I 
have been friends from boyhood, very fast friends. 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 173 

Indeed I once fought a big chap who had struck 
him, and gave the fellow a thorough licking. By 
George, I did, before the whole school. And since 
he came to the title, he has been doing me all 
kinds of good-natured actions, and has treated me 
like a brother. Consequently, I cannot help liking 
such a man." 

"Yes, papa, I know you were always very 
partial to the Duke." 

" Very partial, Fanny, and very anxious to 
show my gratitude for the many important services 
his Grace has rendered me." 

" Yes, papa." 

" And when I noticed how much he admired 
my darling child, so great a man as he is, not only 
in the county, but in the nation, the idea came 
into my head that — that — he might be desirous of 
a closer, tenderer bond to secure our long friend- 
ship ; and that I should attain the summit of hu- 
man ambition and felicity, could I be permitted 
to live to see you — his Duchess." 

Jack Scudamore had taken the leap, and he 



174 jack scudahore's daughter. 

now looked confused, and felt giddy with the con- 
sciousness of his temerity. 

" Papa !" exclaimed his daughter, gazing up 
into his face with her bright features expressive 
of the most profound astonishment. 

" I know the Duke is much too old foe you, 
my dear," he exclaimed in a flurried unsteady 
manner. " For as you know, he is nearly of my 
own age. But much to his credit, he has lived a 
temperate life, therefore his constitution must be a 
thousand times better than that of half the dashing 
young rakes and dangling idlers about town. 
Then you know, my pet, he is always doing good ; 
indeed, I don't know any one who possesses a kinder 
heart. It was only a few months back, you know, 
Fanny dear, he presented you with your Andalu- 
sian barb Zephyr, of which you are so fond.'* 

" It was most kind of his Grace, but I had no 
idea—" 

" Of course not. The Duke wouldn't so much 
as hint of such a thing, though he said to me after 
the ball, 'Jack/ said he, 'that divine daughter 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 175 

of yours, is worthy of being the Queen of the 
county.'" 

"The Duke was always very good to me, 
ye^" 

" All ! and how proud I should be to see you 
the acknowledged queen of all Cheshire," cried 
the old man with renewed fervour. " What an 
enviable position you would enjoy, my pet — not 
only at Porchester Castle, and tliroughout the 
Yale, but at Court, among the great people of the 
great town world. Every body must needs envy 
you, not only as the wife of the most popular Lord 
Lieutenant of the Kingdom, but as the lady of one 
of the greatest men in the state, the friend and 
adviser of his sovereign, and the dispenser of court 
honours and rewards. By George, your poor old 
father's heart would leap with joy every time he 
heard the announcement of your title !" 

" Has the Duke expressed to you any intention 
of—" 

"Yes, Fanny dear. He first intimated Ids 
wish that you should be his Duchess when he last 



176 jack bccdamoke's daughter. 

came to Delamere Court; and this morning I 
have received a note from him, requesting my 
good offices in furthering his suit to you. The 
Duke says that he never had any thing so much at 
heart in his life, and declares that your happiness 
shall be his constant study." 

u The Duke is as good as he is noble — but — " 
" Only let me live to hear you called Duchess 
of Porchester, my pet, to see you at ihe head of 
the county aristocracy, and the leader of the rank 
and fashion at court Only let me live to see that 
day, and I wouldn't care to see another. No, 
not even if every horse in my stable was then to 
be declared a winner of every crack race in the 
three kingdoms. No, by George I wouldn't !" 

This emphatic declaration evidently made an 
impression. The fair face which had looked up to 
his, clouded with a sense of distress that produced 
the " yets" and " buts" the anxious advocate had 
prudently cut short, was filled again with the 
softening spirit of filial affection. She gazed ear- 
nestly into her father's unsteady eyes. 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 177 

" Would it make you very happy, papa ?" 

The question was asked plaintively, with a 
tremulous accent. 

" Happy, my girl !" echoed Honest Jack 
Scudamore, "nothing in this world could make 
me half so happy." 

" Then it shall be as you wish." 

As she said this, Miss Scudamore flung her- 
self on her father's neck, and began to sob pas- 
sionately. 

The old fox-hunter was about to congratulate 
himself that he had made the formidable leap with 
more success than he had ventured to anticipate ; 
but these signs of distress suggested the fear that 

■ 

he had not yet got clear over all the obstacles. 
His affectionate heart became alarmed. 

"But if you don't care enough for the Duke 
to marry him, Fanny dear," he said caressingly, 
" I won't think any tiling more about it. You 
shall have whoever you like, darling ; though I 
never saw a fellow approach you, however dis- 
tinguished he may have been by person or for- 

vol. n. N 



'* 



178 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

tune, whom I thought worthy to tie your shoe- 
strings." 

The sentence ended with the customary em- 
phatic addition ; but the only reply it produced 
was a closer embrace and more hysterical sob- 
bing. 

" The Duke's the best friend that Jack Scu- 
damore ever had," he continued, though with a 
more unsteady voice ; " and I have set my heart 
upon seeing you his Duchess. But if you're sure 
you can't be happy if you marry him, of course 
I'm not such a brute as to persist in it I must 
write at once, and let my old friend know that 
I can't have him as a son-in-law. 'Twill be hard 
lines to me as well as to him, poor fellow ; but 
you see it cannot be helped, Fanny dear." 

Honest Jack Scudamore, with the back of his 
hard horny hand, brushed away from his cheeks 
the tears of disappointment he could «not suppress. 

" No, no, dear papa," his daughter exclaimed, 
as if making a great effort to conquer her emotion. 
" It was very foolish of me to appear otherwise than 



FATHER AND DAUGHTER. 179 

gratified with your solicitude for my welfare. But 
I have quite made up my mind. Please to toll 
the Duke, dearest papa, that I am ready to be- 
come his wife." 

A long and loving embrace, and the tendercst 
of affectionate caresses, concluded this decision. 
The old fox-hunter wisely held his peace. He 
was fully satisfied that he had cleared the formid- 
able leap in first-rate style. 



«HMMnBOTHMMi 



CHAPTER VIL 

A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 

In accordance with his old friend's instructions, 
Arthur took up his residence in Delamere Court, 
and was immediately engaged in an active can- 
vass among a rather widely-spread constituency* 
He had the hearty cooperation of every member 
of the Delamere Hunt. Indeed, as it became 
known that he could claim the support of honest 
Jack Scudamore, he had offers to serve on his 
committee from so large a number of the resi- 
dent landed gentry, that his election seemed se- 
cure before he had asked for a single vote. 

All the Vale was immediately stirred with po- 
litical excitement. The staunchest fox-hunters 
neglected their covers for his committee-room; 
or if they rode across country, it was to secure 
a distant freeholder. It was " hark forward tan- 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 181 

tivy" — not to be in at the death of Sly Reynard, 
but to place their selected representative at the 
head of the poll. 

Not a little to the candidate's surprise, the 
usual shibboleths of party were dispensed with by 
his eager supporters. The placards that made the 
dead walls eloquent did not announce his devotion 
to Church and State ; they merely made known, 
in the largest letters, the alliance of " Honest Jack 
Scudamore and Captain Calverley." The recom- 
mendation expressed every thing. No doubt could 
exist of the Captain's fitness for parliamentary 
honours. No one dared to challenge his ability 
to represent so important a borough. 

Indeed, so enthusiastic were some of Jack Scu- 
damore's hunting associates, that Lord Vernon was 
known to have knocked up three of his best horses. 
Sir Harry Chester spouted himself into a chronic 
hoarsenesp ; and Tom Holyoake, in consequence of 
his perpetually proposing the popular candidate's 
health, was obliged to be carried to bed every 
night during the election. 



182 jack scudamore's daughter. 

There was open house at Delamere Court ; and 
the proverbial hospitality of its owner appeared to 
have become more prodigal than ever. Arthur 
was accepted as his representative, and wore his 
honours as well as a sound constitution and a fair 
share of convivial spirit would permit. 

But these riotous orgies were but little to his 
taste, notwithstanding the fact which became more 
evident every day, that he was winning golden 
opinions from the jovial fox-hunters, by the ge- 
nial manner in which he presided over their re- 
unions. He told stories of hair-breadth 'scapes 
in the saddle, and wonderful sporting adventures 
that out-marvelled their own; and ventured to 
sing a song, or repeat an anecdote, when called 
upon, that had quite as much hunting energy in- 
fused into it as his confreres seemed to find in 
Tom Holyoake's energetic version of " Bright 
Chanticleer proclaims the morn;" or Sir Harry 
Chester's boisterous declamation of" Tom Moody." 

But often, when apparently absorbed as a lis- 
tener to such dramatic representations, Arthur 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 183 

found his mind wandering far from the perform- 
ance. . Perhaps, in glancing round the room, his 
eye fell upon a picture or a trophy he had gazed 
upon, associated with some one who now made the 
object full of the tenderest interest, and he became 
lost in a crowd of entrancing associations, till the 
rude jingling of the silver forks on the dessert- 
plates, the emphatic thumpings on the table, and 
the tumultuous plaudits and exclamations which 
betokened the close of an effective song or speech, 
effectually roused him into a sense of his position. 

Whenever he could escape from the associates 
his candidateship procured him, he rambled alone 
in the gardens and grounds of the estate, where he 
surrendered his imagination to the alternate charm 
of retrospection and anticipation. If he gained his 
election, he should consider himself to be mount- 
ing with a firm foot on the first round of the lad- 
der of Ambition, at the top of which Love ap- 
peared with outstretched arms, waiting to reward 
him with the most prized of those honours such 
elevation would place within his reach. The pro- 



184 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

gress of the statesman, the Calverley archives as- 
sured hhn, secured the advancement of the courtier, 
the soldier, and diplomatist; and when he compared 
his qualifications with those which had been suffi- 
cient to lead his kinsmen to greatness, he felt 
confident that his career would not disgrace theirs. 

He might, to be sure, fail in attaining that ex- 
alted post in the City of Palaces which had brought 
his fortunate kinsman so large a windfall from the 
pagoda-tree ; possibly he might also miss the less 
profitable viceroyship in the land of saints other 
members of his family had gained, with a fair 
amount of invested income ; yet he was too san- 
guine to consider impossible such prizes in the 
great lottery of life, in which he had been seeking 
to secure an investment. As for the minor prizes,, 
such as had been obtained by so many Calverleys, 
he felt a happy confidence respecting them, which 
would have done credit to the most imaginative of 
that fortunate family. 

Arthur passed a good deal of time on horse- 
back, not insensible to the advantage of having 



A PHYSICIAN OP SOULS. 185 

the pick of the renowned Delamere Court stables ; 
but though his hunting friends were constant in 
their attendance, he managed occasionally to get 
a gallop by himself, and not unfrequently a more 
quiet meditative walk through green lanes, over 
flowery fields, and into leafy nooks of forest, en- 
deared to him as the haunts of his youth. Then, 
with the reins loose and whip idle, he rode slowly 
on, oblivious of the feverish dream that intimated 
his Future, and regarding only the glowing visions 
that illumined his Past 

Had not the well-married Calverleys congra- 
tulated him on his footing with the heiress ? In- 
deed, did not Lord Madras, when his lordship 
shook hands with him at parting, declare that he 
was the luckiest of the family ; and had not the 
Bishop's widow asserted to his elder brother, Sir 
Edward Calverley Calverley, that he had realised 
all her pious expectations? Nevertheless, some- 
how, he did not feel quite easy as to his position 
with the tantalising beauty. Her quiet parting 
with him had disappointed him extremely. 



186 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

Arthur's retrospections would travel further 
a-field. The holiday enjoyments of his youth, how 
very pleasant it was to recal them, more especially 
those far away rambles from the quiet vicarage, 
with its long hours of engrossing study, and 
the many strange and occasionally dangerous ad- 
ventures they procured. Fishing excursions on 
the Mere, wanderings in search of rare birds or 
animals, desperate climbings, resolute clamberings, 
imminent risks; sometimes losing his way, more 
than once nearly losing his life. It is impossible 
to express the gratification he experienced in re- 
viewing these animated scenes of his life on the 
very spots where they had occurred. 

It was while in the full enjoyment of such 
stirring retrospection that he emerged from a thick 
wood, and came suddenly upon the rums of the 
Abbey where had begun and ended the great 
romance of his youth. A sudden rush of memory 
passed like a flood over those tender associations 
which Time had subsequently obliterated, and 
brought back all that strange and mysterious 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 18? 

adventure. He checked his horse, and paused, 
not daring to advance nearer. 

Years had elapsed since the prohibition had 
been uttered, surely he might now be permitted 
to approach those hallowed precincts? But he 
remembered the serene dignify of the estimable 
lady who had addressed that caution to him 
on behalf of the poor sisters under her charge, 
and recalled the touching motherly affection which 
beamed in her truly spiritual countenance, and did 
not dare to do any thing that might appear like 
a second intrusion on the privacy of his benefac- 
tresses. 

Arthur hesitated. There could be no harm, ho 
thought, in hearing at a distance the sacred strains 
which had made so powerful an impression on his 
mind when approaching that spot so many years 
before. He listened. His horse remained per- 
fectly still, gazing about expectantly, but more 
curiously at the rich herbage within his reach, 
evidently careless of the architectural masterpiece 
that stood so imposingly even in its ruin some fifty 



18$ JACK bcudaxore'b daughter. 

yards off. The rustling of the leaves, the chorus 
of the joyous birds, and the pleasant humming of 
innumerable insects, alone broke the silence. No 
swelling note of jubilant anthem or choral song 
filled the anxious listener's attentive ear; no wail- 
ing Miserere, no glorious Te Deum, no storing 
Hallelujah thrilled his soul 

At last, under the conviction that the Abbey- 
was untenanted, he dismounted, tied his steed to 
the old thorn, and then slowly and reverently- 
entered the sacred building by the principal door. 
He found himself in one of the aisles near where 
he must have fallen from the window, and could 
view the entire length and breadth of the edifice. 
Every part presented itself to him as an old friend, 
claiming affectionate remembrance. 

It is impossible to express the gratification he 
felt as he dwelt upon each delicate pillar, every 
beautiful window, and each choice example of 
mediaeval carving that had before excited his ad- 
miration. As for the grotesque heads, their 
Gothic grimaces were more welcome to him than 






CUT* 



■ ft- 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 189 

would have been a Valhalla of Teutonic-Greek 
divinities. And when he came to his old ac- 
quaintance, the demoniac gargoyle, he hailed the 
demoniac visage like a friend and a brother. 

He passed along the entire interior, in this 
way renewing innumerable friendships in the 
venerable pile; but the further he proceeded the 
more certain he became that the objects of the 
tenderer interests excited nearly a decade prior to 
his present visit, were no longer there. Indeed, 
not a trace could he discover of any additions to 
render the Abbey habitable. The frame-work of 
the windows that were most perfect were open to 
the bats by night, and the birds by day; the 
door-ways were without doors ; many of the shafts 
of the pillars without capitals ; and the external 
walls were cracking and crumbling, despite of the 
clinging lichens that tried to hold the masonry 
together. 

He could not distinguish the refectory, nor 
the oratory, where he had furtively witnessed so 
much of the inner life of those amiable women. 



190 jack soudamobe's daughter. 

Oh, could he have heard again their tender mid* 
night services, the choral beauty of which pro- 
voked the nightingales to rivalry, he would have 
waited out the day without a murmur. But the 
place had been completely deserted by the pious 
recluses. There was not a vestige of them any 
where. 

At last he found himself in the cemetery ; and 
the fascinating terror of that midnight burial, ad 
a pair of gaunt arms rose out of the half-made 
grave into the lurid moonlight, again stole over 
his senses. So vividly had the scene been im- 
pressed upon his mind, that every weather-stained 
and broken memorial of the dead monks in that 
enclosure appeared familiar to him, till his wan- 
dering glance fell upon the fresher tablet that 
indicated the place of sepulture of the departed 
nun. Her initials were visible, as well as the date 
below, and the cross above ; and he dwelt upon 
the inscription perhaps with a deeper sympathy 
for being the only evidence he had been able to 
discover that his knowledge of the place and its 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 191 

blameless inmates had been real and not ima 
• ginary. 

Just then what would he have given to have 
met even the rigid features of Sister Grudule. She 
was a portion of that community, and therefore 
possessed a fair title to a share in the reverential 
interest the good sisters had excited. But there 
was one — he hardly dared to name her now, so 
long had his passionate regard for her been ab- 
sorbed by a later feeling, — ah, could he but be 
permitted to gaze on her saint-like beauty once 
again I 

All his ambitious aspirations passed like an 
exhalation in the sunshine when that vision of 
holiness and purity filled his soul I What ecstasy 
was there in the idea of seeing her as he had 
beheld her, — to kneel by her side, — to share in her 
prayers, — to receive the benediction of her look ! 

A slight sound startled him out of his reverie. 
On looking up he beheld an elderly gentleman in 
a black spencer-waistcoat and small-clothes, silk 
stockings and gaiters — features in the costume of 



192 jack scudamore's daughter. 

professional men generally,, bat particularly of phy- 
sicians and clergymen at this time. The stranger 
took off his hat and exposed a white head, bald at 
top, giving a venerable character to a peculiarly 
mild and pleasing aspect The face was entirely 
devoid of whisker or beard. 

The courtesey was returned as a matter of 
course, though Arthur felt somewhat startled at 
such an unexpected appearance. 

The stranger approached hat in hand, with a 
smile on his plump handsome face that greatly 
increased its natural kindly expression. 

" Glad to see you, Captain Calvertey," he 
exclaimed, in a singularly mellow voice, "even 
among the graves of the poor Benedictines who 
sleep so soundly under our feet. I am delighted 
at the opportunity of making the acquaintance of 
our future member/' 

There was no resisting the offered hand of such 
a man, nor his frank yet polished manners. They 
shook hands heartily ; and Arthur reciprocated his 
apparent good feeling towards him with the ready 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 198 

tact of a parliamentary candidate in pursuit of the 
votes of a large constituency, and waited till he 
should think proper to introduce himself. 

" You were inspecting this head-stone," said 
the stranger, pointing with a gold-headed cane 
to the tablet that had just called up so many touch- 
ing reminiscences. 

Arthur assented. 

" Beneath it rest the remains of one of those 
innumerable uncanonized martyrs that our religion 
produces in every Catholic country." 

The frank acknowledgment of his faith was not 
lost on the soldier ; nor was he insensible of the 
reverential manner in which his new acquaintance 
bared his head, as if acknowledging the presence 
of the pious dead. 

"You knew the deceased lady perhaps?" he 
inquired. 

" I knew the entire sisterhood," the other replied. 

At once Arthur hung upon his words, as if 
ready to venerate him as an oracle. 

" They have left this neighbourhood ?" he asked, 



VOL. II. 



>i, 



1 94 jack scudamore's daughter. 

almost afraid to trust his voice, so deeply interested 
did he feel in the question. 

" Yes ; they have returned to their convent in 
Belgium." 

Arthur turned awav, and the two walked to- 
gether out of the cemetery, till the former found 
himself once more in the midst of the Abbey ruins, 
his companion conversing fluently on those por- 
tions of the edifice that were most worthy of obser- 
vation. For a time he was heard but indistinctly. 
Arthur's thoughts were wandering across the Chan- 
nel. He yearned for further information. He 
longed, indeed, to ask a hundred questions. But 
his associate was evidently a profound antiquarian 
scholar ; and, having a favourite subject, and as he 
imagined an interested listener, he was too deep 
in a dissertation on the best varieties of English 
Gothic, for the other to hope that he would give 
so much as a moment's attention to any thing 
else. Indeed he had passed from the Saxon to 
the Norman, and had dwelt a good deal about 
perpendicular and other siyles, before i!Le gallant 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 195 

Captain became thoroughly conscious of what was 
being said. 

It was in the midst of a fervent eulogy on 
William of Wykeham that he ventured an inter- 
ruption. 

" Did the good sisters remain long in Eng- 
land ?" he inquired. 

" After you left them do you mean ?" 

Arthur started. The stranger laughed with 
the most evident enjoyment of his surprise. Arthur 
could not help feeling embarrassed and confused, 
believing most firmly that no man living except 
honest Jack Scudamore knew of his boyish adven- 
ture, and he could have had only an imperfect 
knowledge of it. 

" But I was describing the state of architecture 
when it was professed by ecclesiastics," he said ; 
his new acquaintance resuming his discourse where 
it had been interrupted, not without a certain 
amount of satisfaction at the other's continued 
confusion. And then he went on till he had got 
pretty well through the Plantagenet period. 



196 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

" Pray tell me whom I have the honour of ad- 
dressing ?" he asked, with a feeling of desperation 
capable of breaking down small conventionalities* 

" Of course. I ought to have told you before. 
But as we had met already more than once, I 
hardly thought it could be necessary to remind 
you of my existence. I really am grieved to find 
that you have forgotten so old a friend of Jack 
Scudamore's as Dr. Petre." 

Arthur remembered having seen the gentle- 
man at the steeplechase, as well as at the Hunt 
dinner at Delamcre Court; but had heard little 
more of him than his name, which he had long 
since forgotten. He was not aware that they 
had met since then. He was the occupant of 
the carriage that had waited near the pier at 
Dover, and had shared in the mysterious dia~ 
logue he had overheard in the assembly-room of 
the hoteL 

" Dr. Petre," repeated Captain Calverley : " a 
physician, I presume ?" 

" Well ; yes, certainly," he replied} in a hesi- 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 197 

tating manner, which the other fancied implied 
that he had given over practice. 

" You attended those religious ladies in your 
professional capacity perhaps ?" he added. 

u Undoubtedly ; and of course, in my profes- 
sional capacity, I learnt the heavy penalty a cer- 
tain young gentleman had paid for peeping at 
them." 

The doctor laughed a frank, cheerful laugh, 
without an atom of malice in it. Then checking 
his mirth, added, "But it was really a serious 
accident ; and if Sister Gudule had not been one 
of the best bonesetters in all Flanders, you might 
have been crippled for life ; indeed, at one time a 
fatal result was apprehended." 

How delightedly Arthur listened when he heard 
the name of his strange nurse. He hoped it might 
be the forerunner of another infinitely more plea- 
sant to his ears. But most tantalisingly the doctor 
abruptly returned to his disquisition, and soon had 
do much to say about the Tudor buildings and 
builders, that it seemed utterly hopeless to at- 



198 jack scudamorb's daughter. 

tempt to divert his attention. Besides, the Captain 
could perceive that his friend was in an indignant 
mood. He became more severe as he approached 
the Reformation, and spoke with bitterness of the 
ecclesiastical buildings constructed in the reigns of 
Henry the Eighth and Queen Elizabeth. 

Arthur was not at all inclined for a controversy, 
and therefore made not the least effort to defend 
the taste of either sovereign. His forbearance 
was not thrown away; the doctor dwelt lightly 
on the architectural shortcomings of the Stuarts, 
though he compounded for his moderation by the 
most stringent denunciations of the Dutch mon- 
strosities introduced under the auspices of William 
the Third. 

" I hope the very reverend Mother Superior 
is still in the enjoyment of good health, doctor," 
Arthur inquired, as soon as there was a pause. 

" She was never better, Captain Calverley," 
was the reply. 

" And — " the convent pupil, he was about to 
add, but did not dare to hazard the inquiry. 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 199 

"And the good sisters; I hope they are all 
well," 

The doctor laughed again. 

u The poor ladies have their ailments. For in- 
stance, Sister Gudule is rheumatic, and Sister — " 

"Oh, never mind, doctor," replied the gallant 
officer, desirous of escaping a catalogue of femi- 
nine ills; "I have no doubt they are better off 
than their lay sisters, as they deserve to be. Are 
you going my way ?" 

They had got beyond the building, and Arthur 
was about to remount. Dr. Petre held his hand 
with a cordial grasp. 

"I am a physician of souls, my dear sir, not 
of bodies," he said, emphatically. " I am the 
Catholic bishop of this district, — ' Melpotamos,' 
you know, — and in my ' professional capacity' in- 
tend to influence all Catholic voters in my diocese 
to vote for you in the forthcoming election. No 
thanks," he added, kindly, and still detaining the 
hand he grasped ; " I know what you would say." 

He lowered his voice. " Sister Felicia is, God 
be thanked, in perfect health ; I had the privilege, 



200 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

last week, of granting her absolution. She is a 
shining example of all saintlike virtues/' 

The good man uttered a blessing, waved his 
adieux, and walked hurriedly away, before Arthur 
had recovered from the astonishment created by 
his unexpected communication. 

He rode on, lost in a tumult of bewildering 
feelings. It became clear to him, however, that 
his new acquaintance must have been the visitor 
or spiritual director of the nuns at the time of his 
residence in the Abbey ruins, which post it seemed 
probable that he still held, though they had re- 
turned to their foreign convent ; for he had stated 
that he recentlv fulfilled the most confidential of- 
fice of his church for one of them — the one still by 
him so tenderly remembered. 

Then Dr. Petre must know all that he so much 
wished to learn respecting " Sister Felicia ;" and 
he, in the fiflst shock of his surprise, had per- 
mitted him to leave unquestioned. There were a 
hundred inquiries he desired to make. 

Arthur rode rapidly back to the ruins, and 
went round it and out of the Abbey in every 



A PHYSICIAN OF SOULS. 201 

direction, but could see nothing of Dr. Petre. 
He shouted his name, but there came no re- 
sponse. He blamed himself for having permitted 
the only opportunity to escape that had ever pre- 
sented itself for learning facts in which he was so 
profoundly interested ; but his reproaches were 
as unavailing as his desires. The mystery he 
wished explained seemed likely to remain a mys- 
tery to the end of time. 

Even if the good Bishop of Melpotamos would 
have satisfied his curiosity, he had disappeared 
without leaving a trace of his whereabout. So 
there was nothing for it but to try to reconcile 
himself to his disappointment. 

Arthur rode back to Delamere Court to plunge 
once more into the stream of noisy stirring life, 
out of which he had temporarily escaped. He 
lost no time in making inquiries after Dr. Petre, 
but could only ascertain that the reverend gentle- 
man had left that part of the country, and was 
believed to have gone abroad. It was long be- 
fore they again met. 



CHAPTEK VIII. 

SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 

Arthur Calverley had just finished breakfast in 
the morning-room at Delamere Court, previous to 
his start for the neighbouring borough, as his 
nomination was to take place that day. He never 
looked better, was in high spirits, and as perfectly 
satisfied with his prospects as a Calverley ought to 
be, with his feet firmly placed in the lower spokes 
of the ladder of ambition. 

His canvass had been extremely successful, his 
printed and spoken declarations generally well 
received ; indeed he had contrived to make him- 
self so popular, that some doubts had begun to 
be entertained that any opposition would be at- 
tempted — no one as yet having come forward to 



._»../ 



SUCCESS AND FAILUBE. 203 

contest the election with the friend of " Honest 
Jack Scudamore," the popular member for the 
county. 

The Captain rose from the enjoyment of a 
capital meal, to ring for his horse, when he be- 
came aware of a noise of shouting and laughing at 
no great distance, and the next minute the leading 
members of his committee burst into the room, 
apparently wild with pleasurable excitement, each 
wearing a rosette of gaily-coloured ribbons at his 
breast. 

" Come along, old fellow !" cried Tom Holy-* 
oake exultantly, with a look about the eyes as 
if he had not had time to sleep off the preceding 
night's jollification. 

" This way, Captain !" shouted Sir Harry 
Chester, pushing his stalwart form through the 
very demonstrative throng by which his progress 
was impeded. 

" Now, Calverley, my boy, now's your time !" 
exclaimed the young Marquis Delamere, pressing 
forward in the same joyous spirit. 



204 jack scudamorb's daughter. 

« 

Similar invitations were shouted amid a laugh- 
ing scramble at hand-shaking from the others. 

" What is it, gentlemen ? What do you want 
me to do?" demanded the somewhat puzzled can- 
didate, seizing his hat, as he found himself taken 
hold of by his noisy friends, and led to the 
door. 

" Your triumphal car, sir, awaits you," replied 
Lord Vernon. " You have to make your public 
entry into the borough of Delamere Magna ; and 
Caesar never entered Rome during his career of 
conquest, with half the honour you are to receive 
on this proud and memorable occasion. Three 
cheers, gentlemen, for the future member for 
Delamere !" 

Then, amid a wild chorus of cheering, min- 
gled with hearty laughter, Captain Calverley 
allowed himself to be pushed, dragged, and led 
to the front-entrance of the mansion. 

Intense was his astonishment at beholding 
there the entire establishment of the Squire gazing 
delightedly at a four-horse drag, with Miss Bra- 



SUCCESS AND FAILUKE. 205 

bazon in her now well-known top-coat, sitting on 
the box holding the reins ; and the two girls Patty- 
Clark and Nancy Green in their peculiar livery, 
standing before the leaders. The colours of the 
candidate were streaming in every direction, and 
large placards had been pasted on the panels, 
bearing the inscription, " Vote foe Calvebley." 
" Good morning, Captain !" cried the fair 
charioteer, looking as cool as if she had driven 
four-in-hand all her life. "No time to spare — 
jump up-the box-seat here is reserved for you. 
Now, gentlemen, if you please." 

Taking the affair as a capital joke, the Captain 
laughingly sprung up beside the lady; some of 
his committee got inside the carriage, the rest 
ascended to the roof; the fair charioteer smacked 
her long whip, the leaders sprang forward, the 
female grooms ran and clambered to the back- 
seat, and, well cheered by the amazed domestics, 
the team went trotting along the carriage-drive. 

Presently they were in the highroad passing 
through tl\e village. Every cottager turned out as 



206 jack scudamore's daughter. 

the vehicle approached. From the schools the in- 
mates rushed like bees from a hive, all hurrahing 
at the top of their shrill trebles ; and at the Vicar- 
age door stood the Eeverend Basil Plynlymmon 
and his thin curate. 

Miss Brabazon nodded at her clerical friend. 
She laughed as she noticed his look of virtuous hor- 
ror when he recognised her, and observed her oc- 
cupation. Indeed he was so shocked that he forgot 
to return the courteous salute of her companion on 
the box ; and was equally regardless of the some- 
what equivocal hails of several of the passengers. 
Nevertheless the fair charioteer chirruped to her 
team, and continued her lively remarks to her 
friends, as if her clerical friend's virtuous horror 
had not affected her in the very slightest degree. 

Arthur enjoyed a very pleasant ride. The face 
of Lucretia Brabazon was, he could not help ad- 
mitting, rather homely; but her cleverness, her 
coolness, her vivacious conversation, amused him 
extremely. She seemed thoroughly at home in 
every subject; and in repartee her, resources 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 207 

seemed boundless. Only once, and for a very 
short time, she reverted to India ; it was simply to 
make a reference to " Cousin Potter," from whom 
it appeared she had recently received intelligence 
of his having entered the military service of one of 
the native Princes. 

The members of the Committee also enjoyed a 
very pleasant ride; those on the roof shouting 
down jokes to their friends inside, and the more 
jocose of the latter leaning out of the window to 
return the jests that were showered upon them by 
the outsiders. Much to their credit, none of them 
attempted to joke with the occupants of the back 
seat. Whether the intense gravity of the girls' 
countenances discouraged familiarity, or the know- 
ledge that their mistress had horsewhipped, on the 
racecourse, a certain betting-man who had ad- 
dressed an improper observation to her, made 
them keep a guard upon their conduct, I cannot 
say with certainty. I confine myself to a simple 
statement of the fact 

All went merry as a marriage-bell till the 



208 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

equipage entered the suburbs of the little market- 
town that enjoyed the privilege of returning one 
member to the Parliament of the United King- 
dom ; and it then became evident that the inhabi- 
tants amazingly appreciated this privilege. Flags 
were waving from many of the windows ; there 
was a prodigious display of flowers and evergreens; 
in all the conspicuous places there was the placard 
of the candidate; and the people standing at the 
doorways wore his colours. There was much wa- 
ving of caps and handkerchiefs ; there was a con- 
stant succession of cheers as the four-in-hand, with 
the gentlemen waving their hats from the roof and 
windows, came rattling over the stones of the High 
Street But when Patty Clark suddenly produced 
a cornet-a-piston, and begun to play " Rule Bri- 
tannia" in a style that betrayed hard practice in 
the stable for a month at least, the ]>eople exhibited 
a furore that beggars description. 

Under the triumphal-arches, beneath the ban- 
ners, spread across the principal thoroughfare, and 
past the Town-Hall to the Committee-room in the 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 209 

Rose and Crown Inn opposite, went the well- 
appointed team, skilfully handled by their accom- 
plished driver; the candidate acknowledging his 
cordial reception in the approved fashion, while 
the charioteer and the musician, who might have 
claimed a large share of it, maintained an ex- 
pression of countenance which indicated exclusive 
attention to their onerous duties. 

A hustings had been erected in front of the 
Town-Hall, before which a considerable crowd 
had assembled, in the greatest possible good hu- 
mour ; for it was evident they were of but one 
way of thinking. When the popular candidate 
presented himself there was certainly a tremen- 
dous noise; but for all that, there never was a 
more peaceable election. There were speeches 
made by the proposer and seconder of Captain 
Calverley ; but not a word of either was heard, 
the constituency being so impatient to hear him 
alone. 

In due course he advanced to the front; and 

then there was such an uproar of gratulation that 
vol. n. p 



. 210 jack scudamore's daughter. 

for some time his address, cultivated in the very 
best school of Calverley eloquence, was inaudible 
to his audience. A tall handsome man could be 
seen in an oratorical attitude ; they knew that he 
was nearly related to my Lord Madras, and the late 
Bishop of the diocese ; that he was the younger 
brother of Sir Calverley Calverley ; that he was 
supported by the Lord-Lieutenant, and was the 
friend of the Squire ; and, in consequence, were so 
eager to accept his professions, that they vocifer- 
ously applauded every sentence before it had been 
half expressed. 

No one venturing to name another candidate, 
there came the official announcement of Arthur 
Calverley, Esquire, being duly elected a Member 
of Parliament, to represent the free and enlightened 
electors of that important borough. Of course he 
returned thanks for the honour conferred upon 
him ; but again the applause anticipated the grati- 
tude. The representative was at last permitted to 
retire from his frantic supporters, to receive the 
congratulations of the numerous influential per- 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 211 

sonages on the hustings who had been induced to 
attend there to tender him their support. 

While engaged in a round of hand-shaking, 
the attention of the newly-made M.P. was di- 
rected to the popular demand for his immediate 
" chairing. " Arrangements were therefore at 
once entered into for a procession, and, headed 
by the town band in open carriages, with Union 
Jack's and evergreens, his principal supporters 
on horse-back and in vehicles of various descrip- 
tions, with abundance of rosettes, they all filed 
slowly through the crowded streets, the source 
of universal interest, Miss Brabazon's four-in- 
hand last of all. 

Captain Calverley, M.P., stood up, with his 
hand on his heart, bowing to the energetic ladies 
at the balconies, looking quite as amiable as a 
successful candidate ought to look when under- 
going this popular ovation ; the members of Ins 
committee, in ecstasies, bare-headed, making ex- 
traordinary attempts to sing to the air Patty 
Clarke was playing with such solemn earnest- 



212 JACK SCUDAMORS'S DAUGHTER. 

ness; but as they did not know the words, and 
from the uproar going on from the neighbour- 
ing windows and house-tops, could only hear oc- 
casional snatches of the tune, it soon became any- 
thing but a successful performance. Nevertheless 
the musician went on, and though sometimes she 
could not avoid varying the repetition with a bar 
or two of the only other tune she had studied, her 
lapses were safe from discovery. "Rule Britan- 
nia" and " See the conquering hero" were alike 
to the noisy constituency. They only seemed able 
to realise the fact that they had elected their fa- 
vourite, and to be conscious of the novelty of a 
female performer on the cornet-&-piston. 

Sweet as this success may have been, it was 
a special relief to the member and his personal 
friends when the ceremony was over, and they 
found themselves in the long room of the Rose 
and Crown, where a cold collation awaited them. 
Though rather tired, they were still very merry, 
talking loudly, and laughing louder, about the 
incidents of the day. Tom Holyoake, who had 



; yju — ' ,v , a..,j i r.- - . ~*s 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 213 

m^ 8 through *• window at *• crowd 

;„* 1 "^"ng in groups about the market-place, 
mterchanffino' ;«„ 

* g jocose remarks with Sir Harry 

ester, suddenly utter ed an exclamation of sur- 
prise. 

« Chap must ^ a foreigner!" he cried; 

an what a queer trap ! L^ at U8 black ^ 

v ant at the back ,'« i,- , 

oacic, m his g]^^ hfttj plush bre eches, 

f f ? r*' aDd red Wai8tco ^ What a figure 
**»' Look, Sir Harry." 

to the ^ g °° n brou ght his aquiline nose close 
man *.****' ""* obser ved a sallow-complexioned 

wid' "V ° Ut " aWa y °° a t and broad brimmed 
e-awake, about to j^ off d ^ at 

"»« back of whioh „ 

holdi negro footman was seated, 

J£ ° n *° ^ side «> as if to prepare for a jerk, 
on my u f e — y e8 — no 1 but it must be. 
«J it's the very manl » crfed gir H ex _ 

•citedljr. 

"Whatman?" inquired the other. 
Why, the fellow I saw last week/' replied 

the ex-dragoon. << tt^ . . n 

o • -tie was proprietor of an ex- 



214 jack scudamore's daughter. 

hibition at Donnington, that created a tremendous 
sensation. Did, 'pon my life !" 

"Did it though? What was it?" 

" The pig-faced Lajly !" 

" TJie pig-faced Lady!" repeated Tom Holy- 
oake, in tones of extreme astonishment " But 
he's saying ' Good-by' to the landlord : now he's 
driving off. How that poor devil of a nigger 
clings to his seat ! For all the world, like a 
monkey on an uneasy perch ! Never saw a black 
fellow look so pitiable." 

The gentlemen were summoned to take their 
seats at the table. Miss Brabazon having been 
voted into the chair, with the young Marquis as 
vice-chairman, and the newly-elected M.P. in the 
place of honour at her right hand, the weary 
Committee-men were presently busily engaged in 
carving and eating the substantial meal which the 
landlord of the Hose and Crown had provided for 
them. He was even more substantial than his 
joints ; — a large-faced, fat-headed old fellow, who 
had not been able to see his knees for a score of 



SUCCESS AND FAILUBE. 215 

years at least ; but though he suffered much from 
shortness of breath, he insisted on waiting upon 
his distinguished guests. 

Talking went on as briskly as the general mas- 
tication would allow: now and then a burst of 
mirth, recognising the point in some amusing 
remark from the fair president or her youthful 
vice. As the appetite got satisfied, the conver- 
sation became more general; and the usual cur- 
rent of pleasant gossip, enlivened occasionally 
with a bet, flowed round the table. ' 

" Have you seen the JDelamere Guardian V 
inquired Lord Vernon of his opposite neighbour, 
Jacob Cobb, who, though a pig in the opinion 
of his Vicar, was pretty sure of finding a place 
much better than a stye in all county gatherings. 

" No, my lord. I shall get it to-morrow. I 
don't think it's published before." 

" I wanted to know," added his lordship, " lf *■ 
was likely to find there an account of a rather ciev 
hoax which I have heard was practised, for som 
time successfully, at a town some fifty miles off. 



216 JACK SCUDAMOR&'S DAUGHTER. 

" Clever hoax, eh ! What was it, my lord?" 

Jacob Cobb glanced at the innkeeper, who he 
knew liked a good story, and the smirk on the 
man's pudding-face showed that his attention had 
been attracted to the announcement. 

" Well, you see, Cobb, the fellow had an exhi- 
bition which took immensely. Thousands flocked to 
see it, and proclaimed it the greatest wonder in the 
living world. It was what naturalists call a lu#u& 
nature a kind of miracle in natural history." 

" What in the world could it have been, my 
lord ?" 

The fat innkeeper appeared to listen with pro- 
found attention. 

" Well, they called it < The pig-faced Lady.' " 

Sir Harry Chester and Tom Holyoake were 
now listening as intently, but not quite so anx- 
iously, as the landlord. 

"But," continued the speaker, "a spirited 
young doctor publicly denounced the thing as a 
cheat, and proved it to be nothing more than a 
bear clothed in female apparel, whose head had 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 217 

been shaved. The showman bolted with his ex- 
hibition, and got clear off." 

" Lord, Fm rained ! I've been swindled I" 
cried the innkeeper, his complexion turning 
deadly pale. " I've been cheated and robbed by 
that rascal. Here, James ! John ! Thomas !" 

He ran out of the room calling to his waiters, 
exciting much more amusement from some of his 
guests than sympathy, for, on inquiry, it was 
ascertained that he had been induced to accept 
this attractive investment as a short cut to fortune, 
giving a horse and dog-cart, besides a considerable 
sum in ready-money for the lusus naturce, intend- 
ing to exhibit her at the approaching races. 

The incident became the subject of general 
conversation, and there was much speculation 
about the clever cheat That he was the for- 
eigner with the black servant there could be no 
doubt ; but nothing seemed to be known respect- 
ing him; Arthur Calverley had seen him talking 
to the landlord, and thought he could identify 
him; but satisfied himself by recommending im- 
mediate pursuit 



218 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

By degrees the excitement caused by the 
swindle having been brought so close to them 
subsided among the company : the usual healths 
were drunk, and the customary speeches made; 
the forthcoming races were discussed ; Miss Bra- 
bazon booked a good many bets ; in short, not 
only were the victim and his victimiser as com- 
pletely forgotten as if they had never existed, but 
the hero of the day, the newly-elected member for 
the borough, had the mortification to find himself, 
even among the members of his own committee, 
an object of secondary importance compared with 
those promising young horses " Tippetywitchet" 
and " Pot-8-o's." 

In the evening, when in the privacy of his 
chamber, having arranged for his return to town 
on the following day, Arthur had time to reflect 
on the improvement in his prospects caused by his 
entrance into Parliament. With all the confi- 
dence of a Calverley he felt assured that he should 
make a figure there. He had no doubt that his 
claims on the Government would be pushed by 
Lord Madras ; indeed, by all the Calverley 



SUCCESS AND FAILUKE. 219 

interest, and then there was the Squire, and 
through him the Duke. It was a powerful com- 
bination, and might lead to almost any thing. 

Lastly, the new member thought of the 
Squire's daughter. As he smoked a cheroot in 
the easy-chair, he rapidly sketched out his plan 
of operations to bring his affairs in that quarter 
to a satisfactory conclusion. He would resume 
the singing ; that German love-song he must have 
again. He remembered the stolen caress ; if ano- 
ther such opportunity presented itself he should 
make a declaration. Madras expected this ; and 
he must not disappoint Madras if he could help it. 
The Bishop's widow absolutely looked upon it as 
an accomplished feet. 

Besides he could not help acknowledging that, 
all things considered, he could not do better than 
marry Fanny Scudamore. She really was very 
handsome, and had been most tender and affec- 
tionate in her manner towards him. Her father 
evidently wished it, and hence his great desire to 
advance his interests. So it was settled. 



220 jack scudamobe'b daughter. 

At this moment his glance fell upon a letter 
addressed to him, which had been placed on the 
dressing-table. He opened it It was from his 
young comrade. He did not take much interest in 
its contents till he came to the following passage : 

" Old Porchester, after philandering with my 
cousin and sister, at last allowed money to influ- 
ence his decision, and has married the heiress. 
We were all at the wedding. Geraldine as brides- 
maid, and I as best man, and a precious slow af- 
fair I found it, I can tell you. I can't express how 
surprised I am about Fanny. It passes a fellow's 
comprehension to make out some girls." 

The Captain was as much astonished as the 
Cornet, and equally disappointed. He was quite 
at a loss what to say now to his well-married re- 
lations on this change in his prospects. He could 
not account for it Could Jack Scudamore's 
daughter be nothing better than a flirt? And 
their singing such marvellously tender love-songs 
together ! Could they mean nothing ? 

The handsome cavalry officer felt himself non- 



SUCCESS AND FAILURE. 221 

suited; but how his cause had so completely failed 
he had not the most remote idea. Surely the 
matrimonial luck of the Calverleys was not leaving 
them? 

Vexatious as the affair was, he found consola- 
tion in the fact that he had not proposed, and 
therefore had not been refused. He would not 
think Fanny a coquette ; nevertheless her behaviour 
was inexplicable. 

When he returned to town he would learn all 
about it from her cousin. 

As he thought of Geraldine, the image of her 
girlish beauty filled his mind with a sense of fresh- 
ness to which he had long been a stranger. He 
could not help confessing that she had grown very 
lovely; he could not help feeling that there was 
something in her ingenuous nature which held an 
unaccountable influence over him when he thought 
of her. She seemed to have some mysterious 
claim upon his attention. 

He resolved to see more of her. It should not 
be long before he would find his way to the Chis- 



222 jack scudamore's daughter. 

wick Cottage, and learn from her every thing 
about this queer marriage. He did not like it, 
and professed his inability to comprehend its 
meaning. 

At last, having smoked out his cigar, he threw 
the end into the grate and began to undress, with 
an indistinct idea in his mind that, notwithstanding 
his success in his election, his love-making had 
been a failure. 



CHAPTER IX. 

FIRST LOVE. 

Gerald ink found almost insurnioiin toulW ai&rai z 
in reconciling herself to her sepstrmtaov Titai hm^- 
affectionate companion. The intelEgMw t" ^- r 
marriage astounded her. She had- *xb*r * "**"i~- 
gle, the severity of which no onefaw» -■ , «" -**>.. _^, 
brought her mind to a tolersW* ■■ tmm^mi,-^^ 
of another union for her, ***■ ^ " s * r "— =« - ^ 
dential tMe-a-Ute shared br » -"--Tr-^. 3N;_ 
when Fanny came to &** — " u '^ a> "■*■ - 
formed of the Duke's/***- ^ ***" '»»-* 
She was too maei i** - "™' -j»»^. - 
heard the fair /a*' ** * "*-*-' -"=■" a.-,, 
monial prospects i** *""*" ~ - ~" 
dered fay the •kb*"*** " a " %i 

ableness of ik — ■ M ^ 



224 jack scudamore's daughter. 

warm invitation to be her bridesmaid was repeated 
more emphatically, that she seemed to wake up to 
something like consciousness of the fact. 

Of course she could not refuse; and when 
asked reproachfully why she did not wish her 
friend joy, Geraldine did so with a tumultuous 
agitation of feeling that betrayed the uncertainty 
of her thoughts as regarded the nature of the con- 
tingency represented to her as joyftd. Fanny 
rewarded her with one of the fond caresses she 
had used to bestow in her assumed maternal cha- 
racter, and continued to talk in the highest spirits 
about the necessary arrangements for her wedding. 

Though the prayers were said that night rather 
hurriedly, the final benediction was repeated with 
increased fervour. It was acknowledged by a 
passionate embrace that created an hysterical 
sensation Geraldine had great difficulty in sup- 
pressing. 

Neither of them slept much that night. Ge- 
raldine kept awake wondering ; Fanny closed her 
eyes and lay motionless, but only to deceive her 



FIBST LOVE. 225 

loving bedfellow. She had much to think of, and 
more not to think of. Not a word had been said 
by either about Arthur ; both had seemed with a 
like caution to refrain from any expression capable 
of suggesting his name. 

This reticence continued during the whole of 
the interval before the wedding-day. Geraldine, 
after the ceremony, in which she shared as if she 
were moving in a trance, took leave of the dear 
friend of her childhood. She exerted herself 
bravely not to betray her sense of the irreparable 
loss she had to sustain; and was encouraged by 
the bride's high spirits} abundance of caresses, and 
the warmest invitations to come to her directly she 
returned from her bridal tour. Presently she be^ 
held the Duchess step into her travelling-carriage. 
The Duke was quickly by her side, the postillions 
smacked their whips, the horses started ; and the 
next minute the handsome equipage, with bride 
and bridegroom, was out of sight. 

But very far from out of mind. At least one 
of them had too firm a hold on the affectionate 

VOL. II. Q 



226 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

girl's remembrance to be so easily disposed o£ 
Geraldine in her loneliness felt as if she bad lost 
a material part of her identity— of her existence. 
They had lived together in mutual dependence, and 
the younger was quite unprepared for a separation. 
But it was not till she had retired for the night to 
the chamber they had so often shared, and Geral- 
dine regarded one by one the numerous memorials 
of their happy life, that she fully realised the dis- 
solution of that happiness. 

The threatened loss of the object of her long 
devotion had not affected her so deeply, because 
there the bane brought its antidote in the assur- 
ance that Fanny loved Arthur, and could not fail 
of being very happy with him. Was she likely 
to be as happy with the Duke ? was her frequent 
question. She could never frame a satisfactory 
answer to it. 

Geraldine sighed heavily. She could not com- 
prehend the meaning of the sudden abandonment 
of so attractive a lover as Captain Calverley for so 
venerable a husband as the Duke of Porchester. 



have x»<3 
the a.fif» 
hex- trie 

Vff no « 

yovtr*£ 

o«» ** 

tibial- 

TCI'* 






228 jack scudamore's daughter. 

seeing him often? Would he be able to call at 
Rose Lawn soon after his return to town to see 
grandmamma, who was so partial to him ? Would 
he come in time for the archery-fete ? Would he 
ask permission to accompany her ? Oh, how very 
nice it would be to have dear Arthur for her escort 
all to herself! what a delightful archery-f3te that 
would be ! what a happy day to think of ever after ! 
One day, while in her own room engaged in 
these pleasant speculations, the little parlour-maid 
brought her the gratifying intelligence that Captain 
Calverley was in the drawing-room with her grand- 
mother, as she had learned to call the Countess 
from her cousin. In a flutter of exquisite excitement 
Geraldine proceeded to make certain improvements 
in her toilette, all the time thinking how good it 
was of him to come so soon all the way to Chfs- 
wick to visit dear grandmamma ; wondering if he 
would be glad to see herself; wondering what he 
would say about Fanny's marriage ; and wonder- 
ing on a hundred other equally interesting topics 
I cannot even name, as I am obliged to leave this 



FIRST LOVE. 229. 

dear affectionate nature to give some little atten- 
tion to the idol it so fervently worshipped. 

The new Member for Delamere had his own 
particular reasons for hurrying to Rose Lawn. I 
have already intimated as much; so he barely 
allowed himself time to take the oaths and his seat 
in the assembled Commons of England before he 
was seen in a well-appointed cabriolet, driving a 
high-stepping horse along the Hammersmith Road. 

He found the dowager alone, not only in her 
own seat by the window, but with scarcely a per- 
ceptible alteration in her appearance. As soon as 
she was made aware of his presence, she was as 
glad and garrulous as he could have desired to find 
her. Nothing had been changed in the apartment. 
The full-length of the departed Lord-Chamberlain 
remained over the chair of his venerable relict; 
and the old-fashioned marqueterie, the gilt eagles, 
and carved swans were exactly where he had left 
them. 

He had hardly sat down before the stream of 
her reminiscences began to flow. 



230 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

" I was just thinking of my first journey to 
Weymouth with the sweet Queen and the darling 
Princesses," observed the Countess, taking a pinch 
of snuff with spasmodic energy. " I was one of 
the maids of honour, you know, and about the age 
of my granddaughter. It's a good marriage for 
her, isn't it ?" 

Captain Calverley was rather taken aback by 
the sudden question; but was evidently not ex- 
pected to reply. 

"The court were accommodated in a large 
house opposite the sea," she continued, " and a 
very charming party we were ; for the dear good 
King was always pleasant at Weymouth. Not but 
what his most gracious majesty was pleasant every 
where ; but when he found himself in his favourite 
watering-place, he really seemed as if he couldn't 
be happy unless he made every body happy around 
him. And the sweet Queen was happy, of course ; 
and the darling Princesses every one of them. And 
my dear lord was happy, though he was not my 
lord then. / was very happy, for all the court 



FIRST LOVE, 231 

paid me marked attention ; and I am sure I might 
have married a duke like my granddaughter, who 
is really very lucky to make so good a match. 
Not but what she thoroughly deserves it: she's 
worthy to be an empress, as his most gracious 
majesty observed when he congratulated me on 
my receiving an offer of marriage from my dear 
lord. But that was not at Weymouth ; for I had 
been maid-of-honour three years before he pro- 
posed, though he paid me particular attentions 
long before that, of which the whole court took 
notice. Indeed, the dear good King joked him 
on his attentions. His most gracious majesty 
made every body laugh one day when he said — " 

Arthur had been too used to tlje abrupt breaks 
in the current to exhibit any thing like surprise 
when he noticed the usual bewildered look as the 
speaker stopped. 

"You were referring to the marriage of your 
grand-daughter, Countess," he said as loud as 
he could ; for that was the subject on which he 
wished her to dilate. 



232 jack scudamobe's daughteb. 

" Ah, yes, the darling Princess RoyaL I re- 
member it all now. Her royal highness wore a 
spangled muslin-frock over a satin-slip ; and her 
head was dressed the night before, which made it 
necessary that she should not go to bed. And I 
sat up with her all night, playing at ombre to 
keep her awake ; but when the dresser came, she 
found us both fast asleep on the floor, with our 
beautiful tall head-dresses crushed and rumpled 
so badly that they had to be done over again 
before we could be considered fit to present our- 
selves. I thought the sweet Queen would have 
been vexed with me for my carelessness; but, on 
learning the cause of the darling Princess Bcfyal 
being so late, her most gracious majesty good- 
humouredly observed — " 

Here the door opened, and so graceful a vision 
presented itself in the person of the brightly- 
blushing Geraldine, that he, gallant captain though 
he was, became totally oblivious of his old friend's 
court-anecdote, and hurried towards her grand- 
niece with so much genuine pleasure in his coun- 



FIRST LOVE. 



23a 



tenance, that the delighted girl wanted nothing 
more to convince her loving heart that he was 
glad to see her. 

He led her to a chair near her relative, and 
experienced a gratification quite new to him as 
he took the hand that was timidly placed in his 
own. The dowager presently resumed her gos- 
sip ; but perhaps it became more incoherent than 
usual, or was more frequently broken into unin- 
telligible fragments, for if asked, Arthur could not 
have given a rational description of what had 
been said to him. The real fact was, the happi- 
ness glowing in Geraldine's face made its beauty 
so impressive, that he could with difficulty refrain 
from testifying his admiration. 

His ancient friend found her visitor singularly 
inattentive. At last the broken current stopped 
altogether, and Arthur was at liberty to converse 
with her youthful kinswoman. 

Somewhat to Geraldine's surprise, he did not 
ask a single question about dear Fanny ; *u s 
quiries were after her brother and herself. They 



234 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

speedily got into a stream of easy converse on 
subjects of local or temporary interest; in the 
course of which he ascertained the important fact 
of the archery-fSte coming-off the next day. The 
Captain was going there of course, — every body 
would be there. 

Arthur made rather a long visit of it. Though 
he knew that he ought to be in the House of 
Commons by*fe certain hour, he delayed his adieux 
till all chance of getting there in that time had 
become impossible. He did, however, at last sum- 
mon up resolution to rise and shake hands with 
his venerable hostess ; and with a great deal more 
fervour, with her charmiiig relative ; then hurried 
away, and jumped into his cab, wondering how 
he could have been so stupid as to have over- 
looked, or at least not to have sufficiently admired, 
" that exquisitely lovely girl." 

Of what the young senator did in that night's 
debate, unfortunately there is no record. What 
he did when he came home to his comfortable 
lodgings in the Albany after it was over, I 



FIRST LOVE. 235 

am equally at a loss for reliable evidence to 
show; but the next morning, when escorting 
the happy Geraldine in the grounds of the beau- 
tiful villa to which she had been invited, there 
was nothing in his appearance to prove that his 
parliamentary or his domestic duties had been 
very heavy. 

Geraldine was realising one of her happy day- 
dreams ; the object of such intense hero-worship 
was devoting his entire attention to her, and so 
attentive was he that he not unfrequently drew 
towards his companion more notice than she de- 
sired. They were pointed out as the handsomest 
couple that had ever been seen in those grounds. 
They must be lovers. 

Their conversation was chiefly about the 
flowers, the scenery, the balmy air, the bright 
sky over head, and the clear stream flowing at 
their feet; about every thing except what each 
was thinking of — apparently insignificant com- 
monplaces such as any two acquaintances of both 
sexes might interchange in any pleasant spot, 






236 jack scudamorb's daughter. 

Tinder any combination of pleasurable circum- 
stances. 

Arthur had no knowledge of his companion's 
feelings, and did not presume to penetrate her 
thoughts ; he therefore considered that he had not 
the slightest right to interpret the innocent no- 
things of her conversation as having a significance 
that was for the heart rather than for the ear. He 
began, however, to perceive that his own nature 
was developing a new sense that his tongue as 
yet wanted the faculty to communicate. 

They had been brought together as closely as 
life can be to death : the remembrance of this 
alone was an indissoluble link — at least to one of 
them it had always been so. Arthur, as he gazed 
admiringly on that singularly bright young face, 
felt for the first time the full appreciation of his 
timely rescue. He became conscious that it was 
an achievement to be proud of; and he was proud 
of it Very proud, indeed, was the handsome 
cavalry-officer, as he looked upon those eloquent 
ingenuous features — the most eloquent of all, the 



FIBST LOVE. '< 237 

soft lustrous hazel orbs beaming up to meet his 
own, overflowing with the happiness that filled 
her guileless heart; and when he remembered 
the ghastly corpse he had seen through the glassy 
water, a feeling of inexpressible tenderness thrilled 
through his manly frame. He acknowledged to 
himself that he had gained a right to regard this 
beautiful young life as an integral part of his 
own. 

They did not join the archers ; but after wan- 
dering about the grounds, interchanging pleasant 
thoughts and still more pleasurable impressions, 
they sat down to rest upon a mossy bank screened 
by flowering shrubs, where from time to time a 
burst of joyous exclamations was wafted towards 
them as a cheerful chorus to the touching drama 
their souls were then enacting. 

So deeply was this interview impressed upon 
Arthur Calverley, that in many an after hour of 
mingled anxiety and dread he could recal every 
musical inflection of Geraldine's voice, every 
charm that assisted in producing her eminently 



238 jack scudamore's daughter. 

graceful appearance, every expression that minis- 
tered to the beauty of that exquisite face, as they 
sat together under the sweet shelter of the lilacs 
and laburnums, associated in that paradise of 
youth that is illumined by the golden sunrise of 
first love. 



CHAPTER X. 

PATRONAGE. 

About a month after Arthur Calverley's return 
to town, he received this note from the Squire : 

" Hertford Street, May Fair. 
" My dear Friend, — Never was a horse 
ridden so hard. Had I been a three-year old 
they could not have entered me for so many races. 
By George, sir, it seems to me there isn't a cup 
to be run for in the country, or a sweepstakes, 
or a handicap, or a match of any sort, for which 
I am not down. I would not have cared when 
I was in my prime, and when my blood and bone 
made me an Eclipse in my way, capable of dis- 
tancing every thing that came on the course with 
me. 



240 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

" Now the high-mettled racer has run himself 
off his legs. It's a thousand to one against him, 
and no takers. He's aged, he's stiff, he's lame, 
he's spavined, he's wind-galled, he can't see the 
winning-post, he hasn't wind enough left in him 
for a canter. 

" Pray come and see what you can do to get 
him scratehed, so <frat, fi*ed from these inmuner- 
able engagements, the poor old horse may be per- 
mitted to return to his paddock, have his shoes 
taken off, and eat his remaining feeds in peace. 

" Yours truly, 

"Jack Scudamore. 

4 

" P.S. Fanny has just left me. She is quitting 
town for the castle, the Duke being out of order. 
I hope, however, there's nothing much amiss with 
him. I'm quite alone in this big place, except 
Dawkins and the old hounds." 

Arthur hastened to Hertford Street, and, as 
the door opened, beheld the bullet-head of the 



PATRONAGE, 241 

superannuated first whip, his well -tanned and 
freckled face wearing a most lugubrious aspect, 
while his thin gaitered legs, more than usually 
bowed, seemed scarcely able to sustain his light 
weight. 

"I be main glad to see you, sur," he said 
in a whisper; — "they be a baiting the poor 
Squire to death ; they bo a worrying on him like 
a pack o' martins, polecats, weasels, stoats, and 
other varmin. I be terrible tired myself, sur, only 
a opening of the door and answering of their 
questions." 

He pointed with his thumb mysteriously over 
his shoulder. Arthur did not quite comprehend 
the nature of the evil, and looked as if he wanted 
information, 

"All comes of being in Parliament, sur," 
added Dawkins. "As long as the Squire re- 
mained at the Court, a doing of what lie were 
fit for, nothing troubled him, or any on us ; but 
since he were persuaded to represent the county 

and come to live here in Lunnon, where he can't 
vol. n. R 



242 jack scudamore's daughter. 

do what he ha 9 been used to all his life, a badger 
in the open, wi' a dozen dogs at his throat and a 
spear-point within a inch o' his ribs, have a better 
chance of making hisself comfortable." 

As the Captain passed the parlours, the doors 
being open, he could see that they were crowded 
with people of both sexes, wearing that anxious 
expectant physiognomy which distinguishes appli- 
cants for favour. He had become familiar with 
such faces in the ante-rooms of leading members 
of the Government ; he had never made a morning 
call on the Duke of Porchester without finding a 
throng of them waiting his leisure. 

Arthur passed into the drawing-room, where 
he found his friend reclining in an easy-chair, 
beside a large table covered with newspapers, 
pamphlets, parliamentary reports, blue-books, and 
heaped up with letters. A waste-basket was 
before him, crammed with printed and written 
papers of every description. His florid com- 
plexion had contracted a bilious tinge ; his cheer- 
ful, cordial expression had been superseded by 



PATRONAGE. 243 

one of vexation and disgust. In place of the 
neatness which had invariably distinguished his 
dress, it was slovenly, soiled, and rumpled, giv- 
ing the idea of late revelling and a bad night's 
rest under the table. 

As soon as Jack Scudamore recognised his 
visitor, his features were lit up with something 
like their old animation. He pitched a book he 
had in his hand on to the floor, which was well 
littered with* newspapers, envelopes, and prospec- 
tuses, and held out his hand. 

" Welcome as a thaw after a long frost !" he 
exclaimed, with his familiar cheeriness of manner. 
" Never had a master of hounds such a stiff 
line of country. Bull-finches rise before me at 
every step ; and I've no more jump left in my 
limbs than can be found in a dead frog." 

Arthur sat down beside his friend, and re- 
quested to know in what manner he could help 
him out of his difficulties. 

"By Greorge, I've been run too hard!" he 
cried, with his customary emphasis. " I can't 



244 jack scudamore's daughter. 

go the pace; I ain't able to get across such a 
terrible line of country as one meets with in the 
political hunt. It's all easy enough to ride to 
cover ; and when some Towser in the ministerial 
pack gives tongue, I can go with the field pretty 
well ; but then I get bogged in committees." 

The young member ventured to ask for an ex- 
planation. 

" Why, you see, Captain," he said, hesitat- 
ingly, " I find I don't know where I'm going. 
I raise myself in my stirrups under the belief 
that there's something in my way, and I'm to 
take a leap ; but somehow or other, when serv- 
ing on those committees, I'm constantly finding 
myself a-sinking, as it were. The ground seems 
a quagmire ; I stumble, I flounder ; and an un- 
pleasant impression takes possession of me that I 
am going out of my depth, and about to come to 
grief" 

It became clear to Arthur that the new county 
member felt himself unqualified for the duties he 
was called upon to fulfil. They were a tax not 



PATRONAGE. 245 

only upon his time and his patience, but upon his 
understanding; for besides being totally unac- 
quainted with the business of the House, many of 
the subjects under inquiry were very imperfectly 
known to him. 

" In any thing about the breeding of horses," 
he added, " I should be forward enough ; or as to 
the rearing and management of hounds ; or I could 
give tongue concerning sport of almost any sort ; 
moreover, I'm up to a thing or two about land 
and farming, and such matters. But what on 
earth do I know respecting treaties with foreign 
powers, the cultivation of the fine-arts, prison- 
discipline, commercial reciprocity, and a score of 
other things that are constantly being brought 
under the notice of a committee of inquiry? By 
Jove, sir, I sometimes know no more what the 
witnesses are talking of than if they were explain- 
ing in Hebrew !" 

Arthur endeavoured to reconcile the old fox- 
hunter to his ignorance by giving him to under- 
stand that his was far from being a solitary case. 



246 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

Country gentlemen in general, on entering Par- 
liament, he assured his friend, find that they have 
a good deal to learn ; nevertheless, they contrive 
to make respectable legislators. 

The Squire did not seem to care for this dis- 
tinction. "I would rather a thousand times be 
where I feel myself a good deal more at home," 
he replied; "where I know every inch of the 
ground ; where I am my own master, can do as 
I like, and say what I like, without caring what 
any body thinks of it Now, what do you think 
happened, only a day or two ago, in a de- 
bate on what was called an extension of the suf- 
frage ?" 

His visitor had not heard, and requested to be 
informed. 

" There was a radical chap, sir," he continued, 
"ventured to abuse landed proprietors for tyranny 
to their labourers, grinding the poor, and a hun- 
dred other oppressions. At last I couldn't stand 
it any longer, and got up and told him that had I 
heard him tell such a pack of lies, when I was a 



PATRONAGE. 247 

younger man, I would have sent him head-over- 
heels into the nearest ditch. By George," cried 
the speaker in indignant surprise, " there was im- 
mediately a commotion such as might have been 
raised had Guy Fawkes been discovered amongst 
them, sitting on a barrel of gunpowder. You will 
hardly believe it, but I was called to order, and 
told that I had used unparliamentary language. 
By Jove, I was J" 

Arthur endeavoured to look a good deal more 
astonished than he felt. 

"As a master of hounds, you know," he added 
in a confidential tone, " one is obliged to be some- 
what sharp upon fellows who will ride into the 
pack, or do some other mischief: and it's of no 
more use crying, 'Ware hounds! 9 to such awk- 
ward fools than doing nothing at all. I remember 
once I was riding Tom Jones, out of the Queen of 
Sheba by Malbrook, whose sire, you know, was 
the Flying Dutchman. I was out cub-hunting, 
and had come to a check; the pack were dili- 
gently striving to recover the scent in a patch of 



248 jack scudamore's daughter, 

gorse and fern close to a low quickset, when a 
man, whose horse seemed to have run away with 
him, suddenly bounded over the enclosure, and 
the next minute my hounds were scattered, two or 
three howling with. pain. I rode up to him in a 
terrible rage. I don't quite remember what I 
said, but I know that I was far from being choice 
in my language. I called him a tinker, a tailor, 
a cockney, and a snob ; and declared that it was 
impossible to decide which was the most worthless 
brute of the two, himself or his horse. I should 
certainly have knocked him out of his saddle as a 
climax to my impressive address, only I recog- 
nised him as the son of one of my tenants : but he 
got such a jobation as completely prevented his 
again joining the hunt. Now I should have 
liked," added the veteran sportsman emphatically, 
" to have heard any body, while I was double- 
thonging that fellow with my tongue, cry out that 
I was out of order, and was using unparliamentary 
language. That would have been a joke, wouldn't 
it?" 



PATRONAGE, 249 

He burst out into his cheery laugh with a hear- 
tiness that showed he had quite forgot his more 
recent vexations. 

Arthur joined in his mirth, and then directed 
his attention to the heap of correspondence, open 
and unopen, and the packets of various kinds 
upon the table. 

" I gave up the task of making myself ac- 
quainted with the intentions of my innumerable 
correspondents, in sheer despair," the Squire said* 
"At first, I put aside the civil communications 
that seemed to require answers : but when I 
ascertained that I had been appointed steward to 
five-and-twenty public dinners; that I had been 
selected to fill the chair at a dozen charitable 
anniversaries; that I had been promoted to the 
post of director of forty joint-stock companies; 
that I was invited to become vice-patron of at 
least a score of hospitals and infirmaries ; and that 
my known liberality and benevolence were ap- 
pealed to on behalf of more than a. hundred 
interesting young widows with large families,— 



250 jack scudamore's daughter. 

I stopped short, appalled by the magnitude of the 
obligations thus thrust upon me." 

His visitor was no stranger to the persecutions 
which a person of great wealth or influence is sub- 
ject to on his arrival in the metropolis; and ad- 
dressed himself to an examination of the prodigious 
accumulation of them that had fallen to his warm- 
hearted friend, with very little ceremony. 

" I remember hearing of an Irishman/' said 
Jack Scudamore, with all his old social pleasantry, 
"who confessed that he couldn't be in two places 
at once, unless he were a bird; but my friends 
here evidently attribute to me still more miraculous 
powers of wing ; they expect me to be in at least a 
dozen places at once. I'm to be at the London 
Tavern and Exeter Hall, the Crown and Anchor, 
the Albion, and Willis's Booms — even at Green- 
wich and Richmond — at the same hour ; and the 
demands on my digestion are as extravagant as 
those on my purse, for I am to eat a dinner pre- 
pared for the friends of the Indigent Blind, while 
partaking of banquets as liberally arranged for the 



PATRONAGE. 251 

patrons of Superannuated Printers'-devils, of Li- ' 
valided Crossing-sweepers, of Distressed Bar- 
maids, of Reformed' Burglars, of the Institution 
for the Cure of Diseases of the Great Toe-joint, of 
the Society for encouraging Industrious Servant- 
girls, of the Refuge for lost Lap-dogs, of the 
National Costermongers' Athenaeum of the Arts 
and Sciences, of the Royal Association for trans- 
porting the Jews from Duke's Place to Jerusalem, 
of the Mission to convert the followers of Mumbo- 
Jumbo, of the Universal United Samaritans for 
providing the poor Climbing-boys with Soap and 
Water, of the Imperial Philanthropic Institute for 
erecting Model Lodging-houses for Tramps and 
Cadgers — 

" By Jove, I haven't half exhausted my list !'* 
exclaimed the county representative, as his friend 
interrupted him with a burst of laughter he could 
no longer restrain. 

Arthur was soon occupied creating a goodly 
pile of rejected addresses; for he found that the 
name of charity had been abused to the frill ex- 



252 jack scudamore's daughter. 

-tent he had just heard described. While busy at 
his work, the Squire threw himself back in his 
chair with a heavy sigh. 

" Ah !" thought his young friend, " this sort of 
life does not suit you at all, honest Jack Scudamore. 
You are hankering after a return to the joyous 
scenes in which your soul delighted : the excitement 
of adventure in the hunting-field ; the stirring cho- 
rus of hounds in full cry ; the gladdening hail of 
old friends ; and the enlivening emulation of the 
best horses in Cheshire. Even the pleasant so-* 
ciety of canine favourites, interrupted by interest- 
ing reports from the stable and kennel, or the 
cheerful gossip of ancient companions in the field, 
when unable to make his appearance at the cover- 
side, were a thousand times more congenial to your 
nature than the close confinement, studious appli- 
cation, and endless bother inseparable from the 

9 

existence of a public career such as your misjudg- 
ing admirers have selected for you." 

While throwing aside appeal after appeal to 
Mr. Scudamore's well-known liberality, the extern- 



PATRONAGE. 253 

porised secretary kept glancing at the fine healthy, 
happy countenance that had diffused so large a 
share of social enjoyment in the home-circle. He 
was painfully struck by the change it had un- 
dergone. It had not only become aged, but was 
impressed with an expression of profound anx- 
iety. 

" Did I tell you that Fanny called ?" he in- 
quired suddenly. "The Duchess, you know. She 
was here yesterday to say good-by. I'm afraid 
my old friend the Duke is in a bad way. A sud- 
den seizure, I've been told, which has left him 
quite unconscious. Poor dear Duke, I shall miss 
him very much ; he has always been to me as a 
brother, and I have found him still more kind and 
affectionate as a son." 

There was a slight pause. 

" My darling bears up bravely," he continued 
in a less steady voice ; " but I noticed that tears 
were in her eyes, and she looked very different to 
what she used to do. Though every one assured 
me how brilliant her life was after her marriage, 



254 jack scudamore's daughter. 

somehow or other she never seemed so happy as 
she had been before." 

The gallant Captain recalled her bright pre- 
sence, as it had appeared and re-appeared to him, 
as girl and woman, marvellously rich in feminine 
grace. He recalled scenes of affectionate tender- 
ness he had witnessed in the well-remembered 
cottage at Chiswick, and the meeting between 
father and daughter he had beheld at the Hunt 
dinner. Then naturally followed his recollection 
of those passages that a certain German lyric had 
produced. 

The grapes were not sour. He would readily 
have acknowledged their exquisite sweetness, 
though unable to comprehend why ihey had so 
suddenly been put out of his reach. There was 
a true manliness in his nature, that prevented his 
falling into the littlenesses of some lovers when 
they think they have been slighted ; and the man- 
ner he heard her spoken of excited a genuine 
sympathy. 
I "I have missed her terribly/' said the old 



PATRONAGE. 255 

man. " When she left me, the whole sunshine 
of my life went with her. I thought it would 
be so proud a thing to see her a duchess ; but I 
learnt that my ambition had been gratified at too 
heavy a cost. The hunting-field, the old house, 
the hounds, the horses, after she had ceased to 
associate herself with them, seemed in my eyes to 
lose nearly all the interest with which they had 
been regarded. By George, every thing I used 
to like so thoroughly began to grow wearisome; 
and then I knew that I had parted with the zest 
that had made my daily existence so very enjoy- 
able." 

The voice was growing tremulous. The se- 
cretary thought it time to stop his labour, and 
attempted a few words of consolation. 

"Yes," replied the Squire, eagerly ; " the belief 
that I had secured her happiness made me able to 
endure the loss of my own : but, by degrees, the 
conviction has been forced upon me — that — that" 
— he hesitated for a moment, then finished his 
sentence — " that I have made a sad mistake." 



256 jack scudamore's daughter. 

This was to Arthur a new and startling aspect 
of the case. He had always imagined that the 
marriage of Miss Scudamore with the Duke of 
Porchester — notwithstanding the difference in 
their ages, and other minor points of dissimilarity 
— was one of those unions into which girls are 
constantly entering of their free choice, induced 
thereto apparently by a desire to secure social 
elevation. His friend's concluding sentence in- 
timated otherwise. 

The interest he had never ceased to feel for 
her was very greatly increased as the idea pre- 
sented itself that she had been the victim of her 
father's ambition, not her own; — that she had 
become a sacrifice at the altar of filial devotion, — 
a rare instance of such intense affection nowadays. 
His speculations in this direction, which had made 
him oblivious of the claims he had come to adju- 
dicate, were presently checked. 

" When the dear girl first came back to me," 
added the old man, his face lighting up again 
under the influence of that pleasant memory, "I 



PATBONAGE. 257 

seemed to begin a new existence. It was the 
same with every living creature that beheld her 
smile, or heard her voice. When I took her to 
the kennel, the hounds were twice as glad to see 
me; and whether in paddock or in stall, there 
wasn't an animal I cared for that did not testify 
its delight at her presence. Every helper was 
ready to worship her when she mounted her horse ; 
and however crowded the field at the meet, there 
wasn't a man there, young or old, who wouldn't 
have readily risked his life to have done her the 
most trifling service. 

" But what's the use of harking back in this 
way?" he demanded, interrupting himself impa- 
tiently. " I've allowed myself to be thrown out 
of the hunt. I'm unhorsed, and must needs go 
afoot the safest way home ; and all my own fault, 
by Jove! I ought to have set greater store by 
the blessings that were so bountiftilly showered 
upon me. My darling Fanny would have re- 
mained to fill my^ house with sunshine, if I had 
not, like a fool, induced her to leave it." 

VOL, II. 8 



258 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

Here Dawkins entered, his freckled face look- 
ing scared, and evidently in a state of alarm and 
excitement 

"If I beant allowed to thong 'em a-bit, Squire, 
they'll be eating me alive presently." 

He said this in a low voice as lie came up to 
his master's chair. 

" What's the matter now?" 

"They're all a-yelping like mad!" was the 
reply. "They insists on seeing you, Squire; 
crying out again' the shame of keeping on 'em 
waiting. Some have been here two hours and 
more. Though I told 'em you was particklar en- 
gaged, and couldn't see nobody for ever so long, 
not one on 'em would budge. Not one on 'em 
will say what he comes for, but that his bnsi- 
ness is most private and particklar: indeed, 
there's a-most as many women as men amongst 
'em, and they be the most impatient of the 
pack." 

The Squire looked worried. It was plain that 
he wanted to escape the threatened interviews. 



PATRONAGE. 259 

Arthur, much amused, returned to his examina- 
tion of the correspondence. 

" Are there any amongst them who are known 
to me ?" asked the county member. 

" Not a soul; but I managed to larn as they 
all hopes to get summut out o' you,— government 
appointments, places, pensions, and the like. They 
dwells a good deal on your having the Dook as 
your son-in-law." 

" I think this will put an end to the nuisance 
for the present, at any rate," said Arthur, as lie 
tossed a note he had just opened across the table. 
It was a short official letter announcing the dis- 
solution of Parliament in the course of that 
day. 

No sooner had the old fox-hunter cast his eye 
over it than ho jumped up and waved it over his 
head with all the enthusiasm of a school-boy re- 
ceiving the news of an unexpected holiday. 

"Hurra I" he cried in boisterous exultation, 
" Don't open any more letters ! Let the people 
down-stairs know at once that I have nothing to 



260 jack scudamore's daughter. 

do with patronage; and get every thing ready for 
an immediate return home." 

The ex-whipper-in hurried away, well pleased 
to obey the orders he had received; but they 
appeared far from agreeable to the company in 
the parlour. Some of them expressed their dis- 
appointment in loud and angry tones ; indeed 
Dawkins presently came back, stating that a 
clergyman, who had come to solicit subscriptions 
for runaway slaves from the Southern States of 
America, would not leave the place till he had 
had the pleasure of an interview with that en- 
lightened friend of liberty, the great and good 
Mr. Scudamore. 

The Squire's warm heart melted at this appeal, 
and he gave directions to show the reverend gen- 
tleman up-stairs. Presently there entered the 
room a gaunt figure clothed in seedy black, with 
a dirty-white neckcloth, followed by a negro in 
an old long-waisted dress-coat with gilt-buttons, 
plaid trousers, red waistcoat, and boots worn 
very much down at heel. 



PATRONAGE* 261 

" Servant, Squire J" said the former, advanc- 
ing with a solemn stride, and looking from Cap- 
tain Calverley to Mr. Scudamore, as if in doubt 
which he ought to address. 

" You see, I'm a minister in New England, 
and a stump-orator on the abolition platform. I 
go the whole hog — I do — on that sublime ques- 
tion; for there's nothing hatefuller than slavery 
to all free and enlightened naturs. And knowing 
as them is your sentiments, Squire," and again he 
glanced from the younger to the elder gentleman 
he was addressing, " I have called to inform you 
that I have been sent on a mission from the great 
American people, which abhors the domestic in- 
stitution, to the British friends of this cause of 
men and angels, to solicit contributions to a fund 
for runaway slaves ; of which this here nigger is 
one as skedaddled from the South last fall. Didn't 
you, uncle Tom ?" 

" Yes, maasa," cried the other very readily, 
glancing his yellow eyeballs in the direction of 
the two gentlemen. 



262 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

Hie Squire had such a hatred of slavery that 
nothing could afford him greater pleasure than an 
opportunity of helping to put it down ; and he at 
once looked about for his cheque-book, with the 
object of giving a liberal subscription. Li the 
mean time, Captain Calverley had been closely 
scrutinising the ^features of the American clergy- 
man and his protege. Neither face was particu- 
larly interesting ; but he continued to gaze, as he 
had an impression that he had seen them before. 

"Have you been long in this country?" he 
asked. 

" I crossed the Atlantic only last week," was 
the reply. " By the favour of Divine Providence, 
we had a fine passage; and when I heard as 
among all the Britishers there weren't one in 
philanthropy as was equal to the illustrious sena- 
tor Squire Scudamore, I thought my honourable 
mission couldn't prosper till I had enjoyed the 
privilege of seeking his enlightened cooperation." 

" Your name, sir." 

" The Eeverend Jabez Jowler, of Salem Cha- 



PATRONAGE. 26S 

pel, Philadelphia, with the abounding grace of 
the tK>rd." 

The Squire had found his cheque-book, and 
had commenced filling-up a draft; much appa- 
rently to the satisfaction of the pious applicant, 
for he began to watch the operation with a beam- 
ing interest that seemed quite to illumine his 
sunken cheeks and sallow physiognomy. The 
next question changed the expression completely. 

"How did you come to be at Delamere a 
month ago, if you only arrived in England last 
week?" 

The Squire stopped writing, and looked in- 
quiringly from the applicant to his questioner. 

" That was rather a clever trick you played on 
the innkeeper there, Mr. Jowler," said the Captain. 

" You have made a mistake, sir," replied the 
man, trying to look indifferent. " You Britishers 
often do, specially when you think of insulting a 
representative of the greatest nation on the face 
of God's universal earth." 

" Oh, no, it's no mistake, Mr. Jowler. I re- 



9 

264 jack scudamore's daughter. 

cognise that scar on your cheek which I noticed 
as you drove away in the dog-cart, after your 
successful swindle." 

Mr. Scudamore closed his cheque-book, dou- 
bled up his fist, and stared indignantly kt the de- 
tected scoundrel The reverend gentleman looked 
at first as if about to gouge his audacious insulter ; 
but at this moment Dawkins made his appearance, 
accompanied by two large fox-hounds, who began 
to sniff about the legs of himself and his dusky 
associate in a manner any thing but pleasant to 
either; the fellow saw, therefore, that the odds 
were against him for a fight; indeed the stalwart 
Squire and the dashing-looking young officer, as 
they now stood up, were alone more than a match 
for the two confederates in a fair conflict. 

" Dawkins, show these rascals the door !" 
roared the Squire. 

" Persecution is sweet to the innocent !" cried 
the assumed abolitionist meekly. " Come, uncle 
Tom, the poor slave arn't like to get much pity 
hereabouts." 



PATRONAGE. 265 

The negro felt inclined to follow the strides of 
his master with even more celerity ; but the atten- 
tion of the dogs, or rather his frightened inspection 
of their movements before and behind him, made 
speed impossible. 

" I shake the inhospitable dust off my feet as 
I leaves this almighty mean place/' exclaimed the 
pretended abolitionist loftily. 

" Take that to help you !" added Dawkins, and 
with his foot he gave. the scoundrel an impulse in 
the rear that sent him into the gutter. The dogs 
thought this a signal for them, and took a snap at 
the black fellow's legs, which he only avoided by 
making a bound that cleared the door-steps ; then 
he ran for his life. 



CHAPTER XL 

AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 

" You are quite sure that your dear mamma, had 
she lived, would have been satisfied with me as 
her daughter?" 

This question was put to Arthur Calverley 
after he had ventured to declare his attachment ; 
and in the confidence established by the acknow- 
ledgment that his affection was returned, he had 
fondly recalled his mother's ambitious wishes for 
him, and had, with a pardonable pride, dwelt on 
their perfect realisation. 

For what qualification could the most exacting 
parent have demanded for her son's bride that 
was not to be found in his Geraldine? High 
birth ? it was revealed in her look and manner. 
Beauty ? when presented at court her preeminent 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER, 267 

attractions had been universally acknowledged. 
Accomplishments? her mind had developed as 
favourably as her person. 

Arthur was well aware that she had no for- 
tune ; but her advantages in other respects were so 
eminent, he not only felt that in gaining her as a 
wife he obtained an inestimable treasure, but was 
assured of the approval of the more influential 
members of his family ; therefore, in his affec- 
tionate conferences with her, he had dwelt with 
much complacency on certain characteristic traits 
of his immediate connections that illustrated the 
desire of the Calverley s to marry well. 

She listened with evident interest ; but when 
no recalled the more pleasing reminiscences of his 
mother, her look becamo eloquent with womanly 
tenderness. After hearing him out, she asked the 
question with which this chapter commences. 

His reply was not deficient either in ardour or 
sincerity. She smiled, and seemed perfectly con- 
tent. 

They sat together in the arbour on the lawn of 



268 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

the Chiswick cottage, the moonlight playing upon 
the clamps of flowering shrubs around them, and 
making a broad silvery pathway over the silent 
river beyond, — for he had taken the opportunity 

* 

that presented itself during one of his long and 
now somewhat frequent visits, while alone with 
her, of hazarding his declaration. 

Lord Fitzmaurice was just then asleep on the 
dining-room sofa, and the growing feebleness of 
the dear old dowager kept her a prisoner in her 
chamber ; the lovers therefore remained in perfect 
security from disturbance, partly engaged in ar- 
ranging their future, partly, no less delightfully, 
occupied in recalling their past. 

Could Arthur ever forget that delicious con- 
fession of her love he drew from her rosy lips, as 
her blushing face lay half hidden on his breast? 
It began its history with the incident that had 
brought them together, and he had to listen to the 
recital of her childish confidences about him with 
her affectionate cousin and playmate, not only 
when he was absent from England, but after the 



AN ACCEPTED LOYEB. 269 

intimacy had been renewed at the termination of 
Hie war. No one knew, she said, but dear Fanny, 
the state of her feelings, and it was with her co- 
operation that " Fitz" had been induced to seek 
a commission in the same regiment. After his 
reappearance at Rose Lawn, dear Fanny had en- 
couraged her prepossession, and had always been 
ready to assist in bringing about their interviews. 

Then she gently disengaged herself from his 
embrace, and repeated her question as to his 
mother's approval of her. There could be no 
doubt in the gallant Captain's mind that not only 
would the Welsh baronet's daughter, with all her 
claim to the regality of Howel Dha, have been 
content with the alliance he had sought ; but that 
the model Calverleys of the picture-gallery, in- 
cluding the ambitious guardsman, his cousin Tom, 
would have been delighted with a choice so un- 
mistakably patrician. 

He spoke of course with becoming rapture on 
his good fortune in being able so perfectly to fol- 
low the suggestive lessons that had been impressed 



270 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

upon him by his successful kindred. He dwelt 
upon his mother's proud gratification, the wealthy 
bishop's very reverend satisfaction, the sagacious 
lord-chancellor's dignified approbation, the colo- 
nial governor's majestic content, and the secre- 
tary of state's solemn approval 

Again she smiled very sweetly, and seemed 
supremely happy with her prospect 

Arthur could not help feeling some anxiety as 
to the reception his pretensions were likely to 
meet from Gexaldine's family; but she presently 
set his mind at rest on that point 

" You have always been a first favourite with 
dear grandmamma," she replied archly. "Ever 
since she first beheld you in that queer old court- 
suit, your name has been connected with all her 
pleasantest recollections. As for Fitz, he regards 
you like a brother; my uncle Scudamore never 
tires of singing your praises; while dear Fanny, 
duchess though she is, will, I am quite certain, 
afford me her warmest congratulations as soon as 
I let her know that my girlish hopes, in which she 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 271 

joined with such thorough sisterly affection, are 
about to be realised." 

Every thing seemed couleur de rose, — no lover, 
he felt convinced, could have looked upon a 
brighter future. The pleasure both enjoyed in 
these happy explanations made them linge* over 
them till, in the stillness that prevailed, they 
heard Fitzmaurice rise from his couch, where he 
had been left, and walk towards the open window. 

Late as it was, Arthur determined on acquaint- 
ing his friend with his engagement to his sister; 
so he let her glide by him to her own chamber, 
without answering her brother's exclamation of 
surprise at the lateness of the hour ; and after in- 
ducing him to light a cigar, and come out into 
the pleasant night air, as they strolled together 
along the gravelled path, he told him what had 
occurred. 

" Settled that at last, have you ?" he replied in 
the highest spirits and good-humour. " It's what 
I've been expecting a long' time, — a deuced long 
time, I may say, — till I fancied you were seeking 



272 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

more solid advantages in a partner for life than 
Geraldine possesses. I was mistaken; and pre- 
cious glad I was, I can tell you, to find that 
out" 

Arthur did not quite understand the allusion. 
His friend went on, however, without affording 
him an opportunity for explanation. 

u But the Fitzmaurices are not going to per- 
mit the very best and brightest of them all to pass 
away from them empty-handed. The estate, to be 
sure, is plaguily encumbered, — too common a case 
with family property in Ireland, — but I will lose no 
time in poking up Dillon to try and get something 
handsome out of it" 

Arthur earnestly dissuaded the Viscount from 
attempting any thing of the kind, assuring him 
with all a lover's fervour, that his sister's personal 
gifts formed a fortune far beyond the deserts of a 
younger son. 

iC Oh, of course !" answered his young com- 
rade, laughing. " She's an El Dorado. We are 
not likely to differ in that estimation, old fellow, I 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 273 

assure you ; but, between you and I and the post, 
now, will personal gifts, even so brilliant as those 
of Geraldine, maintain the sort of establisliment of 
which she ought to be the mistress ? Just tell me 
that" 

Arthur declared his ability to surround his 
wife with every comfort; and though acknow- 
ledging his friend's right to look for a higher 
position for her, expressed his conviction of being 
able to insure her happiness. 

"That's not the question," was his answer. 
"I represent an Irish house; and though my 
education has made me so entirely English, that 
I hardly seem to have a feeling beyond this island, 
I know what the head of the family ought to do 
when a daughter of the Fitzmaurices becomes a 
bride. Dillon will be able to manage the matter 
for me pleasantly enough, I have not the least 
doubt; and as I am not at all likely to follow 
your example, I can for the future limit my ex- 
penditure to a bachelor's modest allowance. So 

make your mind easy." 

vol. n. T 



274 jack scudamobe's daughteb. 

Though the disinterested lover determined to 
prevent, if possible, this generous idea being real- 
ised, he thought it better to offer no further 
opposition. 

"I hope the Countess will be satisfied?" said 
he interrogatively. 

The Cornet laughed. 

"Poor dear old granny!" he exclaimed; "I 
am sure nothing on earth would give her half as 
much gratification. She has been constantly sug- 
gesting her wishes to me about Geraldine in the 
customary flood of quaint recollections of her own 
girlhood; in which you and my granduncle so fre- 
quently change places, I fall into the belief that it 
must have been you who flourished at court in the 
last century as a model lord-chamberlain, and that 
6 my dear lord' remains in the flesh amongst us, in 
the most capital preservation possible, consider- 
ing that he was contemporary with those vener- 
able royal personages George III. and Queen 
Charlotte." 

He then, in the same pleasant manner, re- 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 275 

ferred to some of the most agreeable incidents that 
occurred during Arthur's intimacy with his family, 
dwelling particularly on those happy scenes in 
which his beautiful cousin formed one of the group. 
The increasing tenderness in the tones of his voice 
whenever he mentioned her name would have be- 
trayed his secret, had it been unsuspected. 

"By the way," he said suddenly, "I heard 
to-day that the Duke had been taken so seriously 
ill that he has been obliged to retire from the 
Cabinet. I will go to the Club to-morrow and 
ascertain what reliance may be placed on the 
report." 

" Oh, there is always some gossip afloat about 
public men," replied Arthur. "I observed no 
change in his appearance when I paid my respects 
at Porchester House the day after his return to 
town." 

" The air is getting cool," was added presently; 
"let us go in." 

Lord Fitzmaurice flung away the end of his ci- 
gar, and returned to the sitting-room through the 



276 jack scttdamoke's daughter, 

open window, talking with all his old gaiety of 
heart 

" In the morning," he said, as they took their 
bed-candlesticks, " I will arrange an interview for 
you with granny. She will be delighted, I know ; 
that is, as far as any thing can delight the dear 
old soul ; but I must warn you of a serious change 
in her appearance. Good-night. I shall see you 
at breakfast." 

They shook hands, and retired to their bed- 
rooms. 

After a pleasant and refreshing sleep, Arthur 
woke at rather a late hour in the morning. He 
looked out at his window, and found the sun high 
in the heavens, the sky serene, and the river bril- 
liant Team after team could be seen on the tow- 
ing-path, dragging heavy barges; and here and 
there a punt, anchored in mid-stream, with one or 
more patient anglers pursuing their favourite re- 
creation. It was a little too early for pleasure- 
boats ; but not too early for the swans, for a group 
of them floated by the rushy margin, the parent- 



AN ACCEPTED LOVEB. 277 

birds looking dazzlingly white in contrast with 
their dusky brood. It was an exquisite scene, and 
long survived among the lover's memories of that 
Jiappy home. 

He dressed, and descended to the breakfast- 
room, where he found Geraldine arranging some 
fresh-cut flowers in the vases. Their mutual salu- 
tations had scarcely been interchanged when her 
brother entered ; so there was no opportunity for 
much tender demonstration on either side. 

Yet Arthur was perfectly satisfied. It was 
impossible to look at her without being convinced 
that she was very happy. Indeed, in the elegant 
morning summer-robe she wore — a delicate French 
muslin — she seemed to float with a grace more 
impressive than that she had gained from her most 
elaborate toilette. 

He could not but acknowledge, as he continued 
to gaze on her admiringly, the air of high birth 
that breathed over her every movement. Again 
and again he congratulated himself on his good 
fortune. There could be no doubt that he had 



278 jack soudamore's daughter, 

secured a prize that would satisfy the most exact- 
ing of his ambitious relatives. 

Lord Fitzmaurice played the host at this agree- 
able meal in the most charming manner imaginable. 
He seemed to throw aside his languor; his wan 
face was rendered cheerful with a beaming smile, 
and the tremulous tones of the invalid changed to 
the laughing voice of the careless thoughtless cor- 
net of hussars. If it had not been for that empty 
sleeve, Arthur could have fancied that the comrade 
of his early career had been restored to him with 
his youthful joyousness of spirit quite unim- 
paired. 

The group seemed far too happy to do justice 
to the excellent repast the housekeeper had set 
before them ; nevertheless there was occasionally 
much pretence of enjoyment, and apparently an 
earnest appreciation of the Chiswick hot rolls and 
butter, the grilled chicken, and rasher of ham, 
and the capital coffee and chocolate of which they 
sparingly partook. Arthur was not sorry when 
Fitzmaurice flung aside his napkin, and with 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER, 279 

sly humour expressed a hope that his presence 
might be dispensed with for a few minutes. 

" If you should be dull in my absence, old 
fellow," he added, glancing towards his friend 
with affected gravity, " there is ' The Whole Duty 
of Man' in the bookcase. One ought to be fully 
prepared, you know. I strongly recommend you to 
profit by a study of that very appropriate work." 

He quitted the room with his gay-hearted 
laugh, and the lovers were left alone. I need 
scarcely say that Arthur did not follow the 
friendly suggestion. The precious volume was 
left undisturbed, and in the blissful half-hour that 
followed the minutes flew by with angel-wings. 
Life had opened before them a landscape of golden 
blossoms steeped in sunshine, a world of enchant- 
ment rosy and brilliant, such as only could be 
created by that potent magician — love. 

And they surrendered themselves not only to 
a sense of its reality, but to a conviction of ita 
endurance. Their Garden of Eden was not only 
& portion of the fair earth created for use, ***** 



280 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

its flowers were immortal, and its sunbeams those 
of a perpetual day. 

At last they were summoned upstairs. The 
venerable old lady of the house had grown too 
feeble to descend to the drawing-room, and a 
cheerful sitting-room had been fitted up for her 
that opened from her bedchamber and looked out 
upon the river. There they proceeded together: 
Geraldine's delicate features a little flushed with 
affectionate excitement ; Arthur, however, under 
the influence of a foreboding that the sparkling 
chalice he had been suffered to raise to his lips 
was about to be dashed to his feet. The impres- 
sion was a sudden one, and he knew not how or 
why it came — probably a reaction from the in- 
tense pleasure in which he had been indulging. 
All he knew was, that he entered the apartment 
with none of the buoyant spirit of the lover he 
had been so freely displaying a very brief inter- 
val before. 

The dowager lay back in her large chair. The 
quaint tall head-dress had totally disappeared ; a. 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 281 

close lace-cap, from which a little silvery hair 
emerged, had been substituted for it ; and in place 
of the stomachered and hooped robe was a loose 
morning-wrapper of white jaconet. 

Her form seemed to have grown thinner, her 
face more pale and wrinkled. One shaking hand 
held a silver ear-trumpet ; the other grasped that 
of her young kinsman, who was leaning tenderly 
over her chair. She held it out to Arthur as he 
approached, apparently having been so prompted. 

He could not help acknowledging that a se- 
rious change had indeed taken place in the ap- 
pearance of his dear old friend ; but the extent of 
that change he had yet to learn. 

A feeble pressure having been accorded, she 
put out her hand to receive that of her grand- 
daughter, and retained it in her grasp. 

" Fitz says you are going to be married, my 
dear child," she said in a low broken voice. 

" Yes, dear grandmamma," was the reply. 

" All !" There was a deep sigh and a mourn- 
ful shake of the head. 



282 jack scudamore's daughter. 

" I hope you will bear in mind your religious 
duties, my dear. Mesh is grass, as poor dear 
Mr. Whitefield used to say. I often went to him 
at the Tabernacle. And then there was dear Mr. 
Wesley, too, a very powerful preacher. I heard 
that sermon of his on — on — I can't remember the 
text, though I know Lady Huntingdon, who went 
with me, took it down. And then there was Dr. 
Watts, who wrote such pretty hymns, you know — 
I was mightily taken with them, and learnt a good 
many. I particularly remember one about the 
busy bee — " 

She stopped, as if to recal the familiar lines ; 
but as they were not forthcoming, her nephew re- 
peated them through the silver trumpet. 

" Of course. What a memory you have, my 
dear! And I went to hear the sermon at the 
chapel of the Lock Hospital with Lady Penning- 
ton, who wrote a book about — well, I can't call to 
mind what it was. And Mr. Chapone wrote a 
book, and so did Hannah More; but I cannot 
remember them either. Of course they were very 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 283 

pious and good — I daresay something like Bishop 
Blair, or Bishop Porteus. And then there was 
Tlve Dairyman's Daughter and Dr. Dodd's Prison- 
Thouglits. It was very good of him to write for 
the poor prisoners, wasn't it, my dear ?" 

Here was a serious change, indeed— one her 
visitor had not at ail contemplated — probably 
brought about by a sense of approaching disso- 
lution. She went on: 

" But I always weut regularly to the Chapel 
Royal ; the chaplains were sure to give us such 
excellent discourses ; so orthodox, you know ; al- 
most as good as the bishops and archbishops. 
Tillotson was my favourite; and his grace was 
held in general esteem by the royal household; 
the dear good King — " 

The speaker stopped short, and looked embar- 
rassed. 

" She told me all that was vanity," she mut- 
tered, apparently to herself, " and that I ought to 
devote my entire attention to spiritual subjects. I 
can't see what harm there can be in thinking of 



284 jack scudamore's daughter. 

the dear good King, and the sweet Queen, and the 
darling Princesses, and in mentioning my dear 
lord now and then ; but they said it was nothing 
but worldly-mindedness, and that I must fix my 
thoughts exclusively on high." 

Arthur looked inquiringly at Lord Fitzmauriee ; 
but he was gazing reverently on the venerable face 
before him. 

"Geraldine is anxious for your approval of 
her choice, dear grandmamma," the Cornet cried 
through the ear-trumpet. 

" Poor dear I" was her exclamation in reply. 
, " Of course I do. Fanny married a duke, and 
Geraldine is worthy of a prince, I am sure. I 
hope that she will be very happy — as happy as I 
was with my dear — but I mustn't talk about him. 
Who is it, Fitz, you said she was going to 
marry?" 

Her nephew had once more recourse to the 
trumpet, and strove hard to stir up his rela- 
tive's dormant recollection a long time without 
the slightest success. Geraldine assisted with re- 



AN ACCEPTED LOVER. 285 

petitions of former flattering opinions, but with 
as little effect. She looked disappointed and dis- 
tressed. 

"I hope that he will be very kind to you, 
child," the dowager said presently. " Every 
body was kind to me when I married, especially 
the sweet — but I'm not to talk of her majesty 
either. I never saw any one I thought good 
enough for you except one, and he was the very 
image of my dear — . It's very hard I mustn't 
mention his name." 

This bitter complaint was scarcely expressed 
when both her young relatives simultaneously en- 
deavoured to make her understand that her visitor 
was the individual so flatteringly remembered. 

The mingled voices conffrsed her. She turned 
her head from one to the other; but the expres- 
sion of her features assured Arthur that she did 
not comprehend what was said. In this dilemma 
he thought that the imperfect sense might still 
befriend him; so, making a sign to his zealous 
advocates to be silent, he addressed her through 



286 jack scudamore's daughter. 

the acoustic tube. The intelligence immediately 
visible in her face was unquestionable evidence 
that she recognised his voice. 

" Ah, you looked so like my dear lord," she 
answered. " Well, I can't help referring to him, 
and I don't believe it's a sin ; for with the very 
dress, you had my lord-chamberlain's very look 
and manner. 

" So you want to have Geraldine for a wife ? 
Very well ; and you shall have an old woman's 
blessing into the bargain." 

Fitzmaurice looked as much gratified as his 
sister; as for the gallant Captain, he felt quite 
touched by the tender manner in which the dow- 
ager presently placed Greraldine's hand in his own. 

u It's exactly what I wished from the begin- 
ning," she said. "Nothing could have pleased 
me more ; and though they insist that at my age 
I ought to direct all my thoughts and feelings 
towards Heaven, I suppose I must be content to 

remain a sinful old woman, for I can't help being 
happy at the happiness of those around me; and 



AN ACCEPTED LOVEK. 287 

the sweet Queen and the dear good King (I must 
and I will think of them !) were always delighted 
when the darling Princesses got married ; and my 
dear lord (they sha'n't stop me speaking of him !) 
was so fond of seeing the maids-of-honour happy, 
that nothing pleased him so much as being invited 
to their marriages." 

Arthur could not understand the nature of 
the coercion his dear old friend was struggling 
against; but as no one attempted to enlighten 
him, he set it down as a delusion. The fact is, 
the brother and sister were absorbed by their 
high spirits while assisting him in keeping the 
somewhat erratic thoughts of their kinswoman in 
the desired channel. With their help they ran 
on — w ith occasional breaks, it is true — till she 
became exhausted by her own vivacity. Then 
her visitor took his leave. 

Tender embraces and cordial congratulations 

attended his departure. 

The grave butler, the ancient "housekeeper, 
and the little parlour-maid, having been app* isei 



288 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

of the state of affairs, could not be restrained from 
demonstrating their good-will. 

A little later Arthur drove away from the door, 
as perfectly content as a Calverley could be with 
his lot on earth* 



CHAPTER XII. 

A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 

Nothing could exceed Arthur's exhilaration of 
spirits as he drove to his lodgings in the Alhany : 
but high as they were, they became still more 
elevated when, on opening the letters awaiting 
him, he found one with an official seal announc- 
ing his appointment to a continental embassy. 
This was far in advance of his most sanguine ex- 
pectations. He appreciated it the more when he 
ascertained that it was the last official act of the 
Duke of Porchester. 

He had surrendered himself to the contempt 
tion of his brilliant prospects, when he was in- 
formed that a stranger wished to see him. Under 

VOL. II. u 



290 jack scudamore's daughter. 

the impression that his visitor was a messenger 
from the Foreign Office, he directed the person 
to be shown in. 

Presently there entered the room a middle- 
aged man, of a somewhat rustic appearance, his 
broad-brimmed hat and long-skirted overcoat, 
foxy complexion, and straggling gray hair by no 
means realising the idea of a Government subordi- 
nate. The expression of his face too was pain- 
fully embarrassed — not at all like that of a bearer 
of good tidings. 

" Maybe ye don't remember me, yer honour ?" 

Arthur stared. There was something familiar 
in the features as well as in the tones of the voice, 
but he could not for the moment recal to his mind 
where he had seen and heard them. The man 
was an Irishman, that was evident enough ; but 
a limited acquaintance with his countrymen did 
not assist the Captain's recollection. Moreover he 
looked a farmer, apparently just arrived in Eng- 
land. 

"Me name is Dillon, sir," he said at last, 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 291 

scratching the back of his head. " Maybe ye've 
heard the young lord speak of me ; but I was 
known to yer honour a good many years back — 
the blessed day ye saved the sweet young lady 
from a watery grave — glory be to God !" 

Arthur recollected the man in a moment as 
Lord Fitzmaurice's agent. He therefore endea- 
voured by a friendly reception to set him at his 
ease; for his embarrassment seemed to increase 
rather than diminish. 

Mr. Dillon sat on the edge of a chair at his 
host's invitation, brushing his hat with his sleeve, 
with a downcast look ; indeed the signs of mental 
distress became so conspicuous, Arthur felt assured 
the poor man must have recently met with some 
great misfortune. 

" I hope nothing has happened, Mr. Dillon,'* 
he said kindly. 

" Faith, then, it is, sir," he replied, his uneasi- 
ness growing more apparent. 

" I'm very sorry. Some family bereavement, 
I am afraid." 



292 jack sctjdamore's daughter. 

" It's true for you, sir. Bereavement it is 
entirely — so grievous, so unbearable, it's meself 
can't find words to spake it to yer honour." 

Arthur tried to soothe him. The poor fellow 
must have lost some one near and dear to him, he 
thought — son, daughter, or wife ; and he was not 
too happy to be beyond the reach of sympathy 
with an honest man's distress. 

" We are all liable to such visitations," he ob- 
served, having recourse to the usual form of conso- 
lation. "You are not specially singled out for 
them, Mr. Dillon. Death is the common lot, my 
good friend." 

"Oh, it's worse than that! it's worse than 
that !" cried the man* 

Arthur looked at him more intently. He was 
not in mourning; it could not, therefore, have 
been the loss of a member of his family which had 
caused that disturbed state of mind. The evil 
must have taken another shape. 

"If it's any pecuniary loss, Dillon, pray 
don't let that distress you. I daresay Lord Fitz- 



A STARTLING DISCOVERT. 293 

maurice and myself will be able to make every 
thing straight." 

"More power to ye're honour; but it isn't 
that at all, at all." Then he added with a broken 
voice, covering his face with his hands, " It's worse 
than beggary — it's disgrace." 

Captain Calverley paused. The man had long 
been employed as agent for the Maurice-Court 
Estate, and the most perfect confidence had been 
reposed in him. The admission just made sug- 
gested misappropriation. 

" I am grieved to hear this," he observed in a 
graver tone. " I have always heard Lord Fitz- 
maurice speak highly of you. I am sure that it 
will distress him very much to know that you have 
done wrong in any way." 

" The devil a-bit of harm have I done to man, 
woman, or child, saving your honour's presence. 
It isn't meself I'm spaking of." 

"Who, then?" 

" Faith, then, it's them as I'd die to sarve 
any day; it's them as I've looked up to as the 



294 jack scudamore's daughter. 

salt of the earth ; it's them as I've toiled for and 
watched over since the father of them came to 
his misfortonate end in that devil's own unlucky 
steeple-chase." 

A cold chill seemed to break over Arthur's 
limbs. The apprehension of a terrible misfortune 
happening to the two beings he loved most in the 
world — coming, too,. so unexpectedly — appalled 
him : he started to his feet 

" Disgrace to them !" he cried. " Disgrace 
to Lord Fitzmaurice ! disgrace to Geraldine ! 
Why, man, you must be dreaming !" 

" Mighty glad I'd be to find it only a drame," 
he replied sorrowfully; " and a joyful waking I'd 
have at the ind of it; but the terribleness of it 
is, there's no disputing its reality." 

" What on earth do you mean ?" asked the 
young man in an almost frantic state of alarm. 

" If your honour will believe me, I'd rather 
cut out my tongue than say it ; but if I don't 
tell ye, ye'll be sure to know it soon enough ; 
and as ye're such a friend of the family, I wanted 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 295 

ye to break it to them, poor things, if they haven't 
had notice of it from them as won't tell it over- 
kindly, I'll go bail." 

"Tell me the worst, Dillon; and tell me at 
once, or I shall go mad !" he cried passionately. 

" Faith, then, Wa illegitimate they are : bad 
cess to me for being pbliged to say it I" 

Arthur dropped back in the chair as if his 
heart had been struck by a bullet. Of all the 
evils that could by any possibility have afflicted 
his friends, this was the very last to be antici- 
pated, and the very worst that could have visited 
them. In a moment he felt the full effect of its 
crushing influence on their refined and highly- 
sensitive natures, and groaned in the bitterness of 
his anguish. Presently the monstrousness of the 
idea suggested its improbability. It could not be 
true ; there must be some mistake. 

In reply to his eager and indignant questions, 
he succeeded in obtaining from his visitor the 
following narrative : 

On a small freehold farm, in the neighbour- 



296 jack scudamobe's daughter. 

hood of the Maurice-Court Estate, had resided a 
family much respected in that part of Ireland, 
though they rarely associated with the gentry. 
They were known to have held the same property 
for many centuries, and were reputed to have 
descended from one of the ancient lords of the 
soil, the original proprietor of the entire barony. 

Be this as it may, at the time to which the 
story refers they consisted only of a widow and 
her daughter, the former in her way of life dif- 
fering but little from the farmers' wives of the 
best class ; the latter, however, resembling none 
of the farmers' daughters in the least, for she 
was possessed of extraordinary beauty ; and hav- 
ing been carefully educated at a convent, her 
accomplishments and personal attractions seemed 
to have raised her so much above her position, 
that all the young fellows who were ambitious of 
becoming her admirers felt themselves constrained 
to worship at a respectful distance. 

Her fame, however, as the beauty of the 
county, travelled far and wide; and though she 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 297 

was remarkably reserved and seldom went from 
home alone, she could not shut herself out en- 
tirely from the curiosity of strangers. The result 
was one of those acts of violence in the last cen- 
tury familiar to Irish lovers — an abduction. She 
was forcibly carried off; and with such secrecy, 
that after a most rigid search not a trace of her 
could be discovered. • 

At last, when the mother's anxieties had be- 
come almost intolerable, she received a letter from 
her daughter, bearing a foreign post-mark, an- 
nouncing her marriage. The most startling part 
of the news it contained was that she had been 
carried off by the heir of Maurice Court, noto- 
riously one of the most reckless libertines in all 
Ireland, assisted by associates as wild as himself; 
nevertheless, it assured her that she had been 
honourably cared for, and married by a priest as 
soon as she had attained a place of safety. 

She had then been hurriedly embarked in a 
sailing-vessel, and taken to Brussels, where her 
husband required her to remain in concealment, 



298 jack scudamore's daughter. 

as he was most anxious to prevent the affair 
coming to the knowledge of his father, who was 
in a bad state of health. As news had just ar- 
rived of the old lord's death, she had availed 
herself of a permission she had received to com- 
municate with her friends. 

Lord and Lady Fltzmaurice remained abroad 
till after the birth of their first child, when they 
went to reside in England, where the former con- 
tinued his career of extravagance till it had been 
suddenly stopped by the catastrophe described at 
the commencement of this narrative, the shock of 
which had so fearful an effect on his young wife, 
that she died within a month. 

Dillon, who was a kinsman of hers, had been 
much noticed by Lord Fitzmaurice, and having 
imbibed the same taste for the turf, had been per- 
mitted to ride his horses at different races. At 
his patron's premature death the estate was found 
to be so exhausted as to leave scarcely a subsist- 
ence for the children; but they were brought up 
by English relatives. 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY, 299 

Dillon returned to Ireland, abandoned the pur- 
suits to which he had been so ardently attached, 
and devoted himself to watching over the interests 
of the orphans. He got himself appointed agent 
to the Maurice-Court Estate, which, by judicious 
management, he had now succeeded in clearing 
of its principal incumbrances. •- 

It appeared that within the last year or two 
he had let a small farm to a man who had come 
from a distant part of the country. He proved a 
troublesome tenant, and the conscientious agent, 
finding that the land was neglected, served him 
with notice of ejectment Shortly afterwards he 
ascertained that the next heir, a cousin of the 
late lord, a notorious gambler who had hitherto 
lived almost entirely abroad, had come into the 
neighbourhood, and had been visiting the tenantry 
in company with a Dublin lawyer; after which 
the agent received a communication announcing 
the commencement of legal proceedings to dispute 
the present Viscount's title to his estates, on ac- 
count of the illegality of his father's marriage. 



300 jack scudamore's daughter. 

Dillon at once had sought the best legal advice, 
in the conviction that he could dispose of the mat- 
ter without causing the family annoyance ; but 
after a searching examination it came to light 
that when the bride had been brought to the 
priest's house, the reverend gentleman was ab- 
sent,* and the impatience of the bridegroom to 
take advantage of a favourable wind, and get his 
prize beyond the reach of pursuit, joined probably 
to the expectation of a liberal reward, had induced 
the priest's brother to put on the sacred vestments 
and make a pretence of a marriage-ceremony. 
He was a young man of bad character, was never 
in holy orders, and proved to be the ejected tenant. 

Arthur heard out this story in a most painful 
state of alarm and anxiety; he was sufficiently 
aware of the character borne by the late lord in 
his youth, to know that the chief incident was 
far from improbable; but the consequences that 
threatened his friends were too terrible to con- 
template. He knew that his gallant, generous, 
high-spirited comrade, in his maimed state and 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 301 

critical health, was in no condition to receive a 
shock of this kind, and determined that the in- 
telligence should be kept from him at all hazards. 
Then came the contemplation of the refined 
and delicate Geraldine, awakened to the conscious- 
ness that she had been filling a position to which 
she had not the shadow of a claim, and must sink 
to one from which her sensitive nature would re- 
coil with aversion and abhorrence. The idea filled 
him with anguish, as he felt convinced that both 
would be unable to hold up against a humiliation 
for which they would be equally unprepared. 

His first thought was for the faithful agent. 
Hie poor fellow was utterly cast down, besides 
being exhausted by fatigue and want of nourish- 
ment. Eefreshment was provided for him at 
once, of which whilst he was partaking, his host 
took serious counsel of himself as to what ought 
to be his own conduct in such a painful crisis. 

All the influential members of his family rose 
up before him in indignant protest against his en- 
tertaining the idea of marriage with a girl now 



302 JACK scttdahorb's daughter. 

totally without fortune or name. He remembered 
how careful the more ambitious had been to con- 
nect themselves well, and what a horror even the 
humblest had entertained of the introduction of 
the bar-sinister into their imposing quarterings. 

He was well aware that vulgar blood had been 
more than once introduced into the genealogical 
current ; but it was invariably a Pactolus that left 
a rich deposit 

In this instance there was unmistakable poverty 
as well as disgrace, and the rising man, with his 
feet firmly planted on the first spokes of the ladder 
of ambition, could scarcely be insensible to the 
world's opinion of the false step he would makfe, 
were he to enter into an obvious mesalliance. 

On the other hand there were the unworldly 
impressions of an honourable love. He could not 
but remember how short a time it was since the 
possession of Geraldine had been regarded as the 
most covetable of human distinctions, and that 
her beauty had filled and elevated his nature like 
a divine inspiration. 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 303 

Then came the entrancing recollection of the 
reality of her attachment, and a recurrence of that 
delicious sense which thrilled his heart and brain 
when she murmured her confession, trembling 
in his arms in the tender moonlight. Her pure 
kisses were scarcely dry upon his lips; he could 
almost feel the pressure of her clinging embrace 
upon his breast. 

A few hours only had gone by since they were 
one and indivisible, and the souls that had min- 
gled and passed into each other were now re- 
quired to disunite and remain for ever asunder. 
Yet all that was angelic in the woman remained 
asrdivine as it had come from heaven. The per- 
fection he had worshipped was still without a 
flaw. The blot on her escutcheon affected neither 
her heart, her mind, nor her soul. 

The sway of natural feeling presently began to 
make itself felt. Her lover could not bear the 
idea of the utter helplessness and degradation to 
which she must inevitably be reduced when the 
secret of her birth became the theme of gossip 



304 jack bcxjdamore's daughter. 

in the circle that had hitherto known her as its 
brightest ornament Her place would know her 
no more ; her associates would regard her as an 
imposter ; and her dearest friends turn their backs 
upon her as one who had forfeited all claim to 
their acquaintance. 

A chivalrous sympathy caused his nature to 
revolt against this injustice, while it made him 
sensible of the feet that he alone had the power 
to remedy it As his wife, no one would venture 
to remind her of the misfortune of her birth — no 
one would dare to treat her with disrespect for her 
heraldic deficiencies; as his wife, she could pass 
unchallenged into any society that he thought 
good enough to receive her. 

His new office would, he was certain, afford 
him an income sufficient for the comfort of both 
brother and sister; and he considered it a bounden 
duty, if only by way of return for the happiness 
he had enjoyed since he had been admitted to the 
privileges of their pleasant home, to share his 
with them. 



A STABTLING DISCOVERY. 305 

At last he settled it all very pleasantly in his 
own mind, with as little reference to the opinion 
of the world as to the prejudices of his well-mar- 
ried kindred. 

" Dillon," said he, suddenly addressing the 
agent, as the latter was languidly breaking a long 
fast — grave and thoughtful, and uneasy at the 
long silence of his companion, as he walked up 
and down the room with a perturbed and dis- 
tressed look — " Dillon, I think I can rely on your 
interest in these dear orphans." • 

" It's meself that would go barefoot through 
the world to serve them," replied the man eagerly. 
" Out of regard to the father, who was as good as 
a brother to me. By the same token I was the 
nearest of kin of the poor deceived young lady 
who thought herself .his wife, and am obligated 
too on that account to stand by them in their 
great misfortune — sorry I am for that same." 

" Well, then, listen to me. I do not think it 
would be prudent just at present to mention the 
circumstance to Fitzmaurice, his health being 

VOL. II. x 



306 jack bcudamobe's daughter. 

delicate; nor to the dowager, who is very old, 
and getting feeble in her intellect." 

u It's thrue for you, sir." 

" You had better go to Chiswick, and as pri- 
vately as possible communicate the facts of this 
lamentable case to Geraldine. Break them to her 
gently ; and when you have done this, you shall 
give her a letter from me, which I trust will 
enable her to bear up against this heavy afflic- 
tion." 

" May the heavens be your bed !" cried Dillon 
fervently. " And ye'll not then neglect the darl- 
ing colleen because of this misfortune that's hap- 
pened to her !" 

The truly gallant gentleman not only assured 
him that he entertained no such intention, but was 
so determined to befriend both brother and sister, 
that he should lose no time in consulting the most 
eminent lawyers with a view to their defence— if 
any chance existed of proving the marriage of 
their mother. 

Dillon, on hearing this, became a changed 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 307 

man. The appearance of hopeless despondency- 
was flung aside ; he grew at once wild with hope 
and high spirits. Expressions of earnest grati- 
tude mingled with equally fervent gratulations 
at his good luck in having met with so true a 
friend to his unfortunate relations. He promised 
to be guided entirely by his advice, and implicitly 
to follow out his instructions. 

He was left to finish his meal, to which he 
applied himself with an energy very different to 
the spiritless manner in which it had been com- 
menced, while the proposed letter was being 
written. 

Arthur sat down to his task with a sense of 
responsibility he had never experienced before. 
His fear was that in the excitement of his feelings 
he should not be able to render his communication 
sufficiently affectionate. Passing lightly over the 
unhappy circumstance that had come to his know- 
ledge, which he affected to treat as a matter that 
might be left to legal management with perfect 
confidence, he kindly insisted on the right GreruU 



308 jack scudamore's daughter, 

dine's affection had given him to befriend her in 
any emergency, informed her of his excellent ap- 
pointment, and implored her to hasten their mar- 
riage, so that nothing could have power henceforth 
to affect their happiness. 

He added that to secure the care and com- 
panionship of her brother, he should get him 
placed in an honourable position. So considerate 
was he that even the dear grandmother was not 
forgotten; for he dwelt on the beneficial effects 
of a change of residence for her in the gay and 
pleasant city to which he was about to be trans- 
ferred. Finally he begged a few lines to call him 
to her dear presence and express her sanction of 
his plans. 

With these credentials Dillon was at last per- 
mitted to go on his errand; but not till he had 
been made to listen to long and anxious sugges- 
tions as to how he was to communicate his start- 
ling news ; and carefully instructed as to the 
arguments he was to use to prevent its making 
too painful an impression on the mind of his 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 309 

young kinswoman; more especially was the ne- 
cessity impressed upon him of urging every in- 
ducement for a speedy marriage and immediate 
acquiescence in the arrangements proposed in the 
letter intrusted to his care. 

Left to himself, Arthur Oalverley looked his 
position fairly in the face. He was satisfied that 
he had acted rightly. Though fully aware of the 
censure that awaited him in certain directions, he 
believed that his conduct would not pass without 
cordial approval from one or two persons whose 
good opinion he far more highly valued. Lord 
Madras was welcome to express whatever adverse 
judgment he pleased ; and all the male and female 
Calverleys might indulge in a chorus of indig- 
nation and pity if they chose, at such a glaring 
departure from the family policy; but he felt 
assured of the commendation of honest Jack 
Scudamore and his beautiful daughter. 

The Squire would, he was certain, never have 
sanctioned the desertion of Greraldine under such 
circumstances ; he was equally confident that as 



310 JACK scudamoke's daughter. 

soon as he heard of them he would do his best 
to render the change they would produce in the 
social position of herself and her brother, scarcely 
appreciable. As for the Duchess, he thought he 
knew her true womanly nature too well to suspect 
her for a moment capable of overlooking her play- 
fellow's claims upon her sympathy. 

Secure as he considered himself of such ap- 
proval and support, he gave himself no ferther 
concern as to what the wordly-minded of his set 
might say or do. Remembering, however, that 
he must not delay in attending to the important 
official document that had afforded him so much 
gratification, he hurried off to Downing Street to 
express his acknowledgments and report himself 
ready to undertake the mission. 

Here he found a letter directing him to proceed 
with all possible expedition to join the writer at 
one of his country mansions more than a hundred 
miles from town, to receive important instruc- 
tions. 

He went, and was detained day after day, 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 311 

conferring upon questions of great political in- 
terest it was essential that he should thoroughly 
understand before he entered upon his post. The 
unexpected retirement of the Duke of Porchester 
had thrown the business of the department into 
great confusion ; indeed had exceedingly embar- 
rassed his grace's colleagues ; and his successor 
could only find time to give an hour occasionally 
to the newly-appointed diplomatist. 

At the end of a week Arthur returned to his 
chambers, having arranged every thing to his 
satisfaction. He was to leave England in a fort- 
night He came back buoyant with hope. He 
had already written to a Chancery lawyer of the 
highest eminence, instructing him to resist the 
claims of the pretender to the Fitzmaurice peerage 
as long as a chance of success remained ; there- 
fore nothing now was left for him to do but to 
see Geraldine, and follow out the plan he had sub- 
mitted for her approval. 

A letter awaited him, the perusal of which 
threw a gloomy cloud over the hopes that had 



312 jack scudamorb's daughter. 

made his prospect so brilliant with happiness. It 
ran as follows : 

" Hose Lawn* 

" Dearest Arthur, — It is impossible for me to 
express the sense of grateful devotion with which 
I read your very, very kind — your noble, generous 
letter, after hearing the distressing intelligence of 
which Mr. Dillon was the bearer. Believe me, I 
shall ever regard it with the same exquisite feelings 
it created when first perused, and I will never part 
with it — never, never. It shall remain with me 
as the most precious evidence of an honourable 
position, that the respect for what is right and 
true, in which I have been so carefully educated, 
compels me to relinquish. 

"It is no easy matter to surrender every thing 
that is most covetable, most enjoyable in life ; still 
more difficult is it to estrange oneself from kind 
friends and pleasant associates, with whom one's ex- 
istence has grown up and flourished ; but to waken 
from the brightest happiest dream of life into im- 
penetrable darkness and dread — to find the golden 



A STARTLING DISCOVERY. 313 

romance of girlhood end in a torn and blotted 
page of commonplace misery, is indeed hard, very 
hard to bear. 

" Yet the recollection that I was found worthy 
of your love strengthens my endurance; and the 
knowledge that I have enjoyed a happiness that 
ought never to have been mine must go far to- 
wards rendering me reconciled to my deprivation. 
It can be no additional disgrace to acknowledge 
that from childhood I loved you with every lov- 
able feeling of my nature ; and for the intense 
felicity which year after year grew with that affec- 
tion, please to accept the blessings and prayers of 
the darkened remnant of my life. 

"Yours ever, 

" Geraldine." 

Hastily placing the letter in his pocket-book, 
in a tumult of passionate regret to which no lan- 
guage could do justice, Arthur hurried to Chis- 
wick, but only to iind the cottage untenanted. All 
the inquiries he immediately instituted in the neigh- 



314 jack schdamobe's daughteb. 

bourhood were fruitless. Nothing could be learnt 
beyond the fact that the family had left the house, 
evidently without any intention of returning to it, 
as it had been stripped of its furniture, and a board 
put up announcing that it was to be let 



END OF VOL. IL 


JACK SCUDAMOEE'S DAUGHTER. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE TURRET CHAMBER. 

It was a clear spring day; the air keen but 
bright; an invigorating breeze played among the 
branches partly covered with young foliage, and 
swept over the tender green blades of the autumn- 
sown crops. The primroses were displaying their 
pale blossoms in innumerable groups upon the 
banks, where less conspicuously the violet held 
up its delicate petals amidst the thickening herb- 
age. There was a continuous twittering in the 
hedgerows, and a restless flying backwards and 
forwards, and whirling in crowds, of sparrows 
and finches. 

VOL. III. B 



2 JACK scudahobe's daughter. 

In the fields the farmer and his men were 
busy breaking-up last yearns pasture with the 
plough, or flinging seed over the prepared soil; 
while flights of noisy rooks were wheeling over- 
head, descending on the freshly-opened furrow, 
or anticipating the advance of the crushing har- 
row, to snatch at the scattered grain. 

The roads were every now and then enveloped 
in dust, that swept over its dry surface like a 
cloud, or eddied and circled in nooks and cor- 
ners tiU a sharper gust came howling through 
the tall trees, and swept the accumulations in a 
blinding drift along the highway, over the hedges, 
and spreading far and wide along the surface of 
the cultivated lands. 

The wagoner marched sturdily before his team, 
with his stubbly chin deep in a worsted comforter, 
his cap fixed low down on his brows, the peak 
over his left ear ; while his legs, encased in thick 
leather gaiters and heavy ankle-boots, seemed to 
defy both dust and wind ; but his arm was raised 

ft 

to protect his face as a violent blast drove before 



THE TUBRET CHAMBER. O 

it the pitiless cloud of sharp particles that would 
otherwise have invaded his eyes and ears. 

Those who rode in the market carts and wa- 
gons took special care to turn their backs to the 
vrind; an example followed by every pedestrian, 
but only when the dust appeared most trouble- 
some^ — ^an inconvenience, however, which no one 
seemed particularly to care for, the brightness of 
the day and the bracingness of the air seeming to 
exhilarate all who were able to enjoy them. 

A stout gentleman, on as stout a cob, was seen 
slowly descending the hill on the road to Por- 
chester. Except that the collar of his top-coat 
was up, he had made no provision against the 
intermittent fury of the gale. Possibly this was 
owing to the fact that he was travelling in the 
same direction. But that weather-tanned face 
evidently cared as little for a stiffish breeze as 
any ancient mariner experienced in cyclones and 
tornadoes. His healthy complexion laughed at 
wind and frost. Every body knew him. Hearty 
greetings from gentle and simple marked his pro- 



4 JACK SCUDAHORE^S DAUGHTER. 

gress. Even the blinding dust could not prevent 
the f annexes wife, going to market with her dairy 
produce, turning round in her cart to have a good 
look at those well-known features. 

" How do, Squire ?" was her hearty exclama- 
tion ; "I be main glad to see thee. Lunnon ain't 
spiled thee a bit." 

"How do, damet" was the cheery response. 
"HoVsaUathome!" 

"Charming, Squire, thank ye kindly; and,'* 
she added, with her broad face glowing with plea- 
sure, " cheese be riz tuppence a stone 1" 

" There goes honest Jack Scudamore !" cried 
an old shepherd, as he stood bare-headed looking 
after the horseman ; " a chap o' the right sort, if 
there ever were one." 

"That be he," added another farm-labourer 
with equal heartiness. "There be few o' the 
gentry as comes up to he." 

On rode the Squire, nodding to and hailing 
as pleasantly every one who recognised him. But 
thoucrh his smile seemed as cordial as ever, his 



THE TURRET CHAMBER. 5 

heart was by no means so light as his many well- 
wishers desired it to be. For the first time in his 
life he was dissatisfied. The consciousness that 
he conld no longer enjoy the recreations that had 
mimstered so largely to his happiness, made him 
discontented. He attributed it to the loss of his 
daughter's society; and as the compensation he 
had looked for — ^the seeing her receive the hom- 
age of the coimty — had not been afforded 
him, he could no longer restrain his desire to 
behold her surrounded by the dignities belonging 
to her elevated position. 

The great castle stood out in all its princely 
magnificence in the landscape before him, and far 
and wide spread the woods and parks of the ducal 
estate. ^ His eyes brightened, and his ruddy face 
glowed with pride. He began to feel a sensible 
satisfaction that his ^^ lass" was mistress of all that 
sohd grandeur and consideration. 

He sighed again as he remembered the charm 
she used to give to his daily life; the radiant 
smile, the silvery laugh, the loving attentions that 



6 JACK soudamobb's daughter, 

made her presence a perpetual joy. Though he 
kept assuring himself that his darling Fanny was 
a duchess, that she was one of the very greatest 
ladies in the land, and the queen of the county, 
the conviction forced itself most unpleasantly 
upon him that her greatness had taken her out of 
his reach. 

It was in vain that he tried to find content in 
the knowledge that she was the wife of the play- 
fellow of his boyhood — the kindest, the truest 
friend he had ever known — ^and that he had done 
the right thing in gratifying the Duke's wish to be 
his son-in-law; a misgiving would intrude into his 
honest mind that it was exactly the right thing 
for him. 

This gratification of his friend had beggared 
himself, stripped him of every thing that had ren- 
dered life enjoyable, caused him to lose all the old 
interest in the old pursuits ; and he now awoke to 
the consciousness that the dear companionship he 
had so readily surrendered had been the savour that 
had given such wonderful zest to his existence. 



THE TURBBT CHAMBKR. 7 

Then, too, there was a terrible uncertainty 
about this grand marriage having made the lass 
happy. The last time he had seen her, her beau- 
tiful face wore quite a (UfiFerent expression to what 
he had been used to see. The Doke had borne 
the character of an attentive husband, and there 
could be no question of his being kind to Jack 
Scudamore's daughter. Still the dear girl might 
have preferred a younger husband, as was very 
natural. Then what a brute he must have been 
to have allowed her to marry the Duke 1 

He was disappointed, too, at her not having 
called or sent to him since his return to Delamere 
Court. But perhaps he thought it was the eti- 
quette for him to make the first visit. He was 
only Jack Scudamore, she the Duchess of Por- 
chester. Of course he ought to pay proper re- 
spect to her grace. Besides, there was that 
sudden departure from town. The Duke was out 
of order; might still be ill. It was his boimden 
duty to call to inquire after the health of his son- 
in-law. 



8 JACK bcudamore's daxtohter. 

With these reflections the much-troubled fox- 
hunter jogged on^ on the back of his stout sure^ 
footed steed. While he is proceeding to hi» 
destination, I will cany the reader in advance, 
and take him to that imposing edifice still in the 
distance. Not at first to any of the ordinary re- 
ception-rooms, or in that still more magnificently 
furnished portion called the state apartments, but 
far away to a distant and unfrequented wing, up 
flights of tortuous steps, through gloomy corridors 
and musty lumbeivrooms, till a cork-screw stone 
stair led to another dark passage, at the end of 
which was a door. 

Having opened this, we enter a dark chamber 
with a carved ceiling and one narrow window, 
very narrow and far out of reach. There is a 
fire-place with a fire burning, but the grate is 
enclosed in a high brass screen. The floor is 
covered with some thick elastic substance, and so 
are the walls to a height of five or six feet. The 
furniture is very simple for a ducal residence. 

On an easy- chair nearest the light sits st, 



THE TUBBBT CHAMBEB, 9 

powerfully-built man in the prime of life, of gen- 
tlemanly appearance, reading, but occasionally 
raising his eyes with a somewhat severe scrutiny 
to a strange figure reclining on a small pallet 
within a few feet of him. He is unquestionably 
an old man, rather under the middle size, and he 
wears a most singular costume, carpet-slippers, 
and strong coarse trousers. But the most remark- 
able garment is the jacket; it seemed made of 
some such material as stout bed-ticking, and in a 
fashion very ill adapted to insure the comfort of 
the wearer. 

The face of this little old man so strangely 
apparelled would at once arrest attention. The 
restless eyes, with a vacant stare fixed upon the 
reader, the childish simper playing about the thick 
lips, the flabby colourless cheeks, heavy brows, 
and projecting jaw, told their own terrible tale — 
imbeciUty and mania. 

In that padded room, with its secure window 
and grate, confined in a strait-waistcoat, stared, 
simpered, and jibbered all that was mortal of one 



10 JACK BOUDAMOBE^S DAU6HTEB. 

of tho most influential stateaonen of his age* The 
ovor-taskod brain had suddenly given way, and 
after a severe conflict with a frightful disease, all 
that remained ^f the descendant of one of the 
younger sons of the heroic Edward the Third — all 
that was left of his grace Edward, Plantagenet, 
Courtenay, De L'Isle, Duke of Porchester, Mar- 
quis of Delamcre, and Baron of Courtenay and 
De L'Isle — ^was an idiot and a maniac. 

Tho keeper read on, his stem eye in a moment 
quelling the unnatural noise in which his patient 
occasionally indulged, till the sound made by 
ascending footsteps attracting his attention, he 
put aside his book, and unlocked the door. 

The Duchess of Porchester entered noiselessly. 
She was dressed in a bright blue robe, with a 
chain of amber beads suspended from her neck. 
She had been told that the patient preferred gay 
colours, and he had once played with the neck- 
lace. She gave a hasty anxious glance towards 
the pallet-bed, then looked inquiringly into the 
face that confronted her. A shake of the head 



THE TURRET CHAMBER. 11 

was her reply, as the door was cautiouslj closed 
and fastened. 

"No improvement, Doctor f** was murmured 
mournfully. 

" Not the slightest, Duchess." 

The patient glanced vacantly from one to the 
other; stared, simpered, and gibbered, but did not 
attempt to move. The lady sighed heavily. 

"God's will be done!" she exclaimed. "I 
have so much faith in your experience, Doctor, I 
cannot give up all hope. I gratefully appreciate 
your kindness in so readily answering my appeal 
to exercise all your skill in his behalf, with the 
hope of preventing the dreadful secret becoming 
known ; and I will have patience. Doctor, — ^I will 
have patience — ^and faith." 

" All that knowledge of the malady can do for 
my interesting patient shall be done, Madam, rest 
assured." 

"Thanks. Now go and take your walk. I 
have come to relieve guard, you know." 

The physician saw a sad faint smile play round 



12 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

the beautiful mouth. His heart was touched by 
her devotion to her husband. Used as he had 
been to human misery in its most terrible forms, 
the sorrow impressed on that lovely face was to 
him far more difficult to look upon. He ardently 
wished to be able to afford her consolation ; but as 
yet the case gave no promise of amelioration, much 
less of cure. 

It seemed a regular arrangement. The Doctor, 
after a few precautionary words, took his hat and 
gloves from a table in a recess, and left the room, 
locking the door on the outside. The Duchess, 
carrying a little basket, drew a chair and sat close 
to the pallet; then taking out some sweetmeats, 
she placed one of them in the mouth of the pa- 
tient. He was evidently used to such attentions, for 
he simpered with a childish sense of gratification. 

"You will be good, then, if your poor wife 
brings you such nice things T she asked, as ten- 
derly as if to a fractious infant. " It is naughty 
to be violent, and try to hurt yourself, — very 
naughty, and frightens your darling Fanny, who 



m^i^— ^* — ; -^ 



THE TUBBET CHAMBEB* 13 

is SO anxioiLs that you should get well. Then dear 
papa can come and see you, or we could go to him, 
which would please him more. 

^ Dear papa I" was added in a trembling under- 
tone ; " if he were to know the dreadful state to 

He mustn't know it. Nobody must know it. 
*^ Here's another I" 

She placed a second bonrbon in the mouth that 
had gaped for more with just sufficient of an ani- 
mal instinct to appreciate the dainty. 

*^ I shall tell the Doctor, when he comes back, 
that you've been very good. Pray don't repeat 
that horrid noise. It makes me shudder." 

The patient was. indulging in the performance 
which the Doctor^s stem glance had restrained. 

"Here, there are plenty more." 

The sweetmeats were crammed into the open 
mouth, as if to stop the disagreeable sounds that 
were being emitted. 

" Come, sit up ; it will be more comfortable for 
you." 



14 JACK scubamobe's daughter. 

She helped him to sit upright, then smiled into 
the idiotic f ace, as though to cheer him into good 
humour. 

"Now do be good, and I will do every thing 
likely to make you welL 

**He doesn't know what I say," she added, 
sinking her voice; "he doesn't even know who it 
is who is taking such care of him. O that terrible 
noise! 

The patient was whining like a dog, and shrug- 
ging his shoulders very pitifully, while tears were 
rolling down his cheeks. 

"Something hurts you," she cried. "Those 
straps are too tight. I will loose them a little. It 
cannot be necessary to put him to pain." 

Her fingers were quickly at the tight fasten- 
ings of the strait-waistcoat, and by tugging at 
them perseveringly, she contrived to release the 
limbs from the strain upon them, which had hi- 
therto prevented free exercise of the muscles. 

" Ah, that is better, isn't it ? And you'll be so 
good now, won't you?" 



THS TUBBET CHAJIBER. 15 

She sat close to him on the bed, and seemed 
inclined to pet*liim more than ever. In answer, 
he stretched out his arms and laughed. 

The Duchess suddenly drew back to her chair 
with a scared look. The laugh was not human, — 
it was like that of a caged hyaena. More horrible 
still, the look with which it was accompanied was 
quite as savage. Too late she saw her imprudence, 
and her heart sunk within her. 

Presently the maniac made a spring in the 
direction of the door. When he found that the 
lock would not turn, he seized the handle with 
both hands, and shook the door with all his force. 
Finding it resist his utmost efforts, he turned 
round, livid with rage, and spying his frightened 
companion, with a terrific yell he bounded towards 
her. 

" Don't, Edward ; you hurt me 1" 

The piteous cry excited no pity. He had 
seized her by the bright necklace that he had been 
permitted to play with, then dragged her into the 
centre of the chamber. She fell half-strangled, he 



16 JACK SCUDAMORE'S DAUGHTER. 

kneeling on her, knocking her hea4 against the 
floor, gibbering and gnashing ancThowling, tiU the 
fastening broke, and the beads were scattered 
about the room. 

She had made no resistance, she had not at-* 

« 

tempted to call for help — nothing had escaped 
her lips but the remonstrance just mentioned. 
Suddenly she uttered a thrilling scream. She 
felt the madman's teeth meet in her flesh. 

Scarcely had the cry of anguish escaped her, 
when a strong arm seized her assailant by the 
neck, and hurled him violently against the wall. 
Before he could recover from the shock, the fas- 
tenings of the strait-waistcoat were secured, and 
the maniac thrown upon his pallet. 

The Doctor now turned to the Duchess. She 
lay pale as death, but conscious. He assisted her 
to rise, and noticed that blood was issuing from 
her dress. 

It was while in this condition, her heart 
beating wildly, her brain confused by terror, that 
her maid came to announce her father's arrival. 



THE TUBBET CHAMBER. 17 

Jack Scudamore stood before one of the two 
fires that warmed the Long Gallery at each end. 
He had been left here by the attentive and rather 
stately groom of the chambers. Indeed, all the 
servants he had met had vied with each other in 
their attentions to him. There could be no ques- 
tion that they were glad to see the father of their 
mistress, and were specially glad to treat him as 
an honoured guest; nevertheless, he noticed an 
unusual solemnity in their reception. 

He had been there often, and was well known 
to most of them ; but he had always been on rather 
an easy footing with the dignified old steward — 
had been permitted to joke with the solemn but- 
ler — ^had even been favoured with the latest Lon- 
don gossip by the fashionable-looking valet. Now, 
though they seemed inclined to be more civil than 
ever, it was with a seriousness of manner that left 
the jocose observations he had been in the habit 
of making, stifled in his throat. 

"All owing to that confounded etiquette!" 

thought the Squire; "these fellows know that I 
VOL. in. 



18 . JACK sctjdamore's dauohter. 

am now the Duke's father in-law, and insist on 
treating me as a great man." 

He was mistaken. The Duchess had taj^en 
extraordinary precautions to prevent a knowledge 
of the unhappy state of the Duke becoming known; 
but though all very willingly appeared ignorant, 
the terrible fact was as well known to the princi- 
pal domestics as to herself. They were equally 
anxious to prevent its further diffusion, and lent 
their ready aid to their mistress's plans for in- 
suring secrecy. 

They accepted the celebrated mad-doctor as a 
physician of eminence, to whose exclusive care 
the Duke's case had been intrusted, and seemed 
perfectly content with his selection of thi turret- 
chamber for the invalid, on account of the salu- 
brity of the air at that elevation, and the perfect 
quiet insured by its retired position. They too 
were sensible of the wife-like devotion of the 
youthful Duchess — ^would have wondered at, as 
much as they commended it, had they not remem- 
bered that she was Jack Scudamore's daughter. 



THE TURBET CHAMBER, 19 

There wa^ a heavy weight upon their spirits, 
which no doubt sensibly afifected their demeanour, 
when they presented themselves before the Squire. 
Profound was thek sympathy, but they did not 
dare to show it too openly. So the honoured visi- 
tor passed on without venturing to question any 
of them, and was ushered into the Long Gallery 
under the mistaken impression I have mentioned. 

He tried to amuse himself by looking at the 
pictures. He had seen them often, but now he 
regarded them with a new interest — ^at least the 
family portraits. They were his connections. He 
put his hands in his pockets, and strode from one 
to the other of his new kinsmen, with sensible 
satisfaction. Yes, with all these dukes, and mar- 
quises, and barons, he could \;laim relationship. 

Presently he started back a pace or two with 
an exclamation of surprise. He gazed on a full- 
length of a very beautiful lady, dressed with ex- 
traordinarjr magnificence-a youthful empress in 
her state robes could scarcely have been more 
richly apparelled. 



20 JACK scddamobe's daughteb. 

^Mt Lass!" cried honest Jack Scndamorey 
his breath ahnoBt taken awaj by the sadden snr- 
prise, and his face glowing with excessive piide 
and pleasure. *^By Jove, she's an Eclipse! Dis- 
tances them aQ I There isn't one of these grand 
ladies that comes within a dozen lengths of her ! 

^ Ahy this was the picture done at Paris, that 
she wrote to me about. Bj George, how like h^ 
dear mother at the same age ! Her lovely face I 
B[er noble figure ! My darling, beautiful Fanny ! 
— there isn't a woman living worthy to come on 
the same course with youT 

Tears trembled on his eyelashes ; he brushed 
them off with the back of the hand that held his 
heavy hunting-whip, and turned away. Then he 
started more violently than before, let the whip 
drop, and stared as though unexpectedly con- 
fronted by a ghost. 

"Papa r cried a tender voice. 

" God bless my soul !" exclaimed the astonished 
Squire; "can it be possible! What on earth 
can be the matter with my lass to have changed 



- p M ■ ■ ^ « 



THE TURRET CHAMBER. 21 

her 80 completely ? Your darling face is as white 
as a tombstone 1 Your cherry lips have almost 
as little colour I Has any one been ill-using you I 
AreyouiUr 

"No, papa; I'm only tired," was the reply. 
" I have been obliged to sit up a good deal — ^the 
Duke does not like me to be out of his room. I 
have been very anxious and troubled about him — 
and — and — perhaps want a little refreshing exer- 
cise — ^that's all, dear papa." 

"Ohl" cried the old man, his clenched fist 
relaxing, and the fierce expression that had come 
into his eyes giving way to one of compassion ; 
"a good daughter makes a good wife. You've 
been trying to do credit to your bringing-up; 
and doing a good deal too much, I can see. But 
I'm glad it's no worse. By George, I am I'' 

He threw his arm round her neck, kissed her 
forehead, and pressed her in an affectionate embrace. 

"How dreadfully fast your heart beats, my 
dear child 1" he presently cried, as if he had dis- 
covered a fresh source of alarm. 



22 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" The pleasure of seeing youy dear papa," was 
murmured in reply. 

" Oh I then, you haven't forgotten your fond 
old dad, Fanny, eh?" was the credulous and much- 
gratified f ather^s rejoinder. " That's as it should 
be, and the knowledge of it repays me for — ^But 
how's the Duke ? I was staying at Sir Harry's 
hunting lodge ; so 1 thought I'd ride over to the 
Castle, and inquire after his grace." 

"Thank you, papa. He is quite as well as 
can be expected. But the doctor will not permit 
him to see any one at present, and he is so very 
impatient when I'm away, that I shall be obliged 
to hurry back." 

The Squire's face looked a little disturbed at 
this information. He was any thing but disposed 
to shorten his interview. His darling was in his 
arms, and he had waited very long for that hap- 
piness. 

" But I intend, dear papa, to pay you a long 
visit as soon as I can." 

The disturbed countenance brightened up. 



THE TUBBET CHAMBEB. 2S 

^'By Jove, shan't I be glad to have you back 
again, my lass; if it's only for a week! You 
see Tve been rather dull. Tm a stupid old fool, 
and ought not to have missed you so much. But 
when you can come back to the dear old place, 
Fanny, TU show them that Jack Scudamore can 
go across country yet. By George, I will ! We'll 
go to the meet together, as of old. If I could 
have but one glorious run, with you leading the 
way, as you used to do, my pet — ^by the Lord 
Harry, I think I should remain content for the 
remainder of my Ufe." 

" Only wait a little, papa ; and then it shall 
be just as you wish." 

"Of course, TU wait, Fanny. Tm really 
quite cut up about the dear Duke. He and I, 
you know, have been such cronies. But as he 
never had much of an illness before, I don't see 
why he shouldn't get over this with proper care ; 
and that Tm sure he has." 

"Yes, papal" 

" I intended selling the brood-mares; but there's 



24 JACK scudamobb's daughter. 

one I can't make up my mind to part with. Do 
you remember Slyboots?" 

She looked inquiringly into his now animated 
face. 

" Surely you haven't forgotten Slyboots, my lass? 
The gray filly on which you raced me for a gold 
watch across the himdred-acre field to the white 
gate leading into the park." 

A faint smile played for a moment over her 
pallid features. 

"Ah I I thought you cotJdn't forget that, 
Fanny. I was on Jupiter, and pulled him in, 
because I wanted you to win; but I shall never 
forget my surprise when I beheld you go slap at 
the gate, as if it were a bulrush — the next blessed 
minute saw your habit flying above the top-rail, 
and heard your merry laugh as the filly landed 
you safe on the other side." 

The Duchess was beginning to feel faint, and 
became afraid that she could not play out this 
painful deception if the conversation continued 
much longer. 



THE TUBBET CHAMBER. * 25 

" You will have some refreshment, dear papa^ 
after your ride," she said. "I am very sorry 
that I am obliged to leave you. Another time 
we will have luncheon together; or, better still, 
you shall come to the Castle, and stay as long as 
you Kke." 

She kissed him with all her accustomed ten- 
derness, intending to withdraw; but the old man 
pressed her closer to his heart. In doing so, he 
laid his heavy hand upon her shoulder. It gave 
her exquisite pain ; but, with a sublime courage^ 
she did not wince. A thin dress only concealed 
the adhesive-plaster that had been hastfly pla<»d 
over the recent wound. 

She knew that had she betrayed any sense 
of pain, her father's suspicions would have been 
excited, and her spirit could not but break down 
under his anxious questions. She therefore smiled 
in his loving face, as if delighted with this demon- 
stration of his affection. 

'^ I will ride back to Sir Harry, my dear," he 
replied quite cheerfully, and stooped to pick up 



26 ' JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

his whip. ^' I suppose I may take him your com- 
pliments; nothing against etiquette in that, is 
there!" 

" Remember me to all your friends, papa !" 

He began to draw-on his riding-gloves. 

"Do you remember, years and years ago, 
Fanny my pet," he added, and his ruddy face 
seemed again all of a glow with pleasure, "when 
you were quite a little thing in frock and trousers, 
one day after you had come in with the dessert, I 
got you to stand on the table, and sing ^ Bright 
chanticleer' to my guests ; and they were all so 
delighted that they elected you a member of the 
hunt on the spot, though you then only rode a 
pony? Ah, those were joyous times. But good-by, 
my lass," he added, evidently with a kind of des- 
peration holding out his hand; "please God, when 
my poor friend gets well, we'll see those good old 
times come back." 

His daughter threw herself into his arms, and 
kissed him very lovingly. 

" Good-by, papa I" was all she could say. 



THE TUBBET CHAMBEB. 27 

^^ And I suppose I may give pleasant messages 
from you to the people at home. Dawkins, you 
know, and Mrs. Lavender, and Dick Wilcox, and 
the rest of them. I know that the poor souls 
would he charmed with an affectionate remem- 
brance from the great Duchess." 

"Say any thing you like, papa; say every 
thing that's most kind. Tell them I often think 
of them ; and when I see them again, I will prove 
to all that they have never been forgotten." 

" That's right, my lass ; and God bless you. 
Never forget old friends, however humble." 

Again they interchanged the good old-fashioned 
parting benediction ; and the Squire left the Long 
Gallery, and proceeded in the direction of the 
grand staircase. 

The Duchess strained her eyes after his re- 
treating figure. Gladly would she have accom- 
panied him to the entrance; very gladly have 
taken his last caress when he should be in the 
saddle ; but her strength had already been taxed 
too much ; she could not have walked with him a 



28 JACK scudamorb's daughter. 

dozen paces. She heard him cheerfully accost the 
groom of the chambers as he descended to the 
hall ; then she tottered to the nearest chair, and, 
flinging her arms on the back, bowed her beauti- 
ful head, and burst into a torrent of tears. 

This appeared to reheve her overcharged heart. 
The intense excitement under which she had been 
suffering seemed to abate. She wiped her eyes, 
and sighed heavily once or twice ; then rose to her 
feet with the intention of returning to her duties, 
thankful that she had not been disturbed; com- 
forted, too, with the conviction that no one had 
witnessed her emotion. The Duchess shuddered 
from head to foot, but resolutely bent her steps 
towards the turret-chamber. 



CHAPTER n. 



AN attache's HOLTOAT. 



Month after month passed by, and found Arthur 
Calverley still making fruitless endeavours to dis- 
cover Geraldine's retreat. There was no "private- 
inquiry oflSce" at this period; espionage was not 
a profession, as it is now; nevertheless, persons 
were to be found ready to trace any thing, from a 
missing heir to a lost lapdog; and they were em- 
ployed by a clever solicitor, who had achieved a 
reputation in such discoveries. 

But the months had accumulated into a year 
without producing any result. Messengers had 
been sent to Ireland to find Dillon. Not only was 
the neighbourhood of Maurice Court carefully ex- 
plored, but every place in the island, where the 



30 JACK SCUDAMOBB^S DAUGHTER. 

worthy fellow was known to liaTe friends. Bat 
he had totally disappeared ; no cme knew where. 

As the piesnmption was that he had accom- 
panied the fogitiTes, advertisements were pub- 
lished in the En^ish and Irish papers, announc- 
ing ^ something to his adTantage," and offering a 
handsome reward for information as to his where- 
about. But poor Dillon never was heard of; and 
a suspicion began to be entertained among his 
friends that he had been secredy murd^^ed, at 
the instigation of the claimant of the Maniice- 
Court Estate^ or his coadjutor, — the man he had 
dispossessed, now acting as his agent for the pro- 
perty, — who was known to be continually boasting 
in ins drunk^i excesses ^how nately he had done 
the thrick, and had Iris revenge into the bargain." 

As four persons had diss^peared, each easily 
to be identified — the dowager, the brother and 
raster, and the agent — Mr. Hawksley, of Thavies 
Inn, the clever lawyer employed by Captain Cal- 
verley, continued to assure his client that they 
must turn up sooner or later; yet neither of them 



AN attache's holiday. 81 

coTild be traced ; moreover, no one could be met 
with who had seen or heard of them since their 
mysterious departure from Rose La^vTi. 

The affair Was much discussed in society, and 
Arthur was warmly congratulated by his well- 
married relations on his fortunate escape. The 
barnsinister was evidently a special bugbear to 
the flourishing Calverleys, and they were rather 
severe in their remarks on the poor old countess 
for having made so much of her nephew's " love- 
children." The bishop's widow even went so far 
as to condemn it as a gross impropriety ; but her 
ladyship continuing her countenance of them, 
after the exposure, was an unpardonable outrage. 

Somehow or other, the member for Delamere 
received his congratulations in a spirit the reverse 
of what his indignant kindred had expected to see. 
The pompous Lord Madras had talked to him 
very seriously on the necessity of maintaining the 
honour of their illustrious family ; in an equally 
fussy manner little Lord Calverley preached to 
him on the same text. His lordship was pleased 



32 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

to wonder how he could have let the great heiress 
slip through his fingers, while he was wasting his 
great natural capabilities on ** a wretched pauper.'* 

The Captain was either very perverse, or an 
extremely degenerate Calverley; for immediately 
after these interviews he went to Thavies Inn, 
and directed ^Ir. Hawksley to increase the reward 
that had been offered for intelligence of his miss- 
ing friends. Then, after earnestly urging him to 
stimulate his agents to further exertions, and to 
communicate the slightest favourable intelligence 
to him without a minute's loss of time, he pro- 
ceeded on the journey he could no longer delay. 

Captain Calverley commenced a new career as 
paid attach^ and his new home was the British 
Embas^ at Brussels. Here his handsome person, 
gentlemanly manners, and intellectual accomplish- 
ments, soon won for hun influential friends of 
both sexes. The only fault they could find with 
him was, they thought he was uncommonly re- 
served for a young cavahy officer in a crack regi- 
ment. 



AN attache's holiday. 33 

This, however^ was rather a recommendation 
than otherwise to his chief; and having gone 
through the drudgery of pr^cw-writing, and copy- 
ing despatches — ^a kind of diplomatic stone-break- 
ing and oakum-picking, used as a labour-test for 
all volmiteers for work at our principal foreign 
embassies-he was regarded as the most promising 
member of the staff. Indeed, he had been f omad 
an efficient substitute for the secretary, during 
an unavoidable absence from his post on *^ urgent 
private affairs." 

The new attach^ appeared to be extremely fond 
of work; and the amount of it he got through, 
whenever there was a sudden pressure on the 
office, was a marvel to his less-industrious as- 
sociates at the Embassy. Brussels was a very 
gay city, and they preferred enjoying its fashion- 
able diversions to studying protocols, or writing 
ultimatums. They could not understand why 
Calverley, who was such a deuced good-looking 
fellow, should not care about going to balls, and 
operas, and concerts, and parties, and did not seem 

VOL. IlL D 



34 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

at all struck by the pretty women who were there 
always to be met with. 

Work as he would, Arthur always found time 
for reflection. On these occasions, his thoughts in- 
variably travelled in one direction. Notwithstand- 
ing the good counsel he had received from his 
seniors, he would think that in losing Geraldine 
he had lost the brightest, the fairest, the best, ay 
and the noblest example of affectionate womanhood 
the world contained. 

All the well-meant remonstrances and exhor- 
tations to which he had had to listen, had not 
in the slightest degree affected the overpowering 
feeling of sympathy and admiration that the 
knowledge of her undeserved misfortune had 
created. Her entire helplessness, her overwhelm- 
ing disgrace, appealed to his truly gallant nature 
more powerfully even than the recollection of her 
youth, her beauty, her innocence, and the thou- 
sand inexpressible graces that accompanied them. 

The pleasant retrospection would return again 
and again, when the pen had accomplished its pre- 



AN attache's holiday. 35 

scribed task. Little did the ambassador think that 
his promising attach secretly gave himself up to 
the consideration of a subject far as the poles 
asunder from the foreign policy of his countiy. 
Little was that experienced diplomatist aware that 
instead of mastering the Kussian complication, he 
was devoting his mind and heart to the disentang- 
ling of one a good deal nearer and dearer to him. 
That sagacious statesman could have fathomed a 
Metternich, or potietratod a Talleyrand; yet ho 
could not see that his subordinate was helplessly, 
apparently hopelessly, in love. 

So Arthur went on, at his leisure chewing the 
cud of sweet and bitter fancies, unsuspected by his 
daily associates; going deliberately over the past, 
as if rather to find a lost clue through a labyrinth 
than to indulge in the gratifications of a lover^s 
memory. He was conscious of a mystery in his 
delightful intimacy at Rose Lawn, that always 
suggested his boyish romance in the Abbey ruins. 
Over and over again the consideration of the one 
had glided into a remembrance of the other. 



36 JACK bcudahobe's daughter. 

Then came recollections of things said or done 
at different times^ that presented themselves to his 
mind as broken links of the same chain* He tried 
to remember the conversation he had overheard 
between the Mothernsuperior of the good nuns and 
her companion, on the morning of his departure 
from the Abbey — or rather her portion of it — ^and 
recal the equally strange dialogue, of which he had 
long subsequently been a forced auditor, between 
the stem sister of the same community and her 
unknown associate, and then piece the disjointed 
fragments together. 

The result seemed only to increase his mystifi- 
cation. Suddenly he remembered the intelligent 
cicerone he had met in the Abbey ruins; and an 
idea struck him with the force of an inspiration. If 
any one was likely to help him to explain this mys- 
tery, it must be Dr. Petre. He had acknowledged 
his long acquaintance with the good sisters; and on 
this foundation the lover built his hopes of finding 
out what had bafBed his powers of investigation. 

He was aware that the Bishop of Melpotamos 



AN attache's holidat. 37 

was in Belgium^ as he had lately read in a Brussels 
newspaper an account of his having been in retreat 
in one of the princqial monasteries. He therefore 
came to a determination, and lost no time in fol- 
lowing it out. 

Having obtained leave of absence, he packed a 
valise, and in due time found himself in a railway- 
carriage that waa leaving the Brussels station. In 
his compartment he had only two companions : one 
a dark^omplexioned man of gentlemanly exterior, 
apparently a foreigner, whose attention was ab- 
sorbed by the columns of the IruHpendance Belge^ 
which screened him from observation; the other 
had much the appearance of a thriving English 
farmer or grazier seeking a profitable investment 
in cattle. 

Seeing a countryman who seemed perfectly dis- 
engaged, this person addressed himself to Captain 
CaJverley almost as soon as they had quitted the 
Flemish capital. 

'^ Not a bad country this, sir, to get a living in, 
I should think ; though any thing but attractive. 



38 JACK scudamobe's daughtsb. 

it looks prosperous*; the peasants appear as if they 
had money to spend." 

"Yes," replied his compatriot courteously; 
" under its enlightened ruler the people enjoy a 
more than ordinary amount of material prosperity." 

" What I thought, sir. I can always tell the 
best line of country for getting money." 

" Indeed ! Are beasts dear here ?" 

" Middling. An animal as has been well taught 
always commands his price." 

The attacJiS was under the impression that it 
was good feeding, not teaching, that made the 
animal desirable ; but he diplomatically held his 
tongue. 

" Pm here on spec, sir." 

" So I thought. I hope you will be successful." 

" It's very difScult to meet with success in my 
line, sir. You can have no idea of the difficulty. 
The British public are always craving for novelty ; 
and the worst of it is, novelty isn't always to be 
had. That brings me here, sir. Tm looking out 
for something new and striking." 



AN attache's holidat. 39 

The (xUache could not quite comprehend what 
his fellow-traveller meant ; but as he knew that he 
was not thorougHy up in breeding and fattening 
Uye stocky he took refuge in a commonplace ex- 
clamation. 

" Oh, indeed T 

^1 think I may say, and I do so with a good 
deal of professional pride, sir, that I have intro- 
duced more novelties to a discerning and discrimi- 
nating British public than any other member of 
the profession." 

" Shorthorns or longhorns?" thought the Captain. 

"It was I who brought forward the Piebald 
Phenomenon and the Pony Fortune-Teller. My- 
self, sir, trained the unrivalled Andalusian Mule, 
which was unique, sir. It could leap through blaz- 
ing hoops, pick an orange out of a tub of water, 
find a card in a sack of grain, and play on the big 
drum sitting on a cane chair. He was quite unique, 
I assure you." 

"May I ask your name?" inquired Arthur, 
endeavouring to conceal his amusement. 



40 JACK scudamobe's bauohteb. 

"Oh yes, sir, certainly, rm Jinks, sir — the 
Jinks, proprietor of Jinks's Imperial Circus. My 
son is going the Western Circuit with it now, sir. 
You don't happen to know if a pair of Aztec War- 
riors could be procured in this country? I don't 
mind a pretty high figure." 

"I cannot say I ever heard of such persons," 
was the reply. 

"You should have seen the pair I had. A 
tremendous success they were, sir. And a Bedouin 
Sheik, sir, as took almost as well. Then I had, at 
the same time, the Ethiopian Grimaldi — ^a real 
nigger, sir, who made the best clown I ever saw 
in the ring. When he came on, with his toes 
turned in, and his tongue out of his mouth, cry- 
ing ' Here we are !' it was quite sensational, sir. 
But you should have heard him sing ^ Hot cod- 
lings ;' as Tm a living man, the spectators seemed 
ready to go into fits." 

"Is it possible!" 

"Yes, sir; that identical nigger, sir, was abso- 
lutely earning a matter of sixteen bob a week 1" 



AN ATTAOHS*B HOLIDAY. 41 

" Ble»» my heart T 

<<They camo to me in a lot^ sir. Tlio best 
spec I ever made in my life. A Yankee felloW| 
of whom I had bought a tame panther, offered 
them to me a bargain, if I would engage him in 
my troupe. I did, sir. I found him useful in 
the establishment, especially in disguises, and gave 
him good wages. He trained the whole of 'em, 
sir ; and when I found that they doubled the re- 
ceipts, I doubled his wages, and took him into my 
confidence. Will you believe it, sir, he proved a 
sarpcntt He induced my Aztec Warriors, my 
Bedouin Hheik, and my Ethiopian (}rimaldi to 
run away with him, when their performances had 
been announced at the largest fair in that part of 
England. And what was more, sir, the miscreant 
carried off the receipts of the day's perfonnance/' 

^^What was his nameT asked, in excellent 
English, the gentleman behind the IruUpendanoi 
Beige. 

^^ lie called himself Whittler, and boasted that 
he had been a captain in the United States.'' 



42 JACK scupamobe's daughteb. 

"Hiram Whittler," said the stranger; ^fthe 
most notorious swindler and horse-stealer in Texas. 
I heard that he had pahned himself upon an 
English lady travelling in the Southern States as 
guide and protector, and had subsequently crossed 
the Atlantic with her." 

" That's him, sir. I was aware as the/d all 
left her, as the good lady beUeved, to return to 
their homes. The Aztecs and the Bedouin w^ere 
traced to a ship that sailed from Liverpool ; but a 
Yankee and a ni^er have since been heard of at 
different places, arswindling every body a'most; 
and the poHce suspects as they are the miscreants 
as imposed upon me." 

Arthur remembered the attempt he had de- 
feated to cheat the Squire, and felt assured of 
the identity of the parties. 

" You are well quit of Mr. Hiram Whittler and 
his accomplices," observed the other, putting down 
his newspaper. 

"But if I could get back the Aztec Warriors," 
said Mr. Jinks. "You don't happen to know 



AN attache's holidat. 43 

where I coixld pick up another pair, sir, do you?'* 
he added pleadingly. 

"Bamum could furnish you with a dozen," 
was the reply. " The Aztecs are a swindle. The 
two fellows were most likely Indians picked up by 
Hiram Whittler." 

Mr. Jinks looked imhappy. He had lived 
under the impression that no man on earth could 
take him in ; and he now learnt the full extent of 
the imposition of which he had been the dupe. 
He became reserved — so much so as scarcely to 
open his mouth till the train stopped at Ghent, 
when he got out, as he said that an equestrian 
troupe were performing in the neighbourhood; 
and he was going to them to see if he could dis- 
cover any thing worth engaging for Jinks's Im- 
perial Circus. The poor fellow made his parting 
salutations in a somewhat subdued tone. 

Arthur found that his remaining companion 
was an American travelling for his pleasure; 
and as he proved to be an accomplished gen- 
tleman, they were soon engaged in an animated 



44 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

conTersatioii upon Enropean and American poll* 
tics. 

At the next station other traveDera entered the 
carriage; a fat lady, her eqnafly fat dan^ter, and 
a priest who looked as if he could have outweighed 
both. The seniors inunediatel j commenced such 
a chattering in French, that it was impossible for 
any one else to conyerse. So the American re- 
turned to his newspaper, and Arthur to his retro- 
spections; while the stout young lady divided her 
attention between her dress, her ornaments, and 
her handsome vis-oHcis. H6 took no notice of her 
coquetry ; and seeing that there was no probability 
of attracting the other gentleman who was behind 
lus newspaper, she drew a small Bosaiy from her 
pocket, and began to repeat her prayers; as she 
moved the beads occasionally glancing out of the 
comers of her eyes at ^^the stupid insensible Eng- 
lishman.'' 

At last the train stopped, and Arthur got out 
of the carriage, after addressing a few parting 
words to his Transatlantic acquaintance, who was 



AN attache's holiday. 45 

going on to Ostend. He had arrived at the ancient 
city of Bruges. 

Haying secured his luggage, he was driven to 
the Hdtel d'Angleterre, where he obtained refresh- 
ment; then went out for a stroll. The air of 
decay that pervaded this mart of commercial ac- 
tivity in the Middle Ages, struck him forcibly. 
The few stragglers he met in the gloomy streets 
were either paupers or priests. The thriving me^ 
chants, the prosperous manufacturers, the busy 
artizans, who once crowded its thoroughfares, had 
totally disappeared. The principal architectural 
features of the place had survived its industry. 
Churches, monasteries, nunneries, hospitals, and 
other religious establishments, were in surprising 
numbers, considering the reduced population. 

Many of the ancient dwelling-houses, that made 
the old city so picturesque, had been turned from 
their secular use ; had become hives where drones 
had superseded the bees that had once stored 
much excellent honey there ; and in and out stole 
habits of all kinds, — ^the mendicant and other re- 



46 JACK scudahobe's daughter. 

ligious orders that had gathered in these mediaeval 
homes. 

Bruges ought to have been a model fold, for 
the shepherds were more numerous than the sheep. 
It could scarce help being intensely Catholic, for 
all that was most thoroughly Koman prevailed in 
its innumerable places of worship. In truth, it 
might lay claim to almost as many relics, as many 
miracles, as many saints, as many shrines, as many 
splendours, and as many professed religieuses of 
both sexes, as the capital of the Pope's dominions. 
And it was quite as much a city of the dead. The 
conmiercial life had gone out of one as completely 
as the classical life had departed from the other. 

Bruges was a minor Eome ; but its Walloon 
inhabitants were not Romans. They were steeped 
to the Ups in bigotry and prejudice, and as monk- 
ish in their religious notions as if they had never 
stirred out of a cloister. 

Arthur passed all these evidences of supersti- 
tion flourishing at the expense of industry and in- 
telligence, with many a sigh for the good old times 



AN attache's holiday. 47 

of the Hanseatic League; — ^for if there was no 
great amoTint of refined civilisation in those days, 
there was no stagnation of the sources of human 
enlightenment and prosperity. It was pitiful to 
see so many evidences of social improvement de- 
voted to purposes with which social elevation has 
nothing to do. . 

At last he came to a church splendidly lighted 
up. He entered, and foimd it gorgeously deco- 
rated. The pulpit was a miracle of carving ; the 
altar-piece a masterpiece of Hans Memling ; every- 
where were such evidences of ecclesiastical luxury 
as are only produced during the grandest ceremo- 
nials of the Church. The place was crowded with 
a devout congregation, absorbed in what was going 
on, — ^gentle and simple, young and old, gazing and 
listening with wondering awe at the sights and 
sounds. 

Presently he felt his frame thrill from head to 
foot. A choir of female voices sang from behind 
a screen, and he recognised the exquisite harmonies 
he had so often listened to in the Abbey ruins. 



48 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

Entranced, as it were, by the delightful associa- 
tions thej suggested, he stood still till the singing 
had concluded* 

He now pushed forward, for he was aware that 
something ^ going on near the altar, which was 
profusely decorated with flowers, that was attract^ 
ing all eyes. At last he obtained a view of an 
elderly ecclesiastic in a mitre and very rich robe, 
with a fenude figure kneeling before him. He 
held a mass of soft golden hair in one hand, and 
in the other a pair of scissors. He was also ad- 
dressing some questions to the kneeling figure, 
which were answered, but in too low a tone to 
reach his ear. 

Again Arthur pressed forward to gain a bett^ 
view ; and an opening being made in the mass of 
people before him, he distinctly saw the features 
of the intended nun. 

"Geraldinel" was shouted by him, in tones 
that must have penetrated every part of the 
church. 

Its effect was electric on the kneeling figure. 



AN attache's holiday. 49 

She clasped her hands together, uttered a piercing 
shriek, and fell senseless at the feet of the bishop. 

Arthur instinctively sprang forward; but in- 
stantly strong hands were laid upon him, and he 
was rudely pulled back. He tried to free himself ; 
the idea of affording assistance to his lost love, 
now so strangely discovered, made him frantic. 
But cries of " Sacrilege T arose from a hundred 
Walloon throats ; a hundred fierce faces clustered 
round him menacingly; more strong arms seized 
him ; and he found himself violently thrust, buf- 
feted, and at last hurled out of a side door into a 
narrow street. 

Here the storm of indignation burst out upon 

him with tenfold fury. Cries of " Heretic !" and 

ft 

other opprobrious names were hissed into his ears ; 

groans, execrations, and curses were heaped upon 

his head in a barbarous patois; they clustered 

around him like wolves mad with hunger, their 

coarse features distorted with hate and rage into 

the likeness of demons. 

They struck at him with hands and sticks; 
VOL. in. E 



50 JACK SCUDAMORE^S DAUOHTEB. 

the^ hulled at him every missile that came within 

their reach, each exdting the other hy baibaioos 

appeals to vengeance. 

"Down with the heretic T 

"Away with the accursed En^ishman T* 

"To hell with the hated of God and the 

Kessed Virgin I*' 

"He has insulted our faith T 

"He has outraged our holj priests I" 

"He has desecrated our most sacred church V^ 

"Strike! strikeT 

"KjU! kiur 

Arthur made strenuous efforts to defend him- 
self. With his hack to a door he struck ont 
right and left at his cowardly assailants, and sent 
a dozen of them screaming into the narrow road. 
But on they rushed again in greater numhers and 
with additional ferocity, with sticks and stones, 
at the one defenceless man. 

The Captain had charged the batteries of the 
Ameers of Scinde, he had cut his way through 
a host of Sikh cavalry, with far less danger than 



AN attache's holiday. 51 

existed in his present position. The mob of fana^- 
tics screaming around him were mad with reH- 
gioos hatred; and every time a blouse was sent 
head-over-heels among them by those straight- 
forward blows, they yelled like savages, and rushed 
forward to annihilate him with their missiles. 

The unequal conflict could not last long. 
Bruised from head to foot, his clothes in rags 
and covered with dirt, Arthur still struck out 
manfully ; but just as he had sent another of his 
innumerable enemies howling into the background, 
the glitter of bright metal flashed momentarily 
in his eyes. His hands dropped, his brain became 
dizzy, and he sank on the steps weltering in his 
blood. 



CHAPTER m. 

BBOTHEB BASHJUS. 

There was again great excitement throogbont 
the parisli of Delamere Panra. In tmth there 
was quite a commotion. The parishioners were 
divided into two camps, that were undeniably 
hostile in their sentiments ; and if there was not 
actual war between them now raging, there was 
more than a sufficiency of belligerent f eeUng to 
produce it. 

The cause was the Vicar. As I have inti- 
mated, there existed a small but influential party 
in the village that entirely disapproved of his 
religious innovations. They could not be brought 
to understand his ecclesiological enthusiasm ; they 
could not appreciate the Anglican Church of the 
Middle Ages. Some of them, indeed, went so far 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 53 

in their crass ignorance as to vote the florid ser- 
vices in their beautiful new church a sham^ and the 
hermit-saint to whom it had been dedicated a 
humbug ; and when the master of the Grammar- 
School published a pamphlet, in which he proved, 
with a prodigious amomit of learning, that no 
such person had ever lived in Delamere, nor any- 
where else in the county, the hitherto compara- 
tively quiet malcontents grew scandalously ob- 
streperous in their opposition. 

But then they were the friends of that " pig 
of a churchwarden;" and the Reverend Basil Plyn- 
lymmon ought not to have been surprised that 
they grunted against him in chorus with their 
leader. He was often facetious on this subject 
with the lean Curate — ^that is to say, the last he 
had engaged; for, somewhat to his mortification, 
aU the preceding half-dozen had followed each 
other into the Romish communion. 

It is just possible that had the reverend gen- 
tleman possessed a little prudence he might have 
maintained his position and his alterations in the 



54 JACK scudamore's daughter, 

ritual; but his taste for mediaeval practices grew 
with what it fed on. His predilections took more 
and more a monastic shape. At last he startled 
his admirers by announcing that he intended esta- 
blishing a new religious order, to be called the 
Brothers of St. Hildebrand, and that the vicar- 
age would henceforth be their first estabUshment. 

Great was the commotion when, as Brother 
Basilius, the Vicar officiated in a dark serge frock, 
with its hood thrown back, displaying the top of 
his head shaved in a circular patch, a rope-girdle 
round his loins, and with naked legs and feet — ^the 
latter bound with sandals ; accompanied by the lean 
Curate similarly fashioned, looking as unsubstan- 
tial as if he were the Vicar's shadow, especially 
where the calves of his legs ought to have been. 

Some of the congregation who had come to 
pray, most certainly remained to scofF. The ton- 
sured faces; the long bodies, supported apparently 
by narrow balustrades ending in a group of ex- 
tremely vulgar-looking toes, appealed too strongly 
to their sense of the ludicrous, — ^with the young 



BBOTHEB BASILIUS. 55 

men especially. Even tlie young ladies, who had as- 
sisted him so liberally urith their time, their pocket- 
money, and their ^ accomplishments, were not all 
proof against the manifest absurdity of this display. 

Subsequently, when it became known that 
Brother Basilius had taken the vow of chastity, 
several neglected their religious duties ; that is to 
say, they were no longer seen in their parish- 
church. If the entire truth must be told, they 
expressed their indignation at their pa.tor's pro- 
ceedings in very strong language, joined the now 
fast-increasing opposition, and made themselves 
rather unamiably conspicuous by their denuncia- 
tion of popish practices. 

It was on the morning of a bleak January day 
that Brother BasiUus, as just described, his hands 
clasped, his eyes fixed on the ground, his cowl 
drawn over his head, left the vicarage, accom- 
panied by Brother Simplicius, as the lean curate 
chose to style himself, though his patronymic was 
Perkins, — and followed by his choir and acolytes, 
bearing censers and banners, singing the custom- 



56 JACK SCUDAMOBS'S DAUGHTSB. 

arj canticle^ — ^and proceeded solemnly towards the 
principal entrance of the church. There was a 
crowd in front of that portion of the sacred edi-* 
fice — a very irreverent crowd apparently from the 
observations that greeted the procession ; but the 
leader, absorbed in his holy meditations, did not 
seem to hear, in fact he did not seem to see, till 
he came to the porch, and nearly ran his head 
against the closed doors. 

Brother Basilins started back in the utmost 
astonishment: Brother Simplicius did the same. 
Tittering from the women and girls, and a loud 
laugh from the men and boys, much increased 
their confusion. 

"How stupid it must have been of the ver- 
ger I" thought the one. 

"A shameful trick of some of the college- 
boys !" thought the other. 

Brother Basilius knocked, but there was no 
response ; Brother Simplicius knocked again, but 
the door did not move. 

The one monk looked at the other with a face 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 57 

of blank amazement^ as a chorus of rostic mirth 
burst upon their outraged ears. But the necessity 
for immediate action was felt by both, especially 
in their naked legs and f eet^ which the frosty air 
made unpleasantly sensitive. 

They were about to proceed to a side door, 
when the burly figure of Jacob Cobb, with a 
forced gravity expressed in his homely features, 
approached the superior, and placed a paper in 
his hand. Brother Basihus took the official-look- 
ing document from his pig of a churchwarden 
with an air of lofty pity. It was sealed with a 
mitre. He opened it, and read the contents. 
They announced his suspension from his duties as 
vicar of the parish of Delamere Parva, and pro- 
hibited his preaching within the limits of the dio- 
cese. 

The Eeverend Basil Plynlymmon might pos- 
sibly have experienced a f eeUng of regret that he 
had too severely tried the forbearance of his bi- 
shop—that is, if he had had a particle of good sense 
in his composition ; but unfortunately this he did 



58 JACK scudamose's 1>AVGBTEBL 



not possess. His mind was shaDow, and his heart 
shallower still* He was the dope of an inordinate 
ranity^ and had beea petted into the conclnsion 
that he was a special instrmnent selected hy Pro- 
vidence to restore the Anglican chnrch to its pris- 
tine parity and splendonr. 

He conld not surrender this delnraon* He 
was still supported hy Ta$xij powerful f riends, and 
felt assured of their assistance in the great work 
he had hitherto carried on with such astonishing 
success. So he quietly put the document in his 
pockety and without deigning to notice rither the 
pig of a churchwarden or the grinning heathens 
who were enjoying his discomfiture, he loftily 
gave orders to return to ^^the monastery;'' and, 
accompanied by the lean Curate shivering in every 
limb, and followed by the silent and puzzled cho- 
risters, led the way back, pursued by a storm of 
rustic jeers, tfll he reached the shelter of his own 
house. 

It was astonishing with what ease this impor- 
tant revolution in Little Delamere appeared to 



BROTHER BASILIUS, 59 

have been accomplished. An hour before, and 
*^the apostle of Puseyism'* was the autocrat of his 
parish ; an hour later, and the most remote portion 
of his government knew that his rule was at an 
end. 

And it was curious to observe how quietly 
consent to his dethronement was manifested. 
There was immediately a laying aside of emblems 
that had hitherto been worn with much ostentar 
tion, and with them a good deal of a peculiar 
phraseology they had adopted about the same 
time. Even the most fervid admirers knew that 
they could do nothing in his behalf. The strug- 
gle was over ; and the knowledge that they could 
neither defend nor support their favourite, recon- 
ciled them to his defeat. 

Brother Basilius believed that his influential 
friends would remain stanch to his cause; he 
especially relied upon his female supporters in this 
crisis ; and after having, as he considered, well 
reflected on his line of action, he determined, 
without loss of time, to institute a personal canvas, 



60 JACK bcudamobe's dauohteb. 

accompanied by Brother Simplicios. In pursu- 
ance of this resolution the two monks left their 
monastery. Very much to the surprise of both, 
though little more than an hour had elapsed since 
the neighbourhood had been crowded with "the 
heathen multitude," not a living creature was dis- 
cernible. Brother Basilius felt humiliated. Could 
so little account hay& been made of him, he 
thought, in a place where he had laboured for so 
many years as the spiritual director of the popu- 
lation ? His downfall had excited any thing but 
sympathy; but it having been accomplished, his 
enemies had thought it only worthy of ridicule, 
and had gone their several ways at once, as if it 
deserved no further attention. 

He tried to console himself with the conviction 
that great spirits are invariably in advance of then: 
generation ; but the neglect, made conspicuous by 
the desertion of the principal street, mortified him 
extremely. He was prepared to meet weeks of 
hooting, and months of public opprobrium; he 
rather desired to be made a martyr of ; he would 



BROTHEB BASILIUS. 61 

have felt quite proud of a good share of popular 

persecution : but the parish was as tranquil as at 

» 

midnight. Nobody molested him. Even the win- 
dows where he had always seen admiring faces 
had the blinds drawn down. 

At last he sees a human being. He is coming 
out of " the Cross Keys.*' It must be — ^it is ab- 
solutely the precentor. ]^ut as soon as the man 
caught a glimpse of Brother BasUius, he turned 
sharp down an alley, without touching his trencher 
cap, and was instantly out of sight 1 The Vicar 
began to experience a feeling closely resembling 
misanthropy. He had done every thing for that 
man, and he had always appeared so zealous and 
grateful. How base must he be I 

Brother Simplicius had also his reflections, and 
they were as little agreeable as those of his supe- 
rior. He had been made acquainted with the 
bishop's proceedings, and was not certain whether 
he would be permitted to retain his curacy. That 
troubled him much; but what troubled him more 
was the insufficiency of his defence against the 



62 JACK scudamorb's daughter. 

severity of the weather. He had always felt 
chilly in the winter, but never so cold about the 
lower extremities as he felt then. He did not 
think that he should continue a Brother of St. 
Hildebrand unless he could be permitted to wear 
wanner garments. He knew he should have the 
rheumatism. There was a chilblain on his heel as 
big as a half-crown, and, if the cold increased, 
there was the terrible probability of getting his 
toes frosts-bitten. 

Brother Simplicius was so far a good monk 
that he was not indisposed to mortify the flesh; 
that is, he could fast in moderation; he did not 
mind discipline with the cord very much ; but he 
never could reconcile his mild spirit to rheuma- 
tism; he hated chilblains, and had a horror of 
frost-bite : so he presently came to the conclusion 
that he would speak to the very reverend father 
superior, on the first opportunity, about leaving 
the order. 

The lady whom Brother BasiUus resolved to 
call upon first was Miss Brabazon. Certainly she 



BBOTHER BASILIUS. 63 

had not been anj thing like so zealous as other 
members of the female portion of his flock; indeed, 
she had more than once passed most unfavourable 
opinions on his Anglican restorations; but then 
he always found excuses for her. She had been 
strangely brought up ; she liked being eccentric ; 
moreover, was invariably liberal. He never could 
find it in his heart to quarrel with her, however 
great was the provocation she had frequently given 
him. And the wisdom of his forbearance struck 
him very forcibly as he pushed open the gate of 
Brabazon Lodge, and remembered the errand on 
which he had come. 

"Now," thought he, "I shall have to endure 
an intolerable amount of stable-slang, and be in- 
vited to make profane bets against horses I never 
saw." 

"Now," thought Brother Simplidus, more 
cheerfully, " I shall have an opportunity of warm- 
ing my poor legs." 

The door opened on the bell being rung, and 
the Vicar on entering could scarcely believe the 



64 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

evidence of his senses. The maid who nshered 
him into the hall would at any other moment have 
attracted his attention by the peculiarity of her 
dress, because it had been carefully copied from 
an Etruscan vase; but nothing could exceed his 
surprise at beholding, in place of the objects of 
natural history he had always seen there, a col- 
lection of antique statues. 

He was staring bewilderingly from one to the 
other, when a door opened, and his hostess made 
her appearance. She saluted him in Latin. Bro- 
ther Simplicius opened his eyes very wide, and 
well he might, when he in turn received the same 
salutation. Brother Basilius opened his eyes quite 
as wide, and well he might. Instead of the jockey- 
cap and habit in which of late Miss Brabazon had 
usually received her visitors, her hair was dressed 
and decorated in a peculiar style, common to cer- 
tain ladies living at Home in the Augustan era, 
and her dress was an exact representation (with one 
exception) of their costume. 

" You see, my friend," said the lady, address- 



BROTHER BASILIXJS. 65 

ing the Vicar in English, " I have ventured to pre- 
cede you in the classical change I have more than 
once recommended for your adoption. I intend to 
revive the order of Vestal Virgins." 

Brother Simplicius smiled as he recognised the 
sfiffibulum^ an oblong piece of white cloth bordered 
with purple, worn on her head, and the stola^ in- 
fuhj and vitta of the habit of the classical nuns. 

Brother Basilius smiled also, for he could not 
help seeing that his eccentric friend looked very- 
well in that singular costume, although her nose 
was far from being as classical as her dress ; but 
he wisely refrained from expressing his ideas on 
that point, or rather snub. 

"The intention is certainly commendable in 
one point of view," he observed, not thinking it 
good policy to find fault: "if you could give a 
religious character to it ; for instance, supplement 
to it the piety of the Middle Ages." 

" A fig for the Middle Ages!" cried Miss Bra- 
bazon indignantly ; " a period of semi-barbarous 
superstition 1" 

VOL. III. F 



66 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

BrotherBasilinsy smiling, slimgged his shoulders. 

^^But I mean to give my restoration of the 
order a religious character/' she added. ^^Look 
here," and she advanced towards one of the star- 
tues. ** Here you will find one of the prototypes 
of the personifications that are such conspicnoos 
features in ultramontane CathoUdsm.'' 

^^ Apollo r cried the monks simultaneously, in 
profound surprise. 

^^ The son of Zeus, who was the ruler of hea- 
ven,'' replied their companion ; *^ the type of hu- 
man perfectibility ; the possessor of infinite grace ; 
the god-like man, and man-like god." 

Brother Basilius pretended to be amused ; Bro- 
ther SimpHcius seemed startled. 

" You see that group T she exclaimed, pointing 
to a mother and son ; " Aphrodite and Eros, — ^the 
Madonna and Bambino of a later age." 

"O fieT' cried the Vicar; and assumed the 
affectation of being shocked. The thin Curate, 
notwithstanding that he would have preferred 
standing before a good fire, appeared interested. 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 67 

"Here," she continued, pointing to a figure 
of the chaste huntress, "is the original of your 
virgin saints: Artemis is the prototype of them 
all ; indeed possesses a far better claim to imma- 
culate conception than the object of the last 
Bomish dogma, because her birth was divine. 

" I will not trouble you with minor plagiarisms 
equally obvious," she added, with a mischievous 
smile, pointing to a statue of Pan ; " but here I 
beg leave to introduce you to the original of tlie 
medicBval deviV^ 

Brother Basilius laughed outright, as if he re- 
garded it as a very good joke. The mistress of 
Brabazon Lodge was constantly poking her fun at 
him in the same way. He was very much amused, 
or seemed to be; and, with great good humour, 
followed his eccentric friend into the parlour. 

This room he found fitted up exactly like a 
chamber in Pompeii ; the furniture, the decorations, 
were careful facsimiles. Brother Simplicius, who 
had been looking uncomfortable, cheered up im- 
mensely at the sight of a bright fire ; and gladly 



68 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

accepted a strange-looking seat, within a conve- 
nient distance of its welcome glow. 

" Hail to my reverend friends !" cried the lady- 
reclining upon a couch, the left arm resting upon 
a striped pillow, in the manner of a guest at a 
symposium; "a happy augury to have two fla- 
mens enter the house together. Like Socrates, I 
this morning sacrificed a cock to JEsculapius ; I 
receive your coming as a token of the god's care, 
— ^f or the soul's health insures that of the body. 
I invite you, holy men, loved of the gods, to pro- 
claim your errand." 

Brother Simplicius felt more astonished than 
ever. He looked around in an ecstasy, — ^for he 
was a scholar, and could appreciate what he ob- 
served ; but the address he had just heard brought 
his surprise to a climax. 

*^ What new vagary is this ?" mentally inquired 
Brother Basihus ; " if any thing, it is worse than 
the racing one." 

He, however, prudently forbore from express- 
ing his objections ; and at once proceeded to open 



BBOTHER BASILIUB. 69 

his mission. After a brief, but somewhat preju- 
diced, relation of the proceedings against him of 
his diocesan, he stated that he had come to solicit 
her assistance to enable him to bring his case be- 
fore the proper tribunal, that would at once force 
the Bishop to reinstate him in his clerical office. 

"If you had followed my advice," she an- 
swered, " and accepted the much more honourable 
office of Pontifex Maximus, you would not have 
had this stroke of ill fortune. The gods evidently 
are averse to Puseyism ; but the good prelate, of 
whom you have spoken, is known to mo. I will 
be your mediatrix with him. In the mean time 
sacrifice a goat to Vertumnus; he will change 
your unproductive season to one of increase." 

At that moment two girls entered the apart- 
ment, dressed in the same classical garb : the one 
bearing on her head a large wine-measure or 
crater; the other carrying in her anns three 
antique drinking-cups, shaped like an animaPs 
head, known to scholars as the rhyton ; and they 
began to pour a liquid from one into the other. 



70 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

If the Vicar was not greatly mistaken, one of 
these nymphs had been his handmaid Patty 
Clark ; and the other a girl he had recommended 
from his school. He had seen them last officiating 
as grooms; but their present transformation was 
much more pleasing in his eyes, though consider- 
ably more heathenish. However, he resolved to 
accept every thing he saw or heard as a matter of 
course ; and in that spirit smiled benevolently as he 
took the filled cup from the hand of the classical- 
looking attendant. 

The lean Curate could not conceal the interest 
he felt in the agreeable novelty presented to his 
astonished eyes ; and when a face, not imlike that 
of a Bacchante, came close to him, — a figure in 
the flowing stoloy kneeling on one knee, and a 
plump arm and hand offered a brimming measure, 
— ^he absolutely smirked, with a long-unfamiliar 
pleasure, as he took the vessel into his own hand. 

" It is mwfewTn," cried their hostess, as she ac- 
cepted a similar cup; "you may rely upon its 
being made from Attic honey and genuine Faler- 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 71 

nian. Come — a libation to Dyonisius." She 
spilled a few drops on the ground. " Health to my 
friendsl may the gods avert evfl from their path P 

She drank from the rhyton a tolerably long 
draught. Brother Basilius merely bowed to his 
hostess^ and took a few mouthfuls. Brother Sim- 
plicius, thinking he was bound to follow the example 
of his hospitable hostess, forgot his sacerdotal 
character, attempted a libation — ^which, however^ 
fell upon his poor legs — and then took a taste of 
the beverage. He found it so nice that he al- 
lowed it to fall down his throat, gulp after gulp, 
with intense enjoyment, before he attempted to 
remove the cup from his lips. 

"How do you like it?" demanded their enter- 
tainer. 

" It is nectar," replied the Vicar cheerfully. 

"It is ambrosia," said the Curate enthusias- 
tically. 

To show their approval, they both took another 
sup. The latter, at the conclusion of it, express- 
ing his content by a deep respiration. 



74 JACK scudauobe's daughteb. 

did the same^ taking care to drop the libation clear 
of his poor legs. Then the one stared hard at the 
carpet, and the other as hard upon the central 
ornament in the ceiling ; the first recollecting that 
he was a priest and wore sandals, the other that 
he was a deacon and wore a frock. Both shook 
their tonsured heads simultaneously. 

"K you fail in guessing, you must pay for- 
feit," observed the lady of the house. 

" I give it up," said Brother Basilius. 

" And /give it up," said Brother Simplicius. 

" Then you have only to take your choice be- 
tween a cup of salt-and-water and one of pure 



• n 

wme. 



"I prefer the latter, certainly," replied the 
Vicar. 

The Curate thought that, as he had the pro- 
spect before him of a long walk in the cold, the 
more pleasant beverage would do h\m most good 
so he voted with his superior. 

The attendants disappeared, but quickly re- 
turned, bearing an amphora and a carcliennm^ or 



BBOTHEB BASILITTS. 75 

beaker. The latter was filled, and handed first 
to the elder of the two guests, kneeling as before. 

" It is true Passum of Crete," observed Miss 
Brabazon; "I had it direct from a Greek mer- 
chant." 

Whatever it was, it was rather a large draught 
of wine ; but as the reverend gentleman could not 
afford to offend his wealthy but very eccentric 
friend, he offered no objection — in truth swal- 
lowed the contents of the cup with much appa- 
rent satisfaction. His subordinate felt himself 
bound to imitate his very reverend brother, ac- 
cepted the re-filled carchesiumy and drank off the 
wine without a check. Their amiable hostess pro- 
posed more enigmas; but the Reverend Basil Plyn- 
Ijrmmon prudently urged pressing engagements, 
and rose to depart. 

" You had better follow my example," said his 
fair parishioner, springing to her feet ; " there is 
every thing in the classical religion you Puseyites 
most covet. A ritual in which there is abundance 
of display— garments more striking than the alb, 



76 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

the dxdmaticoj and the other mediaeval splendours 
that you are striving to filch from the Catholics ; 
and a position far more desirable even than the 
dignity of cardinal, which has dazzled the imagi- 
nations of so many clerical perverts." 

"Thanks! thanks!" exclaimed the Vicar, hurry- 
ing away, yet apparently in the best possible good- 
humour, "m think of your kind offer, my dear 
friend. Come, reverend brother." 

" Vale, my friends, vale I" cried the assumed 
vestal. " May the gods protect you ! May Pallas 
Athena fill your understanding with her divine 
wisdom !" 

The two would-be monks, with their cowls again 
over their heads, stepped out once more into the cold, 
and were presently in the high-road. Scarcely, 
however, had the younger of the two felt the influ- 
ence of the air than a strange .change came over 
him. He had been having one of his long fa^te, 
and the vinous beverage he had so much enjoyed 
had been poured upon an empty stomach, that had 
long been content with no stronger potation than 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 77 

toast-and-water. He suddenly felt the place reel- 
ing round. He burst into a laugh, and staggered 
into a kind of short run. His companion looked at 
him curiously, and met a pair of eyes winking at 
him in a most singular manner, and a cadaverous 
face affecting exaggerated jollity. 

" Good gracious, Brother Simplicius, you're 
drunk T cried the Vicar in tones of unequivocal 
horror. 

" Drunk r repeated the poor man, hiccuping in 
his superior's face, as he swayed his body back- 
wards and forwards, in a vain attempt to establish 
an equilibrium, and speaking very thick. "Of 
course Tm drunk. Every body's drunk. This road's 
drunk. Don't you see it's sliding about in the 
most abominable manner? You!re drunk, old fel- 
low ; you know you are." 

Ho struck the Vicar a familiar slap on the 
shoulder, and then hooked on to his arm with a 
grip that nearly pulled him down. The thin Curate 
was coming out in quite a new character. 

" What shall I do with him in this dreadful 



78 JACK sctjdamore's daughter. 

state ?" said his much-troubled principal to himself* 
" It's impossible to take him through the village. 
If I could get him quietly across the fields, and 
unobserved into the monastery by the back way, 
it would be an escape from a terrible scandal. Til 

try." 

In pursuance of this resolution Brother Simpli- 
cius was, though not without considerable diffi- 
culty, got over a stile that stood close to Brabazon 
Lodge, and was led or rather dragged by his com- 
panion along the comparatively unfrequented mea- 
dows, 

"Til stand by you, old cock 1" he suddenly ex- 
claimed, affecting an excess of friendship which 
nearly sent him and his protector into the diteh. 
"The Bishop sha'n^t bully you I Til punch his 
head r 

" Really, I can't allow such imseemly language, 
Mr. Perkins," replied his employer with more an- 
ger than dignity. " Bespect for our ecclesiastical 
superiors — ^" 

"Ecclesiastical superiors be bothered 1" retorted 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 79 

the other, swinging himself round till they were 
face to f ax;e. " I tell you Pll punch his head !" 

A less sensible man even than the Reverend 
Basil Plynlymmon must have seen at a glance that 
it was worse than useless opposing a creature so 
completely unamenable to reason as was then the 
unfortunate Curate. 

"Very well," he said soothingly, "you may do 
so, if you like." 

" All right!" hiccupped the other, staggering on 
again. Presently he came to a sudden stand-still, 
and laughed. 

"I feel very jolly, very reverend brother," he 
said. "You've no objection to a little singing, 
have you?" 

And he peered again into the face of his sup- 
porter with his lack-lustre eyes. 

The Vicar knew better than to make an objec- 
tion. 

" None in the least," he answered promptly, 
"if you will proceed as fast as you can. Suppose 
you try a Gregorian, or any other chant — or a 



80 JACK SCUDAHOBS^S DAUGHTEPw 

Nunc dimittis, or the verse of a hymn. The people 
conld have no right to complain, if they heard you.** 
" No r shouted the other ; for his small remain- 
ing consciousness was clinging to his college recol- 
lections. He tried to hold up his head as he burst 
forth with a verse of the long-disused Graudeamus : 

" Yiyant onmes yirgines, 
Faoiles, f onnoeae ! 
Yiyant et mulieres, 
BonaB, laborio883 !*' 

" You must join, old fellow T cried he, again 
swinging himself sharp round. 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon dared not re- 
sist the miserable man's invitation, and in hope of 
getting him along the faster, assisted in singing 
the next verse. 

" Good gracious. Brother Simplicius T suddenly 
exclaimed the Vicar in accents of real terror, 
" here's Mbs Pincher^s finishing school coming over 
the stile into this very field." 

Sure enough a regiment of parasols of all the 
colours of the rainbow were seen to bob up and 



BROTHEB BASILIUS. 81 

down in the distance^ something like a flower-bed 
undergoing a succession of earthquake-shocks, and 
several tall girls, in smart dresses, two and two, 
were seen approaching. 

"For Heaven's sake, let us get out of their 
way!" added the frightened Vicar, convulsively- 
dragging his reluctant subordinate as far as he 
could from the path. "Here, stand still near 
the hedge, and appear to be examining the plants. 
They will pass on, and think we are botanising." 

" Of course, old fellow," said the other quite 
passively. 

The youngvadies came on. Very much did 
they wonder to see the two monks of St. Hilde- 
brand standing in that part of the field by them- 
selves. They recognised them in a moment, be- 
cause they frequently assisted in the choir and 
schools ; Miss Pincher being the Rev. Basil Plyn- 
lymmon's most zealous supporter. 

All was going on as harmlessly as the anxious 
Vicar could have desired, when, just as the taller 
girls approached within a few yards of the hedge, 

VOL. III. G 



82 JACK scudamobb's daughter. 

they were surprised to see the bashful timid Cu- 
rate — ^whom none of them had ever been able to 
make any thing of, and whom the more forward 
of the younger girls had given up as ^^ no end of a 
muff" — ^tum his face towards them, and kiss his 
hand to each couple as they passed him. 

His features bore such a ludicrous expression, 
as his cowled head kept spasmodically falling for- 
ward, as if with an intention of turning head- 
over-heels for their diversion, that it upset the 
gravity of the gravest. Some tittered, some stuffed 
their pocket-handkerchief into their mouths, and 
from the eldest to the youngest, they held down 
their heads, and laughed to their heart's content. 

The only grave face there was that of Miss 
Pincher — and dreadfully grave it was. But it 
had not the slightest effect upon the intoxicated 
Brother Simplicius. Far from it. As that prim- 
mest of spinsters passed him, with her head in the 
air, he honoured her with two kisses of the hand. 

" Disgusting r muttered Miss Pincher, as she 
flung up her very aquiline nose, and marched after 



BROTHER BASILIUS. 83 

her charge, most of whom were furtively glancmg 
back, to see what she would do when she beheld 
*^ that dreadful creature." 

" Villain ! wretch ! idiot !" cried the apparently 
frantic Vicar, as, directly the school and its mis- 
tress were out of sight, he sprang upon the dehn- 
quent, and seized him by the collar of his habit, as 
though to give him a good shaking. Brother Sim- 
plicius caught him round the neck, and they both 
rolled on the grass together. 

The Vicar quickly regained his legs, ashamed 
of having given way to violence, and proceeded to 
assist the unconscious offender. A doubtful kind 
of soimd made him look over the hedge into the 
highway that skirted that comer of the field. He 
dropped his unwieldy burden instantly. Gladly 
would he have sunk into the ground, for at the 
open window of a carriage, apparently a quiet 
spectator of all that had occurred, was his Bishop ; 
and, as an additional humiliation, standing in the 
road, with his hand on the carriage-window, was 
— ^the pig of a churchwarden. 



CHAPTER IV. 

REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 

There was a church in Bruges exceedingly rich 
in its ornamentation — ^not merely architectuGraJ, but 
artistic. The wealthy burghers must have contribu- 
ted in a most princely fashion to the expense of its 
erection and decoration ; and the Flemish masons, 
the Flemish carvers, and the Flemish painters, who 
had been employed upon the structure, must have 
displayed all their talent to earn the enormous sum 
in guilders that had been laid out on their work. 

The stained-glass windows were marvels of 
that precious manufactm'e. Nothing in the Low 
Countries could excell the wood-carving. The 
Master of Bruges, as well as several of his most 
distinguished successors, had executed priceless 
clief-d'wuvres for the walls. The reliquary was a 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 85 

miracle of goldsmith's work ; and the furniture of 
the altar was imperial in its splendour. 

It was not to be wondered at that all religious 
ceremonials performed there should have been ex- 
tremely popular ; for in the good town of Bruges, 
as elsewhere, the best-got-up spectacle had always 
attracted the largest crowd. But there were holy 
things as well as fine things to see : the great-toe 
of St. Ursula in a jewelled casket ; the thigh-bone 
of St. Bridget in a box made of the wood of the 
true cross ; the entire jaw of St. Agatha in a ca- 
binet of pm'e gold ; and, more precious than all, a 
small tress of the hair of the blessed St. Elizabeth 
in a case of pure crystal studded with pearls. 

There were numberless other fragments of bea- 
tified humanity ; and as they were invariably attri- 
buted to female proprietors, it might very naturally 
be concluded that the much-envied individuals, who 
had a life-interest in such priceless treasures, were 
of the same sex. Yes, they were nuns. I shall 
not say of what order, as I have a particular rea- 
son for reticence on this point ; but they were an 



86 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

old-established and much-respected sisterhood, to 
which female members of some of the noblest fa- 
milies, not only in Flanders but elsewhere, had 
thought it an honour to belong. 

It was also considered by the priesthood a 
special distinction to be connected with this con- 
vent ; and when Pire Michel was appointed their 
confessor, it produced a sensation in every male 
ecclesiastical establishment throughout the city. 
He was a foreigner: the Flemish priests were 
under the impression that they had a much better 
right to look after the spiritual interests of a 
Flemish sisterhood; consequently they regarded 
their more fortunate reverend brother as an in- 
terloper. 

But Pfere Michel was a man of mark in his 
profession. Possessed of superior talents, of ripe 
experience, of the highest repute for sanctity, he 
had the further recommendation of having been 
a great traveller. He had been intrusted with 
missions of importance to various parts of the 
heathen and Christian world ; had not only been 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 87 

to Kome, but to the Holy Land; was able to 
discourse of the sacred catacombs in the Eternal 
City^ as well as of the ever-blessed sanctuaries 
of Jerusalem ; and could vary his welcome infor- 
mation with picturesque accounts of the progress 
of the faith among the barbarous savages of the 
interior of Africa. 

There therefore could be nothing surprising 
in the selection of this old man for so responsible 
a post, nor in the excitement that prevailed in 
the community when they were preparing to pre- 
sent themselves before him — while undergoing 
the somewhat trying ordeal to a few of them — of 
a confession. 

Pfere Michel, as he took his seat, could he 
have been seen by the penitents, would have 
caused them no uneasiness by the austerity of 
his features ; for though his complexion was dark, 
from familiarity with much warmer climates than 
that of Belgium, his eyes were peculiarly bright, 
and the expression of his countenance benevolent. 
His person, too, was somewhat portly, which his 
clerical vestments did not conceaL 



88 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

The venerable Father heard a rustling. He 
drew aside the panel of the grating, through 

which the words of the nun were to proceed, and 

• 

brought his ear near the opening. Then a mel- 
low female voice was heard to address him, first 
in Latin, with the customary Confiteor and meia 
culpa, and then in French : "Very reverend Father, 
I am here." 

"Yes, dear Mother," was the reply in the 
same language, in a singularly soothing and cheer- 
ing tone. "Pour out your heart without re- 
serve. It is to God you speak. I am but a 
humble instrument in receiving your confession ; 
you enjoy the favour of the Immaculate Virgin, 
for you have ever been an honour to her thrice- 
blessed service." 

The Confessor knew that it was the Mother- 
superior who was kneeling on the other side of 
the confessional. He had taken care to possess 
himself of a tolerably accurate knowledge of her 
antecedents, and was quite satisfied that he should 
have very little to absolve. 



{ 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 89 ( 

"I have tried, very reverend Father," said the 
voice, evidently in a humble spirit; one highly 
becoming the head of a house so distinguished 
in the religious world; for sometimes, as the 
worthy priest was only too well aware, the pos- 
session of authority over other women produces 
no small amount of pride. "I have tried hard 
and long, for I was very young when I entered 
the community; the late Mother- superior, who 
was a lady of rank before she entered the order, 
and was my relation, took charge of my educa- 
tion. I never left the convent. I have no re- 
collection of the world whence I had been taken. 
I was brought up with the good sisters, and 
became a novice. When a pupil, I accompanied 
the very reverend Mother- superior and several 
of the nuns to England, as it was her intention 
to found a branch establishment there, where she 
had powerful friends." 

" Well, dear Mother," exclaimed the venerable 
priest mildly. He was accustomed to such su- 
perfluous personal history from his fair penitents. 






90 JACK bcudamobe's daughter* 

and knew that 'he shonld be called upon to exer- 
cise a large amount of patience when confessing 
them. 

" I lived veiy quietly and happily in our new 
home, very reverend father," 

" No doubt, no doubt, my dear daughter. 
It is a special privilege; it is a great happiness 
to be able to lead a holy life, away from the 
temptations of the sinful world." 

" The temptation came to me, very reverend 
Father." 

" Eh, what ? Temptation ! oh, yes, dear daugh- 
ter ; the flesh is weak. Even within sacred walls, 
even completely shut out from worldly vanities, 
worldly f olKes, and worldly crimes, the temptation 
to sin will present itself. Human nature is falli- 
ble. God alone is perfect. What was your first 
sin, my dear child?" 

" Looking on a man, very reverend Father." 

"Ohr cried the good priest, rather sorrow- 
fully. He knew that the Mother-superior was a 
very handsome woman, and began to be appre- 



BEVEIATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 91 

hensive, from dear-bonght experience^ of a rather 
serious sequel to her small acknowledgment. 

" A layman, of course," he added. 

"He was a youth who had been dreadfully 
hurt, and had been brought into the house to be 
nursed by Sister Ghidule." 

"Ahr he exclaimed, apparently much re- 
lieved ; " attending the sick is a good work ; and 
if the very reverend the Mother-superior sanc- 
tioned his introduction into the convent, there 
could be no sin in your having seen him." 

" But I saw him more than once, and I felt 
great compassion for him, for it was not expected 
that he would recover. When he began to get 
better I saw him again. Ah 1 he was so young and 
so handsome I Yet, though he was a heretic, he 
knelt down beside me, and repeated an Ave Maria, 
word for word, with myself, for on suddenly seeing 
him close to me, I had fallen on my knees, and 
appealed to the blessed Virgin for help." 

" Very right, my dear child. Well ?" 

Fire Michel began to feel anxious. 



92 JACK SCUDAHOBE^S DAUGHTER. 

"I was called away by the Mother-superior, 
and saw him no more — ^for he left the convent — 
and never entered it again. Shortly after which^ 
as the Mother-superior found that she could not ac- 
complish her intention, we all returned to Bruges, 
all except a poor novice, who died, and was buried 
in the cemetery." 

The Confessor breathed freely again. It was, 
after all, only one of those nothings that form the 
staple of a nun's confession. 

" And you returned to your religious duties, 
my dear child, and forgot the young man.** 

^*I returned to my religious duties; I made 
the vows ; I took the veil ; I became a professed 
nim. But, oh, very reverend Father, I never 
could forget that handsome youth, whose bright 
gaze had dwelt so tenderly on mine, while repeat- 
ing the Ave Maria.'* 

^^ Sad — sad f cried the good-natured Pfere Mi- 
chel. " It is a mortal sin — a sacrilege — a terrible 
violation of your vow of chastity. You had be- 
come the bride of Christ. It was an abominable 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 93 

profanation to think even for a moment of an 
earthly lover." 

"I knew it, very reverend Father. I re- 
minded myself of my vows ; I looked at my habit ; 
I regarded my crucifix; I threw myself before 
the image of the blessed Virgin ; but despite of 
them — shutting them out from my eyes, as a fair 
cloud envelopes the blue sky — always came the 
same bright image, with the same tender glance, 
thrilling my^ soul with an ecstasy I never had 
power to restrain." 

"You should have devoted yourself to holy 
exercises, my Mother," said the Confessor, more se- 
riously ; " you stood on the very brink of destruc- 
tion. These carnal thoughts were leading your 
poor soul to eternal damnation." 

"I was aware of my sin, and performed the 
heaviest penances in expiation ; but in vain." 

"You should have continually repeated the 
offices of the blessed Virgin. You should have 
called upon the holy Mother day and night ; you 
should have implored the assistance of those beati- 



94 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

fied members of your sex, who have proved the 
most brilliant examples of the virtue you so much 
needed." 

"I did, very reverend Father. I was truly 
penitent ; my knees were ever on the bare stones 
before the Immaculate Mother, imploring her 
divine compassion and forgiveness. When alone, 
my voice became hoarse with calling upon St. 
Ursula, St. Agatha, and all the female saints I 
had ever heard of as celebrated for chastity and 
piety. When with the sisterhood, with the loving 
smile that interposed between my dazzled gaze 
and their sacred representations, came the musi- 
cally murmured words that as effectually closed 
my ears against the prayers and anthems which 
ought to have absorbed my attention." 

" The manifest agency of Satan," observed the 
good priest. 

" At last, the Immaculate Virgin (blessed be her 
holy name I) condescended to assist my struggles." 

Pire Michel drew a long breath ; his good heart 
felt a sensible relief. 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 95 

" I succeeded at last in banishing the intrud- 
ing remembrance, and with it all the sinful grati- 
fication it produced." 

" Much to your credit, my dear child," said 
the Confessor encouragingly; "of course the 
blessed Mother must have the honour of the vic- 
tory ; but if your nature had not been nourished 
Yrith the diet of grace, furnished in your religious 
education, the devil would have triumphed, and 
any share in beating such an adversary is a thing 
to be proud of, my daughter." 

The penitent did not answer immediately. 
Pfere Michel made no attempt to close the 
grating. He knew that silence was an interval of 
self-communion, from which it was attempted to 
derive courage to make more important revela- 
tions. 

"You have conducted yourself so well, my 
dear child," he said presently, in quite an affec- 
tionate tone, "that you have entirely won my 
sympathy, as well as my respect. Have courage, 
therefore, and conclude your confession." 



96 JACK scudamobe's dauohteb. 

"Accept my thanks^ very reverend Father. I 
was about to tell you that the good sister became 
attached to me; and when the very reverend Mother 
Oriselda went again to England^ to establish a 
branch of onr honse^ those who remained elected 
me their Mother-superior in her place, and I have 
been styled Mother Felicia ever since.'* 

" Yes, my daughter, I have heard as much." 
" Soon afterwards our late Mothernsuperior in 
England sent us a novice, a girl who, in a worldly 
sense, was nearly related to myself, for we had 
been daughters of the same mother. We had, how- 
ever, never seen each other ; indeed, can scarcely 
be said to have had a distinct knowledge of each 
other^s existence. I, having been brought up a 
strict'Catholic, could not be expected to care much 
about a younger sister who lived in the world, had 
been educated as a Protestant, and whom, there- 
fore, I could never meet in this world or the next." 
" And your sister saw the error of her unfor- 
tunate education, and voluntarily entered your 
commimity with the object of becoming a nun ?" 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 97 

"Yes, very reverend Father; and was, as a 
postulant, about to receive the veil from Mon- 
seigneur, when one of the spectators made an out- 
cry, which frightened her so that she fainted, 
and, the good Bishop insisting that the ceremony 
should be deferred, she was carried back to the 
parlour of the convent. While striving to re- 
store her to consciousness, I noticed that the 
postulant had something concealed within her 
dress. It proved to be a miniature in a gold 
frame. I took it out to examine it. Judge of 
my feelings, my dear Father, when I imme- 
diately recognised features, alas ! too well remem- 
bered." 

"A most unfortunate occurrence, my dear 
daughter," said Pfere Michel, with increased se- 
riousness of tone. 

"The partiality I had succeeded, after so 

severe a struggle, in banishing from my nature, 

returned with tenfold additional force. It seemed 

to take possession of me to the exclusion of every 

duty and of every principle. There could be no 
VOL. in. H 



98 JACK scubamorb's daughter. 

mistake; his name was engraved upon the case 
ahnost as indelibly as his f eatm*es upon my heairt. 
The tumult of feeling which the unexpected sight 
of that face created, made me insensible to the 
state of the person in whose possession I had 
found it. But she recovered without further 
help ; and almost immediately missed the con- 
cealed treasure. Her embarrassment, her alarm, 
her intense distress did not affect me in the least. 
I questioned her with severity — ^like a judge ready 
to condemn a criminal, — and wrung from her 
the avowal that the portrait was that of a lover 
who had returned her love. Father I" added 
the voice, hoarse with passion, "she is lovely 
as an angel ; but I hated her worse than all the 
devils in hell I" 

"Hushl hush! my mother. This is very 
wicked 1" cried the alarmed priest. 

" She was my nearest relative ; but I could 
have stabbed her — stifled her; poisoned her — 
crushed her under my feet like a reptile whose 
venom was in my blood." 



BEVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 99 

" Stop I stop ! my mother. This is shocking I 
this is horrible !" 

^ What, was 7, who had seen him first — ^had 
been blest with his tender look, and lived on its 
smishine year after year, while it lighted and 
warmed my narrow cell like a perpetual glory, — 
I, who had wrestled in mortal agony against its 
dear influence, confined within impassable walls, 
and surrounded by every thing likely to drive it 
from my presence, — ^was I to endure and succumb 
under this hopeless struggle, whilst she could en-, 
joy the sumless happiness of seeing him when she 
pleased— of basking in his radiant looks— of hear- 
ing his honeyed words' — of feeling his thrilling 
touch— of listening to his expressions of love — ay 
of receiving his tender caxess,-^ould I know that 
such wrong had been done me, and not instinc- 
tively have sprung upon the detested wretch, and 
struck her dead at my feet?'* 

"I will not listen to this," exclaimed the 
Father Confessor, who had been getting very hot 
in the face. ^' You are in a state of deadly sin. 



100 JACK scxjdamore's daughter. 

It is my duty to tell you that I cannot grant you 
absolution while you are in this reprehensible 
mood. It is not Christian I it is not womanly ! it 
is revengeful and devilish !" 

" O Father, pity me 1" cried the penitent, evi- 
dently in an agony of supplication. " I was mad 
for the moment, and the poor child was scared by 
the fierceness of my look. My Immaculate Pro- 
tectress again interposed, and my fiery wrath was 
satisfied with shouting an angry command to the 
pale and trembling postulant to go to her cell. 
Then I took the senseless miniature, hurled it 
against the wall, and dashed it into a thousand 
pieces." 

" It was not proper for the novice to bring 
such an object into the convent," said Pere Michel, 
wiping his face with his handkerchief. " It was a 
grave fault, but it was lenient in comparison with 
your exhibition of criminal weakness and barbarous 
rage. Very reverend Mother, it grieves me to be 
obliged to tell you that you have shown yourself 
most unfit for the onerous office with which you 



REVELATIONS OP THE CONFESSIONAL, 101 

have been intrusted. If you cannot govern your- 
self, you cannot be permitted to rule others. The 
interests of so distinguished an institution are, I 
am afraid, likely to suffer materially, if longer 
confided to your care. Therefore I shall be obliged 
to make a representation to Monseigneur your 
visitor respecting your very grave offences." 

"Pardon! pardon I" cried Mother FeUcia, in 
mingled terror and anguish. "Dear Father 1 I 
throw myself at your feet. I place myself unre- 
servedly in your hands. I will do whatever you 
require. I will never think of him again. I "vsill 
not harm her in any way. I promise you, — I 
swear to you I Have mercy, dear Father 1 You 
shall never have cause to repent your goodness." 

P6re Michel was naturally a good-natured 
man, and he shrunk from the harsh measure of 
disgracing the Mother-superior almost as soon as 
he had commenced his connection with this highly- 
respectable convent. 

"I reconunend you to proclaim a fortnight's 
retreat for the entire sisterhood," said the good 



102 JACK sottpahore's daughteb. 

Father, at last. ^^ Go through a severe course of 
derotional exercises and self-mortification. On 
the peril of your salvation molest the postulant, 
who has really in no way deserved the harsh treat- 
ment she has excited. Kemember, eternal damna- 
tion will be your portion, if you fail in your duty 
to her, as her protectress, her guardian and spi- 
ritual mother. At the end of your retreat, if I 
find you in a better mood, I will give you abso- 
lution." 

" So this is their model convent 1" he muttered 
to himself, as he covered the grating. " That wo- 
man has been encouraging a sinful passion, ever 
since she took the vows. If the Mother-superior 
is of this description, what must be the sister- 
hood?" 

A sharp impatient knock presently made him 
start out of his unpleasant reflections. He quickly 
drew back the panel, and again placed his ear to 
the opening. A groan was his first salutation. 

*^ Daughter, be of good cheer I" he exclaimed. 
^^ Take courage. The goodness of God is infinite." 



BEVELATIONS OF THIS COKFBBSIOKAL. 103 

He was answered by another groan^ followed 
by a succession of heavy sighs and '^mea culpas.^ 

" Call upon the Blessed Mother, my daughter I 
She will inspire her servant with the spirit of for- 
titude and truth. What are you !" 

^^ A miserable sinner !" 

This avowal was made in a barbarous patois, 
with a voice masculine in its harshness. 

" WIw are you ? I should have said." 

« The wretched Sister Gudule." 

"Ohr thought the good Father to himself, 
" this is the ugly one, — ^the drudge. At any rate, 
she can have had no handsome young fellows 
troubling her imagination. That's a comfort I" 

Then he added in his soothing voice, " Sister 
Gudule, I have heard, is a zealous servant of God, 
and an excellent nun." 

" A lie, very reverend Father ; she is a 
wretch I" 

"Humph I" murmured the Confessor; "she 
has the merit of plain speaking to harmonise with 
her plain features." 



104 JACK SCUDAMORE'S DAU6HTSR. 

But the good Father^s experience made liim 
distrust penitents who called themselves names. 
Groaning, sighs, and ugly epithets were often got 
up for show, — ^in short, cases of great cry and 
little wool. When the real confession came, it 
proved some small peccadillo, scarcely worth listen- 
ing to, — a confessional mountain in labour, that 
bi^ought forth a mouse. He knew, however, that 
he must humour the delinquent. 

''If your sins be as scarlet, repent, and they 
shall be as white as snow," he cried encouragingly. 

"I do repent, very reverend Father; I have 
repented ever since that horrible iniquity was per- 
petrated by the vilest of sinners." 

" Very right, my daughter. What was your 
transgression ?" 

" Having a daughter without first securing a 
husband." 

"Wretched woman r cried the Confessor, as 
much troubled as surprised. "This is absolutely 
worse than the other 1" he thought, " and they call 
it a model convent ! Oh, dear I" 



BEVELATIOKS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 105 

^^ And this shameful thing occurred after you 
had entered upon a conventual lifeT*' 

^^ Nothing of the sort, very reverend Father, 
I adopted the habit and took the vows, partly from 
sincere repentance of my heavy transgression, and 
partly to escape farther temptation of the same 
kind." 

^^ That alters the complexion of the case con- 
siderably; but it is an ugly fact, nevertheless. 
The confession is not likely to end in the ridiculua 
mu8 I had anticipated." 

These unspoken reflections were scarcely con- 
cluded, when, attended with a torrent of sighs and 
groans, the narrative proceeded. 

" Hans was the son of the miller of my native 
village; and I was considered by him, — and 
others, too, for that matter, — ^the prettiest girl in 
the whole parish." 

" Uncommon queer lot of young women they 
must have been," thought the Confessor; but 
added aloud: ^^ There is no occasion to go into 
particulars, my daughter. I will spare you the 



106 JACK scudamobe's paughteb. 

recital of your fall from virtue. It is enough for 
me to know that you siimed and repented. Well^ 
you became a nun ?" 

The penitent seemed at first a little taken 
aback by this direction to a short-cut through the 
worst part of her confession ; but obedience to her 
superiors had been too strongly inculcated into her 
mind during nearly a life spent in the cloister; 
therefore she submitted. 

" Yes, very reverend Father, I became a 
nun ; and Hved strictly within the rules, year after 
year, doing my best to forget Hans, and show my 
contrition for the wickedness I had committed." 

" Good, my daughter." 

" But oh, very reverend Father, I never could 
forget the blameless babe I had brought into a 
world of sin and misery; and was alwap fright- 
ening myself with visions of the temptations to 
which I had left her exposed in the wicked world 
I had abandoned. The good Mother-superior took 
pity on me, and allowed me from time to time to 
see to her careful bringing up. 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 107 

^^ At last she was permitted to attend the con- 
vent-school; and, being much liked by the good 
sisters, they gave her the best education their 
teaching could produce. She won the love of 
every one ; for she was very engaging and artless. 
I alone was austere to her ; for she not only re- 
minded me of my own mis-spent youth, but fiUed 
my heart with continual fear lest she also should 
be tempted and betrayed. 

" So, when she had taken her first communion, 
I, with the help of the good sisters and the good 
Mother-superior, persuaded her into entering the 
convent, that, after her noviciate, she might take 
me veil; and so, ever after, be secure from the 
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the 
devil. 

"She readily consented, very reverend Fa- 
ther; for the dear child was so amiable, that it 
seemed a real pleastire to her to do what she was 
desired by any of the sisterhood, however distaste- 
ful it might seem. And so she was taken away 
from the playfellows of her youth, and the green 



\ 



108 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

fields and the bright skies that had surrounded her 
with verdure and sunshine, and inunured in the 
walls of a convent. 

^^ At first she was diligent in her reli^ous ex- 
ercises, and gratified the entire community by her 
regularity and zeal ; but my watchful eyes shortly 
detected a lassitude in the performance of her 
duties, that alarmed me for the safety of her pre- 
cious soul. I was ever tormented with the con- 
sciousness that she had been bom in sin; and 
watched her with a feverish interest that made 
me sensible of the slightest fault. When I found 
her showing signs of inattention, I exhorted her to 
increased vigilance; when she began to neglect 
her devotions, I became fierce in my denuncia- 
tions; when I observed that she was growing 
weary of severe mortification and protracted vigils, 
I thundered out my complaints. 

^^I did not see that she was daily growing 
thinner and paler; I did not care to notice that 
at refection she ate scarcely at all; I did not 
think of observing that at recreation I often found 



BEVBLATIONS OP THE CONFESSIONAL. 109 

her in a comer with a tearful face. I saw, cared 
for, thought only of a soul that was slipping from 
my care into the gulf of eternal fire. I redoubled, 
therefore, my exhortations and denunciations, and 
became more harsh in my bearing towards her, 
and more angry in my language. 

"The good Mother-superior, seeing that the 
child's health was suffering, took her with us to 
England, on her first journey there, for change of 
air; but the climate did not agree with her, or 
the conventual life became less endurable; for 
she soon exhibited increased weariness ; and at last 
became so weak that she was obliged to remain in 
her cell. 

" Symptoms of an incurable disease manifested 
themselves ; and then it was I discovered that she 
had been pining for the cheerful faces of her 
playmates, the fresh air, the sweet flowers, the 
bright stars of her happy childhood. Even on her 
death-bed I had no compassion. In my eyes this 
was the agency of the Evil One to win her soul 
to damnation; and up to the gates of eternal 



110 JACK SCUDAMOBE'S DAU6HTEB. 

rest I pursued her with exhortations and com- 
plaints. 

^ When the last moment was come," added the 
penitent in a choking Toice, ^and in a feeble 
whisper she asked me to forgive her, I bent 
down to give her one last, one only, token of 
motherly affection. She kissed me, breathed a 
little sigh, and instantly her blameless soni was 
wafted by the good angels to heaven." 

The Confessor was absolutely wiping tears from 
his eyes ; the good man had been listening with as 
much attention as feeling. 

^ Then T cried the voice in tones of angry ve- 
hemence, "I became aware of my barbarity. I 
was stung with remorse for my cruelty to that 
dear innocent. I surrendered myself to grief; 
and, with tears of passionate sorrow, lamented my 
hardness of heart. I asked, as a penance, to be 
permitted to dig the grave in which my unhappy 
child was to be laid. The very reverend Mother 
granted my petition ; and, in the solemn midnight, 
I went alone to the cemetery; and there, sur- 



EEVELATIONS OP THE CONFESSIONAL. Ill 

rounded by bats and owls, and other hateful 
creatures, I dug up the bones of the dead, till 
I had made a suiScient space. 

" Then the precious martyr was borne to it by 
the good sisters, led by the good Mother-superior ; 
and the service was touchingly as well as rever- 
ently performed; for they loved her; all loved 
her but one, who ought to have loved her more 
than the whole sisterhood. I assisted in lowering 
the body into the grave. I covered it with earth. 
I filled up the hollow ; and, having smoothed the 
mound above, helped the good sisters in planting 
immortelles around it ; hating myself the while for 
having been the cause of their sorrow. 

" I returned to my ordinary labours and exer- 
cises^ mortified the flesh more and more, and 
spent hour after hour in silent prayer and disci- 
pline. But I was haunted by frightful visions. 
From the walls near which I passed demoniac 
faces grinned at me in ghastly derisiorf, and d^- 
vilish jeers and hellish laughter pursued my steps. 
The Evil One himself looked down on me from 



* 



112 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

\ the top of a great spout, and shouted after me, 

X * Oho 1 there goes the mother who murdered her 

child I A nice creature you are to be a nun! 

fl 

AhaT Then a chorus of fiendish mirth broke 

m 

out all around and above me." 

Pfere Michel never once attempted to interrupt 
these frantic exclamations. He listened patiently 
and silently. He had met with similar delusions 
in conventual establishments. 

^ " Soon after this, we all went back to Bruges, 

very reverend Father; but my peace of mind did 
not return to me. I busied myself in attending 
to the sick, in looking after the poor, and in 
praying with the sinner ; but a guilty conscience 
pursued me wherever I went. I knew that the 

\ Enemy of Souls wa. waiting for me, dogging 

my steps, and ridicuKng my utmost efforts to 
prevent his approach. 

"At last the very reverend Mother-superior 
took me a second time with her to England ; but 
I was so closely pursued, that even soon after 
landing, while honoured with the private instruc- 



REVELATIONS OF THE CONFESSIONAL. 113 

lions of Monseigneur, I happened to look up, and 
there, in the likeness of a handsome young man, I 
Saw the Devil waiting to pounce upon my miser- 
able soul. 

" I fainted away, very reverend Father, with 
fright, and then became so ill, that I was sent 
back to the old convent, where I have remained 
ever since ; outwardly, I hope, all that a good Sister 
should be; inwardly, I know, a wretch without 
a heart, and, I am beginning to be afraid, with- 
out a soul. That is all, very reverend Father !" 

"Thank God 1" exclaimed the Confessor, under 
his breath ; then addressed the monomaniac kindly 
and impressively. Tenderly did the good Father 
treat the imhappy woman, and very cheering and 
comforting was his discourse. At last he absolved 
her in the usual form; and directing her to tell 
the Sisters he should be in the confessional to- 
morrow, he drew the slide. 

"And this is their model convent!" he mut- 
tered again, as he hastened out of the church. 

** I am afraid my labours here vnW be much heavier 
VOL. in. I 



114 JACK scudakobe's daughter. 

than I anticipated* I have only heard the con- 
fessions of two, — ^the good God grant I may hear 
no more such. ^ Sufficient for the day is the evil 
thereof.' And mch evil! A Mother-superior 
within an ace of murdering her sister; and a 
professed nun, who, from ill-judged zeal working 
on an ignorant mind, has destroyed her own child! 
Very sad indeed !'* 

Pfcre Michel went on his way in deep trouble, 
hoping to meet with something in that reputed 
holy city that might dissipate his distractions, and 
make him in a better mood for entering the con- 
fessional on the morrow. 



CHAPTER V. 

MOKSEIONEUR. 

In a somewhat dosolatolooking chamber lay a 
man on a truckle-bed of the meanest description. 
The floor was almost bare^ the walls looked cold 
and cheerless, the furniture was of the cheapest 
and rudest description. In addition to a small 
deal table were three stout rush-chairs ; as many 
gaudily-coloured prints were hung over the man- 
tel-piece; there was a large cross painted above 
the head of the bed; and several scriptural quo- 
tationsy in good-sized characters, had been quaintly 
labelled round the room. 

There were two other beds there, having the 
same sort of dark woollen coverlet, and the same 
large cross at the head-board; but only one had 
an occupant. lie was a young man, with a very 



116 JACK scudamobe's daughteiu 

pale face. His features^ had they not been so 
ghastly, would have been considered handsome: 
indeed the careless chevelure, full moustache and 
whisker, though evidently in a state of neglect, 
made his head, as it rested on the coarse linen 
pillow-case, both interesting and picturesque. 

Nevertheless, it was not easy to recognise in 
the very sickly-looking occupant of that humble 
couch the attacM at the British Embassy at Brus- 
sels, the member for Delamere Magna, the hand- 
some dashing captain of one of the most crack 
regiments of cavalry in her Majesty's service. 
Yet it was so. There lay all that remained of 
Arthur Calverley, after a more severe conflict 
-with death than ever he had with Sikhs in their 
savagest mood; after, too, having taxed to the 
utmost the skill, not only of the best surgeons in 
Bruges, but of the head of the medical depart- 
ment of the Belgian army, who had been sent to 
his assistance. 

He looked, poor fellow, not only miserably 
weak, but still more miserably weaiy, as he turned 



MONSEIGNKUR. 117 

his lustreless eyes from one uninteresting object 
to another, till they lighted* upon the figure of a 
nun sitting by the deal table, on a flag-chair, mix- 
ing some ingredients in a mortar. Her back was 
towards him, therefore he could not see her face, 
but guessed that she must be either a Sister of 
Charity or a Beguine who had become his nurse. 

The idea sent his mind wandering confusedly 
back to a period when he was similarly cared 
for, and he thought he was still in the ancient 
ruins, recovering from his dangerous fall. But 
the chamber in which he now lay bore no resem- 
blance to the narrow cell he had then tenanted, 
nor was the figure stooping over the table at all 
like the gaunt form that had then tended his 
hurts. 

He tried to recollect what could have happen- 
ed that made him feel so dreadfully sick and faint; 
but his ideas presented such a confused medley of 
Jack Scudamore and Miss Brabazon, of the Duke 
of Porchester and the Bishop's widow, of the Am- 
bassador and the Dowager Countess, as well as of 



118 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

Lord Madras and Jack Scadamore's daughter, 
that he could not approach a rational conclusion. 
The thought of Jack Scudamore's daughter sug- 
gested Geraldine, and there for a time he rested 
content. 

Gh^ually the haze about his mind seemed to 
clear o£F imder her bright influence, and he began 
to trace with tolerable clearness the course of re- 
cent events, till he came to the fracas in which he 
had been so severely handled. How long he had 
been in his present position he did not know. He 
felt that there were dressing of some kind upon 
his breast; but what prospect he had of being able 
to get away from his present veiy dull confine- 
ment he had no means of judging. 

He drew his arms out of the coarse sheets, and 
displayed his weariness by a stretch, accompanied 
by an audible ya^. 

The mm turned round hastilv. 

^^ Monsieur must not do that. He may reopen 
the wound.*' 

She spoke in French, quickly, but not harshly. 



MONSfilGlOBUR. 



lid 



" I think it is healed, or nearly so." 

" Monsieur must not speak to the Sisters, un- 
less to answer their questions," was the next ad- 
dress. " But here is something Monsieur le Doc- 
teurhas ordered for the patient, which he must 
take at once." 

She poured the mixture into a vessel and 
brought it to him. He looked upon a soft round 
Flemish face, that expressed more kindness than 
her words. Taking the vessel from her in silence, 
he swallowed the contents, and inunediately felt 
refreshed. 

" How long have I been here 1" he asked. 

" The Sisters are not to answer questions, and 
Monsieur le Docteur said that you were not to be 
permitted to talk." 

" Thank you, good Sister, for your kindness to 
me. That is all I wish to say." 

" It is a pity he is a heretic," thought the nun, 
as she commenced clearing away the things she 
had been using. " Poor young man, he looks as 
if he would gladly listen to the truth ; but, as I 



120 JACK scudamore's dauohteb. 

have been forbid saying more to him than a verf 
few words, I must leave him to the good God." 

Just then was heard a knock at the outer door, 
and she hastened to open it. On seeing who it 
was, the nun uttered an exclamation of joy, and 
fell on her knees. ' 

^^ It is Monseigneur T 

" Yes, my daughter," was the reply ; " I have 
come to sit with the patient. You must leave us 
together." 

« Assuredly, Monseigneur." 

She reverently kissed a ring on his hand, and 
disappeared. 

"Well, my dear sir," cried a cheerful voice, 
^^ we have met again, you see. I am sorry to find 
you so much less pleasantly situated than when I 
had the honour of seeing you last." 

"Dr. Petrel" exclaimed the patient, as his 
friendly cicerone at the ruins, dressed in the mo- 
dest gentlemanly garb of an English ecclesiastic 
travelling for his pleasure, placed one of the rush* 
bottomed chairs near the bedside, shook the occu- 



HONSEIGlTSnB. 



121 



pant of the pallet kindly by the hand, and sat 
down, 

" Yes, Dr. Petre, if you will," he replied. " But 
my Catholic brethren call me Bishop of Melpota- 



mos." 



"Of course, and I am very remiss in my 
neglect. Permit me to say that I am much gra- 
tified by your lordship's visit." 

^^ Oh, my dear fellow, there is no occasion for 
any ceremony between us. Call me what you 
like, only do me the justice to consider me your 
friend, and extremely anxious to serve you to the 
best of my poor ability." 

The mild face of the excellent prelate beamed 
with quite a paternal interest. The sick man looked 
gratified, but did not attempt any oral acknow- 
ledgment. 

" I assure you, I would at the hazard of my 
life have interposed to prevent any harm happen- 
ing to you. But at first I had not the most re- 
mote idea what the disturbance was about; and 
when I got some inkling of it, and sent my priests 



122 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

to your assistance, they found you in an appa- 
rently dying state. How did you come to learn 
that your fiancee was ^ing to take the veil in that 
particular church, on that particular day; and why 
did you not, as soon as you learnt it, communicate 
privately with met" 

" My entrance into the building was entirely 
accidental. I had scarcely arrived in Bruges an 
hour, and knew only that you were in the city. 
I had come expressly to consult your Lordship 
about matters of profound interest to me." 

" Very singular indeed 1 Most extraordinary ! 
But be frank with me, my dear Captain ; tell me 
how I can serve you." 

" First, have the kindness to tell me where I am." 

^^You are in the infirmary attached to the 
convent in which a certain Sister Felicia, once of 
your acquaintance, is the superior, and a certain 
Geraldine, subsequently of your acquaintance, a 
postulant." 

The good Bishop watched the effect of this 
annoimcement, and could not therefore fail to 



M0N8EIGKXUB. 128 

observe the sadden start of surprise, and the 
equally sudden flush of pleasure, it created in the 
patient. 

^^And it was quite accidental your entering 
the Chuich of the Immaculate Mary, when I 
vros in the very act of making your amiable 
friend Geraldine a nun f " 

« Quite, my lord." 

"How much you must have been indebted 
to accident, my dear Calverley I You first nearly 
break your neck by accident, and turn the head 
of an innocent young novice, whose holy medita- 
tions your presence disturbed. You next get 
into a place where you were equally imlooked 
for, and by accident, and frighten an aged nun 
into the delusion that you were the Enemy of 
Souls. Again, by accident, you thrust yourself 
into the midst of a congregation of very zealous 
Catholics; disturb one of the most sacred cere- 
monials of their faith, and, in consequence, are 
presently left for dead by the fierce and angry 
devotees. If you can effect all this mischief by 



124 JACK BCUDAMOBE'S DAU6HTEB. 

accident^ I tremble to think what terrible evils 
you might produce by design,'* 

"I am veiy sorry, doctor, to have been the 
cause of so much trouble to those religious ladies ; 
but, strange though it may seem to you, it was 
totally unintentional on my part. With regard 
to my apparently unjustifiable presence at a pri- 
vate conference at Dover — ^ 

*^ Say no more about that, my dear Captain, 
I beg. You bring me back that horrible bur- 
lesque too vividly; for it was my misfortune 
there, too, to have to endure the chief respon- 
sibility of the mischief you created. But I am 
a man of the world as well as a bishop, and there- 
fore can make allowances for these unfortunate 
contretemps. The last, however, was infinitely the 
most to be deplored, for its frightful consequences 
to yourself. 

" I assure you, had not half-a-dozen powerful 
priests arrived at the scene of action the very 
moment they did, you would have been torn to 
pieces. As it was, it was only by declaring that 



H0N8EI0NEUR. 125 

you were a maniac, who had seen a resemblance 
in the postulant to his lost mistress, that they 
were permitted to take possession of your bleeding 
body, open the door, on the step of which you 
had fallen, close it behind them, and carry you 
into one of the wards of the infirmary, where, 
as soon as I had recognised your features, 1 sent 
for the best surgeons, by the speediest messengers, 
for your succour." 

" And I have no doubt was the means of sav- 
ing my life. Pray accept my warmest thanks." 

Arthur looked gratefully into the face of the 
Wend a kind providence had so timely provided 
for him, and met the smile of a gratified philan- 
thropist. He seemed to see something more than 
abundant benevolence. • A fund of pleasant hu- 
mour appeared to play around his well-shaped 
mouth, and sparkle in his kindly-beaming eyes. 

"You shall thank me. Captain, when I have 
restored you to your friends hale and sound* 
It is necessary that I should add, I lost no time 
in informing the Ambassador of the accident. 



126 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

Yeiy much was that estunable man and able 
diplomatist astoniahed. In my interview with 
him^ his Excellency was good enough to assure 
mcy that you were the very last person on his 
staff he considered likely to get into such a serious 
scrape; so I thought it best for your sake to 
explain your entire innocence of any culpable 
intention. His Excellency, I am happy to say, 
was quite satisfied, and has shown himself deeply 
interested in your recovery." 

"All this, I gratefully acknowledge, is very 
good of you, my dear Bishop, but — ^' 

"You would rather hear some intelligence of 
my fair postulant?" 

The good prelate laughed, and a faint smile 
played over the wan coimtenance his bonhomie 
was influencing very pleasantly. 

"Ah, I see. You dashing young captains 
must needs be gallant as well as grateful. And 
I am bound to say that you have good cause in 
this instance for not forgetting your gallantry. 
She is one of the most charming girls I ever 



MOSBEIGMSUB. 127 

bebeldy and is possessed of a thorotighljr innocent 
and truthfol nature." 

The invalid's paleness assumed a perceptible 
tinge of pink, and his eyes brightened consider- 
ably. 

^^ Indeed, I think her a little too good for a 
wicked world ; as a nnn she would be the model- 
dflter of the community." 

The countenance of the sick man suddenly 
became gloomy. 

^^ I am by no means certain that such is her 
destination," added the Bishop quickly. " It 
must depend entirely upon her own incUnations. 
I have thought it my duty to defer the ceremony 
that must precede her acceptance of monastic 
obUgations; but, notwithstanding my ardent desire 
to serve you, my dear young friend, if the postu- 
lant insists on taking the black veil, I have no 
option in the matter." 

"But do you think she will, Doctor?" in- 
quired the invalid, with considerable anxiety. 

" You ought to know the young lady's dispo- 



128 JACK scudakobe's daughter. 

sition better than myself/' replied the prelate, 
with a good-humoured twinkle in his bright eyes. 
" Handsome young officers have so many advan- 
tages in studying the female character, which a 
priest, of whatever rank in the church, cannot hope 
to possess. Is she very stubborn in her reso- 
lutions, Captain?" 

"Her nature is singularly amiable,'' mur- 
mured the lover; "but she seems to have been 
influenced by a determination as opposite to her 
previous feelings towards me, as it was imex- 
pected." 

" The sex, my dear friend, have an unfortunate 
reputation for being subject to sudden changes. 
Who knows but that the vane may veer round 
again to the opposite point of the feminine com- 
pass !" 

Arthur Calverley did not look as if quite as- 
sured of this contingency. 

"What I know, I will tell you," presently 
added his venerable friend. "I have thought it 
prudent to conceal from her the dangerous con- 



HONSEIGNEUR. 129 

sequences of your indiscretio^i. For all tliat, she 
has been incessant in her inquiries after you. 
Very improper, my dear Calverley, for a yoimg 
woman about to renounce the vanities of a sinful 
world." 

The good Bishop shook his silvery head with 
an exaggerated doleful look. The patient seemed 
less downcast. 

« A very bad sign— a veiy bad sign indeed ! 
I cannot conceal from you my serious fears that 
your accidental interposition has been so mischiev- 
ous, I shall be obKged to prohibit the young lady 
entering upon a conventual life." 

"A thousand thanks, dear Doctor," cried the 
young man eagerly. 

"Now, don't be over-sanguine ; remember that 
the case depends upon the stabihty of a notoriously 
unstable portion of human nature. I shall most 
likely see her in the course of the day: would it 
fatigue you too much to think of a message I 
might bear to her? I assure you a Bishop makes 
by no means a bad go-between." 

VOL. m. K 



130 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

«0 Doctor! really—" 

^^ Spare your thanks, and consider your mes- 
sage. Be kind enough to bear in mind that I am 
your friend; simply because you are the friend 
of honest Jack Scudamore — ^to whom I owe every 
thing in the world.'' 

The patient heard this reference to his old 
acquaintance with evident surprise. 

^ Surely he is not a Catholic f he inquired. 

"But he is thou^i," was the reply. "And 
so were his ancestors from time immemorial He 
married a Protestant, and having promised on her 
death-bed that her only daughter should be educa- 
ted in her faith, she has been so brou^t up by a 
venerable lady, with two other young people of her 
blood. But the grandmother had a sister abroad, 
who had become a CathoUc To her had been 
confided the charge of another girl, and the lady 
being the Superior of a convent, this child in time 
became a professed reUffieuse. The former recently 
paid a visit to England to establish a House of her 
Order, and was the means of cimverting both her 



MONSEIGNEUR. 131 

venerable sister and her interesting young kins- 
woman. The former is residing with her in the 
new convent ; her grandniece was sent here. 

"Now I hope I have given a clear explanation 
of whatever may have seemed mysterious to you 
in your acquaintance with the two daughters of 
the late Lord Fitzmaurice, who, I need scarcely 
add, belonged to a Catholic family." 

"And what became of his sonT inquired his 
former comrade. 

"Oh, he is doing extremely well," said the 
Bishop, in his most cheerful tones. "I have heard 
that he entered a merchant's house at Antwerp, 
where his steadiness and industry were so well ap- 
preciated, that he has been sent out to take a 
responsible post in a branch-establishment of the 
firm at Singapore." 

Arthur could not at first reconcile himself to 
the idea of the lively ex-comet of Hussars devot- 
ing himself to the dull labours of the countings 
house; but he was much gratified to learn how 
manfully he had submitted to his change of fortune. 



132 JACK SCUDAMORE^S DAUGHTER. 

For a few minutes he remained in a reverie, 
recalling the mystifications that had perplexed him 
in the fragmentary conversations he had cfver* 
heard on two memorable occasions. The frag- 
ments pieced together perfectly now, and ex- 
plained the religiow; expressions in the Dowager 
Countess's last conversation with him, he had then 
considered so strange. The only portion of the 
intelligence he had just learnt that seemed to 
trouble him, was the fact of Geraldine's having 
become a catholic. This, and the knowledge that 
she was still within the walls of a convent, under 
the influence of the sisterhood, who were inter- 
ested in persuading her to embrace a religious life, 
filled his mind with anxiety. 

The impression the amiable prelate sought to 
convey by his half-playful, half-serious assurances, 
was decidedly favourable to his hopes. But could 
any dependence be placed on them? He might 
be quite as willing as he had represented, to oblige 
the friend of his benefactor; but was he not a 
Bishop of the Church of Bome, bound to regard 



MONSEIONEUB. 133 

her advancement far before the objects of one 
who belonged to an antagonistic faith? Arthur 
Calverley had been studying diplomacy^ which 
rarely places confidence in appearances^ 

The Bishop also remained sUent, regarding 
with a genial smile the pale perplexed physiognomy 
before him, as if divining the heretical misgivings. 

" Rest assured, my dear friend," he said cor- 
dially, and kindly taking the hand that lay on the 
coverlet, " all the priests of Bome are not wolves 
in sheep's clothing. There are good and bad in 
every profession, and many of my own, I am 
afraid, are far from what they ought to be ; but 
I will prove that I am thoroughly sincere in my 
wish to serve you. To-morrow I must proceed on 
a journey ; when I return, I have the permission 
of his Excellency to remove you to my own house, 
where there are aids to convalescence that cannot 
be obtained in this humble institution for the poor 
sick* Will you have confidence in me ?" 

A pressure of the hand and a grateful glance 
answered the question. 



134 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" Very well. In the mean time you have no-» 
thing to do^ but to get well as fast as you can. 
You will give me your honour, as a gentleman 
and a soldier, not to communicate with the postu- 
lant except through me, and not to trouble the 
Mother-superior with either message or writing." 

Arthur promptly gave the required obUgation. 
In the last instance it was not necessary ; his boy- 
ish romance had been completely absorbed into 
the more rational passion of his manhood. But 
the good Bishop had perhaps his own reasons for 
what he did. 

"While I shall be absent," he continued, "I 
have provided against your feeling dull. You will 
enjoy the constant companionship of an excellent 
priest of my acquaintance — ^Pfere Michel. He has 
travelled a good deal, is a ripe scholar, a man of 
liberal sentiments and most humane inclinations ; 
and his conversation, I am quite certain, you will 
find particularly entertaining. He has just been 
appointed confessor to this sisterhood ; but I warn 
you not to appear curious to him respecting any 



MONSEIONEUIU 135 

of his penitents. He knows his duty too well to 
blab. Now, what is to be your message to the 
postulant ?" 

The Bishop rose, and held out his hand with 
an air of mock gravity, that again called a smile 
on the wan face. Finding his friend hesitate, he 
pretended to help him, by suggesting one prepos- 
terous message after another. The sick man 
laughingly shook his head. At last he contrived 
to propose a more appropriate communication, to 
which the " go-between" jocosely gave his concur- 
rence ; and, after a warm pressure from the epis- 
copal grasp and a fervent benediction, Arthur 
Calverley was left to his own reflections. 

Was Monseigneiu* sincere I 



CHAPTER VI 

m THE CONTENT PAKLOUK. 

MoTHEK Felicia had finished her "Eetreat.'* 
She had concluded a variety of religions exer- 
cises, ver)" much to the edification of the ohser- 
vant nuns. 

" The very reverend Mothernraperior acts like 
a saint," one pious sister, who wished to he over- 
heard, declared confidently to another pious sister; 
who, desiring also to curry favour, replied as 
audibly, 

" Yes, because our very reverend Mother is sl 
saint r 

Mother FeUda was flattered in other ways 
by the sycophants — ^an element supposed to exist 
in most conventual establishments; but, however 
pleased she might be, it did not close her eye& 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUR. 137 

to the fact that she was watched — a far less 
pleasing evidenqp of the zeal of the good Sisters. 
She had lived in a convent long enough to know 
that spies are not employed without a purpose. 
She took the alarm, and was on her guard. 

She carefully refrained from any interference 
with the postulant : indeed, outwardly appeared to 
have forgotten her existence. She never spoke 
to her — never acknowledged her presence — never 
mentioned her name. No one could have sup- 
posed that they daily met at the refectory, and 
were constantly associated in the sendees of their 
common faith. 

Mother Felicia was unusually attentive and 
kind to the Sisters ; especially amiable to those by 
whom she knew she was watched. She was de- 
termined not to exhibit any impatience of the con- 
trol that was being exercised upon her. Even 
when the Bishop forbade her entering the infir- 
mary, she submitted without a remark. 

As she had been carefullv excluded from all 
information respecting its occupant and his critical 



138 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

state, she could not imagine the cause of the pro- 
hibition. She knew, however, well enough that 
she must obey; knew also that it was her best 
policy to do so with a good grace. 

Therefore she was outwardly cheerful in her 
obedience, professing to believe that there was 
some infectious disorder in one of the wards, and 
that the good Bishop was evincing his love for her 
by preventing her from running the risk of catch- 
ing it. She then strove to blind the watchers as 
to her knowledge of their vocation, by causing 
them to be constantly at her side, receiving the 
cherished attentions reserved exclusively for con- 
ventual favourites. 

From a knowledge of these characteristics, the 
reader is at liberty to imagine that the Sister Fe- 
licia of the ruined monastery at Delamere was not 
exactly the Mother Felicia of the convent at Bru- 
ges. The change was exclusively the result of a 
conventual education. The natural woman had 
gradually been lost in the artificial woman. A 
constant employment of forms and phrases had 



IN THE CON^^ENT PARLOUB. 139 

destroyed the higher attributes of womanhood, and 
the creature had become a machine with machi- 
nery adapted for routine employments — ^that at 
certain intervals of time would go through certain 
ceremonies as regularly and correctly as a barrel- 
organ plays its set of tunes. 

Unfortunately, in driving out the more exalted 
instincts of himian nature, the framers of the con- 
ventual system appear to have furnished in- 
creased room for the development of the meaner 
vices ; and pride, craft, dissimulation, self-conceit, 
falsehood, and treachery, take the place of the af- 
fections. The dear ties of kindred, the sweet as- 
sociations of home, are disowned or trampled imder 
foot, as degrading links in the sinful slavery of 
the world. Every thing outside the convent-walls 
is regarded as under the special agency of the 
spirit of evil : the fairer and brighter the object, 
the more intense the wickedness with which it is 
imbued. And yet a benevolent God has fashioned 
such things, and made them for ages a source of 
imutterable joy to creatures of every condition. 



140 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Sister Felicia had been taught to renounce the 
devil and his works, and avoid the temptations of 
the world and the flesh. She never knew, how- 
ever, with any thing like clearness, what she re- 
nounced, and was made to give far too compre- 
hensive an area to what she avoided. No wonder, 
therefore, that the fairest works of a beneficent 
Creator are in the gloom of the cloister given a 
dark complexion; and that the innocent sympa- 
tliies, the pure well-springs of a common huma- 
nity, become, by a blind prejudice, transformed 
into currents of impurity, and pools of stagnant 
sin. 

Had the heart of Sister Fehcia had fair-play as 
well as her understanding, the Mother-superior 
would have been very different to what she was ; 
but her heart was daily brought mider the indu- 
rating influence of an unsympathising credulity, 
and grew into a petrifaction ; and her understand- 
ing was cramped and pinched, till it was able to 
run in the narrowest gauge of prejudice and bi- 
gotry. Poor Mother Felicia I I am sorry the very 



JK THE CONVENT PARLOUR, 141 

reverend Mother- superior has disappointed the 
reader^s expectations. But it is less her fault than 
the system of which the poor lady had been made 
the victun. 

Contrasted with the novice now imder her con- 
trol, her feminine qualifications fall marvellously 
short ; but this is the difference between a natural 
and a non-natural mode of cultivation. Geraldine 
was allowed the free development of her affections, 
guarded only by those safe-guards which natural 
modesty and the incxdcation of sound principles of 
morality are sure to raise. Her childish friend- 
ship — ^her girlish love — elevated her nature, and 
maintained its purity far more effectually than could 
a life of uninterrupted penance, seclusion, and far 
naticism. 

The one Divine precept, " Love one another^' — 
the one Divine obligation, " Honour thy natural 
guardians, that thy days may be long in the land 
which the Lord thy God giveth thee" — formed her 
law and her gospel, that constantly influenced her 
in harmony with her recollections of those human 



142 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

exceUences which she drew from the teaching and 
example of the Divine Founder of her faith. 

In her case there was no straining after an 
ideal perfection, from the fear of imaginary evils ; 
and no devoting the mental faculties to endless re- 
petitions of mechanical forms and sentences in a 
language she did not understand. Her prayers 
were as simple as her religion was pure. Her hu- 
mility — ^probably the secret consciousness of her 
mother's humble birth — ^needed no senseless degra* 
dations to make it evident ; her piety had its source 
in her infinite trust in the goodness of her Creator, 
and the gratification she enjoyed in its eternal evi- 
dences that surrounded her daily life. She did not 
require apocryphal legends or mystical homilies to 
teach her holy living. To the pure all things are 
pure — ^to the good all things are good. God is 
every where to all who have eyes to recognise His 
presence; but His special abiding-place is the heart 
of the innocent and sincere. 

When the Mother- superior in England, in 
the peculiar, fervent, and persuasive manner of 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUR. 143 

that amiable enthusiast, assured Geraldine of her 
bounden duty to embrace the faith of her father 
and her mother, she was in a state of mind in which 
the prospect placed before her of a conventual 
life was sure to possess a wonderful fascination. 

All the fair world around her, whence she had 
derived such inexpressible happiness, had suddenly- 
faded from her like a vision, and her own person- 
ality had proved the most unreal portion of the 
fairy scene. She was ready to receive any new im- 
pression that offered consolation and refuge. Her 
humility and conscientiousness raised impassable 
barriers against the entreaties of her lover. Her 
love had drawn its strength from an inspiration too 
noble to permit what seemed to her his degradation, 
in marrying so much beneath him. She had been 
made acquainted with the Calverley policy, which 
had greatly strengthened her resolution. So that, 
when she was urged to renounce the world, the 
renunciation of her lover became to her a proper 
as well as a necessary sacrifice. 

She came to Bruges. She entered the convent 



144 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

walls ; the novelty of all that she saw and heard, 
assisted materially in reconciling the impressionable 
girl to the change. She, too, was made much of by 
the good sisters, as all novices are ; but the thought 
that Arthur would be saved from humiliation and 
the displeasure of his family, reconciled her more 
than the caresses of the nuns, or the new life of the 
cloister. She lived, also, in the comforting belief 
that he would soon find some one far more worthy 
of his love, and that she should always be able to 
pray for his happiness. 

In these delusions Geraldine lived during her 
noviciate ; and the daily routine and the daily flat- 
teries of the affectionate sisterhood had tolerably 
well accomplished their work. She imdertook to 
perform her part in the ceremonial that was to shut 
her out eternally from what she had been taught 
to consider a wicked world, with all the necessary 
fortitude. 

When, however, she heard the appealing voice 
of her lover, the over-strained cord snapped at once. 
She recovered consciousness, but only to be haunted 



m THE CONVENT PARLOUR. 145 

With terrible convictions. The idea of Arthur in- 
consolable, wandering about in search of her, and 
penetrating into the neighbourhood of her seclu- 
sion, caused her acute distress. But when she dis- 
covered that the secret source of much of her re- 
cent strength of mind had been taken from her, 
she seemed to lose all confidence in her ability to 
complete the sacrifice she had undertaken. 

The harshness of the Mother-superior she attri- 
buted entirely to what she was made to consider 
her misconduct at the ceremony. The good Sisters 
believed this, and took pains to assure their mi- 
happy associate that she was no longer in a state 
of grace ; indeed, if she did not comply with the 
commands of the very reverend Mother, to send a 
humble message to Monseignem*, expressing con- 
trition for her grave offence, and readiness to throw 
herself at his feet for pardon, and add an earnest 
supplication that he would order an early day for 
the completion of her vows, — ^her soul would be in 
positive peril. 

The harshness of the Mother-superior, and the 

VOL. III. L 



146 JACK scudamoke's daughter. 

representations of the urgent religieitsesj did not 
seem to produce the desired effect. But when 
Monseigneur did them the honour to call at the 
convent^ and condescended to command the pre- 
sence of the obstinate postulant, they were quite 
sure that the scandal would very soon be brought 
to a conclusion. 

They knew that the good Bishop saw the pos* 
tulant alone, and were aware that the interview 
lasted a considerable time; but to their intense 
astonishment, and even bewilderment, no day for 
the ceremony had been named ; and the postulant 
appeared to have got further from a state of grace 
than ever. 

They would have endeavoured to draw from 
her what had been said by her and Monseigneur 
at this extraordinary conference ; but, in the first 
place, the good Sisters found her extremely re- 
served; and in the next, Monseigneur had left 
the most positive injunctions against their inter- 
ference with her in any way. If she desired to 
b6 silent, she was to be left undisturbed. They 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUR. 147 

were to be kind to her, without attempting to in- 
trude on her confidence. The nuns marvelled, but 
obeyed. 

The parlour of the convent was the reception- 
room of the favoured few who enjoyed the privi- 
lege of passing the grille; and here the Mother- 
superior was accustomed to sit and grant audi- 
ences to those secular individuals who had claims 
upon her time, and hold conferences with such 
spiritual personages as had claims upon her con- 
sideration. The chamber seemed to have been 
specially prepared to create and maintain devout 
religious impressions, and excite the most pro- 
found conviction that the establishment to which 
it belonged was one of the very highest distinc- 
tion. 

The ceilings and the panels were adorned with 
intricate carvings, and the side which contained 
the large fireplace was covered with an elaborate 
mass of the same ornamentation. Angels, of a 
Flemish pattern, stood out in bold relief, as sup- 
porters to the arms of certain famiUes that had 



V 



148 JACK scudamobe's dauohtkr. 

bestowed the most liberal endowments on the es^ 
tablishment. Here and there were other sacred 
personages, bearing a shield, in which were dis- 
played the quarterings of other noble families 
whose daughters had entered the convent. 

Within the panels were pictures delineating 
events in the life of the Virgin. In the prin- 
cipal one, quite in the comer, was the kneeling 
figure of a short fat burgher, who had out of 
his abundant wealth liberally rewarded the fa- 
mous artist selected to perform the work; while 
one of the kings presented to the Flemish Mother 
and Child in another picture, held in his hand a 
model of the very building it adorned. 

In the centre compartment was a beautiful 
triptich, enclosed in ivory, representing the en- 
thronement of the Virgin between the Father 
and the Son, the third person of the Trinity 
hovering immediately over her glorified head. 
Opposite was a large ebony cross, containing the 
figure of the crucified Saviour in silver, and be- 
neath was a group of the Virgin and Child with St,. 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUR, 149 

Joseph in marble. There were also full-lengths 
of female saints, each distinguished by her par- 
ticular symbol, and in the borders of the panels 
which enclosed them were their names in gothic 
scrolls. 

The furniture was massive and richly carved. 
The tall chairs, with their tapestry-worked seats, 
had apparently belonged to Mary of Burgundy ; 
and the quaint-looking coffer in the recess, with 
the golden vessels it supported, to Philip the 
Good. Every where there were signs of the pre- 
cious handiwork of Van Eyck (John of Bruges), 
of John Mabuse, of Peter Porbus, or of some 
other master of the school of art that confen'ed 
celebrity and riches on the city — ^the costly offer- 
ings of the merchants who had been their best 
patrons. 

It wa& here, about a week after the Bishop's 
Tisit, that Mother Felicia sat in state, on a seat 
that might once have done duty for a throne. 
She was alone, evidently absorbed in profound 
meditation. The cross on her breast, the beads 



150 JACK SCUDAMOBE^S DAU6HTEB. 

around her neck, were, howeveri as Ktde r^arded 
as the breviary, the missal, and other predoas 
books of devotion that laj on a table close U> 
her hand, or the various suggestive representa- 
tions that surrounded her on every side. 

The very reverend Mother-superior was not 
thinking of a neuvaine in honour of either of the 
saints that were highest in her estimation^ nor was 
she reflecting on the exercises of the " retreat" she 
had just completed. She was thinking of the pos- 
tulant. It was quite evident, from the expression 
in her handsome face, that her thoughts were far 
from agreeable. 

She had contrived to enlist spies in her ser- 
vice, — ^no very difficult matter, — ^and had learnt 
why she had been excluded from the infirmary. 
She had ascertained that the original of the pic- 
ture she had destroyed had been taken there appa- 
rently in the agonies of a cruel death, and had 
there remained, under the wings, as it were, of 
the destroying angel, as anxiously watched over 
as if he had been a patron of the convent, till 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUB. 151 

taken away by the Bishop in his own carriage, 
no one knew where. 

Mother Felicia had also, through the same 
channel, gained some trifling particulars of the 
remarkable interview between the Bishop and the 
postulant. She had been seen to throw herself 
at his feet ; and Monseigneur had been seen lift-* 
ing her from the ground with as much affectionate 
solicitude, it was said, as if he had been supporting 
the blessed St. Agatha. 

Subsequently to this she had been observed 
at the refectory to eat with a better appetite ; and 
at recreation, though occasionally tears would come 
into her eyes, as she sat apart absorbed in her own 
thoughts, she was certainly, in the opinion of the 
watchers, more cheerful. She did not neglect any 
of her appointed duties — ^indeed, performed them 
with more devotion than she had previously exhi- 
bited — ^but said not a word about taking the veil. 

The Mother-superior was also informed of the 
Bishop's direction to the nuns respecting their 
conduct to the postulant. She now mused over 



152 JACK scudamorb's daughtbe. 

these strange things, endeavouring to find an in- 
terpretation to the mystery; but her clenched 
hands, set teeth, and stony look, might have as- 
sured any disciple of Lavater, that it did not pro- 
duce any amiable f eeUng. 

She Hved in mortal fear lest tlie dignity, which 
gave her so much consequence in her oyra eyes, 
should be taken from her; the state as well as 
the rule had become specially dear to her ; and in- 
her excited imagination not only was she threat- 
ened with their loss, but was goaded with the anti- 
cipation of being superseded by that "hateful 
girl." She was winning the Bishop by the same 
arts with which she had gained the love that had 
been forbidden to her. 

As the Mother-superior was biting her Hps 
imder the influence of these very worldly feehngs, 
the repulsive features of Sister Gudule presented 
themselves. 

" A visitor to the very reverend Mother," she 
^smhounced in her grating voice. 

"Who is it, daughter?" . • 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUB. 153 

A card was placed in her hands. It had a black 
edge, and bore a name engraved on it, the read- 
ing of which seemed to create a feeling of surprise, 

" Bring the lady here." 

Presently a tall female, dressed in fashionable 
mourning, and wearing a thick black veil, entered 
the parlour, followed by Sister Gudule. The Mo- 
ther-superior rose from her chair of state, as the 
stranger advanced, carrying a letter in her gloved 
hand. 

"I am the bearer of a commmiication from 
the Bishop of Melpotamos to the Mother-superior 
of this convent.'^ 

The epistle was taken with a formal inclina- 
tion of the head, the seal reverently kissed, and the 
contents perused. A sudden start betrayed the 
interest they excited ; but the reader quickly had 
her feelings under control. The letter must have 
been very short, it was so quickly perused. 

" Sister Gudule, tell the postulant she is wanted 
in the parlour." 

Sister Gudule, who had stood as still as a 



154 JACK SCUDAMOBS'S DAUGHTER. 

statue — ^not an attractive one — ^with her hands 
crossed over her bosom, bowed her head submis- 
sively, and stalked out of the chamber. 

" Madame will do me the honour to be seated.'* 

The stranger seated herself on one of the ta- 
pestry chairs, a Uttle in the back-ground; and 
Mother Felicia resumed her throne, with rather 
an ostentatious assumption of ecclesiastical im- 
portance. 

The features of her visitor could be but indi^ 
tinctly seen, but she appeared to be about her own 
age. Her dress and prepossessing manner, at any 
other time, would have entitled her to the most 
courteous, the most caressing reception; but the 
purport of the note seemed to have taken the 
Mother-superior so much by surprise, that she 
was quite at a loss for words. 

Before she was able to express the customary 
civilities, the door opened, a slight figure in the 
dress of a novice entered, and approached the 
chair of state. It was Geraldine — ^pale and sad, 
but unquestionably Geraldine. 



m THE coKVEyr pablour. 15S 

She was about to throw herself at the feet of 
her Superior, when the latter rose with a haughty 
glance and forbidding gesture. 

As they stood face to face, their likeness was 
evident ; but it was a resemblance with a marked 
difiFerence. What the elder had been, the younger 
was ; but the once youthful Felicia wore a mask 
rather than a face — frigid and pitiless ; while the 
youthful Geraldine looked the incarnation of ideal 
grace and tenderness. 

" You sent for me, very reverend Mother," was 
murmured timidly. 

*^ You are not thought worthy of the vocation 
you have sought," was the severe reply; "and 
Monseigneur, who is the visitor and director of 
this sisterhood, has commanded me to send you 
out of the convent without delay." 

The postulant looked more astonished than dis- 
tressed by this announcement. 

" But, very reverend Mother, where am I tQ 
go?" she asked. 

With a haughty gesture, the other stretched 



156 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

oat her arm in the direction of the viator, of 
whose presence Geraldine had not been awaiel 
The latter rose and threw np her vdL The pos- 
tulant fell back, then, nnable to ccmtrol an im- 
pulse^ totteied forward, with a ay of delight, and 
as oblivions of conventnal rules as regardless of the 
presence of her stately and unsympathising snpe^ 
rior, threw herself into the affectionate arms of her 
old playmate and guardian. 

^It is mj darling mamma T she exclaimed, 
with passionate earnestness. ^O, I am so veiy, 
very glad T 

Tears were trembling on her lashes, and tears 
were chasing each other over the beautiful thou^ 
pale face of the once blooming, radiant Fanny 
Scudamore. But the eyes of the Mother Felicia 
were perfectly diy . Her conventual education had 
made her superior to such weakness. In truth 
the look they possessed was expressive of a fierce 
nature under powerful restraint^ while about the 
curled lips there played a smile of mingled deri- 
sion and contempt. 



IN THE CONVENT PARLOUR, 157 

Geraldine did not notice that her friend was 
in mourning — even the strange cap that pro* 
claimed her widowhood had not attracted her 
attention. She seemed conscious only of the pre- 
sence of the sharer and promoter of her past hap- 
pinessy and received her caresses as though in a 
dream of joy, from which she was afraid of being 
rudely awakened. 

At last her actual condition came home to her. 
Then she gently drew herself from the loving em- 
brace, and with a very humble look knelt at the 
feet of her elder sister. 

** Veiy reverend Mother," she said, in a voice 
trembling with emotion, "I have had the mis- 
fortune to offend you; I am sincerely sorry, and 
beg to be forgiven. I shall never be a source of 
trouble to you again. Pray pardon the errors I 
may have committed, and let me bear away from 
here one pleasant recollection in your benediction, 
very reverend Mother — in your good wishes, 
dear sister." 

"No," was the fierce reply of Mother Felicia, 



158 JACK bcubahobe's daughter. 

dra^g herself away, as if there was contamina- 
tion in the touch of the supplicant. " You are 
going back to the world — and with worldly people 
and worldly feelings it is my priceless privilege to 
have nothing to do." 

With a cold look, and haughty inclination of 
her head to her visitor — which was acknowledged 
only with a stiff bow — ^Mother FeUcia swept out 
of the room. 

A little later a carriage was seen to leave the 
convent-gates, bearing two ladies in the direction 
of the railway terminus. There is no occasion to 
tell the reader who they were. 

Unfortunately for the lovers they were taken 
in totally opposite directions. 

But was Monseigneur sincere? 



CHAPTER Vn. 

A NEW ST. PETBB. 

Bbotiier Simpligius felt unusually comfortable; 
and the reason was^ because he was not Brother 
Simplicius. The frost had set in sharply; so 
sharply that sandals and bare legs became a 
physical impossibility — at least to sham monks of 
the nineteenth century; and Brother Basilius 
then began to be conscious that some mediaeval 
practices, to which a large majority of his parish- 
ioners had urged strong objections, were really 
not to be so easily restored as he had anticipated. 

He would have braved it out if he could — 
indeed, strove to do so. The spirit was strongs 
but the flesh was weak. The frost had got hold 
of his big toe ; so he prudently dissolved the fra- 
ternity of which he had appointed himself Supe- 



160 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

rior, and returned to the more endorable pecu- 
liarities of Puseyite tailoring. 

It is impossible to exaggerate the intense satis* 
faction of the rest of the brotherhood at this un- 
military change to "as you were.'* Though the 
community consisted of only one besides the very 
reverend principal, his measureless content would 
have sufficed for a full monastery. 

Did he not know what a blessed thing it would 
be to his poor legs to return to the warmth of 
stockings, trousers, shoes, and highly appreciated 
gaiters? Was he not aware that the impudent 
girls of the school in which he taught (who in no 
way resembled the singing chariiy-girls in a cer- 
tain popular engraying) were in the habit of scrib- 
bUng on their slates the word " Spindleshanks,** 
and fnrtiyely showing it to each other with an 
unmistakeable grin ? Had he not heard, too, the 
maid-servants, as he passed them on his rounds, 
nudging each other and whispering that highly 
improper cognomen, "the Reverend Broomsticks'* ? 
Brother Simplidus knew these derogatory 



A NEW ST. PETER. 161 

facts, and a good many more of a similar na- 
ture; so that when he was told to lay aside the 
habit of the order of St. Hildebrand, and resume 
his somewhat shabby curate-suit, it is impossible 
to give an adequate idea of his gratification. 

It must not be supposed that because the 
Reverend Basil Plynlymmon had thus been forced 
out of his masquerade, he had at last attended 
to the admonitions of his diocesan, and given up 
the various novelties he had introduced into the 
services of the parish-church. This would be 
allowing to that distinguished Anglican reformer 
a prodigious deal more sense than he possessed. 
To the admonitions of his Bishop he had ventured 
to return defiant answers; indeed, so secure did 
he feel of his own position as a clerical celebrity, 
that he absolutely tendered his resignation. 

Very much to his surprise, and not a little to 
his indignation, it was at once accepted; and 
this was the reason why the lean Curate was sit- 
ting so comfortably in the dining-room of the 
vicarage, — no longer styled the refectory of the 

VOL. III. H 



162 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

monastery, — ^in a soft-cushioned arm-chair, by a 
glowing fire, with a desk open before him on 
the table, and a pen in his hand. 

• Though he dipped his pen in the ink, his long 
nose came so near the paper, apparently from 
short-sightedness, that it required close observa- 
tion to ascertain with which instrument he was 
writing. The scratching sound, however, that 
the process produced, certainly favoured the pre- 
sumption th^t the metalKc nib did the work. 
Occasionally he would look up very intently at 
the hook which supported the chandelier, then 
would bring down his face very close upon the 
Bath post, and the scribbling sound would be 
renewed. 

If he were composing a sermon, it was not 
to him quite so serious a business ^s it is generally 
considered, for a perpetual smirk played around 
his lengthened jaws, and glances of intense plea- 
sure shot out of his pale gray eyes. Was he 
explaining to some valued correspondent the happy 
change that had taken place in his poor legs ? 



A NEW ST. PETER. 163 

" Mr. Perkins !" cried a loud voice. 

The Curate looked up hastily, and was as- 
tonished to find that the Vicar had entered the 
room unperceived. He had his clerical hat on, 
and his clerical overcoat buttoned up to his throat. 

"What are you writing?" was sharply de- 
manded. 

The Curate hesitated, and seemed a little 
confused. 

" About Mulsum, sir," he stammered out at last. 

f^MulsumP^ echoed the reverend gentleman, 
for a moment in some perplexity. " About Mul- 
sum ! Oh, I remember. I thought, Mr. Perkins, 
your first acquaintance with that beverage had 
excited a life-long distaste for the subject. What 
can you have to write about Mulsum?" 

Without the slightest ceremony he took up 
the paper, and read aloud the following lines : 



" If I had Mulsum to my heart's content, 
I should feel happy wherever I went ; 
And had I but plenty of Passam of Crete, 
I should feel blessed from my head to my feet" 



164 JACK BCIPAHOBE'S DAUGHTEB. 

" Sir," observed the reader in a smgulariv so- 
lemn tone^ ^^ henceforth the poet Homer most gnre 
place to the poet Perkins. Even ^schylns never 
wrote such lines." 

"Do you think so, reverend sir?" asked the 
much-gratified scribbler, his thin face gloinng 
like an illuminated dial. 

" Think so f repeated the dispossessed YieaTy 
looking down upon the thin Curate with a smile 
of withering contempt. " There cannot be a 
doubt of it, sir. But I recommend you, Mr. Per- 
kins, to have as little to do with the source of 
your inspiration as you possibly can. I can assure 
you the dreadful exhibition you made, on your 
earliest acquaintance with it, has not been for- 
gotten by me, and never will. Have the good- 
ness to put on your hat and greatcoat^ and come 
with me to the schoolroonL. I am going to take 
leaA*e of the faithful members of the flock to 
whom I have been so careful a diepherd." 

Ven* much abashed, Mr. Perkins locked his 
precious compositioin in his desk, and presently 



A NEW ST. PETER. 165 

was walking by the side of his stouter companion 
in the direction of St. Hildebrand's College. Not 
a word was spoken by either. Perhaps the first 
had too much on his mind, the other too little, 
for the demands of ordinary conversation. 

Was not the Reverend Basil Plynlymmon 
about to take a last farewell of the most zealous 
of his fair supporters, the most ready in their 
adoption of the various innovations that had 
brought upon his defenceless head (it still bore 
the tonsure) so much odium and persecution from 
**the weaker brethren" ? 

Had they not helped him, their faithful 
pastor, most liberally with their valuable help, 
and their still more valuable subscriptions ? Had 
he not privately been in the habit of exercising 
for their benefit the inestimable privilege of auri- 
cular confession, and of granting them absolution 
from all their sins ? 

Alas I these prized evidences of priestly influ- 
ence he was now about to abandon, with all that 
he had with so much trouble effected, to restore 



166 JACK scudahore's daughteb. 

the Anglican Church of the Middle Ages. This 
seemed " hard lines" to the Reverend Basil Plyn- 
lymmon, whose lines had so long been cast in 
pleasant places. No wonder, therefore, that he was 
sUent. His heart was heavy-against his Bishop. 

Did not the thin Curate remember that he was 
about entering a circle of fan* devotees, some of 
whom might give more of their attention to him, 
when their reverend favourite had quitted the 
parish; and was he not sensible that several of 
them had already begun to look at him a good deal 
more than they used to do ? 

The young ladies of Miss Pincher's Finishing 
Establishment, for instance, now never met him 
without favouring him with a peculiar smile. He 
did not know, poor man, how often he had been 
the subject of their conversation since their me- 
morable meeting in the meadows, and what extra- 
ordinary remarks had been made about him by the 
tall girls in confidential conference. Nor was he 
aware that a rather knowing little puss had oracu- 
larly pronounced her opinion that he was not half 



A NEW ST. PETEK. 167 

the muff he looked. All that he could understand 
was, that an interest for him of some kind had 
been displayed by those charming young creatures, 
and he felt elated at the consciousness thereof. 

Then he speculated as to the possible presence 
of Miss Brabazon at the meeting, and whether she 
would invite him to Brabazon Lodge. He was 
inclined to think favourably of vestal virgins in 
general, and gratefully of one in particular. He 
should like, too, to learn more respecting those 
classic statues in the hall. What Miss Brabazon 
had said about them was certainly very curious,— 
remarkable coincidences assuredly. The subject 
deserved further examination. And so did the 
Mulsum. He would not again drink any of that 
deUcious beverage upon an empty stomach; in 
fact, he had made up his mind to give over fast- 
ing, except in Lent. 

As Mr. Perkins could not commimicate these 
ideas to his companion, he naturally kept them to 
himself ; hence it was that their short walk was so 
singularly short of speech. 



1 68 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

As the two reverend gentlemen entered the 
large schoohroom, they became aware that a con- 
siderable assemblage had collected. Almost all 
were females. There was diversity of condition 
and variety of age ; but venerable matrons^ plump 
widows, attenuated old maids, young wives, and 
girls approaching womanhood, were all there, with 
crosses displayed on their bosoms, and strings of 
black beads pendent from their necks. There 
were gold crosses and silver, ivory and jet, accord- 
ing to the rank or fancy of the wearer. Some of 
the wealthier ladies were further distinguished by 
the display of long steel chatelainesy with an assort- 
ment of singular-looking objects dangling at the 
end, — a mediaeval decoration of special interest in 
the eyes of ultra-Puseyites. 

Great sensation was manifested when the dis- 
possessed Vicar made his appearance. He seemed 
sensibly affected; paused as he approached the 
more fashionable-looking portion of the assembly, 
who had congregated in the higher part of the 
school, and bowed over his hat with a very touch- 



A NEW ST. PETER. 169 

ing seriousness of manner. Of course there was 
more sensation. 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon placed liis 
hat on the tall desk, where he usually officiated, 
and the Reverend Samuel Perkins placed his on a 
smaller desk, which had been his post when super- 
intending the rising generation of the parish, or 
assisting in the prayer-meetings of their seniors. 
Then all knelt, and the customary prayer was re- 
peated; then all rose, and the customary hymn 
was sung. There was intense fervour in the ex- 
pression of every sentence of the former, as it was 
intoned after the ex-Vicar, and tremendous ear- 
nestness in every note of the latter as it was sung 
in full choir. 

Then came a pause of expectation, made a 
hundredfold more impressive' by a murmur of soft 
sighs, which followed after a rustle of drapery, 
declaiing that female dresses were submitting to 
the ordinary pressure rendered necessary by the 
adoption of a sitting position. 

The retiring Incumbent of Delamere Parva 



170 JACK scubamore's daughteb. 

stood up and looked benevolently down upon the 
old and the young familiar faces he knew that he 
was gating upon for the la^t time, and beheld un- 
mistakable evidence of their sympathy and affec- 
tion. For those who had not brought smelling- 
bottles carried vinaigrettes; and many a furtive 
sniff declared to him the efforts their owners were 
timely making to repress their sensibiUty. 

In a subdued voice, not very steady, he began 
an address, in which he informed them that his 
enemies had triumphed. 

Every fair listener knew that the pig of a 
churchwarden and his latitudinarian associates 
were thus referred to, and they groaned their dis- 
approbation. 

Mr. Cobb might have taken to heart this 
affecting proof of hii^ fair fellow-parishioners' want 
of appreciation of his interference in the affairs of 
the church, only he did not happen to be present. 
He had been engaged best part of the day in 
auditing the accounts of the Corporation of Dela- 
mere Magna, and was at that precise moment par- 



A NEW ST. PETEB. 171 

ticularly enjoying himself as a guest of his Wor- 
ship the Mayor. 

The reverend orator then declared with indig- 
nant intonation, that by an exercise of arbitrary 
power, unexampled for its injustice, he had been 
deprived of the living of Delamere Parva, and 
therefore was no longer their parish-priest. 

Louder groans testified their hatred of the 
episcopal tyrant, and their respect for his victim. 
Unfortunately for the good Bishop he was unable 
to profit by this exhibition of feehng, for he was 
then engaged in the House of Lords, delivering 
one of those lucid explanations of Church polity 
•for which he had rendered his name famous. 

Now the orator commenced the enumeration 
of the improvements he had effected in every 
thing and every body since the commence- 
ment of his ministry. He made much of the 
new church — ^he made more of the beautiful ser- 
vice he had introduced ; the new college was done 
justice to ; and he did not fail to notice the Coal 
and Blanket Club, the Visiting-the-sick-Poor So- 



172 JACK scxtdamore's daughteb. 

ciety, the Bible-Class, and other kindred institu- 
tions which he had the honour of inaugurating — 
at the expense of his congregation. This, how- 
ever, he did not add ; and for some equally inex- 
plicable reason he omitted to mention the sup- 
pressed Order of St. Hildebrand. 

His audience were apparently sensible of all 
*" they owed to him, for many an audible sniff de- 
clared that their feelings required restraint. Dmv 
ing the next few minutes sighs swelled into sobs, 
for their favourite was dilating on the tender ties 
he had formed in the parish, in the course of his 
active and faithful ministry, and the difficulty — 
almost insuperable difficulty — ^he found in break- 
ing away from them. 

An odour of Preston smelling-salts, mingled 
with that of aromatic vinegar, as stoppers were 
opened, and lids moved on their hinges, proclaimed 
the increased pressure on the feelings of the com- 
munity, as the orator dwelt on special cases of 
devotion to the restored Anglican Church of the 
Middle Ages by his affectionate sisters ; and as he 



A NEW ST. PETER. 173 

I 

wound up with expressions of exaggerated grati- 
tude for the loving assistance so received, signs and 
sounds of hysteria began to accumulate, and went 
on as long as he proceeded in that touching strain. 

Finally, he inveighed with an excess of bitter 
ridicule on certain features of the Low-Church 
section of the Reformed Church of England, pro- 
phesying the entire destruction of the Establish- 
ment, in consequence of the obstacles it put forth 
to the revival of Anglicanism in its purest type ; 
concluding with another slap at the Bishop who 
had so unrighteously accepted his resignation. 

After a good deal of clapping of fair hands, 
and wiping of fair eyes, a movement was observed 
in the front benches; the more fashionable bon- 
nets approached closer to each other ; there was a 
little whispering ; and then all those in any way 
entitled to the title of lady rose, and preceded by 
Mrs. Admiral Proudfoot, approached the reverend 
orator. 

He knew perfectly well the object with which 
they had left their seats, but affected to be startled 



174 JACK scxjdamobk's daughter. 

out of the examination of certain school-papers 
upon his desk. 

There were marked signs of sensation as the 
deputation advanced, and curiosity was evidently 
struggling for the mastery with admiration, among 
the less elegantly-dressed upon the back benches, 
as the former formed in a half-circle on each side 
the tall desk, and the voice of Mrs. Proudf oot, pre- 
ceded by several loud hems, became audible. 

That excellent lady, in a strain of feminine 
eloquence, much interrupted by the necessity she 
seemed under of displaying the valuable lace of 
which her pocket-handkerchief was composed, tried 
to express the sentiments of the female inhabitants 
of the parish of Little Delamere at the loss of 
their beloved pastor. 

She said a good deal — ^with a somewhat con- 
fused relation of predicate and other portions of 
a sentence — ^respecting his Christian virtues, con- 
stantly interrupting the current of her oratory with 
attempts to clear her throat and the application of 
her Valenciennes to her mouth ; but she managed 



A NBW ST, PBTBR. 175 

to utter a highly-coloured estimate of the merits 
of the victim of what she was pleased to term a 
shameful persecution^ which elicited a loud demon- 
stration of acquiescence from the back benches, 

" I say slmmeful persecution /" said the ener- 
getic lady, and immediately loud groans and clap- 
ping of hands from the audience broke out louder 
than before. 

The Reverend Basil Plynlymmon looked com- 
pletely penetrated by this imanswerable evidence 
of his popularity, but satisfied himself by putting 
his hand over his heart and bowing. He knew 
that something more was coming, and reserved 
his feelings for the urgent demand upon them 
that this something would produce. 

Mrs. Proudfoot put her hand to her pocket, 
and instantly there was a sudden silence and a 
general straining of necks. She drew from it a 
very handsome silk purse of large size, that was 
stuffed with a close resemblance to bank-notes and 
gold. 

Here the fair orator's hems became louder, and 
the applications of the lace to her lips almost in- 



176 JACK SCfUDAlfOBE'S DAUGHTER. 

cessant. Her nervousness was fast getting the 
better of her eloquence. But the reverend gen- 
tleman whom she was addressing was quite willing 
to take the deed for the word. Indeed, nothing 
could be clearer to him than that his affectionate 
friends had subscribed a parting testimonial^ and 
had wisely determined that it should take the 
shape he most appreciated. 

With one hand he accepted fhe farewell-offer- 
ings and with the other he displayed his cambric 
pocket-hankerchief . All his fair parishioners knew 
what was forthcoming, and made the most ener- 
getic sniffs at their several restoratives for weak 
nerves. 

As they had anticipated, tears came flowing 
down the cheeks of the victim of persecution, 
and his voice became quite broken in his en- 
deavours to make his gratitude intelligible. He 
wiped his eyes, and the tears flowed again; he 
stopped to find words to express his feelings, and 
then his words became still more thick and frag- 
mentary. 

There was not a dry eye in the place ; even 






Mr. PerldnsfoaiMlk neeesBUTtDcasearer^^^citeil 
nature with a small snirrcl ; and vfafen thi^ leve- 
read friend (faaTing cairefall v deposited tike offex^ 
ing ia his breastcoat-poAet) dasped his hands 
spasmodically together, and permitted his head to 
fall on his arms spread to reoeire it on the desk^ 
•—in token that he was qnite overcome, — agonis- 
ing sobs broke ont all al<Mig the back; two 
yonng Sunday-school teachers went into violent 
hysterics, and the matron of the college fainted 
dead away. 

When the sufferers had been carried out into 
the air, and order had been partly restored, the 
Eeverend Basil Flynlymmon raised his head and 
stood upon his feet. 

" Much that I am unable at this trying mo- 
ment to express to you," he exclaimed, looking 
quite as pitifully as he spoke, ^^must remain un- 
said ; but terrible as this ordeal is to your faith-; 
ful pastor, it must be prolonged. 

" I feel," he added, diving into the pockets of 
his greatcoat, " what holy St. Peter would have 

VOL. HI. N 



178 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

to experience, were he suddenly deprived of the 
gates of Paradise." 

Tremendous sensation was excited when, at 
the conclusion of this enigmatical sentence, the 
speaker produced a number of latch-keys. 

The owners flushed visibly. What a pretty 
compliment! What a touching sentiment! The 
vow of chastity they now knew was all moonshine. 
It was evident that their dear friend meant some- 
thing, and had meant something all along. Such 
a reference to her home as Paradise by an un- 
married man to a marriageable woman was almost 
a declaration ; and matron, widow, or maid, each 
accepted the speech in that sense. 

" With profound regret I part with these sym- 
bols of the most perfect confidence and the most 
exalted regard." 

He approached each owner, presented the key 
to her as reverentially as if it had been a sacred 
mediaeval relic, bending down and kissing the 
hand stretched out to receive it. 

Mr. Perkins began to entertain the idea that 



I 

/ 



A NEW ST. PETEB. 179 

the caress would shortly be bestowed differently, 
and was considering whether, in that case, he 
would not be bound to follow so good an example. 

" I have always found your hearts as open to 
me a^ your dwelUngs," he added with increa^d 
fervour, as he once more wiped his eyes, while the 
recipients of the key and the kiss seemed over- 
powered by the intensity of their emotions. 

" Farewell, dear sisters I All of you, fare- 
well ! Be assured that I shall never forget you in 
my prayers. Eest satisfied that I shall always 
think of you as the most perfect Christians the 
restored Anglican Church has produced. Fare- 
well I" 

Again there was a violent outburst of sobbing 
and other hysterical demonstrations, and when the 
dreadfully distressed ladies took their handkerchiefs 
from their ^yes, their favourite had disappeared. 

As the Reverend Basil Plynlymmon placed his 
hat upon his head at the door of the college, he 
took from his breastcoat-pocket with the other 
hand its bulky contents; looked at the purse a 



180 JACK SCTJDAMORE^S DAUOHTEB. 

moment, smiled, and put it carefnUy back again. 
He was quite satisfied that there was in it more 
than was necessary for the expenses of his jour- 
ney — ^to Rome. 



\ 



CHAPTER Vm. 

JACK SCUDAMOBE IN CLOVER. 

There was a tumultuous barking of dogs, and a 
rapid scampering of men and boys, as a handsome 
park phaeton drawn by a pair of bright bay horses 
was driven into the stable-yard of Delamere Court. 
A young lady in a black-plumed hat, and cloak of 
the same colour, threw the reins to one of the 
grooms, and sprang to the ground whip in hand, 
while, with a little less alacrity, an old gentleman 
in a dark topcoat, fur cap, leather leggings, and 
shooting-boots jumped out on the other side. 

There were delirious barkings and jumpings of 
the canine species, apparently to welcome the re- 
turn home of the two individuals just alluded to ; 
and in the faces of the servants, and exclamations 



182 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

of one or two of the oldest and more prmleged^ 
their gladness of heart was equally manifest. 

^^Down, Ponto! down, Kowley! that's enongh 
good old Towser!" was uttered in a soft sweet 
voice, as the possessor of it patted the heads of the 
old hounds who were struggling with each other 
to express their personal attachment, and secure 
the notice they so highly prized. 

" Zounds, Spot, old girl, do you want to .eat 
mel" cried her male companion cheerily, as he 
gently tried to escape the affectionate demonstra- 
tions of another noble fox-hound. 

^^It's natur^. Squire T exclaimed Dick Wil- 
cox, touching his velvet hunting-cap, with his 
jolly red face a-glow with pleasure. ^^Nothin' 
but natur'. Squire. These poor dumb beast^s has 
hearts for them they knows as love 'em, as warm 
and as true as ever beat in a human bussum. I 
be main glad to see as the ride has done you so 
much good. Squire." 

" Thank ye, Dick. Yes, I never felt better." 

Certainly Jack Scudamore had rarely, if ever. 



JACK SCXTDAMORE IN CLOYER. 183 

looked better in his life. A hale old age never was 
more easily recognised in a ruddy laughing coun- 
tenance. And as she threw up her veil a similar 
compliment might have been paid to the face of 
Jack Scudamore's daughter. The pallid com- 
plexion she had exhibited at Bruges appeared to 
have been replaced by her native roses, and her 
bright eyes once again sparkled with pride and 
animation as she gazed upon her father^s improved 
looks. 

Suddenly there was another outburst of tu- 
multuous barking, and the whole canine party 
dashed away as a young lady on a gray horse rode 
into the yard, followed by half-a-dozen grey- 
hounds. The Squire was at her bridle before 
even the active grooms, and helped her to dis- 
mount. 

"Well, my lass, how have you enjoyed your 
coursing?" he asked in his kindest tones. 

"Oh, wonderfully! Thank you for a very 
delightful day," replied another sweet voice. The 
fair equestrian threw up her veil, and disclosed 



184 JACK scudahobe's daughteb. 

the face of — gracious goodness! — the miserable 
postulant. 

But the expression of that fresh youthful love* 
liness had evidently no more to do with the 
melancholy cloister than with the antipodes. 
Whether the bracing air of the Downs, or the 
enjoyment of a new pleasure in the society of 
dear and loving friends, had worked the meta- 
morphosis, I cannot say, but assuredly her now 
happy healthy face was totally unlike that of a 
nun. 

"Will is coming in the dog-cart with the 
hares," added the ex-novice in the same joyous 
tone. "And didn't we have famous runs after 
them !" 

"And you shall have as many more as you 
like, my lass. God bless your sweet face T 

The honest heart of the Squire was evidently 
as buoyant as that of his young guest. 

"Come, Geraldine, let us dress for dinner,** 
cried her friend ; " papa, you know, is veiy par- 
ticular about our toilettes." 



JACK SCUDAMOBE IN CLOVER. 185 

The two girls went laughing together in the 
direction of their dressing-rooms by the back en- 
trance; and the Squire^ in quite as pleasant a 
frame of mind^ after' giving a few directions about, 
and a few caressing pats to, the horses, followed 
into the house, sauntering leisurely along, his 
hands in his pockets, and whistling "Bright chan- 
ticleer.'' 

" If that beant a change for the better," cried 
Dawkins, jerking his thumb towards the retreat- 
ing figure of his master, "I doan't know what be. 
Why, before and directly arter the Dock's death 
the Squire moped about as though he took no 
interest in nothin'. When the Duchess came to 
live wi' he, he brightened up summut ; and when 
tother un come, he got quite hisself again." 

*^ It's all along o' them pretty smiling lasses," 
added Dick Wilcox impressively. " Their bright 
sunny faces would bring sunshine into a pri- 



son." 



"The Squire feels hisself more comfortabler 
than he ever was afore," remarked Tom Rogers, 



186 JACK SCUBAHOBS'S BAU6HTEB. 

with a knowing wink and a grin. " The old horse 
be in clover, and he knows it, he do." 

The little party met at dinner; the Sqnire in a 
neat suit of black, evidently more carefully dress* 
ed, especially about the white neck-cloth, than he 
had used to be ; but notwithstanding his daugh- 
ter's intimation respecting their toilettes, the 
young ladies could make no particular display, as 
both were in mourning — ^that of the elder being 
of a much deeper kind than that worn by the 
other. 

They took their seats on each side the old 
gentleman, and their occupation seemed much less 
to satisfy their own wants than to attend to his. 
It was a very pleasing picture — ^the two lovely 
girls intent on anticipating his wishes; recom- 
mending this, persuading him to take that, filling 
his glass with wine, and with their lively talk 
striving. to keep him incessantly amused; Daw- 
kins all the while standing behind his master^s 
chair, looking on with an aspect of decided ap- 



JACK SCUDAMOBB IN CLOVER. 187 

provaJ, and only interposing when Ms services 
were required. 

Under these circmnstances it may well be im- 
agined that honest Jack Scudamore thoroughly 
enjoyed his meal, and with his usual honesty he 
betrayed his satisfaction in his happy look and 
cheery voice. His fair companions were far from 
neglected. It was evident that both ate with a good 
appetite, and were in possession of excellent spirits. 

The dessert having been placed on the table, 
Dawkins disappeared to the housekeeper^s-room, 
to inform a select circle there, enjoying a round 
game, of the pleasant scene he had just witnessed; 
and for the special gratification of its stout mis- 
tress of the ceremonies, of the manner in which 
her master had enjoyed the particular delicacies 
in the bill of fare, of which he had been permitted 
to partake. 

"By the way, Fanny,'^ suddenly cried the 
Squire, as he filled her glass, "I saw the post-bag 
in the hall, as I came in, and in it, by Jove, I 
foimd a letter from Fitz." 



188 . JACK scudamorb's daughtkr. 

The two gills immediateljr exhibited a very 
lively astonishment, and uttered the nsnal feminine 
exclamations, expressive of the most intense in- 
terest and excitement. 

^ It is strange, my dear, that he should write 
to me instead of to his dster,^^ he added (the sly old 
fellow knowing all the while that there was no* 
thing the least strange in the circumstance) ; ^^ but 
no doubt it's all pro bono pubUcOj so here it is for 
you both to peruse/* 

He threw it between them. The elder, as in 
the good old times, was intrusted with the o£Gce 
of reader, and lost no time in commencing the 
dut^% She read aloud as follows : 

** Singapore^ Augusty 185^. 
^^Deab Sir, — ^I received your favour and note 
the contents. Our house can supply any quan-> 
tity desired of the principal articles of produce of 
this part of the globe. Edible birds'-nests are 
looking-up; best soy, too, is a fraction higher, 
but we can ship you a hogshead at the last quo* 



JACK SCUDAMORE IN CLOVER, 189 

tation, aUowing for demurrage. Rice is low, so 
I haVe ventured to forward a dozen bags by ship 
Coromandel; also two chests of tea, fine and choice 
— ^known as How-hang and Sing-twang. Also one 
bag pepper ; twelve jars preserved ginger ; a case 
of Japan lacquered-work; ditto Chinese carved 
ivory. Also twenty Cochin fowls, a Brahnmi bull, 
and a Malacca monkey. 

" Hoping same will come safe to hand, I re- 
main. 

Dear sir, 

Yours truly, 

" Mervyn Fitz-Jones.*^ 

" Goodness gracious !" 

" What does it mean V 

" Birds'-nests and demurrage I" 

" How-kang and Sing-twang 1" 

" Cochin fowls. Brahmin bull, and a Malacca 
monkey !" 

"And oh, more horrible than all, to call- him- 
self FUz-Jones /" 



190 JACK SCUBAMOBS'S DATXGHTEB. 

" It's absolutely hideous T 

^^ What does it all mean, I want to knowf 

The Squire turned from one to the other of 
the excited speakers, with his ordinary genial phy- 
siognomy. 

"Remember that he has become a man of busi- 
ness, my dears," he at last interposed nuldly. 

" Business, indeed T echoed the Duchess scorn- 
fully; "it must be a precious business that makes 
him forget his own dear sister." 

"He has not mentioned either of us!" cried 
Geraldine in tones of dismay. 

" Oh, as far as / am concerned, he is welcome 
to omit me. I have not the ambition to expect 
to be named on the same page as the best soy, 
or with his rice and his pepper, and all that 
chandler^s-shop stuff. But, after so long an ab- 
sence, to omit even the name of so darling a sister 
— ^I haven't common patience with him 1" 

"Never mind, dear," murmured a sweet voice. 

" Oh, but I do mind; I hate such cold-blooded 
business^^ The Duchess accentuated the last word 



JAOK BOUDAMOBE IN CLOVEB. 191 

with supreme contempt. " And here's papa, too, 
taking the matter as coolly as if nothing could be 
more proper." 

^^ But, my dear child, what would you have ? 
He is only submitting to circumstances. And I 
am sure that it is very good of him to send me 
so many useful things. Indeed, I suspect that 
some of them must be intended for yow." 

" For me, papa !" 

"Yes, dear. For instance, the tea, and the 
preserved ginger, and the Cochin fowls — and — 

and — ^the monkey." 

« 

The Squire had hesitated and sunk his voice 
at the last item of his list; but it had hardly 
escaped his lips when he ought to have been very 
sorry for his temerity. 

"I shall not accept presents from any one 
who puts an affront upon my friend," she replied 
haughtily. 

'*He has only been a little forgetful of me, 
darling mamma; that's all," again murmured the 
soft voice. 



192 JACK scubahobe's daughter. 

"That's more than enough to set me against 
him," was the sharp rejoinder. "But they are 
not intended as presents to me, or to any body else, 
I would lay any wager. Mr. Fitz-JTones has be- 
come a man of business ; and therefore the rub- 
bish he has sent you, you will be expected to pay 
for.'' 

"Don't be so hard upon poor Fitz," pleaded 
Geraldine. 

"Now, papa, do me the favour to see that no- 
thing from that source ever comes under my obser- 
vation. If such absurd things should really be 
forwarded for my acceptance, I give you f uU per^ 
ndssion to return them.'* 

" Oh, Fanny," was the gentle remonstrance. 

"Very well, my dear," replied the Squire in 
a tone of perfect submission. "Every thing in 
my house shall always be as you wish. Tm sorry 
for poor Fitz, though, for I don't think he meant 
to offend you." 

The Duchess made a gesture of impatience. 

"That's enough, papa. Let us change the 
subject." 



JACK SOUDAMORB IN CLOVER* 193 

"Very well, my dear," was the conciliatory 
reply; and then, as if to show his ready obedience, 
honest Jack Scudamore turned his ruddy face to 
his fair young guest, and inquired, " Did Saladin 
carry you well to-day 1" 

^^ Admirably," she replied, her face brightening 
up considerably, as more pleasant ideas were pre- 
sented to her; " He is a capital lady's horse." 

"So he is, my dear. My old friend gave a 
top price for him, for he is of a pure Arabian stock, 
not often imported. Did I ever tell you about 
Fanny's race, when she rode Saladin against Lord 
Vernon, on his famous horse?" 

"She knows all about it, papa; I told her; 
tell her something else." 

She poured out a glass of water, and drank, 
as the submissive Squire commenced a racing 
adventure of his own. This having been received 
with evident pleasm'e, it was followed by a descrip- 
tion of a remarkable stag-hunt in which he had 
also been engaged. Then sporting story and anec- 

VOL. m. o 



194 JACK SCUDAKORK's DAU6HTKB. 

dote followed in quick socoesaon, to the increasiiig 
gratificatioD of bis audience. 

Jnst when the animation of all three seemed 
to have reached its climax, the door opened, and 
the portly person of Mrs. LaTender appeared^beai- 
ing the coflFee. This she mvariabty served herself, 
on which occasions her best dresses and handsom- 
e^ immneats^-^piu^tia^j :i ms^ye l«oocli and 
gold watch and chain — were sore to be dis^jed. 
As she was entertaining a little party of her own 
that evening, the ample lady was a little more 
magnificent than nsnaL 

Her adv^it was hailed with peculiar satisfac- 
tion by eveiy one of the little party at the table, 
and a current of very lively gossip began to flow 
with the fragrant beverage. The Sqnire took his 
cup and stood np, and the girls poshed back their 
chairs, and sipped and talked evidentljr qnite as 
much at thdr ease, and dinng equal justice to 
Mrs. Lavender^s coffee and her new dress. That 
rery matronly lady was, as usual, cordial and 
jocular with the Squire, and quite as cheerful as 



JACK SCUDAMORB IN CLOVEIL 195 

she was affectionate to the young ladies. In short, 
a good deal of "harmless mirth was soon going on 
in a spirit of extreme good humour. Suddenly 
the two younger faces became serious, and their 
part of the very lively conversation ceased. 

This was occasioned by the Squire simply ask- 

« 

ing, " Have you got the Blue-room ready? I told 
you I expected a visitor who would sleep here.*' 

"Yes, Squire,^ was the answer. "The gentle- 
man is sure to find every thing comfortable." 

"Then a gentleman was coming there that 
evening," both young ladies thought simultane- 
ously. " How veiy strange that not a word should 
have been said to them on the subject T 

"Papa,*' inquired the elder in a somewhat 
stately manner, "is it Mr. Fitz-Jones who is ex- 
j)ected to honour us with his society t** 

"No, my dear,'* replied her father; "he is 
thousands of miles away." 

She then knew who it must be; and having a 
particular policy of her own to develope as soon 
as that individual should come within her influ- 



I 



196 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

ence, she made no further remark on the arrange- 
ment. 

Geraldine also knew who it must be ; and she, 
having a particular policy of her own to demon- 
strate in her future relations with that individual, 
also silently acquiesced. Both pursued their own 
tedn of thought, and left the gossip to be shared 
by Mrs. Lavender and the Squire. But nothing 
more was said by either about "the gentle- 
man." 

As the stout housekeeper was about to retire 
with her china and silver equipage, a firm footstep 
was heard advancing, and the door again opened. 

" Now," said the Duchess to herself, " for my 
little plan for dear Geraldine." 

" Now," said the latter equally to herself, " for 
my little plan for my darling mamma." 

Both girls started to their feet simultaneously, 
with the utmost surprise expressed in their coun- 
tenances, when Dawkins presented himself, and in 
a sonorous voice announced, 

*^ Monseigneur." 



JACK SCUDAMORB IN CLOVER. 197 

About an hour later, a party of four were sit- 
ting at the sides of a small square table, each lady 
opposite a gentleman. The table was covered with 
green baize ; wax candles in antique silver candle- 
sticks were burning upon it. Before each lady 
were four golden coimters, and several little layers 
of oblong pasteboard. Li the centre of the green 
baize were tliree playing-cards with their faces 
displayed, and in one hand of each of the little 
party were several others. 

They were playing at whist. Absolutely the 
right reverend the Lord Bishop of Melpotamos 
had got the ex-postulant as a partner, and was 
engaged in a secular rubber against Jack Scu- 
damore and his daughter. But what a game 
it was I The immortal Hoyle would have dis- 
owned it. The absolute authority Major A* * * 
would have pronounced it any thing but " whist." 
To be sure the young ladies held their hands 
before them properly arranged; but their fair faces 
were brilliant with an interest that was as far 
from gambling as heaven is from — ^its opposite ; and 



198 JACK scubahobe's daughteb. 

those genial-looking old fellows had their cards 
pressed together in their grasp^ the arm resting 
on the green baize, or else the body reclining 
quite at ease against the chair. 

They were . gossiping, joking^ laughing— doing 
any thing rather than playing ; and their partners, 
entranced, as it were, with those charming reminis- 
cences of forty years ago, became quite oblivious of 
rules, looked at each other occasionally in pleased 
surprise, and not mifrequently burst out into peak 
of silvery laughter. 

It became evident that the venerable host and 
his right reverend guest had been associated in 
their joyous youth in all sorts of extraordinary 
escapades; and in their relation every thing else 
was forgotten, apparently by general consent. 
When the Bishop ended some ludicrous adven- 
ture in which he had been jointly engaged with 
his friend, — singularly out of character with his 
present very serious responsibilities, — ^the Squire 
would, with much the same hilarious earnest- 
ness, commence another, in which the same actors 



, JACK SCUDAMORE IN CLOYEB. 199 

distingaished themselves in some performance 
Btili more inconsistent with the senility of either. 

Of course these poor girls became at times 
totally ignorant of how the game was proceeding ; 
they could not have known whether they were 
playing short or long; they had forgotten who 
had taken the last trick; in short they could do 
nothing but watch those eloquent faces, listen to 
the animated talk, and join in the cheery nurth. 

Suddenly the good Bishop would start up from 
the position in which he had enjoyed his last ca- 
chinnation, and look at his cards with attempted 
seriousness, and then kindly address his partner : 

" Bless my heart I, I haven't played all this 
time. What's trumps, my child ?" 

Or Jack Scudamore would withdraw his elbows 
from the table, peer over his cards, and cry out in 
A voice of constrained gravity, " Well, Fanny, my 
<iear, whose trick is it? How do we stand?" 

Bather confused answers were sure to be given, 
which did not increase the seriousness of either 
^seniors or juniors; nevertheless, in some uncom- 



200 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

monly irregular manner the game proceeded, till 
one of the former woidd appeal to the other with 
a fresh reminiscence, and then the pleasant inter- 
regnum would conmience anew. 

What seemed to astonish the fair audience 
was the absence of every thing resembling for- 
mality in the references of the speakers to each 
other. The good-natured prelate condescended 
to address his host by the familiar nickname of 
"Jack;" this did not, however, surprise them so 
much as the Squire calling his distinguished guest 
'^ Harry." The secret of this intimate sociality 
came out at last. 

" Do you play a heart, my child?" inquired the 
Bishop across the table, in one of his momentary 
recollections of the demands of the game* 

'' No, Monseigneur," was the ex-postulant's re- 
ply ; " I do not possess one." 

" So I thought, my dear." 

I do not like positively to affirm that a Koman 
Catholic Bishop could conmiit himself in so very 
secular a fashion as to wink furtively at another 



.JACK SCUDAMORE IN CLOYEB* 201 

old gentleman sitting beside him^ while speaMng 
to a young lady with an apparent seriousness of 
manner; nevertheless, in one eyelid of the right 
reverend father there was certainly a slight move- 
ment. It might have been entirely accidental — 
the ordinary action to refresh the pupil when 
under the influence of artificial light. Be this as 
it may, honest Jack Scudamore chuckled audibly. 

Perhaps he saw something droll in his hand, 
or in the face of his daughter, for he glanced with 
a peculiar expression from one to the other. The 
countenance of the Duchess, too, wore a conscious-* 
ness not there before, as she seemed intent on 
sorting her cards, which had been sorted nearly 
an hour ago. 

" Forty years since, in this very room, Jack," 
said the Bishop presently and in a tone of deep 
feeling, " you were pursuing your studies, under 
my tuition. I don't think you found your pre- 
ceptor difficult to please, eh. Jack?" 

" No, by Jove, Harry," cried the Squire, in 
his most emphatic delivery. " You were only two 



202 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

or three years my senior, and could make allow- 
ances for the natural buoyancy of spirit belonging 
to youth." 

^ We were both naturally vivacious^ Jack ; but 
I think I kept you out of scrapes, and did not 
permit you to neglect your studies." 

^^ That was it, Hiiny, exactly. Thanks to you, 
I got on pretty well with my learning, and never 
disgmced myself in any way." 

^ You always conducted yourself with credit^ 
my dear old friend and pupil. But, among the 
innumerable good lessons I taught you, have you 
forgotten your music? You used to excel, I 
thought, in that accomplishment — in the acquisi* 
tion of which we passed together many a joyous 
hour." 

^^ So we did ; but beyond a song at a hunt- 
dinner, I haven't attempted any thing of the kind 
for many years." 

^^ I should like, Jack, to revive that long-dis- 
used gratification. What's become of the old 
book we had?" 



JACK SCUDAMOBE IN CLOYEB. 203 

" I haven't seen it for ages, "Harry ; and I'm 
afraid my memory is not to be relied upon." 

The Duchess put down her cards, rose, and 
left the room. She knew very well where the 
old music-book was, and went to fetch it. She 
returned in a very few minutes, bearing a much- 
worn oblong volume, which she placed upon the 
card-table, as Dawkins entered with a tray con- 
taining hot-water, wine, and biscuits. 

" Make me a nice glass of negus, my child," 
said the Bishop paternally to his partner. 

She put down her cards, and proceeded to 
the tray, where the Duchess was engaged mak- 
ing a tumbler of the same beverage for her 
father. 

"The dear old book, without a doubt 1" ex- 
claimed the right reverend old gentleman, de- 
lighted, as he recognised the quaintly engraved 
titles, and the figured bass of a variety of Eng- 
lish duets that were popular about the close of the 
last century. 

They drew their chairs so close, that their 



204 JACK SCUDAMORE'S DAU6HTEB. 

silveiy hair seemed to mingle. The elder then 
threw his right arm familiarly over the back of 
his former pupil's seat, while he turned the leaves 
with his left hand. 

There had been a little whispering of sur- 
prised anticipation between the female friends 
over their manufacture, but it did not attract at- 
tention. 

"What shall it be, Jack?" 

" Whatever you like, Harry." 

" Then, suppose we try this T 

« With aU my heart." 

Immediately two manly voices of extraordinary 
richness of tone joined in the lively two-part song 
"Haste, my Nannette." The audience listened 
with breathless interest, for the composition had 
not only first-rate merit to recommend it, but was 
sung with surprising spirit. Neither seemed to 
be conscious of the glaring impropriety of a digni^ 
taiy of the Church of Rome expressing the senti- 
ments to which the music had been set ; all they 
seemed conscious of, was the enjoyment of ^ new 



JACK SCUDAMOKE IN CLOVER. 205 

pleasure. They stood still and listened, occasion-. 
ally interchanging glances of astonishment and 
delight. 

The venerable vocalists proceeded, apparently 
fancying that they had renewed their youth, so 
fresh was the vivacity of feeling they displayed. 

« Well done. Jack r 

" Bravo, Harry T 

Nothing could exceed the joyousness of these 
exclamations, when they had finished the last bar 
of the performance. 

" Ah, my child, it is you I" added the Bishop 
kindly, as he became aware that the ex-postulant 
was standing beside him, bearing in her hand the 
beverage he had asked for. 

" Yes, Monseigneur,'* murmured a soft voice he 
had begun to like very much, ^^ I have made tlia 
negus ; and may I hope that you will do me the 
honour to like it, Monseigneur f '* 

^^ Thanks, my dear ; a thousand thanks. It is 
excellent." 

He sipped the steaming liquid, and was evi^ 



206 JACK SCXJDAMORE^S DAUGHTER. 

dentlj as much pleased with its taste as with its 
fragrance. 

"Well, Fanny darling," exclaimed the Sqtiire, 
as he tarted his brimmmg tumbler, "how did the 
old dad get through that, eh?" 

"Charmingly, papaT was the reply, accom- 
panied by a smile that amply rewarded him for 
novel exertions. "I really cannot express my 
surprise, my wonder, at what I have 'been per- 
mitted to hear." 

"Ah, my dear, you must let my old friend 
hear you and Geraldine," he added affectionately. 
"There's that very pretty duet — that German 
thing, you know — ^yousung so exquisitely with — ^ 

" O, I don't know where it is, papa," answered 
the Duchess, interrupting him quickly, but with 
evident embarrassment. 

She knew extremely well where it was. She 
had placed it behind the fire, that it might never 
again disturb her with its associations. 

The good prelate saw that there was some- 
thing wrong, and with ready tact came to the rescue. 



JACK SCUDAMOBE IN CLOVER. 207 

" Here, Jack !" he exclaimed exultantly, as he 
directed his friend's attention to another title; 
" don't you remember what a favourite this used 
to be!" 

" To be sure I do ; and by George we'll have 
it at once !" 

Thereupon both voices mingled in that old- 
fashioned duet, " Could a man be secure." The 
words here were quite as objectionable in the 
mouth of an ecclesiastic as the other lyric had 
been — perhaps more so — nevertheless, no one 
looked shocked; and the offender was assuredly 
quite unconscious of his offence. 

The two listeners held the steaming beverage 
while the singers proceeded, standing on either 
side of them, and looking their gratification quite 
as eloquently as before. 

"Now, my dear children," said the Bishop, a 
Uttle after the close of this performance, "I must 
request you to retire for the night. In the first 
place, it is growing late, and in the next" — ^he 
added with marked emphasis — " it is essential that 



208 JACK bcudamobe's daughter. 

my old friend should pass an hour or so with me 
alone. We are going to conspire F 

Jack Scudamore chuckled again. His daugh- 
ter looked puzzled. Geraldine at once sought her 
chamber-candlestick. 

"Good-night, my dear child," cried the good 
prelate to her tenderly. 

" Good-night, Monseigneur,'Vas answered with 
equal tenderness ; and the like benediction having 
been generally interchanged, the young ladies pro- 
ceeded to their dressing-room. 

Here they soon compared notes respecting 
their unexpected ^dritor, and the equally unex- 
pected entertainment to which he had contributed. 
They were extremely fluent in their remarks 
during the process of unrobing and preparing 
their toilette de nuit, but did not enlighten each 
other in the least. They wondered, but never 
attempted to explain. 

"O, Fanny! what is that mark on your 
shoulder?" 

The Duchess shivered from head to foot at 



JACK SCXJDAMORE IN CLOVER. 209 

this unlooked-for question^ and turned deadly 
pale. 

^' It is nothing, dear ; nothing of the slightest 
consequence, I mean," she replied, as soon as she 
could speak, " Now say your prayers like a good 
girl." 

Geraldine was aware that her friend did not 
like to be questioned on some subjects, so she 
quietly assumed the time-honoured attitude. 

It might have been expected that she would 
have repeated some of the long prayers in Latin 
she had been so carefully taught at the convent. 
She did nothing of the kmd ; she repeated word 
for word her simple, childish, and, of course, here- 
tical prayers and hynm; the only novelty being 
a slight addition to the benediction, in the form of 

"God bless Monsdgneurj and make him as 
happy on earth as he is sure to be in heaven." 

Then the two dear friends embraced, and 
sought their couch. They lay awake, however, 
some time before they slept the sleep of the inno- 

VOL. III. p 



210 JACK scudahobe's daughteb. 

cent and the true; one revolving her little plan^ 
the other considering hers. 

ShortHsightedy hut thoroughly amiable crear 
toresy they were quite unaware that they were 
playing at cross purposes ; they were equally igno- 
rant of what those old gentlemen they had left 
down stairs were conspiring. 

The ingenuous reader must be reminded that 
both the latter were "Papistef that one was a 
Bishop of the Bomish Chiurch — ^probably a Jesuit, 
of coTU'se dreadfuUy sly; moreover that he had 
said nothing about Arthur Calverley, though that 
ill-fated young gentleman was known to have 
been taken by him from the infirmary, and no- 
thing had been heard of him afterwards. Arthur 
was a Protestant, this was certain. Had he been 
enticed to change his faith ? Was he immured in 
a monastic cell? Could he have been made the 
victim of a horrible conspiracy? 

Monseigneur and Jack Scudamore, it is true, 
in no way resembled plotting followers of Loyola, 
or those still more dreadful members of the Holy 



JACK SCUDAMORE IN CLOVER. 211 

Office; but then it cannot be denied that they 
were Boman Catholics, with whom, as every body 
knows, appearances are awfully deceitful. Pain- 
fully aware of this, I tremble for the lovers. 



CHAPTER IX. 

BUBGLABT. 

In one of the streets on the north side of Covent- 
Garden Market, towards the afternoon of a mar- 
ket-day, when costermongers are getting few and 
cabhage-leaves abundant in that intensely busy, 
noisy, and dirty neighbourhood, a gentleman was 
observed lounging carelessly along, smoking a 
cigar. 

His handsome features, fine figure, and fa- 
shionable appearance attracted general attention 
among the market-gardeners' men, stout female 
porters of fruit and vegetables, and slovenly, taw- 
dry, shp-shod girls, gossiping in any thing rather 
than ^^the purest well of English undefiled," near 
the doors of low coflfee-shops and lower beer-shops 
of that bibulous locality. They recognised him 



BUBGLABT. 213 

immediately as ^^ a swell from the Hummums/' a 
heir with many friends and plenty of ready money, 
come up to town to see life, and staying incog* at 
the hotel most in request for such occasions. 

But he might have been an unusually respect- 
able member of the Garrick Club just elected, 
and having made his first visit to the King-Street 
establishment had ventured out on a voyage of 
discovery. Though clad as a civilian, he had the 
upright bearing and air distinguS of an officer of 
the Household Troops, and might, as a liberal 
patron of the drama, so generally popular among 
them, have been escorting in a hansom a meritori- 
ous danseuse or rising chorus-singer to rehearsal, 
and was merely taking a turn till it should be time 
to present himself and a similar vehicle at the 
stage-door. 

But it so happened that he was neither a swell 
from the Hummums, a new and adventurous 
member of the Garrick, or a gallant protector of 
female theatrical talent. Closer observation de- 
tected well-known features, an unmistakeable 



214 JACK scudamobk's daughter. 

head of hair, faultless whiskers, and an irre- 
proachable moustache. Yes, astounding as may 
be the fact, the careless lounger in this disre- 
putable back street was no other than that su- 
premely important personage (in a novel), ^^my 
hero!" 

It was undoubtedly the handsome Captain of 
Hussars, the member for Delamere Magna, the 
attacks at the British embassy at Brussels, admi- 
rably acting the part of a walking gentleman,, 
apparently with no more the matter with him than 
ever did affect a Calverley in a thoroughly flour- 
ishing condition. 

It is quite true that he looked like one who- 
has been freed from all fears of the Inquisition, or 
kindly excused the principal part in an auto dafi;^ 
so that it is not altogether impossible that he may 
have escaped the machinations of some wily old 
Jesuit, — ^I prefer not mentioning names, — or the 
deep-laid conspiracy of an artful old papist; (every 
inteUigent and Hberal-minded reader will at once 
know to whom I refer). Hence the young gentle-^ 



BURGLARY. 215 

man's self-complacency as he puffed at his ha- 
vanna. 

A more commonplace explanation of Arthur 
Oalverley's unconcern may have been found in 
his consciousness of complete restoration to health 
and strength, combined with his having visited the 
Foreign Office that morning and received therein 
a jocose remonstrance, directed against his evident 
tendency to interfere in the education of intended 
religieusesy which ended with a promise of the first 
vacancy in the post of Secretary at Legation, and 
the possession of a certain letter he had just re- 
ceived from an esteemed correspondent. 

His step was elastic and the expression of his 
face amiably nonchalant, till he was disturbed out 
of his very pleasant reflections by a sudden scatter- 
ing of the population of the thoroughfare. Down, 
without any apparent warning, came a heavy, 
soaking shower of rain. Arthur Calverley, as 
quietly as if riding at the head of his troop and 
fulfilling the order of "Two's about," stepped un- 
der an archway to wait for a passing cab. 



216 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

No such accommodatioii presented itself ; in- 
deed, the narrow street was blocked up at one end 
with empty market-carts, and at the other the 
pavement was being repaired ; so the market-gar- 
deners' men, the stout female porters, slatternly 
girls, and the paviors, having rushed pell-meU into 
the gin-palace at the comer, and the beer-shops, 
the early coffee-houses, and other less creditable 
places of shelter, the gallant Captain presently 
found himself alone, with a rivulet before him 
bearing along a confused medley of orange-peel, 
cabbage-stumps, dead flowers, and decayed fruit, 
wliile the pavement was steaming with the torrent 
by which it had been produced. 

He smoked on with an unruffled countenance ; 
he had been in tropical storms under far less 
agreeable circumstances. In a few minutes he 
became aware of voices within hearing distance, 
and looking about him detected a low window 
partly open, but entirely covered with one of those 
faded red blinds to be seen only in the rooms of 
low public-houses. 



BUKGLABY, 217 

» 

The conversation seemed at first to amuse him; 
but his comitenance changed to an expression of 
intense earnestness, and he dashed his cigar into 
the nearest gutter. He had been used to dan- 
gerous vidette duty in the country of a vigilant 
enemy, and crept nearer the window with the 
cautious air of the leader of a reconnoitring party 
on a perilous service. 

The atmosphere had become thick, and a 
lighted candle having been brought into the 
room whence the voices proceeded, two figures 
were shadowed on the faded curtain. Arthur drew 
closer to the open vmidow, and held his breath. 

"It's a beastly country," said a drawling 
voice ; " there's nothin' go a-head about it. An 
enterprisin' chap hasn't a chance of doing a brisk 
trade any how. John Bull's too used-up even to 
allow hisself to be taken in." 

A scai; of " clack, clack," intended apparently 
for a chuckle, issued from another throat. 

" I've come to my last dollar, and am't at this 
blessed moment aware where on 'arth to look for a 



218 JACK scudamobe's dauohteb. 

cent, unless you has a mind to help me in a little 
bit of a adventure, such as we was sometimes re- 
duced to when desp'rate hard up in Dixie* What 
do you say, old coon ?" 

Another sharp clicking of the teeth was made 
by way of answer. 

"There's nothin' easier to do or safer. I've 
been on the sly into the very house : a lonelyish 
place, with only a haged lady and a helpless gal 
living there ; except fat butler, who is to be at 
the Bed Lion ; the coachman and gardener sure 
to be playing at dominoes in the stable ; a little 
maid fast asleep in the attic. The housekeeper has 
gone on a visit to town. Eveiy thing as if spe- 
cially arranged, you see, darty, for our security." 

"Aha! Massa so 'cute," was said in very 
guttural tones. 

"Window opens on the larder, protected by 
shutter and wir^^creen. The jemmy and file wiU 
soon dispose o' them, I reckon. Larder close to 
pantry. Then comes strong-room, with lock that 
can be picked as easy as a pocket." 



BUBaiiABT. 219 

A noise resembling the gobble of a turkey 
formed the response. 

^^ Stairs at end of passage leading to old lady's 
dressing-room, with jewel-case on table containing 
family diamonds. Young lady's room over — ^gold 
watch and trinkets there. Lots o' baubles about. 
We've only to be silent and quick, and can clear 
out the place and get off with the booty in less 
than no time. I calculate it's a good spec. Eh, 
old boss!" 

" O, massa so^^berry cute !" was the chuckling 
exclamation. 

"Very well, then, it's a deal. I've hired a 
trap in which we can drive there and back as 
conveniently as if we was a takin' a fashionable 
airing on Broadway, New York. It's only a mat- 
ter of six or seven mile along the bank of this 
ugly, dirty river, in which one who has been 
familiar with the sublime Mississippi wouldn't 
condescend to wash his face — that's a fact." 

This idea seemed to tickle the fancy of the 
speaker's companion ; for a paroxysm of gobbling 



220 JACK SCUDAMOBE^S DAUGflXEB. 

burst forth, as if a flock of Christmas turkeys were 
suddenly let out to feed. 

"This cussed rain's over; so I think we'd bet- 
ter make tracks; but we shan't start tQl long arter 
dark. Though the old party is feeble and goes 
to bed early, the youn^un sits up a-writing; 
so we'd better kinder wait a bit till all on em's 
asleep." 

Arthur heard every word distinctly ; and, with 
a fascination he could not withstand, remained as 
if rooted to the spot, waiting to hear more. But 
the room became both silent and dark. Then he 
hurried to the entrance of the archway that com- 
manded a view of the doors of the public-house. 
The pavement was now being traversed by a fast- 
increasing throng. Arthur could see two men 
rapidly making their way through them. Ex- 
citedly he sprang forward to give chase. He saw 
them turn the next comer. When he had reached 
it they had disappeared. 

There was not a doubt on his mind as to the 
house the two scoundrels intended to rob, nor as 



BUBGLART, 221 

to the identity of the ladies described as its ten- 
ants ; but he was not till then aware that his adored 
Oeraldine had returned to Bose Lawn with its 
ancient mistress. His former self-complacency 
changed to a frantic anxiety at the thought of 
the intrusion upon her privacy of the miscreants 
he had overheard. He rushed to the comer of 
the next street — apparently a still more disreput- 
able thoroughfare — ^but beheld only a perspective 
of shabby shops, displaying second-hand finery; 
low eating-houses; windows announcing mutton- 
pies and stewed-eels; a barber^s parti-coloured 
pole; a chemist's row of bright-tinted carboys; 
and three flashy lamps, proclaiming another gin- 
palace. He could see no one in the least resem- 
bling the men he had pursued. 

He hurried on in a very confused state of mind 
till he found himself in Bow Street. The sight of 
a policeman's uniform suggested the proper pro- 
ceeding in the emergency ; and the gallant Cap- 
tain stepped briskly into the police-station* 

It was about ten o'clock on the same evening 



222 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

that a fast-trotting bone was pulled up at the door 
of a roadside inn at Chiswick, and a gentLeman, 
handing the reins to a companion in the light gig 
in which they were seated, jumped down, entered 
the house, and called out the landlord. As soon 
as the latter made his appearance, the person left 
in the gig leapt out There was a whispered con- 
ference between the three, but it did not last long. 
The landlord again went into the house, and in a 
few minutes returned in company with the butler 
at Bose Lawn in full evening costume. 

It was evident at a glance that the respectable 
Barnes was not in a state to be relied upon as an 
assistant in a perilous encounter. 

^^ Glad to see you, sir," he exclaimed in a thick 
voice, addressing Captain Calverley, and then 
looking inquisitively at his somewhat stem-fea- 
tured companion. '' Chiswickian Sons of Haiv 
mony meet to-night, sir. Put me in the ch^ur. 
Would you like to join the Chiswickians — " 

Taking the fuddled chairman up terribly shorty 
the stem-looking man announced himself as a 



BUBGLABT. 223 

sergeant of the Metropolitan Policei sent to pre- 
vent an intended burglary at a house known as 
Bose Lawn; and commanded him to fetch the 
nearest local constables to his assistance. 

^^ Eob the house, eh ! That's a good joke, Mr, 
Sergeant," he replied exultantly, as he produced a 
key from his breeches-pocket. " Every door and 
window is as safe as the Bank of England ; and 
this key opens the door which leads through the 
conservatory into the hall. Nobody ever uses it 
but myself when I attend the convivial meetings 
of the Sons of Harmony ; and — " 

Arthur, observing several white-waistcoated 
individuals emerging, pipe in hand, from the inn- 
door (probably Chiswickians in search of their 
president), grew impatient. Telling the sergeant 
to follow quickly, he snatched the key out of the 
hand of the butler, and started off in the direction 
of the cottage. He found the entrance in the 
wall, and hastily entered the conservatory, leaving 
the door open for those who were to follow. Thence ^^ 

he proceeded cautiously, till he knew that he was 



224 JACK SCUDAMORE's DAU6HTEB. 

in the hall. Stealing noiselessly to the foot of the 
stairs, he listened, with the sense strained to catch 
the slightest sound. He heard nothing. His im- 
pression was that the rascals had not effected an 
entrance. To satisfy himself on this point, he 
groped his way silently in the direction of the 
pantry. His foot struck something at the door. 
Stooping down, he felt two pairs of ankle-boots. 
Their weight assured him that they had been 
taken off and left there by the burglars — a com- 
mon precaution to insure a noiseless access to 
plunder. 

Having now no doubt that the scoundrels had 
effected an entrance, Arthur returned to the foot 
of the stairs, pausing to listen. Still he heard 
nothing that could excite his suspicion. Sud- 
denly a shrUl scream rang through the silent 
house in a sharp clear tone, that seemed to cause 
a vibration in every nerve of his body. 

He sprang up the stairs in frantic haste, and 
flew lightly over the few yards of carpeted cor- 
ridor to which they led, guided by a half-stifled 



BURGLARY. 225 

wailing, mingled with feeble exclamations of af- 
fright. 

He paused a moment to take breath, as he ap- 
proached an open door, from which light streamed 
into the dark passage. He heard muttered oaths, 
as if to silence the faint sobbing and feeble cries. 
Then came a crash, as of some wood-work forcibly- 
burst or shattered. 

Holding his breath, Arthur crept forw^ard to 
reconnoitre. His first glance fell on the figm'e 
of his venerable friend in her night-dress, tied 
down in a heavy chair, a handkerchief fastened 
over her mouth. She was moaning as if in pain. 

Following the direction of her frightened gaze, 
he observed a short stout negro, in a coarse jacket 
and trousers, with his black neck enveloped in a 
red worsted comforter, standing close to a dark- 
lantern that had been placed on a small table. 
He was stooping over a broken jewel-case, and 
exarciining its contents with glistening eyeballs 
and a horrid grin playing round his thick lips, 

that displayed a row of sharp white fangs, any 
VOL. m. Q 



226 JACK SCUDAMOBE*S DAUGHTER. 

thing but pleasant to look npon. The light fell 
partly on his demoniac face and partly on the 
jewels, the sight of which had so strongly ex- 
cited his cupidity. 

A horrible imprecation, muttered as if witli 
clenched teeth, immediately drew Arthur's atten- 
tion to another part of the room, where, with the 
chamber-candlestick in her hand, as if it had been 
caught up hastily, stood a delicate female form 
partly undressed, her pallid face half concealed 
by the mass of soft shiny hair that streamed over 
her ivory neck and shoulders. 

In spite of the ghastly stare that distorted 
her lovely countenance, Arthur instantly recog- 
nised his beloved Geraldine. With a rapid rush 
he sprung upon the tall, large-limbed, gaunt-vis- 
aged ruffian, whose coarse hand was pressed upon 
her beautiful mouth, and swinging him round by 
the collar of his thick overcoat, hurled him against 
a great bedstead. One of the massive posts came 
in contact with his head with a crash that laid 
him senseless on the floor. 



BUEGLARY. 227 

The Captain then fumed rapidly towards the 
negro, and caught sight of the gleam of a pistol- 
barrel, and the phosphoric glitter of two great 
yellowish-white eyeballs taking dehberate aim at 
him. Simultaneously with the report a loud 
shriek rang in his ears. Geraldine had dropped 
the candlestick and sprung forward as she noticed 
her lover's danger, then tottering two or three 
steps, she fell at his feet. 

The sight of her blood maddened him. He 
made a spring at the assassin, as 'the latter was 
striving to steal away. At once a struggle of 
life and death took place. The two tugged and 
wrestled, and then rolled over and over on the 
floor. Whatever came in their way was upset 
and smashed, and the fragments scattered in every 
direction. Neither spoke; the conflict was too 
fierce for speech. No sound escaped them but 
the panting of their hot breath as each' made the 
most desperate efforts to overpower the other. 

The black fellow, though short, possessed ex- 
traordinary strength. More than once he pinned 



228 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

his slighter antagonist to the ground in his mus- 
cular arms. He tried to put one hand in his 
pocket while holding him down with the other, 
but a prompt blow on his ugly face, directed with 
all the Captain's force, prevented his getting hold 
of the clasp-knife, with which, no doubt, he in- 
tended to end the contest, and with his teeth 
clattering under the effect of the blow, or his 
hideous eyes puffed about the lids, he would in- 
stantly resume the terrible struggle. 

Fiercely Arthur cursed the tardiness of those 
who ought to have hurried to his assistance, and 
probably blamed his own folly for venturing 
unarmed and imsupported into such an adventure; 
but the desire to avenge the fate of his murdered 
Geraldine, who had interposed her own dear per- 
son to shield him from the ruflSan's fire, remained 
the ruling impulse, and nerved him to increased 
exertion. 

The fearful struggle continued ; now the liide- 
ous swollen black face uppermost, now the rigid 
relentless white one. Over and over again the 



BUBGLARY. 229 

superior strength of the negro freed him from 
the grip of the other ; but a sudden blow would 
send him staggering down, to continue the scuffle 
on the floor. 

It was now no longer a question between them 
of securing or escaping ; it had mutually become a 
ferocious instinct to slay. The punishment the 
negro had received made him like a wild beast 
thirsting for blood; and Arthur knew tkat his 
safety could only be secured by the life of his 
hideous adversary. 

Both scrambled to their feet at the same mo- 
ment, when Arthur heard a cHck, and beheld a 
long bowie-knife open in the grasp of the panting 
negro ; but quick as lightning, as the f eUow drew 
back his sinewy arm for a plunge, Arthur sent his 
right hand again into his face with a tremendous 
thud. The black threw up his arms ; the knife 
flew out of his hand, he reeled back, his head fell 
against a cheval-glass, smashing it into fragments, 
and then his body dropped on the floor, shaking 
the room with the concussion. 



230 JACK SCUDAMORfi'a DAUGHTEB. 

Even this did not render the fellow insensible ; 
he made efforts to rise ; but his active antagonist 
was in a moment kneeling on his chest. The gleam 
of the murderous blade had brought conviction to 
his mind that he must decidedly and effectually 
settle the assassin's powers of mischief ; so he seized 
the red comforter and twisted it round his bull 
throat till the yellowish phosphoric eyeballs started 
from their sockets, as he yelled the most horrible 
cries. They became fainter — ^they ceased — ^the 
horrible eyes assumed a fixed stare more horrible 
stiU-imd a big tongue protruded from the big 
mouth. 

Arthur loosened the ligature with a succession 
of heavy respirations that betrayed his sense of re- 
lief at finding that the fearful struggle had termi- 
nated. Eaising his eyes from the distorted visage 
of his senseless enemy, his horror may be imagined, 
when in the only piece of the broken cheval-glass 
that remained in the frame, he saw the reflection 
of a tall, gaunt figure, with the fallen bowie-knife 
uplifted in his hand, coming stealthily towards him. 



BUEGLABT. 231 

Arthur sprung to his feet, but believed himself 
lost. In his exhausted state to have to wage a 
deadly conflict with the other ruffian, who had re- 
covered conspiousness, and possessed the further 
advantage of a murderous weapon, momentarily 
appalled him; but a single glance at the white 
figure, prostrate in her blood, seemed to nerve the 
gallant soldier with renewed energy. He seized an 
overturned chair, and with panting breast and set 
teeth raised it in an attitude of defence. 

Th^ tall figure suddenly stopped ; voices were 
heard in the lower part of the house. Whether it 
was the menacing aspect of the strange but for- 
midable weapon within a few feet of his head, or 
the sound of ascending footsteps alarmed the ruf- 
fian, certain it was that he checked himself ; threw 
a hasty glance at the windows, then dropping the 
knife, bounded rapidly towards the only available 
means of egress. 

in the corridor he knocked down the fuddled 
butler, approaching with a blunderbuss ; he dashed 
through a little group of resolute Sons of Harmony, 



232 JACK scudamobe's daughteb. 

who had heen hastily impressed into the service by 
their president; and springing like a panther down 
the stairs half-a-dozen at a time^ would have got 
clear o£F^ had he not at the bottom found himself 
pinioned in the stout arms of the police-sergeant, 
and almost simultaneously handcuffed by two local 
constables. 

As the burglar disappeared, Arthur sprung 
towards the prostrate figure in the ensanguined 
night-dress, and with all a lover^s distraction in his 
eyes, lifted it gently in his arms. Deep was his 
gratitude and profound his emotion when he felt 
the beating of her heart against his own. By the 
light of the night-lamp — ^which, being oM of the 
way on the mantel-piece, had remained undisturbed 
— ^he gazed anxiously on the corpse-like face. 

Though it was deadly pale, he saw the long 
lashes unclose, and the dove-Uke orbs look on him 
with a tenderness that thrilled every fibre of his 
excited frame. 

"Are you safe, dear Arthur?" was murmured 
very gently. 



BUR6LART. 233 

" Quite, darling " 

Exquisite pleasure seemed to sparkle in her soft 
brown eyes, and a faint smile, expressive of intense 
happiness, flittered around her pale lips. She could 
not speak; but those innocent lips suddenly ap- 
proached his own, and rested there. The next 
moment her silken tresses fell back, and her h^ad 
dropped upon his breast. She had again fainted. 

" I must beg you to retire. Captain Calverley," 
said an active little man, about a quarter of an 
hour afterwards — the same intelligent, gentle- 
manly-looking personage into whose arms he had 
once before consigned the dear child, on his first 
memorable introduction to her. " But I can give 
you this much comfort, my dear sir ; the ball has 
passed along a portion of the fleshy part of the 
aim, inflicting a superficial wound only. She haa 
lost a great deal of blood — ^that, and great excite- 
ment, have reduced her to her present state. 
Quiet is indispensable. Captain." 

Arthur wrung the doctor's hand, and prepared 
at once to obey his commands. 



234 JACK SCUDAMOSE^S DAU6HTKB. 

" The old lady," he added, "has been dread- 
fully frightened ; but I do not apprehend any fatal 
consequences even to her." 

Arthur, his mind much lelieyed, went down 
to the breakfast-room, where he found the two 
burglars, manacled and guarded, waiting for the 
conveyance that had been sent for to carry them 
to the station* Kestoratiyes had been adminis- 
tered to the negro, and, except the evidence he 
bore in his features of the rough handling he had 
experienced, he was not very much the worse for 
the conflict. 

"Now, Mr. Hiram Whittler," said the ser- 
geant presently, with a kind of grim politeness, 
addressing his prisoner, " I will thank you to stq> 
out. Your carriage is in waiting." 

" You'll have to pay for this, I reckon, stran- 
ger," the other replied, standing up with an affec- 
tation of dignity, "when our Minister finds as 
youVe had the audacity to lay violent hands on, 
and deprived of his liberty, a free citizen of the 
United States, who had the misfortune to enter a 



BURGLABY. 235 

Britisher's house by mistake. I calculate you'll 
be obligated to eat humble pie, and send me 
across the Atlantic in no time." 

"You'll get no further than Portland, my 
man," replied the sergeant ; " come, look alive." 

" Well, it's a beggarly country, this of youm, 
that's a fact. It am't fit for a dog to live in, is it 
Sambo ?" 

" No, massa," cried the other scoundrel, "beny 
bad place for nigger specially. Nebber know no 
place where de gennlemens hit so dam hard." 

It may here suffice to add, that, as the sessions 
were then sitting, the course of justice was un- 
usually rapid in dealing with these notorious of- 
fenders. The Ambassador did not interfere; and 
in a few weeks they were working in convict 
dresses in a certain veiy stony island that pro- 
tects the harbour of Weymouth. 



CHAPTER X. 

A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 

Captain Calverley, M.P., sat in his dressing- 
gown and slippers in the sitting-room of his old 
chambers in the Albany. He had evidently not 
completed his toilette. His careless necktie indi- 
cated a heart ill at ease, his slovenly clievelure a 
disordered mind. But the gloomy brow of that 
handsome face, what did not that express ? Surely 
no dashing young oflGicer of a crack cavalry regi- 
ment ever before looked so sombre, — ^no Calverley 
ever in his life appeared so disappointed. 

In truth, so gloomy were his thoughts, so 
fearfully melancholy his feelings, that after inef- 
fectually looking for consolation in the pages of 
Zimmerman On Solitude^ — ^after vainly seeking 
cheerfulness from Dodd's Prison Tlioughts, — he had 



<* 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 237 

resolved to do something desperate — to write a 
tragedy, to start a magazine, or organise a joint- 
stock bank. 

He had selected the first of these fearfully- 
desperate adventures; and having opened his 
writing-desk and prepared his stationery, he had 
written down a few dreadfiilly suggestive names 
for the principal characters, and sat in the very 
darkest phase of inspiration, waiting for ideas for 
an effective opening of his first act 

But what could have brought about so fright- 
ful a change in the circumstances and disposition 
of this rising diplomatist, promising statesman, 
and accomplished soldier? Simply this, he had 
taken advantage of his opportunities, — as tlie Cal- 
verleys had done from time immemorial, — to urge 
his suit to his beloved Geraldine, as soon as she 
had been declared convalescent 

Relying on that unspeakably affectionate de- 
monstration she had made in his favour on the 
night of the rencontre described in the last chapter, 
he had, directly he found himself alone with her, — 



238 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

her fiuthful Mend having that moment left the 
room, — ^pressed her to name an early day for the 
consummation of his happiness. But, profoundly 
to his astonishment, nothing seemed Airther from 
her thoughts. She had no intention of marrying. 
She acknowledged herself quite unworthy to be- 
come his wife. More than this, she expressed a 
conviction that he need not look far to find some 
one a great deal better suited to him in every 
way, who was sure to make him as happy as he 
deserved to be. 

It was easy to see that the dear child loved the 
handsome Captain as ardently as he could have 
desired, but that she had placed the idol of her 
girlish worship on so high a pedestal, and wor- 
shipped him with so humble a devotion, that she 
could not reconcile herself to his descending to 
her humiliating leveL He tried every argument, 
he used every endearing entreaty, every passion- 
ate appeal he could think of, — she remained ten- 
der, gentle, amiable, but inflexible as a judge. 

Overwhelmed with this crushing disappoint- 



A BAINBOW IN THE SKY. 239 

ment^ he sought the Duchess. On making his 
case known to her, he only got a vehement scold- 
ing. He was flatly told that he had not employed 
half enough energy in the prosecution of his suit, 
and warmly assured that Geraldine was a treasure 
beyond aU price, for whom the devotion of a life 
was scarcely a sufficient sacrifice. There was not 
a particle of her old warmth of manner, when they 
sang those passionate lyrics. On the contrary. 
Jack Scudamore's daughter was to him as cold as 
an icicle; moreover, with an obvious inclination 
to become as fierce as a tiger-cat on the smallest 
amatory provocation. 

Finding that it was a hopeless case — indeed, 
the most absolute dead-lock he had ever heard of 
— ^he had withdrawn himself from the society of 
the two beautiful girls, confounding most heartily 
his own stupidity in making the dear impressive 
child acquainted with the inclinations of his fa- 
mily, and a little out of patience with the ultra- 
devotion which would not accept a Calverley at a 
reasonable estimation. 



240 JACK scudamoke's daughteb. 

So the poor Captain had taken refuge iu a 
dressing-gown and blank verse, horribly cut up 
with the thought that all he had suffered from his 
escapade at Bruges, and the capital fight he had 
made against two at Chiswick, had brought him 
only so homoeopathic a recompense. 

". Enter the Conspirators," he muttered to him- 
self, "Poignardo, Strichnino, and the Cardinal 
Arsenic Alba, followed by the Marchesa Bella 
Donna." 

" Hullo I" 

The exclamation escaped the tragic author, on 
perceiving several figures entering his apartment 
in a slow solemn manner, something after the 
fashion of a succession of ghosts, or a procession 
of mourners. 

Could he believe his eyes ? Yes, the little wo- 
man in that quaker sort of dress was his dear aunt, 
the Bishop's relict; the big gentleman, distin- 
guished by his fat, bald head, and bright buff 
waistcoat, was his dear cousin Lord Madras ; the 
stifi*, pompous, tall individual so tightly buttoned 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 241 

up, as if to prevent any part of his dignity from 
giving way, was no other than liis very fussy 
uncle Lord Calverley; and the rakish-looking 
personage, with flabby cheeks and weak eyes, so 
very youthfully made up, was beyond all doubt liis 
elder brotlier the baronet. 

The tragic poet rose with instinctive politeness, 
though under an inexplicable mystification as to 
what had caused the advent of this most miex- 
pected family party. 

" Pray be seated," he exclaimed courteously. 
*^ I need not say that I am particularly glad to see 
you. Yet excuse me ; but I certainly should like 
to be enlightened as to the purport of tliis ex- 
tremely agreeable visit." 

Captain Calverley, like other handsome young 
officers of crack regiments, was, it seems, obliged 
to tell fibs sometimes. 

The family party drew their chairs in a line 
before him ; the lady, by right of her sex, placing* 
herself at their head. They looked decidedly of a 

serious turn of mind. After each had grimly nodded 
VOL. ni. R 



242 JACK SCUDAMOBE^S DAUGHTER. 

to their rather shrewd-featured kLaswoman, sh< 
again in right of her sex — ^tomed solemnly to the 
wondering young man, and addressed him thus : 

'^ My dear Arthur, we haye thought it our 
duty, after much grave and earnest consultation 
among ourselves, to come here to express our 
joint remonstrance at your very reprehensible 
proceedings,** 

^^ What in the world have I been doing wrong, 
aunt?'* Arthur exclaimed, taxing his memory for 
some peccadillo of more fbigrant character than is 
allowable to young men of good prospects by an 
indulgent society. 

'' You should remember, my dear,*' added &e 
old lady blandly, " that you are a Calverley. You 
should not only never forget that, but you should 
always behave as if the solemn fact were ever pre- 
sent to your mind.'* 

" Of course,*' cried Lord Madras, authorita- 
tively. 

" Always conduct yourself like a Calverley, 
sir," said the fussy uncle. 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 243 

" Yes, yes ; very proper. Try to do credit to 
the old stock," cried the used-up rake somewhat 
jauntily. 

" "What IS the meaning of this?" demanded the 
Captain, involuntarily stretching his arms in his 
shawl dressing-gown, as if preparing for an at- 
tack. 

" You see, my dear Arthur," recommenced the 
spokeswoman in the same bland manner, " we all, 
of course, feel very anxious for your welfare, quite 
as Calverleys who have a position in the world 
should feel towards a rising Calverley. You have 
extremely good prospects, my dear. I should not 
at all wonder at your achieving high distinction, 
— ^under Divine Providence, of course. That is to 
say, provided you exhibit proper prudence. Pru- 
dence, Arthur, is an inestimable quality to the 
Calverleys." 

" Nothing is more ridiculous than indulging 
in harem-scarem adventures." 

*^ Especially after young women of no standing 
in society." 



244 JACK SCUDAMORE^S DAU6HTEB. 

" Always fight shy of adventmesses, old chap/' 
Captain Calverley turned from one to the oth^r 
of tliis solemn conclave, evidendj in a fog that was 
growing denser eveiy moment. 

" Have the goodness to explain," he said, aj>- 
parently under some constraint 

" Well, my dear, we will," replied the old lady 
in dove-coloured silk. ** It is impossible that well- 
to-do Calverleys can behold one of the femily neg- 
lecting his dearest interests, and not strive to bring 
him to a sense of what he owes to the name he 
bears." 

" I'm still waiting for your meaning, amit," 
he observed, with just a little impatience. 

" There is that nameless good-for-nothing girl, 
Arthur—" 

"What nameless, good-for-nothing girl, ma- 
dam?" 

The Captain's face flushed, and his tone Avas 
angry. 

" Now don't be violent, Arthur. I'm a bishop's 
widow, remember that." 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 245 

" No, no ; let's have respect for your seniors, 



sir." 



" I'll allow no bullying, young man." 
" Don't ride the high-horse. Draw it mild, 
my hoy." 

" Now how much better it would be, my dear," 
continued tlie old lady in a conciliatory coaxing 
tone, " instead of eternally getting yourself into 
danger for a young female of no consideration what- 
ever, were you to employ your great natural advan- 
tages in endeavouring to gain so highly desirable 
an alliance as a marriage with the Duchess 
of Porchester." 

" Ah, the Duchess I that's the wife for you." 
" You ought to have married her before the 
Duke had proposed; most certainly you ought. 



• 5> 

Sir. 



" A deuced pretty woman, with a miraculous 
lot of tin, old chap." 

If ever there was a handsome captain of a 
crack cavalry regiment, a promising young mem- 
ber of Parliament, and a rising diplomatist, tho- 



246 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

roughly riled^ it was Captain Calverley at that 
precise moment. 

Allowance should be made for a lover just sent 
to Coventry by two very beautiful girls, as weU as 
for an author interrupted in so serious a business 
as the composition of a tragedy. 

" Madam/' he cried, turning first to the shrewd 
relict of episcopacy, " I beg to express my sincere 
tlianks for your interference in my affairs. My 
lords," he added, turning fiercely to the two 
noblemen, " I cannot express to you my ac- 
knowledgments for your troubling your right 
honourable heads so unnecessarily. Ned," he 
concluded, addressing his elder brother, "go to 
Bath !" 

He then bowed in a cold formal mamier to 
the conclave, stalked majestically into his bed- 
room, banged the door after him, and turned the 
kev. 

The Calverleys were transfixed with surprise. 
For a few minutes they stared into each others' 
blank faces. 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 247 

" It's a case for a commission de lunatico in- 
quirendoy^^ said Lord Madras. 

" The fellow's a fool !" cried Lord Calverley, 
in a passion. 

"He's uncommon clieeky-j / think," added 
the Baronet. 

"I wash my hands of him," exclaimed the 
Bishop's widow, rising with a promptness of deci- 
sion highly characteristic of that lady. "It is 
impossible for a Calveriey to have any thing more 
to do with so degenerate a member of the family. 
He has lost our countenance for ever." 

Having pronounced tliis very severe judgment, 
she walked slowly to the door, and then descended 
the stairs, followed in single file by the rest of 
the discomfited conclave. 

After they had left the house, the bedroom 
door opened, and their still irate kinsman pre- 
sented himself with a flushed face, highly ex- 
pressive of offended dignity. He resumed his 
seat, drawing his dressing-gown around him with 
the air of a Roman patrician arranging his toga, 



248 JACK SCUDAMOBE^S DAUGHTER. 

after having been bored, bothered, bnllied, and 
badgered to an extent beyond the endnranoe of 
classical flesh-and-blood. 

He cast his eyes over the very small advance 
he had made in his desperate undertaking. 

" Enter the Conspirators — " he read firom the 
authentic Ms. of what was to be his first folio. 
"Poignardo, Strichnino, the Cardinal Arsenico 
Alba, and the Marchesa Bella Donna.'^ 

" Psha!" he exclaimed impatiently, tossing 
the precious first page of fiwlscap aside, after a 
moment's rest of his head upon his hand and his 
elbow upon liis desk, " I've had enough of con- 
spirators for one day." 

He started up, and began pacing the apart- 
ment with one hand in his trousers' pocket, and 
the other behind his back. There was a look 
in tlie face of the handsome Captain to which a 
novelist's powers of portrait -painting cannot do 
justice; and when he slapped his forehead with 
his disengaged handj tightly compressed his lips, 
to the disarrangement of his moustache, and abso- 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 249 

lutely crushed one long whisker under his arm, 
the picture of intense (fashionable) misery thus 
produced beggars imagination. 

Suddenly he stopped ; his feverish eyes seemed 
to dilate, his flushed cheek to pale with anger, 
his moustache, whiskers, and remarkably fine head 
of hair to stand on end with indignation. 

" Surely those dreadful bores cannot have 
come back ?" he asked aloud. 

There were certainly footsteps on the stairs. 

" Come up. Father Mike," cried out a power- 
ful Hibernian voice. "It's yourself will be as 
welcome as the flowers in May. This way, your 
riverence ! Mind the step, honey. This is the 
door; there's no mistake at all, at all; and the 
Captain's in ; so I'm in hopes I've got at last to 
the end of me long rambles by say and land. 
Blessed be the holy Virgin for that same I" 

" Amen I" was added in deep tones. 

The door was thrust open, and there entered 
a figure, in an overcoat that looked a good deal 
the worse for wear and dust, carrying a somewhat 



250 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

battered hat in one hand, and a stout cudgel in 
the other. He stooped respectfully, apparently 
ushering in some one who was following. 

" Dillon !" exclaimed Captain Calverley, as he 
recognised the sun-burnt Celtic physiognomy of 
his visitor. 

"To be sure it is, every mortal inch of me," 
replied the latter, his marked features illumined 
by a broad grin. "And it won't be sorry ye'U 
be to see me. Captain dear, when I've tould ye 
what I've come to say. But here's another, the 
sight of whom will make your honour more glad 
still ; I'll go bail it will. Plase to walk in. Father 
Mike." 

Then entered, in the soutane and ordinary 
costume of a French priest, a portly figure, with 
the broad, benevolent, good-humoured features 
Arthur quickly recognised as those of his friendly 
acquaintance at Bruges, whom he had known 
during his detention in the infirmary as " Pere 
Michel," and who had fiilly realised the recommen- 
dation of the good Bishop. 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 251 

He sprung forward to welcome him with a 
hearty shake of the hand^ though somewhat puzzled 
as to what the confessor of the nuns could have 
to say or do, that should gladden such a desperate 
man a^ himself. 

" Sit down, Pere Michel. Sit down, Mr. 
Dillon. Very glad to see you, aflber your long 
absence." 

^^Tell your story, Dillon," said the priest in 
an undertone, as they both followed their host's 
courteous invitation; he resuming his old seat, 
glancing from one to the other with a look ot 
inquiry. 

" Then, with his honour's permission, I'll begin 
at the beginning." 

Arthur nodded. 

" Ye'll remember, maybe," he began, " the 
sad business that brought me here the very last 
time I was in this big Babel of a place ?" 

" Yes, Dillon," replied the Captain, with in- 
creased gravity. 

" Well, then, afther I had completed my mis- 



252 JACK scudamore's daughteb. 

fortunate errand, I went back to Ireland to make 
some inquiries for a person I thought might be 
able to do me an important service. I found 
that he had gone to Home manj a long year ago. 
I sold every thing I could raise money upon, and 
off to Bome I went as quick as I could. I got 
there at last; a mighty fine place entirely, and 
every way worthy of the Pope — more power to 
him." 

Pfere Michel smiled, and so did Captain Calver- 
ley ; but what the Pope and the eternal city had to 
do with him, that gallant soldier could not, for the 
life of him, conceive. 

" To the Irish College I goes, and the porter 
comes to the gate. ' Is Father Mike at home?* 
says L * What Father Mike do you mane T says 
he : ^ is it Father Mike Donovan, or Father Mike 

O'Shaughnessy, or Father Mike ' ^ It's Father 

Mike O'Dogherty,' says I quite bowldly. ' Oh,' 
says he, * he went two years ago to the mission at 
Timbuctoo.' * Holy Mother! to Timbuctoe, was 
it?' says I, as terribly put to the nonplus as a poor 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 253 

Irisliman without a friend, in a strange place afar 
off in foreign parts, could be. ' Yes ; he was sent 
by the Propaganda,' says he. ' I'm a proper gander 
meself for coming here on such a wild-goose chase,' 
I thought" 

The good Father laughed, and the Captain vo- 
lunteered a smaU addition to his friend's mirth ; 
but still was unable to see how the story or the joke 
could interest him in the slightest degree. 

'' The porter was a coimtryman, and mighty 
civil ; and he introduced me to the president, who, 
when I told him where I came from and what I 
wanted, was as good as a father to me ; and with 
his assistance I managed to leave Rome the next 
day, tlie bearer of letters to the head of the mission 
at Timbuctoo." 

Captain Calverley glanced with a mild spirit of 
inquiry in the direction of Pere Michel. He did 
not quite see the necessity of travelling into the 
interior of Africa witli such a cicerone ; but the good 
priest merely shrugged his broad shoulders, and 
returned the glance with a comical expression of 



254 JACK scudamoke's daughter. 

sympathy. The Captain submitted to his fate. At 
any rate it was better than being bored by med- 
dling relations. 

"To make a long story short," resumed the 
narrator, " after no end of difficulties and dangers 
and throubles of all kinds, I found my way to Tim- 
buctoo, and managed to get to the house of the 
missionaries. ' How's his riverence Father Mike?' 
says I to the first of the good Fathers I met. 
^ Who ?' says he. ^ Father Mike, as was sent here 
by the Propaganda,' says I, quite pat. * Oh,' says 
he, as coolly as yer please, ' he went last week to 
India,' says he. ^ Don't say that, now,' says I ; 
*for the love of the blessed saints,* says I, * don't 
be aflher telling me he's gone to Injy.' ^ He's been 
appointed to an office of trust in a monastery at 
Calcutta,' says he. 

" The short and long of it was, I up and tould 
tlie good Fathers what I came about; and they 
kindly assisted me to get out of Africky as quick as 
I could, and embark on the first vessel I might 
meet that was bound for the East Indies." 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 255 

" My good fellow, can't you get to the end of 
your story by a short cut," mildly interposed the 
Captain ; " it's rather a long way jfrom Timbuctoo 
to Calcutta." 

" So it is, Captain dear," was the soothing 
reply ; " and a dangerous way to boot, as I found 
to my cost ; but I was obligated to go, becase it 
WBS to serve your honour I went" 

" To serve mey Dillon?" 

Pere Michel laughed again, as he observed the 
handsome Captain's look of astonishment. 

" It's thrue, for you. Captain dear ; as you 
shall see for yourself in a brace of shakes." 

Arthur looked resigned, 

" Well, to make a long story short — " 

The gallant officer elevated his eyebrows, appa- 
rently by way of protest ; then placidly twisted an 
end of his moustache. 

"I got safe to Calcutta; and mortal glad I 
was when I reached the gate of the Catholic mon- 
astery there. ' It's Father Mike I've come to see,' 
says I to the lay brother. ' You don't mean the 



256 JACK SCUDAMOBE*S DAUGHTEB. 

Beverend Father Michael O'Dogherh'/ says he. 
^ But I do/ says I ; * plase to tell him I'm here !* 
*But he sailed for Europe yesterday ,* says he. 
*Holy Moses, I'm ruined! I'm kilt! Fm mur- 
thered !' savs L ^ Was there ever such a misfor- 
tunate cratur as I am this blessed minute ? Oh, 
what'U I do ! what'U I do !' 

" The lay brother kindly tried to console me, 
and presently made my case known in the monas- 
tery. The Beverend Father Superior sent for me ; 
and when I had tould him all I had done and 
suffered, he insisted on paying my passage to 
Europe in the next steamer; giving me direc- 
tions where to go to find Father Mike at last* 

" And, by the blessing of the Holy Virgin, the 
ver}' first person I set my two eyes on when I 
stepped out of the railway-train at the end of my 
terrible long chase of him, was his riverence walk- 
ing along the street quite asy and comfortable. 
You may be sure I made up to him ; and when 
I had introduced myself, and tould the good Father 
what it was that had caused me to go in search of 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY, 257 

hiniy he wasn't loug in making up his mind. 
Father Mike and I were on board of the Ostend 
steamer the very next morning. 

" And by the same token," concluded the nar- 
rator rather abruptly, " here we are." 

Captain Calverley became aware that Fatlier 
Mike and Pere Michel were different appellations 
for one individual ; but that was the limit of tlie 
information he had received. 

" May I take the hberty to ask," he said rather 
coldly, as he twisted the other end of his mous- 
tache, "what interest I have in this extremely 
singular story?" 

" Oh, bother I Haven't I told you. Captain 
dear ?" exclaimed the Irishman with genuine sur- 
prise. "Sure and wasn't it Father Mike, who 
married the late Lord Fitzmaurice to Geraldine 
Dillon, my kinswoman, and — " 

Arthur Calverley leapt from his chair, and 

seizing a hand of Dillon in both his own, with 

extravagant gesticulations of gratification, shook it 

warmly. 

VOL. in. s 



258 JACK scuDAJf ore's daughter. 

" TVTiat do I not owe to yon, my dear &Dow I** 
he exclaimed with emotion. 

^^ Jnst, Captain dear," the faithfid fdlow re- 
plied, ^^the pleasure of hating that spalpeen, who 
set this rascally bosiness afloat, within an inch of 
his life." 

** No, no, Dillon, we mnst have no violence," 
remonstrated the priest, while going throngh qnite 
as powerfiil a hand-shaking. ^' Leave him to the 
law. My evidence will restore those he has so 
foully wronged to all their just rights ; and his 
punishment will follow as a matter of course." 

" Oh, I'll lave him to the law fest enough, 
Father Mike," replied his countryman, making, 
however, a reservation that it should be after he 
had given him just the laste taste in life of a 
bellyful of a bating. 

Arthur saw an iris arching that gloomy per- 
spective that had caused him to be so awftdly 
desperate as to think of writing a tragedy ; and 
the sight of it elevated his mind into a restless 
delirium of transport that made him quite as irra- 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 259 

tional in another way. He tore off the first page 
of the precious Ms., crumpled up the conspirators, 
and threw them into the grate; then suddenly 
turned to his guests, his face radiant witli hospi- 
taliiy and benevolence, 

" If you'll stop and take luncheon, 111 dress 
and accompany you to the railway," he said quite 
cheerfully. 

" A carriage is at the door," replied the con- 
fessor. " I've arranged every thing in anticipa- 
tion, even to sending forward a courier to apprise 
the family at Windermere Court, — ^where, as doubt- 
less you already know, the Duchess has taken 
her aged relative and her cousin, — that we are 
coming." 

"What a real friend you are, father!" ex- 
claimed the grateful Arthur, with another spas- 
modic shake of tho hand. 

" Tliat's God's blessed truth, your honour I" 
added Dillon. 

Arthur suddenly left the priest and sprang to 
the bell-rope. This he gave such a desperate tug 



260 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

as a demonstration of his oordialiiy that it bidi^e 
firom its fiistenings. He flmig it aside and hniried 
to the other, which no doubt would have shared 
its fiite, so energeticallj was he ^'on hospitaUe 
thoughts intent,'* had not the door suddenly 
opened, and the Captain's soldier-valet presented 
himself, evidently impressed with the idea that 
the peal he had just been startled by betokened 
nothing less than a conflagration. 

** Luncheon directly for these gentlemen." 

« Yes, SIT." 

^^ Excuse me just a few minutes ;" and mast^ 
as well as servant disappeared. 

*^ Didn't ye come of a good ould stock, ye 
spalpeen?" said the priest in a stage-whisper of 
a rich Milesian accent to his companion, whose 
face had suddenly flushed. " Don't ye know that 
the O'Dillon was king of the O'DiUon country 
when the Calverleys were nowhere ? — I mean no 
disrespect to the Captain, who's infinitely the best 
of a poor race : — so don't let me see ye blushing 
again when ye're called a gentleman. You've 



w— • -J^J^Ii-^-^^J 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 261 

been as &ithful and honourable as ever was the 
first gentleman in the land.'* 

" But ifs only an agent I am, father dear," 
remonstrated the poor fellow, not quite reconciled 
to his accession of dignitj'. 

The entrance of the servant witli a well-covered 
butler's-tray checked an impressive rejoinder. 

Tlie two had sat down to what promised a most 
substantial and appetising meal ; Father Mike had 
said grace, and both were commencing upon the 
viands, when the door of communication opened, 
and their host, in his shirt-sleeves, thrust-in his 
head. 

" There's portable soup in the house, father ; 
it can be served up in a minute." 

'' I shall do very weU with what I see before 
me, my dear sir," was the prompt reply. 

" Dillon, have some soup, there's a good fellow.'* 

" What's enough for Father Mike is lashings 
for me," replied the other. 

The Captain went back to the duties of tlie 
toilet. 



262 JACK scudahobe's daughter. 

^^ This is a capital Strasburg ham. Dillon, let 
me help you to some, with a leg of this capon.'* 

" And mighty glad I'll be to ate that same, 
father dear," said his eountiyman, accepting the 
well-filled plate. 

" There's a pdt^ de foie gras in the larder, 
father. Tou'U surely have some of that." 

The Captain's face, half covered with lather, 
appeared at the open door, and, the wet towel in 
his hand, declared that he had interrupted his 
lavation to attend to his guests. 

"Ah, that's a great delicacy, my dear Cap- 
tain," said the father good-humouredly. " I am 
a&aid my self-denial cannot withstand such an 
extraordinary temptation." 

"And part of a dindon aux trafes; it's ex- 
cellent You must indeed taste it." 

" I'm in your hands, my dear yoimg friend. 
Do as you like with me." 

"Dillon, tell my man to bring up ^Qpdtide 
fok gras and the dindon aux truffesJ*'* 

Dillon went to the head of the stairs, and to 



A RAINBOW IN THE SET. 263 

tho oonstemation of every one who heard him, 
called to the servant to bring up " the patty of 
foreign grass and the ding-dong in the troughs." 

"Yo omadhauni" whispered tho good priest 
emphatically, as the agent, rubbing his hands in 
great glee, returned to his seat, *^ remember, 
now, that the pdtt! is a pie made of the livers 
of geese, and the dindon a turkey stuffed with 
truffles." 

" Holy Moses I livers of geese I Who'd have 
thought of that, now?" exclaimed Dillon, in a 
tremendous state of astonishment. ^^And why 
the dickens can't they call things by their right 
names? Isn't turkey more nat'ral to spake, and 
a dale asier ?" 

**Hold your tongue, and remember you're a 
gentleman," replied Father Mike. " Here come 
the foreign delicacies ; ate every thing as if ye'd 
been use to it all your life, and don't be betraying 
your ignorance like a brute baste, ye bogtrotter, 
or I'll never give ye absolution again as long as I 
live." 



264 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

Dillon looked alarmed; and when the ser- 
vant placed the^a^^ and the dindon on the table^ 
allowed himself to be helped, and began to eat 
with an exaggerated assumption of relish. 

" Very fine this, Dillon?" observed the father 
inquiringly. 

" Oh, mighiy fine it is, entirely, your rive- 
rence," he answered briskly, masticating the liver 
somewhat gingerly. Then dropping his voice, 
added close to the priest's ear, " Faith, it's just 
my humble opinion that an Irish stew is a king 
to it." 

"Have some of the dindon^ my firiend; it is 
really capital," exclaimed the good father, his 
round face glowing with enjoyment. " Did you 
ever taste a better, now ?" 

" Niver, upon my life. Father Mike," replied 
his companion with immense fervour, as he dis- 
posed of the first mouthfiil ; then added confiden- 
tially, "Arrah, then, what's the like of it com- 
pared to wholesome pratees and butthermilk ?" 

" Ye'll never be a gentleman, if ye live to the 



A RAINBOW IN THE SKY. 265 

Day of Judgment," repKod Father Mike in tlie 
8ame tone, evidently thoroughly enjoying the 
comestible to which he had helped himself. 

"What have they given you to drink?" sud- 
denly demanded the Captain, with an ivory-backed 
brush in each hand, as he rushed in to see how his 
friends were getting on. The servant was in tho 
act of opening a bottle of pale ale. 

*^ Oh, never mind the maJt," he added hastily. 
" Bogers, open some wine directly." 
" Yes, sir. What shall it be, sir ?" 
" There's excellent Hock in tlie house, fa- 
ther. Would you prefer Hockheimer or Liebfrau- 
milch?" 

" Oh, either will do very well. Captain." 
" Dillon, old fellow, which will you take?" 
" Oh, then, I'm not so mighty particular. Cap- 
tain dear; but I think I'm most partial to the — to 
the — })edad, if the name hasn't gone dane out of 
me mind»" 

" Bring a bottle of both, Higgins ; one of Bur- 
gundy, and one of champagne." 



266 JACK soudahobe's daughter. 

" Yos, sir." 

Both disappeared again. 

The priest helped himself to the foaming tmn- 
bler that had been poured out for him. 

" Ah I" he exclaimed, fetching a deep respira- 
tion as he put down the empty glass ; " that's re- 
freshing; take a good draught, Dillon, to wash 
down the diwdon." 

The excellent counsel was followed implicitly. 

" Ah !" cried the agent, with a violent hiocup 
as he finished his tumbler ; " it's as refreshing as 
pmnp-wather, every morsel, your river^ice." Then 
he added in a whisper, with a finger an the side 
of his nose, " Jist a noggin of rale potheen in it, 
Father Mike, would make it a dale more drink- 
able.'' 

Higgins entering with the wine and glasses on 
a tray stopped fru*ther confidential opinions, and 
the guests continued their repast with subdued 
enjoyment while the green glasses were being 
fiUed. 

The good priest swallowed his Hock with tiie 



A BAIKBOW or THE SKY. 267 

air of a connoisseur, and the agent imitated him 
86 doselj as he could. Nevertheless, when he had 
tossed off the choice Liebfraumilch, he whispered 
to his companion, "Isn't it small cider, now, 
Father Mike?" 

" An exquisite vintage I" exclaimed the other, 
pretending not to hear tlie question, and holding 
out his glass for more« He made two or three 
sips at it, smacking his lips with evident relish. 
Dillon did the same, concluding the ceremony by 
drawing the back of his hands over his mouth. 

"Use your napkin, ye ill-mannered clown 1" 
whispered the priest 

" Oh, the napkin, is it^? what'U I do with it, 
father dear?" cried the other, taking the damask 
from his lap, where he had placed it, in close 
imitation of his companion. 

"Ate it, if ye like, ye irreclaimable bogtrot- 
ter," cried the good father impatiently. 

" Ate it I" was echoed with a look of intense 
amazement. " Ob, tMn, your riverence, it's too 
full intirely I am." 



268 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

"Some Burgundy, Mr. Dillon?" inquired 
the attentive valet, having filled for the other 
guest. 

Dillon nodded; then watching liis reverend 
model, followed his movements with the correct- 
ness of a reflector. 

" Capital I Bouquet and flavour of the very 
choicest A matchless Hermitage, eh, Dillon ?" 

" Wonderftdly capital. Father Mike ! It bates 
the hermitage at Ballycrannigan to smither- 



eens." 



" Now, then, I'm quite ready," cried the Cap- 
tain, rushing in, as he was in the act of putting 
on his coat. "We'll just have a glass of cham- 
pagne a piece, and then be off*." 

" I'm quite at your service," promptly replied 
the priest, rising and throwing down his napkin. 
Dillon regained his feet in a moment. The cham- 
pagne-glasses bubbled up. 

" Here's to your health and Iiappinessy my 
dear sir I" exclaimed Father Mike, laying par- 
ticular stress on &e last word. 



A KAINBOW IN THE SKY. 269 

^^ Your health and happiness^ Captain dear !" 
echoed his humble friend. 

" Thanks, thanks ; and I drink every body's 
health and every body's happiness," replied then- 
host joyously; and then the glasses were tossed off, 
" Exquisite !" said the good father, looking 
a great deal more easy in his mind than when in 
the confessional. 

" There's the making of a tidyish kind of 
small-beer in it, anyhow," was the aside of the 
agent, as he put down his empiy glass. 

"Now, then, for the terminus!" cried the 
impatient lover. 

" If you please, sir, your scarf is a little on 
one side," observed the valet, much marvelling at 
his master's inattention in a matter of such vital 
importance; "and the waistcoat is buttoned all 
wrong. Allow me, sir." 

"Take another glass of Madame Clicquoty 
Fatlier Mike. Help yourself, Dillon." 

These directions were followed without any 
excuses, and then their host was quite ready. 



270 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

" Higgins," said Father Mike, addressing the 
valet, "I think you had better put-up some of 
your master's things in a portmanteau, and follow 
him to Delamere Court by the next train. It's 
not unlikely he may stay several days." 

"Yes, sir. Certeinly, sir." 

" Thank you again, father, for being so thought- 
ftd. I had really forgotten every thing." 

In a few minutes Arthur Calverley was seated 
beside his friends, about to commence a journey . 
which the rainbow now glowing so brightly in his 
landscape assured him would be the most eventful 
one in his career. He reflected on what he should 
do, and on what he should say. The new position 
of affairs was one that required great delicacy of 
manipulation. He must be very careful, or the 
dead-lock would be a dead-lock still. 

What if the dear child chose to remain single, 
not to separate herself from her friend? What if 
she insisted on his marrying the Duchess ? 

Look at his prospects as favourably as he 
wouldy Arthur was sensible of a complication that 



A RAINBOW m THE SKY. 271 

demanded the very nicest diplomatic caution and 
adroitness to manage. Nevertheless he was ftdl 
of hope. 

But was Monseigneur sincere ? 



CHAPTEBXI* 

love's diplomacy. 

Jack Scudamore reentered the house by the 
French window that opened into the new flower- 
garden. As it had only recently been completed, 
he had been taken on a tour of inspection by the 
two cliarming girls for whose gratification he had 
had it designed, at enormous cost; and the sight 
of their happy blooming faces, and the sound of 
tlieir joyous voices as they rambled from terrace to 
terrace, and beheld parterre after parterre of radi- 
ant blossoms, disposed in the most artistic group- 
ing, well recompensed him for his outlay. 

" A telegram, Squire," said Dawkins, putting 
a folded coloured paper into his master's hand. 

" Hope nobody's dead. Old friends, you know. 



love's diplomacy. 273 

Sometimes survivors telegraph tlie melanchply in 
telligence." 

^^ Yes, Squire. But you'll soon know, if you 
read what's inside." 

" So I suppose ; but where's my glasses ? Oh, 
here comes the Duchess ; she'll read it for me." 

Dawkins withdrew. 

The young ladies entered, having dispossessed 
themselves of their hats and mantles. 

"What is it, papa?" inquired the elder, no- 
ticing a change in the expression of her father's 
generally happy face. 

" Somebody's sent me a telegram, my dear. 
Perhaps it's to tell me Sir Harry's broke his neck, 
or Lord Vernon's had a fit. By George, I wish 
people were as ready to send good news as they 
are to send bad I But, after all, it may be to de- 
clare tlie result of the race at Doncaster, where 
Coriolanus is to run for the Cup, you know. I 
daresay that's it" 

The Duchess made no reply, opened the paper, 
and at once proceeded to read aloud. 

VOL. IIL T 



274 JACK scudamose's daughter. 

" * Mervjm Fitz-Jones to Jofan Scadamore, 
Esq.' — Fitz-Jones !" she repeated with marked 
emphasis. 

" Oh, it's from Fitz ; I'm go glad !" exclaimed 
Geraldine, dapping her hands. 

" a've just arrived in Engknd, and am coming 
by express. My love to the dear little kittens.' " 

The Duchess flung the paper disdainftJly away. 
It was instantly pounced upon by G^raldine, as 
something inexpressibly precious. 

^^ Of course, papa, you are at liberty to invite 
who you like to your own house." 

^^Yes, my dear," replied the Squire, as if 
thanking her for the privUege. 

*^ And it is only right and proper that Greraldine 
should see her own brother as much and as often 
as she pleases." 

" Yes, darling mamma," answered the orphan 
in her tonderest accents. 

" But I do not like this Mr. Fitz-Jones ; he is 
very forward and presuming. I think a merchant's 
clerk, or a bagman, or whatever he is, ought not 



love's diplomacy. 275 

to take such liberties. To send monkeys to me, 
indeed ; and to refer to me as a kitten, — I won't 
put up with it. So during his visit I shall go and 
stay at Brabazon Lodge." 

" My dear, the poor fellow means no harm." 

" Dear Fanny, don't go away." 

" I detest the very name of the man I" 

" Mr. Fitz-Jones I" cried Dawkins, as loud as 
he could bawl, as he opened the door. 

The Duchess shrunk back, expecting to see a 
snobbishly-dressed mercantile-looking individual, 
with possibly a pen behind his ear, and his pockets 
filled with samples. 

Geraldine sprung forward; not troubling her 
warm heart witli any idea of her brother's costume. 
He might come in gaiters and a pigtail, for all she 
cared. The visitor was her "Fitz;" that was 
enough for her affectionate nature. 

The Squire stood still, with one hand project- 
mg forward, apparently for a welcome, and an 
indescribable funny kind of look in his honest 
face. 



276 JACK scudamore's daughteil 

Presently there appeared in the doorway a 
handsome young fellow in the imposing uniform of 
a Captain of Lancers ; but with an empty sleeve, 
with his eyeglass to liis eye, and an air of unmis- 
takable fashion in his general appearance; while 
a saucy smile Ut up his features, as a joyous glance 
from his bright brown eyes roved from one to the 
other of the little party before him. 

" It is Fitz !" exclaimed his sister with ;i cry 
of delight, as she sprung towards him, and flung 
her arms about his neck. 

"Yes, my pet," replied the young officer, 
tlu'owing his one arm affectionately round her 
waist " It's either Fitz, or an uncommon good 
imitation of him. Well, Squire, how are you? 
and how's every body, and every body's wife, and 
every body's daughter? Won't you introduce 
me?" 

They had shaken hands very cordially just be- 
fore tliis question was put, the Duchess standing a 
little aloof, but regarding the scene with mingled 
feelings of interest and embarrassment 



love's diplomacy. 277 

"Oil, certainly," ropliod Jack Scudamore, 
chnckliug as lie advanced towardH his daughter. 
** Don't you remember reading in the papers about 
a Captain Pitzmaurice, my dear, who distinguished 
himself last year in Lidia?" 

" Perfectly." 

"Allow me to introduce you. Captain: — my 
daughter, the Duchess of Porchester." 

The Captain bowed, and the lady curtseyed, 
witli a tremendous assumption of gravity in one, 
and an air of being dreadfully puzzled in the 
other. 

" But, papa, I do not quite understand," said 
the Duchess ; "I thought that this gentleman's 
name was — a — Fitz-Jones — was it not ?" 

" Quite right. Duchess," replied the yomig 
officer, holding himself very upright, after another 
graceful genuflexion, and twirling the end of a 
small light moustache with fashionable sang froid; 
" I had the honour of bearing that illustrious ap- 
pellation — for about five minutes." 

Geraldine laughed very merrily. 



278 JACK SCUBAMORE^S DAUGHTER. 



iC 



You see, my dear," interposed the Squire, 
in some apparent oonfiision. 

"But I dofi't see, papaT said the young 
lady, turning round upon him rather sharply. '^ I 
was led to believe that Pitz" (she dropped the 
plebeian affix, perhaps unconsciously) " had entered 
a merchant's counting-house somewhere in the 
East. Indeed, if I was not dreaming, I read a 
letter from him, offering to sell soy and rice and 
pepper." 

"A decided sell, certainly. Eh, Squire?" 
whispered the pretended clerk to liis somewhat 
flustered friend. 

" Oh, here comes Monseigneur ! He^ll ex- 
plain the affair to you, my dear, better than I 



can." 



The door opened, and not only the good Bi- 
shop, but the venerable dowager, in a wheel-chair, 
directed by her respectftd and respectable butler, 
entered; the former stooping and listening with 
the greatest possible attention and interest to tlie 
still voluble old lady. 



love's diplomacy. 279 

The young Captain received a hearty welcome 
&om the prelate, as soon as he had released himself 
from the dowager's affectionate embrace, evidently 
reciprocating the warmth of feeling it manifested. 

" Monseignenr," cried the elder of the two 
yonng ladies approaching him, with her handsome 
features stUl wearing a look of intense perplexity, 
" I have been referred to you for an explanation 
of this most extraordinary mystery about my dar- 
ling Geraldine's brother." 

" Well, you see, my dear Duchess — " 

" But I dorCt see, Monseigneur," she repeated 
in a higher key. 

"Your father thought," continued the ami- 
able Bishop with his most benevolent smile, " that 
it would be better, instead of letting the young 
gentleman devote himself to the uncongenial 
drudgery of a merchant's oflSce, to purchase an 
exchange for him into a cavalry-regiment ordered 
to India; but to prevent any annoyance to him 
as the possessor of a dropped title, he continued 
the name, while it was given out that the ex-Earl 



280 JACK SCUDAMORfi's DAUGHTER. 

had become content with a veiy mnch humbler 
position," 

"Oh, indeed!" cried the lady, apparently 
mnch amused, yet a little offended. Then she 
turned quickly round to her father : " Papa, of 
all tlie sly-boots that ever came under my ob- 
servation, you have shown yourself to us two poor 
deluded girls the most artful." 

Greraldine had seized hold of his hand, and 
was kissing it, with grateful tears welling from 
her soft brown eyes. 

"I shoiddn't have been able to have done it 
without the Bishop's assistance," observed Jack 
Scudamore, apologetically. 

" I'm afraid that I am the chief offender^ 
Duchess," added the prelate ; " but your father's 
heart is as soft as wax, my child, so I fomid 
no great difficulty in moulding it to a generous 
purpose, — in behalf too, remember, of the dear- 
est friends of his beloved daughter." 

The Duchess looked him ftiU in the face. She 
saw nothing tliere to make her angry. On the 



love's diplomacy, 281 

contrary, Bhe beheld what softened her excited 
feelmgs. She seized his hand and reverently 
kissed the ring upon it, while her bright eyes 
were dimmed by the moisture that trembled on 
their long lashes. 

Monseigneur stooped down and kissed her 
forehead ; his own orbs appearing a little misty. 

" Forget and forgive, Fanny," cried the cheery 
voice of Jack Scudamore. " 1 don't think we've 
done any great harm, after all." 

" I never shall forgot, papa," she exclaimed 
with even more than her usual impetuosiiy, aa 
she dashed the tears from her cheeks. 

" She does look very well indeed," cried the 
shrill voice of the dowager, in reply to some ob- 
servation from her grand-nephew, who wiw leaning 
over her chair, watching the scene with consider- 
able interest, in spite of his assumed nonchalance ; 
"just as I used to look when I first went to Court, 
my dear. The dear good King, in fact, assured 
my dear lord, that — " 

What George the Third had said confidentially 



282 JACK SCUDAKORE'S DAU6HTEB. 

to his Lord-Chamberlain did not transpire; for, 
whilst the picturesque old lady was pausing to re- 
member, the door again opened, and the load 
voice of Dawkins aimounced " Captain Calverley, 
the Beverend Mr. O'Dogherty, and Mr, Dillon," 

The greatest excitement immediately became 
visible in the little party. The young ladies looked 
at each other a telegram of tremendous importance. 
Jack Scudamore glanced at the Bishop, and Mon- 
seigneur gazed suggestively towards Captain Fitz- 
maurice, who had sprung forward to welcome his 
old comrade. 

Then ensued a general hand-shaking, and a 
confusion of noisy exclamations quite as joyous, 
Dillon coming in for a liberal share. He threw 
himself at the feet of the Bishop as soon as he be-* 
held that dignitary ; and whether it was that he 
was elated with the blessing he then obtained, the 
kindly reception he met with, or the wine he had 
drunk before starting on his journey, certain it is 
that he told his story with double the vivacity he 
had infused into its first recitaL 



love's diplomacy. 283 

It was rather a singular &ct^ that the most in- 
terested of his audience was the very person who, 
in the morning, had so much difficulty in seeing 
how the deuce the rigmarole of a story could be 
connected with hinu He was quite alive now to 
the connection, and shouted and laughed at every 
stage of those wonderful travels even more loudly 
than Captain Fitzmaurice. 

Further explanations foUowed ; when it ap- 
peared that the young officer received a telegram 
in India, apprising him of the discovery of the 
priest who had married his father and mother; 
that he had met Dillon in Calcutta ; and that they 
had returned in the same steamer; the agent and 
the confessor having reserved that portion of the 
interesting narrative. 

It now came out that those horrid papists, the 
Bishop of Melpotamos and honest Jack Scuda- 
more, had been plotting, scheming, planning, in 
this awfully secret way, to insure the happiness 
of two Protestant orphans, who had, without the 
slightest fault of their own, been suddenly reduced 



384 JACK scudahobe's dauohteb. 

to the greatest social degradation from a position 
of affluence and dignity. 

As I have ahready intimated, the Squire's wife 
had, on her deathbed, desired that her daughter 
should be educated as a Protestant; and so reli- 
gioasly had he frdfiUed the promise he had then 
made, that he had taken the most jealous care 
that no Roman- Catholic influence should aftect 
her. Moreover, when he had ascertained that her 
affectionate friend and playmate had been per- 
suaded to seek consolation in the walls of a foreign 
convent, he had appealed to his old tutor for as- 
sistance, with what result the reader is already 
informed. 

But I have not yet done with the tableau vward 
I have just been arranging. It must be imagined 
that the serious are grouped together in animated 
gossip, and that two couples had paired-off in dif- 
ferent directions. 

Captain Calverley was aware that the critical 
moment of his life had arrived. If ever he had 
occasion for a display of diplomatic finesse, it was 



love's diplomacy. 285 

at this particular time. He knew that the com* 
plication was in so delicate a state of difficulty tliat 
he must produce his ultimatum. 

He had drawn Geraldine aside. He had, of 
course, been talking to her in that impressive style 
common to handsome officers of crack regiments 
when they obtain a favourable opportunity for the 
display of peculiarly manly eloquence; but he 
knew very well that he must exercise a miracu- 
lous amount of caution. And very prudent he 
was. 

The young lady, on her part, was singularly 
free from mundane troubles. This was evident in 
those dove-like eyes, softer and more tender in 
their expression than ever, and in that fresh ra- 
diant youthfrd face, looking as jubilant as a seraph 
bringing an unpolluted soul to heaven; a sense of 
happiness more exquisite than any enjoyment she 
could have known in a cloister. She was delighted 
to have the hero of her childish dreams, the idol 
of her girlish worship, again near her; to hear the 
voice that had so often thrilled her sensitive na- 



286 JACK BCUDAMORS'S DAUGHTER. 

tore, and look on the bandsome features and noble 
figure that had for so many happy years of dreamy 
speculation been her beau ideoL 

Her conscioasness of pleasure in the present 
apparently was quite as much as she was able to 
appreciate at once. It left no room for the de- 
lightful past^ of course; therefore it could not 
have included a future of any kind. She smiled, 
she laughed, her eyes glistened; in diort, ber 
heart seemed as light as a feather. 

It was while in this enviable mood that her 
lover pointed to the other couple, who, to all ap- 
pearance, were equally well pleased with each 
other and with all the world. 

" Your brother has greatly improved," he said. 

" Yes, dear Fitz has become quite nice-look- 
ing," was the unsuspicious reply; "and he's so 
full of spirits too. It's very long since I have 
seen him in such a lively humour." 

" The Duchess seems greatly amused by him," 
he added in much the same tone. She was 
laughing heartily. 



LOVl'S DIPLOMACY. 287 

" I am glad to see darling Fanny so pleased ; 
and am delighted to see dear Fitz trying to 
please her. They were excellent friends once, 
you know ; that is, before her marriage with the 
Duke." 

" Oh, ah. Yes. I remember," replied the 
Captain, as naturally as if the affair had escaped 
his recollection. "He rather liked her, didn't 
he?" 

" Every one must like her," cried the faithful 
friend. " Fanny has the most lovable nature 
that ever existed." 

"I think I'd better not advance further in 
that direction," said the cautious diplomatist to 
himself. 

" Now, Fitz, as I believe that you have a good 
heart and a loyal nature, I will take you into my 
confidence." 

This was said by the Duchess to Lord Fitz- 
maurice, as I shall now call him, about the same 
time the preceding little dialogue was going on. 



288 JACK SOUDAMOBE^S DAUGHTEIL 

The young soldier elevated his eyebrows, while 
pleased surprise gleamed in his gaze. He thought 
she was joking, but was quite willing to appre- 
ciate the pleasantry of the jest 

" Swear that you will keep my secret," she 
whispered. 

^' I swear r^ murmured her companion with 
such intense emphasis, that it had quite a sepul- 
chral effect 

"You see those young people yonder?" the 
Duchess inquired. 

" Turtle-doves out of a cage !" 

"Exactly. I intend them to enter the cage 
matrimonial." 

"I thought they would have flown Aere oi 
their own accord. I suppose there's seed in the 
box, and a bit of sugar between the bars." 

"Now don't be nonsensical. It's a serious 
business." 

" What, matrimony ? Solemn fact, that" 

" How provoking you are, Fitz I" 

" But what am I expected to do, Duchess ?" 



love's diplomacy, 289 

"If you call me Duchess, I'll call you Fitz- 
Jones." 

" Oh, you spiteful 1 But rCimporte. Any 
thing for a quiet life. Enlighten me as to the 
difficulty." 

" My darling Greraldine has got an odd idea 
in her pretty little head, tliat I ought to marry 
Captain Calverley." 

" What an absurd cliild I" 

"And she thinks that he would be very 

happy, and that I should be very happy, if I 

f 

were to have him." 

^^ Preposterous !" exclaimed the young officer, 
with exaggerated disinterestedness. " It wouldn't 
do at any price." 

" Then you will help me in an alliance, offen- 
sive and defensive, to get those two joined in- 
separably in the bonds of holy wedlock ?" 

" I see. To be sure I will." 

She gave him her hand, and it was warmly 
pressed. 

In anoilier corner were the Bishop, Fathei 

VOL. IIL u 



290 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

Mike, and Jack Scudamore ; to all appearance so 
absorbed in an animated discussion, as to be totrfly 
unaware of what was going on at no very great 
distance from them. Their conversation, however, 
did not quite favour that conclusion. 

« I think. Jack, every thing is proceeding as 
favourably as you could desire,'* observed the first 

" Not a doubt of it, Monseigneur," said the 
confessor. "Leave the yoimg people to them- 
selves ; the comedy will come to as pretty an end- 
ing as we could wish." 

" It's a race in the dark, Harry," replied the 

Squire. " One can't know which horse is win- 

• ^* 
nmg. 

*• Don't seem to be watching them," inter- 
]x>s^ the prelate, ** or they'll take the alarm." 

*'Well, as I was saying," Jack Scodamcxre 
began again in his natoral key, "B<mnie Lass 
challenged, and presoith- the pack burst into fidl 
choruss and then — ^" 

But I need not take the reader further in that 
ailv«:tiire. 



LOYS'S DIPLOMACT. 291 

I have anoiher couple to dispose o£ The 
dowager had found a listener in Dillon, and was 
intent on making the most of him. She had en« 
tirely forgotten his identity; indeed was under the 
impression that he was a stranger of distinction. 

^' Of course you remember' his most gracious 
majesty, the dear good King, George the Third." 

" Oh, yes, my lady 1" was shouted ; and added 
in a lower tone, " I never so much as set eyes on 
his blessed pigtail." 

" Did you ever dance the Saraband?" 

"Did I ever dance with Sarah Band, my 
lady ? Faith, then, I might at a wake, or a pat- 
tern, if she was to the fore." 

" The dear good Kiiig said I danced it admir- 
ably ; and so did the sweet Queen and the charm- 
ing Princesses ; and my dear lord said that I danced 
it divinely." 

" Oh, I belave it, my lady ; ye'd dance it now, 
I daresay, iligantly." Then he muttered, "I'd 
like to see ye footing a jig, old girl. Bedad, ye'd 
cover the buckle now fiunously, wouldn't ye ?" 



292 JACK scudamore's dauohteb. 

While this relic of the old court is drawing 
npon her reminiscences, I will return to the first 
pair of lovers. 

" Don't you think they make a handsome con- 
pie ?" inquired Arthur, still directing Greraldine's 
attention to the very lively pair before them. 

" Yes, Arthur," was the reply. 

" I never knew two people so admirably suited 
to each other in every way," he added, quite as if 
without any arrihe pens^e whatever. 

" Do you think so ?" she exclaimed in a toiie 
of surprise. 

"How could I think otherwise? Fitz is so 
warm-hearted and joyous, besides being as brave 
a fellow as ever fought and bled for his country." 

This eulogium on her brother was very agree- 
able to Geraldine. She smiled so bewitchingly 
that the cautious diplomatist was emboldened to 
proceed in the same course. 

"I think the Squire would be delighted to 
bring it about," he added, still as coolly as if most 
rigidly impartial. " He's always been very fond of 



love's diplomacy. 293 

Fitz, you know ; so I'm sure tlieir marriage would 
make him very happy." 

" He w very fond of dear Fitz ; and I daresay 
it might make him very happy to have him for a 
son-in-law." 

" Nothing can be more certain. Then what a 
capital thing it would be for Fitz I Tlie Squire 
would be certain to make him his heir ; and with 
the Windermere-Court Estate in addition to his 
patrimonial property, he would support his peerage 
with perfect magnificence." 

" Oh, would he ? What a good thing I But—" 

" He would be uncommonly happy with her, 
too." 

" Oh, yes, Arthur. But—" 

"And she would be extremely happy with 
him. She has scarcely been half-an-hour in his 
socieiy, and see how supremely happy she looks." 

" Yes, Arthur, I begin to tliink you are right, 
I haven't seen dear Fanny look so thoroughly 
gratified, I don't know when." 

"Then it's a settled thing. Suppose we use 



394 JACK scudamosb's daughteb. 

onr best endeavonrB — secreflj, yon know — to bring 
it about" 

^^ Oh, I should be so glad to do any flung likely 
to insure the happiness of my darling Fanny !" 

The attacM saw that the ultimatum must be 
produced at once. 

" Yes, Geraldine/* he said with a particularly 
moumfol voice and look ; ** you are amiably ready 
to secure the happiness of your friend, of your 
brother, of your uncle — ^indeed I think I may add 
of the entire world — except yourfaUhful lover /** 

" Arthur I" 

" Your indifference to my fiite has made me 
take a resolution to banish myself from your en- 
chanting presence for ever." 

" Arthur dear, don't say that" 

** Yes, Greraldine, I must seek occupation to 
divert my melancholy ; and court danger to find 
an honourable termination to my blighted hopes. 
I shall volunteer to join the force now about to 
embark for the war in CShina." 

" You must not say such horrid words, dear 



love's diplomacy. 295 

Arthnr. It is quite cruel of you to think of doing 
such a thing. If you would only wait — " 

" For how long, dear Qeraldine ? You see the 
troops are ordered to embark next week." 

" dear I you are very, very unkind. If 
you would only wait till — ^till dear Fanny is out of 
her mourning." 

It wanted a little more than a month to make 
up the year. Tlie gallant Captain appeared to 
hesitate. 

"Will you promise me then to become my 
wife ?" he inquired, his heart beating a great deal 
too fast for that of a diplomatist engaged in ar- 
ranging a difficult complication. 

" Y-e-s, dear Artlmr ;" and she held out her 
hand. He pressed it to his lips with a fervour 
totally at variance with the studied indifference 
with which he had been carrying on the nego- 
tiation. 

"!£[allo!" cried Lord Fitzmaurice, after hav- 
ing stolen a glance at the lovers. " I don't 
think our interposition will be necessary. Those 



296 JACK fiCUPAXOBX^S DAUGHTEB. 

precious turtles are billing and cooing like old 
booter 

" What were they doing, Fitz ?" demanded the 
Duchess, eagetly. 

^^ I am afi^d I shall make but a humble imi- 
tation of a sublime original ; but Til try/' 

Thereupon he took the hand of his lovelj corn- 
panion, and kissed it with passionate devotion. 

" You provoking creature !" exclaimed the 
blushing Duchess, fiiintly attempting to withdraw 
her hand. 

" Yoicks ! Hark forward ! hark forward !" 
shouted Jack Scudamore, who had been furtively 
watcliing the scene. 

"Jack, you'll spoil all!" cried the Bishop, 
forcibly laying hold of one of his arms. 

" My son, you must really be quiet," added 
the confessor, seizing the other. 

" Oh, I forgot. Yes," he went on with osten-. 
tatious loudness, " we ran into our fox in glorious 
style," &c. &c. 

" What's that thick stick you have in your 



love's diplomacy. 297 

hand?" inquired the dowager. "Tliey did not 
cany such things at court in my time ; my dear 
lord always bore a white wand. What's it for?" 

" Is it this nate little bit of a twig, you mane, 
my lady ?" replied Dillon, looking at a tremendous 
bludgeon. "What is it for? oh, it's just for 
dusting a jacket that wants it badly." Adding 
in a lower tone, " I've promised the priest I won't 
hurt a hair of the villain's head; but, bedad, if I 
catch him, his ugly hide will never forget the 
bating he'll get 1" 

Ah, these mental reservations so common 
among Catholics t Of course Dillon was a Jesuit 
in disguise. 

Presently the two girls went to each other ; and 
after a little whispering the Duchess kissed her 
friend very affectionately, and led her away ; then 
the two gallant Captains hastened to each other, 
and spasmodically shook hands; lastly the three 
sly dreadful old papists came towards them with 
beaming faces and ejaculations of the most cordial 
congratulation. 



298 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

At the end of dear Fanny^s monming, Gleral- 
dine's marriage with Arthur Calverley took place. 
A similar happy event came off on the same day, 
and the same hour, and at the same church. Cap- 
tain the Viscount Fitzmaurice led to the hymeneal 
altar, as the communion-rails are somewhat 
heathenishly termed in the newspapers, Frances 
Duchess of Porchester. 

On the first hride the Squire bestowed a por- 
tion of ten thousand pounds, which enabled the 
well-married Calverleys to reconcile themselves to 
the match. Respecting the other union, an ar- 
rangement was made between the high contract- 
ing parties that they should live with the Squire for 
the best part of the year, and that he should live 
with them at Maurice Court the remaining months. 

I must not omit a remarkable fact The two 
brides, having been duly married according to the 
Protestant form in their parish-church, chose to 
be married over again in the Boman-Catholic 
chapel ; Monseigneur ofEciating, assisted by Fa- 
ther Michael. Whether it was merely feminine 



love's diplomacy, 299 

caprice, or proceedod from a sense of gratitude 
and respect, I leave to the decision of the unpre- 
judiced reader ; but it seemed to make the heretic 
couples extremely happy ; and it was difficult to 
say which of the three scheming, plotting, dread- 
fully-artful old papists it gratified most. 

It is only necessary here to add that some little 
time after the events I have been recording, there 
was in England a grand papal promotion, in 
which the Bishop of Melpotamos was raised to tlie 
dignity of Cardinal, and the Rev, Michael O'Do- 
gherty elevated to a bishopric. It is generally 
admitted by their co-religionists, who know these 
worthy men best, that they are among the most 
liberal and enlightened members of the Catholic 
hierarchy. 

In due time both of my charming heroines 
gave hostages to Fortune — I should say, to their 
delighted husbands ; and the faithful friends almost 
immediately began to arrange the ftiture of the 
young gentleman and young lady in long clothes ; 
and an uncommon pretty romance they anticipated. 



300 JACK SCUDAMORE^S DAU6HTEB. 

Gteraldine's daughter was of course a miniatiire 
Greraldine ; but Fanny's son, whom both &ther 
and mother had insisted on naming after his 
grandfather, all his hunting-friends emphatically 
declared to be a focket Jack Scudamore, to his 
unspeakable gratification and pride. 

They made good wiyes and good mothers. Of 
course, how could such true womanly natures do 
otherwise ? They were indeed as perfect in their 
domestic relations as a Divine Proyidence intended 
they should be; better women in real feminine 
virtues than the most rigid convent seclusion and 
religious discipline could have made them. 

Genddine won even the severe Bishop's widow 
to acknowledge that she was a model female Cal- 
verley. As for her beautiftd cousin, the gentie- 
men of the Delamere Hunt were but of one 
opinion, and it was indorsed by the county. She 
was every thing they had expected her to be from 
their first acquaintance. But what of that ? What 
else could she have been? Was she not Jack 
Scudamore's Daughter? 



CHAPTER XII. 

POETICAL JUSTICE — WITH A VENGEANCE ! 

In Uio mean time the parish of Dolomoro Parva 
had boon going (m quite as well as could be ex-' 
poc3ted under the circumstances. A new Vicar 
ha<l been appointed, and had at first performed 
tlie Hervices to extremely thin benches. Some 
cliangOH liad b(»on made in the decorations of the 
new church ; the gaudy drapery about tho altar 
had boon suporsodod by the fair white linen eloth 
of tlie communion-table ; tho great cross above it 
liad boon taken away ; and the little recopta(5les 
for holy water removed, with the lighted tapers 
tliat bunit. around tho picture oftlie Virgin and 
Child. 

ThoHO alterations, however, were not deemed 
ftufficient, no one being more discontented witli 



304 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

neverthelesfi he is obl^ed to conform to them. He 
is a prisoner for life, with worse than prison-dis- 
cipline and prison fiire. 

Alas for the Bev. Basil Flynlynunon ! he sees 
now — a good deal too late — that it might have 
been better for him had he edited his pit^iosed 
new edition of ^sdiylns, or continned to grow 
prize china-asters, and take pupils. He is a me- 
morable example of zeal without judgment. 

Mr. Samuel Perkins did not remain long at 
Delamere Parva after the arrival of the new Vicar. 
Perhaps the Hon. and Bev. Adolphus expressed a 
wish to revive the defimct brotherhood of St. Hil- 
debrand, which alarmed the lean Curate ; and, to 
secure the comfort of his poor legs, he resigned. 
He shortly after accepted a Welsh curacy in a 
mountain parish with an unpronounceable name, 
where, with a stipend totally out of proportion 
with the prodigality of its consonants, he married, 
and had a family that soon threatened to become 
as numerous as his congregation, the bulk of the 
population being Methodists. 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE I 305 

The Bishop's nephew was equally zealous as his 
predecessor, but a good deal wiser in his genera- 
tion. He cared very little for the High-Church 
movement ; but as he found that he could not get 
his congregation together without it, he shortly 
appeared a greater Puseyito than Dr. Pusey him- 
self. It was in vain that the churchwarden remon- 
strated ; it was equally useless for his supporters to 
grumble : they found, unfortunate religious frogs 
as they were, that they had exchanged Vicar Log 
for Vicar Stork. The honourable and reverend's 
very High-Church connections seemed to make 
very High -Church principles matters of course; 
and in the schools, among the poor, or in the pul- 
pit, he gathered about him a throng of fair enthu- 
siasts, who not only furnished him with the latch- 
keys to their street-doors, but to their purses. 

Prominent among his fair ac^irers was Lu- 
cretia Brabazon. Her weakness, in the shape of 
aristocratic predilections, led the brewer's heiress, 
strong-minded woman though she was, to feel an 
interest for the new pastor she had never felt for 

VOL. III. X 



d06 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

the old ; and when he called upon her, ostensibly 
for her counsel rather than for her subscription, 
and talked confidentiallj to her of the great people 
with whom he had been in the habit of associating, 
he met with no difficulty in laying the foundation 
of a very friendly alliance. 

By this time she had become tired of her 
classical freak ; her objects of natural history she 
had previously bestowed on the Delamere Mu- 
seum ; her coUection of statues she now sent as a 
donation to the Delamere Athenaeum. She dressed 
in a prim little poke-bonnet and black cloak, and 
— ^marvellous change 1 — ^went about the village dis- 
tributing tracts. 

But the Honourable and Eeverend Adolphus 
De Oourcy excited her ambition to attempt a 
higher religious flight Why should she not, she 
thought, be th^ founder of a sect? There was 
Lady Huntingdon Connection, — why not Miss 
Brabazon's ? There were Muggletonians, Brown- 
ists, and followers of Joanna Southcote, — why 
not of Lucretia Brabazon ? There were Puseyites 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE I 307 

in the Church of England, — why not Braba- 
zonians ? 

It was upon this element in the capacity of 
the strong-minded woman [that the new Vicar 
skilfully experimentalised. He gave it a bias, 
and then a practical purpose. Soon afterwards, 
extensive alterations were made in Brabazon 
Lodge; and the religious community were star- 
tled by the intelligence that it had become a 
Protestant convent, of which Miss Brabazon was 
the lady superior, and tlie Honourable and Re- 
verend Adolphus De Courcy the spiritual director. 

Several of the fair enthusiasts had joined the 
sisterhood, and the establishment appeared to be 
going on with surprising success ; " Mother Lu- 
cretia," as she was siyled, conducting herself with 
commendable propriety. 

It chanced however one morping, when the 
nuns had returned from vespers, a lay sister, 
wearing the features of Patty Clark, entered with 
a face a great deal more secular in its expression 
than her dress. 



308 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

'^ A visitor is at the grille, who demands to 
see the mother superior/' she said. 

*^ Is he a hiyman?" inquired Mother Lucre- 
tia. ** If he is, send him away." 

** He is a layman, my mother. He declares 
that his name is Potter, — Greneral Potter, of the 
Nizam's Irregulars, I think he said ; just arrived 
from India." 

" Cousin Potter !" exclaimed the mother su- 
perior, clasping her hands together in a sudden 
transport of extremely mundane ecstasy. 

Signs of the deepest excitement immediately 
became evident throughout the sisterhood. 

" I mtist see him, my daughter. Conduct him 
to the parlour of the convent without a moment's 

delay." 

The lay sister disappeared amidst evidences of 
commotion among the nuns. There was a general 
throwing-up of hands, and much casting-up ot 
eyes ; whether by way of appeal or protest, I can- 
not say. 

"You should remember your vows, my mo- 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE 1 309 

ther," observed an elderly sister, bearing a strong 
resemblance to Miss Pincher of the Fashionable 
Finishing School for Young Ladies. 

" So I do, my daughter," replied Mother 
Lucretia in the same grave tone. " I made a vow 
to cousin Potter, behind the great mash-tun in 
my father's brewery, when he was on the point 
of leaving England as a cadet, tliat I would be 
his wife whenever he should return from India 
a great general, and claim my hand." 

Tremendous excitement became visible among 
the dark-robed recluses; with the younger ones 
especially. 

" He luis returned a great general," added 
the Mother Lucretia, with the look and gesture 
of a Siddons. " He has come to claim me as his 
wife." 

The old nims looked horror-struck. 

" I dare not break that sacred vow. My daugh- 
ters," she continued in a low but very emphatic 
tone, " you don't know cousin Potter. Were I to 
refuse him, he'd bum the house about your ears," 



310 JACK scudamobe's daughter. 

A general chorus of shrieks and exclamations 
of affright followed the mother superior's rapid 
step to the parlour. 

Brabazon Lodge underwent a last transforma- 
tion. The sisterhood had to find a new home; 
for in a month it became the residence of Mrs. 
General Potter and her husband. She excused 
herself to the Honourable and Eeverend Adolphus 
De Coiu-cey with the very natural plea, that cir- 
cumstances over which she had no control had 
changed her vocation. The Bishop's nephew pru- 
dently made no objection, and married the lady 
with as little scruple as he would have previously 
received her confession. 

Mrs. General Potter made by no means a bad 
wife. She was always a little eccentric; but 
became reconciled to the fact, that she was much 
better adapted to found a family than a sect. 

DiUon returned to Ireland, reinstated in the 
agency, and with other soUd proofs of the gra- 
titude of those he had served so faithfully; but 
prosperous as his circimfistances were, he could 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE I 811 

not be induced to assume the appearance or posi- 
tion of a gentleman, as his friend and country- 
man Father Mike had suggested. His little bit 
of a twig did not come into operation, as the 
wearer of tlie jacket it was intended to dust had 
drunk himself into a fit of apoplexy before the 
avenger arrived at Maurice Court ; and the pre- 
tender to the title had started for Australia as 
soon as he learnt that the fraud by which he had 
profited had been discovered, and that the police 
were on his track. 

I have yet to dispose of another couple. They 
being the lowest in the author's estimation, have 
been the last thought of. But let justice be done^ 
though the heavens fall. In this winding-up act 
I shall take special care that justice shall be done ; 
and liability shall be most carefully estimated. The 
result, I hope, will be pronounced satisfactory, 
except to the sufferers. 

The reader will be good enough to imagine a 
fir-wood, separated from cliffs overhanging the sea, 
on the south-western coast of England, by an irre«* 



312 JACK sccdamorb's daughter. 

golar dope of sand, dotted over with dumps of 
moss and other herbage, from which the surroond- 
ing soil has been blown away. The diffs are high, 
but composed entirely of sand, in which the action 
of wind and rain has formed steep " chines," up 
which smugglers and preventive men have made 
paths from the beach below. 

A path may be seen running through the 
shady wood, which leads in one direction to the 
high-road, in another to a little watering-place 
in considerable request for its mild climate and 
fine prawns. There are not many visitors at pre- 
sent, for the fir-wood, the favourite promenade, 
3eems quite deserted. In the path to the road, 
and in the one to the half-dozen bathing-ma- 
chines, and then to the village, not an individual 
is to be seen. 

Nevertheless it is not entirely deserted. There 
is a clump of brushwood and tall ferns at one par- 
ticular spot near the steepest part of the slope, 
whare any one lying in the fern may command 
a view of the two paths, the ascent from the beach, 



POETICAL JUSTICE — WITH A VENGEANCE! 313 

and the wide-spreading ocean^ without being ob- 
served except by passing wood-pigeons. 

It was here that two men had thrown them- 
selves, apparently for rest after a long journey, 
for their clothes were covered with dust; moreover 
they bore evidence of having suffered from con- 
tact with brambles or other destructive obstruc- 
tions, for they were miquestionably somewhat 
ragged. 

It may easily be believed from this, that they 
were not of the class of persons who had their 
names inscribed as visitors to the neighbouring 
little watering-place in the Pravmington Gazette; 
indeed their appearance was so thoroughly disre- 
putable, that the most sociably disposed of those 
rather unsocial people would have preferred walk- 
ing on the other side of the way, had they seen 
them approaching. They had the immistakable 
tramp appearance, mingled largely with the 
equally immistakable scamp demeanour. A po- 
liceman, of ever so limited an experience, would 
have arrested them at sight. He would be sure 



314 JACK BCUDAKOBE^S BAUGHTEB. 

that thejr were quite unable to give a respectable 
account of themselves. 

I shall not go into pre-Baphaelite details of 
their picturesque rascality. Let it suffice that 
iheir fragmentary wardrobe and dose-cropped 
hair suggested a strong suspicion of their being 
jail-birds — ^tickets of no leave, hiding there for 
some unlawftd purpose. 

One, a man of taU sinewy frame, wearing 
around one ankle an iron ornament that appeared 
to have been reoentlj filed, was resting a long 
black-tnfied chin, belonging to a narrow cunning 
visage, on a pair of large bony hands, and his 
elbows on the sand, as he lay his length, glancing 
his blood-shot eyes now over the sea, now through 
the wood. 

When I add that his companion was a short 
thick fellow of ebony complexion, the intelligent 
reader will at once recognise two subordinate cha- 
racters in this story. They were convicts escaped 
fixmi Portland. 

Sambo was sitting concealed behind the trunk 



POETICAL JUSTICE— WITH A VENGEANCE ! 315 

of an old thorn, a few yards distant only from the 
line of tall firs that ended the wood on that side. 
He seemed to be greatly elated at his freedom, 
for he occasionally emitted his peculiar guttural 
laugh; but every now and then the greenish-white 
eyeballs shot a phosphoric glare as he glanced at 
the stern gloomy visage of his companion. 

The latter did not look by any means in a 
laughing humour. Whether dissatisfied with his 
thoughts or his tobacco, I cannot say ; but he was 
employed in reflection and mastication. 

Sambo began to sing. He was not quite a 
Sims Reeves ; but considering that the poor fellow 
had no voice and quite as little ear, his perform- 
ance was creditable. He possessed the fiirther 
recommendation of being a genuine Ethiopian 
• serenader, not a sham. 

" I wish I was a brewer's 'oss, 

But twelve months in de 'ear." 

It was intended to go to the time of" Dixie's Land,'* 
but was not very readily recognised as such. 



316 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

" You know why I wish to be brewer's 'oss, 
massa ?" he iuqmred. 

The white man did not deign to give him an 
answer. Unabashed the other continued his song : 

" I'd turn my 'ead where was my taiJ, 
And drink up all de beer !** 

" goUy, massa I dat prime, eh?" 

He gobbled and chuckled in tremendous 
glee. 

" Hold yoiu* row, you tarnation fool !" replied 
his superior. " I am't in no humour for such 
catterwauling. I want to be out of this cussed 
old used-up country. I'm sick o' the Britishers. 
An almighty mean lot they are, that's a fact I A 
mosquito couldn't get blood out of 'em. Better 
be a dog under the stars and stripes." 

" I no want to be dog in Merriky, massa. 
Like betterer to be free nigger among de Brit- 
ishers. Spose you go, massa, and leave Sam- 
bo." 

"That cock won't fight, I teU ye. I think 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE! 317 

you knows what Hiram Whittler is when he's 
riled. He am't then like to trouble hisself about 
the notions of such scum as niggers, I reckon." 

Sambo's eyes flashed at the insult, but he 
made a sort of gobble by way of laugh, and ap- 
proached the white man, apparently quite in a 
jocular mood. 

" Well, well, massa, I go to Merriky when de 
Yankees come in de boat." 

" I thought you'd come round without any of 
my moral suasion," said Mr. Whittler with a sneer. 

" Oh, you so berry cute, massa." 

Sambo had got pretty close behind his com- 
panion, and burst out Into a long chuckle of in- 
tense negro enjoyment. Suddenly he made a 
spring and a quick forward movement. A hand 
that he had carried behind him was raised above 
his head, and descended upon the body of his 
prostrate associate. 

With a yell of agony the latter sprmig to hlsf 
feet, as the negro, with a long knife dropping blood 
from up to the hilt, jumped back. 



318 JACK scudamobb's daughtek. 

" Aha I I hear you tell Yankee captain you'd 
take me to New Orleans and sell me as slave," he 
cried, dancing like a furious maniac, his eyes 
glaring phosphoroudy at his victim. " Aha ! what 
you tink of de nigger scum now ?'' 

It was evident at a glance that the blow had 
struck home ; the wounded man directed a hand 
towards a pocket in his ragged garments, but it 
fell powerless at his side; his eyes appeared to 
glaze, his head drooped, and he fell at the feet of 
his destroyer. 

" Yankee captain no take Sambo just at jire- 
sent, eh, Massa Hiram ? Spose he come, you go 
stead of nigger." 

" Sambo," said the dying man, in so piteous a 
tone that it might almost have softened a stone. 
The negro left off his horrid exultation. 

" Sambo, I ain't used you well, that's a fact ; 
but I am anxious to make amends. I haven't 
many minutes to live; let me do you a service 
afore I die, my faithfiil comrade." 

"What massa say?" inquired the black man 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGEANCE I 319 

With evident interest, coming forward, and drop- 
ping the knife. 

" I wish to tell you where I have buried a 
treasure that would make you rich for life, my 
poor darkie," 

^' Eh, massa, what you say? treaswreV^ 

The eyes of the negro fl^hed with avaricious 
excitement, and his whole demeanour exhibited 
the most intense eagerness. He drew still nearer. 

"My breath is getting very faint; stoop, my 
poor Sambo." 

" Yes, massa ; tell poor Sambo. Where is de 
treasure ? Is it gold ?" 

" All gold," he whispered, — " all gold ; and I 
placed it — " 

" What you say, massa? I no hear de words." 

" Bring your ear closer," murmured the dying 
man more faintly. 

" Yes, massa ; where is de gold ?" 

" Closer, closer." 

The negro knelt down, and brought his ear as 
dose as it possibly could be to* the aperture whence 



320 JACK scudamore's daughter. 

these directions had sdmost inaudibly emanated. 
Tlien followed a yell, or rather a series of yells, of 
the most frightftd description. The dying man 
had pinned his murderer's arms to his side with 
his own, and wound his sinewy legs round his 
lower extremities ; at the same moment he turned 
himself round witli the body he had securely im- 
prisoned, and began to roll down the slope. 

Wliile the prisoner was shrieking and strug- 
gling, a boy in a short smock-frock was seen to 
descend from one of the tallest fir-trees at the 
border of the wood, where he had climbed to rob 
a squirrel's nest, when the sudden appearance of 
the two ruffians forced him to remain. He de- 
scended to the ground, and turned round to take 
another look at the tragedy he had witnessed. 

" Murder I murder ! murder !" he shrieked out 
as he beheld the dead and the living man rolling 
over each other towards the cliff. 

"Murder! murder!" he bawled, as he ran 
swiftly down the path to the village. 

"Murder! murder!'* he screamed out again 



POETICAL JUSTICE — ^WITH A VENGBANOE 1 321 

when the two policemen of the place caught him 
as he was running towards his mother's cottage. 

" Scum o' the airth I" hissed the dying man 
between his teeth. 

"Marcy, massal we are coming to de cliff! 
O Gor A'mighly !" 

The black man, his eyes starting out of their 
sockets, his visage livid with terror, found liimself 
in an iron grasp, without the least power of check- 
ing the downward movement that was hurrjring 
him to a frightful deatL They began indeed to 
roll more rapidly as the impetus increased. 

There was a horrid shriek, followed by a 
fiendish laugh, as the two policemen came rushing 
up out of breath just in time to see the bodies pass 
over the precipice. 

Down the chine they now went, rolling over 
faster and fester, the girations increasing witli 
terrible rapidity as they descended. The murderer 
continued to scream ; the murdered neither spoke 
nor laughed; a demoniac grin was rigidly im- 
pressed upon his hateful visage as over and over 

VOL. III. Y 



322 JACK scubahobe's daughtsr. 

they turned, the living in a death-grasp, fixed as 
in a vice. 

Over projections they bounded; then rushed 
again down precipitous declivities in the sand 
wiHi frightftd velocity ; then sprung from point to 
point with the elasticity of a ball; and finally, 
with a prodigious leap, bounded high over a pro- 
jection, and fell into the sea below. 

It is supposed that the tide sucked their corpses 
entangled into the Channel ; for after their plunge 
into the wave, not a vestige of either was ever seen 
again. 



THE END. 

